DIALOGUES UPON THE USEFULNESS OF ANCIENT MEDALS. Especially in relation to the
Latin and Greek Poets.

-- quoniam haec Ratio plerumque videtur
Tristior esse, quibus non est tractata, retroque
Volgus abhorret ab hac: volui tibi suaviloquenti
Carmine Pierio rationem exponere nostram,
Et quasi musaeo dulci contingere melle,
Si tibi forte animum tali ratione tenerem.
Lucretius. Printed in the Year MDCCXXVI.

VERSES Occasioned by Mr. ADDISON'S Treatise OF MEDALS.
SEE the wild waste of all-devouring years!
How Rome her own sad sepulcher appears:
With nodding arches, broken temples spread!
The very tombs now vanished like their dead!
^ome felt the silent stroke of mouldering age;
^ome, hostile fury; some, religious rage:
^arbarian blindness, Christian zeal conspire*
and Papal piety, and Gothic fire.
^erhaps by its own rains saved from flame,
^me buried marble half preserves a Name;
that Name, the learned with fierce disputes purse,
^^d give to Titus old Vespasian's due.
Ambition sighed. She found it vain to trust
^he faithless Column, and the crumbling Bust;
Huge Moles whose shadow stretched from shore to shore,
Their ruins perished, and their place no more!
Convinced, she now contracts her vast design;
And all her triumphs shrink into a Coin.
A narrow orb each crowded conquest keeps;
Beneath her Palm here sad Judea weeps;
Now scantier limits the proud Arch confine,
And scarce are seen the prostrate Nile and Rhine:
A small Euphrates through the piece is rolled;
And little Eagles wave their wings in Gold.
The Medal, faithful to its charge of fame,
Through climes and ages bears each form and name:
In one short view, subjected to our eye,
Gods, Emp'rors, Heroes, Sages, Beauties lie.
With sharpened sight pale Antiquaries pore,
The Inscription value, but the Rust adore:
This, the Blue vernish, that, the Green endears,
The sacred Rust of twice ten hundred years.
To gain Pescennius one employs his schemes;
One grasps a Cecrops in ecstatic dreams:
Poor Vadius, long with learned spleen devoured,
Can taste no pleasure since his Shield was scoured;
And Curio, restless by the fair one's side,
Sighs for an Otho, and neglects his Bride.
Theirs is the Vanity, the Learning thine.
Touched by thy hand, again Rome's glories shine:
Her Gods, and godlike Heroes rise to view,
And all her faded garlands bloom anew.
Nor blush, those studies thy regard engage;
These pleased the Fathers of poetic rage;
The Verse and Sculpture bore an equal part,
And Art reflected images to Art.
Oh when shall Britain, conscious of her claim,
Stand emulous of Greek and Roman fame?
In living Medals see her wars enrolled,
And vanquished realms supply recording Gold?
Here, rising bold, the Patriot's honest face;
There, Warriors frowning in historic brass.
Then future ages with delight shall see,
How Plato's, Bacon's, Newton's looks agree:
Or in fair Series laureled Bards be shown,
A Virgil there, and here an Addison.
Then shall Thy Craggs (and let me call him Mine)
On the cast Ore, another Pollio, shine;
With aspect open shall erect his head,
And round the Orb in lasting notes be read:
"Statesman, yet friend to Truth! in soul sincere,
"In action faithful, and in honor clear;
"Who broke no promise, served no private end,
"Who gained no title, and who lost no friend;
"Ennobled by Himself, by all approved,
"And praised, unenvied, by the Muse he loved.
A. POPE.

DIALOGUES Upon the Usefulness of ANCIENT MEDALS.
DIALOGUE I.
CYNTHIO, Eugenius and Philander had retired together from the town to a
country village, that lies upon the Thames. Their design was to pass away the
heats of the Summer among the fresh breezes, that rise from the river, ^d the
agreeable mixture of shades and fountains, (...) which the whole country
naturally abounds, ^hey were all three very well versed in the po^er parts of
learning, and had traveled into the ^ost refined nations of Europe: so that
they ^ere capable of entertaining themselves on a thousand different subjects
without running into the common topics of defaming public parties, or
particular persons. As they were intimate friends they took the freedom to
dissent from one another in discourse, or upon occasion to speak a Latin
sentence without fearing the imputation of pedantry or ill-breeding.

They were one evening taking a walk together in the fields when their
discourse accidentally fell upon several unprofitable parts of learning. It was
Cynthio's humor to run down every thing that was rather for ostentation than
use. He was still preferring good sense to arts and sciences, and often took a
pleasure to appear ignorant, that he might the better turn to ridicule those
that valued themselves on their books and studies, though at the same time one
might very well see that he could not have attacked many parts of learning so
successfully, had not he borrowed his assistances from them. After having
rallied a set or two of Virtuoso's, he fell upon the Medallists.

These gentlemen, says he, value themselves upon being critics in Rust, and
will undertake to tell you the different ages of it, by its color. They are
possessed with a kind of learned avarice, and are for getting together hoards
of such money only as was current among the Greeks and Latins. There are several
of them that are better acquainted with the faces of the Antonines, than of the
Stuarts, and would rather choose to count out a Sum in Sesterces, than in pounds
sterling, I have heard of one in Italy that used to swear by the head of Otho.
Nothing can be pleasanter than to see a circle of these Virtuoso's about a
cabinet of Medals, descanting upon the value, rarity and authenticalness of the
several pieces that lie before them. One takes up a coin of gold, and after
having well weighed the figures and inscription, ^ells you very gravely, if it
were brass, it would be invaluable. Another falls a ringing a Pescen^ius Niger,
and judiciously distinguishes the ^ound of it to be modern. A third desires you
^o observe well the Toga on such a reverse, and asks you whether you can in
conscience believe the sleeve of it to be of the true Roman cut.

I must confess, says Philander, the knowledge of Medals has most of those
disadvantages that can ^ender a science ridiculous, to such as are not well
versed in it. Nothing is more easy than to represent as impertinences any parts
of learning that have no immediate relation to the happiness or convenience of
mankind. When a man spends his whole life among the Stars and Planets, or lays
out a twelvemonth on the spots in the Sun, however noble his speculations may
be, they are very apt to fall unto burlesque. But it is still more natural to
^augh at such studies as are employed on low and vulgar objects. What curious
observations have been made on Spiders, Lobsters, and Cockle^hells? yet the
very naming of them is almost sufficient to turn them into raillery. It is no
wonder therefore that the science of Medals, which ^s charged with so many
unconcerning parts of knowledge, and built on such mean materials, should
appear ridiculous to those that have not ta^en the pains to examine it.

Eugenius was very attentive to what Philander said on the subject of Medals.
He was one that ^ndeavoured rather to be agreeable than shining in
conversation, for which reason he was more beloved, though not so much admired
as Cynthio. I must confess, says he, I find my self very much inclined to speak
against a sort of study that I know nothing of. I have however one strong
Prejudice in favor of it, that Philander has thought it worth his while to
employ some time upon it. I am glad then, says Cynthio, that I have thrown him
on a science of which I have long wished to hear the Usefulness. There, says
Philander, you must excuse me. At present you do not know but it may have its
usefulness. But should I endeavor to convince you of it, I might fail in my
attempt, and so render my science still more contemptible. On the contrary,
says Cynthio, we are already so persuaded of the unprofitableness of your
science, that you can but leave us where you find us, but if you succeed you
increase the number of your party. Well, says Philander, in hopes of making two
such considerable proselytes, I am very well content to talk away an evening
with you on the subject; but on this condition, that you will communicate your
thoughts to me freely when you dissent from me, or have any difficulties that
you think me capable of removing. To make use of the liberty you give us, says
Eugenius, I must tell you what I believe surprises all beginners as well as my
self. We are apt to think your Medallists a little fantastical in the different
prices they set upon their coins, without any regard to the ancient value or
the metal of which they are composed. A silver Medal, for example, shall be
more esteemed than a golden one, and a piece of brass than either. To answer
you, says Philander, it ^he language of a Medallist, you are not to look upon a
cabinet of Medals as a treasure of money, but of knowledge, nor must you fancy
any charms in gold, but in the figures and inscriptions ^^at adorn it. The
intrinsic value of an old coin does not consist in its metal but its erudition.
It is the Device that has raised the species, so that at present an As or an
Obolus may carry a higher price than a Denarius or a Dram; and a piece of
money that was not worth a penny fifteen hundred years ago, may be now rated at
fifty crowns, or perhaps a hundred guineas. I find, says Cynthio, that to have
a relish for ancient coins it is necessary to have a contempt of the modern.
But I am afraid you will never be able, with all your Medallic eloquence, to
persuade Eugenius and my self that it is better to have a pocket full of Otho's
and Gordians than of Jaco^us's or Louis d'ors. This however we shall be judges
of, when you have let us know the several uses of old coins.

The first and most obvious one, says Philan^^r, is the showing us the Faces of
all the great persons of antiquity. A cabinet of Medals is a collection of
pictures in miniature. Juvenal calls them very humorously, Concisum argentum in
titulos, faciesque minutas.
Sat. 5. You here see the Alexanders, Caesar's, Pompeys, ^rajans, and the whole
catalogue of Heroes; ^ho have many of them so distinguished themselves from the
rest of mankind that we almost ^ook upon them as another species. It is an
a^reeable amusement to compare in our own thoughts the face of a great Man with
the character that authors have given us of him, and to try if we can find out
in his looks and features either the haughty, cruel, or merciful temper that
discovers it self in the history of his actions. We find too on Medals the
representations of Ladies that have given occasion to whole volumes on the
account only of a face. We have here the pleasure to examine their looks and
dresses, and to survey at leisure those beauties that have sometimes been the
happiness or misery of whole kingdoms: Nor do you only meet the faces of such
as are famous in history, but of several whose names are not to be found any
where except on Medals. Some of the Emperors, for example, have had Wives, and
some of them Children, that no authors have mentioned. We are therefore obliged
to the study of coins for having made new discoveries to the learned, and given
them information of such persons as are to be met with on no other kind of
records. You must give me leave, says Cynthio, to reject this last use of
Medals. I do not think it worth while to trouble my self with a person's name
or face that receives all his reputation from the mint, and would never have
been known in the world had there not been such things as Medals. A man's
memory finds sufficient employment on such as have really signalized themselves
by their great actions, without charging it self with the names of an
insignificant people whose whole history is written on the edges of an old coin.

If you are only for such persons as have made a noise in the world, says
Philander, you have on Medals a long list of heathen Deities, distinguish^d
from each other by their proper titles and or^aments. You see the copies of
several statues that have had the politest nations of the world f^ll down
before them. You have here too seve^l persons of a more thin and shadowy
nature, ^s Hope, Constancy, Fidelity, Abundance, Ho^our, Virtue, Eternity,
Justice, Moderation, Hap^iness, and in short a whole creation of the like
^maginary substances. To these you may add the Genies of nations, provinces,
cities, highways, and the like Allegorical Beings. In devices of this nature
one sees a pretty poetical invention, and may often find as much thought on the
reverse of a Medal as in a Canto of Spenser. Not to interrupt you, says
Eugenius, I fancy it is this use of Medals that has recommended them to several
history-painters, who perhaps without this assistance would have found it very
difficult to have invented such an airy species of beings, when they are
obliged to put a moral virtue into colors, or to find out a proper dress for a
passion. I^ is doubtless for this reason, says Philander, that Painters have
not a little contributed to bring the ^udy of Medals in vogue. For not to
mention several others, Caraccio is said to have assisted A^etine by designs
that he took from the Spintriae of Tiberius. Raphael had thoroughly studied the
figures on old Coins. Patin tells us that Lo ^run had done the same. And it is
well known ^at Rubens had a noble collection of Medals in his ^wn possession.
But I must not quit this head before I tell you, that you see on Medals not
only the names and persons of Emperors, Kings, consuls, Pro-consuls, Praetors,
and the like cha^acters of importance, but of some of the Poets, and of several
who had won the prizes at the Olympic games. It was a noble time, says Cynthio,
when Trips and Cornish hugs could make a man immortal. How many Heroes would
Moor-fields have furnished out in the days of old? A fellow that can now only
win a hat or a belt, had he lived among the Greeks, might have had his face
stamped upon their Coins. But these were the wise ancients, who had more esteem
for a Milo than a Homer, and heapt up greater Honors on Pindar's Jockies, than
on the Poet himself. But by this time I suppose you have drawn up all your
medallic people, and indeed they make a much more formidable body than I could
have imagined. You have shown us all conditions, sexes and ages, emperors and
empresses, men and children, gods and wrestlers. Nay you have conjured up
persons that exist no where else but on old Coins, and have made our Passions
and Virtues and Vices visible. I could never have thought that a cabinet of
Medals had been so well peopled. But in the next place, says Philander, as we
see on coins the different Faces of persons, we see on them too their different
Habits and Dresses, according to the mode that prevailed in the several ages
when the Medals were stamped. This is another use, says Cynthio, that in my
opinion contributes rather to make a man learned than wise, and is neither
capable of pleasing the understanding or imagination. I know there are several
supercilious Critics that will treat an author with the greatest contempt
imaginable, if he fancies the old Romans wore a girdle, and are amazed at a
man's ignorance, who believes the Toga had any Sleeves to it till the
declension of the Roman Empire. Now I would fain know the great importance of
this kind of learning, and why it should not be as noble a task to write upon a
Bib and hanging-sleeves, as on the Bulla and Praetexta. The reason is, that we
are familiar with the names of the one, and meet with the other no where but in
learned authors. An Antiquary will scorn to mention a pinner or a night-rail, a
petticoat or a manteau; but will talk as gravely as a father of the church on
the Vitta and Peplus, the Stola and Instita. How would an old Roman laugh, were
it possible for him to see the solemn dissertations that have been made on
these weighty subjects! To set them in their natural light, let us fancy, if
you please, that about a thousand years hence, some profound author shall write
a learned treatise on the Habit^ of the present age, distinguished into the
following Titles and Chapters. Of the old British Trowser. Of the Ruff and
Collar-bana. The opinion of several learned me concerning the use of the
Shoulder-knot. Such a one mistaken in his account of the Surtout, etc.
I must confess, says Eugenius interrupting him, the knowledge of these affairs
is in it self very lit^^e improving, but as it is impossible without it to
understand several parts of your ancient authors, it certainly has its use. It
is pity indeed there is not a nearer way of coming at it. I have sometimes
fancied it would not be an impertinent design to make a kind of an old Roman
wardrobe, where you should see Toga's and Tunica's, the Chlamys and Trabea, and
in short all the different vests and ornaments that are so often mentioned in
the Greek and Roman authors. By this means a man would comprehend better and
remember much longer the shape of an ancient garment, than he possibly can from
the help of tedious quotations and descriptions. The design says Philander,
might be very useful, but after what models would you work? Sigonius, for
example, will tell you that the Vestis Trabeat^ was of such a particular
fashion, Scaliger is for another, and Dacier thinks them both in the wrong.
These are, says Cynthio, I suppose the names of three Roman tailors: for is it
possible men of learning can have any disputes of this nature? May not we as
well believe that hereafter the whole learned world will be divided upon the
make of a modern pair of breeches? And yet, says Eugenius, the Critics have
fallen as fou^ upon each other for matters of the same moment But as to this
point, where the Make of the garment is controverted, let them, if they can
find cloth enough, work after all the most probable fashions. To enlarge the
design, I would have another room for the old Roman instruments o^ war, where
you might see the Pilum and the shield, the eagles, ensigns, helmets,
battering-rams and trophies, in a word, all the ancient military furniture in
the same manner as it might have been in an Arsenal of old Rome. A third
apartment should be a kind of Sacristie for altars idols, sacrificing
instruments, and other religious utensils. Not to be tedious, one might make a
magazine for all sorts of antiquities, that would show a man in an afternoon
more than he could ^earn out of books in a twelvemonth. This would ^ut short
the whole study of antiquities, and perhaps (...) much more useful to
Universities than those ^ollections of Whale-bone and Crocodile-skins in which
they commonly abound. You will find it very difficult, says Cynthio, to
persuade those societies of learned men to fall in with your project. They will
tell you that things of this importance must not be taken on trust; you ought
to learn them among the Classic Authors and at the fountainhead. Pray consider
what a figure a man would make in the republic of letters, should he appeal to
your University-wardrobe, when they expect a sentence out of the Re Vestiaria?
or how do you think a man that has read Vegetius will relish your Roman
Arsenal? In the mean time, says Philander, you find on Medals every thing that
you could meet with in your magazine of antiquities, and when you have built
your arsenals, wardrobes, and sacristies, it is from Medals that you must fetch
their furniture. It is here too that you see the figures of several instruments
of music, mathematics and mechanics. One might make an entire gally out of the
plans that are to be met with on the reverses of several old coins. Nor are
they only charged with Things but with many ancient Customs, as sacrifices,
triumphs, congiaries, allocutions, decursions, lecti^erniums, and a thousand
other antiquated names ^d ceremonies that we should not have had so j^st a
notion of, were they not still preserved on Coins. I might add under this head
of antiquities, that we find on Medals the manner of spel^^ng in the old Roman
inscriptions. That is, says Cynthio, we find that Felix is never written with
an oe dipthongue, and that in Augustus's days Civis stood for Cives, with other
secrets in Orthography of the same importance.

To come then to a more weighty use, says Philander, it is certain that Medals
give a very great light to history, in confirming such passages as are true in
old Authors, in settling such as are told after different manners, and in
recording such as have been omitted. In this case a cabinet of Medals is a body
of history. It was indeed the best way in the world to perpetuate the memory of
great actions, thus to coin out the life of an Emperor, and to put every great
exploit into the mint. It was a kind of Printing, before the art was invented.
It is by this means that Monsieur Vaillant has disembroiled a history that was
lost to the world before his time, and out of a short collection of Medals has
given us a chronicle of the Kings of Syria. For this too is an advantage Medals
have over books, that they tell their story much quicker, and sum up a whole
volume in twenty or thirty reverses. They are indeed the best epitomes in the
world, and let you see with one cast of an eye the substance of above a hundred
pages. Another use of Medals is, that they not only show you the actions of an
Emperor, but at the same time mark out the year in which they were performed.
Every exploit has its date set to it. A series of an Emperor's Coins is his
life digested into annals. Historians seldom break their relation with a
mixture of chronology, nor distribute the particulars of an Emperor's story
into the several years of his reign: or where they do it they often differ in
their several periods. Here therefore it is much safer to quote a Medal than an
Author, for in this case ^ou do not appeal to a Suetonius or a Lampri^ius, but
to the Emperor himself, or to the whole ^ody of a Roman Senate. Besides that a
Coin is in no danger of having its characters altered by copiers and
transcribers. This I must confess, says Cynthio, may in some cases be of great
moment, but considering the subjects on which your chronologers are generally
employed, I see but little use that rises from it. For example, what signifies
it to the world whether such an Elephant appeared in the Amphi-theatre in the
second or the third year of Domitian? Or what am I the wiser for knowing that
Trajan was in the fifth year of his Tribuneship when he entertained the people
with such a Horse-race or Bull-baiting? Yet it is the fixing of these great
periods that gives a man the first rank in the republic of letters, and
recommends him to the world for a person of various reading and profound
erudition.

You must always give your men of great reading leave to show their talents on
the meanest subjects, says Eugenius; it is a kind of shooting at rovers: where
a man lets fly his arrow without taking any aim, to show his strength. But
there is one advantage, says he, turning to Philander, that seems to me very
considerable, although your Medallists sel^om throw it into the account, which
is the great ^lp to memory one finds in Medals: for my own part I am very much
embarrassed in the names and ranks of the several Roman Emperors, and find it
difficult to recollect upon occasion the different parts of their history: but
your Medal^^sts upon the first naming of an Emperor will immediately tell you
his age, family and life. To remember where he enters in the succession, they
only consider in what part of the cabinet he lies; and by runinng over in their
thoughts such a particular drawer, will give you an account of all the
remarkable parts of his reign.

I thank you, says Philander, for helping me to an use that perhaps I should
not have thought on. But there is another of which I am sure you could not be
but sensible when you were at Rome. I must own to you it surprised me to see my
Ciceroni so well acquainted with the busts and statues of all the great people
of antiquity. There was not an Emperor or Empress but he knew by sight, and as
he was seldom without Medals in his pocket, he would often show us the same
face on an old Coin that we saw in the Statue. He would discover a Commodus
through the disguise of the club and lion's skin, and find out such a one to be
Livia that was dressed up like a Ceres. Let a bust be never so disfigured, they
have a thousand marks by which to decipher it. They will know a Zenobia by the
sitting of her Diadem, and will distinguish the Faustina's by their different
way of tying up their hair. Oh! Sir, says Cynthio, they will go a great deal
farther, they will give you the name and titles of a Statue that has lost his
nose and ears; or if there is but half a beard remaining, will tell you at
first sight who was the owner of it. Now I must confess to you, I used to fancy
they imposed upon me an Emperor or Empress at pleasure, rather than appear
ignorant.

All this however is easily learnt from Medals, says Philander, where you may
see likewise the plans of many the most considerable buildings of Old Rome.
There is an ingenious Gentleman of our own nation extremely well versed in this
stud^, who has a design of publishing the whole history of Architecture, with
its several improvements and decays as it is to be met with on ancient Coins.
He has assured me that he has observed all the nicety of proportion in the
figures of the different orders that compose the buildings on the best
preserved Medals. You here see the copies of such Ports and triumphal Arches as
there are not the least traces of in the places where they once stood. You have
here the models of several ancient Temples, though the Temples themselves, and
the Gods that were worshipped in them, are perished many hundred years ago. Or
if there are still any foundations or ruins of former edifices, you may learn
from Coins what was their Architecture when they stood whole and entire. These
are buildings with the Goths and Vandals could not demolish, that are
infinitely more durable than stone or marble, and will perhaps last as long as
the earth it self. They are in short so many real monuments of Brass.

Quod non imber edax non aquilo, impotens
Possit diruere, aut innumerabilis
Annorum series, and fuga temporum.
Which eating showers, nor northwind's feeble blast,
Nor whirle of time, nor flight of years can waste.
Mr. Creech. This is a noble Panegyric on an old copper Coin, says Cynthio. But
I am afraid a little malicious rust would demolish one of your braze^ edifices
as effectually as a Goth or Vandal. Yo^ would laugh at me, says Philander,
should I mak^ you a learned dissertation on the nature of Rusts I shall only
tell you there are two or three sort of them which are extremely beautiful in
the ey^ of an Antiquary, and preserve a Coin better tha^ the best artificial
varnish. As for other kinds, skilful Medallist knows very well how to de^ with
them. He will recover you a Temple o^ a triumphal Arch out of its rubbish, if I
may (...) call it, and with a few reparations of the gravin^ tool restore it to
its first splendor and magnif^cence. I have known an Emperor quite hid under a
crust of dross, who after two or three day^ cleansing has appeared with all his
Titles abo^ him as fresh and beautiful as at his first comi^ out of the Mint. I
am sorry, says Eugenius, did not know this last use of Medals when I w^ at
Rome. It might perhaps have given me a greater taste of its Antiquities, and
have fixed in m^ memory several of the ruins that I have now fo^gotten For my
part, says Cynthio, I think the^ are at Rome enough modern works of Architectu^
to employ any reasonable man. I never cou^ have a taste for old bricks and
rubbish, nor wou^ trouble my self about the ruins of Augustus's P^lace so long
as I could see the Vatican, t^ Borghese, and the Farnese as they now stand;
must own to you at the same time this is talki^ like an ignorant man. Were I in
other comp^ny I would perhaps change my style, and t^ them that I would rather
see the fragments (...) Apollo's Temple than St. Peter's. I rememb^ when our
Antiquary at Rome had led us a who^ day together from one ruin to another, he
at last brought us to the Rotunda, And this, says he, is the most valuable
Antiquity in Italy, notwithstanding it is so entire.

The same kind of fancy, says Philander, has formerly gained upon several of
your Medallists, who were for hoording up such pieces of money only as had been
half consumed by time or rust. There were no Coins pleased them more than those
which had passed through the hands of an old Roman Clipper. I have read an
Author of this taste that compares a ragged Coin to a tattered Colors. But to
come again to our Subject. As we find on Medals the plans of several buildings
that are now demolished, we see on them too the Models of many ancient Statues
that are now lost. There are several Reverses which are owned to be the
representations of antique figures, and I question not but there are many
others that were formed on the like Models, though at present they lie under no
suspicion of it. The Herc^les Farnese, the Venus of Medicis, the Apollo in the
Belvidera, and the famous Marcus Aurelius on horseback, which are perhaps the
four most beautiful Statues extant, make their appearance all of them on
ancient Medals, though the figures that represent them were never thought to be
the ^pies of statues till the statues themselves were discovered. There is no
question, I think, but t^^ same reflection may extend it self to antique
P^ctures: for I doubt not but in the designs of several Greek Medals in
particular, one might often see the hand of an Apelles or Protogenes, were we
as well acquainted with their works as ^e are with Titian's or Vandike's. I
might here make a much greater show of the Usefulness of Medals, if I would
take the method of others, and prove to you that all arts and sciences receive
a considerable illustration from this study. I must however tell you, that
Medals and the Civil Law, as we are assured by those who are well read in both,
give a considerable light to each other, and that several old Coins are like so
many maps for explaining of the ancient Geography. But besides the more solid
parts of learning, there are severa^ little intimations to be met with on
Medals tha^ are very pleasant to such as are conversant in thi^ kind of study.
Should I tell you gravely, tha^ without the help of Coins we should never have
known which was the first of the Emperors tha^ wore a beard, or rode in
stirrups, I might turt my science into ridicule. Yet it is certai^ there are a
thousand little impertinencies of this nature that are very gratifying to
curiosity, though perhaps not very improving to the understanding To see the
dress that such an Empress delighte^ to be drawn in, the titles that were most
agreeabl^ to such an Emperor, the flatteries that he lay mo^ open to, the
honors that he paid to his chi^dren, wives, predecessors, friends or colleague
with the like particularities only to be met with o^ Medals, are certainly not
a little pleasing to the inquisitive temper which is so natural to the min^ of
man.

I declare to you, says Cynthio, you have ast^nished me with the several parts
of knowledge that you have discovered on Medals. I cou^ never fancy before this
evening, that a Coin cou^ have any nobler use in it than to pay a recko^ing.

You have not heard all yet, says Philander, there is still an advantage to be
drawn from Medals, which I am sure will heighten your esteem for them. It is
indeed an use that no body has hitherto dwelt upon. If any of the Antiquaries
have touched upon it, they have immediately quitted it, without considering it
in its full latitude, light and extent. Not to keep you in suspense, I think
there is a great affinity between Coins and Poetry, and that your Medallist and
Critic are much nearer related than the world generally imagines. A reverse
often clears up the passage of an old poet, as the poet often serves to
unriddle a reverse. I could be longer on this head, but I fear I have already
tired you. Nay, says Eugenius, since you have gone so far with us, we must beg
you to finish your lecture, especially since you are on a subject, that I dare
promise you will be very agreeable to Cynthio, who is so professed an admirer
of the ancient poets. I must only warn you, that you do not charge your Coins
with more uses than they can bear. It is generally the method of such as are in
love with any particular science to discover all others in it. Who would
imagine, for example, that architecture should comprehend the knowledge of
histo^y, ethics, music, astronomy, natural philosophy, ^hysic and the civil
law? Yet Vitruvius will give ^ou his reasons, such as they are, why a good
architect is master of these several arts and sciences. Sure, says Cynthio,
Martial had never read Vitruvius when he threw the Crier and the Architect into
the same class. Duri si puer ingeni videtur
Preconem facias vel architectum.
If of dull parts the stripling you suspect,
A herald make him, or an architect.
But to give you an instance out of a very celebrated discourse on poetry,
because we are on that subject, of an author's finding out imaginary beauties
in his own art. I have observed, Vossius de viribus Rythmi.
says he, (speaking of the natural propension that all men have to numbers and
harmony) that my barber ha^ often combed my head in Dactyls an^ Spondees, that
is, with two short strokes and a lon^ one, or with two long ones successively.
Nay, say he, I have known him sometimes run even into Pyrrhichius's and
Anapoestus's. This you will think perhaps a very extravagant fancy, but I mus^
own I should as soon expect to find the Prosodu^ in a Comb as Poetry in a
Medal. Before I endeavor to convince you of it, says Philander, I mus^ confess
to you that this science has its visionarie^ as well as all others. There are
several, for example, that will find a mystery in every tooth o^ Neptune's
trident, and are amazed at the wisdom of the ancients that represented a
thunder-bol^ with three forks, since, they will tell you, nothing could have
better explained its triple quality of piercing, burning and melting. I have
see a long discourse on the figure and nature of horn to show it was impossible
to have found out a fitte^ emblem for plenty than the Cornu-copiae. These a^^ a
sort of authors who scorn to take up with appearances, and fancy an
interpretation vulg^ when it is natural. What could have been more proper to
show the beauty and friendship of the three Graces, than to represent them
naked an^ knitt together in a kind of dance? It is thus they always appear in
ancient sculpture, whether on Medals or in Marble, as I doubt not but Horace
alludes to designs of this nature, when he describes them after the same
manner. -- Gratia,
Junctis nuda sororibus:
-- Segnesque nodum solvere Gratiae.
The Sister- Graces hand in hand
Conjoined by love's eternal band.
Several of your Medallists will be here again astonished at the wisdom of the
ancients, that knew how to couch such excellent Precepts of morality under
visible objects. The nature of Gratitude, they will tell you, is better
illustrated by this single device, than by Seneca's whole book d^ Beneficiis.
The three Graces teach us three things. I. To remark the doing of a courtesy.
II. The return of it from the receiver. III. The obligation of the receiver to
acknowledge it. The three Graces are always hand in hand, to show us that these
three duties should be never separated. They are naked, to admonish us that
Gratitude should be returned with a free and open heart; and dancing, to show
us that no virtue is more active than Gratitude. May not we here say with
Lucretius? Quae been and eximie quanquam disposta ferantur,
Sunt long tamen a vera ratione repulsa.
It is an easy thing, says Eugenius, to find out designs that never entered
into the thoughts of the ^ulptor or the coiner. I dare say, the same Gentlemen
who have fixed this piece of morality on the three naked Sisters dancing hand
in hand, would have found out as good a one for them, had there been four of
them sitting at a distance from each other, and covered from head to foot. It
is here therefore, says Philander, that the old Poets step in to the assistance
of the Medallist, when they give us the same though in words as the masters of
the Roman min^ have done in figures. A man may see a metaphor or an allegory in
picture, as well as rea^ them in a description. When therefore I confront a
Medal with a Verse, I only show yo^ the same design executed by different
hands, and appeal from one master to another of the sam^ age and taste. This is
certainly a much sure way than to build on the interpretations of a^ author who
does not consider how the ancient used to think, but will be still inventing
mysteries and applications out of his own fancy. T^ make my self more
intelligible, I find a shield o^ the reverse of an Emperor's Coin, designed as
^ compliment to him from the senate of Rome. meet with the same metaphor in
ancient poets t^ express protection or defense. I conclude therefore that this
Medal compliments the Emper^ in the same sense as the old Romans did the
Dictator Fabius when they called him the Buc^ler of Rome. Put this reverse now
if you pleas^ into the hands of a mystical antiquary; He sha^ tell you that the
use of the shield being to defen^ the body from the weapons of an enemy, it
ver^ aptly shadows out to us the resolution or co^tinence of the Emperor, which
made him pro^ to all the attacks, of fortune or of pleasure. (...) the next
place, the figure of the shield being round it is an emblem of perfection, for
Aristotle has said the round figure is the most perfect. It may likewise
signify the immortal reputation that the Emperor has acquired by his great
actions, rotundity being an emblem of eternity that has neither beginning nor
end. After this I dare not answer for the shield's convexity that it does not
cover a mystery, nay there shall not be the least wrinkle or flourish upon it
which will not turn to some account. In this case therefore Poema est pictura
loquax.
Poetry being in some respects an art of designing as well as Painting or
Sculpture, they may serve as Comments on each other. I am very well satisfied,
says Eugenius, by what you have said on this subject, that the Poets may
contribute to the explication of such reverses as are purely emblematical, or
when the persons are of that shadowy allegorical nature you have before
mentioned, but I suppose there are many other reverses that represent things
and persons of a more real existence. In this case too, says Philander, a Poet
lets you into the knowledge of a device better than a Prose-writer, as his
descriptions are often more diffuse, his story more naturally circumstanced,
and his language enriched with a greater variety of epithets: So that you often
meet with little hints and suggestions in a Poet that give a great illustration
to the customs, actions, ornaments, and all kinds of Antiquities that are to be
met with on ancient Coins. I fancy, says Cynthio, there is nothing more
ridiculous than an Antiquary's reading the Greek or Latin Poets. He never
thinks of the beauty of the thought or language, but is for searching into what
he calls the Erudition of the Author. He will turn you over all Virgil to find
out the figure of an old Rostrum, and has the greatest esteem imaginable for
Homer, because has given us the fashion of a Greek scepter. It is indeed odd
enough to consider how all kinds of Readers find their account in the old
Poets. Not only your men of the more refined or solid parts of Learning, but
even your Alchymist and Fortune Tellers will discover the secrets of their art
in Homer and Virgil. This, says Eugenius, is a prejudice of a very ancient
standing. Read but Plutarch's discourse on Homer, and you will see that the
Iliad contains the whole circle of arts, and that Thales and Pythagoras stole
all their philosophy out of this Poet's works. One would be amazed to see what
pains he takes to prove that Homer understood all the figures in Rhetoric,
before they were invented. I do not question, says Philander, were it possible
for Homer to read his praises in this Author, but he would be as much surprised
as ever Monsieur Jordain was when he had found he had talked Prose all his
lifetime without ever knowing what it was. But to finish the task you have set
me, we may observe that not only the Virtues, and the like imaginary persons,
but all the heathen Divinities appear generally in the same Dress among the
Poets that they wear in Medals. I must confess, I believe both the one and the
other took the Mode from the ancient Greek Statuaries. It will not perhaps be
an improper transition to pass from the heathen gods to the several monsters of
antiquity, as Chimaeras, Gorgons, Sphinxes, and many others that make the same
figure in verse as on coins. It often happens too, that the Poet and the Senate
of Rome have both chosen the same Topic to flatter their Emperor upon, and have
sometimes fallen upon the same thought. It is certain, they both of them lay
upon the catch for a great action: It is no wonder therefore, that they were
often engaged on one subject, the Medal and the Poem being nothing else but
occasional compliments to the Emperor. Nay, I question not but you may
sometimes find certain passages among the Poets that relate to the parcular
device of a Medal.

I wonder, says Eugenius, that your Medallists have not been as diligent in
searching the Poets as the Historians, since I find they are so capable of
enlightening their art. I would have some body put the Muses under a kind of
contribution to furnish out whatever they have in them that bears any relation
to Coins. Though they taught us but the same things that might be learnt in
other writings, they would at least teach us more agreeably, and draw several
over to the study of Medals that would rather be instructed in verse than in
prose. I am glad, says Philander, to hear you of this opinion, for to tell you
truly, when I was at Rome, I took occasion to buy up many Imperial Medals that
have any affinity with passages of the ancient Poets. So that I have by me a
sort of poetical Cash, which I fancy I could count over to you in Latin and
Greek verse, If you will drink a dish of Tea with me tomorrow morning, I will
lay my whole collection before you. I cannot tell, says Cynthio, how the Poets
will succeed in the explication of coins, t^ which they are generally very
great strangers. We are however obliged to you for preventing us with the offer
of a kindness that you might well imagine we should have asked you.

Our three friends had been so intent on their discourse, that they had rambled
very far into the fields without taking notice of it. Philande^ first put them
in mind, that unless they turne^ back quickly they would endanger being
benighted. Their conversation ran insensibly into other subjects, but as I
design only to report such part of it as have any relation to Medals, I shall
leav^ them to return home as fast as they please, with out troubling my self
with their talk on the w^ thither, or with their ceremonies at parting.



DIALOGUE II.
SOME of the finest treatises of the most polite Latin and Greek writers are in
Dialogue, as many very valued pieces of French, Italian, and English appear in
the same dress. I have sometimes however been very much distasted at this way
of writing, by reason of the long Prefaces and exordiums into which it often
betrays an author. There is so much time taken up in ceremony, that before they
enter on their subject the Dialogue is half ended. To avoid the fault I have
found in others, I shall not trouble my self nor my Reader with the first
salutes of our three friends, nor with any part of their discourse over the
Tea-table. We will suppose the China dishes taken off, and a Drawer of Medals
supplying their room. Philander, who is to be the Hero in my Dialogue, takes
it in his hand, and addressing himself to Cynthio and Eugenius, I will first of
all, says he, show you an assembly of the most virtuous Ladies that you have
ever perhaps conversed with. I do not know, says Cynthio, regarding them, what
their virtue may be, but methinks they are a little fantastical in their dress.
You will find, says Philander, there is good sense in it. They have not a
single ornament that they cannot give a reason for. I was going to ask you,
says Eugenius, in what country you find these Ladies. But I see they are some
of those imaginary persons you told us of last night that inhabit old Coins,
and appear no where else but on the reverse of a Medal. Their proper country,
says Philander, is the breast of a good man: for I think they are most of them
the figures of Virtues. It is a great compliment methinks to the sex, says
Cynthio, that your Virtues are generally shown in petticoats. I can give no
other reason for it, says Philander, but because they chanced to be of the
feminine gender in the learned languages. First Series. FIGURE I.
You find however something bold and masculine in the air and posture of the
first figure, which is that of Virtue her self, and agrees very well with the
description we find of her in Silius Italicus. Virtutis dispar habitus, frons
hirta, nec unquam
Composita mutata coma, stans vultus, et ore
Incessuque viro propior, laetique pudoris,
Celsa humeris, niveae fulgebat stamine pallae.
Sil. It. L. 15. A different form did Virtue wear,
Rude from her forehead fell the unplaited hair,
With dauntless mien aloft she reared her head,
And next to manly was the virgin's tread;
Her height, her sprightly blush, the Goddess show,
And robes unsullied as the falling snow.
Virtue and Honor had their Temples bordering on each other, and are sometimes
both on the same coin, FIG. 2.
as in the following one of Galba. Silius Italicus makes them companions in the
glorious equipage that he gives his Virtue. [Virtus loquitur.] Mecum Honor, et
Lauds, et laeto Gloria vultu,
Et Decus, et niveis Victoria concolor alis.
Ibid, [Virtue speaks.] With me the foremost place let Honor gain,
Fame, and the Praises mingling in her train;
Gay Glory next, and Victory on high,
White like my self, on snowy wings shall fly.
Tu cujus placido posuere in pectore sedem
Blandus Honos, hilarisque (tamen cum pondere) Virtus.
Stat. Sil. l. 2. The head of Honor is crowned with a Laurel, as Martial has
adorned his Glory after the same manner, which indeed is but another name for
the same person. Mitte coronatas Gloria maesta comas. I find, says Cynthio, the
Latins mean Courage by the figure of Virtue, as well as by the word it self.
Courage was esteemed the greatest perfection among them, and therefore went
under the name of Virtue in general, as the modern Italians give the same name
on the same account to the Knowledge of Curiosities. Should a Roman Painter at
present draw the picture of Virtue, in^^ead of the Spear and Paratonium that
she bears ^n old coins, he would give her a Bust in one hand and a Fiddle in
the other.

The next, says Philander, FIG. 3.
is a Lady of a more peaceful character, and had ^er Temple at Rome. --
Salutato crepitat Concordia nido. She is often placed on the reverse of an
Imperi^ coin to show the good understanding betwee^ the Emperor and the
Empress. She has alway^ a Cornu-copiae in her hand, to denote that Plent^ is
the fruit of Concord. After this short accou^^ of the Goddess, I desire you
will give me you^ opinion of the Deity that is described in the fo^lowing
verses of Seneca, who would have he propitious to the marriage of Jason and
Creus: He mentions her by her qualities, and not b^ her name. -- Asperi
Martis sanguineas quae cohibet manus,
Quae dat belligeris foedera gentibus,
Et cornu retinet divite copiam.
Sen. Med. Act. 1 Who sooths great Mars the warrior God,
And checks his arm distained with blood,
Who joins in leagues the jarring lands,
The horn of Plenty fills her hands.
The description, says Eugenius, is a copy of the figure we have before us: and
for the future, in stead of any further note on this passage, would have the
reverse you have shown us stamped on the side of it. The interpreters of Seneca
says Philander, will understand the precedent verses as a description of Venus,
though in my opinion there is only the first of them that can aptly relate to
her, which at the same time agrees as wel^ with Concord: and that this was a
Goddess wh^ ^ed to interest her self in marriages, we may see the following
description.

-- Jamdudum post reclinis,
Quaerit Hymen thalamis intactum dicere carmen,
Quo vatem mulcere queat; dat Juno verenda
Vincula, et insigni geminat Concordia taeda.
Statii Epithalamion. Silv. li. 1. Already leaning at the door, too long
Sweet Hymen waits to raise the nuptial Song,
Her sacred bands majestic Juno lends,
And Concord with her flaming torch attends.
Peace differs as little in her Dress as in her Character from Concord. FIG. 4.
You may observe in both these figures that the Vest is gathered up before
them, like an Apron, which you must suppose filled with fruits as well as the
Cornu-copiae. It is to this part of the Dress that Tibullus alludes. At nobis,
Pax alma, veni, spicamque teneto,
Perfluat et pomis candidus ante sinus.
Kind Peace appear,
And in thy right hand hold the wheaten ear,
From thy white lap the overflowing fruits, shall fall.
Prudentius has given us the same circumstance in his description of Avarice.
-- Avaritia gremio praecincta capaci.
Prud. Psychomachia. How proper the emblems of Plenty are to Peace, may be seen
in the same Poet. Interea Pax arva colat, Pax candida primum
Duxit araturos sub'juga curva boves;
Pax aluit vites, et succos condidit uvae,
Funderet ut nato testa paterna merum:
Pace bidens vomerque vigent. --
Tibul. El. 10. Lib. 1. She first, White Peace, the earth with ploughshares
broke,
And bent the oxen to the crooked yoke,
First reared the vine, and hoarded first with ca^
The father's vintage for his drunken heir.
The Olive Branch in her hand is frequently touched upon in the old Poets as a
token of Peace. Pace orare manu --
Virg. Aen. 10. Ingreditur, ramumque tenens popularis Olivae.
Ov. Met. lib. 7. In his right hand an Olive Branch he holds. -- furorem
Indomitum duramque viri deflectere mentem
Pacifico sermon parant, hostemque propinquum
Orant Cecropiae praelata fronde Minervae.
Luc. lib. 3. -- To move his haughty soul they try
Entreaties, and persuasion soft apply;
Their brows Minerva's peaceful branches wear,
And thus in gentlest terms they greet his ear.
Mr. Row. Which by the way one would think had been spoken rather of an
Attila, or a Maximin, than Julius Caesar.

You see Abundance or Plenty makes the same figure in Medals as in Horace. FIG.
5.
-- tibi Copia*
Manabit ad plenum benigno
Ruris honorum opulenta cornu.
Hor. Lib. 1. Od. 17. -- Here to thee shall Plenty flow
And all her riches show,
To raise the honor of the quiet plain.
Mr. Creech. The Compliment on this reverse to Gordianus Pius is expressed in
the same manner as that of Horace to Augustus.

-- Aurea fruges
Italiam pleno diffudit Copia cornu.
Hor. Epist. 12. Lib. 1. -- Golden Plenty with a bounteous hand
Rich harvests freely scatters over our land.
Mr. Creech. But to return again to our Virtues. FIG. 6.
You have here the picture of Fidelity, who was worshipped as a Goddess among
the Romans.

Situ oblitus es at Dij meminerunt, meminit Fides.
Catul. ad Alphen. I should fancy, from the following verses of Virgil and
Silius Italicus, that she was represented under the figure of an old woman.

Cana Fides, et Vesta, Remo cum fratre Quirin^
Jura dabunt --
Virg. Aen. Lib. 1 Then banished Faith shall once again return,
And vestal fires in hallowed temples burn,
And Remus with Quirinus shall sustain
The righteous laws, and fraud and force restrain.
Mr. Dryde^ -- ad limina sanctae
Tendebat Fidei, secretaque pectora tentat.
Arcanis dea laeta, polo tum forte remoto
Coelicolum magnas volvebat conscia curas.
Ante Jovem generata, decus divumque hom^ numque,
Qua sine non tellus pacem; non aequora norunt,
Justitiae consors --
Sil. It. Lib. He to the shrines of Faith his steps addressed.
She, pleased with secrets rolling in her breast
Far from the world remote, revolved on high
The cares of gods, and counsels of the sky.
Ere Jove was born she graced the bright abodes
Consort of Justice, boast of men and gods;
Without whose heavenly aid no peace below
The steadfast earth, and rolling ocean know.
FIG. 7.
There is a Medal of Heliogabal^ inscribed FIDES EXERCITUS. that receives a
great light from the preceding verses. She is posted between two military
Ensigns, for the good quality that the Poet ascribes ^her of preserving the
public peace, by keeping the Army true to its Allegiance.

I fancy, says Eugenius, as you have discovered the Age of this imaginary Lady
from the description that the Poets have made of her, you may and too the
color of the Drapery that she wore in the old Roman paintings, from that verse
in Horace, Te Spes et albo rara Fides colit
Velata panno --
Hor. Od. 35. Lib. 1. Sure Hope and Friendship clothed in White,
Attend on thee. --
Mr. Creech. One would think, says Philander, by this verse, that Hope and
Fidelity had both the same kind of Dress. It is certain Hope might have a fair
pretense to White, in allusion to those that were Candidates for an employ. --
quem ducit hiantem
Cretata ambitio --
Pers. Sat. 5. And how properly the Epithet of Rara agrees with her, you may
see in the transparency of the next figure. FIG. 8.
She is here dressed in such a kind of Vest as the ^atins call a Multicium from
the fineness of its issue. Your Roman Beaus had their summer ^a of such a light
airy make. Quem tenues decuere togae nitidique capilli.
Hor. Ep. 14. Lib. 1. I that loved --
Curled powdered locks, a fine and gaudy gow^
Mr. Cree^ I remember, says Cynthio, Juvenal rallys Cre^cus, that was otherwise
a brave rough fellow, very handsomely, on this kind of garment.

-- sed quid
Non facient alij cum tu multitia sumas,
Cretice? et hanc vestem populo mirante peror^
In Proculas et Pollineas. --
Juv. Sat. Acer et indomitus Libertatisque magister,
Cretice, pelluces --
Ibi^ -- Nor, vain Metellus, shall
From Rome's Tribunal thy harangues prevail
Against harlotry, while thou art clad so thin,
That through thy Cobweb-robe we see thy skin,
As thou declaim'st --
Mr. Tat^ Can thou restore old manners, or retrench
Rome's pride, who come transparent to the Bench?
Idem But pray what is the meaning that this transparent Lady holds up her
train in her left hand for I find your women on Medals do nothin^ without a
meaning. Besides, I suppose there a moral precept at least couched under the
figur^ she holds in her other hand. She draws bac^ her garment, says Philander,
that it may not in cumber her in her march. For she is always drawn in a
posture of walking, it being as natural for Hope to press forward to her proper
objects, as for Fear to fly from them.

^t canis in vacuo leporem cum Gallicus arvo
^idit, et hic praedam pedibus petit, ille salutem:
^lter in-haesuro similis, jam jamque tenere
^perat, et extento stringit vestigia rostro;
^lter in ambiguo est an sit comprensus, et ipsis
Morsibus eripitur, tangentiaque ora relinquit:
Sic deus et virgo est: hic spe celer, illa timore.
De Apol. et Daph. Ov. Met. Lib. 1. As when the impatient Greyhound slipped from
far,
^ounds over the glebe to catch the fearful Hare,
She in her speed does all her safety lay:
And he with double speed pursues the prey;
O'er-runs her at the sitting turn, and licks
His chaps in vain, and blows upon the flix:
She escapes, and for the neighboring covert strives,
And gaining shelter doubts if yet she lives: --
Such was the god, and such the flying fair,
She, urged by Fear, her feet did swiftly move,
But he more swiftly who was urged by Love.
Mr. Dryden. This beautiful similitude is, I think, the prettiest Emblem in the
world of Hope and Fear in extremity. A flower or blossom that you see in the
right hand is a proper ornament for Hope, since they are these that we term in
poetical language the Hopes of the year.

^ere novo, tunc herba nitens, et roboris expers
^urget et insolida est, et Spe delectat agrestes.
Omnia tum florent florumque coloribus almus
Ridet ager --
Ov. Met. Lib. 15. The green stem grows in stature and in size,
But only feeds with Hope the Farmer's eyes;
Then laughs the childish year with flower crowned,
And lavishly perfumes the fields around.
Mr. Dryde^ The same Poet in his De fastis, speaking of ^ Vine in flower,
expresses it In spe vitis erat --
Ov. de Fast. Lib.

FIG. 9.
The next on the List is a Lady of contrary character, and therefore in quite
different posture. As Security is free from pursuits, she is represented
leaning carelessly on pillar. Horace has drawn a pretty metaphor from this
posture.

Nullum me a labor reclinat otium.
No ease does lay me down from pain.
Mr. Cree^ She rests her self on a pillar, for the same reas^ as the Poets
often compare an obstinate resol^tion or a great firmness of mind, to a rock
the is not to be moved by all the assaults of win or waves.

Non civium ardor prava jubentium,
No vultus instantis tyranni,
Mente quatit solida, neque Auster
Dux inquietae turbidus Adriae, etc.
The man resolved, and steady to his trust,
Inflexible to ill, and obstinately just,
May the rude rabble's insolence despise,
Their senseless clamours and tumultuous cri^
The tyrant's fierceness he beguiles,
And the stern brow and the harsh voice defies,
And with superior greatness smiles.
^ot the rough whirlwind that deforms
^dria's black gulf -- etc.
Mr. Creech. I am apt to think it was on Devices of this nature that Horace had
his eye in his Ode to Fortune. It is certain he alludes to a pillar that
figured out Security, or something very like it; and till any body finds out
another that will stand better in ^s place, I think we may content our selves
with this before us. ^e Dacus asper, te profugi Scythae
^rbesque gentesque et Latium ferox,
Regumque matres harharorum, et
Purpurei metuunt tyranni:
Injurioso ne pede proruas
Stantem columnam; neu populus frequens
Ad arma cessantes, ad arma
Concitet, imperiumque frangat.
Ad Fortunam. Hor. Lib. 1. Od. 35. To thee their vows rough Germans pay,
To thee the wandering Scythians bend,
Thee mighty Rome proclaims a friend:
And for their Tyrant sons
The barbarous Mothers pray
^o thee, the greatest guardian of their Thrones.
They bend, they vow, and still they fear,
Lest you should kick their Column down,
And cloud the glory of their Crown;
They fear that you would raise
The lazy crowd to war,
And break their Empire, or confine their prai^.
Mr. Cree^ I must however be so fair as to let you know the Peace and Felicity
have their pillars in sever^ Medals as well as Security, so that if you do
(...) like one of them, you may take the other.

FIG. 10.
The next Figure is that of Chasty, who was worshipped as a Go^dess, and had her
Temple. -- deinde ad superos Astraea recessit
Hac comite, atque duae pariter fugere sorores.
De pudicitia. Juv. Sat. At length uneasy Justice upwards flew,
And both the Sisters to the Stars withdrew.
Mr. Drya^ Templa pudicitiae quid opus statuisse puellis,
Si cuivis nuptae quidlibet esse licet?
Tib. Lib Since wives whatever they please unblam'd can
Why rear we useless Fanes to Chastity?
How her posture and dress become her, you (...) see in the following verses.
Ergo sedens velat vultus, obnubit ocellos
Ista verecundi signa Pudoris erant.
Al^ She sits, her visage veiled, her eyes concealed
By marks like these was Chastity revealed.
^^ procul vittae tenues, insigne pudoris,
Quaeque tegit medios instita long a pedes.
Ov. de Art. Aman. -- frontem limbo velata pudicam.
Claud. de Theod. Cons. Hence! ye smooth fillets on the forehead bound,
Whose bands the brows of Chastity surround,
And her coy Robe that lengthens to the ground.
Sh^^ represented in the habit of a Roman Matron. ^atronae praeter faciem nil
cernere possis,
^etera, ni Catia est, demissa vest tegentis.
Hor. Sat. 2. Lib. 1. ^sides, a Matron's face is seen alone;
^ut Kate's, that female bully of the town,
^^r all the rest is covered with a gown.
Mr. Creech. Th^^ ni Catia est, says Cynthio, is a beauty unknown to most of
our English Satyrists. Horace knew how to stab with address, and to give a
thrust where he was least expected Boileau ha^ nicely imitated him in this, as
well as his other beauties. But our English Libellers are for he^^ng a man
downright, and for letting him see at ^^istance that he is to look for no
mercy. I own to you, says Eugenius, I have often admired this piece of art in
the two Satyrists you mention and have been surprised to meet with a man in
Satire that I never in the least expected to find there. They have a particular
way of hiding their ill nature, and introduce a criminal rather to illustrate a
precept or passage, than out of any seeming design to abuse him. Our English
Poets on the contrary show a kind of malice prepense in their Satires, and
instead of bringing in the person to give light to any part of the Poem, let
you see they writ the whole Poem on purpose to abuse the person. But we must
not leave the Ladies thus. Pray what kind of head-dress is that of Piety?

As Chastity, says Philander, appears in the habit of a Roman matron, in whom
that Virtue was supposed to reign in its perfection, Piety wears the dress of
the Vestal Virgins, FIG. 11:
who were the greatest and most shining examples of it. Vittata Sacerdos is you
know an Expression among the Latin Poets. I do not question but you have seen
in the Duke of Florence's gallery a beautiful antique figure of a woman
standing before an Altar, which some of the Antiquaries call a Piety and others
a Vestal Virgin. The woman, Altar and fire burning on it, are seen in marble
exactly as in this coin, and bring to my mind a part of (...) speech that
Religion makes in Phaedrus's fables. Sed ne ignis noster facinori praeluceat,
Per quem verendos excolit Pietas deos.
Fab. 10. Li. 4 It is to this Goddess that Statius addresses himself in the
following lines. Summa deum Pietas! cujus gratissima coelo
Rara profanatas inspectant numina terras,
Huc vittata comam, niveaque insignis amictu,
^alis adhuc praesens, nullaque expulsa nocentum
^ude rudes populos atque aurea regna colebas,
M^tibus exequiis ades, et lugentis Hetrusci
^^ne pios fletus, laudataque lumina terge.
Statius Silv. Li. 3. C^ief of the Skies, celestial Piety!
Whose godhead, prized by those of heavenly birth,
Re^isits rare these tainted realms of Earth,
M^ld in thy milk-white vest, to sooth my friend,
With holy fillets on thy brows descend,
Such as of old (ere chased by Guilt and Rage)
A^ace unpolished, and a golden age,
^^eld thee frequent. Once more come below,
M^ in the soft solemnities of woe,
S^, see, thy own Hetruscus wastes the day
In ^ious grief; and wipe his tears away.
The little trunk she holds in her left hand is the (...) that you so often
find among the Poets, in which the frankincense was preserved that Pi^ty ^ere
supposed to strew on the fire.

D^^tque sacerdoti custodem thuris acerram.
Ov. Met. Li. 13. Haec tibi pro nato plena dat laetus acerra
P^^be --
Mart. Li. 4. Epig. 45. T^ figure of Equity differs but lit^e from that our
painters make of ^er a^ present. FIG. 12.
The scales she carries in her hand ^re so natural an emblem of justice, that
Persius ^as ^med them into an allegory to express the deci^o^ ^f right or wrong.

-- Quirites
Hoc puto non justumest, illud male, rectius istus
Scis etenim justum gemina suspendere lance
Ancipitis Librae. --
Socrat. ad Alcibiad. Sat. -- Romans, know,
Against right reason all your counsels go;
This is not fair; nor profitable that:
Nor the other question proper for debate.
But thou, no doubt, can set the business rig^
And give each argument its proper weight:
Know with an equal hand to hold the scale, and
Mr. Dryde FIG. 13.
The next figure I present you wi^ is Eternity. She holds in her ha^ a globe
with a Phaenix on it. How proper a (...) of Eternity is each of these you may
see in (...) following quotations. I am sure you will p^^don the length of the
latter as it is not impro^ to the occasion, and shows at the same time (...)
great fruitfulness of the Poet's fancy, that co^ turn the same thought to so
many different wa^ Haec Aeterna manet, divisque simillima forma^
Cui neque principium est usquam, nec finis: ipso
Sed fimilis toto remanet, perque omnia par est
de Rotunditate Corporum. Manil. Li. This form's eternal, and may justly claim
A god-like nature, all its parts the same;
Alike, and equal to its self it is found,
No end's and no beginning in a round:
^ought can molest its Being, naught control,
And this enobles, and confines the whole.
Mr. Creech. ^ar volucer superis: Stellas qui vividus aequat
^urando, membrisque terit redeuntibus aevum. --
^am pater est prolesque sui, nulloque creante
Emeritos artus foecunda morte reformat,
Et petit alternam totidem per funera vitam. --
O^senium positure rogo, falsisque sepulchris
^atales habiture vices, qui saepe renasci
Exitio, proprioque soles pubescere letho. --
^ felix, haeresque tui! quo solvimur omnes,
^c tibi suppeditat vires, praebetur origo
^r cinerem, moritur te non pereunte senectus.
^disti quodcunque fuit. Te secula test
^uncta revolvuntur: nosti quo tempore pontus
^derit elatas scopulis stagnantibus undas:
^is Phaetonteis erroribus arserit annus.
E^ clades Te nulla rapit, solusque superstes
^omita tellure manes, non stamina Parcae
(...) Te dura legunt, non jus habuere nocendi.
de Phoenice. Claud. A God-like bird! whose endless round of years
Outlasts the stars, and tires the circling spheres; --
Begot by none himself, begetting none,
Si^e of himself he is, and of himself the son;
^is life in fruitful death renews its date,
^^d kind destruction but prolongs his fate. --
^hou, says he, whom harmless fires shall burn
^y age the flame to second youth shall turn,
A^ infant's cradle is thy funeral urn. --
Thrice happy Phaenix! Heaven's peculiar care
Has made thy self thy self's surviving heir.
By Death thy deathless vigor is supplied,
Which sinks to ruin all the world beside.
Thy age, not thee, assisting Phoebus burns,
And vital flames light up thy funeral Urns.
Whatever events have been thy eyes survey,
And thou art fixed while ages roll away.
Thou saw when raging ocean burst his b^
O'er-top'd the mountains, and the earth o^ spread;
When the rash youth inflamed the high abo^
Scorched up the skies, and scared the death Gods.
When nature ceases, thou shall still remain,
Nor second Chaos bound thy endless reign
Fate's tyrant laws thy happier lot shall bra^
Baffle destruction, and elude the grave.
The circle of rays that you see round the hea^ the Phaenix distinguish him to
be the bird and spring of the Sun. Solis avi specimen --
Una est quae reparet seque ipsa reseminet al^
Assyrii Phaenica vocant: non fruge neque h^
Sed Thuris lacrymis, et succo vivit amomi.
Haec ubi quinque suae complevit secula vitae,
Ilicis in ramis, tremulaeve cacumine palmae,
Unguibus et duro sibi nidum construit ore:
Quo simul ac casias, ac nardi lenis aristas
Quassaque cum falva substravit cinnama myr^
Se super imponit, finitque in odoribus aevum
Inde ferunt totidem qui vivere debeat anno^
Corpore de patrio parvum phaenica renasci.
Cum dedit huic aetas vires, onerique ferend^
Ponderibus nidi ramos levat arboris altae,
^ertque pius cunasque suas, patriumque sepulcrum,
^erque leves auras Hyperionis urbe potitus
^nte fores sacras Hyperionis aede reponit.
Ov. Met. Li. 15. -- Titanius ales.
Claud. de Phaenice. -- From himself the Phaenix only springs:
Self-born, begotten by the parent Flame,
In which he burned, another and the same.
Who not by corn or herbs his life sustains,
^ut the sweet essence of Amomum drains:
and watches the rich gums Arabia bears,
While yet in tender dew they drop their tears.
^e (his five centuries of life fulfilled)
^is nest on oaken boughs begins to build,
^r trembling tops of Palm, and first he draws
^he plan with his broad bill and crooked claws,
Nature's artificers; on this the pile
^^ formed, and rises round; then with the spoil
^f Casia, Cynamon, and stems of Nard,
For softness strewn beneath) his funeral bed is reared:
^un'ral and bridal both; and all around
^he borders with corruptless Myrrh are crowned,
On this incumbent; 'till aetherial flame
First catches, then consumes, the costly frame;
Consumes him too, as on the pile he lies;
He lived on odours, and in odours dies.
An Infant- Phaenix from the former springs,
^is father's heir, and from his tender wings
^^akes off his parent dust, his method he pursues,
and the same lease of life on the same terms renews.
When grown to manhood he begins his reign,
And with stiff pinions can his flight sustain,
He lightens of its load the tree, that bore
His father's royal sepulcher before,
And his own cradle: This (with pious care
Placed on his back) he cuts the buxom air,
Seeks the Sun's city, and his sacred church,
And decently lays down his burden in porch.
Mr. Dry^ Sic ubi foecunda reparavit morte juventam,
Et patrios idem cineres, collectaque portat
Unguibus ossa piis, Nilique ad littora tende^
Unicus extremo Phoenix procedit ab Euro:
Convenient Aquilae, cunctaeque ex orb volu^
Ut Solis mirentur avem --
Claud. de laud. Still. L. So when his parent's pile has ceased to bu^
Towers the young Phaenix from the teeming t^
And from the purple east, with pious toil
Bears the dear relics to the distant Nile;
Himself a species! Then, the bird of Jove,
And all his plumy nation quit the grove;
The gay harmonious train delighted gaze,
Crowd the procession, and resound his prais
The radiated head of the Phaenix gives us meaning of a passage in Ausonius,
which I formerly surprised to meet with in the desc^tion of a Bird. But at
present I am very well ^tisfied the Poet must have had his eye on the ^gure of
this Bird in ancient sculpture and pai^ing, as indeed it was impossible to take
it fr^ the life. Ter nova Nestoreos implevit purpura fusos,
Et toties terno cornix vivacior aevo,
Quam novies terni glomerantem secula tractus
V^ncunt aeripedes ter terno Nestore cervi,
^es quorum aetates superat Phoebeijus oscen,
^em novies senior Gangeticus anteit ales,
^es cinnameo radiatus tempora nido.
Auson. Eidyll. 11. ^canum radiant oculi jubar. igneus ora
Cingit honos, rutilo cognatum vertice sidus
^tollit cristatus apex, tenebrasque serena
I^^ce secat --
Claud. de Phaen. His fiery eyes shoot forth a glittering ray,
and round his head ten thousand glories play:
^gh on his crest, a Star celestial bright
^vides the darkness with its piercing light.
-- Procul ignea lucet
Ales, odorati redolent cui cinnama busti.
Cl. de laud. Still. L. 2. If you have a mind to compare this scale of Be^ with
that of Hesiod, I shall give it you in a ^lation of that Poet. ^er binos
deciesque novem super exit in annos
Justa senescentum quos implet vita virorum.
Hos novies superat vivendo garrula Cornix:
^t quater egreditur cornicis saecula cervus.
^lipedem cervum ter vincit Corvus: at illum
^ultiplicat novies Phoenix, reparabicis ales.
^am vos perpetuo decies praevertitis aevo
^mphae Hamadryades: quarum longissima vita est:
^i cohibent fines vivacia fata animantum.
Auson. Eidyll. 18. The utmost age to man the Gods assign
Are winters three times two, and ten times nine
Poor man nine times the prating Dawes excee^
Three times the Dawe's the Deer's more la^ing breed:
The Deer's full thrice the Raven's race outru^
Nine times the Raven Titan's feathered son:
Beyond his age, with youth and beauty crown
The Hamadryads shine ten ages round:
Their breath the longest is the Fates bestow;
And such the bounds to mortal lives below.
A man had need be a good Arithmetician, sa^ Cynthio, to understand this
Author's works. H^ descriptton runs on like a Multiplication Tab^^ But methinks
the Poets ought to have agreed little better in the calculations of a Bird's
life the was probably of their own creation.

We generally find a great confusion in the ^^ditions of the ancients, says
Phil^^der. FIG. 14.
It seems to me, from the n^ Medal, it was an opinion among the^ that the
Phoenix renewed her self at the beginni^^ of the great year, and the return of
the Gold^ Age. This opinion I find touched upon in ^ couple of lines in
Claudian. Quicquid ab externis ales longaeva colonis.
Colligit, optati referens exordia saecli.
Claud. de rapt. Pros. Li. The person in the midst of the circle is suppos^ to
be Jupiter, by the Author that has publish^ this Medal, but I should rather
take it for t^ figure of Time. I remember I have seen at Ro^ antique Statue of
Time, with a wheel or ^p of marble in his hand, as Seneca describes (...) and
not with a serpent as he is generally rep^^^ented. -- properat cursu
^ita citato, volucrique die
^ota praecipitis volvitur anni.
Herc. fur. Act. 1. Life posts away,
And day from day drives on with swift career
The wheel that hurries on the headlong year.
(...) the circle of marble in his hand represents the ^mon year, so this that
encompasses him is a ^er representation of the great year, which ^e whole round
and comprehension of Time. (...) when this is finished, the heavenly bodies
(...) supposed to begin their courses anew, and to ^sure over again the several
periods and divi^s of years, months, days, etc. into which the ^t year is
distinguished.

-- consumto, Magnus qui dicitur, anno
^ursus in antiquum venient vaga sidera cursum:
Qualia dispositi steterant ob origin mundi.
Auson. Eidyl. 18. When round the great Platonic year has turned,
^n their old ranks the wandering stars shall stand'
^s when first marshalled by the Almighty's hand.
T^^ sum up therefore the thoughts of this Medal. The inscription teaches us
that the whole design ^st refer to the Golden Age which it lively represents,
if we suppose the circle that encompases Time, or if you please Jupiter,
signifies the finishing of the great year; and that the Phaen^ figures out the
beginning of a new series of tim^ So that the compliment on this Medal to the
Emperor Adrian, is in all respects the same that V^gil makes to Pollio's son,
at whose birth he su^poses the annus magnus or platonical year (...) out, and
renewed again with the opening of (...) Golden Age.

Magnus ab integro saeclorum nascitur ordo;
Jam redit et Virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna:
Et nova progenies coelo demittitur alto.
Virg. Ec. The time is come the Sibyls long foretold,
And the blessed maid restores the Age of Gold
In the great wheel of Time before enrolled.
Now a new progeny from Heaven descends
Ld. Laudera -- nunc adest mundo dies
Supremus ille, qui premat genus impium
Coeli ruina; rursus ut stirpem novam
Generet renascens melior: ut quondam tulit
Juvenis tenente regna Saturno poli.
Sen. Oet. Act -- The last great day is come,
When earth and all her impious sons shall
Crushed in the ruins of the falling sky,
Whence fresh shall rise, her newborn rea^ to grace,
A pious offspring and a purer race,
^uch as ere-while in golden ages sprung,
When Saturn governed, and the world was young.
(...) may compare the design of this reverse, if yo^ please, with one of
Constantine, so far as the P^^enix is concerned in both. As for the other
figure, we may have occasion to speak of it in another place. Vid. 15 figure.
King of France's Medalions.

The next figure shadows out Eterni^^ to us, FIG. 16.
by the Sun in one hand ^ the Moon in the other, which in the lan^e of sacred
poetry is as-long as the Sun and ^n endures. The heathens made choice of th^^e
Lights as apt symbols of Eternity, because, contrary to all sublunary Beings,
though they seem to perish every night, they renew themselves every morning.

^les occidere et redire possunt;
Nobis cum semel occidit brevis lux,
^ox est perpetua una dormienda.
Catul. The Suns shall often fall and rise:
But when the short-lived mortal dies
A night eternal seals his eyes.
^ace, whether in imitation of Catullus or not, ^ applied the same thought to
the Moon: and (...) too in the plural number.

Damna tamen celeres reparant coelestia lunae:
Nos ubi decidimus
Quo pius Aeneas, quo Tullus dives, et Ancus,
Pulvis et umbra sumus.
Hor. Od. 7. Lib. ^ Each loss the hastening Moon repairs again.
But we when once our race is done,
With Tullus and Anchises' son,
(Though rich like one, like the other good)
To dust and shades, without a Sun,
Descend, and sink in dark oblivion's flood.
Sir W. Tem^ FIG. 17.
In the next figure Eternity sits a globe of the heavens adorned w^ stars. We
have already seen how proper an e^blem of Eternity the globe is, and may find
^, duration of the stars made use of by the Poets ^n expression of what is
never like to end.

-- Stellas qui vividus aequas
Durando --
Claud -- Polus dum sidera pascet,
Semper honos nomenque tuum laudesque maneb^
Virg. Aen. ^ Lucida dum current annosi sidera mundi, and
Sen. M Vid. FIG. 13.
I might here tell you that Eter^^ty has a covering on her he because we can
never find out her beginni^ that her legs are bare, because we see only the
parts of her that are actually running on; that fits on a globe and bears a
scepter in her hand, show that she is sovereign Mistress of all things but for
any of these assertions I have no war^ from the Poets.

You must excuse me, if I have been longer than ordinary on such a subject as
Eternity. FIG. 18.
The next you see is Victory ^o whom the Medallists as well as ^oets never fail
to give a pair of wings.

Adfuit ipsa suis Ales Victoria --
Claud. de 6. Cons. Honor. -- dubiis volitat Victoria pennis.
Ov^ -- niveis Victoria concolor alis.
Sil. It. T^^ palm branch and laurel were both the rew^^^s of Conquerors, and
therefore no improper ornaments for Victory.

-- lentae Victoris praemia palmae.
Ov. Met. ^t palmae pretium Victoribus.
Virg. Aen. 5. (...) ducibus haetis aderis cum laeta triumphum
^x canet, et longas visent capitolia pompas.
Apollo ad Laurum. Ov. Met. Thou shall the Roman festivals adorn;
Thou shall returning Caesar's triumphs grace,
When pomps shall in a long procession pass.
Dryden. I^ ^^e way you may observe the lower plaits of the ^rapery that seem
to have gathered the wind into them. I have seen abundance of antique figures
in Sculpture and Painting, with just the (...) turn in the lower foldings of
the Vest, when the person that wears it is in a posture tripping forward.
Obviaque adversas vibrabant flamina Vestes.
Ov. Met. Lib. -- As she fled, the wind
Increasing spread her flowing hair behind;
And left her legs and thighs exposed to view
Dryd^ -- tenues sinuantur flamine vestes.
Id. Lib It is worth while to compare this figure of Vic^^ry with her Statue as
it is described in a very be^^tiful passage of Prudentius.

Non aris non far molae Victoria felix
Exorata venit: labor impiger, aspera virtus,
Vis animi, excellens ardor, violentia, cura,
Hanc tribuunt, durum tractandis robur in a^^,
Quae si defuerint bellantibus, aurea quamvis
Marmoreo in templo rutilas Victoria pinnas
Explicet, et multis surgat formata talentis:
Non aderit vestisque offensa videbitur hastis.
Quid miles propriis diffisus viribus optas
Irrita foemineae tibimet solatia formae?
Nunquam pennigeram legio ferrata puellam
Vidit anhelantum regeret quae tela virorum.
Vincendi quaeris dominam? sua dextra cuique
Et Deus omnipotens. Non pexo crine virag
Nec nudo suspensa pede, strophioque revincta,
Nec tumidas fluitante sinu vestita papillas.
Prudentius contra Symm. Lib. Shall Victory entreated lend her aid
For cakes of flower on smoking Altars la^
^er help from toils and watchings hope to find,
From the strong body, and undaunted mind:
^hese be wanting on the embattel'd plain,
(...) sue the unpropitious maid in vain.
^ough in her marble temples taught to blaze
^er dazzling wings the golden dame displays,
and many a talent in due weight was told
To shape her Godhead in the curious mould,
Shall the rough soldier of himself despair,
And hope for female visions in the air?
What legion sheathed in iron ever surveyed
Their darts directed by this winged maid!
Do thou the power that gives success demand?
'^is He the Almighty, and thy own right hand;
Not the smooth Nymph, whose locks in knots are twined,
Who bending shows her naked foot behind,
Who girds the virgin zone beneath her breast,
And from her bosom heaves the swelling vest.
You have here another Victory that I fa^cy Claudian had in his view when he
mentions her wings, FIG. 19.
palm and trophy in the following description. It appears on a Coin of
Constantine who lived about an age before Claudian, and I believe we shall find
that it is not the only piece of antique sculpture that this Poet has copied
out in his descriptions.

-- cum totis exurgens ardua pennis
(...) duci sacras Victoria panderet aedes,
(...) palma viridi gaudens, et amicta trophaeis.
Claud. de Lau. Still. Li. 3. On all her plumage rising, when she threw
Her sacred shrines wide-open to thy view,
How pleased for thee her emblems to displ^
With palms distinguished, and with trophies
FIG. 20,
The last of our imaginary B^ is Liberty. In her left hand she ^ries the wand
that the Latins call the Rud^ Vindicta, and in her right the cap of Lib^ The
Poets use the same kinds of metaphor express Liberty. I shall quote Horace for
first, whom Ovid has imitated on the same ^sion, and for the latter Martial. --
donatum jam rude quaeris
Mecaenas iterum antiquo me includere ludo.
Hor. Lib. 1. Ep^ -- tarda vires minuente senecta
Me quoque donari jam rude tempus erat.
Ov. de Tr. Lib. 4. Since bent beneath the load of years I stan^
I too might claim the freedom-giving wa^
Quod te nomine jam tuo saluto
Quem regem, et dominum prius vocabam,
Ne me dixeris esse contumacem
Totis pilea sarcinis redemi.
Mar. Lib. 2. Epig. By thy plain name though now addressed,
Though once my King and Lord confessed,
Frown not: with all my goods I buy
The precious Cap of Liberty.
I cannot forbear repeating a passage out of Persius says Cynthio, that in my
opinion turns the cer^mony of making a Freeman very handsomely in^^ ridicule.
It seems the clapping a Cap on hi^ ^^ead and giving him a Turn on the heel were
ne^^ssary circumstances. A Slave thus qualified be^^me a Citizen of Rome, and
was honored with a name more than belonged to any of his Forefathers, which
Persius has repeated with a great deal of humor. -- Heu steriles very, quibus
una Quiritem
^rtigo facit! hic Dama est, non tressis agaso,
^ppa, et lippus, et in tenui farragine mendax.
^rterit hunc dominus, momento turbinis exit
^arcus Dama. Papae! Marco spondente, recusas
^redere tu nummos? Marco sub Judice palles?
Marcus dixit, ita est: assigna, Marce, tabellas.
Haec mera libertas: hanc nobis pilea donant.
Pers. Sat. 5. ^^at false Enfranchisement with ease is found:
^aves are made Citizens by turning round.
^ow! replies one, can any be more free?
Here Is Dama, once a Groom of low degree,
Not worth a farthing, and a Sot beside;
So true a Rogue, for lying's sake he ly'd:
But, with a Turn, a Freeman he became;
Now Marcus Dama is his Worship's name.
^ood Gods! who would refuse to lend a sum,
^ wealthy Marcus surety would become!
^arcus is made a Judge, and for a proof
Of certain truth, he said it, is enough.
A Will is to be proved; put in your claim;
It Is clear, if Marcus has subscribed his name.
This is true liberty, as I believe;
What farther can we from our Caps receive,
Than as we please without control to live
Mr. Dry Since you have given us the ceremony of the ^ says Eugenius, I Will give
you that of the W^ out of Claudian. Te fastos ineunte quater, sollennia ludit
Omina libertas. deductum Vindice morem
Lex celebrat, famulusque jugo laxatas herili
Ducitur, et grato remeat securior ictu.
Tristis conditio pulsata front recedit:
In civem rubuere genae, tergoque removit
Verbera promissi felix injuria voti.
Claud. de 4. Cons. H^ The Grato ictu and the felix injuria, says Cyn^ would
have told us the name of the Aut^ though you had said nothing of him. T^ is
none of all the Poets that delights so much these pretty kinds of
contradictions as Clau^ He loves to set his Epithet at variance with
substantive, and to surprise his Reader wit^ seeming absurdity. If this Poet
were well e^ mined, one would find that some of his gre^ beauties as well as
faults arise from the freq^ use of this particular figure.

I question not, says Philander, but you are t^ by this time with the company
of so mysteriou^ sort of Ladies as those we have had before ^ We will now, for
our diversion, entertain ^ selves with a set of Riddles, and see if we ^ find
a key to them among the ancient Po^ The first of them, says Cynthio, is ^ She
under sail, Second Series. FIG. 1.
I suppose it has it h^ a metaphor or moral precep^^or its cargo. This, says
Philander, is an ^m of Happiness, as you may see by the in^cription it carries
in its sails. We find the same Device to express the same thought in several of
^he Poets: as in Horace, when he speaks of the moderation to be used in a
flowing fortune, and ^n Ovid when he reflects on his past happiness.

Rebus angustis animosus atque
Fortis appare: sapienter idem
Co^trahes vento nimium secundo
Turgida vela.
Hor. Od. 10. Lib. 2. When Fortune sends a stormy wind,
Then show a brave and present mind;
And when with too indulgent gales
She swells too much, then furl thy sails.
Mr. Creech. N^minis et famae quondam fulgore trahebar,
Dum tulit antennas aura secunda meas.
Ov. de Tris. Lib. 5. El. 12. En ego, non paucis quondam munitus amicis,
Dum flavit velis aura secunda meis.
Id. Epist. ex Ponto 3. Lib. 2. ^'d the darling Theme of every tongue,
^e golden Idol of the adoring throng;
G^^rded with friends, while Fortune's balmy gales
Wantoned auspicious in my swelling sails.
Yo^ see the metaphor is the same in the Verses is ^^e Medal, with this
distinction only, that the one is in words and the other in figur^ The Idea is
alike in both, though the manner representing it is different. If you would see
^ whole Ship made use of in the same sense by old Poet, as it is here on the
Medal, you ^ find it in a pretty Allegory of Seneca. Fata si liceat mihi
Fingere arbitrio meo,
Temperem zephyro levi
Vela, ne pressae gravi
Spiritu antennae tremant*
Lenis et modice fluens
Aura, nec vergens latus,
Ducat intrepidam ratem.
Sen. OEdip. Chor. Act My fortune might I form at will,
My canvas Zephyrs soft should fill
With gentle breath, lest ruder gales
Crack the main-yard, or burst the sails.
By winds that temperately blow
The Barque should pass secure and slow,
Nor scar me leaning on her side:
But smoothly cleave the unruffled tide.
After having considered the Ship as a Metaph^^ we may now look on it as a
Reality, and obser^^ in it the Make of the old Roman vessels, as th^^ are
described among the Poets. It is carried ^^ by oars and sails at the same time.

Sive opus est velis minimam been currit ad aura^
Sive opus est remo remige carpit iter.
Ov. de. Tris. Li. 1. El. 1^ (...) ^op of it has the bend that Ovid and Vir^
mo^ion.

-- puppique recurvae.
Ibid. Li. 1. El. 3. -- littora curvae
Pr^exunt puppes --
Virg. ^u see the description of the Pilot, and the place sits on, in the
following quotations. Ipse ^ubernator puppi Palinurus ab alta.
Virg. Aen. Li. 5. Ips^ ante oculos ingens a vertice pontus
In puppim ferit. excutitur, pronusque magister
Vol^^ur in caput. --
Id. Aen. Li. 1. Oro^tes' bark, that bore the Lycian crew,
(A ^orrid sight) even in the Hero's view,
From stem to stern, by waves was overborn;
The ^rembling Pilot from his rudder torn,
W^^ headlong hurled; --
Mr. Dryden. -- Segnemque Menoeten,
Oblitus decorisque sui sociumque salutis,
In m^re praecipitem puppi deturbat ab alta:
Ipse ^ubernaclo rector subit.
Id. Aen. Li. 5. ^ess of others lives, (so high was grown
H^ ^sing rage,) and careless of his own:
T^ ^rembling dotard to the deck he drew,
A^ ^noisted up, and overboard he threw;
This done, he seized the helm --
Mr. Dryden. I have mentioned these two last passages ^ Virgil, because I think
we cannot have so (...) an idea of the Pilot's misfortune in each of the
without observing the situation of his post, as ^pears in ancient Coins. The
figure you see the other end of the ship is a Triton, a man in upper parts, and
a fish below with a trumpe^ his mouth. Virgil describes him in the s^ manner on
one of Aeneas's ships. It was p^^bably a common figure on their ancient ve^ for
we meet with it too in Silius Italicus. Hunc vehit immanis Triton, et caerula
con^
Exterrens freta: cui laterum tenus hispida^
From hominem praefert, in pristim desinit al^
Spumea semifero sub pectore murmurat und^
Vir. Aen. Li. The Triton bears him, he, whose trumpet's so
Old Ocean's waves from shore to shore rebo^
A hairy man above the waste he shows,
A Porpoise tail down from his belly grows
The billows murmur, which his breast oppo^
Ld. Laude^ Ducitur et Libyae puppis signata figuram
Et Triton captivus. --
Sil. It. Li. I am apt to think, says Eugenius, from cer^ passages of the
Poets, that several ships made ch^ of some God or other for their guardians,
among the Roman Catholics every vessel is recomended to the patronage of some
particular S^ To give you an instance of two or three.

Est mihi sitque precor flavae tutela Minervae
Navis --
Ov. de Tris. Li. 1. El. ^men erat celsae puppis vicina Dione.
Sil. It. Li. 14. ^mon numen erat Libycae gentile carinae,
^igeraque sedens spectabat caerula front.
Ibid. The poop great Ammon Libya's god displayed,
Whose horned front the nether flood surveyed.
The figure of the Deity was very large, as I have seen it on other Medals as
well as this you have show us, and stood on one end of the vessel that
patronised. This may give us an image of a ^ery beautiful circumstance that we
meet with in a couple of wrecks described by Silius Italicus, and Hersius. --
Subito cum pondere victus
I^^liente mari submergitur alveus undis.
^ta virum cristaeque, et inerti spicula ferro
^elaeque Deum fluitant. --
Sil. It. Li. 14. Sunk by a weight so dreadful down she goes,
And over her head the broken billows close,
Bright shields and crests float round the whirling floods.
And useless spears confused with tutelary Gods.
-- trabe rupta Bruttia saxa.
^ndit amicus inops, remque omnem surdaque vota
C^^didit: Ionio jacet ipse in littore, et una
I^^entes de puppe Dei, jamque obvia mergis
^sta ratis lacerae. --
Pers. Sat. 6. My friend is shipwrecked on the Brutian stra^
His riches in the Ionian main are lost;
And he himself stands shivering on the coast
Where, destitute of help, forlorn and bare,
He wearies the deaf Gods with fruitless pray
Their images, the relics of the wrack,
Torn from their naked poop, are tided back
By the wild waves; and rudely thrown ash
Lie impotent, nor can themselves restore.
The vessel sticks, and shows her opened side
And on her shattered mast the Mews in umph ride.
Mr. Dry^ You will think perhaps I carry my conject^ too far, if I tell you
that I fancy they are ti^ kind of Gods that Horace mentions in his Alle^rical
vessel which was so broken and shattere^ pieces; for I am apt to think that
integra reli^ to the Gods as well as the lintea.

-- non tibi sunt integra lintea,
Non Dii, quos iterum pressa voces malo.
Hor. Od. 14. Li^ Thy stern is gone, thy Gods are lost,
And thou have none to hear thy cry,
When thou on dangerous shelves art tossed,
When billows rage, and winds are high.
Mr. Cr^^ Since we are engaged so far in Roman shipping, FIG. 2.
says Philander, here show you a Medal that has on reverse a Rostrum with three
teeth to it: when Silius's trifidum rostrum and Virgil's rostrisque^ dentibus,
which in some editions is stridenti^ the Editor choosing rather to make a false
quantity tha^ to insert a word that he did not know the m^^ing of. Flaccus
gives us a Rostrum of the sa^ make.

-- volat immissis cava pinus habenis
^finditque salum, et spumas vomit aere tridenti.
Val. Flac. Argon. Li. 1. A Ship-carpenter of old Rome says Cynthio, could not
have talked more judiciously. I am afr^^^, if we let you alone, you will find
out every ^nk and rope about the vessel among the Lati^ ^oets. Let us now, if
you please, go to the n^^ Medal.

The next, says Philander, FIG. 3.
is a pair of Scales, which we meet with on several old Coins. They are
commonly interpreted as an emblem of the Emperor's Justice. But why may not we
suppose that they allude sometimes to the Balance in the Heavens, which was the
reigning constellation of Rome and Italy? Whether it be so or no, the^ are
capable methinks of receiving a nobler interpretation than what is commonly put
on them, if we suppose the thought of the reverse to be the same with that in
Manilius.

Hesperiam sua Libra tenet, qua condita Roma
(...) propriis fraenat pendentem nutibus orbem,
^bis et Imperium retinet, discrimina rerum
^ncibus, et positas gentes tollitque premitque:
^a genitus cum fratre Remus hanc condidit urbem.
Manil. Lib. 4. ^he Scales rule Italy, where Rome commands,
and spreads its empire wide to foreign lands:
They hang upon her nod, their fates are weigh^
By her, and laws are sent to be obeyed:
And as her powerful favor turns the poize,
How low some nations sink and others rise
Thus guide the Scales, and then to fix doom,
They gave us So Vossius reads it.
Caesar, founder of our Rome
Mr. Cree^ FIG. 4.
The Thunderbolt is a reverse Augustus. We see it used by the g^test Poet of the
same age to express a terrible ^irresistable force in battle, which is probably
^ meaning of it on this Medal, for in another pl^ the same Poet applys the same
metaphor to ^gustus's person.

-- duo Fulmina belli
Scipiadas --
Virg. Aen. Lib. -- Who can declare
The Scipio's worth, those Thunderbolts of w^
Mr. Dry^ -- dum Caesar ad altum
Fulminat Euphratem bello --
Id. Georg. Li^ While mighty Caesar thundering from afar,
Seeks on Euphrates' banks the spoils of wa^
Mr. Dry^ I have sometimes wondered, says Eugenius, w^ the Latin Poets so
frequently give the Epith^ of trifidum and trisulcum to the Thunderbolt. am ^ow
persuaded they took it from the sculptors and painters that lived before them,
and had ge^^^ally given it three forks as in the present figu^^. Virgil insists
on the number three in its descr^^^ion, and seems to hint at the wings we see
on it. He has worked up such a noise and terro^ the composition of his
Thunderbolt as cannot be expressed by a pencil or graving-tool.

Tres imbris torti radios, tres nubis aquosae
^diderant, rutili tres ignis, et Alitis Austri.
^gores nunc terrificos sonitumque metumque
^cebant operi, flammisque sequacibus iras.
Virg. Aen. Lib. 8. Three rays of writhen rain, of fire three more,
Of winged southern winds, and cloudy store
A^ many parts, the dreadful mixture frame,
And fears are added, and avenging flame.
Mr. Dryden. Our next reverse is an Oaken Gar^and which we find on abundance of
^mperial Coins. FIG. 5.
I shall not here multiply quo^ations to show that the garland of Oak was the
^eward of such as had saved the life of a citizen, ^ut will give you a passage
out of Claudian, where ^he compliment to Stilico is the same that we have ^ere
on the Medal. I question not but the old Coin^ gave the thought to the Poet.
(...) erat in veterum castris, ut tempora quer^
^ret, validis qui fuso viribus host
^rum potuit morti subducere civem.
At ^ibi quae poterit pro tantis civica reddi
^ibus? aut quantae pensabunt facta coronae?
Clau. de Lau. Still. Lib. 3. Of old, when in the war's tumultuous strife
A Roman saved a brother Roman's life,
And foiled the threatening foe, our Sires decree^
An Oaken Garland for the victor's meed.
Thou, who have saved whole crowds, who^ towns set free,
What groves, what woods, shall furnish crown for thee?
It is not to be supposed that the Emperor h^ actually covered a Roman in
battle. It is enoug^ that he had driven out a tyrant, gained a victor^ or
restored Justice. For in any of these or t^ like cases he may very well be said
to have save the life of a citizen, and by consequence ent^tled to the reward
of it. Accordingly we fin^ Virgil distributing his Oaken garlands to thos^ that
had enlarged or strengthened the dominion of Rome; as we may learn from Statius
that t^ statue of Curtius, who had sacrificed himself for the good of the
people, had the head surround^ with the same kind of ornament. Atque umbrata
gerunt civili tempora quercu.
Hi tibi Nomentum, et Gabios, urbemque Fidena^
Hi Collatinas imponent montibus arces.
Virg. Aen. Lib. But they, who crowned with Oaken wreath appear,
Shall Gabian walls and strong Fidena rear:
Nomentum, Bola, with Pometia, found;
And raise Colatian towers on rocky ground.
Mr. Dryde^ Ipse loci custos, cujus sacrata vorago,
^amosusque lacus nomen memorabile servat,
^numeros aeris sonitus, et verbere crudo
^t sensit mugire forum, movet horrida sancto
^ra situ, meritaque caput venerabile quercu.
Statius Sylv. Lib. 1. The Guardian of that Lake, which boasts to claim
A sure memorial from the Curtian name;
Roused by the artificers, whose mingled sound
From the loud Forum pierced the shades profound,
The hoary vision rose confessed in view,
And shook the Civic wreath that bound his brow.
The two horns that you see on the ^t Medal are emblems of Plenty. FIG. 8.
-- apparetque beata pleno
Copia Cornu.
Hor. Car. Saec. ^ur Medallists tell us that two horns on a Coin ^ify an
extraordinary Plenty. But I see no ^ndation for this conjecture. Why should ^
not as well have stamped two Thunderbolts, ^o Caduceus's, or two Ships, to
represent an ^raordinary force, a lasting peace, or an un^nded happiness. I
rather think that the dou^^ Cornu-copia relates to the double tradition of its
original. Some representing it as the horn of A^helous broken off by Hercules,
and others as the ho^n of the Goat that gave suck to Jupiter. -- rigidum fera
dextera cornu
^um tenet, infregit; truncaque a front revellit.
Naiades hoc, pomis et odoro flore repletum,
Sacrarunt; divesque meo bona Copia cornu (...)
Dixerat: at Nymphe ritu succincta Dianae
Una ministrarum, fusis utrinque capillis,
Incessit, totumque tulit praedivite cornu
Autumnum, et mensas felicia poma secundas.
De Acheloi Cornu. Ov. Met. Lib Nor yet his fury cooled; 'twixt rage and scor
From my maimed front he bore the stubborn he
This, heaped with flowers and fruits, the Na^ bear,
Sacred to Plenty and the bounteous year.
He spoke; when lo a beauteous Nymph pears,
Girt like Diana's train, with flowing hairs;
The horn she brings, in which all Autumn's stor^
And ruddy apples for the second board.
Mr. G^ Lac dabat illa Deo: sed fregit in arbore con
Truncaque dimidia part decoris erat.
Sustulit hoc Nymphe; cinctumque recent^ herbis,
Et plenum pomis ad Jovis ora tulit.
Ille, ubi res coeli tenuit, solioque paterno
Sedit, et invicto nil Jove majus erat,
Sidera nutricem, nutricis fertile cornu
Fecit; quod dominae nunc quoque nomen ha^
De Cornu Amaltheae. Ov. de Fast. Lib The God she suckled of old Rhea born;
And in the pious office broke her horn,
As playful in a rifted Oak she tossed
Her heedless head, and half its honors lost.
Fair Amalthaea took it off the ground,
With apples filled it and with garlands boun^
Which to the smiling infant she conveyed.
He, when the scepter of the Gods he swayed,
When bold he seized his father's vacant throne,
And reigned the tyrant of the skies alone,
Hid his rough nurse the starry Heavens adorn,
And grateful in the Zodiac fixed her Horn.
Betwixt the double Cornu-copia you see Mercury's rod. Cyllenes coelique decus,
facunde minister,
Aurea cui torto virga dracone viret.
Mart. Lib. 7. Epig. 74. Descend, Cyllene's tutelary God,
With serpents twining round thy golden rod.
It ^^ands on old Coins as an emblem of Peace, by ^on of its stupifying quality
that has gained it the title of Virga somnifera. It has wings, for another
quality that Virgil mentions in his description of it. -- hac fretus ventos et
nubila tranat.
Virg. Thus armed, the God begins his airy race,
And drives the racking clouds along the liquid space.
Mr. Dryden. The two heads over the two Cornu-copiae are of the Emperor's
children, who are sometimes called among the Poets the pledges of Peace, as
they took away the occasions of war in cutting off all disputes to the
succession. -- tu mihi primum
^ot natorum memoranda parens --
Utero toties enixa gravi
Pignora pacis.
Sen. Octav. Act. Thee first kind author of my joys,
Thou source of many smiling boys,
Nobly contented to bestow
A pledge of peace in every throe.
This Medal therefore compliments the Emper^ on his two children, whom it
represents as pu^lic blessings that promise Peace and Plenty to (...) Empire.

FIG. 7.
The two hands that join one another are Emblems of Fidelity. Inde Fides
dextraeque datae --
Ov. Met. L. 1 Sociemus animos, pignus hoc fidei cape,
Continge dextram --
Sen. Herc. Fur. Act. -- en dextra fidesque
Quem secum patrios aiunt portare penates!
Virg. Aen. Lib. ^ See now the promised faith, the vaunted nam^
The pious man, who rushing through the flame,
Preserved his Gods --
Mr. Dryde^

By the Inscription we may see that they represent in this place the Fidelity
or Loyalty of the public toward their Emperor. The Caduces rising between the
hands signifies the Peace tha^ arises from such an union with their Prince, ^
the spike of Corn on each side shadows out the Plenty that is the fruit of such
a peace.

Pax Cererem nutrit, pacis alumna Ceres.
Ov. de Fast. Lib. 1. The giving of a hand, in the reverse of Claudius, is a
token of good will. FIG. 8.
For when, after the death of his nephew Caligula, Claudius was in no small
apprehension for his own life, he was, contrary to his expectation, well
received among the Praetorian guards, and afterward declared their Emperor.
His reception is here recorded on a Medal, in which one of the Ensigns presents
him his hand, in the same sense as Anchises gives it in the following verses.
Ipse pater dextram Anchises haud multa moratus
Dat juveni, atque animum praesenti munere firmat.
Virg. Aen. Lib. 3. The old weather-beaten soldier that carries in his hand the
Roman Eagle, is the same kind of officer that you meet with in Javenal's
fourteenth Satire. Dirue Maurorum attegias, castella Brigantum,
Ut locupletem Aquilam tibi sexagesimus annus
Afferat --
Juv. Sat. 14. I remember in one of the Poets the Signifer is described with a
Lion's skin over his head and shoulders, like this we see in the Medal, but at
present I cannot recollect the passage. Virgil has given us a noble description
of a warrior making his appearance under a Lion's skin. -- tegmen torquens
immane Leonis
Terribili impexum seta, cum dentibus albis
Indutus capiti, sic regia tecta subibat
Horridus, Herculeoque humeros indutus amict^
Virg. Aen. Lib. Like Hercules himself his son appears,
In salvage pomp: a Lion's hide he wears;
About his shoulders hangs the shaggy skin,
The teeth, and gaping jaws severely grin.
Thus like the God his father, homely dressed,
He strides into the hall, a horrid guest!
Mr. Dryd^ Since you have mentioned the dress of your Sta^dard-bearer, says
Cynthio, I cannot forbear ^ marking that of Claudius, which was the us^ Roman
habit. One may see in this Medal, ^ well as in any antique Statues, that the
old ^mans had their necks and arms bare, and as m^ exposed to view as our hands
and faces are at p^^sent. Before I had made this remark, I ha^ sometimes
wondered to see the Roman Poe^ in their descriptions of a beautiful man, so often
mentioning the Turn of his Neck and Arm^ that in our modern dresses lie out of
sight, ^ are covered under part of the clothing. N^ to trouble you with many
quotations, Hor^ speaks of both these parts of the body in the begi^ning of an
Ode, that in my opinion may be rec^oned among the finest of his book, for the
na^^ralness of the thought, and the beauty of the ^ pression. Dum tu Lydia
Telephi
Cervicem roseam, et cerea Telephi
Laudas brachia, vae meum
Fervens difficili bile tumet jecur.
When Telephus his youthful charms,
His rosy neck, and winding arms,
With endless rapture you recite,
And in that pleasing name delight;
My heart, inflamed by jealous heats,
With numberless resentments beats;
From my pale cheek the color flies,
And all the Man within me dies.
It was probably this particular in the Roman habit that gave Virgil the
thought in the following verse, where Remulus, among other reproaches the ^he
makes the Trojans for their softness and effe^^acy, upbraids them with the Make
of their T^^^ca's that had sleeves to them, and did not leave the arms naked
and exposed to the weat^ like that of the Romans. ^t tunicae manicas, et habent
ridimicula mitrae. ^il lets us know in another place, that the I^ns preserved
their old language and habits, ^withstanding the Trojans became their Man, and
that the Trojans themselves quitted the (...) of their own country for that of
Italy. (...) he tells us was the effect of a prayer that J^^o made to Jupiter.
^llud te, nulla fati quod lege tenetur,
^ro Latio obtestor, pro majestate tuorum:
^um jam connubiis pacem felicibus (esto;)
^omponent, cum jam leges et foedera jungent;
^e vetus indigenas nomen mutare Latinos,
^eu Troas fieri jubeas, Teucrosque vocari;
Aut vocem mutare viros, aut vertere vestes.
Sit Latium, sint Albani per saecula reges:
Sit Romana potens Itala virtute propago:
Occidit, occideritque sinas cum nomine Troja.
Aen. lib. 12. This let me beg (and this no Fates withstand)
Both for my self and for your father's land,
That when the nuptial bed shall bind the peace,
(Which I, since you ordain, consent to bless)
The laws of either nation be the same;
But let the Latins still retain their name:
Speak the same language which they spoke before,
Wear the same habits, which their Grandsires wore.
Call them not Trojans: perish the renown
And name of Troy, with that detested town.
Latium be Latium still: let Alba reign,
And Rome's immortal Majesty remain.
Mr. Dryden. By the way, I have often admired at Virgil for representing his
Juno with such an impotent kind of revenge as what is the subject of this
speech. You may be sure, says Eugenius, that Virgil knew very well this was a
trifling kind of request for the Queen of the Gods to make, as we may find by
Jupiter's way of accepting it, Olli subridens hominum rerumque repertor:
Et germana Jovis, Saturnique altera proles:
Irarum tantos volvis sub pectore fluctus?
Verum age, et inceptum frustra submit furorem.
Do, quod vis; et me victusque volensque remitto.
Sermonem Ausonii patrium moresque tenebunt.
Utque est, nomen erit: commixti corpore tantum
Subsident Teucri: morem ritusque sacrorum
Adjiciam, faciamque omnes uno ore Latinos, etc.
Aen. Lib. 12. Then thus the Founder of mankind replies.
(Unruffled was his front, serene his eyes,)
Can Saturn's issue, and Heaven's other Heir,
Such endless anger in her bosom bear?
Be Mistress, and your full desires obtain;
But quench the choler you foment in vain.
From ancient blood the Ausonian people sprung,
Shall keep their name, their habit, and their tongue.
The Trojans to their customs shall be tied,
I will my self their common rites provide;
The natives shall command, the foreigners subside:
And shall be Latium; Troy without a name:
And her lost sons forget from whence they came.
Mr. Dryden. I am apt to think Virgil had a further view in this request of
Juno than what his Commentators have discovered in it. He knew very well that
his Aeneid was founded on a very doubtful story, and that Aeneas's coming into
Italy was not universally received among the Romans themselves. He knew too
that a main objection to this story was the great difference of Customs,
Language and Habits among the Romans and Trojans. To obviate therefore so
strong an objection, he makes this difference to arise from the forecast and
praedetermination of the Gods themselves. But pray what is the name of the Lady
in the next Medal? Methinks she is very particular in her Quoiffure.

FIG. 9.
It is the emblem of Fruitfulness, says Philander, and was designed as a
compliment to Julia the wife of Septimius Severus, who had the same number of
children as you see on this Coin. Her head is crowned with towers in allusion
to Cybele the mother of the Gods, and for the same reason that Virgil compares
the city of Rome to her. Felix prole virum, qualis Berecynthia matter
Invehitur curru Phrygias turrita per urbes,
Leta Deum partu --
Virg. Aen. Lib. 6. High as the mother of the Gods in place,
And proud, like her, of an immortal race.
Then when in pomp she makes a Phrygian round,
With golden turrets on her temples crowned.
Mr. Dryden. The Vine issuing out of the Urn speaks the same sense as that in
the Psalmist. Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine on the walls of thy house.
The four Stars overhead, and the same number on the Globe, represent the four
children. There is a Medalion of Romulus and Remus sucking the wolf, with a
Star over each of their heads, as we find the Latin Poets speaking of the
children of Princes under the same metaphor. Utque tui faciunt sidus juvenile
nepotes,
Per tua perque sui facta parentis eant.
Ov. de. Tris. Lib. 2. El. 1. -- Tu quoque extinctus jaces,
Deftende nobis semper, infelix puer,
Modo sidus orbis, columen augustae domus,
Eritannice. --
Sen. Octav. Act. 1. Thou too dear youth, to ashes turned,
Eritannicus, for ever mourned!
Thou Star that wont this Orb to grace!
Thou pillar of the Julian race!
-- Maneas hominum contentus habenis,
Undarum terraeque potens, et sidera dones.
Stat. Theb. Lib. 1. -- Stay, great Caesar, and vouchsafe to reign
Over the wide earth, and over the watery main:
Resign to Jove his Empire of the skies,
And people Heaven with Roman Deities.
Mr. Pope. I need not mention Homer's comparing Astyanax to the Morning Star,
nor Virgil's imitation of him in his description of Ascanius.

The next Medal was stamped on the marriage of Nero and Octavia; FIG. 10.
you see the Sun over the head of Nero, and the Moon over that of Octavia. They
face one another according to the situation of these two Planets in the
Heavens. -- Phabeis obvia flammis
Demet nocti Luna timores.
Sen. Thyest. Act. 4. And to show that Octavia derived her whole luster from
the friendly aspect of her husband. Sicut Luna suo tunc tantum deficit orb,
Quum Phoebum adversis currentem non vidit astris.
Manil. Lib. 4. Because the Moon then only feels decay,
When opposite unto her brother's ray.
Mr. Creech. But if we consider the history of this Medal, we shall find more
Fancy in it than the Medallists have yet discovered. Nero and Octavia were not
only husband and wife, but brother and sister, Claudius being the father of
both. We have this relation between them marked out in the Tragedy of Octavia,
where it speaks of her marriage with Nero. Fratris thalamos sortita tenet
Maxima Juno: soror Augusti
Sociata toris, cur a patria
Pellitur Aula? --
Sen. Oct. Act. 1. To Jove his sister consort wed,
Uncensur'd shares her brother's bed:
Shall Caesar's wife and sister wait,
An Exile at her husband's gate?
Implebit aulam stirpe caelesti tuam
Generata divo, Claudiae gentis decus,
Sortita fratris, more Junonis, toros.
Ibid. Act. 2. Thy sister, bright with every blooming grace,
Will mount thy bed t'inlarge the Claudian race:
And proudly teeming with fraternal love,
Shall reign a Juno with the Roman Jove.
They are therefore very prettily represented by the Sun and Moon, who as they
are the most glorious parts of the universe, are in a poetical ^nealogy brother
and sister. Virgil gives us a ^ght of them in the same position that they
regard ^^ch other on this Medal.

Nec Fratris radiis obnoxia surgere Luna.
Virg. Georg. 1. The flattery on the next Medal is in ^e same thought as that
of Lucretius. FIG. 11.
Ipse Epicurus ob^t decurso lumine vitae;
Quigenus humanum ingenio superavit, et omneis
Praestinxit, stellas exortus uti aetherius Sol.
Lucret. Lib. 3. Nay, Epicurus' race of life is run;
That man of wit, who other men outshone;
As far as meaner stars the midday Sun.
Mr. Creech. The Emperor appears as a Rising Sun, and holds ^ Globe in his hand
to figure out the Earth that is enlightened and actuated by his beauty. Sol qui
terrarum flammis opera omnia lustras.
Virg. -- ubi primos crastinus ortus
Extulerit Titan, radiisque retexerit orbem.
Id. When next the Sun his rising light displays,
And gilds the world below with purple rays.
Mr. Dryden. On his head you see the rays that seem to grow out of it. Claudian
in the description of his infant Titan descants on this glory about his head,
but has run his description into most wretched fustian.

Invalidum dextro portat Titana lacerto,
Nondum luce gravem, nec pubescentibus alte
Cristatum radiis; primo clementior aevo
Fingitur, et tenerum vagitu despuit ignem.
Claud. de rapt. Pros. Lib. An infant Titan held she in her arms;
Yet sufferably bright, the eye might bear
The ungrown glories of his beamy hair.
Mild was the babe, and from his cries ther^ came
A gentle breathing and a harmless flame.
FIG. 12.
The Sun rises on a Medal of Commodus, as Ovid describes him in the story of
Phaeton Ardua prima via est, et qua vix mane recentes
Enituntur equi --
Ov. Met. Lib. 2. You have here too the four horses breaking through the clouds
in their morning passage. -- Pyroeis, et Eous, et Aethon,
Solis equi, quartusque Phlegon --
Ibid. Corripuere viam, pedibusque per ae^ra motis
Obstantes scindunt nebulas --
Ibid. The woman underneath represents the Earth, as Ovid has drawn her sitting
in the same figure. Sustulit omniferos collo tenus arida vultus;
Opposuitque manum fronti, magnoque tremore
Omnia concutiens paulum subsedit.
Ibid. The earth at length --
Uplifted to the heavens her blasted head,
And clapped her hand upon her brows, and said,
(But first, impatient of the sultry heat,
Sunk deeper down, and sought a cooler seat)
^he Cornu-copiae in her hand is a type of her ^^itfulness, as in the speech
she makes to Jupiter. Hosne mihi fructus, hunc fertilitatis honorem,
Officiique refers? quod adunci vulnera aratri
Rastrorumque fero, totoque exerceor anno?
Quod pecori frondes, alimentaque mitia fruges
Humano generi, vobis quoque thura ministro?
Ibid. And does the plow for this my body tear?
This the reward for all the fruits I bear,
Tortured with rakes, and harrass'd all the year?
That herbs for cattle daily I renew,
And food for man; and frankincense for you?
So much for the designing part of the Medal; as for the thought of it, the
Antiquaries are divided upon it. For my part I cannot doubt but it was made as
a compliment to Commodus on his s^ill in the chariot-race. It is supposed that
the same occasion furnished Lucan with the same thought in his address to Nero.
Seu te flammigeros Phoebi conscendere currus,
Telluremque, nihil mutato sole, timentem
Igne vago lustrare juvet --
Luc. Lib. 1. ad Neronem. Or if thou choose the empire of the day,
And make the Sun's unwilling steeds obey;
Auspicious if thou drive the flaming team,
While earth rejoices in thy gentler beam --
Mr. Ro^ This is so natural an allusion, that we find the course of the Sun
described in the Poets by metaphors borrowed from the Circus. Quum suspensus
eat Phoebus, currumque reflect^
Huc illu^ agiles, et servet in aethere metas.
Manil. Lib. 1* -- Hesperio positas in littore metas.
Ov. Met. Lib. 2* Et Sol ex aequo meta distabat utraque.
Idem However it be, we are sure in general it is ^ comparing of Commodus to
the Sun, which is ^ simile of as long standing as poetry, I had almost said, as
the Sun it self.

I believe, says Cynthio, there is scarce a great man he ever shone upon that
has not been compared to him. I look on similes as a part of his productions. I
do not know whether he raises fruits or flowers in greater number. Horace has
turned this comparison into ridicule seventeen hundred years ago. -- laudat
Brutum, laudatque cohortem,
Solemn Asiae Brutum appellat --
Hor. Sat. 7. Lib. 1. He praises Brutus much and all his train;
He calls him Asia's Sun --
Mr. Creech.

You have now shown us persons under the dis^uise of Stars, Moons and Suns. I
suppose we ^ave at last done with the celestial bodies.

The next figure you see, says Philan^er, had once a place in the Heavens, FIG
13.
^ you will believe ecclesiastical story. It is the ^^gn that is said to have
appeared to Constantine before the battle with Maxentius. We are told ^y a
Christian Poet, that he caused it to be wrought ^n the military Ensign that the
Romans call their Labarum. And it is on this Ensign that we find in the present
Medal. Christus purpureum gemmanti, textus in auro
Signabat Labarum. --
Prudent. contra Symm. Lib. 1. A Christ was on The Imperial standard born,
That Gold embroiders, and that Gemms adorn.
By the word Christus he means without doubt ^he present figure, which is
composed out of the ^wo initial letters of the name.

He bore the same sign in his standards, FIG. 14.
^s you may see in the following Me^al and verses. Agnoscas, Regina, libens mea
signa necesse est:
In quibus Effigies Crucis aut gemmata refulget,
Aut longis solido ex auro praefertur in hastis.
Constantinus Romam alloquitur. Ibid. My Ensign let the Queen of nations praise,
That rich in gemms the Christian Cross displays:
There rich in gemms; but on my quivering spean
In solid gold the sacred mark appears.
Vexillumque Crucis summus dominator adorat.
Id. in Apotheo^^ See there the Cross he waved on hostile shores,
The Emperor of all the world adores.


FIG. 15.
But to return to our Labarum; (...) you have a mind to see it in a state of
Paganism you have it on a Coin of Tiberius. (...) stands between two other
Ensigns, and is the mark of a Roman Colony where the Medal was stamped. By the
way you must observe, the wherever the Romans fixed their standards they
looked on that place as their country, and thought themselves obliged to defend
it with their lives. For this reason their standards were always carried before
them when they went to settle themselves in a Colony. This gives the meaning of
a couple of verses in Silius Italicus, that make a very far-fetcht compliment
to Fabius.

Ocyus huc Aquilas servataque signa referte,
Hic patria est, murique urbis stant pectore in un^.
Sil. It. Li. 7. FIG. 16.
The following Medal was stamped on Trajan's victory over the Daci, you see on
it the figure of Trajan presenting a little Victory to Rome. Between them lies
the conquered province of Dacia. It may be worth while to observe the
particularities in each figure. We see abundance of persons on old Coins that
hold a little Victory in one hand, like this of Trajan, which is always the
sign of a Conquest. I ^ave sometimes fancied Virgil alludes to this ^ustom in a
verse that Turnus speaks.

Non adeo has exosa manus Victoria fugit.
Virg. Aen. Li. 11. If you consent, he shall not be refused,
Nor find a hand to Victory unused.
[Mr. Dryden. The Emperor's standing in a Gown, and making (...) present of his
Dacian Victory to the city of Rome, agrees very well with Claudian's character
of him.

-- victura feretur
Gloria Trajani; non tam quod, Tigride victo,
Nostra triumphati fuerint provincia Parthi,
Alta quod invectus stratis capitolia Dacis:
Quam patriae quod mitis erat -- Claud. de 4 to Cons. Honor.
Thy glory, Trajan, shall for-ever live:
Not that thy arms the Tigris mourned, overcome,
And tributary Parthia bowed to Rome,
Not that the Capitol received thy train
With shouts of triumph for the Daci slain:
But for thy mildness to thy country shown.
The city of Rome carries the Wand in her hand that is the symbol of her
Divinity. Delubrum Romae (colitur nam sanguine et ipsa
More Deae) --
Prudent, cont. Sym. L. 1. For Rome, a Goddess too, can boast her shrine,
With victims stained, and sought with rites divine.
As the Globe under her feet betokens her dominion over all the nations of the
earth. Terrarum Dea, Gentiumque Roma;
Cui par est nihil, et nihil secundum.
Mart. Li. 12. Epig. 8. O Rome, thou Goddess of the earth!
To whom no rival ever had birth;
Nor second ever shall rise.
The heap of arms she sits on signifies the Peace that the Emperor had procured
her. On old Coins we often see an Emperor, a Victory, the city of Rome, or a
slave, sitting on a heap of arms, which always marks out the Peace that arose
from such an action as gave occasion to the Medal. I think we cannot doubt but
Virgil copied out this circumstance from the ancient Sculptors, in that
inimitable description he has given us of Military Fury shut up in the Temple
of Janus and laden with chains. Claudentur belli portae: Furor impius intus
Saeva sedens super arma, et centum vinctus ahenis
Post tergum nodis, fremet horridus ore cruento.
Virg. Aen. Li. 1. Janus himself before his fane shall wait,
And keep the dreadful issues of his gate,
With bolts and iron bars: within remains
Imprisoned Fury, bound in brazen chains:
High on a Trophy raised of useless arms
He sits, and threats the world with dire alarms.
Mr. Dryden. We are told by the old Scholiast, says Eugenius, that there was
actually such a statue in the Temple of Janus as that Virgil has here
described, which I am almost apt to believe, since you assure ^s that this part
of the design is so often met with on ancient Medals. But have you nothing ^o
remark on the figure of the Province? Her posture, says Philander, is what we
often meet with in the slaves and captives of old Coins: among the Poets too,
sitting on the ground is a mark of Misery or Captivity. Multos illa dies
incomtis maesta capillis
Sederat --
Propert. Li. 1. O utinam ante tuos sedeam captiva penates.
Id. L. 4. O might I sit a captive at thy gate!


You have the same posture in an old Coin that celebrates a victory of Lucius
Verus over the Parthians. FIG. 17.
The captive's hands are here bound behind him, as a farther instance of his
slavery. Ecce manus juvenem interea post terga revinctum,
Pastores magno ad Regem clamore ferebant.
Virg. Aen. L. 2. Mean while, with shouts, the Trojan shepherds bring
A captive Greek in bands before the King.
Mr. Dryden. Cui dedit invitas victa noverca manus.
Ov. de Fast. Cum rudis urgenti brachia victa dedi.
Proper. L. 4. We may learn from Ovid that it was sometimes the custom to place
a slave with his arms bound at the foot of the Trophy, as in the figure before
us. Stentque super vinctos trunca trophaea viros.
Ov. Ep. ex Ponto L. 4. You see on his head the cap which the Parthians, and
indeed most of the eastern nations, wear on Medals. They had not probably the
ceremony of veiling the Bonnet in their salutations, for in Medals they still
have it on their heads, whether they are before Emperors or Generals, kneeling,
sitting or standing. Martial has distinguished them by this cap as their chief
characteristic.

Frustra blanditae venitis ad me
Attritis miserabiles labellis,
Dicturus dominum, deumque non sum:
Jam non est locus hac in urbe vobis.
Ad Parthos procul ite pileatos,
Et turpes, humilesque supplicesque
Pictorum sola basiate regum.
Mart. Ep. 72. L. 10. In vain, mean flatteries, ye try,
To gnaw the lip, and fall the eye;
No man a God or Lord I name:
From Romans far be such a shame!
Go teach the supple Parthian how
To veil the Bonnet on his brow:
Or on the ground all prostrate fling
Some Pict, before his barbarous King.
(...) cannot hear, says Cynthio, without a kind of indignation, the satirical
reflections that Martial ^as made on the memory of Domitian. It is certain so
ill an Emperor deserved all the reproaches that could be heaped upon him, but
he ^ould not deserve them of Martial. I must confess I am less scandalized at
the flatteries the Epi^rammatist paid him living, than the ingratitude ^e
showed him dead. A man may be betrayed unto the one by an overstrained
complaisance, or ^y a temper extremely sensible of favors and obligations:
whereas the other can arise from nothing but a natural baseness and villainy of
^oul. It does not always happen, says Philan^er, that the Poet and the honest
man meet together in the same person. I think we need enlarge ^o farther on
this Medal, unless you have a mind ^o compare the Trophy on it with that of
Me^entius in Virgil.

Ingentem quercum decisis undique ramis
Constituit tumulo, fulgentiaque induit arma,
Mezenti ducis exuvias; tibi, magne, tropaeum,
Bellipotens: aptat rorantes sanguine cristas,
Telaque trunca viri, et bis sex thoraca petitum
Perfossumque locis; clypeumque ex aere sinistrae
Subligat, atque ensem collo suspendit eburnum.
Virg. Aen. Li. 11. He barred an ancient Oak of all her boughs:
Then on a rising ground the trunk he placed;
Which with the spoils of his dead foe he graced.
The coat of arms by proud Mezentius worn,
Now on a naked Snag in triumph born,
Was hung on high; and glittered from afar:
A trophy sacred to the God of war.
Above his arms, fixed on the leafless wood,
Appeared his plumy crest, besmeared with blood;
His brazen buckler on the left was seen;
Trunchions of shivered lances hung between:
And on the right was placed his Corslet, bored,
And to the neck was tied his unavailing sword.
Mr. Dryden. FIG. 18.
On the next Medal you see the Peace that Vespasian procured the Empire, after
having happily finished all its wars both at home and abroad. The woman with
the olive branch in her hand is the figure of Peace. -- pignora Pacis
Praetendens dextra ramum canentis olivae.
Sil. It. Li. 3. With the other hand she thrusts a lighted torch under a heap
of armor that lies by an Altar. This alludes to a custom among the ancient
Romans of gathering up the armor that lay scattered on the field of battle,
and burning it as an offering to one of their Deities. It is to this custom
that Virgil refers, and Silius Italicus has described at large.

Qualis eram cum primam aciem Praeneste sub ipsa
Stravi, scutorumque incendi victor acervos.
Virg. Aen. Li. 8. Such as I was beneath Praeneste's walls;
Then when I made the foremost foes retire,
And set whole heaps of conquered shields on fire.
Mr. Dryden. Ast tibi, Bellipotens, Sacrum, constructus acervo
Ingenti mons armorum consurgit ad astra:
Ipse manu celsam pinum, flammaque comantem
Attollens, ductor Gradivum in vota ciebat:
Primitias pugnae, et laeti libamina belli,
Hannibal Ausonio cremat haec de nomine victor.
Et tibi, Mars genitor, votorum haud surde meorum,
Arma electa dicat spirantum turba virorum.
Tum face conjecta, populatur fervidus ignis
Flagrantem molem; et rupta caligine, in auras
Actus apex claro perfundit lumine campos.
Sil. It. Li. 10. To thee the Warrior-God, aloft in air
A mountain-pile of Roman Arms they rear:
The General grasping in his Victor-hand
A pine of stately growth, he waved the brand,
And cried, O Mars! to thee devote I yield
These choice first fruits of Honor's purple field.
Joined with the partners of my toil and praise,
Thy Hannibal this vowed oblation pays;
Grateful to thee for Latian laurels won:
Accept this homage, and absolve thy son. --
Then, to the pile the flaming torch he tossed;
In smould'ring smoke the light of Heaven is lost:
But when the fire increase of fury gains,
The blaze of Glory gilds the distant plains.
As for the heap of Arms, and mountain of Arms, that the Poet mentions, you may
see them on two Coins of Marcus Aurelius. FIG. 19.20.
DE SARMATIS and DE GERMANIS allude perhaps to the form of words that might be
used at the setting fire to them. -- Ausonio de nomine. Those who will not
allow of the interpretation I have put on these two last Medals may think it an
objection that there is no torch or fire near them to signify any such
allusion. But they may consider that on several Imperial Coins we meet with the
figure of a funeral pile, without any thing to denote the burning of it, though
indeed there is on some of them a Flambeau sticking out on each side, to let us
know it was to be consumed to ashes.

You have been so intent on the burning of the Arms, says Cynthio, that you
have forgotten the Pillar on your 18th Medal. You may find the history of it,
says Philander, in Ovid de Fastis. It was from this Pillar that the spear was
tossed at the opening of a war, for which reason the little figure on the top
of it holds a spear in its hand, and Peace turns her back upon it.

Prospicit a templo summum brevis area Circum:
Est ibi non parvae parva columna notae:
Hinc solet hasta manu, belli praenuncia, mitti;
In regem et gentes cum placet arma capi.
Ov. de fast. Li. 6. Where the high Fane the ample Cirque commands
A little, but a noted pillar stands,
From hence, when Rome the distant Kings defies,
In form the war-denouncing Javelin flies.
FIG. 21.
The different interpretations that have been made on the next Medal seem to be
forced and unnatural. I will therefore give you my own opinion of it. The
vessel is here represented as stranded. The figure before it seems to come in
to its assistance, and to lift it off the shallows: for we see the water scarce
^eaches up to the knees, though it is the figure of a man standing on firm
ground. His attendants, and the good office he is employed upon, resemble those
the Poets often attribute to Neptune. Homer tells us, that the Whales leaped up
at their God's approach, as we see in the Medal. The two small figures that
stand naked among the waves are Sea-Deities of an inferior rank, who are
supposed to assist their Sovereign in the succor he gives the distressed
vessel. Cymothoe, simul et Triton adnixus acuto
Detrudunt naves scopulo; levat ipse tridenti,
Et vastas aperit syrtes, et temperat aequor.
Virg. Aen. Li. 1. Cymothoe, Triton, and the seagreen train
Of beauteous Nymphs, the daughters of the main,
Clear from the rocks the vessels with their hands;
The God himself with ready trident stands,
And opes the deep, and spreads the moving sands.
Mr. Dryden. Jamplacidis ratis extat aquis, quam gurgite ab imo
Et Thetis, et magnis Nereus socer erigit ulnis.
Val. Flac. Li. 1. The interpreters of this Medal have mistaken these two
figures for the representation of two persons that are drowning. But as they
are both naked and drawn in a posture rather of triumphing over the waves than
of sinking under them, so we see abundance of Water-Deities on other Medals
represented after the same manner. Ite Deae virides, liquidosque advertite
vultus,
Et vitreum teneris crinem redimite corymbis,
Vest nihil tectae: quales emergitis altis
Fontibus, et visu Satyros torquetis amantes.
Statius de Balneo Etrusci. Lib. 1. Haste, haste, ye Naiads! with attractive art
New charms to every native grace impart:
With opening flourets bind your seagreen hair,
Unveiled; and naked let your limbs appear:
So from the springs the Satyrs see you rise,
And drink eternal passion at their eyes.
After having thus far cleared our way to the Medal, I take the thought of the
reverse to be this. The stranded vessel is the Commonwealth of Rome, that by
the tyranny of Domitian, and the insolence of the Praetorian Guards under
Nerva, was quite run aground and in danger of perishing. Some of those embarked
in it endeavor at her recovery, but it is Trajan that by the adoption of Nerva
stems the tide to her relief, and like another Neptune shoves her off the
quicksands. Your Device, says Eugenius, hangs very well together; but is not it
liable to the same exceptions that you made us last night to such explications
as have nothing but the writer's imagination to support them? To show you, says
Philander, that the construction I put on this Medal is conformable to the
fancies of the old Romans, you may observe, that Horace represents at length
the Commonwealth of Rome under the figure of a ship, in the Allegory that you
meet with in the fourteenth Ode of his first book. O Navis, referent in mare te
novi
Fluctus. --
And shall the raging waves again
Bear thee back into the main?
Mr. Creech. Nor was any thing more usual than to represent a God in the shape
and dress of an Emperor. -- Apelleae cuperent te scribere cerae,
Optassetque novo similem te ponere templo
Atticus Elei senior Jovis; et tua mitis
Ora Taras: tua sidereas imitantia flammas
Lumina, contempto mallet Rhodos aspera Phaebo.
Statius de Equo Domitiani Syl. 1. Now had Apelles lived, he would sue to grace
His glowing Tablets with thy godlike face:
Phidias, a Sculptor for the Powers above!
Had wished to place thee with his Ivory Jove.
Rhodes and Tarentum, that with Pride survey,
The Thund'rer This, and That the God of day;
Each famed Colossus would exchange for Thee,
And own thy form the loveliest of the three.
For the thought in general, you have just the same metaphorical compliment to
Theodosius in Claudian, as the Medal here makes to Trajan. Nulla relicta foret
Romani nominis umbra,
Ni pater ille tuus jamjam ruitura subisset
Pondera, turbatamque ratem, certaque levasset
Naufragium commune manu. -- Claudian. de 4 to Cons. Honorii.
Had not thy Sire deferred the impending fate,
And with his solid virtue prop'd the state;
Sunk in Oblivion's shade, the name of Rome,
An empty name! had scarce survived her doom:
Half-wreck'd she was, 'till his auspicious hand
Resumed the rudder, and regained the land.
I shall only add, that this Medal was stamped in honor of Trajan, when he was
only Caesar, as appears by the face of it....SARI TRAIANO.

FIG. 22.
The next is a reverse of Marcus Aurelius. We have on it a Minerva mounted on a
monster, that Ausonius describes in the following verses. Illa etiam Thalamos
per trina aenigmata querens
Qui bipes, et quadrupes foret, et tripes omnia solus;
Terruit Aoniam Volucris, Leo, Virgo; triformis
Sphinx, volucris pennis, pedibusfera, front puella.
To form the monster Sphinx, a triple kind,
Man, bird, and beast, by nature were combined:
With feathered fans she winged the aerial space;
And on her feet the Lion-claws disgrace
The bloomy features of a Virgin-face.
Over pale Aonia pannic horror ran,
While in mysterious speech she thus began:
"What animal, when yet the Morn is new,
"Walks on Four legs infirm; at Noon on Two:
"But day declining to the western skies,
"He needs a Third; a Third the Night supplies?
The monster, says Cynthio, is a Sphinx, but for her meaning on this Medal, I
am not O Edipus enough to unriddle it. I must confess, says Philander, the
Poets fail me in this particular. There is however a passage in Pausanias that
I will repeat to you, though it is in prose, since I know no body else that has
explained the Medal by it. The Athenians, says he, drew a Sphinx on the armor
of Pallas, by reason of the strength and sagacity of this animal. The Sphinx
therefore signifies the same as Minerva herself, who was the Goddess of arms as
well as wisdom, and describes the Emperor, as one of the Poets expresses it, --
Studiis florentem utriusque Minervae.
Whom both Minerva's boast t'adopt their own.
The Romans joined both devices together, to make the emblem the more
significant, as indeed they could not too much extol the learning and military
virtues of this excellent Emperor, who was the best Philosopher and greatest
General of his Age.

We will close up this Series of Medals with one that was stamped under
Tiberius to the memory of Augustus. FIG. 23.
Over his head you see the star that his father Julius Caesar was supposed to
have been changed into. Ecce Dionaei processit Caesaris astrum.
Virg. Ecl. 9. See, Caesar's lamp is lighted in the skies.
Mr. Dryden. -- micat inter omnes
Julium sidus, velut inter ignes
Luna minores.
Hor. -- Julius Caesar's light appears
As, in fair nights and smiling skies,
The beauteous Moon amidst the meaner stars.
Mr. Creech. Vix ea fatus erat, media cum sede senatus
Constitit alma Venus, nulli cernenda, suique
Caesaris eripuit membris, nec in era solvi
Passa recentem animam, coelestibus intulit astris.
Dumque tulit lumen capere atque ignescere sensit,
Emisitque sinu: Luna evolat altius illa,
Flammiferumque trahens spatioso limite crinem,
Stella micat. --
Ov. Met. Li. 15. This spoke; the Goddess to the Senate flew;
Where, her fair form concealed from mortal view,
Her Caesar's heavenly part she made her care,
Nor left the recent Soul to waste to air;
But bore it upwards to its native skies:
Glowing with newborn fires she saw it rise;
Forth springing from her bosom up it flew,
And kindling, as it soared, a Comet grew;
Above the lunar sphere it took its flight,
And shot behind it a long trail of light.
Mr. Welsted. Virgil draws the same figure of Augustus on Aeneas's shield as we
see on this Medal. The Commentators tell us, that the star was engraven on
Augustus's helmet, but we may be sure Virgil means such a figure of the Emperor
as he used ^o be represented by in the Roman sculpture, and ^^ch a one as we
may suppose this to be that we ^ave before us. Hinc Augustus agens Italos in
praelia Caesar,
Cum patribus, populoque, Penatibus, et magnis Diis,
Stans celsa in puppi; geminas cui tempora flammas
Laeta vomunt, patriumque aperitur vertice sidus.
Virg. Aen. Li. 8. Young Caesar on the stern in armor bright,
Here leads the Romans, and the Gods, to fight:
His beamy temples shoot their flames afar;
And over his head is hung the Julian star.
Mr. Dryden. The thunderbolt that lies by him is a mark of his Apotheosis, that
makes him as it were a compa^ion of Jupiter. Thus the Poets of his own age that
deified him living, Divisum Imperium cum Jove Caesar habet.
Virg. Hic socium summo cum Jove numen habet.
Ov. -- regit Augustus socio per signa Tonante.
Manil. Li. 1. Sed tibi debetur coelum, te fulmine pollens,
Accipiet cupidi Regia magna Jovis.
Ov. de. Augusto ad Liviam. He wears on his head the Corona Radiata, which at
that time was another type of his Divinity. The spikes that shoot out from the
crown were to represent the rays of the Sun. There were twelve of them, in
allusion to the Signs of the Zodiac. It is this kind of crown that Virgil
describes.

-- ingenti mole Latinus
Quadrijugo vehitur curru, cui tempora circum
Aurati bis sex radii fulgentia cingunt,
Solis-avi specimen. --
Virg. Aen. Lib. 12. Four steeds the chariot of Latinus bear:
Twelve golden beams around his temples play,
To mark his lineage from the God of day.
Mr. Dryden. FIG. 24:
If you would know why the corona radiata is a representation of the Sun, you
may see it in the figure of Apollo in the next reverse, where his head is
encompassed with such an arch of glory as Ovid and Statius mention, that might
be put on and taken off at pleasure. -- at genitor circum caput omne micantes
Deposuit radios --
Ovid. Met. Lib. 2. The tender Sire was touched with what he said,
And flung the blaze of glories from his head.
Imposuitque comae radios --
Ibid. Then fixed his beamy circle on his head.
-- licet ignipedum fraenator equorum
Ipse tuis a^te radiantem crinibus arcum
Imprimat --
Statius. Theb. Lib. 1. ad Domitian. Though Phoebus longs to mix his rays with
thine,
And in thy glories more serenely shine.
[Mr. Pope. In his right hand he holds the whip with which ^e is supposed to
drive the horses of the Sun: as ^n a pretty passage of Ovid, that some of his
edi^ors must needs fancy spurious. Colligit amentes, et adhuc terrore paventes,
Phoebus equos, stimuloque dolens et verbere saevit:
Saevit enim, natumque objectat, et imputat illis.
Ov. Met. Lib. 2. Prevailed upon at length, again he took
The harnessed steeds, that still with horror shook,
And plies 'em with the lash, and whips 'em on,
And, as he whips, upbraids 'em with his son.
The double-pointed dart in his left hand is an emblem of his beams, that
pierce through such an ^nfinite depth of air, and enter into the very bowels of
the earth. Accordingly Lucretius calls them the darts of the day, as Ausonius
to make a sort of witticism has followed his example.

Non rodii solis, neque lucida tela Diei.
Lucr. Exultant udae super arida saxa rapinae,
Luciferique pavent letalia tela Diel.
de piscibus captis. Aus. Eid. 10. Caligo terrae scinditur,
Percussa solis spiculo.
Prud. Him. 2. I have now given you a sample of such emblematical Medals as are
unriddled by the Latin Poets, and have shown several passages in the Latin
Poets that receive an illustration from Medals. Some of the Coins we have had
before us have not been explained by others, as many of them have been
explained in a different manner. There are indeed others that have had very
near the same explication put upon them, but as this explication has been
supported by no authority, it can at best be looked upon but as a probable
conjecture. It is certain, says Eugenius, there cannot be any more authentic
illustrations of Roman Medals, especially of those that are full of fancy, than
such as are drawn out of the Latin Poets. For as there is a great affinity
between Designing and Poetry, so the Latin Poets, and the Designers of the
Roman Medals, lived very near one another, were acquainted with the same
customs, conversant with the same objects, and bred up to the same relish for
wit and fancy. But who are the Ladies that we are next to examine? These are,
says Philander, so many Cities, Nations and Provinces that present themselves
to you under the shape of women. What you take for a fine Lady at first sight,
when you come to look into her will prove a town, a country, or one of the four
parts of the world. In short, you have now Afric, Spain, France, Italy, and
several other nations of the earth before you. This is one of the pleasantest
Maps, says Cynthio, that I ever saw. Your Geographers now and then fancy a
country like a Leg or a Head, a Bear or a Dragon, but I never before saw them
represented like women. I could not have thought your mountains, seas and
promontories could have made up an assembly of such well-shaped persons. This
therefore, says Philander, is a Geography particular to the Medallists. The
Poets however have sometimes given into it, and furnish us with very ^ood
lights for the explication of it. Third Series. FIG. 1.
The first Lady you see on the List is Africa, she carries an Elephant's tooth
^y her side. Dentibus ex illis quos mittit porta Syenes,
Et Mauri celeres, et Mauro obscurior Indus:
Et quos deposuit Nabathaeo bellua saltu,
Jam nimios, capitique graves --
Juv. Sat. 11. She is always quoiff'd with the head of an Elephant, to show
that this animal is the breed of that Country, as for the same reason she has a
Dragon lying at her feet. Huic varias pestes, diversaque membra ferarum,
Concessit bellis natura infesta futuris;
Horrendos angues, habitataque membra veneno,
Et mortis partus, viventia crimina terrae;
Et vastos Elephantes habet, saevosque Leones,
In poenas faecunda suas, parit horrida tellus.
Manil. Lib. 4. de Africa. Here Nature, angry with mankind, prepares
Strange monsters, instruments of future wars;
Here Snakes, those Cells of poison, take their birth,
Those living crimes and grievance of the earth;
Fruitful in its own plagues, the desert shore
Hears Elephants, and frightful Lions roar.
Mr. Creech. Lucan in his description of the several noxious animals of this
country, mentions in particular the flying Dragon that we see on this Medal.
Vos quoque, qui cunctis innoxia numina terris
Serpitis, aurato nitidi fulgore dracones,
Pestiferos ardens facit Africa: ducitis altum
Era cum pennis, armentaque tota secuti
Rumpitis ingentes amplexi verbere tauros.
Nec tutus spatio est Elephas. datis omnia letho:
Nec vobis opus est ad noxia fata veneno.
Luc. Lib. 9. And you, ye Dragons! of the scaly race,
Whom glittering gold and shining armours grace,
In other nations harmless are you found,
Their guardian Genii and Protectors owned;
In Afric only are you fatal; there,
On wide-expanded wings, sublime you rear
Your dreadful forms, and drive the yielding air.
The lowing Kine in droves you chase, and cull
Some master of the herd, some mighty Bull:
Around his stubborn sides your tails you twist,
By force compress, and burst his brawny chest.
Not Elephants are by their larger size
Secure, but with the rest become your prize.
Resistless in your Might, you all invade,
And for destruction need not poison's aid.
Mr. Row. The Bull that appears on the other side of the Dragon, shows us that
Afric abounds in agriculture. -- tibi habe frumentum, Alledius inquit,
O Libye, disjunge boves, dum tuberae mittas.
Juv. Sat. 5. -- No more plough up the ground
O Libya, where such mushrooms can be found,
Alledius cries, but furnish us with store
Of mushrooms, and import thy corn no more.
Mr. Bowls. This part of the world has always on Medals something to denote
her wonderful fruitfulness, ^s it was indeed the great granary of Italy. In the
^wo following figures, the handful of wheat, the Cornu-copiae, and basket of
corn, are all emblems of the same signification.

Sed qua se campis squalentibus Africa tendit,
Serpentum largo coquitur faecunda veneno:
Felix qua pingues mitis plaga temperat agros;
Nec Cerere Ennaea, Phario nec victa colono.
Sil. It. Lib. 1. Frumenti quantum metit Africa --
Hor. Sat. 3. Lib. 2. -- segetes mirantur Iberas
Horrea; nec Libyae senserunt damna rebellis
Jam transalpina contenti mess Quirites.
Claud. in Eutrop. Lib. 1. FIG. 2.
The Lion on the second Medal marks ^er out for the -- Leonum
Arida nutrix.
Hor.

The Scorpion on the third is another of her productions, FIG. 3.
as Lucan mentions it in particular, in the long catalogue of her venomous
animals. -- quis fata putaret
Scorpion, aut vires maturae mortis habere?
Ille minax nodis, et recto verbere saevus,
Test tulit coelo victi decus Orionis.
Luc. Lib. 9. Who, that the Scorpion's insect form surveys.
Would think that ready Death his call obeys?
Threatening he rears his knotty tail on high,
The vast Orion thus he doomed to die,
And fixed him, his proud trophy, in the sky.
Mr. Row. The three figures you have here shown us, say^ Eugenius, give me an
idea of a description or two in Claudian, that I must confess I did not before
know what to make of. They represent Africa in the shape of a woman, and
certainly allude to the corn and head-dress that she wears on old Coins --
mediis apparet in astris
Africa, rescissae vestes, et spicea passim
Serta jacent, lacero crinales vertice dentes,
Et fractum pendebat ebur --
Claud. de Bell. Gild Next Afric, mounting to the blessed Abodes,
Pensive approached the Synod of the Gods:
No arts of dress the weeping Dame adorn;
Her garments rent, and wheaten garlands torn:
The fillets, graced with teeth in Ivory rows,
Broke and disordered dangle on her brows.
Tum spicis et dente comas illustris eburno,
Et calido rubicunda die, sic Africa fatur.
Claud. de Cons. Still. Lib. 2. I think, says Philander, there is no question
but the Poet has copied out in his description the figure that Africa made in
ancient sculpture and painting. FIG. 4.
The next before us is Egypt. Her basket of wheat shows us the great
fruitfulness of the country, which is caused by the inundations of the Nile.
Syrtibus hinc Libycis tuta est Aegyptus: at inde
Gurgite septeno rapidus mare summovet amnis:
Terra suis contenta bonis, non indiga mercis,
Aut Jovis; in solo tanta est fiducia Nilo.
Luc. Lib. 8. By Nature strengthened with a dangerous strand,
Her Syrts and untried channels guard the land.
Rich in the fatness of her plenteous soil,
She plants her only confidence in Nile.
Mr. Row. The instrument in her hand is the Sistrum of the Egyptians, made use
of in the worship of the Goddess Isis. -- Nilotica sistris
Ripa sonat --
Claud. de 4 to Cons. Honor. On Medals you see it in the hand of Egypt, of
^sis, or any of her Worshippers. The Poets too ^ake the same use of it, as
Virgil has placed it ^n Cleopatra's hand, to distinguish her from an Egyptian.

Regina in mediis patrio vocat agmina sistro.
Virg. Aen. Lib. 8. The Queen her self, amidst the loud alarms,
With Cymbals tossed, her fainting soldiers warms.
Mr. Dryden. -- restabant Actia bella,
Atque ipsa Isiaco certarunt fulmina sistro.
Manil. Lib. 1. -- imitataque Lunam
Cornua fulserunt, crepuitque sonabile sistrum.
de Iside. Ov. Met. Lib. 9. -- The lunar horns, that bind
The brows of Isis, cast a blaze around;
The trembling Timbrel made a murmuring sound
Mr. Dryden. Quid tua nunc Isis tibi, Delia? quid mihi prosu^
Ilia tua toties era repulsa manu?
Tib. Lib. 1. El. 3. Nos in templa tuam Romana accepimus Isin,
Semideosque canes, et sistra jubentia luctus.
Luc. Lib. 8. Have we with honors dead Osiris crowned,
And mourned him to the Timbrel's tinkling sound?
Received her Isis to divine abodes,
And ranked her dogs deformed, with Roman Gods?
Mr. Row. The bird before her is the Egyptian Ibis. This figure however does
not represent the living bird, but rather an idol of it, as one may guess by
the pedestal it stands upon, for the Egyptians worshipped it as a God.

Quis nescit, Volusi Bithynice, qualia demens
Aegyptus portenta colat? crocodilon adorat
Pars haec, illa pavet saturam serpentibus Ibin;
Effigies sacri nitet aurea Circopitheci.
Juv. Sat. 15. How Egypt, mad with superstition grown,
Makes Gods of monsters, but too well is known:
One sect devotion to Nile's serpent pays;
Others to Ibis, that on serpents preys.
Where, Thebes, thy hundred gates lie unrepair'd,
And where maimed Memnon's magic harp is heard,
Where these are mouldering left, the sots combine
With pious care a Monkey to enshrine.
Mr. Tate. Venerem precaris? comprecare et Simiam.
Placet sacratus aspis Aesculapii?
Crocodilus, Ibis et Canes cur displicent?
Prudentius. Pas. 1. Romani. We have Mauritania on the fifth Medal, FIG. 5.
leading a horse with something like a thread, for where there is a bridle in
old Coins you see it much more distinctly. In her other ^and she holds a
switch. We have the design of his Medal in the following descriptions that
ce^ebrate the Moors and Numidians, Inhabitants of Mauritania, for their
horsemanship. Hic passim exultant Numidae, gens inscia freni:
Queis inter geminas per ludum mobilis aures
Quadrupedum flectit non cedens virga lupatis:
Altrix bellorum bellatorumque virorum,
Tellus --
Sil. It. Li. 1. On his hot Steed, unused to curb or rein,
The black Numidian prances over the plain:
A wand betwixt his ears directs the course,
And as a Bridle turns the obedient horse.
-- an Mauri fremitum raucosque repulsus
Umbonum et nostros passuri, comminus enses?
Non contra clypeis tectos, galeisque micantes
Ibitis; in solis long fiducia telis.
Exarmatus erit, cum missile torserit, hostis.
Dextra movet jaculum, praetentat pallia laeva,
Caetera nudus Eques; sonipes ignarus habenae:
Virga regit, non ulla fides, non agminis ordo;
Arma oneri. --
Claud. de Bell. Gildon. Can Moors sustain the press, in close-fought fields,
Of shortened fauchions and repelling shields?
Against a host of quivering spears ye go,
Nor helm nor buckler guards the naked foe;
The naked foe, who vainly trusts his art,
And flings away his armor in his dart:
His dart the right hand shakes, the left uprears
His robe, beneath his tender skin appears.
Their Steeds un-rein'd, obey the horseman's wand,
Nor know their legions when to march, or stand;
In the war's dreadful laws untaught and rude,
A mob of men, a martial multitude.
The Horse too may stand as an emblem of the warlike genius of the people.

Bello armantur Equi, bella haec armenta minantur.
Virg. Aen. Li. 3. FIG. 6.
From Africa we will cross over into Spain. There are learned Medallists that
tell us, the Rabbet which you see before her feet, may signify either the
great multitude of these Animals that are found in Spain, or perhaps the
several mines that are wrought within the bowels of that country, the Latin
word Cuniculus signifying either a Rabbet or a Mine. But these Gentlemen do not
consider, that it is not the Word but the Figure that appears on the Medal.
Cuniculus may stand for a Rabbet or a Mine, but the picture of a Rabbet is not
the picture of a Mine. A pun can be no more engraven than it can be translated.
When the word is construed into its idea the double meaning vanishes. The
figure therefore before us means a real Rabbet, which is there found in vast
multitudes.

Cuniculosae Celtiberiae fili.
Catul. in Egnatium. The Olive Branch tell us, it is a country that abounds in
Olives, as it is for this reason that Claudian in his description of Spain
binds an Olive branch about her head.

-- glaucis tum prima Minervae
Nexa comam foliis, fulvaque intexta micantem
Vest Tagum, tales profert Hispania voces.
Claud. de Laud. Still. Li. 2. Thus Spain, whose brows the olive wreaths infold,
And over her robe a Tagus streams in gold.
Martial has given us the like figure of one of the greatest rivers in Spain.
Boetis olivifera crinem redimite corona,
Aurea qui nitidis vellera tingis aquis:
Quem Bromius quem Pallas amat --
Mar. Li. 12. Ep. 99. Fair Boetis! Olives wreath thy azure locks;
In fleecy gold thou cloath'st the neighboring flocks:
Thy fruitful banks with rival-bounty smile,
While Bacchus wine bestows, and Pallas oil.
And Prudentius of one of its eminent towns.

Tu december sanctos revehes et octo,
Caesar Augusta studiosa Christi,
Verticem flavis oleis revincta
Pacis honor.
Prudent. Hymn. 4. FIG. 7.
France, you see, has a Sheep by her, not only as a sacrifice, but to show that
the riches of the country consisted chiefly in flocks and pasturage. Thus
Horace mentioning the commodities of different countries, Quanquam nec Calabrae
mella ferunt apes,
Nec Laestrigonia Bacchus in amphora
Languescit mihi, nec pinguia Gallicis
Crescunt vellera pascuis.
Hor. Od. 16. Li. 3. Though no Calabrian Bees do give
Their grateful tribute to my hive;
No wines, by rich Campania sent,
In my ignoble casks ferment;
No flocks in Gallic plains grow fat; --
Mr. Creech. She carries on her shoulders the Sagulum that Virgil speaks of as
the habit of the ancient Gauls. Aurea caesaries ollis, atque aurea vestis:
Virgatis lucent sagulis --
Virg. Aen. Lib. 8. The gold dissembled well their yellow hair;
And golden chains on their white necks they wear;
Gold are their vests --
Mr. Dryden. She is drawn in a posture of sacrificing for the ^afe arrival of
the Emperor, as we may learn from the inscription. We find in the several
Medals that were struck on Adrian's progress through the Empire, that at his
arrival they offer^d a sacrifice to the Gods for the reception of so ^reat a
blessing. Horace mentions this custom.

Tum meae (si quid loquar audiendum)
Vocis accedet bona pars; et O Sol
Pulcher, o laudande, canam, recepto
Caesare felix. --
Te december tauri, totidemque vaccae;
Me tener solvet vitulus --
Hor. Od. 2. Lib. 4. And there, if any patient ear
My Muse's feeble song will hear
My voice shall sound through Rome:
Thee, Sun, I Will sing, thee, lovely fair,
Thee, thee I Will praise, when Caesar's come. --
Ten large fair bulls, ten lusty cows,
Must die, to pay thy richer vows;
Of my small stock of kine
A calf just weaned --
Mr. Creech. Italy has a Cornu-copiae in her hand, FIG. 8.
to denote her fruitfulness; -- magna parens frugum Saturnia tellus.
Virg. Geor. 3. and a crown of towers on her head to figure out the many towns
and cities that stand upon her. Lucan has given her the like ornament, where he
represents her addressing herself to Julius Caesar. Ingens visa duci patriae
trepidantis Imago:
Clara per obscuram vultu maestissima noctem,
Turrigero canos effundens vertice crines,
Caesarie, lacera nudisque adstare lacertis,
Et gemitu permista loqui --
Lucan. Lib. 1. Amidst the dusky horrors of the night,
A wondrous vision stood confessed to sight;
Her awful head Rome's reverend image reared,
Trembling and sad the Matron form appeared;
A tow'ry crown her hoary temples bound,
And her torn tresses rudely hung around:
Her naked arms uplifted ere she spoke,
Then groaning thus the mournful silence broke.
Mr. Row. She holds a scepter in her other hand, and sits on a globe of the
heavens, to show that she is the Sovereign of nations, and that all the
influences of the Sun and Stars fall on her dominions. Claudian makes the same
compliment to Rome.

Ipsa triumphatis quae possidet aethera regnis.
Claud. in Prob. et Olyb. Cons. Jupiter arce sua totum dum spectat in orbem,
Nil nisi Romanum quod tueatur habet.
Ov. de fast. Lib. 1. Jove finds no realm, when he the globe surveys,
But what to Rome submissive homage pays.
Orbem jam totum victor Romanus habebat,
Qua mare, qua tellus, qua sidus currit utrumque.
Petron. Now Rome, sole Empress reigns from pole to pole,
Wherever earth extends, or oceans roll.
The picture that Claudian makes of Rome one would think was copied from the
next Medal. FIG. 9.


-- innuptae ritus imitata Minervae:
Nam neque caesariem crinali stringere cultu,
Colla nec ornatu patitur mollire retorto:
Dextrum nuda latus, niveos exerta lacertos,
Audacem retegit mammam, laxumque coercens
Mordet gemma sinum. --
Clipeus Titana lucessit
Lumine, quem tota variarat Mulciber art;
Hic patrius, Mavortis amor, foetusque notantur
Romulei. post amnis inest, et bellua nutrix.
Claud. in Prob. et Olyb. Cons. No costly fillets knot her hair behind,
Nor female trinkets round her neck are twined.
Bold on the right her naked arm she shows,
And half the bosom's unpolluted snows;
Whilst on the left is buckled over her breast,
In diamond clasps, the military-vest.
The Sun was dazzled as her shield she reared,
Where, varied over by Mulciber, appeared
The loves of Mars her Sire, fair Ilia's joys,
The wolf, the Tyber, and the infant boys.
The next figure is Achaia. FIG. 10.


I am sorry, says Cynthio, to find you running farther off us. I was in hopes
you would have shown us our own nation, when you were so near us as France. I
have here, says Philander, FIG. 11.
one of Augustus's Britannia's. You see she is not drawn like other countries,
in a soft peaceful posture, but is adorned with emblems that mark out the
military genius of her Inhabitants. This is, I think, the only commendable
quality that the old Poets have touched upon in the description of our country.
I had once made a collection of all the passages in the Latin Poets, that give
any account of us, but I find them so very malicious, that it would look like a
libel on the nation to repeat them to you. We seldom meet with our
forefathers, but they are coupled with some epithet or another to blacken
them. Barbarous, Cruel and Inhospitable are the best terms they can afford us,
which it would be a kind of injustice to publish, since their posterity are
become so polite, good-natured, and kind to strangers. To mention therefore
those parts only that relate to the present Medal. She sits on a globe that
stands in water, to denote that she is Mistress of a new world, separate from
that which the Romans had before conquered, by the interposition of the sea. I
think we cannot doubt of this interpretation, if we consider how she has been
represented by the ancient Poets.

Et penitus toto divisos orb Britannos.
Virg. Ec. 1. The rest among the Britons be confined;
A race of men from all the world disjoined.
Mr. Dryden. Adspice, confundit populos impervia tellus:
Conjunctum est, quod adhuc orbis, et orbis erat.
Vet. Poet. apud Scalig. Catul. At nunc oceanus geminos interluit orbs.
Id. de Britannia et opposito Continente. -- nostro diducta Britannia mundo.
Claud. Nec stetit oceano, remisque ingressa profundum,
Vincendos alio quaefivit in orb Britannos.
Id. The feet of Britannia are washed by the waves, in the same Poet. -- cujus
vestigia verrit
Coerulus, oceanique aestum mentitur, amictus.
Id. de Laud. Still. Lib. 2. She bears a Roman Ensign in one of her hands, to
confess herself a conquered province.

-- victricia Caesar
Signa Caledonios transvexit ad usque Britannos.
Sidon. Apollin. But to return to Achaia, FIG. 10.
whom we left upon her knees before the Emperor Adrian. She has a pot before
her with a sprig of Parsley rising out of it. I will not here trouble you with a
dull story of Hercules's eating a sallade of Parsley for his refreshment, after
his encounter with the Nemean Lion. It is certain, there were in Achaia the
Nemean Games, and that a garland of Parsley was the Victor's reward. You have an
account of these Games in Ausonius. Quattuor antiquos celebravit Achaia Ludos,
Coelicolum duo sunt, et duo festa hominum.
Sacra Jovis, Phoebique, Palaemonis, Archemorique:
Serta quibus pinus, malus, oliva, apium.
Aus. de Lustral. Agon. Greece, in four games thy martial youth were trained;
For Heroes two, and two for Gods ordained:
Jove bade the Olive round his Victor wave;
Phoebus to his an Apple-garland gave;
The Pine, Palaemon; nor with less renown,
Archemorus conferred the Parsly-crown.
Archemori Nemeaea colunt funebria Thebae.
Id. de locis Agon. -- Alcides Nemeae sacravit honorem.
de Auct. Agon. Id. Archemori Nemeaea colunt funebria Thebae.
Id. One reason why they chose Parsley for a Garland, was doubtless because it
always preserves its verdure, as Horace opposes it to the short-lived Lilly.
Neu vivax apium, nec breve lilium.
Lib. 1. Od. 36. Let fading Lillies and the Rose
Their beauty and their smell disclose;
Let long-lived Parsley grace the feast.
And gently cool the heated guest.
[Mr. Creech. Juvenal mentions the Crown that was made of it, and which here
surrounds the head of Achaia. -- Graiaeque apium meruisse coronae.
Juv. Sat. 8. And winning at a Wake their Parsley crown.
Mr. Stepney. She presents herself to the Emperor in the same posture that the
Germans and English still salute the Imperial and Royal family.

-- jus imperiumque Phraates
Caesaris accepit genibus minor. --
Hor. Epis. 12. Li. 1. The haughty Parthian now to Caesar kneels.
Mr. Creech. Ille qui donat diadema fronti
Qaem genu nixae tremuere gentes.
Senec. Thyest. Act. 3. -- Non, ut inflexo genu.
Regnantem adores, petimus.
Id. Te linguis variae gentes, missique rogatum
Foedera Persarum proceres cum patre sedentem,
Hac quondam videre domo; positaque tiara
Submisere genu. --
Claud. ad Honorium. Thy infant Virtue various climes admired,
And various tongues to sound thy praise conspired:
Thee next the Sovereign seat, the Persians viewed,
When in this Regal Dome for peace they su'd:
Each Turban low, in sign of worship, waved;
And every knee confessed the boon they craved.
Sicily appears before Adrian in the same posture. FIG. 12.
She has a bundle of Corn in her hand, and a Garland of it on her head, as she
abounds in wheat, and was consecrated to Ceres.

Utraque frugiferis est Insula nobilis arvis:
Nec plus Hesperiam longinquis messibus ullae,
Nec Romana complerunt horrea terrae.
de Sicilia et Sardinia. Luc. Li. 2. Sardinia too, renowned for yellow fields,
With Sicily her bounteous tribute yields;
No lands a glebe of richer tillage boast,
Nor waft more plenty to the Roman coast.
Mr. Row. Terra tribus scopulis vatum procurrit in aequor
Trinacris, a positu nomen adepta loci,
Grata domus Cereri. multas ibi possidet urbes:
In quibus est culto fertilis Henna solo.
Ov. de Fast. Li. 4. To Ceres dear, the fruitful land is famed
For three tall Capes, and thence Trinacria named:
There Henna well rewards the tiller's toil,
The fairest Champian of the fairest Isle.
FIG. 13.
We find Judaea on several coins of Vespasian and Titus, in a posture that
denotes sorrow and captivity. The first figure of her is drawn to the life, in
a picture that Seneca has given us of the Trojan matrons bewailing their
captivity. -- paret exertos
Turba lacertos. Vest remissa
Substringe sinus, uteroque tenus
Pateant artus --
-- cadat ex humeris
Vestis apertis: imumque tegat
Suffulta latus. jam nuda vocant
Pectora dextras. nunc nunc vires
Exprome, Dolor, tuas.
Hecuba ad Trojan, chor. Sen. Troas. Act. 1. -- Bare
Your arms, your vestures slackly tied
Beneath your naked bosoms, slide
Down to your wastes --
-- Let
From your divested shoulders slide
Your garments, down on either side.
Now bared bosoms call for blows,
Now, Sorrow, all thy powers disclose.
Sir Ed. Sherburn. -- apertae pectora matres
Significant luctum --
Ov. Met. Li. 13. Who barred their breasts, and gave their hair to flow:
The signs of grief, and mark of public woe.
The head is veiled in both figures, as another expression of grief. -- ipsa
tristi vestis obtentu caput
Velata, juxta praesides astat Deos.
Sen. Herc. fur. Act. 2. Sic ubi fata, caput ferali obducit amictu,
Decrevitque pati tenebras, puppisque cavernis
Delituit: saevumque arcte complexa dolorem
Perfruitur lacrymis, et amat pro conjuge luct^m.
Luc. Li. 9. de Cornelia. So said the Matron; and about her head
Her veil she draws, her mournful eyes to shade:
Resolved to shroud in thickest shades her woe,
She seeks the ship's deep darksome Hold below:
There lonely left, at leisure to complain,
She hugs her sorrows, and enjoys her pain;
Still with fresh tears the living grief would feed,
And fondly loves it, in her husband's stead.
Mr. Row. I need not mention her sitting on the ground, because we have
already spoken of the aptness of such a posture to represent an extreme
affliction. I fancy, says Eugenius, the Romans might have an eye on the customs
of the Jewish nation, as well as of those of their country, in the several
marks of sorrow they have set on this figure. The Psalmist describes the Jews
lamenting their captivity in the same pensive posture. By the waters of Babylon
we sat down and wept, when we remembered thee, O Sion. But what is more
remarkable, we find Judaea represented as a woman in sorrow sitting on the
ground, in a passage of the Prophet that foretells the very captivity reed on
this Medal. The covering of the head, and the rending of garments, we find very
often in Holy Scripture, as the expressions of a raging grief. But what is the
tree we see on both these Medals? We find, says Philander, not only on these,
but on several other coins that relate to Judaea, the figure of a Palm Tree, to
show us that Palms are the growth of the country. Thus Silius Italicus,
speaking of Vespasian's conquest, that is the subject of this Medal.

Palmiferamque senex bello domitabit Idumen.
Sil. It. Li. 3. Martial seems to have hinted at the many pieces of painting
and sculpture that were occasioned by this conquest of Judaea, and had
generally something of the Palm Tree in them. It begins an Epigram on the death
of Scorpus a chariot-driver, which in those degenerate times of the Empire was
looked upon as a public calamity.

Tristis Idumaeas frangat Victoria palmas;
Plange Favor saeva pectora nuda manu.
Mart. Li. 10. Epig. 50. The man by the Palm Tree in the first of these Medals,
is supposed to be a Jew with his hands bound behind him.

I need not tell you that the winged figure on the other Medal is a Victory.
FIG. 14.
She is represented here as on many other coins, writing something on a shield.
We find this way of registring a Victory touched upon in Virgil, and Silius
Italicus.

Aere cavo clypeum, magni gestamen Abantis,
Postibus adversis figo, et rem carmine signo;
Aeneas haec de Danais victoribus arma.
Virg. Aen. Lib. 3. I fixed upon the Temple's lofty door
The brazen shield, which vanquished Abas bore:
The verse beneath my name and actions speaks,
"These arms Aeneas took from conquering Greeks.
Mr. Dryden. Pyrettes tumulo clypeum cum carmine figunt;
Hasdrubalis spolium Gradivo Scipio victor.
Sil. Ital. Li. 15. High on Pyrene's airy top they placed,
The captive Shield, with this inscription graced;
"Sacred to Mars, these votive spoils proclaim
"The fate of Asdrubal, and Scipio's fame.
FIG 15.
Parthia has on one side of her the Bow and Quiver which are so much talked of
by the Poets. Lucan's account of the Parthians is very pretty and poetical. --
Parthoque sequente
Murus erit, quodcunque potest obstare sagittae --
Illita tela dolis, nec Martem comminus unquam
Ausa pati virtus, sed long tendere nervos,
Et, quo far velint, permittere vulnera ventis.
Luc. Li. 8. Each fence, that can their winged shafts endure,
Stands, like a fort, impregnable, secure --
To taint their coward darts is all their care,
And then to trust them to the flitting air.
Mr. Row. -- Sagittiferosque Parthos.
Catul. The Crown she holds in her hand, refers to the crown of gold that
Parthia, as well as other provinces, presented to the Emperor Antonine. The
presenting a Crown, was the giving up the sovereignty into his hands.

Ipse oratores ad me, regnique coronam,
Cum sceptro misit --
Virg. Aen. Lib. 8. Tarchon, the Tuscan Chief, to me has sent
Their Crown, and every regal ornament.
Mr. Dryden. Antioch has an Anchor by her, FIG. 16.
in ^emory of her founder Seleucus, whose ^ace was all born with this mark upon
them, if you will believe Historians. Ausonius has taken notice of it in his
verses on this city. -- Illa Seleucum
Nuncupat ingenuum, cujus fuit Anchora signum,
Qualis inusta solet; generis nota certa, per omnem
Nam sobolis seriem nativa cucurrit imago.
Aus. Ordo Nobil. Urbium. Thee, great Seleucus, bright in Grecian fame!
The towers of Antioch for their founder claim:
Thee Phoebus at thy birth his son confessed,
By the fair Anchor on the babe impressed;
Which all thy genuine offspring wont to grace,
From thigh to thigh transmissive through the race.


Smyrna is always represented by an Amazon, FIG. 17.
that is said to have been her first foundress. You see her here entering into a
league with Thyatira. Each of them holds her tutelar Deity in her hand. Jus
ille, et icti foederis testes Deos
Invocat. --
Sen. Phaenissae. Act. 1. On the left arm of Smyrna, is the Pelta or Buckler of
the Amazons, as the long weapon by her is the Bipennis or Securis.

Non tibi Amazonia est pro me sumenda securis,
Aut excisa levi pelta gerenda manu.
Ov. Li. 3. Epis. 1. ex Pont. Lunatis agmina peltis.
Virg. In their right hands a pointed Dart they wield;
The left, for ward, sustains the lunar Shield.
Mr. Dryden. Videre Rhaeti bella sub Alpibus
Drusum gerentem, et Vindelici; quibus
Mos unde deductus per omne
Tempus Amazonia securi
Dextras obarmet quaerere distuli.
Hor. Od. 4. Li. 4. Such Drusus did in arms appear,
When near the Alps he urged the war:
In vain the Rhaeti did their axes wield,
Like Amazons they fought, like women fled the field:
But why those savage troops this weapon choose,
Confirmed by long established use,
Historians would in vain disclose.
FIG. 18.
The dress that Arabia appears in, brings to my mind the description Lucan has
made of these eastern nations. Quicquid ad Eoos tractus, mundique teporem
Labitur, emollit gentes clementia coeli.
Illic et laxas vestes, et fluxa virorum
Velamenta vides. --
Luc. Lib. 8. While Asia's softer climate, formed to please,
Dissolves her sons in indolence and ease.
Here silken robes invest unmanly limbs,
And in long trains the flowing Purple streams.
Mr. Row. She bears in one hand a sprig of frankincense. -- solis est thurea
virga Sabeis.
Virg. And odorous frankincense on the Sabaean bough.
Mr. Dryden. Thuriferos Arabum saltus.
Claud. de 3. Cons. Hon. Thurilegos Arabas --
Ov. de Fas. Lib. 4. In the other hand you see the perfumed reed, as the
garland on her head may be supposed to be woven out of some other part of her
fragrant productions. Nec procul in molles Arabas terramque ferentem
Delicias, variaeque novos radicis honores;
Leniter adfundit gemmantia littora pontus,
Et terrae mare nomen habet --
de sinu Arabico. Manil. Lib. 4. More west the other soft Arabia beats,
Where incense grows, and pleasing odor sweats;
The Bay is called the Arabian gulf; the name
The country gives it, and it is great in fame.
Mr. Creech. Urantur pia thura focis, urantur odores,
Quos tener a terra divite mittit Arabs.
Tibul. Lib. 2. El. 2. -- sit dives amomo,
Cinnamaque, costumque suam, sudataque ligno
Thura ferat, floresque alios Panchaia tellus,
Dum ferat, et Myrrham.
Ov. Met. Lib. 10. Let Araby extol her happy coast,
Her Cinnamon, and sweet Amomum boast;
Her fragrant flowers, her trees with precious tears,
Her second harvests, and her double years:
How can the land be called so blessed, that Myrrha bears?
Mr. Dryden. -- Odoratae spirant medicamina Sylvae.
Manil. The trees drop balsam, and on all the boughs
Health sits, and makes it sovereign as it flows.
Mr. Creech. Cinnami sylvas Arabes beatos
Vidit --
Sen. OEdip. Act. 1. What a delicious country is this, says Cynthio? a man
almost smells it in the descriptions that are made of it. The Camel is in
Arabia, I suppose, a beast of burden, that helps to carry off its spices. We
find the Camel, says Philander, mentioned in Persius on the same account. Toll
recens primus piper e sitiente Camelo.
Pers. Sat. 5. -- The precious weight
Of pepper and Sabaean incense, take
With thy own hands from the tired Camel's back.
Mr. Dryden. He loads the Camel with pepper, because the animal and its cargo
are both the productions of the same country.

Mercibus hic Italis mutat sub sole recenti
Rugosum piper --
Id. Sat. 5. The greedy Merchants, led by lucre, run
To the parched Indies and the rising Sun;
From thence hot pepper, and rich drugs they bear,
Bart'ring for spices their Italian ware.
Mr. Dryden. You have given us some quotations out of Persius this morning,
says Eugenius, that in my opinion have a great deal of poetry in them. I have
often wondered at Mr. Dryden for passing so severe a censure on this Author. He
fancies the description of a Wreck that you have already cited, is too good for
Persius, and that he might be helped in it by Lucan, who was one of his
contemporaries. For my part, says Cynthio, I am so far from Mr. Dryden's
opinion in this particular, that I fancy Persius a better Poet than Lucan: and
that had he been engaged on the same subject, he would at least in his
Expressions and Descriptions have out-writ the Pharsalia. He was indeed
employed on subjects that seldom led him into any thing like Description, but
where he has an occasion of showing himself, we find very few of the Latin
Poets that have given a greater beauty to their Expressions. His obscurities
are indeed sometimes affected, but they generally arise from the remoteness of
the Customs, Persons and Things he alludes to: as Satyr is for this reason more
difficult to be understood by those that are not of the same Age with it, than
any other kind of Poetry. Love-verses and Heroics deal in Images that are ever
fixed and settled in the nature of things, but a thousand ideas enter into
Satyr, that are as changeable and unsteady as the mode or the humors of
mankind.

Our three friends had passed away the whole morning among their Medals and
Latin Poets. Philander told them it was now too late to enter on another
Series, but if they would take up with such a dinner as he could meet with at
his Lodgings, he would afterward lay the rest of his Medals before them.
Cynthio and Eugenius were both of them so well pleased with the novelty of the
subject, that they would not refuse the offer Philander made them.

DIALOGUE III.
-- causa est discriminis hujus
Concisum Argentum in titulos faciesque minutas.
Juv. Sat. 14.
A PARALLEL between the Ancient and Modern MEDALS.
PHILANDER used every morning to take a walk in a neighboring wood, that stood
on the borders of the Thames. It was cut through by abundance of beautiful
allies, which ^erminating on the water, looked like so many ^ainted views in
perspective. The banks of the ^iver and the thickness of the shades drew into
them all the birds of the country, that at Sunrising filled the wood with such
a variety of notes, as made the prettiest confusion imaginable. I know in
descriptions of this nature the scenes are generally supposed to grow out of
the Author's imagination, and if they are not charming in all their parts, the
Reader never imputes it to the want of sun or soil, but to the Writer's
barrenness of invention. It is Cicero's observation on the Plane-tree, that
makes so flourishing a figure in one of Plato's Dialogues, that it did not draw
its nourishment from the fountain that ra^ by it and watered its roots, but
from the richness of the style that describes it. For my own part, as I design
only to fix the scene of the following Dialogue, I shall not endeavor to give
it any other ornaments than those which nature has bestowed upon it.

Philander was here enjoying the cool of the morning, among the dews that lay
on every thing about him, and that gave the air such a freshness as is not a
little agreeable in the hot part of the year. He not been here long before he
was joined by Cynthio and Eugenius. Cynthio immediately fell upon Philander for
breaking his night's rest. You have so filled my head, says he, with old Coins,
that I have had nothing but figures and inscriptions before my eyes. If I
chanced to fall into a little slumber, it was immediately interrupted with the
vision of a Caduceus or a Cornu-copiae. You will make me believe, says
Philander, that you begin to be reconciled to Medals. They say it is a sure
sign a man loves money, when he is used to find it in his dreams. There is
certainly, says Eugenius, something like Avarice in the study of Medals. The
more a man knows of them, the more he desires to know. There is one subject in
particular that Cynthio, as well as my self, has a mind to engage you in. We
would fain know how the Ancient and Modern Medals differ from one another, and
which of them deserves the preference. You have a mind to engage me in a
subject, says Philander, that is perhaps of a larger extent than you imagine.
To examine it thoroughly, it would be necessary to take them in pieces, and to
speak of the difference that shows it self in their Metals, in the Occasion of
stamping them, in the Inscriptions, and in the Figures that adorn them. Since
you have divided your subject, says Cynthio, be so kind as to enter on it
without any further preface.

We should first of all, says Philander, consider the difference of the Metals
that we find in ancient and modern Coins, but as this speculation is more
curious than improving, I believe you will excuse me if I do not dwell long
upon it. One may understand all the learned part of this science, without
knowing whether there were Coins of iron or lead among the old Romans, and if a
man is well acquainted with the Device of a Medal, I do not see what necessity
there is of being able to tell whether the Medal it self be of copper or
Corinthian brass. There is however so great a difference between the antique
and modern Medals, that I have seen an Antiquary lick an old Coin, among other
trials, to distinguish the age of it by its Taste. I remember when I laughed at
him for it, he told me with a great deal of vehemence, there was as much
difference between the relish of ancient and modern brass, as between an apple
and a turnep. It is pity, says Engenius, but they found out the Smell too of an
ancient Medal. They would then be able to judge of it by all the senses. The
Touch, I have heard, gives almost as good evidence as the Sight, and the
Ringing of a Medal is, I know, a very common experiment. But I suppose this
last proof you mention relates only to such Coins as are made of your baser
sorts of metal. And here, says Philander, we may observe the prudence of the
Ancients above that of the Moderns, in the care they took to perpetuate the
memory of great actions. They knew very well that silver and gold might fall
into the hands of the covetous or ignorant, who would not respect them for the
Device they bore, but for the Metal they were made of. Nor were their
apprehensions ill-founded; for it is not easily imagined how many of these
noble monuments of history have perished in the goldsmiths hands, before they
came to be collected together by the learned men of these two or three last
Centuries. Inscriptions, Victories, Buildings, and a thousand other pieces of
antiquity were melted down in those barbarous Ages, that thought figures and
letters only served to spoil the gold that was charged with them. Your
Medallists look on this destruction of Coins, as on the burning of the
Alexandrian Library, and would be content to compound for them, with almost the
loss of a Vatican. To prevent this in some measure, the ancients placed the
greatest variety of their devices on their brass and copper Coins, which are in
no fear of falling into the clippers hands, nor in any danger of melting till
the general conflagration. On the contrary, our modern Medals are most in
silver or gold, and often in a very small number of each. I have seen a golden
one at Vienna, of Philip the second, that weighed two and twenty pound, which
is probably singular in its kind, and will not be able to keep it self long out
of the furnace when it leaves the Emperor's Treasury. I remember another in the
King of Prussia's collection, that has in it three pound weight of gold. The
Princes who struck these Medals, says Eugenius, seem to have designed them
rather as an ostentation of their Wealth, than of their Virtues. They fancied
probably, it was a greater honor to appear in gold than in copper, and that a
Medal receives all its value from the rarity of the metal. I think the next
subject you proposed to speak of, were the different Occasions that have given
birth to ancient and modern Medals.

Before we enter on this particular, says Philander, I must tell you by way of
preliminary, that formerly there was no difference between Money and Medals. An
old Roman had his purse full of the same pieces that we now preserve in
Cabinets. As Soon as an Emperor had done any thing remarkable, it was
immediately stamped on a Coin, and became current through his whole Dominions.
It was a pretty contrivance, says Cynthio, to spread abroad the virtues of an
Emperor, and make his actions circulate. A fresh Coin was a kind of a Gazette,
that published the latest news of the Empire. I should fancy your Roman Bankers
were very good Historians. It is certain, says Eugenius, they might find their
profit and instruction mixed together. I have often wondered that no nation
among the moderns has imitated the ancient Romans in this particular. I know no
other way of securing these kinds of monuments, and making them numerous enough
to be handed down to future ages. But where Statesmen are ruled by a spirit of
faction and interest, they can have no passion for the glory of their country,
nor any concern for the figure it will make among posterity. A man that talks
of his nation's honor a thousand years hence, is in very great danger of being
laughed at. We shall think, says Cynthio, you have a mind to fall out with the
Government, because it does not encourage Medals. But were all your ancient
Coins that are now in Cabinets once current money? It is the most probable
opinion, says Philander, that they were all of them such, excepting those we
call Medalions. These in respect of the other Coins were the same as modern
Medals, in respect of modern money. They were exempted from all commerce, and
had no other value but what was set upon them by the fancy of the owner. They
are supposed to have been struck by Emperors for presents to their Friends,
foreign Princes, or Ambassadors. However, that the smallness of their number
might not endanger the loss of the devices they bore, the Romans took care
generally to stamp the subject of their Medalions on their ordinary Coins that
were the running cash of the nation. As if in England we should see on our
halfpenny and farthing pieces, the several designs that show themselves in
their perfection on our Medals.

If we now consider, continued Philander, the different Occasions or Subjects
of ancient and modern Medals, we shall find they both agree in recording the
great actions and successes in war, allowing still for the different ways of
making it, and the circumstances that attended it in past ages, and in the
present. I shall instance one. I do not remember in any old Coin to have seen
the taking of a town mentioned: as indeed there were few conquerors could
signalize themselves that way before the invention of powder and
fortifications, a single battle often deciding the fate of whole kingdoms. Our
modern Medals give us several sieges and plans of fortified towns, that show
themselves in all their parts to a great advantage on the reverse of a Coin. It
is indeed, a kind of justice, says Eugenius, that a Prince owes to posterity,
after he has ruined or defaced a strong place to deliver down to them a model
of it as it stood whole and entire. The Coin repairs in some measure the
mischiefs of his Bombs and Cannons. In the next place, says Philander, we see
both on the ancient and modern Medals the several noble pieces of Architecture
that were finished at the time when the Medals were stamped. I must observe
however, to the honor of the latter, that they have represented their
buildings according to the rules of perspective. This I remember to have seen
but in very few of the plans on ancient Coins, which makes them appear much
less beautiful than the modern, especially to a mathematical eye. Thus far our
two setts of Medals agree as to their Subject. But old Coins go farther in
their compliments to their Emperor, as they take occasion to celebrate his
distinguishing Virtues; not as they showed themselves in any particular action,
but as they shone out in the general view of his character. This humor went so
far, that we see Nero's fidling, and Commodus's skill in fencing, on several of
their Medals. At present, you never meet with the King of France's generosity,
nor the Emperor's devotion recorded after this manner. Again, the Romans used
to register the great actions of Peace that turned to the good of the people,
as well as those of War. The remission of a Debt, the taking off a Duty, the
giving up a Tax, the mending a Port, or the making a Highway, were not looked
upon as improper subjects for a Coin. They were glad of any opportunity to
encourage their Emperors in the humor of doing good, and knew very well, that
many of these acts of beneficence had a wider and more lasting influence on the
happiness and welfare of a people, than the gaining a Victory, or the Conquest
of a nation. In England perhaps it would have looked a little odd to have
stamped a Medal on the abolishing of Chimney-money in the last Reign, or on the
giving a hundred thousand pound a year toward the carrying on a war, in this.
I find, says Eugenius, had we struck in with the practice of the ancient
Romans, we should have had Medals on the fitting up our several Docks, on the
making of our Rivers navigable, on the building our men of War, and the like
subjects, that have certainly very well deserved them. The reason why it has
been neglected, says Philander, may possibly be this. Our Princes have the
coining of their own Medals, and perhaps may think it would look like vanity to
erect so many Trophies and Monuments of praise to their own merit; whereas
among the ancient Romans, the Senate had still a watchful eye on their Emperor,
and if they found any thing in his life and actions that might furnish out a
Medal, they did not fail of making him so acceptable an offering. It Is true,
their flatteries betray often such a baseness of spirit, as one would little
expect to find among such an order of men. And here by the way we may observe,
that you never find any thing like Satyr or Raillery on old Coins.

Whatever victories were got on foreign enemies, or the several pretenders to
the Empire obtained over one another, they are recorded on Coins without the
least bitterness or reflection. The Emperors often jested on their rivals or
predecessors, but their Mints still maintained their gravity. They might
publish invectives against one another in their discourses or writings, but
never on their Coins. Had we no other histories of the Roman Emperors, but
those we find on their money, we should take them for the most virtuous race of
Princes that mankind were ever blessed with: whereas, if we look into their
lives, they appear many of them such monsters of lust and cruelty, as are
almost a reproach to human nature. Medals are therefore so many compliments to
an Emperor, that ascribe to him all the Virtues and Victories he himself
pretended to. Were you to take from hence all your informations, you would
fancy Claudius as great a Conqueror as Julius Caesar, and Domitian a wiser
Prince than his brother Titus. Tiberius on his Coins is all Mercy and
Moderation, Caligula and Nero are Fathers of their Country, Galba the patron of
public Liberty, and Vitellius the restorer of the city of Rome. In short, if
you have a mind to see the religious Commodus, the pious Caracalla, and the
devout Heliogabalus, you may find them either in the inscription or device of
their Medals. On the contrary, those of a modern make are often charged with
Irony and Satyr. Our Kings no sooner fall out, but their mints make war upon
one another, and their malice appears on their Medals. One meets sometimes with
very nice touches of Raillery, but as we have no instance of it among the
ancient Coins, I shall leave you to determine, whether or no it ought to find a
place there. I must confess, says Cynthio, I believe we are generally in the
wrong, when we deviate from the ancients: because their practice is for the
most part grounded upon reason. But if our forefathers have thought fit to be
grave and serious, I hope their posterity may laugh without offense. For my
part, I cannot but look on this kind of Raillery as a refinement on Medals: and
do not see why there may not be some for diversion, at the same time that there
are others of a more solemn and majestic nature, as a Victory may be celebrated
in an Epigram as well as in an Heroic Poem. Had the ancients given place to
Raillery on any of their Coins, I question not but they would have been the
most valued parts of a collection. Besides the entertainment we should have
found in them, they would have shown us the different state of Wit, as it
flourished or decayed in the several ages of the Roman Empire. There is no
doubt, says Philander, but our forefathers, if they had pleased, could have
been as witty as their posterity. But I am of opinion, they industriously
avoided it on their Coins, that they might not give us occasion to suspect
their sincerity. Had they run into mirth or satyr we should not have thought
they had designed so much to instruct as to divert us. I have heard, says
Eugenius, that the Romans stamped several Coins on the same occasion. If we
follow their example, there will be no danger of deceiving posterity: since the
more serious sort of Medals may serve as Comments on those of a lighter
character. However it is, the raillery of the Moderns cannot be worse than the
flattery of the Ancients. But hitherto you have only mentioned such Coins as
were made on the Emperor, I have seen several of our own time that have been
made as a compliment to private persons. There are pieces of money, says
Philander, that during the time of the Roman Emperors, were coined in honor of
the Senate, Army or People. I do not remember to have seen in the upper Empire
the face of any private person that was not some way related to the Imperial
family. Sejanus has indeed his Consulship mentioned on a Coin of Tiberius, as
he has the honor to give a name to the year in which our Savior was
crucified. We are now come to the Legend or Inscription of our Medals, which as
it is one of the more essential parts of them, it may deserve to be examined
more at length. You have chosen a very short Text to enlarge upon, says
Cynthio: I should as soon expect to see a Critique on the Posie of a Ring, as
on the Inscription of a Medal.

I have seen several modern Coins, says Philander, that have had part of the
Legend running round the edges, like the Decus et Tutamen in our milled money;
so that a few years will probably wear out the action that the Coin was
designed to perpetuate. The ancients were too wise to register their exploits
on so nice a surface. I should fancy, says Eugenius, the moderns may have
chosen this part of the Medal for the inscription, that the figures on each
side might appear to a greater advantage. I have observed in several old Coins
a kind of confusion between the legend and the device. The figures and letters
were so mingled together, that one would think the Coiner was hard put to it on
what part of the money to bestow the several words of his inscription. You have
found out something like an excuse, says Philander, for your milled Medals, if
they carried the whole legend on their edges. But at the same time that they
are lettered on the edges, they have other inscriptions on the face and the
reverse. Your modern Designers cannot contract the occasion of the Medal into
an inscription that is proper to the Volume they write upon: so that having
scribbled over both sides, they are forced, as it were to write upon the
margin. The first fault therefore that I shall find with a modern legend, is
its Diffusiveness. You have sometimes the whole side of a Medal overrun with
it. One would fancy the Author had a design of being Ciceronian in his Latin,
and of making a round period I will give you only the reverse of a Coin stamped
by the present Emperor of Germany, on the raising of the siege of Vienna.
VIENNA AVSTRIA^ 4/^4 IVLII AB ACHMETE II. OBSESSA ^/1^ SEPT. EX INSPERATO AB EO
DESERTA EST. I should take this, says Cynthio, for the paragraph of a Gazette,
rather than the inscription of a Medal. I remember you represented your ancient
Coins as abridgements of history; but your modern, if there are many of them
like this, should themselves be epitomized. Compare with this, says Philander,
the brevity and comprehensiveness of those legends that appear on ancient
Coins. Salus Generis humani. Tellus stabilita. Gloria Orbis Terrae. Pacator
Orbis. Restitutor Orbis Terrarum. Gaudium Reipublicae. Hilaritas po^uli Romani.
Bono Reipub. nati. Roma rena^cens. Libertas restituta. Saeculum Aureum. Puellae
Faustinianae. Rex Parthis datus. Victoria Germanica. Fides Mutua. Asia Subacta.
Judaea capta. Amor mutuus. Genetrix orbis. Sideribus recepta. Genio Senatus.
Fides exercitus. Providentia Senatus. Restitutori Hispaniae. Adventui Aug.
Britanniae. Regna Adsignata. Adlocutio. Discipulina Augusti. Felicitas publica.
Rex Armenis datus. What a majesty and force does one meet with in these short
Inscriptions! Are not you amazed to see so much history gathered into so small
a compass? You have often the subject of a Volume in a couple of words.

If our modern Medals are so very prolix in their prose, they are every whit as
tedious in their verse. You have sometimes a dull Epigram of four lines. This,
says Cynthio, may be of great use to immortalize Punns and Quibbles, and to let
posterity see their forefathers were a parcel of blockheads. A Coin, I find,
may be of great use to a bad Poet. If he cannot become immortal by the goodness
of his verse, he may by the durableness of the Metal that supports it. I shall
give you an instance, says Philander, from a Medal of Gustavus Adolphus, that
will stand as an eternal monument of Dullness and Bravery. Miles ego Christi,
Christo duce sterno tyrannos,
Haereticos simul et calco meis pedibus.
Parcere Christicolis me, debellare feroces
Papicolas Christus dux meus en animat.


It is well, says Cynthio, you tell us this is a Medal of the Great Gustavus: I
should have taken it for some one of his Gothic Predecessors. Does it not bring
into your mind Alexander the Great's being accompanied with a Chaerilus in his
Persian expedition? If you are offended at the homeliness of this Inscription,
says Philander, what would you think of such as have neither sense nor grammar
in them? I assure you I have seen the face of many a great Monarch hemmed in
with false Latin. But it is not only the stupidity and tediousness of these
Inscriptions that I find fault with; supposing them of a moderate length and
proper sense, why must they be in verse? We should be surprised to see the
title of a serious book in rhyme, yet it is every whit as ridiculous to give
the subject of a Medal in a piece of an Hexameter. This however is the practice
of our modern Medallists. If you look into the ancient Inscriptions, you see an
air of simplicity in the words, but a great magnificence in the thought; on the
contrary, in your modern Medals you have generally a trifling thought wrapped up
in the beginning or end of an Heroic verse. Where the sense of an Inscription
is low, it is not in the power of Dactyls and Spondees to raise it; where it is
noble, it has no need of such affected ornaments. I remember a Medal of Philip
the second, on Charles le Quint's resigning to him the Kingdom of Spain, with
this Inscription, Ut Quiescat Atlas. The Device is a Hercules with the Sphere
on his shoulders. Notwithstanding the thought is poetical, I dare say you would
think the beauty of the Inscription very much lost, had it been -- requiescat
ut Atlas. To instance a Medal of our own nation. After the conclusion of the
peace with Holland, there was one stamped with the following Legend -- Redeant
Commercia Flandris. The thought is here great enough, but in my opinion it
would have looked much greater in two or three words of prose. I think truly,
says Eugenius, it is ridiculous enough to make the Inscription run like a piece
of a verse, when it is not taken out of an old Author. But I would fain have
your opinion on such Inscriptions as are borrowed from the Latin Poets. I have
seen several of this sort that have been very prettily applied, and I fancy
when they are chosen with art, they should not be thought unworthy of a place
in your Medals.

Which ever side I take, says Philander, I am like to have a great party
against me. Those who have formed their relish on old Coins, will by no means
allow of such an innovation; on the contrary, your men of wit will be apt to
look on it as an improvement on ancient Medals. You will oblige us however to
let us know what kind of rules you would have observed in the choice of your
quotations, since you seem to lay a stress on their being chosen with Art. You
must know then, says Eugenius, I do not think it enough that a quotation tells
us plain matter of fact, unless it has some other accidental ornaments to set
it off. Indeed if a great action that seldom happens in the course of human
affairs, is exactly described in the passage of an old Poet, it gives the
Reader a very agreeable surprise, and may therefore deserve a place on a Medal.

Again, if there is more than a single circumstance of the action specified in
the quotation, it pleases a man to see an old exploit copied out as it were by
a Modern, and running parallel with it in several of its particulars.

In the next place, when the quotation is not only apt, but has in it a turn of
Wit or Satyr, it is still the better qualified for a Medal, as it has a double
capacity of pleasing.

But there is no Inscription fitter for a Medal, in my opinion, than a
quotation that besides its aptness has something in it lofty and sublime: for
such an one strikes in with the natural greatness of the soul, and produces a
high idea of the person or action it celebrates, which is one of the principal
designs of a Medal.

It is certainly very pleasant, says Eugenius, to see a verse of an old Poet,
revolting as it were from its original sense, and siding with a modern subject.
But then it ought to do it willingly of its own accord, without being forced to
it by any change in the words, or the punctuation: for when this happens, it is
no longer the verse of an ancient Poet, but of him that has converted it to his
own use.

You have, I believe, by this time exhausted your subject, says Philander; and
I think the criticisms you have made on the poetical quotations that we so
often meet with in our modern Medals, may be very well applied to the Mottos of
books, and other Inscriptions of the same nature. But before, we quit the
Legends of Medals, I cannot but take notice of a kind of wit that flourishes
very much on many of the modern, especially those of Germany, when they
represent in the Inscription the year in which they were coined. As to mention
to you another of Gustavus Adolphus. CHR IS IT US DVX ERGO TR IVMPH US. If you
take the pains to pick out the figures from the several words, and range them
in their proper order, you will find they amount to 1627, the year in which the
Medal was coined; for do not you observe some of the letters distinguish
themselves from the rest, and top it over their fellows? these you must
consider in a double capacity, as letters and as ciphers. Your laborious German
Wits will turn you over a whole Dictionary for one of these ingenious Devices.
You would fancy perhaps they were searching after an apt classical term, but
instead of that, they are looking out a word that has an L. an M. or a D. in
it. When therefore you see any of these Inscriptions, you are not so much to
look in them for the thought, as for the year of the Lord. There are foreign
Universities where this kind of wit is so much in vogue, that as you praise a
man in England for being an excellent Philosopher or Poet, it is an ordinary
character among them to be a great Chronogrammatist. These are probably, says
Cynthio, some of those mild provinces of Acrostic land, that Mr. Dryden has
assigned to his Anagrams, Wings and Altars. We have now done, I suppose, with
the Legend of a Medal. I think you promised us in the next place to speak of
the Figures.

As we had a great deal of talk on this part of a Coin, replied Philander, in
our discourse on the Usefulness of ancient Medals, I shall only just touch on
the chief heads wherein the Ancient and the Modern differ. In the first place,
the Romans always appear in the proper Dress of their country, insomuch that
you see the little variations of the Mode in the drapery of the Medal. They
would have thought it ridiculous to have drawn an Emperor of Rome in a Grecian
Cloak or a Phrygian Mitre. On the contrary, our modern Medals are full of
Toga's and Tunica's, Trabea's and Paludamentums, with a multitude of the like
antiquated garments, that have not been in fashion these thousand years. You
see very often a King of England or France dressed up like a Julius Caesar. One
would think they had a mind to pass themselves upon posterity for Roman
Emperors. The same observation may run through several customs and religions,
that appear in our ancient and modern Coins. Nothing is more usual than to see
Allusions to Roman customs and ceremonies on the Medals of our own nation. Nay
very often they carry the figure of a heathen god. If posterity takes its
notions of us from our Medals, they must fancy one of our Kings paid a great
devotion to Minerva, that another was a professed Worshipper of Apollo, or at
best that our whole religion was a mixture of Paganism and Christianity. Had
the old Romans been guilty of the same extravagance, there would have been so
great a confusion in their Antiquities, that their Coins would not have had
half the uses we now find in them. We ought to look on Medals as so many
monuments consigned over to Eternity, that may possibly last when all other
memorials of the same Age are worn out or lost. They are a kind of Present that
those who are actually in Being make over to such as lie hid within the depths
of Futurity. Were they only designed to instruct the three or four succeeding
generations, they are in no great danger of being misunderstood: but as they
may pass into the hands of a posterity, that ^ie many removes from us, and are
like to act their part in the world, when its governments, manners and
religions may be quite altered; we ought to take a particular care not to make
any false reports in them, or to charge them with any Devices that may look
doubtful or unintelligible.

I have lately seen, says Eugenius, a Medallic history of the present King of
France. One might expect, methinks, to see the Medals of that nation in the
highest perfection, when there is a society pensioned and set apart on purpose
for the designing of them.

We will examine them, if you please, says Philander, in the light that our
foregoing observations have set them: but on this condition that you do not
look on the faults I find in them any more than my own private opinion. In the
first place then, I think it is impossible to learn from the French Medals
either the religion, custom, or habits of the French nation. You see on some of
them the Cross of our Savior, and on others Hercules' his Club. In one you
have an Angel, and in another a Mercury. I fancy, says Cynthio, posterity would
be as much puzzled on the religion of Louis le Grand, were they to learn it
from his Medals, as we are at present on that of Constantine the Great. It is
certain, says Philander, there is the same mixture of Christian and Pagan in
their Coins; nor is there a less confusion in their customs. For example, what
relation is there between the figure of a Bull, and the planting of a French
colony in America? The Romans made use of this type in allusion to one of their
own customs at the sending out of a colony. But for the French, a Ram, a Hog,
or an Elephant, would have been every whit as significant an emblem. Then can
any thing be more unnatural than to see a King of France dressed like an
Emperor of Rome, with his arms stripped up to the elbows, a Laurel on his head,
and a Chlamys over his shoulders? I fancy, says Eugenius, the society of
Medallists would give you their reasons for what they have done. You your self
allow the Legend to be Latin, and why may not the customs and ornaments be of
the same country as the language? especially since they are all of them so
universally understood by the learned. I own to you, says Philander, if they
only design to deliver down to posterity the several parts of their Great
Monarch's history, it is no matter for the other circumstances of a Medal; but
I fancy it would be as great a pleasure and instruction for future ages, to see
the Dresses and Customs of their ancestors, as their Buildings and Victories.
Besides, I do not think they have always chosen a proper Occasion for a Medal.
There is one struck, for example, on the English failing in their attempts on
Dunkirk: when in the last reign they endeavored to blow up a Fort, and bombard
the town. What have the French here done to boast of? A Medal however you have
with this inscription, DVNKIRKA ILLAESA. Not to cavil at the two K's in
Dunkirka, or the impropriety of the word Illaesa, ^he whole Medal, in my
opinion, tends not so much to the honor of the French as of the Eng^ish, --
quos opimus
Fallere et effugere est triumphus.
I could mention a few other faults, or at least what I take for such. But at
same time must be forced to allow, that this Series of Medals is the most
perfect of any among the moderns in the beauty of the Work, the aptness of the
Device, and the propriety of the Legend. In these and other particulars, the
French Medals come nearer the ancients than those of any other country, as
indeed it is to this nation we are indebted for the best lights that have been
given to the whole science in general.

I must not here forget to mention the Medallic history of the Popes, where
there are many Coins of an excellent workmanship, as I think they have none of
those faults that I have spoken of in the preceding set. They are always
Roman-Catholic in the Device and in the Legend, which are both of them many
times taken out of the holy Scriptures, and therefore not unsuitable to the
character of the Prince they represent. Thus when Innocent XI. lay under
terrible apprehensions of the French King, he put out a Coin, that on the
reverse of it had a ship tossed on the waves to represent the Church. Before
it, was the figure of our Savior walking on the waters, and St. Peter ready to
sink at his feet. The inscription, if I remember, was in Latin. Help Lord, or
else I perish. This puts me in mind, says Cynthio, of a Pasquinade, that at the
same ^ime was fixed up at Rome. Ad Galli cantum Petrus flet. But methinks,
under this head of the figures on ancient and modern Coins, we might expect to
hear your opinion on the difference that appears in the Workmanship of each.
You must know then, says Philander, that till about the end of the third
Century, when there was a general decay in all the arts of designing, I do not
remember to have seen the head of a Roman Emperor drawn with a full face. They
always appear in profil, to use a French term of art, which gives us the view
of a head, that, in my opinion, has something in it very majestic, and at the
same time suits best with the dimensions of a Medal. Besides that it shows the
nose and eyebrows, with the several prominencies and fallings in of the
features, much more distinctly than any other kind of figure. In the lower
Empire you have abundance of broad Gothic faces, like so many full Moons on the
side of a Coin. Among the moderns too, we have of both sorts, though the finest
are made after the antique. In the next place, you find the figures of many
ancient Coins rising up in a much more beautiful relief than those on the
modern. This too is a beauty that fell with the grandeur of the Roman Emperors,
so that you see the face sinking by degrees in the several declensions of the
Empire, till about Constantine's time it lies almost even with the surface of
the Medal. After this it appears so very plain and uniform, that one would
think the Coiner looked on the flatness of a figure as one of the greatest
beauties in Sculpture. I fancy, says Eugenius, the Sculptors of that age had
the same relish as a Greek Priest that was buying some religious pictures at
Venice. Among others he was shown a noble piece of Titian. The Priest having
well surveyed it, was very much scandalized at the extravagance of the relief,
as he termed it. You know, says he, our religion forbids all idolatry: We admit
of no Images but such as are drawn on a smooth surface: The figure you have
here shown me, stands so much out to the eye, that I would no sooner suffer it
in my Church than a Statue. I could recommend your Greek Priest, says
Philander, to abundance of celebrated Painters on this side of the Alps that
would not fail to please him. We must own however, that the figures on several
of our modern Medals are raised and rounded to a very great perfection. But if
you compare them in this particular with the most finished among the ancients,
your men of art declare universally for the latter.

Cynthio and Eugenius, though they were well pleased with Philander's
discourse, were glad however to find it at an end: for the Sun began to gather
strength upon them, and had pierced the shelter of their walks in several
places. Philander had no sooner done talking, but he grew sensible of the heat
himself, and immediately proposed to his friends the retiring to his lodgings,
and getting a thicker shade over their heads. They both of them very readily
closed with the proposal, and by that means give me an opportunity of finishing
my Dialogue.

THREE SETTS OF MEDALS Illustrated by the ANCIENT POETS, In the foregoing
DIALOGUES.

-- decipit
Frons prima multos; rara men's intelligit
Interiori condidit quae cura angulo.
Phaedr. Multa poetarum veniet manus, Auxilio quae
Sit mihi --
Hor. Printed in the Year MDCCXXVI.

THE FIRST SERIES.

The FIRST SERIES.
1. VIRTVTI AVGVSTI. S. C. Reverse of Domitian. 2. HONOS ET VIRTUES. Reverse of
Galba. 3. CONCORDIA AVG. S. C. Reverse of Sabina. 4. PAX ORBIS TERRARVM.
Reverse of Otho. 5. ABVNDANTIA AVG. S. C. Reverse of Gordianus Pius. 6, 7.
FIDES EXERCITVS. Reverse of Heliogabalus. 8. SPES AUGUSTA. Reverse of Claudius.
9. SECVRITAS PVBLICA. S. C. Reverse of Antoninus Pius. 10. PVDICITIA. S. C.
Reverse of Faustina Junior. 11. PIETAS AVG. S. C. Reverse of Faustina Senior.
12. AEQVITAS AVGVSTI. S. C. Reverse of Vitellius. 13. AETERNITAS. S. C. Reverse
of Antoninus Pius. 14. SAECVLVM AVREVM. Reverse of Adrian. 15. FELIX TEMPORVM
REPARATIO. Reverse of Constantine. 16. AETERNITAS AVGVSTI. S.C. Reverse of
Adrian. 17. AETERNITAS. S.C. Reverse of Antonine. 18. VICTORIA AVGVSTI. S.C.
Reverse of Nero. 19. SARMATIA DEVICTA, A Victory. Reverse of Constantine. 20.
LIBERTAS PVBLICA. S. C. Reverse of Galb^.
1.


2.


3.


4.


5.


6, 7.


8.


9.


10.


11.


12.


13.


14.


15.


16.


17.


18.


19.


20.


THE SECOND SERIES.

The SECOND SERIES.
1. FELICITATI AVG. COS. III. P.P.S.C. Reverse of Hadrian. 2. PONTIF. MAX. TR.
POT. PP. COS. II. 3. P.N.R.S.C. Reverse of Claudius. 4. S.C. Reverse of
Augustus. 5. S.P.Q.R.P.P. OB. CIVES SERVATOS. Reverse of Caligula. 6. Reverse
of Tiberius. 7. FIDES PVBLICA. Reverse of Titus. 8. PRAETOR RECEPT. Reverse of
Claudius. 9. FECVNDITAS. S.C. Reverse of Julia Augusta. 10. NERO CLAV. CAESAR.
IMP. ET OCTAVIA. AUGUST: F. Reverse of Claudius. 11. ORIENS AVG. Reverse of
Aurelian. 12. Reverse of Commodus. 13. GLORIA EXER CITVS, E.S.I.S. Reverse of
Constantine. 14. PRINCIPI IVVENTVTIS. S.C. Reverse of Constantine. 15. M, CATO.
L. VET TIACVS. II. VIR. LEG. IV. LEG. VI. LEG. X. C. C.A. Reverse of Tiber^^s*
16. TR. P. VII. IMP. III. COS. V.P.P.S.C. Reverse of Trajan. 17. TR. POT. V.
IMP. III. COS. II. S.C. Reverse of Lucius Verus. 18. PAX AVG. S.C. Reverse of
Vespasian. 19. IMP. VIII. COS. III. P.P. S.C. DE GERMANIS -- Reverse of Marcus
Aurelius. 20. IMP. VIII. COS. III. P.P. S.C. DE SARMATIS -- Reverse of Marcus
Aurelius. 21. Reverse of Trajan. 22. TR. POT. XIIII. P.P. COS. II. Reverse of
M* Aurelius. 23. DIVVS AUGUSTUS PATER. coined under Tiberius. 24. COS. IIII.
S.C. Reverse of Antoninus Pius.
1.


2.


3.


4.


5.


6.


7.


8.


9.


10.


11.


12.


13.


14.


15.


16.


17.


18.


19.


20.


21.


22.


23.


24.


THE THIRD SERIES.

The THIRD SERIES.
1. FELIX ADVENT. AVG. G. NN. PEN. Reverse of Dioclesian. 2. AFRICA. S. C.
Reverse of Septimius Severus. 3. AFRICA. S. C. Reverse of Adrian. 4. AEGYPTOS.
S. C. Reverse of Adrian. 5. MAVRETANIA. S C. Reverse of Adrian. 6. HISPANIA. S.
C. Reverse of Adrian. 7. ADVENTVI AVG. GALLIAE. S. C. Reverse of Adrian. 8.
ITALIA. S. C. Reverse of Marcus Antoninus. 9. ROMA. S. C. Reverse of Nero. 10.
RESTITVTORI ACHAIAE. Reverse of Adrian. 11. BRITANNIA. Reverse of Antoninus
Pius. 12. RESTITVTORI SICILIAE. S. C. Reverse of Adrian. 13. IVDEA CAPTA. S. C.
Reverse of Vespasian. 14. VICTORIA AVGVSTI. S. C. Reverse of Vespasian. 15.
PARTHIA. S. C. COS. II. Reverse of Antoninus Pius. 16. ANTIOCHIA. 17. (...)
Reverse of Marcus Aurelius. 18. ARAB. ADQ. S. P. Q. R. OPTIMO PRINCIPI. S. C.
Reverse of Trajan.
1.


2.


3.


4.


5.


6.


7.


8.


9.


10.


11.


12.


13.


14.


15.


16.


17.


18.


THE PRESENT ^TATE of the WAR, AND THE ^^cessity of an AUGMENTATION, considered.

PREFACE.
THE Author of the following Essay has endeavored to draw into one continued
scheme the whole state of the present war, and the methods that appear to him
the most proper ^or bringing it to a happy conclusion.

After having considered that the French are the constant and most dangerous
enemies to the British ^ation, and that the danger from them is now grea^er
than ever, and will still increase till their present Union with Spain be
broken, he sets forth ^he several advantages which this Union has already given
France, and taken from Great Britain, in re^ation to the West Indies, the
woollen manufacture, the trade of the Levant, and the naval power of the two
nations.

He shows how these advantages will still rise higher after a peace,
notwithstanding our present conquests, with new additions, should be confirmed
to us, as well because the monarchy of Spain would not be weakened by such
concessions, as because no Guarantee could be found sufficient to secure them
to us. For which reasons he lays it down as a fixed Rule, that no peace is to be
made without an entire disunion of the French and Spanish Monarchies.

That this may be brought about, he endeavors to prove from the progress we
have already made toward it, and the successes w^ have purchased in the
present war, which are very considerable if well pursued, but of no effect if
we acquiesce in them.

In order to complete this disunion in which we have gone so far, he would not
have us rely upon exhausting the French Treasury, attempts on the Spanish
Indies, Descents on France, but chiefly upon out-numbring them in troops,
France being already drained of her best supplies, and the confederates masters
of much greater forces for multitude and strength, both in men and horse, and
provided with Generals of greater fame and abilities.

He then considers the wrong measures we have hitherto taken in making too
small levies after a successful campaign, in regulating their number by that of
the enemies forces, and hiring them of our confederates; showing at the same
time the inconveniences we suffer from such hired troops, and several
advantages we might receive from employing those of our own nation.

He further recommends this augmentation of our forces, to prevent the keeping
up a standing body of them in times of peace, to enable us to make an
impression on the Enemy in the present posture of the war, and to secure our
selves against a Prince, who is now at the head of a powerful army, and has not
yet declared himself.

In the last place, he answers by several considerations those two popular
objections. That we furnish more toward the war than the rest of the Allies,
and That we are not able to contribute more than we do already.

These are the most material heads of the following Essay, in which there are
many other subordinate reflections that naturally grow out of so copious a
subject.

November 1707.

THE PRESENT STATE of the WAR, AND The Necessity of an Augmentation, considered.
THE French are certainly the most implacable, and the most dangerous enemies
of the British nation. Their form of government, their religion, their jealousy
of the British power, as well as their prosecutions or commerce, and pursuits
of universal Monarchy, will fix them for ever in their animosities and
aversions toward us, and make them catch at all opportunities of subverting
our constitution, destroying our religion, ruining our trade, and sinking the
figure which we make among the nations of Europe: Not to mention the particular
ties of honor that lie on their present King to impose on us a Prince, who
must prove fatal to our country if he ever reigns over us.

As we are thus in a natural state of war, if I may so call it, with the French
nation; it is our misfortune, that they are not only the most inveterate, but
most formidable of our enemies; and have the greatest power, as well as the
strongest inclination, to ruin us. No other state equals them in the force of
their fleets and armies, in the nearness and convenience of their situation,
and in the number of friends and well-wishers, which, it is to be feared, they
have among us.

For these reasons, our wars with France have always affected us in our most
tender interests, and concerned us more than those we have had with any other
nation; but I may venture to say, this Kingdom was never yet engaged in a war
of so great consequence, as that which now lies upon our hands. Our All is at
stake, and irretrievably lost, if we fail of success. At other times, if a war
ended in a dishonorable peace, or with equal loss, we could comfort our selves
with the hopes of a more favorable juncture, that might set the balance right,
or turn it to our advantage. We had still the prospect of forming the same
alliance, or perhaps strengthening it with new confederacies, and by that means
of trying our fortune a second time, in case the injustice or ambition of the
enemy forced us into the field. At present, if we make a drawn game of it, or
procure but moderate advantages, we are in a condition which every British
heart must tremble at the thought of. There are no second trials, no wars in
reserve, no new schemes of alliance to which we can have recourse. Should the
French King be able to bear down such an united force as now makes head against
him, at a time when Spain affords him no greater assistance; what will he do
when the trade of the Levant lies at his mercy; when the whole kingdom of Spain
is supplied with his manufactures, and the wealth of the Indies flows into his
coffers; and, what is yet worse, when this additional strength must arise in
all its particulars from a proportionable decay in the States that now make war
upon him? It is no wonder therefore that our late King of glorious memory, who,
by the confession of his greatest enemies, was a Prince that perfectly
understood the interests of Europe, should in his last speech recommend to his
Parliament the declaring war against France in those memorable words: You have
yet an opportunity, by God's blessing, to secure to you and your posterity the
quiet enjoyment of your religion and liberties, if you are not wanting to your
selves, but will exert the ancient vigor of the English nation: but I tell you
plainly, my opinion is, if you do not lay hold on this occasion, you have no
reason to hope for another.

We have already a dreadful proof of the increase of power that accrues to
France from its conjunction with Spain. So expensive a war as that which the
French Monarchy has been carrying on in so many and so remote parts at once,
must long since have drained and exhausted all its substance, had there not
been several secret springs, that swelled their treasury from time to time, in
proportion as the war has sunk it. The King's coffers have been often reduced
to the lowest ebb, but have still been seasonably refreshed by frequent and
unexpected supplies from the Spanish America. We hear indeed of the arrival but
of very few ships from those parts; but as in every vessel there is stowage for
immense treasures, when the cargo is pure Bullion, or merchandise of as great a
value: so we find by experience they have had such prodigious sums of money
conveyed to them by these secret channels, that they have been enabled to pay
more numerous armies, than they ever had on foot before; and that at a time
when their trade fails in all its other branches, and is distressed by all the
arts and contrivances of their neighboring nations. During the last four
years, by a modest computation, there have been brought into Breast above six
millions of pounds sterling in bullion. What then shall we suppose would be the
effect of this correspondence with America, might the wealth of those parts
come to them on squadrons of men of war, and fleets of galeons? If these little
by-currents, that creep into the country by stealth, have so great a force, how
shall we stem the whole torrent, when it breaks in upon us with its full
violence? and this certainly will be our case, unless we find a means to
dissolve the union between France and Spain. I have dwelt the longer on this
consideration, because the present war has already furnished us with the
experiment, and sensibly convinced us of the increase of power, which France
has received from its intercourse with the Spanish West Indies.

As there are many who look upon every thing which they do not actually see and
feel as b^ probability and speculation, I shall only touch on those other
reasons of which we have already had some experience, for our preventing this
coalition of interests and designs in the two monarchies.

The Woollen manufacture is the British strength, the staple commodity and
proper growth of our country; if this fails us, our trade and estates must sink
together, and all the cash of the nation be consumed on foreign merchandise.
The French at present gain very much upon us in this great article of our
trade, and since the accession of the Spanish monarchy, supply with cloth, of
their own making, the very best mart we had in Europe. And what a melancholy
prospect have we, if ever a peace gives them leave to enrich their manufacture
with mixtures of Spanish wool, to multiply the hands employed in it, to improve
themselves in all the niceties of the art, and to vend their wares in those
places where was the greatest consumption of our woollen works, and the most
considerable gain for the British merchant? Notwithstanding our many seasonable
recruits from Portugal and our plantations, we already complain of our want of
bullion; and must at last be reduced to the greatest exigencies, if this great
source be dried up, and our traffic with Spain continue under its present
discouragement.

The trade of the Levant must likewise flourish or decay in our hands, as we
are friends or enemies of the Spanish monarchy. The late conquest of Naples
will very little alter the case, though Sicily should follow the fate of her
sister kingdom. The Streight's mouth is the key of the Levant, and will be
always in the possession of those who are Kings of Spain. We may only add, that
the same causes which straiten the British commerce, will naturally enlarge the
French; and that the naval force of either nation will thrive or languish in
the same degree as their commerce gathers or loses strength. And if so powerful
and populous a nation as that of France become superior to us by sea, our whole
is lost, and we are no more a people. The consideration of so narrow a channel
betwixt us, of such numbers of regular troops on the enemy's side, of so small
a standing force on our own, and that too in a country destitute of all such
forts and strong places as might stop the progress of a victorious army, has
something in it so terrifying, that one does not care for setting it in its
proper light. Let it not therefore enter into the heart of any one that has
the least zeal for his religion, or love of liberty, that, has any regard
either to the honor or safety of his country, or a well wish for his friends
or posterity, to think of a peace with France, till the Spanish monarchy be
entirely torn from it, and the house of Bourbon disabled from ever giving the
law to Europe.

Let us suppose that the French King would grant us the most advantageous terms
we can desire; without the separation of the two monarchies they must
infallibly end in our destruction. Should he secure to us all our present
acquisitions; should he add two or three frontier-towns to what we have already
in Flanders; should he join the kingdoms of Sicily and Sardinia to Milan and
Naples; should he leave King Charles in the peaceable possession of Catalonia;
should he make over to Great Britain the town and harbor of Cadiz, as well as
that of Gibraltar, and at the same time resign his conquests in Portugal: it
would all be of no effect toward the common safety of Europe, while the bulk
of the Spanish continent and the riches of America remain in the possession of
the Bourbon family.

Boccalini when he weighs the States of Europe in his political balance, after
having laid France ill one scale, throws Spain into the other, which wanted but
very little of being a counter-poise. The Spaniards upon this, says he, begun
to promise themselves the honor of the balance; reckoning that if Spain of it
self weighed so well, they could not fail of success when the several parts of
the monarchy were lumped in the same scale. Their surprise was very great when
upon the throwing in of Naples they saw the scale rise, and was greater still
when they found that Milan and Flanders had the same effect. The truth of it
is, these parts of the Spanish monarchy are rather for ornament than strength.
They furnish out Vice-royalties for the Grandees, and posts of honor for the
noble families; but in a time of war are encumbrances to the main body of the
kingdom, and leave it naked and exposed by the great number of hands they draw
from it to their defense. Should we therefore continue in the possession of
what we have already made our selves masters, with such additions as have been
mentioned, we should have little more than the excrescencies of the Spanish
monarchy. The strength of it will still join it self to France, and grow the
closer to it by its disunion from the rest. And in this case the advantages
which must arise to that people from their intimate alliance with the remaining
part of the Spanish dominions, would in a very few years not only repair all
the damages they have sustained in the present war, but fill the kingdom with
more riches than it has yet had in its most flourishing periods.

The French King has often entered on several expensive projects, on purpose
to dissipate the wealth that is continually gathering in his coffers in times
of peace. He has employed immense sums on architecture, gardening,
waterworks, painting, statuary, and the like, to distribute his treasures
among his people, as well as to humor his pleasures and his ambition; but if
he once engrosses the commerce of the Spanish Indies, whatever quantities of
gold and silver stagnate in his private coffers, there will be still enough to
carry on the circulation among his subjects. By this means in a short space of
time he may heap up greater wealth than all the Princes of Europe joined
together; and in the present constitution of the world, wealth and power are
but different names for the same thing. Let us therefore suppose that after
eight or ten years of peace, he has a mind to infringe any of his treaties, or
invade a neighboring State; to revive the pretensions of Spain upon Portugal,
or attempt the taking those places which were granted us for our security; what
resistance, what opposition can we make to so formidable an enemy? Should the
same alliance rise against him that is now in war with him, what could we hope
for from it, at a time when the States engaged in it will be comparatively
weakened, and the enemy who is now able to keep them at a stand, will have
received so many new accessions of strength?

But I think it is not to be imagined that in such a conjuncture as we here
suppose, the same confederates, or any other of equal force, could be prevailed
upon to join their arms, and endeavor at the pulling down so exorbitant a
power. Some might be bought into his interests by money, others drawn over by
fear, and those that are liable to neither of these impressions, might not
think their own interest so much concerned as in the present war; or if any
appeared in a disposition to enter into such a confederacy, they might be
crushed separately before they could concert measures for their mutual defense.

The keeping together of the present alliance can be ascribed to nothing else
but the clear and evident conviction which every member of it is under, that if
it should once break without having had its effect, they can never hope for
another opportunity of reuniting, or of prevailing by all the joint efforts of
such an union. Let us therefore agree on this as a fixed rule, and an inviolable
maxim, never to lay down our arms against France, till we have utterly
disjoined her from the Spanish monarchy. Let this be the first step of a
public treaty, the basis of a general peace.

Had the present war indeed run against us, and all our attacks upon the enemy
been vain, it might look like a degree of frenzy, or a mixture of obstinacy and
despair, to be determined on so impracticable an undertaking. But on the
contrary, we have already done a great part of our work, and are come within
view of the end that we have been so long driving at. We remain victorious in
all the seats of war. In Flanders we have got into our hands several open
countries, rich towns, and fortified places. We have driven the enemy out of
all his alliances, dispossessed him of his strong holds, and ruined his allies
in Germany. We have not only recovered what the beginning of the war had taken
from us, but possessed ourselves of the kingdom of Naples, the duchy of Milan,
and the avenue of France in Italy. The Spanish war has given us a haven for
our ships, and the most populous and wealthy province of that kingdom. In
short, we have taken all the outlying parts of the Spanish monarchy, and made
impressions upon the very heart of it. We have beaten the French from all their
advanced posts in Europe, and driven them into their last entrenchments. One
vigorous push on all sides, one general assault will force the enemy to cry out
for quarter, and surrender themselves at discretion. Another Blenheim or
Ramillies will make the confederates masters of their own terms, and
arbitrators of a peace.

But notwithstanding the advantages already gained are very considerable if we
pursue them, they will be of no effect unless we improve them toward the
carrying of our main point. The enemy staggers; if you follow your blow, he
falls at your feet; but if you allow him respite, he will recover his strength,
and come upon you with greater fury. We have given him several repeated wounds
that have enfeebled him, and brought him low; but they are such as time will
heal, unless you take advantage from his present weakness to redouble your
attacks upon him. It was a celebrated part in Caesar's character, and what
comes home to our present purpose, that he thought nothing at all was done,
while any thing remained undone. In short, we have been tugging a great while
against the stream, and have almost weathered our point; a stretch or two more
will do the work; but if instead of that we slacken our arms, and drop our
oars, we shall be hurried back in a moment to the place from whence we first
set out.

After having seen the necessity of an entire separation of the kingdoms of
France and Spain, our subject naturally leads us into the consideration of the
most proper means for effecting it.

We have a great while flattered our selves with the prospect of reducing
France to our own terms by the want of money among the people, and the
exigencies of the public treasury; but have been still disappointed by the
great sums imported from America, and the many new expedients which the Court
has found out for its relief. A long consumptive war is more likely to break
the grand alliance, than disable France from maintaining sufficient armies to
oppose it. An arbitrary government will never want money so long as the people
have it; and so active a people will always have it, whilst they can send what
merchandises they please to Mexico and Peru. The French since their alliance
with Spain keep thirty ships in constant motion between the western ports of
France and the south seas of America. The King himself is an adventurer in this
traffic, and besides the share that he receives out of the gains of his
subjects, has immense sums that come directly from it into his own hands.

We may further consider, that the French since their abandoning Bavaria and
Italy have very much retrenched the expense of the war, and lay out among
themselves all the money that is consumed in it.

Many are of opinion, that the most probable way of bringing France to reason
would be by the making an attempt upon the Spanish West Indies, and by that
means to cut off all communication with this great source of riches, or turn
the current of it into our own country. This I must confess carries so
promising an appearance, that I would by no means discourage the attempt: but
at the same time I think it should be a collateral project rather than our
principal design. Such an undertaking (if well concerted, and put into good
hands) would be of infinite advantage to the common cause: but certainly an
enterprise that carries in it the fate of Europe, should not turn upon the
uncertainty of winds and waves, and be liable to all the accidents that may
befall a naval expedition.

Others there are that have long deceived themselves with the hopes of an
insurrection in France, and are therefore for laying out all our strength on a
descent. These, I think, do not enough consider the natural love which the
gross of mankind have for the constitution of their fathers. A man that is not
enlightened by travel or reflection, grows as fond of arbitrary power, to which
he has been used from his infancy, as of cold climates, or barren countries in
which he has been born and bred. Besides, there is a kind of sluggish
resignation, as well as poorness and degeneracy of spirit, in a state of
slavery, that we meet with but very few who will be at the pains or danger of
recovering themselves out of it; as we find in history instances of persons who
after their prisons have been flung open, and their fetters struck off, have
chosen rather to languish in their dungeons, than stake their miserable lives
and fortunes upon the success of a revolution. I need not instance the general
fate of descents, the difficulty of supplying men and provisions by sea against
an enemy that has both at hand, and without which it is impossible to secure
those conquests that are often made in the first onsets of an invasion. For
these and other reasons I can never approve the nursing up commotions and
insurrections in the enemy's country, which for want of the necessary support
are likely to end in the massacre of our friends and the ruin of their families.

The only means therefore for bringing France to our conditions, and what
appears to me, in all human probability, a sure and infallible expedient, is to
throw in multitudes upon them, and overpower them with numbers. Would the
confederacy exert it self as much to annoy the enemy, as they themselves do for
their defense, we might bear them down with the weight of our armies, and in
one summer overset the whole power of France.

The French monarchy is already exhausted of its best and bravest subjects. The
flower of the nation is consumed in its wars: the strength of their armies
consists at present of such as have saved themselves by flight from some or
other of the victorious confederates; and the only proper persons to recruit
them are but the refuse of those who have been already picked out for the
service. Marshall de Vauban, though infinitely partial in his calculations of
the power of France, reckons that the number of its inhabitants was two
millions less at the peace of Ryswick, than in the beginning of the war that
was there concluded: and though that war continued nine years, and this has as
yet lasted but six, yet considering that their armies are more strong and
numerous; that there has been much more action in the present war; and that
their losses sustained in it have been very extraordinary; we may, by a
moderate computation, suppose that the present war has not been less
prejudicial than the foregoing one in the ravage which it has made among the
people. There is in France so great a disproportion between the number of males
and females; and among the former, between those who are capable of bearing
arms, and such as are too young, sickly, or decrepit for the service; and at
the same time such vast numbers of Ecclesiastics, secular and religious, who
live upon the labors of others, that when the several trades and professions
are supplied, you will find most of those that are proper for war absolutely
necessary for filling up the laborious part of life, and carrying on the
underwork of the nation. They have already contributed all their superfluous
hands, and every new levy they make must be at the expense of their farms and
vineyards, their manufactures and commerce.

On the contrary, the grand Alliance have innumerable sources of recruits, not
only in Britain and Ireland, the United Provinces, and Flanders; but in all the
populous parts of Germany that have little trade or manufactures, in proportion
to the number of their inhabitants. We may add, that the French have only
Switzerland, besides their own country, to recruit in; and we know the
difficulties they meet with in getting thence a single regiment: whereas the
Allies have not only the same resource, but may be supplied for money from
Denmark and other neutral States. In short, the Confederates may bring to the
field what forces they please, if they will be at the charge of them: but
France, let her wealth be what it will, must content herself with the product
of her own country.

The French are still in greater streights for supplies of horse than men. The
breed of their country is neither so good nor numerous as what are to be found
in most of the countries of the Allies. They had last summer about threescore
thousand in their several armies, and could not perhaps bring into the field
thirty thousand more, if they were disposed to make such an augmentation.

The French horse are not only few, but weak in comparison of ours. Their
cavalry in the battle of Blenheim could not sustain the shock of the British
horse. For this reason our late way of attacking their troops sword in hand is
very much to the advantage of our nation, as our men are more robust, and our
horses of a stronger make than the French; and in such attacks it is the weight
of the forces, supposing equal courage and conduct, that will always carry it.
The English strength turned very much to account in our wars against the French
of old, when we used to gall them with our long bows, at a greater distance
than they could shoot their arrows: this advantage we lost upon the invention
of firearms, but by the present method our strength as well as bravery may
again be of use to us in the day of battle.

We have very great encouragement to send what numbers we are able into the
field, because our Generals at present are such as are likely to make the best
use of them, without throwing them away on any fresh attempts or ill-concerted
projects. The Confederate armies have the happiness of being commanded by
persons who are esteemed the greatest leaders of the present age, and are
perhaps equal to any that have preceded them. There is a sort of resemblance in
their characters; a particular sedateness in their conversation and behavior,
that qualifies them for council, with a great intrepidity and resolution that
fits them for action. They are all of them men of concealed fire, that does not
break out with noise and heat in the ordinary circumstances of life; but shows
it self sufficiently in all great enterprises that require it. It is true, the
General upon the Rhine has not had the same occasions as the others to
signalize himself; but if we consider the great vigilance, activity and
courage, with the consummate prudence, and the nice sense of honor which
appears in that Prince's character, we have great reason to hope, that as he
purchased the first success in the present war, by forcing into the service of
the Confederates an army that was raised against them in the very heart of the
Empire, he will give one of the finishing strokes to it, and help to conclude
the great work which he so happily begun. The sudden check that he gave to the
French army the last campaign, and the good order he established in that of the
Germans, look like happy presages of what we may expect from his conduct. I
shall not pretend to give any character of the Generals on the enemies side;
but I think we may say this, that in the eyes of their own nation they are
inferior to several that have formerly commanded the French armies. If then we
have greater numbers than the French, and at the same time better Generals, it
must be our own fault if we will not reap the fruit of such advantages.

It would be loss of time to explain any farther our superiority to the enemy
in numbers of men and horse. We see plainly that we have the means in our
hands, and that nothing but the application of them is wanting. Let us only
consider what use the enemy would make of the advantage we have mentioned, if
it fell on their side; and is it not very strange that we should not be as
active and industrious for our security, as they would certainly be for our
destruction? But before we consider more distinctly the method we ought to take
in the prosecution of the war, under this particular view, let us reflect a
little upon those we have already taken in the course of it for these six years
past.

The Allies after a successful summer are too apt, upon the strength of it, to
neglect their preparations for the ensuing campaign, while the French leave no
art nor stratagem untried to fill up the empty spaces of their armies, and
swell them to an equal bulk with those of the Confederates. By this means our
advantage is lost, and the fate of Europe brought to a second decision. It is
now become an observation, that we are to expect a very indifferent year after
a very successful one. Blenheim was followed by a summer that makes no noise in
the war. Ramillies, Turin, and Barcelona, were the parents of our last
campaign. So many dreadful blows alarmed the enemy, and raised their whole
country up in arms. Had we on our side made proportionable preparations, the
war by this time had been brought to a happy issue. If after having gained the
great victories of Blenheim and Ramillies, we had made the same efforts as we
should have done had we lost them, the power of France could not have withstood
us.

In the beginning of the winter we usually get what intelligence we can of the
force which the enemy intends to employ in the campaigns of the succeeding
year, and immediately cast about for a sufficient number of troops to face them
in the field of battle. This, I must confess, would be a good method if we were
engaged in a defensive war. We might maintain our ground with an equal number
of forces; but our business is not only to secure what we are already in
possession of; we are to wrest the whole Spanish Monarchy out of the hands of
the enemy; and in order to it, to work our way into the heart of his country by
dint of arms. We should therefore put forth all our strength, and without
having an eye to his preparations, make the greatest push that we are able on
our own side. We are told that the enemy at present thinks of raising
threescore thousand men for the next summer; if we regulate our levies in that
view, we do nothing; let us perform our utmost, as they do, and we shall
overwhelm them with our multitudes. We have it in our power at least to be four
times as strong as the French, but if ten men are in war with forty, and the
latter detach only an equal number to the engagement, what benefit do they
receive from their superiority?

It seems therefore to be the business of the Confederates to turn to their
advantage their apparent odds in men and horse; and by that means to out-number
the enemy in all rencounters and engagements. For the same reason it must be
for the interest of the Allies to seek all opportunities of battle, because all
losses on the opposite side are made up with infinitely more difficulty than on
ours; besides that the French do their business by lying still, and have no
other concern in the war than to hold fast what they have already got into
their hands.

The miscarriage of the noblest project that ever was formed in Europe, can be
ascribed to nothing else but our want of numbers in the several quarters of the
war. If our armies on all sides had begun to busy and insult the enemy, at the
same time that the forces marched out of Piemont, Toulon had been at present in
the hands of the Duke of Savoy. But could that Prince ever have imagined that
the French would have been at liberty to detach whole armies against him? or
will it appear credible to posterity, that in a war carried on by the joint
force of so many populous and powerful nations, France could send so great a
part of its troops to one seat of the war, without suffering in any of the
rest? Whereas it is well known, that if the Duke of Savoy had continued before
Toulon eight days longer, he had been attacked by an army of sixty thousand
men, which was more than double the number of his own; and yet the enemy was
strong enough every where else to prevent the Confederates from making any
impression upon them. However, let us fall into the right measures, and we may
hope that the stroke is only deferred. The Duke of Savoy has secured a passage
into Dauphiny, and if the Allies make such efforts in all parts, as we may
reasonably expect from them, that Prince may still make himself Master of the
French dominions on the other side of the Rhone.

There is another part of our conduct which may perhaps deserve to be
considered. As soon as we have agreed with the States General upon any
augmentation of our forces, we immediately negotiate with some or other of the
German Princes, who are in the same confederacy, to furnish out our quota in
Mercenaries. This may be doubly prejudicial to the alliance; First, as it may
have an ill influence on the resolutions of those Princes in the Diet of the
Empire, who may be willing to settle as small a quota as they can for
themselves, that they may have more troops to hire out; and in the next place,
as it may hinder them from contributing the whole quota which they have settled
This actually happened in the last campaign, when we are told the Germans
excused themselves for their want of troops upon the Rhine, as having already
put most of their forces into the British and Dutch service. Such an excuse,
indeed, is very unjust, but it would be better to give them no occasion of
making it; and on such occasions to consider what men are apt to do, as well as
what they may do with reason.

It might therefore be for our advantage that all the foreign troops in the
British pay should be raised in neutral countries. Switzerland in particular,
if timely applied to, might be of great use to us; no only in respect of the
reinforcements which we might draw from thence, but because such a draught of
forces would lessen the number of those that might otherwise be employed in the
French service. The bulk of our levies should nevertheless be raised in our own
country, it being impossible for neutral States to furnish both the British and
Dutch with a sufficient number of effective men; besides that the British
soldiers will be more at the disposal of their General, and act with greater
vigor under the conduct of one for whom they have so just a value, and whom
they do not consider only as their leader, but as their countryman. We may
likewise suppose that the soldiers of a neutral state, who are not animated by
any national interest, cannot fight for pay with the same ardour and alacrity,
as men that fight for their Prince and country, their wives and children.

It may likewise be worth while to consider whether the military Genius of the
English nation may not fall by degrees, and become inferior to that of our
neighboring states, if it has no occasion to exert it self. Minds that are
altogether set on trade and profit, often contract a certain narrowness of
temper, and at length become incapable of great and generous resolutions.
Should the French ever make an unexpected descent upon us, we might want
soldiers of our own growth to rise up in our defense; and might not have time
to draw a sufficient number of troops to our relief from the remote corners of
Germany. It is generally said, that if King Charles II. had made war upon
France in the beginning of his reign, he might have conquered it by the many
veterans which were scattered up and down this kingdom, and had been inured to
service in the civil wars. It is to be hoped we shall never have such another
nursery of soldiers; but if the present war gives a more military turn to all
other nations of Europe, than to our own, it is to be feared we may lose in
strength, what we gain in number. We may apply the same consideration nearer
home. If all our levies are made in Scotland or Ireland, may not those two
parts of the British monarchy, after the disbanding of the present army, be too
powerful for the rest, in case of a revolt? though, God be thanked, we are not
in any danger of one at present. However, as these considerations do not
concern the more essential part of our design, it is sufficient to have
mentioned them.

The sparing of our selves in so important a conjuncture, when we have but this
single opportunity left for the preserving every thing that is precious amongst
us, is the worst sort of management that we can possibly fall into. The good
husbandry of one age may intail an endless expense upon all posterity. We must
venture the sacrificing a part of our lives and fortunes at present, if we will
effectually secure both for the future. The British Kingdom is so well stocked
with people, and so much abounds in horse, that we have power enough in our own
hands, did we make our outmost use of it, to humble France, and in a campaign
or two to put an end to the war.

There is not a more disagreeable thought to the people of Great Britain than
that of a standing army. But if a peace be made before the disunion of France
and Spain, there are few, perhaps, that will not think the maintaining a
settled body of numerous forces indispensable for the safety of our country. We
have it therefore in our choice to raise such a strong reinforcement of troops
as at present may be sufficient, in conjunction with those of the allies, for
breaking the strength of the enemy; or when the peace is concluded, to keep on
foot such an army as will be necessary for preventing his attempts upon us.

It is to be hoped that those who would be the most zealous against keeping up
a constant body of regular troops after a general peace, will the most
distinguish themselves for the promoting an augmentation of those which are now
on foot; and by that means take care that we shall not stand in need of such an
expedient.

We are indeed obliged by the present situation of our affairs to bring more
troops into the field than we have yet done. As the French are retired within
their lines, and have collected all their strength into a narrow compass, we
must have greater numbers to charge them in their intrenchments, and force them
to a battle. We saw the last campaign that an army of fourscore thousand of the
best troops in Europe, with the Duke of Marlborough at the head of them, could
do nothing against an enemy that were too numerour to be assaulted in their
camps, or attacked in their strong holds.

There is another consideration which deserves our utmost attention. We know
very well, that there is a Prince at the head of a powerful army, who may give
a turn to the war, in which we are engaged, if he thinks fit to side with
either party. I cannot presume to guess how far our ministers may be informed
of his designs: but unless they have very strong assurances of his falling in
with the grand alliance, or not opposing it, they cannot be too circumspect and
speedy in taking their precautions against any contrary resolution. We shall be
unpardonable, if after such an expense of blood and treasure, we leave it in
the power of any single Prince to command a peace, and make us accept what
conditions he thinks fit. It is certain, according to the posture of our
affairs in the last campaign, this Prince could have turned the balance on
either side; but it is to be hoped the liberties of Europe will not depend any
more on the determination of one man's will. I do not speak this because I
think there is any appearance of that Prince's uniting himself to France. On
the contrary, as he has an extraordinary zeal for the reformed religion, and
great sentiments of honor, I think it is not improbable we should draw him
over to the confederacy, if we press him to it by proper motives. His love for
religion, and his sense of glory, will both have their effect on a Prince who
has already distinguished himself by being a patron of protestants, and
guarantee of the Westphalian treaty. And if his interest has any part in his
actions, the allies may make him greater offers than the French King can do in
the present conjuncture. There are large extents of dominion in the forfeited
principalities of the Empire; doubtful successions, to which the King of Sweden
seems to have very just pretensions; and at the same time a great title not yet
disposed of, and a seat of war on the Moselle, where none of our generals have
signalized themselves. It would be presumption to be particular in any
proposals on such an occasion; it is enough to have shown in general, that
there are fair opportunities, of which the wisdom of the confederates may make
use.

Common sense will direct us, when we see so warlike a prince at the head of so
great an army ^hovering on the borders of our confederates, either to obtain
his friendship, or secure our selves against the force of his arms. We are
sure, whatever numbers of troops we raise, we shall have no hands but what will
turn to account. Nay, we are certain, that extraordinary funds and
augmentations for one or two campaigns may spare us the expense of many years,
and put an end to ^axes and levies for a whole age; whereas a long parsimonious
war will drain us of more men and money, and in the end may prove ineffectual.

There is still a great popular objection, which will be made to every thing
that can be urged on this subject. And indeed it is such a one as falls so much
in with the prejudices and little passions of the multitude, that when it is
turned and set off to advantage by ill-designing men, it throws a damp on the
public spirit of the nation, and gives a check to all generous resolutions for
its honor and safety. In short, we are to be told, that England contributes
much more than any other of the Allies, and that therefore it is not reasonable
she should make any addition to her present efforts. If this were true in fact,
I do not see any tolerable color for such a conclusion. Supposing among a
multitude embarked in the same vessel, there are several that in the fury of a
tempest will rather perish than work for their preservation; would it not be
madness in the rest to stand idle, and rather choose to sink together than do
more than comes to their share? Since we are engaged in a work so absolutely
necessary for our welfare, the remissness of our Allies should be an argument
for us to redouble our endeavors rather than slacken them. If we must govern
our selves by example, let us rather imitate the vigilance and activity of the
common enemy, than the supineness and negligence of our friends.

We have indeed a much greater share in the war than any other part of the
confederacy. The French King makes at us directly, keeps a King by him to set
over us, and has very lately augmented the salary of his court, to let us see
how much he has that design at his heart. Few of the nations in war with him,
should they ever fall into his hands, would lose their religion or form of
government, or interfere at present with him in matters of commerce. The Dutch,
who are likely to be the greatest losers after the Britains, have but little
trade to the Levant in comparison with ours, have no considerable plantations
or commerce in the West Indies, or any woollen-manufactures for Spain; not to
mention the strong barrier they have already purchased between France and their
own country.

But after all, every nation in the confederacy makes the same complaint, and
fancies it self the greatest sufferer by the war. Indeed in to common a
pressure, let the weight be never so equally distributed, every one will be
most sensible of that part which lies on his own shoulders. We furnish, without
dispute, more than any other branch of the Alliance: but the question is,
whether others do not exert themselves in proportion according to their
respective strength. The Emperor, the King of Prussia, the Elector of Hanover,
as well as the States of Holland and the Duke of Savoy, seem at least to come
up to us. The greatest powers in Germany are borrowing money where they can get
it, in order to maintain their stated Quota's, and go thorough their part of
the expense: and if any of the Circles have been negligent, they have paid for
it much more in their late contributions, than what would have furnished out
their shares in the common charges of the war.

There are others who will object the poverty of the nation, and the
difficulties it would find in furnishing greater supplies to the war than it
does at present. To this we might answer, that if the nation were really as
poor as this objection makes it, it should be an argument for enforcing rather
than diminishing our present efforts against France. The sinking our taxes for
a few years would be only a temporary relief, and in a little time occasion far
greater impositions, than those which are now laid upon us. Whereas the
seasonable expense of part of our riches, will not only preserve the rest; but
by the right use of them procure vast additions to our present stock. It may be
necessary for a person languishing under an ill habit of body to lose several
ounces of blood, notwithstanding it will weaken him for a time, in order to put
a new ferment into the remaining mass, and draw into it fresh supplies.

But we can by no means make this concession, to those who so industriously
publish the nation's poverty. Our country is not only rich, but abounds in
wealth much more than any other of the same extent in Europe. France,
notwithstanding the goodness of its climate, the fertility of its soil, the
multitude of its inhabitants, its convenient harbors, both for the Ocean and
Mediterranean, and its present correspondence with the West Indies, is not to
compare with Great Britain in this particular. I shall transcribe word for word
the passage of a late celebrated French Author, which will lay this matter in
its full light; and leave the Reader to make the counter-part of the parallel
between the two nations.

According to all the inquiries that I have been able to make during several
years, in which I have applied my self to this sort of remarks, I have
observed, that about a tenth part of the people of this kingdom are reduced to
beggary, and are actual beggars. That among the nine other parts, five are not
in a condition to give alms or relief to those aforementioned, being very near
reduced themselves to the same miserable condition. Of the four other remaining
parts, three are very uneasy in their circumstances, and embarrassed with debts
and lawsuits. In the tenth part, I reckon the Soldiers, Lawyers,
Ecclesiastics, Merchants and substantial Citizens, which cannot make up more
than a hundred thousand families. And I believe I should not be mistaken, if I
should say, that there are not above ten thousand of these families, who are
very much at their ease: and if out of these ten thousand we should take the
men that are employed in public business, with their dependents and adherents,
as also those whom the King supports by his bounty, with a few Merchants, the
number of those who remain will be surprizingly little. Dixme Royale.

What a dreadful account is this of nineteen millions of people; for so many
the author reckons in that kingdom. How can we see such a multitude of souls
cast under so many subdivisions of misery, without reflecting on the absurdity
of a form of government that sacrifices the ease and happiness of so many
reasonable Beings to the glory of one of their fellow creatures? But this is
not our affair at present.

If we run over the other nations of Europe that have any part in the present
war, we shall only pass through so many different scenes of poverty. Spain,
Portugal, and Savoy are reduced to great extremities. Germany is exhausted to
the last degree in many parts of it, and in others plundered of all she had
left. Holland indeed flourishes above the rest in wealth and plenty: but if we
consider the infinite industry and penuriousness of that people, the coarseness
of their food and raiment, their little indulgences of pleasure and excess, it
is no wonder that notwithstanding they furnish as great taxes as their
neighbors, they make a better figure under them. In a common wealth there are
not so many overgrown estates as in monarchies, the wealth of the country is so
equally distributed, that most of the community are at their ease, though few
are placed in extraordinary points of splendour and magnificence. But
notwithstanding these circumstances may very much contribute to the seeming
prosperity of the United Provinces, we know they are indebted many millions
more than their whole republic is worth, and if we consider the variety of
taxes and impositions they groan under at a time when their private dissentions
run high, and some of the wealthiest parts of the government refuse to bear
their share in the public expense, we shall not think the condition of that
people so much to be envied as some amongst us would willingly represent it.

Nor is Great Britain only rich as she stands in comparison with other States,
but is really so in her own intrinsic wealth. She had never more ships at sea,
greater quantities of merchandise in her warehouses, larger receipts of
customs, or more numerous commodities rising out of her manufactures than she
has at present. In short, she sits in the midst of a mighty affluence of all
the necessaries and conveniences of life. If our silver and gold diminishes,
our public credit continues unimpaired, and if we are in want of bullion, it
lies in our own power to supply our selves. The old Roman General, when he
heard his army complain of thirst, showed them the springs and rivers that lay
behind the enemy's camp. It is our own case: the rout of a Spanish army would
make us masters of the Indies.

If Prince Eugene takes upon him the command of the confederate forces in
Catalonia, and meets with that support from the alliance which they are capable
of giving him, we have a fair prospect of reducing Spain to the entire
obedience of the house of Austria. The Silesian fund (to the immortal
reputation of those generous patriots who were concerned in it) enabled that
Prince to make a conquest of Italy, at a time when our affairs were more
desperate there, than they are at present in the kingdom of Spain.

When our Parliament has done their utmost, another publick-spirited project of
the same nature, which the common enemy could not foresee nor prepare against,
might in all probability set King Charles upon the throne for which he has so
long contended. One pitched battle would determine the fate of the Spanish
continent.

Let us therefore exert the united strength of our whole Island, and by that
means put a new life and spirit into the confederates, who have their eyes
fixed upon us, and will abate or increase their preparations according to the
example that ^s set them. We see the necessity of an augmentation if we intend
to bring the enemy to reason, or rescue our country from the miseries that may
befall it; and we find our selves in a condition of making such an augmentation
as, by the blessing of God, cannot but prove effectual. If we carry it on
vigorously, we shall gain for our selves and our posterity a long, a glorious
and a lasting peace; but if we neglect so fair an opportunity, we may be
willing to employ all our hands, and all our treasures, when it will be too
late; and shall be tormented with one of the most melancholy reflections of an
afflicted heart, That it was once in our power to have made our selves and our
children happy.

OF THE Christian Religion.

OF THE Christian Religion.
SECTION I.
I. General division of the following discourse, with regard to Pagan and
Jewish Authors, who mention particulars relating to our Savior.

II. Not probable that any such should be mentioned by Pagan writers who lived
at the same time, from the nature of such transactions.

III. Especially when related by the Jews:

IV. And heard at a distance by those who pretended to as great miracles as
their own.

V. Besides that, no Pagan writers of that age lived in Judaea or its Confines.

VI. And because many books of that age are lost.

VII. An instance of one record proved to be authentic.

VIII. A second record of probable, though not undoubted, authority.

I THAT I may lay before you a full state of the subject under our
consideration, and methodize the several particulars that I touched upon in
discourse with you; I shall first take notice of such Pagan Authors, as have
given their testimony to the history of our Savior; reduce these Authors under
their respective classes, and show what authority their testimonies carry with
them. Secondly, I shall take notice of Jewish Authors in the same light.

II. There are many reasons, why you should not expect that matters of such a
wonderful nature should be taken notice of by those eminent Pagan writers, who
were contemporaries with Jesus Christ, or by those who lived before his
Disciples had personally appeared among them, and ascertained the report which
had gone abroad concerning a life so full of miracles.

Supposing such things had happened at this day in Switzerland, or among the
Grisons, who make a gre^ter figure in Europe than Judaea did in the Roman
Empire, would they be immediately believed by those who live at a great
distance from them? or would any certain account of them be transmitted into
foreign countries, within so short a space of time as that of our Savior's
public ministry? Such kinds of news, though never so true, seldom gain credit,
till some time after they are transacted and exposed to the examination of the
curious, who by laying together circumstances, attestations, and characters of
those who are concerned in them, either receive or reject what at first none
but eyewitnesses could absolutely believe or disbelieve. In a case of this
sort, it was natural for men of sense and learning to treat the whole account
as fabulous, or at farthest to suspend their belief of it, until all things
stood together in their full light.

III. Besides, the Jews were branded not only for superstitions different from
all the religions of the Pagan world, but in a particular manner ridiculed for
being a credulous people; so that whatever reports of such a nature came out of
that country, were looked upon by the heathen world as false, frivolous, and
improbable.

IV. We may further observe that the ordinary practice of Magic in those times,
with the many pretended Prodigies, Divinations, Apparitions, and local Miracles
among the Heathens, made them less attentive to such news from Judaea, till
they had time to consider the nature, the occasion, and the end of our
Savior's miracles, and were awakened by many surprising events to allow them
any consideration at all.

V. We are indeed told by St. Matthew, that the fame of our Savior, during his
life, went throughout all Syria, and that there followed him great multitudes
of people from Galilee, Judaea, Decapolis, Idumaea, from beyond Jordan, and
from Tire and Sidon. Now had there been any historians of those times and
places, we might have expected to have seen in them some account of those
wonderful transactions in Judaea; but there is not any single Author extant, in
any kind, of that age, in any of those countries.

VI. How many books have perished in which possibly there might have been
mention of our Savior? Look among the Romans, how few of their writings are
come down to our times? In the space of two hundred years from our Savior's
birth, when there was such a multitude of writers in all kinds, how small is
the number of Authors that have made their way to the present age?

VII. One authentic Record, and that the most authentic heathen Record, we
are pretty sure is lost. I mean the account sent by the Governor of Judaea,
under whom our Savior was judged, condemned, and crucified. It was the custom
in the Roman Empire, as it is to this day in all the governments of the world,
for the praefects and viceroys of distant provinces to transmit to their
Sovereign a summary relation of every thing remarkable in their administration.
That Pontius Pilate, in his account, would have touched on so extraordinary an
event in Judaea, is not to be doubted; and that he actually did, we learn from
Justin Martyr, who lived about a hundred years after our Savior's death,
resided, made Converts, and suffered martyrdom at Rome, where he was engaged
with Philosophers, and in a particular manner with Crescens the Cynick, who
could easily have detected, and would not fail to have exposed him, had he
quoted a Record not in being, or made any false citation out of it. Would the
great Apologist have challenged Crescens to dispute the cause of Christianity
with him before the Roman Senate, had he forged such an evidence? or would
Crescens have refused the challenge, could he have triumphed over him in the
detection of such a forgery? To which we must add, that the Apology, which
appeals to this Record, was presented to a learned Emperor, and to the whole
body of the Roman Senate. This father in his apology, speaking of the death and
suffering of our Savior, refers the Emperor for the truth of what he says to
the acts of Pontius Pilate, which I have here mentioned. Tertullian, who wrote
his Apology about fifty years after Justin, doubtless referred to the same
Record, when he tells the Governor of Rome, that the Emperor Tiberius having
received an account out of Palestine in Syria of the Divine person who had
appeared in that country, paid him a particular regard, and threatened to punish
any who should accuse the christians; nay, that the Emperor would have adopted
him among the Deities whom they worshipped, had not the Senate refused to come
into his proposal. Tertullian, who gives us this history, was not only one of
the most learned men of his age, but, what adds a greater weight to his
authority in this case, was eminently skilful and well read in the laws of the
Roman Empire. Nor can it be said, that Tertullian grounded his quotation upon
the authority of Justin Martyr, because we find he mixes it with matters of
fact which are not related by that Author. Eusebius mentions the same ancient
Record, but as it was not extant in his time, I shall not insist upon his
authority in this point. If it be objected that this particular is not
mentioned in any Roman Historian, I shall use the same argument in a parallel
case, and see whether it will carry any force with it. Ulpian the great Roman
Lawyer gathered together all the Imperial Edicts that had been made against the
christians. But did any one ever say that there had been no such Edicts,
because they were not mentioned in the histories of those Emperors? Besides,
who knows but this circumstance of Tiberius was mentioned in other historians
that have been lost, though not to be found in any still extant? Has not
Suetonius many particulars of this Emperor omitted by Tacitus, and Herodian
many that are not so much as hinted at by either? As for the spurious Acts of
Pilate, now extant, we know the occasion and time of their writing, and that
had there not been a true and authentic Record of this nature, they would
never have been forged.

VIII. The story of Agbarus King of Edessa, relating to the letter which he
sent to our Savior, and to that which he received from him, is a record of
great authority; and though I will not insist upon it, may venture to say, that
had we such an evidence for any fact in Pagan history, an Author would be
thought very unreasonable who should reject it. I believe you will be of my
opinion, if you will peruse, with other Authors, who have appeared in
vindication of these letters as genuine, the additional arguments which have
been made use of by the late famous and learned Dr. Grabe, in the second volume
of his Spicilegium.

SECTION II.
I. What facts in the history of our Savior might be taken notice of by Pagan
Authors.

II. What particular facts are taken notice of, and by what Pagan Authors.

III. How Celsus represented our Savior's miracles.

IV. The same representation made of them by other unbelievers, and proved
unreasonable.

V. What facts in our Savior's history not to be expected from Pagan writers.

I. WE now come to consider what undoubted authorities are extant among Pagan
writers; and here we must premise, that some parts of our Savior's history may
be reasonably expected from Pagans. I mean such parts as might be known to
those who lived at a distance from Judaea, as well as to those who were the
followers and eyewitnesses of Christ.

II. Such particulars are most of these which follow, and which are all
attested by some one or other of those heathen Authors, who lived in or near
the age of our Savior and his disciples. That Augustus Caesar had ordered the
whole empire to be censed or taxed, which brought our Savior's reputed parents
to Bethlehem: This is mentioned by several Roman historians, as Tacitus,
Suetonius, and Dion. That a great light or a new star appeared in the east,
which directed the wise men to our Savior: This is recorded by Chalcidius.
That Herod, the King of Palestine, so often mentioned in the Roman history,
made a great slaughter of innocent children, being so jealous of his successor,
that he put to death his own sons on that account: This character of him is
given by several historians, and this cruel fact mentioned by Macrobius, a
heathen Author, who tells it as a known thing, without any mark of doubt upon
it. That our Savior had been in Egypt: This Celsus, though he raises a
monstrous story upon it, is so far from denying, that he tells us our Savior
learned the arts of magic in that country. That Pontius Pilate was Governor of
Judaea, that our Savior was brought in judgment before him, and by him
condemned and crucified: This is recorded by Tacitus. That many miraculous
cures and works out of the ordinary course of nature were wrought by him: This
is confessed by Julian the Apostate, Porphyry, and Hierocles, all of them not
only Pagans, but professed enemies and persecutors of Christianity. That our
Savior foretold several things, which came to pass according to his
predictions: This was attested by Phlegon in his annals, as we are assured by
the learned Origin against Celsus. That at the time when our Savior died,
there was a miraculous darkness and a great earthquake: This is recorded by the
same Phlegon the Trallian, who was likewise a Pagan and Freeman to Adrian the
Emperor. We may here observe, that a native of Trallium, which was not situate
at so great a distance from Palestine, might very probably be informed of such
remarkable events as had passed among the Jews in the age immediately preceding
his own times, since several of his countrymen with whom he had conversed,
might have received a confused report of our Savior before his crucifixion,
and probably lived within the Shake of the earthquake, and the Shadow of the
eclipse, which are recorded by this Author. That Christ was worshipped as a God
among the Christians; that they would rather suffer death than blaspheme him;
that they received a sacrament, and by it entered into a vow of abstaining from
sin and wickedness, conformable to the advice given by St. Paul; that they had
private assemblies of worship, and used to join together in Hymns: This is the
account which Pliny the younger gives of Christianity in his days, about
seventy years after the death of Christ, and which agrees in all its
circumstances with the accounts we have in holy writ, of the first state of
Christianity after the crucifixion of our Blessed Savior. That St. Peter,
whose miracles are many of them recorded in holy writ, did many wonderful
works, is owned by Julian the apostate, who therefore represents him as a great
Magician, and one who had in his possession a book of magical secrets left him
by our Savior. That the devils or evil spirits were subject to them, we may
learn from Porphyry, who objects to Christianity, that since Jesus had begun to
be worshipped, Aesculapius and the rest of the gods did no more converse with
men. Nay, Celsus himself affirms the same thing in effect, when he says, that
the power which seemed to reside in Christians, proceeded from the use of
certain names, and the invocation of certain demons. Origin remarks on this
passage, that the Author doubtless hints at those Christians who put to flight
evil spirits, and healed those who were possessed with them; a fact which had
been often seen, and which he himself had seen, as he declares in another part
of his discourse against Celsus. But at the same time he assures us, that this
miraculous power was exerted by the use of no other name but that of Jesus, to
which were added several passages in his history, but nothing like any
invocation to Demons.

III. Celsus was so hard set with the report of our Savior's miracles, and the
confident attestations concerning him, that though he often intimates he did
not believe them to be true, yet knowing he might be silenced in such an
answer, provides himself with another retreat, when beated out of this; namely,
that our Savior was a magician. Thus he compares the feeding of so many
thousands at two different times with a few loaves and fishes, to the magical
feasts of those Egyptian impostors, who would present their spectators with
visionary entertainments that had in them neither substance nor reality: which,
by the way, is to suppose, that a hungry and fainting multitude were filled by
an apparition, or strengthened and refreshed with shadows. He knew very well
that there were so many witnesses and actors, if I may call them such, in these
two miracles, that it was impossible to refute such multitudes, who had
doubtless sufficiently spread the fame of them, and was therefore in this place
forced to resort to the other solution, that it was done by magic. It was not
enough to say that a miracle which appeared to so many thousand eyewitnesses
was a forgery of Christ's disciples, and therefore supposing them to be
eyewitnesses, he endeavors to show how they might be deceived.

IV. The unconverted heathens, who were pressed by the many authorities that
confirmed our Savior's miracles, as well as the unbelieving Jews, who had
actually seen them, were driven to account for them after the same manner: For,
to work by magic in the heathen way of speaking, was in the language of the
Jews to cast out devils by Beelzebub the Prince of the devils. Our Savior, who
knew that unbelievers in all ages would put this perverse interpretation on his
miracles, has branded the malignity of those men, who contrary to the dictates
of their own hearts started such an unreasonable objection, as a blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost, and declared not only the guilt, but the punishment of
so black a crime. At the same time he condescended to show the vanity and
emptiness of this objection against his miracles, by representing that they
evidently tended to the destruction of those powers, to whose assistance the
enemies of his doctrine then ascribed them. An argument, which, if duly
weighed, renders the objection so very frivolous and groundless, that we may
venture to call it even blasphemy against common sense. Would Magic endeavor
to draw off the minds of men from the worship which was paid to stocks and
stones, to give them an abhorrence of those evil spirits who rejoiced in the
most cruel sacrifices, and in offerings of the greatest impurity; and in short
to call upon mankind to exert their whole strength in the love and adoration of
that one Being, from whom they derived their existence, and on whom only they
were taught to depend every moment for the happiness and continuance of it? Was
it the business of magic to humanize our natures with compassion, forgiveness,
and all the instances of the most extensive charity? Would evil spirits
contribute to make men sober, chaste, and temperate, and in a word to produce
that reformation, which was wrought in the moral world by those doctrines of
our Savior, that received their sanction from his miracles? Nor is it possible
to imagine, that evil spirits would enter into a combination with our Savior
to cut off all their correspondence and intercourse with mankind, and to
prevent any for the future from addicting themselves to those rites and
ceremonies, which had done them so much honor. We see the early effect which
Christianity had on the minds of men in this particular, by that number of
books, which were filled with the secrets of magic, and made a sacrifice to
Christianity by the converts mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles. We have
likewise an eminent instance of the inconsistency of our Religion with magic,
in the history of the famous Aquila. This Person, who was a kinsman of the
Emperor Trajan, and likewise a man of great learning, notwithstanding he had
embraced Christianity, could not be brought off from the studies of magic, by
the repeated admonitions of his fellow christians: so that at length they
expelled him their society, as rather choosing to lose the reputation of so
considerable a Proselyte, than communicate with one who dealt in such dark and
infernal practices. Besides we may observe, that all the favorers of magic
were the most professed and bitter enemies to the christian religion. Not to
mention Simon Magus and many others, I shall only take notice of those two
great persecutors of christianity, the Emperors Adrian and Julian the Apostate,
both them initiated in the mysteries of divination, and skilled in all the
depths of magic. I shall only add, that evil spirits cannot be supposed to have
concurred in the establishment of a religion which triumphed over them, drove
them out of the places they possessed, and divested them of their influence on
mankind: nor would I mention this particular, though it be unanimously reported
by all the ancient christian Authors; did it not appear from the authorities
above cited, that this was a fact confessed by heathens themselves.

V. We now see what a multitude of Pagan testimonies may be produced for all
those remarkable passages, which might have been expected from them: and indeed
of several, that, I believe, do more than answer your expectation, as they were
not subjects in their own nature so exposed to public notoriety. It cannot be
expected they should mention particulars, which were transacted amongst the
Disciples only, or among some few even of the Disciples themselves; such as the
transfiguration, the agony in the garden, the appearance of Christ after his
resurrection, and others of the like nature. It was impossible for a heathen
author to relate these things; because if he had believed them, he would no
longer have been a heathen, and by that means his testimony would not have been
thought of so much validity. Besides, his very report of facts so favorable to
Christianity would have prompted men to say that he was probably tainted with
their doctrine. We have a parallel case in Hecataeus, a famous Greek Historian,
who had several passages in his book conformable to the history of the Jewish
writers, which when quoted by Josephus, as a confirmation of the Jewish
history, when his heathen adversaries could give no other answer to it, they
would need suppose that Hecataeus was a Jew in his heart, though they had no
other reason for it, but because his history gave greater authority to the
Jewish than the Egyptian Records.

SECTION III.
I. Introduction to a second list of Pagan Authors, who give testimony of our
Savior.

II. A passage concerning our Savior, from a learned Athenian.

III. His conversion from Paganism to Christianity makes his evidence stronger
than if he had continued a Pagan.

IV. Of another Athenian Philosopher converted to Christianity.

V. Why their conversion, instead of weakening, strengthens their evidence in
defense of Christianity.

VI. Their belief in our Savior's history founded at first upon the principles
of historical faith.

VII. Their testimonies extended to all the particulars of our Savior's
history,

VIII. As related by the four Evangelists.

I. TO this list of heathen writers, who make mention of our Savior, or touch
upon any particulars of his life, I shall add those Authors who were at first
heathens, and afterward concerted to Christianity; upon which account, as I
shall here show, their testimonies are to be looked upon as the more
authentic. And in this list of evidences, I shall confine my self to such
learned Pagans as came over to Christianity in the three first centuries,
because those were the times in which men had the best means of informing
themselves of the truth of our Savior's history, and because among the great
number of Philosophers who came in afterward, under the reigns of christian
Emperors, there might be several who did it partly out of worldly motives.

II. Let us now suppose, that a learned heathen writer who lived within 60
years of our Savior's crucifixion, after having shown that false miracles were
generally wrought in obscurity, and before few or no witnesses, speaking of
those which were wrought by our Savior, has the following passage. But his
works were always seen, because they were true, they were seen by those who
were healed, and by those who were raised from the dead. Nay these persons who
were thus healed, and raised, were seen not only at the time of their being
healed, and raised, but long afterward. Nay they were seen not only all the
while our Savior was upon earth, but survived after his departure out of this
world, nay some of them were living in our days.

III. I dare say you would look upon this as a glorious attestation for the
cause of Christianity, had it come from the hand of a famous Athenian
Philosopher. These forementioned words however are actually the words of one
who lived about sixty Years after our Savior's crucifixion, and was a famous
Philosopher in Athens: but it will be said, he was a convert to Christianity.
Now consider this matter impartially, and see if his testimony is not much more
valid for that reason. Had he continued a Pagan Philosopher, would not the
world have said that he was not sincere in what he writ, or did not believe it;
for, if so, would not they have told us he would have embraced Christianity?
This was indeed the case of this excellent man: he had so thoroughly examined
the truth of our Savior's history, and the excellency of that religion which
he taught, and was so entirely convinced of both, that he became a Proselyte
and died a Martyr.

IV. Aristides was an Athenian Philosopher, at the same time, famed for his
learning and wisdom, but converted to Christianity. As it cannot be questioned
that he perused and approved the apology of Quadratus, in which is the passage
just now cited, he joined with him in an apology of his own, to the same
Emperor, on the same subject. This apology, though now lost, was extant in the
time of Ado Viennensis, A. D. 870, and highly esteemed by the most learned
Athenians, as that Author witnesses. It must have contained great arguments for
the truth of our Savior's history, because in it he asserted the divinity of
our Savior, which could not but engage him in the proof of his miracles.

V. I do allow that, generally speaking, a man is not so acceptable and
unquestioned an evidence in facts, which make for the advancement of his own
party. But we must consider that, in the case before us, the persons to whom we
appeal, were of an opposite party, till they were persuaded of the truth of
those very facts, which they report. They bear evidence to a history in defense
of Christianity, the truth of which history was their motive to embrace
Christianity. They attest facts which they had heard while they were yet
heathens, and had they not found reason to believe them, they would still have
continued heathens, and have made no mention of them in their writings.

VI. When a man is born under christian Parents, and trained up in the
profession of that religion from a child, he generally guides himself by the
rules of Christian Faith in believing what is delivered by the Evangelists; but
the learned Pagans of antiquity, before they became Christians, were only
guided by the common rules of Historical Faith: That is, they examined the
nature of the evidence which was to be met with in common fame, tradition, and
the writings of those persons who related them, together with the number,
concurrence, veracity, and private characters of those persons; and being
convinced upon all accounts that they had the same reason to believe the
history of our Savior, as that of any other person to which they themselves
were not actually eyewitnesses, they were bound by all the rules of historical
faith, and of right reason, to give credit to this history. This they did
accordingly, and in consequence of it published the same truths themselves,
suffered many afflictions, and very often death it self, in the assertion of
them. When I say, that an historical belief of the acts of our Savior induced
these learned Pagans to embrace his doctrine, I do not deny that there were
many other motives, which conduced to it, as the excellency of his precepts,
the fulfilling of prophecies, the miracles of his Disciples, the irreproachable
lives and magnanimous sufferings of their followers, with other considerations
of the same nature: but whatever other collateral arguments wrought more or
less with Philosophers of that age, it is certain that a belief in the history
of our Savior was one motive with every new convert, and that upon which all
others turned, as being the very basis and foundation of Christianity.

VII. To this I must further add, that as we have already seen many particular
facts which are recorded in holy writ, attested by particular Pagan Authors:
the testimony of those I am now going to produce, extends to the whole history
of our Savior, and to that continued series of actions, which are related of
him and his Disciples in the books of the New Testament.

VIII. This evidently appears from their quotations out of the Evangelists, for
the confirmation of any doctrine or account of our blessed Savior. Nay a
learned man of our nation, who examined the writings of the most ancient
Fathers in another view, refers to several passages in Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Clemens of Alexandria, Origin, and Cyprian, by which he plainly shows that each
of these early writers ascribe to the four Evangelists by name their respective
histories; so that there is not the least room for doubting of their belief in
the history of our Savior, as recorded in the Gospels. I shall add, that three
of the five Fathers here mentioned, and probably four, were Pagans converted to
Christianity, as they were all of them very inquisitive and deep in the
knowledge of heathen learning and philosophy.

SECTION IV.
I. Character of the times in which the Christian religion was propagated:

II. And of many who embraced it.

III. Three eminent and early instances.

IV. Multitudes of learned men who came over to it.

V. Belief in our Savior's history, the first motive to their conversion.

VI. The names of several Pagan Philosophers, who were Christian converts.

I. IT happened very providentially to the honor of the Christian religion,
that it did not take its rise in the dark illiterate ages of the world, but at
a time when arts and sciences were at their height, and when there were men who
made it the business of their lives to search after truth, and sift the several
opinions of Philosophers and wise men, concerning the duty, the end, and chief
happiness of reasonable creatures.

II. Several of these therefore, when they had informed themselves of our
Savior's history, and examined with unprejudiced minds the doctrines and
manners of his disciples and followers, were so struck and convinced, that they
professed themselves of that sect; notwithstanding, by this profession in that
juncture of time, they bid farewell to all the pleasures of this life,
renounced all the views of ambition, engaged in an uninterrupted course of
severities, and exposed themselves to public hatred and contempt, to
sufferings of all kinds, and to death itself.

III. Of this sort we may reckon those three early converts to Christianity,
who each of them was a member of a Senate famous for its wisdom and learning.
Joseph the Arimathean was of the Jewish Sanhedrim, Dionysius of the Athenian
Areopagus, and Flavius Clemens of the Roman Senate; nay at the time of his
death Consul of Rome. These three were so thoroughly satisfied of the truth of
the Christian religion, that the first of them, according to all the reports of
antiquity, died a martyr for it; as did the second, unless we disbelieve
Aristides, his fellow-citizen and contemporary; and the third, as we are
informed both by Roman and Christian Authors.

IV. Among those innumerable multitudes, who in most of the known nations of
the world came over to Christianity at its first appearance, we may be sure
there were great numbers of wise and learned men, beside those whose names are
in the Christian records, who without doubt took care to examine the truth of
our Savior's history, before they would leave the religion of their country
and of their forefathers, for the sake of one that would not only cut them off
from the allurements of this world, but subject them to every thing terrible or
disagreeable in it. Tertullian tells the Roman Governors, that their
corporations, councils, armies, tribes, companies, the palace, senate, and
courts of judicature were filled with Christians; as Arnobius asserts, that men
of the finest parts and learning, Orators, Grammarians, Rhetoricians, Lawyers,
Physicians, Philosophers, despising the sentiments they had been once fond of,
took up their rest in the Christian religion.

V. Who can imagine that men of this character did not thoroughly inform
themselves of the history of that person, whose doctrines they embraced? for
however consonant to reason his precepts appeared, how good soever were the
effects which they produced in the world, nothing could have tempted men to
acknowledge him as their God and Savior, but their being firmly persuaded of
the miracles he wrought, and the many attestations of his divine mission, which
were to be met with in the history of his life. This was the groundwork of the
Christian religion, and, if this failed, the whole superstructure sunk with it.
This point therefore, of the truth of our Savior's history, as recorded by the
Evangelists, is every where taken for granted in the writings of those, who
from Pagan Philosophers became Christian Authors, and who, by reason of their
conversion, are to be looked upon as of the strongest collateral testimony for
the truth of what is delivered concerning our Savior.

VI. Besides innumerable Authors that are lost, we have the undoubted names,
works, or fragments of several Pagan Philosophers, which show them to have been
as learned as any unconverted heathen Authors of the age in which the lived. If
we look into the greatest nurseries of learning in those ages of the world, we
find in Athens, Dionysius, Quadratus, Aristides, Athenagoras; and in
Alexandria, Dionysius, Clemens, Ammonius, Arnobius, and Anatolius, to whom we
may add Origin; for though his father was a Christian martyr, he became,
without all controversy, the most learned and able Philosopher of his age, by
his education at Alexandria, in that famous seminary of arts and sciences.

SECTION V.
I. The learned Pagans had means and opportunities of informing themselves of
the truth of our Savior's history;

II. From the proceedings,

III. The characters, sufferings,

IV. And miracles of the persons who published it.

V. How these first Apostles perpetuated their tradition, by ordaining persons
to succeed them.

VI. How their successors in the three first centuries preserved their
tradition.

VII. That five generations might derive this tradition from Christ, to the end
of the third century.

VIII. Four eminent Christians that delivered it down successively to the year
of our Lord 254.

IX. The faith of the four abovementioned persons, the same with that of the
Churches of the East, of the West, and of Egypt.

X. Another person added to them, who brings us to the year 343, and that many
other lists might be added in as direct and short a succession.

XI. Why the tradition of the three first centuries, more authentic than that
of any other age, proved from the conversation of the primitive Christians.

XII. From the manner of initiating men into their religion.

XIII. From the correspondence between the Churches.

XIV. From the long lives of several of Christ's Disciples, of which two
instances.

I. IT now therefore only remains to consider, whether these learned men had
means and opportunities of informing themselves of the truth of our Savior's
history; for unless this point can be made out, their testimonies will appear
invalid, and their enquiries ineffectual.

II. As to this point, we must consider, that many thousands had seen the
transactions of our Savior in Judaea, and that many hundred thousands had
received an account of them from the mouths of those who were actually
eyewitnesses. I shall only mention among these eyewitnesses the twelve
Apostles, to whom we must add St. Paul, who had a particular call to this high
office, though many other disciples and followers of Christ had also their
share in the publishing this wonderful history. We learn from the ancient
records of Christianity, that many of the Apostles and Disciples made it the
express business of their lives, traveled into the remotest parts of the
world, and in all places gathered multitudes about them, to acquaint them with
the history and doctrines of their crucified Master. And indeed, were all
Christian records of these proceedings entirely lost, as many have been, the
effect plainly evinces the truth of them; for how else during the Apostles
lives could Christianity have spread itself with such an amazing progress
through the several nations of the Roman empire? how could it fly like
lightning, and carry conviction with it, from one end of the earth to the other?

III. Heathens therefore of every age, sex, and quality, born in the most
different climates, and bred up under the most different institutions, when
they saw men of plain sense, without the help of learning, armed with patience
and courage, instead of wealth, pomp, or power, expressing in their lives those
excellent doctrines of Morality, which they taught as delivered to them from
our Savior, averring that they had seen his miracles during his life, and
conversed with him after his death; when, I say, they saw no suspicion of
falsehood, treachery, or worldly interest, in their behavior and conversation,
and that they submitted to the most ignominious and cruel deaths, rather than
retract their testimony, or even be silent in matters which they were to
publish by their Savior's especial command, there was no reason to doubt of
the veracity of those facts which they related, or of the Divine Mission in
which they were employed.

IV. But even these motives to Faith in our Savior would not have been
sufficient to have brought about in so few years such an incredible number of
conversions, had not the Apostles been able to exhibit still greater proofs of
the truths which they taught. A few persons of an odious and despised country
could not have filled the world with Believers, had they not shown undoubted
credentials from the Divine person who sent them on such a message. Accordingly
we are assured, that they were invested with the power of working miracles,
which was the most short and the most convincing argument that could be
produced, and the only one that was adapted to the reason of all mankind, to
the capacities of the wise and ignorant, and could overcome every cavil and
every prejudice. Who would not believe that our Savior healed the sick, and
raised the dead, when it was published by those who themselves often did the
same miracles, in their presence, and in his name! Could any reasonable person
imagine, that God Almighty would arm men with such powers to authorize a lie,
and establish a religion in the world which was displeasing to him, or that
evil spirits would lend them such an effectual assistance to beat down vice and
idolatry?

V. When the Apostles had formed many assemblies in several parts of the Pagan
world, who gave credit to the glad tidings of the Gospel, that, upon their
departure, the memory of what they had related might not perish, they appointed
out of these new converts, men of the best sense, and of the most unblemished
lives, to preside over these several Assemblies, and to inculcate without
ceasing what they had heard from the mouths of these eyewitnesses.

VI. Upon the death of any of those substitutes to the Apostles and Disciples
of Christ, his place was filled up with some other person of eminence for his
piety and learning, and generally a member of the same Church, who after his
decease was followed by another in the same manner, by which means the
succession was continued in an uninterrupted line. Irenaeus informs us, that
every church preserved a catalogue of its Bishops in the order that they
succeeded one another, and (for an example) produces a catalogue of those who
governed the Church of Rome in that character, which contains eight or nine
persons, though but at a very small remove from the times of the Apostles.

Indeed the lists of Bishops, which are come down to us in other churches, are
generally filled with greater numbers than one would expect. But the succession
was quick in the three first centuries, because the Bishop very often ended in
the Martyr: for when a persecution arose in any place, the first fury of it
fell upon this Order of holy men, who abundantly testified by their Deaths and
Sufferings that they did not undertake these offices out of any temporal views,
that they were sincere and satisfied in the belief of what they taught, and
that they firmly adhered to what they had received from the Apostles, as laying
down their lives in the same hope, and upon the same principles. None can be
supposed so utterly regardless of their own happiness as to expire in torment,
and hazard their Eternity, to support any fables and inventions of their own,
or any forgeries of their predecessors who had presided in the same church, and
which might have been easily detected by the tradition of that particular
church, as well as by the concurring testimony of others. To this purpose, I
think it is very remarkable, that there was not a single Martyr among those
many Heretics, who disagreed with the Apostolical church, and introduced
several wild and absurd notions into the doctrines of Christianity. They durst
not stake their present and future happiness on their own chimerical
imaginations, and did not only shun persecution, but affirmed that it was
unnecessary for their followers to bear their religion through such fiery
trials.

VII. We may fairly reckon, that this first age of Apostles and Disciples, with
that second generation of many who were their immediate converts, extended
itself to the middle of the second Century, and that several of the third
generation from these last mentioned, which was but the fifth from Christ,
continued to the end of the third Century. Did we know the ages and numbers of
the members in every particular church, which was planted by the Apostles, I
doubt not but in most of them there might be found five persons who in a
continued series would reach through these three centuries of years, that is
till the 265th from the death of our Savior.

VIII. Among the accounts of those very few out of innumerable multitudes, who
had embraced Christianity, I shall single out four persons, eminent for their
lives, their writings, and their sufferings, that were successively
contemporaries, and bring us down as far as to the year of our Lord 254. St.
John, who was the beloved Disciple, and conversed the most intimately with our
Savior, lived till Anno Dom. 100. Polycarp, who was the Disciple of St. John,
and had conversed with others of the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord, lived
till Anno Dom. 167, though his life was shortened by martyrdom. Irenaeus, who
was the Disciple of Polycarp, and had conversed with many of the immediate
Disciples of the Apostles, lived, at the lowest computation of his age, till
the year 202, when he was likewise cut off by martyrdom; in which year the
great Origin was appointed Regent of the Catechetick school in Alexandria, and
as he was the miracle of that age, for industry, learning and philosophy, he
was looked upon as the champion of Christianity, till the year 254, when, if he
did not suffer martyrdom, as some think he did, he was certainly actuated by
the spirit of it, as appears in the whole course of his life and writings; nay,
he had often been put to the torture, and had undergone trials worse than
death. As he conversed with the most eminent Christians of his time in Egypt,
and in the East, brought over multitudes both from heresy and heathenism, and
left behind him several Disciples of great fame and learning, there is no
question but there were considerable numbers of those who knew him, and had
been his hearers, scholars, or proselytes, that lived till the end of the third
century, and to the reign of Constantine the Great.

IX. It is evident to those, who read the lives and writings of Polycarp,
Irenaeus, and Origin, that these three Fathers believed the accounts which are
given of our Savior in the four Evangelists, and had undoubted arguments that
not only St. John, but many others of our Savior's disciples, published the
same accounts of him. To which we must subjoin this further remark, that what
was believed by these Fathers on this subject, was likewise the belief of the
main body of Christians in those successive ages when they flourished; since
Polycarp cannot but be looked upon, if we consider the respect that was paid
him, as the representative of the Eastern Churches in this particular, Irenaeus
of the Western upon the same account, and Origin of those established in Egypt.

X. To these I might add Paul the famous hermit, who retired from the Decian
persecution five or six years before Origen's death, and lived till the year
343. I have only discovered one of those channels by which the history of our
Savior might be conveyed pure and unadulterated, through those several ages
that produced those Pagan Philosophers, whose testimonies I make use of for the
truth of our Savior's history. Some or other of these Philosophers came into
the Christian faith during its infancy, in the several periods of these three
first centuries, when they had such means of informing themselves in all the
particulars of our Savior's history. I must further add, that though I have
here only chosen this single link of martyrs, I might find out others among
those names which are still extant, that delivered down this account of our
Savior in a successive tradition, till the whole Roman empire became
Christian; as there is no question but numberless series of witnesses might
follow one another in the same order, and in as short a chain, and that perhaps
in every single Church, had the names and ages of the most eminent primitive
Christians have been transmitted to us with the like certainty.

XI. But to give this consideration more force, we must take notice, that the
tradition of the first ages of Christianity had several circumstances peculiar
to it, which made it more authentic than any other tradition in any other age
of the world. The Christians, who carried their religion through so many
general and particular persecutions, were incessantly comforting and supporting
one another, with the example and history of our Savior and his Apostles. It
was the subject not only of their solemn assemblies, but of their private
visits and conversations. Our virgins, says Tatian, who lived in the second
century, discourse over their distaffs on divine subjects. Indeed, when
religion was woven into the civil government, and flourished under the
protection of the Emperors, men's thoughts and discourses were, as they are
now, full of secular affairs; but in the three first centuries of Christianity,
men, who embraced this religion, had given up all their interests in this
world, and lived in a perpetual preparation for the next, as not knowing how
soon they might be called to it: so that they had little else to talk of but
the life and doctrines of that divine person, which was their hope, their
encouragement, and their glory. We cannot therefore imagine, that there was a
single person arrived at any degree of age or consideration, who had not heard
and repeated above a thousand times in his life, all the particulars of our
Savior's birth, life, death, resurrection, and ascension.

XII. Especially if we consider, that they could not then be received as
Christians, till they had undergone several examinations. Persons of riper
years, who flocked daily into the Church during the three first centuries, were
obliged to pass through many repeated instructions, and give a strict account
of their proficiency, before they were admitted to Baptism. And as for those
who were born of Christian parents, and had been baptized in their infancy,
they were with the like care prepared and disciplined for confirmation, which
they could not arrive at, till they were found upon examination to have made a
sufficient progress in the knowledge of Christianity.

XIII. We must further observe, that there was not only in those times this
religious conversation among private Christians, but a constant correspondence
between the Churches that were established by the Apostles or their successors,
in the several parts of the world. If any new doctrine was started, or any fact
reported of our Savior, a strict enquiry was made among the Churches,
especially those planted by the Apostles themselves, whether they had received
any such doctrine or account of our Savior, from the mouths of the Apostles,
or the tradition of those Christians, who had preceded the present members of
the Churches which were thus consulted. By this means, when any novelty was
published, it was immediately detected and censured.

XIV. St. John, who lived so many years after our Savior, was appealed to in
these emergencies as the living Oracle of the Church; and as his oral testimony
lasted the first century, many have observed that, by a particular providence
of God, several of our Savior's Disciples, and of the early converts of his
religion, lived to a very great age, that they might personally convey the
truth of the Gospel to those times, which were very remote from the first
publication of it. Of these, besides St. John, we have a remarkable instance in
Simeon, who was one of the seventy sent forth by our Savior, to publish the
Gospel before his crucifixion, and a near kinsman of the Lord. This venerable
person, who had probably heard with his own ears our Savior's prophecy of the
destruction of Jerusalem, presided over the Church established in that city,
during the time of its memorable siege, and drew his congregation out of those
dreadful and unparalled calamities which befell his countrymen, by following
the advice our Savior had given, when they should see Jerusalem encompassed
with armies, and the Roman standards, or abomination of desolation, set up. He
lived till the year of our Lord 107, when he was martyred under the Emperor
Trajan.

SECTION VI.
I. The tradition of the Apostles secured by other excellent institutions;

II. But chiefly by the writings of the Evangelists.

III. The diligence of the Disciples and first Christian converts, to send
abroad these writings.

IV. That the written account of our Savior was the same with that delivered
by tradition:

V. Proved from the reception of the Gospel by those Churches which were
established before it was written.

VI. From the uniformity of what was believed in the several Churches.

VII. From a remarkable passage in Irenaeus.

VIII. Records which are now lost, of use to the three first centuries, for
confirming the history of our Savior.

IX. Instances of such records.

I. THUS far we see how the learned Pagans might apprize themselves from oral
information of the particulars of our Savior's history. They could hear, in
every Church planted in every distant part of the earth, the account which was
there received and preserved among them, of the history of our Savior. They
could learn the names and characters of those first missionaries that brought
to them these accounts, and the miracles by which God Almighty attested their
reports. But the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, to preserve the history of
his life, and to secure their accounts of him from error and oblivion, did not
only set aside certain persons for that purpose, as has been already shown, but
appropriated certain days to the commemoration of those facts which they had
related concerning him. The first day of the week was in all its returns a
perpetual memorial of his resurrection, as the devotional exercises adapted to
Friday and Saturday, were to denote to all ages that he was crucified on the
one of those days, and that he rested in the grave on the other. You may apply
the same remark to several of the annual festivals instituted by the Apostles
themselves, or at furthest by their immediate Successors, in memory of the most
important particulars in our Savior's history; to which we must add the
Sacraments instituted by our Lord himself, and many of those rites and
ceremonies which obtained in the most early times of the Church. These are to
be regarded as standing marks of such facts as were delivered by those, who
were eyewitnesses to them, and which were contrived with great wisdom to last
till time should be no more. These, without any other means, might have, in
some measure, conveyed to posterity, the memory of several transactions in the
history of our Savior, as they were related by his Disciples. At least, the
reason of these institutions, though they might be forgotten, and obscured by a
long course of years, could not but be very well known by those who lived in
the three first Centuries, and a means of informing the inquisitive Pagans in
the truth of our Savior's history, that being the view in which I am to
consider them.

II. But least such a tradition, though guarded by so many expedients, should
wear out by the length of time, the four Evangelists within about fifty, or, as
Theodoret affirms, thirty years, after our Savior's death, while the memory of
his actions was fresh among them, consigned to writing that history, which for
some years had been published only by the mouth of the Apostles and Disciples.
The further consideration of these holy penmen will fall under another part of
this discourse.

III. It will be sufficient to observe here, that in the age which succeeded
the Apostles, many of their immediate Disciples sent or carrried in person the
books of the four Evangelists, which had been written by Apostles, or at least
approved by them, to most of the Churches which they had planted in the
different parts of the world. This was done with so much diligence, that when
Pantaenus, a man of great learning and piety, had traveled into India for the
propagation of Christianity, about the year of our Lord 200, he found among
that remote people the Gospel of St. Matthew, which upon his return from that
country he brought with him to Alexandria. This Gospel is generally supposed to
have been left in those parts by St. Bartholomew the Apostle of the Indies, who
probably carried it with him before the writings of the three other Evangelists
were published.

IV. That the history of our Savior, as recorded by the Evangelists, was the
same with that which had been before delivered by the Apostles and Disciples,
will further appear in the prosecution of this discourse, and may be gathered
from the following considerations.

V. Had these writings differed from the sermons of the first planters of
Christianity, either in history or doctrine, there is no question but they
would have been rejected by those Churches which they had already formed. But
so consistent and uniform was the relation of the Apostles, that these
histories appeared to be nothing else but their tradition and oral attestations
made fixed and permanent. Thus was the fame of our Savior, which in so few
years had gone through the whole earth, confirmed and perpetuated by such
records, as would preserve the traditionary account of him to after-ages; and
rectify it, if at at any time, by passing through several generations, it
might drop any part that was material, or contract any thing that was false or
fictitious.

VI. Accordingly we find the same Jesus Christ, who was born of a Virgin, who
had wrought many miracles in Palestine, who was crucified, rose again, and
ascended into Heaven; I say, the same Jesus Christ had been preached, and was
worshipped, in Germany, France, Spain, and Great Britain, in Parthia, Media,
Mesopotamia, Armenia, Phrygia, Asia, and Pamphylia, in Italy, Egypt, Afric, and
beyond Cyrene, India and Persia, and, in short, in all the islands and
provinces that are visited by the rising or setting sun. The same account of
our Savior's life and doctrine was delivered by thousands of Preachers, and
believed in thousands of places, who all, as fast as it could be conveyed to
them, received the same account in writing from the four Evangelists.

VII. Irenaeus to this purpose very aptly remarks, that those barbarous
nations, who in his time were not possessed of the written gospels, and had only
learned the history of our Savior from those who had converted them to
Christianity before the Gospels were written, had among them the same accounts
of our Savior, which are to be met with in the four Evangelists. An
uncontestible proof of the harmony and concurrence between the holy scripture
and the tradition of the Churches in those early times of Christianity.

VIII. Thus we see what opportunities the learned and inquisitive heathens had
of informing themselves of the truth of our Savior's history, during the three
first Centuries, especially as they lay nearer one than another to the
fountainhead: beside which, there were many uncontroverted traditions, records
of Christianity, and particular histories, that then threw light into these
matters, but are now entirely lost, by which, at that time, any appearance of
contradiction, or seeming difficulties, in the history of the Evangelists, were
fully cleared up and explained: though we meet with fewer appearances of this
nature in the history of our Savior, as related by the four Evangelists, than
in the accounts of any other person, published by such a number of different
historians who lived at so great a distance from the present age.

IX. Among those records which are lost, and were of great use to the primitive
Christians, is the letter to Tiberius, which I have already mentioned; that of
Marcus Aurelius, which I shall take notice of hereafter; the writings of
Hegesippus, who had drawn down the history of Christianity to his own time,
which was not beyond the middle of the second Century; the genuine Sibylline
oracles, which in the first ages of the Church were easily distinguished from
the spurious; the records preserved in particular Churches, with many other of
the same nature.

SECTION VII.
I. The sight of miracles in those ages a further confirmation of Pagan
Philosophers in the Christian faith.

II. The credibility of such miracles.

III. A particular instance.

IV. Martyrdom, why considered as a standing miracle.

V. Primitive Christians thought many of the Martyrs were supported by a
miraculous power:

VI. Proved from the nature of their sufferings.

VII. How Martyrs further induced the Pagans to embrace Christianity.

I. THERE were other means, which I find had a great influence on the learned
of the three first Centuries, to create and confirm in them the belief of our
blessed Savior's history, which ought not to be passed over in silence. The
first was, the opportunity they enjoyed of examining those miracles, which were
on several occasions performed by Christians, and appeared in the Church, more
or less, during these first ages of Christianity. These had great weight with
the men I am now speaking of, who, from learned Pagans, became fathers of the
Church; for they frequently boast of them in their writings, as attestations
given by God himself to the truth of their religion.

II. At the same time, that these learned men declare how disigenuous, base and
wicked it would be, how much beneath the dignity of Philosophy, and contrary to
the precepts of Christianity, to utter falsehoods or forgeries in the support of
a cause, though never so just in it self, they confidently assert this
miraculous power, which then subsisted in the Church, nay, tell us that they
themselves had been eyewitnesses of it at several times, and in several
instances; nay, appeal to the heathens themselves for the truth of several
facts they relate, nay challenge them to be present at their assemblies, and
satisfy themselves, if they doubt of it; nay we find that Pagan Authors have in
some instances confessed this miraculous power.

III. The letter of Marcus Aurelius, whose army was preserved by a refreshing
shower, at the same time that his enemies were discomfited by a storm of
lightning, and which the heathen historians themselves allow to have been
supernatural and the effect of magic: I say, this letter, which ascribed this
unexpected assistance to the prayers of the Christians, who then served in the
army, would have been thought an unquestionable testimony of the miraculous
power I am speaking of, had it been still preserved. It is sufficient for me in
this Place to take notice, that this was one of those miracles which had its
influence on the learned Converts, because it is related by Tertullian, and the
very letter appealed to. When these learned men saw sickness and frenzy cured,
the dead raised, the oracles put to silence, the Demons and evil spirits
forced to confess themselves no Gods, by persons who only made use of prayer
and adjurations in the name of their crucified Savior; how could they doubt of
their Savior's power on the like occasions, as represented to them by the
traditions of the Church, and the writings of the Evangelists?

IV. Under this head, I cannot omit that which appears to me a standing miracle
in the three first Centuries, I mean that amazing and supernatural courage or
patience, which was shown by innumerable multitudes of Martyrs, in those slow
and painful torments that were inflicted on them. I cannot conceive a man
placed in the burning iron chair at Lions, amid the insults and mockeries of a
crowded Amphitheatre, and still keeping his seat; or stretched upon a grate of
iron, over coals of fire, and breathing out his soul among the exquisite
sufferings of such a tedious execution, rather than renounce his religion, or
blaspheme his Savior. Such trials seem to me above the strength of human
nature, and able to over-bear duty, reason, faith, conviction, nay, and the
most absolute certainty of a future state. Humanity, unassisted in an
extraordinary manner, must have shaken off the present pressure, and have
delivered it self out of such a dreadful distress, by any means that could have
been suggested to it. We can easily imagine, that many persons, in so good a
cause, might have laid down their lives at the gibbet, the stake, or the block:
but to expire leisurely among the most exquisite tortures, when they might come
out of them, even by a mental reservation, or an hypocrisy which was not
without a possibility of being followed by repentance and forgiveness, has
something in it, so far beyond the force and natural strength of mortals, that
one cannot but think there was some miraculous power to support the sufferer.

V. We find the Church of Smyrna, in that admirable letter which gives an
account of the death of Polycarp their beloved Bishop, mentioning the cruel
torments of other early Martyrs for Christianity, are of opinion, that our
Savior stood by them in a vision, and personally conversed with them, to give
them strength and comfort during the bitterness of their long-continued
agonies; and we have the story of a young man, who, having suffered many
tortures, escaped with life, and told his fellow christians, that the pain of
them had been rendered tolerable, by the presence of an Angel who stood by him,
and wiped off the tears and sweat, which ran down his face whilst he lay under
his sufferings. We are assured at least that the first Martyr for Christianity
was encouraged in his last moments, by a vision of that divine person, for whom
he suffered, and into whose presence he was then hastening.

VI. Let any man calmly lay his hand upon his heart, and after reading these
terrible conflicts in which the ancient Martyrs and Confessors were engaged,
when they passed through such new inventions and varieties of pain, as tired
their tormentors; and ask himself, however zealous and sincere he is in his
religion, whether under such acute and lingering tortures he could still have
held fast his integrity, and have professed his faith to the last, without a
supernatural assistance of some kind or other. For my part, when I consider
that it was not an unaccountable obstinacy in a single man, or in any
particular set of men, in some extraordinary juncture; but that there were
multitudes of each sex, of every age, of different countries and conditions,
who for near 300 years together made this glorious confession of their faith,
in the midst of tortures, and in the hour of death: I must conclude, that they
were either of another make than men are at present, or that they had such
miraculous supports as were peculiar to those times of Christianity, when
without them perhaps the very name of it might have been extinguished.

VII. It is certain, that the deaths and sufferings of the primitive Christians
had a great share in the conversion of those learned Pagans, who lived in the
ages of Persecution, which with some intervals and abatements lasted near 300
years after our Savior. Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Lactantius, Arnobius, and
others, tell us, that this first of all alarmed their curiosity, roused their
attention, and made them seriously inquisitive into the nature of that
religion, which could endue the mind with so much strength, and overcome the
fear of death, nay raise an earnest desire of it, though it appeared in all its
terrors. This they found had not been effected by all the doctrines of those
Philosophers, whom they had thoroughly studied, and who had been laboring at
this great point. The sight of these dying and tormented Martyrs engaged them
to search into the history and doctrines of him for whom they suffered. The
more they searched, the more they were convinced; till their conviction grew so
strong, that they themselves embraced the same truths, and either actually laid
down their lives, or were always in a readiness to do it, rather than depart
from them.

SECTION VIII.
I. The completion of our Savior's prophecies confirmed Pagans in their belief
of the Gospel.

II. Origen's observation on that of his Disciples being brought before Kings
and Governors.

III. On their being persecuted for their religion;

IV. On their preaching the Gospel to all nations;

V. On the destruction of Jerusalem, and ruin of the Jewish economy.

VI. These arguments strengthened by what has happened since Origen's time.

I. THE second of those extraordinary means, of great use to the learned and
inquisitive Pagans of the three first Centuries, for evincing the truth of the
history of our Savior, was the completion of such prophecies as are recorded
of him in the Evangelists. They could not indeed form any arguments from what
he foretold, and was fulfilled during his life, because both the prophecy and
the completion were over before they were published by the Evangelists; though,
as Origin observes, what end could there be in forging some of these
predictions, as that of St. Peter's denying his master, and all his Disciples
forsaking him in the greatest extremity, which reflects so much shame on the
great Apostle, and on all his companions? Nothing but a strict adherence to
truth, and to matters of fact, could have prompted the Evangelists to relate a
circumstance so disadvantageous to their own reputation; as that Father has
well observed.

II. But to pursue his reflections on this Subject. There are predictions of
our Savior recorded by the Evangelists, which were not completed till after
their deaths, and had no likelihood of being so, when they were pronounced by
our blessed Savior. Such was that wonderful notice he gave them, that they
should be brought before Governors and Kings for his sake, for a testimony
against them and the Gentiles, Mat. 10.28. with the other like prophecies, by
which he foretold that his Disciples were to be persecuted. Is there any other
doctrine in the world, says this Father, whose followers are punished? Can the
enemies of Christ say, that he knew his opinions were false and impious, and
that therefore he might well conjecture and foretell what would be the
treatment of those persons who should embrace them? Supposing his doctrines
were really such, why should this be the consequence? what likelihood that men
should be brought before Kings and Governors for opinions and tenets of any
kind, when this never happened even to the Epicureans, who absolutely denied a
Providence; nor to the Peripateticks themselves, who laughed at the prayers and
sacrifices which were made to the Divinity? Are there any but the Christians
who, according to this prediction of our Savior, being brought before Kings
and Governors for his sake, are pressed to their latest gasp of breath, by
their respective judges, to renounce Christianity, and to procure their liberty
and rest, by offering the same sacrifices, and taking the same oaths that
others did?

III. Consider the time when our Savior pronounced those words, Matt. 10.32.
Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my Father
which is in heaven: but whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also
deny before my Father which is in heaven. Had you heard him speak after this
manner, when as yet his Disciples were under no such trials, you would
certainly have said within your self, If these speeches of Jesus are true, and
if, according to his prediction, Governors and Kings undertake to ruin and
destroy those who shall profess themselves his Disciples, we will believe (not
only that he is a Prophet) but that he has received power from God sufficient
to preserve and propagate his religion; and that he would never talk in such a
peremptory and discouraging manner, were he not assured that he was able to
subdue the most powerful opposition, that could be made against the faith and
doctrine which he taught.

IV. Who is not struck with admiration, when he represents to himself our
Savior at that time foretelling, that his Gospel should be preached in all the
world, for a witness unto all nations, or as St. Origin (who rather quotes the
sense than the words) to serve for a conviction to Kings and people, when at
the same time he finds that his Gospel has accordingly been preached to Greeks
and Barbarians, to the learned and to the ignorant, and that there is no
quality or condition of life able to exempt men from submitting to the doctrine
of Christ. As for us, says this great Author, in another part of his book
against Celsus? When we see every day those events exactly accomplished which
our Savior foretold at so great a distance: That his Gospel is preached in all
the world, Matthew 24.14. That his Disciples go and teach all nations, Matthew
28.19. And that those, who have received his doctrine, are brought for his sake
before Governors, and before Kings, Matthew 10.18. we are filled with
admiration, and our faith in him is confirmed more and more. What clearer and
stronger proofs can Celsus ask for the truth of what he spoke?

V. Origin insists likewise with great strength on that wonderful prediction of
our Savior, concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, pronounced at a time, as
he observes, when there was no likelihood nor appearance of it. This has been
taken notice of and inculcated by so many others, that I shall refer you to
what this Father has said on the subject in the first book against Celsus. And
as to the accomplishment of this remarkable prophecy, shall only observe, that
whoever reads the account given us by Josephus, without knowing his character,
and compares it with what our Savior foretold, would think the historian had
been a Christian, and that he had nothing else in view but to adjust the event
to the prediction.

VI. I cannot quit this head without taking notice, that Origin would still
have triumphed more in the foregoing arguments, had he lived an age longer, to
have seen the Roman Emperors, and all their Governors and provinces, submitting
themselves to the Christian religion, and glorying in its profession, as so
many Kings and Sovereigns still place their relation to Christ at the head of
their titles.

How much greater confirmation of his faith would he have received, had he seen
our Savior's prophecy stand good in the destruction of the temple, and the
dissolution of the Jewish Economy, when Jews and Pagans united all their
endeavors under Julian the Apostate, to baffle and falsify the prediction?
The great preparations that were made for rebuilding the temple, with the
hurricane, earthquake, and eruptions of fire, that destroyed the work, and
terrified those employed in the attempt from proceeding in it, are related by
many historians of the same age, and the substance of the story testified both
by Pagan and Jewish writers, as Ammianus Marcellinus and Zemath-David. The
learned Chrysostom, in a sermon against the Jews, tells them this fact was
then fresh in the memories even of their young men, that it happened but twenty
years ago, and that it was attested by all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, where
they might still see the marks of it in the rubbish of that work, from which
the Jews desisted in so great a fright, and which even Julian had not the
courage to carry on. This fact, which is in it self so miraculous, and so
indisputable, brought over many of the Jews to Christianity; and shows us, that
after our Savior's prophecy against it, the temple could not be preserved from
the plough passing over it, by all the care of Titus, who would fain have
prevented its destruction, and that instead of being re-edified by Julian, all
his endeavors toward it did but still more literally accomplish our Savior's
prediction, that not one stone should be left upon another.

The ancient Christians were so entirely persuaded of the force of our
Savior's prophecies and of the punishment which the Jews had drawn upon
themselves, and upon their children, for the treatment which the Messiah had
received at their hands, that they did not doubt but they would always remain
an abandoned and dispersed people, an hissing and an astonishment among the
nations, as they are to this day. In short, that they had lost their
peculiarity of being God's people, which was now transferred to the body of
Christians, and which preserved the Church of Christ among all the conflicts,
difficulties and persecutions, in which it was engaged, as it had preserved the
Jewish government and economy for so many ages, whilst it had the same truth
and vital principle in it, notwithstanding it was so frequently in danger of
being utterly abolished and destroyed. Origin, in his fourth book against
Celsus, mentioning their being cast out of Jerusalem, the place to which their
worship was annexed, deprived of their temple and sacrifice, their religious
rites and solemnities, and scattered over the face of the earth, ventures to
assure them with a face of confidence, that they would never be re-established,
since they had committed that horrid crime against the Savior of the world.
This was a bold assertion in the good man, who knew how this people had been so
wonderfully re-established in former times, when they were almost swallowed up,
and in the most desperate state of desolation, as in their deliverance out of
the Babylonish captivity, and the oppressions of Antiochus Epiphanes. Nay, he
knew that within less than a hundred years before his own time, the Jews had
made such a powerful effort for their re-establishment under Barchocab, in the
reign of Adrian, as shook the whole Roman empire. But he founded his opinion on
a sure word of prophecy, and on the punishment they had so justly incurred; and
we find, by a long experience of 1500 years, that he was not mistaken, nay that
his opinion gathers strength daily, since the Jews are now at a greater
distance from any probability of such a re-establishment, than they were when
Origin wrote.

SECTION IX.
I. The lives of primitive Christians, another means of bringing learned Pagans
into their religion.

II. The change and reformation of their manners.

III. This looked upon as supernatural by the learned Pagans,

IV. And strengthened the accounts given of our Savior's life and history.

V. The Jewish prophecies of our Savior, an argument for the heathens belief:

VI. Pursued:

VII. Pursued.

I. THERE was one other means enjoyed by the learned Pagans of the three first
centuries, for satisfying them in the truth of our Savior's history, which I
might have flung under one of the foregoing heads; but as it is so shining a
particular, and does so much honor to our religion, I shall make a distinct
article of it, and only consider it with regard to the subject I am upon: I
mean the lives and manners of those holy men, who believed in Christ during the
first ages of Christianity. I should be thought to advance a paradox, should I
affirm that there were More Christians in the world during those times of
persecution, than there are at present in these which we call the flourishing
times of Christianity. But this will be found an indisputable truth, if we form
our calculation upon the opinions which prevailed in those days, that every one
who lives in the habitual practice of any voluntary sin, actually cuts himself
off from the benefits and profession of Christianity, and whatever he may call
himself, is in reality no Christian, nor ought to be esteemed as such.

II. In the times we are now surveying, the Christian religion showed its full
force and efficacy on the minds of men, and by many examples demonstrated what
great and generous souls it was capable of producing. It exalted and refined
its proselytes to a very high degree of perfection, and set them far above the
pleasures, and even the pains, of this life. It strengthened the infirmity, and
broke the fierceness of human nature. It lifted up the minds of the ignorant to
the knowledge and worship of him that made them, and inspired the vicious with
a rational devotion, a strict purity of heart, and an unbounded love to their
fellow creatures. In proportion as it spread through the world, it seemed to
change mankind into another species of Beings. No sooner was a convert
initiated into it, but by an easy figure he became a New Man, and both acted
and looked upon himself as one regenerated and born a second time into another
state of existence.

III. It is not my business to be more particular in the accounts of primitive
Christianity, which have been exhibited so well by others, but rather to
observe, that the Pagan converts, of whom I am now speaking, mention this great
reformation of those who had been the greatest sinners, with that sudden and
surprising change which it made in the lives of the most profligate, as having
something in it supernatural, miraculous, and more than human. Origin
represents this power in the Christian religion, as no less wonderful than that
of curing the lame and blind, or cleansing the leper. Many others represent it
in the same light, and looked upon it as an argument that there was a certain
divinity in that religion, which showed it self in such strange and glorious
effects.

IV. This therefore was a great means not only of recommending Christianity to
honest and learned heathens, but of confirming them in the belief of our
Savior's history, when they saw multitudes of virtuous men daily forming
themselves upon his example, animated by his precepts, and actuated by that
Spirit which he had promised to send among his Disciples.

V. But I find no argument made a stronger impression on the minds of these
eminent Pagan converts, for strengthening their faith in the history of our
Savior, than the predictions relating to him in those old prophetic writings,
which were deposited among the hands of the greatest enemies to Christianity,
and owned by them to have been extant many ages before his appearance. The
learned heathen converts were astonished to see the whole history of their
Savior's life published before he was born, and to find that the Evangelists
and Prophets, in their accounts of the Messiah, differed only in point of time,
the one foretelling what should happen to him, and the other describing those
very particulars as what had actually happened. This our Savior himself was
pleased to make use of as the strongest argument of his being the promised
Messiah, and without it would hardly have reconciled his Disciples to the
ignominy of his death, as in that remarkable passage which mentions his
conversation with the two Disciples, on the day of his resurrection. St. Luke,
chap. 24. verse 13. to the end.

VI. The heathen converts, after having traveled through all human learning,
and fortified their minds with the knowledge of arts and sciences, were
particularly qualified to examine these prophecies with great care and
impartiality, and without prejudice or prepossession. If the Jews on the one
side put an unnatural interpretation on these prophecies, to evade the force of
them in their controversies with the Christians; or if the Christians on the
other side over-strained several passages in their applications of them, as it
often happens among men of the best understanding, when their minds are heated
with any consideration that bears a more than an ordinary weight with it: the
learned Heathens may be looked upon as neuters in the matter, when all these
prophecies were new to them, and their education had left the interpretation of
them free and indifferent. Besides, these learned men among the primitive
Christians, knew how the Jews, who had preceded our Savior, interpreted these
predictions, and the several marks by which they acknowledged the Messiah would
be discovered, and how those of the Jewish Doctors who succeeded him, had
deviated from the interpretations and doctrines of their forefathers, on
purpose to stifle their own conviction.

VII. This set of arguments had therefore an invincible force with those Pagan
Philosophers who became Christians, as we find in most of their writings. They
could not disbelieve our Savior's history, which so exactly agreed with every
thing that had been written of him many ages before his birth, nor doubt of
those circumstances being fulfilled in him, which could not be true of any
person that lived in the world besides himself. This wrought the greatest
confusion in the unbelieving Jews, and the greatest conviction in the Gentiles,
who every where speak with astonishment of these truths they met with in this
new magazine of learning which was opened to them, and carry the point so far
as to think whatever excellent doctrine they had met with among Pagan writers,
had been stole from their conversation with the Jews, or from the perusal of
these writings which they had in their custody.

FINIS.

