AN ESSAY ON THE King's Evil.

-- Quod Medicorum est
Promittunt Medici --
HOR. By ROBERT WILLAN, M.D.

LONDON: Printed for J. and P. KNAPTON, and T. LONGMAN; and sold by M. COOPER,
in Paternoster-Row. M,DCC,XLVI.

(Price One Shilling.)

The fol^^^ing ERRATA were (...) by the AUTHOR'^ Distance from the Press.
IN the Preface, Page 10, Line 16, Read, Incuable: That it was ^o esteemed we
need not, etc. P. 11. L. 7. i^g^nuous.

Page 2, Line 13. Read, (...) P. 7. L. 23. Gallbladder. P. 10. L. 18. Vis^i^
Chyle is received, etc. P. 12. L. 18. Gl^nds. P. 14. L. 5. Affinity with the
others. P. 17. L. 3. We prefer Riding. P. 22. L. 26. (...) P. 25. L. 28. many
that they cannot well be enumerated here; therefore the chief of them only
shall be mentioned. P. 26. L. 9. Sabina. P. 28. L. 19 Funnel. P. 30. L. 8.
Turpertine, ^als. Capoi^a, etc. P. 35. L. 10. principally. P. 39. L. 23. no
more than, etc. P. 40. L. 5. effervesces.

TO Dr. MEAD.
THE Art of Healing would seem to be of all Arts the most honorable, even though
no better Reason could be given for it, than that it is the most difficult. The
last is indeed so true, that the Task appears unsurmountable to many, and even
to some of those whom propitious Heaven has blessed with the brightest and most
intelligent Faculties. The provident and all-wise Governor of the Universe, has
therefore imprinted on some Minds a great and insuperable Attachment to this
Science, not to be overcome with Difficulties, or rather which knows no
Difficulties; to whom the Study is as easy as it is natural, and is so far
from being a Task, that it becomes a considerable Part of their Happiness; who
can penetrate with Freedom and Delight all the latent Powers of created Bodies,
and can discover by a Sagacity somewhat more than human, their Dependence and
Effects on each other.

To this wonderful Bias, this happy Prejudice in Favor of Aesculapius, we owe
the Characters of a Pitcairne, Lister, Friend, Sloane, Sydenham, etc. But I
shall not be thought guilty of Flattery in saying, that this Attachment has in
a very extraordinay Manner distinguished Dr. Mead.

I am no Stranger to Addresses of this Kind, or to the general Abuse of them,
than which nothing is more opposite to my Temper and Inclination; but a
generous Mind, however upright, sincere and impartial, cannot avoid
acknowledging, on these public Occasions, the Merit which it admires and
extolls in private Conversation; such a Mind I say, cannot forbear to confess
in Dr. Mead, deep Learning, profound Knowledge of Medicine, Candor,
Benevolence, and Condescension.

Some of these Qualities have preserved thee from being moved with Applause or
Adulation, and have hindered Envy itself from attacking thee: They have both
gained and preserved the Esteem as well of the Multitude, as of the learned
World, through a very long Series of successful Practice.

Several of these Considerations have induced me to present thee with the
following Sheets, which contain naked Truths, undisguis'd with subtle and
hypothetical Conjectures, but established on plain and certain Principles,
consonant to the unparalled System of Boerhaave.

That thou may long, very long, be preserved by thy own Art, to be an
Example of Moderation, an Honor to the Profession, and a Patron of it is rising
Sons, is the most sincere Wish and Hope of

Thy very respectful Friend Robert Willan.

THE PREFACE.
IT will be unnecessary to tell the Learned of the Faculty, that nothing has
yet been wrote upon this Subject, which might be sufficient for the Information
of those who are unacquainted with it. The Systematic Writers have either
forgot it entirely, as Boerhaave has done, or have passed it over
superficially, and as often obscurely. To the young Artist, therefore, I
presume this Piece will be acceptable; in which, though all has not been said
which might be said, yet perhaps sufficient to assist him to form a more clear
and perfect Idea of this Disease and its Method of Cure, than has hitherto been
offered to the Public. The Method of Cure he will find more ample than the
other Parts of this Discourse, which are as concise as they could well be; but
this will be readily excused, when he knows how much more difficult it is to
cure this Malady, than to understand it.

I should do Injustice to the Subject, if I forgot to take Notice, in this
Place, of that very short and subtle Method, by which the gross Superstition
of our Ancestors taught them to believe this very obstinate Disease might be
cured, viz. By the wonder-working Touch of a sceptered Hand, or of a Piece of
Money from the same Hand; but we are to remark, by the bye, that it must be the
Hand of a lineal Heir to the Crown; for those entitled to it, by the Invitation
of the Subject, or the Voice of the People, (though this was the best Title in
the World) were not thought capable of performing this Feat, till this Royalty
had been propagated to the second or third Generation. And this was so much
attended to, that they scrupled not to make a Miracle the Test of his
Prerogative or genuine Descent; as may be gathered from the Records of
Antiquity. Though the Light of a better governed Eaucation has shown the Weakness
and blind Credulity of our Forefathers, and made us Infidels to these and the
like Traditions; yet we shall find that many of them still remain in Esteem,
and even with those who want neither the Advantages of Learning, or of natural
Sagacity; and with the Multitude most of them remain unshaken. Of these
Traditions the Royal Touch for the Evil is none of the least sacred: The Origin
of this Whim seems to be at least as old as the dark Night of Popery in this
Island; having probably been contrived to answer the Designs of the crafty
Priests upon a superstitious People, since by such a Miracle as this they might
claim a Right to the Throne for that Prince who would best answer their
Purposes; and such Miracles they would not fail of publishing by Wholesale,
though upon no better Foundation than their own dark Inventions. This Conjecture
will appear more probable to those who know, that from such vile Arts as these,
viz. the forging of Miracles, the Popish Religion receives no inconsiderable
Support, even at this Day in Foreign Countries, though the Learned amongst them
are not so blind as not to see it; but a Hand of Cruelty commands at least
their Silence, and forbids them to say that they have Eyes to see.

From this Piece of Superstition then the Disease has borrowed its English
Name, at least a Part of it; but how it came to be called by Way of Eminence
the Evil, is to be the Subject of another Enquiry. It seems in Reality to have
been owing to its great Obstinacy, which made it esteemed desperate if not
incurable: We need not wonder, if we suppose that they knew nothing of the true
Genius of this, or any other Diseases a very few Centuries ago; when the State
of Physic in England, was as despicable as we can possibly conceive it to have
been: Witness the Histories of Gilbert, John Gaddesden, etc. the Archiaters of
those Days, when the Lives of Princes were trusted in the Hanas of ignorant
Mountebanks: But though they were not perhaps less ignorant than their Modern
Brethren, they were however, content not with doing much Mischief or spreading
Destruction around them as some of these have done; but with acting the
Impostor well, and catching their Game, in which they discovered at least as
much Craft as our modern Quacks, and much more ingenious Roguery. By this we
see that Physic is but new to our Clime, though in Justice to our Countrymen, it
must be confessed it suits the Soil so well, that it is likely to make as great
a Figure in this Island, as in the ancient Empire of Arts and Sciences.

But they had another Reason for esteeming this Disease worthy the Appellation
of a Plague or Evil, viz. it is being remarkably hereditary. This is indeed one
of the worst Circustances that can attend any Disease, which instead of being a
private Misfortune, proves a Calamity to Families, and becomes an unhappy Mark
of Distinction, as it appears always externally, and offers itself to the
Observation of every Spectator. This indeed will appear a hard and unequal Law
to those who have not considered that the Constitutions of Parents properly
belong to their Children, as much as the Species itself; nor can it be
otherwise without reversing and counter-acting those uniform and perfect Laws
which all Matter, and the organized Bodies composed of it are obliged to obey.
These Laws we may suppose as ancient as the first Formation of Matter, and the
mighty Fiat which unfolded the great Scene of Nature: They seem, I say, to be
as old as the Creation itself, nor can they be contradicted, varied or
suspended, without violating that Order and most exact Harmony, which we
observe in all Nature's Works, and which were inseparable from the Perfection
of her Author.

But does it not hence follow, that all Diseases are, or must be hereditary?
No: And why? This is no easy Question, except it be sufficient to say, that
those Diseases only are hereditary, which can be communicated to the original
Stamina of an animal Body. If this Answer be not satisfactory, we must be
content to acknowledge our Ignorance, by appealing to others, " Dicat qui
novit. This then was esteemed both an incurable and hereditary Disease, and
this probably the Reason why it was chosen as the most proper Subject for a
Miracle, as the Cure of the greatest Evil was fittest to demonstrate the best
King.

I have only now to acquaint my Readers, that the following Doctrines are
supported by the Dissection of Bodies, and other Matters of Fact. For as those
Things which affect our Senses, are always esteemed the surest and most
infallible Test of every Doctrine; so a more than common Regard to those is
necessary in our Attempts for the Advancement of Medicine; which as it is only
conversible with sensible Bodies, ought not to admit any Thing for Truth which
has not the Testimony of the Senses. On this Consideration, wearied with the
Jargon and Confusion, which the Flights of fertile but deceitful Imagination had
introauc'd into the noblest of all Sciences, Many of the wisest and most
judicious of the Moderns are resolved to allow no Reasoning for Orthodox, which
is not supported on the Basis of Demonstration. By this Means an Art, which has
been accused of Doubt and Uncertainty, is already arrived at such Perfection,
as may enable her devoted Sons to follow her Steps with perfect uninterupted
Satisfaction, and the Testimony of a good Conscience. A great and admirable
Progress has been made in this Reformation, by the late incomparable Boerhaave,
which will be a Subject of Praise and Admiration in Ages to come, and an Honor
to the Age and Country in which he lived.

AN ESSAY ON THE KING'S EVIL.
NOTHING is more necessary to the perfect understanding any Disease, than a
just and exact Definition; such an one as may determine the Bounds betwixt the
real Subject and every Thing that may be disguised under a similar Appearance.
This, which we shall call a determinate Definition, was never more requisite in
any Disease, than that which is to be the Subject of this Essay; which, as it
is observed to be remarkably hereditary, is reputed (tho unjustly) the most
ignominious of Diseases, if we except the Lues; and for this Reason we ought to
be well informed of the Requisites for distinguishing this Hydra from the many
Maladies which bear any the least Resemblance to it.

For this Purpose then, we shall call by the Name of Scrophula, or King's Evil,
a Swelling which has the following Characters: 'It is of the same Color with
the Skin, without Pain, and almost equal in Hardness to a Schirrus;' but these
will not be so well understood, without adding to them such a depraved State of
the Fluids as disposes them to be pituitous. By De^ravity here, I mean no more
than that original Disposition of both Solids and Fluids, which the Ancients
called significantly enough (...), or Temperamentum, of which they had no less
than eight different Classes. Of these, few were more remarkable than the
Temperamentum pituitosum.

By Pituit, the Ancients understood too great a Solution of the Blood, in which
its Particles have lost that Figure, Firmness and Solidity, from which it
derives its red Color, but at the some time cohere together too tenaciously;
and thus we easily distinguish betwixt this and the Humid Crasis, in which the
Tenacity is not included.

It Is easy to see, that this Disposition of the Blood will render it unfit for
many of its Functions, and alone is sufficient for the Production of the worst
Diseases. And if it be asked, where these are most likely to be produced, or
what Organs are most likely to suffer? The Answer will be easy, those Organs in
which the Circulation is the most difficult: And, pray, which are these? Every
Body knows, the Glands. Their Structure seems so much to retard the Motion of
the Fluids through their Vessels, and the propelling Force of the Heart and
Arteries is so much diminished, that it is the greatest wonder the Circulation
is not more frequently interrupted.

These, therefore, are the Parts of the Body most liable to be obstructed, and
this is our Case at present but amongst these the Glands of the conglob^te Kind
about the Face, Axillae, Neck, Groin, etc. Yet these are not all the Glands
that are observed ^o be affected; those of the Mesentery are also obstructed
too, and perhaps the readiest of any, and indeed it is no wonder to those who
consider the Structure, Situation, and the Vis Propellens of these Glands. This
last Obstruction is indeed the productive Cause of the worst Symptom of this
Disease, as will appear afterward when we come to treat of the Symptoms.

But though this Malady principally affects the glandular System, and chiefly
those Glands which we have mentioned, several other Parts are sometimes Sharers
in the Calamity. This is in its last Stage, and does not happen till it has
made a considerable Progress; and then, indeed, the Tendons, the Articulations,
and the Bones themselves are likewise affected.

We ought, next in order, to deliver the Symptoms of this Disease; but as these
cannot be understood without a previous Knowledge of its genuine Cause, we
shall for the Sake of Perspicuity be obliged to postpone our Account of the
several Phenomenon, till we have discovered the Sourse from whence they are
derived; and it had been well that this Method had been followed by many of
those who have taken some Trouble to oblige the World with Essays on Diseases,
which, though otherwise meritorious enough, have, for want of Order, failed in
their Design, and left the Subject involved in its former Obscurity. It Is too
well known to be dissembled, that this has been the Case with too many of our
own Countrymen The learned Dr. ASTRUC, speaking of a certain English Writer,
says Ordine parum composito disseritur, saltem ea Methodo quae Lucem afferat,
quam in Anglorum Medicorum Operibus plerumque desiderari dolemas. Pudet haec
Opprobria, etc.
who wanted neither Genius nor Abilities to do Honor to the Subject, to their
Art, and to their Country.

The proximate See Page 2, and 3.
Cause of this Disease appears to be nothing more, than a viscid pituitous
State of the Fluids and too great Laxity of the Solids. By these we must
endeavor to explain all the Phenomenon we have to explain; and where these
prove insufficient, we must patiently submit to the Imputation of Ignorance.
This however is only to be understood of the recent or simple Struma, without
those desperate Symptoms to be observed in its last Stage, and which are to be
referred to their proper Place.

The remote Causes of this Disease are, whatever Accidents are capable of
producing the aforesaid Disposition, such as, first, an hereditary Labes, which
is perhaps the most frequent Cause. Every Body knows this Disease to be
hereditary, but few know how it comes to be so; we may solve this Problem as
easily as any other of the same Kind by saying, That an inviolable Law is
imposed upon every Genus of created Bodies, whether animated or not, which
propagate their Species, by which its Foetus or Embryo not only agrees in every
individual Organ with its Parent, but likewise partakes of its Perfections or
Imperfections. Thus the solid Fiber produces another of the same Sort, and a
lax Fiber a lax one, etc. Thus far we may proceed safely, and perhaps no
farther; for in attempting a more minute Solution, we shall, I believe, find
our selves at our utmost Limits, and on the Border of Obscurity: There seem to
be some Bounds placed to all Physical Enquiries, beyond which we cannot go,
except in Imagination, and sometimes even that will fail us. I don't mean by
this to undervalue the deep Philosopher or his profound Enquiries into the
Abscondita Naturae: No, the deep Man best deserves the Title of Philosopher,
and will always receive the most Delight, as well as Honor, for the Reward of
h^s Labor: But let us endeavor to be contented with the Knowledge within our
Reach, and to place the Bounds betwixt deep and unfathomable, profound and
unintelligible. By this means we shall save ourselves some Trouble, and avoid
not a few Mistakes. -- Thus much on hereditary Diseases.

The next of the remote Causes must be understood from the Consideration of
that Time of Life in which it first discovers itself: This is in Childhood,
when both Solids and Fluids always tend too much to that Cachexia which we have
assigned as the proximate Cause of the Scrophula. The Faetus immediately after
Conception is a mere Jelly, and scarce any Distinction can be made betwixt its
solid and fluid Parts. In a few Months the first have acquired a stronger Power
of Cohaesion, and the latter are more attenuated: At the Time of Birth this
Change is yet more considerable, but the Vessels are yet very lax, and their
contained Liquors are viscid and disposed to be pituitous; nor are they brought
to a proper Crasis in less than about twenty Years. Nobody who considers this
will wonder why Children are so subject to this Disease, but the Disposition is
often aggravated by their W^y of living, and from the immoderate Use of sweet
Fruits, farinaceous or other glutinous Substances, etc.

We are now at L^berty to observe the several Phenomenon, and will first begin
with the Tumors themselves which were already described in attempting to
define the Disease. And first,

They are dispersed, or, which is the same Thing, affect many different Glands
at the same Time, and this needs no Explanation. Secondly, They are very
smooth, and this will be best understood by considering the Structure of the
Organs affected; as their Figure is globular they will be equally distended on
every Side by the obstructing Matter in their Cavities, and thus their Surface
will be even and smooth, though not commonly shining. Thirdly, These Tumors are
also somewhat hard, though not so hard as the Schirrhus; the viscid Matter being
lodged in the Follicle and confined there, the finer Parts are carried off by
the Absorbent Vessels, and the remaining Matter, becomes more viscid, then
glutinous, and at length firm: This is no more than happens, in a lesser
Degree, in all the Cavities of the Body where their contained Liquors are
permitted to remain for some Time; as the Vesiculae Seminales, Gall, Bladder,
etc. Fourthly, They are, even when ulcerated, without Pain; and this, perhaps,
is not less remarkable than any of the other Peculiars to this Disease. It will
not be wondered that the Conglobate Glands have not this uneasy Sensation
before their being ulcerated; as the same is observed in more Diseases than
this, and may be explained afterward; but the most sensible Parts, as well as
the more firm, such as Tendons, Ligaments, etc. are destroyed by this Labes,
without any Sense of Pain. This indeed is not easily understood, except it be
sufficient to say, that the Destruction of these nerve us Parts is not owing to
any acrid Matter which corrodes them; but to the Laxity of the Vessels in which
the Tension, or attractive Force, is so small, as to allow their component
Fibers to be divided without that Resistance which is the immediate Cause of
Pain.

The next Symptom is an Inflation of the Face and Neck. This is indeed a
constant Attendant of the Struma, and perhaps one of the best distinguishing
Signs we are acquainted with. I remember to have heard a learned Physician, a
Person of great Ingenuity, say, that by means of his long Experience and
Practice, he could disti^guish a Patient affected with this Disease, by only
looking him in the Face. This Inflation is greatest in the inferior Part of the
Cheeks; and is best understood, by considering that in this Habit of Body the
Vessels are supposed too lax, which alone will be sufficient for understanding
the Cause of an Inflation; but why this is confined to the Face and Neck, or at
least is more remarkable in these than any other Parts is not so easily
understood. Perhaps the Exposure of these Parts to the Action of Cold, by which
the proximate Cause of the Disease is aggravated in their Vessels: The Number
of Glands about these Parts, in which the Motion of the Blood is retarded or
obstructed; and lastly, an hereditary Disposition of the Parts themselves, may
be sufficient for explaining this Phenomenon. We don't observe that the
Complexion is so much changed as might be expected; there is however a certain
livid or bluish Cast, which is better learned by Observation than Description:
This is seldom wanted, and in Children helps to complete that particular Aspect
of the Face, from which the Presence of this Disease will rarely be mistaken by
those who have made the Study familiar.

Another remarkable Symptom of the Scrophula, is a great or frequent Pain in
the Belly, which is easily understood from what was said before of the
Mesenteric Glands, if these are rightly supposed to be the Seat of this Pain;
but indeed this Uneasiness in the Bowels seems, not less probably, to be
produced by the viscid pituitous Matter lodged in the Rugae of the Intestines
themselves; and this will perhaps appear more reasonable, if we remember that
the same Sort of Obstruction does not produce Pain in the other Glands, or even
much more sensible Parts; and that we find nothing more ready to produce a
Cholic than this Pituit in the Intestines, as may be observed in the Diseases
of Children.

The last Symptom we shall mention, and which is rarely absent in this Disease,
is a great Prostration of the natural Functions; those, to wit, of Digestion
and Nutrition. This Change, or Process, is twofold, and may be comprehended
under the general Heads of Chylification and Sanguification; but both these
will suffer greatly in such a Stale of the Solids and Fluids as was before
described as the proxima Causa of this Malady. The first Requisite to the first
of these Actions is Appetite, or Inclination for Food, which is here destroyed
by the great Quantity of viscid Pituit in the Stomach and Intestines. Again,
after they are received into the Stomach, the Action of this is so weak, and
the Juices necessary for dissolving the Food are so much depraved, that this
Part of Digestion cannot proceed as it ought; and the same Defect will be found
in the Intestines. The first Process therefore either is not performed at all,
or at least very imperfectly, and this Deficiency cannot be repaired
afterward, for this crude and viscid Chyle, when received into the Circulation
in Order to undergo it is second Change by the Action of the Vessels; but this
is already too weak for that Purpose, and thus the Pituit increases, and at
length the vital Functions suffer. The last Consequence will be a Hectic Fever,
not to be expected till near the End of the Tragedy.

All these Phenomenon are sometimes accompanied with a Fever, Heat, etc. The
Tumor then becomes painful, and at length ulcerated, and what we commonly call
malign, pouring out a disagreeable Sanies, generating remarkably fungous Flesh,
and yielding little or nothing to Remedies. The Fever seems not to be the
genuine Effect of the Disease, except we suppose some other Cause to have
acceded, as some acrid, irritating Virus, latent in the Fluids; but as this is
not presumed to be a Part of the Disease itself, we must be obliged to impute
the Fever to a foreign Cause of this or some other Kind. I know a Fever to be
the natural Product of this Malady in it is advanced State, but it is of the
Hectic Kind, and generally the Forerunner of Death.

This Fever appears to be generally owing to the Chyle, which however crude and
unprepared is received into the Vessels, and being incapable of undergoing its
proper Change there, produces a Febris Symptomatica. The Circulation being now
increased the Fluids are propell'd with more than wonted Impetus into the
Glands, their Follicles are burst, and pour out a disagreeable Sanies.

The Consequence of all these is easily understood. The Sanies will be absorbed
in pretty large Quantity into the Mass of Blood, which being now infected
contaminates the whole Circulation, and thus all Parts of the Body may be
affected.

Many fresh Ulcers now appear on the external Parts; the Tendons and Ligaments
themselves are eroded and exulcerated, likewise the Bones chiefly at their
Extremities where their Texture is least firm by the Laminae being more
separated from e^ch other; at length the internal Viscera suffer in the common
Calamity, as they must inevitably receive into their Vessels the same morbific
Fluids which corrode and convert them into a similar Sanies. This again is
absorbed into the common Mass, which now becomes yet more corrupted; hence a
Phthisis Multiplex, which is certain Death.

It Is unnecessary, as well as unsuitable to the Design we laid down, to trace
the various Symptoms, Effects, etc. of this Pthisis before it terminates in
Death; but it may be proper to take notice that it is incurable; nor will a
Proof of this be required, after reflecting on what has been already delivered.

But the Progress of the Scrophula does not always observe the Order we have
explained; it sometimes makes a shorter Period by swelling the Thuroid Gland,
which by compressing the Aspera Arteria puts a sudden End to the Scene. In this
case, the necessary Relief cannot be easily given, and our principal Dependence
must be on such Medicines as can be immediately applied to the Part affected,
which must be in the Form of Vapor; but of this more hereafter.

Thus far we have traced the Progress of the Scrophula with its several
Symptoms, without supposing any other Disease connected with it, but this too
frequently happens, and then it is easy to see how difficult will be the Cure,
and how dubious the Event.

The Diseases we find sometimes joined to this are several, and those of the
worst Kind too, which give a Stimulus to the tardy Progress of the Struma, and
render its Termination shorter, as the Scurvy and Lues; in each of which is a
considerable Degree of Acrimony, as is plain both from their Origin and
Effects. They are to be discovered by their proper Signs, and an exact and
minute Enquiry into the Patient's former Way of Living, and into the Errors he
may have committed in the Non-naturals sufficient for producing this or the
other Species of Acrimony. By such a rigorous Enquiry into his History, we
shall be able to judge more safely on this Head, than we can otherwise do by
any Signs whatever.

Both the abovementioned Distempers show themselves pretty clearly to the
external Senses, as they appear for the most part on the Surface of the Body.
The Ulcers of the Lues have some Peculiarities, which will not allow us to
mistake them; and their Progress is so regular and uniform that we need not
often be deceived.

The Presence of the Scurvy is not determined with more Difficulty than that of
the other; but to determine its Species, will require more Sagacity than may be
readily beliv'd by those who have not made the Experiment. To the Want of this
Distinction we may impute the ill Success with which the Scurvy is so often
treated, which need not surprise us if we consider that one Species requires a
Method of Cure opposite to that of another, and a third has no Affinity with
the other, either in its Origin or Method of Cure. In a word, they proceed from
Causes entirely repugnant; and to attempt the Cure of the Scurvy by any one
Set of Medicines, would be just as reasonable as was the learned Bishop of C
-- ne's hardy Attempt to cure both the Pleurisy and Dropsy by his subtle
Tar-Water.

Whoever therefore undertakes the Cure of the Scrophula, must examine with due
Attention, whether it is accompanied with the abovementioned, or any other
Diseases, that he may be able to draw a certain and faithful Indication.

The Diagnosis of this Malady was given before, and therefore nothing more need
be said to it; and of the Prognosis what we have to say, will now be easily
apprehended.

The hereditary Struma is by much the worst Species, and the same is true of
all original Diseases, (for so we may call them) which, as they have their
Essence intermixed with the first Principles of Life, can scarcely be separated
by a less Power than that which united them together; and though the Symptoms of
perhaps all Diseases admit of some Mitigation, yet the Experience of Antiquity
as well as our own, has taught us that the Labes Hereditaria, of almost every
Kind, is incurable.

The next in Malignity we shall esteem that of those Children whose Parents
were of a lax and weakly Habit, effeminate in their Way of Living, eating and
drinking voluptuously, and indulging a sedentary unactive Life; who, for
Reasons we shall not attempt to give, derive to their Offspring a weak and
sickly Machine subject to the Incroachment of many Diseases (from which their
Parents might yet be free) and unable to make a proper Defense, or to receive
all the Benefit of Medicinal Aid. These, when attacked by the Scrophula, may
indeed be relieved, and perhaps cured; but it will be necessary at the same
time to repair and improve that Constitution which Nature had left imperfect,
or rather which Nature's Antagonist had rendered so, viz. Luxury in the Parents.

But other Children there are afflicted with this Disease, whose Parents were
strong, vigorous and healthy; and themselves, when first brought into the World
in every Respect healthy as their Parents, and likely to continue so; yet,
these are, perhaps, pretty early attacked by this Disease. In these, therefore,
it must be attributed to some Error of the Non-naturals much aggravating that
universal Diathesis in Children, which was first assigned as the genuine Source
of the Scrophula These indeed have the fairest Chance of a sure and quick
Relief from Medicine, as the Habit of Body was before very good, and is fit for
undergoing the Action of Medicines. These are indeed curable, and will rarely
be disappointed of a perfect Cure from the Method we shall endeavor to deliver.

The first Thing in Order (for Order is here necessary) we have to do for the
effectual Cure of this Distemper, will be the Correction of that Cachexy which
is the fundamental Cause of it. The Means of doing this, are, First, By
corroborating the Vessels. 2dly, By diminishing the Quantity of the morbific
Matter, both in the primae viae and whole Body. 3dly, By concocting the
Remainder.

To the first Intention, a proper Regimen of the Nonnaturals must be adapted,
and on which it will principally depend: Let the Patient's Food be light and
dry, not at all glutinous, but rather somewhat astringent. Roasted Meats, well
seasoned with Spices, such as are generally used in the Kitchen, as Cinnamon,
Mace, Cloves, etc. Bread exceeding well fermented, or such as has undergone
that Process a second Time, and made from the dryer and less glutinous
Vegetables: To these may be added the dry Fruits of the Indies. His Liquors
must also be well fermented; and of these, the best are, fine old Ale, and the
astringent Wines, if they are of a due Maturity, as Rhenish, Red-Port, etc.
which will be much fitter for our Purpose, after being well impregnated with
the dry Aromatics.

Exercise is of no small Consequence in this Case: Of the several Diversions
which go under that Name, prefer Riding, as well in this, as most other
Diseases where Exercise is necessary, as it, perhaps, answers all the
Intentions of Exercise in general, without any of the Inconveniences which
attend some of the other Species of it. We are, however, to be governed in
this, as in every other Change of the Nonnaturals, by the strict Rules of
Prudence: Exercise is always to be proportioned to the Strength of the Patient,
nor ever to exceed it on any Pretense whatever; and the Limits of this
Direction will be best determined by the Patient, who is always to take the
first Sensation of Weariness as a Caution to desist: This will be a certain and
safe Rule, which, as it may be followed without any Uneasiness, as it is no
more than avoiding Uneasiness, so he is always to esteem it sacred; nor can he
trespass upon it without greater Mischiefs than those it was intended to
remove. To check Nature, or her luxuriant Sallies, is no difficult Matter; but
to restore her when languid, oppressed, and almost overcome with the Combat, is
an hardy Task,

Hic Labor, hoc Opus est -- -- Let us therefore remember always to have a
proper Regard to her Preservation; let us remember we are her Servants, and
profess ourselves, yea, are ambitious of the Title of, The Ministers of Nature.

The Air is of no mean Importance here; the best is the dry, serene, and
somewhat warm: If the Climate and Season are contrary, we must endeavor to
supply their Defects within Doors; and for this Purpose a Situation remote from
much Wood and Water, on a dry and barren Soil, defended from the rainy Winds,
will be most suitable. The House itself ought to be exceeding close, and
preserved from Damp by large and constant Fires, and let its Windows confront
the meridian Sun. The Patient's Chamber ought to be in the upper Part of the
House, well wainscotted; and let its Air be impregnated with the Effluvia of
the most odoriferous Spices. Let his Bed be very hard, and composed of the
cordial Astringent and most aromatic Plants. Moderate Sleep will be best; that
is, within the Compass of seven or eight Hours, which Number ought never to be
exceeded, unless we are willing to increase the Malady. Sleep is a Time of
Relaxation, and that always. The Muscles before wearied with Contraction, are
now to be relieved by resting in a contrary State. And whence is this Change?
The contracting Cause ceases in all the voluntary Motions, that all these being
still and quiet, the other Functions may be performed with less Interruption:
The Circulation of the Fluids through their Vessels is now calm and undisturbed,
because the Equilibrium betwixt them is not destroyed by any foreign Agent. But
there is another Cause of Relaxation besides that of Sleep itself, and which
seems not to have been hitherto sufficiently regarded, and that is, the Vapor
formed around the Body by its own Atmosphere; which being confined, and as it
were reverberated by the Bed-Clothes, makes a true Balneum Vaporis, than which,
a more powerful Menstruum is scarcely known for relaxing the Fibers of an
animal Body: And this feems to produce all the ill Effects we observe from long
Lying-a-bed, in those who lie awake a considerable Part of the Time: Of this
Class, perhaps, may be supposed no small Number of the Ladies of Ease; and this
is probably one grand Cause of all those Diseases which are more peculiar to
the Fair, and imputed to a lax and feeble Make of the Solids. The Atmosphere we
have been speaking of, and which derives its Name from its Similitude to that
surrounding the Earth, is no more than the invisible Matter of Perspiration,
exhaling from every Point of the Body, and seems necessary for preserving it
from the Injuries of the Air.

The Covering of the Body is of no small Consequence, which, as it ought to be
well defended from the Cold, must also be incited to a brisk Perspiration: The
Patient's Clothes therefore are to be thick and warm, and the best Materials
for this Purpose is allowed to be Wool.

The last of the Nonnaturals we shall speak to, are the Passions of the Mind.
These ought never to be forgot in treating of any Regimen for the Cure of
chronic Diseases: Upon the Mind, as the first Mover, depends the Freedom and
Perfection of all the Functions of the Body; and this is reciprocally true; and
though we know not, or are ever likely to know, the Laws by which they act upon
each other, this we w^ll know, and constantly experience it, that their
Connection is such as will not allow one of them to be hurt without drawing the
other into inevitable Suffering: They rejoice and mourn together. Whoever
therefore desires to restore the Machine to its pristine Alacrity and Vigor,
must always have an attentive Regard to its Associate and Fellow-Sufferer. This
Design may be often effected in a considerable Degree by Medicine, by means of
the mutual Intercourse we have been speaking of; but other artful Means are
also to be used for exciting, alleviating, or diverting the Passions, which
need not be mentioned here, as they don't properly belong to this Place. In the
present Case a cheerful and lively Disposition ought to be much encouraged, and
the contrary to be diligently avoided or prevented. The first affords a free
and liberal Supply of Spirits, as well to the Heart and the other involuntary
Organs, as those subservient to the Will; and thus the Circulation dependent on
them is brisk and free, which is always to be our Study in this and the like
Diseases. The latter or sorrowful Mood produces the contrary Effects, and those
remarkably enough.

The second Intention, or the Diminution of the morbific Matter, both in the
primae viae and whole Body, is to be effected by cleansing that Canal, and
evacuating the morbific Matter out of it; and by this Means we cannot fail of
lessening its Quantity in every other Part of the Body. But this is to be done
by two, and those very different Evacuations.

The first is Vomiting; which is no other than a convulsive Contraction of the
Stomach, and those Organs, which, by Means of Nerves, immediately communicate
with it, and is excited by any thing that is capable of producing that
Contraction. It would be too tedious to give an Account here of the Operation
of every kind of Emetic: A very small Number of them is now in use, and a much
smaller will be sufficient for us here. The celebrated Ipec. which is now
deservedly had in so universal Esteem, is by much the safest, and yet
sufficiently effectual: With this therefore alone, we shall be contented in our
present Design of evacuating the Viscid Pituit lodged in the Stomach, if we may
be allowed sometimes on Occasion the Tartar. Emet. which, if the Dose be
ascertained with the requisite Exactness, may deserve the second Place.

The latter Evacuation is effected by a Set of Medicines intended for that sole
Use, under the general Name of Cathartics. But the judicious Ancients having
observed the various Effects of Cathartics, in producing a larger Discharge of
different Humors, have, with Care and Exactness enough, reduced them into
proper Order, according to these various Effects; and though they could not
explain upon mechanical Principles their Causes or Manner of Operation, as not
being well enough acquainted with the Laws of the animal Economy, as deduced
by the Light of modern Discoveries, their Testimonies are however founded on
Experience and most accurate Observation; nor does it signify to us, whether
they have explained Effects from some specific, hidden, or chimerical
Properties, or by the Qualities of Hot and Cold, etc. It is sufficient that
they have faithfully acquainted us with Matters of Fact, and give us the
Liberty of embracing or rejecting their Reasoning. These several Classes of
purging Medicines derive their Names from the Humor they are observed most
remarkably to act upon; and though in some of the Terms they have mistook one
Thing for another, a very little Candor will oblige us to excuse this, and to
admire that Sagacity, and extol the Industry that has laid the Foundation of
almost all we know of these Matters, which deserves our Confidence or the
Appellation of Science.

Of these Classes there is one Tribe peculiarly adapted to our Purpose of
evacuating Phlegm out of the Stomach and Intestines, and thence called (...).
Their Number is pretty considerable, as their Manner of Operation is various.
We shall divide them into two Classes, of which,

The first are those which dilute, attenuate, or resolve the viscid Matter, and
so render it fit for Expulsion. These are, 1. Water, which ought to be drank
warm, with the Body lightly covered and exposed to a cool Air, to prevent its
passing off by the Skin. 2. The same rendered saponaceous with Sapo's, whether
natural or artificial, as Honey, Sugar unrefined, Cassia, Manna, common Soap,
as that which bears the Name of Castile or Venice, Sapo Philosophorum, and that
natural one of Animals, the Bile. 3. The same Fluid [Water] impregnated with
the saponaceous Gums; which, by help also of their Acrimony, have a
considerable solvent Power, as G. Aloes, Ammoniac, Galbanum, Sagapen. etc. 4. A
Solution of any of the chemical Salts which have a resolvent Quality; such are
the Tartar regenerat. Tart. vitriolat. Tart. solub. Tart. simplex. Sal.
Ammoniac. crud. etc.

The second Class of Phlegmagogues comprehends all those which are capable of
giving such a Stimulus as is sufficient, and not more than sufficient, for
increasing the peristaltic Motion of the Intestines, by which they are to be
discharged of their Contents: These it is easy to see are to be endued with
such an Acrimony as is not too naked and violent, or too volatile: The first
might blister and inflame the tender and very sensible Tunica Villosa, and
produce a Train of the worst Symptoms, as Convulsions, Dysentery, etc. The
latter would not be constant enough for promoting this constant Motion, and be
therefore insufficient for the Purpose. Those therefore will best answer our
End which have a moderate and corrigible Acrimony, or envelop'd in some viscid
and glutinous Matter; and of this sort are the following, which have many of
them likewise a solvent Power; Oxymel. Hiera Picra. Several Preparations of
Mercury, of which the safest and much the best is the Merc. Sublimat. Dulc. the
Chemical Salts of the last Class, the Roots of Mechoacann. Brion. Jalap. etc.
The Fruit and middle Bark of the Ebulus, Juice of Buckthorn, etc.

Our next Design is the Concoction of the morbific Matter in the Vessels, and
whole Body; but before we proceed allow me to observe, that this Coction is no
more than such a Change of the morbid Matter, as renders it no longer noxious,
but assimilates it so much to the Nature of the sound Fluids, as to fit it for
passing through its Vessels without Hurt; and then it will no longer deserve the
Name of Morbid, but is transmuted or concocted so as to be an Humor Sanus; or,
which is the same Thing, the Disease ceases. How therefore is this happy Change
to be effected? To this the Answer is short, -- By Nature herself: And if this
Word be not acceptable, I shall change it for another, the Vis Vitae, by which
the Design is to be principally effected; though there is an additional Means to
be afterward mentioned, in which we shall be much beholden to Art. And indeed
we must be so here, notwithstanding our Expectation of seeing it performed by
the Hand of Nature, the Vis Vitae, the Action of the Vessels, and the Force of
the Circulation. As these have not been hitherto sufficient for the Purpose (or
the Disease could not have taken Place) we must render them so by proper
Methods; which are, First, By corroborating the Vessels. Secondly, By
stimulating them. The first will render them fit for Contraction, and the
latter will force them to it. The best Method of corroborating the Vessels has
been already given ex Professo. The Stimulus necessary here, may be
communicated by a Set of Medicines, which have on this Account received the
Name of Stimulantia; which, as they will be of eminent Service, deserve in this
Place to be ranged in some Order. The first shall be those which act so upon
the Mind, as to produce a greater Influx of the nervous Fluid, by which the
Heart and Arteries are made to contract with greater Force as well as Velocity;
and this we observe remarkably in several of the stronger Passions, as will be
sufficiently demonstrated to any one who will take the Trouble of feeling the
Pulse of a Person under such an Agitation; and this is true in a less Degree of
the cheerful and lively Disposition formerly mentioned.

The next and most general Stimulants are the Acria of every Kind, but these
are so numerous that they cannot well be enumerated, and this will be less
necessary* only shall be recommended here: These are the Aromatics, of which
the best are those which are at the same Time Corroborants or Astringents. Such
are the greater Part of the following; the Barks of Cinnamon, Peru, Winter,
Cassia lignea, etc. The Roots of Gentian, Ginger, Imperatorium, Valerian,
Calamus Aromaticus, Galangal, etc. Seeds of Cardamomum, Mustard, etc. The
Leaves of the Abrotanum, Absinthium, Ruta, Sabin, etc.

The last Tribe of Stimulants consists of those Things, which cannot be
referred to either of the other two Orders, such as Fire, Wounding Instruments,
Motion or Exercise, etc.

Having now laid down the Method by which Nature is to be enabled to concoct
the morbid Matter, let us consider what further Assistance can be given to this
Work by simple Art. The viscid Pituit which constitutes the Disease, is to be
attenuated and divided; and therefore our Indication commands the Use of those
Medicines, which are capable by a sole menstrual Power of inciding and
attenuating. Some such valuable Medicines indeed we have, whose menstrual Force
is perhaps much greater than is generally supposed: The following are the
principal, viz. The neutral Salts, as the Tartar regenerat. Tartar solub.
Tartar Vitriolat. the Spiritus Mindereri, which is indeed an excellent
Resolvent, and seems well to deserve the Reputation it has acquired in a very
few Years, a neutral Spirit made for the most Part extemporaneously, by the
Affusion of Juice of Lemons on the Sal. Absinth. or any other fixed Alcaline
Salt; the crude Sal. Ammoniac.

I must not forget another Medicine, which seems to be endu'd with almost all
the Properties we could wish for our Purpose, viz. of dissolving, stimul^ting,
and attenuating; I mean the Aq. Calc. which, if It is used fresh, (as it always
ought to be will perhaps preserve it is Qualities, through the whole Course of
Circulation, more perfectly than any Medicine we are acquainted with.

For all these inestimable Preparations we are obliged to Chemistry; they
perhaps deserve to be esteemed the most universal Medicines we are acquainted
with; and the Use of them is never to be forgot in this Disease, but to be
insisted on with the greatest Care and Diligence from the Beginning to the
Completing the Cure.

I shall not presume to direct my learned Reader in the Choice, Order and
Method, of prescribing the Medicines, as all these will vary according to
Circumstances; but it may not be amiss to observe that those which dilute and
attenuate are always first to be used, and that for a competent Time; and when
this End is obtained, the Expulsion of the resolved or concocted Matter will be
easy. But the Attenuantia, if prudently chosen, can never be given unseasonably.

We have now treated of our great Design of correcting the universal Cachexy,
and we are next to consider the safest and most effectual Method of taking away
the Tumors: And this is threefold. First, By Resolution. Secondly, By
Suppuration. Thirdly, By the Knife. The Resolution of this Sort of Tumors will
be difficult enough, nor ought it to be attempted in their more advanced State;
those only being fit for Resolution which are recent, gentle, and where other
Circumstances are the best, and then it is to be performed if it can be
performed at all: 1. By the internal Medicines for correcting and eradicating
the proximate Cause of the Disease. 2. By Topical Applications, of which
perhaps the best will be in Form of Vapor: For this Purpose the Antiseptics
are best, as Vinegar, whose Vapor may be directed through a Tunnel. The
Antiseptic Gums may be likewise very fitly applied in the Form of Plaster,
etc. We shall not insist longer on this Resolution as we are not acquainted
with any better Methods for that Purpose.

2. The Suppuration of these obstinate Tumors is to be attempted by the
Application of those Substances we generally term Maturants, or Suppurants;
which, though suppps'd to operate in some hidden or specific Manner, do no more
than confine, and, if the Term be allowable, reverberate the natural Heat, and
by this Means promote that Change, which Nature herself only can effect, of the
morbid Matter into Pus. Thus all glutinous, oily, or farinaceous Substances,
become Suppurants, when applied in the Form of Plaster or Poultice; such are
Balsams, most Resins, Meal of Barley, Oats, or Wheat, etc. These will not be
less effectual if they have added to them some small Degree of Acrimony. When
the Tumor is suppurated, and not till the Process is quite perfected, it may
be opened at Discretion, either by Incision or the potential Cautery, and then
the Ulcer is to be treated like an ordinary one, by the common Detergents.

But neither Resolution nor Suppuration will sometimes succeed, and this is
when the Tumor is very hard; and when this happens we have but one Method to
choose, viz. Extirpation by the Knife, according to the ordinary Rules of Art;
but this Operation is not to be undertaken without well considering the
Circumstances of the Case: If, however, the Disease be not inveterate, and the
Tumor is benign, it may be extirpated; but not without observing it is
Situation, and Proximity to the larger Vessels, which will sometimes absolutely
forbid it.

The exulcerated Tumor is next to be treated of, and is to be healed, 1. By
internal Medicines, viz. such as may correct the putrid Acrimony, which has now
contaminated the whole fluid Mass, and is likely to produce a Pthisis
multiplex: This is to be done by mild, demulcent Medicines, together with the
Antiseptics. For this Purpose the Use of Milk is to be insisted on, together
with such Medicines as best answer this Intention; such are the native Balsams,
viz. Turpentine, Tar, Bals. Capivi, etc. 2. By destroying the Remainder of the
Tumor and fungous Flesh by Escharotics, together with the ordinary Detergents
mixed with them; and when this is done the Cicatrizantia are to be applied.

There is another Kind, or rather Form, of the exulcerated Struma, which preys
upon the Membrana Cellulosa, betwixt the Muscles, forming large Sinus's betwixt
them; and these will be difficultly healed, as indeed are all other Sinus's
betwixt Muscles: These are, however, to be treated much like others, viz. By
filling them with Digestives and injecting Determents. It Is easy to see that
this Manner of treating them (and we are not acquainted with a better) will
require a very considerable Time for the healing of such very deep Ulcers. When
the Tendons, Articulations, etc. are affected in the Manner we formerly
described, they are to be treated like ordinary Apostems, Care being taken to
correct as much as possible the putrid Diathesis of the Blood, by the Method
above prescribed. It seems unnecessary to mention, after what has been said
already, that if we discover any Signs of the Scurvy, or Lues, they are to be
treated according to the established Rules of treating those Diseases; and if
any Contra-Indications should occur we can never be at a Loss, if governed by
that Golden Axiom of the Schools;

Ubi Indicatio impar simul urget, tum semper erit satisfaciendum maximae. Thus
I hope to have given such a Method of Cure in this obstinate Disease, as will
not need further Explication: If it is persisted in with the Resolution always
to be expected from those who wait for the Cure of Chronic Diseases, we cannot
doubt of all the Success which it is in the Power of Art to give. To say more
will be superfluous; I therefore shall proceed to some other Matters relating
to this Malady, absolutely necessary to be considered by those who wish to be
Masters of the Subject.

The first Thing which deserves our Animadversion, is the common Complaint of
it is Return, after the Tumors, or Ulcers, have been extirpated and healed.
It Is true, this is often the Case, and is no small Discouragement to the
Patient and his Friends; and sometimes obliges them to sit down contented with
believing that the Malady is incurable. But the Reason of all this is not
difficult; they have attempted the Cure of the Disease without eradicating it is
real Cause or Essence, the external Appearances, being no more than the Product
or Effects of the other. It Is no Wonder, therefore, that they have been
disappointed, and that the Tumors return very soon after they have been taken
away; and, indeed, to expect a Cure from this Method, is just as reasonable as
it would be to hope for the Cure of an Inflammation by the Use of an Opiate

As the Use of Mercury has been much recommended in this Disease, we cannot
avoid taking notice of it, and giving our Reasons for not mentioning it, in
delivering the Method of Cure. We shall first therefore observe in what manner
it operates, so as to produce Salivation; and this is now generally agreed to
depend on the Weight and Figure of its Parts, by which it increases the
Momentum of the Blood, divides the Globules, and destroys their attracting
Force; in a word, dissolves a great Part of the Mass into a putrid Tabum, and
fits it for passing readily off by the secretory Organs, which however happens
almost constantly (for Reasons we shall not now attempt to give) by the
salivary Glands. This wonderful Effect of a wonderful Fluid does not seem to
depend on any other Principles than these we have given; and therefore it
appears to act chiefly on the red Globules of Blood, and that the phlegmatic
Particles cannot be easily attenuated by it even whilst in the Vessels; and
this will be much less probable when out of the Laws of Circulation, as the
Glands may in some sense be said to be. But if Mercury cannot eradicate the
Cause of the Disease, when in its recent State, it will be much less
beneficial, yea, an absolute Poison, when the Disease is so far advanced as to
have produced a Suppuration; and when the Tendons, Articulations, etc. are
affected, when the Pus being absorbed and conveyed into the Blood, contaminates
the the whole Mass with the putrid Acrimony, and thence produces an universal
and desperate Phthisis: In this case, I say, Quicksilver cannot be exhibited
without the worst Effects The putrid Diathesis of the Blood was already such as
threatened inevitable Death, and is the whole Mass to be now rendered in a worse
degree putrid? which is the genuine Effect of Mercury; nor is this all, the
augmented Velocity of the Blood augments the Hectic Fever, and thus every Thing
conspires toward a fatal Period.

The Reader has perhaps already wondered that no mention has yet been made of
Mineral Waters in the Cure of the Scrophula, which must be excused by saying,
we designedly referred him hither for the sake of showing the Use which has
been discovered in one of our own Mineral Waters for that Purpose; I mean the
celebrated Spaw at Scarborough, whose Reputation, which long and repeated
Experience has acquired it, is not more than equal to its Merit. We shall
endeavor to demonstrate very soon, that its constituent Principles are such as
render it as universally useful, as it is possible for any Mineral Water to be,
or as any Medicine which the benevolent Hand of Nature has hitherto pointed out
for the Preservation or Restoration of the Health of Mortals. It Is indeed
impossible for us to avoid the Suspicion of Prejudice in treating on this
Subject; but we beg leave to observe, that neither that Suspicion, nor any
other Reason ought to deter us from doing Justice to the Cause of Truth, or
from publishing it when it concerns the Welfare of the Community and the
Happiness of Mankind. But we shall endeavor to prove, that this Character of
the Scarborough Spaw-Waters is more than a Panegyric, and that they are adapted
to the Cure of very many obstinate Chronic Diseases, though of few more aptly
than the Scrophula; in which our grand Intention has been to evacuate the
viscid Matter out of the primae Viae, to attenuate the Fluids, gently to
stimulate the Solids, and to invigorate the Spirits; and I appeal to the
Judgment of the Learned whether these Indications are not the most universal
ones we are acquainted with, for eradicating the first Cause or Sourse of the
whole Chronic Tribe. In order therefore to determine the Merit of these Waters,
let us consider their Principles separately; which is, doubtless, the most
certain Method of determining the real Properties and Value of Medicines, or
Medicinal Waters; as by this means only we can be enabled to judge of their
Manner of Operation, and of explaining all their Phenomenon. We know it is
objected, and that truly, that the component Parts of Bodies cannot be supposed
to have existed in the same Form before their Separation, as after they are
divided by the Action of Fire; and that therefore a Chemical Analysis is not
sufficient for teaching us their Properties, as it does not show us in what
Form they existed before this Separation, and how the several heterogeneous
Particles were united; since on the Form of their previous Existence and Manner
of Union will very much depend their Effects. This Objection, as we have
already confessed, is just; but it is punctually so of those solid Bodies,
which cannot be analyzed without extreme Torture of the Fire, in which the
whole Process is performed with Violence; but this is not the case with fluid
Bodies, and those of a less firm Texture; for of these we can discover the
constituent Principles, and their Proportions, to each other, with little Force
and great Certainty, and can determine their Effects with happy Exactness. In
the Scarborough Spaw-Water, accurate and judicious Experiment has discovered
the following Principles.

1 st. An Aqueous Fluid differing very little in any of its sensible Properties
from common distilled Water, from which it is impossible by any Sort of Trial to
distinguish it; from whence let us learn that the Medicinal Virtues of the Spaw
Water don't reside in this very simple Fluid.

We are now to consider what Medicinal Uses this simple Water retains, in order
to understand the Effects of that compound Fluid of which it constitutes so
great a Part. And first, it is as we shall afterward see the most suitable,
and indeed the only suitable, Menstruum for dissolving the other Principles,
and rendering them as effectual as possible by conveying them into the most
minute Branches of the Vascular System; as it is the most subtle Fluid we are
acquainted with, Mercury excepted, and capable of passing through Vessels of
inconceivable Smallness; and the famous Florentine Experiment has taught us,
that it is capable of passing through the least porous, that is most solid, of
all solid Bodies, viz. Gold. This Property alone is sufficient to render it,
valuable as a Menstruum, and the Smoothness of its Particles is such, as
renders it entirely innocent; for it does not discover the least Degree of
Acrimony when applied to the most sensible Part of an Animal Body, viz. the
Eye; but on the contrary, is one of the most general Antacria.

2 dly, The several Properties of Elementary Water, which cannot be fitly
recited here, will show us, and the Experience of Antiquity has confirmed it,
that Water the most common, and for that Reason the most neglected of all
Medicines, ought to be esteemed one of the most universal. If it be true that
the much greater Part of Diseases proceed from Obstruction, that Medicine will
be most generally useful which best answers the Indications which Obstructions
in general require; and the two chief of these are, to attenuate and relax.
Whether are not these the remarkable Effects of Water? In acute Diseases the
Obstruction is attended with a Fever, and these constitute an Inflammation, and
then another additional Postulatum is required in the Indication, viz. to
moderate the Fever by cooling, diluting, correcting Acrimony; and how
beautifully are all these performed by Water? Nor can they be performed without
it. I don't mean by this that simple Water is only fit or necessary for all
these Purposes; by no Means: But all the Emulsions, Infusions, Decoctions, etc.
which are or can be given in acute Diseases, consist for the far greatest Part
of Elementary Water. We need not therefore wonder, that Boerhaave, the
sagacious and incomparable Boerhaave, in speaking of Panacea's, numbers Water
amongst the quatuor Remedia maxim universalia. I am far from intending by this
to extol this Medicine beyond its due Merit, or to espouse the Cause of a late
Writer, who weakly undertook to prove it a Cure for every Disease: No; let me
be allowed this Opportunity of declaring myself a professed Enemy to all the
Panacea's, which Ignorance, Avarice, or Vainglory, have hitherto introduced
into the World; and which have no Foundation in the Essence of Things, but are
contrary to the known Laws of Nature; and a very small Share of plain
Philosophy, or indeed of plain Sense, is sufficient to show them contrary both
to Philosophy and Sense. But the Subject naturally led, or rather obliged me,
to speak of the Virtues of Water, and to do Justice to its Merit.

The next and chief Principle of the Scarborough Water is a neutral purgative
Salt (as indeed all neutral Salts are purgative when directed by a proper
Regimen) of a remarkably bitter Taste, readily dissolving in the Mouth, its
Pungency seeming to penetrate deep into the Tongue, though without impressing any
nauseous Sensation. It easily dissolves in the Air, though not near so readily as
the Tart. Regenerat. and very quickly in twice its Weight of cold Water.

These Properties only are sufficient to show, that this Salt appears at least
a priori to be an excellent Deobstruent, as all neutral Salts deserve to be
esteemed. Rational and Experimental Chemistry has taught us, that they have a
surprising solvent Power, and are therefore in a fluid Form the fittest
Medicines we know of in the greater Part of chronic Diseases. Long and repeated
Experience has also taught, that the Scarborough Salt or Water are wonderfully
safe, and have produced as sew ill Effects as any efficacious Medicine can be
supposed to do: But this, like all other Medicines, ought to be administered by
a judicious Hand, to those who expect all its Advantages without any
Inconveniences, which may well be expected from the imprudent or unseasonable
Use of the best Remedies in Nature; though these are, perhaps, no where fewer
than in the Scarborough Salt and Water. It don't appear necessary in this Place
to repeat what has been already said or neutral Medicines: They were believed,
if not demonstrated, to be the most useful Class of Remedies in the Cure not
only of the Scrophula, but of the greater Part of chronic Diseases. If this be
true, or shall be granted by the Adepts in Physic, the Spaw-Waters of
Scarborough will certainly deserve their Regard, Esteem, and Recommendation.

The Salt may be given like other Neutrals, either as a Purgative or Alterant,
by proportioning the Dose to the Intention: Its Action may likewise, by a
proper Regimen, be directed to the Kidneys; and it seems not less fit for
answering the best Intentions of a Diuretic than any other Medicine of that
Denomination. Its Operation is mild, easy, and gentle, and in this differs from
most other Cathartics, that it revives and exhilarates the Spirits, producing
and leaving after it a cheerful Briskness; an Effect, I say, contrary to that
of most other Purgatives, which generally fatigue the Body, and depress the
Spirits.

3 dly, There is another Salt in this Water to be separated from it after the
Chrystallization of the other, and appears no other than common Sea Salt, whose
singular Properties it discovers on every Experiment. Its Quantity is but
small, being only to the other in the Proportion of 1 to 18. Its Effects must
consequently be inconsiderable: It will, however, be allowed to promote, in
some small Degree, the Operation of the Waters, and contribute to the
preserving it from Putrefaction.

The fourth Principle is a white Powder or Earth, which the most ingenious Dr.
Shaw calls an Alcaline Substance, as it effervates with all Acids, and changes
the Syrup of Violets green. To this Earth are probably owing the good Effects,
daily experienced, from drinking these Waters after the immoderate Use of Wine,
by correcting the Acidity which such Liquors contain and discover by their ill
Effects in the Stomach.

The fifth Principle of the Scarborough Waters is Air, and this it will be said
is contained in all Water; and indeed it had been unnecessary to have taken
notice of it here as a Principle, but that it is observed in somewhat more than
ordinary Proportion. Of this Air we shall say no more than that to it is
considerably owing its brisk Taste, and perhaps its quicker Operation.

6 thly and lastly, A Mineral Spirit consisting of Particles of Iron
exceedingly subtiliz'd: These are in no inconsiderable Proportion, and must
produce in some Degree the excellent Effects of Chalybeate Preparations, than
which no Medicines we are acquainted with more effectually corroborate the
Vessels, attenuate the Fluids, increase the Circulation, and invigorate the
Spirits. This Spirit is inconceivably volatile, almost as much so as Heat
itself, and scarcely to be confined by any Art, which makes it necessary for
those, who wish to have the entire Virtues of the Water, to drink it at the
Well.

Thus much on the Scarborough Spaw-Waters may be sufficient to give such an
Idea of their Nature and Properties, as may show how well they are adapted to
the Cure not only of the Disease, which has been the Subject of this Essay, but
of the greater Part of the formidable Chronic Tribe.

FINIS.

