THE LADY's Physician.

A PRACTICAL TREATISE ON THE VARIOUS DISORDERS INCIDENT TO The FAIR SEX.

With proper DIRECTIONS for the Cure thereof.

The Whole laid down in so plain a Manner, as to enable every Reader not only
to be a competent Judge for herself, but also to direct others with Propriety
and Success.

Written Originally in French, By M. TISSOT, M. D.

First Physician to the Queen of France, and Fellow of the Royal Society of
London; Member of the Medico-Physical Society of Basil, and of the Oeconomical
Society of Berne, and Author of Advice to the People concerning their Health.

Translated by an EMINENT PHYSICIAN.

LONDON: Printed for J. PRIDDEN, at the Feathers, in Fleet Street. MDCCLXVI.
[One Shilling.]

THE LADY's Physician.
INTRODUCTION.
THE Author of this Work, besides the Emolument that every Practitioner has a
Right to expect from his Profession, had another Motive to encourage him to the
completion thereof; to wit, a humane and Christian Concern with which he had
been long actuated for the Welfare of the Fair, whose delicate Frames are too
often a Prey to Diseases, which, through the Decrees of Providence, peculiar to
their Sex, yet, through a mistaken Modesty, they are loath to declare, and apply
for Succor, from those duly qualified, to relieve them.

They are here provided with the most rational, yet easy Instructions, as well
as with the most select and approved of Recipes, either to prevent in Time, or
cure themselves of, when, through carelessness, or any other cause they are
surprised with, any of those Distempers particular to their own Sex, but
unknown to the other.

Most Males, young or old, make little, or rather, no scruple, of unfolding any
complaint they may labor under, to a Physician, Surgeon, or Apothecary; while
young Females, except abandoned Prostitutes, and many even of those more
advanced in Years, through innate Modesty, an almost invincible Bashfulness;
and a being reserved in the Extreme to the great Detriment of their health, by
the ridiculous concealment of a beginning Distemper, suffer a kind of petty
Martyrdom to misunderstood Notions of Virtue, which are consequently the cause
of their health and constitution being ruined, and of their manifestly pining
away, though all around them can assign no Reason; and no Disorder of the Fair
Sex is made such a destructive Mystery of, as that which shall take the lead
here; to wit,

The Menstrual Flux.
UNTIL the Age of Puberty, (that is, of being capable to propagate the Species)
which varies in different Nations, being earlier in the Southern Climes, and
later in the Northern, young Males and Females are indiscriminately liable to
the same Distempers; nor before that critical Period of Life, is there any
sexual Difference; the Cause of this Difference, the first of that Class,
which, on Account of its being the Forerunner and fruitful Source, whence all
others are derived, that in an especial Manner, afflict the more amiable Part
of Society, must afford us ample Matter of Admiration, as will obviously appear
to all who, in a philosophical or Christian Light, shall consider this
essential Evacuation.

The Womb of a Female being designed by Nature for the first Receptacle and
Nursery of the yet unborn Being, is, after a certain revolutionary Period of
Life, irrigated with an extraordinary Quantity of Blood, at stated Times; by
which means the Vessels are used to open and distend themselves for the more
easy Admission of the Monthly Tide, which when, by a kindly Discharge is
decreased of its super-abounding Quantity, the stretched Vessels recover their
due Spring, and return the rest to the general Course of Circulation.

Nature's Intent, by this Process, is, that after Impregnation, such increasing
Quantities of the Blood, derived to the Womb, are to supply Nutriment to the
Foetus; who, when brought forth, is supported by Milk from the Breasts, of
which the redundant Blood, then diverted from the Womb to those Parts, becomes
the nourishing Fountain. -- While Things are thus carried on in their due
Course, all goes right; but as from every Deviation some new Malady arises, and
indeed directly or indirectly all those with which the Sex is peculiarly
affected: and that we may progressively follow them, we have fixed our Choice
to begin with the menstrual Discharge, that is perverted either by its
Obstruction, or an extraordinary Efflux, in a more or less violent Degree.

SECT. I. An Obstruction, Suppression, or Stoppage, of the Menstrual Discharge,
IS caused in young Females either by too great a Consistence, Viscidity, or
Siziness of the Blood, which cannot force its Way into the smaller Vessels, to
be through them emptied to a certain Degree; or else is owing to too great a
Compactness in the Fibers of the Womb, whose secretory Orifices, or little
Mouths are too closely compressed to yield Admission to any Ingress of the
Blood, and consequently preventative of salutary Evacuations. In either Case,
the Blood's Escape being debarred, its return into the general Circulation, on
account of its augmented Quantity, makes offensive Lodgments on many Parts,
through their Weakness rendered more liable to yield; and prove dangerous in
Proportion to the Parts affected being more or less essential to Life.

This Distemper is ever attended with an Unwillingness to Action, an Heaviness
of Mind, a Paleness of Complexion. Pains are felt both in the Groin and Loins,
with a Difficulty of breathing; cold Sweats, hysteric and fainting Fits, etc.
There ensues a total Depravation of all the Functions of the Body. Nay, such
has often been the dreadful Effect of the Discharge not being able to make its
Way through the proper Outlets, as to force for itself an unnatural, violent,
and perilous Egress, through the Anus, or Fundament, the Bladder, Breasts,
Eyes, Ears, etc.

The Bowels are wont to suffer prodigiously in such Patients, and in general,
more outrageously, as their Constitution is more delicate. -- Hence what a
Train of Maladies arise, particularly every Species of a depraved Appetite, as
is made manifest by unnatural, and often offensive Longings, too well known to
need being mentioned here.

Besides the above assigned inherent Causes of this Disease, whether in the too
compact Structure of the Womb, or the too great Siziness obstructive to its
escaping by the emissary pores; the following, which we may call external or
adventitious ones, are not to be neglected, but rather seriously attended to;
such are the improper Use of astringent Remedies; of acids; and whatever may
cause a Spissitude in the Humors; too incrassating a Diet; that is,
Nourishment which thickens the Blood too much. A Suppression of the menstrual
Discharge is sometimes caused by too great an Evacuation of the Blood from a
Wound, or otherwise; it being thence rendered too weak to force its Way by the
Womb. It is also caused by any sudden Terror, obstinate Grieving, a violent
Cold, etc.

The Cure.
IN general, where too great an Evacuation of Blood, or Weakness of the
Patient's Constitution, is not supposed to be the leading Cause, it is proper
the Patient should undergo a gentle Bleeding, in order to make Way for the
Remedies operating more effectually; and during the Course of taking them, to
receive frequently the Steam of Camomile Flowers that had been boiled in Water,
by the Means of a conveying Tube, or Funnel, through a certain Part, to play
upon the Insertion of the Womb, in order to soften its Texture, in ease the
Suppression should be owing to the Toughness of its Structure.

But should there appear to be a stagnating Vice; that is, an Unwillingness to
flow in the Blood, a Spur must be given to its Laziness, by Fomentations, such
as the above, accompanied with frequent Exercise, diluting Drinks, such as Tea,
Whey, or a pleasant and wholesome Liquor, that may be made by infusing the
Rinds of Oranges, Citrons, and Lemons, in Spring Water, till it shall have
acquired an agreeable Taste from them.

Then take the following Pills for some Time; to wit, Venetian Soap -- Borax --
Aloes -- one Dram each, to be made into Pills; each Pill to confist of three
Grains; four Pills to be taken every Day; one a little after the Patient rises
in the morning, and some Time before her Breakfast; another about an Hour, or
at least Half an Hour before Dinner; a third at about the same Distance before
Tea-Time in the Evening; the fourth is to be taken on going to Bed.

Let the Patient seek all Occasions of Exercise, of Merriment, and whatever may
excite a Flow of Spirits. Some Time after the bleeding in the Arm, if Matters
succeed not as may be wished, then let a gentle Bleeding in the Foot take
Place; and this Practice carefully followed for some Time, cannot fail of
effectuating a Cure, where consummate Weakness, an exhausted Constitution, or
other insuperable Difficulties do not intervene.

SECT. II. The immoderate Flux of the Menstrual Discharge.
AS a due Discharge of Blood by the Uterus every Month is an Insurer of Health,
so an extraordinary Efflux is the Harbinger of Sickness, and highly detrimental
to the Constitution; because it occasions a Loss of Strength, which is attended
by other Symptoms; to wit, Crudities from Indigestion, a Loss of Appetite, a
Sense of Oppression in the Stomach, a sickly Complexion, oftentimes a small
Increase of Heat, a feeble Pulse; a Swelling in the Feet, and a Restlessness
during the Time of Sleep.

The immoderate Flux of the menstrual Discharge is effectuated in three
different Manners: 1. By too plentiful and impetuous an Eruption at the usual
Period. 2. Sometimes by happening twice, or oftener, within the Space of a
Month. 3. Sometimes by continuing several Days longer than they were wont to
flow. The Cure to be obtained, is a restraining of the present Flux, and
keeping a future one within due Bounds. For this purpose let the Patient rest,
as long as convenient to her Situation of Life, in Bed upon her Back, and as
much as possible let her avoid speaking. According as she is strong or weak,
and concurring Circumstances will allow, let her blood in the Arm. Care should
be taken that no strict Ligatures be suffered on any Part of her Body, as by
means of Garters, Sleeve-buttons, etc. which are very prejudicial. Let the
Patient's Diet be slender, and consist chiefly of Veal, Chickenbroths,
Fish-soups; let her constant Drink be Ptisan of Plantane, Yarrow, and
Nettletops, into which, by way of giving it a Zest, put some Orange-peel, or of
the greater Comfrey; but put in Linseed, if she be of a hot and bilious
Temperament.

In Cases where these Remedies do not succeed, then Recourse must be had to the
following prescribed by Dr. Mead, as a more efficacious one: "Take one Ounce of
burnt Alum, one quarter of an Ounce of Dragon's Blood, which reduce to a
Powder; to those of weakly Constitutions let there be given from fifteen Grains
to twenty; to those of middling, from twenty to twenty-five; to those of a
strong Habit, thirty Grains in a Glass of red Wine, diluted with an equal
Quantity of warm Water and to be taken three Times a Day."

In the more alarming Cases of this Malady, the Womb, on account of its Orifice
being in a quite relaxed State, may be syringed with a Decoction of Yarrow, red
Roses, Plantane, or with warm Water impregnated with the Powder of Roch-alum,
or with Vinegar made warm.

SECT. III. Of the Whites, or Fluor Albus.
THIS Malady is the running of a liquid Matter, from the private Parts of the
female Sex, but stinks not like Ulcers, and is free from any infectious Taint.
Its Color is sometimes white, sometimes green, sometimes yellow, etc. It is
sometimes of an acid Nature, and excoriates the Parts, sometimes not. This
Species of running is in general continued, but not copious. It is interrupted
in some Patients, and returns either at irregular or stated Periods. It is in
many a constant Forerunner of the menstrual Discharge, and after that is over,
re-appears for some Time.

The common Signs to distinguish the Whites from the venereal Flux or Clap, is,
that in the latter Case the Discharge is more copious, and continues during the
Times of the menstrual Discharge; whereas the former suffers an Interruption:
the Patient's Knowledge of her own Conduct must help to judge in this Case.

The Patients who labor under an uninterrupted Fluor Albus, or one that
frequently returns, have a pale and swollen Countenance, a Distaste for their
wonted Aliments, a Loss of Strength, frequent Pain about the Region of the
Heart, besides troublesome Twitchings, and a sinking Weakness of the Stomach.

Inasmuch as this remote and fixed Cause of the Fluor Albus is in the Stomach,
the setting that to rights is the surest Way of performing a Cure. Let the
Patient set off in the Beginning of the Disorder, when not much enfeebled, by
letting a little Blood from the Arm; and in a Day or two after, be puked with
one Grain of Tartar Emetic; if young, and rather weak, with half an Ounce of
Tincture of Hipecacuanha; but if at her full Growth, and of a strong Habit of
Body, let two Grains of Tartar Emetic be employed; and when it begins to
operate, it is to be encouraged by drinking after each Effort some
Camomile-tea. In a few Days after let her be purged with what ever purgative
Medicine and Dose she may have been used to; but if not habituated to any, in
case the Patient be young and weakly, let fifteen Grains of Jalap in Powders be
taken in a Dish of Tea, or Whey, or any other inoffensive and weak Liquor
warmed, to be also drunk from time to time, while the Medicines are operating,
in order to encourage it.

After these Preludes to a Cure, the Patient must betake herself to a proper
Regimen; that is, she must shun all Ragousts, Fruits, Salads,
Confectionary-articles, Roots; and live chiefly on Rice, Beef, Mutton, Fowl,
and all Sorts of Food that tend to strengthen the Constitution. If denied
either by the Place of her Abode, or of her Circumstances, the means of
procuring Ferrugineous Waters, she may make an artificial one for herself, by
boiling old pieces of rusty Iron in Water, of which she is to drink half a pint
each Day, if young, and of a weakly Constitution; but if of a strong Habit, and
come to be full grown, then she may drink a Pint, and every eight Days, for the
first Month, repeat the above Purgative; in the second, every fifteen Days; in
the third Month let the Interval be of three Weeks; and once a Month afterward
for the Space of six, if the Malady should persevere.

Immediately subsequent to the first Purge, let her begin to take the following
Remedies for a recent or inveterate State: 1. In the Commencement the Fluor
Albus, and in as yet a not-emaciated Constitution; an Infusion of Rosemary
drunk every Day, in the manner, and in the room of Tea, has been often known to
prevent its farther Progress; but when of a long standing, and that it has
resisted the commonly advised Remedies by female Friends, Gossips, and Matron
Advisers, etc. Recourse must be had to the following Remedy; "Take Extract of
the Peruvian Bark, Nutmeg, Alum, of each one Scruple, and of Syrup of Clove a
sufficient Quantity, to make a Bolus of th^se Ingredients." Let the Patient
begin by taking a very small Quantity from the Tip or Edge of a Tea-spoon, and
so continue for one Week, increasing it the next and following, but there she
is to stop where the Quantity may be found disagreeable. In Cases where a
Weakness of the Back is perceived, let a strengthening Plaster (to be had at
any Apothecary's shop) be thereto applied.

Doctor Russel advises for the Cure of an inveterate Fluor Albus, to bathe in
the Seawater, and drink it. Those who are situated near the Sea, may try; but
since it has been known to fail in so many Cases, it is not strenuously
insisted upon here, and frequent Exercise is preferable to it.

SECT. IV. Of the Green Sickness, or Chlorosis.
TO this Malady are subject Maids and Widows. It is attended with a slow,
irregular, and almost imperceptible Fever. The Complexion of the Patient is
discolored, being sometimes a ghastly pale, at other times livid, and not
rarely greenish, with a Circle of a Violet Color under the Eyes. They feel a
constant Irksomeness, and a Despondency without any apparent Cause: the Pulse
is small, unequal, and variable; the Ancles and Eyelids are apt to swell: the
Face is bloated; a benumbing Dullness is diffused through the whole Body: in the
Legs and Feet are felt a tensive Lassitude; such Patients are also subject to a
Palpitation of the Heart, racking Pains in the Head, and an inordinate Desire
of things totally unfit for nourishing the Body; to wit, Chalk, Coals, etc.

The Treatment in order to obtain a Cure, is to be commenced by a Purgative
proportioned to the Patient's Strength, as may be gathered from our Directions
in the Maladies already treated of. Then get, of Castile Soap, three Drachms;
of Rhubarb in Powder half a Dram; Filings of Steel, half a Dram; Species of
Hiera Picra, half a Dram; with a sufficient Quantity of Orange Peels made
into an Electuary; of which the Patient, if young and weakly, is to take the
Quantity of half a small Tea Spoon full twice a Day; if grown up, and strong,
she is to take, each Time, the Tea-Spoon full.

She is to eat nothing but wholesome Food, and of easy Digestion, such as the
young of all Kinds of Animals, Fowls, etc. and to delight in much Exercise
without continuing it to a wearisome Fatigue. Doctor Mead has advised, to take
of the Tincture of Black Hellebore thirty Drops, two or three Times a Day; it
sometimes produces good Effects; and there is no Harm in trying it alternately,
Day about, with the above Electuary, after the latter has been taken for the
Term of a Week.

Mineral Waters, especially of the ferrngineous or iron-Class, prove often very
effectual in those Disorders, and may be drunk several Times in a Day in
moderate Quantities, followed by some moderate Exercise immediately after. If
the Distemper be caused by a Suppression of the menstrual Discharges, it is
effectually removed by the Remedies that restore them. When a deep rooted
Passion for a Male Object is the Cause, then Marriage with the Object beloved
is the most powerful of all Specifics.

SECT. V. Of the Furor Uterinus.
THIS Frenzy, or rather, libidinous Rage, all the Female Sex are liable to, not
only Maids and Widows, but sometimes even married Women, and especially those
who are disappointed in their conjugal Expectations. It is a continual and
insatiable Desire of Copulation. All Regard to Decency is thrown aside. It
begins by a morose Silence, and an occasional Sparkling of the Eyes. The
Patient is kindled at hearing any obscene or wanton Expressions, and her Pulse
beats tumultuously; she alternately bursts into Fits of Weeping and Laughing.
She soon bids adieu to Shame, and speaks openly and boldly of every Part and
Action from which Modesty turns aside. Unhappy Females, a Prey to this Curse,
become even so abandoned as to attempt to force Men to satisfy their lustful
Desires.

This dreadful and calamitous Disease, is the most disgusting and offensive of
all that invade the Female Sex (because the like suffering State in the Males
is not held so disgraceful) owes its Origin to some remote, and to some
immediate Causes. The remote are the reading obscene Books, hearing immodest
Discourses, or the frequent Presence of a loved Object without proceeding to
the last Favor. A natural Disposition of the Body, Time of Life, Manner of
Living; for it is always observed, to seize on those who lead an indolent Life,
more than on others. The immediate Causes are an Irritation of the Womb caused
by the Acrimony of the Humors that are brought thither; or the applying
(either through the Patient's own Wantonness, or false Lover's cruel Deceit)
external Remedies that are called Provocatives, whether internally taken, or
externally applied.

In order that a Cure may be attempted, the Patient must, in the first Place,
renounce all Excitements to lustful Sensation, such as Reading, Conversation,
Self-touching, etc. She must be copiously and repeatedly let Blood. Her Food
must be of the mildest Kind; she must avoid salted Food, high Sauces, all
seasoning whatever that may tend to inflame. Her Drink must be cooling, such as
Whey, or other weak Liquor, with twenty Grains of Nitre, to be dissolved in
every Quart.

She must frequently sit in half Baths of warm Water; when out of them let her
as often as conveniently she can, convey by Means of a Funnel put into the
Vagina, and up toward the Orifice of her Womb, the Vapors of warm Water. She
is to take frequent Clysters of warm Water, with two Ounces of Manna dissolved
therein, which she is to retain as long as conveniently she can. It will not be
amiss, from Time to Time, that Blood may be drawn more immediately from the
suffering Part, to apply Leeches to the Anus.

By this Process the desired Ends are to be obtained; which are, 1. To diminish
the Quantity of irritating Humors. 2. To correct the Acrimony of the remainder
by a cooling Diet. 3. To dilute and weaken the local stimulatory Cause, by the
Application of warm Water in Half-baths and Injections. 4. To act as an
immediate Auxiliary to the enflamed Womb in the gentlest Manner, by Manna's
mildly operating in the simple Form of Clysters, and, at the same Time,
concurring with the other curative Views, to release the Fibers from their
violent State of Tension, and bring about the wished-for Calm, which cannot be
missed of, with the Concomitance of Regularity, Sobriety, and chaste Company.

SECT. VI. Of the Vapors, or Hysteric Passion.
THIS Malady of the Female Sex arises mostly from an Accumulating of the Blood
in the Bowels, and is caused chiefly by an Hindrance of the menstrual
Discharge, which Obstruction is productive of much Mischief to the fair Sex, on
account of their tender Structure. It is frequently accompanied with a
Vomiting, a Sense of Suffocation, a violent Compression of the Breast,
convulsive Efforts, etc. Maiden Ladies (in the true chaste Sense) and Widows,
are the most liable to this Complaint. It is sometimes occasioned by too
immoderate Evacuations through whatever Means, whether of Bleeding, Puking,
Purging, etc. Sometimes by being debarred from a Commerce with the other Sex,
in those especially whose Frame consists of too delicate and irritable Fibers.

This very unaccountable Disorder arises from many different Sources, and each
requires different Views of Cure; thus it is wont to make its dreadful Invasion
in what is vulgarly called a Fit. A compressive Pain is felt in the Forehead, a
Numbness of the Limbs, a Dimness of the Sight, an universal Irksomness is
diffused through all the Parts; something, as if in a globular Form, seems to
force its Way upward through the Throat, and menace immediate Suffocation. The
Speech is interrupted, the Heart is in a violent Palpitation, the Pulse is
irregular and hard. Very acid Matter, like to a greenish Bile, is thrown out by
the Mouth. A tormenting Headache fixes in one Part, and is called the Clavus
Hystericus; racking Pains are felt in the Bladder and Kidney, as if the Patient
was afflicted with the Stone; the Back aches prodigiously; an excruciating
Toothache often comes in for a Share. The Legs and Arms are cold. Fits of
Weeping and Laughing succeed to each other, without any apparent Cause for
either, and are accompanied with Convulsions.

The Intention of curing is twofold; one when the Patients are in the Fit; the
other when they are out of it: Let the Body and Limbs be rubbed with warm
Flannels; let the Legs be plunged deep into a warm Bath, in which are Camomile
Flowers, or Bran, and there be detained for some Time; let the Soles of their
Feet be tickled, let the Patients be pulled by the Hair in the most sensible
parts, to awaken the Faculty of Feeling; let the Fume of Assa-foetida Leather,
Horn, or of any strongly smelling Substance, when burnt, even of Tobacco, be
conveyed through a Pipe up their Nostrils. Some Practitioners recommend a few
Grains of Musk, or Civet tied in a Rag, to be introduced into the Vagina, and
assert this Method to have often proved very efficacious.

Treatment out of the Fit, -- in order to prevent its Return, or, at least, to
make it abate of its Violence, when it shall re-appear: A bleeding in the Foot,
to be followed in a Day or two by a Vomit of Hypecacoana, fifteen Grains for
Girls about Fourteen; twenty Grains for those between Nineteen and Twenty; for
those turned of Four and twenty, Twenty-five Grains -- the Patients are to
drink Camomile-tea by Preference, to quicken its Energy, and is productive of
very good Effects on this Occasion. The following Remedy has been recommended
by very eminent Practitioners, to wit, Mead, Hoffman, and others of no less
Fame, dosed in these Proportions. Take twenty-four Ounces of simple
Pepper-mint-water, of Valerian in Powder two Ounces, and of Lavender-drops one
Ounce; let them be perfectly well mixed together, and two or three Times in the
Day, let the Patient take three large Tea-Spoonfulls. It is looked upon as a
good Method to apply a large Galbanum-plaister to the Navel. -- Twelve or
fourteen Drops of the Spirit of Hartshorn taken in any proper Vehicle, as weak
Tea, Whey, etc. prove a serviceable Medicine. To make use of as a constant
Drink, waters impregnated with Iron are a powerful Assistant; and Women who are
not situated in the Neighborhood of such salutary Springs, may, in Part,
substitute thereto by heating in the Fire Pieces of old rusty Iron, and
plunging them repeatedly into Water, small Beer, Tea, etc. which they drink.

Let those who are liable to this afflicting Disorder, seize on every
Opportunity of taking Exercise; and although that on Horseback has been
accounted the best, yet the others, such as walking, being carried in a Coach,
Chair, etc. are beneficial to a certain Point; let them seek all Occasions of
Mirth, avoid dull Company, too serious Conversation, melancholy Stories; and if
they be single, let them finally make trial of that powerful Remedy, which the
Matrimonial State alone provides, in a lawful and blameless Manner.

SECT. VII. Of Pregnancy.
HAving, in the Close of our last Section, advised all single Females, whether
Maids or Widows, to have Recourse to Matrimony, as yet the most universally
acknowledged Specific against so manifold a Disease, and the greatest Tyrant
over the tender Sex; to wit, the Hysteric Passion; it is now consistent with
the strictest Order, that our next process be (on Supposition that the
suffering Fair ones have followed our Advice, and taken Refuge in the conjugal
State, for the Cure of so grievous a Calamity) to delineate the Changes, the
salutary Ailments they are to undergo, in Consequence of their Change of Life,
the first whereof is to be in the State of Pregnancy; which is discoverable,
and may, beyond all Doubt, be ascertained by the following Signs:

We think it proper to premise, that the Signs of Conception, especially at the
Beginning, are very obscure, because common to several other Diseases, and that
more over they are different in different Women, which depend, in a great
Measure, upon a more or less robust Constitution, and different Manner of
Living. However, the following Signs in general are declaratory of a
Conception: the Menses, or monthly Discharge from the Womb (being at the End of
the first, second, or third Month, after having undergone the Embraces of a
Man) either entirely suppressed, or at least very much diminished, with a
frequent Tendency to Puking; in the fourth Month, and, in some, not until the
fifth, a Motion of something alive is felt in the Womb, and, soon after, that
inwardly felt Intimation is perceived by others on applying their Hands on the
Belly; there then remains no longer a doubt of the Person's having conceived,
being advanced in Pregnancy, and big with Child. The Breasts swell to a greater
Size than they were wont to be of, by the flowing thither of a serous Fluid,
the Forerunner of milk, which oozes out occasionally from, and admonishes them
of the Motherly Care they are soon to be charged with in suckling their
Children. Around the Nipple are darkish Circles. The swelling or Expansion of
the Abdomen, or Belly, is upwards.

All the pretended Foretelling, before its Birth, of what Sex the Child in the
Womb is, ought to be treated with the highest Contempt, as a barefaced
Imposition on the Belief of weak People, who have no Repugnance to let
themselves be made Dupes; provided if wishing for a Son, they are flattered
with the Promise of their soon being delivered of one.

A Dropsy is easily distinguished from advanced Pregnancy, because in the
former the swelling is in the lower Part of the Belly; whereas in the latter it
is in the upper. Besides, another Proof which puts the Matter out of all Doubt,
is, if the Patient's Swelling be Hydropical, that will appear by putting one
Hand at either Side of the Person's Belly, and then to pat or push it gently
with the other; the Hand on the opposite Side will feel a Fluctuation of Water.

The chief Inconveniences which pregnant Women are liable to, are either a
Loss or Depravation of their Appetite, a Nauseating, or Tendency to puke, a
Listlessness, a Heaviness, an Headache, a Diziness, Difficulty of Breathing, a
Swelling of the Feet and Breast, a violent Toothache; in all which Cases proper
Rest, as far as their Condition will allow, is required; and that they expose
themselves to no great Fatigue. A gentle Bleeding is often not amiss. But if
Pregnancy be the Consequence of a private Love Affair, let the Patients
communicate their Situation to some experienced Female Friend, that may perhaps
be able to advise; or at least able to apply for them to the skilled in Physic.
We purposely avoid giving any Directions, through Fear of dangerous
Consequences, either by Misapprehension, or unskilful Application.

SECT. VIII. Abortion or Miscarriage.
THE Female Disease next, in order to Pregnancy, is Abortion, which is the
premature Exclusion of the Foetus many Months before the natural Term. This
Disaster most commonly happens in the third Month, or thereabout; the most
dangerous to the Mothers are those that happen on the fifth Month. To avoid
being the Cause of any Mischief, we, for the same Reasons as in the preceding
Chapter, decline directing any complicated Remedy. Yet when these Forerunners
of an Abortion are felt; to wit, a Pain in the Bottom of the Matrix, or Womb,
or in the inward Parts of the Thighs, as well as slight shiverings between the
Skin and the Flesh, and at the same Time the Belly becomes depressed and
flattish about the Navel from pointed, which it had been in that Part at the
Beginning of such Symptoms, Linseed has been often proved a very good Remedy to
prevent a Miscarriage, or Abortion. It may not also be amiss to bleed about the
third Month of Pregnancy, more or less, according to the Strength of the
Person; and during the first Months particularly, let it be remembered, that
the Body is to be kept open with Rhubarb, or Senna, or other Purgative of the
mild Class. We cannot finish this Section more profitably to the Commonwealth,
than with a truly physical, moral and religious inculcating to young Maids, who
may have unfortunately been seduced, to beware of, and shun, as they would
Poison, all Remedies which the wicked recommend to cause Abortions, and for the
following Reasons, obvious to the meanest Capacity.

The Remedies that have been cried up by Ignorance and Vice, as capable of
causing an Abortion, or Miscarriage, are in Fact, nay absolutely not endowed
with any such especial Faculty; for the Way that they act toward, and
contribute to that Purpose, is by the Violence with which they exert themselves
when introduced into the human Body; where, by the outrageous Tumult which they
cause, they are sometimes productive of the too early Expulsion of the Foetus
from the Womb, all shaken and convulsed, by the general Commotion caused
throughout the Mother's Frame, which storm likewise frequently causes her
Death; so by one unhappy Deed she is guilty of Self-murder, and that of her
Child.

But in those Constitutions where such accursed Remedies cannot operate the
wished and diabolical Effect of murdering, and prematurely driving the Foetus
out of the Womb, whether through too great an Adhesion, or strong Contexture of
the Parts, and. then they exercise all their malignant Power on the
Constitution of the unhappy Mother, which they ruin for ever after; and thus
she shortens her Date of Life, as but too many fatal Instances have been known
in Practice.

If they have no feeling for their yet unborn Babes let them have some Regard
for their own Health, and well being, in this World; which, should they
overlook, let them tremble at the Certainty of their being to appear before a
tremendous Judge on the last Day, and there to receive the Sentence of eternal
Torture for the most detestable, the most barbarous and inhuman of all Crimes,
a Mother guilty of the Murder of her own Child; nay, of tearing it bleeding
ftom her own Womb before its allotted Time of Delivery. To mangle its tender
Thread of Life! Nature shudders at the Thought -- The most wild, most savage,
and most ferocious Beasts that howl Terror through dreary Forests or Deserts,
never commit so monstrous a Deed. --

SECT. IX. Of a Mole.
BY the Term Mole, is to be understood nothing more than a fleshy Substance
generated in the Womb; it is most commonly of a spherical Form, and, until
ocular Conviction after its Delivery, or a Continuance long beyond the Time of
Childbearing, has been mistaken for the true Consequence of a Conception, a
Foetus, or Child in the Womb.

Its Dimensions vary from the common Size of an Infant down to that of a large
Nut-shell. Some are of a membranous Texture, others of a softish or spongy
Consistence, and have, in their middle, a Cavity. They sometimes abound with
little Bladders, called Hydatides, and, at others, they are replete with a
serous Matter.

Moles are apt to alarm those who are troubled with them, by a Display of
Symptoms at first not unlike to those of Women really with Child. They differ
much afterward; for a dull heavy Weight, like a Ball of Lead, is felt when a
Mole is the Case; but it never does (like a living Foetus) exhibit a vibratory
Motion to any Hand applied on the Outside of the Abdomen, which, in the State
of undoubted Pregnancy, is spherical and roundish.

A Mole in itself menaces no Peril to the Patient; and all the Danger or
Difficulty, that it is liable to be accompanied with, consists chiefly in the
Manner of freeing the Womb from so useless an Encumbrance: for otherwise Women
have been known to have carried them for many Years; nay, even to a very
advanced Age in Life, without suffering any other Inconvenience than the being
troubled, from Time to Time, with the disagreeable Sensation of a listless
Weight, and a teazing Uneasiness.

The most ignorant of the Sex may be persuaded, beyond any Possibility of a
doubt, that they have a Mole in the Womb, when they perceive that an Increase
of Bulk and Weight has exceeded by far the usual Time of Gestation or
Childbearing, which in general exceeds not nine Months, and the utmost
Indulgence of Physicians to cover the Reputation of great Ladies has never let
it stretch beyond eleven, the Truth of which Complaisance is much doubted of,
and not without Reason.

The Certainty of a Mole in the Womb being established, the next Attention is
to eject an idle Occupant of the first Cradle of human Existence, for the
twofold Reason of being useless in itself, and preventive of introducing there
what may prove the reverse.

The Method to be followed by those who do not choose to run the Risk of violent
internal Remedies, which ought not to be ventured on without proper Advice, is
to take the fresh slender Root of a Walnut Tree, not exceeding in Length the
Palm of the Hand, then to shave and polish it to the Thickness of a
middle-sized Finger, which is to be introduced, from Time to Time, into the
Vagina, where it will excite a tingling Sensation of Heat, and that being
communicated to the Womb will provoke it to Action, and cause it, in Time, to
eject its inanimate Contents, whether it be a real or dead Foetus, a Mole, or
any Concretion formed in the Womb in Consequence of a former Delivery not
happily conducted. It will not be amiss to accompany the above Application with
the Repetition of a pretty strong Puke, and Purgative, alternately, that is,
within a few Days Distance of each; in order to accelerate the desired Effect.
The Dose of the Puke or Purgative is to be settled by the Patients, which in
this Case is to be increased beyond that which is wont to work them.

SECT. X. Dropsy of the Uterus, or Womb.
THAT Distemper of the female Sex, and which by Practitioners, in all Treatises
upon their Maladies, is called a Dropsy of the Uterus, is obviously
distinguishable from the common Dropsy of the Abdomen or Belly, and for this
very striking Reason, because in the former the Dropsy of the Womb, by the
Appearance both to the Eye and Touch is confined to the Region or Neighborhood
of the Uterus or Womb, and is round, circumscribed and prominent. But it is
quite the contrary in the other Dropsy, because then the whole Belly is equally
swelled.

The curing a Dropsy of the Womb is not attended with so much Difficulty as
curing that of the Belly. Sometimes nothing more is necessary than hard riding,
or any other violent Exercise, accompanied as in the Cure of Mole, dead Foetus,
etc. with strong Pukes, and Purges, from Time to Time.

The following simple Injection has been found of great Use -- Get an Ounce of
Ipecacoana boiled in a Pint of Water till the Quantity be diminished about a
Quarter; then let it be put by to cool -- When to be used, which may be every
Morning, as the Action of the Day will forward its Effect, let it be warmed to
that Degree a Clyster commonly is, and then be injected up through the Vagina
toward the Orifice of the Womb, the Patient lying on her Back, in which
Situation she is to continue as long as she can; and if for a Quarter of an
Hour, so much the better; because by that Means the Remedy will have the more
Time to make its desired Impression.

It will not be amiss to take internally of the Tincture of Jalap and
Florentine Orris mixed together, one Tea-spoon full just before Tea-time in the
Morning and Evening; and constantly to put a small Quantity of Saffron into
their Tea will not be unserviceable.

SECT. XI. The Falling down of the Womb.
WHAT is in the Writings of eminent Physicians called Procidentia Uteri, and
which, for the being readily understood by the most vulgar Capacity, we have
translated The Falling down of the Womb, is, alas! too common a Disorder in
that Part, and easily known by presenting itself between the Lips of the
Vagina, and preventing an Entrance into it.

This Distemper is rather more incommodious and disagreeable than dangerous --
The first View of Cure is to reduce the Uterus, and the next, to retain it in
its proper Situation. -- To answer the first View of reducing it, a common
Clyster must be taken in order to discharge the Gut that is next to it, called
the Rectum, of any excremental Lodgment.

The Patient must be let Blood three or four Times; and there must also be
applied emollient or softening Plasters, as of White Bread and Milk. -- A few
warm Baths will be of Use, because, by their Means, the Parts will be properly
relaxed. Then must the Patient lie on her Back, with her Hips raised much
higher than her Head, and her Legs must be separated to a proper Distance. Then
in a most gentle and gradual Manner is the Womb to be put back, and in that
Direction where it meets with the least Obstacle. When this Operation is
performed, the Patient, still taking Care to keep her Hips raised, and Legs
across, is to remain in Bed about a Fortnight.

But to put a finishing Hand to the Cure, an astringent Medicine, dexterously
applied, will be necessary; such as for Instance -- a Quarter of a Pound of the
Bark of Oak, with two Oun^^^ of Misletoe, boiled in two Quarts of Water, until
reduced to one Quart; then lay it aside for Use. It is to be twice a Day
injected with a proper Degree of Warmth up through the Vagina toward the Womb
-- And in the Vagina, on going to rest at Night, ought to be introduced as high
as convenient, an adapted Piece of Sponge; or else soft Linen Rags twisted into
a circular Form, and well soaked in the above Decoction of the Bark of Oak and
Misletoe; the longer it is retained in the Part, so much the better.

SECT. XII. On Delivery, or Childbirth, and after-Pains.
ONE of the Inconveniences that most commonly attend Women approaching to the
Time of Delivery, or of being brought to Bed, is a Difficulty of making Water,
which in general may be removed without taking any inward Remedy, or applying
any outward, and that by raising the Belly. For the Pressure of the Womb (big
with a grown Foetus) on the Sphincter or Outlet of the Bladder, is frequently
the Cause of such Stoppage.

When Things are so far gone as to be near Childbirth, since from the
extraordinary Bulk of the Patient, it can be no longer kept a Secret, were
there even a Necessity for so doing; then it is prudent to lay aside ill-timed
Modesty, and Application is to be made to those who practice in that Branch,
whether they be of the Male or Female Sex; especially when Nature seems in
Danger of meeting Difficulties she cannot overcome, although, in most cases,
she is sufficient of herself; and great Mischief is often caused by conceited
Practitioners thwarting her Operation. Doctor Mead advises, for the quickening
of a Delivery, that a Grain of purified Opium be divided into two Pills, one to
be taken six Hours after the other.

About an Hour after the Delivery the Mother ought to take a Tea-spoon full of
the Oil of Sweet Almonds, and that repeatedly, if it appear requisite, in order
to soothe the subsequent Pains. Then let a Cataplasm, made up of Oil of Sweet
Almonds two Ounces, with two or three new laid Eggs boiled together, be applied
to the Parts, and, for the Space of two Days, be renewed every six Hours.

If the Pains after Delivery prove violent and menacing, then the following
Prescription has been experienced of the greatest Use: Take two Scruples of
Sperma Ceti; ten Grains of volatile Salts of Hartshorn; ten Drops of Balsam of
Peru, and one Dram of Venice Treacle; let them be carefully mixed with as
much Syrup of White Poppies as will suffice to be made into four Doses; one to
be taken every six Hours, till the Pains disappear; the Patient is to drink
Caudle very plentifully, and to be kept very warm.

In about fifteen Days after Delivery, and a vanishing of the Pains attendant
thereon, the late suffering Parts are to be bathed with an astringent Decoction
that they may be braced up; which Decoction is to consist of Half a Pint of red
Wine, wherein are to be boiled red Roses and Balaustins as chief Ingredients.

Inasmuch as after all Births that are any ways laborious, the Mother is in
general weak, and very apt to faint, it will be necessary, and far from
imprudent, by the Means of a Glass of hot Wine, or other generous Liquor, to
comfort and keep up her Spirits. The same is to be repeated as often as she
shall appear to stand in need thereof. Comfortable Broths greatly contribute to
forward a Recovery of Strength. All other Occurrences of a more intricate
Tendency are to be remedied by professed Practitioners.

SECT. XIII. The Lochia.
THE Advice with which we have closed the last Section, must take Place
relative to the Disorders of this Discharge immediately after Childbearing,
whether in Excess or diminished, because then the Patient, on account of so
enfeebled a State, can be of no Service to herself, and the relying on Friends
in general is dangerous.

SECT. XIV. Disorders of the Breasts after Childbearing.
THAT which commonly takes the Lead, and is therefore reckoned the first,
because it appears the third or fourth Day after Delivery, is caused by a
Congestion, or Gathering of Milk in both the Breasts, or in either of them. It
is thence called the Milk Fever.

It is usually accompanied with a tensive or excruciating Pain: and also with a
Tumor or swelling of both the Breasts, or either, that frequently extend to
both Armpits, or at least to that of the Breasts affected.

This Pain of the Armpits is sometimes violent to a most insupportable Degree.
It is wont to persevere for the Space of one to two Days, and then puts an End
to itself by copious Sweats, (always proportioned to the preceding cold Sweats)
by which it is diverted out of the Body as a Benefit of Nature.

In some Cases, however, there may be a Necessity of using gentle diaphoretic
Remedies that increase Perspiration, or some of the hot diluting ones to assist
and encourage the disembarrassing of the Vessels in the Breasts; to which the
Child ought often to be put, and the Mother confine herself to a strict Diet.

But if it should not be the Intention of the Patient to suckle the Child, then
a more strict Regimen is to be observed, and a proper Person is to be procured
to draw the Breasts, from Time to Time, which will contribute to hinder a
Gathering there.

Moreover, a thickening of the Milk is to be hindered by embrocating the Breast
with Oil of Sweet Almonds, or even with Linseed Oil. Nay, a warm Application of
the Leaves of red Cabbage has proved beneficial on such Occasions, as have
also double Cloths dipped in Brandy, and then put under the Armpits. But if
the Milk Fever should prove very hot, acute, and threaten immediate
Inflammation, then Recourse must be had to Bleeding.

SECT. XV. An Inflammation of the Breasts.
IF, in a short Time after Childbirth, there happens a stagnating of the Milk,
accompanied with a Swelling and a Pain, it is called an Inflammation of the
Breasts. Then inwardly let gentle Cordials be taken; and externally apply hot
Linen Cloths steeped in Rum. Care must be taken to have the Milk drawn off some
how or other, whether by the Mouth of an Animal, such as a Puppy, or the Hand
of the Nurse, etc.

But should the Swelling, caused by a Stagnation of Milk, be observed to be
without Heat, then, with all possibe Speed, let the Part be bathed with red
Wine made warm, or Spirit of Wine camphorated. Nay, the Cataplasm or Plaster
of white Bread, and red Wine boiled together, with the Addition of some
camphorated Spirit of Wine, has been recommended as a successful Remedy by some
very good Practitioners.

When the Swelling appears inclinable to break, then make Use of a softening
Plaster, particularly the common one with the Gums which will ripen it to an
Opening. As soon as it shall be opened, take Care to cleanse it with a
digestive Ointment, to heal it with balsamic Remedies, particularly the Balsam
of Peru, to be had at any apothecary's shop. -- Women, in this disorder, are
liable to a disagreeable attendant upon it, and that is, a Chapping in the
Nipples, which in that case are to be anointed with a mixture of oil and bees
wax.

SECT. XVI. An Inflammation of the Uterus, or Womb.
THIS Malady happens frequently to Childbed Women, at the same time of the
Milk Fever appearing; however, if proper care be taken to oppose its progress
in the Beginning all will go well. Therefore let the Patient take inwardly oil
of sweet Almonds alone to the Quantity of Half an Ounce. But for exterior
Remedy, let the whole Abdomen, or Belly, be duly anointed with Oil of Dill an
Ounce, with the same Quantity of white Lillies and Camomile, to which add a
Dram either of Camphire or Caraways, over which a double Napkin must be laid.

SECT. XVII. The Cancer.
THIS Malady is incidental either to the Womb or Breasts in Women. It begins at
first with a small Swelling, no exceeding a Nut in Bigness; nor does the Color
of the Skin, on the Breasts, undergo any sudden Change, because the Cancer,
without causing any terrifying Alarms in its first Stages, continues, as it
were, a silent Progress for many Years.

But when the fostering Humors of that Evil is endowed with a greater Degree
of Activity, the Swelling is suddenly enlarged into a great, unequal, round,
and livid Tumor, accompanied with a racking Pain.

Finally, it terminates in a Rupture, and thence discharges a Blood-urged
Stinking, and acrimonious Humor, which, by preying upon the Parts that are
sound, render the Lips of the Wound ghastly and horrible to Sight, nay often
Death.

The Cancer of the Womb seldom admits of any Cure, because the Patient,
generally speaking, is in a desperate State before it can be ascertained. The
Cancer of the Breasts, as well as of the other Parts, if timely taken in hand,
is often cured; for which End the following Remedy is recommended for its
powerful Virtue by a very eminent Physician. Get two Ounces of the Shavings of
Guaiacum, which boil in two Quarts of Water, and let it continue to boil until
it be reduced to three Pints. Half a Pint of this Decoction is to be drank
twice a day.

For external Application -- Make use of a fomentation of Milk and Water, in
which Camomile Flowers had been boiled and let that be succeeded by a Pultice
of White Bread and Milk.

The Patient must be ever mindful that the Cancer must be preserved with all
imaginable Care from every Impression of the cold Air, on which, for that
Purpose, ought constantly to be spread a little of the Sperma Ceti Ointment,
which salutary Practice ought to be renewed every Day two or three Times.

We cannot conclude the present Section with a more essential Advice to all
laboring under this Distemper, than to bid them avoid dealing with ignorant
Quacks, or Nostrum Retailers for a Cure, because the taking such a step must
lead to certain Danger.

SECT. XVIII. Ulcer of the Womb.
THE principal and determining Sign by which this Malady may be known is by a
Discharge of stinking and purulent Matter that is streaked all over with Blood
and the greater the Quantity oozing from it is, the deeper you may pronounce
the Ulcer to be: But when the flowing Matter is not distained with Blood, then
no more than the serous and lymphatic Vessels are affected; but when it is of a
reddish color, then, to a certainty, the Blood Vessels are attacked.

The following Injection is recommended: Let an Ounce of Honey of Roses in half
a Pint of Water be heated to a proper Degree, to wit, such as can be borne
without exciting a Sense of Pain, which, by means of a Sponge, is to be applied
through the Vagina on the ailing Part several Times in the Day. Half a Tea
Spoon-full of the Tincture of Myrrh may be added to each Injection.

But in order to correct the Acrimony of the Blood, a Milk Diet is the most
effectual, which may be relieved, from Time to Time, by the Use of Herb Soups,
light Broths, as of Veal, Chicken, etc.

I have now treated sufficiently of all those Distempers incidental to the Fair
Sex; and which every Individual, either through their own Sagacity, or with the
assistance of some intelligent Female Friend, may safely undertake the cure of.
-- There are no cases omitted, but those quite out of their Reach to bring any
Help to, and that require both the Inspection, as well as Operation, of a
skilful Surgeon.

There are, indeed, a few slight Diseases, or rather Deficiences of Nature in
the married State, that obstruct the Propagation of the Species; but Decency
forbids me to mention any thing about them, lest Libertinism should make a
vicious Use thereof.

FINIS.

