This is that matchless Pigs meat so famous far and near

Oppressors hearts it fills with Dread. But poor Men's hearts does cheer.



PIGS' MEAT; OR, LESSONS FOR THE SWINISH MULTITUDE.

PUBLISHED IN WEEKLY PENNY NUMBERS, Collected by the Poor Man's Advocate (an
old Veteran in the Cause of Freedom) in the Course of his Reading for more than
Twenty Years.

INTENDED To promote among the Laboring Part of Mankind proper Ideas of their
Situation, of their Importance, and of their Rights.

AND TO CONVINCE THEM That their forlorn Condition has not been entirely
overlooked and forgotten, nor their just Cause unpleaded, neither by their
Maker nor by the best and most enlightened of Men in all ages.

For the oppression of the Poor, for the sighing of the Needy, now will I
arise, says the Lord, I will set him in safety from him that puffs at him.
PSALM xii. ver. 5. And the Lord said, I have surely seen the affliction of my
people which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their
taskmasters: for I know their sorrows. EXODUS, chap. iii. ver. 7. THE THIRD
EDITION.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. SPENCE, AT THE HIVE OF LIBERTY, No. 8,
LITTLE-TURNSTILE, HIGH-HOLBORN.

Behold I conspired against my master, and slew him: but who sl^w all these? 2
Kings x. 9.
INTRODUCTION. A judicious Compiler is better than a bad Author.
THE BE AND THE SPIDER. FROM DODSLEY'S FABLES.
THE Be and the Spider once entered into a warm debate which was the better
artist. The Spider urged her skill in the mathematics, and asserted, that no
one was half so well acquainted as herself with the construction of lines,
angles, squares and circles: that the web she daily wove was a specimen of art
inimitable by any other creature in the universe: and, besides, that her works
were derived from herself alone, the product of her own bowels; whereas the
boasted honey of the Be was stolen from every herb and flower of the field;
nay, that ^he had obligations even to the meanest weeds. To this the Be
replied, that she was in hopes the art of extracting honey from the meanest
weeds would at least have been allowed her as an excellence; and, that, as to
her stealing sweets from the herbs, and flowers of the field, her skill was
therein so conspicuous, that no flower ever suffered the least diminution of
its fragrance from so delicate an operation. Then, as to the Spider's vaunted
knowledge in the construction of lines and angles, she believed she might
safely rest the merits of her cause on the regularity alone of her combs; but
since she could add this, the sweetness and excellence of her honey, and the
various purposes to which her wax was employed, she had nothing to fear from
the comparison of her skill with that of the weaver of a flimsy cobweb; for the
value of every art, she observed, is chiefly to be estimated by its use.

FROM CATO's LETTERS. ON FREEDOM OF SPEECH.
SIR,
WITHOUT freedom of thought, there can be no such thing as wisdom; and no such
thing as public liberty, without freedom of speech: which is the right of every
man, as far as by it he does not hurt and control the right of another; and
this is the only check which it ought to suffer, the only bounds which it ought
to know.

This sacred privilege is so essential to free government, that the security of
property and the freedom of speech always go together; and in those wretched
countries where a man cannot call his tongue his own, he can scarce call any
thing else his own. Whoever would overthow the liberty of the nation, must
begin by subduing the liberty of speech; a thing terrible to public traitors.

This secret was so well known to the court of King Charles the first, that his
wicked ministry procured a proclamation to forbid the people to talk of
parliaments, which those traitors had laid aside. To assert the undoubted right
of the subject, and defend his majesty's legal prerogative, was called
disaffection, and punished as sedition. Nay, people were forbid to talk of
religion in their families: for the priests too had combined to cook up
tyranny, and suppress truth and the law. While the late King James, when Duke
of York, went avowedly to mass, men were fined, imprisoned, and undone, for
saying he was a papist: and that King Charles the second might live more
securely a papist, there was an act of parliament made, declaring it treason to
say that he was one.

That men ought to speak well of their governors, is true, while their
governors deserve to be well spoken of; but to do public mischief without
hearing of it, is only the prerogative and felicity of tyranny; a free people
will be showing they are ^o, by their freedom of speech.

The administration of government is nothing else but the attendance of the
trustees of the people, upon the interest and affairs of the people. And as it
is the part and business of the people, for whose sake alone all public matters
are, or ought to be transacted, to see whether they be well or ill transacted;
so it is the interest, and ought to be the ambition, of all honest magistrates,
to have their deeds openly examined, and publicly scanned: only the wicked
governors of men dread what is said of them.

Freedom of speech is the great bulwark of liberty; they prosper and die
together: and it is the terror of traitors and oppressors, and a barrier
against them. It produces excellent writers, and encourages men of fine genius.
Tacitus tells us, that the Roman commonwealth bred great and numerous authors,
who wrote with equal boldness and eloquence: but when it was enslaved, those
great wits were no more. Tyranny had usurped the place of equality, which is
the soul of liberty, and destroyed public courage. The minds of men, terrified
by unjust power, degenerated into all the vileness and methods of servitude:
abject, sycophancy and blind submission grew the only means of preferment, and
indeed of safety; men durst not open their mouths but to flatter.

Pliny the younger observes, that this dread of tyranny had such effect, that
the senate, the great Roman senate, became at last stupid and dumb. Hence, says
he, our spirit and genius are stupefied, broken and sunk for ever. And in one
of his epistles, speaking of the works of his uncle, he makes an apology for
eight of them, as not written with the same vigor which was to be found in the
rest; for that these eight were written in the reign of Nero, when the spirit
of writing was cramped with fear.

I have long thought that the world are very much mistaken in their idea and
distinction of libels. It has been hitherto generally understood that there are
no other libels but those against magistrates, and those against private men:
now to me there seems to be a third sort of libels, full as destructive as any
of the former can possibly be, I mean libels against the people. It was
otherwise at Athens and Rome; where, though, particular men, and even great
men, were often treated with much freedom and severity, when they deserved it;
yet the people, the body of the people, were spoken of with the utmost regard
and reverence; the sacred privileges of the people, the inviolable majesty of
the people, and the unappealable judgment of the people, were phrases common in
those wise, great, and free cities. Other modes of speech are since grown
fashionable, and popular madness is now almost proverbial; but this madness of
theirs, whenever it happens, is derived from external causes. Oppression, they
say, will make a wise man mad; and delusion has not less force; but where there
are neither oppression nor imposters, the judgment of the people in the
business of property, the preservation of which is the principal business of
government, does rarely err. Perhaps they are destitute of grimace, mystery,
reserve, and other accomplishments of courtiers; but as these are only masks to
conceal the absence of honesty and sense, the people, who possess as they do
the substance, have reason to despise such insipid and contemptible shadows.

Machiavel, in the chapter where he proves that a multitude is wiser and more
constant than a prince, complains, that the credid which the people should be
in declines daily: For, says he, every man has liberty to speak what he pleases
against them, but against a prince no man can talk without a thousand
apprehensions and dangers. I have indeed often wondered, that the inveighing
against the interest of the people, and calling their liberties in question, as
has been, and is commonly done amongst us by old knaves and young fools, has
never been made an express crime.

I must own, I know not what treason is, if sapping and betraying the liberties
of a people be not treason, in the eternal and original nature of things. Let
it be remembered for whose sake government is, or could be appointed; then let
it be considered who are more to be regarded, the governors, or the governed;
they indeed owe one another mutual duties; but if there be any transgressions
committed, the side that is most obliged, ought doubtless to bear the most: and
yet it is so far otherwise, that almost all over the earth, the people, for one
injury that they do their governors, receive ten thousand from them: any, in
some countries, it is made death and damnation, not to bear all the oppressions
and cruelties which men, made wanton by power, inflict upon those that gave it
them.

The truth is; If the people are suffered to keep their own, it is the most
that they desire: but even that is a happiness which in few places falls to
their lot; they are frequently robbed by those whom they pay to protect them. I
know that it is a general charge against the people. that they are turbulent,
restless, fickle, and unruly; than which there can be nothing more untrue, for
they are only so, where they are made so. As to their being fickle, it is so
false, that, on the contrary, they have almost ever a strong bent to received
customs, and as strong a partiality to names and families that they have been
used to: and as to their being turbulent, it is as false; since there is scarce
and example in an hundred years of any people's giving governors any
uneasiness, till their governors had made them uneasy: nay, for the most part,
they bear many evils without returning one, and seldom throw off their burdens
so long as they can stand under them.

From Swift's Sermon on False Witness.
A Second way by which a man becomes a false witness, is, when he mixeth
falsehood and truth together, or concealeth some circumstances, which, if they
were told, would destroy the falsehoods he uttered. So the two false witnesses
who accused our Savior before the chief priests, by a very little perverting
his words, would have made him guilty of a capital crime; for so it was among
the Jews to prophecy any evil against the temple. This fellow said, I am able
to destroy the Temple of God, and to rebuild it again in three days Mat. xxvi.
6.
; whereas the words, as our Savior spoke them, were to another end, and
differently expressed; for when the Jews asked him to show them a sign, he
said, Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up. In such cases
as these, an innocent man is half confounded, and looks as if he were guilty,
since he neither can deny his words, nor perhaps readily strip them from the
malicious additions of a false witness.

Thirdly, A man is a false witness, when, in accusing his neighbor, he
endeavors to aggravate, by his gestures and tone of his voice, or when he
charge a man with words, which were only repeated o^ quoted from somebody
else. As if any one should tell me that he heard another speak certain
dangerous and seditious speeches, and I should immediately accuse him for
speeking them himself; and so drop the only circumstance that made him
innocent. This was the case of St. Stephen. The false witnesses said, This man
ceas^th not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place and the law Acts
vi, 13
. Whereas St. Stephen said no such words, but only repeated some prophesies of
Jeremiah or Malachi. which threatened Jerusalem with destruction if it did not
repent: However, by the fury of the people, this innocent holy person was
stoned to death, for words he never spoke.

Fourthly, The blackest kind of false witnesses, are those who do the offices
of the devil, by tempting their brethren in order to betray them, I cannot call
to mind any instances of this kind mentioned in holy scripture; but I am afraid
this vile practice has been too much followed in the world. When a man's
temper has been so soured by his misfortunes and hard usage, that perhaps he
has reason enough to complain; then one of these seducers, under the pretense
of friendship, will seem to lament his case, urge the hardships he has
suffered, and endeavor to raise his passions, until he has said something
that a malicious informer can pervert or aggravate against him in a court of
justice.

Fifthly, Whoever bears witness against his neighbor, out of a principle of
malice and revenge, from any old grudge, or hatred to his person; such a man is
a false witness in the sight of God, although what he says be true; because the
motive or cause is evil, not to serve his prince or country, but to gratify his
own resentments. And therefore, although a man thus accused, may be very justly
punished by the law, yet this does by no means acquit the accuser, who, instead
of regarding the public service, intended only to glut his private rage and
spite.

Sixthly, I number among false witnesses, all those who make a trade of being
informers, in hope of favor and reward; and to this end employ their time,
either by listening in public places, to catch up an accidental word, or in
corrupting men's servants to discover any unwary expression of their master; or
thrusting themselves into company, and then using the most indecent scurrilous
language; fastening a thousand falsehoods and scandals upon a whole party, on
purpose to provoke such an answer as they may turn to an accusation: And truly
this ungodly race is said to be grown so numerous, that men of different
parties can hardly converse together with any security. Even the pulpit has
not been free from the misrepresentations of these informers; of whom the
clergy have not wanted occasions to complain with holy David: They daily
mistake my words, all they imagine is to do me evil. Nor is it any wonder at
all, that this trade of informing should be now in a flourishing condition.
since our case is manifestly thus; we are divided into two parties, with very
little charity or temper toward each other: the prevailing side may talk of
past things as they please with security, and generally do it in the most
provoking words they can invent: while those who are down, are sometimes
tempted to speak in favor of a lost cause, and therefore without great
caution, must needs be often caught tripping, and thereby furnish plenty of
materials for witnesses and informers.

Lastly, Those may well be reckoned among false witnesses against their
neighbor, who bring him into trouble and punishment by such accusations as are
of no consequence at all to the public, nor can be of any other use but to
create vexation. Such witnesses are those who cannot hear an idle intemperate
expression, but they must immediately run to the magistrate to inform; or
perhaps wrangling in their cups over night, when they were not able to speak or
apprehend three words of common sense, will pretend to remember every thing in
the morning, and think themselves very properly qualified to be accusers of
their brethren.

It might perhaps be thought proper to have added something by way of advice to
those who are unhappily engaged in this abominabe trade and sin of bearing
false witness; but I am far from believing or supposing any of that destructive
tribe are now my hearers. I look upon them as a sort of people that seldom
frequent these holy places, where they can hardly pick up any materials to
serve their turn, unless they think it worth their while to misrepresent or
pervert the words of the preacher: and whoever is that way disposed, I doubt
cannot be in a very good condition to edify and reform himself by what he
hears. God in his mercy preserve us all from the guilt of this grievous sin,
forbidden in my text Exodus, xx. 16. Thou shall not bear false witness against
thy neighbor.
and from the snares of those who are guilty of it!

I shall conclude with one or two precepts given by Moses from God to the
children of Israel, in the xxiii. of Exodus 1.2.

Thou shall not raise a false report: put not thine hand with the wicked, to be
an unrighteous witness.

Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, neither shall thou speak in a
cause to decline after many, to wrest judgment.

Now to God the father, etc.

SOME CAUSES OF ENGLISH MISERY.
BY SMOLLET.
NOTWITHSTANDING the improvements, the capital is become an overgrown monster;
which, like a dropsical head, will in time leave the body and extremities
without nourishment and support, The absurdity will appear in it full force;
when we consider, that one sixth part of the natives of this whole extensive
kingdom, is crowded within the bills of mortality.

What wonder that our villages are depopulated and our farms in want of day
labors: The abolition of small farms, is but one cause of the decrease of
population. Indeed, the incredible increase of horses and black cattle, to
answer the purposes of luxury, requires a prodegious quantity of hay and grass,
which are raised and managed without much labor; but a number of hands will
always be wanted for the different branches of agriculter, whether the farms be
large or small. The tide of luxury has swept all the inhabitants from the open
country -- the poorest squire, as well as the richest peer, must have his house
in town, and make a figure with an extraordinary number of domestics. The
plough boys', cow herds, and lower kinds, are debauched and seduced by the
appearance and discourse of those coxcombs in livery, when they make their
summer excurtions, they desert their dirt and drudgery, and swarm up to London,
in hopes of getting into service, where they can live luxuriously, and wear
fine clothes, without being obliged to work; for idleness is natural to man. --
Great numbers of those being disappointed in their expectation, become thieves
and sharpers.

ON THE EXECUTION OF LOUIS CAPAT. From a Pamphlet entitled. "Peace and Union."
By William Friend, M. A.
LOUIS CAPET has afforded an excellent topic for parliamentary declamation.
Let us strip the subject of figures of rhetoric, and no Englishman need be
alarmed at the execution of and individual at Paris. Louis Capet was once King
of France, and entitled to the honors of that exalted station. The supreme
power of the nation declared that France should be a Republic; from that moment
Louis Capet lost his titles. He was accused of enormous crimes, confined as a
state prisoner, tried by the National Convention, found guilty, condemned, and
executed. What is there wonderful in all this? Our revolution, the boast of the
present days, pursued the same conduct as nearly as possible. Our Convention
declared, that James the Second should be no longer king; it did not choose to
abolish kingship, but dignified William the Third with regal honors. James was
stripped of his titles, and became plain James Stuart, and the rebublican
William became a sovereign. James was not tried, condemned, and executed,
because he saved his life by flight: but the laws against himself and his son,
and the proceedings in the years fifteen and forty-five, must convince the most
superficial reasoner, that the maxims of the English and French nations, with
respect to the dethroning of kings, are exactly the same. But some one will
say, Louis Capet was unjustly condemned. Ninety-nine out of a hundred, who make
this objection, have not given themselves the trouble of examining the records
of the trial; and why should I give greater credit to the remaining objector
than to the verdict of the court? If Louis Capet did when king encourage the
invasion of his country, however, we may be inclined to pity the unfortunate
man, for the error of his conduct, we have no right to proclaim him innocent in
pomt of law. It is, in short, no business of ours; and if all the crowned heads
in the continent are taken off, it is no business of ours. We should be
unworthy of the constitution settled at the revolution, and enemies to the
Brunswick families now seated on our throne, if we denied to any nation the
right of settling, as it pleased, its own internal government. These sentiments
do not prevent us from commiserating the situation of the French refugees. They
are entitled to our compassion; and it is but right that we should attend to
their distresses, since foreign countries have been put to the expense of
maintaining those refugees from our own island, who, for their attachment to an
ancient family, were, by the rigor of the two foreign reigns, subjected to all
the penalties exacted from recusant by the present government in France.

ON POLITICAL SUPERSTITION.
[From Barlow's Advice to the Privileged Orders.]
THERE is another consideration from which we may argue the total extinction of
wars, as a necessary consequence of establishing governments on the
representative wisdom of the people. We are all sensible that superstition is a
blemish of human nature, by no means confined to subjects connected with
religion. Political superstition is almost as strong as religious; and it is
quite as universally used as an instrument of tyranny. To enumerate the variety
of ways in which this instrument operates on the mind, would be more difficult
than to form a general idea of the result of its operations. In monarchies it
induces men to spill their blood for a particular family, or for a particular
branch of that family who happens to have been born first, or last; or to have
been taught to repeat a certain creed, in preference to other creeds. But the
effect which I am going chiefly to notice, is that which respects the
territorial boundaries of a government. For a man in Portugal of Spain to
prefer belonging to one of those nations rather than the other, is as much
superstition, as to prefer the house of Braganza to that of Bourbon, or Mary
the second of England to her brother. All these subjects of preference stand
upon the same footing as the turban and the hat, the cross and the crescent,
or, the lily and the rose.

The boundaries of nations have been fixed for the accommodation of the
government, without the least regard to the convenience of the people. Kings
and ministers, who make a profitable trade of governing, are interested in
extending the limits of their dominion as far as possible. They have a property
in the people, and in the territory that they cover. The country and its
inhabitants are to them a farm stocked with sheep. When they call up these
sheep to be sheared, they teach them to know their names, to follow their
master, and avoid a stranger. By this unaccountable imposition it is, that men
are led from one extravagant folly to another, -- to adore their king, to boast
of their nation, and to wish for conquest, -- circumstances equally ridiculous
in themselves, and equally incomp^table with that rational estimation of
things, which arises from the science of liberty.

FROM MERRY's ODE, For the 14th. of July, 1791.
HAVE kings and nobles rights alone?
Is this prolific globe their own?
And is the mingled mass beside,
Formed as the creature of their pride?
Not, so, -- the dire deception over,
Mankind can now mankind adore;
Nor bauble crowns, nor regal toys,
Shall ch^at them of their natural joys,
Nor shall they more, by artifice subdued,
Kiss the oppressor's rod, "A SWINISH MULTITUDE."
Have not the titled sons of earth,
Usurp^d prerogative of birth;
As though appropriate to descent,
Were high and noble sentiment?
What sentiments can noble be,
But those of truth and liberty?
And what can dignity dispense,
But justice and benevolence?
And are not these the common share,
Of all who breathe this vital air?
And has not kind impartial Heaven,
To every rank an equal feeling given?
Virtue alone should vice subdue,
Nor are THE MANY baser than THE FEW.
The Effects of War on the Poor.
(From Mr. Frend's Pamphlet entitled, "Peace and Union.")
THREE days after the debate on the king's message, I was walking from my
friend's house to the neighboring town, to inspect the printing of these few
sheets, and in my way joined company with two men of the village, who, being
employed by the Wool-staplers to let out spinning to the poor, had lately
received orders to lower the value of labor. We were talking on this subject,
when the exclamations of a groupe of poor women going to market, overhearing
our conversation, made an impression on my mind which all the eloquence of the
Houses of Lords and Commons cannot efface. -- We are to be sconced three pence
in the shilling; let others work for me, I Will not. We are to be sconced a
fourth part of our labor. What is all this for? I did not dare to tell them
what it was for, nor to add insult to misery. What is the beheading of a
monarch to them? What is the navigation of the Scheldt to them? What is the
freedom of a great nation to them, but reason for joy? Yet the debating only on
these subjects has reached their cottages. They are already sconced threepence
in the shilling. What must be their fate, when we suffer under the most odious
scourge of the human race, and the accumulation of taxes takes away half of
that daily bread which is scarce sufficient at present for their support?

Oh! that I had the warning voice of an ancient Prophet, that I might penetrate
into the inmost recesses of palaces, and appal the harranguers of senates. I
would use no other language than that of the poor market-women. I would cry
aloud in the ears of the first magistrate: We are sconced threepence in the
shilling, the fourth part of our labor, for what? I would address myself to
the deliberating bodies: We are sconced three pence in the shilling, the fourth
part of our labor, for what? Is there a man that could stand out against this
eloquence? Yes. Thousands. Threepence in the shilling for spinning conveys no
ideas to them. They know not what a cottage is, they know not how the poor
live, how they make up their scanty meal. Perhaps there may be some one in our
House of Commons, whose feelings are in union with mine; communicate them to
your colleagues, impress them with the horror attendant on their deliberations;
tell them what the deduction of threepence in the shilling occasions among the
myriads of England, And should any grave courtier, pitying the distresses of
the poor, be anxious to relieve them, say to him, There is an easy method: let
the first magistrate, the peers, the representatives of the people, the rich
men of the nation, all who are for war, be sconced one fourth part of their
annual income to defray the expense of it. Let them be the first sufferers, let
the burden fall on them not on the poor. Alas! my poor countrymen how many
years calamity awaits you, before a single dish or a glass of wine will be
withdrawn from the tables of opulence!

At this moment, perhaps the decree is gone forth for war. Let others talk of
glory, let others celebrate the heroes, who are to deluge the world with blood
-- the words of the poor market-women will still resound in my ears -- We are
sconced threepence in the shilling, one fourth of our labor. For what!!!

A Prognostic of the French Revolution. CHESTERFIELD TO HIS SON.
London April, 13, O. S. 1751.
I Received this moment your letter of the 19th, N. S. with the enclosed pieces
relative to the present dispute between the king and the parliament I shall
return them by Lord Huntingdon, whom you will soon see at Paris, and who will
likewise carry you the piece, which I forgot in making up the packet I sent you
by the Spanish Ambassador. The representation of the parliament is very well
drawn, suavitor in modo, fortiter in re. They tell the king very respectfully
that in a certain case, which they should think it criminal to suppose, they
would not obey him. This has a tendency to, what we call here revolution
principles. I do not know what the Lord's anointed, his vicegerent upon earth,
divinely appointed by him, and accountable to none but him for his actions,
will either think or do, upon these symptoms of reason and good sense, which
seem to be breaking out all over France; but this I foresee, that before the
end of this century, the trade of both king and priest will not be half so good
a one as it has been. Du Clos, in his Reflections, has observed, and very
truly, qu'il y a un germe rasion qui commence a se developer en France. A
developpement that must prove fatal to regal and papal pretensions. Prudence
may, in many cases recommend an occasional submission to either; but when that
ignorance, upon which an implicit faith in both could only be founded, is once
removed, God's vicegerent, and Christ's vicar, will only be obeyed and
believed, as far as what the one orders, and the other says, is conformable to
reason and truth.

A LESSON FOR ANTIGALLICANS.
Extracts from a pamphlet, enti^^led "A Tour through the Theater of War, in the
Months of November and December, 1792, and January 1793."
-- THERE is a vice in the civil polity of almost every state in Europe, that
is necessarily the parent of revolution, creating all the misery-and crimes
that afflict the great mass of mankind, and driving them to insurrection as a
last resource. The government draws the money out of the pockets of the poor,
to give it, under the denomination of places and pensions, to the rich. The
rich avail themselves of this to accumulate property; till at last their
colossal stride reaches from province to province, and the whole land, that
seems the birth right of the community, is monopolized by a few individuals.
The rest of the nation is then left at their mercy; and both the knowledge of
mankind and experience prove, that the rest of the nation have nothing to hope
for at their hands, but what they can obtain by making their own subservient to
the support, the luxury, and the pleasure of their lordly masters, who always
take care that the salary of their day's labor shall be precisely enough to
supply rest and strength for the labors of the next. Thus are they reduced to
more working automata, with neither the means nor leisure necessary to acquire
instruction, or to soften their manners to social intercourse and enjoyments;
and thus is the human species degraded, The evil, by a necessary progression,
grows greater; for the number of rich growing smaller, proportion as the most
wealthy swallow up the rest, the demand for labor becomes less, while the
competition for employment increases. A harder bargain is consequently made,
till at last the point of sufferance is past, the boast of burden kicks the
load off his back, turns to a beast of prey, tears every thing he meets with to
pieces, and takes a blind and furious vengeance for all the oppression he has
suffered. Of this continued the Frenchinan with a sigh, my country is a
lamentable example.

After this monopoly of landed property, the grand source of human vices and
misfortunes. the greatest scourge that can afflict a people is an extensiv^
foreign commerce. If by the nation be understood a few merchants. ship owners.
ship's husbands, brokers, bankers manufact^re^s, and fiscal officers, the
nation is indeed prosperous when trade is in a thriving state. But if by the
nation we may be allowed to understand all those not comprised in the above
description, that is to say at least nine-tenths of the community, the case is
the reverse. It is self evident, that foreign commerce can only consist of
exportation and importation, ^^less indeed where a people should be merely
brokers and carriers for others. It is equally evident, that a country can only
export what is produced by the labor of its inhabitants on the soil. or by
their drudgery in manufactures If then no part of what is imported comes to the
share of those who drudge and toil. can it be denied that they give up ease,
plenty and leisure, for nothing? that the necessaries of life, the enjoyments,
and repose of the many, are sacrificed to feed the luxury of the few? What a
noble export trade does Ireland carry on in beef, pork, butter, and flour!
Well, what does the nation at large. that live in that fertile country get in
return? The advantage of never lasting meat, bread, or butter: of feed^ng on
potatoes and butter-milk, and sleeping among the litter of their pigs; all
which their noble landlords while drinking French wines, and wearing French
silks, assure us is vastly conducive to their health! Oh! but in some other
countries those who furnish all the exports, obtain a small portion of the
returns. Yes; from America a noxious and intoxicating weed, an enervating drink
from Asia, and from the other parts of Europe liquid poisons, that do indeed
for a moment make them forget the sacrifice they cost.

This evil is the offspring of the former; for if property were divided with
any tolerable equality, a man would begin by providing amply for his support,
comfort, and enjoyment; and would only suffer the surplus to be exchanged for
foreign superfluities; nor would he for superfluities condemn himself to
incessant labor. I have made an exact calculation, continued he; and I find
that four hours of work in a day, in our temperate climates, would suffice for
the subsistence of a man and his family. Those that remain would afford him
leisure for instruction and reflection; and it would then become impossible for
such men to be imposed upon by the cant of a few interested individuals, who
assure them that the nation has reached the highest pitch of prosperity,
because they themselves have obtained every gratification o^ not and luxury
that they can devise. But to keep men ignorant, you must make them work, and to
make them work you must keep them ignorant. This is the eternal circle in which
rolls the torrent of abuse. I have often heard it said, that Heaven made some
for enjoyment, and some for toil. I confess that I cannot myself see, why those
who do nothing should have all, and why those who do all should have nothing.

He hold a number of political tenets more extraordinary still. He said, when
wars were declared by the caprice, or for the interests of kings, that kings
alone should fight the battles; that i^ a nation at large were consulted,
hostilities would rarely occur; that a country should never engage in a war in
defense of a state, on which it is found it cannot depend for defense; that a
minister who should attempt to embroil his country for futile or insufficient
reasons, should be sent abroad, to fulfill in person the engagements he might
have made; that the best way to prevent wars would be for every one to
understand the use (...) which is indeed the bounden duty of every freeman; for
without the means of resisting oppression, who can fla^ter himself that he is
free? -- A large state would then be unattackable, and the fee simple of a
small one would not be worth the conquest.

He said, that magistrates, who should assume no improper power, could never be
afraid of its being wrested out of their hand; and that the majori^y of a
nation has a right to a bad government, upon the absurd supposition of its
choosing such a one, in preference to a good one's b^ing thrust down their
throats. But these and many other of his strange opinions, I forbear to
mention, lest I should expose my new acquaintance to the censure of Those
wholesale c^^tics, that in Coffee.
Houses cry down all philosophy.


All along the road from Calais to Dunkirk, from Dunkirk to Lisle, add from
Lisle to Valenciennes we hardly saw a man that had not assumed some, thing of a
military garb and appearance. Some had a sword and belt thrown over their
shoulder, some had a feather in their hats, and some were fully accoutred. In a
word, or rather in the words of Shakespeare, we found them All furnished, all
in arms,
All plumed like est^id^es.


The diligence with which they were practicing the military exercise in many
places, and the heartiness in the cause that they expressed in all would have
sufficed to convince us, that the idea many people in England affect to
entertain of a small faction domineering it over the whole nation, was totally
destitute of foundation, had any proof been wanting to overthrow an opinion so
indefensible. How is it possible for a small part to oppress the whole, when
all are armed? Yes: but the party averse to the revolutionists, though the most
numerous, are afraid to show themselves. -- Why, then what a wretched opinion
must they have of their cause, or what sorry dastards must they be? However, to
"make assurance doubly sure," I conversed with numbers of people, of all ranks,
on my way and found them, with very few exceptions, agreed upon the great
principle of liberty. They frequently lamented that many unwise steps had been
taken by their representatives, and reprobated the infamous crimes of
particular factions; but they considered them, at the same time, as partial and
accidental abuses of a system generally and essentially good. Here and there I
met with a man, who openly regretted the old government: nor was it a little
remarkable, that the greatest aristocrats I heard speak of politics, were
employed by the new government in the civil and military line. Let it however
be remembered, that the Department of the north is one of those the most
suspected of aristocracy,

On December 6th we set off for Brussels. Desirous of not meeting with the same
difficulties in our way that we had experienced in coming from Valenciennes, we
hi^e^i an excellemt carriage, with four horses. This was the more necessary, as
we did not leave Mons till the morning was far advanced. We found the roads
entirely covered with convoys going to the army, with detachments of troops,
and with straggling soldiers trudging on to join their respective regiments.

A thaw had lately taken place, the carriages deprived them of the benefit of
the pavement, and they were obliged to wade through mud half way up their legs.
Yet still their native gaiety supported them, and on they went, singing ca ira,
and other patriotic tunes. We took up behind us two of th^se that seemed the
most tired. It is only giving a florin or two more to the coachman, said my
companion, and sleeping in the superbs instead of the town A little further on,
as we were going slowly up a hill, I saw a young lad walking very lame, and
losing his shoe at every moment in the mud. As he did not call upon pestilence
and the devil to run away with them, and the road into the bargain, I was sure
he could not be a Frenchman. although he had the national uniform on his back.
We asked him if he also would get up behind, and he joyfully accepted our
offer. But as the weather was cold, and he seemed weakly, we soon after found
means to make room for him in our carriage. I then asked him if he had been
wounded. -- Dieu merci! he had only been cut down at the battle of Jemappe, and
then wounded in the foot, while lying on the ground, which was the reason of
his walking so lame. I told him he was too young to run such hazards, and bear
the fatigues of a military life. Too young! said he, with a proud smile, that
ill concealed a little indignation; too young! why I am now nineteen, and near
three years ago was shot through the body in the Belgic war. He added that at
the beginning of the present campaign he had been ill of a fever; that he had
been sent to the hospital at Maubeuge; that in the time of his convalescence,
he had walked out with some of his comrades; that they had fallen in with a
party of French, who were engaged with the enemy at Grisoelle; that he had
taken up a dead man's musket to have his shot, tout comme un autre; and that a
ball from the rifle gun of a Tyrolian chasseur, had hit him in the neck.

When I enquired into the motives of his taking up arms, he said he had been on
the side of the patriots before, and had heard that they were up again, and so
he had l^ft his home at Namur, where he had a father, a mother, and a little
sister assez aimable, and he would leave them again, as soon as it should
please God and the blessed Virgin to cure the lameness of his foot; for a
patriot should always fight for his country, and should not mind a wound or
two, or a little pain, in a good cause. I am now going to Brussels, said he, to
see some relations I have there. -- Go where thou will, said I to myself, thou
art a brave youth, and not only a patriot but a philosopher, although I verily
believe thou do not know the meaning of the word.

Gaiety was ever the Frenchman's birthright, but never was it so strongly
exhibited as since they have been animated by the spirit of Patriotism. This
cheerfulness is always accompanied by another characteristic of the nation; an
uncommon degree of carelessness and disregard of danger. In the plains of
Champaigne, the two armies were often in sight and almost within shot of each
other: At such times, there stood the Prussians menacing a charge, in regular
array, with supported arms, and motionless as statues; and here were the
French, dancing in rings around their fires, and broiling their meat on the
points of their bayonets.

On a march, woe to the game that gets up before them; a hundred soldiers are
sure to send after it the contents of their muskets, not without danger of
shooting their comrades, Even the presence of the enemy is insufficient to
correct this deviation from discipline. It once happened, as a battalion of
volunteers was advancing to the attack, in the momentary expectation of
receiving and returning the enemy's fire, that they trod up a solitary hare. As
she run along the line, she was saluted with an universal shout, and with a
shot or two at least from every company she passed. The fugitive however
escaped it being no easy matter to kill so small an animal with a single ball.

The old animosity, and false point of honor, that used to set regiment
against regiment, and man against man, and that were supposed every year to
cost the state the lives of five hundred soldiers, are so much forgot, that a
duel is now a thing of very unfrequent occurrence. It was predicted, that
endless dissensions and jealousies would embroil the regular troops with the
national guards, but these fears were so ill founded, that it is impossible to
conceive an army living in more universal harmony than that of Dumourier. At
public and private tables, nothing is more common than to see the shoulder-knot
of a grenadier touching the epaulet of a Colonel; nor does this vicinage seem
to surprise either party. The one shows no haughtiness, the other no servility,
and both interchange upon equal terms the salutation of Citizen or Comrade.
Though a stranger may be startled at it at first, his wonder diminishes when he
finds that not a few of the common national volunteers are men of property,
some of them possessing ten, twenty, and thirty thousand livres a year. Many of
those I spoke with supported well the national character of politeness, but
they had discarded the frivolous flippancy that was but too frequently its
companion. They assumed no credit for their courage, spoke of their giving up
ease and comfort to encounter the danger and hardships of a military life, as
only discharging a debt they owed to their country; lamented its being
desolated by war and faction; and vowed to see their enemies humbled, or to
sleep in the dust. I listened to them with admiration, and, God and Mr. Burke
forgive me, I thought I should have disgraced them by a comparison with the
defunct chivalry of France.

Many of the officers, many even of the superior ranks, have been raised from
that of a private soldier. In a ball or drawing room, they would, no doubt,
make an awkward figure; but surely, after a long apprenticeship to war, they
are as fit to lead a company or a battalion into the fire, as a giddy and
beardless boy, just broke loose from the military school.

Republican severity is by degrees removing that foppishness in dress and
manners that sprung from the example of a frivolous court. The small sword,
that formerly dangled at the side of the French officers and soldiers, has
resigned its place to a weighty sabre. The three-cornered hat, that sheltered
them neither from rain, sun, nor blows, is very generally changed into a
helmet. Their hair, far the most part cut short, is in the state nature gave
it; and many of their whiskers grow unchecked by the razor. The whole of their
dress, in short, bespeaks more attention to utility than show. Some of their
new corpse must however be excepted, particularly the legion of the celebrated
St. George. This is a body of seven hundred men, composed of Creoles, Negroes,
and Mulattoes, and is dressed and accoutred in the richest and most brilliant
manner.

I dined one day in company with a black captain of horse, and judged this new
Othello to be worthy of his occupation. His easy and polite manners deserved,
and met with the respect and attention of a great number of officers that were
present. As for me, it did me good to see the general fraternity of mankind so
nobly established, and convinced me, that all the worthless parts of the human
race are only so, because debased by their political institutions.

Till I came to Liege, I never could give entire belief to the wonderful
effects said to have been produced by the music of the ancients. How is it
possible, I used to say, that among the multitude of our instruments, and the
endless variety of our compositions, one of those moving sounds, or powerful
passages, should never yet have been hit upon? But when I came to Liege, the
struggle between my faith and my reason was at an end. I thought I discovered,
that those enthusiastic emotions were not excited in the Greeks by the
mechanical operation of "a concord of sweet sounds," but by the subject of
their lays, the circumstances they stood in, and the disposition of their
minds. In their old popular governments, glory and duty went hand in hand, and
the persecution of their liberty, called forth the fanaticism of freedom. Such
is the situation of the French, and such are their feelings, as I had an
opportunity of observing at the dinner I have just mentioned. While we were at
table, some itinerant musicians were admitted. I need not say that their music,
vocal and instrumental, was far from being of an excellent kind. It was,
nevertheless, astonishing to see the effect the Marseilles Hymn produced upon
the company. When they came to the passage aux arms, Citoyens! all the French
officers joined them in concert, most untuneable indeed, but with very forcible
expression. Some of them stood up erect in military attitude, grasping their
swords; and I saw tears trickle down faces as hard as iron. In my early youth I
had felt much of the martial mania myself; but my long vacancy from warlike
occupation, since the last peace, had given time to reason to take the place of
sentiment; and cold calculations of safety and repose had damped if not
extinguished all military ardour. The contagion, however, reached me; I
repeated aux arms with the rest, and felt that I was again become a soldier.

This valor at table is well maintained in the field. If I had only the bare
word of the French for it, I should not fail to make a large abatement for this
self-praise. Credit, however, cannot be refused to the universal testimony of
the natives of the country, who speak with artless wonder of what they call the
rage of the new republicans. This bravery is the more meritorious, as a large
proportion of their soldiers are boys. But they are boys, according to the
words of our favorite dramatist, "with ladies' faces and fierce dragon's
spleen."

During the whole of the journey we remarked, that the apprehension of a war
with England was peculiarly painful to the French. Though flushed with their
late successes, and "confident against a world in arms," it was evident there
was nothing they dreaded more than such an event; not merely on account of the
mischief that might ensue, but because it would force them to regard as enemies
the only nation in Europe they considered as their friends.

All along the road, they anxiously asked us what we thought would be the
consequence of the armament in England? We frankly told them, we presumed it
would be war, and generally observed a moment of silence and dejection follow
the delivery of our opinion. But soon, bristling up at the aspect of new
dangers, several of them said -- "Well! if all the world be determined to fight
with us, we will fight with all the world. We can be killed but once.

The imminence of hostilities, however, diminished in no degree the respect
they showed us as Englishmen; and not only we did not meet with any thing like
an insult in the whole of our tour; but, on the contrary, we experienced every
where particular kindness and attention. They seemed eagerly to court our good
opinion; and frequently begged us not to ascribe to a whole nation the faults
of individuals, and not to charge their government with disorders its present
state of vacillation rendered it incompetent to repress. If there was any
disputing such high authorities as Mr. Burke, and the collective wisdom of the
kings of the continent, I confess I should never have suspected, that I was
traveling among a nation of savages, madmen, and assassins. I should rather
have wished with Shakespeare, -- that these contending kingdoms,
England and France, whose very shores look pale
With envy of each other's happiness,
May cease their hatred --
-- that never war advance
Her bleeding sword 'twixt England and fair France --
That English may as French, French Englishmen,
Receive each other.


They looked upon Louis XVI. as a tyrant and a traitor, who had brought a
disastrous war upon their country. Though a king, they considered him as no
more than another man. And let us Britons, penitus ab orb divisi, who have a
special privilege for judging better of what passes all over the world, than
all the world, pity this lamentable mistake. Let us be the more indulgent, as
the superior beings expressed no particular concern. The Heavens did not shed a
tear; no earthly convulsion rent the veil of the Temple, nor did the thunder,
rolling on the left of the guilty city, reprobate the atrocity of the action.

Nay, in proportion as our feelings are sensibly affected at the death of a
king we have so few of us seen, let us make some allowance for the feelings of
others. The minds of the Parisians were peculiarly irritated. Thousands of them
had lost their dearest friends, and their nearest relatives, in the bloody
seenes of which the deceased monarch had been the wilful, or the occasional
cause; and they all saw their country invested by cruel and innumerable foes,
who were come with the declared intention of reinstating him in his former
despotism, and who asserted that he was the insidious accomplice of their
hostile attack.

The same deeds done in different circumstances may stand as wide asunder as
the poles. The killing of a man from whom we have received no offense, or upon
strong provocation, constitutes in the first case, a horrible crime; in the
second, a fault that may admit of excuse. Considered in this point of view,
even the sanguinary scenes of the beginning of September may allow some little
extenuation. Let no man imagine, that I mean in any degree to justify what I
have never yet suffered with patience a Frenchman to defend. My blood has ever
been chilled by the horrid recital; nor have I a dearer wish, than to see the
instigators and preformers of these base and atrocious actions punished as they
deserve. But it is not the less true, that the Parisians were driven to despair
by the Duke of Brunswick's approach to Paris, and by his infamous manifestoes.
Bouille's threat of not leaving stone upon stone in the capital, was backed by
the menaces of the Emigrants. Their cruel conduct on the frontiers plainly
showed the inhabitants of Paris what they had to expect. When the whole
strength of the city rose to repel the enemy, they feared that they should
leave their aged fathers, and their defenseless children, to the mercy of a
band of conspirator, of which the part that was in the prisons was to be set at
liberty by their accomplices without.

Be this true or false, it is certain that such was their persuasion; and I
have been assured by a respectable French merchant, who mixed, without
participating in these horrid scenes, that all the prisoners had received a day
or two before stockings, striped blue and white, to enable them to recognize
each other. Their being in this uniform, he said he could attest from his own
observation. The nobles and the priests had also their distinctive marks. If I
could doubt the assertions of numbers who pretend to have seen these marks, I
could not easily reject the testimony of a youth, too ingenuous to deceive, and
too young to invent, who was present at the massacre in the Convent of
Carmelite Friars. He says, that he saw cards, taken from the breasts of the
murdered priests, on which were depicted a royal crown, and a crown of thorns,
with the words Regiment de Solomon written above, and below miserere nostri.
Why then should an event, enchained with so many incidents and circumstances,
be considered as the natural consequence of the revolution? Those who affect to
look upon it in this light, and who would fain make it an argument for the
extermination of the new principles of liberty, are not aware, that while the
Saint Bartholomew in France, and the massacre of protestants in Ireland (scenes
of blood far less provoked, and of much greater extent) are upon record; they
are not aware, I say, that their bold conclusion involves the condemnation of
the christian religion, and the proscription of all kings.

But admitting that the page of history was never so foully stained before, this
is so far from being a reason for bringing the French under the yoke of their
old despotism, that it is the strongest argument that can be found for letting
them try the experiment of a new government. As the cruelty with which they are
reproached has marked their conduct from the first day of the revolution, it is
evident that their old government made them what they are; for who will
believe, that there is any thing in the kindly climate or grateful soil of
France to render its inhabitants serocious, or that the taking of the Bastile
instilled this sudden venom into their souls. It is indeed little to be
wondered at, that a people treated like brutes, for so many centuries, should
become like brutes when they broke their chain.

It may perhaps be safer, in this christian land, for the man who rejoiced that
there were prisons for the libellers of a queen, to libel a whole nation, and
to advise the cutting of his fellow creatures throats, from generation to
generation, than it is for another to inculcate charity to our neighbors, by a
candid statement of facts, and demonstrable truth. But as my tour induced me to
relate the things I saw, and as these things led me naturally to the
reflections that accompany the mention of them, I defy reproach, and trust that
my readers will show some indulgence to the hasty production of an unskilful
pen.

ON THE EXCELLENCY OF A FREE GOVERNMENT, AND ITS TENDENCY TO EXALT THE NATURE
OF MAN.
By Dr. Price.
EVERY Member of a Free State, having his property secure, and knowing himself
his own governor, possesses a consciousness of dignity in himself, and feels
incitements to emulation and improvement, to which the miserable slaves of
arbitrary power must be utter strangers. In such a state all the springs of
action have room to operate, and the mind is stimulated to the noblest
exertions. But to be obliged, from our birth, to look up to a creature no
better than ourselves, as the master of our fortunes; and to receive his will
as our law -- What can be more humiliating? What elevated ideas can enter a
mind in such a situation? -- Agreeably to this remark, the subjects of free
states have, in all ages, been most distinguished for genius and knowledge.
Liberty is the soil where the arts and sciences have flourished; and the more
free a state has been, the more have the powers of the human mind been drawn
forth into action; and the greater number of BRAVE men has it produced. With
what luster do the ancient free states of Greece shine in the annals of the
world? How different is that country now, under the Great Turk? The difference
between a country inhabited by men, and by brutes, is not greater.

These are reflections which should be constantly present to every mind in this
country. As moral liberty is the prime blessing of man in his private capacity,
so is civil liberty in his public capacity. There is nothing that requires more
to be w^^^hed than power. There is nothing that ought to be opposed with a more
determined resolution than its ^^^roachments. Sleep in a state, as Montesquien
says, is always followed by slavery.

The people of this kingdom were once warmed by such sentiments as these. Many
a sycophant of power have they sacrificed. Often have they fought and bled in
the cause of Liberty. But that time seems to be going. The fair inheritance of
liberty left us by our ancestors many of us are not unwilling to resign. An
unbounded venality, the inseparable companion of dissipation and extravagance,
has poisoned the springs of public virtue among us: and should any events ever
arise that should render the same opposition necessary that took place in the
times of King Charles the First, and James the Second, I am afraid all that is
valuable to us would be lost. -- The terror of the standing army, the danger of
the public funds, and the all-corrupting influence of the treasury, would
deaden all zeal, and produce general acquiescence and servility.

A LAMENTATION FOR THE OPPRESSED.
From the Deserted Village.
SWEET smiling Village, loveliest of the lawn,
Thy sports are fled, and all thy charms withdrawn;
Amidst thy bowers the tyrant's hand is seen,
And desolation saddens all the green;
One only master grasps the whole domain,
And half a tillage stints thy smiling plain:
No more thy glassy brook reflects the day,
But choked with sedges, works its weedy way.
Along thy glades, a solitary guest,
The hollow sounding bittern guards its nest;
Amidst thy desert walks the lapwing flies,
And tires their echoes with unvaried cries.
Sunk are thy bowers, in shapeless ruin all,
And the long grass o'ertops the mouldering wall;
And trembling, shrinking from the spoiler's hand,
Far, far away, thy children leave the land.
Ill fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,
Where wealth accumulates, and men decay;
Princes and lords may flourish or may fade;
A breath can make them, as a breath has made;
But a bold peasantry, their country's pride,
When once destroyed, can never be supplied.
A time there was, ere England's griefs began,
When every rood of ground maintained its man,
For him light labor spread her wholesome store,
Just gave what life required, but gave no more:
His best companions, innocence and health;
And his best riches, ignorance of wealth.
But times are altered; trade's unfeeling train
Usurp the land, and dispossess the swain;
Along the lawn, where scattered hamlets rose,
Unweildy wealth, and cumbrous pomp repose;
And every want to opulence allied,
And every pang that folly pays to pride.
These gentle hours that plenty bade to bloom,
Those calm desires that asked but little room,
Those healthful sports that graced the peaceful scene*
Lived in each look, and brightened all the green;
These far departing seek a kinder shore,
And rural mirth and manners are no more.
Yes! let the rich deride, the proud disdain,
These simple blessings of the lowly train;
To me more dear, congenial to my heart,
One native charm, than all the gloss of art;
Spontaneous joys, where nature has its play,
The soul adopt, and owns their firstborn sway;
Lightly they frolic over the vacant mind,
Unenvied, unmolested, unconfined.
But the long pomp, the midnight masquerade,
With all the freaks of wanton wealth arrayed,
In these, ere trifles half their wish obtain,
The toiling pleasure sickens into pain;
And, even while fashions brightest arts decoy,
The heart distrusting asks, if this be joy?
Ye friends to truth, ye statesmen, who survey
The rich man's joys increase, the poor's decay,
It Is yours to judge, how wide the limits stand
Between a splendid and an happy land.
Proud swells the tide with loads of freighted ore,
And snouring folly hails them from her shore;
Hoards even beyond the miser's wish abound,
And rich men flock from all the world around,
Yet count our gains. This wealth is but a name
That leaves our useful products still the same.
Not so the loss. The man of wealth and pride,
Takes up a space that many poor supplied;
Space for his lake; his parks extended bounds;
Space for his horses, equipage, and hounds;
The robe that wraps his limbs in silken sloth,
Has robbed the neighboring fields of half their growth;
His seat, where solitary sports are seen,
Indignant spurns the cottage from the green;
Around the world each needful product flies,
For all the luxuries the world supplies,
While thus the land adorned for pleasure, all
In barren splendour feebly waits the fall.
As some fair female unadorned and plain,
Secure to please while youth confirms her reign,
Slights every borrowed charm that dress supplies,
Nor shares with art the triumph of her eyes;
But when those charms are past, for charms are frail,
When time advances and when lovers fail,
She then shines forth, solicitous to bless,
In all the glaring impotence of dress.
Thus fares the land by luxury betrayed,
In nature's simplest charms at first arrayed,
But verging to decline, its splendors rife,
Its vistas strike, its palaces surprise;
While scourged by famine from the smiling land,
The mournful peasant leads his humble band;
And while he sinks without one arm to save,
The country blooms -- a garden, and a grave.
Where then, ah where, shall poverty reside,
To escape the pressure of contiguous pride.
If to some common's fenceless limits strayed,
He drives his flock to pick the scanty blade.
Those fenceless fields the sons of whealth divide,
And even the bare-worn common is denied.
If to the city sped -- What waits him there?
To see profusion that he must not share;
To see ten thousand baneful arts combined
To pamper luxury and thin mankind;
To see those joys the sons of pleasure know,
Extorted from his fellow creatures' woe.
Here where the courtier glitters in brocade,
There the pale artist plies the sickly trade;
Here, while the proud their long-dawn pomps display,
There the black gibbet glooms beside the way.
The dome where pleasure holds her midnight reign,
Here richly decked, admits the gorgeous train;
Tumultuous grandeur crowds the blazing square,
The rattling chariots clash, the torches glare.
Sure scenes like these no troubles ever annoy?
Sure these denote one universal joy?
Are these thy serious thoughts? -- Ah, turn thine eyes
Where the poor houseless shivering female lies.
She once perhaps in village plenty blessed,
Has wept at tales of innocence distressed;
Her modest looks the cottage might adorn,
Sweet as the primrose peeps beneath the thorn;
Now lost to all; her friends, her virtue sled;
Near her betrayer's door she lays her head,
And pinched with cold, and shrinking from the shower,
With heavy heart deplores that luckless hour,
When idly first ambitious of the town,
She left her wheel and robes of country brown.
ON THE RESPONSIBILITY OF KINGS.
From THE CANDID PHILOSOPHER.
I ONCE thought that in point of morals the actions of all men, however
distinguished in rank, stood on the same footing, and were entitled to the same
praise or censure. I thought that the morality of a monarch and of a private
man, as prescribed by the same divine authority, were exactly the same. But I
find the world thinks otherwise. The world thinks, that what is fit and just in
a subject is not so in a king; that a king is not bound by those narrow rules
that were only intended to bind the vulgar herd; and that a king may commit
actions which, though highly criminal in a subject, are not so in him. Owing to
these opinions, a political and practical system has been drawn by acute
statesmen, and metaphysical lawyers; in which, among other equally judicious
principles, they lay it down as a rule, that though in the case of a subject
the master is answerable for the ill conduct of his servants, yet in the case
of a sovereign, he is not responsible for the errors and misconduct of his
ministers* So far from it, they are accountable for his misconduct and errors,
if such he could commit, for they say he cannot. They say he is not a FREE
AGENT, but a more machine. and as such can do no wrong [therefore can do no
right] the reason of this they tell us is, that the king is always supposed to
be advised by his ministers, and, therefore, to imagine he was capable of doing
injustice, or was to be made responsible for his actions, would be to destroy
his independence. This is paying the king but a very scorbutic compliment. To
represent him as a machine, and the mouth-piece of his ministers, is treating
him as an idiot, or a puppet moved by wires. And with respect to the
independency they want to ascribe to the king, I insist on it they rob him of
it entirely, according to their system; and render him the most abject, pitiful
dependent creature imaginable, dependent on the nod, the wink, the command of
his servants. They make him a very child in leading strings, unfit to walk
himself, but to be led blindfold wherever his tutors shall be pleased to drag
him. Whether this is the case in reality with any king now living, I presume
not to say; but it has been the case of multitudes, whom HISTORY has damned to
everlasting infamy in her fair and impartial page. If in a point of this
delicate nature I may dare to hazard an opinion, I would say, that I think a
king (I mean of Utopia not of England) ought to be personally responsible for
his misconduct, as much as a private man is for his: that a king ought to be
responsible for his misconduct in choosing ignorant or wicked ministers: That
though a king takes the advice of others, yet, as advice does not bind his
conduct, he is as much accountable for it as the private malefactor would be in
taking and pursuing the ill advice of his comrades to rob or murder.

FROM THE SAME. ROMAN PATRIOTISM FOUNDED ON INJUSTICE, AND THE RUIN OF MANKIND.
THE patriotism of ancient Rome has been much extolled by modern writers, but I
think unjustly. Her patriotism was founded on the most flagrant injustice and
iniquity, and therefore deserved not so much to be called patriotism, as a
desire to render Rome the mistress of the universe.

For this purpose she scrupled not committing all manner of tyrannous and
wicked acts against the liberties of mankind. Her feverish fondness for
universal empire laid desolate all the known world. The possessions, the
habitations, the paintings, the sculptures, all the riches of the Romans, were
the spoils of plundered nations. Thus they erected to themselves an empire as
unwieldy as it was unjust, on the ruins of their fellow creatures. What then
are all their beautiful lectures and pompous declamations on the love of their
country? What their labored orations in praise of LIBERTY? Indisputable proofs
indeed of their eloquence; but not of their humanity. If the language of
benevolence were to constitute the character, we must allow it is due to these
Romans; but if actions are to afertain the right, and to be considered as the
criterion of justice, we shall find it a difficult matter to make good their
claim, though we were masters of eloquence equal to their own.

A DESCRIPTION OF ENGLAND.
From the LETTERS OF A PERSIAN IN ENGLAND, TO HIS FRIEND AT ISPAHAN.
THOU ask if the English are as free as heretofore? the courtiers assure me
confidently that they are; but the men who have least relation to the court,
are daily alarming themselves and others with apprehension of danger to their
liberty. -- I have been told that the Parliament is the curb to the king's
authority: and yet I am well informed, that the only way to advancement in the
court is to gain a seat in Parliament.

The House of Commons is the representative of the nation, nevertheless there
are many great towns which send to deputies thither, and many hamlets, almost
uninhabited, that have a right of sending two. Several members have never seen
their electors, and several are elected by the Paliament, who were rejected by
the people. All the electors swear not to sell their voices, yet many of the
candidates are undone by the expense of buying them. This whole affair is
involved in deep mystery, and inexplicable difficulties.

Thou ask if commerce be as flourishing as formerly: Some whom I have
consulted upon that head say, it is now in its meridian; and there is really an
appearance of its being so; for luxury is prodigiously increased, and it is
hard to imagine how it can be supported without an inexhaustible trade: But
others pretend, that this very luxury is a proof of its decline; and they add,
that the frauds and villainies in all the trading companies, are so many inward
poisons, which if not speedily expelled, will destroy it entirely in a little
time.

Thou would know if property be so safely guarded as is generally believed:
It is certain that the whole power of a King of England cannot force an acre of
land from the weakest of his subjects; but a knavish attorney will take away
his whole estate by those very laws which were designed for its security: The
judges are incorrupt, appeals are free, and notwithstanding all these
advantages it is usually better for a man to lose his right than to sue for it.

These, Mirza, are the contradictions that perplex me. My judgment is
bewildered in uncertainty; I doubt my own observations and distrust the
relations of others: more time and better information may perhaps clear them up
to me; till then modesty forbids me to impose my conjectures upon thee, after
the manner of Christian travelers, whose prompt decisions are the effect
rather of folly than penetration.

A LESSON FOR GENTLEMEN VOLUNTEERS.
From the LETTERS OF A PERSIAN IN ENGLAND TO HIS FRIEND AT ISPAHAN.
AS I was walking in the fields, near this city, the other morning, a disbanded
soldier, somewhat in years, implored my charity, and to excite my compassion,
bared his bosom, on which were the scars of many wounds, all received in the
service of his country. I gladly relieved his wants, and being desirous to
inform myself of every thing, fell into discourse with him on the wars in which
he had served. He told me he had been present at the taking of ten or twelve
strong towns, and had a share in the danger and glory of almost as many
victories. How then, said I, comes it to pass that you are laid aside? Thy
strength is indeed in its decline, but not yet wasted; and I should think that
experience would well supply the loss of youth. Alas! Sir, answered he, I have
a good heart, and tolerable limbs, but I want three inches more of stature: I
am brave and able enough, thank God, but not quite handsome enough to be a
soldier.

How then did thou serve so long, returned I, in Flanders? Sir, said he,
there were some thousands such ill-looking fellows, who did very well in the
day of battle, but would make no figure at a review. -- It appears to me very
strange, replied I, that thou should be poor after fighting so many years
with such great success. The plunder of a single town in the east is enough to
enrich every soldier that helped to take it. Plunder! Sir, said he; we have no
such term in the modern art of war. We fight for sixpence a day. -- But when
you have gained a battle do you get nothing by it? -- Yes, said he, we have the
advantage to go on and besiege a town. -- Ay, then, my honest lad, comes your
harvest. -- Then, Sir, replied he, it defends itself till we are half of us
destroyed: and when it can hold out no longer, it capitulates; that is, every
burgher saves his house, and every soldier carries off his baggage. -- What
becomes of the conquering army? -- Why the conquering army has the pleasure to
besiege another town, which capitulates also; and at the end of the campaign it
goes into quarters. -- But when you enter an enemy's country don't you raise
contributions? The generals do, answered he, but military discipline allows no
part of it to the common soldiers; they have just sixpence a day as they had
before.

A LESSON FOR ALL MEN.
From LOOK ON GOVERNMENT.
WHETHER we consider natural reason, which tells us, that men, being once born,
have a right to their preservation, and consequently to meat and drink, and
such other things as nature affords for their subsistence: Or revelation, which
gives us an account of those grants God made of the world to Adam, and to Noah,
and his sons; it is very clear, that God, (as King David says, Psalm. 115.16.)
HAS GIVEN THE EARTH TO THE CHILDREN OF MEN, GIVEN IT TO MANKIND IN COMMON.

FROM SPENCE's RIGHTS OF MAN.
A SONG, to be sung at the Commencement of the Milennium, when there shall be
neither Lords nor Landlords, but God and Man will be all in all.
FIRST PRINTED IN THE YEAR 1782.
Tune, "God save the King."
1
HARK! how the trumpet's sound See Leviticus, Chap. 25.

Proclaims the land around
The Jubilee!
Tells all the poor oppressed,
No more they shall be cess'd,
Nor landlords more molest
Their property.
2.
Rents to ourselves now we pay,
Dreading no quarter day,
Fraught with distress.
Welcome that day draws near,
For then our rents we share Though the inhabitants in every district or parish
in the world have an undoubted right to divide the WHOLE of the rents equally
among them, and suffer the state and all public affairs to be supported by
taxes as usual; yet from the numerous evils and restraints attending revenue
laws, and the number of collectors, informers, etc. appendant on the fame, it
is supposed, they would rather prefer, That after the whole amount of the rents
are collected in a parish from every person, according to the full value of the
premises which they occupy, so much per pound, according to act of parliament,
should be set apart for support of the state instead of all taxes; that another
sum should next be deducted for support of the parish establishment, instead of
tolls, tithes, rates, cesses, etc. and that after these important matters were
provided for, the remainder of the money should be equally divided among all
the settled inhabitants, whether poor or rich.
,
Earth's rightful lords we are
Ordained for this.
3.
How has the oppressor ceased, Isaiah, Chap. 14.

And all the world released
From misery!
The fir-trees all rejoice,
And cedars lift their voice,
Ceased now the FELLER's noise,
Long raised by thee.
4.
The scepter now is broke,
Which with continual stroke
The nations smote!
Hell from beneath does rise,
To meet thy lofty eyes,
From the most pompous size,
How brought to naught!
5.
Since then this Jubilee
Sets all at Liberty
Let us be glad.
Behold each man return
To his possession
No more like doves to mourn
By landlords sad!
ALL MONARCHIES NATURALLY TEND TO DESPOTISM.
From CHESTERFIELD'S LETTERS.
THOUGH Monarchies may differ a good deal, Kings differ very little. Those who
are absolute desire to continue so, and those who are not, endeavor to become
so; hence, the same maxims and manners, almost in all courts: Voluptuousness
and profusion are encouraged, the one to sink the people into indolence, the
other into poverty, consequently into despondency.

A MODEST PLEA FOR AN EQUAL COMMONWEALTH, AGAINST MONARCHY.
Published in the Year 1659.
THOUGH I was never possessed with a^ evil spirit of opposition, or genius of
contrad^^^^^g and snarling at what is present; but rather studied at least a
passive, if not an active compliance with the present power; as knowing there
was never any power, whose commission was not passed, if not under the broad
seal of Heaven's approbation, yet at least by the privy seal of God's
permissive providence; which I have always taken as a sufficient warrant for
paying the tribute of passive obedience, wheresoever I received the benefit of
reciprocal protection: Yet I cann^^ but acknowledge some governments more pure,
refined, and less prone to corruption, than others; and certainly, those
wherein the supreme magistrate (whether one or more) has an interest distinct
from that of the people, must be most apt to degenerate, and have greatest
propensity to tyranny and oppression. Now whether monarchy, that winds up all
the strings in the instrument of government to the interest of a single person;
that tunes laws, religion, and all things, to an harmony and compliance with
the monarch's single will, may not justly be suspected of this strain, I leave
at the bar of any considerate man's judgment to be decided.

Certainly, whatever gloss or varnish the courtship or flatteries of princes or
their parasites may set upon it, such a government is diametrically opposite
to, and inconsistent with, the true liberty and happiness of any people.

I remember to have read a pretty strange passage of one of the French kings,
that he was the most religious prince, and greatest tyrant that ever wore the
crown of France. I was (I confess) some time startled at the strangeness of the
character; but our late experience of one, might wear the same livery, makes me
able not only to digest the wonder, but also to give credence to this general
aphorism, that whatever may be the qualifications of any prince in reference to
the personal endowments of his mind, the title of good was never justly
attributed to any king, in reference to his office, except comparatively: And
therefore, in my apprehension, elective kingdoms have small advantage of
hereditary, by reason the unhappiness of such governments seems not so much to
spring from the nature of the person administering, as of the office and
dignity, which ever lays an iron yoke of slavery and oppression on the peoples'
necks: So that, considering the vast expense of blood and treasure with which
the competition of the office and dignity is usually managed by the scarlet
candidates of crowns and sceptres, an hereditary monarchy may seem eligible, as
the lesser evil; especially, if by some fundamental constitution, like the
Salique law of France, the absurd (though not unusual) pretensions of women and
children might be cut off: For to hang the keys of the power civil and
ecclesiastic upon apron strings, and to put the scepter into a hand sitter to
were a distaff, is to invert the order both of God and nature, and to set a
nation with its heels upwards. And yet I know it is the opinion of some, that
women and children are fittest to make princes, as being of a more passive
spirit; and therefore likeliest to steer by the ad^ice of wise council: by
reason they repose less stress and confidence in their own prudence than men;
in authority of which, the happy and prosperous reign of Queen Elizabeth is
usually alleged; but whether without wrong to the more than masculine vigor
of her spirit, and matchless quickness of parts, whereby she was, to a wonder,
qualified for government, and reported rather to outstrip than come short of
the more noble sex, I leave others to judge. But should we grant this assertion
to have the countenance of reason, and that experience had also set to it its
seal of confirmation; it is so far from being of any advantage to monarchy, by
warding off the blow usually given by such as skirmish against it, with their
reasons sharpened with these inconveniences, that it gives the deepest wound to
its reputation that could be desired, by asserting oligarchy, which by the
general consent of all times and ages, has been exploded as one of the worst
of tyrannies, to be the best of monarchies.

I have met with some, that plead much for the single person that should be
only the name, without the thing; the office, without the power; the shadow or
image, without the substance; as if it were impossible for men, that are the
masters and proprietors of reason, to be knit together into civil society and
peace for their own common interest and safety, without erecting either some
gaudy thing to humor them, or some scarecrow to fright them into obedience;
Nor do I know whose convenience would be herein consulted, except the lawyers,
who (if like pack-horses trained up in one road) not able to change their
accustomed pace or style, it be prudence for the nation to hazard a relapse
into tyranny, and again expose their lives and liberties to the will and lust
of an arbitrary power, to set up a John of Oak, or Will of Style, with infinite
expense of blood and treasure, by reimposing the yoke so lately cast off, that
this pack, etc. may not alter the style and form of their writs, etc. I say
wherefore the nation should be so over-indulgent to a corrupt interest of men,
rather than to regulate and reform the forms of law, that, through the
subtility of this generation, are become rather snares than fences of our
es^ates and properties, falls not within the precincts of my apprehension.

Should we now unbowel and trace to its original this name, for which there
have of late appeared so many advocates, I presume it would be found of as ill
complexion as the word Tyrant was accounted among the Greeks; the English word
king, being but the abbreviate of cunning, the usual epithet (as all men know)
of knaves; and to speak truth, experience has made good, though never so great
a saint has sat upon the throne, the devil and a bishop have ever stepped into
the office: For I am not of that fond opinion, that kings are not capable in
their private capacities of like virtues and qualifications with other men; but
that, notwithstanding their accomplishments, how excellent, how bright, how
orient soever are their personal virtues, they stand on slippery places, and
their dignities, their interests, their parasites, their flatterers, are snares
too great for them to retain their integrity, and therefore that the talent of
sovereign power is too great, too precious to be entrusted or deposited, in one
man's hand, though an angel, left so great a temptation should endanger his
fall, and make him apostate to a devil.

That kings are God's scourges, and given in wrath, we have the testimony of
scripture. Nimrod was a great hunter, a mighty man, a great oppressor, and the
first king or prince we read of; the first that invaded the liberty of the
world, that usurped first authority, and presumed to exercise dominion over his
brethren; the first that put a period to that golden age, wherein no other than
paternal government was known; but though thus nigh the morning of time, God
sent his scourge Nimrod as a just plague amongst the other nations of the
earth; yet the people of God, the seed of Abraham, the children of Israel, were
a long while after free, a free state, and enjoyed their native liberties till
the time of Samuel, when they rebelled, and desired a king like the other
nations, that they might be like the heathen whom God had cast out before them;
which God construed no other than apostasy, and rejecting of him, than
rebellion and high treason against his own divine majesty; and said, They have
rejected me: And then tells them what would be the issue, fruit, and product
thereof.

They should give away their liberty, and be subjected to an arbitrary power,
and become the slaves and vassals of their king, who should take their sons and
their daughters to make them his servants, and send them forth to fight his
battles; that is, to be the instruments of his pride and luxury, and the
champions of his malice and ambition.

And then he should destroy their property, and take away their houses, and
their vineyards, and give them to his servants. Thus the spirit of God gives
the same description of a King as of what we call a Tyrant, a Nero, a Monster,
as if they were all one, and it were essential to the nature of the office or
dignity to be a beast of prey, a l^viathan, an oppressor and devourer of the
people; which character has been too easy to be read in the lives of most of
the best kings, whose names are not taken off the file of memory.

Now as for those that would have a mock, a counterfeit, a limited king, a king
and no king, an empty title, a bare name, vox and preterea nihil, or I know not
what: they propose a remedy worse than the disease; for to divide the
sovereignty, is to say a seen of blood, to sow the seed of a perpetual civil
war, and intail ruin on ourselves and posterity: What is divided cannot stand;
there will spring up perpetual jealousies, fears and animosities, which will
cause intrenchings on each others authority, until the one have supplanted and
overturned the other, this is to institute a civil war, anarchy and confusion,
instead of a well ordered commonwealth or politic.

Having thus unmasked the true nature of monarchy, which is no other than the
mere gentle or civil expression of tyranny, I shall endeavor to obviate some
of the most plausible and strenuous arguments, by whose strength and subtility
it is endeavored to be obtruded, and our assents conciliated to the reception
thereof.

One of the grand arguments whereby the betrayers of our liberty endeavor to
decoy us into the iron yoke, we have so lately shaken of, is taken from our
long use and custom to draw therein, which has rendered slavery a second
nature to us, and therefore endeavor to scare us from our liberty as a novel
and dangerous thing; as if servitude were more natural to a nation than
freedom, or any custom could utterly expunge nature: I am sure the former
cannot reflect with the greater disgrace, or more derogate from the honor of
our nation, that we should be of so coarse a metal, so base an alloy, of so
spaniel-like couchant, slavish, and degenerate a spirit, than the other does
deviate from truth; but the worthy advocates of this cause, measure truth by
the wicked standard of their base and corrupt designs, as they take altitude of
all other men's spirits, though never so brave and elevated by the Jacob's staff
of their own pitiful crouching, fawning humor.

It would waste more ink and paper than I am either willing, or have leisure to
bestow, should I show how much the state of our nation is altered, and into how
great an unsuitableness we are of late traveled unto that government, this
argument would plead precription for.

But of what weight or trurh is it of, will easily appear to any that have
taken notice of that, passage of our modern history of the last century, which
c^^^erns the gallant hero Sir Philip Sidney; who though born in that most
unlucky juncture of time for prod^cing brave spirits, when the nation tr^^^led
under the government of a woman, was yet thought word^y of the Polish crown,
and had an overture in order to his election thereto, had not his jealous
mistress prevented; if, then, one born, under the inf^^ences of a female
government, and not of the highest rank of nobility, was thought si^^to sway a
scepter, of how great blasphemy against the honor of our nation, may they be
thought guilty, who say, the ^r^^-born people of England, after they have ^roke
the more ancient Norman yoke, and the more modern of a latter, etc. are not
(...) to enjoy that liberty, that has been the price of so much blood and
treasure: But should we concede all the argument seem^ to beg, that our necks
are used to the yoke, and we are become familiar to servitude; shall ^^e the
^^fore willingly suffer our ears to be bored to the posts of our new masters,
and become slave^ for ever? Shall we court our bonds, and glory in that which
is our shame? Shall we never learn to be free, and value liberty? Shall we
never emancipate ourselves and posterity, but intail thraldom and s^^ cry on
them also, to all generations? For so long as we draw in this yoke, our
condition is the (...) with slaves; whatsoever is born unto us is a ves^^l of
our Lords; the fruit of our loins must drink of the same cup with us, draw in
the same yoke, groan under the same tyranny and oppression we bequeath unto
them: nay, who knows but their bondage may ^n^rease, li^e that of Israel's
under the son or Solomon, whose little finger was heavier than his father's
l^ins; for tyrannies usually exasperate and wax worse with continuance: shall
we now bequeath our children liberty or bonds, freedom or oppression? If we,
who have had our necks worn with the yoke, and our backs bowed down with heavy
burdens, are of a couchant slavish spirit, perhaps our posterity, if born in a
freer air, and under the influences of a more benign government, may prove of
more generous and noble spirits, worthy of, and knowing how to prize their
liberty. But without doubt, those brave and gallant souls, by the conduct of
whose valor and prudence we have broken the iron yoke of arbitrary and
exorbitant power; and by the good providence of God, redeemed the captivity of
our nation, from the unrighteous bonds of its wicked oppressors, are worthy of,
and know how to prize and improve what has been purchased with so much ^^eat
and oil, and will not in the end sell their birthright for a mess of pottage,
but leave an offspring, heirs of their own valor and gallantry, that will,
with the utmost peril of their lives and fortunes, desend and preserve what the
labors of their ancestors has purchased, with sore travel both of mind and
body, and so transmit it entire to their posterity, through msny generations,
till the consummation of all things, and that time shall be no more.

But for a farther and more fatisfactory answer, to silence this argument, we
may consider how the scene is changed, and balance of lands altered since these
last centuries; and by reason thereof, with how great difficulty monarchy has
made good its ground since Henry the Eighth's days, in which it first began
most visible to decline, and has ever since been posting to its period.

For that wilful prince, by alienating the church revenues, quite altered the
balance of lands that was the basis of his government, and thereby did that
service unawares, that pulled up the stake of monarchy: for the church (which
with all its preferments, was at the king's devotion and sole dispose) did at
that time possess a third part of the lands and wealth of the whole nation:
which being afterward sold, and coming into the hands of private men, set up
many thousands of families that had no dependence on the crown. Since which
time, the number of freeholders being much increased, the nation has had a
natural and strong vergency toward a commonwealth; which has been much
discovered in the spirit and complexion of our parliaments, of which the house
of commons (heretofore an inconsiderable truckling kind of court, that was only
summoned for the Prince to milk their purses, and let the people blood in the
silver vein) grew now more peremptory, and began to give check to their princes
exorbitances; insomuch, that Queen Elizabeth was put to her courtship to retain
them in allegiance; as afterward King James, to a thousand shifts and juggles:
who, notwithstanding all his King-craft and cunning, in which he so much
gloried, and boasted himself so great a master, was scarce able, with much
juggling and dissimulation, to divert the storm from falling on his own head,
which afterward rained so much blood and vengeance on his son and posterity, to
the utter ruin and confusion of his family.

To conclude therefore this particular, it being a maxim of truth, placed
beyond all hazard of contradiction, that no government can be fixed in this
nation, but according to the balance of land. That Prince that is not able,
neither by his own nor the public revenue, in some measure to counterpoise, if
not over balance the greater part of the people, must necessarily be tenant at
will for the crown he wears: for they that are the proprietors of the land and
wealth of any nation, will with ease be able, by that magnetism, to draw the
greatest number of abettors to their side, and so to gild over their
pretensions, as to render them current with the people, and so in the end, give
law to the rest of their brethren: Therefore, where there is one proprietor or
landlord, as in Turkey, there is absolute monarchy; where a few, aristocracy,
etc.

Now, since the crown lands, and church lands of this nation are sold, what
other prop or pillar of security is left for the throne of a prince to rest
upon, except that of a mercenary army, lies not within view of my
apprehensions; and then how wholesome or safe advice the re-establishing of
monarchy is to this nation, I leave all men (that have not altogether abjured
their reason and conscience, to judge and determine.

As for those poetical, if not profane flourishes, wherewith orators and
poets, the constant parasites of princes, use to gild over monarchy, pretending
it the most natural and rational of all other forms of government, and that
whose pattern was first shown in the mount, or rather let down from heaven,
parale^ling it with God's regimen of the universe, which is alleged as its
prototype first exemplar; and therefore to have something more of a divine
right and character impressed upon it than any other, etc.

These, I say, are such trite, bald, and slight reasonings, that they do not
merit so much respect as to receive an answer; for may we not as well by this
loose and allusive way of arguing, borrow a pattern from heaven for the
triumvirate, that Augustus, Lepidus, and Mare Antony sometime imposed on Rome.

Does it not as well quadrate with the sacred Trinity, by the triple sceptred
of whose divine providence the empire of the world is administered, as by
their's sometime that of the Romans? Will any one therefore be so bold as to
say, that it was the most natural and rational government, and founded by no
less than a divine right, according to its pattern and archetype in the
heavens! notwithstanding the brand of the blackest and bloodiest tyranny Rome
ever saw has been set thereon, by the universal consent of all historians.

Or may we not, considering the pride, ambition, rapine, extortion, injury and
oppression, that usually crowd into the courts of the best princes, with as
much or more reason parallel absolute monarchy, with that of the prince of
darkness, in which there is no Trinity, as in the other; and therefore more
exactly quadrate to the absoluteness our proud monarchs so much endeavor to
obtain?

I confess, could we have a prince to whom majesty might be atributed, without
profane hyperboles, that was a true vicar or lieutenant of God, that was not
subject to the passions and infirmities, much less the vices and monstrosities
of human nature, that could neither be imposed on by deceit, nor abused by
flattery, whom the passions neither of fear nor affection, could warp to the
least declivity, from what is right and honest; whose reason could never be
biassed by any private interest or base respect, to decline the paths of
justice and equity, but would manage the reins of his power with a like
constancy and steadiness, as by the hand of Providence the helm of the universe
is steered: I should then become an advocate of monarchy, and acknowledge it to
have the impress of divinity, and bear the character and inscription of God
upon it, to be the best and most absolute form of government, and a true copy
of its divine original: but till security be given for such a righteous
administration, I desire to be excused from being a pander to ambition, or the
advocate of tyranny, as having learnt, It is not good for man to be alone,
especially on the high and slippery places, where the strongest heads are apt
to wax giddy; but, in the multitude of counselors there is safety: and
methinks, the very dialect of princes in the plural number (whatever of state
or majesty may be pretended) is a witness of, and does clearly speak the
unnaturalness of such exorbitant monopolies of power, and that though they act
in a single capacity, are willing to speak like a commonwealth.

Most of the other arguments, of which the advocates of tyranny make use, are
drawn from the pretended advantages of that government, above and beyond others
in respect of secrecy, celerity, unanimity, and the like, which though
conveniences, yet being far too light to counterpoise and balance the other in
commodities, together with the great charge and excise they are rated at,
require no other answer, nor shall I waste more time and ink upon them.

Having thus passed the pikes of the sharpest arguments, that are usually
raised in defense of the odd thing called a single person, I shall only speak a
word or two to that is founded on the single command, that in times of war and
eminent danger, when the gates of Janus's temple are set open, is committed to
one man, it being a received maxim, that reason has always conceded an
advantage to the absolute jurisdiction of a single person in the field,
prescribing to that end but one general to an army, for fear of divisions upon
contrary counsels and commands.

To which may be replied, notwithstanding generals are not taken upon trust, as
kings in successive monarchies, but upon the test of experience, and proved
sufficiency manifested in former services; yet if it seem expedient to the
commonwealth, there may be a rotation in that office as well as others, as was
anciently in the Roman republic, whose armies were led forth by their annual
successive consuls, and that with great success and victory.

But the expedient our present parliament has found out by commission, does so
fully answer this objection that I need say no more unto it; for without doubt,
it is the interest of a free state to have all the people so trained up in
military discipline, and made familiar with arms, that he may not be thought
arrived at the just accomplishments of a gentleman, that is not able to lead an
army in the field, it being among the Romans no absurd apostrophe to leave the
ploughtail, to head an army, or, vice versa, when their military employments
were accomplished: how much then may they be thought to fall short of the
accomplishments of a gentleman, that know not how to manage the conduct of a
troop of horse, as I fear, too many of our gentry, upon a due scrutiny would be
found; who, notwithstanding all their great pretenses to be accounted armigeri,
or esquires, are scarce stout enough to discharge a pistol, or were ever
militant beyond the borders of their ladies carpets.

I shall now sound a retreat to the further progress of my pen on this theme,
lest I should seem too much to triumph over a baffled and prostrate enemy, it
being my desire to use victory with like moderation, I desire to bear a foil,
conquest or captivity: therefore, fince by the good providence of God, together
with the gallant conduct of the no less prudent than valiant assertors of our
native rights and liberties, we are re-instated in the possession of our
birthrights, I shall attempt the discovery of those rocks and shelves, on
which in the late night of apostasy we split our liberties, and endanger the
utter ruin and shipwreck of our lives and fortunes, in the dangerous sea of an
exorbitant and unlimited power; and thereby strike some sparks of light for the
future better steering of the commonwealth, in whose bottom, as all our lives
and felicities are adventured, we are all concerned to endeavor its being
brought into a safe port and harbor.

The work then of our present pilots, that sit at the stern, and manage the
conduct of our affairs, is, to endeavor the commonwealth may be so equally
balanced, as it may neither have propensity to a second relapse into monarchy,
as of late; or oligarchy, which is worse: nor yet into anarchy, the worst of
all three: But to settle a free state upon such just and righteous foundations
as cannot be moved, that may be a strong rampire of defense, not only to our
civil liberties, as men, from the future enchroachment of tyranny, or
inundation of exorbitant power; but also of security to our spiritual
liberties, as Christians, from the invasion of those that desire to domineer
and lord it over the consciences of their brethren: both which seem so linked
and twisted to each other, that what conduces to the security of one, has no
smail tendency to the establishing of the other also, and do commonly so
inseparable accompany each other, that wheresoever there is a free state, or
equal commonwealth, liberty of conscience is inviolably preserved, together
with convenient and inoffensive latitude in toleration of religions, as in
Holland, Venice, etc.

Now, for the better securing of these, we are to take notice of what persons
or things are most inconsistent with, and have greatest enmity to, the interest
of a free state or equal commonwealth.

For discovery of which, as I know it a crime of presumption unpardonable, for
one seated in the vale of a private condition, to pretend a fairer prospect
into the interest of state, than those Providence has placed in the
watch-towers, and on the pinnacles of power; yet by reason a by-stander may be
allowed to discern something of the game; and he that is out of play, to show
the ground to a bowler; and one that stands below may better know what props
the foundation rests upon, than he that is on the top of the tower: and it
being the duty of every one to cast in his mite to the vaster treasures of
their knowledge, to whom Providence has committed the conduct of our affairs,
I am bold, being partly thereto encouraged by that great candor wherewith I
observe the like tribute of zealous and faithful hearts are already received,
to tender what in my apprehension may have a tendency to a future settlement
and security. I confess, were we at this time bowed down under the government
of a monarch, in whose court every counselor of state is to be taken on an
implicit faith to enjoy by his prince's patent and favor, a monopoly of reason
as well as honor; and that his understanding is no less elevated than
according to the proportion his titles and fortunes swell above the tide of
other men's: I might justly be accounted absurd to offer any thing of this
nature, as knowing with what scorn and contempt so rash an adventure would be
encountered.

But in a free state, where the greatest senators are not ashamed to confer
with the meanest persons, I am not afraid to put myself into the crowd of those
that make addresses of this nature: wherefore, to conclude this parenthesis,
and resume the thread of our discourse, there are nor, as I presume, past two
or three sorts of persons, whose interests run counter to, or, indeed are not
twisted and wound up in the same botton with that of a free state, or at least
in the spinning out of a few years, might not be interwoven therewith; and
those are, the Lawyer, the Divine, and Hereditary Nobility; as for the Cavalier
and Courtier, I question not but a little time would breathe out their
antipathy, and warp their affections to a perfect compliance, and closing with
an equal commonwealth.

Discontent productive of Human Happiness and the Elevation of the Species.
From Young's Spirit of Athens.
WHY are we tenacious of liberty, but because it gives an open field to that
exertion of our minds or bodies, whence alone pleasure can proceed? -- whether
they are employed in tracking a wild beast, or in exploring a system, it is the
same pleasure; and restriction to the man who has once tasted it, is surely
worse than death.

The discontented spirit of mankind, so often and so much deprecated by every
trifler in metaphysics, is then found to be consistent with their happiness,
and necessary to their improvement. Divinely is it thus instituted, that the
activity of our faculties should constitute our happiness, whilst what blesses
the individual, enriches the species; and the pursuit which gives pleasure to
each, tends to some acquisition productive of further distinctions to humanity,
and elivating it more and more, in the system in which it makes a part.

AN ODE, IN IMITATION OF ALCAEUS.
By Sir WILLIAM JONES, Knight. One of the Judges of the Supreme Court of Judicature
at Calcutta.
WHAT constitutes a State?
Not high-rais'd battlement, or labored mound,
Thick wall, or moated gate;
Not cities proud with spires, and turrets crowned;
Where, laughing at the storm, rich navies ride;
Not starr'd and spangled courts,
Where low-bred baseness wafts perfume to pride;
No: -- MEN, high-minded MEN,
With powers as far above dull brutes endu'd,
In sorest, brake, or den,
As beasts excel cold rocks and brambles rude;
Men, who their duties know,
But know their rights, and, knowing, dare maintain,
Prevent the long-aim'd blow,
And crush the tyrant while they rend the chain:
These constitute a State,
And sovereign LAW, that State's collected will,
Over thrones and globes elate
Sits Empress, crowning good, repressing ill;
Smit by her sacred frown
The fiend Discrection like a vapor sinks,
And even the all-dazzling Crown
Hides his faint rays, and at her bidding shrinks,
Such was this heav'n-lov'd isle,
That Lesbos fairer and the Cretan shore!
No more shall freedom smile?
Shall Britons languish, and be MEN no more?
Since all must life resign,
Those sweet rewards, which decorate the brave,
It Is folly to decline,
And steal inglorious to the silent grave.
Every Man is born with an imprescriptible Claim to a Portion of the Elements.
From Barlow's Advice to the Privileged Orders.
IT is a truth, I believe, not to be called in question, that every man is born
with an imprescriptible claim to a portion of the elements, which portion is
termed his birthright. Society may vary this right, as to its form, but never
can destroy it in substance. She has no control over the man till he is born;
and the right being born with him, and being necessary to his existence, she
can no more annihilate the one than the other, though she has the power of
new-modelling both. But on coming into the world, he finds that the ground
which nature had promised him is taken up, and in the occupancy of others;
society has changed the form of his birthright; the general stock of elements,
from which the lives of men are to be supported, has undergone a new
modification; and his portion among the rest. He is told, that he cannot claim
it in its present form, as an independent inheritance; that he must draw on the
stock of society, instead of the stock of nature; that he is banished from the
mother and must cleave to the nurse. In this unexpected occurrence he is
unprepared to act; but knowledge is a part of the stock of society: and an
indispensible part to be allotted to the portion of the claimant, is
instruction relative to the new arrangement of natural right. To withhold this
instruction, therefore, would be not merely the omission of a duty, but the
commission of a crime; and society in this case would sin against the man,
before the man could sin against society.

I should hope to meet the assent of all unprejudiced readers, in carrying this
idea still further. In cases where a person is born of poor parents, or finds
himself brought into the community of men, without the means of subsistence,
society is bound in duty to furnish him with the means. She ought not only to
instruct him in the artificial laws by which property is secured, but in the
artificial industry by which it is obtained. She is bound in justice as well as
policy, to give him some art or trade. For the reason of his incapacity is,
that she has usurped his birthright; and this restoring it to him in another
form, more convenient to both parties. The failure of society in this branch of
her duty, is the occasion of much the greater part of the evils that call for
criminal jurisprudence. The individual feels that he is robbed of his natural
right; he cannot bring his process to reclaim it from the great community by
which he is overpowered; he therefore feels authorized in reprisal; in taking
another's goods to replace his own. And it must be confessed, that in
numberless instances the conduct of society justifies him in this proceeding,
she has seized his property and commenced the war against him.

Some, who perceive these truths, say that it is unsafe for society to publish
them; but I say it is unsafe not to publish them. For the party from which the
mischief is expected to arise, has the knowledge of them already, and has acted
upon them in all ages. It is the wise who are ignorant of these things, and not
the foolish. They are truths of nature; and in them the teachers of mankind are
the only party that remains to be taught: It is a subject on which the logic of
indigence is much clearer than that of opulence. The latter reasons from
contrivance, the former from feeling; and God has not endowed us with false
feelings, in things that so weightily concern our happiness.

None can deny that the obligation is much stronger on me to support my life,
than to support the claim that my neighbor has to his property. Nature
commands the first, society the second: -- In one I obey the laws of God, which
are universal and eternal; in the other the laws of man, which are local and
temporary.

It has been the folly of old governments to begin every thing at the wrong
end, and to erect their institutions on an inversion of principle. This is more
sadly the case in their systems of jurisprudence, than is commonly imagined.
Compelling justice is always mistaken for rendering justice. But this important
branch of administration consists not merely in compelling men to be just to
each other, and individuals to society, -- this is not the whole, nor is it the
principal part, nor even the beginning, of the operation. The source of power
is said to be the source of justice; but it does not answer this description,
as long as it contents itself with compulsion. Justice must begin by flowing
from its source; and the first, as well as the most important object is, to
open its channels from society to all the individual members. This part of the
administration being well devised and diligently executed, the other parts
would lessen away by degrees to matters of inferior consideration.

It is an undoubted truth, that our duty is inseparably connected with our
happiness; and why should we despair of convincing every member of society of a
truth so important for him to know? Should any person object, by saying, that
nothing like this has ever been tried. Society has hitherto been cursed with
governments whose existence depended on the extinction of truth. Every moral
light has been smothered under the bushel of perpetual imposition; from whence
it emits but faint and glimmering rays, always insufficient to form any
luminous system on any of the civil concerns of men. But these covers are
crumbling to the dust, with the governments which they support; and the
probability becomes more apparent, the more it is considered, that society is
capable of curing all the evils to which it has given birth.

HOW TO CONSTITUTE A FREE GOVERNMENT.
From CATO'S LETTERS.
THE only Secret in forming a Free Government, is to make the interests of the
Governors and of the Governed the same, as far as human policy can contrive.
Liberty cannot be preserved any other way. Men have long found, from the
weakness and depravity of themselves and one another, that most men will act
for interest against duty, as often as they dare. So that to engage them to
their duty, interest must be linked to the observance of it, and danger to the
breach of it. Personal advantages and security, must be the rewards of duty and
obedience; and disgrace, torture, and death, the punishment of treachery and
corruption.

Human wisdom has yet found out but one certain expedient to effect this; and
that is, to have the concerns of all directed by all, as far as possibly can
be: and where the persons interested are too numerous, or live too distant to
meet together on all emergencies, they must moderate necessity by prudence, and
act by deputies whose interest is the same with their own, and whose property
is so intermingled with theirs, and so engaged upon the same bottom, that
principals and deputies must stand and fall together. When the deputies thus
act for their own interest, by acting for the interest of their principals;
when they can make no law but what they themselves, and their posterity, must
be subject to; when they can give no money, but what they must pay their share
of; when they can do no mischief, but what must fall upon their own heads in
common with their countrymen; their principals may then expect good laws,
little mischief, and much frugality.

Here therefore lies the great point of necessity and care in forming the
constitution, that the persons entrusted and representing, shall either never
have an interest detached from the persons entrusting and represented, or never
the means to pursue it. Now to compass this great point effectually, no other
way is left but one of these two, or rather both, namely, to make the deputies
so numerous, that there may be no possibility of corrupting the majority; or,
by changing them so often, that there is no sufficient time to corrupt them,
and to carry the ends of that corruption. The people may be very sure, that the
major part of their deputies being honest will keep the rest so; and that they
will all be honest, when they have no temptations to be knaves.

The glorious Prospect of better Times, which are fast approaching.
From The Critic Philosopher.
He has showed strength with his arm: he has SCATTERED the proud in the
imagination of their hearts. He has PUT DOWN the mighty from their seats, and
EXALTED them of LOW degree. He has FILLED the HUNGRY with good things, and the
RICH he has sent EMPTY AWAY. Luke i. ver. 51.
THE Gothic pride of absurd prejudices, cemented by the ignorance and weakness
of our forefathers, must fall to the ground; and on its ruin must be raised the
immortal temple of reason, of liberty, of justice! At the sight of this
glorious fabric, despotism will shudder, tyranny shall be struck dumb;
irritated pride must murmur; unmasked avidity shall be confounded; and
philosophy, smiling at her great work, will secretly applaud herself for the
trophy thus erected to her honor. The RIGHTS OF MAN, engraved by nature upon
his heart, in indelible characters, restored to their original perfection: that
primitive equality on which all were formed, must take place of artificial
inequality effected by self-created nobility, be placed on a proper footing,
and change its nature, objects, and pretensions; the clergy must be reformed
and brought back to that simple, evangelical modesty, that most beautiful
ornament, which a proud and worldy spirit has long disfigured.

The rich must be convinced, that while they live sumptuously, and while the
POOR are fed with a few of the scanty crumbs which fall from their table, they
act quite contrary to the tenor of that gospel, which they say they believe. It
is not in nature or reason, that one man should destroy twenty thousand a year,
and another should be left without the common necessaries of life: -- No, every
creature which nature has formed with a mouth and digestive powers, has an
equal right to participate of her blessings.

To conclude, we trust that the glorious fabric of freedom, reared up, as it
were, by the hand of Onipotence, will soon appear. A fabric that will stand
fir^ and un^haken, as being fenced round with barriers, which will mock the
dark designs of treachery, and bid defiance to the impotent efforts of
despotism and corruption.

Mr. Burke's tyrannical system of politics, and confined ideas of liberty,
published in his late pamphlet, must fall to the ground; and every scheme, or
plan, made use of to oppress the human race, must be destroyed. Wealth and
property must be wrested from the hands of rapacity and indolence, and divided
amongst mankind at large, in proportion as they merit it. Then will those of
useful invigorated industry shine as useful members of the community. It Is
true, nations like individuals seem subject to infatuation, and while they are
under its influence, they submit to treatment which would shock them, if they
were in their proper senses. Men can assign no other reason for bearing
oppression, than that they bore it before. -- The world is grown old in error,
I grant, but it should not on that account preclude reform. Notwithstanding its
great age, society is hardly yet got beyond its first elements! Legislators
have hitherto only drawn lines or boundaries to confine mankind, instead of
tracing plans to make them happy. In all their general institutions, they seem
to have been ignorant that man is a being formed for love and friendship: they
have rather considered him as in a state of perpetual warfare with his
fellow creatures. Hence it is, that the systems of all governments, and the
spirit of their laws, have been directed rather to separate than to unite the
different members of society; by granting peculiar privileges to some; by
restraining others; by rendering the meltitude passive, and giving activity and
power only to a few; by occasioning superabundance in palaces, and famine in
the peasant's cot; by counteracting, in short, the designs of God and nature,
in the impartial diffusion of their blessings.

Laws, founded upon such unnatural principles, have kept the whole machine of
society in a state of perpetual discord and distraction. They have hindered the
rich from becoming humane, by giving a sanction to their insolent luxuries.
They have robbed the poor of every right, even of permission to utter their
complaints: they have chained down genius; clipped the wings of thought; and
chilled, with freezing pressure the warm sallies of sensibility: -- By treating
man as a ferocious animal, those laws have made him so in reality. They made
him jealous of his fellow creatures: they erected a wall of prejudice and
division between one people and another: their voice, like that of demons;
crying out to the inhabitants of every country, be guarded against strangers
and foreigners, and look upon them as your natural enemies. -- By these means,
a sort of constant hostility has been kept up in the universe, man being at war
with man, nation with nation, and empire with empire!

We have a book, which we call our guide to eternal happiness; it teaches us,
that all the human race descended from one man, and that we are all brethren;
yet we are, by our own laws, daily enacting a specific distinction, and giving
one part of us a statute authority to commit rapine and plunder the other. We
believe that a divine prophet came down, exerted himself, and died for the
redemption of all nations from misery and punishment; and while we sacrifice to
him for this unparalelled love, we overwhelm one another with the very evils,
which he, by his examples and sufferings, taught us to avoid.

THE ADVANTAGES OF FREEDOM OF SPEECH.
From THE CANDID PHILOSOPHER.
EVERY one will allow, that freedom of thought ought not, and cannot be
restrained, however freedom of speech may be so. The judge observed very justly
to a satirical author, that the law forbade him to call him rogue. "I know it,
my lord," replied as justly the arch wag; "but the law does not forbid my
thinking your lordship one."

Since, then, freedom of thought cannot be taken from a man, and is confessedly
useful, let us briefly consider the advantages of Freedom of Speech.

And here a most excellent author occurs to me, and I shall give his sentiments
on the subject, as nearly as I can remember, they being perfectly agreeable to
my own: --

The passions are not to be extinguished but with life: To forbid, therefore,
people to speak, is to forbid them to feel. -- The more men express of their
hate and resentment, perhaps the less they retain; and sometimes they vent the
whole that way; but these passions, where they are smothered, will be apt to
fester, to grow venomous, and to discharge themselves by a more dangerous organ
than the mouth; even by an armed and vindictive hard. Less dangerous is a
railing mouth than an heart filled with bitterness and curses; and more
terrible to a prince ought to be the secret execrations of his people than
their open revilings, or than even the assaults of his enemies. In truth, where
no liberty is allowed to speak of governors, besides that of praising them,
their praises will be little regarded. Their tenderness and aversion to have
their conduct examined will be (...) to prompt people to think their conduct
guilty or (...); to suspect their management and designs to be worse tha^
perhaps they are; and to become turbulent and seditious, rather than be forced
to be silent,

THE MARSEILLES MARCH, OR HYMN.
YE sons of France! awake to glory,
Hark! hark! what myriads bid you rise!
Your children, wives, and grandsires hoary,
Behold their tears, and hear their cries.
Shall hateful tyrants, mischief breeding,
With hireling hosts a ruffian band,
Affright and desolate the land,
While peace and liberty lie bleeding!
To arms, to arms, ye brave,
The avenging sword unsheath;
March on, march on, all hearts resolved
On victory or death.
Now, now the dangerous storm is rolling,
Which treacherous kings, confed'rate, raise:
The dogs of war, let loose, are howling,
And so! our fields and cities blaze.
And shall we basely view the ruin,
Wh^le lawless force, with guilty stride,
Spread desolation far and wide,
With crimes and blood his hands embruing?
To arms, to arms, ye brave, etc.
With luxury and pride surrounded,
The vile insatiate despots dare,
Their thirst of power and gold unbounded,
To mete and vend the light and air.
Like beasts of burden would they load us,
Like Gods would bid their slaves adore;
But man is man, and who is more?
Then shall they longer lash and goad us?
To arms, to arms, ye brave, etc.
O Liberty! can man resign thee,
Once having felt thy generous flame!
Can dungeons, bolts and bars confine thee,
Or whips thy noble spirit tame!
Too long the world has wept bewailing,
That falsehood's dagger tyrants wield;
But Freedom is our sword and shield,
And all their arts are unavailing.
To arms, to arms, ye brave, etc.
Translation of an Extract from a late Publication, entitled, Les Ruins, by
M. De Volney, Member of the late Constitutive National Assembly of France, and
author of "Travels in Syria and Egypt."
[This book is supposed to be written on the Ruins of Palmyra, where a Spectre,
or Genius, appears to the Author, and after taking him up into the Heavens,
shows him below, our Hemisphere: accounts for past, and foretells many future
Revolutions; after which the work thus proceeds:]
SCARCE had the genius finished these words, before an immense noise was heard
toward the west, when that way directing my attention, I perceived within the
extremity of the Mediterranean, within the domains of one of the nations of
Europe, a prodigious movement, such as when, in the bosom of a vast city, a
violent sedition breaking out in all its parts, one sees an innumerable people
agitated and rushing like torrents into the streets and public places. And my
ears, struck with shouts which rent the skie^, distinguished at intervals these
phrases.

"What is then this prodigy? What is this cruel and mysterious scourge? We are
a numerous nation, yet we want hands! We have an excellent soil, and we want
necessaries! We are active, laborious, and we live in indigence! We pay
enormous taxes, and yet we are told they are not sufficient! We are at peace
abroad, and neither our persons nor our property are in safety at home! What is
then the concealed enemy which devours us?"

And certain voices, issuing from the bosom of the multitude, answered, "Erect
a distinct standard, around which let all those assemble who, by useful
labors, support and nourish society; and you will then discover the enemy
which consumes you."

And the standard being raised, the nation was all at once divided into two
bodies, unequal, and of an aspect in all respects different from each other:
the one innumerable and comparatively almost total, presented in the general
poverty of their apparel, and in the meagre tanned air of their countenance,
appearances of misery and labor; the small group, an inconsiderable fraction,
presented in all the splendor of clothes, bedaubed with gold and silver, and
in the plumpness of their faces, symptoms of leisure and abundance. And,
considering these men more attentively, I perceived that the great body was
composed of laborers, of ar^izans, of shopkeepers, of all the professions
useful to society; and that in the small group there were only priests of the
higher orders, financiers, nobles, great officers of armies: in a word, nothing
but the civil, military, and religious agents of government.

After these two bodies had, in the presence of each other, face to face,
considered one another with astonishment, I saw indignation and rage spring up
on the one hand, and a kind of fear and dismay on the other; when the great
body said to the small one --.

"Why have you separated from us? Are you not then o^ (...) number?"

"N^," answered the small group, "ye are but the people, we are a different
kind of beings; we are of a distinguished class; who have our laws, our
customs, our rights pecular to ourselves."

People. And what business do you follow in our society?

Distinguished Class. None; -- we are not made to work.

People. How then have you acquired your riches?

Distinguished Class. By taking ^^e trouble to govern you.

People. Really! Let us see what it is you call government? We toil and sweat,
and you enjoy; we produce, and you dissipate: -- Distinguished Class, who are
not the people, form a separate nation, if you please, and take the trouble to
govern yourselves.

Whereupon the small group, deliberating on the new case, a few of the most
enlightened of them said -- "Let us join ourselves again to the people, and
share with them their burdens and their occupations, for they are men as well
as ourselves;" but the rest said, "No, it would be a shame, it would be
infamous to confound ourselves with the vulgar; they are made to serve us; we
are men of a different race."

And the Civil Governors said, "This people is mild, and naturally servile, let
us speak to them of the king and of the law, and they will presently re-enter
into their duty. People! The king wills it, the sovereign ordains it."

People. The king can only will the good of the people; the sovereign can only
ordain according to the law.

Civil Governors. The law enacts that ye be submissive.

People. The law is the general will, and we will a new order.

Civil Governors. You will be a rebellious people.

People. Nations cannot revolt; tyrants are the only rebels.

Civil Governors. The king is with us, and he commands you to submit.

People. The kingly office originates in the people who elect one of themselves
to execute it for the general good; kings, therefore, are essentially
indivisible from their nations. The king of our's then cannot be with you; you
only possess his phantom.

And the Military Governors stepping forward said. "The people are timid, let
us menace them; they only obey force. Soldiers, chastise this insolent rabble!

People. Soldiers! you are of our own blood; Will you strike your brothers? If
the people perish, who will maintain the army?

And the soldiers, grounding their arms, said to their chiefs, we are also the
people, we are the enemies of --

Whereupon, the Ecclesiastical Governors said -- "There is now but one resource
left; the people are superstitious; we must frighten them with the names of God
and of religion.

Our dearly beloved brethren, our children -- God has appointed us to govern
you.

People. Produce to us your heavenly powers.

Priests. You must have faith: reason will lead you astray.

People. Do you govern then without reason?

Priests. God ordains peace. Religion pr^scribes obedience.

People. Peace pre-supposes justice. Obedience has a right to know the law it
bows to.

Priests. Man is only born into this world to suffer.

People. Do you then set us the example.

Priests. Will you live without Gods, and without kings?

People. We will live without tyrants, without impostors.

Priests. Meditators, interceders are necessary to you.

People. Meditators between us and God, between us and kings! Courtiers and
priests, your services cost us too dear: we will henceforward treat for
ourselves immediately with the principals.

And hereupon the small group said, "We are undone: the multitude are
enlightened.

And the people answered, You are saved; for inasmuch as we are enlightened, we
will not abuse our power; we wish for nothing beyond our rights. We have
resentments, but we forget them: We were slaves, we might command, and retort
upon you your own principles: we will only be free: we are so!

This dialogue between the people, and the idle classes, is the analysis of all
society. All the vices* all the political disorders, are deducible from this
source; Men who do nothing, and who devour the substance of others; men who
arrogate to themselves particular rights, exclusive privileges of riches and
idleness; such men are the source and definition of all the abuses which exist
among all nations. Compare the Mamloucks of Egypt, the nobles of Europe, the
Nairs of India, the Emirs of Arabia, the Patricians of Rome, the Christian
Priests, the Imans, the Bramins, the Bonzes, the Lamas, etc. you will always
find the same results, Idle men living at the expense of those who work.

ON THE MINISTRY OR CLERGY: BY THE AUTHOR OF A PLEA FOR A COMMONWEALTH.
IT being the method of Heaven, for judgment to begin at the house of God. I
shall first speak to the reformation of the public ministry or national clergy,
so far as they seem prompted by their interest to run counter to that of a
commonwealth; and though I know (notwithstanding the complexion of their coat,
which seems, or at least ought to promise greater moderation) it is no less
dangerous to meddle, or in the least exasperate this generation of men, than to
puddle in a hornets nest, or encounter a bear robbed of her whelps: yet my
conscience bearing me witness, I have neither malice to their persons, nor envy
their preferments: I shall not forbear to give in my testimony against the
corrupt interest and principles wherewith they are leavened: where by the way,
I must profess myself unsatisfied of what ground or foundation may (since the
Jewish priesthood was abolished) be found in scripture, for that distinction
between the laity and clergy, which custom has introduced into most Christian
commonwealths: my zeal and charity being apt to prompt me to a like wish with
that of Moses, That all the Lords people were prophets: or rather, to think all
the Lord's people are holy, and to be accounted a royal priesthood to God, Nor
can I persuade myself learning is so necessary a qualification for teaching the
gospel, as some would make us believe, having observed our Savior altogether
rejected the wisdom of man, and made not use (...) the learned scribes, or
doctors of the law, but simple and illiterate fishermen, to be the first
heralds of peace unto the world, to proclaim goodwill to the children of men,
to be the first evangelists, and messengers of the glad tidings of salvation:
and indeed the introduction of learned rabbis into the church of Christ, and
blending divinity with the learning of the gentiles, seems to run counter to
the whole design of the gospel, which is by the foolishness of preaching, to
confound the wisdom of the world. Certainly the sword of God's spirit will be
able to do its work, though not managed by the skilful hand of an artist, or
master of fence, that has been brought up in the polemicks and digladiations
of human literature, vain philosophy, or sophistry of the schools,

Nor do I find that the apostles, and those sent forth by Christ, to be the
Catholic Bishops of the whole earth, and to teach all nations, did assume unto
themselves any distinction of garb, color, or habits, from the ^est of
Christ's flock; and I have read of some that were censured in the primitive
times, or first centuries, for wearing large black cloaks; for what is this but
to bring back those jewish types and shadows, to cloud and obscure the
brightness of the Gospel's dispensation, that were long since dispelled and
abrogated by the rising of the Sun of righteousness upon the world? For as one
who has lately well observed, What is the canonical girdle, and formality of
doctors wearing boots, but as types and allusions to those places, of having
their loins, girt, and their feet shod with the preparation of the gospel, etc?

Nor do I read that they who were called to the ministry, did look upon that as
a writ of case, or sufficient warrant to quit their other particular callings,
trades, and vocations; but that Paul wrought with his hands, that he might not
become burdensome; and it is generally presumed our Savior wrought at his
father's trade; not that I would not have those that minister in spiritual
things, reap of other's carnal; but that it seems more according to the rule
and president of the gospel, that they should be content with what voluntary
contribution, God shall move the people's hearts unto, than by force and rigor
of law exact a maintenance.

And when I find the apostle saluting the church in Caesar's family, I am
prompted to wish, that all our houses were chapels unto the Lord, and that our
families (like that of Caesar's) contained a church within them. I am sure it
is no new observation, that the greatest heat and zeal of religion has been
always found in conventicles and private meetings; which suggests unto my
thoughts, no small ground of suspicion, that our parochial churches, bells,
together with the whole order, pomp, method, and formality of our national
clergy, and public worship, stands upon no other foundation than that of human
invention, which by the stream of corrupt times, have been carried beyond the
pattern and president of the primitive ages, and become very unlike and
dissonant to the examplar Christ and his apostles left us.

Nor am I satisfied, if the generality of men are incapable of receiving the
truth and power of godliness, whether the endeavors of giving all men a
tincture of religion, and forcing them into the garb and livery of an outward
profession, which is the great design of, and plea for a national clergy be
more acceptable unto God than morality. I know under the law, God had a
peculiar people, that were picked and culled (as it were) from the dross and
rubbish of the rest of mankind, that were to be built up in an outward
profession, and national way of public worship, adorned with many ceremonies,
together with much pomp, and outward splendor, but whether religion be not now
under the gospel, a more inward, refined, spiritual and less visible thing. I
humbly submit to serious consideration. And if I am herein mistaken (for I
pretend not to infallibility) I should be thankful to any, God shall be pleased
to make use of as instruments to better inform me; for I would willingly see
and know my errors.

But if it be here objected, that the primitive times were times of
persecution, in which the church was (as it were) under hatches, and
christianity in its infancy, and the professors thereof forced to hide
themselves in holes of the rocks, and caves of the earth; but now, having
gained ground upon the world, and being in better plight, and since it is come
up out of Egypt from the house of bondage, from under the pressures,
persecutions, afflictions, and burdens of the heathenish taskmasters, under
which it formerly groaned, ought according to the example of the Israelites, be
adorned with the spoils of the heathen, etc.

I answer, that as the kingdom of God comes not with observation, so it
consists not in any outward pomp and splendor. Its said, the king's daughter
(or spouse of Christ) is all glorious within; and by how much the more ground
christianity has gained upon the world, by so much the less need does it now
stand of the wisdom and learning of men to commend and propagate it, than when
it was to encounter with so great opposition, and such potent antagonists, as
under the heathen emperors it met withal. And if the truth did then under all
those disadvantages not only make good its ground but so much gained upon the
world, when it had few other champions than poor fishermen, and illiterate
mechanics, how much less need it now fear brow-beating, when the power of God
has subdued so many nations to the knowledge and obedience of his truth, and
has made princes of the earth bow unto the scepter of his Son?

Whether the nation is yet willing to part with their calves they have so long
worshipped, I know not, but I am sure it has pleased God to give them a great
discovery of the corruption, pride, ambition and flattery of this sort of men;
how willing they could be to reap their own profit, though sown in, and
springing from the ruin of the nation's liberty and felicity; how willingly
they could sell their brethren slaves into the hands of tyranny and oppression,
to purchase to themselves dominion and lordship.

THE DESIRE OF GLORY NATURALLY GENERATED IN REPUBLICS.
FROM THE PERSIAN LETTERS
THE sanctuary of honor, reputation, and virtue; seems to be placed in
republics, and in those states where a man may with safety pronounce the word,
country. At Rome, Athens, and Sparta, honor was the only reward for the most
signal services. A crown of oak-leaves, or laurel, a statue, an inscription,
was an immence return for a battle won, or a city taken.

There, a man that had performed a noble action, thought himself sufficiently
recompensed in the action itself. He could not see one of his countrymen,
without feeling the inward satisfaction of knowing himself his benefactor; he
reckoned the ^^^ber of his services by that of his fellow citizens. Any man is
capable of doing a piece of service to another man; but it is somewhat divine
to contribute to the happiness of a whole society.

The manly Spirit produced in France, by their new System of Equality.
From Dr. Moore's Journal.
IT was natural to think that the introduction of the term egalite would,
produce an universal insolence among the lower classes of people in France,
toward their superiors: but I confess I have not hitherto remarked any
disagreeable instances of this nature. No person, indeed, of whatever rank, is
allowed to dress his footmen in livery, but every one is allowed to have as
many footmen as he pleases; and when L. L -- 's carriage was driving, a day or
two since, in at the gates of the Louvre, it was stopped by the sentinel, who
had observed that the hammer-cloth had fringes of a different color; and
informed his lordship, that such a kind of distinction was no where permitted
in France* being contrary to that egalite, which every Frenchman had sworn to.
The coachman had been ordered never to use any but a plain cloth: but having a
fringed one in his possession, of which he was very vain, he had ventured to
adorn his coach-box with it, on this unfortunate day. As the poor fellow was
taking it off with a very mortified air, the valet de-place reproached him for
having put it on; which the sentinel over hearing, said angrily to the
coachman, ll sied bien a un gueux comone toi d'etre aristocrate. (It well
becomes a beggar like you to give yourself the airs of an aristocrate.)

A few days since, I saw a man dressed in the uniform of a general officer*
come up to a poor fellow, who with a pike in his hand, stood sentinel at a
gate, and addressing him by the name of "Citoyen Soldat," asked him the way to
a particular street.

The pikemen were formerly considered as of a rank inferior to the national
guards, who are armed with muskets; but of late they are put on a footing, and
do duty together; but still it might have been expected, that this gentleman's
rank in the army would have commanded the strongest marks of respect from a
common soldier, if his laced coat failed to produce them in a poor fellow
almost in rags.

"Tenez, mon camarade," said the pikeman; you will first turn to the right, and
then walk straight on until, etc.

The officer having heard the directions, returned thanks to the Citoyen
Soldat, and moving his hat, walked away.

An extract from the Examination of James Harrington, when confined in the
Tower, by the Earl of Lauderdale, etc.
Har. MY Lord, in the preamble, you charge me with being eminent in principles,
contrary to the king's government, and the laws of this nation. Some, my lord*
have aggravated this, saying* that I, being a private man, have been so mad as
to meddle with politics: what had a private man to do with government? My Lord,
there is not any public person, not any magistrate, that has written in the
politics worth a button. All that have been excellent in this way, have been
private men, my lord* as myself. There is Plat^ there is Aristotle, there is
Livi, there is Machiavel. My Lord, I can sum up Aristotle's politics in a very
few words; he says there is the barbarous monarchy, (such a one where the
people have no voices in making the laws): he says there is the heroic monarchy
(such a one where the people have their votes in making the laws); and then he
says there is the democracy; and affirms, that a man CANNOT be said to have
liberty, but in a democracy only.


My Lord Lauderdale, who thus far had been very attentive, at this showed some
impatience. Har. I SAY Aristotle says so: I have not said so much. And under
what prince was it? Was it not under Alexander the greatest prince then in the
world? I beseech you, my lord, did Alexander hang up Aristotle, did he molest
him? Livi for a commonwealth is one of the fullest authors: did not he write
under Agustus Coesar? did Coesar hang up Livi did he molest him? Machiavel,
what a commonwealth's man was he? but he wrote under the Medici, when they were
princes in Florence, did they hang up Malchiavel, or did they molest him? I
have done no otherwise than as the greatest politicians, the king will do no
otherwise than as the greatest princes. But, my Lord, these authors had not
that to say for themselves that I have; I did not write under a prince, I wrote
under a usurper, Oliver. He having started up into the throne, his officers (as
pretending to be for a commonwealth) kept a murmuring, at which he told them,
that he knew not what they meant, nor themselves: but let any of them show him
what they meant, by a commonwealth (or that there was any such thing) they
should see that he sought not himself, but to make good the cause. Upon this
some sober men came to me, and told me, if any man in England could show what a
commonwealth was, it was myself. Upon this persuasion I wrote, and after I had
written, Oliver never answered his officers as he had done before, therefore I
wrote not against the king's government. And for the law, if the law could have
punished me, Oliver had done it; therefore my writing was not obnoxious to the
law. After Oliver, the Parliament said that they were a commonwealth, I said
they were not, and proved it; insomuch that the Parliament accounted me a
cavalier and one that had no other design in my writing, than to bring in the
King, and now the King, first of any man, makes me a roundhead.


Lord. These things are out of doors; if you be no plotter, the King does not
reflect upon your writings.


Notwithstanding the apparent innocence of our author, he was still detained a
close prisoner many months.

A SONG.
Sung by Mr. Meredith at Liverpool, on the Anniversary of the French Revolution.
OVER the vine-cover'd hills and gay regions of France.
See the day star of Liberty rise;
Over the clouds of detraction unweared advance,
And hold its new course through the skies.
An effulgence so mild, with a luster so bright,
All Europe with wonder surveys;
And from deserts of darkness; and dungeons of night,
Contends for a share of the blaze.
Let Burke, like a bat, from its splendor retire,
A splendor too strong for his eyes;
Let pedants, and fools, his effusions admire,
Intrapt in his cobwebs like flies.
Shall phrenzy and sophistry hope to prevail,
Where reason opposes her weight;
When the welfare of millions is hung on the scale,
And the balance yet trembles with fate?
Ah! who, midst the horrors of night would abide
That can taste the pure breezes of morn,
Or who that has drunk of the chrystaline tide,
To the feculent flood would return?
When the bosom of beauty the throbbing heart meets,
Ah, who can the transport decline?
Or who that has tasted of liberty's sweets,
The prize but with life would resign?
-- But it is over -- high Heaven the decision approves,
Oppression has struggled in vain;
To the hell she has formed superstition removes,
And tyranny bites his own chain.
In the records of time a new era unfolds,
All nature exalts in its birth --
His creation benign, the Creator beholds,
And gives a new charter to earth.
O catch its high import, ye winds as ye blow,
O bear it ye waves as ye roll!
From regions that feel the sun's vertical glow,
To the farthest extremes of the pole.
Equal rights -- equal laws -- to the nations around,
Peace and friendship its precepts impart,
And wherever the footsteps of man shall be found,
May he bind the decree on his heart.
REASONS OF MONARCHY.
[From HARRINGTON's OCEANA]
I HAVE often thought it strange, that among all the governments, either past
or present, the monarchial should so far in extent and number exceed the
popular, as that they could never yet come into comparison. I could never be
persuaded but it was more happy for a people to be disposed of by a number of
persons jointly interested and concerned with them, than to be numbered as the
herd and inheritance of one, to whose lust and madness they were absolutely
subject; and that any man of the weakest reason and generosity, would not
rather choose for his habitation that spot of earth, where there was access to
honor by virtue* and no worth could be excluded, rather than that where all
advancement should proceed from the will of one scarcely hearing or seeing with
his own organs, and gained for the most part by means lewd and indirect: and
all this in the end to amount to nothing else but a more splendid and dangerous
slavery.

He knows nothing, that knows not how superstitiously, the generality of
mankind is given to retain traditions, and how pertinacious they are in the
maintenance of their first prejudices, insomuch that a discovery or more
refined reason is as insupportable to them, as the sun is to an eye, newly
brought out of darkness. Hence opinionativeness (which is commonly proportioned
to their ignorance) and a generous obstinacy, sometimes to death and ruin. So
that it is no wonder if we see many gentlemen, whose education enabled them
only to use their senses and first thoughts, so dazzled with the splendor of a
court, prepossessed with the affection of a prince, or bewitched with some
subdalous favor, that they chose rather any hazard than the enchantment should
be dissolved. Others, perhaps a degree above these, yet in respect of some
title stuck upon the family (which has been as fortunate a mystery of
king-craft as any other) or in reverence to some glorious former atchievments
[minding not that in all these cases the people are the only effective means,
and the king only imaginary] think they should degenerate from bravery in
bringing on a change. Others are withheld by sloth and timorousness, either not
daring, or unwilling to be happy; some looking no further than their private
welfare, indifferent at the multiplication of public evils; others [and these
the worst of all] out of a pravity of nature sacrificing to their ambition and
avarice, and in order to that following any power, concurring with any
machinations, and supporting their authors; while princes themselves [trained
up in these arts, or receiving them by tradition] know how to wind all their
humors to their own advantage, now foisting the divinity of their titles into
pulpits, now amusing the people with pomp and shows, now diverting their hot
spirits to some unprofitable foriegn war [making way to their accursed ends of
revenge or glory, with the effusion of that blood which should be as dear to
them as their own] now stroking the people with some feeble but enforced law,
for which notwithstanding they will be paid [and it is observed the most
notorious tyrants have taken this course] now giving up the eminentest of of
their ministers, [which they part with as indifferently as their robes] to the
rage and fury of the people: so that they are commanded and condemned by the
same mouth, and the credulous and ignorant, believing their king divinely set
over them, sit still, and by degrees grow into quiet and admiration, especially
if lulled asleep with some small continuance of peace (be it ever so injust,
unsound, or dangerous) as if the body politic could not languish of an internal
disease, though its complexion be fresh and cheerful, Those are the reason
which (if I conceive aright) have stupefied the less knowing part of mankind.

THE FREE NOTIONS OF THE ENGLISH.
FROM THE PERSIAN LETTERS.
ALL the nations of Europe are not under equal subjection to their princes: for
instance, the impatient humor of the English seldom gives the king leisure to
extend or strengthen his authority: Submission and obedience are virtues they
very little value themselves upon. They, hold very extraordinary opinions about
this article. According to them there is but one tie that has any effect upon
men, which is that of gratitude: a husband, a wife, a father, a son, are bound
to each other by nothing, but either the love they bear to each other, or
mutual services and benefits; and these various motives of acknowledgement, are
the origin of all kingdoms, and all societies.

But if a prince, instead of endeavoring to make his subjects happy, studies
only how to oppress and destroy them, the foundation of obedience ceases;
nothing ties, nothing obliges them to him, and they return to their natural
liberty. They maintain that no unlimited power can be lawful, because it could
never have a lawful beginning. For we cannot, say they, give to another more
power over us than we have over ourselves: Now we have not an unlimited power
over ourselves; for instance, we cannot touch our own lives; no man upon earth
therefore, conclude they, can have such a power.

High treason, according to them, is nothing but a crime committed by the
weaker against the stronger, by disobeying him, let him disobey him in what way
he will. And accordingly the people of England, happening to prove the stronger
in a contention with one of their kings, declared it to be high treason in a
prince to make war upon his subjects. They have very good reason, therefore to
say, that the precept in their Alcoran, which enjoins obedience to the powers,
is not very hard to follow, since they cannot help following it if they would;
in as much as it is not to the most virtuous that they are bound to submit, but
to the strongest.

The English tell you, that one of their kings having overcome and taken a
prince that rebelled against him, and disputed the crown with him, and
upbraiding him with his treachery and perfidiousness: -- It has been decided
but a moment, answered the unfortunate prince, which of us two is the traitor.

ON LOYALTY. FROM CATO'S LETTERS.
NO good prince will pretend that there is any loyalty due to him further, than
he himself is loyal to the law, and observant of his people, the makers of
kings and of laws. If any man misled by sound and delusion, doubt this, let him
consider what is the design of magistracy, and what the duty of magistrates;
and if he has reason in him, he will find that his duty is only due to those
who perform theirs. That protection and allegiance are reciprocal; that every
man has a right to defend what no man has a right to take: That the divine
right of kings, if they had it, can only warrant them in doing actions that are
divine, and cannot protect them in cruelty, depredation and oppression: That a
divine right to act wickedly, is a contradiction and blasphemy, as it is
Maledictio Supremi Numinis, a reproach upon the Deity, as if he gave any man a
commission to be a devil: That a king in comparison with the universe, is not
so much as a mayor of a town in comparison of a kingdom; and that, were Mr.
Mayor, called king, it would give him no new right; or, if a king were only
called Mr. Mayor, it would not lesson nor abrogate his old jurisdiction: That
they are both civil officers, and that an offense in the lesser is more
pardonable than an offense in the greater. That the doctrines of unbroken
hereditary right, and blind obedience, are the flights and forgeries of
flatterers, who belie Heaven, and abuse men, to make their own court to power,
and that not one of them will stand the trial himself; in fine, that
government, honest and legal government, is imperium legum non hominum, the
authority of law, and not of lust.

These are the principles upon which our government stands, the principles upon
which every free government must stand: and that we Britons, dare tell such
truths, and publish such principles is a glorious proof of our civil and
religious freedom: They are truths which every Briton ought to know, even
children and servants; They are eternal truths, that will remain for ever,
though in too many countries they are dangerous or useless or little known.

Before I have done, I would take notice of another mistake very common,
concerning loyalty: It is indeed a trick more than a mistake; I mean of those
who would assert or rather create a sort of LOYALTY TO MINISTERS, and make
every thing which they do not like, an offense against their master.

FROM SWIFT's WORKS. AN UNPLEASANT LESSON FOR THE PIGS' BETTERS.
I HAD the curiosity to enquire, in a particular manner, by what method great
numbers had procured to themselves high titles of honor, and prodigious
estates; and I confined my enquiry to a very modern period. However, without
granting upon present times, because I would be sure to give no offense, even
to foreigners (for I hope the reader need not be told, that I do not in the
least intend my own country, in what I say upon this occasion) and a great
number of persons were called up, and, upon a very slight examination,
discovered such a scene of infamy, that I cannot reflect upon it without some
seriousness. Perjury, oppression, subbrnation, fraud, pandarism, and the like
infirmities, were amongst the most excuseable arts they had to maintain, and
for these I gave, as it was reasonable great allowance. But, when some
confessed they owed their greatness and wealth to sodomy, or incest; others, to
the prostituting of their own wives and daughters; others to the betraying of
their country, or their prince; some to poisoning, more to the perverting of
justice, in order to destroy the innocent: I hope I may be pardoned, if these
discoveries inclined me a little to abate of that profound veneration which I
am naturally apt to pay to persons of HIGH rank, who ought to be treated with
the utmost respect, due to their sublime dignity, by us their inferiors.

LESSONS FOR THE MONOPOLIZERS OF LAND.
Lesson I.
Lev. Chap. xxv. -- And thou shall number seven sabbaths of years unto thee,
seven times seven years; and the space of the seven sabbaths of years shall be
unto thee forty and nine years. Then shall thou cause the trumpet of the
Jubilee to sound on the tenth day of the seventh month, in the day of atonement
shall ye make the trumpet sound throughout all your land. And ye shall hallow
the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty throughout all the land, unto all the
inkabitants thereof: It shall be a Jubilee unto you: And ye shall return every
man unto his possession, and ye shall return every man unto his family. A
Jubilee shall that fiftieth year be unto you: You shall not sow, nor reap that
which grows of itself in it, nor gather the grapes in it of thy vine
undressed. For it is the Jubilee; it shall be holy unto you: Ye shall eat the
increase thereof out of the field. In the year of the Jubilee, ye shall return
every man unto his possession.

The land shall not be sold for ever: For the land is mine; for ye are
strangers and sojourners with me. And in all the land of your possession ye
shall grant a redemption for the land. If thy brother be waxen poor, and has
sold away some of his possession, and if any of his kin come to redeem it, then
shall he redeem that which his brother sold. And if the man have none to redeem
it; and himself be able to redeem it; then let him count the years of the sale
thereof, and restore the overplus unto the man to whom he sold it; that he may
return unto his possession. But if he be not able to restore it to him, then
that which is sold shall remain in the hand of him that bought, until the year
of jubilee; and in the jubilee it shall go out, and he shall return unto his
possession.

Lesson II.
Isaiah, v. 8. -- Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay field to
field, till there be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of
the earth.

ON EQUALITY. From Puffendorf's Whole Duty of Man, according to the Law of
Nature.
MAN is a creature not only most solicitous for the preservation of himself,
but has of himself so nice an estimation and value, that to diminish any thing
thereof does frequently move in him as great indignation as if a mischief were
done to his body or estate. Nay, there seems to him to be somewhat of dignity
in the appellation of MAN: so that the last and most efficacious argument to
curb the arrogance of insulting men, is ^sually -- I am not a dog, but a man as
well as yourself. Since then human nature is the same in us all, and since no
man will or can cheerfully join in society with any, by whom he is not at least
to be esteemed equal as a man, and as a partaker of the same common nature. It
follows that, among those duties which men owe to each other, this obtains the
second place, That every man esteem and treat another, as naturally equal to
himself, or as one who is a man as well as he:

Now this equality of mankind does not alone consist in this, that men of ripe
age have almost the same strength, or if one be weaker, he may be able to kill
the stronger, either by treachery, or dexterity, or by being better furnished
with weapons: but in this, that though nature may have accomplished one man
beyond another, with various endowments of body and mind: yet nevertheless he
is obliged to an observation of the precepts of the law-natural toward the
meaner person, after the same manner as he himself expects the same ^on others;
and has not therefore any greater liberty given him to insult upon his fellows.
As, on the other side, the niggardliness of nature or fortune cannot of
themselves set any man so low as that he shall be in a worse condition, as to
the enjoyment of common right, than others. But what one man may: rightfully
demand or expect from as another, the same is due to others also
(circumstancies being alike) from him; and whatsoever one shall deem reasonable
to be done by others, the like it is most just he practice himself; For the
obligation of maintaining sociality among mankind, equally binds every man;
neither may one man more than another violate the law of nature, in any part.
Not but that there are other popular reasons which illustrate this equality; to
wit, That we are all descended of the same stock; that we are all born,
nourished, and die after the same manner; and, that God has not given any of us
a certain assurance, that our happy condition in this world shall not at one
time or other be changed. Besides, the precepts of the Christian religion tell
us, that God favors not man for his nobility, power, or wealth, but for
sincere piety, which may as well be found in a mean and humble man, as in those
of high degree.

Now from this equality it follows, That he who would use the assistance of
others in promoting his own advantage, ought to be as free and ready to use his
power and abilities for their service, when they want his help and assistance
on like occasions. For he who requires that other men should do him kindnesses,
and expects himself to be free from doing the like, must be of opinion, that
those other men are below himself and not his equals. Hence as those persons
are the best members of a community, who, without any difficulty, allow the
same things to their neighbors that themselves require of him; so those are
altogether incapable of society, who setting a high rate on themselves, in
regard to others, will take upon them to act any thing toward their neighbor,
and expect greater deference and more respect than the rest of mankind; and in
their insolent manner demanding a greater portion unto themselves of those
things, to which, all men having a common right, they can in reason claim no
larger share than other men: Whence this also is an univerfal duty of the
lawnatural, That no man, who has not a peculiar right ought to arrogate more to
himself than he is ready to allow to his fellows, but that he permit other men
to enjoy equal privileges with himself.

The same e quality also shows what every man's behavior ought to be, when his
business is to distribute justice among others; to wit, that he treat them as
equals, and indulge not that, unless the merits of the cause require it, to
one, which he dentes to another: For, if he do otherwise, he who is
discountenanced is, at the same time, affronted and wronged, and loses somewhat
of the dignity which nature bestowed upon him. Whence it follows, that things
which are in common, are of right to be divided by equal parts among those who
are equal: Where the thing will not admit of division, they who are equally
concerned, are to use it indifferently; and, if the quantity of the thing will
bear it, as much as each party shall think fit; But if this cannot be allowed,
then it is to be used after a stated manner, and proportioned to the number of
the claimants; because it is not possible to find out any other way of
observing equality. But if it be a thing of that nature as not to be capable of
being divided, nor of being possessed in common, then it must be used by turns;
and if this yet will not answer the point, and it is not possible the rest
should be satisfied by an equivalent. the best way must be, to determine
possession by lot; for in such cases, no fitter method can be thought on, to
remove all opinion of partiality and contempt of any party, without debasing
the person whom fortune does not favor,

ON THE ABSURDITY OF UNALTERABLE ESTABLISHMENTS. FROM PRIESTLY ON GOVERNMENT.
HIGHLY as we think of the wisdom of our ancestors, we justly think ourselves,
of the present-age, wiser, and, if we be not blinded by the prejudice of
education, must see, that we can, in many respects, improve upon the
institutions they have transmitted to us. Let us not doubt, but that every
generation in posterity will be as much superior to us in political, and in all
kinds of knowledge, and that they will be able to improve upon the best civil
institutions that we can prescribe for them. Instead then of adding to the
difficulties which we ourselves find, in making the improvements we wish to
introduce, let us make this great and desirable work easier to them than it
has been to us.

However, such is the progress of knowledge, and the enlargement of the human
mind, that, in future time, notwithstanding all obstructions thrown in the way
of human genius, men of great and exalted views will undoubtedly arise, who
will see through, and detest our narrow politics; when the ill-advisers, and
ill-advised authous of these illiberal and contracted schemes, will be
remembered with infamy and execration: When notwithstanding their talents as
statesmen or writers, and though they may have pursued the same mind enslaving
schemes by more artful and less sanguinary methods, they will be ranked among
the Bonners and Gardeners of past ages; they must have been worse than Bonners
and Gardeners, who could pursue the same ends by the same means, in this more
humane and more enlightened age.

England has hitherto taken the lead, in almost every thing, great and good,
and her citizens stand foremost in the annals of fame, as having shaken off the
fetters which hung upon the human mind, and called it forth to the exertion of
its noblest powers. And her constitution has been so far from receiving any
injury from the efforts of these her freeborn enterprising sons, that she is
in part, indebted to them for the unrivalled reputation she now enjoys, of
having the best system of policy in Europe. After weathering so many real
storms, let us not quit the helm at the apprehension of imaginary dangers, but
steadily hold on in what, I trust, is the most glorious course that a
government can be in. Let all the friends of liberty and human nature join to
free the minds of men from the shackles of narrow and impolitic laws. Let us be
free ourselves, and leave the blessings of freedom to our posterity.

In short, it seems to have been the intention of Divine Providence, that
mankind should be, as far as possible, self-taught; that we should attain to
every thing excellent and useful, as the result of our own experience and
observation; that our judgment should be formed by the appearances which, are
presented to them, and our hearts instructed by their own feelings. But by the
unnatural system of rigid, unalterable establishments, we put it out of our
power to instruct ourselves, or to derive any advantage from the lights we
acquire from experience and observation; and thereby, as far as in our power,
we counteract the kind intentions of the Deity in the constitution of the
world, and in providing for a state of constant, though slow improvement in
every thing.

In spite of all the fetters we can lay upon the human mind, notwithstanding
all possible discouragements in the way of free enquiry, knowledge of all kinds
will increase. The wisdom of one generation will be folly in the next. And
that, though we have seen this verified in the history of near two thousand
years, we persist in the absurd maxim of making a preceding generation dictate
to a succeeding one, which is the same thing as making the foolish instruct the
wise; for what is a lower degree of wisdom but comparatively folly?

Were any more laws restraining the liberty of the press in force, it is
impossible to say how far they might be construed to extend. Those already in
being are more than are requisite, and inconsistent with the interests of
truth. Were they to extend further, every author would lie at the mercy of the
ministers of state, who might condemn, indiscriminately, upon some pretense or
other, every work that gave them umbrage; under such circumstances; might fall
some of the greatest and noblest productions of the human mind, if such works
could be produced in those circumstances. For, if men of genius knew they could
not publish the discoveries they made, they would not give free scope to their
faculties, in making and pursuing those discoveries. It is the thought of
publication, and the prospect of fame, which is generally the great incentive
to men of genius to exert their faculties, in attempting the untrodden paths of
speculation. In those unhappy circumstances, writers would entertain a dread of
every new subject. No man could safely indulge himself in any thing bold,
enterprising, and out of the vulgar road; and in all publications we should see
a timidity incompatable with the spirit of discovery. If any towering genius
should arise in those unfavourable circumstances, a Newton in the natural
world; or a Lock, a Hutchinson, a Clarke, or a Harley in the moral, the only
effectual method to prevent their defusing a spirit of enterprise or
innovation, which is natural to such great souls, could be no other than that
which Tarquin so significantly expressed, by taking off the heads of all those
poppies which overlooked the rest. Such men could not but be dangerous, and
give umbrage in a country, where it was the maxim of the government, that every
thing of importance should for ever remain unalterably fixed.

GENERAL POLITICAL APHORISMS OR MAXIMS. FROM HARRINGTON'S WORKS.
TO leave ourselves and posterity to a farther purchase in blood and sweat of
that which we may presently possess, enjoy, and hereafter bequeath to posterity
in peace and glory, is inhuman and impious.

As certainly and suddenly as a good state of health dispels the peevishness
and peril of sickness, does a good state of government the animosity and danger
of parties.

The frame of a commonwealth, having been first proposed and considered,
expedients (in case such should be found necessary for the safe effectual, and
perfect introduction of the same) may with some aim be applied and fitted; as
to a house, when the model is resolved upon, we fit scaffolds in building. But
first to resolve upon expedients, and then to fit to them the frame of a
commonwealth, is as if one should set up props, and then build a house to lean
upon them.

While the civil and religious parts of a commonwealth are in forming, there is
a necessity that she should be supported by an army; but when the military and
provincial parts are rightly formed, she can have no farther use of any other
army. Wherefore at this point, and not till then, her armies are by the
practice of commonwealths, upon slighter occasions, to have half pay for life,
and to be disbanded.

Where there is a standing army, and not a formed government, there the army of
necessity will have dictatorian power.

Where an army subsists upon the pay or riches of a single person, or of a
nobility, that army is always monarchical. Where an army subsists not by the
riches of a single person, nor of a nobility, that army is always popular.

The reason why the nations that have commonwealths use them so well, and
cherish them so much, and yet that so few nations have commonwealths, is, that
in using a commonwealth it is not necessary it should be understood; but in
making a commonwealth, that it be understood is of absolute necessity.

It shall be as soon found when and where the soul of a man was in the body of
a beast, as when or where the soul or freedom natural to democracy, was in any
other form than that only of a senate, and an assembly of the people.

As the soul of man can never be in the body of a beast, unless God make a new
creation; so neither the soul or freedom, natural to democracy, in any other
form whatsoever than that only of a senate and a popular assembly.

To the making of a well ordered commonwealth, there goes little more of pains
or charge, or work without doors, than the establishment of an equal or apt
division of the territory, and the proposing of such election to the divisions
so made, as from an equal foundation may raise equal superstructures; the rest
being but paper work, is as soon done as said or voted.

The highest earthly felicity that a people can ask or God can give, is an
equal and well ordered commonwealth. Such a one among the Israelites was the
reign of GOD; and such a one (for the same reason) may be among Christians the
reign of CHRIST, though not every one in the Christian commonwealth should be
any more a Christian indeed, than every one in the Israelitish commonwealth was
an Israelite indeed.

ADDRESS AND DECLARATION OF THE FRIENDS of Universal PEACE and LIBERTY' Held at
the Thatched House Tavern, St. James's-street, August 20, 1791.
Friends and Fellow Citizens.
AT a moment like the present, when wilful misrepresentations are industriously
spread by the partisans of arbitrary power, and the advocates of passive
obedience and Court-Government; we think it incumbent upon us to declare to the
world our principles, and the motives of our conduct.

We rejoice at the glorious event of the French Revolution.

If it be asked -- What is the French Revolution to us?

We answer -- It is much. Much to us as men: Much to us as Englishmen.

As men, we rejoice in the freedom of twenty-five millions of our fellow men.
We rejoice in the prospect, which such a magnificent example opens to the
world. We congratulate the French nation for having laid the axe to the root of
tyranny, and for erecting Government on the sacred HEREDITARY Rights of MAN. --
Rights which appertain to ALL, and not to any one more than to another. -- We
know of no human authority, superior to that of a whole nation; and we profess
and proclaim it as our principle, that every nation has at all times, an
inherent, indefeasible right to constitute and establish such Government for
itself as best accords with its disposition, interest and happiness.

As Englishmen, we also rejoice, because we are immediately interested in the
French Revolution.

Without enquiring into the justice, on either side of the reproachful charges
of intrigue and ambition, which the English and French courts have constantly
made on each other, we confine ourselves to this observation; -- That if the
Court of France only was in fault, and the numerous wars which have distressed
both countries are chargeable to her alone, that Court now exists no longer;
and the cause and the consequence must now cease together. The French
therefore, by the Revolution they have made, have conquered for us as well as
for themselves; if it be true, that their Court only was in fault and ours
never.

On this state of the case, the French Revolution concerns us immediately. We
are oppressed with a heavy National debt, a burden of taxes, and an expensive
administration of Government; beyond those of any people in the world. We have
also a very numerous poor; and we hold, that the moral obligation of providing
for old age, helpless infancy and poverty, is far superior to that of supplying
the invented wants of courtly extravagance, ambition and intrigue.

We believe there is no instance to be produced, but in England, of seven
millions of inhabitants, which make but little more than one million of
families, paying yearly SEVENTEEN MILLIONS of taxes.

As it has always been held out by all administrations, that the restless
ambition of the Court of France rendered this expense necessary to us for our
own defense; we consequently rejoice as men deeply interested in the French
Revolution; for that Court as we have already said exists no longer and
consequently the same enormous expenses need not continue to us.

Thus rejoicing, as we sincerely do, both as men and Englishmen, as lovers of
universal peace and freedom, and as friends to our national prosperity and a
reduction of our public expenses; we cannot but express our astonishment, that
any part, or any members of our own government, should reprobate the extinction
of that very power in France or wish to see it restored, to whose influence
they formerly attributed (whilst they appeared to lament) the enormous increase
of our own burdens and taxes. What then, Are they sorry that the pretense for
new oppressive taxes, and the occasion for continuing many old taxes, will be
at an end? -- If so, and if it is the policy of Courts and Court Government to
prefer enemies to friends, and a system of war to that of peace, as affording
more pretenses for Places, Offices, Pensions, Revenue and Taxation, it is high
time for the people of every nation to look with circumspection to their own
interest.

Those who pay the expense, and, not those who participate in the emoluments
arising from it, are the persons immediately interested in enquiries of this
kind. We are a part of that National body, on whom this annual expense of
seventeen millions falls; and we consider the present opportunity of the French
Revolution, as a most happy one for lessening the enormous load, under which
this nation groans. If this be not done, we shall then have reason to conclude,
that the cry of intrigue and ambition against other Courts is no more than the
common cant of all Courts.

We think it also necessary to express our astonishment, that a Government
desirous of being called FREE, should prefer connections with the most despotic
and arbitrary powers in Europe. -- We know of none more deserving this
description than those of Turkey and Prussia, and the whole combination of
German despots. -- Separated as we happily are by nature from the tumults of
the continent we reprobate all systems and intrigues which sacrifice (and that
too at a great expense) the blessings of our natural situation. -- Such systems
cannot have a national origin.

If we are asked, What Government is? -- We hold it to be nothing more than a
National Association end we hold that to be the best, which secures to every
man his rights, and promotes the greatest quantity of happiness with the least
expense.

We live to improve, or we live in vain; and therefore we admit of no maxims of
government or policy, on the mere score of antiquity, or other men's authority,
the Old Whigs or the New.

We will exercise the reason with which we are endowed, or we possess it
unworthily. As reason is given at all times, it is for the purpose of being
used at all times.

Among the blessings which the French Revolution has produced to that nation,
we enumerate the abolition of the feudal system of injustice and tyranny, on
the 4th of August, 1789. Beneath the feudal system all Europe has long groaned,
and from it England is not yet free. Game laws, borough-tenures and tyrannical
monopolies of numerous kinds still remain amongst us: but rejoicing as we
sincerely do, in the freedom of others, till we shall happily accomplish our
own, we intended to commemorate this prelude to the universal extirpation of
the feudal system, by meeting on the anniversary of that day, (the 4th. of
August) at the Crown and Anchor. From this meeting we were prevented by the
interference of certain unnamed and sculking persons with the Master of the
Tavern, who informed us that on their representations he could not receive us.
-- Let those who live by, or countenance feudal oppressions, take the reproach
of this ineffectual meanness and cowardice to themselves. They connot stifle
the public declaration of our honest, open, and avowed opinions.

These are our principles, and these our sentiments. They embrace the interest
and happiness of the great body of the nation of which we are a part. As to
riots and tumults, let those answer for them, who by wilful misrepresentations
endeavor to excite and promote them; or, who feek to stun the sense of the
nation, and lose the great cause of public good, in the outrages of a
misinformed mob. We take our ground on principles that require no such riotous
aid. We have nothing to apprehend from the poor; for we are pleading their
cause. And we fear not proud oppression; for we have truth on our side.

We say, and we repeat it; that the French Revolution opens to the world an
opportunity, in which all good citizens must rejoice: that of promoting the
general happiness of man. And that (...), moreover, offers to this country in
particular an opportunity of reducing our enormous taxes.

These are our objects, and we will pursue them.

JOHN HORN TOOK, Chairman,

LESSONS FOR STATESMEN.
Lesson I. -- FROM-COMMERCE, IN THE ENCYCLOPADIA BRITANNICA.
THE augmentation of riches, in a country, either not capable of improvement as
to the soil, or where precautions have not been taken for facilitating a
multiplication of inhabitants, by the importation of subsistence, will be
productive of the most calamitous circumstances.

On one side, this wealth will effectually diminish the mass of food before
produced; and on the other, will increase the number of useless consumers. --
The first of these circumstances will raise the demand for food; and the second
will diminish the number of useful free hands, and consequently raise the price
of manufactures; here are shortly the outlines of this progress.

The more rich and luxurious a people are, the more delicate they become in
their manner of living, if they fed on bread formerly, they will now feed on
meat; if they fed on meat, they will now feed on fowl. The same ground which
feeds an hundred with bread, and a proportionable quantity of animal food, will
not maintain an equal number of delicate livers. Food must then become more
scarce; demand for it rises: the rich are always the strongest in the market;
they consume the food, and the poor are forced to starve. Here the wide door to
modern distress opens; to wit, a hurtful competition for subsistence. Farther
when a people become rich, they think less of occonomy; a number of useless
servants are hired, to become an additional dead weight on consumption; and
when their starving countrymen cannot supply the extravagance of the rich so
cheaply as other nations, they either import instruments of foreign luxury, or
seek to enjoy them out of their own country.

Lesson II. -- FROM THE SAME.
ASET of industrious and frugal people were assembled in a country (Holland) by
nature subject to many inconveniences, the removing of which necessarily
employed abundance of hands. Their situation upon the continent, the power of
their former masters, and the ambition of their neighbors, obliged them to
keep great bodies of troops. These two articles, added to the numbers of the
community, without either enriching the state by their labor exported, or
producing food for themselves or countrymen.

The scheme of a commonwealth was calculated, to draw together the industrious;
but it has been still more useful in subsisting them; the republican form of
government being there greatly subdivided, vests authority sufficient in every
part of it, to make suitable provision for their own subsistence; and the tie
which unites them, regards only matters of public concern. Had the whole been
governed by one sovereign, or by one council, this important matter never could
have been effectuated.

It would be impossible for the most able minister that ever lived, to provide
nourishment for a country so extensive as France, or even as England, supposing
those as fully peopled as Holland is: even though it should be admitted, that a
sufficient quantity of food might be found in other countries for their
subsistence. The enterprise would be too great, abuses would multiply; the
consequence would be, that the inhabitants would die for want. But in Holland
the case is different; every little town takes care of its own inhabitants; and
this care being the object of application and profit to so many persons, is
accomplished with success.

Lesson III. -- From Lady Montague's Letters.
IT is impossible not to observe the difference between the free towns, and
those under the government of absolute princes, as all the little sovereigns of
Germany are. In the first there appears an air of commerce and plenty: The
streets are well built, and full of people neatly and plainly dressed. The
shops are loaded with merchandise, and the commonality are clean and cheerful.
In the other you see a fort of shabby finery, a number of dirty people of
quality tawdred out: narrow nasty streets out of repair, wretchedly thin of
inhabitants, and above half of the common sort asking alms. I cannot help
fancying one under the figure of a clean Dutch Citizen's wife; and the other
like a poor town lady of pleasure, painted and ribboned out in her head dress,
with tarnished silver-laced shoes, a ragged under-petticoat, a miserable
mixture of vice and poverty.

We take care to make such short stages every day, that I rather fancy myself
upon parties of pleasure, than upon the road; and sure nothing can be more
agreeable than traveling in Holland. The whole country appears a large garden,
the roads are all paved* shaded on each side with rows of trees, and bordered
with large canals, full of boats passing and repassing. Every twenty paces
gives you the prospect of some villa, and every four hours that of a large
town, so surprisingly neat, I am sure you would be charmed with them.

My arrival at Rotterdam* presented me a new scene of pleasure. All the streets
are paved with broad stones, and before many of the meanest artificer's doors,
are placed seats of various colored marbles, so neatly kept, that I assure
you, I walked almost all over the town yesterday, incognito, in my slippers,
without one spot of dirt; and you may see the Dutch maids washing the pavement
of the street with more application than ours do our bed-chambers. The town
seems so full of people, with such busy faces, and all in motion, that I can
hardly fancy it is not some celebrated fair; but I see it every day the same.
It is certain no town can be more advantageously situated for commerce. Here
are seven large canals, on which the merchants' ships come up to the very doors
of their houses. The shops and warehouses are of a very surprising neatness and
magnificence, filled with an incredible quantity of fine merchandise, and so
much cheaper than what we see in England, that I have much ado to persuade
myself I am still so near it. Here is neither dirt nor beggary to be seen. One
is not shocked with those loathsome cripples, so common in London, nor teazed
with the importunity of idle fellows and wenches, that choose to be nasty and
lazy. The common servants and little shop-women here, are more nicely clean,
than most of our ladies; and the great variety of neat dresses (every woman
dressing her head after her own fashion) is an additional pleasure in seeing
the towns.

ACCOUNT OF THE GOVERNMENT OF GENEVA BY D'ALEMBERT.
IT is very remarkable, that a city, which contains scarce 24000 inhabitants,
and whose scattered territory consists not of thirty villages, should be a
sovereign state, and one of the most flourishing cities of Europe; enriched by
her liberty and her commerce, she frequently beholds every thing around her in
flames, without having any share in the calamity. The events which disturb the
rest of Europe, afford her only an amnsing spectacle, which she observes
without taking any part in them. Attached to France, by treaties and by
commerce, to England by commerce and religion, she is too prudent to interest
herself in the wars that embroil these two powerful nations; she pronounces
with impartiality upon the justice of their contests, and judges all the
sovereigns of Europe, without flattering, injuring, or fearing them.

The city is well fortified, particularly on the side of that prince from whom
it has most to fear, the King of Sardinia. On the side of France it is almost
open and defenseless; but discipline is kept up as in a military place, the
arsenals and magazines well furnished, every citizen is a soldier, as in
Switzerland, and ancient Rome; the Genevois are allowed to go into foreign
service, but the republic does not furnish any state with regular bodies of
men, nor does it suffer an inrolment within its own territories.

Though the individuals are rich, the government is poor, from that aversion
which the people show to new taxes, how little burdensome soever. The revenues
of the state do not amount to 500,000 livres of French money; and yet, by the
admirable economy with which they are managed. they are sufficient, and even
afford a surplus for extraordinary emergencies.

Hereditary dignity is unknown at Geneva; the sons of the first magistrate are
lost in the crowd, till their own merit distinguishes them; nobility and riches
confer neither rank nor privilege, nor give any facility of advancement to the
offices of the state. All solicitation for places is strictly prohibited; --
Public employments are so little lucrative, that they afford no temptations for
the avaricious; they are objects only to nobler minds, by the consideration and
respect they procure.

Few disputes come to a legal trial; they are generally adjusted by common
friends, by the advocates themselves and by the judges.

Their sumptuary laws forbid the use of jewels and embroidery, limit the
expense of funerals, and oblige all the citizens to walk on foot in the
streets, carriages being allowed only in the country. -- These laws, which are
regarded in France as too severe, nay, almost barbarous and inhuman, by no
means abridge the real conveniences of life, which are always to be obtained at
little expense; they retrench only the pageantry of it, which contributes not
to happiness, and often produces ruin, without any advantage.

There is, perhaps, no where so many happy marriages: Geneva has, in this
respect, the start of our manners at least two centuries. -- The restraints
upon luxury remove the fear of a multitude of children; and, by this means,
luxury is not as in France, one of the greatest obstacles to population.

Geneva has an university, which they call an academy, where youth are educated
without expense: The professors are eligible to offices of state -- Many of
them have become magistrates, and this privilege contributes much to keep up
the emulation and same of the academy.

Their public library is a well chosen collection of books, consisting of
twenty-six thousand volumes, and a great number of manuscripts. The books are
lent to all the citizens, every one reads, and informs himself: and by this
means, the people of Geneva are better instructed than any where else. They
find none of those inconveniences which we suppose would follow the same
indulgence among us; perhaps the Genevois and our politicians may be both in
the right.

All the sciences, and most of the arts, have been cultivated with so much
success at Geneva, that it is surprising to see the list of learned men and
artists of every kind, which this city has produced within the last two ages --
It has even had the good fortune sometimes to be the residence of celebrated
strangers, whom its agreeable situation, and the liberty it enjoys, have invited
to retire thither. M. de Voltaire, who has resided there for the last seven
years, finds, among these republicans, the same marks of esteem and
consideration which he has received from so many monarchs.

The eccle^^astical constitution of Geneva is pure Presbyterianism; no bishops
nor canons; -- Not that they disapprove of episcopacy, but as they have no
faith in the divine right of bishops, they think Pastors, not quite so rich and
important as bishops, agree better with a small republic.

The ministers are either pastors, like our parish priests, or postulans as our
priests without benefice. The revenue of the pastors does not amount to above
1200 livres, without any casual profits: The state makes this allowance. -- The
church has nothing.

The speech of Charles Turner, Esquire. Member of Parliament for the City of York,
to the Electors of Westminster, from the Hustings in Westminster Hall, on
Thursday the 6th of April, 1780,
I FEEL a satisfaction in addressing so numerous and respectable a body of my
countrymen, that cannot be animated by a slavish mind. I have ever opposed the
torrent of corruption, and the inroads of arbitrary power; and though I have
been unsuccessful, yet with your assistance, I will fight and conquer.
Corruption and tyranny can never stand against the virtuous efforts of a free
people: be firm, be resolute and unanimous; assert your birthright. Annual
Parliaments, and an equal representation, are privileges inherent in the
constitution; but if you do not think yourselves free with obtaining that
object, you have a right to infist on what government you please. Laws were
made for the governed, not the governor; and all government originates with the
people. If you choose to be slaves, you may submit to an unlimited monarchy, or
an oppressive aristocracy; if you wish to be free, you have a right to insist
on a democracy, or you have a right to form a republic. Don't tell me of the
power of Parliament, or the power of the Crown; all power originates with
yourselves, and if the Crown or the Parliament abuse that power you have
invested them with, you have a right to reassume it; you are the lords of the
creation, not the slaves of power: you are the masters, and we are only your
servants, delegated and employed by you to do your business; and till you pay
your servants, as was anciently the custom, they will never act to your
advantage; if you do not pay them, the Crown will, and then they become the
servants of the Crown, and no longer the servants of the people. An honest man
can have no interest but that of his country in coming to parliament; and if he
sacrifices his ease and retirement to the duty of a senator, his expenses at
least ought to be reimbursed by his country. You now pay your members with a
vengeance, for enslaving you, and picking your pockets: but if you would once
pay them yourselves, you would no longer complain of oppression: Act with
spirit and resolution; insist upon your privileges, and I will meet you at
Runny Mead. I love the poor, I divide my fortune with them, and I will die with
them; the poor man's labor is the rich man's wealth; and without your toil, a
kingdom would be worth nothing. While I am free, you never shall be slaves. God
bless the People!

Observations of Charles Turner, Esquire. Member of Parliament for the City of
York, in the Debate in the House of Commons, April 13, 1780. on the Bill for
preventing Revenue Officers from voting at Elections.
HE contended, that the House was bound to pass the Bill; that they must do it,
the people of England had petitioned for it, and who would gainsay the people
of England? They would have their way, they had a right to it, for the
constitution of this country was a republic. He repeated it, he said, in the
face of all the Crown lawyers, and let them make the most of it, a republic,
and one of the finest in the world! He had held this language to the people in
Westminster Hall, and he would hold it every where. Where the Monarch was
limited by the same laws which governed the subject, it certainly was a
republic, and nothing else.

A LESSON FOR VENAL PARLIAMENTS: The Speech that was spoken by OLIVER CROMWELL'
when he dissolved the Long Parliament.
IT is high time for me to put an end to your sitting in this place, which you
have dishonored by your contempt of all virtue, and defiled by your practice
of every vice: Ye are a factious crew, and enemies to all good government: Ye
are a pack of mercenary wretches, and would, like Esau, sell your country for a
mess of pottage; and, like Judas, betray your GOD for a few pieces of money. Is
there a single virtue now remaining amongst you? Is there one vice you do not
possess? Ye have no more religion than my horse: Gold is your God. Which of you
have not bartered your conscience for bribes? Is there a man amongst you that
has the least care for the good of the commonwealth? Ye sordid prostitutes!
have ye not defiled this sacred place, and turned the Lord's temple into a den
of thieves, by your immoral principles and wicked practices? Ye are grown
intolerably odious to the whole nation. You were deputed here by the people to
get grievances redressed, are not yourselves become the greatest grievance?
Your country therefore calls upon me to cleanse this Augean stable, by putting
a final period to your iniquitous proceedings in this House, and which, by
God's help, and the strength he has given me, I am now come to do. I command
ye, therefore, upon the peril of your lives, to depart immediately out of this
place. Go, get ye out, make haste, ye venal slaves, be gone! So take away that
shining bauble there, and lock up the doors.

THE INHABITANTS OF HELL. From a Pamphlet, entitled "The Rights of the Devil."
THESE (that is the priests) are the most numerous of all Lucifer's subjects,
except the military, for next to the clergy, the military are the most devoted,
which may be seen by the ardor they discover on all occasions in the service of
their grand master and monarch, Lucifer. Nothing diminishes the zeal of
soldiers, no hardships or calamities can intimidate them from the pursuit of
their master's interest. Captivity, prisons, fetters, chains, slavery, or
death, give no check to their activity; but havoc and devastation are the
works of their hands. See how these heroes leave every thing near and dear
behind them. Their trades are nothing in comparison to the intrinsic
acquisitions of the soldier, who sacrifices every thing to the pleasure of
murdering his fellow creatures. How many of these English Sans Culottes have
left twenty-five, and even thirty shillings per week, within these six months
past, to gain in return sixpence a day, to be food for gunpowder, and to
distinguish themselves as the best friends and warmest advocates for Satan's
kingdom. Mark! what disinterestedness! Surely Lucifer has some right to such
property as this! Only examine their fa^es and their figures, both will declare
to you whom they serve, and whose they are. Their pole complexions, their tawny
countenances, their tanned hides; in short, the whole of their meagre bodies
have more the appearance of carcases or skeletons, than of human figures. Their
bodies, I say, loaded with wounds, exhausted by labors which they have
undergone, with distempers which consume them, with vermin which gnaw them
while alive, with hunger which devours them, with excessive heat, and rigorous
cold, which they experience and endure with courage and delight, for a poor and
wretched stipend, plainly show that the most powerful and predominant of all
their passions, is their desire for the infernal regions. And this is further
confirmed by the ardent exclamations with which they conclude every sentence
they pronounce; such as, The Devil take me! The Devil seize me! The Devil choke
me! The Devil fly away with me! etc. etc. Which ejaculations certainly express
their earnest wish to go to Lucifer's kingdom. The Devil will never deny his
right to such property as they are.

I had like to have omitted informing you, that the military are accompanied
with their officers, even in Hell: and why not? They are fond of leading the
dance with them on Earth, and surely ought to partake of their pleasures in
Hell. They are led by their officers by thousands every day, with colors
flying, music playing, and drums beating, amidst the acclamations of all who
see them, on their journey to Pluto's regions. There is no exception of persons
in the military, they go unanimously, hand in hand. There you see them
traveling in social union, with wonderful contrast, generalissimo and private,
general and drummer, duke and corporal, prince and sergeant, kings and
serjeant-majors, emperors and adjutants, in most parts of Europe, vieing with
each other in their various tactical knowledge, to discover who has the
greatest ability, in getting tenants in the greatest numbers, to occupy
Beelzebub's kingdom. Witness the scenes now exhibiting on the other side the
water, what bravery is displayed by the English, Dutch, Prussians, Austrians,
Hessians, Hanoverians, etc. of all ranks and degrees, from the prince to the
private, in order to transport themselves to the infernal regions; and none can
be more deserving than those who take up the sword in defense of their common
master, for the express purpose of peopling his kingdom. Go on, then, ye
veterans! hide your trusty blades in the bowels of your brethren! your laurels
will cleave to your brows in never fading and glowing colors: and Satan shall
crown you with everlasting honors!

Ignorance the Foundation of unequal Governments, and fostered by them
designedly.
[From "Barlow's Advice to privileged Orders."
UNEQUAL Governments are necessarily founded on ignorance, and they must be
supported by ignorance; to deviate from their principle, would be voluntary
suicide. The great object of their policy is to perpetuate that undisturbed
ignorance of the people, which is the companion of poverty, the parent of
crimes, and the pillar of the state.

In England, the people at large are as perfectly ignorant of the acts of
Parliament, after they are made, as they possibly can be before. They are
printed by one man only, who is called the king's printer -- in the old German
character, which few men can read -- and sold at a price that few can afford to
pay. But, lest some scraps or comments upon them should come to the people,
through the medium of public newspapers, every such paper is stamped with a
heavy duty: and an act of parliament is made, to prevent men from lending their
papers to each other; so that, not one person in a hundred sees a news-paper
once in a year. If a man at the bottom of Yorkshire discovers, by instinct,
that a law is made which is interesting for him to know, he has only to make a
journey to London, find out the king's printer, pay a penny a page for the law,
and learn the German alphabet. He is then prepared to spell out his duty.

As to the general system of the laws of the land, on which all property
depends, no man in the kingdom knows them, and no man pretends to know them.
They are a fathomless abyss, that exceeds all human faculties to sound. They
are studied, not to be understood, but to be disputed; not to give information,
but to breed confusion. The man whose property is depending on a suit at law,
dares not to look into the gulf that separates him from the wished-for
decision; he has no confidence in himself, nor in reason, nor in justice; he
mounts on the back of a lawyer, like one of Mr. ^urke's heroes of chivalry,
between the wings of a gr^ffin, and trusts the pilotage to a man, who is
superior to himself only in the confidence which results from having nothing at
stake.

On the Injustice of taking Fees from Persons acquitted in Courts of Justice.
[From "The Candid Philosopher."]
A MAN suspected of a felonious action, is taken up, sent to goal, used there
in a barbarous manner, yet when brought to his trial is found perfectly
innocent. A man of common sense, upractised in the wisdom of our laws, would
naturally imagine he would be now discharged. But no such thing; he must be
remanded to prison to undergo the same harsh treatment he received before his
trial, unless he pays the fees that are demanded of him. -- They are the
poorest people on whom suspicions generally fall, and who, so far from being
able to pay goaler's fees, could scarcely maintain themselves in prison before
the proof of their innocence appeared. How cruel, therefore, after punishing an
innocent person with imprisonment, making him lose his business and his
character, to rob him of his property, under the name of paying fees! -- O
shame! shame! shame!

Whether the Balance of Dominion in Land be the natural Cause of Empire?
[From Harrington's Oceana.]
IF a man having one hundred pounds a year may keep one servant, or have one
man at his command, then having one hundred times so much, he may keep one
hundred servants; and this multiplied by a thousand, he may have one hundred
thousand men at his command. Now, that the single person, or nobility of any
country in Europe, that had but half so many men at command, would be king or
prince, is that which I think no man will doubt. But no money no Switzers, as
the French speak: if the money be flown, so are the men also. Though riches in
general have wings, and be apt to bate, yet those in land are the most hooded
and tied to the perch, whereas those in money have the least hold, and are the
swiftest in flight. A bank, where the money takes not wing, but to come home
seized, or like a coy duck, may well be great; but the treasure of the Indies
going out, and not upon returns, makes no bank. Whence a bank never paid an
army; or paying an army soon became no bank. But where a prince or nobility has
an estate in land, the revenue whereof will defray this charge, there their men
are planted, have toes that are roots, and arms that bring forth what fruit you
please.

Thus a single person is made, or a nobility makes a king, not with difficulty
or any great prudence, but with ease, the rest coming home, as the ox that not
only knows his master's crib, but must starve or repair to it. Nor for the same
reason is government acquired with more ease than it is preserved; that is, if
the foundation of property be in land. but if in morey, lightly come, lightly
go. The reason why a single person, or the nobility that has one hundred
thousand men, or half so many at command, will have the government, is, that
the estate in land, whereby they are able to maintain so many, in any European
territory, must overbalance the rest that remains to the people, at least three
parts in four, by which means they are no more able to dispute the government
with him or them, than your servant is with you. Now, for the same reason, if
the people hold three parts in four of the territory, it is plain there can
neither be any single person nor nobility able to dispute the government with
them; in this case, therefore, except force be interposed, they govern
themselves. So by this computation of the balance of property, or dominion in
land, you have according to the threefold foundation of property, the root or
generation of the threefold kind of government or empire.

If one man be sole landlord of a territory, or overbalance the whole people,
three parts in four, or thereabouts, he is Grand Seignior; for so the Turk, not
from his empire, but his property, is called; and the empire in this case, is
absolute monarchy.

If the few, or a nobility, or a nobility with a clergy, be landlords to such a
proportion as overbalances the people in the like manner, they may make whom
they please king; or, if they be not pleased with their king, down with him,
and set up whom they like better; a HENRY the Fourth, or the Seventh, a GUISE,
a MONTFORT, a NEVIL, or a PORTER, should they find that best for their own ends
and purposes: For, as not the balance of the king, but that of the nobility, in
this case, is the cause of the government, so not the estate or the riches of
the prince or captain, but his virtue or ability, or fitness for the ends of
the nobility, acquires that command or office. This for aristocracy or mixed
monarchy. But if the whole people be landlords, or hold the land so divided
among them, that no one man or number of men within the compass of the few, or
aristocracy overbalance them, it is a commonwealth. Such is the branch in the
root, or the balance of property naturally producing empire; which not
confuted, no man shall be able to batter my superstructures, and which confuted
I lay down my arms; till then, if the cause necessarily precede the effect,
property must have a being before empire; or, beginning with it, must be still
first in order.

Property comes to have a being before empire or government two ways, either by
a natural or violent revolution. Natural revolution happens from within, or by
commerce, as when a government erected upon one balance, that for example of a
nobility or a clergy, through the decay of their estates comes to alter to
another balance; which alteration in the root of property leaves all to
confusion, or produces a new branch of government, according to the kind or
nature of the root. Violent revolution happens from without, or by arms, as
when upon conquest there follows confiscation. Confiscation again is of three
kinds; when the captain taking all to himself, plants his army, by way of
military colonies, benefices, or timars, which was the policy of MAHOMET; or
when the captain has some sharers, or a nobility that divides with him which
was the policy introduced by the Goths and Vandals; or when the captain divides
the inheritance by lots, or otherwise, to the whole people; which policy was
instituted by GOD or MOSES in the commonwealth of Israel. This triple
distribution, which from natural or violent revolution returns as to the
generation of empire to the same thing, that is to the nature of the balance
already stated and demonstrated.

ABRIDGMENT OF ROMAN HISTORY.
ROMULUS and REMUS being sent by their grandfather Numetor, from Alba, at the
head of a colony, to seek a new settlement, quarrelled about the choice of a
spot where they should fix, and build them a city: Romulus choosing mount
Palatine, and Remus mount Aventine. Remus is said to have lost his life in this
dispute. The city was therefore built on mount Palatine, and, in compliment to
its founder, called Rome. As Romulus had not taken upon him the chief command
of the colony for any longer time than while the city was building, he, as soon
as the work was finished, submitted the form of its future government to the
choice of the people, and, calling the citizens together, harangued them in
words to this effect:

"If all the strength of cities lay in the height of their ramparts, or the
depth of their ditches, we should have great reason to be in fear for that
which we have now built. Are there in reality any walls too high to be scaled
by a valiant enemy? And of what use are ramparts in intestine divisions? They
may serve for a defense against sudden incursions from abroad; but it is by
courage and prudence chiefly, that the invasions of foreign enemies are
repelled: and by unanimity, sobriety, and justice, that domestic seditions are
prevented. Cities fortified by the strongest bulwarks have been seen to yield
to force from without, or to tumults from within. An exact military discipline,
and a steady observance of civil policy, are the surest barriers against these
evils. But there is still another point of great importance to be considered:
the prosperity of some rising colonies, and the speedy ruin of others, have in
a great measure been owing to their form of government. Was there but one
manner of ruling states and cities that could make them happy, the choice would
not be difficult. But I have learnt, that of the various forms of government
among the Greeks and Barbarians, there are three which are highly extolled by
those who have experienced them; and yet, that no one of these is in all
respects perfect, but each of them has some innate and incurable defect. Choose
ye, then, in what manner this city shall be governed. Shall it be by one man?
Shall it be by a select number of the wisest among us? or shall the legislative
power be in the people? As for me, I shall submit to any form of adminstration
you shall please to establish. As I think myself not unworthy to command, so
neither am I unwilling to obey. Your having chosen me to be the leader of this
colony, and your calling the city after my name, are honors sufficient te
content me; honors, of which, living or dead, I can never be deprived."

Romulus was chosen king; and Rome was governed by kings for upwards of 240
years, till the expulsion of Tarquin the Second, which was occasioned by his
son Sextus ravishing Lucretia, the wife of Collatinus, a noble Roman. Lucretia,
upon receiving this injury, sent for her husband, who was then in the camp at
Ardea with Tarquin, and for several of his friends, and having informed them of
the outrage she had received, and engaged them to revenge it, stabbed herself
to the heart, and died before them. The Romans had long groaned under the
tyranny and cruelty of the Tarquins, and were therefore glad to lay hold on so
flagrant and outrageous an insult, to shake off their yoke. The famous Junius
Brutus, who for some reasons had masked himself, and concealed great talents,
under the appearance of idiotism, suddenly threw off his disguise, and, going
near to the dying lady, drew the poignard out of her bosom, and showing it all
bloody to the assembly, to their great astonishment thus addressed them:

"Yes, noble lady, I swear by this blood, which was once so pure, and which
nothing but royal villainy could have polluted, that I will pursue Lucius
Tarquinius the Proud, his wicked wife, and their children, with fire and sword,
nor will I ever suffer any of that family, or of any other whatever, to be king
in Rome: Ye Gods, I call you to witness this my oath! -- There, Romans, turn
your eyes to that sad spectacle -- the daughter of Lucretius, Collatinus's wife
-- she died by her own hand. See there a noble lady, whom the lust of a Tarquin
reduced to the necessity of being her own executioner, to attest her innocence.
Hospitably entertained by her as a kinsman of her husband's, Sextus, the
perfidious guest, became her brutal ravisher. The chaste, the generous Lucretia
could not survive the insult. Glorious woman! But once only treated as a slave,
she thought life no longer to be endured. Lucretia, a woman, disdained a life
that depended upon a tyrant's will; and shall we, shall men, with such an
example before our eyes, and after five-and-twenty years of ignominous
servitude, shall we, through a fear of dying, defer one single instant to
assert our liberty? No, Romans, now is the time; the favorable moment we have
so long waited for is come. Tarquin is not at Rome. The patricians are at the
head of the enterprise. The city is abundantly provided with men, arms, and all
things necessary. There is nothing wanting to secure the success, if our own
courage does not fail us. And shall those warriors, who have ever been so
brave, when foreign enemies were to be subdued, or when conquests were to be
made to gratify the ambition and avarice of Tarquin, be then only cowards, when
they are to deliver themselves from slavery? Some of you, perhaps, are
intimidated by the army which Tarquin now commands. The soldiers, you imagine
will take the part of their general: Banish so groundless a fear. The love of
liberty is natural to all men. Your fellow citizens in the camp feel the weight
of oppression, with as quick a sense, as you that are in Rome. They will as
eagerly seize the occasion of throwing of the yoke. But, let us grant there may
be some among them who through baseness of spirit, or a bad education, will be
disposed to favor the tyrant. The number of these can be but small, and we
have means sufficient in our hands to reduce them to reason. They left us
hostages more dear to them than life. Their wives, their children, their
fathers, their mothers are in the city. Courage, Romans, the gods are for us!
those Gods, whose temples and altars the impious Tarquin has profaned by
sacrifices and libations made with polluted hands, polluted with blood, and
with numberless unexpiated crimes committed against his subjects. Ye Gods, who
protected our forefathers! ye Genii, who watch for the preservation and glory
of Rome! do you inspire us with courage and unanimity in this glorious cause,
and we will, to our last breath, defend your worship from all profanation."

[To be continued in following Numbers.]
Eccl. iv. 1, 2, 3. So I returned, and considered all the Oppressions that are
done under the Sun: and behold the TEARS of such as were OPPRESSED, and they
had NO COMFORTER; and on the side of their Oppressors there was POWER, but they
had no Comforter. Wherefore, I praised the dead which are already dead, more
than the living which are yet alive. Yea, better is he than both they, which
has not yet been, who has not seen the EVIL WORK that is done under the Sun.
THE following extract, from a very interesting work, lately published,
entitled "Travels in the Western Hebrides, by the Rev. John Lane Buchanan,"
will show some few of the hardships suffered by our brethren in one part of
this free and happy nation. It may be proper to premise, that the Islands here
spoken of are not those which lie next to the coast of Scotland, but the
Western Abudae, a long chain of Islands, about seventy miles farther west in
the Atlantic Ocean. It may be also proper to mention, that although the author
has adopted the title of Travels, this work is the result of observation made
by him, during his residence in these Islands, in quality of Missionary
Minister from the Church of Scotland. from 1782 to 1790.

There are in these Islands an unfortunate and numerous class of men, known
under the name of Scallags.

The Scallag, whether male or female, is a poor being. who, for mere
subsistence, becomes a predial slave to another, whether a subtenant, a
tacksman By Tacksmen are meant farmers, to whom extensive tracts of lands are
let, and who let them out in small parcels to the poor people, over whom they
exercise the most cruel tyranny and oppression As sew of the proprietors
resides themselves on the islands, these ^acks^en, who are generally relations
of the LAIRDS, may ^e considered the highest class of the people.
, or a lord. The Scallag builds his own hut, with sods and boughs of trees,
and if he is sent from one part of the country to another, he moves off his
sticks; and, by means of these, forms a new hut in another place. He is,
however, in most places, encouraged by the possession of the walls of a former
but, which he covers in the best way be can with his old sticks, stubble, and
fern. Five days in the week he works for his master; the sixth is allowed to
himself, for the cultivation of some scrap of land, on the edge of some moss or
moor; on which he raises a little kail or colewort, barley and potatoes. These
articles boiled up in one mash, and often without salt, are his only food;
except in those seasons and days when he can catch some fish, which he is also
obliged not unfrequently to eat without bread or salt. The only bread he tastes
is a cake, made of the flower of barley. He is allowed coarse shoes, with
tartan hose, and a coarse coat, with a blanket or two for clothing. It may
occur to an English reader, that, as the Scallag works only five days out of
seven for his master, he has two to provide for himself. But it is to be
recollected, that throughout the whole of Scotland, and all its appendages,
Sunday, or the sabbath as it is called, is celebrated by a total cessation from
all labor, and all amusements, as well as by religious exercises.

The tacksmen and subtenants, formerly on an equal footing, or nearly so, were
wont to plead their cause on equal terms before a common chief. At present they
are obliged to be much more submissive to their tacksman than ever they were in
former times to their lairds or lords. Formerly they were a free, animated, and
bold people, commanding respect for their undanted courage, and repelling
injuries from whatever quarter they came, both by words and actions. But now
they must approach even the tacksmen, with cringing humility, heartless and
discouraged, with tattered rags, hungry bellies and downcast looks, carrying
their own implements of husban try for ten or twelve miles backward and
forward, over hills and mountains, to do the work of the tacksmen; and must
either sit we^ in their clothes all night in a dirty kitchen, or sleep in dirty
clothes, particularly in Luskintire in Harris, exposed to be trampled on by
swine, where the kitchen is commonly the stye. Formerly a Highlander would have
drawn his dirk against even a lord, if he had subjected him to the indignity
of a blow; at present any tyrannical tacksman may strike a Scallag, or even a
subtenant, with perfect impunity. What degree of spirit and virtue is to be
expected, from a people so humbled, so enstaved? What degree of courage, or
even inclinatition to repel an invading enemy? If we have not money (some of
these tacksmen have been known to say,) we have men enough: let us wear them
well while they are in our power. In short they treat them like beasts of
burden; and in all respects like slaves attached to the soil, as they cannot
obtain new habitations, on account of combinations among the tacksmen, and are
entirely at the mercy of the lord or tacksman.

The master or his overseer, often on the most frivolous pretenses, abandons
himself to bursts of passion, and with hands, feet and rods, breaks the bones
of men and women too. This is not an exaggerated picture. The broken ribs of
one young maid, named Macklellan, from the village of Cluar, attest the fact,
which was committed by a tacksman, assuming the title of DOCTOR. This same
doctor almost took the life of another innocent maid from Shilebost; though she
gave no other offense, than that of tarrying a little longer than he wished, at
her mistresses desire, to finish something she had in hand.

Better to trust a whole People with the power of doing Wrong, than one only.
(From Dodsley's Poems.)
YET vainly would despotic will conclude,
That force may sway the erring multitude.
Justice it is owned, should ever guide the free,
But power of wrong, In all, is liberty;
And for whatever purposes restrained,
A nation is enslaved that may be chained;
Heaven gives to all a liberty of choice,
A people's good requires a people's voice:
Man's surest guide where different views agree,
From private hate and privaet interest free.
Fatal their change from such who rashly fly,
To the hard grasp of guiding tyranny!
Soon shall they find, when will is armed with might,
Injustice wield the sword, though drawn for right.
Lines addressed to the Grand Conspirators AGAINST HUMAN LIBERTY.
Written (previous to the 2d. Campaign) By W. D. GRANT.
DELUDED ravagers! enslavers of Mankind,
All your ambitious dreams too late (though soon) you will find,
Must end in freedom's triumph -- slavery dismay --
No more shall despotism darken reason's day!
Ah! son's of regal folly and inflated pride
Lay all your butchering, murdering schemes aside
Let not your hands again in human blood be died!
Kindness -- not cruelty -- implies parental care:
If ye are fathers -- let actions show ye are!
Not see, inhumanly, your children wounded! slain!
Grief and toil their portion, while yours is all the gain.
Sunk in sensual pleasure, you leave them naught but pain.
A GOVERNMENT OF CITIZENS IS INVULNERABLE. FROM HARRINCTON'S OCEANA.
ALL government, as implied by what has been already shown, is of these three
kinds: A government of servants: A government of subjects; or A government of
citizens. The first is absolute monarchy, as that of Turkey: The second
aristocratical monarchy, as that of France: The third a commonwealth, as those
of Israel, of Rome, of Holland. Now to follow MACHIAVEL (in part) of these, the
government of servants is the harder to be conquered, and the easier to be
held: The government of subjects is the easter to be conquered and the harder
to be held. To which I shall presume to add, that the government of citizens is
both the hardest to be conquered, and the hardest to be held.

My author's reasons, why a government of servants is the hardest to be
conquered, come to this, that they are under perpetual discipline and command,
void of such interests and factions as have hands or power to hold upon
advantages or innovation; whence he that invades the Turk must trust to his own
strength, and not rely upon disorders in the government, or forces which he
shall be sure enough to find united.

His reasons why this government, being once broken, is easily held, are, that
the armies once past hope of rallying, there being no such thing as families
hanging together, or nobility to stir up their dependants to further reluctance
for the present, or to preserve themselves by complacence with the conquerors,
for future discontents or advantages, he that has won the garland has no more
to do but to extinguish the royal line, and wear it ever after in security. For
the people having been always slaves, are such whose condition he may better,
in which case they are gainers by their conqueror, but can never make a worse,
and therefore they lose nothing by him. Hence ALEXANDER having conquered the
Persian empire, he and his captains after him could hold it without the least
dispute, except it arose among themselves. Hence MAHOMET the second having
taken Constantinople, and put Palaeologus the Greek emperor (whose government
was of like nature with the Persian) together with his whole family, to the
sword, the Turk has held that empire without reluctance.

On the other side, the reasons why a government of subjects is easier
conquered, are these: That it is supported by a nobility so ancient, so
powerful, and of such hold and influence upon the people, that the king without
danger, if not ruin to himself or the throne (an example whereof was given in
HENRY the seventh of England,) can neither invade their privileges, nor level
their estates; which remaining, they have power upon every discontent to call
in an enemy, as ROBERT Count of Artois did the English, and the Duke of Guise
the Spaniard, into France.

The reasons why a government of subjects being so easily conquered, is
nevertheless harder to be held, are these: that the nobility being soon out of
countenance in such a case, and repenting themselves of such a bargain, have
the same means in their hands, whereby they brought in the enemy, to drive him
out, as those of France did both the English and the Spaniards.

For the government of citizens, as it is of two kinds, an equal or an unequal
commonwealth, the reason why it is the hardest to be conquered, are also of two
kinds; as first, the reasons why a government of citizens, where the
commonwealth is equal, is hardest to be conquered, are, that the invader of
such a society must not only trust to his own strength, insomuch as the
commonwealth being equal, he must needs find them united, but in regard, that
such citizens being all soldiers or trained up to their arms, which they use
not for the defense of slavery, but of LIBERTY (A CONDITION NOT IN THIS WORLD
TO BE BETTERED); they have more especially upon this occasion, the highest soul
of courage, and (if their territory be of any extent) the vastest body of a
well disciplined militia that is possible in nature: wherefore AN EXAMPLE OF
SUCH A ONE OVERCOME BY THE ARMS OF A MONARCH, IS NOT TO BE FOUND IN THE WORLD.
And if some small city of this frame has happened to be vanquished by a potent
commonwealth, this is her prerogative, her towers are her funeral pile, and she
expires in her own flame, leaving nothing to the conqueror but her ashes, as
Saguntum overwhelmed by Carthage, and Numantia by Rome.

A DESCRIPTION OF PRINCE LUCIFER's SUBJECTS. (From a Pamphlet entitled: The
Rights of the Devil.)
ALL those men whatever description or whatever country they may belong to, in
whom the Devil ^as right and property, and over whom he extends his influence,
are like wolves, easily distinguished from the sheep, to which he lays claim:
because there is a particular mark whereby you may know those ravenous beasts.
Moreover, you will always see them exceedingly active in their monarch
Lucifer's service; they are invested with full power to oppress and torture
human nature, for the sake of plundering them. Their iron hearts are dead to
the feelings of humanity; they regard not the cries of the fatherless, neither
does the cause of the widow come near them. Cast an eye to the cruelties daily
committed in the sl^ve trade; reflect for a moment on the many thousands of
wretched Africans, who are tortared out of existence yearly, in order to exact
from their labor, to which in justice they have not the least claim. Some in
the various modes of obtaining them; others suffocated in the floating
bastiles, by the stench and corrupted air, which they breathe in the hold,
while being conveyed to the land of slavery and death, in the West Indies; and
those who survive the shocking treatment they experience while on board, or are
not swept away by disease, have only a worse fate awaiting them; worked without
intermission, and flogged without commiseration, they are hurried to their
eternal home, by those savage monsters who have the charge of them. Thus are
these innocent beings murdered by the agents and servants of the devil, whom
they adore and serve, and whose right and property they are.

Is not the influence of Satan very visible in some other illustrious
characters, the avowed enemies of the human race, who claim and lay hold upon
the tenth of the product of the earth, which have been increased by
improvement, and produced by the sweating brows of other men? Can there be any
justice in such plundering as this? or rather, is not that man a better
character who only stops you in the highway once in your life, and exacts from
you your purse? You will certainly answer these questions in the affirmitive,
and declare that we are completely humbugged by the priesthood. Hence arises
the necessity of priestcraft to blind the eyes of the people, and render them
totally ignorant and unaquainted in this important fact, that a priesthood is,
and always has been a curse to all nations of the earth. Ignorance in the
multitude is the chief support and only nutriment by which the v^mity and pride
of the clergy is fed. As tithe pigs fill their filthy sties and black
waist-coasts of corruption. Ah! deluded swinish multitude, typified by the
tithe pig; highly emblematical of your wallowing in the mire of church and
state, while the idle and dissipated beings who oppress you, are rolling in
luxury and debauchery, at the expense of your delusion. How long you will you
not call to Beelzebub to remove from you your tormentors, and take them, as his
right, to his eternal kingdom?

There is another class of men, in whom Lucifer has great right, and are thus
described by Lord Chatham: "There is," says he, a set of men in London, who are
known to live in riot and luxury, upon the plunder of the ignorant, the
innocent and the helpless; upon that part of the community which stands in most
need of, and best deserves the care and protection of the legislature. To me,
my lords, whether they be miserable jobbers of Change-alley, or the lofty
Asiatic plunderers of Leadenhall street, they are all equally detestable. I
care but little whether a man walks on foot, or is drawn by six or eight
horses; if his luxury be supported by the plunder of his country, I despise and
abhor him. My lords, while I had the honor of serving his majesty, I never
ventured to look at the Treasury, but from a distance, it is a business I am
unfit for, and to which I never could have submitted. The little I know of it,
has not served to raise my opinion of what is vulgarly called the monied
interest, I mean that blood-sucker that muckworm, which calls itself the friend
of government, which pretends to serve this or that administration, and may be
purchased on the same terms by any administration. Under this description I
include the whole race of commissioners, jobbers, contractors, clothiers, and
remitters. To these may be added, all placemen (in general) pensioners, gapers,
and expectants, collectors of excise and customs, proprietors of ministerial
newspapers, humane press-gangs, etc. etc. all come under one class or
domination of Lucifer's loyal, and loving subjects, who devote their whole
lives to the service of their master.

To enumerate all the various characters in the different parts of the world,
over whom the devil exercises a special right and influence, would require an
age. Yet you may observe. that I have pointed out to you, some of the most
conspicuous persons who are the destined inhabitants of Lucifer's kingdom, from
the regal oppressor to the meanest peasant. What mean ye, that ye beat my
people to pieces, and GRIND the faces of the poor? says the Lord God of Hosts.
Isaiah iii. 15 -- Therefore my people are gone into captivity, BECAUSE THEY
HAVE NO KNOWLEDGE; and their honorable men are famished, and their multitude
(i. e. swinish multitude) dried up with thirst. Therefore HELL has enlarged
herself, and opened her mouth without measure, and their glory, and their
multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoiceth, shall descend into it. Isaith
v. 13. For the leaders of this people CAUSE them to err: and THEY that are led
of them ARE destroyed, Isaiah ix. 16. Thus you see the people are destroyed,
because they rid not the earth of such hypocritical leaders, or governors,
tyrants, or false teachers, and choose from among themselves men to rule over
them. Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write grievousness
which they have prescribed: To turn aside the needy from judgment, and to take
away the RIGHT from the poor of my people, that widows may be their prey, and
that they may ro^^ the fatherless! Isaiah, x. 1. 2. Hence, it appears, that to
take away the rights of the people is a sin, but to refuse to restore them when
demanded is still worse; therefore HELL has enlarged herself to receive them.

WHO WOULD NOT BE A SOLDIER?!!!
BY VOLAIRE.
-- YOU must drink the King of BULGARIA'S health, said the soldiers; he is the
best of kings. Most willingly, replied Candide, and drank. Now you are a brave
fellow, said they, you are become his support, his defender, one of the heroes
of Bulgaria; your fortune is made, your fameeternal. They then put handcuffs on
his wrists, conducted him to the regiment. There they made him turn to the
right, wheel to the left, shoulder his musket, rest upon his arms, present,
fire, march and countermarch; in return for which the drill sergeant gave him
some thirty strokes with the cane, The next day he performed his exercise
better, and received only twenty. On the morrow they gave him but ten, and all
his comrades regarded him as a prodigy of genius.

The astonished Candide could not conceive by what enchantment he had become a
hero. One pleasant morning in spring, when the birds were singing, and the
trees beginning to bloom, he thought proper to take a walk. Proceeding in a
right line, and supposing it was the privilege of the human species, like other
animals, to make use of their legs, he had not gone above two leagues, before
six other heroes, each of six feet high, overtook him, bound him, and threw him
into a dungeon. He was juridically asked, whether he preferred being thirty-six
times flogged through the regiment, or to suffer twelve balls to pass through
his brains? In vain did he assert the freedom of the will, and affirm, that he
preferred neither the one nor the other: choose he must, and, in virtue of that
gift of God, which is called Liberty, he concluded in favor of flogging. He
was twice brought to the halbards, where he each time received five hundred
lashes, which slayed him from the hips to the nape of the neck, and laid the
muscles and nerves all bare. As they were proceeding to the third course,
CANDIDE, unable to endure more, requested for God's sake, they would have the
goodness to blow out his brains. His petition was favorably received; but, as
he was kneeling blindfold, the King of the Bulgarians happened to come to the
parade, and enquired concerning his crime. As this king was a man of great
genius, he comprehended from the story they told him, that CANDIDE was a young
metaphysician, ignorant of the world, and he granted his pardon; which clemency
has been and will be recorded in every newspaper, every history, and every age.
A skilful surgeon iu three weeks cured CANDIDE by use of the emollients which
DIOSCO^IDES prescribes. The skin again began to cover his back, and he was able
to march, when the King of the Bulgarians gave battle to the King of the
Abarians.

Nothing could be so charming, so dazzling, so well disciplined, so well
appointed as the two armies. The trumpets, drums, hautboys, fifes, and cannon
formed a concert of such harmony as Hell itself never equalled. To begin, the
artillery laid low about six thousand men on each side. The musquetry next
dispatched between nine and ten thousand knaves, who infested the surface of
this best of possible worlds; and the bavonet in its turn, was the adequate
cause of the death of as many more. The whole amount was at least thirty
thousand souls. CANDIDE, who trembled like a philosopher, hid himself as well
as he could during this heroic butchery. At length, while the two kings ordered
Te deum to be sung in their two camps, he thought proper to depart and reason
elsewhere on causes and effects. He passed over mountains of the dying and the
dead. The first village he came to belonged to the Aba^ians; it was reeking
with smoke, having been burnt by the Bulgarians, according to the laws of
nations. Here stood old men maimed by the enemy. gazing on their murdered ^ives
with their dead children extended on their bleeding bosoms. There lay virgins
with their wombs ripped open, after having appeased the natural appetites of
certain heroes, giving up the ghost. Others half ro^^ed, called aloud for one
to come and dispatch them entirely. Here the brains of men were scattered, here
their arms, here their legs and here their mangled trunks. CANDIDE fled with
all his might to another village, that belo^^ed to the Bulgarians, which the
heroes of Abaria had treated in much the same manner. At length. marching over
limbs still trembling, hearts still p^lpitating, and fires yet unextinguished,
he luckily escaped from the theater of war and glory.

From the Candid Philosopher, printed in the year 1778. ON THE PROCRESS OF
LIBETRY IN FRANCE.
HOWEVER the present age may have receded from genuine piety, it has certainly
m^de the most rapid advances in a freedom and liberality of sentiment, which do
honor to human nature. The French nation has particularly distinguished itself
in this respect. Its writers display a vigor of thought they have till now
been almost strangers to. They plead the cause of human nature, and assert
man's natural ^ights, with an energy and warmth that seem to indicate the
speedy downfall of that vast fabric of superstition and error, that has hitherto
so greatly obstructed the progress of free enquiry, and chilled even the
emotions of humanity. What writer of any nation can express himself with
greater zeal for the sovereignty of the laws, against the blind will of the
monarch, the tyranny of ministers, or the clamor of a mob, than to lay this
down as a just maxim? "Le glaire redoubtable de la justice n'a point ete
deposed^ns les mains des magistrates, pour venger des haines parti^ul^eres, ni
meme pour suivre les monvemens de I indignation public. ^^e^t a LA LOI SEULE
appartient de marquer les victimes; et si les clameurs d'une multitude aveugle
et passionn^e pouvoint decider les juges a prononcer one Peine capitale, I
innocence pren^oit la place du crime. et il n'y auroit plus de surete pour le
citoyen." These are just and excellent sentiments; but they are not peculiar to
this writer. The greater part of his countrymen now think with the same
freedom, and speak with the same force. This liberal spirit has a greater
tendency to exalt the French nation than all the military operations of their
much boasted Lewis XIV. whose glories sunk, and whose victories impoverished,
the kingdom he sought to strengthen and enrich. However, as Englishmen, we may
lament the dawing splendour of the French monarchy, enlighte'ed by the Sun of
science; yet, as citizens of the universe, we must rejoice at the great and
glorious effects produced by the genius of liberty, that can turn Siberia's
deserts into Albion's fertile plains; unlock the sources of plenty and bliss,
and change brutes and slaves into men and heroes!

ON A LIFE OF LABOR.
FROM THE SAME.
WE read in many authors great encomiums on a life of labor, and of the
superior blessings of peasants and hard working men, whose temperate and
abstemious lives not only make them enjoy an uninterrupted state of health, but
throw a crimson on their cheeks, and give a vigor to their bodies, the sons of
wealth and affluence, they tell us, may in vain sigh for. This sounds well; but
I own I am doubtful of the fact.

If I compare the working part of mankind, who ^^^e hard and work hard. with
those who eat and drink of the good "things of the earth," I think I can
discern better complexions. choicer animal sp^ri^s, and stronger bodies in the
latter than in the former. Incessant labor, and coarse and scanty food, have
certainly a tendency to weaken the bodies of mankind, and wear them out before
their time^ And this we (...) is the ease, What becomes t^^n of the fine spun
theories of visionary authors. who so greatly extol a laborious life? -- Why,
they are destroyed, like other cobweb systems, that will not bear handling.

The personal Virtues of a Monarch are unable to secure him from contempt, if
he will be led blindfold by wicked Ministers.
FROM THE SAME.
A MONARCH who will suffer himself to be directed by vicious favorites and
ministers, though virtuous in himself, is, in fact, the author of their vices,
and all the unhappy consequences that result from them. A monarch who is the
father of his people, should not be the dupe of a favorite. A monarch who
should see and judge for himself, should not take things upon trust. If a
nation, from the height of splendor and glory, should be brought by the
ignorance or treachery of incapable or wicked ministers, to a state of misery
and contempt, despised abroad, and at home unhappy -- it is but poor
consolation to reflect, that the king has many personal virtues. Was this
imaginary description to become a real picture of a nation, and its virtuous
monarch, I would cry out wiih Marcus, in the Tragedy of Cato,

"Curse on his virtues -- they have undone his country."

MODERN MOTIVES FOR WAR.
(From Barlow's advice to the Privileged Orders.)
ONE general character will apply to much the greater part of the wars of
modern times, -- they are political, and not vindictive. This alone is
sufficient to account for their real origin. They are wars of agreement, rather
than of dissension; and the conquest is taxes. and not territory. To carry on
this business. it is necessary not only to keep up the military spirit of the
noblesse by titles and pensions, and to keep in pay a vast number of troops,
who know no other God but their king, who lose all ideas of themselves, in
contemplating their officers, and who forget the duties of a m^n, to practice
those of a soldier. -- this is but half the operation; an essential part of the
military system is to disarm the people, to hold all the functions of war, as
well the arm that executes, as the will that declares it, equally above their
reach. This part of the system has a douhle effect, it palsies the hand and
brutalizes the mind; an habitual disuse of physical forces totally destroys the
moral; and men lose at once the power of protecting themselves, and of
discerning the cause of their oppression,

ON THE GOVERNMENT OF HELL.
(From a Pamphlet entitled: The Rights of the Devil.)
WE have a long time disputed, and are not yet agreed in this point, what is
the best and most advantageous form of government for any nation, and for the
people whereof it consists. Some are for a democracy, others for aristocracy,
and others for monarchy. Although each of these opinions has its favorites,
and is supported by very solid reasons; it nevertheless appears certain, that
monarchy prevails over the other two, because the four great empires which
succeeded one another in the world, and existed near two thousand years, all
adopted and followed a monarchial form of government. And it appears to be an
indisputable fact, that this is the government of the infernal empire (viz) an
absolute monarchy. It is undoubtedly the best form of government for the
monarch, whatever it may be for the subjects, because the Devil assumes the
power of the whole mass of beings collectively, and consequently can make what
aggrandizement he pleases at the expense of his vassals, and they dare not
grunt their disapprobation. Thus, you see the Devil has a right and property in
his subjects, as he, like earthly monarchs, can rob and plunder them at his
pleasure, and is accountable to no one for his deeds; for it is an established
maxim, "That kings can do no wrong." Therefore, Lucifer, as King of Hell,
cannot act amiss. But you are ready to ask, from whence did the Devil derive
these inestimable rights and privileges? Did the people, his subjects, give up
their rights? No: he acquired them by assumption; and by God's permission, he
has possessed those valuable rights through a series of ages, and will continue
to enjoy them for ages to come, as their is no heir apparent to lucceed him. Is
not those Rights of the Devil with respect to the length of time he enjoys them
far superior to the Rights of earthly Kings? certainly they are, as history
furnishes us with documents to prove that he has exercised those rights through
a succession of ages, already near six thousand years; and will undoubtedly
enjoy them as many more. The infernal monarchy, according to history, appears
to have been original; for I do not recollect reading of any other previous to
the establishment of a monarchical government in Hell by the puissant Lucifer.
Why, thou fool, say some of you, how should thou hear of its having a
precedent, since its originality is unquestionable, and all other absolute
monarchies are but eminations from that primary authority, having their
existence from that very source. Hell is the fountain head, and all terrestrial
monarchies, I say, are but corrupted waters in comparison with the fountain
which supplies them, notwithstanding no labor has been lost on the part of the
monarchs in all ages and kingdoms, to render their governments pure like their
original. Yet Hell is the most peaceable, and justice therein the best
administered of any other kingdom I have ever heard of. No wars! no riots! no
tumults or insurrections! no traitorous correspondence! no sediton or attempt
to alienate the affections of Lucifer's subjects from his person! no attempt to
vilify and bring into contempt the constitution of the empire! But, on the
contrary, the virtues most prevalent are, unity, peace and concord, throughout
the whole of Lucifer's dominions. In Hell, the public tranquillity is never
disturbed in any state or apartment. There you will hear of no such odious
names, as Pain, or Priestley, to alarm or terrify you, by their endeavors to
subvert the government or the country. There will be no Birmingham Roberspieres
to affright, or disturb "the loyal Job Not," when he lays down his head on the
lap of his mother, of whom poor Job has such dreadful apprehensions.

Go on, thou loyal true blue, and pursue thy journey, and fear not for thou
may assuredly depend upon a welcome reception by King Lucifer, but more
especially if thou art accompanied by thy confort Betty Martin, no questions
will then be asked, the mark in your foreheads will testify whose subjects you
are. Hail! happy Job and Betty! Two faithful pot companions; greet the brethren
of the household with an unholy kiss, when you enter those happy realms, where
loyalty and unanimity ever dwells. Who can avoid contemplating the happiness of
Job, when undisturbed by his enemies? There is no such thing as a Jacobin in
Hell; and the names of Pain, Priestley, and in short all the names of modern
reformers, are detestable there as well as here: no projects of reform are
recognized there; in fact, thereis no necessity, the constitution being in its
primitive purity, which is rendered manifest by the desire of anti-republicans
and others show in their emigration thither. What has been left undone by the
celebrated Job Not, the more effectually to secure to himself a place at the
helm of affairs in Satan's kingdom? Has not every thing in his power been done,
to obtain the favor of his master Lucifer? Certainly Job has been a very
zealous friend in his master's service, which was very conspicuous in his
conduct in the Birmingham riots; and he is entitled to patronage and promotion
in the court of Lucifer, in whom the sole right of conferring places, honors,
pensions, and emoluments is invested, Job's literary productions have also
contributed very much to the population of the infernal regions; which will
undoubtedly prejudice the inhabitants greatly in his favor. Methinks, I hear
some of you say that I am jealous of the honor about to be done to Job: no,
no; far be it from me to envy any man; for I declare to Job and all the world,
that neither envy, hatred, malice or uncharitableness shall ever find place
within me.

The Impossibility of commencing Tyrant over an armed Nation convinced of the
universal Equality of Mankind.
(From Barlow's Advice to the Privileged Orders)
ONLY admit this original, un^lt^rable truth, that all men are qual in their
rights, and the foundation of every thing is laid: to build the superstructures
requires no effort but that of natural deduction. The first necessary deduction
will be, that the people will form an equal representative government; in which
it will be impossible for orders or privileges to exist for a moment; and
consequently the first materials for standing armies will be converted into
peaceable members of the state. Another deduction follows, that the people will
be universally armed: they will assume those weapons for security, which the
art of war has invented for destruction. You will then have removed the
necessity of a standing army, by the organization of the legislature, and the
possibility of it, by the ararangement of the militia; for it is saimpossible
for an armed soldiery to exist in an armed nation, as for a nobility to exist
under as equal government.

It is curious to remark how ill we reason on human nature, from being
accustomed to view it under the disguise which the unequal governments of the
world have always imposed upon it, During the American was, and especially
toward its close, General Washington might be said to possess the hearts of
all the Americans. His recommendation was law, and he was able to command the
whole power of that people for any purpose of defense. The philosophers of
Europe considered this as a dangerous crisis to the cause of freedom. They
knew, from the example of Caesar, and Silla, and Marius, and Alcibiades, and
Pericles, and Cromwell, that Washington would never lay down his arms, till he
had given his country a master. But after he did lay them down, then came the
miracle -- his virtue was more than human; and it is by this miracle of virtue
in him, that the Americans are supposed to enjoy their liberty at this day.

I believe the virtue of that great man to be equal to the highest human virtue
that has ever yet been known; but to an American eye no extraordinary portion
of it could appear in that transaction. It would have been impossible for the
General or the anny, to have continued in the field after the enemy left it;
for the soldiers were all citizens! and if it had been otherwise. their numbers
were not the hundredth part of the citizens at large, who were all soldiers. To
say that he was wise in discerning the impossibility of success, in an attempt
to imitate the great heroes abovementioned, is to give him only the same merit
for sagacity which is common to every other person who knows the country, or
has well considered the effects of equal liberty.

ON THE POMPOUS TITLES GIVEN TO THE DIGNIFIED CLERGY.
(From the Candid Philosopher)
THE pompous titles given to the haughty successors of humble fishermen, have
often amazed me. Some of them appear to me either to border on the very
confines of blasphemy, or to have no meaning in them. I would fain know how any
man alive can, with propriety, be called a RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD? What
is the meaning of this great title? How can any man. formed of dust and ashes,
full of frailty, and full of sin, be said to be RIGHT REVEREND? And how is he a
Father in GOD? Equivocation may explain away these words, but common sense must
determine they are impious and absurd. -- As to the terms, your Grace, your
Lordship, your Reverence, etc. etc. they favor too much of vanity and laical
pride, to become the humility of the disciples of CHRIST, and teachers of his
gospel. I cannot find any such titles were ever given to our SAVIOR or his
apostles; yet, without intending any affront to the pious Pastors of the
established Church, I really think the apostles were as holy, wise and
virtuous, as any of the Primates, Archbishops, Prebendaties, Rectors, Vicars,
etc. etc. etc. etc. etc. of the present age.

ON THE VENALITY OF VOTERS, BOTH IN AND OUT OF PARLIAMENT.
(From the Adventures of Gabriel Outcast.)
THOUGH our prudent ancestors found it necessary to curb the influence of the
crown, by enacting a law, that none of its officers should interfere in
elections, yet matters are come to such a pass. that administration found it
necessary to have as many voices in the house, as they could acquire; for this
purpose no money was spared, and every measure pursued that would defe^t and
evade the standing laws against bribery and corruption. The misfortune seemed
to be this: in the reign of King William, venality in parliament was unknown,
every man voted as his judgment and conscience directed him, and the minister
could carry no measures of his own, unless they tended to the general good.

This did not agree with King William, who was an arbitrary prince, and of
course, found his situation so uneasy. that he was once on the eve of returning
to Holland in disgust, and would undoubtedly have done it, had not his
ministers contrived to carry his favorite points, by bribing the Parliament of
those times. Thus did that venality, to which the enormous debt of this nation
is in a great measure owing, descend from the crown to the people; for in those
days it was found difficult to find representatives; and the electors were
obliged to court gentlemen to serve them. But when the members found they were
to be rewarded for their votes. men were so eager to get into parliament, that
they courted the electors, who, in their turn, expected o^ be paid for their
suffrages, of course, the members of the lower house, in a few years, could not
obtain a sear but at a great expense, and to reimburse themselves, made terms
with the minister; and such was the degeneracy of the times, that men would not
vete, even according to their consciences, without a bribe. This corruption
spreading from the lower house to the upper, has occasioned all the cala^^ties
under which this country labors; and whereas venality near a century ago
descended, as I observed, from the crown to the people, it now rises from the
people to the crowm. Note. -- At the end of the Second Part will be given a
Table of Contents to the Volume.
The remaining Part of the Work will be published as the former, neemely, in
Weekly Penny Numbers.


END OF THE FIRST PART.
PART SECOND, OF PIGS' MEAT; OR, Lessons for the Swinish Multitude. PUBLISHED
IN WEEKLY PENNY NUMBERS.
Defects in the English Constitution, as to Representation. From the Complaints
of the Poor People of England.
By G. Dyer. B. A.
IN England few poor men have any share in making the laws. Some may probably
think, and certain politicians assert, that poor men have neither the power,
nor the right, to make laws. What is this, but to assert, that the poor man's
portion in England is s^wery. I do not say, that the poor people of England are
slaves. But this I say, that all freemen make their own laws; and I do but
speak after our best political writers. Will gentlemen tell me, why poor men
are to be slaves? However, while I consider every man's right to make laws, as
his most sacred property, and the exercise of that right as essential to
liberty, whoever cannot exercise that right, be he ever so rich, I must at
least consider as poor; in the worst sense poor. My complaints, therefore, do
not confine themselves to paupers, commonly so called. Many poor men live in
England, who are possessed of thousands!

There are two ways of making laws, viz. in our own persons, or by
representatives. If a country be large and populous, all the people cannot
assemble and consult together for the purpose of making laws: but if they
authorize persons, acquainted with their wants, and interested in their
happiness, to represent them, every good end may be answered. The only danger
is, lest these persons should not express the public mind. Never will they
express it, unless they represent the public. -- This is the case in England:
the government of which it is usual to call a limited monarchy, in reference to
the person of the prince. But in reference to the people, so great a part of
whom have no share in representation, it might be called, notwithstanding what
we say of the house of commons, a mixed aristocracy, as Poland has been called.

The king, the house of peers, and the house of commons, compose what are
called the three branches of the constitution -- the king in his own person,
the nobles in their own persons. What is a house of commons? It is supposed to
represent the people: but some say, it is a fiction; that is, that it does not
exist, but that it is only supposed to exist. When men inquire into facts, what
are called theories frequently vanish. We talk of a house of commons, of a
house of representatives; it is the glory of Britons! and foreigners laugh at
us. They ask us, Where is this house? I leave others to answer this question.

If this house of commons were indeed something more than a fiction, I should
myself retract a little of my wonted admiration. A house of commons, fairly and
equally representing all the people of England, never did exist. But if it were
not a mere fiction, if it were a reality, I should still be obliged to yield
something to the following remark, viz. that a house of commons supposes some
superior house, of nobles, or some such name. But where any order of men
exists, of separate claims and of separate interests from the people, and whose
separate characters give them a kind of sacred superiority over the people,
liberty may perhaps be endangered. It has been asserted, whether justly I do
not determine, that such a house as that of a house of commons exists in no
free state.

I shall here make a sew remarks on nobility. I will repeat what an ancient
writer says: "In no state," says he, "are the nobles favorable to the people:
equals are favorable to equals." And elsewhere he observes, in every part of
the earth, the government of the nobles is inconsistent with that of the
people: and he gives his reasons for the oppsition of the two orders. A French
writer, perhaps, had his eye on these passages, when he said, the English
nobility baried themselves with Charles I. under the ruins of the throne. He
adds, "they think it an honor to obey a king, but consider it as the lowest
infamy to snare the power with the people.

It might be easily shown, that a patent nobility made no part of the old
English government, or of the other governments of Europe. Xenophon and
Montesquieu were friends, the one to aristocracy, the other to monarchy, yet
nobody ever more exposed them. It is of a government, where an hereditary
patent nobility is said to balance the two extremes of monarchy and democracy,
that Blackstone observes, "It creates and preserves that gradual scale of
dignity, which proceeds from the beggar to the prince, rising like a pyramid
from a broad foundation, and diminishing to a point as it rises. It is this
ascending and contracting proportion, that adds stability to any government;
for when the departure is sudden from one extreme to another, we may pronounce
that state to be precarious." This is beautiful, flattering also to national
vanity, but it is theoretical. The ascending and contracting proportion is seen
among most of the American states, in a house of representatives chosen by the
people, in a senate appointed by the representatives, and in a president, or
governor, appointed mediately or immediately by the people: yet the Americans
have no nobles. The system of aristocracy, they think, tends to weakness. It
dissolves, they say, the ties of families by the law of primogeniture; exhausts
the public money in places for the younger branches of noble families; keeps
the orders of society in a kind of dwarsish state, by perpetuating the maxims
of a barbarous age; weakens the legislature by advancing men to legislation,
whose private regards absorb public spirit, and who are irresponsible to the
nation; and, by dividing man from man, enfeebles the order of human beings. Who
can tell where the tide of contingencies will flow? France, in whose political
fabric nobility did indeed seem to form the great Corinthian capital, saw it
necessary to remove it, to raise a government of justice.

"I have also admitted that an order of nobles might exist without a patent
nobility. I have not said that it is necessary; or if necessary, that an
hereditary nobility is. Its great use may be thought to consist in forming a
kind of senate to give bias and consistency to other powers, and to produce a
harmony in states; a senate has even been thought essential to a republic.
France, we have been told, has left out of her political fabric the pillar of
strength. "Never," says a writer, "before this time was heard of a body politic
without such a council;" yet Geneva, in the infancy of the republic, was such:
a more scientific writer than Mr. Burke, though he elsewhere says, that a king
and people may exist without a senate, yet does, in fact, say, "there never was
a good government in the world, that did not consist of the three simple
species, of monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy."

"Yet France has thought otherwise. She thinks, that by breaking the
distinctions between man and man, she strengthens society, and makes the public
force permanent by uniting it in a national assembly. I decide nothing on the
truth of these sentiments: I propose these questions: -- Was it not the
existence of the two orders of patricians and plebeians, that promoted all the
disorders of the Roman government, Were not the senatus consulta and the
plebiscita frequently little else than exclusive decrees for particular
interests? And while the patricians were encroaching on the plebeians, the
tribunes, called to the aid of the plebeians, became in their turn factious
demagogues. Amid private regards was not public liberty unknown? Was it not a
senate that destroyed the liberties of Geneva?"

But to return to the House of commons. Whom, or what does a house of commons
represent? -- not always rational beings, men and women; but for the greater
part, property; and property of a particular kind. Property, though ever so
large, copyhold, leasehold, or personal, cannot be represented, but freehold
estates only, possessed by men. Females, though possessed of 100,000 l, a year,
either in land or money, have no representatives. Since the reign of Henry VI.
none can be electors of knights of the shire, but men possessed of forty
shillings a year. But how few poor men have freeholds! Some parishes consisting
of several hundred persons, perhaps, have not a single freeholder. Some of the
largest and most wealthy towns in England have not a single representative. I
have not yet spoken of boroughs. But our theory begins to vanish!

If the reader can avoid smiling at the following facts, I shall think him
fimple; if he feel no indignation, I shall think him something worse.

The borough of Midhurst in Sussex, it is well known, contains not a single
house, and yet sends two members to Parliament. The right of election is in one
hundred and twenty burgage-holds; the former situation of which is marked out
by a stone on each side. -- The borough of Old Sarum, in Wiltshire sends two
members to parliament; yet there is but one or two houses standing. The members
are chosen by a bailiff, and six burgesses, appointed by Lord Camelford, the
lord of the borough, and entrusted by him with burgage-scites. The borough of
Gatton and Castle-Rising have each two houses only, and two representatives
each.

The tenures of Midhurst, I would observe, make no part of the town of
Midhurst. They were the property of the late Lord Montague, who, at the time of
the election, made a temporary assignment of a part of them, either to some of
his domestics or friends, in order to have those members returned that he
should nominate. The trustees of the estates of the present lord sold these
burgage-holds to the earl of Egremont for 40,000 guineas, whose brothers were
returned for this borough the last general election.

Hastings, in Sussex, before the ^assing of Mr. Crewe's bill, was entirely at
the disposal of the treasury. The number of voters was ^^out twenty, all of
whom had places under government, or were provided for some other way. This is
the borough I think, in the management of which a Mr. Collins acquired a most
splendid fortune, and made ample provision for five co-heiresses, his
daughters. The borough of Hastings, I think, is still in the management of
government. These are what are called rotten boroughs.

I have already hinted that some large towns, and these abounding with
manufactories, have not a single representative: and even where property is
represented, it is not represented equally. The county of Middlesex, in 1693,
paid 80 parts of the land tax, and in 1697, 185 of the subsidy, and sent only
eight members to parliament; while Cornwall paid but eight parts of the land
tax, and five only of the subsidy and yet sent forty-four. As to the rotten
boroughs, of some of which I have just spoken, they represent nobody; they are
private property. The persons who are chosen for them represent nobody, yet
they have all the power of representatives: a use also they certainly have;
they strengthen the influence of the crown; and if a man have money enough to
purchase a borough, and meanness enough to obey the beck of the minister, we
know the rest. -- Thus it is, that persons, who were never appointed by the
people, make laws......

The house of representatives amounts to between five and six hundred members;
the majority of which are appointed by voters not exceeding twelve thousand;
the nation consists of seven or eight million: so that the persons who do
actually give a vote for members are, comparatively, a small part of the
community. The Duke of Richmond, whose statement I here nearly follow, once
understood political calculation; and I am persuaded, it is only what is
supposed to be the danger of the experiment, that makes him fearful of the rule
of practice. Mr. Pain observes, that not above one in seven is represented;
this relates to representatives, actually chosen: for when all the
circumstances taken into the account are considered, one writer asserts, that
the walls of St. Stephen's Chapel have not been visited by six members in any
parliament, elected, appointed, or delegated by their constituents; and
another, that not one person in five housand is represented. But leaving these
writers, I ask again, Where is our house of commons? Some call it a stubborn
aristocracy. Where is our house of representatives? -- Some call it a fiction.
Our theory they say is gone. Be this as it may, the poor man is left to pay
taxes.

AN APOLOGY FOR YOUNGER BROTHERS.
By the Author of A Plea for a Common Wealth. Printed in the Year 1659.
IT has been a long received custom in this land, or at least, of as ancient
date as the Norman monarchy, that notwithstanding the elder son obtains the
whole inheritance, yet to bestow a generous and liberal education on the
younger, in which, considering the circumstances of those times, together with
the complexion of their government, I find no cause wherefore to accuse our
ancestors, of either imprudence or injustice.

For first, the levelling of estates has always (and that justly enough) been
accounted altogether unsuitable to the majesty and gaudy splendour of monarchi^l
government, which has sometimes, though fals^ly been supposed, not only the
most absolute and perfect form, but that which by long experience has been
found most suitable to the genius or humor of the English people, the interest
of which government is rather to have large public revenues, with a vast stock
of preferments, wherewith to gratify the ambition of the more ingenious part of
the gentry, who have nothing to rely on save what they can purchase in the
favor of their prince. Nor was antiquity herein deceived; for when the
greatest part of the nation, by this means, reap their chief subsistence from
the public revenues of the Commonwealth, and favor of the prince, in whose
sole dispose they are, and on whom for this cause, they look upon as their
common father; and indeed to whom they have greater obligations than to their
own parents; there appears little probability how the pillars of such a
government should be easily shaken, whose basis is founded on the interest of
so great a part of the nation, to defend it with the utmost peril of their
lives and blood. Nor have we more reason to accuse our ancestors of impiety or
injustice, than imprudence, since heretofore so great and ample were the public
revenues, that a younger son could, either in church or state, by the wings of
his own industry or merits, have raised himself to as high a pitch of honor
and fairer fortunes, than those of his elder brother's birthright; so that to
be the firstborn was scarce a privilege, except to such as wanted worth to
advance them; wherefore, while the Church and Court were open with their large
train of preferments, to entertain the more ingenious of the gentry's younger
sons, and monasteries to entomb those of a less mercurial genius, there was
little reason for commencing this complaint; for this I am compelled by the
violence of truth to confess, in defense of the ancient constitution of the
laws and government of this nation, that whatever their other faults, they were
not injurious to younger brethren, till after the sale of church lands, and the
abrogating those many preferments that were their former inheritance.

This was the former state of the nation, in which, if younger sons were
debarred a share in their fathers inheritance, they might receive an ample
compensation from the Church their mother, whose jointure was no less than two
thirds of the whole land; so that they might seem rather owned as the only
children of the Commonwealth, and honorably maintained at the public charge
thereof, than disinherited by the unkindness of the laws. A generous education
was then a sufficient portion, which is now, for want of a suitable employment,
become a curse instead of a blessing, serving to no other end, than to
discover, if not augment their misery; so much is the scene of things changed
since Henry VIII. spoiled the church of her revenues, and by consequence these
of the fairest part of their inheritance; and yet nothing of the rigor of the
ancient laws are herein abated toward them. It is not my intention (God knows
my heart) to speak a word in approbation of those superstitious uses to which
any abbey or bishops lands were heretofore employed, but with reflection on
those good and pious, to which (in the opinion of some) they might have been
converted.

Nor is it the design of these discourses to retrieve ecclesiastical
promotions, or demonstrate a necessity of rebuilding the things we have so
lately destroyed; but rather to show, how unsafe and injurious it would be to
establish and fix a Commonwealth upon the ruins and tottering foundation of a
decayed monarchy: nor do I blame the prudence of our late reformers, that
unhorseing the pride of the clergy, and putting down the hierarchy, they rather
sold, than reserved in a public stock, the revenues of the church, by reason it
may seem more safe for a Commonwealth to keep nothing that may encourage an
invasion of its liberty, or become the reward of usurpation and tyranny, only I
could wish, that since the reason and circumstances of our laws are quite
altered, we might not still build on old foundations, and entail the whole land
on a few proprietors or elder brethren, to the exclusion and utter ruin of the
greatest part of the nation, and contrary to the interest of a free state or
Commonwealth. I dare not charge all our late changes and many turnings in the
balance of affairs on this account, though I cannot but observe, that our times
have rung more changes, been tuned to more different instruments, and ran
through more several forms of government, than were from the times of the
Norman Conquest known before, to which how much the discontent and poverty of
our gentry may have contributed, I know not; but Solomon says, Oppression will
make a wise man mad. I am sure the Younger Brothers are by far the greater
number; and through nature's courtesy, commonly as rich in intellectual
endowments, as poor in fortunes, and being by the tyranny (as affairs now
stand) of Law and Custom, debarred sharing in their parents estates, to which
they conceive nature equally entitles them with their Elder Brethren; it is no
wonder if they desire to interrupt the peace and tranquillity of the
Commonwealth, since by the shakings thereof, they may probably root themselves
in fairer fortunes, than from its peace and settlement, they may with reason
expect; and that which arms their discontent with fit weapons for revenge, and
renders them more formidable, is their generous education; for certainly, it is
of very unsafe and dangerous consequence, to qualify such for great and noble
undertakings, that are heirs to no other fortunes than what their valors can
purchase with the ruin of the Commonwealth's peace and government. Therefore,
had those that made the public revenues a prey to their ambition, also drunk up
those streams of bounty, by which the schools and universities are fed and
maintained, and so taken away the means as well as the encouragement of liberal
education, they had better consulted the peace, though not the honor of the
nation; for so long as these are open (if not better ordered), I doubt there
will be vipers hatched to eat through the womb of government, by which they
conceive themselves injured and debarred, both that which nature gives them
title to of their parents, and the ancient constitution of the Commonwealth in
public revenues, which I would not have understood as proceeding from any
prejudice or ill will to the universities, which I much honor, and in which,
with thankfulness I acknowledge, to have received my education, but only to
discover the shortness of that policy, that taking away the preferments, should
reward and crown all academic endeavors, yet never reduced the means whereby
men are qualified for an expectation, and prompted to an ambition of them; and,
indeed, of a like strain is most of our modern policy, not skin deep, and
rather to be accounted shifts and present evasions of impendent evils, than
antidotes of solid prudence, for either the obviating, or healing any disaster
or malady in the body politic.

Certainly, a generous education is not proper for such as are intended for
little less than slaves. It is ignorance is the mother of obedience, whereas
knowledge makes men proud and factious, especially when they conceive their
fortunes and e^ployments are not correspondent to the grandeur of their birth
and education.

The younger son is apt to think himself sprung from as noble a stock, from the
loins of as good a gentleman as his elder brother, and therefore cannot but
wonder, why fortune and the law should make so great a difference between them
that lay in the same womb, that are formed of the same lump; why law or custom
should deny them an estate, whom nature has given discretion to know how to
manage it.

Learning ennobles and elevates the soul, causing it to despise and set light
by small and base things; and therefore, where that flourishes, men are not
easily taught to submit their necks to an iron yoke of slavery; which prompts
the Turkish prudence to extinguish all such lights by which men gain a prospect
or discovery of the thraldom and misery of their condition. It would drink more
ink, and waste more time than I, or perhaps the reader, would willingly bestow,
to give an account of all the mischiefs and inconveniences that proceed from
the fertile womb of this single mistake, that a generous education
(notwithstanding the abolition of all encouragements of learning and ingenious
preferments) is a sufficient portion for a Younger Brother. Wisdom is good with
an inheritance, but the wisdom of the poor man is despised. The muses without a
dowry are but despicable virgins, and the unnatural, though usual divorce, that
is at this day found between wit and money, renders both useless, if not
pernicious to the Commonwealth. I doubt not, but should we take a view of
things through the prospective of some men's observations, we should discover
this in part the cause of that tranquillity and settlement, peace and
prosperity, with which in former times this British Isle was crowned; as also
of those many shakings and convulsions in which these latter ages have seen her
cast into: and can we expect it should be otherwise? when (as Solomon has
observed) There is not bread to the wise, nor riches to men of understanding,
nor yet favor to men of skill, etc. which seems to proceed from no other cause
than the iniquity of our laws, pouring all the wealth into one channel, and
conveying the whole land into the hands of a few Proprietors or elder Brethren.

I confess, those providence has placed on high, on the battlements of supreme
power, may, if their eyes are open, and not blinded by private interest,
command a fairer prospect, and discern farther into these things, then such
whom a meaner fortune has left in the valley of a low and private condition;
therefore, I shall not presume to inform those intelligences that turn about
the orbs of government; only could wish, there were such a scene of things
brought forth, as may give encouragement to expect a settlement, without a
miracle.

To which, as things now stand, I cannot persuade myself, but that the
establishing of gavel kind, would have no small tendency; for can any thing be
done more suitable to a Commonwealth? or is there any thing more just and
equitable, than that all the children should share in their Parents
inheritances? or indeed is there not rather an absolute necessity thereof,
since all the former avenues by which men had access to preferment are hedged
up? is not the only door at present open to a fortune, that of the law? which
is also now, together with all other professions, so overstocked with students,
and thereby become so burdensome, that the Nation will no longer endure it. For
are they not necessitated to devise daily new quirks and subtleties, whereby
suits may be multiplied, to the confusion of estates, and oppression of the
people. How much more honorable would it be to our reformation, and new
established government, that there were a more equal and righteous distribution
of the things of this earth, than that the greater part of the nation should be
put to shift and scramble for a livelihood, or be necessitated to live on the
sins of the people.

Why estates may not, for the future, descend regularly to the whole offspring
that are of the same blood and family, instead of one branch thereof, I know no
inconvenience in that, especially in those circumstances we are in at present,
being fallen into an age so eagle-eyed and quick-sighted, as to discern spots
on the sun, and discover corruption in the heavens; which the duller optics of
antiquity judged immaculate, and as altogether incorruptible: an age that dares
pry into the pious frauds, and unmask the most religious deceits, which the
devouter ignorance of our ancestors never beheld, but at a superstitious and
reverential distance; an age, in which the art of living, or to gain and honest
subsistence, is grown so subtle, so difficult and abstruse a mystery, that few
are able to master it.

How many ingenious gentlemen, that are now clothed with rags and misery, might
have raised themselves to fair estates, had they had a stock wherewith to set
their industry on work; for can any man make brick wherewith to build
themselves a fortune without any straw? How many might this have reprieved from
an untimely death, who might have been useful to their country, and ornaments
to the Commonwealth, had their parts and ingenuities found due encouragements?
How many brave sparkling wits, that might have proved bright stars and shining
lamps both in Church and Commonwealth, have been extinguished in obscurity, for
want of maintenance, the oil whereby their lamps should have been fed and
nourished.

Were it not far more just to restrain marriage, or at least give check, and
set bounds to the lust of parents, by stinting the number of their offspring to
a child or two, and sealing up the fertile womb, than thus turn that blessing
of god, increase and multiply, into the greatest curse, and visit the iniquity
of the parents upon the children? Or, were it not a greater act of charity,
according to the example of the Heathen, to expose or drown these latter
births, as we do such supernumerary dogs etc. as would otherwise over-stock our
commons, than thus expose them like so many little ^^^s^ses in arks of
bulrushes to a sea of poverty and ^^^sery, from whence they many never expect
reprieve, unless some miraculous providence (like Pharo's ^^^^ghters) chance to
rescue and receive them into her court and favor? Our law making no more
provision for Younger Brethren than if they were to be clothed like the
lillies of the field, or like Elias, to expect their food from ravens,
receiving no other comfort from the hands of men, than what they can suck from
the dry breasts of an old proverb, that God will send meat wheresoever he has
provided mouths, than which nothing more true, did not the covetousness of men
withhold it.

It was the custom of our gentry and nobility to clap such of their phlegmatic
offspring, as nature had not made mercurial enough to ambiate either church or
court preferments into some religious habit; and so keep up the splendor of
their families, by pruning away such under-branches for the service of the
alter, as either, through their number or folly were like to let in poverty,
and thereby become a dispar^gement to the noble stock from whence they sprang,
which has prompted some to an opinion, that if in these more populous northern
climates, a kind of Protestant monasteries were erected for encouragement of
chastity and single life, especially among the poorer sort, it would (pardoning
the solecism of the name) be more consonant to the maxims of state and true
polley, than in those hotter and more barren climates, where there is so little
danger of being over-stocked or burdened with people, that on the contrary they
want men for the necessary defense of their territories; of which we have a
pertinent instance in Spain, whose religious houses (did not their blind
devotion so much triumph over their policy) had long since been buried under
their own ruins; for there can no other account be given, why that wise and
prudent nation laboring under so great a weight of affairs, and scarcity of
men, to manage their wars, should tolerate so many hives of drones; which so
long as they shall continue, may give good caution and security to its
neighboring states and princes, to lay asleep their fears and jealousies of
his ever attaining that universal monarchy, at which, for so many centuries,
the lips of his proud ambition have been thought to water: there being little
probability that his palsy hands should grasp the universe, that has not
strength enough to hold that little part thereof he has already fastened on;
and therefore the Spanish conquests may not unfitly be compared to those of
rivers upon the banks of their channels, losing as much in one place as they
gain in others?

But since Providence has been pleased in mercy to bring back our captivity,
and again to cast us into the advantageous form of a Commonwealth, if
gavel-kind were once established, we shall stand in need of no other devices
for keeping out of poverty, than the setting industry on work according to the
opportunities, plentiful occasions will administer in an equal Commonwealth.
But I shall now return to the lawyers, from whom I have made so long a
digression. I have read, that in the more pure and less sophisticated times of
our ancestors, great estates have been passed in few words, and the conveyance
proved more firm and good, than those tedious, prolix, tautological
instruments, the knavery of latter ages has introduced. In sign that this is
sooth
I bite the white wax with my tooth.
Or the like being the form of those more simple and sincere times; whereas
now, through the fraud of lawyers, all things are so ambiguously penned, that
none but a sphinx in their mysteries is able to understand or unriddle them.

The professors of which mystery of iniquity that live upon the sins of the
people, are of late grown so numerous, that like locusts, or an Egyptian
plague, they cover the face of our land, and are thriven to such vast estates,
that whereas heretofore the Church and Clergy being in possession of two
thirds, of the best lands throughout the realm, gave birth to the statute of
Mortmain for security of the rest: we may justly fear, unless some prudent care
be taken for prevention of their future purchases, lest this pack, etc. by
their quirks, etc. instate themselves in our inheritances, and ingross the
wealth and revenues of the whole nation unto themselves, etc.

I have heard this subtle generation were not in so fair a plight, when every
term they beat upon the hoof to London, with their satchels on their backs, and
at the towns end proffered their services, like waterman at the Thames side, to
be retained by the country clients; and I know not whether we may ever expect a
golden age, or to see good days, till the interest of this corrupt generation
be laid as low as any histories can produce a precedent; which at this time
must needs have the greatest countenance of justice that can be, they having
been so notoriously instrumental in betraying our liberties; and selling us
into the hands of tyranny, by which, together with their other iniquities, they
have contracted so great an odium in the hearts and eyes of all honest men,
that I Know not whether the hanging up of their gowns in Westminster Hall might
not be as acceptable a trophy in the eyes of the people, as the Scotch colors.

I have often wondered, that notwithstanding the grace mischief the nation has
suffered by the lawyers ^^^ning our laws and acts of parliaments, being known
to leave flaws, and always render them so lame, they can, for their advantage,
wrest them to what sense they please, and thereby make themselves the lords and
absolute arbitrators both of our lives and fortunes; that for prevention of
like future abuses they are not excluded the House of Commons as well as the
Clergy, there being as much reason and more precedent for the one than the
other, for that the Judges never had a vote in the House of Peers, but only sat
upon the Wool-pack, whereas the Bishops had like privileges with the other
Lords. It being very incongruous in reason that they should be the makers of
our laws who are the mercenary Interpreters, lest biassed by their own
interests, instead of fences to our properties, they make them snares to our
lives and estates.

But it is hoped, the prudence of our Senators will make so thorough a
reformation of the Laws, that as they are the birthright and inheritance of
every Englishman, and the interest of all persons to know and be intimately
acquainted with them, so they shall be rendered so facil and easy, that the
meanest capacity may conceive them, at least so far as he is concerned therein;
that so there may be no longer any occasion of keeping up so corrupt an
interest of men to make justice mercenary, who have been always found the
panders of tyranny, and betrayers of our liberties; and that for the future,
every man may be permitted to be his own orator and plead his own cause, or
procure what friend they please to be their advocates; that right may be done
gratis to every man, and the cry of the oppressed may no longer be heard in our
gates; But that judgment may run down like a stream, and righteousness like a
mighty torrent in the midst of our streets.

I shall conclude with that honest desire of the inhabitants of Hull, of late
presented to the Parliament; That the laws by which this Commonwealth is to be
governed may be those holy, just and righteous laws of the great and wise God,
our rightful lawgiver; and where any case is unprovided for in the express
terms of his word, care may be taken to determine it, with the most exact
proportion that is possible thereto, that so our laws being founded on the
Scriptures, and so composed, as not only to have great affinity with, but also
to border on the very suburbs of divinity, the greater reverence and authority
may be conciliated to each; and it may seem the less incongruous for our civil
magistrates to be utrisque peritus, skilful in both.

Now whatsoever has been here spoken out of a most intensely heated zeal for
public good, with reflection on the abuses of the law, and the professors
thereof, I would not have misconstrued to reflect upon their persons, which I
honor, and acknowledge many of them to be men of great candor and integrity,
but rather of the corrupt interest of the profession, it being the design of
these discourses to witness only against interests, and not to revile or
asperse the persons of any whatsoever, etc.

And, indeed, to speak my mind freely, the grand error in the reformation of
these times has been its weeding out of persons, when as the blow should have
been levelled against the interests, which notwithstanding the frequent change
of persons, still take root, and spring up in as great vigor as before; and
therefore I humbly conceive, till the ax be laid to the root of every evil and
corrupt interest, we may not expect to reap any great fruit or success by our
reformation, for all flesh is corruptible, and every man a lie; nor is he that
marches in the rear any better able to resist the temptation, or avoid the
snares of his place than he that fell before him.

They may comment on the Two following Advertisements that will for me.
IN the Norfolk Chronicle of November 2, 1793, a reward of two hundred pounds
is promised by his Majesty, for discovery of the writer or publisher of the
following hand-bill, which was stuck up and distributed in and about Norwich.

To all real Lovers of Liberty.
My Friends and Fellow Citizens,
^^s with the greatest joy I congratulate you on the Defeat of the combined
Tyrants. -- Be assured that Liberty and Freedom will at last prevail. Tremble O
thou Oppressor of the People, that reigns upon the Throne, and ye Ministers
of State weep, for ye shall fall. Weep, O ye Conductors of this vile and wicked
War, ye who grind the Face of the Poor, oppress the People, and starve the
industrious Mechanic. -- My friends, you are oppressed -- you know it. --
Revenge it. Lord Buckingham, who died the other day, had Thirty Thousand Pounds
yearly, for setting his Arse in the House of Lords, and doing nothing. -- Think
of this, ye who work hard, and have hardly a crust to put in your Mouths, think
how many Wretches it would have made happy. In short, my Friends, Liberty calls
aloud, ye who will hear her Voice, may you be free and happy. He who does not,
let him starve and be damned.

Sunday, Sept. 14. N. B. Be resolute, and you shall be happy; he who wishes
well to the Cause of Liberty, let him repair to Chapel Fields at Five o'Cloek,
This Afternoon, to begin a glorious Revolution.



ADVERTISEMENT VERBATIM, From the MORNING CHRONICLE of Nov. 15, 1793.
FIVE THOUSAND POUNDS.

The above sum will be given as A COMPLIMENT to any LADY or Gentleman, who has
interest to procure a Situation FOR LIFE under Government, for a Gentleman of
an active disposition, between 40 and 50, of the strictest honor and
integrity, who will have no objection to a few hours attendance every day in
London, BY WAY OF AMUSEMENT. The emolement thereof must be equal to the
gratuity. As the above sum is ready at a day's notice, none but principals will
be treated with, and the most inviolable secresy will be observed, if required.
A line for B. A. Will's Coffee-house, Cornhill, will be attended to.

NATIONAL FASTING GENERALLY INSIDIOUS AND IMPIOUS.
From Fast Day Sermons, by the Rev. J. Murray, of Newcastle, Author of Sermons
to Asses. Printed in the Year 1781.
ISAIAH, 58, 4, 6. Behold, ye fast for Strife and Debate, and to smite with the
fist of Wickedness. -- Is not this the Fast that I have chosen? to loose the
Bands of Wickedness, to undo the heavy Burdens, and to let the Oppressed go
free, and that ye break every Yoke.
ACCORDING to the style of Revelation, all unjust and arbitrary decrees are
bands of wickedness, by whatsoever human authority they are imposed, because
they are contrary to moral justice, and are oppressive to the people. And
though they can never bind the consciences of men, and so have no moral
influence, yet they are cords of oppression, that sit hard upon their bodies
and their temporal interest. Laws that are unfriendly to the temporal interest,
and general good of society; laws that are made to exalt a few to power and
dignity, by spunging, squeezing, and oppressing all other ranks of people,
though contrived trived by angels, and executed by saints, are bands of
wickedness, which may cause people to suffer for transgressing, but can never
create sin in disobeying.

When the Rulers of a Nation, to gratify their own lusts of pride and ambition,
impose heavy and oppressive burdens upon the people by legislative authority,
they establish iniquity by a law, which in the strictest sense of the words, is
a band of iniquity. The lusts of princes and their servants, often create their
own wants, and render them necessitous; they then make use of their power and
influence to procure laws to oblige others to supply them, whether they are
able or not; and what aggravates the evil, when the subjects know and feel that
they are not able to answer the heavy demands of power, they are not allowed to
be judges of their own abilities. Those that rule over others ought to be sober
and temperate, and make the reasonable finances of state serve them in
executing their offices. Unnecessary splendour and expense in government are
inconsistent with both reason and religion, which teach us, that it is one of
the great ends of laws and government to restrain unruly appetites and
passions. It is sinful in princes to coin expensive offices to serve their
favorites, and oppress their subjects. Nothing can be more audacious, than for
men appointed to be guardians of society, with a design to make individuals
easy and happy, to pretend to come before the Lord, in the most solemn manner,
to ask his aid and assistance to oppress them. Such is undoubtedly the language
of the ensuing Fast, and of the conduct of its authors and devisers.

The poor, in all parts of Britain, are groaning under a heavy load of taxes,
devised for new purposes, and imposed by new statutes. But for what reasons?
Where is the necessity? What way are they applied? Are they not intended to
carry violence and desolation, fire and sword, among a people, whose only fault
is, that they are endowed with principles, and a spirit which Englishmen once
gloried in, and which saved this nation from poverty and arbitrary power, and
will not part with what God and nature, and the laws have given them, to
gratify the lusts of men who have degenerated from the noble generous temper of
their ancestors, into Eastern nabobs, and Turkish bashaws. These men have
thought sit to contrive war, foreign and domestic, to gratify their depraved
passions, and the rich and poor throughout the nation must be oppressed to
carry it on; bands of wickedness are twisted one year after another, and the
nation groans in chains. All the necessaries of life are in some way or other
taxed; our smoke cannot ascend to the sky, nor a ray of light peep in at our
windows, without paying an heavy impost. The inside, as well as the outside of
our houses, are assessed; and poor people, who cannot, without great
difficulty, afford to pay five pounds for a house to lodge in through the year,
must now pay five sixpences more. And for what reason? to carry on a war that
originated in injustice, has been carried on with folly, and attended with
disgrace and disappointment. -- To shed innocent blood, and carry death and
desolation across the Atlantic to destroy our brethren, to satiate the
voracious lusts of a few ambitious men, who would waste the globe, and ruin
Heaven itself, provided they had the management thereof. Ah, Britain! will the
God of mercy, who delights in forgiving offenses, hear your prayers, or regard
your fastings, when you are twisting cords of oppression, instead of loosing
bands of wickedness. Ah, ye Rulers of the Land, whither are ye hastening? you
cannot run long when you are rushing upon the bosses of Jehovah's buckler! When
you fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness, do
you imagine that the God of Mercy will hear your prayers with acceptance, or
regard your fasting, any otherwise than setting them down to the sum total of
your past iniquities.

ON THE LIBERTY OF THE PRESS.
By Mr. ERSKINE, in his Speech on the Trial of THOMAS PAIN.
From Gurney's Edition of the said Trial.
EVERY man, not intending to mislead and to confound, but seeking to enlighten
others with what his own reason and conscience, however erroneously, dictate to
him as truth, may address himself to the universal reason of a whole nation,
either upon the subject of governments in general, or upon that of our own
particular country: he may analyze the principles of its constitution, point
out its errors and defects, examine and publish its corruptions, warn his
fellow-citizens against their ruinous consequences, and exert his whole
faculties, in pointing out the most advantageous changes in establishments,
which he considers to be radically defective, or sliding from their object by
abuse. All this every subject of this country has a right to do, if he
contemplates only what he thinks its happiness, and but seeks to change the
public mind by the conviction which flows from reasonings dictated by
conscience.

If, indeed, he writes what he does not think; if, contemplating the misery of
others, he wickedly condemns what his own understanding approves; or, even
admitting his real disgust against the government, or its corruptions; if he
calumniates living magistrates; or holds out to individuals, that they have a
right to run before the public mind in their conduct; that they may oppose by
contumacy or force what private reason only disapproves; that they may disobey
the law, because their judgment condemns it; or resist the public will, because
they honestly wish to change it; he is then a criminal upon every principle of
rational policy, as well as upon the immemorial precedents of English justice;
because such a person seeks to disunite individuals from their duty to the
whole, and excites to overt acts of misconduct in a part of the community,
instead of endeavoring to change, by the impulse of reason, the universal
ascent which, in this and in every country, constitutes the law for all.

Gentlemen, I say, in the name of Thomas Pain, and in his words as author of
the Rights of Man, as written in the very volume that is charged with seeking
the destruction of property,

The end of all political associations is, The preservation of the Rights of
Man, which rights are Liberty, Property, and Security; that the nation is the
source of all sovereignty derived from it: the right of property being secured
and inviolable, no one ought to be deprived of it, except in cases of evident
public necessity, legally ascertained, and on condition of a previous just
indemnity.

These are undoubtedly the rights of man -- the rights for which all
governments are established -- and the only rights Mr. Pain contends for; but
which he thinks (no matter whether right or wrong) are better to be secured by
a republican constitution than by the forms of the English government. He
instructs me to admit, that, when government is once constituted, no
individuals, without rebellion, can withdraw their obedience from it -- that
all attempts to excite them to it are highly criminal, for the most obvious
reasons of policy and justice -- that nothing short of the Will of a whole
people can change or effect the rule by which a nation is to be governed -- and
that no private opinion, however honestly inimicable to the forms or substance
of the law, can justify resistance to its authority, while it remains in force.
The author of the Rights of Man not only admits the truth of all this doctrine,
but he consents to be convicted, and I also consent for him, unless his Work
shall be found studiously and painfully to inculcate culcate these great
principles of government, which it is charged to have been written to destroy.
Let me not, therefore, be suspected to be contending, that it is lawful to
write a book pointing out defects in the English government, and exciting
individuals to destroy its sanctions, and to refuse obedience. But, on the
other hand, I do contend, that it is lawful to address the English nation on
these momentous subjects, for had it not been for this unalienable right
(thanks be to God and our fathers for establishing it), how should we have had
this Constitution which we so loudly boast of? If, in the march of the human
mind, no man could have gone before the establishments of the time he lived in,
how could our establishment, by reiterated changes, have become what it is? If
no man could have awakened the public mind to errors and abuses in our
government, how could it have passed on from stage to stage, through
reformation and revolution, so as to have arrived from barbarism to such a
pitch of happiness and perfection, that the Attorney General considers it as
profanation to touch it any further, or to look for any future amendment.

In this manner power has reasoned in every age -- Government, in its own
estimation, has been at all times a system of perfection; but a free press has
examined and detected its errors, and the people have happily reformed them:
this freedom has alone made our government what it is, and alone can preserve
it; and therefore, under the banners of that freedom, today I stand up to
defend Thomas Pain. But how, alas! shall this task be accomplished? How may I
expect from you what human nature has not made man for the performance of? How
may I address your reasons, or ask them to pause, amidst the torrent of
prejudice which has hurried away the public mind on the subject you are to
judge?

Was any Englishman ever so brought as a criminal before an English Court of
Justice? -- If I were to ask you, Gentlemen of the Jury, what is the choicest
fruit that grows upon the tree of English Liberty, you would answer, SECURITY
UNDER THE LAW. If I were to ask the whole people of England, the return they
looked for at the hands of Government, for the burdens under which they bend to
support it, I should still be answered, SECURITY UNDER THE LAW; or, in other
words, an impartial administration of justice. So sacred, therefore, has the
Freedom of Trial been ever held in England; so anxiously does justice guard
against every possible bias in her path, that if the public mind has been
locally agitated upon any subject in judgment, the forum is either changed or
the trial postponed. The circulation of any paper that brings, or which can be
supposed to bring, prejudice, or even well-founded knowledge, within the reach
of a British tribunal, on the spur of an occasion, is not only highly criminal,
but defeats itself, by leading to put of the trial which its object was to
pervert. On this principle, his Lordship will permit me to remind him, that on
the trial of the Dean of St. Asaph, for a libel, or rather, when he was brought
to trial, the circulation of books by a society favorable to his defense, was
held by the noble Lord, as Chief Justice of Chester, to be a reason for not
trying the cause; although they contained no matter relative to the Dean, nor
to the object of his trial; being only extracts from ancient authors of high
reputation, on the general Rights of Juries to consider the innocence as well
as the guilt of the accused; yet still, as the recollection of these rights was
pressed forward, with a view to effect the proceedings, to guard the principle
the proceedings were postponed.

Is the Defendant then to be the only exception to these admirable provisions?
Is the English law to judge him, stripped of the armor with which its universal
justice encircles all others? Shall we, in the very act of judging him for
detracting from the English government, furnish him with ample matter for just
reprobation, instead of detraction? Has not his cause been prejudged through a
thousand channels? Has not the work before you been daily publicly revived, and
his person held up to derision and reproach? Has not the public mind been
excited, by crying down the very phrase and idea of the Rights of Man? Nay,
have not associations of gentlemen, I speak it with regret, because I am
persuaded, from what I know of some of them, that they, amongst them at least,
thought they were serving the public; yet have they not, in utter contempt and
ignorance of that Constitution of which they declare themselves to be the
guardians, published the grossest attacks upon the Defendant? Have they not,
even while the cause has been standing here in the paper for immediate trial,
published a direct protest against the very work now before you; advertising in
the same paper, though under the general description of seditious papers, a
reward on the conviction of any person who should dare to sell the book itself,
to which their own publication was an answer? -- The Attorney General has
spoken of a forced circulation of this Work; but how have these prejudging
papers been circulated? We all know how: they have been thrown into our
carriages in every street; they have met us at every turnpike; and they lie in
the areas of all our houses. To complete the triumph of prejudice, that High
Tribunal, of which I have the honor to be a member (my learned friends know
what I say to be true), has been drawn into this vortex of slander; and some of
its members, for I do not speak of the House itself, have thrown the weight of
their stations into the same scale.

By all means I maintain that this cause has been prejudged.

It may be said, that I have made no motion to put off the trial for these
causes, and that courts of themselves take no cognizance of what passes
elsewhere, without facts laid before them. Gentlemen, I know that I should have
had equal justice from that quarter, if I had brought myself within the rule.
But when should I have been better in the present aspect of things? And
therefore I only remind you of all these hardships, that you may recollect that
your judgment is to proceed upon that alone which meets you here, upon the
evidence in the cause, and not upon suggestions destructive of every principle
of justice.

Having disposed of these foreign prejudices, I hope you will as little regard
some arguments that have been offered to you in court. The letter which has
been so repeatedly pressed upon you, you ought to dismiss even from your
recollection; I have already put it out of the question, as having been written
long subsequent to the Book, and as being a libel on the King, which no part of
the information charges, and which may hereafter be prosecuted as a distinct
offense. I consider that letter besides, and indeed have always beard it
treated, as a forgery, contrived to injure the merits of the cause, and to
embarrass me personally in its defense. I have a right so to consider it,
because it is unsupported by any thing similar at an earlier period. The
Defendant's whole deportment, previous to the publication, has been wholly
unexceptionable; he properly desired to be given up as the author of the Book,
if any enquiry should take place concerning it; and he is not affected in
evidence, directly or indirectly, with any illegal or suspicious conduct; not
even with having uttered an indiscreet or counting expression, nor with any one
matter or thing, inconsistent with the duty of the best subject in England. His
opinions indeed were not adverse to our system; but I maintain that OPINION is
free, and that CONDUCT alone is amenable to the law.

You are next to judge of the author's mind and intention, by the modes and
extent of the circulation of his work. The First Part of the Rights of Man, Mr.
Attorney General tells you, he did not prosecute, although it was in
circulation through the country for a year and a half together, because it
seems it circulated only amongst what he styles the judicious part of the
public, who possessed in their capacities and experience an antidote to the
poison; but that with regard to the Second Part now before you, its circulation
had been forced into every corner of society; had been printed and reprinted
for cheapness even upon whited brown paper, and had crept into the very
nurseries of children, as a wrapper for their sweetmeats.

In answer to this statement, which after all stand only upon Mr Attorney
General's own assertion, unsupported by any kind of proof (no witness having
proved the author's personal interference with the sale), I still maintain,
that if he had the most anxiously promoted it, the question would remain
exactly the same: the question would still be, whether at the time when Pain
composed his work, and promoted the most extensive purchase of it, he believed
or disbelieved what he had written, and whether he contemplated the happiness
or the misery of the English nation, to which it is addressed; and which ever
of these intentions may be evidenced to your judgments upon reading the Book
itself, I confess I am utterly at a loss to comprehend how a writer can be
supposed to mean something different from what he has written, by an axiety
(common I belive to all authors) that his work should be generally read.

Remember, I am not asking your opinions of the doctrines themselves, you know
them already pretty visibly since I began to address you; but I shall appeal
not only to you, but to those who, without our leave, will hereafter judge
without appeal of all that we are doing to day; whether, upon the matter which
I hasten to lay before you, you can refuse in justice to pronounce, that from
his education -- from the accidents and habits of his life -- from the time and
occasion of the publication -- from the circumstances attending it -- and from
every line and letter of the work itsself, and all his other writings before
and even since, his conscience and understanding (no matter whether erroneously
or not) were deeply and solemnly impressed with the matters contained in his
Book, -- that he addressed it to the reason of the nation at large, and not to
the passions of individuals, and that in the issue of its influence, he
contemplated only what appeared to him (though it may not to us) to be the
interest and happiness of England, and of the whole human race. In drawing the
one or the other of these conclusions, the Book stands first in order, and it
shall now speak for itself.

Gentlemen, the whole of it is in evidence before you, the particular parts
arraigned having only been read by my consent, upon the presumption that on
retiring from the court, you would caresully compare them with the context, and
all the parts with the whole viewed together. You cannot indeed do justice
without it. The most common letter, even in the ordinary course of business,
cannot be read in a cause to prove an obligation for twenty shillings without
the whole being read, that the writer's meaning may be seen without deception.
But in a criminal charge of only four pages and a half, out of a work
containing nearly two hundred, you cannot, with even the appearance of common
justice, pronounce a judgment without the most deliberate and cautious
comparison. I observe, that the noble and learned Judge confirms me in this
observation. But if any given part of a work be legally explanatory, of every
other part of it, the preface, a fortiori, is the most material; because the
preface is the author's own key to his writing: it is there that he takes the
reader by the hand, and introduces him to his subject: it is there that the
spirit and intention of the whole is laid before him by way of prologue. A
preface is meant by the author as a clue to ignorant or careless readers: the
author says by it, to every man who chooses to begin where he ought -- look at
my plan -- attend to my distinctions -- mark the purpose and limitations of the
matter I lay before you.

(To be continued.)
THE NEW CONSTITUTION OF FRANCE, As accepted by the Nation on the 10th of
August, 1793.
DECLARATION OF RIGHTS.
THE French people, convinced that forgetfulness of, and contempt for, the
natural rights of man, are the only causes of the crimes and misfortunes of the
world, have resoved to expose, in a Declaration, their sacred and inclienable
right, in order that all Citizens, being always able to compare the acts of the
government with the end of every social institution, may never suffer
themselves to be oppressed and degraded by tyranny; and that the people may
always have before their eyes the basis of their liberty and happiness; the
magistrates the rule of their duty; and legislators the object of their mission
--

They acknowledge therefore and proclaim, in the presence of the Surreme
Being^, the following Declaration of the Rights of Man and of Citizens: --
ARTICLE I. The end of society is common happiness. Government is instituted to
secure to man the enjoyment of his natural and imprescriptible rights. II.
These rights are Equality, Liberty, Safety, and Property. III. All men are
equal by nature, and before the law. IV. The Law is the free and solemn
expression of the general will. It ought to be the same for all, whether it
protects or punishes. It cannot order but what is just and useful to Society.
It cannot forbid but what is hurtful. V. All Citizens are equally admissible to
public employments. Free people know no other motives of preserence in their
elections, than virtue and talents. VI. Liberty is that power which belongs to
a man, of doing every thing that does not hurt the rights of another: Its
principle is nature: Its rule justice: Its protection the law: And its moral
limits are detined by this maxim, "Do not to another what you would not wish
done to yourself." VII. The rights of manifesting one's thoughts and opinions,
either by the press, or in any other manner; the right of assembling peaceably,
and the free exercise of religious worship cannot be forbidden. The necessity
of announcing these rights, supposes either the presence, or the recent
remembrance of despotism. VIII. Whatever is not forbidden by the law cannot be
prevented. No one can be forced to do that, which it does not order. IX. Safety
consists in the protection granted by the Society to each Citizen for the
preservation of his person, his rights, and his property. X. The Law avenges
public and individual liberty of the abuses committed against them by power.
XI. No person can be accused, arrested or confined, but in cases determined by
the law, and according to the forms which it prescribes. Every Citizen summoned
or seized by the authority of the law, ought immediately to obey; he renders
himself culpable by resistance. XII. Every act exercised against a man to which
the cases in the law do not apply, and in which its forms are not observed, is
arbitrary and tyrannical. Respect for the law forbids him to submit to such
acts; and if attempts are made to execute them by violence, he has a right to
repel force by force. XIII. Those who shall solicit, dispatch, sign, execute,
or cause to be executed, arbitrary acts, are culpable, and ought to be
punished. XIV. Every man being supposed innocent until he has been declared
guilty, if it is judged indispensible to arrest him, all severity not necessary
to secute his person ought to be strictly represied by the law. XV. No one
ought to be tried and punished until he has been legally summoned, and in
virtue of a law published previous to the commistion of the crime, A law which
should punish crimes committed before it ^^isted would be tyrannical. The
re-troactive effect given to a law would be a crime. XVI. The law ought not to
decree any punishments but such as are strictly and evidently necessary --
punishment ought to be proportioned to the crime, and a^^^ul to society. XVII.
The right of property is that right which belongs to every Citizen to enjoy and
dispose of according to his pleasure, his property, revenues, labor and
industry. XVIII. No kind of labor, culture, or commerce, can be forbidden to
the industrious Citizen. XIX. Every man may engage his services and his time,
but he cannot sell himself -- his person is not alienable property. The law
does not acknowledge servitude -- there can exist only an engagement of care
and gratitude between the man who labors, and the man who employs him. XX. No
one can be deprived of the smallest portion of his property, without his
consent, except when the public necessity, legally ascertained, evidently
require it, and on condition of a just and previous indemnification. XXI. No
contribution can be established, but for general utility, and to relieve the
public wants. Every Citizen has a right to concur in the establishment of
contributions, to watch over the use made of them, and to call for a statement
of expenditure. XXII. Public aids are a sacred debt. The Society is obliged to
provide for the subsistence of the unfortunate, either by procuring them work,
or by securing the means of existence to those who are unable to labor. XXIII.
Instruction is the want of all, and the Society ought to favor, with all its
power, the progress of public reason; and to place instruction within the reach
of every Citizen. XXIV. The social guarantee consists in the actions of all, to
secure to each the enjoyment and preservation of his rights. This guarantee
rests on the National Sovereignty. XXV. The social guarantee cannot exist, if
the limits of public functions are not clearly determined by the law, and if
the responsibility of all public functionaties is not secured. XXVI. The
Sovereignty resides in the people: it is one and indivisible, imprescriptible
and inalienable. XXVII. No proportion of the people can exercise the power of
the whole: but each Section of the Sovereign assembled ought to enjoy the right
of expressing its will in perfect liberty. Every individual who arrogates to
himself the Sovereignty, or who usurps the exercise of it, ought to be put to
death by free men. XXVIII. A people have always the right of revising,
amending, and changing their Constitution. One generation cannot subject to its
law future generations. XXIX. Every Citizen has an equal right of concurring in
the formation of the law, and in the nomination of his mandatories or agents.
XXX. Public functions cannot be considered as distinctions or rewards, but as
duties. XXXI. Crimes committed by the mandatories of the people and their
agents, ought never to remain unpunished. No one has a right to pretend to be
more inviolable than other Citizens. XXXII. The right of presenting petitions
to the depositories of public authority belongs to every individual. The
exercise of this right cannot, in any case, be forbidden, suspended, or
limited. XXXIII. Resistance to oppression is the consequence of the other
rights of man. XXXIV. Oppression is exercised against the social body, when
even one of its members is oppressed. Oppression is exercised against each
member, when the social body is oppressed. XXXV. When the government violates
the rights of the people, insurrection becomes to the people, and to every
portion of the people, the most sacred, and the most indispensible of duties.


(To be continued.)
ENGLISH INJUSTICE TO THE FRENCH.
WHEN exulting we tell how our fathers of yore,
Their wrongs and oppressions were wont to redress,
How firmly they waded through rivers of gore,
And fore'd from proud despots those rights we possess;
When we boast of our own revolution and laws,
Yet reprobate men, who have spurned base control,
We may show an acquaintance with Liberty's cause,
But we strongly evince a contraction of soul.
We deem ourselves lodged under Liberty's tree,
Where the whole human race might with comfort recline;
We boast of the blessing -- and, Britons, shall we
At the joyous approach of our neighbors repine?
Forbid it -- ye offspring of men who were tried,
Of men, who unshackled both body and mind;
Forbid it -- and learn, ere ye dare to deride,
That the cause of the French is the cause of mankind.
How can WE, if our sires be entitled to praise,
For boldly resisting unauthoriz'd sway,
How can we with aversion on Liberty gaze?
How can we be offended if tyrants decay?
Has Jehovah selected a new-chosen race,
And on them, and them only, his freedom bestowed?
If not -- how can Gallic resistance be base,
And the fate of a James show the finger of God?
When the orbs of the sightless receive the bright Day,
Shall those who have vision presume to complain?
Shall men saved from shipwreck with anguish survey
Their fellows preserved from the merciless main?
How degrading the thought! -- yet the sons of this Isle,
Who deem themselves nurtured at Liberty's board.
Evince a malignity equally vile,
In wishing thy shackles, O Gallia! restored.
When the will of a driv'ler held millions in chains,
Did we pity them? -- no -- we despised them as slaves;
And now not a trace of debasement remains,
We brand the brave people as maniacs and knaves!
Thus servile or free, we the French have reviled,
Our own half-form'd system we proudly commend;
We boast our wise laws -- though our code is defiled
With statutes, that tyrants would blush to defend.
O spurn the mean prejudice, Britons, and say,
If our fathers are right, how can Frenchmen be wrong?
The will of oppressors both scorned to obey,
And asserted those rights that to mortals belong,
Yet the struggles of these are to infamy hurled,
While the actions of those we with triumph rehearse;
But the bright orb of reason now peeps on the World,
And the thick clouds of prejudice soon shall disperse:
Yes! soon shall these truths far and wide be conveyed,
'Spite of Pindar's poor prattle, and Burke's raving din,
That the thrones of true kings by the PEOPLE are made,
And when kings become tyrants -- submission is sin!
That the power of oppressors can never be of Heaven,
A Being all-just -- cannot justice despise:
A Being all-just -- EQUAL RIGHTS must have given;
And who robs man of these must offend the All-wise.
[ROMAN HISTORY, continued from Page 122.]
AFTER the expulsion of the Tarquins, Rome was governed by two consuls, who
held their office during the space of a year, at the conclusion of which new
ones were chosen, by the senate and people. After some time, the people found
themselves very much oppressed by the patricians; who engrossed the whole power
of the state, and, by various extortions, such as lending them money at
exorbitant interest, and the like, had got possession of all their lands, and
often seized their persons, imprisoned, or used them as slaves, (the laws
permitting it in the case of the non-payment of their debts) in a barbarous
manner. Unable to bear this cruel treatment, a number of them, at the
instigation of Sisinnius Bellutus, and another Junius Brutus, took an
opportunity, when the state had great need of their assistance, to desert their
generals, and retired to a hill three miles from Rome. In this exigence, a
deputation was sent to them from the senate, persuading them with many fair
promises, to return. At the head of this deputation were T. Lartius, Menenius
Agripah, and M. Valerius, all three in great esteem, and of whom two had
governed the republic, and commanded her armies in quality of dictator. When
they were introduced to the camp of the malcontents, and had given an account
of their commission, Junius Brutus, perceiving his comrades continued in
profound silence, and that none of them attempted to make himself an advocate
in the cause, stepped forward, and thus addressed them:

"One would imagine, fellow soldiers, by this deep silence, that you are still
awed by that servile sear in which the patricians and your creditors have kept
you so long. Every man consults the eyes of the rest, to discover whether there
be more resolution in others than he finds in himself; and not one of you has
the courage to speak in public that which is the constant subject of your
private conversation. Do you not know that you are free? This camp, these arms,
do they not convince you that you are no longer under tyrants? And if you could
still doubt it, would not this step which the senate has taken be sufficient to
satisfy you? Those patricians, so haughty and imperious, now send to court us;
they no longer make use of proud commands, or cruel threats, they invite us as
their fellow-citizens to return into our common city; nay, some of our
sovereigns, you see, are so gracious as to come to our very camp, to offer us a
general pardon. Whence then can proceed this obstinate silence, after such
singular condescensions? If you doubt the sincerity of their promises; if you
fear, that under the veil of a few fine words, they conceal your former chains,
why do ye not speak? Declare your thoughts freely. Or, if you dare not open
your mouths, at least hear a Roman, who has courage enough to fear nothing but
the not speaking the truth. [Then turning to Valerius] You invite us to return
to Rome, but you do not tell us upon what conditions: Can plebeians, poor, yet
free, think of being united with patricians, so rich, and so ambitious? And
even though we should agree to the conditions you have to offer, what security
will the patricians give us for the performance; those haughty patricians, who
make it a merit among themselves to have deceived the people? You talk to us of
nothing but pardon and forgiveness, as if we were your subjects, and subjects
in rebellion; but that is the point to be discussed. Is it the people or the
senate who are in fault? Which of the two orders was it, that first violated
the laws of society, which ought to reign among the members of the same
republie? This is the question. In order to judge of this, without prejudice,
give me leave barely to relate a certain number of facts, for the truth of
which I will appeal to no other but yourselt and your colleague. Our state was
founded by kings, and never was the Roman people more free, and more happy,
than under their government. Tarqu^n himself, the last of those princes;
Tarquin, so ^^^ots to the senate and the nobility, savoured our interests as
much as he opposed yours. Nevertheless, to avenge your wrongs, we drove that
prince from Rome; we took arms against a sovereign who defended himself only
with the prayers he made to leave your interests, and to return to his
obedience. We afterward cut to pieces the armies of Veil and Tarquinii, which
endeavored to restore him to the throne. The formidable power of Porsenna, the
famine we underwent during a long siege, the fierce assaults, the continual
battles; were all these, or, in short, was any thing capable of shaking the
faith which we had given you? Thirty Latin cities united to restore the
Tarquines. What would you have done then, if we had abandoned you, and joined
your enemies? What rewards might we not have obtained of Tarquin, while the
senate and nobles would have been the victims of his resentment? Who was it
that dispersed this dangerous combination? To whom are you obliged for the
defeat of the Latins? Is it not to this people? Is it not to them that you owe
that very power which you have since turned against them? What recompense have
we had for the assistance we lent you? Is the condition of the Roman people one
jot the better? Have you associated them in your offices and dignities? Have
our poor citizens found so much as the smallest relief in their necessities? On
the contrary, have not our bravest soldiers, oppressed with the weight of
usury, been groaning in the chains of their merciless creditors? What has come
of all those vain promises of abolishing, in time of peace, the debts which the
great had forced us to contract? Scarce was the war finished, but you alike
forgot our services, and your oaths. With what designs then do you come hither?
Why do you try to reduce this people by the enchantment of your words? Are
there any oaths so solemn as to bind your faith? And, after all, what would you
get by an union brought about by artifice, kept up with mutual distrust, and
which, at last, must end in a civil war? Let us, on both sides, avoid such
heavy misfortunes, let us not lose the happiness of our separation; suffer us
to depart from a country where we are loaded with chains, like so many slaves,
and where, being reduced to be only farmers of our own inheritances, we are
forced to cultivate them for the profit of our tyrants. So long as we have our
swords in our hands, we shall be able to open ourselves a way into more
fortunate climates; and, wherever the Gods shall grant us to live in liberty,
there shall we sind our country."

By this, and frequent struggles of this sort, which the people had made
before, they at length attained the establishment of the tribuneship, which
consisted of two officers annually chosen out of the order of the plebeians,
with authority to prevent the injustices that might be done to the people, and
to defend their interests both public and private. Rome, by this establishment,
made a great advance toward a new change in the form of her government. It had
passed before from the monarchic state, to a state of aristocracy; for upon the
expulsion of Tarquin, the whole authority did really and in fact devolve upon
the senate and the great: But now, by the creation of the tribunes, a democracy
began to take place, and the people, by insensible degtees, and under different
pretenses, got possession of the much greater share in the government. A famine
which raged at Rome, soon after the establishment of this office, occasions
great complaints amongst the people; and a large supply of corn being procured
from Sicily, by the patricians, Coriolanus, a young senator, who had done great
services to the state as a general, is for taking advantage of the people's
distress, to get the tribuneship abolished, which he proposes in the senate.
The tribunes and the people, enraged at this, determined to prosecute
Coriolanus, and after much altercation, desire to be heard by the senate, in
^^lation to their charge against him; where Decius, one of the tribunes, makes
the following speech:

"You know, Conscript Fathers, that having by our assistance, expelled Tarquin,
and abolished the regal power, you established in the republic the form of
government which is now observed in it, and of which we do not complain. But,
neither can you be ignorant, that, in all the differences which any poor
plebeian had afterward with wealthy patricians, those plebeians constantly
lost their causes, their adversaries being their judges, and all the tribunals
being filled with patricians only. This abuse was what made Valerius Poplicola,
that wise consul and excellent citizen, establish the law which granted an
appeal to the people, from the decrees of the senate, and the judgments of the
consuls.

"Such is the law called Valeria, which has always been looked upon as the
basis and foundation of the public liberty. It is to this law that we now fly
for redress, if you refuse us the justice we demand upon a man, black with the
greatest crime that it is possible to commit in a republic. It is not a single
plebeian complaining, it is the whole body of the Roman people demanding the
coudemnation of a tyrant, who would have destroyed his fellow citizens by
famine, has violated our magistracy, and forcibly repulsed our officers, and
the aediles of the commonwealth. Coriolanus is the man we accuse of having
proposed the abolition of the tribuneship, a magistracy made sacred by the most
solemn oaths. What need is there of a senatus consulium to prosecute a criminal
like this? Does not every man know, that those particular decrees of the
senate, are requisite only in unforeseen and extraordinary affairs, and for
which the laws have as yet made no provision? But, in the present case, where
the law is so direct, where it expressly devotes to the infernal gods those who
infringe it, is it not to become an accomplice in the crime to hesitate in the
least? Are you not apprehensive, that these affected delays, this obstruction
you throw in the way of our proceedings against this criminal, by the pretended
necessity of a previous decree of the senate, will make the people inclined to
believe that Coriolanus only spoke the sentiments of you all?

"I know that several among you complain it was merely by violence we extorted
your consent for the abolition of the debts, and the establishment of the
tribuneship. I will even suppose that, in the high degree of power to which you
had raised yourselves, after the expulsion of Tarquin, it was neither
convenient nor honorable for you to yield up part of it in favor of the
people; but you have done it, and the whole senate is bound by the most solemn
oaths never to undo it. After the establishment of those sacred laws, which
render the persons of the tribunes inviolable, will ye^, in compliance with the
first ambitious man that arises, attempt to revoke what makes the peace and
security of the state? Certainly you never will; and I dare answer for you, so
long as I behold in this assembly those venerable magistrates who had so great
a share in the treaty upon the mons sacer. Ought you to suffer a matter like
this to be so much as brought into deliberation? Coriolanus is the first who,
by his seditious advice, has endeavored to break those sacred bands, which,
strengthened by the laws, unite the several orders of the state. It is he alone
who is for destroying the tribunitian power, the people's assylum the bulwark
of our liberty, and the pledge of our reunion. In order to force the people's
consent, in order to perpetrate one crime, he attempted another much greater.
He dares, even in a holy place, and in the midst of the senate, propose to let
the people die of hunger. Cruel and unthinking man, at the same time! Did he
not consider, that this people whom he meant to exterminate with so much
inhumanity, and who are more numerous and powerful than he could wish, being
reduced to despair, would have broken into the houses, forced open those
granaries, and those cellars which conceal so much wealth, and would rather
have fallen under the power of the patricians, or have totally rooted out that
whole order? -- Could he imagine, that an enraged populace would have hearkened
to any law, but what was dictated by necessity and resentment?

"For, that you may not be unacquainted with the truth, we would not have
perished by a famine brought upon us by our enemies: but, having called to
witness the gods, revengers of injustice, we would have filled Rome with blood
and slaughter. Such had been the fatal consequences of the counsels of that
perfidious citizen, if some senators, who had more love for their country, had
not hindered them from taking effect. It is to you, Conscript Fathets, that we
address our just complaints. It is to your aid, and to the wisdom of your
decrees, that we have recourse, to oblige this public enemy to appear before
the whole Roman people, and answer for his pernicious counsels. It is there,
Coriolanus, that thou must defend thy former sentiments, if thou dare so to
do, or excuse them from proceeding from want of thought. Take my advice; leave
thy haughty and tyrannical maxims; make thyself less; become like us; nay, put
on a habit of mourning, so suitable to thy present fortune. Implore the pity of
thy fellow-citizens, and perhaps thou may obtain their favor, and the
forgiveness of thy fault."

Co^iolanus was given up to be tried by the tribunes of the people; by whom he
was condemned to perpetual banishment.

(To be continued.)
[ Continuation of Mr. ERSKINE'S Defense of PAIN, and of The Liberty of the
Press, from page 175.]
LET then the calumniators of Thomas Pain now attend to his Preface, where, to
leave no excuse for ignorance or misrepresentation, he expresses himself thus:

I have differed from some professional gentlemen on the subject of
prosecutions, and I since find they are falling into my opinion, which I will
here state as fully, but as concisely as I can.

I will first put a case with respect to any law, and then compare it with a
government, or with what in England is, or has been, called a Constitution.

It would be an act of despotism, or what in England is called arbitrary power
to make a law to prohibit investigating the principles, good or bad, on which
such a law, or any other, is founded.

If a law be bad, it is one thing to oppose the practice of it, but it is quite
a different thing to expose its errors, to reason on its defects, and to show
cause why it should be repealed, or why another ought to be substituted in its
place. I have always held it an opinion (making it also my practice), that it
is better to obey a bad law, making use at the same time of every argument to
show its errors, and procure its repeal, than forcibly to violate it; because
the precedent of breaking a bad law might weaken the force, and lead to a
discretionary violation, of those which are good.

The case is the same with principles and forms of government, or to what are
called constitutions and the parts of which they are composed.

It is for the good of nations, and not for the emolument or aggrandisement of
particular individuals, that government ought to be established, and that
mankind are at the expense of supporting it. The defects of every government
and constitution, both as to principle and form, must, on a parity of
reasoning, be as, open to discussion as the defects of a law; and it is a duty
which every man owes to society to point them out. When those defects, and the
means of remedying them are generally seen by a nation, that nation will reform
its government or its constitution in the one case, as the government repealed
or reformed the law in the other.

Gentlemen, you must undoubtedly wish to deal with every man who comes before
you in judgment, as you would be dealt by yourselves; and surely you will not
lay it down as a law to be binding hereafter even upon yourselves, that if you
should publish any opinion concerning the existing abuses in your country's
government, and point out to the whole public the means of amendment, you are
to be acquitted or convicted as any twelve men may happen to agree with you in
your opinions. Yet this is precisely what you are asked to do to another; it is
precisely the case before you. Mr. Pain expressly says, I obey a law until it
is repealed; obedience is not only my principle but my practice, since my
disobedience of a law from thinking it bad, might apply to justify another man
in the disobedience of a good one; and thus individuals would give the rule for
themselves, and not society, for all.

Gentlemen, you will presently see that the same principle pervades the rest of
the work; and I am the more anxious to call your attention to it, however
repetition may tire you, because it unfolds the whole principle of my argument:
for, if you find a sentence in the whole book that invests any individual, or
any number of individuals, or any community short of the whole nation, with a
power of changing any part of the law or constitution I abandon the cause --
YES, I freely abandon it, because I will not affront the majesty of a court of
justice, by maintaining propositions which, even upon the surface of them, are
false. -- Mr. Pain, page 162 -- 186, goes on thus:

When a nation changes its opinion and habits of thinking, it is no longer to
be governed as before; but it would not only be wrong, but bad policy, to
attempt by force what ought to be accomplished by reason. Rebellion consists in
forcibly opposing the general will of a nation, whether by a party or by a
government. There ought, therefore, to be, in every nation, a method of
occasionally ascertaining the state of public opinion with respect to
government.

There is therefore, no power but the voluntary Will of the People that has a
right to act in any matter respecting a general Reform; and, by the same right
that two persons can confer on such a subject, a thousand may. The object in
all such preliminary proceedings is, to find out what the general sense of a
nation is, and to be governed by it. If it prefer a bad or defective government
to a reform, or choose to pay ten times more taxes than there is occasion for,
it has a right so to do; and, so long as the majority do not impose conditions
on the minority different to what they impose on themselves, though there may
be much error, there is no injustice; neither will the error continue long.
Reason and discussion will soon bring things right, however wrong they may
begin. By such a process no tumult is to be apprehended. The poor, in all
countries, are naturally both peaceable and grateful in all reforms in which
their interest and happiness are included. It is only by neglecting and
rejecting them that they become tumultuous.

Gentlenen, these are the sentiments of the Author of the Rights of Man; and,
whatever his opinions may be of the defects in our government, it can never
change our sentiments concerning it, if our sentiments are just; and a writing
can never be seditious in the sense of the English law, which states that the
government leans on the universal will for its support.

Gentlemen, this universal will is the best and securest title which his
Majesty and his family have to the throne of these Kingdoms; and in proportion
to the wisdom of our institutions, the title must in common sense become the
stronger: so little idea indeed, have I of any other, that in my place in
parliament, not a week ago, I considered it as the best way of expressing my
attachment to the constitution, as established at the Revolution, to declare (I
believe in the presence of the Heir Apparent of the Crown, for whom I have the
greatest personal zeal) that his Majesty reigned in England, by choice and
consent, as the magistrate of the English people; not indeed a consent and
choice by personal election, like a King of Poland, the worst of all possible
constitutions; but by the election of a family for great national objects; in
defiance of that hereditary right, which only becomes tyranny, in the sense of
Mr. Pain, when it claims to inherit a nation, instead of governing by their
consent, and continuing for its benefit.

Gentlemen, this sentiment has the advantage of Mr. Burke's high authority, he
says with great truth, in a letter to his constituents, Too little dependence
cannot be had at this time of day on names and prejudices: the eyes of mankind
are opened; and communities must be held together by a visible and solid
interest. I believe, Gentlemen of the Jury, that the Prince of Wales will
always render this title dear to the people. The Attorney General can only tell
you what he believes of him; I can tell you what I know, and what I am bound to
declare, since this Prince may be traduced and calumniated in every part of the
Kingdom, without its coming into question, till brought in to load a defense
with matter collateral to the charge. I therefore assert what the Attorney
General can only hope, that, whenever that Prince shall ever come to the throne
of this Country (which I hope, but by the course of nature, will never happen),
he will make the Constitution of Great Britain the foundation of all his
conduct.

Having now, Gentlemen, established the Author's general intention by his own
introduction, which is the best and fairest exposition, let us next look at the
occasion which gave it birth.

(To be continued.)
-- To show
The very Age and Body of the Time its Form
And Pressure. --
Glorious News for Church and --. Rioters!

The Church is not in danger -- it is only to be sold!!!

Morning Chronicle, Nov. 20, 1793.

NEXT PRESENTATION TO A VALUABLE LIVING, ESSEX.

By Messrs. SKINNER and DYKE,

On Thursday, the 5th of December, at twelve o'clock, at Garraway's
Coffee-house, 'Change-alley, Cornhill,

THE NEXT PRESENTATION to the valuable consolidated RECTORIES of SOUTH and WEST
HANNINGFIELD, situate in a delightful, healthy, and sporting part of the county
of Essex, a short distance from Chelmsford, and only 30 miles from London, of
the annual value of Three hundred and seventy-six pounds, seventeen shillings
and sixpence per annum, arising from the great and small tithes, which if
taken in kind, would produce considerably more, with a good parsonage-house,
and fifty acres of glebe land. The present Incumbent is upwards of 80 years of
age!!!

Particulars may be had, fourteen days preceding the sale, at the Black Boy,
Chelmsford; George, Witham; White Heart, Colchester; Mr. Jackson, Printer,
Oxford; at the place of sale; and of Messrs, Skinner and Dyke,
Aldersgate Street.

Morning Chronicle, No. 27, 1793.

CORNWALL.

To be SOLD, the next Presentation to a LIVING, of the annual value of 500l.
and upwards, and the present Incumbent 91 years of age!!!

For further particulars apply to Messrs. Graham, Lincoln's Inn.

THE DISTRESSES OF THE POOR, Exemplified in the LIFE OF A PRIVATE SOLDIER.
From the Citizen of the World. By Dr. Goldsmith.
THE misfortunes of the great, my friend, are held up to engage our attention,
are enlarged upon in tones of declamation, and the world is called upon to gaze
at the noble sufferers; they have at once the comfort of admiration and pity.

Yet where is the magnanimity of bearing misfortunes, when the whole world is
looking on? Men in such ^^^^^hances can act bravely even from motives of
vanity. He only who, in the vale of obscurity, can ^^ave a svertity, who,
without friends to encourage, as quaintances to pity, or even without hope to
alleviate his distresses, can behave with tranquillity and indiference, is truly
great; whether peasant or courtier, be deserves admiration, and should be held
up for our imitation and respect.

The miseries of the poor are, however, entirely disregarded, though some
undergo more real hardships in one day than the great in their whole lives. It
is indeed inconceivable what difficulties the meanest English sailor or soldier
endures without murmuring or regret. Every day to him is a day of misery, and
yet he bears his hard fate without repining.

With what indignation do I hear the heroes of tragedy complain of misfortunes
and hardships, whose greatest calamity is founded in arrogance and pride. Their
severest distresses are pleasures, compared to what many of the adventuring
poor every day sustain, without murmuring. These may eat, drink and sleep, have
slaves to attend them, and are sure of sustenence for life, while many of their
fellow creatures are obliged to wander, without a friend to comfort or to
assist them, find enmity in every law, and are too poor to obtain even justice.

I have been led into these reflections, from accidentally meeting some days
ago, a poor fellow begging at one of the outlets of the town, with a wooden
leg. I was curious to learn what had reduced him to his present situation; and
after giving him what I thought proper, desired to know the history of his life
and misfortunes, and the manner in which he was reduced to his present
distress. The disabled soldier, for such he was, with an intrepidity truly
British, leaning on his crutch, put himself into an attitude to comply with my
request, and gave me his history as follows:

'As for misfortunes, Sir, I cannot pretend to have gone through more than
others. Except the loss of my limb, and my being obliged to beg, I don't know
any reason, thank heaven, that I have to complain: there are some that have
lose both legs and an eye; but, thank heaven, it is not quite so bad with me.

'My father was a labourer in the country, and died when I was five years old;
so I was put upon the parish. As he had been a wandering sort of a man, the
parishioners were not able to tell to what parish I belonged, or where I was
born; so they sent me to another parish, and that parish sent me to a third;
till at h^^ it was thought I be longed to no parish at all. At length, however,
they sixed me. I had some disposition to be a scholar, and had actually learned
my letters; but the master of the workhouse put me to business, as soon as I
was able to handle a mallet.

'Here I lived an easy kind of a life for five years. I only wrought ten hours
in the day, and had my meat and drink provided for my labor. It is true, I was
not suffered to stir far from the house, for fear I should run away; but what
of that, I had the liberty of the whole house, and the yard before the door,
and that was enough for me.

'I was next bound out to a farmer, where I was up both early and late, but I
eat and drank well, and liked my business well enough, till he died. Being then
obliged to provide for myself, I was resolved to go and seek my fortune. Thus I
lived and went from town to town, working when I could get employment, and
starving when I could get none, and might have lived so still; but happening
one day to go through a field belonging to a magistrate, I spied a hare
crossing the path just before me. I believe the devil put it in my head to
fling my stick at it: well, what will you have on it? I killed the hare, and was
bringing it away in triumph, when the justice himself; met me: he called me a
villain, and collering me, desired I would give an account of myself. I began
immediately to give a full account of all that I knew of my breed, seed and
generation: but though I gave a very long account, the justice said, I could
give no account of myself; so I was indicted and found guilty of being poor,
and sent to Newgate, in order to be transported to the plantations.

'People may say this and that of being in jail; but for my part, I found
Newgate as agreeable a place as ever I was in, in all my life. I had my belly
full to eat and drink, and did no work; but alas, this kind of life was too
good to last for ever! I was taken out of prison, after five months, put on
board of a ship, and sent off with two hundred more. Our passage was but
indifferent, for we were all confined in the hold, and died very fast, for want
of sweet air and provisions; but for my part, I did not want meat, because I
had a fever all the way; providence was kind when provisions grew short, it
took away my desire of eating. When we came on shore, we were sold to the
Planters. I was bound for seven years; and as I was no scholar, for I had
forgot my letters, I was obliged to work among the negroes; and served out my
time as in duty bound to do.

'When my time was expired, I worked my passage home, and glad I was to see Old
England again, because I loved my Country. O Liberty, Liberty, Liberty! that is
the property of every Englishman, and I will die in it is defense: I was afraid,
however, that I should be indicted for a vagabond once more, so did not much
care to go into the country, but kept about town, and did little jobs when I
get them. I was very happy in this manner for some time, till one evening,
coming home from work, two men knocked me down, and then defired me to stand
still. They belonged to a press gang; I was carried before the justice, and as
I could give no account count of my self (that was the thing that always
hobbled me), I had my choice left, whether to go on board a man of war, or list
for a soldier; I chose to be a soldier, and in this part of a gentleman I
served two campaigns, was at the battles in Flanders, and received but one
wound through the breast, which is troublesome to this day.

'When the peace came on, I was discharged; and as I could not work, because my
wound was sometimes painful, I listed for a landsman in the East India
Company's service. I here fought the French in six pitched battles; and verily
believe, that if I could read or write, our Captain would have given me
promotion, and made me a corporal. But that was not my good fortune, I soon
fell sick, and when I became good for nothing, got leave to return home again
with forty pounds in my pocket, which I saved in the service. This was at the
beginning of the present war, so I hoped to be set on shore, and to have the
pleasure of spending my money; but the government wanted men, and I was pressed
again before ever I could set foot on shore.

'The boatswain found me, as he said, an obstinate fellow: he swore that I
understood my business perfectly well, but that I pretended sickness merely to
be idle: God knows, I knew nothing of sea business! He beat me without
considering what he was about. But still my forty pounds was some comfort to me
under every beating; the money was my comfort, and the money I might have had
to this day, but that our ship was taken by the French, and so I lost it all!

'Our crew was carried into a French prison, and many of them died, because
they were not used to live in a jaiI; but for my part it was nothing to me, for
I was seasoned. One night however, as I was sleeping on the bed of boards, with
a warm blanket about me, (for I always loved to lie well) I was awaked by the
boatswain, who had a dark lanthorn in his hand. Jack, says he to me, will you
knock out the French centry's brains? I don't care, says I, striving to keep
myself awake, if I lend a hand. Then follow me, says he, and I hope we shall do
business. So up I got, and tied my blanket, which was all the clothes. I had,
about my middle, and went with him to fight the Frenchmen: we had no arms; but
one Englishman is able to beat five French at any time; so we went down to the
door; where both the centries were posted, and rushing upon them, seized their
arms in a moment, and knocked them down. From thence nine of us ran together to
the Quay, and seizing the first boat we met, got out of the harbor, and put to
sea. We had not been here three days, before we were taken by an English
privateer, who was glad of so many good hands, and we consented to run our
chance. However, we had not so much luck as we expected. In three days we fell
in with a French man of War of forty guns, while we had but twenty-three; so to
it we went. The fight lasted for three hours, and I verily believe we should
have taken the Frenchman, but unfortunately we lost almost all our men, just as
we were going to get the victory. I was once more in the power of the French,
and I believe it would have gone hard with me, had I been brought back to my
old jail in Breast; but by good fortnue we were re-taken, and carried to England
once more.

I had almost forgot to tell you, that in this last engagement I was wounded in
two places; I lost four fingers of the left hand, and my leg was cut off. Had I
the good fortune to have lost my leg and the use of my hand on board a king's
ship, and not a privateer, I should have been entitled to clothing and
maintenance during the rest of my life, but that was not my chance; one man is
born with a silver spoon in his mouth, and another a wooden ladle. However,
blessed be God, I enjoy good health, and have no enemy in this world that I
know of, but the French and the justice of peace.'

Thus saying, he limped off, leaving my friend and me in admiration of his
intrepidity and content.

ON KINGS.
From Godwin's Enquiry concerning Political Justice.
MONARCHY is so unnatural an institution, that mankind have at all times
strongly suspected it was unfriendly to their happiness. The power of truth
upon important topies is such, that it may rather be said to be obscured than
obliterated; and falsehood has scarcely ever been so successful, as not to have
had a ref^ess and powerful antagonist in the heart of its votaries. The man who
with difficulty earns his scanty subsistence, cannot behold the ostentatious
splendour of a king, without being visited by some sense of injustice. He
inevitably questions in his mind the utility of an officer, whose services are
hired at so enormous a price. If he confider the subject with any degree of
accuracy, he is led to perceive, and that with sufficient surprise, that a king
is nothing more than a common mortal, exceeded by many, and equalled by more in
every requisite of strength, capacity, and virtue, He feels therefore, that
nothing can be more groundless and unjust, than the supposing that one such man
as this is the fittest and most competent instrument for regulating the affairs
of nations.

These reflections are so unavoidable, that Kings themselves have often been
aware of the danger to their imaginary happiness with which they are pregnant.
They have sometimes been alarmed with the progress of thinking, and oftener
regarded the ease and prosperity of their subjects as a fource of terror and
apprehension. They justly consider their functions as a sort of public
exhibition, the success of which depends upon the credulity of the spectators,
and which good sense and courage would speedily bring to a termination. Hence
the well known maxims of monarchial government, that ease is the parent of
rebellion, and that it is necessary to keep the people in a state of poverty
and endurance, in order to render them submissive. Hence it has been the
perpetual complaint of despotism, that "the restive knaves are overrun with
ease, and plenty ever is the nurse of faction Tragedy of Jane Shore, Act III.
." Hence it has been the lesson perpetually read to monarchs: "Render your
subjects prosperous, and they will speedily refuse to labor; they will become
stubborn, proud, unsubmissive to the yoke, and ripe for revolt. It is impotence
and misery that alone will render them supple, and prevent them from rebelling
against the dictates of authority Telemaque, Live. XIII.
."

(To be continued.)
ON THE REBELLION OF PRINCES.
Isaiah, 1. xxiii. Thy Princes are rebellions, and Companions of Thieves: every
one loves Gifts, and follows after Rewards: they judge not the Fatherless,
neither does the Cause of the Widow come before them.
From Fast Day Sermons, by the Rev. J. Murray, of Newcastle, Author of Sermons
to Asses.
Printed in the Year 1781.
PRINCES may be rebellious by joining interests and partnership with thieves
and dishonest persons. These are such as take what is not their own, and apply
it to their own purposes. This is a coarse compliment to princes, but as it is
given by an inspired Prophet it cannot be taken amiss.

It is rebellion against God and the laws, for rulers to take more than justly
is due to them, or join interests with those who do.

It is also dishonest to promote or procure laws, that may make it legal to
give them more than the people can afford: this comes under the notion of theft
and rebellion, according to the Prophet's idea.

The Princes of Judah and Israel went partners with the Sovereign in the
plunder of the Nation. They probably voted large supplies to the king, because
they knew they would receive a share of the revenue, and might promote a law
for increasing the civil list in hopes of serving in his Majesty's household;
but this was theft and rebellion against justice, and the laws of the land.

Those who obey the fundamental laws of government cannot be rebels, though it
is manifest that legislators that make laws contrary to natural justice and the
law of God may be guilty of rebellion.

Not executing the laws impartially is joined with rebellion, or is rather a
part of it. The fatherless and the widow were either neglected or made seel all
the force of penal laws when they were guilty, when those who had influence in
a tribe, or could serve the ends of administration, were rescued from justice,
when they had committed the most capital crimes.

This is by the Prophet accounted the very height of rebellion, and is often
committed by princes and their companions.

Thus it is plain, that rebellion is not a crime pecu^far to the people only,
but is also sometimes to be found at the very springs of government.

Some would make us believe that kings and princes cannot be guilty of
rebellion, but the scripture informs us otherwise.

As we are certain from the best authority, that even princes may rebel, the
question now is, whether they ought to be punished for it like other rebels,
and who can lawfully punish them? This question requires a little caution, and
must be determined by scripture; and it is hoped that then no Christian will
dissent from the conclusion.

Whether there is any difference between trying Kings and Princes for
rebellion, and punishing them without trying them, I shall leave to the Tories
and Causuists to determine. For there has been more noise concerning the trial
of King Charles the First, than concerning the punishment of all the rebellious
princes since the Conquest.

This Prince is the only martyr we find among the Kings of England, though many
of them have suffered for their tytanny and rebellion against the laws.

The Kings in this country are considered as the source of the laws, and it is
supposed that if the King could die, that all law would be at an end; for this
reason the lawyers have made our kings immortal, and laid it down as a first
principle, that the King cannot die.

It ought to have been seriously considered, before such a mysterious maxim had
been laid down as a first principle, whether laws or Kings were first appointed
by the Almighty; for if ever we find laws without Kings, it will appear
manifest that they are not necessary to the being of government, but that laws
may continue when there is no monarch.

It is plain, that there was law before we heard any thing of any ruler except
God himself, from hence it would appear, that the existence of laws does not
depend upon any human regal authority, and though that Kings should chance to
die, the laws, if just, will continue immortal; if they are unjust, they ought
never to exist.

ON THE NATIONAL SIN OF SUFFERING BAD GOVERNMENT.
From A Discourse for the Fast on April 19th, 1793. Entitled SINS OF THE NATION.
THE vices of nations may be divided into those which relate to their own
internal proceedings, or to their relations with other states. With regard to
the first, the causes for humiliation are various. Many nations are guilty of
the crime of permiting oppressive laws and bad governments to remain amongst
them, by which the poor are crushed, and the lives of the innocent are laid at
the mercy of wicked and arbitrary men. This is a national sin of the deepest
dye, as it involves in it most others. It is painful to reflect how many
atrocious governments there are in the world, and how little even they who
enjoy good ones, seem to understand their true nature. We are apt to speak of
the happiness of living under a mild government, as if it were like the
happiness of living under an indulgent climate; and when we thank God for it,
we rank it with the blessings of the air and of the soil; whereas we ought to
thank God for the wisdom and virtue of living under a good government, for a
good government is the first of national duties. It is indeed a happiness, and
one which demands our most grateful thanks, to be born under one which spares
us the trouble and hazard of changing of it; but a people born under a good
government, will probably not die under one, if they conceive of it as of an
indolent and passive happiness, to be left for its preservation, to fortunate
conjunctures, and the floating and variable chances of incalculable events; our
second duty is to keep it good.

ON CIVIL LIBERTY, AND THE PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENT.
By Richard Price, D. D. F. R. S.
FROM what has been said it is obvious, that all Civil Government, as far as it
can be denominated free, is the creature of the people. It originates with
them. It is conducted under their direction; and has in view nothing but their
happiness. All its different forms are no more than so many different modes in
which they choose to direct their affairs, and to secure the quiet enjoyment of
their rights. -- In every free state every man is his own legislator. All taxes
are free-gifts for public services. -- All laws are particular provisions or
regulations established by COMMON CONSENT for gaining protection and safety. --
And all Magistrates are trustees or deputies for carrying these regulations
into execution.

Liberty, therefore, is too imperfectly defined when it is said to be "a
Government by LAWS, and not by MEN." If the laws are made by one man, or a
junto of men in a state, and not by COMMON CONSENT, a government by them does
not differ from slavery. In this case it would be a contradiction in terms to
say, that the state governs itself.

From hence it is obvious that Civil Liberty, in the most perfect degree, can
be enjoyed only in small states, where every member is capable of giving his
suffrage in person, and of being chosen into public offices. When a state
becomes so numerous, or when the different parts of it are removed to such
distances from one another, as to render this impracticable, a diminution of
liberty necessarily arises. There are, however, in these circumstances, methods
by which such near approaches may be made to perfect liberty as shall answer
all the purposes of government, and at the same time secure every right of
human nature.

Though all the members of a state should not be capable of giving their
suffrages on public measures, individually and personally, they may do this by
the appointment of substitutes or representatives. They may entrust the powers
of legislation, subject to such restrictions as they shall think necessary,
with any number of delegates; and whatever can be done by such delegates within
the limits of their trust, may be considered as done by the united voice and
counsel of the community. -- In this method a free government may be
established in the largest state; and it is conceivable, that by regulations of
this kind, any number of states might be subjected to a scheme of government,
that would exclude the desolations of war, and produce universal peace and
order.

Let us think here of what may be practicable in this way with respect to
Europe in particular. -- While it continues divided, as it is at present, into
a great number of independent kingdoms, whose interests are continually
clashing, it is impossible but that disputes will often arise, which must end
in war and carnage. It would be no remedy to this evil to make one of these
states supreme over the rest; and to give it an absolute plenitude of power to
superintend and control them. This would be to subject all the states to the
arbitrary discretion of one, and to establish an ignominious slavery, not
possible to be long endured. It would, therefore, be a remedy worse than the
disease; nor is it possible it should be approved by any mind that has not lost
every idea of civil liberty. On the contrary. -- Let every state, with respect
to all its internal concerns, be continued independent of all the rest; and let
a general confederacy be formed by the appointment of a SENATE, consisting of
representatives from all the different states. Let this SENATE possess tbe
power of managing all the common concerns of the united states, and of judging
and deciding between them, as a common arbiter or umpire, in all disputes;
having, at the same time, under its direction, the common force of the states
to support its decisions. In these circumstances, each separate state would be
secure against the interference of foreign power in its private concerns, and,
therefore, would possess liberty; and at the same time it would be secure
against all oppression and insult from every neighboring state. -- Thus might
the scattered force and abilities of a whole continent be gathered into one
point; all litigations settled as they rose; universal peace established; and
nation prevented from any more lifting up a sword against nation.

THE NEW CONSTITUTION OF FRANCE, [ Continued from page 180.]
OF THE REPUBLIC.

1. THE French Republic is one and indivisible.

OF THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE PEOPLE.

2. The French People is distributed, for the exercise of its sovereignty, into
Primary Assemblies of Cantons.

3. It is distributed, for administration and for justice, into Departments,
Districts and Municipalities.

OF THE STATE OF CITIZENS.

4. Every man born or domiciliated in France, of the age of twenty-one years
complete;

Every foreigner of the age of twenty-one years complete, who has been
domiciliated in France for one year;

Lives in it by his labor; or acquires a property; or marries a French woman;
or adopts a child; or maintains an age^ ^erson; finally, every foreigner, who
shall be judg^^ by the Legislative Body to have deserved well of humanity;

Is admitted to the exercise of the rights of a French citizen.

5. The exercise of the rights of a citizen is lost, by naturalization in a
foreign country; (...) ^he acceptance of functions or favors flowing from a
government not popular; by condemnation to punishments infamous or afflictive,
till recapacitation.

6. The exercise of the rights of a Citizen is suspended, by the state of
accusation; by a judgment of contumacy, as long as that judgment is not
annulled.

OF THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE PEOPLE.

7. The sovereign people is the universality of French citizens.

8. It nominates directly, its Deputies.

9 It delegates to Electors the choice of Administrators, of Public
Arbitrators, of Criminal Judges, and Judges of Appeal.

10. It deliberates on the laws.

OF THE PRIMARY ASSEMBLIES.

11. The Primary Assemblies are composed of the Citizens domiciliated for six
months in each canton.

12. They are composed of 200 citizens at the least, and 600 at the most called
to vote.

13. They are constituted by the nomination of a President, Secretaries and
Scrutineers.

14. Their police appertains to them.

15. No person can appear in them armed.

16. The elections are made by ballot, or open vote, at the option of each
voter.

17. A Primary Assembly cannot, in any case, prescribe a uniform mode of voting.

18. The Scrutineers ascertain the votes of citizens, who cannot write and
choose to vote by ballot.

19. The suffrages upon laws are given by yes or by no.

20. The will of a Primary Assembly is proclaimed th^^? The citizens met in
Primary Assembly of --, to the number of -- votes, vote for, or vote against,
by a majority of --.

OF THE NATIONAL REPRESENTATION.

21. The population is the sole basis of the National Representation.

22. There is one Deputy for every 40,000 individuals.

23. Each reunion of Primary Assemblies resulting from a population of from
39,000 to 41,000 souls, nominates directly one Deputy.

24. The nomination is made by the absolute majority of suffrages.

25. Each Assembly casts up the suffrages, and sends a Commissioner for the
general casting up to the place pointed out as the most central.

26. If the first casting up does not give an absolute majority, a second vote
is proceeded to, and the votes are taken for the two citizens who had the most
voices.

27. In case of equality of voices, the eldest has the preference, either to be
on the ballot, or elected. in case of equality of age, lot decides.

28. Every Frenchman, exercising the rights of Citizen, is eligible through the
extent of the Republic.

29. Each Deputy belongs to the whole nation.

30. In case of the non-acceptance, resignation, forfeiture or death of a
Deputy, he is replaced by the Primary Assemblies who nominated him.

31. A Deputy who has given in his resignation, cannot quit his post, but after
the admission of his successor.

32. The French People assemble every year on the (...) of May for the
elections.

33. It proceeds in them, whatever be the number of Citizens present having a
right to vote.

34. Primary Assemblies are formed on extraordinary occasions, on the demand of
a fifth of the Citizens, who have a right to vote in them.

35. The Convocation is made, in this case, by the Municipality of the ordinary
place of meeting.

36. These extraordinary Assemblies do not deliberate but when one more than
the half of the citizens, who have a right to vote in them, are present.

OF ELECTORAL ASSEMBLIES.

37. The Citizens met, in Primary Assemblies, nominate one Elector for every
200 Citizens; present or not, two for from 201 to 400, and three for from 401
to 600.

38. The holding of the Electoral Assemblies, and the mode of elections, are
the same as in the Primary Assemblies.

OF THE LEGISLATIVE BODY.

39. The Legislative Body is one indivisible and permanent.

40. Its session is for a year.

41. It meets the 1st. of July.

42. The National Assembly cannot be constituted, if it do not consist of one
more than the half of the Deputies.

43. The Deputies cannot be examined, accused, or tried at any time, for the
opinions they have delivered in the Legislative Body.

44. They may, for a criminal act, be seized, enflagrant delight; but a warrant
of arrest, or a warrant summoning to appear, cannot be granted against them
unless authorized by the Legislative Body.

HOLDING OF THE SITTINGS OF THE LEGISLATIVE BODY.

45. The Sittings of the National Assembly are public.

46. The minutes of its sittings are printed.

47. It cannot deliberate, if it be not composed of 200 members at least.

48. It cannot refuse to hear its members speak in the order in which they have
demanded to be heard.

49. It deliberates by the majority of the members present.

50. Fifty members have a right to require the appeal nominal.

51. It has the right of censure on the conduct of its members in its bosom.

52. The police appertains to it in the place of its sittings, and in the
external circuit which it has determined.

OF THE FUNCTIONS OF THE LEGISLATIVE BODY.

53. The Legislative Body proposes laws and passes decrees.

54. Under the general name of laws are comprehended the acts of the
Legislative Body concerning the Legislation civil and criminal; the general
administration of the revenues, and of the ordinary expenses of the Republic;
the national domains; the title, the weight, the impression, and the
denomination of money; the nature, the amount, and the collection of
contributions; the declaration of war; every new general distribution of the
French territory; the public instruction; the public honors to the memory of
great men.

55. Under the particular name of Decrees, are included the acts of the
Legislative Body, concerning the annual establishment of the land and sea
forces; the permission or the prohibition of the passage of foreign troops
through the French territory; the introduction of foreign naval forces into the
ports of the Republic; the measures of general safety and tranquillity; the
annual and momentary distribution of public succors and works, the orders for
the fabrication of money of every kind; the unforeseen and extraordinary
expenses; the measures local and particular to an administration, a commune, or
any kind of public works; the defense of the territory; the ratification of
treaties; the nomination and the removal of commanders in chief of armies; the
prosecution of the responsibility of Members of the Council, and the public
fu^^^^onaries; the accusation of persons charged with plots against the general
safety of the Republic; all change in the partial distribution of the French
territory; National recompenses.

O^ THE FORMATION OF THE LAW.

56. The plans of law are preceded by a report.

57. The discussion cannot be opened, and the law cannot be provisionally
resolved upon till 15 days after the report.

58. The plan is printed and sent to all the Comm^^^s of the Republic, under
this ^^^e: Law proposed.

59. Forty days after the sending of the law proposed, if in more than one half
of the Departments, the renth of the Primary Assemblies of each, have not
objected to it, the plan is accepted and becomes law.

60. If there be an objection, the Legislative Body convokes the Primary
Assemblies.

OF THE ENTITLING OF LAWS AND DECREES.

61. Laws, decrees, judgments, and all public acts are entitled: In the name of
the French People, the -- year of the French Republic.

(To be continued.)
POPULAR ASSEMBLIES UNDERSTAND ONLY THEIR OWN INTERESTS.
From Harrington's Oceana.
A Popular Assembly has no mean, but is either the wisest in nature, or has no
brains at all. When affairs go upon no other than the public interest this
having no other interest to follow, nor eyes to see withal, is the wisest
council: but such ways are destructive to a prince, and they will have no nay.
The congregation of Israel, when REHOBOAM would not hearken to their advice,
deposed him: and we know what popular councils, so soon as they came to
sufficient power, did in England. If a prince put a popular council from this
ward, he does a great matter, and to little purpose; for they understand
nothing else but themselves. Wherefore the Kings of France and of Spain have
dissolved all such assemblies. It is true, where a prince is not strong enough
to get money out of them but by their consent, they are necessary; yet then
they are not purely of advice and dispatch, but share in the government, and he
cannot be meddling with their purses, but they will be meddling with his laws.
The Senate is of sieter use for a prince; and yet, except he has the way of
TIBERIUS, but a ticklish piece, as appears by MAXIMINUS, who was destroyed by
PUPIENUS and BALBINUS, captains set up against him by this order. To go to the
root: These things are not otherwise in prudence or choice than by direction of
the balance; where this is popular, no remedy but the prince must be advised by
the people, which if the late king would have endured, the monarchy might have
subsisted somewhat longer: but while the balance was Aristocratical, as during
the great estates of the nobility and the clergy, we find not the people to
have been great or wise counselors. In sum, if a king governs by a popular
council, or a house of commons, the throne will not stand long: if he governs
by a senate, or a house of lords, let him never fear the throne, but have a
care of himself: there is no third, as I have said often enough, but the Divan.

ON RELIGION.
MORNING CHRONICLE, Nov. 29, 1793.
A Few days after the Bishop of Paris and his Vicars had set the example of
renouncing their clerical character, a Cure from a village on the Banks of the
Rhone, followed by some of his parishioners, with an offering of gold and
silver saints, chalices, rich vestments, etc. presented himself at the Bar of
the National Convention. The sight of the gold put the Convention in a very
good humor, and the Cur^, a thin venerable looking man, with gray hairs, was
ordered to speak. I come, said he, from the village of --, where the only good
building standing (for the Chateau has been pulled down), is a very fine
church; my parishioners beg you will take it to make an hospital for the sick
and wounded of both parties, they being both equally our countrymen; the gold
and silver, part of which we have brought you, they entreat you will devote to
the service of the state, and that you will cast the bells into cannon, to
drive away its foreign invaders; for myself, I am come with great pleasure to
resign my letters of ordination, of induction, and every deed and title, by
which I have been constituted a member of your ecclesiastical polity. Here are
the papers, you may burn them, if you please, in the same fire with the
genealogical trees and patents of the nobility. I desire likewise, that you
will discontinue my salary. I am still able to support myself with the labor
of my hands, and I beg you to believe, that I never felt sincerer joy than I
now do in making this renunciation. I have longed to see this day, I see it,
and am glad.

When the old man had done speaking, the applause; were immoderate. You are an
honest man, said they, all at once; a brave fellow; and the President advanced
to give him the fraternal embrace. The Cure did not seem greatly elated with
these tokens of approbation, and thus resumed his discourse: -- "Before you
applaud my sentiments, it is fit you should understand them; perhaps, they may
not entirely coincide with your own. I rejoice in this day, not because I wish
to see religion degraded, but because I wish to see it exalted and purisied. By
dissolving its alliance with the state, you have given it dignity and
independence. You have done it a piece of service, which ^^s well-wishers would
perhaps never have had courage to render it, but which is the only thing wanted
to make it appear in its genuine beauty and luster. Nobody will now say of me
when I am performing the offices of my religion, it is his trade, he is paid
for telling the people such and such things, he is hired to keep up an useful
piece of mummery. They cannot now say this, and therefore I feel myself raised
in my own esteem, and shall speak to them with a confidence and frankness,
which before this I never durst venture to assume. We resign without reluctance
our gold and silver images, and embroidered vestments, because we have never
found that looking upon gold and silver made the heart more pure, or the
affections more heavenly: we can also spare our churches, for the heart that
wishes to lift itself up to GOD will never be at a loss for room to do it in;
but we cannot spare oar religion, because, to tell you the truth, we never had
so much occasion for it. I understand that you accuse us priests of having told
the people a great many falsehoods. I suspect this may have been the case, but
till this day we have never been allowed to enquire whether the things which we
taught them were true or not. You required us formerly to receive them all
without proof, and you now would have us reject them all without
discrimination; neither of these modes of conduct become philosophers, such as
you would be thought to be. I am going to employ myself diligently along with
my parishioners, to sift the wheat from the bran, the true from the false; if
we are not successful, we shall be at least sincere. (...) fear, indeed, that
while I wore these vestments which we have brought you, and spoke in that large
gloomy building which we have given up to you, I told my poor flock a great
many idle stories. I cannot but hope, however, that the errors we have fallen
into have not been very material, since the village has in general been sober
and good, the peasants are honest, decile, and laborious, the husbands love
their wives, and the wives their husbands; they are fortunately not too rich to
be compassionate, and they have constantly relieved the sick and fugitives of
all parties whenever it has lain in their way. I think therefore what I have
taught cannot be so very much amiss. You want to extirpate pri^sts: but will
you hinder the ignorant from applying for instruction, the unhappy for comfort
and hope, the unlearned from looking up to the learned? If you do not, you will
have priests, by whatever name you may order them to be called; but it is
certa^^^ly not necessary they should wear a particular dress, or be appointed
by stare letters of ordination. My letters of ordination are my zeal, my
charity, my ardent love for my dear children of the village, if I were more
learned I would add my knowledge, but alas! we all know very little; to man
every error is pardonable but want of humility. We have a public walk, with a
spreading elm-tree at one end of it, and a circle of green round it, with a
convenient bench. Here I shall get together the children as they are playing
around me. I shall point to the vines laden with fruit, to the orchards, to the
herds or cattle lowing around us, to those distant hills stretching one behind
another, and they will ask me, how came all these things? I shall tell them all
I know or have heard from wise men who have lived before me; they will be
penetrated with love and veneration; they will kneel, I shall kneel with them;
they will be at my feet, but all of us at the feet of that Good Being, whom we
shall worship together, and thus they will receive within their tender minds a
religion. The old men will come sometimes from having deposited under the green
sod one of their companions, and place themselves by my side; they will look
wishfully at the turf, and anxiously enquire -- is he gone for ever? shall we
soon be like him? will no morning break over the tomb? -- When the wicked cease
from troubling, will the good cease from doing good? We will talk of those
things: I will comfort them. I will tell them of the goodness of God; I will
speak to them of a life to come; I will bid them hope for a state of
retribution. In a clear night, when the stars slide over our heads, they will
ask what those bright bodies are, and by what rules they rise and set? -- and
we will converse about different forms of being, and distant worlds in the
immensity of space governed by the same laws, till we feel our minds raised
from what is grovelling, and refined from what is sordid. You talk of Nature,
this is Nature; and if you could at this moment extinguish religion in the
minds of all the world, thus would it be rekindled again, and thus again excite
the curiosity and interest the feelings of mankind. You have changed our
holidays; you have an undoubted right, as our civil governors, so to do; it is
very immaterial whether they are kept once in seven days, or once in ten; some
however, you will leave us, and when they occur, I shall tell those who choose
to hear me, of the beauty and utility of virtue, of the dignity of right
conduct. We shall talk of good men who have lived in the world, and of the
doctrines they taught; and if any of them have been persecuted and put to death
for their virtue, we shall reverence their memories the more. -- I hope in all
this there is no harm. There is a book out of which I have sometimes taught my
people; it says we are to love those who do us hurt, and to poor oil and wine
into the wounds of the stranger. It has enabled my children to bear patiently
the spoiling of their goods, and to give up their own interest for the general
walfare: I think it cannot be a very bad book. I wish more of it had been read
in your town, perhaps you would not have had quite so many assassinations and
massacres. In this book we hear of a person called JESUS; some worship him as a
God; others, as I am told, say to it is wrong to do so; -- some teach that he
existed before the beginning of ages; others, that he was born of JOSEPH and
MARY. I cannot tell whether these controversies will ever be decided; but, in
the mean time, I think we cannot do otherwise than well to imitate him, for I
learn that he loved the poor, and went about doing good.

Fellow-Citizens; as I traveled hither from my own Village, I saw peasants
sitting amongst the smoking ruins of their cottages; rich men and women reduced
to deplorable poverty; Fathers lamenting their children in the bloom and pride
of youth; and I said to myself, these people cannot afford to part with their
religion. But indeed you cannot take it away; if, contrary to your first
declaration, you choose to try the experiment of persecuting it, you will only
make us prize it more, and love it better. Religion, true of false, is so
necessary to the mind of man, that even you have already begun to make
yourselves a new one. You are sowing the seeds of superstition at the moment
you fancy you are destroying superstition. Let every one chufe the religion
that pleases him; I and my parishioners are content with ours, it teaches us to
bear without despondency whatever evils may befall us.

ON KINGS.
From Godwin 's Enquiry concerning Political Justice.
[ Continued from page 201.]

LET us proceed to consider the moral effects which the institution of
monarchical government is ^tleulated to produce upon the inhabitants of the
countries in which it flourishes. And here it must be laid ^^^wn as a first
principle, that monarchy is founded in imp^^ture. It is false that kings are
entitled to the e^^^^nee they obtain. They possess no intrinsic superiority
over their subjects. The line of distinction that is drawn is the offspring of
pretense, an indirect means employed for effecting certain purposes, and not
the offspring of truth. It tramples upon the genuine nature of things, and
depends for its support upon this argument, "that, were it not for impositions
of a similar nature, mankind would be miserable."

Secondly, it is false that kings can discharge the duties of royalty. They
pretend to superintend the affairs of millions, and they are necessarily
unacquainted with these affairs. The senses of kings are constructed like those
of other men, they can neither see nor hear what is transacted in their
absence. They pretend to administer the affairs of millions, and they possess
no such supernatural powers as should enable them to act at a distance. They
are nothing of what they would persuade us to believe them. The king is often
ignorant of that of which half the inhabitants of his dominions are informed.
His prerogatives are administered by others, and THE LOWEST CLERK IN OFFICE IS
FREQUENTLY TO THIS AND THAT INDIVIDUAL MORE EFFECTUALLY THE SOVEREIGN THAN THE
KING HIMSELF. He knows nothing of what is solemnly transacted in his name.

To conduct this imposture with success it is necessary to bring over to its
party our eyes and our ears. Accordingly kings are always exhibited with all
the splendor of ornament, attendance and equipage. They live amidst a
sumptuousness of expense; and this not merely to gratify their appetites, but
as a necessary instrument of policy. The most fatal opinion that could lay hold
upon the minds of their subjects is, that kings are but men. Accordingly they
are carefully withdrawn from the profaneness of vulgar inspection; and, when
they are exhibited, it is with every artifice that may dazzle our sense and
mislead out judgment.

The imposture does not stop with our eyes, but addresses itself to our ears.
Hence the inflated style of regal formality. The NAME OF KING every where
o^^^des it^^lf upon us. It would seem as if every thing in the country, the
lands, the houses, the furniture and the inhabitants were his property. Our
estates are the king's dominions. Our bodies and minds are his subjects. Our
representatives are his parliament. Our courts of law are his deputies. All
^^^gistrates throughout the realm are the king's officers. His name occupies
the foremost place in all statutes and decrees. He is the prosecutor of every
criminal. He is "Our Sovereign Lord the King." Were it possible that he should
die, "the fountain of our blood, the means by which we live," would be gone:
every political function would be suspended. It is therefore one of the
fundamental principles of monarchical government that "the king cannot die."
Our moral principles accommodate themselves to our veracity: and accordingly
the sum of our political duties (the most important of all duties) is loyalty;
to be true and faithful to the king; to honor a man whom it may be we ought to
despise: and to obey; that is, to acknowledge no immutable criterion of justice
and injustice.

(To be continued.)
KINGS ARE GREAT BLESSINGS!
SOON as a Monarch mounts a throne,
His usefulness is clearly known,
As thousands can declare;
The kingly trade he undertakes,
And MANY a little monarch makes,
The government to share.
And now in all the toils of state,
He thinks and labors -- early -- late;
And with an anxious mind!
He presses on from care to care,
The people's burdens heavy bear,
Upon his gracious mind!
He leaves the dissipated crew;
Routs, feasts, and sporting to pursue --
The Follies of the Day:
Far greater thoughts his heart engage,
Than concerts -- hunting -- or the stage;
As wise Duguet does say.
The law he next surveys, and sees
That acts and deeds, and suits and fees
May not the poor oppress;
Hence judges so UPRIGHT we see,
And juries HONEST, wise, and FREE;
Their purest thoughts express.
Anon the Church his care demands,
The holy troop with gowns and bands,
He suffers none FOR HIRE!
To feed and guide the poor and blind,
To raise and cultivate the mind,
Of each he does require.
Thus Kings are raised to bless a land,
And Church and State go hand in hand,
The blessing to ensure;
Upon men's backs the Junto rides;
So soft they sit upon their hides,
It Is pleasant to endure!
ON THE HORRORS OF WAR.
By Dr. JOHNSON.
IT is wonderful, with what coolness and indifference the greater part of
mankind see war commenced. Those who hear of it at a distance, or read of it in
books, but have never presented its evils to their minds, consider it as little
more than a splendid game, a proclamation, an army, a battle, and a triumph.
Some indeed must perish in the most successful field, but they die upon the bed
of honor, resign their lives awidst the joys of conquest, and, filled with
England's glory, smile in death.

The life of a modern soldier is ill represented by heroic fiction. War has
means of destruction more formidable than the cannon and the sword. Of the
thousands and ten thousands who perished in our late contests with France and
Spain, a very small part ever felt the stroke of an enemy; the rest languished
in tents and ships, amidst damps and putrefaction, pale, torpid, spiritless,
and helpless; gasping and groaning, unpitied among men, made obdurate by a long
continuance of hopeless misery; and were at last whelmed in pits, or heaved
into the ocean, without notice, and without remembrance. By incommodious
encampments, and unwholesome stations, where courage is useless, and enterprise
impracticable, fleets are silently dispeopled, and armies sluggishly melted
away.

Thus is a people gradually exhausted, for the most part with little effect.
The wars of civilized nations make very slow changes in the system of empire.
The public perceives scarcely any alteration but an increase of debt; and the
few individuals who are benefited, are not supposed to have the clearest right
to their advantages. If he who shared the danger enjoyed the profit, and after
bleeding in the battle grew rich by the victory, he might show his gains
without envy. But at the conclusion of a ten years war, how are we recompensed
for the death of multitudes, and the expense of millions, but by contemplating
the sudden glories of paymasters and agents, contractors and commissuries,
whose equipages shine like meteors, and whose palaces rise like exhalations.

These are the men who, without virtue, labor, or hazard, are growing rich as
their country is impoverished; they rejoice when obstinacy or ambition add;
another year to slaughter and devastation; and laugh from their desks at
bravery and science, while they are adding figure to figure, and cipher to
cipher, hoping for a new contract from a new armament, and computing the
profits of a siege or a tempest.

[ Continuation of Mr. ERSKINE's Defense of PAIN; and of The Liberty of the
Press, from page 193.]
THE Attorney General, throughout the whole course of his address to you (I
knew it would be so), has avoided the most distant notice or hint of any
circumstance having led to the appearance of the Author in the political world,
after a silence of so many years; he has not even pronounced or even glanced at
the name of Mr. Burke, but has left you to take it for granted, that the
Defendant volunteered this delicate and momentous subject; and that without
being led to it by the provocation of political controversy, he had seized a
favorable moment to stigmatize, from mere malice, and against his own
confirmed opinions, the constitution of this country.

Gentlemen, my learned friend knows too well my respect and value for him to
suppose that I am charging him with a wilful suppression; I know him to be
incapable of it; he knew it would come from me. He will permit me, however, to
lament that it should be left for me, at this late period of the cause, to
inform you, that, not only the Work before you, but the First Part, of which it
is a natural continuation, were written avowedly, and upon the face of them, IN
ANSWER TO MR. BURKE. They were written besides under circumistances which I
shall hereafter explain, and in the course of which explanation I may have
occasion to cite a few passages from the Works of that celebrated person. And I
shall speak of him with the highest respect; for, with whatever contempt he may
delight to look down upon my hamble talents, however he may disparage the
principles which direct my public conduct, he shall never force me to forget
the regard which this country owes to him for the Writings which he has left
upon record for the illumination of our most distant posterity. After the
gratitude which we owe to God for the divine gifts of reason and understanding,
our next thanks are due to those, from the fountain of whose enlightened minds
they are fed and fructified. But pleading, as I do, the cause of freedom of
opinions, I shall not give offense by remarking, that this great Author has
been thought to have changed some of his; and, if Thomas Pain had not thought
so, I should not now be addressing you, because the Book, which is my subject,
would never have been written. Who is right and who is wrong, in the contention
of doctrines, I have repeatedly disclaimed to be the question; I can only say,
that Mr. Pain may be right throughout, but that Mr. Burke cannot -- Mr. Pain
has been uniform in his opinions, but Mr. Burke has not -- Mr. Burke can only
be right in part; but, should Mr. Pain be even mistaken in the whole, still I
am not removed from the principle of his defense. My defense has nothing to do
with either the concealment or rectitude of his doctrines. I admit Mr. Pain to
be a Republican; you shall soon see what made him one -- I do not seek to shade
or qualify his attack upon our constitution; I put my defense on no such matter
-- he undoubtedly means to declare it to be defective in its forms, and
contaminated with abuses, which in his judgment, will one day or other bring on
the ruin of us all: it is in vain to mince the matter; this is the scope of his
Work. But still, if it contains no attack upon the King's majesty, nor upon any
other living magistrate; if it excites to no resistance to magistracy; but, on
the contrary, if it even inculeates, as it does, obedience to government, then,
wherever may be its defects, the question continues as before, and ever must
remain an unmixed question of THE LIBERTY OF THE PRESS. I therefore consider it
as no breach of professional duty, nor injurious to the cause I am defending,
to express my own admiration of the real principles of our constitation -- a
constitution which I hope never to see give way to any other -- a constitution
which has been productive of various benefits, and which will produce many more
hereafter, if we have wisdom enough to pluck up those weeds that grow in the
richest soils, and among the brightest flowers. I agree with the merchants of
London, that the English government is equal to the reformation of its own
abuses; and, as an inhabitant of the city, I would have signed their
declaration, if I had known, of my own knowledge, the facts recited in its
preamble. But abuses the English constitution unquestionably has which call
loudly for reformation, the existence of which has been the theme of our
greatest statesmen, which have too plainly formed the principles of the
Defendant, and created the very conjecture which produced this Book.

Gentlemen, we all but too well remember the calamitous situation in which our
country stood but a few years ago -- a situation which no man can look back
upon without horror, nor feel himfelf safe from relapsing into it again, while
the causes remain which produced it. The event I allude to, you must know to be
the American war, and the still existing causes of it, the corroption of this
Government. In those days it was not thought virtue by the Patriots of England
to conceal their existence from the people; but them, as now, authority
condemned them as disaffected subjects, and deseated. the end^ they sought by
their promulgation.

Hear the opinion of Sir George Saville; -- not his speculative opinion
concerning the structure of car government in the abstract, but his opinion of
the settled abuses which prevailed in his own time, and which continue at this
moment. But first let me remind you who Sir George Saville was -- I fear we
s^all hardly look upon his like again -- How shall I ^^scri^^ him to you? -- In
my own words I cannot. I was lately commended by Mr. Burke, in the House of
Commons, for strongthening my own language by an appeal to Dr. Johnson. Were
the honorable gentleman present at this moment, he would no doubt doubly
applaud my choice in resorting to his own Works for the description of Sir
George Saville:

His fortune is among the largest; a fortune, which, wholly unincumbered as it
is, without one single charge from luxury, vanity, or excess, sinks under the
benevolence of its dispenser. This private benevolence, expending itself into
patriotism, renders his whole being the estate of the public, in which he has
not reserved a peculium for himself of profit, diversion or relaxation. During
the session, the first in, and the last out of the House of Commons; he passes
from the senate to the camp; and, seldom seeing the seat of his ancestors, he
is always in parliament to serve his country, or in the field to defend it.

It is impossible to ascribe to such a character any principal but patriotism,
when he expresses himself as follows:

I return to you baffled and dispirited, and I am sorry that truth obliges me
to add, with hardly a ray of hope of seeing any change in the miserable course
of public calamities. On this melancholy d^ of account, in rence^ing up to you
my trust, I deliver to you your share of a country maimed and weakened; (...)
treasure lavished and misspent; its honors faded; and its conduct the
laughing stock of Europe: our nation in a manner without allies or friends,
except such as we have hired to destroy ^^r follow-subjects, and to ravage a
country, in which we once claimed an invaluable share. I return to you some of
your principal privileges impeached and mangled. And, lastly, I leave you, as I
conceive, at this hour and moment fully, effectually, and absolutely, under the
discretion and power of a military force, which is to act without waiting for
the authority of the civil magistrates.

Some have been accused of exaggerating the public misfortunes, nay, of having
endeavored to help forward the mischief, that they might afterward raise
discontents. I am willing to hope, that neither my temper, nor my si^^ation in
life, will be thought naturally to urge me to promote misery, discord, or
confusion, or to exult in the subversion of order, or in the ruin of property.
I have no reason to contemplate with pleasure the poverty of our country, the
increase of our debts, and of our taxes; or the decay of our commerce. -- Trust
not, however, to my report: reflect, compare, and judge for yourselves.

But, under all these disheartening circumstances, I could yet entertain a
cheerful hope, and undertake again the commission with alacrity, as well as
zeal, if I could see any effectual steps taken to remove the original cause of
the mischief. -- Then would there be a hope?

But, till the purity of the constituent body, and thereby that of the
representation be restored, there is NONE.

I gladly embrace this most public opportunity of delivering my sentiments, not
only to all my constituents, but to those likewise not my constituents, whom
yet, in the large sense, I represent, and am faithfully to serve.

I look upon restoring election and representation in some degree (for I expect
no miracles) to their original purity, to be that without which all other
efforts will be vain and ridiculous.

If something be not done, you may, indeed, retain the outward form of your
Constitution, but not the power thereof.

(To be continued.)
ON THE AUTHORITY OF ONE COUNTRY OVER ANOTHER.
By Dr. PRICE.
FROM the nature and principles of Civil Liberty, it is an immediate and
necessary inference that no one community can have any power over the property
or legislation of another community, that is not incorporated with it by a just
and adequate representation. -- Then only, is a state free, when it is governed
by its own will. But a country that is subject to the legislature of another
country, in which it has no voice, and over which it has no control, cannot be
said to be governed by its own will. Such a country, therefore, is in a state
of slavery. And it deserves to be particularly considered, that such a slavery
is worse, on several accounts, than any slavery of private men to one another,
or of kingdoms to despots within themselves. -- Between one state and another,
there is none of that fellow-feeling that takes place between persons in
private life. Being detached bodies that never see one another, and residing
perhaps in different quarters of the globe, the state that governs cannot be a
witness to the sufferings occasioned by its oppressions; or a competent judge
of the circumstances and abilities of the people who are governed. They must
also have, in a great degree, separate interests; and the more the one is
loaded, the more the other may be cased. The infamy likewise of oppression,
being in such circumstances shared among a multitude, is not likely to be much
felt or regarded. On all these accounts there is in the cafe of one country
subjugated to another, little or nothing to check rapacity; and the most
flagrant injustice and cruelty may be practiced without remorse or pity. I will
add, that it is particularly difficult to shake off a tyranny of this kind. A
single despot, if a people are unanimous and resolute, may be soon subdued. But
a despotic state is not easily subdued; and a people subject to it cannot
emancipate themselves without entering into a dreadful, and, perhaps, very
unequal contest.

I cannot help observing farther, that the slavery of a people to external
despots may be qualified and limited; but I don't see what can limit the
authority of one state over another. The exercise of power in this case can
have no other measure than discretion; and, therefore, must be indefinite and
absolute.

Once more. It should be considered that the government of one country by
another, can only be supported by a military force; and, without such a
support, must be destitute of all weight and efficiency.

A LESSON FOR DARING PUBLISHERS.
The PROPRIETORS of the MORNING CHRONICLE were prosecuted, and tried the 9th of
December, 1793, for publishing in their Paper the following ADDRESS, and the
Jury, after a conscientious No. XX.

Struggle of Fifteen Hours! returned a Verdict of NOT GUILTY. It is therefore
inserted in this Publication as a Specimen of what the FREEBORN SONS OF OLD
ENGLAND may no longer publish with Safety.

THE DERBY ADDRESS.
At a Meeting of the Society for Political Information, held at the Talbot Inn,
in Derby, July 16th, 1792, the following Address, declaratory of their
Principles, etc. was unanimously agreed to, and ordered to be printed:
To the Friends of Free Enquiry, and the General Good.
FELLOW CITIZENS,
CLAIMING it as our indefeasible right to associate together, in a peaceable
and friendly manner, for the communication of thoughts, the formation of
opinions, and to promote the general happiness, we think it unnecessary to
offer any apology for inviting you to join us in this manly and benevolent
pursuit; the necessity of the inhabitants of every community endeavoring to
procure a true knowledge of their rights, their duties, and their Interests,
will not be denied, except by those who are the slaves of prejudice, or the
interested in the continuation of abuses. As men who wish to aspire to the
title of Freemen, we totally deny the wisdom and the humanity of the advice --
to approach the defects of government with "pious awe and trembling
solicitude." What better doctrine could the Pope, or the Tyrants of Europe
desire? We think, therefore, that the cause of truth and justice can never be
hurt by temperate and honest discussions, and that cause which will not bear
such a scrutiny, must be systematically or practically bad. We are sensible
that those who are not friends to the general good, have attempted to inflame
the public mind with the cry of "Danger," whenever men have associated for
discussing the principles of government; and we have little doubt but such
conduct will be pursued in this place; we would therefore caution every honest
man, who has really the welfare of the nation at heart, to avoid being led away
by the prostituted clamours of those who live on the sources of corruption. We
pity the fears of the timorous, and we are totally unconcerned respecting the
false alarms of the venal. -- We are in the pursuit of truth, in a peaceable,
calm, and unbiassed manner; and wherever we recognize her features, we will
embrace her as the companion of happiness, of wisdom, and of peace, This is the
mode of our conduct: the reasons for it will be found in the following
declaration of our opinions, to the whole of which each member gives his hearty
assent.

DECLARATION.
I. That all true Government is instituted for the general good; is legalized
by the general will; and all its actions are, or ought to be, directed for the
general happiness and prosperity of all honest citizens.

II. That we feel too much not to believe, that deep and alarming abuses exist
in the British Government, yet we are at the same time fully sensible, that our
situation is comfortable, compared with that of the people of many European
kingdoms; and that as the times are in some degree moderate, they ought to be
free from riot and confusion.

III. Yet we think there is sufficient cause to enquire into the necessity of
the payment of seventeen millions of annual taxes, exclusive of poor rates,
county rates, expenses of collection, etc. etc. by seven millions of people; we
think that these expenses may be reduced, without lessening the true dignity of
the nation, or the government; and therefore wish for satisfaction in this
important matter.

IV. We view with concern the frequency of Wars. -- We are persuaded that the
interests of the poor can never be promoted by accession of territory when
bought at the expense of labor and blood; and we must say, in the language of
a celebrated author, -- "We, who are only the people, but who pay for wars with
our substance and our blood, will not cease to tell Kings, or Governments, that
to them ^lone wars are profitable: that the true and just con^ are those which
each makes at home, by co^^^^ting the peasantry, by promoting agriculture and
manufactories: by multiplying men, and the other productions of nature; that
then it is that Kings (...) themselves the image of God, whose will is
perpetually directed to the creation of new beings. If they continue to make us
fight and kill one another, in uniform, we will continue to write and speak,
until nations shall be cured of this folly." -- We are certain our present
heavy burdens are owing, in a great measure, to cruel and impolitic wars, and
therefore we will do all on our part, as peaceable citizens, who have the good
of the community at heart, to enlighten each other, and protest against them.

V. The present state of the representation of the People, calls for the
particular attention of every man, who has humanity sufficient to feel for the
honor and happiness of his country; to the defects and corruptions of which we
are inclined to attribute unnecessary Wars, etc. etc. We think it a deplorable
case when the poor must support a corruption which is calculated to oppress
them; when the labourer must give his money to afford the means of preventing
him having a voice in its disposal; when the lower classes may say. -- "We give
you our money, for which we have toiled and sweat, and which would save our
families from cold and hunger; but we think it more hard that there is nobody
whom we have delegated, to see that it is not improperly and wickedly sp^nt: we
have none to watch over our interests; the rich only are represented." -- "The
form of Government since the Revolution, is in some respects, changed for the
worse by the triennial and septennial acts we lost annual Parliaments: besides
which, the wholesome provision for obliging Privy Counselors to subscribe
their advice with their names, and against Placemen and Pensioners sitting in
Parliament, have been repealed." It is said, that the voice of the people is
the constitutional control of Parliament, but what is this ^^t saving, that
the Representative, (...) naturally in^^^^d to support wrong measures, an^ that
the peo^^^ (...) be constantly assembling to oblige them to do their duty. An
equal and incorrupt representation would, we are persuaded, save us from heavy
expenses, and deliver us from many oppressions, we will therefore do our duty
to procure this reform, which appears to us of the u^^^ost importance.

VI. In short, we see with the most lively concern, an army of Placemen,
Pen^^ners, etc. fighting in the (...) of corruption and prejudice, and
spreading the ^^^^agio^ far and wide; -- a large and highly expensive military
establishment, though we have a well regulated militia; -- the increase of all
kinds of robberies, riots, executions, etc. though the nation pays taxes equal
to the whole land rental of the kingdom, in order to have its property
protected and ^^^ured; and is also obliged to enter into separate associations
against felonious deprelations. -- A criminal code of law sanguine and
inefficacious. -- a civil code so volominods and mysterious as to puzzle the
best understandings; by which means, justices, denies to the poor, on account
of the expense attending the obtaining of it; -- corporations under ministerial
or party influence, swallowing up the importance and ^^cting against the voice
of the people; -- pena^^ ^^^icted (...) those who accept of office, without
(...) ^^in^ to one vio^^^^ of their consciences a^^ (...); the voice of (...)
^^^^^^ry drowned in p^^^^^^tion, and the clamours of the pensioned and
interested; and we view, with the most poignant sorrow, a part of the people
deluded by a cry of the Constitution and Church in danger, fighting with the
weapons of savages, under the banners of prejudice, against those who have
their true interest at heart; -- we see with equal sensibility the present
outcry against reforms, and a cruel proclamation (tending to cramp the liberty
of the press, and discredit the true friends of the people) receiving the
support of numbers of our countrymen; -- we see the continuation of oppressive
game laws and destructive monopolies; -- we see the education and comfort of
the poor neglected, notwithsdanding the enormous weight of the poor r^^^; -- we
see burthe^^ multiplied -- the lower classes sinking into poverty, disgrace and
excesses, and the means of these shocking abuses increased for the purposes of
revenue; -- for the same end, Excise Laws, those badges and sources of
oppression, kept up and multiplied. -- And when we cast our eyes on a people
just formed in a free communit^, without ^^^ing had time to grow rich, under a
Government by which justice is duly administered, the poor taught and
comforted, properly protected, taxes sew and easy, and that at an expense as
small as that of our pension lift -- we ask ourselves -- "Are we in England? --
Have our forethers fought, and bled, and conquered ^^r liberty? -- And did not
they think that the fruits of their patriotism would be more abundant in pea^^,
plenty, and happiness? -- Are we allways to stand still or go backwards? -- Are
our burdens to be as heavy as the mo^^ enslaved people? -- Is the condition o^
the poor never to be improved?" Great Britain must have arrived at the highest
degree of national happiness and prosperity, and our situation must be too good
to be mended, or the present outcry against refer us and improvements is
inhuman and criminal. But we hope our condition will be speedily improved, and
to obtain so desirable a good is the object of our present Association; an
union founded on principles of ^erevolence and humanity; disclaiming all
connection with riot and disorder, but firm in our purpose, and warm in our
affections for liberty.

VII. Lastly -- We invite the friends of freedom throughout Great Britain to
form similar Societies, and to act with unanimity and firmness, till the people
be too wise to be imposed upon; and their influence in the government be
commensurate with their dignity and importance,

THEN SHALL WE BE FREE AND HAPPY.

By Order of the Society, S. AIR, Chairman.

ODE TO HUMAN KIND.
From Dodsley's Poems.
IS there, or do the Schoolmen dream?
I, there on earth a power supreme,
The Delegate of Heaven?
To whom an uncontrolled command,
In ^^^ry realm, over seas and l^nd,
By special grace is given?
Then say what signs this God proclaim?
Dwells he amidst the diamond's slame,
A throne his hallow'^ shrine?
Alas! the pomp, the armed array,
Want, fear, and impotence betray,
Strange proofs of power divine!!!
If service due from human kind,
To men in SLOTHFUL ease r^elin'd,
Can form a sovereign's cla^m,
Had Monare^s! ^e whom Heaven ordains,
Our toils unshar'^ -- to share our g^ins,
YE IDIOTS BLIND and LAME!
Superior virtue, wisdom, might,
Create and mark the Ruler's right,
So REASON must conclude --
Then thine it is, to whom belong,
The wise, the virtuous, and the strong,
THRICE SACRED MULTITUDE.
In thee, vast ALL! are these contained,
For these are those, thy parts ordained,
So Nature's systems roll:
The sceptre's thine, it such there be,
If none there is -- then thou art FREE,
GREAT MONARCH! MIGHTY WHOLE!
Let the proud Tyrant rest his cause
On Faith, Prescription, Force, or Laws,
An host's or senate's voice,
HIS VOICE affirms thy stronger due,
Who for the many made the few,
And gave the species choice.
Unsanctif^^'d by thy command,
Unown'd by thee, the sceptered hand,
The trembling slave may bind;
But loose from Nature's moral ties,
The oath (...) force imposed, belies
The un^^^nting mind.
THY WILL's thy rule -- thy good its end;
You p^^^^^ only to defend
W^^ ^^^^ent Nature gave;
A^^ he (...) ^^^e her gif^^ ^^vade,
By (...) ^^de,
(...) ^^^ctim (...) s^^ve.
The (...) founds the just decree,
O^ ^^ive (...),
No private (...) sign'^:
T^^^^^h (...) Nature'^ ^^vide extent,
No (...) A^E (...) over (...) meant,
To hurt the GENERAL ^^nd.
Avails it thee, if ONE devours,
OR LESSER spoilers share his powers,
While BOTH thy claim oppose?
Monster, who wore thy sullied crown,
Tyrants who pulled those monsters down,
Alike to thee were foes!
Far other shone fair Freedom's band,
Far other was the immortal stand,
When Hamp^en fought for thee:
They s^^te^'d from rapine's grief thy spoils,
The fruits and prize of glorious toils,
Of arts and industry.
The foes, with fronts of brass, invade;
Thy friends afford a timid aid,
And yield up half thy right?
Even LOCK, beams forth a mingled ray,
Afraid to pour the flood of day,
On man's too feeble sight.
O! shall the bought and buying tribe,
The slaves who take and deal the bribe,
A people's claims enjoy!
So India murd'rers hope to gain,
The powers and virtues of the slain,
Of wretches they destroy.
Avert it Heaven! you love the brave,
You hate the treach rous willing slave,
The self-devoted head;
Nor shall an hireling's voice convey,
That sacred prize to lawless sway,
For which a nation bled.
-- To show --
The very Age and Body of the Time its Form
And Pressure. --
For comments pray don't look;
For whatsoever we think
In these informing times
We scarce dare SHRUG OR WINK!
Sweet s^^^^ for Old English Roast Beef!!!
Don't open your mouth at me, fellow.
DUKE OF YORK's ARMY.
Head Quarters, Tourney, Dec. 13, 1793.
HIS Royal Highness orders, that all the troops under his command pay proper
respect to the Host, and all other religious processions. He directs, that ^ll
sentinels carry their arms when any religious procession is passing; and
demands the attention of all officer^, but particularly of those on duty, to
prevent the s^^^^est impropriety being committed on these occasions.

His Royal Highness is confident, that the troops under his command will ever
bear in mind, that though we differ in some of the ceremonies of religion, we
unite with our gallant allies; and it is our glory to do so, in every sentiment
of devotion to our CREATOR, and attachment and loyalty to our SOVEREIGNS.

Extract of a Letter from Mons, to the Convention, dated December 12.
"We send you a list of the famous relics taken from the Rebels. -- 1. The HEAD
of St. Charles Borromu. 2. BLESSED STUFFS! found in the Shrine of St. Dennis.
3. Papers to PROVE that the RELICS of St. Vincent are GENUINE. 4. A TOOTH of
the LOWER Jaw of St. Vincent. 5. A Bit of the HEAD and the Hair of St.
Guignelot. 6. A PIECE of the ROBE of the HOLY Virgin. 7. A PIECE of the FROCK
of the Infant Jesus. 8. The SKULL of St. Sebastian. 9. The GRIDIRON of St.
Laurence. 10. A Piece of the TRUE Cross. 11. Two Vials of the MILK of the MOST
Holy Virgin."

The perusal of this List produced much laughter.

Monday, December 16, 1793.
A Deputation from the Commune of DIJON informed the Convention, that various
SAINTS of BOTH Sexes, GOLD and SILVER, would arrive in a sew days. We gave them
nothing to cat on the road, said the Orator, because we are told they can
change stone to bread, and water to wine. We asked what kind of carriage they
would choose? To which they replied, That, being Saints of Burgundy, they should
prefer wine casks; and in two or three days you will so receive them, with
flaggons once thought sacred. (Honorable mention, and insertion in the
Bulletin.)

A PANEGYRIC! A SAFE MORSEL FOR THE PIGS. FROM CATO^ LETTERS.
WE have at last, by the bounteous gift of indulgent Providence, a most (...)
King, and a wise and incorrupt Parliament; a^^ ^et -- But what shall I say, or
what shall be left unsaid? I will go on. -- We have a Prince, I say, who is
possessed of every virtue which can grace and adorn a crown; a Parliament too,
than whom England has never chosen one better disposed to do all those things,
which every honest man in it wished, and called for, and yet -- by the iniquity
of the times, or the iniquities of particular men, we are still to expect our
deliverance, though I hope we shall not expect it long.

Public corruptions and abuses have grown upon us: sees in most, if not in all
offices, are immensely increased: places and employments, which ought not to be
sold at all, are sold for treble values: the necessity, of the public have
made greater impositions unavoidable, and yet the public has run very much in
debt; and as these-debts have been increasing, and the people growing poor,
salaries have been angmented, and pensions multiplied: I mean in the l^st
reign, for I hope that there have been no such doing in this.

THE NEW CONSTITUTION OF FRANCE.
[ Concluded from page 212.]

OF THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL.

62. THERE is one Executive Council composed of twenty-four members.

63. The Electoral Assembly of each Department, nominate, one Candidate. The
Ligislative Body chooses the Members of the Council from the general list.

64. One half of it is renewed by each Legislature, in the last month of the
session.

65. The Council is charged with the direction and superintendance of the
general Administration. It cannot act, but in execution of the laws and decrees
of the Legislative Body.

66. It nominates, not of its own body, the Agents in chief of the general
Administration of the Republic.

67. The Legislative Body determines the number, and the functions of these
Agents.

68. These Agents do not form a Council. They are separated, without any
immediate correspondence between them; they exercise no personal authority.

69. The Council nominates, not of its own body, the external Agents of the
Republic.

70. It negotiates treaties.

71. The Members of the Council, in case of mal^^rsation, are accused by the
Legislative Body.

72. The Council is responsible for the non-execution of laws and decrees, and
for abuses which it does not denounce.

73. It recals and replaces the agents in its nomination.

74. It is bound to denounce them, if there be occasion, before the Judicial
Authorities.

OF THE CONNECTION OF THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL WITH THE LEGISLATIVE BODY.

75. The Executive Council resides near the Legislative Body. It has admittance
and a separate seat in the place of sittings.

76. It is heard as often as it has an account to give.

77. The Legislative Body calls it into the place of its sittings, in whole or
in part, when it thinks fit.

OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE AND MUNICIPAL BODIES.

78. There is a Municipal Administration in each commune of the Republic; in
each District an intermediate Administration; In each Department a central
Administration.

79. The Municipal Officers are elected by the Assemblies of the Commune.

80. The Administrators are nominated by the Electoral Assemblies of Department
and District.

81. The Municipalities and the Administrations are renewed, one half, every
year.

82. The Administrators and Municipal Officers have no character of
representation; they cannot, in any case, modify the acts of the Legislative
Body, or suspend the execution of them.

83. The Legislative Body determines the functions of the Municipal Officers,
and Administrators, the rules of their subordination, and the penalties they
may incur.

84. The sittings of Municipalities and Administrations are public.

OF CIVIL JUSTICE.

85. The code of civil and criminal laws is uniform for all the Republic.

86. No infringement can be made of the right which Citizens have to cause
their differences to be pronounced upon by arbitrators of their choice.

87. The decision of these arbitrators is final, if the Citizens have not
reserved the right of objecting to them.

88. There are Justices of Peace, elected by the Citizens in circuits
determined by the law.

89. They conciliate and judge without expense.

90. Their number and their competence are regulated by the Legislative Body.

91. There are public Arbitrators elected by the Electoral Assemblies.

92. Their number and their circuits are fixed by the Legislative Body.

93. They take cognizance of disputes which have not been finally determined by
the private Arbitrators' of the Justice of Peace.

94. They deliberate in public; they give their opinions aloud; they pronounce,
in the last resort, on verbal defenses, or simple memorials, without
procedures, and without expense; they assign the reasons of their decision.

95. The Justices of Peace and the Public Arbitrators are elected every year.

OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE.

96. In criminal cases, no Citizen can be tried, but on an examination received
by a Jury, or decreed by the Legislative Body; the accused have Counsel chosen
by themselves, or nominated officially; the process is public; the fact and the
intention are declared by a jury of judgment; the punishment is applied by a
criminal tribunal.

97. The Criminal Judges are elected every year by the Electoral Assemblies.

OF THE TRIBUNAL OF APPEAL.

98. There is one Tribunal of Appeal for all the Republic.

99. This Tribunal does not take cognizance of the merits of the case: It
pronounces on the violation of forms, and on express contravention of the law.

100. The Members of the Tribunal are nominated every year by the Electoral
Assemblies.

OF PUBLIC CONTRIBUTIONS.

101. No Citizen is exempted from the honorable obligation of contributing to
the public charges.

OF THE NATIONAL TREASURY.

102. The National Treasury is the central point of the receipts and expenses
of the Republic.

103. It is administered by accountable agents, nominated by the Executive
Council.

104. These agents are superintended by Commissioners nominated by the
Legislative Body, not of its own members, and responsible for abuses which they
do not denounce.

OF ACCOUNTABILITY.

105. The accounts of the Agents of the National Treasury and the
Administrators of the public money are given in annually to responsible
Commissioners, nominated by the Executive Council.

106. These verificators are superintended by Commissioners in the nomination
of the Legislative Body, not of its own members, and responsible for errors and
abuses which they do not denounce; the Legislative Body passes the accounts.

OF THE FORCES OF THE REPUBLIC.

107. The general forces of the Republic is composed of the whole people.

108. The Republic maintains in its pay, even in time of peace, an armed force,
by sea and by land.

109. All the French are soldiers; they are all exercised in the use of arms.

110. There is no Generalissimo.

111. Difference of ranks, their distinctive marks and subordination, subsist
only with relation to service, and during its continuance.

112. The public force employed for maintaining order and peace in the
interior, does not act but on the requisition in writing, of the constituted
authorities.

113. The public force employed against enemies from without, acts under the
orders of the Executive Council.

114. No armed bodies can deliberate.

OF NATIONAL CONVENTIONS.

115. If in one more than the half of the Departments, the tenth of the Primary
Assemblies of each, regularly formed, demand the revision of the Constitutional
Act, or the change of some of its articles, the Legislative Body is bound to
convoke all the Primary Assemblies of the Republic, to know if there be ground
fot a National Convention.

116. The National Convention is formed in the same manner as the Legislatures,
and unites in itself their powers.

117. It employs itself, with respect to the Constitution, only on the objects
which were the cause of its convocation.

OF THE CORRESPONDENCE OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC WITH FOREIGN NATIONS.

118. The French people is the friend and the natural ally of every free people.

119. It does not interfere in the government of other nations. It does not
suffer other nations to interfere in its own.

120. It gives an asylum to foreigners, banished from their country for the
cause of liberty; it refuses it to tyrants.

121. It does not make peace with an enemy, that occupies its territory.

OF THE GUARANTEE OF RIGHTS.

122. The Constitution guarantees to all the French, equality, liberty, safety,
property, the public debt, the free exercise of worship, a common instruction,
public succors, the indefinite liberty of the press, the right of petition,
the right of meeting in popular societies, the enjoyment of all the rights of
man.

123. The French Republic honors loyalty, courage, age, silial piety,
misfortune. It puts the deposit of its constitution under the guard of all the
virtues.

124. The Declaration of Rights and the Con^^^^tional Act are engraven on
tables, in the ^^som of the Legislative Body, and in the public (...)

COLLOT D'HERBOIS, President. DURAND-MAILLAN^, ^UCOS, Secretaries. MEAULLE, CIL
DE^^^ROIX, Secretaries. COSSUJ^, P. A ^V^OY, Secretaries.


CAUTIONS Against the natural Encroachments of Power.
From CATO'S LETTERS.
PEOPLE are ruined by their ignorance of Human Nature; which ignorance leads
them to credulity, and too great a confidence in particular men. They fondly
imagine that he, who, possessing a great deal by their favor, owes them great
gratitude, and all good offices, will therefore return their kindness: But,
alas! how often are they mistaken in their favorites and trustees; who, the
more they have given them, are often the more incited to take all, and to
return destruction for generous usage. The common people generally think that
great men have great minds, and scorn base actions; which judgment is so false,
that the basest and worst of all actions have been done by great men: Perhaps
they have not picked private pockets, but they have done worse; they have often
disturbed, deceived, and pillaged the world: And he who is capable of the
highest mischief, is capable of the meanest: He who plunders a country of a
million of money, would in suitable circumstances steal a silver spoon; and a
conqueror, who steals and pillages a kingdom, would, in an humbler fortune,
rifle a portmanteau, or rob an orchard.

Political jealousy, therefore, in the people, is a necessary and laudable
passion. But in a chief magistrate, a jealousy of his people is not so
justifiable, their ambition being only to preserve themselves; whereas it is
natural for Power to be striving to enlarge itself, and to be encroaching upon
those who have none. The most laudable jealousy of a magistrate is to be
jealous for his people; which will show that be loves them, and has used them
well: But to be jealous of them, would denote that he has evil designs against
them, and has used them ill. The people's jealousy tends to preserve Liberty;
and the prince's to destroy it. Venice is a glorious instance of the former,
and so is England; and all nations who have lost their Liberty, are melancholy
proofs of the latter.

Power is naturally active, vigilant and distrustful; which qualities in it
push it upon all means and expedients to fortify itself, and upon destroying
all opposition, and even all seeds of opposition, and make it restless as long
as any thing stands in its way. It would do what it pleases, and have no check.
Now because Liberty chastises and shortens Power, therefore Power would
extinguish Liberty; and consequently Liberty has too much cause to be exceeding
jealous, and always upon her defense. Power has many advantages over her; it
has generally numerous guards, many creatures, and much treasure; besides, it
has more craft and experience, less honesty and innocence: And whereas Power
can, and for the most part does subsist where Liberty is not, Liberty cannot
subsist without Power; so that she has, as it were, the enemy always at her
gates.

Some have said, that Magistrates being accountable to none but God, ought to
know no other restraint. But this reasoning is as frivolous as it is wicked;
for no good man cares how many punishments and penalties lie in the way to an
offense which he does not intend to commit: A man who does not intend to commit
murder, is not sorry that murder is punished with death. And as to wicked men,
their being accountable to God, whom they do not fear, is no security to us
against their folly and malice; and to say that we ought to have no security
against them, is to insult common sense, and give the lie to the first law of
nature, that of self-preservation. Human reason says, that there is no
obedience, no regard due to those rulers, who govern by no rule but their lust.
Such men are no rulers; they are outlaws, who, being at defiance with God and
man, are protected by no law of God, or of reason. By what precept, moral or
divine, are we forbid to kill a wolf, or burn an infected ship? Is it unlawful
to prevent wickedness and misery, and to resist the authors of them? Are crimes
sanctified by their greatness? And is he who robs a country, and murders ten
thousand, less a criminal than he who steals single guineas, and takes away
single lives? Is there any sin in preventing, and restraining, or resisting the
greatest sin that can be committed, that of oppressing and destroying mankind
by wholesale? Sure there never were such open, such shameless, such s^^fish
impostors, as the advocates for lawless power. It is a damnable sin to oppress
them; yet it is a damnable sin to oppose them when they oppress, or-gain by the
oppression of others. When they are hurt themselves ever so little, or but
think themselves hurt, they are the loudest of all men in their complaints, and
the most outrageous in their behavior: but when others are plundered,
oppressed and butchered, complaints are sedition; and to seek redress is
damnation. Is not this to be the authors of all wickedness and falsehood?

To conclude: Power, without control, appertains to God alone; and no man
ought to be trusted with what no man is equal to. In truth, there are so many
passions, and inconsistencies, and so much selfishness belonging to human
nature, that we can scarce be too much upon our guard against each other. The
only security which we can have that men will be honest, is to make it their
interest to be honest; and the best defense which we can have against their
being knaves, is to make it terrible to them to be knaves. As there are many
men wicked in some stations, who would be innocent in others; the best way is
to make wickedness unsafe in any station.

DEFINITION OF LOYALTY, By Mr. TOPLADY, Vicar of Broad Hembury, Devon, in his
Church of England Vindicated, page 49.
Printed in 1769.
TRUE Loyalty extends to one's country, as well as to the prince: and to oppose
tyranny, is no breach of Loyalty, but an essential branch of it, Loyalty (as
the very word imports) is such an attachm^^^ to king and people, as is founded
on the LAWS: and an hair's breadth beyond LAW, true LOYALTY does not go. So
allegience is obedience ad leges, ACCORDING TO LAW. Whenever therefore (as was
eminently the case in Mr. Prynn's time) a prince over-steps law, Loyalty itself
obliges a loyal people to say to such a prince, as the Almighty to the sea,
"Hitherto shall thou come, and no further."

The Meaning of the Word PENSION.
From Dr. Johnson's Dictionary.
AN allowance made to any one without an equivalent. In England it is generally
understood to mean pay given to a State-hireling for treason to his Country.

The Meaning of the Word PENSIONER.
From the same Authority.
A Slave of State, hired by a stipend to obey his master.

In Britain's Senate he a seat obtains.
And one more Pensioner St. Stephen gains.
POPE, BURKE's ADDRESS TO THE "SWINISH MULTITUDE!"
Tune, "Derry down, down," etc.
YE vile SWINISH Herd, in the Sty of Taxation.
What would you be after? -- disturbing the Nations?
Ghe over your grunting -- Be off -- To your Sty!
Nor dare to look out, if a KING passes by:
Get ye down! down! down! -- Keep ye down!
Do ye know what a KING is? By Patrick I Will tell you;
He has Power in his Pocket, to buy you and sell you:
To make you all Soldiers, or keep you at work?
To hang you, and cure you for Ham or Salt Pork!
Get ye down! etc.
Do you think that a KING is no more than a Man?
Ye Brutish, Ye Swinish, irrational Clan?
I swear by his Office, his Right is divine,
To flog you, and feed you, and treat you like Swine!
Get you down! etc.
To be sure, I have said -- but I spoke it abrupt --
That "the State is defective and also corrupt."
Yet remember I told you with Caution to peep,
For Swine at a Distance WE prudently keep --
Get ye down! etc.
Now the Church and the State, to keep each other warm,
Are married together. And where is the Harm?
How healthy and we^lthy are Husband and Wife!
But Swine are excluded the conjugal Life --
Get ye down! etc.
The State, it is true, has grown fat upon SWINE,
And Church's weak Stomach on TYTHE-PIG can dine;
But neither you know, as they roast at the Fire,
Have a Right to find fault with the Cooks, or enquire.
Get ye down! etc.
"What Use do we make of your Money?" -- You say;
Why the first Law of Nature: -- We take our own Pay --
And next on our Friends a few Pensions bestow --
And to you we apply when our Treasure runs low,
Get ye down! etc.
Consider our Boroughs, Ye grumbling SWINE!
At Corruption and Taxes, they never repine:
If we only Proclaim, "YE ARE HAPPY!" -- They say,
" WE ARE Happy!" -- Believe and be Happy as they!
Get ye down! etc.
What know ye of COMMONS, of KINGS, or of LORDS,
But what the dim Light of TAXATION affords?
Be contented with that -- and no more of your Rout:
Or a new Proclamation shall muzzle your Snout!
Get ye down! etc.
And now for the SUN -- or the LIGHT OR THE DAY!
"IT does not belong to a PIT?" -- You will say.
I tell you be silent, and hush all your Jars:
Or he will charge you a ^^rthing a piece for the Stars
Get ye down! etc.
Here Is MYSELF, and His Dar^ness, and Harry Dun^^:
(...), F^^^^^^, and Irish, with Fronts made of Brass --
A Cord plated Three-sold will stand a good pull,
Against SAWNEY, and PATRICK, and old Johnny Bal!!!!
Get ye down! etc.
To conclude: Then no more about MAN and his RIGHTS,
TOM PAIN, and a Rabble of Liberty Wights:
That you are but our "SWINE," if ye ever forget,
We'll throw you alive to the HORRIDIE PIT!
Get ye down! down! down! -- Keep ye down!
[ROMAN HISTORY, concluded from Page 189.]
M. GENUCIUS and C. Curti^s being consuls, the commons of Rome demand, that the
plebeians may be admitted into the consulship; and, that the law, prohibiting
patricians and plebeians from intermarrying, may be repealed. In support of
this demand, Canulcius one of the tribunes of the people, thus delivered
himself: --

"What an insult upon us is this! If we are not so rich as the patricians, are
we not citizens of Rome, as well as they? Inhabitants of the same country?
Members of the same community? The nations bordering upon Rome, and even
strangers more remote; are admitted not only to marriages with us, but to what
is of much greater importance, the freedom of the city. Are we, because we are
commoners, to be worse treated than strangers? And when we demand that the
people may be free to bestow their offices and dignities on whom they please,
do we ask any thing unreasonable or new? Do we claim more than their original
inherent rights? What occasion then for all this uproar, as if the universe was
failing to ruin? They were just going to lay viole^^ hands upon me in the
senate house. What, must this empire then be unavoidably overturned: must Rome
of necessity sink at once, if a plebeian, worthy of the office, should be
raised to the consulship? The partricians, I am persuaded, if they could, would
deprive you of the common light. It certainly offends them that you breathe,
that you speak, that you have the shapes of men. Nay, to make a commoner a
consul would be, say they, a most enormous thing, Numa Pompiliu^, however,
without being so much as a Roman citizen, was made king of Rome. The elder
Tarquin by birth not even an Italian, was, nevertheless, placed upon the
throne. Servius Tullius, the son of a captive woman, (nobody knows who his
father was) obtained the kingdom, as the reward of his wisdom and virtue. In
those days, no man, in whom virtue shone conspicuous, was rejected or despised
on account of his race or descent. And did the state prosper the worse for
that? Were not these strangers the very best of our kings? And, supposing now,
that a plebeian should have their talents and merit, must not he be suffered to
govern us? Must we rather choose such governors as the decemvirs? Those
excellent magistrates, I think, were mostly patricians. But we find, that upon
the abolition of the regal power, no commoner was chose to the consulate. And
what of that? Before Numa's time there were no pontifices in Rome. Before
Servius Tullus's days, there was no census, no division of the people into
clases and centuries. Whoever heard of consuls before the expulsion of Tarquin
the proud? Dictators, we all know, are of modern invention; and so are the
offices of tribunes; ^^diles, questors. Within these ten years we have made
decemvirs, and we have unmade them. Is nothing to be done but what has been
done before? That very law forbidding marriages of patricians with plebeians,
is not that a new thing? Was there any such law before the decemvirs enacted
it? And a most shameful one it is in a free state! Such marriages, it seems,
would taint the pure blood of the nobility! Why, if they think so, let them
take care to match their sisters and daughters with men of their own sort. No
plebeian will do violence to the daughter of a patrician. Those are exploits
for our prime nobles. There is no need to sear that we shall force any body
into a contract of marriage. But, to make an express law to prohibit marriages
of patricians with plebeians, what is this, but to show the utmost contempt of
us, and to declare one part of the community to be impure and unclean? Why
don't they lay their wise heads together to hinder rich folks from matching
with poor? They talk to us of the confusion there will be in families, if this
statute should be repealed. I wonder they do not make a law against a
commoner's living near a nobleman, or going the same road that he is going, or
being at the same feast, or appearing at the same marketplace. They might as
well pretend, that these things make confusion in families, as that
inter-marriages will do it. Do not every one know, that the child will be
ranked according to the quality of his father, let him be patrician or
plebeian? In short, it is manifest enough, that we have nothing in view but to
be treated as men and Citizens; nor can they who oppose our demand have any
motive to do it; but the love of domineering. I would fain know of you, consuls
and patricians, is the sovereign power in the people of Rome, or in you? I hope
you will allow, that the people can, at their pleasure, either make a law, or
repeal one. And will you then, as soon as any law is proposed to them, pretend
to list them for the war, and hinder them from giving their suffrages, by
leading them into the field? Hear me, consuls: Whether the news of the war you
talk of be true, or whether it be only a false rumor, spread abroad for
nothing but a color to send the people out of the city; I declare, as a
tribune, that this people, who have already so often spilt their blood in our
contry's cause, are again ready to arm for its defense and its glory, if they
be restored to their natural rights, and you will no longer treat us like
strangers in our own country. But if you account us unworthy of your alliance
by inter-marriages, if you will not suffer the entrance to the chief offices in
the state to be open to all persons of merit, indifferently, but will confine
your chief ingistrates to the senate alone; talk of wars as much as ever you
please; paint in your ordinary discourses the league and power of our enemies
ten times more dreadful than you do now; I declare that this people, whom you
so much despise, and to whom you are nevertheless indebted for all your
victories, shall never more enlist themselves; not a man of them shall take
arms, nor a man of them shall expose his life for imperious lords, with whom he
can neither share the dignities of the state, nor in private life have any
alliance by marriage."

You have seen by the foregoing speeches, the progress of the struggles between
the patricians and the plebeians, which continued for many years; the people
always encroaching more and more upon the privileges of the patricians, till at
length, all the great offices of the state became equally common to the one and
to the other. The following speech, which was spoken above an hundred years
after the foregoing one, may serve as an instance and a proof of that great
simplicity of manners, public virtue, and noble spirit, which raised that
people to that height of power and dominion, which they afterward attained.
The occasion of it was this. The Tarantines having a quarrel with the Romans,
invite Pyrrhus, king of Epirus, to their assistance, who lands with his forces
in Italy, and defeats the Roman army under the command of Laevinius. After this
battle, Fabritius, with two other Roman senators, is sent to Tarentum to treat
with Pyrrhus about the exchange of prisoners. The king, being informed of the
great abilities, and great poverty of Fabritius, hinted in a private
conversation with him, the unsuitableness of such poverty to such distinguished
merit, and that if he would assist him to negociate with the Romans an
honorable peace for the Tarentines, and go with him to Epirus, he would bestow
such riches upon him, as should put him at least upon an equality with the most
opulent nobles of Rome. The answer of Fabritius was to this effect: --

"As to my poverty, you have indeed Sir, been rightly informed. My whole estate
consists in a house of but mean appearance, and a little spot of ground, from
which, by my own labor, I draw my support. But if, by any means, you have been
persunded to think that this poverty makes me less considered in my own
country, or in any degree unhappy, you are extremely deceived. I have no reason
to complain of fortune, she supplies me with all that nature requires; and, if
I am without supersluities, I am also free from the desire of them. With these,
I confess, I should be more able to succor the necessitous, the only advantage
for which the wealthy are to be envied; but as my possessions are, I can still
contribute something to the support of the state, and the assistance of my
friends. With regard to honors, my country places me, poor as I am, upon a
level with the richest: For Rome knows no qualifications for great employments
but virtue and ability. She appoints me to officiate in the most august
ceremonies of religion; she entrusts me with the command of her armies; she
consides to my care the most important negotiations. My poverty does not leslen
the weight and influence of my counsels in the senate, the Roman people honor
me for that very poverty which you consider as a disgrace; they know the many
opportunities I have had in war to enrich myself without incurring censure;
they are convinced of my interested zeal for their prosperity; and, if I have
any thing to complain of in the return they make, it is only in the excess of
their applause. What value then can I set upon your gold and silver! What king
can add any thing to my fortune? Always attentive to discharge the duties
incumbent on me, I have a mind free from self-reproach, and I have an honest
fame."

THE MARRIAGE ACT CENSURED.
From The Citizen of the World. By Goldsmith.
NOT far from this City lives a poor Tinker, who has educated seven sons, all
at this time in arms, and fighting for their country, and what reward do you
think has the tinker from the state for such important services? none in the
world; his sons, when the war is over, may probably be whipped from parish to
parish as vagabonds, and the old man, when past labor, may die a prisoner in
some house of correction.

Such a worthy subject in China would be held in universal reverence; his
services would be rewarded, if not with dignities, at least with an exemption
from labor; he would take the left hand at seasts, and mandarines themselves
would be proud to show their submission. The English laws punish vice, the
Chinese laws do more, they reward virtue!

Considering the little encouragements given to matrimony here, I am not
surprised at the discouragements given to propagation. Would you believe it, my
dear Fum Hoam, there are laws made, which even forbid the people's marrying
each other. By the head of Confucius, I jest not; there are such laws in being
here; and their lawgivers have neither been instructed among the Hottentots,
nor imbibed their principles of equity from the natives of Anamaboo.

There are laws which ordain, that no man shall marry a woman contrary to her
own consent. This, though contrary to what we are taught in Asia, and though in
some measure a clog upon matrimony, I have no great objection to. There are
laws which ordain, that no woman shall marry against her father and mother's
consent, unless arrived at an age of maturity; by which is understood those
years, when woman with us are generally past childbearing. Thi^ must be a clog
upon matrimony, as it is more difficult for the lover to please three than one,
and much more difficult to please old people than young ones. The laws ordain,
that the consenting couple shall take a long time to consider before they
marry; this is a very great clog, because people love to have all rash actions
done in a hurry. It is ordained that all marriages shall be proclaimed before
celebration: this is a severe clog, as many are ashamed to have their marriage
made public, from motives of vicious modesty, and many, afraid from views of
temporal interest.

It is ordained, that there is nothing sacred in the ceremony, but that it may
be dissolved to all intents and purposes by the authority of any civil
magistrate. And yet opposite to this it is ordained, that the priest shall be
paid a large sum of money for granting his sacred permission.

Thus you see, my friend, that matrimony here is hedged round with so many
obstructions, that those who are willing to break through or surmount them,
must be contented, if at last they find it a bed of thorns. The laws are not to
blame, for they have deterred the people from engaging as much as they could.
It is indeed become a very serious affair in England, and none but serious
people are generally found willing to engage. The young, the gay, and the
beautiful, who have motives of passion only to induce them, are seldom found to
embark, as those inducements are taken away, and none but the old, the ugly,
and the mercenary are seen to unite, who, if they have any posterity at all,
will probably be an ill favored race like themselves.

What gave rise to those laws might have been some such accidents as these. It
sometimes happened, that a miser, who had spent all his youth in seraping up
money, to give his daughter such a fortune as might get her a mandarine husband
found his expectations disappointed at last, by her running away with his
footman; this must have been a sad shock to the poor disconsolate parent, to
see his poor daughter in a onehorse chaise, when he had designed her for a
coach and six: what a stroke from providence!!! to see his dear money go to a
beggar; all nature cried out at the profanation!!!

It sometimes happened also, that a lady, who had inherited all the titles, and
all the nervous complaints of nobility, thought fit to impair her dignity, and
mend her constitution, by marrying a farmer; this must have been a sad shock to
her inconsolable relations, to see so fine a flower snatched from a flourishing
family, and planted in a dunghill; this was an absolute inversion of the first
principles of things!!!

In order, therefore, to prevent the great from being thus contaminated by
vulgar alliances, the obstacles to matrimony have been so contrived, that the
rich only can marry amongst the rich, and the poor, who would leave celebacy,
must be content to increase their poverty with a wife. Thus have the laws
fairly inverted the inducements to matrimony; nature tells us, that beauty is
the proper allurement of those who are rich, and money of those who are poor;
but things here are so contrived, that the rich are invited to marry by that
fortune which they do not want, and the poor have no inducement, but that
beauty which they do not feel.

An equal diffusion of riches through any country constitutes its happiness.
Great wealth in the possession of one stagnates, and extreme poverty with
another keeps him in unambitious indigence; but the moderately rich are
generally active; not too far removed from poverty, to fear its calamities; nor
too near extreme wealth, to slacken the nerve of labor; they remain still
between both, in a state of continual fluctuation. How impolitic, therefore,
are those laws which promote the accumulation of wealth among the rich, more
impolitic still, in attempting to increase the depression on poverty.

Bacon, the English Philosopher, compares money to manure; if gathered in
heaps, says he, it does no good; on the contrary, it becomes offensive; but,
being spread, though never so thinly, over the surface of the earth, it
enriches the whole country. Thus the wealth a nation possesses must expatiate,
or it is of no benefit to the public, it becomes rather a grievance, where
matrimonial laws thus consine it to a few.

But this restraint upon matrimonial community, even considered in a physical
light, is injurious. As those who rear up animals take all possible pains to
cross the strain, in order to improve the breed; so in those countries where
marriage is most free, the inhabitants are found every age to improve in
stature and in beauty; on the contrary, where it is confined to a cast, a
tribe, or an hord, as among the Gaurs, the Jews, or the Tartars, each division
soon assumes a family likeness, and every tribe degenerates into peculiar
deformity. From hence it may be easily inferred, that if the Mandarines here
are resolved only to marry among each other, they will soon produce a posterity
with Mandarine Faces: and we shall see the heir of some honorable family
scaree equal to the abortion of a country farmer.

These are a few of the obstacles to marriage here, and it is certain they have
in some measure answered the end; for celebacy is both frequent and
fashionable. Old batchelors appear abroad without a mask, and old maids, my
dear Fum Hoam, have been absolutely known to ogle. To confess in friendship, if
I were an Englishman, I fancy I should be an old bachelor myself; I should
never find courage to run through all the adventures prescribed by the law. I
could submit to court my mistress herself upon reasonable terms, but to court
her father, her mother, and a long tribe of cousins, aunts, and relations, and
then stand the butt of a whole country church, I would as soon turn tail, and
make love to her grandmother.

I can conceive no other reason for thus loading matrimony with so many
prohibitions, unless it be that the country was thought already too populous,
and this was found to be the most effectual means of thinning it. If this was
the motive. I cannot but congratulate the wise projectors on the success of
their scheme. Hail, O ye dim-sighted politicians, ye weeders of men! It Is yours
to clip the wing of industry, and convert hymen to a broker. It Is yours to
behold small objects with a microscopic eye, but to be blind to those which
require an extent of vision. It Is yours, O ye discerners of mankind, to lay the
line between society, and weaken that force by dividing, which should bind with
united vigor, It Is yours, to introduce national real distress, in order to
avoid the imaginary distresses of a few. Your actions can be justified by an
hundred reasons like truth, they can be opposed but by few reasons, and those
reasons are true. Farewell.

I also will show mine opinion. JOB xxxii. ver. 10.
THE RIGHTS OF MAN, BY QUESTION AND ANSWER.
Q. WHAT is Man?

A. An irrational, unsocial, cowardly, and covetous animal.

Q. How do you prove he is irrational?

A. His actions are as much influenced by present passions and interests as are
the actions of other animals deemed irrational.

Q. How is it that he is unsocial?

A. His ridiculous pride makes him imagine himself in an infinite variety of
ways superior to others of his species, and of course too noble for every
company.

Q. Give some instances?

A. Some prefer themselves for being born of parents in this or that station,
or in some particular country, or for being more tall, handsome, etc. and
therefore refuse to associate with their supposed inferiors in these respects
(excepting to serve some sinister purpose), nor will they allow those despised
people equal privileges.

Q. How do you make it appear, that man is a cowardly animal?

A. Because he hunts in packs like hounds, the most cowardly of all dogs. He
seldom attacks singly either his own or any other species without manifest
superiority of situation or arms. When a company of them make a booty, they do
not all boldly fall on to partake, each according to what his hunger or
necessity requires, but sneakingly keep at a distance, till the strongest or
most presumptuous think proper to allow them to partake.

Q. Do the herds or companies of other animals behave in the same timid manner
to certain individuals among them?

A. By no means; they are not half so complaisant. A company of hounds or
wolves will partake equally of their prey, or else they will fight for it, and
wage eternal war till they gain their rights. A hungry beast will attempt again
and again, whereas men have been frequently known to starve rather than help
themselves to the common provisions of nature monopolized by their arrogant
fellow creatures.

Q. Do we not frequently see a striking difference in sleekness and fatness
among a herd of cattle feeding together in the same pasture, owing to the
presumption of some of them driving away the weaker animals from their victuals?

A. No. None of them will submit to suffer thus far by others. The most
voracious and mischievous will only fill his own belly. And while he is
sighting and driving off one, another will have the assurance to come in for a
share, and thus, either by force or stealth, they are sure to partake pretty
equally.

Q. Are not droves of hogs frequently seen passing through London of different
appearance among themselves; some being hardly able to walk with fat, while
others are like greyhounds for thinness?

A. No, never. Swine living together are all alike, either all fat or all lean.

Q. Are mankind living in the same neighborhood all of the same liking too?

A. No; very far from it. Some are like to hurst with fat and saticty, while
others appear like shadows, and frequently die of want, and diseases flowing
from scarcity, or unwholesome diet.

Q. Did not Edmund Burke then very improperly term his starving
fellow creatures the Swinish Multitude?

A. Yes, he therein blundered most egregiously. For on very flight observation,
he would find real Swine to be more noble animals, and far from being so
obsequeous. They will not quietly suffer want on any account, much less by the
encroachments of their fellow creatures. If any great hog offer to thrust them
from the trough, they will scream most seditiously, and will, without regard to
consequence, insist on having their noses in, on one side or the other.
Besides, if men were like swine, how would they be drilled into soldiers? Could
an army of hogs be disciplined and marched against another army of hogs? No,
they are not so fond of armor and trapping as to dance in them to their
destruction. They leave such stupid bravery to the rational being called Man.
They do not understand slaying each other for masters. They only know bravery
in persisting in what they think tends to their own happiness, and that they
will most obstinately do. Mr. Burke must think of some other name for his filly
brethren, for they will never have the sense or spirit to defend their Rights
and Interests like Swine. -- Thus much for the cowardliness of mankind above
other animals.

Q. Have men no other way of showing their peculiar meanness, than by tamely
giving up their Rights to the first usurper?

A. Yes. By insulting decrepid individuals or small numbers of their own
species, when they are in company with other malicious beings like themselves.
But this they never venture upon except emboldened by their numbers. No single
man could ever yet venture to be insolent or witty upon another, without his
own companions. As observed before, they are like hounds -- they always hunt in
packs.

Q. How does it appear that men are covetous animals?

A. Nay, they are so much so, that this passion seems to be the source of all
their other bad qualities. Other animals only covet till their present appetite
is satisfied, and then leave the world in peace to others. But man is
insatiable. He is like the grave, he never says he has enough.

Q. Does his covetousness induce him to take things not absolutely necessary to
life, from his species by force?

A. Yes: for the sake of mere superfluities to hoard up, and which are of no
manner of use but to look at, he will destroy his fellow creatures in numbers
to the utmost of his power.

Q. He is a vicious, dangerous, and detestable animal. Does he ever compel
others of the species to toil for him, in procuring him food and raiment, and
those superfluous articles which he covets?

A. Does he, aye. He was not long in the world till he reduced his fellows to
slavery. He continues to do so still, and while the world lasts he will
continue such injustice if the species do not acquire more spirit to resist the
usurpations of each other. If there is not universal and individual spirit to
resist universal and individual presumption and covetousness, a great portion
of men must always be in subjection to the assuming few. For mankind are not
very likely to relinquish their injustice and avarice.

Q. What pity that they are not rational! For then might this universal
injustice and covetousness spur them on to invent some preventative against
their common encroachments on the rights and properties of each other?

A. Certainly. A small portion of reason might suffice for that purpose.

Q. What are the specific rights of the animal called Man?

A. Though the species, by their inconsistent behavior to each other, may
raise doubts concerning their rationality, yet, by their superior form of body,
and inventive powers of mind, they seem qualified to turn all nature to their
advantage, and may not improperly be termed the Lords of the Creation. And the
Psalmist (Psalm. viii. ver. 5.) says, God has made man but a little lower than
the angels, and crowned him with glory and honor. Has made him to have
dominion over the works of his hands, and has put all things under his feet:
All sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field; the fowl of the air, and
the fish of the sea. Again, in Psalm. cxv. ver. 16, it is said, The Heaven, even
the Heavens are the Lord's: BUT THE EARTH HAS HE GIVEN TO THE CHILDREN OF MEN.

Q. If then the earth be given to the children of men, what pity it is that
they cannot agree on some equitable mode of enjoying their common property, and
be content to live and let live, like other creatures?

A. Nothing seems more easy than to devise such a mode, were men honest enough
to be content with equality of rights and privileges.

Q. Whether such a plan may or may not be adopted, it ought to be presented to
them, and then they will be left without excuse?

A. There is no more requisite to render mankind as happy as they can be on
earth than simply this: That the people in every district or parish should
appoint collectors to receive the rents, and divide them equally among
themselves, or apply them to what public uses they may think proper.

Q. Can any tyranny or abuses flow from such a principle?

A. No, none can exist where such a principle is adhered to.

Q. Ought every one to pay rent to those collectors?

A, Every one should pay according to the full value of the premises which he
occupied, whether farm, house, or apartment.

Q. How would the value of those tenements be known?

A. By letting them by public auction to the best bidder.

Q. For how long a term would the public probably let their tenements?

A. For the life of the occupier, if he so long make good his payments, that he
might enjoy the fruits of any improvements he might make during his residence.

Q. But what if an occupier or tenant should not make good his payments?

A. Then the parish agents would let the premises by public auction to the best
bidder, that the people might receive no damage.

Q. Who would build and repair the houses, etc.?

A. The parish agents, who would have to state the accounts of these and all
other expenses to the people, by whose orders alone they could act.

Q. Would such a people pay taxes as usual for support of the state, or would
they supply the state immediately out of the parish rents?

A. That they might do as they chose. If they wished not to be shackled by
revenue laws, or pestered by excisemen and informers, they would probably pay
the state a sum of money as their quota at once, and have done with it.

Q. Would such a people build bridges, make roads, or rather public works, with
their money?

A. They might if they would.

LESSONS FOR PIG EATERS.
LESSON I. -- From the General Epistle of James, Chap. ii. ver. 6.
DO not rich men oppress you, and draw you before the Judgment Seats?

LESSON 2. -- From Ditto, chap. v. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon
you. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments are moth-eaten. Your gold and
silver is cankered; and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and
shall eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye have heaped treasure together for the
last days. Behold, the hire of the laborers who have reaped down your fields,
which is of you kept back by fraud, cries: and the cries of them which have
reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. Ye have lived in
pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; ye have nourished your hearts as in a
day of slaughter. Ye have condemned and killed the just; and he does not resist
you.

LESSON 3. -- From Amos, chap. ii. ver. 6.
Thus says the Lord; for three transgressions of Israel, and for four, I will
not turn away the punishment thereof; because they sold the righteous for
silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes; that pant after the dust of the earth
on the head of the poor, and turn aside the way of the meek.

LESSON 4. -- From Isaiah, chap. iii. ver. 12.
As for my people, children are the oppressors, and women rule over them. O my
people, they which lead thee cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy
paths. The Lord stands up to plead, and he stands to judge the people. The
Lord will enter into judgment with the Ancients of his people, and the Princes
thereof: for ye have eaten up the vineyard: the spoil of the poor is in your
houses. What mean ye, that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of
the poor? says the Lord of Hosts.

A Comparison between the AFRICAN SLAVES in the WEST INDIES, and the CELTIC
SLAVE, or SCALLAG, in some of the HEBRIDES.
From Travels in the Western Hebrides, by the Rev. JOHN LANE BUCHANAN.
[ Continued from page 125.]
1st. With regard to the respective conditions of their life in general, it is
in neither case of their own choosing. The African is bereft of his freedom, and
sold into slavery by fraud and violence. The Hebredian Slave is, indeed,
neither trapanned into slavery by guile, nor compelled by physical compulsion;
but he is drawn into it by a moral necessity equally invincible, by a train of
circumstances which are beyond his power to control, and which leave him no
option, but either to serve some master as a Scallag, or to protract a
miserable existence for some time in the forest, and near the uninhabited sea
shores, where he may pick up some shell fish, to perish at last, with his wife,
perhaps, and little ones, with cold and hunger.

2dly. With regard to labor. The Negro generally works only from six o'clock
in the morning to six in the evening; and out of that time he has two complete
hours for rest and refreshment. The Scallag is at work from four o'clock in the
morning to eight, nine, and sometimes ten at night.

3dly. With regard to respite from labor. The Negro is allowed two days in the
week for himself -- so is the Scallag: but the precepts of Religion allow the
Scallag only one of these days to labor for his own maintenance.

4thly. With regard to food. The Negro has a plentiful allowance of such common
fare as is sufficient for his support; besides his little spot of land which he
cultivates for himself on Saturday and Sunday, as well as in the evenings,
after he has finished his master's work. The Scallag, when at hard labor for
his master, is fed twice a day with water gruel, or brochan, as it is called;
or kail, or coleworts, with the addition of a barley cake or potatoes; and all
this without salt. But, for his family, and for himself on Sundays, or when he
is unable to work through bodily indisposition, he has no other means of
subsistence than what he can raise for himself, by the labor of one day out of
seven, from a scanty portion of cold and moorish soil -- barley, potatoes,
coleworts, and perhaps a milch cow, or a couple of ewes, for giving milk to his
infants; though if often happens, that he is obliged to kill these household
gods, as it were, to prevent his family from starving. At certain seasons he
has fish in abundance, but this he is, for the most part, obliged to eat
without bread, and often without salt. The Negro, if he be tolerably
industrious, can afford on Saturdays and other holidays, with pepper-pot, a
pig, or a turkey, and a cann of grog; nay, Negroes have been known to clear,
besides many comforts for their own family, twenty, thirty, even forty pounds a
year; so that there is a fair probability that a Negro may, be enabled to gain
the price of his liberty. But, of relief from bondage and woe the Scallag has
not a single ray of hope, on this side the grave.

5thly. With regard to lodging and clothing. The Negro is comfortably lodged,
in a warm climate. The Scallag is very poorly clothed, and still more
wretchedly lodged, in a cold one. And as the Negro is provided by his master
with bedding and body clothes, so he is also furnished by him with the
implements of husbandry. The Scallag, with sticks and sods, rears his own
miserable hut, procures for himself a few rags, either by what little flax or
wool he can raise, or by the refuse or coarser part of these furnished by his
master, and provides his own working tools, as the spade, etc.

6thly. With regard to usage or treatment. The Slave is driven on to labor by
stripes: so also is the Scallag; who is ever, on some occasions, formally tied
up, as well as the Negro, to a stake, and scourged on the bare back. The owner
of the Slave, it may be farther observed, has a strong interest in his welfare;
for if he should become sick or infirm, the master must maintain him; or if he
should die, the master must supply his place at a considerable expense. There
is no such restraint on the peevish humors or angry passions of a Hebredian
lord or tacksman. The Scallag, under infirmity, disease, and old age, is set
adrift on the wide world, and begs his bread from door to door, and from island
to island. Nor is it necessary in order to supply the place of a Scallag, to be
at any expense: for the frequent failure of settlments affords but too many
recruits to the wretched otder of Scallags.

7thly. As there is nothing so natural as the love of liberty, and an aversion
to restraint and oppression, the Scallag, as well as the Negro, sometimes
attempts emancipation, by fleeing to the uninhabited parts of the country:
though such attemps are not so often made by the Scallags after they are enured
to slavery, as when they feel themselves on the verge of sinking into that
dreadful and deserted condition of existence.

The only asylum for the distressed in the Long Island is the King's Forest;
where several are sheltered with their families and cattle for the summer
season; where they live in caves and dens of the earth; and subsist, without
fire, on milk, the roots of the earth, and shell fish. But in the winter
season, cold and famine drive them back again to seek for subsistence and
shelter under the same tyranny that had driven them to the forest. The Blue or
other mountains afford the means of life to runaway-negroes (if they can escape
the search of their masters), both summer and winter.

In the West Indies, no planter or captain of a vessel is allowed by the law of
the Colonies, to kidnap, conceal, or keep any runaway slave, or by any means to
detain him from his master. Here also the comparison holds between the Slave
and the Scallag. There is not a takcsman who will take or retain in his
service, or on his land, either the Scallag or subtenant of another master,
without a written certificate from that master, that the Scallag or subtenant
has a good character; and also, if he be otherwise satisfied as to the
character of the poor man, that his master is willing to part with him. For as
the Colonists by their laws, so the Tacksmen of the Hebrides, by their country
regulations, have entered into a firm compact, that no one shall harbor the
subtenant or Scallag of another, who does not produce a proof of his humble and
unlimited obedience to his former master. And it is evident from reason, were
it not proved by experience, that certificates are most withheld when they are
most wanted. For no landlord who is known to be cruel to his people will ever
give them certificates, because in that case they would all leave the tyrant,
and seek for milder treatment under some less severe master.

GENERAL POLITICAL APHORISMS, OR MAXIMS.
From HARRINGTON'S WORKS.
THE errors and sufferings of the people are from their governors.

The people cannot see but they can feel.

Where the security is no more than personal, there may be a good monarch, but
can be no good commonwealth.

Where the security is in the persons, the government makes good men evil:
where the security is in form, the government makes evil men good.

Assemblies legitimately elected by the people, are that only party which can
govern without an army.

Not the party which cannot govern without an army, but the party which can
govern without an army, is the refined party, as to this intent and purpose
truly refined; that is, by popular election, according to the precept of Moses,
and the rule of Scripture: take ye wise men, and understanding, and known among
your tribes, and I will make them rulers over you.

The people are deceived by names, but not by things.

Where there is a well ordered commonwealth the people are generally satisfied.

Where the people are generally dissatisfied, there is no commonwealth.

Where civil liberty is entire, it includes liberty of conscience.

Where liberty of conscience is entire it includes civil liberty.

Either liberty of conscience can have no security at all, or under popular
government it must have the greatest security.

To hold that a government may be introduced by a little at once, is to wave
prudence, and commit things to chance.

Government is of human prudence, and human prudence is adequate to man's
nature.

Where the government is not adequate to man's nature, it can never be quiet or
perfect.

A King governing now in England by an army, would for the same causes find the
same effects with the late protector.

A king governing now in England by parliaments, would find the nobility of no
effect at all.

A parliament, where the nobility is of no effect at all, is a mere popular
council.

A mere popular council will never receive law from a king.

A mere popular council giving law to a king, becomes thereby a democracy, or
equal commonwealth; or the difference is no greater than the imperfection of
the form.

A commonwealth or democracy to be perfect in the form, must consist especially
of such an assembly, the result whereof can go upon no interest whatsoever, but
that only which is the common interest of the whole people.

An assembly consisting of a few, may go upon the interest of one man, as a
king, or upon the interest of one party, as that of divines, lawyers, and the
like; or the interest of themselves, and the perpetuation of their government.

The popular assembly in a commonwealth may consist of too few, but can never
consist of too many.

To make principles or fundamentals, belongs not to men, to nations, nor to
human laws.

To build upon such principles or fundamentals as are apparently laid by God in
the inevitable necessity or law of nature, is that which truly appertains to
men, to nations, and to human laws. To make any other fundamentals, and then
build upon them, is to build castles in the air.

Whatever is violent, is not secure not durable; whatever is secure or durable
is natural.

Government in the whole people, though the major part were disaffected, must
be secure or durable, because it waves force, to found itself upon nature.

Government in a party, though all of these were well affected, must be
insecure and transitory, because it waves nature, to found itself upon force.

Commonwealths, of all other governments, are more especially for the
preservation, not for the destruction, of mankind.

THE BANEFUL INFLUENCE OF DEPENDENCE ON THE MIND.
From The Citizen of the World, by Dr. Goldsmith.
AMONG many who have enforced the duty of Giving, I am surprised there are none
to inculcate the ignominy of Receiving, to show that by every favor we accept,
we in some measure forfeit our native freedom, and that in a state of continual
dependence on the generosity of others in a life of gradual debasement.

Were men taught to despise the receiving obligations with the same force of
reasoning and declamation that they are instructed to confer them, we might
then see every person in society filling up the requisite duties of his
situation with cheerful industry, neither relaxed by hope, nor sullen from
disappointment.

Every favor a man receives, in some measure, sinks him below his dignity, and
in proportion to the value of the benefit, or the frequency of its acceptance,
he gives up so much of his natural independence. He, therefore, who thrives
upon the unmerited bounty of another, if he has any sensibility, suffers the
worst of servitude; the shackled slave may murmur with out reproach, but the
humble dependent is taxed with ingratitude upon every symptom of discontent;
the one may rave round the walls of his cell, but the other lingers in all the
silence of mental confinement. To increase his distress, every new obligation
but adds to the former load which kept the vigorous mind from rising; till at
last, elastic no longer, it shapes itself to constraint, and puts on habitual
servility.

It is thus with the feeling mind, but there are some who, born without any
share of sensibility, receive favor after favor, and still cringe for more,
who accept the offer of generosity with as little reluctance as the wages of
merit, and even make thanks for past benefits an indirect petition for new;
such, I grant, can suffer no debasement from dependence, since they were
originally as vile as was possible to be; dependence degrades only the
ingenuous, but leaves the sordid mind in pristine meanness. In this manner,
therefore, long continued generosity is misplaced, or it is injurious; it
either finds a man worthless, or it makes him so; and true it is, that the
person who is contented to be often obliged, ought not to have been obliged at
all.

It is perhaps one of the severest misfortunes of the great, that they are in
general, obliged to live among men whose real value is lessened by dependence,
and whose minds are enslaved by obligation. The humble companion may have at
first accepted patronage with generous views, but soon he feels the mortifying
influence of conscious inferiority, by degrees he sinks into a flatterer, and
from flartery at last degenerates into STUPID VENERATION. To remedy this, the
great often dismiss their old dependents, and take new. Such changes are
falsely imputed to levity, falsehood, or caprice, in the patron, since they may
be more justly ascribed to the client's gradual deterioration, No, my son, a
life of independence is generally a life of virtue. It is that which fits the
soul for every flight of humanity, freedom, and friendship. To give should be
our pleasure, but to receive our shame; serenity, health and affluence attend
the desire of rising by labor; misery, repentance, and disrespect, that of
succeeding by extorted benevolence; the man who can thank himself alone for the
happiness he enjoys, is truly so; and lovely, far more lovely the sturdy gloom
of laborious indigence, than the fawning simper of thriving adulation.

ON DOING GOOD TO OUR COUNTRY.
From SWIFT'S SERMONS.
TEXT -- Gal. vi. ver. 10. As we have therefore opportunity, les us do good
unto all men.
BUT, beside this love we owe to every man in his particular capacity under the
title of neighbor, there is a duty of a more large and extensive nature
incumbent on us; which is, our love to our neighbor in his public capacity, as
he is a member of that great body the commonwealth; and this is usually called
love of the public, and is a duty to which we are more strictly obliged than
even that of loving even ourselves; because therein ourselves are also
contained, as well as all our neighbors, in one great body. This love of the
public or of the commonwealth, or love of our country, was in ancient times
properly known by the name of virtue, because it was the greatest of all
virtues, and was supposed to contain all virtues in it: and many great examples
of this virtue are left us on record, scarcely to be believed, or even
conceived, in such a base, corrupted, wicked age as this we live in. In those
times it was common for men to sacrifice their lives for the good of their
country, although they had neither hope or belief of future rewards; whereas,
in our days, very few make the least scruple of sacrificing a whole nation, as
well as their own souls, for a little present gain, which often has been known
to end in their own ruin in this world, as it certainly must in that to come.

Have we not seen men, for the sake of some petty employment, give up the very
natural rights and liberties of their country, and of mankind, in the ruin of
which themselves must at last be involved? are not these corruptions gotten
among the meanest of our people, who, for a price of money, will give their
votes at a venture, for the disposal of their own lives and fortunes, without
considering whether it be to those who are most likely betray or to defend them?

But, if I were to produce only one instance of a hundred wherein we fail in
this duty of loving our country, it would be an endless labor; and therefore I
shall not attempt it.

But here I would not be misunderstood: but the love of our country, I do not
mean Loyalty to our King, for that is a duty of another nature; and a man may
be very loyal, in the common sense of the word, without one grain of public
good at his heart. Witness this very kingdom we live in. I verily believe,
that, since the beginning of the world, no nation upon earth ever showed (all
circumstances considered) such high constant marks of loyalty in all their
actions and behavior, as we have done: and, at the same time, no people ever
appeared more utterly void of what is called a public spirit. When I say the
people, I mean the bulk or mass of the people, for I have nothing to do with
those in power.

Therefore I shall think my time not ill spent, if I can persuade most or all
of you who hear me, to show the love you have for your country, by
endeavoring, in your several stations, to do all the public good you are able.
For I am certainly persuaded, that all our misfortunes arise from no other
original cause than that general disregard among us to the public welfare.

I therefore undertake to show you three things.

First, That there are few people so weak or mean, who have it not sometimes in
their power to be useful to the public.

Secondly, That it is often in the power of the meanest among mankind to do
mischief to the public.

And, lastly, That all wilful injuries done to the public are very great and
aggravated sins in the sight of God.

First, then, there are few people so weak or mean, who have it not sometimes
in their power to be useful to the public.

Solomon tells us of a poor wise man who saved a city by his counsel. It has
often happened that a private soldier, by some unexpected brave attempt, has
been instrumental in obtaining a great victory. How many obscure men have been
authors of very useful inventions, whereof the world now reaps the benefit? The
very example of honesty and industry in a poor tradesman will sometimes spread
through a neighborhood, when others see how successful he is, and thus so many
useful members are gained, for which the whole body of the public is the
better. Whoever is blessed whith a true public spirit, God will certainly put
it into his way to make use of that blessing, for the end it was given him, by
some mean or other: and therefore it has been observed in most ages, that the
greatest actions for the benefit of the commonwealth, have been performed by
the wisdom or courage, the contrivance or industry, of particular men, and not
of numbers; and that the safety of a nation has often been owing to those
hands from whence it was least expected.

THE YEAR NINETY-THREE. A SONG.
COME hither good people, come hither and hear,
The dainty fine deeds of this mavelous year,
For ever and ever each Briton so free,
In triumph shall carol the year Ninety-Three.
Derry down.
We all call to mind not a twelvemonth ago,
Our trade was increasing, our riches did flow;
Each heart was then light, filled with mirth and with glee,
We had not yet come to the year Ninety-Three.
Derry down.
The devil ill bearing to see us so gay,
To tame our proud spirits, soon found out a way;
In his friend Billy's ear he was ever a flea,
Crying "war Billy war," then behold Ninety-Three.
Derry down.
Each day and each hour a merchant then stops,
Only shutters are seen, they all shut up their shops,
Whole families ruined! 'twas piteous to see --
Oh what a fine year was the year Ninety-Three!!!
Derry down.
Trade's now at an end, there is no work to be found,
Brave Britons are dying with hunger around.
Or at famine's approach to the Continent flee,
And York lets their blood -- that is the year Ninety-Three.
Derry down.
By sea and by land, naught but shame and defeat,
('It Is the judgment of heaven) our arms ever meet.
The like Britain never, no never, did see!
Oh shame of all shames, is the year Ninety-Three.
Derry down.
In ancient good times 'twas the Briton's proud boast,
To be loyal, yet free, King and Country his toast,
To praise or to censure then boldly dared he --
'Twas in ancient good times -- not in year Ninety-Three.
Derry down.
Now pillory, whipping post, British bastille,
The loss of old times makes each Englishman feel:
No spirit, no thought, now dare circulate free,
For Pit, Kenyon, Dundas, in cursed Ninety-Three.
Derry down.
THE PROGRESS OF LIBERTY.
Tune -- "Britannia rule the Waves."
HARK! hark! on yonder distant shore,
The noisy din of war I hear;
The sword's unsheathed -- the cannons roar,
And Gallia's sons in arms appear,
It Is France, it is France, the people cry,
Fighting for sacred Liberty.
Though numerous armies her invade;
Of warlike slaves a barbarous host;
Of Despots crowned, a grand crusade,
To crush her Liberty they boast.
But France like Britain will be free,
Or bravely die for Liberty.
No more the grinding hand of Power,
The opening bud of Reason blights;
On eagle's wings fair Truth shall tower,
For Man begins to know his Rights.
The iron yoke we crumbling see,
Beneath the Cap of Liberty.
Go on, great souls, no dangers fear,
Your glorious Standard high erect;
Then Freemen to it will repair,
And Providence your cause protect.
Go, plant on distant shores the Tree,
Sacred to god-like Liberty.
No dreams of conquest you inspire,
Great Nature's Cause depends on thee;
Europe will catch the sacred fire,
And bid adieu to Slavery.
Then raise your warlike banners high,
And rally under Liberty.
No longer war, of Kings the spoil,
Usurping nations shall divide;
Nor stain with blood each fruitful soil,
By Nature formed to be allied.
But Britons hope the world to see
Unite in Peace and Liberty.
A DESCRIPTION OF GOVERNMENT, AS REALLY OR FICTITIOUSLY FREE.
By Dr. PRICE.
I Have observed; that though, in a great state, all the individuals that
compose it cannot be admitted to an immediate participation in the powers of
legislation and government, yet they may participate in these powers by a
delegation of them to a body of representatives. -- In this case it is evident
that the state will be still free or self-governed; and that it will be more or
less so in proportion as it is more or less fairly and adequately represented.
If the persons to whom the trust of government is committed, hold their places
for short terms; if they are chosen by the unbiassed voices of a majority of
the state, and subject to their instructions; Liberty will be enjoyed in its
highest degree. But if they are chosen for long terms by a part only of the
state; and if during that term they are subject to no control from their
constituents; the very idea of liberty will be lost, and the power of choosing
representatives becomes nothing but a power, lodged in a few, to choose at
certain periods, a body of masters for themselves and for the rest of the
community. And if a state is so sunk that the majority of its representatives
are elected by a handful of the meanest persons in it, whose voices are always
paid for; and if also, there is a higher will on which even these mock
representatives themselves depend, and that directs their voices: in these
circumstances, it will be an abuse of language to say that the state possesses
liberty. Private men, indeed, might be allowed the exercise of liberty; as they
might also under the most despotic government; but it would be an indulgence or
connivance derived from the spirit of the times, or from an accidental mildness
in the administration. And, rather than be governed in such a manner, it would
perhaps be better to be governed by the will of one man without any
representation: for a representation so degenerated could answer no other end
than to mislead and deceive, by disguising slavery, and keeping up a form of
liberty when the reality was lost.

THE ADVANTAGES ACCRUING TO MANKIND FROM A HABITUAL CONSCIOUSNESS OF THEIR
BEING EQUAL.
From Barlow's Advice to Privileged Orders.
IN the United States of America, the Science of Liberty is universally
understood, felt, and practiced, as much by the simple as the wise, the weak as
the strong. The deep-rooted and inveterate habit of thinking, that all men are
equal in their Rights, that it is impossible to make them otherwise; and this
being their undisturbed belief, they have no conception how any man in his
senses can entertain any other. This point once settled, every thing is
settled. Many operations, which in Europe have been considered as incredible
tales or dangerous experiments, are but the infallible consequences of this
great principle. The first of these operations is the Business of Election,
which, with that people is carried on with as much gravity as their daily
labor. There is no jealousy on the occasion, nothing lucrative in office; any
man in society may attain to any place in the government, and may exercise its
functions. They believe that there is nothing more difficult in the management
of the affairs of a nation than the affairs of a family; that it only requires
more hands. They believe that it is the juggle of keeping up impositions to
blind the eyes of the vulgar, that constitutes the intricacy of state. Banish
the mysticism of inequality, and you banish almost all the evils attendant on
human nature.

Another consequence of the habitual idea of Equality, is the facility of
changing the structure of their Government whenever and as often as the Society
shall think there is any thing in it to amend. As Mr. Burke has written no
"Reflections on the Revolution" in America, the people there have never been
told that they had no right "to frame a government for themselves;" they have
therefore done much of this business, without ever affixing to it the idea of
"Sacrilege," or "Usurpation," or any other term of rant to be found in that
Gentleman's Vocabulary.

Within a few years, the Fifteen States have not only framed each its own
State-Constitution, and Two successive Federal Constitutions; but since the
settlement of the present general Government in the year 1789, three of the
States, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, and Georgia, have totally new-modeled
their own. And all this is done without the least confusion; the operation
being scarcely known beyond the limits of the State where it is performed. Thus
they are in the habit of "choosing their own Governors," of "cashiering them
for misconduct," of "framing a Government for themselves," and all those
abominable things, the mere naming of which, in Mr. Burke's opinion, has
polluted the pulpit in the Old Jewry. The SECOND VOLUME will be Published as
the FIRST, namely, in PENNY NUMBERS Weekly.


CONTENTS Of VOLUME FIRST.
The Fable of the Be and the Spider -- Page 2 On Freedom of Speech Cato's
Letters Page 3 On False Witness Swift. Page 7 On the Execution of Louis Capet
Friend. Page 11 On Political Superstition Barlow. Page 13 The Effects of War on
the Poor Friend. Page 14 A Prognostic of the French Revolution Chesterfield.
Page 16 A Lesson for Antigallicans Page 17 On the Excellency of a Free
Government, and its Tendency to exalt the Nature of Man Dr. Price. Page 31 A
Lamentation for the Oppressed Goldsmith. Page 33 On the Responsibility of
Kings. Candid Philosopher. Page 36 Roman Patriotism founded on Injustice, and
the Ruin of Mankind Ditto. Page 38 A Description of England Lord Lyttleton.
Page 38 A Lesson for Gentlemen Volunteers Ditto. Page 40 A Lesson for All Men.
Lock. Page 41 A Song to be sung at the Commencement of the Milenium. From
Spence's Rights of Man in Prose, price 4d. Page 42 All Monarchies naturally
tend to Despotism Chesterfield. Page 44 A Modest Plea for an Equal Commonwealth
Page 44 Every Man is born with an imprescriptible Claim to a Portion of the
Elements Barlow. Page 59 The glorious prospect of better Times, which are fast
approaching Critic Philosopher. Page 63 The Advantages of Freedom of Speech
Candid Philosopher. Page 66 The Marseilles March, or Hymn Page 67 Extract from
Les Ruins, by M. de Volney. Page 69 Of the Ministry or Clergy Page 74 The
Desire of Glory naturally generated in Republics Lord Lyttleton. Page 78
Examination of James Harrington in the Tower, concerning his Oceana. Page 79 A
Song on the French Revolution Page 81 Extract from Harrington's Works Page 83
The free Notions of the English Lord Lyttleton. Page 85 An unpleasant Lesson
for the Pigs' Betters Swift. Page 86 Lessons for Monopolizers of Land Page 88
On Equality Puffendorf. Page 89 On the Absurdity of unalterable Establishments
Priestly Page 92 General Political Aphorisms, or Maxims Harrington. Page 96 A
Song to be sung an Hundred Years hence Page 98 A Lesson for Venal Parliaments
Cromwell. Page 100 Lessons for Statesmen, viz. 1. From the Encyclopedia
Britannica Page 101 2. From the Same Page 102 3. From Lady Montague's Letters
Page 103
The Government of Geneva D'Alembert. Page 105 Speeches of Charles Turner, Esquire.
Page 108 The Inhabitants of Hell Rights of the Devil. Page 110 Ignorance the
Foundation of unequal Governments, and fostered by them designedly Barlow. Page
112 On the Injustice of taking Fees from Persons acquitted in Courts of Justice
Page 114 Whether the Balance of Dominion in Land be the natural Cause of
Empire? Harrington. Page 114 * Abridgement of the Roman History Page 118 On the
shameful Oppression of the Highlanders in the Western Islands of Scotland Page
122 A Government of Citizens is invulnerable Harrington. Page 125 A Description
of Prince Lucifer's Subjects Rights of the Devil. Page 128 Candide, a Soldier
Voltaire. Page 132 On the Progress of Liberty in France Candid Philosopher.
Page 134 On a Life of Labor Candid Philosopher. Page 136 The personal Virtues
of a Monarch are unable to secure him from Contempt, if he will be blindfolded
by wicked Ministers Page 137 Modern Motives for War Barlow. ibid. On the
Government of Hell Rights of the Devil. Page 138 The impossibility of
commencing Tyrant over an armed Nation convinced of the universal Equality of
Mankind Barlow. Page 142 On the pompous Titles given to the Dignified Clergy
Candid Philosopher. Page 143 Defects in the English Constitution, as to
Representation Dyer. Page 145 An Apology for Younger Brothers Page 152 A
Seditious Hand-Bill circulated at Norwich, and Re-published by Authority in the
Norfolk Chronicle Page 163 Five Thousand Pounds offered, in the Morning
Chronicle, for a Place of Amusement under Government!!! Page 164 National
Fasting generally insidious and impious Rev. I. Murray, Page 165 On the Liberty
of the Press. By Erskine, in his Speech on the Trial of Thomas Pain Page 168
The New Constitution of France Page 176 English Injustice to the French. A Poem
Page 180 * Roman History (continued) Page 182 Erskine's Speech (continued) Page
189 Church Livings to be Sold by Auction!!! Page 193 The Distresses of the
Poor, exemplified in the Life of a Private Soldier Goldsmith. Page 194 On
Kings. From Godwin's Enquiry concerning Political Justice. Page 200 On the
Rebellion of Princes Murray. Page 201 On the National Sin of suffering Bad
Government Page 204 On Civil Liberty, and the Principles of Government Dr.
Price. Page 205 The New Constitution of France (continued) Page 207 Popular
Assemblies understand only their own Interest Harrington's Oceana. Page 212 On
Religion Marning Chronicle. Page 214 On Kings (continued) Godwin. Page 219
Kings are Great Blessings. A Poem Page 221 On the Horrors of War Dr. Johnson
Page 222 Liberty of the Press (continued) Page 223 Patriotic Speech of Sir
George Saville Page 226 On the Authority of one Country over another Dr. Price.
Page 228 A Lesson for daring Publishers Page 229 The Derby Address Page 230 Ode
to Human Kind Page 235 Orders of the Duke of York Page 238 Curious Letter to
the Convention Page 238 A Panegyric! Cato's Letters. Page 239 The New
Constitution of France (concluded) Page 240 Cautions against the Natural
Encroachments of Power Cato's Letters. Page 246 Definition of Loyalty Toplady.
Page 249 Meaning of the Word Pension, etc. Dr. Johnson. ibid. Burke's Address
to the Swinish Multitude. A Song Page 250 * Conclusion of the Roman History
Page 252 The Marriage Act censured Goldsmith. Page 257 The Rights of Man, by
Question and Answer Page 261 Lessons for Pig Eaters Page 267 A Comparison
between the African Slaves in the West Indies, and the Celtic Slave, or
Scallag, in some of the Hebrides Page 268 General Political Aphorisms, or
Maxims Harrington. Page 272 The baneful Influence of Dependence on the Mind
Goldsmith. Page 274 On doing Good to our Country Swift Page 276 The Year
Ninety-Three. A Song Page 279 The Progress of Liberty. A Song Page 280 A
Description of Government, as really or fictitiously free Dr. Price. Page 281
The Advantages accruing to Mankind from a habitual Consciousness of their being
equal Barlow. Page 283
END OF VOL. 1.

