ODES BY Mr. GRAY, Author of an Elegy in a Country Churchyard.

PHONANTA SYNETOISI -- PINDAR, Olymp. II. DUBLIN: Printed for G. FAULKNER in
Essex-street, and J. RUDD, at the Apollo in Dame-Street. MDCCLVII.

ODE.
I. 1.
AWAKE, Aeolian lyre, awake,
And give to rapture all thy trembling strings.
From Helicon's harmonious springs
A thousand rills their mazy progress take:
The laughing flowers, that round them blow,
Drink life and fragrance as they flow.
Now the rich stream of music winds along
Deep, majestic, smooth, and strong,
Through verdant vales, and Ceres' golden reign:
Now rolling down the steep amain,
Headlong, impetuous, see it pour:
The rocks, and nodding groves rebellow to the roar.
I. 2.
Oh! Sovereign of the willing soul,
Parent of sweet and solemn-breathing airs,
Enchanting shell! the sullen Cares,
And frantic Passions hear thy soft control.
On Thracia's hills the Lord of War,
Has curbed the fury of his car,
And dropped his thirsty lance at thy command.
Perching on the scept'red hand
Of Jove, thy magic lulls the feathered king
With ruffled Plumes, and flagging wing:
Quenched in dark clouds of slumber lie
The terror of his beak, and lightenings of his eye.
I. 3.
Thee the voice, the dance, obey,
Tempered to thy warbled lay.
Over Idalia's velvet-green
The rosy-crowned Loves are seen
On Cytherea's day
With antic Sports, and blue-ey'd Pleasures,
Frisking light in frolic measures;
Now pursuing, now retreating,
Now in circling troops they meet:
To brisk notes in cadence beating
Glance their many-twinkling feet.
Slow melting strains their Queen's approach declare
Wherever she turns the Graces homage pay.
With arms sublime, that float upon the air,
In gliding state she wins her easy way:
Over her warm cheek, and rising bosom, move
The bloom of young Desire, and purple light of Love.
II. 1.
Man's feeble race what Ills await,
Labor, and Penury, the racks of Pain,
Disease, and Sorrow's weeping train,
And Death, sad refuge from the storms of Fate!
The fond complaint, my Song, disprove,
And justify the laws of Jove.
Say, has he given in vain the heavenly Muse?
Night, and all her sickly dews,
Her Specter wan, and Birds of boding cry,
He gives to range the dreary sky:
Till down the eastern cliffs afar
Hyperion's march they spy, and glittering shafts of war.
II. 2.
In climes beyond the solar road,
Where shaggy forms over ice-built mountains roam,
The Muse has broke the twilight-gloom
To cheer the shivering Natives dull abode.
And often, beneath the odorous shade
Of Chili's boundless forests laid,
She deigns to hear the savage youth repeat
In loose numbers wildly sweet
Their feather-cinctured Chiefs, and dusky Loves.
Her track, wherever the Goddess roves,
Glory pursue, and generous Shame,
The unconquerable Mind, and Freedom's holy flame.
II. 3.
Woods, that wave over Delphi's steep,
Isles, that crown the Egaean deep,
Fields, that cool Ilissus laves,
Or where Maeander's amber waves
In lingering Lab'rinths creep,
How do your tuneful Echo's lanquish,
Mute, but to the voice of Anguish?
Where each old poetic Mountain
Inspiration breathed around:
Every shade and hallowed Fountain
Murmured deep a solemn sound:
Till the sad Nine in Greece's evil hour
Left their Parnassus for the Latian plains.
Alike they scorn the pomp of tyrant-Power,
And coward Vice, that revels in her chains.
When Latium had her lofty spirit lost,
They sought, oh Albion! next thy sea-encircled coast.
III. 1.
Far from the sun and summer-gale,
In thy green lap was Nature's Darling laid,
What time, where lucid Avon strayed,
To him the mighty Mother did unveil
Her awful face: The dauntless Child
Stretched forth his little arms, and smiled,
This pencil take (she said) whose colors clear
Richly paint the vernal year:
Thine too these golden keys, immortal Boy!
This can unlock the gates of Joy;
Of Horror that, and thrilling Fears,
Or open the sacred source of sympathetic Tears.
III. 2.
Nor second He, that rode sublime
Upon the seraph-wings of Ecstasy,
The secrets of the Abyss to spy.
He passed the flaming bounds of Place and Time:
The living Throne, the saphire-blaze,
Where Angels tremble, while they gaze,
He saw; but blasted with excess of light,
Closed his eyes in endless night.
Behold, where Dryden's less presumptuous car,
Wide over the fields of Glory bear
Two Coursers of ethereal race,
With necks in thunder clothed, and long-resounding pace.
III. 3.
Hark, his hands the lyre explore!
Bright-eyed Fancy hovering over
Scatters from her pictured urn
Thoughts, that breath, and words, that burn.
But ah! it is heard no more --
Oh! Lyre divine, what daring Spirit
Wakes thee now? though he inherit
Nor the pride, nor ample pinion,
That the Theban Eagle bear
Sailing with supreme dominion
'Thro' the azure deep of air:
Yet often before his infant eyes would run
Such forms, as glitter in the Muse's ray
With orient hues, unborrow'd of the Sun:
Yet shall he mount, and keep his distant way
Beyond the limits of a vulgar fate,
Beneath the Good how far -- but far above the Great.
THE following Ode is founded on a Tradition current in Wales, that EDWARD THE
FIRST when he completed the conquest of that country, ordered all the Bards,
that fell into his hands, to be put to death.

ODE II.
I. 1.
'RUIN seize thee, ruthless King!
'Confusion on thy banners wait,
'Tho' fanned by Conquest's crimson wing
'They mock the air with idle state.
'Helm, nor Hauberk's twisted mail,
'Nor even thy virtues, Tyrant, shall avail
'To save thy secret soul from nightly fears,
'From Cambria's curse, from Cambria's tears!'
Such were the sounds, that over the crested pride
Of the first Edward scattered wild dismay,
As down the steep of Snowdon's shaggy side
He wound with toilsome march his long array.
Stout Gloucester stood aghast in speechless trance:
To arms! cried Mortimer, and couched his quivering lance.
I. 2.
On a rock, whose haughty brow
Frowns over old Conway's foaming flood,
Robed in the sable garb of woe,
With haggard eyes the Poet stood;
(Loose his beard, and hoary hair
Streamed, like a meteor, to the troubled air)
And with a Master's hand, and Prophet's fire,
Struck the deep sorrows of his lyre.
'Hark, how each giant-oak, and desert cave,
'Sighs to the torrent's aweful voice beneath!
'O'er thee, oh King! their hundred arms they wave,
'Revenge on thee in hoarser murmurs breath;
'Vocal no more, since Cambria's fatal day,
'To highborn Hoel's harp, or soft Llewellyn's lay.
I. 3.
'Cold is Cadwallo's tongue,
'That hushed the stormy main:
'Brave Urien sleeps upon his craggy bed:
'Mountains, ye mourn in vain
'Modred, whose magic song
'Made huge Plinlimmon bow his cloud-top'd head.
'On dreary Arvon's shore they lie,
'Smear'd with gore, and ghastly pale:
'Far, far aloof the affrighted ravens sail;
'The famished Eagle screams, and passes by.
'Dear lost companions of my tuneful art,
'Dear, as the light, that visits these sad eyes,
'Dear, as the ruddy drops that warm my heart,
'Ye died amidst your dying country's cries --
'No more I weep. They do not sleep.
'On yonder cliffs, a griesly band,
'I see them sit, they linger yet,
'Avengers of their native land:
'With me in dreadful harmony they join,
'And weave with bloody hands the tissue of thy line.
II. 1.
"Weave the warp, and weave the woof,
"The winding sheet of Edward's race.
"Give ample room, and verge enough
"The characters of hell to trace.
"Mark the year, and mark the night,
"When Severn shall re-eccho with affright
"The shrieks of death, through Berkley's roofs that ring,
"Shrieks of an agonizing King!
"She-Wolf of France, with unrelenting fangs,
"That tear'st the bowels of thy mangled Mate,
"From thee be born, who over thy country hangs
"The scourge of Heaven. What Terrors round him wait!
"Amazement in his van, with Flight combined,
"And sorrow's faded form, and solitude behind.
II. 2.
"Mighty Victor, mighty Lord,
"Low on his funeral couch he lies!
"No pitying heart, no eye, afford
"A tear to grace his obsequies.
"Is the sable Warrior fled?
"Thy son is gone. He rests among the Dead.
"The Swarm, that in thy noontide beam were born?
"Gone to salute the rising Morn.
"Fair laughs the Morn, and soft the Zephyr blows,
"While proudly riding over the azure realm
"In gallant trim the gilded Vessel goes;
"Youth on the prow, and Pleasure at the helm;
"Regardless of the sweeping Whirlwind's sway,
"That, hushed in grim repose, expects his evening-prey.
II. 3.
" Richard the Second, (as we are told by Archbishop Scroop, Thomas of
Walsingham, and all the older Writers,) was starved to death. The story of his
assassination by Sir Piers of Exon, is of much later date.
Fill high the sparkling bowl,
"The rich repast prepare,
"Reft of a crown, he yet may share the feast:
"Close by the regal chair
"Fell Thirst and Famine scowl
"A baleful smile upon their baffled Guest.
"Heard ye the din of battle bray,
"Lance to lance, and horse to horse?
"Long years of havoc urge their destined course,
"And through the kindred squadrons mow their way.
"Ye Towers of Julius, London's lasting shame,
"With many a foul and midnight murder fed,
"Revere his Consort's faith, his Father's fame,
"And spare the meek Usurper's holy head.
"Above, below, the rose of snow,
"Twined with her blushing foe, we spread:
"The bristled Boar in infant-gore
"Wallows beneath the thorny shade.
"Now, Brothers, bending over the accursed loom
"Stamp we our vengeance deep, and ratify his doom.
III. 1.
"Edward, lo! to sudden fate
"(Weave we the woof. The thread is spun)
" Eleanor of Castile, died a few years after the conquest of Wales. The heroic
proof she gave of her affection for her Lord is well known. The monuments of
his regret, and sorrow sor the loss of her, are still to be seen in several
parts of England.
Half of thy heart we consecrate.
"(The web is wove. The work is done.)
'Stay, oh stay! nor thus forlorn
'Leave me unblessed, unpitied, here to mourn:
'In yon bright track, that fires the western skies,
'They melt, they vanish from my eyes.
'But oh! what solemn scenes on Snowdon's height
'Descending slow their glittering skirts unroll?
'Visions of glory, spare my aching sight,
'Ye unborn Ages, crowd not on my soul!
'No more our long-lost Arthur we bewail.
'All-hail Accession of the Line of Tudor.
, ye genuine Kings, Britannia's Issue, hail!
III. 2.
'Girt with many a Baron bold
'Sublime their starry fronts they rear;
'And gorgeous Dames, and Statesmen old
'In bearded majesty, appear.
'In the midst a Form divine!
'Her eye proclaims her of the Briton-Line;
'Her lyon-port, her awe-commanding face,
'Attemper'd sweet to virgin-grace.
'What strings symphonious tremble in the air,
'What strains of vocal transport round her play!
'Hear from the grave, great Taliessin Taliessin, Chief of the Bards,
flourished in the VIth Century. His works are still preserved, and his memory
held in high veneration among his Countrymen.
, hear;
'They breath a soul to animate thy clay.
'Bright Rapture calls, and soaring, as she sings,
'Waves in the eye of Heaven her many-colour'd wings.
III. 3.
'The verse adorn again
'Fierce War, and faithful Love,
'And Truth severe, by fairy Fiction dressed.
'In buskined measures move
'Pale Grief, and pleasing Pain,
'With Horror, Tyrant of the throbbing breast.
'A Voice, as of the Cherub-Choir,
'Gales from blooming Eden bear;
'And distant warblings lessen on my ear,
'That lost in long futurity expire.
'Fond impious Man, think thou, yon sanguine cloud,
'Rais'd by thy breath, has quenched the Orb of day?
'To-morrow he repairs the golden flood,
'And warms the nations with redoubled ray.
'Enough for me: With joy I see
'The different doom our Fates assign.
'Be thine Despair, and scept'red Care,
'To triumph, and to die, are mine.'
He spoke, and headlong from the mountain's height
Deep in the roaring tide he plunged to endless night.
FINIS.

