PEEPING TOM, OF COVENTRY.

A COMIC OPERA.

AS IT IS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, SMOCK-ALLEY

BY JOHN O'KEEFE; Esquire

^UB^^^

PRINTED BY JOHN SMITH, CASTLE STREET

MDCCLXXXV.

[P^^^^^d B^^^^sh Sixpence]

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Tom, -- Mr. RYDER, Mayor, -- Mr. O'REILLY, Harold, -- Mr. WOOD, Crazy, -- Mr.
BAKER, (...), -- Mr. (...), (...), -- Mr. M^^^ADY,
WOMEN.
Maud, -- Mrs. HITCHCOCK, (...), -- Mrs. R^M^NZINI, Mayoress, -- Mrs. HANNAM,
PEEPING TOM.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A view of Coventry. Enter Count Lewis, Emma, and attendants. Emma. I
CAN scarce believe I am safe, but where is that young peasant that rescued me?


Lewis. That young fellow behaved very well, he did indeed, my, lovely Emma,
but you are safe now, I give you joy.


Emma. Give me joy, no, that you never shall; --


Lewis. Now you are angry, but when we are married --


Emma. You and I married, that we never shall.


Lewis. Oh^ that will be fine indeed, to be (...) from Normandy, your father
the earl of M^^cia says, you Count Lewis, shall wed my daughter Emma -- But the
enemy of all sport, a wicked Dane, darted like a ravenous falcon on you, my
pretty little dove, and because I would not fight, you will not marry me -- now
if I did, I might be killed, and would not be married.


Emma. To run away, and not even draw your sword.


Lewis. It is ill manners to draw -- in the presence of the ladies.


Emma. To be sure you're a gallant champion for the ladies!


Lewis. I love the ladies, and love myself, -- for the ladies sake -- besides
the Danes are a barbarous enemy, and I made a vow never to encounter a Dane.


Emma. Here comes my benefactor and deliverer.


Enter Harold. Harold. Madam -- I Have chastised the villains that have dared to
insult you, but hope you have received no hurt!


Emma. Thanks to your kindness -- but what is your name?


Har. William, madam. --


Emma. William -- while I am here in Coventry, this token will remind you who
it is you have obliged


gives a ring. Lew. And young man, if you were a a little more polished, I
would prefer you to be squire, to my lady wife here.


Emma. Your wife! never.


Exit Har. Lewis Never! Oh, I will go and tell your father -- Oh! I --


Exit. Emma. No, nothing shall ever unite me to a creature so contemptible.

SONG.
Glittering trifler sport of fashion,
Gaudy insect ever ranging;
For some other feign a passion,
Free me in thy fancy changing.
Love never blooms where men are wanting,
Then how vain tyrannic power;
Is the soil unkind for planting.
Who can raise the blooming flower.
Self-enamoured swain all sighing,
Gazing tender admiration;
In our eyes their image eying,
There they pay their adoration.
True love I will believe you,
While you ove yourself so dearly,
If I hate I don't deceive you,
Yet I fear I love sincerely.

Exit Emma and attendants. SCENE, the Street. Enter Harold. Har. Charming Emma!
when she knows me to be Harold, the son of Earl Goodwin, her father's prosessed
enemy, my blooming hopes are blasted in the birth.


Enter Tom and Mob. Tom. Is any body here? Joy! joy! huzza!


Har. For what?


Tom. Because Earl Goodwin and his sons are banished.


Har. My father, myself and my brother banishe dmdash;


(aside.) Tom. Huzza! bishop Dunstan has commanded king Edward, to command the
earl, to command the mayor, to command me, to make proclamation at the cross,
that the earl Goodwin and his sons, are traitors in the land.mdash;And I am now
going to do the jobmdash;come along good-folks, God bless the king, and the
crier, knights, yeomen, young and old men, women and children -- O yes! -- 0
yes!


Exit Tom and Mob. Har. Shall I venture into the town, if once Emma returns to
her father's castle, probably I snall never see her again, she is lodged here
in the mayor's house, if I am known to be Harold, it is instant death, but life
without my Emma is not worth my care.


SCENE, a Chamber. Enter Mayor and Maud. Maud. Nay, now, don't, I told your
worship -- you know, don't you believe any such thing -- Lord, what will the
folks say, to see his honor the mayor of Coventry, make so free with Tom the
taylor's wife?


Mayor. Let me hear them talk, and I Will set them in. the stocks -- Zounds, dare
they censure a magistrate -- Let me see them wink and there is the ducking-stool
-- for a nod, the cage -- for an inuendo, the pillory -- and for a malicious
whisper five hundred twirls in the whirligig.


Maud. You know, your worship, I was vartuous -- you know I was forced to leave
madam, your wife's service, because I would not let you -- you know I would not
be naught with you, and sooner than do so -- I was forced to take up with Tom,
who but a tailor, was honest!


Mayor. Ay! Tom's a rogue!


Maud. A rogue, and like your worship! -- why he is a bit of a magistrate -- was
not he a parish clerk, beadle and sexton at one time, and is he not now
overseer and churchwarden?


Mayor. Ay, but who made him all this? -- was he no better than a clown, till I
took him under my wing?


Maud. He Is certainly a little beholden to your worship.


Mayor. Ah! he owes it all to your pretty face Maud -- it was all for your
sake, in your beauty -- for you have provisions of all forts -- why you have
got a beadle in that arched dimple -- a constable's staff in that pretty mole
-- an overseer in that hazle-eye -- a churchwarden in those auburn-locks --
and a pair of plump aldermen in that panting bosom --


Maud. Oh lord, I did not think I was such a great body.


Mayor. Yes, you are, indeed you are -- talk of Godiva the earl's new-married
lady, and his daughter Emma -- why I will wager that smile, against the whole
kingdom of Mercia -- egad, if those stars were to twinkle in the court of
Gloucester, king Edward would soon forget his vow of chastity.


SONG.
Mayor. Maud. The deuce a one but you, pretty Maud,
I love, indeed it is true, pretty Maud,
One kiss, nay prithee hush

Md. I vow you make me blush;

May. Like a rose bud in a bush, pretty Maud.

Md. Do let me go away, Mr. Mayor,
What will the people say, Mr. Mayor.

May. Let them prattle as they will,
Of love I Will have my fill,
Like a dove I Will coo and bill;

Md. You shall not coo and bill Mr. Mayor.

May. Pretty Maud, pretty Maud.

By all that is great and grand, pretty Maud;
Golden chain, and lilly wand, pretty Maud.
Md It Is all of little use
Chain and wand I must refuse
For the needle, thimble, goose
Mr. Mayor, Mr. Mayor

Maud. I tell you what now, Mr. Mayor, you shall not talk to me in that way any
more, that is what you shall not.


Mayor. But I will -- I will tell you what -- I will call on you by and by --
do not be out -- I know Tom will be ringing his bells.


Maud. Lord, your honor, if your lady should know.


Mayor. My lady, poh! poh! she is at home, God bless her, let her stay there.


Maud. Ay, but then the neighbors. --


Mayor. Neighbors! -- the pillory -- the stocks -- the whirligig. -- I Will tell
you Maud, I Will send you a present of some French wine, that I had from count
Lewis, and Egad we'll be so snug and so comfortable; you go home and I Will be
with you by and by.


Tom [listening.] My wife will be a mayor soon and I shall be an alderman.


[ Maud Exit.] Enter Tom. Mayor. I Will send you the wine, and there is something
to buy a bit of dinner. (gives Tom money)


Tom. I Am obliged to your worship.


Mayor. ( surprised at seeing Tom instead of Maud) Tom, ay, ay, how do you do
Tom, how do you do, how do you do?


Tom. Pretty well I thank your worship; -- but sir, is this for a corporation
dinner?


Mayor. No, no, (what the devil brings this felllow here, aside.) Pray have you
not a ringing to day, at the Guy of Warwick, Tom.


Tom. Oh yes, we jingle a peal of tripple-bobs, for a leg of mutton and
trimmings.


Mayor. (Egad that is very lucky, I shall have Maud all to myself.) Tom you are
a good ringer.


Tom. Pretty well, sir.


Mayor. Yes, you are Tom, you are, you will certainly win. Mind your bells, Tom
-- do not neglect going, you will certainly win Tom. -- But what brought you to
me now Tom?


Tom. Though merry I be, I never was so treated in my whole life, why you know
our old mad Crazy, the beadle, I thought he might make some blunder in
proclaiming, the proclamation of earl Goodwin and his sons, as traitors, so I
took the bell and rung the people all about me, and there I stood like a hen
and chickens, but I no sooner cried ' O Yes, O Yes' than I heard a voice like a
gander in the marshes, screaming out' O No, O No' and who should this be but
old Crazy, for I having got the city bell, he hobbled with the 'pothecary's
pestle and mortar, and clattered with such a devil of a noise, folks could not
hear, and because I told him to be quiet, he flew at me and tripped up the leg
of old corporal Standfast, tumbled over Kit the tinker, overturned father
Fogarty, the fat friar, and has mauled my nose in this manner -- look -- he fit
for an office, indeed, an old driveller.


Mayor. Why, you most impudent of all rascals, who am I?


Tom. Why, sir, you are the Mayor of Coventry.


Mayor. And did not I appoint him beadle?


Tom. Why, lord, he is so infirm, that when he stands at church-door with the
poor's box, his hand shakes so, that the gentle folks charity-farthings fall
out of the box -- why, he has not one of his twelve senses left but his
scratching.


Mayor. Sirrah, he has all his talents about him, -- he is been a devilish
shrewd fellow.


Tom. Yes, he is a man of sharp talons as my nose can testify.


Mayor. Oh! here he comes.


Enter Crazy. Crazy. You a mayor -- there is a fig for your crown and scepter.


Tom. There your worship, the fellow has made a king of you.


Crazy. Tell me of kings -- I that have seen Edward the martyr -- the glorious
Alfred and Canute the great!


Tom. Yes, but did Canute the great give you authority to scratch my nose?


Crazy. I Will Canute you -- I that have been beadle here ever since the days of
Edmond Ironside.


Mayor. Ay, and a devilish clever fellow he was.


Crazy. What do you mean?


Tom. I mean that you are cursedly shabby about the noddle, -- you have lived a
great while.


Mayor. Come, be quiet Tom -- here I command you to read the proclamation --
now show him that you can proclaim it right; -- mind, in king Edward's name,
you are to offer a reward of five hundred marks, to any man that will bring in
Goodwin, earl of Warwick, dead or alive.


Crazy. Yes I will -- This is to give notice, that by command of Earl Goodwin,
king Edward shall have five hundred marks for bringing in the head of the mayor
of Coventry, dead or alive.


Tom. That sensible fellow has made a pretty proclamation!


Crazy. Now, ain't I an old chaunter?


Mayor. Yes -- I Will trust you with the public affairs, but you shall have
nothing to do with mine.


Tom. So -- between the magistrate and his deputy, the affairs of the public
are likely to fare well -- he has not sense enough to help you in your love
affairs with the girls, as he used to do.


Mayor. I Will try him (aside) cannot you contrive to keep Tom from going home?


Crazy. What! you are going to Maud? -- well, I will, I will.


Mayor. Mind your bells Tom -- Tom -- mind your bells.


Tom. I will:


SONG.
Tom. Merry are the bells,
And merry do they ring,

Crazy. Merry was myself, --
And merry could I sing;

Chorus. Merry is your ding-dong, happy, gay and free,
Merry with a sing song, merry let us be.
Mayor. Waddle goes your gait,

Tom. Hollow are your hoes;

Mayor. Noddle goes your pate,

Tom. And purple is your nose.

Chorus. Merry is pur ding-dong, happy, gay and free,
And with a merry sing-song, merry let us be.

Exeunt, SCENE changes to Tom's House. Enter Maud. Maud There never was a young
woman so beset as I am by his worship -- if I tell Tom, there is a quarrel --
and then there is no staying for us in Coventry, the mayor has such a power of
interest -- I Have a great mind to tell madam, his lady, now I will be quit with
him one way or other, for his bad opinion of me, that I will; when people get
up a little in the world -- Lord, they think there is nothing but to use poor
folks as they please -- hang the town -- how is my Tom altered since I came
into it,

SONG.
Maud. What pleasure to think of the times we have seen,
It Was May Day I first saw my Tom on the green,
So neat was I dressed, and so sprightly a mein,
A king was my love, and I was his queen. --
The garland presented by Tommy,
From the hands of my Tommy.
A side look I stole at my lover by chance,
Which straight he returned with so tender a glance;
My heart leaped with joy when I saw him advance,
And well did I guess 'twas to lead off the dance.
For none danced so neat as my Tommy
In all things complete was my Tommy.
Oh! here comes the wicked mayor.


Enter Mayor, two countrymen and Hamper. Mayor. Now, here, bring the hamper
this way -- bring it along -- make haste -- there now, get along with you.

drives the two men out.
Maud. What shall I do?


Mayor. Come along -- come -- there get along -- now to bolt the door,

fastens the door.
Maud. I Am undone, no creature in the house but myself -- he must not know that
or he may be unmodest indeed,

(aside.)
Mayor. Egad here I am Maud, and Tom is abroad with the ringers practicing his
bells -- here am I -- but you little rogue, how nicely you gave me the flip
just now!


Maud. I ask your pardon, but you know I must obey my husband -- why would you
bring me all this wine?


Mayor. All under the rose; you shall treat me with a glass; it will make your
veins thrill, your cheeks glow, your bosom pant, your heart beat, your eyes
sparkle with love and rapture.


Maud. Lord, sir, will wine bewitch a body so?


Mayor. Yes, it will, do you know that Love has summoned you before me, as a
witch, and by the virtue of my authority, I commit you to those arms!


Maud. O! sure your worship's a little mad-dish!


Maud. I am at this time as mad a magistrate as ever devoured a haunch of
venison.


Maud. Nay, now do not talk that way to me, now, do not now,

(a great knocking at the door.)
Tom. (from without) Maud, Maud, why have you bolted the door?


Maud. That Is my Tom!


Mayor. Where shall I go?


Maud. Oh, lord, if he sees you?


Mayor. I Will go up stairs.


Maud. You must not, indeed, he will go up there!


Mayor. What shall I do? oh my dear reputation, hide me, hide me, some where.


Maud. Suppose you hide in this hamper that brought the wine?


Mayor. Oh, excellent! right woman, for invention, says,

(gets into the hamper.)
Tom still making a noise at the door. Why don't you open the door, Maud?


Maud. I Am coming, I Am coming, Tom.


Tom pushes open the door. Why the deuce did you bolt the door Maud, now I Have
broke the bolt.


Maud. Because I was alone, and one cannot tell what might happen to a body --
but what brought you home, Tom?


Tom. Why grand news!


Maud. News!


Tom. Yes, there is his lorship, the earl of Mercia, coming to our town -- and
there is the wedding liveries to be finished -- and you are to pay your honors
to the bride before she leaves the mayor's house, and goes back to the castle
-- I have won the wager Maud, at the Guy of Warwick.


Maud. Have you?


Tom. I have won it, tol de roll -- I Am come home half fuddled with joy -- I Will
now go and see how the clothes go on -- what hamper's that Maud?


Maud. Oh that! -- aye, that is a hamper of wine that the Mayor desires you to
see left safe at home, and delivered to madam his lady.


Tom. Wine! -- Oh! I Will carry it immediately, as I Am an Officer should do the
Mayor's business.


Maud. So you should Tom -- for the Mayor is willing enough to do your business.


Tom. I Will see the hamper delivered to none but his lady.


Maud. (aside) Egad, you will trim his worship neatly.


Tom. You are a happy wife to have so clever a husband as I am -- such a rare
husband, Maud!


Maud. And you have a rare wife of me, if you knew but all -- Lord! what gcod
spirits you're come home in Tom.


Tom. How loving good cheer makes a body,

Song.
Tom. Egad we had a glorious feast
So good in kind so nicely dressed
Our liquor too was of the best -- I Will tell ye
One leg of mutton, two sat geese
With beans and bacon, ducks and pease
In short we^d every thing to please -- the belly
The clock struck twelve in merry chime
The priest said grace in Saxon rhyme
Says I to me this is no time -- for playing
The room was full when I came in
But soon I napkin'd up my chin
With knife and sork I now begin -- to lay in
The curate who at such a rate,
Of dues and tithe pigs used to prate,
In silence sat behind his plate -- a peeping.
Most churchmen like the vicar too
A Shepherd to his flock below,
Like any wolf good mutton now -- was deep in.
We nodded health for no one spoke,
The cloth rolled off we cracked a joke,
And drink the king, and sing and smoke -- tobacco.
Our reckoning out, they call a whip.
I steals my h^^ and home I trip,
My pretty Maud your velvet lip -- to smack-o.

Exeunt SCENE, The Mayor's House. Emma asleep.[Enter Harold] Har. The people of
this town are all running after news -- Mobs and Proclamations -- it is bold of
me to venture here even into the Mayor's house, and a price set upon my head by
command of the earl -- Cruel fate! but I will see Emma again, 'tho at the risk
of my life -- Ah! what, my lovely Emma sleeping -- sweet emblem of innocence.


Enter Tom with the Hamper. Tom. There -- leave the hamper of wine 'till I find
out madam the Mayoress -- where the plague are all the servants, Oh dear! ah!
ah! there is young lady Emma taking a nap after dinner -- egad these great
folks eat so heartily of so many dishes -- she looks so rosy and for all the
world like a pretty picture -- what a charming landscape -- I fancy your great
ladies never snore -- even Maud does not snore much -- perhaps she is dreaming
-- I dreamt once, I should be exalted above the whole town, by the means of a
great lady -- may be this is my lucky minute; what if I -- Oh dear, I have a
great mind -- Egad I will give her a kiss -- I will [Harold advances and draws
his sword, Tom falls on his knees] I Am dead.


Har. Tom, you are the only person that has seen me enter here, betray me and
here is instant death -- assist me, and here is the means of living well.

[Shews a purse.]
Tom. Sir, I always love to live well, because -- because -- I am a good
christian.


Har. Take your choice, gold or steel.


Tom. Gold is a pretty thing, I am out of conceit with steel, since last
Monday, when I run the needle into my thumb.


Har. When she wakes give her this ring, and if she questions tell her the
owner's at hand.

Retires,
Tom. Yes Sir, I Will tell her its in the owners hands.


Har. From thence I may form some idea of my success.


Tom. Madam, a handsome gentleman, an ill-looking robber, with great civility
-- a sword to my throat -- said, Sir be so good, to show that lady this ring --
you villain -- you dog -- give her this.


Emma. That ring I gave to my benefactor, my dear my generous William.

[Harold appearing] Heavens! what do I hear?


Tom (going off and peeping) Oh, ho! well I will go and carry the hamper to the
Mayoress -- Oh, ho! -- I suppose so -- oh well -- what is that to Tom? -- Aye,
oh, aye! -- oh, ho! -- oh, ho!

Exit Tom.
Har. Madam, if I am so happy as to hold, a place in your affections, whilst I
acknowledge your condescension, permit me to say, it reflects no dishonor on
your choice, for in poor William the peasant, you behold Harold, son to
Goodwin, earl of Kent, and happy only in being hated by the father of her he
loves.


Emma. Is it possible, are you Harold, for whose life the proclamation is out?
Oh heavens! if you are discovered you are lost, and I miserable,


Har. Charming Emma, that tender anxiety for my safety, rewards a life of
exile; but this evening is appointed for the celebration or your nuptials with
the Count -- This moment the equipage is on the road to convey you away to the
castle.


Emma. Oh Heavens! doomed to a wretch I despise.


Har. Trust to my honor madam, and I will instantly convey you to my father's
court; thus you will avert the impending storm, and there in safety you may
determine the fate of him who adores you.


Emma. It would be ungrateful to distrust your sincerity -- I resign myself
entirely to your protection -- free me from this odious match with count Lewis,
and it will be a favor I shall ever acknowledge -- and esteem as a generous
obligation. Exeunt.


Scene, A Room in the Mayor's house. Enter Tom with the Hamper. Tom. Yes, that
poor fellow must be some rich man from the money he gave me -- there is love --
0 yes, there is certainly love in the case -- well, what is that to Tom? -- my
business is to deliver this wine to the Mayoress, I am in great favor -- she
smiles upon me whenever she sees me, -- now if she should be the great lady who
is to exalt me -- who knows, here comes the Mayoress herself.


Enter Mayoress. Mayoress. Not a servant in this house, all gone I suppose to
see the young lady, Godiva come into town -- Oh! good Tom.


Tom. (aside) She always calls me good Tom, that is no bad sign.


Mayoress. What Is this Tom?


Tom. Madam, when I went home, I found my door locked, and bursting it open, my
wife Maud got this hamper in care, which his worship the Mayor had told her --
to tell me, to fetch it to your ladyship.


Mayoress More nonsense of my blockhead of a husband.


Tom It Is no nonsense madam, because it is wine.


Mayoress Oh, wine I suppose that he has purchased from the French Count.


Tom It Is no purchase, it is a present.


Mayoress (...) a present from the French Count I suppose -- Well for this
trouble Tom you shall have the first glass.


Tom I long to drink your ladyship's health -- you are the tulip of Coventry.


Mayoress You have a good taste Tom.


Tom Taste, Madam, I could drink a bottle when you are the toast;


Enter Maud. Maud Ay, and you will have a bottle well filled presently.


Mayoress What brings you here?


Maud I come to empty the hamper, madam.


Mayoress You.


Maud Yes madam for it was last filled at my house.


Tom So Maud you was toping, when you locked yourself in. (opens the hamper and
discovers the Mayor) There madam!


Mayoress My husband!


Tom Egad, this is indeed a big-bellied bottle!


Mayoress What -- you have been at your old tricks I suppose.


Tom Well done Maud -- Egad you have hampered his worship.


Mayoress You are a right worshipful magistrate.


Mayor (comes out of the hamper) So I am wife -- Tom, remember I am the father
of you all.


Tom Yes! and you want to be father of my children.


Mayor Come here wife -- come here -- well Tom, as this was only a frolic
you will send home the wine.


Tom Oh, is it at home now?


Mayor Yes, but you will send it home to me.


Tom Oh no -- the devil a drop you get -- I Will keep it to drink to my wife's
virtue, and the like success to your worship's intrigues.


Mayor Dear wife, forgive this.


FINALE.
Maud Who would destroy domestic joy,
Be ever shamed like you Sir,
Then girls agree to do like me,
Out with each fly seducer.
The deuce may mend and shame attend,
Who thus with supple temper,
Then Master Mayor pray have a care,
Nor again get into a hamper.

Tom. Well pleased to find my wife so kind.
So cunning and so clever,
The bells shall ring, her praise I Will sing,
For ever, and for ever. The bells etc.

END OF ACT I.
ACT II
SCENE The Street. Enter Tom, followed by a Mob. Tom. HUZZA! huzza! neighbors,
neighbors, where are you all going?


Mob. Huzza! -- to meet the earl of Mercia, and lady Godiva!


Tom. Why, neighbors, what will they think of our town -- let us welcome them
in order -- if we must roar, let us roar like men and christians -- I Will cheer
them with a choice chaunt -- and then I Will make a fine speech, -- and then when
I Am making the speech -- not a grunt from one of you -- not a grunt!


Mob. Why, what will you say?


Tom. Why, suppose now, you to be the countess -- I desire you to make a low
courtsey to me, because you are very civil -- now you frown with your under lip
more -- now curl up your nose -- so now Mr. Countess take your fingers out of
your mouth -- do, now settle your diamond necklace -- show your fine ring and
white hand. --


Mob. But Mr. Tom, as I have got no diamond necklace, will not it do as well to
stroke my beard?


Tom. No, no it will not -- did you ever hear of a countess stroking her beard? --
now I will make a spcech -- "May it please your lordship and your ladyship --
the great honor you have done us, in coming to our beggarly town;"


Mob. What -- Coventry a beggarly town? -- why you deserve a kicking!


Tom. Now, did you ever know a countess to kick a churchwarden?


Enter Mayor. Mob No speech, no speech -- a speech from the mayor, to be sure.


Tom The mayor's an ignorant man!


Mayor What Is the matter here?


Mob Here Is Tom abusing the whole town.


Mayor Is he? -- get you gone all of you -- Tom, you are a very impudent fellow
-- so Tom, I Am an ignorant man.


Tom Are you, sir?


Mayor And you are an impudent rascal;


Tom My impudence, and having a wise too pretty for me, and too virtuous for
your worship.

SONG.
Tom. Your Worship your wings may clap,
And think yourself a great city cock,
You Will never my Maud entrap,
For she is the hen of a pretty cock.
Your worship, etc.
Have done with your winks and your leers,
For Tom is a tailor that is knowing sir;
He Will trim you himself with his sheers,
And then you will have done with your crowing sir.
Your worship, etc.
My wife is a white-legged fowl,
Can bill like a thrush or dove in tree;
But never will pair with an owl,
My worshipful mayor of Coventry.
Your worship, etc.

Mayor Tom, I discharge you from all public offices -- the public good demands
it.


Tom The public good-why -- can you forget when you collected the poor's-rate,
you lent out the money at three pence a week for a shilling -- and when
churchwarden, you was detected in putting in sixpence and taking out
half-a-crown


Mayor I put in half-a-crown.


Tom Ay, that was compound.


Mayor Tom, I discharge you down to a common constable.


Crazy He is no constable, that office belongs to me!


Mayor. Tom, I supercede you -- I must be ready to receive the earl of Mercia.


Enter the Earl of Mercia, Godiva, and attendants. Earl Mr. Mayor, my daughter
has made a long visit at your house.


Mayor. She does my house, my lord much honor.


Lady God. Has not your fair at Coventry lasted much longer than usual?


Mayor My lady, in order to compensate for the great honor done us, we have had
a greater variety of entertainments than ever was known in Coventry!


Tom We have indeed had great diversions my lady; lord, how beautiful she is!


Crazy Yes, we have had much merrymaking.


Earl Who are you, my old friend?


Crazy Please your worship -- I Am mayor of Coventry.


Mayor The devil you are.


Tom Please your worship, that old gentleman's wits are a little out at the
elbows, and tho'my brain is quite new, and I Have been so active in every office,
yet the mayor has put him over my head -- and he is mad.


Mayor Crazy there has merit.


Tom. I Have done nothing.


Earl So then you are the active officer that has done nothing!


Crazy. I do all myself!


Earl This same town of Coventry seems to be well-governed -- if one may judge
by the appearance of its magistrates.


Tom His lordship seems to be in a plaguey ill-humour -- he looks damned glum --
come -- clear up your pipes and give him a song.


SONG.
Tom. Your lordship's welcome among us,
Because you are the peer;
Your ladyship never will wrong us,
Because you're not severe.

Chorus. This is joyful news,
What citizen will refuse.
To stick up their houses with holly?
We'll broach a tub of humming bub,
To welcome home with a rub-a-dub-dub,
So neighbors let us all be jolly.

Mayor. At our fair you will be delighted,
The bells shall ring merrily,
And when my lord, I Am knighted,
Sir Gregory Goose, I Will be.

Chorus. Enter Count Lewis. Count Emma, my lord, your daughter's fled -- gone
off -- and accompanied by a young peasant -- that I dare say must be the
peasant that rescued her from the Danes; it seems Harold, earl Goodwin's son
has been lurking about the town.


Earl (looking on the mayor) Is this your fidelity to me -- since you have
joined in the treason, all partake in the punishment -- for this offense I
amerce your city in a thousand marks, and by Heavens, the power of man shall
not induce me to abate one scruple -- see that this is complied with in an
hours notice, or rigor shall enforce my sentence.


Exit Earl and attendants. Tom Here Is a pretty job!


Crazy I remember Alfred the great laid a tax upon horn combs.


Enter Mayoress. Mayoress Fine care you have taken of us!


Mayor Fire, sword and famine is come upon Us! -- O grief -- O ruin!


Tom You see when my lord takes a thing in his head, he says I will do it --
and in that case he surely does it -- and then it is done.


Mayoress We all know that lady Godiva is as sweet-temper'd as her husband is
crabbed and crusty -- now I will summon all the good-wives in a body and I will
go at their head, and with dishevelled hair and streamin'g eyes, will beseech
the lady, to beseech her husband -- to take off the tax.


Tom. An excellent thought!


Mayor I must get the consent of the corporation -- I will go summon the livery
--


Mayoress Summon the Livery, you had better go summon the petticoats --


Tom. I Am for the petticoats.


Crazy And I love the petticoats.

Exeunt
SCENE a Street. Enter Emma and Harold. Emma. What a dilemma?


Har. The city guard being posted prevented our escape --


Emma. When my father knows you are the person that assisted my escape, he will
be in such a rage --


Har. A separation from my Emma, alone is a terror for her faithful Harold.


Emma. Was my father but to consider your valor, he would certainly be
reconciled.


Har. True, my love, I have bled in my country's cause, and shall again -- not
the fire of love, nor the frost of age, shall check my spirit in the cause of
Britain.


Emma. Oh, do not have an idea of separation; if you could but find a place of
safety here for the present -- I think this is the house of poor honest Tom,
the tailor, I have seen so often at the Mayor's.


Enter Tom. Tom. Ay, they there go -- what a fine string of them, I did not
think there were so many women in Coventry, at least not so many pretty girls
in it -- I love the pretty girls because they are generally so handsome -- they
always snigger at me as they pass, how can they help it, when I cast such fly
looks at them -- there they all march in a body -- egad it is a delicate body
and the Mayoress at their head, she is a fine head -- well if this scheme
succeeds, I will get drunk tonight like a sober citizen, and drink success to
the petticoat corporation -- Oh lord, madam Emma, there they are gone up to the
lady Godiva.


Emma. You Will not betray me!


Har. Mind Tom, money or steel.


Tom. No, Sir, I have enough of gold and keep the sword to defend the lady, --
you will find shelter in my house, perhaps as good as in a rich man's -- for
lord, I am as great a friend to love as the women's favorite the fat friar
father Fogarty.


SONG.
When I was a younker and lived with my Dad,
The neighbor's all thought me a smart little lad,
My mammy she call d me a white headed boy,
Because with the girls I liked for to toy.
There was Ciss, Priss, Letty, and Betty and Doll,
With Meg, Peg, Jenny and Winny and Moll,
I flatter their chaiter so sprightly and gay,
I rumble 'em, tumble 'em that is my way.
One fine frosty morning a going to school,
Young Moggy I met and she called me a fool,
Her mouth as my primmer a lesson I took,
I swore it was pretty and kissed the book;
But school, fool, primmer, and trimmer and birch,
And boys for the girls I have left in the lurch.
I flatter etc
It Is very well known I can dance a good jig,
And at cudgels from Robin I won a fat Pig,
I wrestle a fall, and a bar I can sling,
And when over a flaggon most sweetly can sing.
But Pig, jig, wicket, and cricket and ball
I Would give up to wrestle with Moggy of all,
I flatter etc.
Exit. Scene a chamber in Tom's house. Enter Tom. Tom. I have a great fancy to
know what Maud and the Mayoress have done -- Lord, how I long to know what
success they have had, or whether they will forgive the tax -- oh, there is Maud
come back, I hear her voice.


Maud. (without) Oh, madam, I Will only tell my Tom.

(entering) Oh, Tom, here we have got the young lady Emma in the house -- have
you seen the countess?


Tom. I know what we have got -- but tell me, shall we get the tax off, you all
went, and were you all there?


Maud. Yes, there we went, and we were all admitted to lady Godiva's presence!


Tom. Oh, God that was pleasant.


Maud. So it was Tom -- we all fell a crying.


Tom. How did you manage that, Maud -- I never saw you cry in all my life.


Maud. I only made believe -- then we all fell on our knees, then we got up
again.


Tom. Yes, yes, Oh, I see -- I see you did!


Maud. Then the Countess she heard our petitions, and she asked my lord to
pardon the city -- no, said his lordship that I will not -- I have sworn that
the power of man shall not persuade me -- Yes, but says she, the power of woman
may, and I am a woman, says she.


Tom. Oh, she need not have told him that.


Maud. And says her ladyship, I am a good woman and your wife; and you as a
good husband ought to do as I bid you.


Tom. She was a little out there.


Maud. Says the earl as you are a good woman, I will forgive the tax, only on
one condition -- what is that says my lady? It is, says he, only if you will
ride through the city of Coventry naked, without a rag of clothes on.


Tom. What!


Maud. Now, he only joked; having no notion she would do it -- but she having
the good of our city at heart took him at his word, and is actually now
preparing for it.


Tom. Lady Godiva, ride a horseback -- all through the city, without any --
well if I ever --


Maud. Now you are all agog, with you nonsensical curiosity.


Tom. I have? no curiosity.


Maud. Tom, Tom, our fortune is made, for as the lady Emma has taken shelter in
our house --


Tom. O u house -- ride -- so, so --


Maud. But here is a young peasant in her company.


Tom. Company; then I suppose she will have nothing, at all --


Maud. It Is very odd, for he seems to have a fight of money.


Tom. Sight of money -- such a sight.


Maud. Hang the man is he grown stupid -- what are you thinking of Tom?


Tom. I was thinking of a side-saddie.


Maud. Was there ever such a fool, but I must go and attend lady Emma, so I
will leave you to ride on your side-saddle.

Exit.
Tom. Talk of a coronation, it is no more to this -- Lady Godiva is a procession
in herself, I must go in time to procure a good place -- shall I ask our Maud
to go -- no, no, the sight would be lost, upon Maud -- but I Will go --


Enter the Mayor. Tom. What brings you here, Sir.


Mayor. Well Tom, I suppose you have heard?


Tom. Yes Sir.


Mayor. Lady Godiva, in her progress through the city, passes by your house here.


Tom. Gad Sir, that is lucky, I shall have an opportunity of seeing her nicely.


Mayor. Yes, and you will have an opportunity of hanging in hemp nicely at your
own door -- the streets are to be cleared -- all the windows and the houses to
be fastened up, no person to be seen on pain of death, of the male kind.


Tom. Me -- do you think I would look, sir, -- I wish I could get him out of my
house -- why what need your worship be in a hurry to go.


Mayor. I am in a hurry to go Tom.


Tom. It Is a fine day abroad, Sir.


Mayor. But every body must stay at home.


Tom. Well if you will go home you must -- good-bye, to you, Sir.


Mayor. What are you going Tom?


Tom. Yes, Sir; I wish you a good-bye, Sir, I will not stay in this room, while
lady Godiva passes it commands such a prospect.


Mayor. Gad that is true, from that window I could have a charming peep, if that
fellow was but out of the way.

aside.
Tom. I Will go down, and lock myself in the cellar to avoid temptation.


Mayor Do Tom -- that is a good boy, and I Will go home, Tom!


Tom Good-bye to you, Sir.


Mayor Good-bye to you, Tom.


Tom So you are going home, Sir?


Mayor Yes, I Am going home, now do you go and lock yourself up in the cellar.


Tom Yes, I will Sir, good-bye, Sir


Mayor Good-bye, Tom!


Tom Good-bye, Sir.


Mayor. Good-bye, Tom!


Exeunt severally. Re-enter Mayor. Bell tolls. Mayor. By this time, lady
Godiva's past the cross, all is clear, and foolish Tom has locked himself up in
the cellar, and thinks I am gone home -- She cannot be far off now -- I shall
have a charming peep at her from that window -- I Will go and look for something
to put on this table.

Exit.
Enter Tom. Tom So by this time his worship's at home, cursed troublesome old
hound, and lady Godiva must be at hand -- I think. I hear her horse's feet --
the clinking of their hoofs is far sweeter than a haut-boy.

(Drags a stool and puts it on the table, and gets up) There there, she is
turning the corner.


Enter Mayor. Mayor I can find, nothing -- I Will. try to reach the window upon
my tip-toes, though I break my neck for it --

( in striving to get up he catches Tom in his arms) Oh, you villain have I
caught you peeping.


Tom Sir, I was only going to take in the cock chaffinch.


Mayor Come down, I Will have you hanged -- I came here only on the look-out.

Exit.
Scene a Street. Enter Tom, followed by the Earl, Mayoress, and attendants.
Earl You shall be hanged Tom.


Tom Then your lordshp must get me another neck, for this is engaged already --


Earl How, sirrah! did you not know it was instant death!


Tom. True, my lord, but I thought it was no harm.


Enter Maud. Maud. Oh, my dear, what is the matter, it is all along this wicked
Mayor, he wants to make a widow of me -- it would be for the public good if he
was hanged, instead of my husband --


Earl Then we should leave his wife here a sorrowful widow.


Mayoress Oh, my lord I should not mind my private sorrows for the public good
--


Earl. So then Mr. Mayor, all this was to forward your designs upon the young
woman -- if this culprit here will give up my daughter, his life shall be saved.


Tom Then I have a dull chance, my lord; but my lord, tho'I am but a poor
fellow, the richest jewel in your lordship's coronet could not make me betray a
person, after once giving him the protection of my roof.


Earl See him to execution -- I will try him further.


Tom. No mercy, my lord.


Earl Yes, if you can produce Harold in your place, that may save your life.


Enter Harold and Emma. Har. Then save his life and take mine, I am Harold, but
now the husband of your unhappy daughter.


Earl. Disobedient child -- of all men upon earth, is this your wretched choice?


Emma My choice -- my pride.


Earl I would sooner have bestowed you on that peasant, that rescued you from
the Danes, for his valor at loast has a claim upon my gratitude.


Emma Then let Harold have that claim; he was that peasant, the protector of my
life and honor.


Earl I see now that my prejudice to Earl Goodwin, has blinded me to his son's
peculiar virtues, and what you have saved -- take for your reward.


Enter the Count. Count My lord, your daughter I claim acording to your promise.


Earl No, he is unworthy of a lady's ^^e, that has not courage to protect it.


Tom So here I stand all this while with the rope about my neck.


Mayor I must do my duty, bring in the constables.


Earl It Is your duty to resign an office to which you are a disgrace -- Here I
grant Tom a full pardon for his adherence to his word, and in your place I
appoint him Mayor of Coventry.


Mayor What Peeping Tom!


Tom Hold your tongue, you dog, or I Will put you in the stocks.


Crazy Whoever is Mayor, I Will be Churchwarden.


Earl I believe I have been too severe upon your city, but since it has
produced one honest man, I relinquish my claims.


Crazy Yes, I Am an honest man, and you have found me out.


Tom Then I hope our friends will be equally indulgent, and every man that
loves a fine woman, will pardon, PEEPING TOM OF COVENTRY.


FINALE.
Harold. Let every care and tumult cease,
Bands of love unite us,
Kind friendship joy and lasting peace,
Ever shall delight us.

Maud. I wish you joy of your disgrace,
Let his wise alone, Sir;
For since by her you have lost your place,
Better kiss your own, Sir.

Mayor. I Have brought things to a pretty pass,
By my own gallanting;
Tho'late a Mayor -- I Am now an Ass
This is my gala-ganting.

Crazy. Why what a deuce is all this rout,
Cease your idle singing,
Or by this hand I Will put you out,
And set the bells a ringing.

Tom. Though you have as Poets see,
Rods in pickle steeping;
Forgive poor Tom of Coventry,
And pardon for his Peeping.

FINIS

