ODE TO Mr. PINCHBECK, UPON HIS NEWLY INVENTED PATENT CANDLE-SNUFFERS, By
MALCOLM McGREGGOR, Esquire Author of the Heroic Epistle to Sir WILLIAM CHAMBERS,
and the Heroic Postscript.

Quosque ergo frustra pascemus ignigenum istum?
Apuleii Met. Lib. 7. Why should a Patent be granted to this Candle-Snuffer in
vain?
THE SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for J. ALMON, opposite Burlington-House, Piccadilly.

MDCCLXXVI.

[Price SIXPENCE.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
EVER since my first Pulication, the Curiosity, not to say Anxiety, of the
World concerning my Name, has been so great, that it has frequently given me
Pain to conceal what the World will now see it was not possibly in my Power to
discover.

In short, I had no Name, till the Royal Favor lately restored my very ancient
and honorable Clan to its pristine Title and Honors. I was therefore in the
same deplorable Case with a certain nameless Lady, whom I have long had the
Honor to call my Neighbor, and who, I sincerely hope, will soon, by the same
Favor, be restored to that Title, which, upon my Honor, I believe, she has
erroneously, and not intentionally forfeited.

I have only to add, that now, when the Public is in possession of my real
Name, it will not, I hope, suffer any national Prejudice to prevent it from
receiving this my first Lyrical Attempt with its former Candor. But I must
needs say, that if this Ode does not sell as well as Mr. CUMBERLAND'S, I shall
be apt to impute it, not to any inferiority of Lyrical Ordonance, but merely to
its having been written by a Scotchman.

Knightsbridge, May 6, 1776.
ODE TO Mr. PINCHBECK.
I.
ILLUSTRIOUS PINCHBECK! condescend,
Thou well-belov'd, and best King's-Friend,
These Lyric Lines to view;
O! may they prompt thee, ever too late,
To snuff the Candle of the State,
That burns a little blue.
II.
It once had got a stately Wick,
When in its Patent-Candlestick
The Revolution put it;
As white as Wax we saw it shine
Through two whole Lengths of BRUNSWICK's Line,
'Till B -- first dared to smut it.
III.
Since then -- but wherefore tell the Tale?
Enough, that now it burns pale,
And sorely wastes its Tallow:
Nay, if thy Poet rightly weens,
(Though little skilled in Ways and Means)
Its Save-all is but shallow.
IV.
Come then, ingenious Artist, come,
And put thy Finger, and thy Thumb,
Into each polished Handle;
On thee alone our Hopes depend,
Thy King's, and eke thy Country's Friend,
To trim Old England's Candle.
V.
But first we pray, for its Relief,
Pluck from its Wick, each Tory Thief,
It else must quickly rue it;
These Initials, like those in the Banns of Marriage published between N. and
M. may be filled up at the Reader's Pleasure. Vide Common Prayer Book.
While N -- and M -- sputter there,
Thou Wilt never prevent with all thy Care,
The melting of the Suet.
VI.
There Is TWITCHER too, that old He-witch,
Sticks in his Bole as black as Pitch,
Our ingenious Inventor's Snuffer^ are peculiarly calculated to remedy this
evil, to which indeed all Candles are more or less subject. See the Patentee's
Advertisement.
And makes a silthy pother;
When cursed with such a sorry Fiend,
And lighted too at either End,
'Twill soon be in a smother.
VII.
I fear me much in sucha plight,
Those Tapers blessed would lose their Light,
Canadian Fanes that deck;
Which pious -- * -- ordains to blaze,
And gild with their established Rays,
Our Lady of Quebec.
VIII.
It is humbly presumed that the classical Reader will here perceive a boldness
of Transition, only to be equalled by PINDAR, and perhaps by HORACE, in some of
his sublimer Odes.
His Arms, thou hallowed Image! bless,
And surely thou can do no less,
He is thy Faith's Defender;
Thou owe thy Place to him alone,
As other Jacobites have done,
And not to the Pretender.
IX.
Haste then, and quash the hot Turmoil,
That flames in Boston's angry Soil,
And frights the Mother-Nation:
Know, Lady! if its Rage you stop,
PINCHBECK shall send you, from his Shop,
A most superb Oblation.
X.
His Patent-snuffers, in a Dish
Of burnished Gold; if more you wish,
His Cyclops shall bestir
Their brawny Stumps, and for thy sake,
Of PINCHBECK's own Mixt-metal make
A huge Extinguisher.
XI.
To form the Mass --,thy Zeal
Shall furnish that well-tempered Steel,
Thou did at Minden brandish;
Nor yet shall G -- 's reverend Dean,
Counting its Worth, refuse, I ween,
His ponderous leaden Standish.
XII.
Poor Doctor JOHNSON, I Am afraid,
Can give but metaphoric Aid;
His Style's case-harden'd Graces:
M' PHERSON, without Shame, or Fear,
Sir JOHN DALRYMPLE, and SHEBBEARE
Shall melt their brazen Faces.
XIII.
And sure, this mixed metallic Stuff,
Will yield Materials large enough
To mold the mighty Cone;
But how transport it, when it is cast
Across the deep Atlantic Vast,
'Twill weigh some thousand Stone?
XIV.
"Leave that to me" our Lady cries,
"However gigantic be its Size,
"I have a Scheme in petto;
"I Will fly with it from Shore to Shore,
"Safe as my sooty Sister bore,
"Her Cottage to Loretto.
XV.
"Swift to the Congress with my Freight
"I Will speed, and on their Heads its Weight
"Souse with such Skill and Care;
"That PUTTNAM, WASHINGTON beneath,
"And grasping LEE shall wish to breathe
" This great Philosopher has lately discovered a Method of fabricating a new
Species of Air, of so infinitely superior salubrity and duration to that vulgar
atmospherical Air, which for want of better we have been obliged to breathe for
upwards of five thousand Years, that it is to be supposed that no Macaroni,
Savoir Vivre, or in plain English, no body that knows what is what, will in
future condescend to respire any Air, that is not sealed with the Doctor's own
Arms, and signed with his own Handwriting. It is to be feared, however, that
his Pneumatic Vials will be liable to be counterfeited, as our Philosopher has
not Interest enough at Court to procure a Patent. Indeed were such a Patent
granted, it might supersede Mr. PINCHBECK's; because that in this Air a Candle
is found to burn with so bright and continued a Flame, that it could never want
snuffing.

See Vol. II. of Dr. Priestley's Experiments on Air.


A Pint of PRIESTLEY's Air.
XVI.
"The Deed is done, thy Foes are dead,
"No longer England, shall thou dread
"Such Presbyterean Huffers;
"Thy Candle's Radiance never shall fade,
"With now and then a little Aid,
"From PINCHBECK's Patent-snuffers."
FINIS.
JUST PUBLISHED.
AN Heroic Epistle to Sir William Chambers, Knight, Comptroller General o his
MAJESTY's Works, and Author of a late Differtation on Oriental Gardening;
enriched with explanatory Notes, chiefly extracted from that elaborate
Performance. -- The Thirteenth Edition, Price 1s.

An Heroic Postscript to the Public, occasioned by the favorable Reception of,
A Late Heroic Epistle to Sir William Chambers, Knt. etc. By the Author of that
Epistle. -- Seventh Edition, Price 1s.

Lord Ch-t -- m's Prophecy, An Ode; addressed to Lieut. Genesis Gage, with
explanatory and critical Notes, Price 1s.

Ode for the New Year, 1776, (not the Laureat's) Price 1s.

Genius of Britain, An Ode, in allusion to the present Times, Price 1s.

An Epistle from Oberea, Queen of Otaheite, to Joseph Banks, Esquire translated by
T. Q. Z. Esquire Professor of the Otaheite Language in Dublin, and of all the
Languages of the undiscovered Islands in the South-Seas; and enriched with
historical and explanatory Notes. -- Fifth Edition, Price 1s.

Macarony Fables. -- Third Edition, Price 2s. 6d.

Lyric Consolations, by the same, Price 3s.

The Above are all printed in Quarto.

An Asylum for Fugitives; No. I. Price 1s. -- No. II. will be published on the
1st. of June 1776.

[The New Foundling Hospital for Wit, and the Fugitive Miscellany, being
completed; it has been desired to continue the Plan of collecting such Fugitive
Pieces of Merit, as are either circulated in M. S. or occasionally printed in
the temporary Publications of the Day. Though this Work may be called a
Continuation of the former two, being printed in the same Size and Manner; yet,
the Publication being intended to be more frequent, affords a greater variety;
and therefore it is hoped, will prove as agreeable to the Public. Those
Gentlemen, who wish to see any of their Pieces preserved in this Collection,
may be assured, that their Favors will, at all Times, be most gratefully
received.]

The New Foundling Hospital for Wit, being a Collection of Fugitive Pieces in
Verse and Prose, many of which were not before printed; several were written by
Sir Charles Hanbury Williams, the Duke of Wharton, Earls of Chesterfield,
Delawar, Bath, Hardwicke, Carlisle, and Chatham; Lord Visc. Clare; Lords
Lyttelton, Harvey, and Capel; Lady M. W. Montagu, Lady Irwin; Miss Carter; Hon.
C. York, and Hon. H. Walpole; Rt. Hon. C. Townshend; Sir J. Mawbey; T. Potter,
Soame Jenyns; Dr. King, Dr. Armstrong, Dr. Akenside; C. Anstey, T. Edwards, C.
Churchill, W. Shenstone, Mr. Gray; J. Thomson, J. S. Hall, J. Wilkes, D.
Garrick, S. Johnson, B. Thornton, G. Colman, R. Lloyd, R. Bentley, C. Morris,
Esqrs. and other eminent Persons; with some Pieces of Milton, Waller, Pope,
Congreve, etc. not in their Works; in six Volumes, (each Volume ornamented with
a curious Frontispiece) Price 18s. bound, and 15s. sewed.

[The following Books are printed in the same Size and Manner as the New
Foundling for Wit, and being Collections of Fugitive Pieces upon the same Plan,
may be had bound uniform with that Work, Price 1l. 7s. or separate, at the
Prices undermentioned.]

The Fugitive Miscellany, being a Collection of such Fugitive (...) Prose and
Verse as are not in any other Collection, with many Pieces never before
published. By several Noblemen and Gentlemen. In Two Volumes, Price 5s. sewed,
or 6s. bound.

A Companion for a Leisure Hour, being also a Collection of Fugitive Pieces, in
no other Collection; chiefly serious. In Prose and Verse. One Volume, 2s. 6d.
sewed, or 3s. bound.

Printed for J. ALMON, opposite Burlington-House in Piccadilly.


