THE RIVAL SISTERS.

A TRAGEDY.

-- Scelerate, revertere, Theseu;
Flecte ratem; numerum non habet illa suum.
OVID. ADAPTED FOR THEATRICAL REPRESENTATION, AS PERFORMED AT THE
THEATER ROYAL, DRURY LANE.

REGULATED FROM THE PROMPT-BOOK, By Permission of the Manager.

The Lines distinguished by inverted Commas, are omitted in the Representation,
and those printed in Italics are Additions.

LONDON: PRINTED BY JOHN BELL, British Library, STRAND, Bookseller to His ROYAL
HIGHNESS the PRINCE of WALES.

MDCC XCIII.

PREFACE
THERE is, perhaps, nothing more uninteresting than the generality of those
preliminary discourses, in which Authors too frequently lay out much of their
time in talking of themselves and their works. The importance of a Man to
himself is fully displayed, while the Reader yawns over the tedious page, or
laughs at the rhetoric, that would persuade him he ought to be pleased. The
present Writer has been unwilling, upon almost all occasions, to conform to a
practice which he saw attended with so little success: But the following
Tragedy is sent into the worla in a manner that may require some explanation.
It has not gone through the siery trial of the Theater; nor is it recommended
by the favorable decision of an Audience. The pomp of splendid scenery, and
the illusions of the skilful performer, have not awakened the public attention:
-- The Play ventures abroad, without having previously gained, by the
advantages of representation, a character, which in the leisure of the closet
is not always supported. But this circumstance, while it raises no expectation,
may, on the other hand, excite a prejudice not casy to be sarmounted. If it be
of any value, why was it not produced in the usual form of a Public Exhibition?
The reasons that influenced the Author, would lead to a long and frivolous
detail. Whatever those reasons were, whether caprice, whim, peevishness, or
delicacy, they were of weight to determine his conduct. His work, however, does
not go forth with accusations of any kind against the Proprietors of either
Theater: it makes no appeal from their judgment. The fact is, it never was in
their hands; and where there was no refusal, there can be no room for complaint.

It need not be dissambled, that the Play was written with a view to the Stage.
It was begun and finished in the Summer 1783, at a time when the Author was
disabled, by a nervous disorder in his eyes, from pursuing a more important
work, which has engaged several years of his life. It was painful to read, and
he found amusement necessary. He walked in green fields, made verses, and threw
them upon paper in characters almost illegible. For a subject, he was not long
at a less. He remembered that Madame de Sevigne Vide her Letter 1st April, 1672.
mentions her having attended the representation of ARIANE, a Tragedy by the
younger Corneille. The play, says that amiable Writer, though in its general
style and conduct flat and insipid; was, notwithstanding, followed by all
Paris, not for the sake of the poetry, but the Actress, La Champmele, whom she
calls the greatest prodigy the Stage ever beheld. The others were disgusting;
but when the Champmele entered the scene, a murmur of applause ran through the
Theater; every heart was interested, and every eye dissolved in tears.

WHEN this country could, with pride, boast of an Actress equally followed, and
perhaps with better reason; it occurred that a Tragedy, with the beauties of
the original, but freed from it is defects, might, at such a season, be
acceptable to the Public. The defects, which drew down the judgment of so
enlightened a Critic as Madame de Sevigne, are pointed out with minute
exactress, by the judicious Voltaire. See his Edition of Corseille's Works.
From that pleasing Writer we learn, that the Tragedy in question still keeps
it is rank upon the Stage, whenever an Actress of eminence wishes for an
opportunity to display her talents in a principal character. The situation he
observes, is interesting and pathetic: "A princess, who has done every thing
for her hero; who has delivered him from a cruel death, and sacrificed all
considerations for his sake; who loves him generously; who thinks herself loved
in return, and deserves to be so; who finds herself, at last, abandoned by the
Man whom she adores, and betrayed by a Sister whom she also loved: 'A woman
thus situated,' says I Voltaire, 'forms the happiest subject that has come down
to as from antiquity.' Notwithstanding this general account, Voltaire's
observations, which trace the Author scene by scene, show that Madame de
Sevigne was not mistaken in her judgment.

SHALL the present Writer flatter himself that he has removed the vices of the
first concoction, and substituted what is better? He has certainly endeavored
to do it. For this purpose a New Fable was necessary. The progress of the
business required to be conducted in a different manner, with more rapidity,
and without those languid scenes which weaken the interest, and too often
border upon the dialogue of Comedy. The characters were to be cast in a new
mould; and instead of definitions of the passions, their conflict, their
vehemence, and their various transitions, were to be painted forth in higher
coloring, than are to be found in the French composition. The Reader,
therefore, is not to expect a mere translation. The Author does not scruple to
say that he entered into a competition with the original; that he has aimed at
a better Tragedy; and to use the words of a late elegant Writer, he hopes he
has shown some invention, though he has built upon another man's ground.

BUT here again the question recurs, if the new superstructure raised upon the
old foundation has any merit, why not produce it with all the advantage of that
celebrated Actress, who, it seems inspired the first design? The plain truth
shall be the answer: When the piece was finished, the Author had his moments of
self-approbation, and in his first ardour, hinted to a friend, that he intended
to give it to the Stage. But self-approbation did not last long: -- That glow
of imagination, which (to speak the truth) is sometimes heated into a pleasing
delirium with its own work, subsided by degrees, and doubt and diffidence
succeeded. A Play, that might linger nine nights upon the Stage, was not the
object of the Author's ambition; Whether he has been able to execute any thing
better, he has not considered for a long time, nor has he now courage to
determine. He has often said to himself, in the words of TULLY, Nihil hue, nisi
perfectum ingenio, Elaboratum Industria, afferri oportere; and after adopting,
in his own case, so rigid a rule, how shall he presume to say, that the
production of a summer can boast either of genius, or the elaborate touches of
industry?

IN this irresolute state of mind, the Author's respect for the Public, who
have done him, upon former occasions, very particular honor, increased his
t'midity: he was unwilling to appear a candidate for their favor, when he was
not sure of adding to their pleasure. At present, being to give an edition of
such pieces, as he has been able to produce, he could not think of keeping back
the only dramatic work left upon his hands. He, therefore, sends it into the
world an humble adventurer: with one of, his predecessors, he says, ' Va mon
Enfant; prens ta Fortune.' The Play amused him while he was engaged in the
writing of it, and should the candid Reader find an hour of leisure not
entirely thrown away in the perusal, the Author will not think his time
altogether mis-employed. He now dismisses the Piece, if not with indifference,
at least with resignation; content to leave the honors of the Theater to
Writers of more ambition than he possesses at present.

Non jam prima peto Mnestheus, neque vincere certo:
Quamquam O! sed saperent, quibus hoc, Neptune, dedisti.
VIRG. -- Veianius armis,
Herculisis ad postem fixis, latet abditus agro;
Ne poputum extrem'd toties exoret arena.
HOR. LINCOLN'S END, March 4, 1786.
Dramatis Personae.
DRURY LANE.
Men.
PERIANDER, King of Naxes, -- Mr. Wroughton. THESEUS, -- Mr. Palmer. PERITHOUS,
-- Mr. Kemble. ARCHON, an Officer of Periander, Mr. Packer. ALETES, Ambassador
from Minos, King of Crete, -- Mr. Caulfield. OFFICER, -- Mr. Phillimore.
Women.
ARIADNE, -- Mrs. Siddons. PHAEDRA, -- Mrs. Powell
VIRGINS attending on Ariadne, etc.

SCENE, the Palace of Periander, in the Isle of Naxos.

THE RIVAL SISTERS.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
PERIANDER'S Palace. A violent Storm of Thunder and Lightning. Enter PHAEDRA
and ARCHON. Phaedra. AWAY! no more! -- why thus pursue my steps?
Begone and leave me; leave me to my woes.

Arc. Yet, Phaedra, be advised.

Phae. Presume no further.
Advised by thee! no, -- let your pliant king,
Your king of Naxos, to thy treacherous counsels
Resign himself, his people, and his laws.
Thou have undone us all; by thee we die;
Yes, Ariadne, Phaedra, Theseus, all,
All die by thee!

Arc. Princess, your fears are groundless.
Your timorous fancy forms unjust suspicions.
If you but knew me --

Phae. O, too well I know thee!
This very morn it is fixed; yes, here your king
Gives audience to the Ambassador of Crete;
Here in this palace; here, by your persuasion,
He means to yield us to the rage of Minos,
To my vindictive father's stern demand.
Ere that I Will see your king; here wait his coming.
And counteract thy base ungen'rous counsel.

Arc. This storm of passion bears your reason down.
Let prudence guide thee. In a night like this,
Why quit your couch, and to the whirlwind's rage,
The vollied lightening, and the war of nature,
Why will thou thus commit thy tender frame? --
Thunder and lightning. Again that dreadful peal! -- "All-gracious Powers!
"What crime provokes your wrath? must this fair island,
"That long has flourished in the Aegean deep,
"Must Naxos with her sons, a blameless race,
"Burn to the center, and the brawling waves
"Close over the wreck for ever?

Another clap of thunder. " Phae. Oh, that burst
"Shoots horror to my soul!

" Arc. Thus through the night
"Has the wild uproar shook the groaning isle.
"Fierce rain and liquid fire in mingled torrents
"Came rushing over the land. The wrath of Heaven
"Rides in the tempest. Towers and sacred domes
"Fell in promiscuous ruin. Ships were dashed,
"On pointed rocks, or swallowed in the deep.
"Destruction rages round:" amidst the roar,
When all things else, when even the fiercest natures
Shrink from the hideous ruin, you alone
Walk through the storm, with fierce, with hagard mien,
A form that suits the dreadful wild commotion.

Phae. Yes, with a heart, in which the storm that rages,
Surpasses all the horrors of the night.
"Yes, here I come supreme in misery.
"I only wake to cares unknown to him
"Who treads secure the paths of humble life,
"And thanks the gods for his obscure retreat,
"For the blessed shade in which their bounty placed him."

Phae. It Is you have raised this tempest of the soul.
You, sir, are minister; you govern here,
And bend at will an unsuspecting monarch.
To thee he yields his oracie of state;
And when with wrongs you have oppressed mankind,
It Is the king's pleasure; it is the royal will.

Arc. Unjust, ungenerous charge! have you forgot,
When first your vessel reached the coast of Naxos?
You sued for leave to land upon the isle:
To pray for shelter here. Ere that we heard
Theseus was with you: Theseus, whom the state
Of Athens sent a sacrifice to Minos,
A victim to absolve the annual tribute,
Imposed by conquest: Ariadne's love,
Her generous efforts to redeem the hero,
Even then were known at Periander's court.
The wondrous story on the wings of Fame
Had reached our Isle; she pitied, and she loved him.

Phae. She loved him -- Yes, she saw, and she adored.
Gods! who could see the graces of his youth,
His cause, his innocence, the hero's mien,
Manly and firm, yet softened by distress,
Gods! who could see him, and not gaze entranced
In ecstacy and love? -- What have I said?
My warmth too far transports me -- ah! beware
Aside. 'Twas as you say; she pitied, and she loved.

Arc. She favored his escape: you fled together.
To every neighboring isle you winged your flight.
You visited each realm; with prayers and tears
Wearied each court. All feared your father's power.
You came to Naxos; Periander's will,
Your orator, came forth. Did not I then --

Phae. You succored our distress:the tear of sympathy
Stood in your eye; and you may boast your merit --
You played it well, sir.

Arc. This ambiguous strain
But ill requites the offices of friendship;
For you I watched the temper of the king,
His ebbs and flows of passion: in apt season
You landed here. Thrice has the waning moon
Concealed her light, and thrice renewed her orb,
While you, meantime, have lived protected here.
Each hour has seen your sister Ariadne
Rise in her charms; and now with boundless sway
She reigns supreme in Periander's heart.

Phae. True, we have found protection from your king.
Three months have passed -- but in that time a statesman.
May change his mind. New views of interest --
New plans of policy, fair seeming motives,
May give new principles.

Arc. It is my first.
My best ambition to relieve the wretched.
You wrong me, princess; you had best retire.

Phae. No; Periander first shall hear my suit.
Here will I wait his coming; on the earth
Fall prostrate at his fect, implore his mercy.
Cling round his knees; and never loose my hold.
Till his heart melt, and save us from destruction.

Enter THESEUS. The. What plaintive sorrow through the lonely palace
Alarms my lift'ning ear?

Phae. That well-known voice
Dispels my fears. O! Theseus, how my heart
Bounds at thy loved approach! and yet this day
Decides your doom. -- Archon can tell you all.
This day resigns you to my father's power.
Here Periander has resolved to answer
The ambassador of Crete.

The. Control thy fears.
Archon has served me, and I thank him for it.
All will be well; the king protects us still.
Archon, the storm that threatened hideous ruin
At length subsides. The angry blast recalls
Its train of horrors. Through the sev'ring clouds
Faint gleams of day disclose the face of things.
The raging deep, that rose in mountain billows,
Sinks to repose: The winds, the waves are hushed.
From yon high tower, that overhangs the bay,
I viewed the ocean round. No sail appears,
No vessel cleaves the deep, save one escaped
From the wild uproar of the warring winds;
That with it is shattered masts, and laboring oars,
Stems the rough tide, and enters now the harbor.

Phae. Another sail! and enters now the harbor!
From whence? Who and what are they? From what coast?
Alas, from Crete! it is Minos sends; my father's wrath
Pursues us still; another embassy
Comes to demand us all,
And banish every fear.

Arc. Perhaps some vessel
Rich with the stores, with busy commerce sends
From the adjacent isles, on Naxos' coast
Now seeks a shelter from the roaring deep --
I Will to the harbor. Theseus, be it thine
To pour over Phaedra's wees the balm of comfort,
And hush her cares to peace. From Crete, I trust,
The messengers of woe no more will come,
To urge their stern demand.

Exit. Phae. Go, traitor, go;
Pernicious vile dissembler!

The. Ah! forbear.

Phae. He seems a friend, the surer to betray.
Full well he knows that Ariadne's charms.
Have waked a flame in Periander's heart.
To that alliance with a statesman's craft
He stands a foe concealed: He dre ds to see
On Naxos' throne a queen from Minos sprung,
And therefore plans our ruin.

" The. Yet thy fancy,
"Still armed against itself, turns'pale and trembles
"At shadowy forms. Were thy suspicions just,
"Wherefore reveal them? Why unguard thyself,
"And lay each secret open to your foe?
"With him, whose rankling malice works unseen,
"While smiles becalm his looks, 'twere best pretend
"Not to perceive the lurking treachery --
"Reproof but goads him, and new whets his passions;
"Till what was policy becomes revenge --
"Detected villainy can never forgive.

" Phae. And must I fall in silence? must we perish,
"Abandoned by ourselves, tame, willing victims;
"Nor let the murderer hear one dying groan?
"Must I behold him with his treacherous arts,
"A lurking foe, nor pour my curses on him;
"But poorly crouch, and thank him for the blow?
"Oh! love like mine, the love which you inspired,
"That each day rises still to higher ardour;
"Think thou that love like mine will calmly see thee
"Given up a victim to my father's rage?"

The. And think thou then that Archon is my foe?

Phae. He is; I know him well; he means destruction.
The ambassador of Crete will soon have audience.
Archon concerted all. Oh! if my care
Could counteract his dark, his sell designs,
Then were I blessed indeed. When first you landed
A helpless victim on the Cretan sho^e;
Full well you know, soft pity touched my heart,
And soon, that tender pity changed to love.
I wished to save you: Ariadne's fortune
Gave her the clue that led you through the maze.
Her zeal out-ran my speed, but not my love.
And would my fate allow me now to save thee,
Then by that tie ('it is all my sister's claim)
I then should prove me worthy of thy love.

The. Deem me not, generous Phaedra, deem me not
Formed of such common clay, so dead to beauty,
As not to feel with transport at my heart
Thy powerful charms. To Ariadne
I owe my life. That boon demands respect,
Demands my gratitude: But love must spring
Spontaneous in the heart, it is only source,
Unmixed with other motives than it is own;
Unbrib'd, unbought -- above all vulgar ties.

Phae And yet while ruin --

The. Check this storm of passion,
Nor think, with abject fear that Periander
Will ever resign us. Ariadne's charms
Have touched his heart. "His words, his looks proclaim it,
"In the soft tumult all his soul is lost,
"He dwells for ever on the loved idea,
"And with her beauty means to grace his throne.

" Phae. Archon abhors the union: To prevent it,
"His deep designs -- "
Hear what I shall disclose,
And treasure it in sacred silence sealed.
Last night admitted to a private audience,
Wrapped in the friendly mantle of the dark --

Enter an OFFICER. The. What would thou? speak thy purpose.

Of. At the harbor
That fronts the northern wave, a ship from Athens
This moment is arrived.

Phae. Relief from Athens!

Of. Your presence there by all is loudly called for.

The. Say to my friends, I will attend them straight.

Exit Officer. Phae, A ray of hope to gild the cloud of woe.

The. Now PhaeDRA, mark me. Let thy fears subside.
Last night when every care was lulled to res't,
No eye to trace my steps, no conscious ear
To catch the sound, then Periander granted
A private conference: I unbosom'd to him,
In confidence, the secrets; of my heart.
To Ariadne I resigned all claim;
Renounced each tender passion. Periander
No longer viewed me with a rival's eye.
He promised his protection. Ariadne
Has powerful charms, and the king bears a heart
To beauty not impassive. Joy and rapture
Spoke in his eye, and purpled over his face.
With vanity she will hear a monarch's sighs,
Proud of her sway. A diadem will quench
Her former flame, with glittering splendour tempt her,
And make the infidelity her own.

Phae. But if she hears a sister dares dispute
A heart like thine --

The. Trust to my prudent caution.
That dangerous secret I have skreen'd with care.
Here it lies buried. Periander thinks
A former flame, kindled long since in Greece,
Preys on my heart with slow consuming fires.
But hark -- beware -- this way some hasty step.

Enter ARCHON. Arc. The Greeks now issue on the beck. They bring
Tidings from Athens, and from every tongue
Your name resounds, and rings along the shore.

The. Thy friendship knows no pause; each hour your bring
New succor to the wretched. Princess, farewell.
Archon, I thank thee, and now seek my friends.

Exit. Arc. Princess, if once again I may presume
To offer friendly counsel; from this place
'Twere best you now retire. Yon' eastern clouds
Blush with the orient day. My royal master,
Attentive ever to the cares of state,
Will soon be here.

Phae. Let him first hear my prayer;
Permit me here to see him. To the voice
Of misery his ear will not be closed

A flourish of Trumpets. Enter PERIANDER, and attendant Officers. Oh!
Periander' 'midst the nations famed
For wisdom and for justice, let thy heart
Incline to mercy. Spare, oh, spare the wretched.

Perian. Rise, Princess, rise. That humble suppliant state
Suits not the dignity of Minos' daughter.
Whence this alarm, and why those gushing tears?

Phae. We fled for refuge to you. Oh! protect,
Protect the innocent. You gave us shelter;
It was a godlike act; recall it not;
Yield us not victims to a father's wrath;
Nor by one barbarous action sully all
The glories of your reign. Save Ariadne,
Save Theseus too: our misery claims respect.

Perian. Save Ariadne! can that beauteous mourner
Suspect my promised faith? perhaps even now,
Like some frail flower by beating rains oppressed,
She pining droops, and fickens in despair.
Oh! quickly seek her: with the words of comfort
Heal all her woes; raise that afflicted fair,
And bid the graces of her matchless form
Flourish secure beneath my fost'ring smile.
When Ariadne sues, a monarch's heart
Yields to her tears with transport.

Phae. Men will praise
The generous deed: the gods will bless thee for it.

Exit. Arc. The Ambassador from Crete with Minos' orders
Attends your royal will.

Perian. He shall be heard.

He ascends his Throne. Enter ALETES. Perian. To Naxos' court, Aletes, your are
welcome.
You come commssion'd from the Cretan, king:
Now speak your embassy.

Al. In fairest terms
Of friendly greeting Minos, sir, by me
Imparts his rightful claim. He knows the justice,
The moderation that directs your counsels:
He knows, though often in the embattled field
Your sword has reek'd with blood, your wisdom still
Respects the rights of kings; respects the laws,
That hold the nations in the bonds of peace.
To you, sir, he appeals; he claims his daughters,
His rebel daughters, leagued against his crown:
He claims the victim from his vengeance rescued;
Rescued by fraud, by Ariadne's fraud;
And here at Naxos sheltered from his justice.
A sovereign and a parent claims his rights.
You will respect the father and the king.

Perian. Of Minos' virtues, his renown in arms,
His plan of laws, that spread around the blessings
Of sacred order, and of social life;
Laws, which even kings obey, the world has heard
With praise, with gratitude. All must revere
The legislator, and the friend of man:
But in the sorrows that distract his house,
Is it for me with rash mistaken zeal
To interpose my care? is it for me
To judge his daughter's conduct? What decree,
What law of mine, what policy of Naxos
Have they offended? All who roam the deep
Find in my ports a safe, a sure retreat.
Should I comply with your proud, bold request,
The hardy genius of this sea-girt isle
Would call it tyranny, and power usurped;
It Is law, and not the sov'reign's will, that here
Controuls, directs, and animates the state

Al. The law that favors wrongs, and shelters guilt,
Subverts all order. Through her hundred cities
All Crete will mourn your answer. With regret
Minos will hear it. By pacific means
He would prevail; by justice, not the sword.
But, Sir, if justice, if a righteous cause
At your tribunal list their voice in vain,
I see the gathering storm; I see the dangers
That hover round your isle, and over the scene
Humanity lets fall the natural tear;
The sons of Crete, a brave, a generous race,
Active and ardent in their monarch's cause
Already grasp the sword. "I see the ocean
"White with unnumber'd sails; your coast, your harbors
"Beleaguered close. I see the martial bands
"Planting their banners on the well-fought shore;
"Your hills, your plains glittering with hostile arms,
"Your cities sacked, your villages on fire,
"While from its source each river swollen with carnage
"Runs crimson to the main. I see the conqueror
"Urge to your capital with rapid march,
"And desolation covering all the land.
"Still, Sir, you may prevent this waste of blood;
"Your timely wisdom -- "

Perian. The scope appears
Of your fair seeming message. And does Minos,
Famed as he is in arms, say, does he hope
With proud imperious sway to lord it over.
The Princes of the world? And does he mean.
To write his laws in blood? And must the nations
Crouch at his nod? Must I upon my throne
Look pale and tremble, when your fancied Jove
Grasps the unlifted thunder? Tell your king
He knows my warlike name -- knows we have met
In fields of death, opposed in adverse ranks,
Braving each other's lance -- he knows the sinew,
With which this arm can wield the deathful blade.
Or send the missive javelin on the foe,
Thirsting for blood. -- Go, bear my answer back,
And say besides, that Naxos boasts a race
Rough as their clime, by liberty inspired,
Of stubborn nerve, and unsubmitting spirit,
Who laugh to scorn a foreign master's claim.
You Have spoke your embassy, and have our answer.

Al. Unwilling I bear hence the ungrateful tidings.

Exit. Perian. Tomorrow's sun shall see him spread his sails:
He must not linger here.

Arc. Your pardon, Sir,
This answer may provoke the powers of Crete,
And war, inevitable war ensues.

Perian. Let the invader come, here we have war
To meet his bravest troops.

Arc. But where the numbers
To man each port, and line the sea-beat shore?
Within the realm should the foe flushed with conquest
Rear his proud banner --

Perian. With auxiliar aid
Greece will espouse my cause. The fleets of Athens
Full soon shall cover the Aegean deep,
And with confederated bands repel
A tyrant's claim.

Arc. Each state will urge its claim.
Minos demands his daughter: Greece expects
Her gallant warrior, and even now asserts
To crown his love, the princess, as her own.
Let Theseus spread his sails, and steer for Greece,
With Ariadne, partner of his flight.
You gain that generous state: by every tie
Of honor bound, Athens unsheaths her sword.
And haughty Minos threatens here in vain.

Perian. Yield Ariadne! yield that matchless beauty,
Where all the loves, where all the graces dwell!
No, I will save her; will protect her here
From rude unhallowed violence. Do thou
Haste to the palace, where the princess dwells;
Say to the attendant train, ourself will come,
To tell the counsels which my heart has formed.

Arc. Ay, there it lies, -- there lurks the secret wound
Love strikes the sweet infection to his soul.
It Is as I feared. [Aside.] -- Perhaps by mild remonstrance
We may gain time, and by the specious arts,
Of treaty and debate prevent the war.

Perian. You know my orders; see them straight obeyed.

Exit Arc. Perian. Yes, Ariadne, from the inclement storms
Of thy rude fortune, it is fixed to shield thee,
And soften all thy woes. Her father then,
When with her milder ray returning reason
Becalms his breast, shall thank the friend that held
His rage suspended, and with joy shall hear
That Ariadne reigns the queen of Naxos;
Here rules with gentle sway a willing people,
And with her virtues dignifies a throne.

Exit. ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter PERIANDER, with Attendants. Periander. LET all with duty, with
observance meet,
Wait on the princess: let the virgin train
With songs of rapture, and melodious airs
Try their best art; wake all the magic power
Of harmony, to soothe that tender breast,
And with soft numbers lull each sense of pain,
I have beheld her, gazed on every charm,
And Ariadne triumphs in my heart.

Enter ARCHON. Arc. A messenger from Athens waits your pleasure.

Perian. From Athens, say thou?

Arc. In the northern bay
His ship is moored. Theseus attends the stranger;
And both now crave an audience.

Perian. In apt time.
Their messenger arrives: when war impends,
Tidings from Athens are right welcome to me:
They breathe new vigor. Let the Greek approach.

Enter THESEUS and PERITHOUS. The. Forgive the transports of a heart that swells
Above all bounds, when I behold my friend,
My gallant, generous friend, the brave Perithous!
It glads my soul, thus to present before you
A chief renowned in arms, the best of men,
My other self, the partner of my toils,
And my best guide to glory.

Perian. To the virtues
Of the brave chief my ear is not a stranger,
You come from Athens?

Perit. Scarce two days have passed
Since thence I parted. Through the realms of Greece
^ame spread at large the adventures of my friend,
With Ariadne's glory, and the deed,
The generous deed, that snatched him from destruction;
How she conveyed him to this happy shore,
How he has been received and sheltered here.
The men of Athens, sensibly alive
To each fine motive, each exalted purpose,
Have heard with gratitude. My feeble voice
Would but degrade the sentiments that burn
In every breast, with joy and rapture fired
Warm with the best sensations of the heart,
They pour their thanks, the tribute of their praise.

Perian. The praise that is offered by the sons of Greece,
By that herioc, that enlightened race,
Is the best meed fair virtue can receive.

Perit. That fair reward is yours: your worth demands it.
To my brave friend Athens next points her care.
"What crime is his? Did he imbrue his hands
"In young Androgeus' blood? Why should he fall
"To expiate the death of Minos' son?
"Against the innocent who makes reprisals,
"And on the blameless head lets fall the sword,
"Offers up victims to his fell revenge.
"'It Is murder, and not justice.

"Perian. Righteous Heaven
"In the hour of danger has watched over your friend,
"And he has triumphed over their barbarous rites,
"Their savage law, the stain of Minos' reign."

Perit. Exulting now she pants for his return.
In crowds her eager citizens go forth,
And on the beach, and on the wave-worn cliff,
Over all the main roll their desiring eyes,
And ask of every ship that ploughs the deep,
News of their hero. A whole people's voice
Chose me their delegate, their faithful officer,
To seek my friend, and bear him hence with speed
Back to his native land.

Perian. The laws of Naxos
To all are equal. None are here constrained
None forced by violence, or lawless power,
To quit this safe, this hospitable shore.
Theseus will use the rights of freeborn men.
It Is his to give the answer.

The. For this goodness
My heart overflows with more than words can speak.

Perit. All Greece will thank you. -- Ariadne too --

Perian. How? -- Ariadne, say thou?

Perit. With delight,
With admiration, with unbounded transport,
Athens has heard her generous exploits;
Has heard, when Theseus on the Cretan shore
Arrived to glut their vengeance, how the tear
Bedewed her cheek. She pitied his misfortunes,
And whom she snatched from death, she means to bless
With that rare beauty, and connubial love.

Perian. Ha! do thou come to sink me to a slave?
It Is pride, it is arrogance makes this demand.
Must I obey the proud imperious mandate?
Bear Ariadne with you! -- By yon' Heaven,
No power on earth shall force her from the isle. --
"If thou presum'st again --

" Perit. I never have,
"I never can presume --

" Perian. It Is insolence! --
"Is this the praise? Are these the thanks you bring?
"Urge that request no more. -- "

Perit. If to my words
You Will deign to lend a favorable ear --

" Perian. Say, on what law does Athens found a right
"To claim, an alien princess?

" Perit. When her choice,
"Her generous choice, the impulse of the heart,
"Inclines her will, you will not fetter freedom?"

Perian. Her father claims her: -- do thou vainly hope,
That Greece can silence his paternal rights?
Is that your errand? -- Who commissioned thee? --
Is Theseus your adviser? and does he
Second this proud attempt?

The. No, Theseus never
Will plan, or counsel what may stain your honor.

Perit. Nor will he ever forget, -- I know him well --
I know his gratitude, his generous warmth,
His constancy and truth -- He Will never forget
His vows of faithful love. The debt he owes
To Ariadne never can be paid.
Athens approves their union; tuneful bards
Prepare the tribute of immortal verse,
And white-rob'd virgins even now are ready,
Where ever she treads, to scatter at her feet
The blooming spring, and at the sacred altar
To hymn the bridal song.

The. Unthinking man!
This blind mistaken zeal will ruin all.

Aside. Perian. No more! I Will hear no more! -- here break we off.
Proud Greek, forbear, nor wound again my ear
With terms of vile disgrace. Another word
Of yielding Ariadne, and by Heaven
The claims of Minos -- His ambassador
Is here at hand; once more I Will give him audience.
And if again this outrage to my crown, --
If Theseus is found tamp'ring in your plot, --
If you presume, by subtlety and fraud,
To Theseus, To mock my hopes, and after last night's conference,
Renounce your honor, my resentment roused
May do a deed to whelm you all in ruin;
Then, let your friend, when next he dares approach us,
Learn to respect a monarch, who disdains
A proud demand from the vain states of Greece.

Exit. Perit. The states of Greece, proud monarch! be assured,
Will vindicate their rights. -- Ha! -- why that look
Of wild dismay? that countenance of sorrow?
Explain; -- what means my friend?

The. Alas! you know not,
You little know the horror and despair
In which the hand of fate has plunged my soul.

" Perit. And can despair oppress thee? can thy heart
"Know that pale inmate? By our dangers past,
"By all our wars, spite of this braggart king,
"The beauteous Ariadne shall be thine.

" The. No more; no more of that: -- I cannot speak -- "

Perit. Those falt'ring accents, and those laboring sighs
Import some strange alarm.

" The. Oh! lead me hence,
"To meet the fiercest monsters of the desert,
"Rather than bear this conflict of the mind!

" Perit. Unfold this mystery." -- Those downcast eyes --

The. You have awakened Periander's fury.
Thy words have led me to a precipice,
And I stand trembling on the giddy brink.

Perit. From thence I Will lead thee to the peaceful vale,
To life and happiness. -- And can you thus,
When all your country's wishes bless your name,
When Athens to promote your happiness --

The. They may mis-judge my happiness: -- Alas!
I thank them: -- little do they know of Theseus.

Perit. They know your virtues, your heroic ardour,
Your patriot toil in the great cause of Greece:
They know that honor in your breast has fixed
Her sacred shrine: They know the generous flame
That love has waked in Ariadne's breast,
And how, in gratitude, the bright idea
Must fire a soul like thine. --

The. Too deep, too deep
"Each accent pierces here.
Aside.
" Perit. Those faithful arms
"Shall soon receive her."

The. You should not have claimed her.

Perit. Not claim that excellence! that rarest beauty --

" The. By that mistaken claim you have raised a storm
"That soon may burst in ruin on my head.
"You Have fired to madness Periander's soul,
"And wounded me, here in the tenderest nerve,
"That twines about the heart. For Ariadne"
Thy suit is vain, it is fruitless: urge no more.
Let me embark for Greece; gain my dismission;
But for the princess, name her not: her liberty
The heart of Periander never will grant:
No words that ever were formed will wring it from him.

Perit. Not grant her freedom! not release her hence!
Should he refuse, all Greece will rise in arms:
One common cause will form the generous league.
Soon Periander shall behold the ocean
White with the foam of twenty thousand ships;
The Grecian phalanx posted on his hills,
And his desenceless island wrapped in flames.

The. Let Greece forget me, nor in such a cause
Unchain the fury of wide-wasting war.
Oh! not for me such slaughter.

Perit. Think thou Greece
Will see thee torn from Ariadne's arms?
From her who sacrificed her all for thee?
From her whose courage has braved every danger;
Fied from her country, from her father's court,
To save her hero's life? From her, whose beauty
Already is the praise of wondering Greece,
Surpassing all that lavish fancy forms.
I know the princess; the revolving year
Has not yet closed it is round, since I beheld her
The pride, the glory of the Cretan dames.
"That harmony of shape, that winning grace;
"And when she moves, that dignity of mien!
"Those eyes, whose quick and inexpressive glance
"Brightens each feature, while it speaks the soul."

The. Thou need'st not, oh! my friend, thou need'st not point
Her beauties to my heart, -- Each charm is here is,
Softness and dignity in union sweet,
And each exalted virtue. Nature formed her
The hero's wonder, and the poet's theme.

Perit. You shall not lose her, by yon' Heaven you shall not.
I Will seek the king; apprise him of his danger,
Unmoor my ship, remeasure back the deep,
And bring the sleets of Athens to his harbor.

" The. It must not be; no Periander's soul
"Is firm, heroic, unsubdu'd by danger.
"His sudden rage, his irritated pride
"Will seal my doom: The deputies from Crete
"Are here to claim their victim: Periander sees
"Each charm, each grace of Ariadne's form,
"And sends his rival hence to instant death."

" Perit. I can prevent him; can elude his malice.
"This very night, when all is wrapped in darkness,
"Embark with me. The partner of your heart
"Shall be our lovely freight. I Will bear her hence
"Far from the tyrant's power. I Will lead you both
"To Athens' happy realm, the growing school
"Of laurell'd science, and each liberal art,
"Of laws, and polished life, where both may shine
"The pride, the luster of a wondering world;
"Dear to each other, and to aftertimes
"The pattern of all truth and faithful love."

The. Wretch that I am! -- his every word presents
My inward self, the horrors of my guilt.

Aside. Perit. Theseus, -- that altered look, -- those sighs renewed!
Some hoarded grief, --

The. Enquire no more but leave me.

Perit. I cannot, will not leave thee: tell me all.
Some load of secret grief weighs on thy spirit.

The. There let it lodge, there swell, and burst my heart.

Perit. You terrify your friend: Why heaves that groan?
Why those round drops, just starting from thy eye,
Which manhood combating forbids to fall?

The. I see my guilt.

Perit. Your guilt!

The. I feel it all.

Perit. If there is ought that labors in thy breast --

The. Here, here it lies.

Perit. To me unbosom all.

The. Perithous, would thou think it? -- Oh! my friend,
I owe to Ariadne more, -- alas! much more
Than a whole life of gratitude can pay.
And yet --

Perit. Go on: unload thy inmost thoughts;
A friend may heal the wound.

The. Oh! no; thou wilt scorn me,
Abjure, detest, abhor me. -- Will thou pardon
The frailties of a heart, that drives me on,
Endears the crime, and yet upbraids me still?
In me thou see -- who can control his love?
In me thou see --

Perit. Speak; what?

The. A perjured villain!
The veriest traitor, that ever yet deceived
A kind, a generous, a deluded maid;
And for his life preserved, for boundless love,
Can only answer with dissembling looks,
With counterfeited smiles, with fruitless thanks;
While with resistless charms another beauty --

Perit. Another! gracious powers!

The. She kindles all
The passions of my soul; charms every sense,
And Phaedra reigns the sovereign of my heart.

Perit. Her sister Phaedra! -- "and does she aspire
"To guilty joys; Does she admit your love?"
Does she too join you in the impious league?
Will she thus wound a sister, and receive
A traitor, a deserter to her arms?

The. Oa me, on me let fall thy bitt'rest censure,
But blame her not.

Perit. Not blame her! -- Who can hear
A tale like this, and not condemn you both?
The ungen'rous act will tarnish all your fame.

The. Forbear, my friend; the god of love inspired --

Perit. Some fiend, a see to every generous instinct,
A foe to all that is fair, or great in man,
Infused the baleful poison through your soul.

The. The guilt is mine: But spare, oh! spare my Phaedra,
A single glance from those love-beaming eyes
Infiames each thought, and hurries me to madness.
Hark! [Soft music is heard] Ariadne comes! -- this way, my friend;
Thou still can serve me. With a lover's ardour
The King beholds her, and with earnest suit
He woes her to his throne. Let us retire;
Thou still can guide me through the maze of fate.

Exeunt. SCENE II.
Soft Music is heard. Enter ARIADNE, with a train of Virgins. " 1st.Vir Now,
Ariadne, now, my royal mistress,
"Propitious fortune smiles, and from this day
"The gods prepare a smiling train of years."

Ari. I thank you, Virgins; this kind of sympathy
Shows you have hearts that feel another's bliss.
"Oh! much I thank you, virgins; yet this day
"Dispels the clouds, that hovered over my head."
Thou source of life, thou bright, thou radiant god,
Who through creation pour'st thy flood of glory,
All hail thy golden orb! "Thou come to quell
"The howling blast, to bid the tempest cease,
"And after all the horrors of the night,
"To cheer the face of nature! -- Oh! to me
"Thou come propitious, in thy bright career
"Leading thy feltive train. The circling hours
"That smile with happier omens, as they pass
"Shedding down blessings from their balmy wings,
"Prepare thy way rejoicing; with thee come
"Bright Hope, and rose-lip'd Health, and pure delight,
"And love and joy, the sunshine of the soul."

" 1st. Vir. Be all your hours like this: may no misfortune
"O'ercloud the scene; and may you never have cause
"To dim the luster of those eyes in tears."

Ari. Oh, from this day! From this auspicious day,
Theseus is mine; "The godlike hero's mine,
"With every grace, with every laurel crowned,
"The lover's softness, and the warrior's fire.
"A monarch now protects him; he has pledged
"His Royal word -- But O, my love!"
Swift as some God, that mounts the viewless winds
And cleaves the liquid air, thou should have flown
To tell me all, to bless me with thy presence,
And bid the news more joyful touch my ear,
Raised and endeared by that enchanting tongue.
"Why does he loiter thus?"

" 1st. Virg. His friends from Greece
"Perhaps detain him,"

" Ari. "Oh! it must be so,
"And without cause I chide his lingering stay.
"A ship from Greece to claim us! mighty gods!
"When your displeasure smo^e me, when your wrath,
"Severely just, gave to my trembling lip
"The cup of bitterness, to your high will
"I bowed in reverence down; I bore it all,
"For Theseus' sake, I bore it all with patience;
"And midst our sorrows, with a dawn of gladness
"I soothed his wounded spirit; teach me now,
"Oh! teach me how to bear this tide of joy,
"Nor with excess of bounty try too much
"A heart that melts, that languishes with love."

Enter PHAEDRA. Ari. Oh! Phaedra, why this long, unkind delay?
The gods restore my Theseus to my arms.

Phae. If the protecting gods from Theseus' head
Ward off the impending blow, none more than Phaedra
Will feel the general joy. But still my fears --

Ari. Suppress them all. Theseus has naught to fear.
But where, where is he? whither has he wandered?
Say, tell me all, and speak to me of Theseus.
In vain I ask it. "Though his name delights
"My listening ear, yet you will never charm me
"With the loved praises of the godlike man."
On Periander's name you often dwell,
In strains, that in a heart not touched like mine,
Might stir affection. -- Not a word of Theseus:
Why silent thus? -- it is unkind reserve.
Alas, my sister, thy unruffled temper
Knows not the tender luxury of love,
That joys to hear the object it adores
Approved, admired of all, when every tongue
Grows lavish in his praise, then, then, with ecstacy
The heart tuns over and with pride we listen.

Phae. I have been just to Theseus; never wronged him.
His fame in arms has filled the nations round;
And purple victory in fields of death
For him has often turned the doubtful scale.

Ari. Unkind, ungen'rous praise! Has no one told you
His brave exploits? the number of his battles?
But who can count them? Fame exalts her trump,
Delighted with his name to swell the note;
And victory exulting claps her wings,
Still proud to follow, where he leads the way.

Phae. So fame reports -- With what unbounded rage
Her passions kindle. -- She alarms my fears.

Aside. Ari. Why that averted look? Of late, my filter,
Of late I Have marked thee with dejected mien,
Pensive and sad. -- If aught of discontent
Weighs on thy heart, disclose it all to me.
"In every state of life, in all conditions,"
With thee I have unloaded every secret,
Fled to your arms, and sighed forth all my care.

Phae. Does Ariadne think my love abated?

Ari. No, Phaedra, no; I harbor no mistrust.
I know thy virtues: -- We grew up together,
Knit in the bands of love. No opening grace
That sparkled in thy eye, or dawned in mine,
Could prompt the little passions of our sex.
We heard each other's praise, and envy slept.
And sure had Theseus, though with boundless ardour
I now must love him, to distraction love him;
Yet if my Theseus had first six'd on thee,
I could; I think I could, have seen you happy
In his loved aims, and hero as he is
I had resigned him to you. -- Why that sigh,
Phaedra? way fall those tears?

Phae. Forgive your sister,
If still she fears for thee -- Her every look,
Each word she utters pierces to my heart.

Aside. Ari. Speak, tell me why is this? why thus alarm me?
I never had a thought concealed from thee.

Enter THESEUS and PERITHOUS. Ari. Oh! Theseus, in thy absence every moment
Was counted with a sigh. "Support me, help me
"For I am faint with bliss."

" The. Revive, revive;
"Recall thy sleeting strength. Your counsels, Phaedra,
"Will best assist her; your persuasive voice
"Will charm her sense, and banish all her cares.

" Phae. At his loved sight, what new emotions rise!"

Aside. The. My friend Perithous from the realms of Greece --

Ari. Perithous here! the messenger from Athens!
When last you sojourned at my father's court;
(The sun has circled since his annual round)
I well remember you, admired of all.
Men heard and praised the wonder of your friendship
"For Theseus, then a stranger to those eyes,
"But since beheld, and ah! beheld to charm
"The heart of Ariadne! -- you come now
"To succor our distress."

Perit. In evil hour
I sailed from Greece. Would I had never embarked.

Ari. My heart dies in me. -- Say what new event --
Theseus explain, and tell me, tell me all.

The. Oh! I was born to be the unceasing curse
Of Ariadne's life; still, still indebted,
Unable to repay.

Ari. Thou generous man!
To hear those sounds, and view thee thus before me,
Over pays me now for all my sufferings past.

Enter ARCHON. Arc. Theseus, on matters of some new concern,
To me unknown, your presence is required.
It Is Periander's order.

The. I obey.

Ari. What may this mean? yet, Theseus, ere you go --

The. My friend will tell each circumstance; from him
You Will calmly hear it all. And may his voice,
Soft as the breeze that pants in eastern groves
Approach your ear, and sooth your thoughts to peace.

Exit with Archon. Ari. The gods will watch thy ways, and Periander
Has promised still to shield thy suffering virtue.

Phae. I dread some mischief: Ariadne, here
Wait my return: I Will follow to the palace,
And bring the earliest tidings of his fate.

Exit. Ari. My heart is chilled with fear. What dark event --
Can Periander -- no; dishonor never
Will stain his name. -- And yet that awful pause!
Those looks with grief overwhelmed!

Perit. Yes, grief indeed
Sits heavy at my heart. --

Ari. Reveal the cause;
Give me to know the worst. This dread suspense --

Perit. Oh! that in silence I could ever hide
From you, from all, and in oblivion bury
What here is lodged, and shakes my soul with horror!

Ari. With horror! wherefore? is not Theseus safe?
Does not his country claim him? Does not Greece
With open arms expect him? Does not Athens
Send you with orders to demand us both?

Perit. From thence your dangers rise: the sons of Athens,
A quick, inconstant, fluctuating race --

Ari. Yet ever wise, heroic, generous brave,
All soul, all energy. Do they oppose
Our nuptial union? Do they still retain
Their old hostility? Do they exclude
An alien princess from the throne of Athens?
If such their will, take, take the sovereign sway,
The imperial diadem, the pomp of state:
Let Theseus to his father's rights succeed,
And reign alone; make me his wedded wise;
It Is all I ask; "the Gods can grant no more."
Thrones, sceptres, grandeur! love can scorn you all.

Perit. Unhappy Theseus! by disastrous fate
Doomed to betray such excellence; to see
The fairest gift of Heaven, and spurn it from him.

Aside. Ari. You answer not: speak and resolve my doubts.
Pity a heart, too tenderly alive,
And wild with fear, "that throbs, that aches like mine.
Thy pure, exalted mild will tower above
The arts of mean equivocating phrase.
You Will not deceive a fond, a faithful woman.

Perit. None should deceive you; none. You will forgive
My hesitating fears. I would not wound
That tender frame with aught that may alarm you.
For thee my mind misgives: the fear that awes me
Pays homage to your virtue.

Ari. And does Greece
Reject the love I proffer?

Perit. No, all Greece
Reveres your honored name: The Athenian slate
By me demands your liberty. In terms
Of earnest import I have urged their claim;
But Periander, -- to his ardent spirit
You are no stranger. -- He no sooner heard
The name of Ariadne, than with fiercest rage --
Perhaps you know the cause -- with high disdain
He spurned at the demand. Some hidden motive --
It Is love perhaps -- you will forgive my boldness --
It Is love, perhaps, that prompts the stern reply
Should I presume once more to urge the claim,
Theseus that moment must embark for Crete.
So says the king: he will not brook a rival.
You Will see you lover torn by russians from you;
You Will see the ship bound swiftly over the waves;
In vain you will shriek; in vain extend your arms,
And call on Theseus lost!

Ari. That savage purpose
The soul of Periander will disdain.

Perit. What will not love persuade? love made you fly
Your father's court; and love may teach a monarch
To break all bonds, and tower above the laws.

Ari. If this be what alarms you --

Perit. Theseus' life
Once more depends on thee. --

Ari. To save that life
Is there an enterprise, a scene of danger,
That Ariadne will not dare to meet?

Perit. Your wondrous daring on the wings of same
Has reached the nations round. But now, alas!
One only way is left.

Ari. Direct me to it.

Perit. To Periander lend a gracious ear.
For thee he sighs; for thee his vows ascend.
His throne awaits thee; the imperial crown --

Ari. Sir, do you know me?

" Perit. Princess here to reign
"In this fair island --

" Ari. Do you know the spirit
"That rules this breast, end over informs my soul?"

Perit. Forgive the zeal that prompts me to this office.
The king intensely loves; and in a base,
Degenerate world, frem which all truth is fled,
He still may faithful prove to worth like thine.
Consult with Theseus: he can best advise you.

Ari. Consult with Theseus! ask his kind consent,
That I may prove a traitress to my vows!
Resign my Theseus!
With every grace, with every laurel crowned,
The lover's softness, and the warrier's sire. --
Sir, for this counsel, for this generous care,
Accept my thanks. -- "You are too much alarmed --
"Resign my Theseus! -- Oh, the gods have formed him
"With every virtue that adorns the hero!
"With valor, to incite the soldier's wonder;
"With every grace to charm the heart of woman.
"Oh! none will rival him. 'Twill be the pride
"Of Periander, it is his highest glory,
"That Theseus fl^d for shelter to his throne,
"And met protection here."

Perit. I Have been to blame.
Perhaps I urge too far: -- Princess, farewell!
May the benignant gods watch all your ways.

Exit. Ari. Your fears are vain; each gloomy cloud shall vanish,
Or, tinged with orient beams of smiling fortune,
With added luster gild our various day;
While over our heads Hymen shall wave his torch,
Sooth all our cares, and brighten every joy.

Exeunt. ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter ARIANDE and THESEUS. Ariadne. Oh, look not thus! "those eyes that glare
so pale,"
Those sighs that heave as they would burst your heart,
Affright my soul, and kill me with despair.
Oh! banish all thy doubts, and let those eyes
Smile, as when first they beamed their softness on me.

" The. Alas! I Am doomed to mourn; my thread of life
"Was steeped in tears, and must for ever run
"Black and discolored with the worst of woes.

" Ari. Can thy great heart thus shrink, appalled with fear?
"Theseus, I never saw thee thus before."

The. Our days of rapture and of promised joy
Far hence are fled.

" Ari. No, on their rosy wings
"The hours of joy and ever new delight
"Come smiling on. Is this a time for fear,
"When all is gay serenity around us,
"And fortune opens all her brightest scenes?

" The. Too soon that scene, with lowering clouds deformed,
"Will show the sad reverse." You little know
How Periander with resistless fury
Breaks through all bounds. His passions scorn restraint.
And what he wills, his vehemence of soul
Pursues with fierce, with unremitting ardour.
To his wild fury all must yield obedience.

Ari. His reign has ever been both mild and just.
Fair virtue, like some god that rules the storm,
Still calms the warring elements within him;
And moderation with her golden curb
Guides all his actions.

The. Yet there is an impulse,
Which with the whirlwind's unresisted rage,
Roots up each virtue, and lays waste the soul.
Love reigns a lawless tyrant in his heart.
For thee he sighs; and sure that matchless beauty
May well inflame the passions of a prince,
Who with a diadem can deck thy brow.

Ari. Too well he knows the ties that bind us both.
Knows you're all truth, all constancy and love.
He knows the flame my virgin sighs have owned;
Knows that for thee I left my native land,
Fled from my friends, and from my father's palace,
And gave up all for thee. And thinks he now
His throne, his diadem, his purple pomp,
Have charms of power to lure me from thy arms?
He knows his vows are lost in air: Thy heart
Is Ariadne's throne.

The. "His fiercest passions
"Break forth at once, like the deep cavern'd fire.
"All ties, all tender motives must give way.
His resolution's six'd." Alas! this very day,
Unless for ever I renounce thy love,
His jealous rage sends me hence bound in chains,
To die a victim on the Cretan shore.

Ari. He will not dare it; no, so black an outrage
His heart will never conceive. Should he persist,
Should malice goad him on. I too can fly
This barbarous shore; with unextinguish'd love
Through every region, every clime attend thee;
Follow your fortunes, if the fates ordain it,
Even to my father's court; there prostrate fall.
And clasp his hand, and bathe it with my tears.
Nor cease with vehemence of grief to melt him,
Till he release thee to these circling arms,
"Approve my choice, and show thee to the people,
"The adopted heir, the rising sun of Crete."

The. By yielding me, his rival is destroyed;
And by that act his proud ambition hopes
To sooth your father's irritated pride,
And mould him to his wish.

Ari. Can Periander
Harbor that black intent? "and does he mean
"To prove at first a villain and a murderer,
"And then aspire to Ariadne's love?"
No, Theseus, no; he will not stoop so vilely:
I Have heard you often commend him; often my sister
Employs whole hours with rapture in his praise.
He is her constant theme. Her partial voice
Even above thine exalts his favorite name.
"She dwells on each particular; in peace
"His milder virtues, his great fame in arms:
"How, when he talks, fond admiration listens:
"And each bright princess hears him, and adores.

" The. Not envy's self, however his pride inflamed
"May deal with me, can overshade his glory.
"R^nown in war is his; the softer virtues
"Of mild humanity adorn his name.
"The poli^h'd arts of peace, and every muse
"Attune to finer sentiments his soul.
"His throne is fixed upon the firmest basis
"Of wisdom, and of justice. There to shine
"The partner of his heart, his soft associate
"In that bright scene of glory, well may prompt
"In every neighboring state the virgin's sigh,
"And wake the ambition of each monarch's daughter.

" Ari. The strain, the rapture that to me in secret
"My sister Phaedra pours the live-long day,
"Enamored of his name! Perchance you have heard her,
"And marked the heaving sigh, and seen the blush
"That glowed with conscious crimson on her cheek."
Oh! if she cherishes the tender flame,
"With maiden coyness veiled, and pines in love,"
Beauty like here is may fire a monarch's heart,
And Periander, without shame or guilt,
Without a crime, may woe her to his arms.
To see her happy, to behold my Phaedra
Crowned with a monarch's and a people's love,
Would be the pride of Ariadne's heart.

The. Oh, it were misery, the worst of woes.

Aside. Ari. Why do you start? why that averted look?
If you approve their nuptials, freely tell me:
With Periander I can plead her cause,
Paint forth each charm of that accomplished mind,
"'Till the king glow with rapture at the sound."

The. Oh, this would plunge me in the worst despair!
Aside. It must not be! -- Has not Perithous told you --

Ari. Perithous is your friend. -- Perhaps to draw
The tie still closer, you would see him blessed
In Phaedra's arms. -- Tell me your inmost thoughts.
If such your will, what will I not atempt.
To sooth to dear delight a mind like thine?
Phaedra will listen to me; mutual love
Has so endeared us, from our tenderest years
"Has so increased, and with our growth kept pace,"
That we have had one wish, one heart, one mind. --
My voice with Phaedra will have all the power
Of soft persuasion: her exalted merit
Will bless your friend and brighten all his days.

The. Oh, the bare image fires my brain to madness!
Aside. Alas! this dream of happiness --

Ari. What means
That sudden cloud? and why that laboring sigh?
Oh, let my sister to Perithous' vows
Yield her consent, and bless him with her beauty:
Together then we'll seek the realms of Greece;
There in sweet union see our growing loves
Spring with new rapture, share each other's bliss,
And by imparting multiply our joys.

Enter ARCHON. Arc. With thee, fair princess, Periander craves
Another interview: He enters now
The palace garden.

Ari. Does he there require My presence?

Arc. Where you deign to give him audience,
He will attend you.

The. "It were best go forth."
His virtues claim respect; and Oh, remember
My fate, my happiness on thee depend.

Ari. Trust Ariadne, trust your fate with me.

Aside. Arc. The Cretan princess, with resistless passion.
Inflames his fierce desires. My boding fears
Foresee some dire event.

The. A glance from her
Will sooth his rage, and all may still be well.
When love resistless fires the noble mind,
The effects, though sudden, from that generous source,
Are often excused; the errors of our nature,
The tender weakness of the human heart.

Arc. Errors that influence the public weal,
His rank prohibits. -- "Let his vices be
"(If vices he must have) obscure and private,
"Unfelt by men, leaving no trace behind.
"It were unjust, that his unbounded fury
"Should tear thee from the arms of her you love."

The. "But when a monarch" -- Ha! Perithons comes.

Enter PERITHOUS. Perit. Theseus, I sought thee. -- Archon, does your king
Relent? or must confed'rate Greece send forth.
Her fleets and armies to support her rights?

Arc. The miseries of war my feeble voice
Shall labor to prevent. Theseus, farewell.
Archon is still your friend. With Ariadne,
Ere long, I trust, you may revisit Greece.

Exit. The. With her revisit Greece! Why all this zeal
For Ariadne? Who has tampered with him?
Why not convey her to her father's court?
Why not invite her to the throne of Naxos?
Why all this busy, this officious care
To torture me? to foil his sovereign's love?
To send far hence the idol of his heart,
And blend her fate with mine?

Perit. Her fate with thine
So close is blended, nothing can divide them.
Truth, honor, justice, gratitude combine
Each tender sentiment; they form a chain,
An adamantine chain, indissoluble, firm,
And strong as that which from the throne of Jove
Hangs down to draw to harmony and union
This universal frame.

The. It this my friend?

Perit. Your friend, who scorns to flatter;
Who dares avow the emotions of his heart.
Oh! Theseus, we have long together walked
The paths of virtue, upright, firm in honor;
And shall we now decline? and shall we now
Wiih fraud, with perfidy, with blackest perfidy,
For eVer damn our names?

" The. This stern reproof
"Is not the language the time now demands.
"'It Is thine, my friend, to soften my distress;
"To pour the balm of comfort over my sorrows,
"And sooth the anguish of a wounded mind.
"Oh! step between me and the keen reproaches
"Of injured beauty; save me from myself;
"From Ariadne save me!

" Perit. Is it thus,
"Oh! rash deluded man!" and is it thus
With high disdain you spurn that rarest beauty,
That fond, believing, unsuspecting fair?

" The. "Have you not painted to her dazzled fancy
"The splendour of a throne, that here awaits her?

" Perit. So generous, so unbounded is her love,
"She seeks but thee, thee only. Pomp and splendour
"Are toys that sink, and fade away before her.

" The. Then tell her all the truth: tell her at once,
"Another flame is kindled in my heart,
"And fate ordains she never can be mine.

" Perit. Will that become Perithous? that the task
"Thy friendship would impose? Must I proclaim
"To the astonished world, my friend's dishonor?
"Must I with cruelty, with felon purpose,
"Approach that excellence, that beauteous form,
"And for her generous love, for all her virtue,
"Fix in her tender breast the sharpest pang,
"With which ingratitude can stab the heart?"

The. Why will thou goad me thus? it is cruelty;
It Is malice in disguise. -- Forbear, forbear;
Assist your friend in the soft cause of love,
Involuntary love, that hold's enslaved
The fettered will.

Perit. Involuntary love!
Beware, beware of the deceitful garb
That vice too often assumes. -- There Is not a purpose
Prompting to evil deeds, that dares appear
In it is own native form. The first approach,
With bland allurements, with insidious mien,
Wears the delusive' semblance of some virtue.
The Siren spreads her charms, and fancy lends
Her thousand hues to deck the lurking crime.
Opinion changes; it is no longer guilt;
It Is amiable weakness, generous frailty,
Involuntary error. On we rush
By fatal error led, and thus the language,
The sophistry of vice deludes us all.

The. Perithous, it is in vain: in vain you strive,
By subtle maxims, and by pedant reasoning
To talk down love, and mould it to your will.
It rages here like a close pent-up fire;
And think thou tame advice can check it is course,
And soothe to rest the fever of the soul?

Perit. And will thou thus, by one ungen'rous deed,
Blast all thy laurels, and give up at once
To shame and infamy thy honored name?

The. Woul'dst thou destroy my peace of mind for ever?

Perit. I would preserve it. Would thou still enjoy
The attesting suffrage of the conscious heart?
The road is plain and level: live with honor.
Be all your deeds, such as become a man:
It Is that alone can give the unclouded spirit,
The pure serenity of inward peace.
All else is noisy fame; the giddy shout
Of gazing multitudes that (...) expires,
And leaves our laurels, and our martial glory
To wither and decay. By after times
The roar of fond applause no more is heard.
The triumph ceases, and the hero then
Fades to the eye: the faithless man remains.

The. Was it for this you spread your sails from Greece?
To aggravate my sorrows? -- If a monarch
Woes (...) to his throne and bed;
If I resign her to imperial splend^^,
Where is my guilt? Why will she not accept
The bright reward, that waits to crown her virtues?

Perit. Because like thee, she is not prone to change.

The. Why, crue^, (...) pierce my very soul?

Perit. Because, (...) knows not to betray.

The. Disastrous fate* And (...) ^^ou have me fly
From Phaedra's arms? By every ^^^^mn vow,
By every sacred tie, by love itself,
My heart is here is She is my only source
Of present bliss, my best, my only earnest
Of future joy; the idol of my soul
Should I des^rt her, can invention find,
Midst all her stores, a tint of specious coloring
To varnish the deceit?

Perit. It wants no varnish,
No specious coloring. Plain honest truth
Will justify the deed. With open firmness
Go, talk with Phaed^a: tell her with remorse
Conscience has shown the horrors of your guilt,
Tell her the (...), you breathe to A^^a^ne,
Were heard above, recorded by the gods,
Tell her if sti^^ ^he spr^ads her fatal lure,
She takes a perjured traitor to her arms,
Practiced in fraud, who may again deceive.
Tell her, with equal guilt, nor less abnor'd,
She joins to rob a (...) of her rights.
Tell her that Greece --

The. No more; I Will here no more.
Assist my love; it is there I ask your aid.
Forget my same; it is not worth my care.

Perit. Then, go, rush on, devoted to destruction.
Let Hymen kindle his unhallowed torch,
Clasped in each, other arms enjoy your guilt.
Renounce all sacred honor; add your name
To the bright list of those illustious worthies,
Who have seduced, by vile insidions arts,
The fond affections of the generous fair;
And in return for all her wondrous goodness,
Leave the fair mourner to deplore her fate;
To pine in solitude, and die at length
Of the slow pangs that rend the broken heart.

The. Oh! fortune, fortune! -- wherefore was I born
With a great heart, that loves, that honors virtue,
And yet thus fated to be passion's slave?

Perit. It Is but one effort, and you tower above
The little frailties that debase your nature.
That were true victory, worth all your conquests.
You triumph over yourself. And lo! behold
The occasion offers. -- Ariadne comes!

The. I must not see her now.

Perit. By heaven, you shall!

The. Often, loose your hold. Confusion, shame, and horror,
Rage and despair, distract and rend my soul.
It Is you have fixed these scorpions in my breast.

Perit. And yet --

holding him The. No more; let midnight darkness hide me
In some deep cave, where I may dwell with madness,
Far from the world, far from a friend like thee.

Exit. Perit. Misguided man! my friendship still shall save him.

Ari. Stay, Theseus, stay: does he avoid my presence?
Why with that haste, that wild disordered look --

Perit. It Is now the moment of suspended fate:
The gods assembled hold the uplifted balance,
And my friend's peace, all that is dear, or sacred,
His fame and honor, --

Ari. The gods protect him still: you need not fear.
All danger slies before him.

Perit. While the king
D^^ains him here, he knows to what excess
A monarch's love --

Ari. Does that alarm his fear?
And does he therefore fly? -- Ungen'rous Theseus!
And is it thus you judge of Ariadne?
And yet, Perithous, I will not upbraid him.
His tender sensibility of heart
Too quickly takes the alarm: yet that alarm
Shows with what strong solicitude he loves;
My tears prevail, and he may sail for Greece.
This very moment Periander granted --
See, where he comes: he will confirm it all.

Perit. It were not fit he should behold me here.
When apt occasion serves, we'll meet again.
A heart like yours, with every virtue fraught.
Should be no more deceived. I now withdraw.

Exit. Ari. Go tell my Theseus all his fears are vain.
In love, as well as war, he still must triumph.

Perian. If once again I trouble your retreat,
Deem me not, princess, too importunate,
Nor with indignant scorn reject a heart,
That throbs in every vein for you alone.

Ari. Scorn in your presence, sir, no mind can feel.
Far other sentiments your martial glory,
And the mild feelings of your generous nature,
Excite in every breast. The crown you wear,
From virtue's purest ray derives it is luster.
Your subjects own a father in their king.
"Beneath your sway the wretched ever find
"A sure retreat. At Periander's court
"All hearts rejoice: here misery dries her tear."
To me your kind humanity has given
It Is best protection. "For the generous act
"My heart overflows: these tears attest my thanks."
Each day beholds me bow to you with praise,
Respect, and gratitude.

Perian. And must respect,
Fruitless respect, and distant cold regard,
Be all my lot? Has Heaven no other bliss
In store for me? unhappy royalty!
Condemned to shine in solitary state,
With no fond tenderness of mutual love,
To sooth the heart, and sweeten all it is cares
"Without the soft society of love"

Ari. For thee the gods reserve sublimer joys,
"The happiness supreme of serving millions."
It Is yours, in war to guard a people's rights;
In peace, to spread one common bliss to all,
And feel the raptures of that best ambition.
"Mankind demands you: glory is your call."

Perian. Ambition is the phrenzy of the soul;
The fierce insatiate avarice of glory,
That wades through blood, and marks it is way with ruin:
And when it is toils are over, what then remains,
But to look back through wide dispeopled realms?
Where nature mourns over all the dreary waste,
And hears the widows, and the orphans' shrieks,
And sees each laurel wither at the groans,
And the deep curses of a ruined people.
Vain efforts all! vain the pursuit of glory,
Unless bright beauty arm us for the field,
Hail our return, enhance the victor's prize,
And love reward what love itself inspired.

" Ari. The vast renown, that spread such luster round you,
"Like the bright sun, that dims all meaner rays,
"And makes a desert in the blue expanse,
"Will never want uplifted wondering eyes
"To gaze upon it." From the neighboring states
Some blooming virgin, some illustrious princess
Will yield with rapture to a monarch's love,
Proud of a throne, which virtue has adorned.

Perian. That pew'r is yours: one kind indulgent glance,
One smile, the harbinger of soft consent,
Has bliss in store beyond the reach of fortune,
Beyond ambition's wish.

Ari. Your pardon, sir,
I must not hear you sigh, and sigh in vain:
Look round your isle, where in it is fairest forms,
In all it is winning graces, beauty decks
Your splendid court. Amidst the radiant train,
If none has touched your heart, may I presume --
Perhaps you will think mine a too partial voice --
If none attract you, see where Phaedra shines
In every grace, in each attractive charm
Of outward form, and dignity of mind.
Her rare perfections, her unequalled virtue,
"The mild affections of her generous heart,"
Her friendship firm, in every instance tried,
Transcend all praise. "In her pure virgin breast
"Love never kindled yet his secret flame.
"Your voice may wake desires unfelt before:"
With pride she will listen, and may crown your vows
With all the endearments of a love sincere,
And with her softer luster grace your throne.

Perian. Why, cruel, torture me with cold disdain?
With; thee to reign were Periander's glory.

Ari. Oh, not for me that glory! well you know
This heart already is another's right.

Perian. There lies the precipice on which you tread.
By your own hand it is covered over with flowers:
Your fall will first discover it.

Ari. Those words
Dark and mysterious --

" Perian. It were not fit
"That fond credulity should lead you on,
"In gay (...), and in errors maze." --
The base deceive^ --

Ari. Who? -- what do thou mean?

" Perian. I mean to save you from his treacherous arts;
"To place you on a throne, beyond his reach,
"Where soul ingratitude will see her shafts
"Fall pow'rle^s at your feet.

" Ari. Cold tremors shoot, --
"I know not why, -- through all my trembling frame." --

Perian. Tender, sincere, are generous yourself,
You little know the arts of faithless man.

Ari. Explain; unfold; -- you freeze my soul with horror.

Perian. Beware of Theseus!

Ari. How! of Theseus, said thou?

Perian. Were I this day to send him hence a victim,
(And you alone -- your tears suspend my purpose)
Twere vengeance due to perfidy like his.

Ari. The viper-tongue of slander wrongs him, Sir.
Too well I know his worth: -- my heart's at peace.

Perian. With fond enchantment the gay siren hope
Has lured you, on a calm unruffled sea,
To trust a smiling sky and flattering gales.
Too soon you will see that sky deformed with clouds:
Too soon you will wonder at the gathering storm,
And look aghast at the deep lurking ruin,
Where all your hopes must perish.

Ari. Still each word
Is wrapped in darkness: -- end this dread suspense,
Or else my fluttering soul will soon forsake me,
And leave me at your feet a breathless corse.

Perian. A former flame -- restrain that wild surprise;
Summon your strength: -- I speak his very words:
A former flame, kindled long since in Greece,
"Preys on his heart with slow consuming fires."

Ari. Does this become a monarch? Can your pride
Thus lowly stoop, thus with a tale suborned
To tempt the honor of this faithful breast?

Perian. By every power that views the heart of man,
And dictates moral thoughts, it is truth I utter.
Last night, admitted to a private audience,
He owned it all; renounced your love for ever;
Gave up his fair pretensions. -- Ariadne,
Your color changes, and the gushing tear
Starts from your trembling eye. --

Ari. The very thought --
Though sure it cannot be, -- the very thought
Strikes to my heart like the cold hand of death.

Perian. If still you doubt, go charge him with his guilt:
He will allow it all.

Ari. And if he does,
Oh, what a change in one disastrous day!

Perian. Your sat now calls for firm decisive measures.
I will no longer urge the ungrateful subject.
I leave you to collect your fluttering spirits.
I would not see your generous heart deceived --
His guilt should rouse your noblest indignation.
Now you may prove the greatness of your soul.

Exit. Ari. "If this be so, -- if Theseus can be false,
"Is there on earth a wretch so cursed as I am?" --
A former flame! -- ha! think no more -- that thought,
With ruin big, shoots horror to my brain.
A former flame "still rages in his soul. --
"So said the king." -- Who is the fatal fair?
"Where, in what region does she hide her charms?"
Was it for her I saved him from destruction?
For her rebelled against my father's power?
To give to her all that my heart adores?
Can Theseus thus! -- no, "yonder sun will sooner
"Start from his orbit." -- Yet wherefore shun my presence?
Why all this day that stern, averted look?
I Am torn, distracted, tortured with these doubts;
And where, Oh, where to fix! -- I think him still
All truth, all honor, tenderness and love.
And yet Perithous -- it is all too plain;
All things conspire; all things inform against him.
"He will avow it!" -- Let me seek him straight,
Unload my breast, nnd charge him with my wrongs;
With indignation harrow up his soul;
Tell all I Have heard, all that distracts my brain;
Pour forth my rage, pour forth my fondness too,
And perhaps prove him innocent at last.

ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter ARIADNE. Ariadne. "WHERE, Ariadne, where are now the hours
"That, winged with rapture, chased each other's slight,
"In one gay round of joy? -- Where now the hopes,
"That promised years of unextinguish'd love?" --
"'It Is past; -- the dream is fled; -- "the sun grows dim;
"Fair daylight turns to darkness;" -- all within me
Is desolation, horror, and despair. --
And are his vows, breathed in the face of heaven,
"Are all his oaths at once dispersed in air?"
Those eyes, whose glance sent forth the melting soul,
Were they too false? -- "The tears, with which he often
"Bedewed his bosom, were they taught to seign?
"He shuns me still: where does he lurk concealed?" --
In all our haunts, in each frequented grove,
(Ah! groves, too conscious of the traitor's vows!)
In vain I Have sought him. -- Does this hated rival,
Has she seduced him to her amorous parley?
Gods! does she see him smile, and hear that voice?
And does he sigh, and languish at her feet,
Enamored gaze, and twine those arms around her?
"Hold, traitor, hold; the gods forbid your love: --
"Those looks, those smiles art mine! -- Deluded maid!
"Mine are those vows, that fond embrace is mine."
Horror! distraction! -- Still it is but surmise
That with these shadowings makes me tremble thus.
I still may wrong him: -- Periander's fraud --
"'It Is he abuses my too credulous ear.
"The tale may be suborned: -- I Will not believe it. --
"Lost Ariadne! you believe too much.
"Where, where is Phaedra? her unwearied friendship
"May still avert my ruin: she may find
"The barbarous man, and melt his heart to pity.
"And yet she comes not." -- Ha! Perithous here! --
He knows the worst: -- he can pronounce my doom.

Perit. Forgive me, princess, with officious zeal
If I one more intrude. The time no longer
Admits of wavering, hesitating doubt.
The king, enfetter'd in the chains of love,
Reject the claims of Greece. If hence you part,
You must, with Theseus, steer your course for Crete.
His resolution's fixed.

Ari. Does Theseus know
The impending danger? -- have you seen your, friend?

Perit. His great heart labors with a war of passions
Too big for utterance. In the soldier's eye
The silent tear stood trembling. Strong emotions
Convul'sd his frame. He knows your every virtue,
And rails in grief, in bitterness of soul,
At his hard fate, and and each malignant planet,
That leaves him empty praise, and fruitless thanks,
The only sad return he now can make.

Ari. Thanks! unavailing thanks! -- You need not come
To add to misery this sharpest pang.
Love in this breast is not a vulgar flame,
The mere compliance of a will resigned;
It Is generous ecstacy, it is boundless ardour.
A heart, that feels like mine, will not be paid
With cold acknowledgments, and fruitless thanks;
Mere gratitude is perfidy in love.

" Perit. Your bright persections were his favorite theme,
"He sees your days, that shone serenely bright,
"Discolored now with sorrows not your own.
"He sees you following, with unwearied steps,
"One on whom fortune has not yet exhausted
"Her stores of mailce; -- whom the gods abandon. --

" Ari. Whom justice, truth, and honor all abandon!"

Perit. It grieves him, Ariadne, much it grieves him,
To see thee overwhelmed in his misfortunes:
Condemned with him to drain the bitter cup
Of endless woe; and since propitious fortune
With better omens courts you here at Naxos,
It Is now his wish, that you renounce for ever
A man accursed, sad outcast from his country,
The fatal cause of all your sorrow, past.

" Ari. The fatal cause of all my woes to come!

" Perit. I do not mean to justify his guilt.
"Might I advise you, you may still be happy."
A monarch lays his scepter at your feet.
Your father Minos will approve your choice;
All Naxos will consent; a willing people
With fond acclaim will hail you as their queen,
And Theseus never can betray you more.

Ari. And do thou think, say, does the traitor think
Thus to ensnare me with insidious counsels?
Last night admitted to a private audience,
To Periander he confessed his guilt.
Another passion rages in his heart.
You know it all: unfold your lurking thoughts,
Reveal the truth; give me the tale of horror,
Own the black treason, and consummate all.

" Perit. Would I could hide the failings of my friend.

Aside. " Ari. Those broken accents but distract me more.
"Let ruin come; I am prepared to meet it. --
"Oh, speak! pronounce my doom! -- In me you see
"A wretched princess, a deluded maid, --
"Lost to her friends, her country, and her father. --
"In pity tell me all: with generous frankness
"Deal with the wretched: let me know the worst."

Perit. Far be deceit from me: of just resentment
I would light up the flame: my friend is plunged,
Beyond all depth, in treachery and guilt.
Another love shoots poison to his soul.
At length he owns it. He avows his passion.

Ari. Avows his passion!

" Perit. It Is his fatal crime.

" Ari. "You hear it, gods! -- I ask no patience of you:
"Lend me no fortitude, no strength to bear
"This horrible deception." -- If your justice gods,
From your bright mansions views this scene of guilt,
Why sleeps thy thunder? -- "Send me instant madness,
"To raze at once all traces from my brain,
"All recollection of a world like this.
"All busy memory of ungrateful man."

Perit. Affer. yourself; revenge your injured rights,
And tower above the false, the base deserter,
Who breaks all vows, and triumphs in his guilt.

Ari. Can fraud like this engender in his heart?
It cannot be; no, -- the earth does not groan
With such a monster! -- You traduce him, sir.
Who formed the black design? Who forged the tale? --
It Is Periander's art: -- 'twas he suborned you.

Perit. If you will hear me --

Pri. Trouble me no more:
Theseus shall hear how his friend blasts his fame,
And comes from Athens with his high commission,
To tempt my says, and work a woman's ruin.

Exit. Perit. Too generous princess! my heart inward bleeds
To fee the cruel destiny that waits thee.
"Ruin, inevitable ruin falls
"On her, on Theseus, and his blasted fame."
And yet if Phaedra -- would some gracious power
Inspire my voice, and give the energy
To wake, to melt, to penetrate the heart. --
What if I seek her? -- Ha! --

Enter PHAEDRA. Phae. Methought the sound
Of Ariadne's voice --

Perit. It Is as I wished:
Her timely presence --

Aside. Phae. Went my sister hence?

Perit. Yes, hence she went, wild as the tempest's rage,
As if a conflagration of the soul
To madness fired her brain. But, Oh! I fear
She went to brood in secret over her wrongs;
To think, and to be deeper plunged in woe.

Phae. You chill my heart with fear: you have not told her
For whom in secret Theseus breathes his vows;
For whom he cherishes the hidden flame.

Perit. There wants but that -- that circumstance of horror,
To desolate her soul with instant madness.

Phae. Yet why still obstinate, why thus disdain
A monarch's vows? A mind like hers, elate
With native dignity, and fierce with pride,
May view with scorn the lover who betrays her,
And on the imperial throne revenge her wrongs.

Perit. Revenge is the delight of vulgar souls,
Unfit to rule the breast of Ariadne.

Phae. Your words, your looks alarm me: from your eye
Why shoots that fiery glance? -- What must we do?

Perit. What must we do? -- The honest heart will tell thee.
"'It Is in your power: -- renounce your guilty loves;"
Do justice to a sister; scorn by fraud,
By treacherous arts to undermine her peace;
Restore the lover whom you ravished from her,
A lover all her own, by every tie,
By solemn vows her own, nor join in guilt
To wrest him from her, for the selfish pride,
The litttle triumph over a sister's charms.

Phae. To Ariadne turn: give her your counsel. --
She still, if timely wise, may save herself,
For joy and rapture: -- she may live and reign. --
If I lose Theseus, I can only die.

Perit. Better to die, than live in vile dishonor.
You rush on sure destruction: -- Awful conscience,
That sits in judgment in each human heart,
And, from that dread tribunal speaks within us --
Conscience will tell you, you have broke all faith,
Betrayed all confidence, destory'd the bonds
Of sacred friendship, and with shame and infamy
Ruined a sister, who would die to serve you.

Phae. Inhuman that thou art! why wound me thus
With stern reproach? -- why arm against my peace,
With scorpion whips, these furies of the soul?

Perit. For this will thou invade a sister's rights?
For this betray her? to endure for ever
The self-accusing witness of the heart!
Remorse will be your portion: shame and anguish
Will haunt your nights, and render all your days
Unblest and comfortless.

Phae. It is too much,
Too much to bear this agony of mind.

Perit. It Is virtue speaks; it warns you: -- hear it is voice,
And, ere too deeply you are plunged in guilt,
Return with honor, and regain the shore.

Phae. No more; -- it is too much: -- I cannot bear it.

Perit. Greece honors Ariadne; -- Think when Theseus
Returns with glory stained, with soul dishonor,
Think of the black reverse. Will men receive
With songs of triumph, and with shouts of joy,
Him and his fugitive? -- I see you're moved: --
Those tears are symptoms of returning virtue.

Phae. You Have turned my eyes with horror on myself. --
Oh! thou bast conquered: -- Ariadne, take,
Take back your lover; I resign him to you.
No, Phaedra will not live the slave of vice;
"I will not bear this torture of the mind,
"Goaded by guilt, pale, trembling at itself."

Perit. There spoke the generous soul: -- to those emotions
May the gods give the energy of virtue.

Phae. Go, say to Theseus, for his love I thank him; --
Bid him renounce, forget me -- Can he do it? --
Bid him preserve his honor, and his life. --
You need not counsel him. -- He will not fall
A willing victim for a wretch like me.
Yet, if his heart consents, let him forget
His vows, his plighted faith; and as he once,
With unfelt ardour, could delude my sister,
Bid him once more dissemble, and betray.

Perit. Oh, blessed event! All danger will retreat. --
I leave you now, while nature stirs within you,
I leave you to the emotions of your heart.

Exit. Phae. Oh, what a depth of sorrow and remorse,
Of shame and infamy have I escaped! --
Just gods! to you I bend: your warning voice
Has taught me to renounce all guilty joys,
And dwell, fair virtue! -- dwell in peace with thee!

Enter Theseus. The. Phaedra, what mean those tears? -- Upon the wing
Of strong impatience I have sought your presence. --
What new alarm --

Phae. My soul is full of horror. --
Renounce my love; -- forget me; --
think no more Of rashly plighted vows.

The. Renounce thee, Phaedra! --

Phae. Fly my disastrous love: -- Disgrace and ruin
Are all the portion Phaedra has to give.

The. Is that my Phaedra's voice? -- Can she talk thus?
The tyrant fair, who first inspired my heart
With love unfelt before? -- I struggled long
To stifle in my breast the hidden flame;
I fled your presence; -- wheresoe'er I fled
Your image followed, and I still loved on.
In vain I struggled: your discerning eye,
What could escape? -- You fanned the rising flame,
And soon my fluttering heart was wholly thine.

Phae. Call not to memory the fond delight.
My guilt stands forth to view; I own it all.

The. And were the graces of each winning smile
Meant only to deceive me? Were those eyes
Instructed how to roll the hidden glance,
To fool me with a mockery of hope,
Then spurn me from your arms a wretch despised?

Phae. I must not, will not hear; the gods forbid it. --
I see my sister pale, deformed with murder,
And hear the curses of mankind condemn me. --
Your friend has told me all.

The. Perithous?

Phae. He.

The. Is he too joined? is he too leagued against me?

Phae. It was his friendship spoke.

The. Then send me hence,
A victim to appease your father's rage,
To be a spectacle for public view,
And meet at length an ignominious death.

Phae. Heartbreaking sounds!

Aside. The. Or if, ungenerous fair,
If you will have it so, command me hence,
Once more to sigh at Ariadne's feet,
And to that beauty -- Phaedra, have a care: --
That lovely form the wondering eyes of men
Adore, and even envy must admire.
Beauty like here is may twine about my heart,
And gain, though much I Have struggled to resist her,
And gain at length my fond consent to wed her.

Phae. Consent to wed her! -- Death is in the thought! --
Perfidious traitor! -- practiced in deceit! --
And can another -- after all your oaths --
Oh, light inconstant man! -- Ah! can a rival
Blot out all fond remembrance of your love,
And twine her fatal charms about your heart? --
Consent to wed her! -- Go, -- abandon Phaedra;
Seek Ariadne; To her matchless beauty
Breathe all your vows -- those you can well dissemble; --
Go, melt in tears -- those too you well can feign; --
Revel in joys your heart will never taste,
And see me laid a victim at your feet!

The. Restrain this frantic rage, does this become
The tender moment, when the faithful Theseus,
With all a lover's ardour, comes to greet thee?

Phae. The thought of losing thee turns wild my brain,
Oh, love resumes his empire over my soul!
And all inferior motives yield at once.
These tears can witness --

The. It Is no time for tears.
Go seek your sister: your soft prayers and tears
May still prevail. If not, tomorrow's dawn,
Tell her, shall end her doubts, ere that, I Have planned
Measures, that may make sure our mutual bliss!
To Periander I must now repair.
His messengers have fought me. Oh, remember,
My life, my hope of bliss, must spring from thee.

Exit. Phae. And on his fate my happiness is grafted.
Ha! Ariadne comes! -- Oh, love! what virtues
You force me to betray! -- That hagard mien --
Those looks proclaim the tumult of her soul.

Enter ARIADNE. Ari. [Not perceiving Phae.] In vain I struggle to deceive
myself:
I am betrayed, abandoned, lost for ever.

" Phae. How her fierce rage shoots lightning from her eyes!

Aside. " Ari. Oh, while his accents charmed my listening ear,
"While each fond look ensnared my captive heart,
"Even then another lured the wanderer from me!
"Another's beauty taught those eyes to languish;
"Another's beauty tuned his voice to love!

" Phae. Appease her anger, gods, and grant her patience!

Aside." Ari. And must I live to see her haughty triumph?
"To bear her scorn? -- to bear the insulting pity
"Of Cretan dames! -- all pleased with my undoing?"
To die at length in misery of heart,
And leave to aftertimes a theme of woe,
A tragic story for the bards of Greece?

Phae. How my heart shrinks! -- I dread the interview.

Aside. Ari. "Let lightning blast me first:" -- Let whirlwinds seize me,
"To atoms dash me on the craggy cliff,"
And blow me hence "upon the warring winds"
To climes unknown, beyond the verge of nature,
"To the remotest planet in the void;
"That never, never can approach this world;
"But rolling onward, farther, farther still
"Holds in the wilds of space it is fated round;" --
There I may rave, and to the listening waste
Pour forth my sorrows; "think 'till reason leaves me;
"And tell to other stars, and other suns,
"A tale to hold them in their course suspended,
"And turn them pale with horror at the sound. --
"There let me dwell;" grow savage with my wrongs,
And never hear from this vile globe again.

Phae. Yet be of comfort.

Ari. There is no comfort for me. --
Whence is that voice? -- Oh, Phaedra! Oh, my sister!
"Assist me, help me -- I am sick at heart.

" Phae. Recall year reason, summon all your strength,
"Nor thus afflict yourself.

" Ari. Have I not cause?"
The barbarous man! he flies me; he abjures me;
Breaks all the fervent vows which each day's sun,
which every conscious planet of the night,
Which every god bent down from heaven to hear.

Phae. And yet, if calmly you will hear a sister --

" Ari. Could you suspect that perfidy like this
"Can lie close ambush'd in the heart of man?

" Phae. But still, if Theseus, harrass'd out with woes,
"Persued by fate, and bending to misfortune --

" Ari. I gave up all for him.

" Phae. Were you but calm -- "

Ari. Can the wretch tortured on the rack be calm?
Ingratitude, thou source of evil deeds!
Foe to the world's repose! -- "thou can with fair,
"With specious words, with treacherous disguise,
"Deceive the friend, and thrive upon his smiles;
"By servile arts enrich thee with his spoils,
"Till pampered to the full, with favors bloated,
"Thy hour is come to show thy native hue,
"And carry pain and anguish to the breast
"And carry pain and anguish to the breast
"That warmed and cherished thee." Detested fiend!
By thee truth fades even from the noblest mind;
Of fair, and good, and just, no trace remains;
Honor expires, the generous purpose dies,
And every virtue withers in the soul.

Phae. Yet be advised, and you may still be happy.
A Youthful monarch woes you to his throne.
The gods have sent relief --

Ari. Oh, Phaedra! Oh, my sister!
As yet a stranger to man's wily arts,
You keep the even tenor of your mind:
You know not what it is to love like me.

Phae. Oh, conscious, conscious guilt.

Aside. Ari. "I see you pity me."
It grieves me to afflict your tender nature.
In all his hours of tenderness and love --
Oh, charming hours, that must return no more! --
I never deemed it was illusion all, --
Never suspected a more happy rival, --
Saw not her image lurking in his heart.
"Tell me her name: Who is she? Let me see
"The fatal fair, that poisons all my joys.
"Your own heart, Phaedra, must condemn the deed."

Phae. Her words too deeply pierce; they rend my soul!

Aside. Ari. "You can detect the traitress; guide me to her."
Tell me her name: Who is she? Let me see
The fatal fair, that poisons all my joys.
If on this isle -- Ha! -- why that sudden pause?
That downcast eye? -- why does your color change?
Go, now I see you know her! -- in your looks
I read it all.

Aside. Phae. Confusion, shame, distraction! --
If this wild fury that desorms your reason --

Ari. Phaedra, beware: if you deceive your sister,
If you conceal this rival 'twere a deed
To shock all nature; to make heaven and earth,
And men and gods abhor thee.

Phae. Since unjustly
You thus suspect me -- have I given you cause?

Ari. Disclose it all and league not with my foes.

Phae. I see my fault: -- with too officious care
I came to heal your sorrows. -- I forbear:
I Have been to blame; but now, farewell, farewell!

Ari. Stay, Phaedra, stay: you shall not leave me thus.
In all afflictions you are still my comfort.

Phae. Then check this fury; it is phrenzy all.
Where is the pride becoming Minos' daughter?
Disdain the traitor; drive him from your thoughts.
Turn where the gods invite you: Periander
Wishes to lay his scepter at your feet.
Your sway shall bless the land, and humbled Theseus
Will be reduced to sue to you for mercy.
The power will then be yours, the envied power
Of godlike clemency: 'twill then be yours
To show thee worthy of imperial sway,
To shelter still the man you once could love;
Know him insensible to worth like thine,
To honor lost, and yet forgive him all.

Ari. Must I transfer the affections of my soul
To justify his perfidy? Must I
Bargain away my heart, to save a traitor?
For the fair Greek to save him? Mighty gods!
He shall not wed her! -- Give her to my rage. --
I Will follow to the altar; there my vengeance --
How my heart shrinks -- no, strike -- "my blood recoils --
"Assist me, Phaedra, give the means of death."
She shall not live to revel in his arms.
Then Theseus shall behold her faded form,
"And every drop the traitor then lets fall,"
Shall pay me for the tears, the galling tears,
His persidy has cost me: then he will know
The agony of soul, the mortal pang,
When we are robbed of all the heart adores.

" Phae. Ha! will you, sister, stain your hand in blood?

" Ari. Then Theseus too -- he clings about my heart; --
"No, let him sail for Crete; my father's justice
"Will claim atonement for a daughter's wrongs,
"Doom him a sacrifice for broken vows,
"A dreadful warning to ungrateful man."

Enter PERITHOUS. Perit. Your woes increase each hour. A guard even now
Leads Theseus forth, by Periander's order,
To yonder tower that overhangs the bay.
From hence, ere morn he must depart for Crete.

Phae. Ah! there to perish -- Ariadne haste,
Seek Periander, -- fly -- prevent the stroke,

Ari. "He can no more deceive me."
Let the barbarian perish -- no,
No more of tenderness -- the generous deed
But gives to fell ingratitude the power
With scorpion stings to pierce you to the heart.

Phae. Will you, then,
Ah, will you, cruel, see him doomed to die?
I Will seek the king, and bathe his feet with tears,
And rave, and shriek, till he release him to me,

Exit. " Perit. If he must fall, it is you have fixed his doom.
"You still can save him. At one glance from you
"The king will feel his resolution melt.

" Ari. I saved him once, and he requites me for it.
"No more of tenderness. The generous deed
"But gives to fell ingratitude the power
"With scorpion stings to pierce you to the heart.

" Perit. Yet, Ariadne, think --

" Ari. No more, but leave me.
Exit Perit. "Yes, let the traitor die: -- if he must die,
"In some dark cave I can deplore his fate,
"Hid from the world, forgetting all but him,
"'Till the kind hand of death shall lay me stretched,
"In cold oblivion on the flinty ground,
"Pale, wan, and senseless as the marble form
"That lies in sorrow on some virgin's tomb! --
"He will not see my tears: the barbarous man
"Will be no more ungrateful. -- Mighty gods!
"I loved, I am betrayed -- yet love him still. --
"Quick let me hence: -- one generous effort more
"May still -- fond wishes, how you rush upon me! --
"Should he relent, -- Oh, should returning love
"Once more -- vain hope! -- yet the delusion charms me: --
"One generous effort more may make him mine."

Exit. ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter ALETES, followed by an OFFICER. Aletes. JUSTICE prevails, and Theseus is
my prisoner;
Yon' tower immures him close. Seek thou the harbor,
Unmoor the ship; let all things be prepared
To give the spreading canvass to the wind.
The day declines, and the moon's silver beam
Plays on the trembling wave. This night it is fixed
Theseus with me shall seek the Cretan shore.

Exit Officer. Enter ARIADNE. Ari. Where is your prisoner?

Al. In yon' tower secured.

Ari. Your policy has failed; release him straight:
It Is the king's order; you may read it, sir.

Gives him a Paper. Al. Your interest has prevailed, and I obey.

Exit. Ari. Ye fond ideas, ye fierce warring passions,
With what a mingled sway you drive me on!
Gries, rage, and indignation rise by turns;
But love flows in, and resolution dies.
Ha! see he comes -- Oh! how this fluttering tumult,
With hopes and fears alternate, shakes my frame.

Enter THESEUS. Ari. [viewing him as he advances] Dissimulation fails him, and
his looks
No longer hide the characters of guilt.

The. How shall I pour my thanks? a thousand sentiments
All press at once, and yet deny me utterance.
Words are too poor: expression strives in vain.

Ari. You need no more dissemble -- sir, I Have heard "Periander
"Has heard the purpose of your soul. Last night,
"When sleep sealed every eye, in darkness wrapped,
"Through secret ways, clandestine as your thoughts,
"You stele into his presence; there disclosed"
Year hidden flame, your alienated heart. --

turns from him. The. Spare your reproaches, princess; Oh! forbear,
Forbear in pity to afflict a mind
Too deeply wounded! that feels all it is errors,
Feels all your virtues, and with keenest sense
Aches at it is own reflections.

Ari. Of the pardon
Which Periander to my prayers has granted,
You know not the extent. Tomorrow's fun
Shall light you to your nuptials; you may then
Show to the world this unapparent beauty,
And give to her the vows that once were mine.

The. Oh! Ariadne, spare this keen reproof!
Could you but know the pangs that struggle here --

Ari. "Theseus, you weep! you weep over my afflictions;
"You feel my wrongs, yet barbarous even in pity,
"You fix the shaft of anguish in my heart!

The. "On me, on me the weight of ruin falls;
"'It Is I am plunged in woe; a man condemned,
"To wander over the world." Alas, it is fate,
Fate drives me on. If you forget a wretch,
The prey of grief, the sport of fortune's malice:
And if a monarch, to reward your virtues,
Prepares the imperial wreathe to deck your brow --

Ari. Is that the recompense I wished to gain?
"Too well you know this heart. Had Periander
"A wider empire than ever monarch ruled,
"And you were helpless, destitute of fortune,
"I had been, heaven can witness! happy with you.
"In loving you, I sought yourself alone,

The. "For all this waste of generous affection,
"Calamity is all that Theseus brings.

Ari. Come lead me hence to some far distant wild,
Where human footstep never prints a trace?
There blessed with thee I could for ever dwell,
"Throned in thy heart, the mistress of thy love.

" The. Here happiness awaits you; here you're destined
"The mild vicegerent of the gods on earth.
"In that bright sphere while you serenely shine,
"The pattern of all virtue, temp'ring justice
"With mercy, and diffusing blessings round you,
"With tears of joy mankind will own your sway.

Ari. Oh, vile ingrate!

" The. If you wid deign to hear me:
"Though great my crimes --

" Ari. "Thou traitor! -- was it thus
"You looked and talked, when first I saw and loved?
"Your doom was fixed; the officers of vengeance
"Remorseless led you forth; my trembling eye
"Pursued your steps; tears gushed; I could not speak.
"I fled to your relief, and my undoing:
"Then every god was witness to your vows.
"The fond delusion charmed me. I rebelled
"Against my father; I betrayed his honor;
"And all for thee. I fled my native land.
"Nor winds, nor waves, nor exile could debar me.
"This the return! -- have I deserved it of you?
"Tell me my crime; and, oh! if possible
"Teach me to think it is justice that I suffer;
"For even in ruin I would not abhor thee."

The. You wrong me much: By yon bright stars I swear,
I never meant by base ingratitude
To fix affliction in that bosom-softness.
Thy name, thy merit, and thy wondrous goodness,
While life informs this frame, shall ever live
Esteemed and honored, treasured in my heart.

Ari. Esteemed and honored! -- 'twas your love you promised.
A monarch, said thou, woes me to his arms! --
What truth, what fair return have I to give him?
Give me, barbarian! give me back my heart,
The heart you robbed me off: -- Give back my vows,
My artless vows, my pure unpledg'd affections,
With equal warmth that I may meet his love;
And not like thee, with treacherous bland allurements,
Courts his embrace, and charm him to betray.

The. Then if you will, wreak your worst vengeance on me.
Ascend the throne; back to the Cretan shore
Convey me hence to glut your father's rage:
I there can die content. Or if your mercy
Permit me once again to visit Greece,
Often I shall hear of Ariadne's name;
Well pleased at distance, in the humble vale
Of private life, or in the tented field,
To view the radiant glory that surrounds you,
And thank the gods for shedding blessings down
On thee and all thy race.

Ari. Ay, visit Greece;
Display to Athens all your brave exploits,
Your battles won, the nations you have conquered.
And let your banners, waving high in air,
Hold forth the bright inscription to men's eyes,
Lo, this is he who triumphed over a woman.'
My death will blazon forth the fame of him,
Who freed the world from monsters of the desert,
Who slew the minotaur, but could not quell
Ingratitude, that monster of the soul.

The. You need not, Ariadne, Oh, you need not
Thus tear me piecemeal. My distracted heart
Feels in each nerve, and bleeds at every vein.

Ari. Unbidden tears, why will you fool me thus!
These tears that fall, that thus gush out perforce,
Are not the tears of supplicating love: --
They are the tears of burning indignation,
Of shame, and rage, and pride, and conscious virtue;
Virtue that feels, feels at the very heart
Each stab inhuman treachery has given,
Yet fees that calm tranquillity in guilt.
See me no more; tomorrow spread your sails.
But take not, Sir, the partner of your heart; --
No, -- dare not, on thy life, convey her hence.
Go, sail for Athens,
Alone, heart-broken, comfortless; like me
Plunged in despair.
Farewell, for ever, Oh, ungrateful man?

Enter PHAEDRA, Phae. Once more restored to liberty and life.

To The. The. Oh, death were happiness to what I feel!

" Ari. See me no more; tomorrow spread your sails;
"Take in your train the partner of your heart. --
"She shall not go: -- once more I Will see the king,
"And dare not on thy life convey her hence.

" Phae. What meddling fiend inflames you thus to madness?
"Hear, Ariadne, hear. --

" Ari. Go, sail for Athens,
To The. "Alone, heart-broken, comfortless; like me
"Plunged in despair; like me, deprived of all
"Your heart held dear.

" Phae. Let me appease your wrath.

" Ari. I will descend to prayers and tears no more.
"Farewell for ever; Oh, ungrateful man!

Exit. " The." Distraction! -- madness! -- Oh, she has destroyed
My peace of mind for ever!

Phae. Theseus, no: --
My lenient care shall mitigate your grief.

The. For thee, my Phaedra, I bear all for thee. --
Since liberty is mine, let me employ it
To serve our mutual bliss. The time admits
No dull delay. This moment I must leave thee.

Phae. Ah! -- whither do you go?

The. Observe me well.
That path that winds along the barren heath,
Leads to the mountain's ridge: there down the steep
A soft declivity will guide your steps
To Neptune's temple, sheltered in the grove.
There I expect you.

Phae. Wherefore? -- what intent? --
Unfold the dark design; my fears alarm me.

The. No more; -- the fun descends, and fable night
Draws over the face of things her dusky veil.
With cautions step proceed; but, ere you go,
Watch Ariadne: -- here beguile her stay,
If she pursues me, all is lost for ever.
Farewell, farewell, I trust my fate with thee.

Exit. Phae. Oh, how my bosom pants with doubt and fear!
What may this mean? -- some dread event impends.
He will not -- no -- preserve him, gracious powers!
Let him not, prompted by despair, attempt
Beyond his strength, and rush on sure destruction.

Enter ARIADNE. Ari. Where, Phaedra, whither is the traitor fled?

Phae. Oh, you have been to blame! -- with hagard eyes
Upturn'd to Heaven, he paused, and heaved a sigh,
As if his laboring heart would burst his frame,
And leave him hoar, a pale, a breathless corpse,
At length with haste, with fury in his look,
But blessing still your name rushed along,
And vanished from my sight.

Ari. The barbarous man!
Did he deny his falsehood? Did one tear
Speak his cumpunction? Did he once relent?
In guilt obdurate! did you mark his mien,
The pride, the scorn that darted from his eye?

Phea. What choice was left him, when with fierce disdain
you spurned him from you?

Ari. Therefore did he shun me?
Ungen'rous man! he saw I loved him most,
Then when enraged I poured my curses on him:
My heartstrings even then were twined about him.
Once more I Will see him: should he sail for Athens,
It Is fixed to follow him. "He will not then
"Dare to avow a treachery like this.
"His glory is at stake: with one accord
"All hearts declare for me. The sons of Greece,
"For all my sorrows, all my sufferings past,
"Wish to reward me in their hero's arms".

Phae. And does Perithous join you? does he mean
To waft you over the deep?

Ari. His ship already
From last night's storm resitted, courts the breeze,
And even now prepares to plough the deep.

Phae. Theseus, the while, in pining discontent,
Forlorn and wretched on the blasted heath,
Sighs to the winds, and drinks his falling tears.

Ari. Oh, fly, pursue him! calm his troubled spirit!
"Still, traitor as he is, he may relent.
"For Oh, too well I know his godlike nature;
"Know the mild virtues that adorn his mind,
"And more than speak in each enchanting look."
Go seek him, Phaedra: tell him all my woes,
And reconcile his heart to love and me. --
But hark! -- some step this way --

Phae. Perithous comes.

" Ari. Haste -- fly -- pursue him -- find the barbarous man."

"Phae." I leave you now.

Ari. Farewell.

Phae. Where shall we meet?

Ari. In yonder palace.

Phae. There you may expect me.

Exit. Ari. Oh, grant her power to touch, to melt his heart!

Enter PERITHOUS. Perit. I bring you tidings may revive your hopes. --
Theseus may still be thine.

Ari. May still be mine!

Perit. Yes: -- Periander, should he still persist
To hold you here a captive, sees his danger.
Crete arms against him: Athens too will claim you.
And let destruction loose. To cope with both,
Not even the soul of Periander dares.
He must release you: then you sail for Greece.
Theseus will there be yours: his solemn vow's,
And the vast debt of gratitude he owes,
Joined by the public voice, will bind him to you.

Ari. But if constraint alone -- Ah! can you think
That his relenting heart will feel remorse?

" Perit. The indignation of mankind will warn him.
"Returning virtue then --

" Ari. If aught can waken
"A spark of love in that obdurate breast;"
A look, a sigh, impassioned from the heart,
Will heal my sorrows, and, with tears of joy.
Make me forgive him all. I burn once more
To wander with him over the roaring deep. --
And his the king consented?

Perit. Even now I left him
In close debate, and onward to this spot
Bending his eager step. With friendly counsels
Archon attends, and seconds all I wish.
Lo, where he comes this way. Retire a while:
Yon' grove will give you shelter: there remain.
A single glance from those persuasive eyes
May once again inflame his fierce desires,
And reason then will plead your cause in vain.

Ari. May all your words sink melting to his soul!

Exit. Perit. Now, gods, assist me! If I now succeed,
My fears subside, and danger is no more.

Enter PERIANDER. Perian. Perithous, hear: this hour ends all debate.
My resolution's fixed: then urge no more
Your haughty claim: it is torture to my heart.

Perit. A heart like thine will generously love.
You will not force the princess to your arms,
Nor light with Hymen's torch the flames of war.

Perian. Ha! do thou deem me of so fierce a spirit,
To tyrannize the fears of Ariadne?
No, -- her own lip, the music of that voice,
To my delighted ear shall breathe the promise,
The soft avowal of our mutual flame.

Perit. She doats on Theseus: the wide world has heard
The story of her love. And can you hope
To turn away the current of affection
From him, who first awaked her young desires,
Still fans the flame, and lords it over her soul?

Perian. Let him depart: I have released him to you.
Then Ariadne will resent her wrongs,
Incline her heart, and listen to my vows.
Bear your friend hence: my orders shall be issued.
For Ariadne trouble me no more.

Exit. Perit. Proud monarch, go! This night shall mar your hopes*
This very night, while sleep lulls all your guards,
She shall embark. When lawless power prevails,
The noble end must justify the means.

Enter ARIADNE. Ari. Thou generous man! have thou regained my freedom?

Perit. This very night we quit the hated shore.
Enquire no more: you must embark with me. --
For Theseus, he will gladly join our flight.

Ari. All things invite us! from the sky bursts forth
A stream of radiance, and the level main
Presents a wide expanse of quivering light.
Where is my sister?

Perit. She must here remain.

Ari. No, it were perfidy, a breach of friendship.
She fled with me: our hearts were ever joined
By the sweet ties of friendship and of love.

Perit. Here she must stay; your happiness requires it.

Ari. What is her crime? Ah, why should we desert her!

Perit. Seek not to know too much.

Ari. No, Phaedra, no;
I cannot leave thee here.

Enter ARCHON. Ari. This very moment
A soldier from the harbor brings this letter.
To you it it addressed.

Gives a letter to Perit. Perit. And comes from Theseus.

Ari. From Theseus! -- wherefore? -- whence? -- what new event?

Perit. [Reads.] 'My heart's too full to vent itself in words.
'I know my conduct will be blamed by all.
'I will not varnish it with vain excuse.
'I seized your ship: we have already pas'd
'The head-land of the harbour'.
Oh! this consummates all.

Ari. Why do thou pause?
Proceed; go on; let me drink deep of horror.

[ Taking the letter, endeavors to proceed, but cannot. She returns it to
Perithous.] 'Perit. [Reads.] We have already passed
'The head-land of the harbor: "sunk in grief,
"Distracted with her fears, in wild amaze,
"Phaedra has joined my flight. --
"Is Phaedra with him?

" Ari. They embarked together."

Ari. [Reads.] 'To Ariadne
'Be every duty paid, each tender care,
'Assuag'd her sorrows: Periander's love
'Will charm each sense, and teach her to forget;
'Perhaps in time, when every bliss attends her,
'To pardon Phaedra, and the wretched Theseus.'
Is Phaedra with him?

Arc. They embarked together.

" Ari. All just and righteous" --

Ari. falls on the ground. Perit. Ah! she faints! she faints:
Bring instant help; assist her, lend your aid.
Enter attendant Virgins. Oh! wretched princess! would the gods allow you
To breathe your last, and never wake again
To this bad world, 'twere happiness indeed!
She stirs, she moves; the blood returns again,
But oh! to make her feel the weight of woe,
And see the desolation that surrounds her.

" Ari. Where have my senses wandered? Why around me
"Are you all fixed, the statues of despair?
"Oh! I remember -- Open earth, and hide me:
"In your cold caves you never yet received
"A wretch batray'd, undone, and lost as I am.

" Perit". Afflicted mourner, raise thee from the earth.
Thy woes indeed are great.

Ari. O, say -- could you believe it?
As she rises. Phaedra has joined his flight; she too batrays me.
She was my other self; for ever dear;
Dear as the drops that circled in my veins,
But now, ah! now, to warm this heart no more.
Perhaps even now she gazes on his charms,
Hang on each accent, catches from those eyes
The sweet enchantment; "knows I shed these tears;
"Knows that I beat this breast, and rend this hair,
"And tell my sorrows to these craggy cliffs,
"And rave and shriek, in madness and despair."
Haste, fly, pursue them, lunch into the main,
Arm all your ships, bring fwords, bring liquid fire,
Fly, Overtake them, whelm them in the deep, oh! --

Falls into the arms of her attendants. " Perit. Attend her, virgins with your
tenderest duty

Exeunt Ariadne with attendants. " Arc. If this be thy contrivance --

" Perit. Charge me not
"With a black deed that has undone my friend,
"And to the latest time must brand his name.
"I feel for him; I feel for Ariadne.
"She now demands our-sympathy and care.

Exeunt. " The Back Scene opens; the Harbor and the Sea in view." Enter
ARIADNE with Attendants. " Ari. Behold, look there, see where the vessel bounds,
"Oh: horror, horror! how the rapid prow
"Glides through the waves! Will none pursue the traitor?

" 1st. Vir. Alas, my royal mistress, it is in vain.

Ari. Turn, Theseus turn; it is Ariadne calls.
"Return barbarian! whither do you fly?
"This way direct your course: stay, Phaedra, stay.
"See how they bound along the level main,
"And cleave their way; and catch each gale that blows.
"Inhuman treachery!

Leans on her attendants. " Perit. Her grief exhausts her strength, but soon
again
"Despair will rouse her with redoubled force.

" Ari. Heart-piercing sight! And see the traitor still
"Pursues his course. Yon' glittering host of stars
"Lend all their rays; the elements combine!
"Ye winds, ye waves, you too are leagued against me;
"You join with guilt, accomplices in fraud!
"All false as Theseus; all as Phaedra false;
"Officious all to end this wretched being.
"Your victory will soon be gained: That pang,
"Oh! this cold tremor -- it is the hand of death --
"I hope it is; my grave is all I ask.

Sits down on the point of a rock. Enter PERIANDER, PERITHOUS, and ARCHON.
Perian. Oh, dire event!

" Perit. See where the beauteous mourner
"Grows to the rock, and thinks herself to stone"!

Perian. Rise, princess, rise, and let us bear you hence
To your own palace, where the storm of grief
Will soon subside, and peace, and love, and joy,
Revisit your sad heart.

"They lead her forward." " Ari. No, never, never;
"My easy heart will be deceived no more.

" Perian. For thee love still has new delights in store,
"Whole years of bliss." --

Ari. Why do you smile upon me?
I never ferv'd you; never fav'd your life;
Made you no promise: why should you deceive me?

Perian. May sweet oblivion of her past afflictions
Steal gently over her soul. Restore her, heaven!

Ari. Have you a sister? -- She will break your heart.

Perian. I come to calm your griefs, and crown your days
With love sincere, and everlasting truth.

" Ari. All truth is fled; long since she fled the earth,
"Tired of her pilgrimage. Why, holy powers!
"Why leave poor mortals crawling here below,
"Where there is no confidence, no truth, no faith!
"All nature moves by your eternal law;
"Truth is the law of man, and yet she is fled.
"I see her there -- there near the throne of Jove,
"Her garments white as her own candid mind;
"She looks with pity on this vale of error,
"And drops a tear: while falsehood in disguise,
"With specious seeming; walks her deadly round,
"And masked in friendship, where she smiles, destroys.

" Perian. Let me conduct you: trust your friends."

Ari. You look
As if I might believe you: so did Theseus;
But where, where is he now? -- 'To Ariadne
'Be every duty paid, each tender care!'
Oh! artful man! -- Look there! I see him still;
I see the ship; it lessens to my view,
It lessens still! and now, just now it fades!
It fades away, it melts into the clouds!
Scarce, scarce perceived! it is gone, it is lost,
For ever, ever lost! is that the last,
The last sad glimpse? and must I linger here?
Die, Ariadne, die, and end your woes.

Stabs herself Perian. Oh! fatal rashness! quick, bring every help!

Perit. Deep in her veins the poniard drinks her blood.

Ari. 'Twas Theseus' gift: his best, his kindest present;
As such I sheathed it in my very heart.

" Perian. Her fluttering soul is on the wing to leave her.

" Ari. Elysium is before me; let not Theseus
"Pursue me thither; in those realms of bliss
"Let my departed spirit know some rest.
"Oh! let me feel ingratitude no more.
"Keep Theseus here in this abode of guilt;
"This world is his; let him remain with Phaedra;
"Let him be happy -- no, the fates forbid it:
"They will deceive each other."

Perian. Ah! that wound,
Pours fast the stream of life.

Ari. It gives no pain.
It is the stab fell persidy has given,
That rankles here. Oh! raise me, raise me up.
"No, let me see the light of heaven no more."
Perithous, you behold your friend's exploit!
I thank you, Periander; you have been
Kind, good, and tender. May some worthier bride,
Adorned with all that virtue adds to beauty,
Endear the joys of life. -- Alas, I die!
No mother here with pious hand to close
My faded eyes; no father over my urn
To drop a tear, and soothe my pensive shade.
"No; I deserve it; I betrayed them both.
"The barbarous man! -- He stabbed me to the heart!
"And yet even then I knew but half my wrongs."
And you too, Phaedra! -- Oh!

Dies. Perian. She Is gone, and with her what a noble mind!
What generous virtues are there laid in ruin!

Perit. Thou injured innocence! oppressed with wrongs,
And sore beset, there rests thy languish'd head.
Oh! when the gods bestow on mortal man
That bloom of beauty, those exalted charms,
By virtue dignified, they give the best,
The noblest gift their bounty has in store:
A gift to be esteemed, adored by all;
To be protected by the soldier's valor,
Not thus betrayed, abandoned to despair,
And the keen pangs of ill requited love.

Exeunt Omnes. PROLOGUE.
WRITTEN BY I. P. KEMBLE. Spoken by Mr. WROUGHTON.
WHENEVER the Poet, in retiring vein,
Proclaims his purpose never to write again,
The threatened Town interprets the kind way,
And takes an interest in his next last play.
Not that our Bard has played you fast and loose.
Or pleads this general candor for excuse;
He dares not trifle with the public sense,
But thinks such folly downright impudence;
Brought, not advancing, since he then appears,
To risk the well won fame of forty years,
He trusts distinct indulgence you' ll afford --
Not he, but Ariadne, breaks his word.
From ancient stores we take our plot tonight,
Formed on the mournful tale of Theseus' flight;
The time, that golden Era, some relate,
When equal Minos ruled the Cretan state.
Hail, holy Sage! who taught'st licentious man
To find his freedom where the laws began;
Whose fame in arms, redoubted from afar,
From thine own shores detered invasive war --
Whilst thy mild genius over a prosperous isle
Gave every good and every grace to smile;
'Till thine to all thy subjects were as dear,
As George's virtues to his Britons here.
To all our author bids me humbly bend,
But deprecate no foe, end court no friend:
With grateful pride he thinks of honors past,
And hopes you 'll bid those valued honors last.
Freely to you he now commends his cause --
Should he deserve -- you will not withhold applause.

EPILOGUE
LADIES -- though scarce alive -- quite out of breath,
I come -- to talk a little after death;
When tired of woe, and daggers, and all that,
Nothing revives us like a little chat.
Now -- so the laws of Epilogue ordain,
All should be turned to jest, and flippant strain;
And I, with points most miserably witty,
Should play the mimic, and lampoon the city.
Far other motives bid me now appear;
Far other sentiments are struggling here:
I come to view this circle, fair and bright,
And thank you for each tear you have shed tonight;
The tear, that gives the soft endearing grace;
Virtues cosmetic for the loveliest face;
That shows the features in their genuine hue,
Like roses blushing through the morning dew.
Ye men, -- ye boasted lords of the creation,
Who give your Ariadnes such vexation;
May I approach you, pray? and may I dare
Ask why you droop? -- and why that languid air?
It Is sympathy in guilt; and Theseus' case
With rising blushes crimsons every face;
Ceusure on fraud like his, you own, must fall:
Too well you know -- he represents you all.
And yet you have same excuse; these modish days
Lend a few tints to varnish all your ways.
When a GRAND SWEEPSTAKES to Newmarket calls.
And FIVE TO FOUR each groom, each jockey bawls:
What beauty then can lure you from the course,
And hope -- you will love her BETTER than year HORSE?
When to the Club the gaming rage invites,
And fascinating FARO claims your nights;
The tender passion then intrudes no more,
And FORTUNE is the VENUS you adore.
But is she constant? -- Loss on loss ensues,
And bonds, and mortgages, attorneys, Jews:
Love then may well his softer rights forego,
Spread his light wings, and fly the scene of woe.
But now the times a nobler plea may yield;
A War invites you; -- arm, and take the field.
The SONS OF FRANCE would fain subvert your laws;
Go forth the champions of your country's cause.
Behold the bright example of the day,
Go -- where our ROYAL FREDERICK leads the way;
So Albion's liberties secure shall stand,
And KING, and LORDS, and COMMONS guard the land.


