THE TRUE-BORN IRISHMAN; OR, IRISH FINE LADY. A COMEDY 0F TWO ACTS.

By CHARLES MACKLIN.

DUBLIN: SOLD BY THE BOOKSELLERS, M, DCC, LXXXIII.

[Price, a British Sixpence.]

Dramatis Personae
MEN.
MURROGH O'DOGHERTY, Count MUSHROOM, Counselor HAMILTON, Major GAMBLE, PAT
FITZMUNGREL, JAMES, JOHN, WILLIAM.
WOMEN. Mrs. DIGGERTY, Lady KINNEGAD, Lady BAB FRIGHTFUL, Mrs. GAZETTE, Mrs.
JOLLY, KATTY FARREL.
Scene, Dublin. -- A Room in Mr. O'Dogherty's House.

Time, from Noon to Evening.

THE True-born Irishman.
ACT I.
Enter O'Dogherty and Servant. O'Dogh. Who Is there?


Serve. Sir.


O'Dogh. Is John come in yet?


Serve. No, Sir.


O'Dogh. Be sure send him to me as soon as he comes in.


[ Exit Serve. Enter John. John. I am here, Sir.


O'Dogh. Well, John, how is my brother after his journey?


John. The counselor gives his compliments to you, sir, and thanks you for
your enquiry: He is very well, and will wait on you as soon as he is dressed.


O'Dogh. Mighty well -- what is that you have in your hand, John?


John. It is nothing for you, Sir -- it is a card for my mistress, from Madam
Mulroony; her man gave it me as I came in.


O'Dogh. Pray, let me see it -- "Mrs. Mulroony makes her compliments to Mrs.
Murrogh O'Dogherty, and likewise to Mr. Murrogh O'Dogherty, and hopes to have
the favor of their company on Sunday the 17th instant, to play at cards, sup,
and spend the evening, with Lady Kinnegad, Mrs. Cardmark, Miss Brag, Mr.
Mushroom, Cornet Basilisk, Sir Anthony All-Night, Major Gamble, and a very
jolly party." -- Here, John, take it to your mistress -- I have nothing to say
to it. ( Exit John) -- Well done Mrs. Mulroony -- faith, and it well becomes
your father's daughter, and your husband's wife, to play at cards upon a
Sunday. She is another of the fine ladies of this country, who, like my wife,
is sending her soul to the devil, and her husband to a gaol as fast as she can.
The booby has scarce a thousand pounds a year in the world, yet he spends above
two thousand in equipage, taste, high life, and jolly parties -- besides what
his fool of a wise loses to that female sharper, my Lady Kinnegad and her jolly
party; which, if I may judge by my own wife, is at least a good two thousand
more; so that by the rule of subtraction, take four thousand pounds a year out
of one, and in a very little time nothing will remain but a goal, or an escape
in the packet on Connaught Monday.


Enter William showing in Counselor Hamilton. Will. Counselor Hamilton.


[ Exit William. O'Dogh. Counselor, you are welcome to Dublin.


Coun. Brother, I am extremely glad to see you.


O'Dogh. By my faith, and so am I you. Odzooks give us a kiss, man: I give you
my honor I am as glad to see you in Dublin at this juncture, as I should to
see a hundred head of fat bullocks upon my own land, all ready for Ballinasloe
Fair.


Coun. Sir, your humble servant. That is a great compliment from you, brother,
I know.


O'Dogh. It is a very true one I assure you.


Coun. Well, I see by the newspapers that my sister is returned from her
coronation frolie, and in health I suppose, or you would have wrote me word had
it been otherwise.


O'Dogh. Yes, yes, she is in health indeed, and returned with a vengeance.


Coun. Pray what is the matter?


O'Dogh. Ogho! enough is the matter, the devil an inhabitant in Swift's
Hospital for Lunatics, is in a worse pickle than she is.


Coun. You surprise me! -- in what respect, pray?


O'Dogh. Why, with a distemper that she has brought over with her from England,
which will, in a little time, I am afraid, infect the whole nation.


Coun. Pray, what may that be?


O'Dogh. Sir, it is called the Irish Fine Lady's delirium, or the London
vertigo; if you were to hear her when the sit is upon her -- oh, she is as mad
-- the devil a thing in this poor country but what gives her the spleen, and
the vapors -- then such a phrenzy of admiration for every thing in England --
and, among the rest of her madness, she has brought over a new language with
her.


Coun. What do you mean by a new language?


O'Dogh. Why a new kind of a London English, that is no more like our Irish
English, than a coxcomb' fine gilded chariot like a Glassmanogue noddy. -- Why
what name do you think she went by when she was in England?


Coun. Why, what name dare she go by but Dogherty?


O'Dogh. Dogherty! -- ogho -- upon my honor she startles when she hears the
name of Dogherty, and blushes, and is as much ashamed as if a man had spoke
bawdy to her. -- No, no, my dear, she is no longer the plain, modest,
good-natured, domestic, obedient Irish Mrs. O'Dogherty, but the traveled,
rampant, high-lis'd, prancing English Mrs. Diggerty.


Coun. Ha, ha, ha! Mrs. Diggerty! ridiculous!


O'Dogh. Ay, ridiculous indeed! to change her name -- was there ever such
impertinence? But do you know, brother, among the rest of your sister's whims
and madnesses, that she is turned a great politician too concerning my name.


Coun. Ha, ha, ha! a politician I -- Why how in the name of wonder and common
sense can politics and the name of Dogherty be connected?


O'Dogh. O it is a wonder indeed! -- but strange as it is, they are connected --
but very ridiculously as you may imagine.


Coun. But, prithee, by what means?


O'Dogh. Why, you must know, we are to have an election shortly for the county
that I live in, which young Lord Turnabout wants to carry for one of his own
gang; and as the election in a great measure depends upon my interest, the
young fox, knowing the conceit and vanity of my wife, has taken her by her
favorite soible, and tickled it up, by telling her that if I direct my
interest properly, it would not be difficult to procure me a title. Now, sir,
this piece of flattery has stirred up such a rage of quality and title in her
giddy head, that I cannot rest night or day for her importunity -- in short,
she would have me desert my friends, and sell myself, my honor, and my
country, as several others have done before me, merely for a title, only that
she may take place of a parcel of foolish idle women, and sink the ancient name
of Dogherty in the upstart title of Lady Thingum, my Lady Fiddle F addle, or
some such ridiculous nonsense.


Coun. But, sir, pray pause a little upon this business -- my sister's vanity,
I grant you, may be ridiculous -- but though you despise titles and
oftentation, yet, as your interest can certainly make the member, were I in
your circumstances, I would have a voice in the senate of my country -- go into
parliament for the county yourself.


O'Dogh. Ogh, I have been among them already, and I know them all very well.
What signifies my sitting among hundreds of people with my single opinion all
alone. When I was there before I was stigmatized as a singular blockhead, an
impracticable fellow, only because I would not consent to sit like an image,
and when the master of the puppets pulled the string of my jaw on one side, to
say aye, and on the other side, to say no, and to leap over a stick backwards and
forwards, just as the faction of party and jobbers, and leaders, and political
adventurers directed -- ah, brother, brother, I have done with them all -- oh,
I have done with them all.


Coun. What, and after all your expense of opposing government right or wrong,
and supporting your patriots, will you give them all up?


O'Dogh. Indeed I will -- I was patriot mad I own, like a great many other
fools in this distracted country -- sir, I was so mad that I hated the very
name of a courtier as much as an illiterate lay-swaddling methodist does that
of a regular clergyman. But I am cured of that folly; for now I find that a
courtier is just as honest a man as a patriot -- my dear, they are both made of
the same stuff; ah, I have at last found out what sort of an animal a patriot
is.


Coun. Ay! -- and pray, brother, what sort of an animal is he?


O'Dogh. Why he is a sort of a political weathercock, that is blown about by
every wind of society, which the foolish people are always looking up at, and
staring, and distracting themselves with the integrity of its vicissitudes --
today it is blown by the rough, rattling, tempest of party; next day by the
trade-wind of fly, subtle, veering faction; then by the headlong hurricane of
the people's hot foggy breath; huzza boys, down with the courtier, up with the
patriot, 'till at last the smooth, soft, gentle warm breeze of interest blows
upon it, and from that moment it rusts to a point, and never stirs after -- so
there is your puff patriot for you -- ogh, to the devil I pitch them all.


Coun. Ha, ha, ha! I am glad to find, brother, that you are come to that way of
thinking at last, and I wish you had had the same notions years ago, it would
have saved you many thousands.


O'Dogh. Indeed, and that it would -- however experience is an excellent tutor,
and as you are a young man, and just coming into the world, mine may be of some
service to you; take this judgment from me then, and remember that an honest
quiet country gentleman who out of policy and humanity establishes
manufactories, or that contrives employment for the idle and the industrious,
or that makes but a blade of corn grow where there was none before, is of more
use to this poor country than all the courtiers, and patriots, and politicians,
and prodigals that are unhanged; -- so there let us leave them and return to my
wife's business.


Coun. With all my heart, I long to have a particular account of her conduct.


O'Dogh. O, brother, I have many grievances to tell you of, but I have one
that is more whimsical than all the rest.


Coun. Pray what is it?


O'Dogh. Why you must know, brother, I am going to be a cuckold as fast as I
can.


Coun. Ha, ha, ha! that is a comical grievance indeed.


O'Dogh. O stay 'till you hear the story, and I Will engage you will say it is as
comical a cuckoldom as ever was contrived.


Coun. I am glad to find, sir, it is of so sacetious a nature -- pray let me
hear this business?


O'Dogh. Sit down then, brother, for I have got a little touch of my gout, let
us sit down for a moment, and I will let you into the whole affair.


Coun. Pray do, sir, for you have really raised my curiosity.


(sits.) O'Dogh. You must know, brother, there is an English coxcomb in this
town just arrived among us, who thinks every woman that sees him is in love
with him, and this spark, like another Paris of Troy, has taken it into his
head to make a Helen of my wife, and a poor cuckoldy Menelaus of me.


Coun. Ha, ha, ha! Pray who is the spark?


O'Dogh. Why the name of this cuckoldmaker is Mushroom, but from his conceit
and impertinence, the women and jokers of this town have dignified him with the
title of Count Mushroom. Sir, he is the son of a pawn-broker in London, who
having a mind to make a gentleman of his son, sent him to the university of
Oxford; where, by mixing in the follies and vices of irregular youth, he got
into a most sanguine friendship with young Lord Old-Castle, who you know has a
large estate in this country, and of whose ancestors mine have held long and
profitable leases, which are now near expiring -- in short, sir, this same
Count Mushroom and my Lord became the Pylades and Orestes of the age, and so
very fond was my Lord of him, that out of sheer friendship to the Count, he got
his sister with child.


Coun. Ha, ha, ha! that was friendly indeed.


O'Dogh. O yes, it was what you may call modern friendship, taste, and bun tun;
and my Lord being a man of gratitude, in return made him his agent in this
country, and sent him over to settle his affairs here. And the Count and I
being in treaty to renew the leases with my Lord, and we not being able to
agree upon the terms, the coxcomb sends my wife a warm billedoux, in which he
very gallantly tells her, that she shall decide the difference between us, and
settle the leases at her own price, only upon the trifling condition that he
may be permitted now and then to be the occasional lord of her ladyship's
matrimonial manor.


Coun. Impudent rascal! And, pray, what says my sister to all this?


O'Dogh. Why she does not know a word of the matter.


Coun. No! pray how came you to be acquainted with his letter then, and his
designs upon my sister?


O'Dogh. Why there is the joke: it was by the help of Katty Farrel, my wife's
woman, by whose assistance I carry on a correspondence with the fellow in my
wife's name, unknown to her; and by that means I shall not only detect and
expose the fellow, but get an excellent bargain of the leases, which are to be
signed this very day.


Coun. But, sir, I hope you wont accept of leases upon those terms.


O'Dogh. O, I have no time to moralize with you on that point, but depend upon
it I will convince you before I sleep of the propriety of my taking the leases:
Lord, what signifies it; it is only a good bargain got from a foolish lord by
the ingenuity of a knavish agent, which is what happens every day in this
country, and in every country indeed.


Enter John. John. Sir, Mr. Mushroom and Mr. Sharp the attorney are below.


O'Dogh. O, they are come about the leases. I will wait on them, John.

[ Exit John. Now, brother, you shall see one of the pertest and most conceited
impudent coxcombs that has ever yet been imported into this land, or that
disgraced humanity.


Mushroom without. Mush. My compliments, Mrs. Katty, to your lady, I will be
with her in the twinkling of a star, or in less time than a single glance of
her own immortal beauty can pass to the center of an amorous heart.


O'Dogh. Orra now did you ever hear such cursed nonsense.


Enter Mushroom. Mush. My dear Diggerty, I kiss your hands. I am come on
purpose -- I beg ten thousand pardons -- I understood you were alone -- you are
busy I presume.


O'Dogh. Indeed, Count, we are not. This gentleman is a relation -- my wife's
brother -- counselor Hamilton, whom you have so often heard me talk of, and
with whom I desire you will be acquainted.


Mush. Sir, I feel a superlative happiness in being known to you, I have long
expected and long wished for it with a lover's appetite; therefore without
waiting for the dull avocation of experience, or the pedantic forms of
ceremony, I beg you will honor me with a niche in your esteem, and register me
in the select catalogue of your most constant and most ardent friends and
admirers.


Coun. O dear sir, you are superabundantly obliging -- this is such a favor --


Mush. No, no, no -- none, none -- give me your hand, Hamilton, you are my
friend Diggerty's friend, and that is enough -- I Will serve you -- say no more --
I Will serve you -- rely upon me -- I live in this town quite en famille -- I go
about every where, am of no party but those of love, pleasure and gallantry --
the women like and command me at cards, tea, scandal and dancing -- the men, at
wit, hazard, jolly parties, a late hour and a bottle -- I love ease, hate
ceremony, and am at home wherever I go -- that is my system, Hamilton -- ha, is
not that taste, life, philosophy, and summum bonum -- ha, my dear, at home
wherever I go, an't I, Diggerty.


O'Dogh. O, indeed, to give you your due, Count, you are never bashful in any
place.


Mush. Never, never, my dear.


O'Dogh. No faith, nor none of your family I believe.


Mush. Ha, ha, ha! never, never, my dear Diggerty -- bashfulness is a mark of
ignorance, an uncourtly, vulgar disease -- what we men of the world are never
infected with -- but, my dear Diggerty, I am come on purpose to settle with
you; my attorney with the leases is below, for as I know my lord would be loath
to lose you as a tenant, and as I am convinced it would be for his interest you
should have the lands, why we will even sign and seal at once upon your own
terms -- for really I think tenants in Ireland want encouragement -- they are
racked too high -- they are indeed -- it is a shame they should be racked so
high.


O'Dogh. Faith, Count, there is many a true word poke in jest.


Mush. Upon my honor I am serious -- you want encouragement in trade too.


O'Dogh. But do you really think so?


Mush. I do upon my honor, and I will speak to some people of consequence
about it on the other side, as soon as I return.


O'Dogh. Orra but will you?


Mush. I will upon my honor.


O'Dogh. O aye, you politicians promise us the devil and all while you are
among us, but the moment you get o't'other side, you have devilish bad memories.


Coun. You seem to like Ireland, sir.


Mush. O immensely, sir -- it is a damned fine country, sir -- and excellent
claret -- excellent claret upon my honor! it is true indeed it is not such
claret as we drink in London -- however, upon the whole, it is a pretty, neat,
light, soft, silky, palateable wine, and I like it mightily -- but your fish in
this here country is horrid. There you want taste, Hamilton -- that there is an
article of the scavoir vivre, in which you are totally ignorant -- quite
barbarous --


Coun. Aye! in what respect, sir?


Mush. Oh, my dear Hamilton, how can you ask such a question -- you, you, now
-- who have been in London! -- why you eat all your fish here too no --


Coun. Too no?


Mush. Yes, all too no -- why you eat it the very day -- nay, sometimes the
very hour it comes out of the water -- now that there is a total want of taste
-- quite barbarous.


O'Dogh. O yes, brother, we eat all our fish in this here country too no --
too no a great deal. Now, I fancy, Count, we should keep our fish before we
dress it, as you keep your venison, till it has got the hot gout.


Mush. Ha, ha, ha! -- the hot gout -- ha, ha, ha! -- Oh, I shall expire -- my
dear Diggerty, I honor your hot gout -- but your French is a little en
Irlandois -- en Provence -- haut gout is the word.


O'Dogh. Yes, yes -- I understand you -- Fogo.


Mush. Ha, ha, ha! -- Hamilton, you are a little odd in this here country in
some points -- your friend there -- is -- you understand me -- however upon the
whole, take you altogether, you are a damned honest, tory rory, rantum scantum,
dancing, singing, laughing, boozing, jolly, friendly, fighting, hospitable
people, and I like you mightily.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha!


Coun. Upon my word, sir, the people of Ireland are much obliged to you for
your helter skelter, rantum scantum portrait of them.


O'Dogh. Indeed and that we are; and so you like us mightily?


Mush. I do upon honor, and I believe I shall marry one of your women here,
grow domestic, and settle among you.


O'Dogh. Orra but will you do us that honor?


Mush. I really intend it.


O'Dogh. Faith then you will be a great honor to us, and you will find a great
many relations here, Count; for we have a large crop of the Mushrooms in this
here country.


Mush. O, sir, I don't doubt it, for we are a numerous family both in England
and Ireland -- but I beg pardon, my dear Diggerty, I must rob you of my company
for a moment to pay my devoirs to your lady; I know she is impatient to see me
upon a particular affair -- I will return upon the wings of diligence, then
sign, squeeze wax, and dedicate to wit, mirth, and convivial jollity --
Hamilton, yours, yours -- my dear Diggerty, give me thy hand -- from this
moment set me down as thy unalterable friend -- for I intend to be well with
thy wife this very evening.


[Exit. O'Dogh. Sure there never was so conceited and so impertinent a coxcomb
as this puppy.

Enter Katty Farrel. Oh here is Katty Farrel. So, Katty, do you see who is here,
child -- your friend the counselor.


Katty. Sir, your humble servant, I am glad to see you look so well. I hope all
your good family are in health.


Coun. All very well, I thank you, Mrs. Katty.


O'Dogh. Well, well, now your ceremonies are over, let us to business -- is
your fine mistress dressed yet?


Katty. Yes, sir -- but she has had a sad misfortune.


O'Dogh. What is that, Katty?


Katty. The money, sir, that you gave her to pay the mercer's bill, from
Covent Garden, that was sent after her, she lost last night to my Lady
Kinnegad, and some more of them, at bragg -- but do not take any notice that I
have told you of it, for she intends to borrow as much from Mr. Mushroom for a
day or two as will pay the bill.


Coun. Why the woman has lost all sense of shame.


(Aside.) O'Dogh. Katty, that must not be. She must not do so mean a thing upon
any account, as to borrow money of Mushroom. I will let you have the money to
pay the bill, and do you say you borrowed it of your brother, or some friend or
other, for her.


Katty. I will, sir.


[Exit. [Mrs. Diggerty, Mushroom, etc. laugh very loud without.] O'Dogh. So,
the toilet council is broke up at last -- here she comes, as fantastically
fine, as a fine lady in a play. Ogho, what a head she has.


Enter Mrs. Diggerty and Mushroom. Mrs. Dig. Brother, I am veestly glad to see
you.


Coun. Welcome from England, sister.


Mrs. Dig. I am imminsely obligated to you, brother.


Coun. I hope it answered your expectation, sister.


Mrs. Dig. Transcendantly.


Coun. I am glad it pleased you.


Mrs. Dig. Ravishingly.


Coun. Indeed!


Mrs. Dig. Beyond all degrees of compirison.


O'Dogh. O yes -- beyond all degrees of compirison.


Mrs. Dig. Veest! imminse! extatic! I never knew life before -- every thing
there is high, tip top, the grand monde, the bun tun -- and quite teesty.


O'Dogh. O yes, every thing there is quite teesty, brother.


Mrs. Dig. Well, Count, do you know that you pleased me veestly last night; I
never saw you in such high humor -- brother, I believe you do not know Mr.
Mushroom, an English gentleman; pray let me have the honor of introducing him
to you.


Coun. I have had that honor already, sister.


Mush. Yes, madam, Hamilton and I are old acquaintance.


O'Dogh. O yes they are old acquaintance, they have known each other above
these two minutes.


Coun. Pray how do you like London, sister?


Mrs. Dig. O the place of the world, brother.


Coun. Then Dublin I suppose --


Mrs. Dig. O, dear brother, don't neem them together.


O'Dogh. O no, you must not neem them together.


Mrs. Dig. Upon my honor, Dublin, after seeing London, looks like Irish-Town
or Ring's-End: Oh, every thing I set my eyes on here gives me the ennui, and
the country cure.


O'Dogh. O yes, every thing here gives her the contre coeur; that is a disease
she has brought over with her from London that we know nothing of here.


Mrs. Dig. The streets are so narrow, the houses so dirty, and the people so
ridiculous! then the women, Count! ha, ha, ha! -- I cannot help laughing when I
think of them. Well, I am convinced that the women of this here country who
have never traveled, have nothing of that -- a -- a -- non-chalance, and that
jenny-see-quee that we have in London.


O'Dogh. O no, brother! the women have nothing of that jenny-see-quee, that she
has brought over with her from London.


Mrs. Dig. But, Mushroom -- I don't know if what I am going to tell you be
conceit or real; but, upon my honor, when I first came from England -- you
must know, brother, I came over in the picket.


O'Dogh. O yes, brother, she came over in the picket.


Mrs. Dig. Yes, sir, I came over in the picket, and we had a great orage -- I
don't believe, Mr. Diggerty, you know what an orage is.


O'Dogh. Indeed you may take your oath I don't, my dear.


Mrs. Dig. That is, sir, becase you have not been in foreign parts -- then I
will tell you what an orage is -- sir, an orage is a storum.


O'Dogh. Madam, I thank you for your intelligence -- indeed you are very
learned and very obliging.


Mrs. Dig. And so, as I was saying, Count, we had a great storum, and the
picket -- I shall never forget it -- the picket landed us about twenty miles
from Dublin -- and so, do you know, I say, Mushroom, that I fancied, being just
come from England, that the very dogs here when they barked, had the brogue,
ha, ha, ha!


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha!


Mush. Why then, by all that is gothic, madam, I have thought so a thousand
times.


Mrs. Dig. You have!


Mush. I have, upon honor.


Mrs. Dig. Have you ever observed it, brother? Mr. Diggerty, what do you think?
Hav'n't the dogs of this here country the brogue?


O'Dogh. Indeed and that they have, my dear, and the cows too, and the sheep,
and the bullocks, and that as strong as ever your own mother had it, who was an
O'Gallagher.


Mrs. Dig. Oh!


G'Dogh. Not two of whose ancestors could ever speak three words of English to
be understood.


Mrs. Dig. You are a strange rude man, Mr. Diggerty, to tell me of my mother's
family -- you know I always despised my mother's family -- I hate the very name
of Gallagher, and all the old Irish whatever.


Coun. The present company excepted, sister -- your husband, you know --


Mrs. Dig. O, I never think of him.


Coun. Ha, that is polite indeed.


O'Dogh. O no, she never thinks of me.


Coun. Well, but sister, you have given us no account of the coronation, no
doubt you were there.


Mrs. Dig. There! O Moundew! -- What a quistion! Why I was in every part of it
-- ax Mushroom else.


Mush. Every where, every where -- she was every where, and with every body.


OF Dogh. Well, well -- then I suppose it was very fine; but after all now, was
it as fine as our riding the fringes here, or the lord lieutenant going to the
parliament house.


Mrs. Dig. He, he, he! O shocking! don't neem them together -- now that is so
Irish -- but, brother, what would have afforded you the highest entertainment,
was the city feast. O that there was imminse.


OF Dogh. O yes, that there was imminse, brother, and much finer than this here.


Coun. Then you were at the city feast too, sister?


Mrs. Dig. O dear, yes! the court never stirred without me.


O'Dogh. No, indeed, the court never stirred without her.


Mrs. Dig. And the lord mayor made a point of having me there: so I went with
her Grace, a friend of mine, and a party of the court, as one of the household
-- but the minute I went in every eye was upon me: Lord, it was veestly
pleasant to see how the she grocers, the she mercers, the she dyers, the she
hosiers, and the she tailors did stare at me -- I was very brilliant that is
certain -- rather more so than I was at the wedding.


O'Dogh. O indeed I don't doubt but you were a sight.


Mrs. Dig. O pray, Mr. Diggerty, be quiet, and don't interrupt me. -- Well,
but, brother, as I was saying, it was imminsely entertaining to hear the
awkward city creatures whisper and give their vardee upon me, in their city
manner -- Lord, is this the handsome Irish woman? -- the famous Irish toast?
the celebrated Mrs. Diggerty -- ha! -- I don't think she is so handsome, says
one -- hum! -- well enough, says another, only I don't like her nose -- pray,
does not she squint? says a third -- O yes, she certainly squints, says a fourth
-- and she is a little crooked -- but she is genteel -- O yes, yes, the city
creatures all allowed I was genteel.


O'Dogh. O yes, yes, to be sure they all allowed she was genteel.


Mrs. Dig. But, brother -- O Lud! I had like to have forgot -- do you know that
the Count is one of the prettiest poets in England, aye, or in Ireland either.


Mush. O heavens! madam!


Mrs. Dig. He is, by my honor.


Coun. I do not doubt the gentleman's talents in the least, sister.


Mush. Sir, you are very polite, the lady is pleased to rally, that is all, for
my muse is but a smatterer -- a slattern -- a mere slip-shod lady.


Mrs. Dig. Do not mind him, brother, what I say is true. He is a mighty pretty
poet, and to convince you that he is, I will show you some verses that he
indicted upon me, as I was dancing at court -- (Pulls them out). -- Here they
are, brother: Count, will you be so obliging as to read them to my brother?


Mush. Madam, as the sublime bard politely sings, the nod of beauty sways both
gods and men, and I obey. Gentlemen, the title will at once let you into the
whole of what you are to expect in this little production. "An extempore on the
famous Mrs. O'Diggerty's dancing at court." -- Now attend -- "When beauteous
Diggerty leads up the dance
"In fair Britannia's court,
"Then every heart is in a prance,
"And longs for Cupid's sport.
"Beaux ogle, and pant and gaze,
"Belles envy and sneer, yet praise,
"As Venus herself were there;
"And prudes agree, it must be she,
"It must be she -- or Diggerty,
"It must be she -- or Diggerty,
"Or Diggerty, the fair."
[ Bows very low to Mrs. Diggerty. That Is all, gentlemen, that is all -- only a
jeu d'esprit, as I told you; a slight effort of a muse, bound in the silken
chains of beauty and delight.


[He bows, she curtsies. Coun. Conceited coxcomb!


(Aside.) Mush. And now, madam, I have a favor to beg of you.


Mrs. Dig. O command it -- what is it?


Mush. Why, madam, as the celebrated doctor Thomas Augustus Arne has honored
this hasty offspring with an alliance of his harmonious mule, and as your
ladyship has frequently here-tofore enlivened it with your vocal glee, shall we
beg that you will once more animate these verbal images with a touch of your
Promethean pipe.


Mrs. Dig. O dear, Count, you are veestly panegyrical.


Coun. Aye, aye, come, sister, as you have the tune oblige us with it.


Mrs. Dig. I will try, brother, what I can do -- but, by my honor, I have a
great big cold -- hem, hem! --


Mush. The worse your voice, madam, the more your taste will shine.


Mrs. Dig. Nay, Count, voice or no voice I will make an effort --
Sol-la-mi-fa-sol, etc. -- Upon my honor I have no more voice than a killing.


SONG. [During the song Mushroom beats time conceitedly, but so as not to
interrupt her, or interfere with her acting it.] Mush. Bravo! bravissimo!
carissimo! novellissimo! transcendissimo! and every superlativissimo in the
sublime region of excellentissimo!


O'Dogh. Come, Count, now if you please we will go down, and sign the leases,
and dispatch the attorneys.


Mush. With all my heart.


[ Exit O'Dogh. Mrs. Dig. You dine here, Count.


Mush. Do I breathe! do I exist! I will but just step down, sign the leases,
and return on the wings of inclination -- ma chere belle sans, adieu.


[Exit. Mrs. Dig. Au revoir -- well, he is a most humourous creature, and
mighty witty: don't you think so, brother?


Coun. Very witty, indeed, and I suppose understands a lady's toilet --


Mrs. Dig. The best of any man in the world, the most handy-creature about a
woman -- and such teest -- but, brother, you must sup with us tonight -- I
have a few friends -- a private peerty this evening: Lady Kinnegad, Lady Pam,
old Lady Bab Frightful, Mrs. Gazette, Mr. Mushroom, Pat Fitzmungrel, Major
Gamble, Mrs. Cardmark, and half a score more -- quite a private peerty -- you
must be with us, brother -- we are to have a little gambling and dancing, and
are to be mighty jolly -- I shall expect you -- yours, yours -- I must go
finish my toilet.


[Exit. Coun. What a strange turn this woman's mind has taken -- she is far
gone I see, and must be pinched to the quick -- and shall this very night.


[Exit. ACT II.
Enter Mr. and Mrs. O'Dogherty. O'Dogh. WELL, but, my dear, why will you be in
such a passion? Why will you not hearken to reason?


Mrs. Dig. Mr. Diggerty, I will hear no reason; there can be no reason against
what I say -- you are the strangest man -- not be a lord -- sir, I insist upon
it -- there is a necessity for a peerage.


O'Dogh. O! then only show me the necessity, and all my objections will vanish.


Mrs. Dig. Why, sir, I am affronted for want of a title: a parcel of upstarts,
with their crownets upon their coaches, their chairs, their spoons, their
handkerchiefs -- nay, on the very knockers of their doors -- creatures that
were below me but the other day, are now truly my superiors, and have the
precedence, and are set above me at table.


O'Dogh. Set above you at table?


Mrs. Dig. Yes, sir, set above me at table wherever I go.


O'Dogh. Upon my honor then that is a great shame. Well, well, my dear -- come,
come, my dear, don't be in such a fluster.


Mrs. Dig. Fluster! why sir, I tell you I am ready to expire when ever I go
into the great world.


O'Dogh. At what, my dear?


Mrs. Dig. At what -- Egh! how can you ax such an ignorant quistion? Can there
be any thing more provoking to a woman of my teest and spirit, than to hear the
titles of a parcel of upstart ugly creatures bawled in one's ears upon every
occasion -- my Lady Kinnegad's coach there -- my Lady Kilgobbin's chair there
-- my Lady Casteknock's servants there -- my Lady Tanderagee's chariot there.
And after all these titles only consider how my vile neem founds -- (cries)
Mrs. Diggerty's servants there -- Mrs. Diggerty's chair there -- Mrs.
Diggerty's coach there -- it is so mean and beggarly I cannot bear it -- the
very thought of it makes me ready to burst my stays, and almost throws me into
my hysterics.


(throws herself into a couch.) O'Dogh. Nay, my dear, don't be working yourself
up to your sits, your hysterics, and your tantrums now.


Mrs. Dig. My life is miserable (rises). You cross me in every thing, you are
always finding fault with my routs, and my drums, and my fancy ball -- the other
night you would not make up a dress for it, nor appear at it -- O fie, fie, fie
-- but you are true Irish to the very bone of you.


O'Dogh. Indeed I am, and to the marrow within the bone too; and what is more,
I hope I shall never be otherwise.


Mrs. Dig. Ridiculous weakness! Pray, sir, do not you think, the English love
their country as well as the Irish do theirs?


O'Dogh. O indeed I believe they do, and a great deal better; though we have a
great many among us that call themselves patriots and champions, who, at the
same time, would not care if poor old Ireland was squeezed as you squeeze an
orange -- provided they had but their share of the juice.


Mrs. Dig. Pooh, pooh! nobody minds what you say -- you are always abusing
every body in power -- well, sir, you see the English are improving in teest
every day, and have their burlettas and their operas, their Cornelys, their
Almacks, their macaronies --


O'Dogh. O my dear, I tell you again and again, that the English can never be
precedent to us. They, by their genius and constitution, must always run mad
about something or other, either about burlettas, pantomimes, a man in a
bottle, a Cock-lane ghost, or something of equal importance. But, my dear, they
can afford to run mad after such nonsense; why they owe more money than we are
worth; stay 'till we are as rich as they are, and then we may be allowed to run
mad after absurdities as well as they.


Mrs. Dig. Mighty well, sir, mighty well! Oh mighty well.


O'Dogh. Heyday, what is the matter now?


Mrs. Dig. But I see your design -- you have a mind to break my heart -- (sobs
and cries) -- yes, you argue and contradict me for no other end -- you do every
thing to fret and vex me.


O'Dogh. Pray explain, my dear? What is it you mean?


Mrs. Dig. Why, sir, ever since I returned to this odious country I have been
requesting and begging, and praying, that you would send to London only for the
set of long-tailed horses, that I told you I admired so -- but no, I cannot
prevail, though you know my Lady Kilgobbin, my Lady Balruddery, my Lady
Castleknock, and, in short, every lady of figure all run upon long tails --
nobody but doctors, apothecaries, lawyers, cits, and country squires drive with
short tails now -- for my part, you know I detest a short tail.


O'Dogh. Well, my dear, I have sent for your brother to town, on purpose to
settle all these points between us, and if he thinks it proper that you should
have long tails, you may have them as long as my Lady Kilgobbin's, my Lady
Balruddery's tails, or any tails in the universe; and as to the title, if it
can be had, why we will submit that to him likewise.


Mrs. Dig. I know it can be had -- and so let me have no more trouble about it,
for a title I will have -- I must be a lady as well as other people -- I cannot
bear being a plain Mrs. Diggerty any longer.


( cries.) O'Dogh Well, well, my dear, we will try what we can do -- you must
be a lady! yes, yes, you shall be a lady; but by the blood of the O'Doghertys,
it shall be a broken-back'd lady. A hump shall be your patent, my dear.


( aside.) [Exit. Mrs. Dig. An obstinate man! not accept of a title -- in
short, there is no living without it. Who Is there?


Enter John. John. Madam!


Mrs. Dig. Nobody come yet?


John. No, madam.


Mrs. Dig. What Is o'clock?


John. A quarter past seven, madam.


Mrs. Dig. Are the candles lit, and the cards ready?


John. They have been ready this half hour, madam.


Mrs. Dig. Show the company into this room?


John. Yes, madam.


[A loud knocking, three servants, without.] Will. Lady Kinnegad.


James. Lady Kinnegad.


John. Lady Kinnegad.


Enter John, showing in Lady Kinnegad. John. Lady Kinnegad, madam.


[Exit. L. Kin. My dear Diggy -- what, all alone -- nobody come?


Mrs. Dig. Not a mortal, I have been sretting this hour at being alone, and had
nothing to divert me but a quarrel with my husband.


L. Kin. The old fogrum! what, he will not open, his purse strings, I suppose --
but you should, make him, for he is as rich as a Jew.


Mrs. Dig. Aye, but he is as close-sisted as an old judge -- Lord, he has no
notion of any thing in life, but reading musty books, draining bogs, planting
trees, establishing manufactories, setting the common people to work, and
saving money.


L. Kin. Ha, ha, ha! the monster!


[A loud knocking.] Will. Major Gamble.


James. Major Gamble.


John. Major Gamble.


Enter John and Major Gamble. John. Major Gamble, madam.


[Exit. Mrs Dig. Major, how is your gout today?


Major. I don't know how the devil it is, not I -- hobbling up your stairs has
made me sweat -- Lady Kinnegad, I kiss your hands; I ask your pardon, but I
must sit down -- I cannot stand -- I got cold last night, and I feel it today
-- what, is there nobody come yet but us -- nothing going forward.


[Loud knocking.] Will. Lady Bab Frightful.


James. Lady Bab Frightful.


John. Lady Bab Frightful.


L. Kin. Here she comes, as Mushroom says, Nature's contradiction -- youth and
age, frost and-fire, winter and summer, an old body and a young mind.


Enter John and Lady Bab Frightful. John. Lady Bab Frightful, madam.


[Exit. Mrs. Dig. My dear Lady Bab!


L. Bab. My dear Diggy -- Lady Kinnegad, I kiss your hands -- O, major -- why
you had like to have ruined us all last night -- the bank was just broke --
well, I am a perfect rake -- I think I was one of the last this morning. I
danced till five.


L. Kin. As the old saying is, Lady Bab -- you can never do it younger -- Live
while we live, that is the rule of happiness, you have good spirits, a good
jointure, and nobody to control you -- you amiable creature.


L. Bab. Yes, I thank my stars, I never want spirits, tol, lol, lol, (sings) --
I could dance till morning.


[Loud knocking.] Will. Mrs. Jolly.


James. Mrs. Jolly.


John. Mrs. Jolly.


Enter John and Mrs. Jolly. John. Mrs. Jolly, madam.


[ Gives a card to Mrs. Dig. and exit. Mrs. Jolly. So, good folks.


Mrs. Dig. Madam, your most obedient.


Mrs. Jolly. What, all idle! -- no loo -- no brag -- no hazard -- nor no
dancing begun yet, and Lady Bab here -- but where is Mushroom -- I Have such a
story for him. -- Where Is the Count, Diggerty?


Enter John with a note and exit. Mrs. Dig. O he will be here, never fear,
madam -- O this is a card from Gazette, ( reads) "Dear Dig, I cannot be with
you at seven;" but before you have played two hands, expect "me -- three short
visits at the Green, one in" Merrion-street, two in the Mall, in
Britain-street, "three words at the castle with his" excellency, and then I am
yours for the "night, and whilst I am -- Gazette."


L. Kin. Well said, Gazette! -- she will spread more scandal in these short
visits than truth can remove in a twelvemonth.


[Loud knocking.] Will. Mr. Fitzmungrel.


James. Mr. Fitzmungrel.


John. Mr. Fitzmungrel.


L. Kin. O, here is Fitzmungrel! drunk, I suppose, according to custom.


L. Bab. And brutal, according to nature; yes, yes, he is drunk I see. I will be
gone, for I know he will be rude.


L. Kin. No, no, stay -- let us all share in his abuse, pray.


Enter John. John. Mr, Fitzmungrel, madam.


Enter Fitzmungrel, drunk and singing. Fitz. My dear, Mrs. O'Dogherty -- but I
know you do not love to be called O'Dogherty, and therefore I will call you by
your English name, Mrs. Diggerty -- my dear Diggerty, I have not been in bed
since I saw you.


Mrs. Dig. Why where have you been, Fitz?


Fitz. At the Curragh, my dear, with Pat Wildsire, Sir Anthony All-Night, Sir
Toby Ruin, Dick Bashaw, and half a score more, and a fine chase we had -- haux,
haux, my honies -- over, over, haux -- but I was resolved to be with you, my
little Diggerty, because I promised, so I smoaked it away to town -- drove
myself in my own Phaeton, and was over-turned just as I came to dirty Dublin.


Mrs. Dig. Why you are all dirty?


Fitz. Yes, I had a fine set down in the dirtiest spot of the whole road.


Mrs. Dig. I hope you are not hurt?


Fitz. Not I, my dear -- haux -- haux -- whoop -- no, no, my dear Diggerty, I
am like a cat -- I always light upon my legs -- haux -- haux -- whoop -- ha, my
dear angelic cousin, Lady Bab Frightful -- by Heavens, you are a beautiful
creature, and look like the picture of good luck -- well, shall we have another
bank to night? -- here, take this note into your bank (gives a note) I will go
take a nap in the next room in my old chair, and when you have made it five
hundred, wake me, my little babby -- do you hear --


L. Bab. I will, I will -- that is a good man, go, and take a nap.


Fitz. My dear cousin, you are the beauty of our family.


L. Bab. Well, well -- go sleep -- go sleep.


Fitz. The beauty of our family, Bab -- another Venus -- as handsome as Medusa,
and you are besides a good-natured, old, young, middleaged, giggling girl of
threescore -- so I Will go take my nap -- haux -- haux -- tally ho -- whoop --


[Exit. Mrs. Dig. He is horrid drunk.


L. Kin. And what is worse, he is a greater brute sober than drunk.


[Loud knocking.] Will. Mrs. Gazette.


James. Mrs. Gazette.


John. Mrs. Gazette.


L. Kin. Here she comes, that knows every body's business but her own, ha, ha,
ha!


Major. I will swear she is in as many houses every day as Faulkner's Journal.


Enter John and Mrs. Gazette. John. Mrs. Gazette, madam.


[Exit. Mrs. Gaz. My dear Diggerty, you got my billet -- I came to you as soon
as possible -- but where is Mushroom -- I do not see him.


Mrs. Dig. He will be here, Madam.


Mrs. Gaz. My dear Jolly, why you look in high bloom to night -- Major, how is
your gout -- Lady Kinnegad, your most devoted -- Oh, but Diggerty, I have a
piece of news -- -they say your husband's to have a peerage.

Omnes. Ha, ha, ha!


Mrs. Dig. It is very true, madam, very true -- we are to be entitled.


Mrs. Gaz. Why not? I am sure there are those, that have not half your fortune,
who have got peerages. And pray, my dear, what is your title to be -- you must
consult me upon it.


Mrs. Dig. Why, I have thought of several, but know not which to pitch upon --
I am distracted about it, I have thought of nothing else this week -- I wish
you would all advise me -- it must be something new, elegant, and uncommon --
and teesty -- yes, I must have it teesty -- see, here is the lift of titles --
if you will all step into the drawing room, we will determine upon one, and
then sit down to our peerties -- come, alons -- sans ceremony -- I Will show you
the way -- come, major --


[ Exeunt, all but the Major. Major. Aye, aye, pack along -- I Will hobble after
you -- get the hazard ready -- but I must sit by the fire -- I am cursed lame
-- 'sblood, I have trod upon some damned shell or pebble -- O damn it -- curse
the shell -- but Lady Bab's bank will be worth touching.


[Exit. Enter O'Dogherty and Katty Farrel. O'Dogh. They are all gone to their
nightly devotions -- well, and what did she say when you gave her the money?


Katty. O sir, she was overjoy 'd, and so thankful -- but she will lose it all
again to that Lady Kinnegad.


O'Dogh. Not to night, Katty; her brother was in the room before them to
prevent her playing; he is resolved to settle all affairs with her this very
night. But what makes this Mushroom stay so long? Sure he will come.


Katty. O never fear, sir -- you never saw a man so eager, and so full of
expectation.


O'Dogh. And so you have really dressed him up in your lady's clothes.


Katty. I have, sir, indeed -- and he is ten times fonder of himself (if
possible) as a woman, I think, than he was as a man.


O'Dogh. Ogh I will engage I will cure him of his passion for himself, and for
all Irish women, as long as he lives.


Katty. Here comes my mistress, and her brother with her, sir.


O'Dogh. Come, come, quick; let us get out of their way, for he is resolved to
startle the lady, and waken her, if possible. Let us leave them to themselves,
for I reckon they will have a sharp brush.


[Exeunt. Enter Mrs. Diggerty and Hamilton. Coun. Madam, madam, you shall hear
me.


Mrs. Dig. Was there ever so, rude, so abrupt a behavior -- to force me from
my company thus.


Coun. It Is what your insolent disease demands; the suddenness and abruptness of
the shock is the chief ingredient in the remedy that must cure you.


Mrs. Dig. What do you mean, sir?


Coun. I will tell you, madam -- you are not ignorant that your husband took
you without a fortune; that he generously gave the little our father left you
to your younger sister, with the benevolent addition of two thousand pounds --
you know too, that by marriage articles, upon a separation or your husband's
death, you are entitled only to a hundred pounds a year; which cautious
pittance his prudence wisely insisted on, as a necessary check upon the conduct
of giddy, female youth, and thoughtless vanity, when matched with the tempered
age of sobriety and discretion -- now, madam, I am commissioned to inform you,
that the doors are open, and that the stipulated sum will be punctually paid
you, as your vicious appetite shall demand; for know, that neither your
husband's love, my affection, nor a residence in this house can be enjoyed by
you another hour, but on the hard condition of a thorough reformation.


Mrs. Dig. Sir!


Coun. Madam, it is true; for if female vanity will be mad, husbands must be
peremptory.


Mrs. Dig. Pray, sir, do not speak so loud.


Coun. Why not?


Mrs. Dig. The company will hear you.


Coun. I know it -- and I intend they shall.


Mrs. Dig. Oh, oh, oh! I shall be ashamed for ever -- pray do not speak so loud
-- bless me, brother, you startle me -- what is it you mean?


Coun. Will you hear what I have to say? will you attend to the dictates of a
brother's love, with modest patience, and virtuous candor?


Mrs. Dig. I will.


Coun. Sit down -- know then, in your husband's judgment, the sums you have
squandered, and those you have been cheated of by your female friends, is your
least offense -- it is your pride, your midnight revels, insolence of taste,
rage of precedence, that grieve him; for they have made you the ridicule of
every flirt and coxcomb, and the scorn and pity of every sober person that
knows your folly; this reflects disgrace upon your friends, contempt upon the
spirit and credit of your husband, and has furnished whispering suspicion with
stories and implications, which have secretly fixed an infectious stain upon
your chastity.


(both rise) Mrs. Dig. My chastity! I defy the world!


Coun. Aye, madam, you may defy it; but she who does, will find the world too
hard a match for her.


Mrs. Dig. I care not what slander says -- I will rely upon my innocence.


Coun. But I will not, madam, nor shall you -- it is not sufficient for my
sister, your husband's wife, or female reputation, to rely on innocence alone
-- women must not only be innocent, they must appear so too.


Mrs. Dig. Brother, I don't know what you mean by all this. I beg you will
explain.


Coun. I will -- know then, this coxcomb Mushroom --


Mrs. Dig. Mushroom!


Coun. Mushroom! -- as a man of wit and spirit, thought himself obliged to take
some hints your levity had given him.


Mrs. Dig. I give him hints -- brother, you wrong me.


Coun. Pray hear me -- this spark, I say, like a true man of intrigue, not only
returns your hints with a letter of gallantry, but bribes your own woman to
deliver it.


Mrs. Dig. My woman!


Coun. The same.


Mrs. Dig. I am ignorant of all this, and will turn her out of the house this
instant.


Coun. Softly! hear the whole! the maid, instead of carrying the letter to you,
delivers that, and many others, to her master, who, in your name, hand, style,
and sentiment, has answered them all, and carried on an amorous correspondence
with the gentleman, even up to an assignation; and, now, at this very instant,
the spark is preparing for the happy interview, and has made the town the
confidants of his good fortune.


Mrs. Dig. O heavens!


Coun. Now judge what your husband, brother, and your friends must feel, and
what the world must think of her, whose conduct could entitle a coxcomb to such
liberties.


Mrs. Dig. Brother, I shall make no defense -- the story shocks me! and though
I know my own intentions, yet what people may say -- but, be assured, I shall
be more prudent for the future -- perhaps I have been to blame -- pray advise
me -- only say what I shall do to be revenged upon the fellow for his
impudence, and what will convince my husband, you, and all the world of my
innocence, and I will do it. I protest you have given such a motion to my
heart, and such a trouble and a trembling, as it never felt before.


Coun. It is a virtuous motion -- encourage it -- for the anxiety and tears of
repentance, though the rarest, are the brightest ornaments a modern fine lady
can be decked in.


Katty and O'Dogherty without. O'Dogh. I shall be in here with the counselor,
Katty, and the moment he comes, bring me word.


Katty. I shall, sir.


Coun. Here your husband comes.


Mrs, Dig. I am ashamed to see him.


Enter O'Dogherty. O'Dogh. Well, brother, have you spoke to her?


Coun. There she is, sir -- and as she should be -- bathed in the tears of
humility and repentance.


O'Dogh. Ogh! I am sorry to see this indeed -- I am afraid you have gone too
far. If I had been by, I assure you, brother, you should not have made her cry.
-- Yerrow, Nancy, child, turn about, and don't be crying there.


Mrs, Dig. Sir, I am ashamed to see your face -- my errors I acknowledge -- and
for the future --


O'Dogh. Pooh, pooh -- I will have no submissions nor acknowledgments; if you
have settled every thing with your brother, that is sufficient.


Mrs. Dig. I hope he is satisfied -- and it shall be the business of my life --


O'Dogh. Pooh, pooh! say no more I tell you, but come, give me a kiss, and let
us be friends at once -- there -- so, in that kiss, now, let all tears and
uneasiness subside with you, as all fears and resentment shall die with me.


Coun. Come, sister, give me your hand, for I must have my kiss of peace too. I
own I have been a little fevere with you, but your disease required sharp
medicines.


O'Dogh. Now we are friends, Nancy, I have a favor or two to beg of you.


Mrs. Dig. Pray, command them.


O'Dogh. Why, then, the first thing that I ask, is, that you will send away
that French rascal the cook, with his compots and combobs, his alamodes and
aladobes, his crapandoes and frigandoes, and a thousand outlandish kickshaws,
that I am sure were never designed for Christian food; and let the good rough
rumps of beef, the jolly surloins, the geefe and turkies, cram fowls, bacon and
greens; and the pies, puddings and pasties, that used to be perfectly shoving
one another off of the table, so that there was not room for the people's
plates; with a fine large cod too, as big as a young alderman -- I say, let all
those French kickshaws be banished from my table, and these good old Irish
dishes be put in their places; and then the poor every day will have something
to eat.


Mrs. Dig. They shall, sir.


O'Dogh. And as to yourself, my dear Nancy, I hope I shall never have any more
of your London English; none of your this here is, your that there is, your
winegars, your weals, your vindors, your toastesses, and your stone postesses;
but let me have our own good plain, old Irish English, which I insist upon is
better than all the English English that ever coquets and coxcombs brought into
the land.


Mrs. Dig. I will get rid of these as fast as possible.


O'Dogh. And pray, above all things, never call me Mr. Diggerty -- my name is
Murrogh O'Dogherty, and I am not ashamed of it; but that damned name Diggerty
always vexes me whenever I hear it.


Mrs. Dig. Then, upon my honor, Mr. O'Dogherty, it shall never vix you again.


O'Dogh. Ogh, that is right, Nancy -- O'Dogherty for ever -- O'Dogherty! --
there is a found for you -- why they have not such a name in all England as
O'Dogherty -- nor as any of our fine sounding Milesian names -- what are your
Jones and your Stones, your Rice and your Price, your Heads and your Foots, and
Hands and your Wills, and Hills and Mills, and Sands, and a parcel of little
pimping names that a man would not pick out of the street, compared to the
O'Donovans, O'Callaghans, O'Sullivans, O'Brallaghans, O'Shaghnesses,
O'Flahertys, O'Gallaghers, and O'Doghertys, -- Ogh, they have courage in the
very sound of them, for they come out of the mouth like a storm; and are as old
and as stout as the oak at the bottom of the bog of Allen, which was there
before the flood -- and though they have been dispossessed by upstarts and
foreigners, buddoughs and sassanoughs, yet I hope they will flourish in the
Island of Saints, while grass grows or water runs.


Enter Katty. Katty. Mr. Mushroom is come, sir.


O'Dogh. What, in his woman's clothes?


Katty. Yes, sir.


O'Dogh. Impudent rascal! and where have you put him, Katty?


Katty. In the back parlour, sir.


O'Dogh. Odzooks! Katty, go down, and show him up here -- this is the largest
room to exercise the gentleman in -- begone, quick, and leave all the rest to
me.


Katty. I am gone, sir.


[Exit. O'Dogh. My dear, you must act a part in this farce; the better to bring
the rascal into ridicule.


Mrs. Dig. Any thing to be revenged of him for his ill opinion of me.


O'Dogh. Step into your own room, then, and I will come and instruct you how to
behave.

[ Exit Mrs. Dig. And, brother, do you go and open the affair to the company,
and bring them here to listen to the Count's gallantry, and to be witnesses of
his making me a cuckold.


Coun. I warrant you I will prepare them for the scene. But, brother, be sure
you make the gentleman smart.


[Exit. O'Dogh. Ogh, leave him to me -- by the honor of the whole Irish nation
I will make him remember the name of Diggerty, as sensibly as ever his
schoolmaster did hic, haec, hoc, genitivo hujus -- an impudent rascal! make a
cuckold of an Irishman -- what, take our own trade out of our hands -- and a
branch of business we value ourselves so much upon too -- why, sure that and
the Linen Manufacture are the only free trade we have. -- O, here the company
come.


Enter all the Company. L. Kin. Well, where is this Count, this hero of
intrigue?


O'Dogh. Below stairs.


L. Bab. And in woman's clothes, Mr. Dogherty?


O'Dogh. And in woman's clothes, Lady Bab, come to make a cuckold of me; and if
you will all hide yourselves in the next room, you may see how the operation
proceeds -- hush -- here he comes -- get in, get in -- and do not stir -- here
he is -- begone.


[ They all retire. -- Exit O'Dogh. Enter Katty, and Mushroom in woman's
clothes. Katty. Step into this room for a moment, sir, and I will let my
mistress know you are here -- I protest I should not have known you.


Mush. Should not you? Ha, ha, ha! Why I think I do make a handsome woman, Mrs.
Katty.


Katty. Handsome! why you are a perfect. beauty! you are the very picture of a
Connaught lady, that visits my mistress -- well, I will go and see if the coast
is clear, and let her know you are come.


Mush. Do, dear Mrs. Katty, and tell her my soul is all rapture, extacy, and
transport, and rides upon the wings of love.


Katty. I will, I will, sir.


[Exit Mush. A man must speak nonsense to these creatures, or they will not
believe he loves them. I shall have more intrigues upon my hands in this
country than I shall know what to do with; for I find the women all like me. As
to Lady Kinnegad, I see she is determined to have me.


L. Kin. Indeed! Conceited puppy!


Mush. But she is gross, coarse, and stinks of sweets intolerably.


L. Kin. Rascal!


Mush. Gazette is well enough; I am sure I can have her. Yes, she is a blood,
but she will not do above once and away.


Gazette. Saucy fellow! -- but once indeed -- I assure you!


Mush. Jolly has some thoughts of me too, I see -- but she is an idiot, a fool
-- damned silly.


Mrs. Jolly. Mighty well, sir -- very well --


Mush. But of all the spectacles that ever attempted to awaken gallantry, sure
Nature never formed such another antidote as poor Lady Bab.


L. Bab. Oh the villain! -- an antidote -- an antidote --


Mush. She always puts me in mind of an old house newly painted and white
washed.


L. Bab. I will go tear his eyes out.


Mush. Then she is continually feeding that nose of hers, and smells stronger
of rappee than Lady Kinnegad does of the Spice Islands.


L. Kin. Oh, the rascal!


Mush. That Kinnegad is a damned tartar; she and Mrs. Cardmark have fleeced
poor Diggerty horridly -- when I get Diggerty to England, I will introduce her
to my Lord; for by that time I shall be tired of her. Oh, here the party comes.

Enter Mrs. Diggerty and Katty. My angel! my goddess!


Mrs. Dig. O dear Mr. Mushroom, how could you venture so? I am ready to die
with apprehension, lest my husband should discover you.


Mush. Never fear, my charmer; love despises all dangers, when such beauty as
yours is the prize.


Mrs. Dig. But I hope, Mr. Mushroom, your passion is sincere?


Mush. Madam, the winged architect of the Cyprian goddess has fabricated a
pathetic structure in this breast, which the iron teeth of Time can never
destroy.


Mrs. Dig. O dear Mr. Mushroom, you are veestly kind.


Katty. Come, come, madam, do you lose no time, retire to your chamber, there
you will be safe, here you may be interrupted.


Mrs. Dig. Do you step and send the servants out of the way.


Mush. Do, do, dear Mrs. Katty.


Katty. I will, I will.


[Exit. Mush Dear creature, do but lay your hand upon my heart, and feel what
an alarm of love and gratitude it beats.


Katty and O'Dogherty without. O'Dogh. Well, but Katty, if she is so very ill,
that is the very reason why I must see her.


Mush. Zounds! your husband's voice!


Mrs. Dig. O heavens!


Enter Katty. Katty. My master, my master!


Mrs. Dig. What will become of me?


Katty. Run you down the back stairs, madam, and leave him to me.


Mrs. Dig. Dear sir, farewell; for heaven's sake, don't discover yourself.


Mush. No, no, madam, never fear me, not for the world.


Mrs. Dig. Adieu.


[Exit. Mush. What the devil shall I do, Mrs. Katty?


Katty. Sit you still, sir, at all events -- I will put out the candles. (Puts
them out.) -- He will take you for my mistress; pretend to be very ill; leave
the rest to me. Sure you can mimic a fine lady that has the vapors or the
cholic.


Mush. O nobody better! -- nobody better --


Enter O'Dogherty with a Pistol. O'Dogh. Heyday! what in the dark, my dear?


Katty. Yes, sir, my mistress is very ill, and cannot bear the light.


O'Dogh. What is her complaint?


Katty. The cholic, sir.


O'Dogh. The cholic, sir! and what good can darkness do the cholic, sir -- get
candles.


Mush. Oh, oh! -- no candles -- no lights, pray my dear, no lights.


Katty. No, no lights -- my lady has the headache, as well as the cholic, and
the lights make her much worse; therefore, pray let her sit in the dark, she
will soon be well -- are you any better, madam?


Mush. A great deal, but no lights, pray -- oh, oh, -- no lights! no lights!


O'Dogh. Well, my dear, you shall have no lights, you shall have no lights --
leave us, Katty -- I have some business with your mistress.


[ Exit Katty. How are you, my dear? are you any better?


Mush. Oh, a great deal, my dear.


O'Dogh. I am mighty glad of it, my soul. But now, my dear, I have long wanted
to have a little serious conversation with you upon a business that has given
me the utmost uneasiness, nay indeed the utmost torture of mind; so without
farther ceremony, and in one word, to come to the point -- I am jealous, my
dear.


Mush. How! jealous!


O'Dogh. Indeed I am, as are half the husbands of this town, and all occasioned
by one man, which is that coxcomb, Count Mushroom.


Mush. He is a very great coxcomb, I own, my dear.


O'Dogh. You may say that with a safe conscience -- and a great jackanapes he
is too into the bargain; though, I must own, the fellow has something genteel
in him notwithstanding.


Mush. O yes, my dear, he is a very pretty fellow -- that all the world allows.


O'Dogh. It is very true, but his prettiness will be his ruin; for as he makes
it his business and his glory to win the affections of women, wherever he goes,
and as he has made conquests of several married women in this town, there are
half a dozen husbands of us that have agreed to poison him.


Mush. How! poison him! O horrid! why that will be murder, my dear.


O'Dogh. O that is none of our business -- let him look to that -- we must
leave that to the law -- the fellow is always following you to the playhouse,
balls, and routs, and is constantly smiling at you, and ogling, and sighing --
but if ever I catch him at those tricks again, as sure as his name is Mushroom,
I will put the lining of this little pistol into the very middle of his scull.


Mush. Oh, oh, oh!


O'Dogh. He told me this morning that he had a new intrigue upon his hands this
afternoon -- I wish I knew where it was; by all that is honorable, I would help
the husband to put eight or ten inches of cold iron into the rascal's bowels.


Mush. Oh, oh, oh!


O'Dogh. What is the matter, my dear? what makes you start and cry out so? --
give me your hand -- why you are all in a tremor! -- ogho, why you have got the
shaking ague.


Mush. I am mighty ill -- mighty ill --


O'Dogh. Why you are all in a cold sweat -- you had best go up stairs and lie
down.


Mush. No, no, no, -- oh, no! --


O'Dogh. Why you shall have some immediate help -- here, Katty -- John --
William -- who is there?


Enter William. Will. Did your honor call, sir?


O'Dogh. Fly this minute to the next street to Mr. Carnage the surgeon, and bid
him hasten hither to bleed my wife; then run as fast as you can to doctor
Fillgrave, and tell him my wife is very ill, and must be blistered directly.
Begone -- fly --


Will. I will, sir.


[Exit. Mush. Soh! what the devil shall I do now, I shall certainly be
discovered.


(Aside.) O'Dogh. How are you now, my dear?


Mush. O better, better, a great deal.


O'Dogh. Oh, but for fear of the worst, I will have you bled plentifully, my
dear, and half a score good rousing blisters laid on by way of prevention; for
it is a very sickly time, my life.


Mush. Aye, so it is, my soul. But, my dear, I begin to be a little better;
pray send the maid hither.


O'Dogh. What do you want with the maid, my angel?


Mush. I want her upon a particular occasion, my love -- oh, oh, oh --


O'Dogh. Very well, my dear, I Will send her to you. I think we have the Count of
the three blue balls in a fine pickle; but I have not done with him yet. I have
laid a ridiculous snare for him, if he will but fall into it, that will not
only expose him to the world, but cure him for ever, I think, of trespassing
upon matrimonial premises.


[Exit. Mush. Was ever poor devil so sweated! I wish I were out of the kingdom!
I shall certainly be poisoned among them! they are a damned barbarous people. I
have often heard of the wild Irish, but never believed there were such till
now. Poison a man, only for having an intrigue with a friend's wife. Zounds, we
never mind such things in England; but they are unpolished beings here.


Enter Katty with two candles. Mush. Oh! Mrs. Katty, get me out of the house,
or I am a dead man -- he suspects I have a design upon his wife, and carries a
loaded pistol to shoot me.


Katty. O heavens, sir -- I don't know what to do with you -- here comes my
poor mistress, frighted out of her wits too.


Enter Mrs. Diggerty. Mush. O, madam! if you don't contrive to convey me out of
the house some way or other, I shall be detected, poisoned, shot, or run
through the vitals.


Mrs, Dig. I am so distracted, I cannot think -- you must even discover
yourself to him, and say you came hither in that disguise out of a frolic.


Mush. Zounds, a frolic! Madam, he is as jealous as a Spanish miser, or an
Italian doctor; he has a pistol in his pocket laden with a brace of balls --
he would shoot me, run me through the body, or poison me directly, should he
discover me -- have you no closet, or cup-board? dear, Mrs. Katty, cannot you
contrive to get me out of the house in some shape or other?


Katty. Why yes, sir, I have a contrivance that I think might save you.


Mush. What is it? what is it? quick, quick, for heaven's sake; for he
certainly has a pistol in his pocket -- he showed it to me.


Katty. Why, sir, I have a large portmanteau trunk, by the help of which, I
think, you might be safely conveyed out of the house, if you would but submit
to be shut up in it.


Mush. Submit! zounds! any thing, any thing, dear Mrs. Katty, to save my own
life and a lady's honor. Why, child, it is an excellent contrivance, and, in
my condition, perhaps the only one that could relieve me. For heaven's sake,
let me see it -- where is it?


Katty. It stands just without the door here in the passage -- (Brings it in.)
Here it is, sir, if it is but big enough -- that is all the danger.


Mush. Zounds! let me try it -- let me try it -- quick -- quick -- put in my
clothes -- there -- cram me in -- buckle me up -- stay, stay -- leave this end
a little open for air, or I shall be stifled -- very well -- excellent well --
Mrs. Katty -- there -- cram me in -- it will do -- snug -- snug -- damned snug
--


Mrs. Dig. Now call the men to carry it up to your room.


Katty. Here, John, William --


Servants without. Serve. Madam.


Katty. Come here quickly.


Enter John and William. Katty. Here take this portmanteau on your shoulders,
and carry it up to my room -- make haste.


[ The servants turn it up endways, with Mushroom's head to the ground, then
raise it on their shoulders.] Enter O'Dogherty. O'Dogh. Where are you going
with that portmantle?


John. Up to Mrs. Katty's room.


O'Dogh. Set it down here -- what have you got in this portmantle, Katty?


Katty. It is, sir -- it is --


O'Dogh. What, what is it?


Katty. Why it is -- it is --


O'Dogh. Speak this minute, or I will put my sword up to the hilts in it.


Mush. Ah! Hold, hold -- my dear Diggerty, hold -- it is I -- it is I --


O'Dogh. I -- who the devil is I? --


Mush. Mushroom -- your friend Mushroom.


O'Dogh. What! Count Mushroom!


Mush. The same -- the very same. --


O'Dogh. Hold the candle -- aye, it is my friend the Count indeed.


Mush. Zounds, my dear Diggerty -- you have dropped the hot wax on my face --
do pray let me out.


O'Dogh. And so this was the new intrigue you told me of this afternoon.


Mush. Ah, my dear Diggerty, I was but in jest, upon my honor.


O'Dogh. Aye, now you are right, Count -- the intrigue was but in jest on my
wife's side, indeed -- here, ladies, come hither, and see this hero of intrigue
and taste that they all admire so much.


Mujh. Ah, dear Diggerty, don't expose me.


Enter the Company. Omnes. Ha, ha, ha!


O'Dogh. Here, John -- set him upon his legs on the ground -- so -- there --
Lady Kinnegad, pray let me introduce you to the knight of the leathern
portmantle.


L. Kin. Count, your most obedient -- I would salute you, but I am coarse and
stink of sweets.


Mush. Ah, my dear Lady, that was only the wanton vanity of a coxcomb upon the
verge of paradise as he thought.


Mrs. Jolly. Your humble servant, Count -- I would strive to extricate you,
but, you know, I am an idiot, a fool -- ha, ha, ha!


Mush. O dear Mrs. Jolly --


L. Bab. Yes, and I am like an old house newly painted and white-washed, and I
stink of rappee. I think a little rappee would not be amiss to clear your eyes,
and refresh your spirits, and there is some for you.


(Throws snuff in his face.) Mush. O dear Lady Bab, this is (sneezes) cruel --
(sneezes) indelicate -- (sneezes) and intolerable -- (sneezes) but I beg you
will let me out of this consinement.


O'Dogh. Indeed I will not, for I intend that other people shall enjoy your
situation as well as I -- this is Lady High-Life's night -- all the world is
there -- so here, John, take this portmantle on your shoulders to Lady
High-Life's, with my compliments, and never stop till you take it up stairs to
the ball-room, and there set it down -- they will be extremely glad to see
their old friend, the Count of the three blue balls.


Mush. Mr. Diggerty -- madam -- ladies --


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha! away with him -- away with him.


Mush. Mr. Diggerty, you shall answer for this.


Omnes. Away with him -- away with him. Ha, ha, ha!


[He is carried off. O'Dogh. Now, gentlemen and ladies, you may go plunder one
another at cards and dice as fast as you can -- and, like the Count, make
yourselves objects for a farce. -- If every fine lady and coxcomb in this town
were turned into a farce, faith we should be the merriest people in all Europe
-- but ours is over for tonight, and pretty well upon the whole.


Indeed, I think it is very fairly ended: The coxcomb's punished; The fine Irish
lady's mended.

FINIS.

