THE REGISTER-OFFICE: A FARCE OF TWO ACTS.

ACTED at the THEATER ROYAL in Drury Lane.

By J. REED.

DUBLIN: Printed for H. SAUNDERS, R. WATTS, and W. WHITESTONE, Booksellers in
Skinner-row.

M,DCC,LXI.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. KING. THE Bard, whose Hopes on Comedy depend,
Must strive Instruction with Delight to blend;
While He, who bounds his less aspiring Views
To Farce, the Combrush of the comic Muse,
With Pleasantry alone may fill the Scene --
His Business chiefly this; to cure the Spleen;
To raise the pensive Mind from Grave to Gay,
And help to laugh a thoughtful Hour away.
If any quibbling Wit dispute my Thesis,
Pd ask the Use of half our petty Pieces?
Nay, Sirs, My Question still shall higher climb --
Pray what is the Use of full-pric'd Pantomime?
How does the pleasur'd Eye with Rapture glance
When mingling Witches join in hobbling Dance!
When wriggling Harlequin, the magic Sage,
In horn-pipe Amble traverses the Stage!
When trembling Pierrot in his Quivering shines,
An Ostrich enters, or a Serpent twines!
When headless Tailors raise the laughing Fit,
Or flour-dredg'd Footmen twirl upon a Spit! --
But oh! How loud the Roar, how dear the Rumble,
When Scaffolds, Mortar-Boards, and Bricklayers tumble!
When Clodpate runs, or limps, or quaintly rears
From Laundress-Tub his anabaptist Ears!
While all the Wit, these Exhibitions draw,
Is comprehended in a Cry -- O Laa!
Our Author, in this awful Court of Drury,
Submits his Cause to an impartial Jury.
No friendly Junto he tonight employs
To catch, by favoring Hands, the public Voice:
He founds on British Candor all his Trust,
Convinced a British Audience will be Just.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN
HARWOOD, BY Mr. AUSTIN. FRANKLY, Mr. BADDELEY. GULWELL, Mr. PACKER. WILLIAMS,
Mr. ACKMAN. Lord BRILLIANT, Mr. CASTLE. Capt. Le BRUSH, Mr. KING. TRICKIT, Mr.
FOX. SCOTCHMAN, Mr. FOOT. IRISHMAN, Mr. MOODY. FRENCHMAN, Mr. BLAKES.
WOMEN.
MARIA, Miss REED. MARGERY, Mrs. KENNEDY. Lady WRINKLE, Mrs. SNAREWELL,
These two Characters were not permitted to be played.

Footmen, two Chairmen, and a Highland Piper.

SCENE, LONDON.

THE REGISTER-OFFICE.
ACT I. SCENE, A genteel Apartment.
Enter HARWOOD and FRANKLY. Fran. WELL, this is the most unexpected Visit! --
but prithee, Harwood, what in the Name of Mystery, has brought thee to town at
this unfashionable Time of the Year?


Har. The Loss of my fair Housekeeper.


Fran. The Loss of Maria! -- Is she dead?


Har. Worse, my dear Frankly -- elop'd.


Fran. Elop'd! Why I thought you had so great a Regard for each other, that you
had been as inseparable as old Age and Avarice, or a Coquette and a
Looking-Glass.


Har. I thought so too: but Women are as changeable as their Dresses: there is
no answering for the Humors of the Sex -- though Faith I cannot altogether
excuse myself in the Affair of our Parting.


Fran. Prithee explain.


Har. You know, Charles, after the Death of my Wise, whom, with Shame I must
own, I never thoroughly, loved, as she was not mine but my Father's Choice. I
prevailed on Maria, who was either beggared by an unnatural Father or a
villainous Uncle, to take upon her the Care of my Family. -- Her good Sense,
Beauty, and Behavior, imperceptibly won my Heart; but my Pride forbidding me
to marry a Woman without a Fortune, I made use of every Means in my Power to --
gain her Affections.


Fran. I understand you: to gain them in the old Way.


Har. But the fair Maria was so much upon her Guard, or so obstinately
virtuous, that nothing but downright Matrimony would induce her to listen to my
Solicitations.


Fran. An unreasonable Gipsy! And so you dropped the Affair?


Har. Not quite so hasty in your Conclusions, good Sir. -- After a vast
Profusion of lying and swearing, which failed of the desired Success, I
determined to make my grand Attack.


Fran. Resolved like a Man of Spirit!


Har. And accordingly one Night the last Week, When every Eye was closed, and
the pale Moon
And Stars alone shone conscious of the Theft,
Hot with the Gallic Grape, and high in Blood,
and so forth, I began my Assault.


Fran. Bravo!


Har. It would be needless to tell thee I was repulsed. -- In short, the dear,
lovely, affronted, virtuous Maria, so highly resented the Familiarity, that she
instantly left the House, and from that Hour I have not set Eye on the fair
Enslaver.


Fran. And so you are come to Town to hire a new Housekeeper?


Har. No; to marry my old one, if I can be so fortunate as to encounter her. --
I must have her! -- I cannot be easy without her. -- I have some faint Hopes of
meeting with her, as she was seen on the London Road. -- Which do you think the
most likely Way of finding her out?


Fran. Hum! -- this requires some thought -- ay -- Pray what do you think of a
penitential Advertisement?


Har. No hang it! Should I be discovered for the Author, it would make me too
ridiculous.


Fran. That Is true I must confess -- stay -- do you imagine she will be looking
after another Place?


Har. I fancy she will, as her Finances must below.


Fran. Then the only Method I can put you into is an. Application to some of
our Intelligence-Warehouses.


Har. I don't understand your cant Phrase: Pray what: do you mean by an
Intelligence-Warehouse?


Fran. A Register-Office.


Har. Oh! I take you! the Places where Servants may be heard of. -- Pray were
not these Offices invented by the ingenious Author of Tom Jones?


Fran. They were. -- The Project has been, and still is of great Utility to
the Public; but as there is no general Rule without an Exception, this
laudable Institution has been strangely perverted, through the Villainy and
Avarice of some of it is Managers. -- There is an old Rascal in this
Neighborhood, who has amassed a tolerable Fortune by Abuses of this Kind. His
Office is frequented by Persons of every Degree; and, among it is other
Conveniences, the good old Trade of Pimping is carried on with great Success
and Decency. I believe as many Proselytes have been made to the Flesh, by the
Knavery of this Rascal, as by the most successful Bawd in Town.


Har. So, I find the old Fellow is a Genius in his Way?


Fran. A complete one. -- Our old School-fellow, Jack: Williams, is his Clerk,
from which honorable Employment he retires in a few Days to a Stewardship, to
which I have lately recommended him. -- By his Means I have often had an
Opportunity of overhearing some Passages, which have afforded great Humor and
Entertainment.


Har. If my Heart were not so full for the Loss of this dear Woman, I could
like to throw away an Hour in an Amusement of this Kind.


Fran. That you may this very Morning if you please -- I Will introduce you -- It
will help to dissipate your Melancholy for the Loss of your fair Deserter.


Har. Psha! I am not in a Humor to relish any Pleasantry -- excuse me, Charles
-- some other Time I Will accept of your Offer.


Fran. Since you are so serious, I must insist on your going -- Why thou art as
melancholy as a superseded Placeman -- Come; come, George, don't despair! -- I
warrant we will find out it is Charmer in a few Days -- You must go with me,
Harwood.


Har. Then I am ready to attend you.


Fran. Allons donc. Exeunt.


Scene, a Register-Office. Enter WILLIAMS. Will. The Business of the Morning is
partly over -- What a crowd of deluded Females have flocked to this Office
within these three Hours, in Expectation of the imaginary Place we have
advertised! -- A Register-Office, under the Direction of so conscientious a
Person as Mr. Gulwell, instead of a public Good, becomes a public Evil -- My
upright Master seldom feels any Reflections of this Kind! Avarice is his
leading Principle; and so long as he can swell his Bags, by the Folly or
Credulity of Mankind, he will not suffer Conscience to hinder him in his
Pursuit of Gain -- Mr. Frankly! -- a propos! I must have his Opinion of this
Letter -- it is an Affair too serious to be connived at.


Enter HARWOOD and FRANKLY. Fran. Mr. Williams, your Servant.


Will. Sir, your most obedient.


Fran. I am come to ask the Favor of your giving this Gentleman an Opportunity
of overhearing the Humors of the Register-Office.


Will. Sir, you could not impose on me a more welcome Command -- Sir -- I beg
Pardon for my Freedom -- if I mistake not I had the Honor of being your
Schoolfellow -- Your Name I think is Harwood?


Har. It is, Sir -- I am very glad to see you, Mr. Williams.


Will. Come, Sir, this is no Time for Compliments: I expect my Master every
Minute -- there is your Way, Sir -- you may see all that come in through the
Blind -- pray slip the Spring-Lock for fear of a Surprise from my master -- if
he offer to unlock the Door, Mr. Frankly, you will step into my Bedchamber -- to
your Posts, Gentlemen: I think I hear him coming. Exeunt Harwood and Frankly.


Enter GULWELL. Gul. So this Advertisement has brought in two Pounds thirteen
shillings -- no very bad Morning's Work -- Well, thanks to the Memory of our
witty Eounder, say I! Had he not luckily hit on the Scheme of a
Register-Office, I might have dangled on at Quill-driving without ever being
worth a Groat.


Will. But, Sir, do you think this Calling of ours the most conscientious one in
the World? -- I begin to imagine my old Employment the Law the more honest
Profession of the two.


Gul. Mr. Williams, there is Roguery in all the Employments under the Sun.
Every Day's Experience will convince you, that there is no getting through the
World without a necessary Portion of Trick and Chicanery.


Will. Sir, if the Imposture of this very Advertisement were sound out and duly
punished, one or both of us would stand a fair Chance for the Pillory. How many
poor Girls have this Morning been stripped of perhaps their last Shilling, by
being amused with the Hopes of the Place we have advertised -- In Faith, Sir,
some of our Profession are little better than downright Pickpockets -- I am
glad I shall have the good Fortune to leave it so soon.


Gul. Mr. Williams, I am truly sorry for our Separation, yet rejoice at the
Occasion of it -- however, if you hope to make a Fortune in your altered
Condition of Life, you must learn to keep your Conscience in proper
Subordination. I can assure you, that Fraud is as necessary a Requisite in a
Stewardship, as in an Intelligence-Office. -- Is there no Message from Dr.
Skinflint about the Welsh Living?


Will. Yes, Sir: he says as Curates are so cheap in Wales, he will not take less
than a thousand Guineas.


Gul. A spiritual Curmudgeon! Why it is not quite a hundred a Year -- I forgot
to ask if you called at Captain Sparkle's last Night?


Will. I did, Sir, and was surprised to see him so greatly recovered.


Gul. Ay, I thought he would grow better after the Embarkation! I never
supposed him in any very great Danger, because he refused eight hundred Guineas
for his Commission, when his Life was said to be despaired of -- Have you
finished the Assignment of the Surgeoncy?


Will. No, Sir.


Gul. Then get it done, Mr. Williams -- stay -- you must write an Advertisement
for the Daily -- any Time this Afternoon will do -- of an Employment to be
disposed of in Ireland of a thousand Pounds per Annum, which requires little
Learning or Attendance, and may be executed by a Deputy -- Remember to add,
that Secrecy is required, and none but Principals need to apply.


Will. I forgot to tell you, the young Gentleman was here, to know if you had
received an Answer about the Secretary's Place.


Gul. Truly I am sorry I cannot succeed -- Fifteen hundred Guineas were
insisted on -- I pleaded the young Gentleman's acknowledged Merit, and the
public Services of his brave Father, who lost his Life in fighting for his
Country, which so softened my Principal, that he sunk his Demand from --


Will. Fifteen to five hundred, I hope?


Gul. From Guineas to Pounds: I could get no further Abatement.


Will. It is a Pity that such extraordinary Merit should have no better Success.


Gul. Ah! Mr. Williams, if Places were given to Persons of Merit only, the Lord
have Mercy upon many a big-looking Family -- away! here is Company a coming!
Exit Williams. Heyday! Who have we here? By his looks he must be one of the
Tribe of the Soup Maigres!


Enter a Frenchman. French. Be votre Nom Monsieur le Gulville?


Gul. It is, Sir -- Your Business?


French. Site, me be tell dat dear be de grand Nombre of des Academies
Francoises in Londres, an me vould be glad to be employer as un Maitre de
Langues. Me speak a de Frens vid de vrai Prononciation; an you see beside ma
Connoissance in de Langue Angloise be not de most inconsiderable.


Gul. O yes, Sir, you speak very pretty English I must own -- pray what
business have you been bred to?


French. Bisness! do you means to front a me? me be von of de Gens de Qualite.


Gul. How, Sir, a Person of Quality, and so poor as to be seeking after a
Livelihood?


French. Vy vere be de vonders of all dat? Noting be more commune in France --
Me dit indeed sometime, pour passer le Temps, amuser my sell vid curl a de Air,
and cut a de Corn of mine Comrades of Qualite of bot Sex.


Gul. Sir, if you be a Proficient in these Sciences, I give Joy with all my
Heart, for I don't know a more profitable Calling in London: nay, nor a more
reputable one; for it is Professors are caressed by Persons of the first Fashion
and Distinction -- There Is your Countryman Monsieur Frizzellette de la
Corneille, a Hair and Corn-Cutter in St. James's, that keeps his Chariot, though
it is scarce half a score Years since he would have made a Bow to the Ground for
a Bellyfull of Soup-Maigre -- Sir, I will cook you up an Advertisement, as long
as a Proclamation, that will effectually do your Business: In the mean Time I
shall give Orders for one of the Laconic Kind, to hang in golden Letters over
your Door, as Hair and Corns cut after the French Taste by a Person of Quality.


French. Ay dat vill do ver vel! Par une Person de Qualite.


Gul. But, Sir, as you are a Man of Rank, you may perhaps think it below your
Dignity to follow any Profession, that has the least Appearance of Business?


French. Non, non, Monsieur: tout au contraire.


Gul. Then I dare venture to say, that in less than a dozen Years you will be
rich enough to return to your native Country, and marry a Princess of the Blood
-- How in the Name of Wonder could you think of being a pitiful Teacher of
French for a Livelihood, when you are possessed of Talents, superior to all the
Learning in the World?


French. Me vill tell you, Monsieur -- It be not more as dix leven -- douze --
tirteen -- ay tirteen Year, since mon Cousin com'd over to l' Angleterre to
teash a de Frens in de Boarding-Ecole -- Vell, he dit engager de Affection of
de Angloise Lady, sa belle Ecoliere, runn'd avay vid her, and so begar he
getted de Vife, vid not less as von hunder tousan Livres -- Now, as mon Cousin
could marrier de Lady, vid so much of de l'Argent, vy may not me open to do de
same?


Gul. True, Sir: but there is an ugly Act of Parliament since that Time, which
hinders you Fortune-hunting Gentlemen from gaining such Wives -- Well, Sir, you
will deposit a small Sum; two or three Guineas or so, and I shall begin the
Advertisement.


French. Hey! vat you say! deposit! -- Je ne entens pas deposit.


Gul O, Sir, I Will soon explain it! -- Deposit signifies --


French. Non, non, mon chere Ami! -- it be impossible for me to know vat you
means; for me do not understand un Mot de Langue Angloise.


Gul. Why, Sir, I thought your Connoissance in de Langue Angloise had not been
de most inconsiderable? (mimicking him.


French. O Monsieur! -- but dat -- dat -- dat vas anoder ting.


Gul. Well, Sir, I must have two or three Guineas, by Way of Earnest, before I
proceed any further in your Business.


French. Two tree Ginee! begar! me could so soon give you two tree Million --
Vat you take a me for? Un grand Voleur? von Tief? -- You tink me ave rob you
Inglise Exchequer; for all de Vorld know Dat of mine Country ave scarce so
mush to be rob of -- Let a me see -- me ave no more as von Chelin, -- an von,
-- two, -- tree alf Pence.


Gul. Thirteen Pence Halfpenny! a very critical Sum in England -- Well, Sir,
you may leave that in part: I must give you credit for the Remainder. Frenchman
gives him Money.


French. Dear, Sir -- An so, Monsieur le Gulvelle, you tink en Verite me sal
ride in my Coash?


Gul. Not at all impossible -- Call again in a Week, and you shall see what I
have done for you.


French. Begar! you ave elever mine 'Art -- Sire, me be votre tres humble, tres
oblige, and tres devote, Serviteur -- O mon Dieu! Ride in my Carosse! Exit.


Gul Your most humble Servant, good Monsieur le Carosse -- If it were not for
the Credulity of Mankind, what a Plague would become of us Office-keepers!


Enter MARGERY. Mar. Sur, an I may be so bold, I'se come to ax an ye've sped
about to Woman Servant, at ye advertised for.


Gul. I have not -- Come nearer, young Woman.


Mar. Let me steck't Deer first, an ye please. Shuts the Door.


Gul. What Countrywoman are you?


Mar I'se Yorkshire, by my truly! I was bred an bworn at Little Yatton, aside
Roseberry Topping.


Gul. Roseberry Topping! Where is that, my pretty Maid?


Mar. Certainly God! ye know Roseberry? I thought any Fule had knawn Roseberry
-- Its' to biggest Mountain in oll Yorkshire -- It Is aboun a Mile an a hofe
high; an as coad as Ice at 'top on it i't hettest Summer's Day -- that it is.


Gul. You Have been in some Service, I suppose?


Mar. Ay, I Will uphode ye have I, ever sin I was neen Year ald Nay, makins, I Would
a God's-penny at Stowslah Market, aboun hofe a Year before at I was neen -- An
as good a Servant I Have been, thof I say it mysel, as ever came within a pair o
Deers -- I can Milk, Kurn, Fother, Bake, Brew, Sheer, Winder, Card, Spin, Knit,
Sew, and do every Thing at belangs to a Husbandman, as weel as any Lass, at
ever ware Clog-Sheen: An as to my Karecter, I defy any Body, gentle or simple,
to say Black'smy Nail.


Gul. Have you been in any place in London?


Mar. Ay, an ye please -- I lived wi Madam Shrillpipe, in St. Pole's
Kirk-Garth, but was forced to leave my Place, before at I had been a week o Days
in it.


Gul. How so.


Mar. Marry becose she ommost flighted an scauded me out o my Wits -- She wast
arrantest Scaud, at ever I met wi in my bworn Days -- She had seerly sike a
Tongue, as never was in any Woman's Head, but her awn -- It wad ring, ring,
ring, ring, ring like a Larum frae Mworn to Neeght -- The she wad put hersel
into sike Flusters, that her Face wad be as black as't Reeking-Crook -- Nay for
that Matter I was nobut rightly sarra'd; for I was tell'd aforehand, by some
verra sponsible Fwoke, at she was a mere Donnot: howsomesever as I fand my
Money grow less an less every Day (for I had brought my good seven an twonty
Shilling to neen Groats an two Pence) I thought it wad be better to take up wi
a bad Place, than nea Place at oll.


Gul. And how do you like London?


Mar. Marry, Sur, I like nowther Egg, nor Shell on it -- They Are sike a Set o
Fwoke, as I never saw wi my Eyn -- They laugh an flier at a Body like any Thing
-- I went nobut the other Day ti't Baker's Shop for a Lafe o Bread, an they fell
a giggling at me, as if I Would been yan o't greatest Gawvisons i't World -- Do you
think, Sur, at I look ought like a Gawison?


Gul. Not in the least, my pretty Damsel.


Mar. They may bwoast as they will o their Manners, but they have nea mare
Manners than a Miller's Horse, I can tell them that; that I can -- I wish I had
been still at canny Yatton!


Gul. As you have so great a Liking to the Place, why would you leave it?


Mar. Marry, Sur, I was forced, as yan may say, to leav't! -- The Squire wad
not let me be -- by my truly, Sur, he was after me Mworn, Noon, an Neeght -- If
I wad but ha consented to his wicked Ways, I might a had Gould by Gopins; that
I might -- Lo ye, Squire, says I, you're mista'en o me! I'se nane o thea sort o
Cattle -- I'se a vartuous young Woman, I Will asseer ye -- You Are others Fwoke's
Fwoke -- Wad ye be sike a Taystrell as to ruin me? -- But oll wadn't do: he
kept following an following, and teizing an teizing me -- At lang run I tell'd
my ald Dame, and she advised me to gang to London to be out of his way; that
she did like an honest Woman as she was -- I went to my Cousin Ishbell, an says
I to her, Ishbell says I, come will you goway to London? -- An tell'd her the
hale Affair atween me an the Squire -- Odsbeed! says she, my Lass, I Will gang wi
thee ti t Warld's End -- An away we come in good yearnest.


Gul. It was a very vartuous Resolution -- Pray how old are you?


Mar. I'se ninteen come ald haly Even.


Gul. Would you undertake a Housekeeper's Place?


Mar. I'se flaid I cannot manege't, unless it were in a Husband-Man's House!


Gul. It is a very substantial Farmer's in Buckinghamshire -- I am sure you
will do -- I Will set you down for it -- Your Name?


Mar. Margery Moorpout, an ye please.


Gul. How do you spell it?


Mar. Nay, makins, I know naught o Speldering -- I'se nea Schollard


Gul. Well, I shall write to him this Evening -- What Wages do you ask?


Mar. Nay marry, for that Matter, I wad'nt be ower stiff about Wage.


Gul. then I can venture to assure you of it -- You must give me half a Crown,
my pretty Maid -- Our Fee is only a Shilling for a common Place; but for a
Housekeeper's we have always half a Crown.


Mar. There Is twea Shilling, an yan -- twea -- three -- four -- fave -- six
pen'north o Brass, with a thousand Thanks -- God's Prayer light o you! for I'se
seer ye'rt'best Friend, I have met wi sine I come frae canny Yatton: that you
are -- When shall I coll again, Sur?


Gul. About the Middle of the next Week.


Mar. Sur, an ye please, good Mworning to you. Exit.


Gul. Good Morning to you, dear, vartuous Mrs. Margery Moorpout -- So this is a
Specimen of Yorkshire Simplicity; that it is -- More Customers!


Enter an Irishman. Irish. My dear Honey, I am com'd to she, if you have
Commiferashon enough in your Bowelsh to a poor Irishman, to get him a Plaish.


Gul. What sort of a Place are you fit for?


Irish. Upon my Shalwashon, Joy, do you see, I am fit for any Plaish alive! I
have Strength and Bonesh enough in this Carcash of mine, to do all the Work in
the World.


Gul. Have you ever been in Service?


Irish. In Shervish! No to be sure I have not -- Yes, by St. Patrick, ever
since after I was so big as a Potatoe!


Gul. With whom did you last live?


Irish. With Squire Maclellan of Killybegs.


Gul. Killybegs! Where the Duce is that?


Irish. Why where the Devil should it be but in Ireland, my dear Honey?


Gul. But what Part of Ireland? -- What Province? -- What County?


Irish. It is in the Provinsh of Donegal, in the County of Ulster. It is an
Inland Seaport Town, where they catch the best pickled Herrings in all England
-- By my set! he was the best Man of a Maishter between Derry and Youghal --
Arra! I shall never live so well with nobody else, unless I go back to live
with him again!


Gul. As he was so good a Master, how came you to leave him?


Irish. Leave him, Joy! Becase he wanted to make a Bug and a Fool of me. When I
went to go to Plough and Harrow, he would insist on yoking the dear Creatures
the Mulesh by the Necks, instead of the Tailsh.


Gul. The Tails! Why, is that the Irish Custom in Ploughing?


Irish. Ay, upon my Conscience, it is, Joy! and the best Cushtom, that ever was
born in the World -- I Will give you a Reason for it, Honey -- You know when the
Trashes is sasten'd to the Tail, all the rest of the Body is free; and when all
the Carcash but the Tail goes along, the Tail must shertainly follow it --
Besides, Honey, all the World knows the Strength of every human Creature lies
in the Tail -- Arra! He wanted to bodder me with his dam English Tricks, but
the Devil burn me, if honest Paddy would not have left twenty Plaishes, if he
had been in them all at once, sooner than be put out of the Way of his Country!


Gul. You were certainly in the Right! I commend your Spirit -- But pray how
have you lived since you came to London?


Irish. Lived, Honey! As a great many lives in London; no body knows how -- by
my Shoul! I have only picked up five Thirteens for these four Weeks and a half!


Gul. A special raw-bon'd Fellow this! He will do for America -- I must send
Word to my nephew Trappum -- Would you like to go abroad, Friend?


Irish. Ay, my dear Honey; any way in England, or in Scotland; but I would not
like, do you see, to live out of my native Kingdom.


Gul. Oh! It Is only a very short Voyage! A little round the Land's-End -- A
Gentleman has taken a very considerable Farm in the West, and if I could
prevail on him to hire you, you would have the sole management of it -- 'Twould
be the making of you -- You can write, I suppose?


Irish. Yes, upon my Conscience, that I can very well! -- My Mark, Honey;
that is all -- But that is Nothing, my dear; I could get any Body to write for
me, if they did but know how.


Gul. That Is true -- Well, I shall see the Gentleman this Evening, and have a
little close Talk with him about you.


Irish. Upon my Shoul, the most shivilest Person, dye see, that ever I met with
since I was an Irishman! Aside.


Gul Where do you lodge, Friend?


Irish. At the Harp and Spinning-Wheel in Farthing-Fields; Wapping; in a Room
of my own, that I hire at Nine-pence a Week.


Gul. Your Name?


Irish. Patrick O Carrol.


Gul. O Carrol! Give me your Hand -- we must be Cousins -- my great
Grandmother was an O Carrol


Irish. Was she by St. Patrick? Then we must be Cushins sure enough! -- Where
was she born?


Gul. At what do you call the Place where Squire O Carrol lives?


Irish What Provost O Carrol?


Gul. Ay, the Provost.


Irish Oh! You're a soft Lad! you don't know it was Ballyshanny?


Gul Right! That is the very Place! -- Well, Cousin, I should like to be better
acquainted with you.


Irish. And so should poor Paddy, by my set -- You cannot conceive how my heart
dances in the inside of my Bowelsh, to see a Relashon in this Part of the
World, where I expected to see no body at all; -- do, Honey, put your Head here
to feel -- fet, Joy, it beats, and beats, and beats, and jumps about in my
Belly like a brustled Pea upon a red hot Fire-Shovel -- Arra! I knew you to be
better half an Irishman, by your Shivility to Strangers!


Gul. Ay, I wish I were wholly so! but it was my Misfortune to be born in
England.


Irish. Upon my Conscience, that was almost poor Paddy's Misfortune too! I was
begot in England, but as good Luck would have it, I went over to Ireland to be
born.


Gul. Well, Cousin, if you will call on me To-morrow-Morning, I hope I shall be
able to give you Joy of your Place.


Irish. I shall, my dear Cushin -- Arra! Now if I was but my Father, who has
been dead these seven Years, I should be for making Song upon you for this
Shivility.


Gul. Your Father! What was he?


Irish. A true Irish Poet, my dear; he could neither read nor write -- By my
set, Honey, he wrote many an excellent new Song -- I have one of his uppn Moggy
Maclachlan, a young Virgin in Sligo, who he fell in Love with, after she had
two Love-Begots at one Time to Squire Concannen.


Gul. I should be glad to see it, if you have it on you.


Irish. O yes, my dear Creature! I always carry it upon me -- It is in my Head,
Honey: You shall see it in a Minute, if you will give me leave to sing it.


Gul. With all my Heart, Cousin.


Irish. The Devil burn me now, Honey, if I can think of the right Tune, becase
it never had any Tune at all! -- However it will go to Larry Grogan.


Gul. By all Means let us have it.


Irishman Sings. I.
My sweet pretty Mogg, you're as soft as a Bog,
And wild as a Kitten, and wild as a Kitten:
Those Eyes in your Face -- (O pity my Case)
Poor Dermot has smitten, poor Dermot has smittem
Far softer than Silk, and as fair as New-Milk
Your Lily white Hand is, your Lily white Hand is:
Your Shape's like a Pail; from your Head to your Tail
You're strait as a Wand is, you're strait as a Wand is.
II.
Your Lips red as Cherries, and your curling Hair is
As black as the Devil, as black as the Devil:
Your Breath is as sweet too, as any Potatoe,
Or Orange from Seville, or Orange from Seville.
When dressed in your Boddice, you trip like a Goddess,
So nimble so frisky; so nimble so frisky:
A Kiss on your Cheek (it is so soft and so sleek)
Would warm me like Whisky, would warm me like Whisky.
III.
I grunt, and I pine, and I sob like a Swine
Becase you're so cruel, becase you're so cruel.
No Rest I can take; and asleep or awake
I dream of my Jewel, I dream of my Jewel.
Your Hate then give over; nor Dermot your Lover
So cruelly handle, so cruelly handle;
Or Dermot must die, like a Pig in a Sty,
Or Snuff of a Candle, or Snuff of a Candle.

Gul. I thank you very kindly; it is a most admirable Song -- Well, you will be
here at nine tomorrow?


Irish. You may be certain of my coming, my dear Cousin.


Gul. But hark you -- Be sure not to mention a Word of this Affair to any
Person whatever -- I would not have it get Wind, lest any Body else should be
applying to the Gentleman.


Irish. Oh! let Paddy alone for that, my dear Creature! I am too cunning to
mention it to nobody, but my nown Shelf -- Well, your Servant, my dear Cousin.
Exit.


Gul. Your Servant, your Servant -- We must have this Fellow indented as soon
as possible -- He will fetch a rare Price in the Plantations -- Odso! here
comes one of my best Customers.


Enter Lady WRINKLE. Gul. Your Ladyship's most obedient.


L. Wrin. Mr. Gulwell, your Servant -- I called to see if you have never a
handsome well-bred young Fellow on your Books. Master Richard, whom you lately
recommended to me, grew so intolerably vain, and so swelled with his own
Importance, that I was last Night obliged to send him a packing -- Would you
think it, Mr. Gulwell -- the Creature had even the Impudence to --


Gul. Bless me, Madam! Not offer any Rudeness to Lady Wrinkle, I hope! A Lady
of her Prudence! her Virtue! her Character!


L. Wrin The most consummate Rudeness in the World! -- As I hope to be saved,
Mr. Gulwell, the Monster had the Audacity, the immoderate Audacity, to make
Love to me -- ay, and in an honorable Way, I assure you!


Gul. Make Love to your Ladyship, I am astonished at the Rascal's Impudence?


L. Wrin. I am so naturally good-natured, that I could almost have forgiven any
other Rudeness; but this was so excessively impudent, so immensely provoking,
that I could almonst run mad to think on it.


Gul. And so could I too, I assure your Ladyship. Walks to and fro in a
disordered Manner.


L. Wrin. Because I showed him some slight Civilities -- for, excusing this
Fault, he was really a pretty agrecable Fellow -- he had the Assurance to use
me in this audacious Manner -- Oh! Mr. Gulwell! there was no bearing such
Insolence! I must have been as insensible as an Idiot to put up with such
astonishing ill Usage -- But I must be on the Wing -- I have three and twenty
Visits this Morning -- Well, you will be upon the Lookout for me -- I would
have him well built -- Nothing, at least very little less than six Foot -- None
of your snipper-snapper, whey-fac'd Jacks, but as proper a Man, as one would
wish to see at a Review of the Guards -- Nothing adds more to the Dignity of an
Equipage, than the Size and Stateliness of one's Domestics.


Gul. What Countryman would your Ladyship have him?


L. Wrin. Why, if he be but a proper, stately, active Person, it is no great
Matter for his Country -- Suppose he were a Swiss -- they are a hale, robust
Nation -- but I should like him the better for being an Irishman -- The Irish
in general are a very obliging People.


Gul. I have one in my Eye that answers your Ladyship's Description to a Hair:
he was with me the other Day about purchasing a Place in the Guards -- let me
see -- ay! here he is! -- Arthur Mackilwayne -- he is a Strapper i'saith, and a
Man of very good, but decayed Family!


L. Wrin. Family, Mr. Gulwell! -- Surely the Man's turned in his Head! -- Don't
you know, Sir, that we Quality always make it a Point never to admit into our
Services any Creature that has the least Pretense to Birth? -- With the
Mushroom Part of Mankind we can do as we please; treat them with all the
Contempt, State, Insolence, and Superiority, which characterize the Woman of
Quality; but if we behave in a like Manner to the Gentleman, he gives himself a
great many impertinent Airs on his Birth -- Why it was but last Week that Lady
Stilts reprimanded her Footman, when the Rascal had the Impudence to tell her,
he was of a better Family than herself; For his Grandfather was an Attorney,
and her Ladyship's but a Bum-Bailiff -- No, no, Mr. Gulwell; there is no
enduring the Insolence of a decayed Gentleman!


Gul. I ask your Ladyship's Pardon -- I was not aware of this Objection.


L. Wrin. Well, if any Thing happen in a Day or two, you will remember me -- If
you don't hear of one in that Time, I would have you advertise -- Your last
Advertisement if you have a Copy of it, with a little Alteration, will do again
-- It was an extreme good one, but bordered rather too much on the double
Entendre -- Lady Die Spritely was very funny on reading it -- I would not for
the Universe she had known that it was written upon my Account -- You wicked
Creature! how could you use me in such a Manner? -- I protest I was horridly
angry at you for it -- You know I abominate every Thing that has the least
Appearance of Indelicacy -- Well, you will take Care to advertise: for it will
positively be of great Inconvenience to my Family Affairs, to have Richard's
Place unsupplied -- Mr. Gulwell, your Servant. Exit.


Gul. Your Ladyship's most devoted -- Of great Inconvenience to my Family
Affairs to have Richard's Place unsupplied! -- In Faith I believe her Ladyship!
-- So Dick is unshipp'd, and the Bond not worth a Farthing! -- I have lost the
five hundred Pounds, as clean as a Whistle! -- He gave me such Assurances of
her Ladyship's Regard, that I thought the Money as safe, as if I had it in my
Pocket -- Who Is here? -- one of my party-colored Customers! -- Oh! it is Lady
Vixen's Livery!


Enter a Footman. Foot. Sir, my Lady Vixen desires to speak with you, at Mr.
Bombazine's, the Silk-Mercer's over the Way.


Gul. Mr. Williams, give an Eye to the Office -- I shall be back in a few
Minutes. Exeunt.


The End of the first Act.
ACT II. Scene continues.
Enter HARWOOD and WILLIAMS. Har. It Is lucky that your Master was sent for, or
we should have been terribly puzzled in getting Frankly out of the House.


Will. 'Twas fortunate indeed!


Har. What an infamous Rascal he is! Such a Villain is enough to bring an Odium
on the whole Fraternity of Office-Keepers -- I hope they are not all like this
Master of yours, Mr. Williams?


Will. No, they are not! -- There are Persons, in this Way of Life, of as strict
Honor and Integrity, as in any Profession whatever.


Har. A Register-Office, under the Managment of an honest Man, must certainly
be very serviceable to the Public?


Will. Undoubtedly, Mr. Harwood -- but the old Gentleman is crossing the Street
-- To your Post, Sir. Exit Harwood.


Enter GULWELL. Gul. Her Ladyship has released me sooner than I expected --
go, get the Instrument finished, Mr. Williams. -- Exit Williams. [writing] A
Comb-brush for Lady Vixen! -- this I believe will be the one and twentieth, she
has had from my Office within these two Years -- a special Customer in faith!
-- Heyday! who have we here? A spruce Coxcomb of the Military Cast!


Enter Captain Le BRUSH. Capt. Sir, your most obedient -- Pray an't you Mr.
Geofry Gullwell, Esquire?


Gul. The same, Sir.


Capt. Then I am come to have a little Talk with you.


Gul. Your Business, good Sir?


Capt. You must know, Sir, I am an Ensign, in a new-raised Ridgmen, to which
Post I was advance through the Interest of my very Good Friend and
Acquaintance, Lord Pliant, whom I had the Honor to serve many Years in the
Capacity of a Valet de Chamber -- But, Sir, though formerly a Servant, I am a
Gentleman born, and have had the Honor of a University Iddication.


Gul. Sir, I make no Dispute of it: you have the Appearance of a Man of
Consequence -- May I crave your Name and Family?


Capt. My Name, Sir, is Le Brush -- I am commonly called Brush; but le Brush is
the Name my Family was ariginally, nay even so lately as Harry the Eight, known
by: a Name, Sir, given by Way of Distinction to one of my Auntsisters, that was
General under All-afraid the Great, for so victoriously sweeping away hole
Armies of the Enemy -- Our Family had all their Estate consisticated in the
Broils between the Yorkshire and Lancashire Line, so that their Predecessors
have been a little out of Repair to the present Time, and the Name regenerated
into plain Brush.


Gul. Sir, as your Family has been so long reduced, how came you by the
Education you talk of?


Capt. Sir, I was taught to read and write free-gratis for nothing at a Charity
School, and attended Lord Pliant to the University, where you know there is
many Opportunities for a Man of Talons to improve himself.


Gul. Right, Sir, such Opportunities, that I have frequently known a Valet
return from thence full as wise as his Master.


Capt. Egad, Sir, I see very plainly you're a Gentleman, that knows what is what.


Gul. And pray, Captain, what were your favorite Studies at College?


Capt. Logic and Poetry, the only two Studies sit for a Gentleman; as the first
will teach you to cheat the Devil, and the last to charm the Ladies.


Gul. I should be glad to have a little Conference with you on the latter, for
I am a bit of a Dabler in it.


Capt. Then serously as a Friend, I would dissuade you to look out damned
sharp, or upon my Soul you will catch a Tartar! For I have not met with any Body,
that was fit to hold the Candle to me in Poetry, for a long Serus of Time --
But, Sir, as I am in haste, we had better refer the Dispute at prosent -- any
other Time I am at your Service for a (...) -- I shall run through my Business
with as brief Prolixity as possible -- At a Country Town, where I was
Recruiting, I had the good Fortune to pick up a maiden Lady, pretty well
stricken in Years, with a Fortune of three thousand Pounds in the Stocks. Now,
Sir, as the Interest of the Money, and my present Pay will scarce be sufficient
to maintain me -- for you know, Sir, a Soldier and a Gentleman is anonymous
Characters, and a Man in my Office must live up to his Dignity -- I say, Sir,
as the Interest of Money is damned low, I have a Desire to purchase a Cornecy
or a Company of Foot, that I may be better able to live like a Gentleman.


Gul. Posts of this kind frequently fall under my Disposal. I think it a
prudent and honorable Intention in you; as, in case of Mortality, the
Provision for your Lady will be larger.


Capt. Pho! Dam the old Hag! I don't care if the Devil had her: I have been
married above two Months, and was as tired of her in the first Fortnight, as a
modern Man of Quality after a Twelve-month's Cohabitation I have, for these
five Weeks past, done every thing in my Power to break her Heart; but egad it
is made of such tough Stuff, such penctrable Stuff, as my Friend Shakespeare
calls it, that I believe I shall not be able to defect the Business, damme! -- In
short, my Disappointment has thrown me into such a hellish Deel ha me, that
the Devil fetch me if I know, for the Blood and Soul of me, how to execrate
myself out of it! For I want to be rid of her most cursedly that is certain.


Gul. There are Ways -- many Ways, Captain, by which such a Business may be
brought about.


Capt. True, Sir My Sergeant Tom Spaterdash, who is a damned cute Dog, as any
in the Coppercan System -- You don't know Tom? do you, Sir?


Gul. I cannot say I have the Honor of his Acquaintance.


Capt. Oh! the most archest, comicalest Son of a Whore in the whole Universe
egad! -- As I was a saying, Tom offered me for ten Pieces to give her a Dose;
but no, no; damme thinks I to myself, I Will not poison the old Beldam neither!
It will be the more fashionable Way to break her Heart.


Gul. Sir, as you are a Gentleman, I would beg leave to ask why you are so
desirous of parting with a Woman, who has been so great a Benefactress to you
-- I should be afraid your Patron and his Lady would resent such Behavior --
Will you be kind enough to answer my Question with Truth?


Capt. Truth, Sir, is to be sure a most amable Thing, and what every Gentleman
ought to make Use of. As Mr. -- what is his Name? -- One of the old Roman
Philosophers there -- Pythogorus, I believe -- Ay Squire Pythogorus it was --
used to say, Sockratas is my Friend, Pluto is my Friend, but Truth is more my
Friend. So say I, Lord Pliant is my Friend, Lady Pliant is my Friend, but Truth
is more my Friend -- And though some Persons will affirm that Truth ought not to
be spoken at all Times; yet no Philosopher, not no body else, would ever
venture to affirm, but that Truth ought to be spoken at sometimes -- which
being granted -- I say, Sir, which being granted, it must follow -- necessarily
follow. Sir, -- that though Truth ought not to be spoken at all Times, Occasions,
and Seasons; yet seasonable Truths may be occasionally spoken at all Times --
But this, Sir, is the very Profundity of Logic, and consequently out of the
Reach of every Capacity, wherefore I shall descend into the Spear of common
Sense to be the better understood.


Gul. Sir, I must acknowledge that your Arguments are very Sublime and Logical;
but yet they are no Answer to my Question -- Perhaps I have been too rude to
press you on the Occasion -- there may be some Lady in the Case, who --


Capt. Egad! Sir, you're in the Right! I had not been Married above ten Days;
till I fell most consumedly in Love with a Niece of my Wise's, a Girl of
Fifteen with a damned large Fortune -- a most exquisite Creature upon my Soul!
-- In short, She is all the hole Tote of my Desires -- As that there black
Fellar in the Play -- Othello Moor I think they call him -- says, Perdition
catch my Soul but I do Love her: and when I Love her not Chaos is come again!"


Gul. Pray, Captain, who is that Chaos?


Capt. Chaos! Lard bless you! -- You pertend you don't know! A Man of your
Years and Understanding too! Fie! Fie! Mr. Gulwell! None of your Tricks upon
Travelers!


Gul. Sir, I seldom ask the Meaning of a Word I understand.


Capt. Then you must know Chaos is a -- my dear, it is a -- a -- a -- zounds I
What shall I say? -- The Devil Chaos him -- It is a -- I cannot find Words to
express myself properly -- It is a -- as it were a -- as one may say a --
Chaos. I cannot divine it otherwise for the Blood and Soul of me!


Gul. You have not divined it at all; at least not to my Satisfaction -- I
suppose by the Connection it signifies Dislike?


Cap. Right Sir, it is a -- a -- kind of Dislike, but not, as one may say, a --
a -- an absolute Dislike -- But, Sir, to proceed in my Story -- If I could but
break my Wife's Heart, I should assuredly marry my Niece in less than a Month
after her Decease -- A seprate Maintenance will not do, or Mrs Le Brush should
have it with all my Soul but if we part, you know all Hopes of breaking her
Heart are over -- She has offered to seprate, if I would give her two hundred
Pounds in ready Rhino, and allow her for Life an annual Provision of fifty
Pounds per Annum every Year --.


Gul. Which you have refused, I suppose?


Capt. Refused! Most certainly, Sir: I was almost putrified with Astonishment
at the agregious Impudence of her Demand -- I shall not consent to allow here a
Shilling more as Fifteen a Year -- She may live very comfortably; very
comfortably on it in the North.


Gul. Truly, Sir, I think fifteen Pounds a Year a very genteel Allowance;
especially as she brought you so small a Trifle as Three Thousand.


Capt. I think so too egad! But these old Devils have no Conscience at all
damme! -- Well, Sir, you will give me an Answer as soon as possible -- You may
hear of me at Mrs. Dresden's, a Milliner under the Peeaches, in Common-Garden.


Gul. (writing) Very well, Sir -- I Will talk with a Principal about your Affair
this Evening.


Capt. There Sir -- [gives him Money] You Will take Care to beat him down as low
as possible?


Gul. You may depend on my best Endeavors, most noble Captain. Exit Captain Le
Brush. Scoundrel I should have said -- Why this Fellow's a greater Rascal than
myself -- But what can be expected from a Coxcomb of his Stamp? -- More
Company! -- In a Chair too! -- I fancy this must be my dear Sister in
Wickedness.


Enter Mrs. SNAREWELL in a Chair. Dear Mrs. Snarewell, your most obedient --
Let me hand you to a Seat, Madam.

Snare. Oh! Oh! Oh! Touch me gently, Mr. Gulwell.


Gul. I am glad to see you Abroad again. (kisses her) I hear you have had a
very bad Night.


Snare. Oh! The most shocking one, that can be imagined! The Chelic, and my old
cursed Distemper the Rheumatise, have plagued me to so violent a Degree, that I
could not possibly attend your Office in Time -- Such Twitchings! Such
Tortures! -- I never expected to live 'till Morning, I assure you -- Poor Mr
Watchlight, the Tallow Chandler, was called twice out of Bed to comfort me --
The dear Man was so servent in his Prayers, and so earnest in his Ejaculations,
that I received great Comfort and Consolation -- I was so Easy, so Composed, so
Resigned after I had made my Peace, that I could have parted with Life with as
little Uneasiness, as a young Wife of Quality with her Deary of Threescore --
Oh! he is a most Heavenly Creature! -- He said such comfortable moving Things!
-- But what Success had the Advertisement?


Gul. Beyond Expectation! I had above fifty Damsels with me -- You might have
culled half a Dozen at least, that would have answered to a T: such fresh
blooming Creatures!


Snare. The Devil's in my Luck to be sure! -- Ay! Ay! he owes me a Grudge for
turning Methodist -- I have been cursing my Fortune in Bed these three Hours --
so violently pained, so tortured, that I could not rise though my Life had
depended on it -- I am certainly the most unfortunate Woman alive! The
Reputation of my House will be utterly blasted for want of fresh Faces! -- O
this cursed Rheumatise! that it should seize me at such a Juncture! -- I could
cry my Eyes out to think on it! weeps.


Gul. Dear Madam, be comforted, I shall have many of them applying Tomorrow to
know their Success.


Snare. Tomorrow! But that will not answer my Purpose: I have promised a Virgin
to Mr. Zorobabel Habakkuk to Night.


Gul. You must palm some of your freshest Commodities on him for one.


Snare. Palm some of your freshest Commodities, quotha! Mr. Gulwell you are
vastly mistaken in your Man! -- He is too knowing in these Matters to be
imposed on in any such Manner -- It would be as difficult to deceive my little
Israelite in that Point, as a Jury of Matrons -- Besides, he pays the Price of
Virginity; and I assure you I am a Person of more Honor and Conscience, than
even to endeavor to fob him off with a Counterfeit -- Conscience should be
used in all our Dealings -- I have too strong a Sense of Religion to be guilty
of such a heinous Imposture -- No, no, Mr. Gulwell! if we expect to be Happy
hereafter, we must endeavor to do as we would be done by -- Is there never a
likely Girl you expect at the Office to Day?


Gul. None that I know of -- But pray how stands the Account for the Irish
Lady, you had the last Week?


Snare. Why, Sir, I could not squeeze a Penny more than ten Guineas from the
old close listed Scrivener, so that I owe you Five -- Upon my Soul, Mr.
Gulwell, you must abate of your Demands for the future! The Expenses of a
Bagnio run so high, that I cannot afford you an equal Moiety of my Procuration
-- There Is Rent, Taxes, Sesses, Repairs, Fire, Candle, Linen, Washing, Clothes,
Connivance-Money, and a thousand other expensive Articles -- I can give you no
more than a fourth Part: I can afford you no more, as I hope to be saved!


Gul. Madam, I can do Business, on my present Terms, with any of the
Procuresses in Town.


Snare. Ah! you're a covetous Curmudgeon! but there is no quarrelling with you
Well, I must be going! I have promised Mr. Watchlight to be at the Tabernacle,
to return Thanks for my Recovery -- He will preach a Thanksgiving Sermon, and
Sing an occasional Hymn of his own composing after the Discourse -- Here it is!
I have been humming it over in the Chair -- O they are sweet Words! divine
Words! comfortable Words, Mr. Gulwell! -- You shall hear two or three Lines.


Gul. With all my Heart, Madam.


Snare. Let me see where shall I begin! -- Oh here! read! When as a Sinner
groaning sore
In Cholic Pain most sad;
And eke in Rheumatise did roar
Like one quite raving mad:
Then did their come Relief --
But you shall have it some other Time: I will get Mr. Watchlight to write you
out a Copy -- Oh! he is a good Creature, Mr. Gulwell -- I must have been in a
State of utter Darkness but for him -- I can never be out of his Debt for the
great Work of my Reformation -- It is true I have left him, in token of my
Gratitude, all my worldly Substance, except Rings and Mourning to you and a few
Friends -- Dear Man! He has promised to lay it out, even to the uttermost
Farthing, in building a new Tabernacle.


Gul. I hope, Madam, you have not disinherited your two Daughters?


Snare. Why I had some Scruples on that Head, but Mr. Watchlight removed them
-- He told me, as they were Illegitimate, it would be a great Slur and Reproach
to my Reputation, if I named them in my Will: and you know one would wish to
die with a good Name -- Besides, he convinced me of the exceeding great
Sinfulness of leaving any Thing to Bastards, as it was a direct Countenance and
Encouragement to the Cause of Lewdness and Debauchery -- He assured me that
many good Men, in all Ages, had disinherited even their lawful Children, for
the charitable Work of building Hospitals and Alms Houses -- and if there be
such Merit in building an Hospital, what must there be in erecting a Tabernacle?


Gul. Here Is Religion with a Vengeance! aside.


Snare. Besides, my Daughters are both very happily provided for. Sukey is in
keeping with a rich Jew, and Lucy with a grave Merchant in the City -- Poor
Girls! They have no Occasion for any Assistance from me -- No, no; Mr.
Watchlight has perfectly satisfied me of the Lawfulness of Disinheriting them
-- Oh! he is a good Creature, Mr. Gulwell! -- I should have been Lost! utterly
Lost! irrecoverably Lost! if he had not been luckily made the Means and
Instrument of my happy Change -- Well, I shall be with you in the Morning to
take a Survey; in the mean Time if you meet with any delicate young Thing, be
sure to give me Notice -- Oh! Oh! Oh!


Gul. Pray what is the Matter, Madam?


Snare. A Return of my late Disorder -- Have you no Holland's Gin in your
Scrutore?


Gul. Yes, I have always a Bottle for the Service of the Ladies. Takes out a
Bottle and Glass.


Snare. Hold! hold! hold! I would not have above a Thimbleful -- Mercy on me!
You surely think I have the Brain of a Country Justice, to bear such a Glass in
a Morning!


Gul. I design this Glass for myself -- To your better Health, Mrs. Snarewell.
Drinks.


Snare. Thank you, dear Sir -- But I am persuaded I cannot live long -- You had
better give me the Bottle: my Hand shakes so violently, that I am afraid of
spilling, if I drink out of the Glass -- It would be a Pity to waste the good
Creature. -- Come, Sir, Success to all our Undertakings. Drinks out of the
Bottle.


Gul. I thank you, Madam -- So! the Thimbleful will be half a Pint at least!


Snare. Yes, Mr. Gulwell, as I was saying I am persuaded I cannot live long --
I feel the Decays of Nature in me very sensibly! I am wasting and wasting every
Day -- I must entirely give over my wicked Life, and wholly apply myself to the
Care of my precious and immortal Soul -- I am grown so Feeble and Infirm, that
I am almost unfit for this World -- Oh! Oh! Oh! -- there is another envious
Twitch -- Pray hand me the Bottle -- I must have the other Thimbleful -- Thank
you, Mr. Gulwell -- Chairman! (Enter Chairmen who help her into the Chair.)
Carry me to the Tabernacle -- Dear Sir, your Servant.


Gul. Madam, I wish you a good Day.


Snare. O Lard! I have forgot my Hymn -- There it is upon the Table -- Hand it
me, dear Sir -- (looks on the Paper) Ay! it is right enough -- Go on, Chairmen
-- Mr. Gulwell -- Mr. Gulwell! -- Have you no Ears, you damned Rascals? -- Hark
you, Sir -- If any Thing offer in half an Hour or so, send me Word to the
Tabernacle.


Gul. I shall, Madam. ( Mrs Snarewell is carried off singing When as a Sinner
groaning sore. Let me see -- Mrs. Martin's fair Lodger was to call to Day -- I
must not let Mother Snarewell see her -- I Will market for her on my own Bottom
-- If the don't turn Restive on my Hands, I shall make a pretty Penny of her --
More Customers!


Enter Scotchman. Well, Sir, your Business with me?

Scotch. Gin ye be the Master of this Office, my Buzziness wi' ye is to spear
at ye, gif ye can be of any Service till a peur distressit Gentleman?


Gul. Sir, I should be glad to do a Gentleman in Distress any Service in my
Power; especially one of your Country. I have a Veneration for the very Name of
a Scotchman -- My Father was one.


Scotch. Troth, ye speak verra meikle like a Gentleman, and seem to hae a
proper Sense of National Honor A'm glad that A've been sae ^on^y, as to fa'
into sic Hands -- Ye maun ken that my Family is as ancient as any in a'
Scotland; and that by diract lineal Deshent, I sprang frae the great Jamy
Macintosh, who was a Preevy-Counsellor to King Sandy the Second.


Gul. A very considerable Origin indeed! -- But pray, Sir, what may have been
the Cause of your present Distress?


Scotch. I'se tell ye the hale Matter -- When I was a Callant, I was sae dyl'd
as to get the ill Wull of a' my Kin, by the Disgrace I had brought upo' the
Macintoshes, by pitting mysel Prentice till a cankert auld Carle of a
Sword-Slipper in Aberdeen, whase bonny Daughter I was sae unsonsy as to click a
Fancy to.


Gul Well, Sir --


Scotch. When I was out of my Prenticeship, I wanted Gear to begin the World
wi': I ax'd a' my Friends, but they girnit at me like the Vengeance -- Hald ye
there, Lad, quo they: Ye maun even pickle in your ain poke-nuke! -- As ye
baked, ye may brew -- And the Deel of owther Gowd or Siller; nae no sae meikle
as a Plack, or a Bawbie wald they gie me, unless I wald betak mysel to some
mare Gentleman-like Occupation -- Weel, Sir, I was forcit to wale a new
Buzziness -- They game Graith enough to buy a Pack, an I turned traveling
Merchant, whilk the English, by way of Derision, ca' a Pether, that I might nae
langer be a Disgrace to my Kin.


Gul. Why this was a Way to retrieve the Disgrace of the Macintoshes indeed!


Scotch. Right, Sir, verra Right a-truly! -- But wi' your Permission, I'se
speed me to the tragical Part of my Story -- As I was ganging my gate toward
Portsmouth, I was attackit by two Rubbers, wha gar'd me strip frae the muckle
Coat of my Back to my verra Sark; an rubbit me of a', ay an mare nor a' I could
ca' my ain -- An no content wi' taking my Gudes, they ruggit my Hair, they
pou'd me by the Lugs; they brissit and skelpit me to sic a Gree, that the gore
Blude rin into my Breeks, an my Skin was amaist as black as Pik -- Nay when I
greand in meikle Dool an Agony, the Fallows leugh at my pitifu Mains, caw'd me
an illfar'd scabbit Tyke, and bad me be gane into my ain croudy Country to sell
Butter an Bruntstane.


Gul. The barbarous Villains! Not only to rob and abuse you, but to insult your
Country!


Scotch I wat, it was a downright National Reflection! An A'm sic a Loo'er of
my Country, that it hurt me mare, nor a' the Whacks they ga' me, an the Tyne of
my Pack into the Bargain -- Weel, Sir, A'm now brought to the may ruefu'
Plight, that ever peur Fallow was in; for I canna get Claiths to my Back, or
Veetles to my Wame -- A'm sae blate that I maun starve to Deid, or I can ax
Chary; abeit A'm sae hungery, that I could make a braw Meal upo' a whin sour
Kail, an a Haggise, taken aff a Midding; gif it even stank like a Brock.


Gul. Poor Gentleman! I pity your Condition with all my Heart.


Scotch. As I trudge alang the Wynds, I can hear the cawler Waiter, I drink at
the Pant gang jaup, jaup, jaup, in my empty Kyte -- Excep a Bicker of good fat
Brose, an a Lunch of salt Beef, whilk I gat last Sabbath Day aboard of a wi^
Scotch Barkie, I ha no had my peur Wame weel-sleght this two Owks an aboon: an
Hunger ye ken is unco sair to bide.


Gul. It is so indeed.


Scotch. Now gin ye can pit me intil any tolerable Way of gitting my Bread, I
sal rackon it a verra great Kyndness.


Gul. For what Station in Life do you think yourself fittest?


Scotch. For any Station, where Learning is necessary -- I care na a pickle of
Sneeshing what it be -- Ye may ken by my Elocution, A'm a Man of nae sma' Lair
-- I was sae weel-leer'd that ilka auld Wife in Aberdeen wald turn up the
Whites of her Even, like a Mass John at Kirk, an cry, God guide us! what a pawky
Chiel is Donald! He Is sae ald-gabbit that A speaks like a Print Buke! -- I
could like verra weel to be Latin Secretary till a Minister o'State, and can
say without Vanity, A'm as sit for sic an Office, as any Man in the British
Dominions.


Gul. Then you understand Latin?


Scotch. Latin! Hout awa, Man! hout awa, ye daft Gowk! Do ye jeer abody' -- a
Scotchman, an no unnerstan Latin? ha! ha! ha! A verra good Joke a-truly! --
Unnerstan Latin, quo' he! -- Why we speak it better, nor any of his Majesty's
Subjects, an wi the genuine original Pronunciation too -- I'se gie ye a
Specimen frae that wutty Chiel Master Ovid. Parve, nec inviden, sine me,
Liber, ibis in urbem,
Hei mihi, quod Domino non licet ire tuo!
Now ken ye, Man, whether I unnerstan Latin, or no?


Gul. Oh! Sir, I see you are a complete Latinist -- Well, if we cannot fall in
for the Secretary, suppose you should take up with translating a while 'till
something better offer? -- there are pretty Pickings, very comfortable Pickings
now and then to be had in that Way.


Scotch. Any Thing at present to satisfy the Cravings of my Wame, that is no
an-under the Dignity of my Family -- Ye ken the auld Saw, Beggars munna be
Chusers -- for that Matter I'se no repine, gif I can but even git Bannocks, an
Sneeshing till something better fa' out.


Gul. Give me your Name, and Place of Abode, and you may expect to hear from me
very shortly.


Scotch. Donald Macintosh, Gentleman; at Master Archibald Buchanan's, a
Tobacco-Merchant, at the Sign of the Highlander an Snuff-Bledder, ower anenst
King James's Stairs, Shadwell. [Gulwell writes] What Is your Charge, Sir?


Gul. Only a Shilling, Sir -- it is a Perquisite to my Clerk.


Scotch. There it is for ye, Sir -- [gives him Money.] I was sain to borrow'to'
Sandy Ferguson, the Coal-Heaver, for the Deel a Bodle had I of my ain.


Gul. Have you got any Body to give you a Character?


Scotch. In troth, I canna say I have even now! -- I ken nae living Sawl in
London, but Sandy an my Landlord, that I could ax sic a Favor of; an ablins
their Karecter of me would no be thought sufficient.


Gul. Nay, Sir, it is no very great Matter -- it would have saved you a Trifle;
for when we make Characters we must be paid for them -- We have Characters, as
Jockies have Pedigrees, from five Shillings to five Guineas.


Scotch. Weel, Sir, we may tauk of that anither Time -- gin ye succeed, ye'se
find me no ungratesu' -- Ye sal see I hae no sae meikle of the fause
Englishman, in me, as to be forgetfu' of my Benefactors -- A'm afeard A've been
verra fasheous; however I'se fash ye nae langer, but gaung my Waus Hame -- Sir,
your verra abliged Servant -- In good troth, this is a Rara avis in terris,
nigroque simillima cygno. Exit.


Gul. Your most obedient, good Mr. Latin. Secretary -- There goes one of the
many Fools, that owe their Ruin to Family Pride -- Oh! here comes one of my
Right Honorable Customers!


Enter Lord BRILLIANT. My Lord, your Lordship's most devoted.

L. Bril. Mr. Gulwell, I am most immensely glad to see you! I am come to know
if you can recommend to me a Housekeeper -- Lady Brilliant, who by the by is
the most whimsical Person alive, has insisted on the Discharge of Mrs. Candy;
and unless I consent, we shall have nothing but Hell and the Devil to do about
the Affair. This is the Curse of marrying a Tradesman's Daughter for the Sake
of her Fortune! My Lady is ten Times more haughty and impertinent, than if she
had been really born a Woman of Quality -- As I hope to be saved, Mr. Gulwell,
her Temper is past enduring!


Gul. And how does your Lordship intend to dispose of Mrs Candy? -- She Is a
very good Sort of Woman.


L. Bril. Upon my Honor, the most virtuous, inoffensive, deserving Creature on
the Globe! -- I want to consult you on this very Affair -- You have often the
Advowsons of Livings to dispose of, and if I could make a reasonable Purchase
of one, of about a cool hundred a Year, I would marry her to Mr. Secondly my
Chaplain, and take his Bond for the Purchase-Money.


Gul. My Lord, I have frequently Bargains of this Kind under my Negotiation: I
could help you to one about the Mark, but would not advise you to it, on
account of it is extravagant Price. The Impropriator, who by the by is one of
the Cloth, has the Conscience to set it at ten Year's Purchase.


L. Bril. An unconscionable Muckworm! -- If any Thing happen in a few Days, you
will be kind enough to let me know -- I would not have it lie at too great a
Distance; for Mr. Secondly is a Man, for whom I have so particular an Esteem,
that I should like now and then to give him a friendly Call -- But we want a
Housekeeper to supply Mrs. Candy's Place -- Have you never a one to recommend?
You know what will please.


Gul. I wish your Lordship had been so fortunate, as to have applied a Day or
two sooner. I have one of the finest Women in the World to provide for, but
have unluckily promised her to an elderly Barrister of my Acquaintance.


L. Bril. A Barrister! Why did not you give me Notice of it sooner? Upon my
Honor I did not think you would have used me with so little Respect!


Gul. I should have informed your Lordship of it sooner, but the Templar was so
very genteel on the Occasion, as to promise me an hundred Guineas for my
Commission.


L. Bril. You had no Reason to dispute my Generosity: if I had thoroughly liked
her, I should not have minded twice the Sum.


Gul. Why, my Lord, the Affair may be yet brought about -- I expect her here
every Minute -- Will your Lordship be pleased to step into that Room -- You may
see her through the Lattice. -- You will find Rochester's Poems, and the Memoirs
of a Woman of Pleasure to entertain you -- please to retire, my Lord: here is
Company a coming -- Exit Lord Brilliant. Lucky enough! it is the very Woman! --
If she be but of the right Sort, I shall make a tolerable Penny of her.


Enter MARIA. Ma. Sir, I am come agreeable to Appointment -- Have you yet heard
of any Thing that will suit me?


Gul. Madam, I believe I have done your Business: there is a Peer in the next
Room perusing a Mortgage Deed, who is in immediate Want of a Housekeeper.


Ma. Is the Nobleman married, or single?


Gul. Married, Madam; to one of the best Women in the World: you will be
extremely happy in the Place. Her Ladyship is the most generous Woman of the
Age. Mrs. Candy, the present Housekeeper, has saved a Fortune in the Family,
and is going to be married to a Clergyman of great Character -- Shall I call
his Lordship?


Ma. I had rather first see his Lady? -- but do as you please?


Gul. My Lord! My Lord! -- [Enter Lord Brilliant.] This is the Gentlewoman I
told your Lordship of.


L. Bril. Madam, your most obedient -- egad a most angelic Creature! -- Madam,
I was telling Mr. Gulwell -- s' Death! what a Face is there! -- I say, Madam, I
was telling Mr. Gulwell that my Housekeeper is going to be married -- Heavens!
what a Shape and Mien! -- and that we shall want one to supply her Place --
wherefore if you are inclinable -- that is, if the Place would suit, and you
can be well recommended -- I say, Madam, well recommended -- for my Lady will
take nobody without a sufficient Character -- therefore, Madam, if -- I say,
Madam, if the Place would suit, and you can have a fatisfactory Recommendation,
I should be glad to know your Terms -- I was never in such Confusion in my
Life, curse me!


Gul. Here Is Company a coming! -- Please to step into the next Room, and you
may talk of the Affair with less Interruption. Exeunt Lord Bril. and Ma. So!
so! Matters seem to go on very promi^ingly -- My Friend Harry Trickit! what can
be his Business?


Enter TRICKIT. Trick Well, Sir, you received my Letter?


Gul. Letter! what Letter?


Trick. The Letter I sent you this Morning.


Gul. Not I indeed -- pray how did you send it?


Trick. By a Ticket-Porter, whom I ordered to call in his Way to the Banker's.


Gul. The Fellow must have forgot it -- What are the Contents? -- Speak low:
there is Company in that Room.


Trick. My Niece is going to file a Bill in Chancery against me, to set aside
her Father's Will. She will be supported by a Person of Fortune, with whom she
now lives -- I was told it this Morning by a Friend, who dined with the
Gentleman a few days ago in Somersetshire -- Now as Mr. Williams is going to
leave you, I am afraid he will begin to squeak; and then I shall not only lose
the Money, but my Life into the Bargain.


Gul. Sir, it is not in Williams's Power to do you any Injury in the Affair: he
was not privy to the Fraud of your Brother-in-law's signing a counterfeit Will,
but only called hastily in to witness the Signature. The other Evidence is
dead, therefore there is no Danger from that Quarter -- Don't be afraid, Mr.
Tricket; I Will answer for the Validity of the Will -- I thought you had known
the Law better in these Cases, than to be afraid of such a Bugbear as a
Chancery Suit!


Trick. You have given me some Comfort: I have been very uneasy about the
Affair these three Hours.


Ma. [within] Help! help! Murder! help!


Enter HARWOOD and WILLIAMS. Har. Ha! my Maria in Danger! Enter Maria. What Is
the Matter, my Dear?


Ma. Good Heaven! Is it you, Mr. Harwood? -- I am so frighted and out of
Breath, that I can scarce speak -- A noble Villain in the other Room has
attempted my Ruin.


Har. Let me but secure the Door, that none of this Nest of Villains escape,
and I shall punish the Right Honorable Scoundrel -- [locks the Door] there is
the Key, Mr. Williams -- Frankly and the Officers must soon be here -- Now for
his Lordship. Exit Harwood.


Trick. My Niece and her Master!


Gul. The Devil they are! -- I don't like the Business! I wish it were well
over!


Enter HARWOOD dragging in Lord BRILLIANT. Har. No, I will not kill you cowardly
-- Now, my Lord, if your Life be worth preserving a few Minutes, draw.


L. Bril. Sir, This is no proper Place for a Duel.


Har. Not quite so proper, as the other Room for your Lordship's intended
Purpose, I must own: however it will do -- come, my Lord, you must fight me, or
ask your Life -- You can fight, I am sure, for I have been a Witness of your
Lordship's Courage in Flanders -- Why don't you draw? -- Do the one or the
other, or I shall dishonor the Peerage of my Country, by kicking your Lordship
out of the Room.


L. Bril. Sir, in a bad Cause I think it no Diminution of my Honor to own
myself to blame; in Consequence of which, I ask the Lady's Pardon, and wish it
were in my Power to make her any further Satisfaction for the intended Injury.


Har. This is talking like the Peer and the Gentleman -- I Will take you at your
Word -- I beg your Lordship to inform me whether or no you did not lately
borrow five thousand Pounds of Mr. Tricket, who, if I mistake not, has the
Honor to be your Lordship's Steward?


L. Birl I did, Sir: pray what of that?


Har. My Lord, you will pardon me for withholding the Reason of such Enquiry:
at a proper Time I may perhaps inform you -- I have a few Questions to ask Mr.
Tricket, which are improper for your Lordship to hear at present, and shall
take it as a particular Favor, if you will be kind enough to leave us for a
few Minutes.


L. Bril. Sir, I shall immediately withdraw; and if I can be of any Service to
you or the Lady, you may freely command the Execution of it.


Har. I humbly thank your Lordship -- Mr. Williams, please to unlock the Door.
Exit Lord Brilliant. I am sorry, Mr. Trickit, there should be such a Brace of
Rascals in the World, as you and your Friend there. Mr. Williams has given me
a Letter, directed to his Master, which he opened on a Supposition of it is
being relative to the Business of the Register-Office -- I need not tell you
that it contains a Proof of a Piece of Villainy, sufficient to hang you both:
however, Sir, in Consideration of your Family, I shall let your Crime slip
unpunished, on Condition of your restoring the Money, of which you have robbed
your Niece by a villainous Will.


Trick Sir, I acknowledge my Offense, and will make whatever Restitution you
require.


Har. Enough, Sir -- Mr. Williams, I see Frankly and the Officers at the Door
-- pray step out, and tell him we have made up the Affair.


Will. I shall, Sir. Exit Williams.


Trick. I must beg leave to inform you, by way of lessening my Offense, that
this Villain put me upon the Fraud, which was no sooner executed, than he
insisted on a thousand Pounds for his Advice and Secrecy.


Har. I am sorry it is not in my Power to make an Example of him, without
exposing or punishing you: However, if he will not agree to restore the Money,
he shall be given up to Justice.


Gul. Sir, I shall restore it whenever the Lady pleases.


Har. But this is not all your Punishment -- I must insist on the immediate
Resignation of your present Employment -- You are too dangerous a Man to be
continued in a Register Office any longer. And surther you must pay into the
Hands of the Treasurer of the Magdalen-House, five hundred Pounds for the Use
of that Charity. I am convinced, from your Connexions with Mother Snarewell,
that you have been the Cause of bringing many a young Creature to Shame. It is
but therefore Poetical Justice that you should be obliged to contribute to the
Support of ruined Innocence.


Gul. Sir, I am too much in your Power to dispute your Will: but the Devil take
the Porter for his Blunder in delivering the Letter!


Enter FRANKLY and WILLIAMS. Fran. Well, you have brought them to Terms I
suppose?


Har. Ay; Thanks to my Friend Williams, We have!


Enter Irishman. Irish. My dear Cushin, after I went away before, I forgot to
remember to pay you for your Shivility; therefore I am going to come back again
to be out of your Debt.


Gul. Never mind it, Cousin -- any other Time.


Irish. Arra! Joy, I am a Person of more Honor, than to continue in no body's
Debt, when I owe him nothing at all -- Besides, my dear Creature, if I should
be taken sick, and die of a Consumption to night, you might tell me to my Face
the next Time I seed you, that I stole out of the World on purpose to cheat you
-- There, my dear Cushin. (Beats Gulwell.)


Enter Scotchman and a Highland Piper. Gul. Oh! Oh! Oh! Murder! Murder!


Irish. Upon my Shoul, you lie now, Honey, for it is only a Shivil Beating!


Gul. A Plague on such Civility, say I!


Enter Frenchman. Scotch. Lay on, Lad, an welcome; for the Deel brust me an I
bid ye hald your Hand, gin ye skelp him this sax Hours -- Here Is Wully, the
Piper, tells me he is as great a Faw, as ever swang in a Helter.


French. Begar! So say my Countryman, Monsieur la Fricasie.


Har. Gentlemen, what is the Matter between you and this Office-keeper?


Irish. Matter, my dear Joy! Nothing at all -- I am only paying him for getting
me a Plaish in the West -- Ah! the Devil West you, my Dear! Your West is some
of the Plantations in the East Indies, where Pickpockets are transported to --
This kidnapping Rascal was going to send me into the other World to be turned
into a black Negro -- I had gone shure enough, if it had not been for Macarrell
O Neill, whom I overtook, as we run against one another in your English St.
Patrick's Church Yard -- St. Paul's I believe they call it -- He told me this
Scoundrel Cushin had transported three of my Countrymen, overland in a Ship to
the Plantations, on Pretense of getting them Plaishes in the West -- I Will
Plantation you, you Tie^ of the World!


Scotch. Good troth, Wully tells me he played even sic a Trick to two of my
Countrymen.


French. Begar! me vill ave von kick at the Fanfaron for my von Chelin and tree
alspence.


Irish. Hold, my dear Creature! -- Don't lift a Hand at him I beseech you! For
no Foreigners, but the Irish, must pretend to kick an Endlishman.


French. Den pray give him von Kick for me.


Irish. Upon my Conscience, but I would sooner give him half a score for myself.


Scotch. What think ye, had, an we tak him to the neist Horse-Pool, an wash the
Fleas aff him?


Irish. The Devil burn me but that is the very Thing, I was just going to think
of! There Is some of my Countrymen at the Door that will assist -- My dear
Cushin, you must go along with us.


Gul. I beseech you, Gentlemen, don't disgrace me so publicly!


Scotch. Good troth, we'se no care a bawbie for your Disgrace -- Come, Wully,
gie's a Lilt; and we'se carry him aff in musical Triumph -- Do you guard him
behind, Man.


Irish. Let me alone for that, Honey -- If he offer to run away, I Will knock him
down as dead as ever he was born. They hurry him off.


Har Ha! ha! ha! There is so much Justice in the Rascal's Punishment, that I
was resolved not to oppose the Execution of it -- Now, My dear Maria, I have
two Favors to ask of you, both of which I hope you will grant me.


Ma. Sir, you have been my Deliverer, and cannot ask any Thing, Consistent with
Honor, that I shall refuse.


Har. First then I must desire you to forgive the Cause of your quitting my
House: in the next Place, that you will return with me to Somersetshire; not in
the Capacity of a Housekeeper, but a Wife -- Don't imagine the Recovery of your
Fortune has induced me to this Proposal -- Mr. Frankly can convince you the
sole lntent of my Journey to Town was to marry you.


Ma. Sir, I don't dispute your Veracity; and must belie my own Heart, if I make
any Objection to your honorable Proposal.


Har. An honest Girl in faith! -- Come, my dear Maria, let us step to Frankly's,
and I Will order my Post Chariot to drive us to Doctors Commons -- My Friend
Charles and Mr. Williams, will be kind enought to attend us.


Fran. With all my Heart. -- So the Adventure of the Register-Office has
turned out a lucky Affair?


Har. Fortunate for me indeed! And were I not fully convinced of the great
Service, arising to the Community, from the Institution and proper Management
of a Register-Office, I should be apt to conclude, from the Trick, Villainy,
and Chicanery I have seen practiced within this Hour, that none but a Fool or a
Knave would ever set foot within it is Walls. Exeunt.


The END.
ADVERTISEMENT.
As there is a palpable Similarity between the Characters of Mrs. COLE in the
Minor, and Mrs. SNAREWELL in the foregoing Performance; it may not be
unnecessary to declare, that the Register-Office was put into Mr. Foote's Hands
in August 1758, on his Promise of playing it at one of the Patent-Theatres in
the ensuing Season.


