ROYAL BENEVOLENCE.

A POEM. Most humbly Addressed to her MAJESTY Queen CAROLINE. As it was
Presented to the said Queen's MAJESTY, by the AUTHOR, On Friday, the 2d of
October, 1730. at Windsor-Castle.

To which is annexed, A POEM on PROVIDENCE.

Both written by STEPHEN DUCK, Thresher and Husbandman, of the County of Wilts.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by W. HARRIS, at the Blue Ball next Door to the Rose
Tavern, without Temple Bar; and by the Booksellers and Pamphletsellers of
London and Westminster. M,DCC,XXX. [Price Sixpence.]

ON ROYAL BENEVOLENCE.
Most humbly Inscribed to Her MAJESTY Queen CAROLINE.
MOST bounteous QUEEN, my grateful Thanks I pay,
Which scarcely for the Dress of Words will stay:
Your ROYAL MAJESTY a Muck-worm took
From Labor, pleased with his mean trifling Book:
And now the Reptile at your Footstool lays
In humble Strains, to sing your worthy Praise.
The Wits profane may court Urania's Aid,
And make Addresses to a fictious Shade.
But I need no such Phantoms to inspire;
Your Royal Bounty sets my Soul on fire;
And what I loved before, I now admire.
As on our Parents Labor was entailed,
I worked, and fallen State of Man bewailed:
I prayed for Ease, from Sorrow, Want and Pain,
And labored, my poor Offspring to maintain.
Without ambitious Thoughts, or Wishes vain,
I found my Ease in only Rest from Pain;
And blessed the Giver, when I thrash'd the Grain.
YET Want sometimes would stare me in the Face,
And scarce my Labor would supply my Race.
WHEN Heaven, in pity to my poor Estate,
Brought me in Favor with the Wise and Great:
And heaping Bounty upon Bounty more,
Raised me to Plenty from a Threshing-floor.
Your Royal Goodness over my Cottage shone,
With brighter Beams, than did the rising Sun:
And from a Barn Companion to the Mice,
Placed me at Ease, and in a Paradise.
Under great Heaven, my QUEEN I must adore,
Whose bounteous Soul no Captive needs implore.
Like Phoebus, in his Glory, all She sees,
And blesses all in various Degrees.
May Heaven preserve all who surround her Throne,
And may her Line never want a ROYAL SON.
Now, as I Have leisure Fancy to display,
My Pen shall ever grateful Homage pay:
For sure no Wretch can e're so stupid prove,
As to be blind to such abundant Love.
What am I -- What I was -- From whence I came,
Are Thoughts cannot leave me long without a Theme.
WHEN e're I view the Grain in Barn or Field,
Or see a Farm that does GOD's Blessing veild;
The Prospect will such Contemplation raise,
As must begin in Joy, and end in Praise.
No Meadow green, or Stack or Cock of Hay,
But where I view will furnish an Essay:
And then the Objects of my Praise will be,
The mighty Lord, and her great Majesty.
Our GOD, the Author of Benevolence,
Who does, by second Causes, Gifts dispense;
In Goodness as in Greatness infinite,
His Children to good Actions does excite.
HE saw her Majesty made up of Love,
And often heard her Orrisons above.
To know his Will, and knowing it to do
His Work, is all She aims at here below.
The Almighty seeing so much Christian Grace,
And how, on Earth, she ran the heavenly Race;
Has constituted ROYAL CAROLINE
His Agent here, to make his Glory shine.
The Noble, Great and Powerful, humbly kneel;
Submissive, full of Loyalty and Zeal:
And ask but to obey to all Commands,
Signed by such just and mutal Royal Hands.
The poor anticipated have no more,
Than but to have it barely known they are Poor.
Nay, some have strove their Poverty to hide,
Through Shame, or what should shame, remaining Pride.
But such our Royal QUEEN in secret found,
And brought them out of Mire to blessed Ground.
And this contriving and performing Good,
Runs in each Vein of HANOVERIAN Blood.
On PROVIDENCE.
COULD Mortals taste of heavenly Bliss and Joy,
The Rapture would the human Frame destroy:
Our little Minds, tossed with perpetual Cares,
Are lost, when Grief or Joy comes unawares.
Excess shakes Nature, but Vicissitude
In Moderation is an Interlude,
When right applied to all our humane Good.
I, who have labored in a Threshing-floor,
Was once contented in my State, though poor:
Yet, like all Mortals, still I prayed for Ease,
But labored still, like the industrious Bees;
Knowing the Winter comes, when Food is dear,
And Nature wants Supplies of wholesome Cheer.
Justly to think is Happiness on Earth,
And cheerful Thoughts at Labor is sound Mirth.
I, who have labored for a trifling Sum,
Was pleased, to think the time of Pay was come.
One Shilling goes for this, and one for that,
And still the Flail went patt and patt a-patt.
The Wife would say, How can you be content?
I know not how to pay your Quarter's Rent.
I bid her look on Birds in Bushes there,
And see the little silly Insect here;
Behold the Order of the Universe,
And ask the Hen and Chickens for a Purse.
She talked, like Woman, guided by a Will,
Who nothing knew of real Good or Ill:
But when she had the Course of Things surveyed,
She owned, what all must own, Heaven sends its Aid.
To all its Creatures, Reason and Instinct join,
And both, with Care, complete our GOD's Design.
A virtuous Man may various Troubles find,
But still the greatest Trouble's in the Mind.
The Death of Friends affects us -- Poor, we pine;
But could we see our Maker's great Design,
There Is some good End, and something that is Divine.
FINIS.

