A TREATISE ON THE TEETH.

WHEREIN The true Causes of the several Disorders to which they are liable, are
considered; and the Precautions necessary to their Preservation particularly
pointed out.

TOGETHER WITH Observations on the Practice of Scaling the Teeth:

On the Use of Dentrific Powders in general:

And on the Diseases of Children in the Time of Toothing.

By A. TOLVER, SURGEON.

LONDON: Printed for LOCKYER DAVIS, at Lord Bacon's Head near Salisbury-Court,
Fleet Street. 1752.

A TREATISE ON THE TEETH.
THE Teeth, Formation,
which are the hardest and smoothest Bones of the Body, are formed within the
Cavities of the Jaws. Above the Gums they are not covered by any Membrane, but
within their Sockets are invested with the common covering of all other Bones;
viz. the Periosteum, a fine transparent Skin, observable in scraping any Bone,
after the Meat is taken clean off.

The Number of Teeth in a grown Person are generally thirty-six; more or less
according to Age, Constitution, etc. As they are not all formed at once, so
neither do they all appear at the same time; the last but one, of the great
Teeth in each Jaw, it is remarkable, seldom appears 'till about the Age of
twenty-one, and the last, sometimes not till that of forty.

Each Tooth is composed of an internal bony Substance, and an external vitrious
Cortex, of a solid hard Consistence, and of the Color of Ivory. The Uses of
this glossy Substance are to prevent the Teeth being worn by the Friction they
undergo in Mastication or Chewing; and to preserve their bony Substance from
the Air.

The different Shape and Series of the Teeth are sufficiently obvious; the four
front Teeth in each Jaw which are thin and broad, are called Incissores or
Cutters, from their cutting or dividing the Aliment. The Canini or Dog-teeth,
which are two in each Jaw, are so called from their Resemblance to the Tusks of
a Dog; those of the upper Jaw are by some, called the Eye-teeth, from the
Communication of Nerves betwixt them and the Eyes; they are thick and round,
terminating in a sharp Point, and like the Incissores have but one Root, but
are remarkably strong, and of a greater Length than any of the rest: Their
proper Use being to pierce and hold the Aliment steady when we bite it, as the
front Teeth are very apt to be forced outward by the Things we hold or break
with them.

The large or double Teeth, are by Anatomists called Molares or Grinders, from
their Use in grinding and making small our Aliment before it is swallowed. They
are ten in each Jaw; their Extremities are broad and uneven, and because the
Pressure upon them is perpendicular, they are provided with two or three, and
sometimes four Roots separated a little from one another, and inclining
somewhat outward, that in chewing our Aliment the Pressure may be less upon
the Jaws, than if they run directly downwards, and with only a single Root.

The first Teeth, according to Hippocrates, are engendered in Time of
Pregnancy; this Urbain Hemard confesses he never could discover; he says,
indeed, that having opened the Jaws of some Children three or four Days old,
and others immediately at their Birth, he has found the Incissores, the Canini,
and some of the Molares on each Side the Jaw in part ossified, and in part
mucilaginous, of a middling Size, and surrounded with their little Alveoli.

However this may be, it is certain they do not appear, until some Time after
the Formation of the other Bones, notwithstanding the Matter of which they are
formed, is at the same Time in the Womb; and therefore Galen De Usu Partium,
Lib. ii. Chap. 3.
writes, that he who would understand the Works of Nature, and observe her
Economy in the Composition of the human Body, ought not implicitly to rely on
what he finds in Books, but rather what he sees with his Eyes.

The Teeth are formed within the Cavities of the Jaws, which are lined with a
thin Membrane, supplied with several Vessels, conveying a thick, viscous,
transparent Liquor, which as it increases, hardens into the Form of Teeth.

This transparent Humor appears first in Form of a Mucus, afterward a thin
cortical Lamella, and some ossious Strata are perceived, with a large Cavity in
the Middle, then gradually both the vitrious and bony Parts increase by the
hardening of the Mucus, and Opposition of new Matter.

The ossious Strata are no other than a Separation of this fluid Matter, made
by the same Membrane which covers the whole Cavity of the Jaw; and this
Division forms two Lays, one below the other, the uppermost of which forms the
Teeth which come out first; but about the seventh Year, they are thrust out by
the Teeth made at the undermost Lay, which then begin to sprout; if these
latter be lost, they seldom if ever grow again; some are indeed observed to
shed their Teeth twice, which must be owing to their having three Lays of this
Matter.

The Teeth receive Nerves and Vessels at the Orifices of their Roots; it is
these Nerves which are afflicted in the Toothach, and which are frequently
shown to the common People, by the ignorant among Tooth-drawers, for Worms;
which they pretend would have eaten the whole Tooth in a short time, etc. Part
of these Nerves being always torn away with the Tooth drawn, it requires great
Care to keep the Mouth warm until the Gum becomes closed, and the Nerve
defended from the Air.

This Orifice commonly closes about the Age of thirty-five, which is the Reason
why old People are not so subject to the Toothache as young.

The first Teeth perceived, are the Incissores of the upper Jaw, then those of
the lower, these being the thinnest and sharpest. After them appear the Canini,
and last of all the Molares.

The general Opinion is, that the Teeth are connected to thin Alveoli, or
Sockets, by that kind of Suture called Gomphosis, that is, like a Nail drove
into a Piece of Wood; but this is proved to be false by the following
Experiment. If the Jaws be macerated in Water, for some Time, all the Teeth
will drop out, which they would not do, if they were of the same Size of their
Alveoli. From hence it appears, that it is by a Ligament, or by the
Articulation called Synchondrosis.

That the Teeth are joined to their Sockets by some means like this is evident,
for when a Tooth has been drawn and replaced immediately, it has taken root,
and been as firm as ever, which could not have happened, had not the Cavity
been lined with a Membrane, which contained it.

After all that can be said concerning the Formation of the Teeth, nothing will
so much illustrate the Tooth in Embrio, as that called the Sweet-Tooth in a
Calf, by which the Reader may form an Idea, not only of the Color and
Substance of the Mucus, or Juice usually sucked out, but of the Lamella or
Shellwork itself.

The Use of the Teeth.
The Teeth are so necessary to Man, that I conceive the greatest Difficulty of
his subsisting in the younger part of his Life without them: Certain it is,
that the strongest Constitution, would not be able to digest or separate a
Quantity of Chyle sufficient for the Nourishment of the Body for any
considerable Time, were the Aliment to be swallowed whole and unprepared; for
it is well known how much the chewing our Aliment contributes to the easy and
expeditious Digestion of it, and consequently to our Health. There are indeed
many old People and others, who for want of Teeth are confined to a liquid
Diet, such as Broths, Jellies, Milk, etc. for the Sake of an easy Digestion. To
those in old Age, I think such a Diet not only proper, but very necessary; for
Nature, by the Decay of Strength, the Loss of Teeth, and the gradual Diminution
of our Senses, seems to have appointed this Time, as a Return to our primary
Innocence; that we may make our Exit in some Measure conformable with our
Birth: And at this Time the Weakness of the Body generally renders it incapable
of performing the natural Functions, and consequently of digesting such Meats,
as before it had been accustomed to.

Upon a transient Reflection we might imagine it injudicious of Nature to leave
Age thus helpless and unable to support itself, but upon a more careful Survey,
we shall find in this, as well as in all her Works, that her Economy is
absolutely just, and that every minute Variation of Form, etc. is important:
Whenever we think otherwise, we ought always to suspect our Capacities of being
too gross to comprehend the Sublimity of her Wisdom.

The Loss of Teeth to an old Man, is in Fact but trifling, for the Human Body
is so providentially disposed, that as the natural Powers begin to lessen i^
their Force and Action, the less is required in the Constitution to maintain
that Force and Action; and that a less Quantity of Chyle will better nourish
and support Health in old Age, is a Truth every Anatomist is able to assert,
for it is frequently seen in the Dissections of the older Subjects, that many
of the small Vessels, and sometimes Part of the larger also have been collapsed
and grown up, so as to reject the Fluid that used to circulate through them:
And this is one Reason why old People are most subject to paralytic Disorders.

If the Number of Vessels be diminished, as in this Case they certainly are,
then is there the less required to fill them, and the Body is more easily
supported than before, and from hence it is, that we can so well dispense with
the Loss of Teeth when old: But when this Loss happens earlier in Life, I think
it may justly be deemed very great, since it is capable of depriving us of our
Health, our Beauty, our Voice: Nor does the Inconveniency stop here, it proves
of Detriment even to Society.

If such extensive Effects appear strange, let the Husbandman, so necessary to
Society, be viewed in this State, and we shall soon be convinced, that the Want
of Teeth is of greater Moment than is commonly imagined: It would oblige him to
live on a liquid Diet, by no means proper in his laborious Employ; for we are
not the least capable to support the continual Action of the Body (and which in
his Business is almost violent) without proper Food; I mean such as will remain
some Time in the Stomach and yield its Nourishment gradually to the lacteal
Vessels, which receive and carry it to the Blood.

This is always performed by such Food either animal or vegetable. And if the
Diet of the Labourer consisted only of those Juices exclusive of the
Substances, though these latter afford no Part of Nourishment, yet the Body would
waste, the Fibers would become lax, the Intestines would lose their Tone, and a
general Languor would seize the whole Body; and if not relieved by a Change of
Diet, a Diarrhea, Dropsy, etc. would be the certain Introduction to Death.

The Consequence of a liquid Diet is no where more obvious, than in the old
sedentary Man, in whom, by an inactive Life, the Viscera are rendered weak, and
the Vigor of the digesting Powers in a great Measure lost for want of Use. He
is indeed better able to support Life than the working Man, as he is void of
the Fatigue; but with what great Difficulty it is effected, may be seen in his
pale languid Countenance, his emaciated Body, and the Defect of Vigor in his
Motion.

I cannot help reflecting in this Place on the general Error of Men fond of
Study, whose contemplative Geniuses inclining them to a Life, in other Respects
full of Indolence and Neglect, they suppose it agreeable to their Way of Life,
to eat their Aliment liquid, and prepared for an expeditious Passage in the
Primae Viae; in this Method they seem to imitate Birds and other Animals,
which, in the room of Teeth, Nature has supplied with two Stomachs. Where in
the first the Corn is only swelled and softened by the Liquor of its Glands,
but broken and disolved in the second; which is composed of very strong
Muscles. This Economy is wonderful in the Animal, but by no means applicable
to the rational Creature. Although the Pot and other Implements used in
Cookery, where the Aliment receives some Degrees of Digestion, may bear some
Analogy to the first Stomach in the Animal, yet the Operation is different, it
is by the Succus Gastricus, a Liquor separated by the Glands of the Stomach,
that the Corn is made soft and fitted, to the Action of the second Stomach,
where it is received together with the Juices of the first. But in boiling, the
most nutrimental Parts are lost, the more volatile and spiritous evaporate,
while the gross fatty Parts are blended with the Water.

Therefore whoever takes down the Substance loads the Stomach to very little
Purpose, and whoever drinks the Broth will relax his Stomach, and rob it of the
Vigor required to perform its Office. But nothing will so much convince us of
the Impropriety of such a Regimen, as a Knowledge of Digestion, and the Manner
of its being performed; which for the Sake of such Readers as are unacquainted
with these Subjects we will take a cursory View of in its first Stages.

The principal Agents employed in this Action, are the Teeth, the Saliva, the
Succus Gastricus, and the Liquors we drink. The Aliment being broke by the
Teeth, and mixed with the Saliva in the Mouth, descends into the Stomach, where
it imbibes the Juices of the Glands, and the Liquors drank, whose chief
Property is to soften the Aliments, as they are Fluids which easily enter the
Pores of moist Bodies, and, swelling them, break their most intimate Cohesions;
and this is augmented by the Impetus which the Heat of the Stomach gives to the
Particles of the Fluids; and likewise by rarefying the Air contained in the
Pores of our Food, which bursts its Parts asunder.

The Aliments thus prepared, their Parts soon separate from one another, and
disolve into a Fluid with the Liquor of the Stomach, by the continual Motion of
its Sides, whose absolute Power is demonstrated (by Pitcairn) to be equal to
the Pressure of 117088 Pound-weight: To which if we add the absolute Force of
the Diaphragm, and Muscles of the Abdomen, which likewise conduce to Digestion,
the Sum will amount to 250734 Pound-weight.

From whence this Force? Or for what Purpose has Nature (who yet has never
been detected in an Error) employed all this Mechanism, if useless? There can
be no Occasion to spare it the Trouble of its Office, and the only Excuse Men
find for so doing, is because it is already weakened by some Cause, and
incapable of acting. But to such I would observe, that it is not by these Means
to be brought to its natural Tone. And the studious Man, whose Life is
generally inactive, will find it more to his Advantage, and agreeable to the
Constitution of his Nerves, on whose Sensation he depends for his Ideas, to
live more upon Food containing the natural Juices, of which Kind especially are
all roasted Meats.

I could not conveniently treat on this Subject without mentioning Digestion,
since the Teeth are the first and necessary Organs of it. Wherever we observe
these Instruments wanting in Animals, etc. we shall always find them furnished
with two Stomachs; and where they have Teeth besides, they are only used as
Weapons of Defense, which we see in the Viper, and some Kinds of Fish, who
swallow their Prey whole.

From hence we may conclude, that the Teeth, besides their Importance for the
Preservation of our Health, are likewise necessary for the Agreement of the
Voice, the Pronunciation and Articulation of our Words, and the Ornament of the
Face.

Precautions for preserving the Teeth.
Though the Production of the Teeth is entirely the Work of Nature, the
Preservation of them depends greatly upon ourselves.

Men are naturally attentive to their Health, but by a Neglect of this Kind
they are too often rendered incapable of attaining it: For, as I have before
shown, the Health depending on the Digestion of the Aliments, which ought first
to be pounded as it were, and broke for the easier Admission of the Juices of
the Stomach: And this being the Office of the Teeth, it intimately concerns us
to keep them in such Order as will enable them to perform it.

The Means to preserve them, consists then principally in the Choice of a good
Regimen, and avoiding the Use of such Things as are hurtful to their external
Parts.

The first you see will not only preserve the Teeth, but at the same Time the
Health also, as it consists in the Choice of such Aliment as will yield a good
Nourishment. But the Generality of People are so prone to Intemperance, and eat
with so little Attention, or rather so precipitately, that too much cannot be
said of its ill Effects. Nothing is capable of producing greater Disorders,
than an imperfect Mastication; for if the Aliment be not well broken by the
Teeth, it is certain the Dissolution in the Stomach will be long, laborious, and
imperfect. And the sweet balsamic Blood, will be changed into a thick, acrid,
and viscous State. And this Alteration cannot fail of producing a bad Effect in
the Teeth, not only as it circulates through them, but by the Vapors which arise
from the Stomach and Breath, and lodge upon them as they pass through the Mouth.

The too great Use of Vegetables, as also the Flesh of Pork, salted Meats,
Salt-fish, Cheese, etc. must be prejudicial, as they all produce a bad Chyle.

All Kinds of Sweetmeats and Sugars contribute very much to the Destruction of
the Teeth; because their gluey Juice is insinuated into the Gums, and sticks to
the Teeth; besides, Sugars are of an acid, penetrant, and corrosive Nature, and
by a Chemical Analysis we see that the Effects will be sooner or later
pernicious. It Is also remarkable that those People who make great Use of this
Poison, are more subject to the Toothache, and lose their Teeth sooner than
others.

Those who love Sugar, and use it frequently, are seldom remarkable for
handsome Teeth, and very rarely good ones. This is particularly exemplified in
Holland, the Inhabitants whereof, especially the Women, are great Tea-drinkers,
and in their Manner somewhat particular, for instead of sweetning each Dish
with Loaf-Sugar as in England, they hold a Piece of Sugar Candy in their
Mouths, which frequently serves six or eight Dishes before it is disolved, which
inevitably produces those Effects to which they are so subject, viz. the Loss
and Ruin of their Teeth: For it is rare to find a Dutch Woman of thirty Years of
Age with a good Set of Teeth: For this Reason, after eating Sugar, or any Thing
that contains much Sugar in its Composition, it will be necessary to rince the
Mouth with warm Water, to dissolve and wash away those Parts which would stick
to the Gums and Teeth.

It would be absurd from hence to conclude it absolutely necessary to deprive
ourselves of these Things, but to regulate their Use; and not to make a Habit
of that which Experience shows to be prejudicial most certainly is worth our
Consideration.

Of no less Importance is Moderation in Drinking, since our Health is equally
dependant on Sobriety; the many Constitutions we see ruined by Excess of this
Kind, is a stronger Argument to deter us than any Thing that can be further
said on this Head.

It Is as necessary likewise to avoid chewing or breaking any hard Bodies, as
Nuts, Cherry-stones, etc. biting off the Ends of Thread or Silk, lifting up
great Weights, picking them with Instruments of Gold, Silver, or any other
Metal, by which they may be either loosened or lost, and other such idle and
pernicious Practices.

Excessive smoking Tobacco is also very injurious (especially if Care be not
taken to cover the End of the Pipe with Wax); which will by Degrees wear off
their vitrious or glossy Substance, and subject them to the Danger of becoming
rotten, and perfectly useless: It besides gives them a black and filthy
Appearance, and causes an unnatural Heat in the Mouth, which by the immediate
Admission of cold Air, may arrest a Humor in the Gums or neighboring Glands,
and be the Foundation of great Pain and Trouble.

I would not have the Reader imagine me ignorant of the Qualities of Tobacco: I
am sufficiently sensible of its Service in preserving the Teeth, by evacuating
the superfluous Humors: But like any other Specific, it may, if improperly
made use of, answer a very different Effect. I would therefore by all Means
advise washing the Mouth with warm Water, and not exposing it too soon after
smoking to the Impressions of a cold Air, etc.

The Effects which have been observed to follow smoking, are the very same
when we eat our Victuals too hot, and immediately, or in a little Time after,
eat something cold. Many People drink, in the same Instant, a Liquor almost
boiling hot, and some other as cold as Ice, without recollecting that the
Diversity of Heat and Cold is able to arrest and fix the Humors which nourish
the Teeth, which stagnating, will ferment and break the Membrane that covers
the Roots of the Teeth, and render them carious.

This Effect is produced by the Dilatation of the Parts and the Rarefaction of
the Liquids that pass through the Vessels, occasioned by Heat. As Cold on the
contrary will contract and shut up the Parts, abate the Motion of Circulation
and render the Juices contained in ^he Vessels, thick and incapable of passing.

The great Preservation of our Teeth, in short chiefly depends on our Regimen
of Living; the Constitution, and the Teeth, have so equal a Dependence on each
other, that the Destruction of the latter proves the Ruin of the former, almost
as certain, as that a bad Blood can never supply the Teeth with good
Nourishment.

General Causes of the Disorders of the Teeth.
The Causes that produce the Diseases of the Teeth, are two in general: The one
internal, the other external. The internal Cause is owing to the Quantity or
Quality of the Lymph, which by its corrosive Parts is capable of destroying the
most compact Parts of the human Body, such as are the Teeth, by breaking the
external Substance, or glossy Covering of the Bones of which they are composed.

The Lymph we find of this Character in the Scurvy, in the King's Evil, and in
the Pox.

When the nutritious Juice is too abundant, or distributed in too great
Quantity into the Teeth, that it stagnates between their Alveoli and their
Roots, its Effects are very dangerous, like as when the Blood is inflamed, it
may form phlegmonic Abscesses in the Cavity of the Teeth, or in the
neighboring Parts: It may also occasion the most exquisite Pains, incurable
but by the Loss of the Tooth.

The Regimen of Living.
Too much Sleep, too much watching, a too sedentary Life, or a too laborious
one, contribute not a little to the Preservation or to the Ruin of the Teeth.

The good Quality of the Milk which the Child receives from its Nurse is of
great Importance to the Formation of the Teeth, in the Time of too thing; as it
serves to prevent or diminish the many Accidents that happen to Children, when
the Teeth are disposed to pierce the Membrane of the Gum, that covers their
Extremities and opposes their Issue.

All violent Passions are capable of altering Digestion, of increasing or
thickning the Mass of Blood, of causing Obstructions, and of stopping the
Secretions and Excretions which mould operate daily for the Preservation of our
Health. The Passions, I say, may, when they alter the Mass of Blood to a
certain Degree, be ranged with the internal Causes that produce the Diseases of
the Teeth.

All Persons in a pituitous or plethorick Habit of Body, in whom the Lymph is
very abundant, are generally subject to suffer not only Pain in the Teeth, but
even their Loss.

The Generality of Women with Child are likewise subject to this Complaint: The
menstrual Discharge being stopped, the Mass of Blood must rest charged with a
Superfluity; it is therefore from the Quantity that is deposited on the Teeth or
on the Gums, that Women suffer this Uneasiness sooner when with Child than at
other Times; and we see that they are often afflicted for the same Reason, when
their monthly Economy is over.

The Ja^^dice occasions so much Disorder in the Blood, that the Teeth sometimes
perish by an Abscess on those Parts.

The external Causes are not less in Number, nor are they less dangerous in
their Effects. The thick Vapors that arise from the Stomach and Lungs adhere
to the Mouth much in the same Manner that Soot adheres to the Sides of the
Chimney, forming a tenacious viscous Substance that covers the Teeth like
Paste. This tenacious Matter is very hurtful to the Teeth. When certain l^^tle
Portions of our Aliment adhere to the Teeth, or stick betwixt their Interstices
or the Gums, it is capable of producing the same Effect, especially if we
neglect rincing our Mouths after.

The Injuries of the Weather are the Causes of Rheums and Catarrhes, from which
the Teeth, the Alveoli, and the Gums, are too often very great Sufferers

The too great Use of dentrifick Powders serves chiefly to Destruction, as they
use or wear off the Part of the most Importance to their Preservation, viz.
their Enamel or vitrious Substance.

But the Neglect in not keeping them clean, is the most general Cause of all
the Disorders that happen to the Teeth.

Mercury is a great Enemy to the Teeth, not only by itself but by the bad
Effects that it may produce in the Body, by the corrosive Qualities that most
of the Preparations of Mercury are charged with, or by the Alliance that it
contracts with different Principles in our Bodies, when it stays too long, or
when it is not properly evacuated.

It Is very evident that Mercury, by its ill Effects, swells the Gums and
renders them sore; this it does also to the Membranes that cover the Roots of
the Teeth, either internally or externally; it desects, if I may be allowed the
Expression, the very Roots, and throws them out of their Sockets, or otherwise,
it destroys them by the Caries that it occasions. These melancholy Effects we
see but too often, especially where Mercury has been employed by Persons
little versed in its Use. The most experienced Practitioners in the Venereal
Disease use it with the utmost Circumspection, and with great Industry guard
against its Poison. The Gilders and those who cover Looking-Glasses, Plumbers,
and such as work in Mines, etc. experience the bad and fatal Impressions that
Mercury makes upon them, and particularly upon their Teeth.

It Is by the Effects produced from these Causes, that the Teeth are attended
with such Diversity of Diseases, almost always accompanied with Pain, more or
less violent.

Authors have reckoned the Number of Diseases of the Teeth to amount to upwards
of an hundred, but I find only nineteen necessary to comprehend all that may be
useful to know, and these may be divided into three Classes: In the first are
those produced by external Causes; in the second are contained the Disorders of
the Alveoli and Gums; and in the third are the Diseases accidental or
symptomatic.

Of the Tartar or Turf.
The first Disease from external Causes worth our Notice is, the Tartar or Turf,
concerning which Authors speak of many different Sorts, as the yellow, the
gray, the black, and the petrified, and distinguish them also by their Degrees
of Consistence; but as this last is owing only to the Duration, and the
Difference of Color not material, I shall speak only of the most common Sort,
which is of a dark yellow, tending rather to a brown Color.

The Tartar is a Matter accumulated on the Surface of the Teeth, near the Gums,
which in Process of Time will form a strong Crust, of a considerable Bigness,
common to those who are negligent in keeping their Teeth clean. This foreign
Matter as it increases in Quantity, inevitably consumes the Gums, and by that
Means occasions a Rottenness of the Teeth.

For the better understanding the Nature of this Tartar, with the Causes that
produce it, and the Manner of its insensible Formation, the two following
Principles may be of Service.

First the Foundation of this Matter and its Increase may bear some Analogy to
the Stones formed in the Kidneys, Bladder, etc. which owe their Origin very
often to a Retention of some Matter, capable of Attraction and Cohesion: The
small Portions of our Aliment that adhere to the upper Part of the Teeth, or
betwixt their Interstices, being softened by the Saliva, become of a gluey
Consistence, which soon grows dry, by the Assistance of more Air, passing in
Inspiration and Expiration.

Secondly, when the Saliva becomes viscous, from a Deprivation of the Lymph,
and is loaded with saline Particles, it is very probable that it may be lodged
upon the Body of the Teeth, and by Degrees form the Mass we are speaking off.
That this Matter may be so caused, I am the more ready to believe from the
Observation Le Journal de Saeavans de lannle, 1721.
of a strong Concretion being found upon the Roots of the Tongue, formed by a
viscous Lymph, resembling the Saliva in Thirst. It Is difficult to assign any
other Cause than that the Saliva may become tartarous and form this Substance.

The first Lay or Bed of Tartar being once formed, it is easy to conceive it
augmented by the Addition of fresh Matter, and to increase to an extraordinary
Size.

From the Nature of this Disease we may readily infer, that the Cure, or Means
to prevent it, will consist in keeping such a Regimen as will preserve the
Purity of the Blood in its natural State; and by being careful to wash the
Mouth often, (which is absolutely necessary to prevent a stinking Breath
occasioned as well by this Neglect as the Disorder here mentioned) we may
maintain the Use and Beauty of our Teeth, for many Years.

The Jaundice of the Teeth is mentioned as another Disease; but I think with
Impropriety, it being nothing more than a tarnished Substance, or Viscosity
sticking to the Teeth, like Dust, or the Humidity that covers the Surface of a
Looking-glass when it is not kept clean; and to me it seems to be nothing more
than a Bed or Lay of Matter, forming the Tartar.

Sensibility and Agacement.
The Sensibility and Agacement of the Teeth, are Disorders produced from
external Causes.

The Writers on this Subject have been of opposite Opinions, some maintaining
the Teeth to be insensible Bodies, others on the contrary making them extremely
capable of Sensation. It Is true that simply as so many Bones, we may consider
them as insensible; but as covered and lined with Membranes, and furnished with
Vessels and Nerves, we cannot deny them the Quality of Sensation, any more than
other Parts of the Body.

By the Sensibility of the Teeth is to be understood that fixed and permanent
Pain, that we generally express by saying we have the Toothache.

By the Agacement of the Teeth is meant that acute Pain we express by saying
they are set on Edge, caused by certain Sounds, such as the touching of Stuffs,
the slipping of a Knife or Fork upon a China-Plate, or the filing a Piece of
Iron, etc. etc.

The Pains of the Teeth are of different kinds: But the most general are those
called pungent or pricking, coming by Intervals; the other distensive or
continual, such as accompany a Caries, in which the Air by drying or crisping
the Fibers, Nerves and Coats of the little Vessels, render them bony, and
contract their Diameters too small to receive any Fluid through them, by which
Means the Efforts of the Humors, to distend their Orifices, cause that Pain we
call distensive.

If on the contrary the little Vessels should be ruptured, the Liquor
extravasated would soon change its Nature, and fermenting would irritate the
Membranes, and produce the Pain called pungent.

The Agacement we find to be a different Kind of Sensation, owing, according to
the general Opinion, to an acid Juice, insinuated betwixt the Fibers of the
Membranes, that covers the Roots of the Teeth; and when the Teeth are
compressed against this Membrane, that Disposition occasions the Action of the
Juices against the Fibers of the Membrane.

I believe that the Juices of certain Fruits, such as Cherries, Gooseberries,
Apples, etc. may be insinuated betwixt the Interstices of the Fibers that
compose the Membranes, and distending them, intercept the Course of the Liquors
in some Vessels, and by stretching the Nerves, produce a Sensation more or less
troublesome to bear: But it is very different from that seated in the Body of
the Tooth.

What makes me consider that the Agacement is fixed only to the Body or Surface
of the Teeth is, if they are wiped with a Piece of warm Linen, it will
immediately diminish their Uneasiness. And in Opposition to the Opinion of an
Acid being the Cause, the following Experiment will serve to convince: If the
Herb Sorrel be chewed between the Teeth, the Agacement will suddenly cease; if
this Disease be occasioned by an Acid, is it not strange that it should admit
of this Remedy? Sorrel which is itself an Acid, must rather increase than abate
the Disorder! It Is possible that some Parts of the Juice may be subtle enough
to penetrate the Fibers that terminate it: But how Sorrel acts in remedying
this Evil, I confess, I am not able to conceive. We may observe that the Air
taken in Respiration when the Mouth is half open, will produce the same Effect:
And I cannot believe that Air in passing, presses so forcibly as to make that
Compression against the Membranes at the Roots of the Teeth, which they assign
to be the Cause. It Is more natural to suppose that the subtle Particles of the
Air entering the Pores of the Enamel, and the Resistance made to the grosser
Parts, may occasion a Tremor in the Tooth, and a Sensation not unlike the
Agacement.

The Caries or Rottenness is a Disease produced likewise from external Causes.
Rottenness.


The Teeth are more subject to this Disease, than all the other Bones in the
Body, both by their Structure and Situation.

This Disease is occasioned by a Humor insinuated between the boney Fibers of
the Teeth, which generally meets with Obstructions in the most substantial Part
of the Tooth, and by the particular Impulse, that every Particle communicates
to the Cells of the Tooth, by Degrees, breaks off little Parcels, and in Time,
makes that dark Cavity in the Tooth which we call hollow.

The Teeth are more subject to Rottenness than the other Bones, because their
Periosteum is more pressed; which renders them subject to Obstructions, etc.
The Molares are more subject to this Disease than the Incissores or Canini; and
the Incissores and Canini of the upper Jaw, more than those of the lower Jaw,
because by their Situation they are more exposed to Heat and Cold, in eating or
drinking, in Inspiration and Expiration.

It often happens, that after a Tooth is attacked with a Caries, the opposite
Tooth, on the other Side of the same Jaw, is affected also. Nor does it appear
that this Effect depends only upon Hazard: For it is remarkable, that in the
opposite Tooth the Caries will not only much resemble the other, but sometimes
be exactly uniform to it.

The Vulgar, as well as certain Authors, are of opinion, that all Pains of the
Teeth are caused by a Worm, that gnaws and eats the Membranes and Nerves of the
Teeth. This Notion is founded upon pretended Experiments on these Infects,
which (as they report) by smoking Hembane, will fall from the Teeth, etc. And
some of the Doctors of Montpellier have been very prolix in their Accounts of
the Generation of these Worms; besides the Discoveries with their Glasses: But
whoever will be at the Pains to make some Trials with the Microscope, may prove
the Absurdity of this Notion.

The Time in which the Caries ravages most of the Teeth, is between the Age of
25 and 50 Years.

I have omitted the many Divisions that may be seen in some Books upon this
Subject; both on Account of their Perplexity and Non-use. For the Caries, of
what Kind or Cause soever, produces its Effects, more or less considerable,
according to the Parts of the Tooth they attack. And the Operations practiced
on these Occasions are more or less difficult, according to the Situation of
the Tooth; or according as the Caries is more or less penetrating in the Body,
or the Roots of the Teeth.

Whenever the Caries is situated without the Gums, either on the Sides, or
Extremity of the Tooth, the Cure will consist in separating the rotten Part
from the sound, by Exfoliation, with the File, the Rugine, Cautery, etc. And by
filling the Cavity with Wax (which must be often renewed) it will defend the
boney and nervous Parts from the Air, or the Impression of any other Bodies;
likewise hinder any Bits of our Aliment from lodging in the Cavity, which are
so apt to putrify and cause a stinking Breath.

Although the Teeth, Fractures.
in their natural Situation, are harder and more compact than the other Bones
in the Body, and more remarkably so in the human Specie than Brutes, we find
them by Experience extremely subject to break; especially when the least Defect
happens in them.

Their Fractures, are simple, compound, or Fissure.

The Simple happens often by Falls and Blows, particularly by the Attempts to
draw them before they are loose: The Compound is when, their Roots are strongly
attached to their Alveoli, and a Piece of the Jaw comes away with Part of the
Tooth: A Fissure is a Fracture lengthways, without any seeming Alteration in
the Form of the Tooth.

When once the Parts of the other Bones are divided, they never can be again
united; for the Vessels distributed in them are not so disposed as to furnish a
Juice sufficient, or that is capable of a Glutination; because their proper
Substance is too compact to give them Passage; or their Motion, the Air, and
Bodies that they touch, are Obstacles that oppose the Reunion of the divided
Parts.

But though the Reunion of the Fracture be impracticable, the Scales, or
Splinters, that remain, may be extracted, or their Angles and sharp Points
smoothed and polished.

All the Luxations the Bones suffer in their Articulations, Luxations.
are either complete, or incomplete. When a Tooth is loosened, it is a Luxation
incomplete.

If after having been naturally well situated, they lean either in, or out of
the Mouth, of one Side, or the other, they are so many Luxations.

When a Tooth turns in the Alveoli, so that the lateral Parts of the Tooth
incline, either outward or inwards, it is a Luxation complete.

When a Tooth seems to be longer, and exceed the others, that the Neck and Part
of the Roots appear above the Edge of the Gums, occasioned by some Matter
contained in the Alveoli, it is a Semi-luxation.

The large Teeth are most frequently luxated inwards. The Incissores, on the
contrary, generally luxate outward: Although both these Dislocations are bad,
and incommode the Equality of Mastication, yet the Luxation inwards is the
worst, because it fatigues and hurts the Tongue; which Uneasiness is more than
the Inconvenience that is caused by the Teeth against the Lips, or Cheeks, when
they fall outward. The least inconvenient Luxation is, when the Tooth is only
turned in the Cavity of the Alveoli.

When the Teeth are luxated, in such a manner as to exceed the others by their
Extremities, which we call a Luxation, or Dislocation of the Bottom to the Top
of the lower Jaw, or of the Top to the Bottom of the upper Jaw, the Mastication
is very difficult.

In all these Cases, the Remedy is, to return them, each, in their proper
Places, by which means they will often become quite fast; to guard against the
Causes of Luxations, and so fortify the Gums.

Diseases within the Alveoli and Gums.
The Diseases that happen to the Parts of the Teeth contained within the Alveoli
and Gums, are,

1. Caries of the Neck and Roots of the Teeth.

2. Inflammation of the Membranes, that line the internal Cavities of the Roots
of the Teeth, their Periosteum, etc. occasioned by Cold.

3. Abscesses in the Cavities of the Teeth and Gums: The Consequence of an
Inflammation.

4. Atrophy, or Dryness of the Alveoli and Membranes of the Gums; which is
sufficient to make the Teeth fall out, without any Caries, and even without
Pain.

The accidental, or symptomatic Diseases of the Teeth, are,

1. Caries of the Alveoli, caused by the Teeth.

2. Exostosis of the Alveoli, occasioned by the Teeth also.

3. Inflammation of the Periosteum, lining the Cavities of the Alveoli.

4. Fracture of the Alveoli, caused by the Extraction of the Teeth, etc.

5. Hemorrhage, sometimes violent, occasioned by the Extraction of the Teeth
also. Sometimes this Hemorrhage proceeds from, the Gums being tore in the
Operation of drawing.

6. Abscesses in the Gums, Cheeks, and Palate, caused by the Teeth.

7. Fistulas occasioned by long Continuance of those Abscesses.

8. Miscarriages have been the Consequence of violent Pains in the Teeth: And,

9. Nausea, Vomiting, Diarrheas and Fevers, and to Infants, even Death itself.

On the Methods of Cleaning the Teeth with Observations on Scaling.
THE common Methods for preserving the Color of the Teeth, serve rather to
blacken and destroy them: And I would caution the Public against the Use of all
Remedies sold with this Design; The Opiates, and many Medicines of different
Titles, to my certain Knowledge, are composed of Brick, China, Rotten-stone, or
other Ingredients of this Nature, powdered or levigated very fine, and colored
according to the Fancy of the Inventors. It is very natural to conceive that
these Powders must act upon the Teeth much in the same manner as a File, or the
Dusts used in polishing Metals; by which means the enameled Substance will be
wore away, and the long Part of the Tooth left bare, and defenseless to all
Insults.

The white Salt, Scuttle-fish Bone, Salt of Tartar, Salt of Lead, Burnt-allum,
and other Ingredients of the same Species, the World has been long abused with.

Juice of Sorrel, Juice of Lemons, Spirit of Alum, Spirit and Salt of Vitriol,
have been employed on this Occasion, and though with the greatest Circumspection,
have always in the End given them a yellow Color, never to be repaired. Nor is
this the only bad Effect produced by these Liquors, for by a frequent
Application, they corrode, and eat little Holes in the Enamel of the Teeth:
Notwithstanding it is in the Use of these Remedies that consist all the Secrets
of our Quacks! and if we examine the Teeth of any of their Confidents (that
seem to have reaped the greatest Advantage from them) with a Microscope, or
even with the naked Eye, the Ravage they have made will easily show us a sure
Foundation for a Caries.

The Methods of cleaning the Teeth are various. Most People use small Brushes,
or Bits of Cloth or Linen, without any Suspicion of their Impropriety, but they
are much too rough, and by frequent indiscreet Use, often ruin the Gums and
Teeth. For this reason I would abolish their Use, and advise a Piece of Sponge,
dipped in warm Water, in which should be dissolved a Piece of Soap, to be used
preferable to all other Methods whatever. Soap is known to be of a penetrating,
attenuating and detergent Nature, and therefore not only most proper for
cleaning the Teeth, but also very serviceable in most Disorders of the Gums; in
short, it may be used with the utmost Propriety; the only Objection to be made,
is the Offense it may give on account of its Taste: but Custom will render it
familiar, and sufficiently recompense die Trouble of using it.

I would recommend the Morning as the most convenient Time for cleaning the
Teeth; but before using of the Sponge, it will be necessary to scrape off the
gluey Substance, which adheres to their Surface, with a Quill; and after
cleaning them with the Sponge and Soap, the Mouth may be rinced with Hungary
Water, Spirit of Lavender, etc. diluted with warm Water.

The, Scurvy of the Gums is dependent on the bad State of the Constitution, the
relieving of which last will infallibly cure the other. When the Teeth become
loose, from whatever Cause, a Teaspoonful of the Tincture of Myrrh, mixed with
a Tea-cup-full of Water, to wash the Mouth with twice or thrice a Day, will be
the most efficacious Remedy.

It Is become a great Fashion with the English Ladies, (and with too many of my
own Sex) to have their Teeth sealed; and this Practice, shocking as it is,
seems to be pursued with an uncommon Attention.

The Design of this Operation is to beautify the Color of the Teeth, by
removing the Tartar or Turf, which adheres to their Surface, and is done with
Iron Instruments, made for that Purpose. But whoever will consider attentively
the Nature of the Teeth, and of this petrified Substance, which I have already
described, will readily conceive the Impropriety of this Practice. It Is very
probable that by endeavoring to detach this Matter, some of the enameled Part
may be taken away with it; and this not only depends on Hazard, but is the
certain Consequence of frequent Use; indeed these Instruments themselves, by
often rubbing upon the Vitrious Substance, must risque its Ruin, both as they
are of a Nature too hard to approach the Teeth, and as their Mettalic Particles
will insinuate themselves into the Pores of the Enamel, and never fail to
produce great Michief.

If it should be said that this Matter may be removed by a dextrous Hand, one
familiar in the Operation, without any such Dangers, a brief Repetition of the
Nature of the Disease will, I hope, prove a sufficient Answer.

The Tartar is generally accumulated on that Part of the Teeth which joins with
the Gums, and covers more or less, according as it increases in Quantity, that
Part we call the Neck of the Tooth, which it separates from the Gum. This is
the true State of the Disease.

Now suppose the Operator ever so dextrous, he must, in Consequence of taking
away this Matter, expose the Neck of the Tooth bare, and liable to all Injuries
of the Air, the Aliment, or whatever comes near it; in which are contained many
Causes of a Caries. This Matter when left to itself, seldom fails of dropping
off insensibly, and if it is the Color only which induces us to try the Remedy,
'twould be much better to be content with this Inconvenience, than subject
ourselves to its ill Effects. But by following the Methods I have advised,
there will be no necessity for exposing ourselves to this Operation.

A certain Merchant in, the City, though otherwise sufficiently covetous,
bestowed a considerable Purse upon one of our foreign Operators; who had in
good Truth changed the Color of his Teeth, from a Black to a very beautiful
White: But behold the Consequence! The Merchant found himself under a Necessity
of bespeakihg a new Set; for they all actually fell out, one after the other:
I saw him within three Months after the Operation, when he had only two
remaining in his Head. This is an Instance not without its Precedent.

Thus it is that our curious Ladies and others, by endeavoring (by these
unatural Means) to make their Teeth exceeding-white, will at length bring on a
Caries, and render them black and frightful as well as useless. I am astonished
to see so many pretending an Aversion to Foreigners, and yet suffer them (as we
say of Sharpers, etc.) to draw the furthest Teeth in their Heads, And I am
still more sorry to see such numbers of the finest Women become the Dupes of
such foreign Miscreants.

Diseases of Children in the Time of Toothing.
THE Teeth hardly make their Appearance in the Mouth before they require some
Succor from Surgery: The Caries is the first Disease that works their Ruin,
and is their greatest Enemy during Life; but even before their Appearance, the
Diseases they cause, we know by Experience, are considerable enough to take
away Life.

The first Appearance of Teeth happens commonly about seven Months after our
Birth, and is attended with diverse Accidents. The Symptoms preceding their
Appearance is an Itching of the Gums, followed by a Ptyalismus, or Salivation
of the Infant, easily discovered by the great Quantity of Saliva running from
the Mouth. After this follows the Swelling of the Gums, accompanied with great
Pain.

If the Child has Strength to resist, he will be attacked with the Apthae, or
little Ulcers, unequal with a white Point: These Ulcers are often engendered by
the most acrid and serous Parts of the Blood, formed most easily on the Surface
of the Membrane in the Mouth, being the most soft and tender. Sometimes the
parotid Glands swell and become considerable Abscesses.

When the Teeth, especially the Canini, are upon the Point of piercing the
Gums, the Itching is then turned into great Pain, with Swelling of the Cheeks
and Eyes, Catarrhs, Fever, Diarrhea, Nausea, Vomiting, Insomnitude,
Convulsions, Lethargy, and too often the tragical Scene ends in Death.

The Thirst occasioned by the Fever excites them to suck more than their little
Stomachs are able to bear; and from hence follows that Indigestion, and
Corruption, Vomiting, and Diarrhea, to which they are so subject.

All the Symptoms happening to Children of the first Age are produced by the
Compression the Teeth make in dividing the Gums: And it is remarkable that these
Disorders sometimes happen to Children of a more advanced Age, though very seldom.

The Incisores are more sharp, and pierce the Gums with less Pain than the
Canini. The Molares, as they are large and flat upon their Extremities, are the
Occasion of more Difficulty and Pain; but as they make their Appearance later
than the others, the Child has generally acquired greater Strength to resist
their Efforts.

The Diseases I have mentioned, are indeed more or less considerable, as the
Child is more or less vigorous. Hippocrates tells us, that those who cut their
Teeth in the Winter, are less liable to the Danger of the Fever, than in a
warmer Season: that when they have a Diarrhea, they are less subject to
Convulsions; that the healthiest-looking Children, and who sleep sound, are in
Danger of being surprised with Convulsions, of which Death is not always the
Consequence.

From these Prognostics we may judge of the Effects resulting from a good or
bad Constitution of the Child, etc. But I would advise Mothers on these
Occasions to apply to a Man of Skill in the Profession, and be extremely
cautions of engaging in an Affair wherein the least Error may prove fatal.

FINIS.
In the Press and speedily will be published,

RECEIPTS In PHYSIC and SURGERY:

Being the entire Practice of an eminent and learned Physician lately deceased.

Containing, a complete Body of PRESCRIPTIONS answering to every DISEASE.

Now first published from the Author's Original MANUSCRIPTS.

To which are added by the EDITOR,

Occasional Remarks, Directions, and Cautions, suited to the different Stages
of Distempers, in order to render this Work particularly useful in Families.


