A CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY OF THE Crown-Inn: With CHARACTERS of some of the
late SERVANTS; And the PROCEEDING of the TRUSTEES To the Coming of the New
LANDLORD.

Part II.

LONDON: Printed for J. MOOR, and Sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster. Price 3 d.

A CONTINUATION OF THE HISTORY, etc.
SO many things of consequence offer at this time, that I find I shall swell my
Design to a much greater length than I imagined: Instead of Writing once a
Week, I shall never be able to retain so many memorable Particulars, or get
through my Promise, without adjusting the Substance every Post.

You would split your Sides at the late Set of Servants, and their Favorers,
in this Town, were you to see how they behave themselves in their present
Circumstances? What a mixture they discover in their Countenances of the Sullen
and the Impertinent; or indeed of the Spaniel and the Lion. They would fain lay
a timely claim to the good Graces and Favor of Mr. WRIGHT, but their
Pretensions are awkardly made out, and built on such senceless Foundations,
that it is queer enough to hear them explain 'em.

Harry Aucumy, who is at leizure now to carry on all the Intrigues that lay
upon his Hands, has had a very great Levee of Condolants since his late
Misfortune; for say they, Harry appeared a Man of Spirit, and was always firm
to his Purpose. Harry was resolute and constant in the Measures he pursued, and
would have pushed Things with another manner of Spirit than that unaccountable
Fellow Slyboots showed, who had been asleep for three Years, and always kept
his Friends as well as his Enemies in doubt what he designed. Harry was the
Life of the Cause, the Joy of the Party, and the Toast of the CLUB. From Harry
we expected something very great and surprising; he had a Spirit and Impudence
really fitted for it. Our hopes in him daily increased; we saw him, on Robin's
Downfall, which was owing to his dextrous Conduct, placed in a Sphere, whereby
his excellent Talents would have come to shine in their full Luster; nay, he
had managed it so admirably, that he sent the Trickster Robin off the Stage
with the utmost Disgrace, which for Reasons well known to us, would have proved
of Service to future Purposes.

But I must not stay to finish the Encomiuns these Visitants of Harry's
bestowed on him, without letting you know, that they were such Friends of young
Shute's, as began to place the greatest Confidence in him, from the several
steps which they plainly saw he had taken in his Favor. The rest were such as
Harry had really let into the Secret; and among whom there ran a mutual and
entire Chain of Confidence, in which they would all rather have Hanged
together, than to have broke their Faith with one another.

Must it not therefore be the most sensible Mortification to Men elated with
such Hopes, and inspired by a Genius so very promising as Harry's to promote
their Views, to see him at two Steps fall headlong from such an Eminence of
Power and Authority, and lie the bleeding Sacrifice of a Ruined-Party at the
Feet of his Enemies, despised, threatened and levelled to their Resentments by
the Act of the new LANDLORD, who singled him out, like a Deer for the Chase, to
be the common Sport of all the honest Servants and Tenants; nay, even to his
Antagonist Robin? What can show a Man more despised than the Message delivered
him by the TRUSTEES for his Dismission.

Mr. Aucumy,
Your Proceedings having rendered your Conduct suspected, we are Ordered by our
new LANDLORD Mr. WRIGHT to tell you, that he has no farther Service for you;
with Directions likewise to take from you your Books of Accounts, and Seal up
the COUNTING HOUSE.


You may be sure his Friends bleed inwardly for him; but they have, indeed, the
most admirable way of out-facing Things that ever was known. They had before
this given out, that he stood on no bad terms with Mr. WRIGHT, and chiefly,
that on the first Indisposition of the Widow, it was he who promoted the
Delivery of BOB's Conjuring-VVand into the Hands of the Chamberlain; which He
could not choose but acknowledge as a piece of good Service: But this is
somewhat like BOB's INVIOLABLE ATTACH.

This they maintained with an Assurance peculiar to them, till the time of
Harry's disgrace, when a fresh Astonishment appeared in them; and for two or
three Days there was a general run of Guilty confused Faces among the Party,
Harry himself stood this shock with a great deal of outward Confidence before
his Friends, because he was unwilling to discourage them, but alas we know that
nothing but a clear and unspotted Conscience can really support a Man's Spirits
under such sudden and capital Afflictions. This required that they should give
their Sentiments a new turn, and now Harry was consoled by his Friends as a Man
purely suffering for his Principles, and one who deserved all the Confidence
they had placed in him.

One would think this Indication should have taught them a little Modesty, but
they go on at the old rate: They will not stand convinced that they have a less
share of the Favor of Mr. WRIGHT than others, though it is with the utmost
Impudence and Vanity they dare, even make Pretenses to it. They are the most
impatient People at the loss of Power imaginable, and certainly make the worst
use of it when they have it of any living, for they are all Heat and Choler:
whence it is observable, through their precipitate and Posthaste Fury, that they
have never been long before they finished their Course.

They have the merriest Way of Interpreting Things that can be: They pretend
they are very impatient for the arrival of the New LANDLORD, being uneasy at
the Management of the TRUSTEES, who have gone a great way toward putting the
Affairs of the INN in a better Posture, and to draw a better Trade to the whole
Town. They cannot, or rather will not believe, that the Choice of the TRUSTEES
has any thing of the true Meaning of Mr. WRIGHT in it; but that it was done
upon their own Solicitations and Intelligence; and that they doubt not, but
they shall soon convince him when they come to talk with him.

Would it not anger one that these Fellows should have the Impudence to form
these preposterous Suggestions? (for I will forgive the Folly of it) Do they
think he has forgot, or ever will, their turning two or three of his Servants
out of the House in a rude Sort of Manner, though they paid honestly for what
they called for, only because they gave their Master Notice of their Intrigues?
Was any thing more grossly Impudent than Harry's Conduct in this Matter? Or his
inspiring the CLUB to do all they could to hinder Young Mr. Wright from coming
among them? They are mistaken if they think him a Person so short-sighted as to
be deceived in distinguishing his Friends from his Foes: And if those who have
always appeared in his Interest, and on all Occasions justified their Love to
him, are not to be entitled to his Favor; nay, if his own Sense of this, in
choosing such for TRUSTEES, is not sufficient to prove it, I leave them to be
corrected by their own Folly.

Every Reed serves a drowning Man to catch at; you would smile, did you but
know the mighty Splutter they make, that their Consort, Tom Scatterwit, has
shook Hands with Mr. WRIGHT. Now you must know there is no more in it than
this. Tom was Agent for the Widow at NICK FROG's, especially on the
Composition: Tom, like the rest of his Fraternity, was a very active furious
Fellow, and when Reason would not do, he used to cock his Hat, and tread upon
NICK's Toes. NICK made damned sour Faces, but was not able to cope with the
young Bully. Nick, in his Time had been a very sturdy Fellow, but he was then
cursedly pinched with Corns, and could hardly stir out of his Elbow-Chair: It Is
true, he kicked and winced a little, but Tom always turned him by main
Strength, and in the End worked him into Temper to consent quietly to the
Agreement. Tom, on the Widow's Death, lay under dreadful Apprehensions; he was
conscious that a very good Understanding would ensue between Mr. WRIGHT and
NICK; and that if NICK should remember the Smart of his Toes, it would prove
but a little queer for him. Tom therefore came to NICK, and showed a geat deal
of unusual Condescension. Instead of the Bully Cock, he now came Cap in Hand,
and entered into an Expostulation somewhat servile. He desired NICK to forget
old Grudges, and to make the best of Matters to Mr. WRIGHT. NICK looked a
little sour on him, as remembering the cursed Gripes he had given him; however,
like a Man of Honor, he told him he forgave him, and should be glad to hear of
his Conversion. Another thing likewise laid Tom's Friends under some
Apprehensions for him; he was dipped in Harry's Project of entering into a
League with Old Savage and his Grandson, tending to the Prejudice of Mr.
WRIGHT's Interest; and had unluckily written for further Orders therein just at
the Time of the Widow's Death; which Packet falling of course into the Hands
of the TRUSTEES, they sealed it up, and sent it to Mr. WRIGHT.

Poor Tom looked plaguey queer upon it at first; but it seems he has had a long
Conference with Mr. WRIGHT on his arrival at NICK FROG's; which his Friends
interpret strangely to his Advantage; not that they think Tom will prove very
Stanch, but that they love a Fellow of a predominant Spirit. Most People laugh
heartily at this, and say, that Tom, who is an excellent Fellow at Congee and
Grimace, took all Opportunities to wriggle himself into Mr. WRIGHT's
Acquaintance, and screwed in at the lower End of the Table to Dinner.

Nick Spitfire, was to have played the same Game at 'Squire SOUTH's, but the
'Squire being a Man of Spirit forbid Nick the House, and resolved to receive no
Message from the Widow by such Hands; which put Nick upon the Splutter for
losing so favorable an Opportunity of exerting himself.

Bob Bungey is selling his Equipage again, sensibly afflicted at the
Miscarriage of his Business to Phil. Baboon. Bob breeds excellent Bullocks, and
has got Money by it; but was never looked on to be a Fellow of any tolerable
Sense.

Matt Spindleshanks, the Tavern-Boy, is in a strange Quandary whether he shall
return Home, or stay at Old Savage's. It Is noted for excellent Air in a
Consumption, and it is very probable that Matt, who is a little infirm, will
choose it for his Health's Sake. Life is sweet, and it is very probable that the
late Damps that have happened in this Country may be apt to suffocate poor
Matt, so that his Physicians have advised him, that the other Air is more safe
for him.

Peregriue Scamper, who makes such a mighty Noise of his CONDUCT, is lately
returned from his last Errand. He pleads a great deal of Merit, and is angry he
was not named one of the TRUSTEES. To say Truth, the Man had had never much
Harm in him, but being always thought a little Troublesome at Home, was usually
sent out of the Way for Quietness Sake. Most People would believe he had done
some Service, if he talked Jess of it, and had shown less Compliance to some
Points which render him a little disagreeable.

Jacob Rash, the New Agent, is the less concerned at being shut out of the
Management of all Affairs at the INN, because it furnishes him with an
Opportunity to indulge himself in a voluptuous Life. He was a zealous Promoter
of Harry's New Scheme, and a great Closeter of the BUFF-COATS upon that
Occasion. Jacob has lost his former Reputation, and has the Misfortune of being
looked on as a Tool, when perhaps too much Indolence and good Nature only has
been his Fault.

Old Biass the Malster, has a greater Inclination than a Spirit to do Mischief:
Covetousness, which is in others a Crime, has in him proved a Virtue. He would
have gone greater lengths in Young Shute's Favor, but for the excessive dread
of losing his Pelf: Besides, he saw no reason why he should Embark on a Level
with Fellows of desperate Fortunes. Biass dropped them in several Important
Points, and cried, Safe's the Word: He was willing to come in for something
among them, but would not run the Hazard of losing one of his G -- s for never
a Cause in Christendom; so that People say, Though he is no very honest Man,
yet he has proved an excellent BOWLER.

I know no one lies more exposed than Sim the Scrivener: Sim's Principles
prevailed over his Gratitude, to show his good Inclinations to Young Shute.
It Is whispered, that he has already received his Quietus; and no doubt but a
Post or two more will confirm it. Will Bromingham, notwithstanding his great
Pretenses, looks with a very formidable dull Air. He would fain be thought to
merit his Place, but I hear Mr. WRIGHT is of another Opinion.

BOB and Harry Aucumy are as far from being Friends as ever: Bob has lost his
Reputation with both Parties, but Harry stands fair with one side at least. In
short, Harry appears most Guilty, but Bob has the more despicable Phiz.

Will Wildfire would be a solitary Fellow too if he was capable of thinking;
but that is what he never did in his Life: He is a great Comforter to Harry
under his Affliction, and talks mightily of his Interest in a certain Family he
is allied to by Marriage, that are like to come into Favor; but a Bottle I
believe is the more solid consolation of the two.

Arthur Skipkennel has packed up his Movables and is ready for the Scamper.
Con -- is turned out of the West Farm by the TRUSTEES. A Fellow that has done a
damned deal of Mischief to the Country there. More of this in my next.

Tom Dimple has recovered his former Reputation. Tom you must know, was pitched
on to carry Instructions to Jacob Rush, in relation to stifling the Evidence,
mentioned in my last. Tom, thought he had been sent to influence the CAUSE; but
by a cursed Artifice found, that Bob and Harry had sealed his Packet up. Tom
was chose Steward at the next CLUB, and has shown himself a very honest Friend
of Mr. WRIGHT's.

Honest Charles Barrier is made Clerk of the Brewhouse in Harry's Room, which
is highly Satisfactory to all honest Men here; and no doubt is an Instance of
Mr. WRIGHT's Esteem to Nick Frog, and to take off the Odium of his Conduct in
concert with Charles, when the CLUB at the INN, in the VVidow's Time fell foul
on him in opprobious Words; and had like to have sent Charles to the Stocks for
the Bargain he made with Nick in relation to some Copses and Enclosures on Esquire
South's Estate, which were to be put into NICK's Occupation; wherein Charles,
as they alleged, suffered him to infringe on a TURNIP FIELD or two of the
VVidow's

Never was Man so joyfully caressed and entertained as Mr. WRIGHT was at NICK's
House; both he, and all his Tenants were ready to devour him for Joy. And
indeed, to say Truth, NICK had a great deal of Reason for his Exaltation, for
he had been used but a little scurvily in the latter part of the VVidow's Days.
Many of the New Servants hated him in their Hearts; and 'twas feared, that to
bring about some other Design, they would not have stuck to persuade the VVidow
into a Law Suit against poor NICK. But these Fears are all cured now, and NICK
begins to speak and act with his usual Spirit again.

I am yours, etc,

POSTSCRIPT.
THE swift Current of Affairs at this Time, will not let me, I find, conclude
without a Postscript.

Jacob Rush is dismissed from the Agency and honest John Trusty has got his Place
again. John met Mr. WRIGHT on the Road, and wishing him Joy on his Accession to
the Estate; Mr. WRIGHT answered, That he was satisfied a great deal was owing
to him on that Occasion; and he should always very gratefully remember his
Services.

This Day Mr. WRIGHT arrived in Town: Nothing can express the great Joy and
Satisfaction of the People: He was met by the Heads of the Town, and conducted
to the INN through Crowds of Spectators, making loud Acclamations.

I just now learn that Harry Aucumy is sent for to be present at the opening of
the COUNTING HOUSE; and that he comes with a heavy splenetick Air. The same
Hand informs me, that poor Sim has received a very civil Message from Mr.
WRIGHT, to desire his Absence from the House, to make room for honest WILL the
COOPER. A Man that can SEE a little farther into a Millstone than the other. Sim
takes his misfortune very heavily; and some queer Fellows that used to write
Hackney under him, are like to be reduced to the Circumstance of wanting Heels
to their Shoes again. These scurvy Dogs had just as much Love for Mr. WRIGHT as
their Master.

I am likewise credibly informed that Charles the HEAD-OSTLER, Ned Topsail, and
several other of the honest old Servants will have their Places again at the
INN. The House begins to flourish, and none are to be admitted but what are
known to be Men that have always promoted its Interest.

I must now finish, for every moment almost brings me some fresh Particular,
and I never should have done if I waited for any Conclusive Period.

I wish this may come safe to your Hands; for the Post-Boy is such a damned
impudent Rascal, one is hardly Abel to express it. The Dog sold Ballads up and
down the Town before, and now sets up for Writing News Letters. He was a great
Lurker about Harry's Office, and it is thought, has conveyed many a private
Packet for him to Young Shute. He has been often basted for his scurrilous
saucy Tongue, without any Effect, but it is very probable we shall now bring him
to the VVhipping-Post. When Will Bromingham troops off, he will be forbid
coming near the INN; and we hope then to rid the Town of such a scurrilous
Varlet.

Even whilst I am Writing this short Postscript, there is News of other
numerous Changes at the INN, but I cannot enter into Particulars till my next.

Honest Dan. Sobersides is popp'd into old Biass's TWO-ARM'D-CHAIR, at the
CLUB. Jemmy Brisk, one of the prettiest Fellows in Town, is made Chief Clerk in
the room of Will. Bromingham.

You may perhaps not give this Article its full Weight, but I can assure you
it is meant as a distant Compliment to 'Squire SOUTH. Jemmy is one he has a
particular Esteem for; and his Preferment is an Argument that a good
Understanding is renewed with the 'Squire. I believe you will soon see Young
Shute removed to a little farther Distance from the Estate. If I don't conclude
now, I never shall.


