AGIS: A TRAGEDY.

As it is acted at the THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE.

LONDON: Printed for A. MILLAR, in the Strand.

MDCCLVIII.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

PROLOGUE,
Written by --
Spoken by Mr. GARRICK.
IF in these days of luxury and case,
A tale from Sparta's rigid state can please;
If patriot plans a British breast can warm;
If Kings asserting liberty can charm;
If Virtue still a grateful aspect wear;
Check not at Agis' fall the generous tear.
He viewed his subjects with a parent's love;
With zeal to save a sinking people strove;
Strove their changed hearts with glory to inflame;
To mend their Morals; and restore their name:
Till Faction rose with Murder at her side;
Then mourned his country; persever'd; and died.
That country once for virtue was revered;
Admired by Greece; by haughty Asia feared.
Then Citizens and Soldiers were the same;
And soldiers heroes; for their wealth was fame.
Then for the Brave the Fair reserved her charms;
And scorned to clasp a toward in her arms.
The trumpet called; she seized the sword and shield;
Arrayed in haste her husband for the field;
And sighing whispered in a fond embrace,
"Remember! -- death is better than disgrace.
The widowed Mother showed her parting son
The race of glory which his sire had run.
"My son, thy fight alone I shall deplore.
"Return victorious! -- or return no more!"
While Beauty thus with patriot zeal combined,
And round the laureled head her myrtle twined;
Whilst all confessed the Virtuous were the Great;
Fame, Valor, Conquest, graced the Spartan state.
Her Power congenial with her Virtue grew,
And freedom's Banner over her Phalanx flew;
But soon as Virtue dropped her sickening head,
Fame, Valor, Conquest, Power and Freedom fled.
May this sad scene improve each Briton's heart!
Rouse him with warmth to act a Briton's part!
Prompt him with Sparta's noblest sons to vie;
To live in glory; and in freedom die!
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
AGIS, King of Sparta, Mr. MOSSOP. Spartans. LYSANDER, Mr. GARRICK. AMPHARES,
Mr. HAVARD.
Thracians. RHESUS, Mr. HOLLAND. EUXUS, Mr. DAVIES.

WOMEN.
AGESISTRATA, Mother of AGIS, Mrs. PRITCHARD. SANDANE, Queen to LEONIDAS the
exiled King, Mrs. YATES. EUANTHE, an Athenian Lady, Mrs. CIBBER.
Senators, Ephori, Messengers.

AGIS: A TRAGEDY.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A court and hall, common to the palaces of the kings of SPARTA. Enter SANDANE
attended. HASTEN, ORONTES, to the senate house,
And learn if rumor's voice has spoke the truth.
[Exit Attendant. The adverse fortune of an exiled king
Pursues my lord. Achaia's generous aid
Sustains his cause in vain. Why risk a battle,
When the continuance of defensive war
Secured success and victory in Sparta?
Would I had never left thy splendid court,
Delightful Sardis! to be Sparta's queen.
Enter AMPHARES. Welcome, AMPHARES! Have the armies met?
AMPHARES. They have. This morning, at the break of day,
The Spartan army charged Achaia's host.
This and no more is known. Suspense and fear
Possess the people; to the gates they run,
Then to their houses: the still whisper spreads
Through justling multitudes the dread alarm.

SANDANE. Alas! revenge and empire now depend
On the wild issue of unruly war.
What if the arms of AGIS should prevail?

AMPHARES. Although he should, the toils of fate surround him.
Dauntless and firm our brave associates stand,
And with impatience wait the destined hour
To rush on AGIS. This unlook'd-for battle
Is but a solemn prelude to the act,
Which bold conspiracy will soon perform.
This day shall terminate the reign of AGIS,
And make, O Queen! all power in Sparta thine.

SANDANE. I see that danger only whets the brave.
But yet, AMPHARES, if my lord is vanquished,
Will not the conquering army awe the city?

AMPHARES. AGIS shall be the surety of our cause,
And hostage for our safety, till we wrest
The sword from proud LYSANDER, if he conquers;
But that I fear not much. New to command
From idle Athens the mock hero comes,
Starts up a soldier, and a statesman too;
Each palm he claims: All honors must adorn
The chosen friend of visionary AGIS.

SANDANE. May Mars direct him so to guide the war,
As AGIS rules the state: And mutiny
Prove there as fatal as sedition here.

AMPHARES. This factious state must change its feeble form,
Waver no more beneath a double reign
Of limited, contending, useless kings.
Henceforth our monarch shall in Sparta rule,
As Jove alone in high Olympus reigns.

SANDANE. S^ reign the mighty monarchs of the East;
And such imperial power, I thought, belonged
To Sparta's king, else I had never been queen.
Young, and deceived, I left my father's court
For Lacedaemon's miserable scepter.
I did endeavor to extend its sway,
And to ambition roused my Spartan lord.
But the vain pupil of the Grecian schools,
Unprincely AGIS, marred the brave design.
Chief of the multitude, idol and slave
Of the base populace, he led the herd,
He urged their brutal fury on the king.

AMPHARES. And now their fury on himself recoils.
Like the unruly elephant, they turn,
And trample down the ranks in which they fought.

SANDANE. That is their Liberty.

AMPHARES. Let us employ,
And then suppress, such formidable license.
My magistracy now is near expired;
A king's resentment and a rival's hate
Have long hung over my devoted head:
Farewell to place, to dignity, and power,
Whilst haughty AGIS fills the Spartan throne.
I will not live obscure in Lacedaemon,
Nor roam through Grecian states a banished man.
If I must set, to rise and shine no more,
A fiery track shall mark my setting sun.
But AGIS comes.

SANDANE. And AGESISTRATA.
Farewell! Success attend thee, brave AMPHARES!
I will not stay. My soul disdains to hide
Its hatred or its scorn.
[Exit SANDANE.
AMPHARES. Yet they who mean
To gratify these passions, must conceal them.
This day decides my fate. So let it be,
Such brief conclusion have I ever loved.
Assist me, Hermes, God of stratagem,
With artful words, to sooth the mind of AGIS,
And turn him from the track my purpose holds.
Enter AGIS and AGESISTRATA.
AGESISTRATA. Alas, my son! that bold bad man I dread!

AGIS. He seems to wait us. At this hour, AMPHARES,
I think that thou of all men should have shunned me.

AMPHARES. My motive in attending here your presence
Merits a less injurious salutation.

AGIS. I know thy merits, and I will reward them.
Art thou not author of the woes of Sparta,
Prime mover and inflamer of sedition?
Have thou not bent the power of thy high office
To the subversion of the state thou serv'st?
At thee this day my indignation burns.
I am dishonored --

AMPHARES. What has dishonored thee?

AGIS. Thou and thy practices, they have compelled me
To leave the noblest station of a prince.
In time of war where should a king be found
But at his army's head? There AGIS stood,
When you and your presumptuous Ephori
Required my presence here. Ungrateful Spartans!
Had you allowed me but one other day,
Then had I fought this battle for my country,
And died or conquered with her bravest sons.

AGESISTRATA. Peril, my son! dwells not in camps alone:
In cities, palaces, and courts of justice,
With treachery and treason she inhabits.
Peril attended thus thou must encounter,
More hideous sure than in the ranks of war.

AMPHARES. I know my actions have incensed the king
But I imagined not that such suspicions
Found entertainment in your royal breasts?

AGIS. Have thou not joined the enemies of AGIS?
Thou who wast once his friend, inconstant man.

AMPHARES. I have opposed the counsel of a foe,
Whose arts deprived me of my prince's favor.

AGIS. Thou have opposed LYCURGUS and the laws,
Which raised the name of Sparta to the skies.
The Delphic God inspired the deep design:
For more than human was that power of thought
Which joined the public to the private good,
With such perfection, that each selfish passion
Flowed in the channel of the common welfare,
And, like one family of sons and sires,
And dearest brothers, a great people lived.
In peace they lived without or strife or scorn,
In war they fought to conquer, or to die.
Equal and free, our happy fathers knew
No interest but the interest of the state;
No gain but Sparta's glory; proud they bore
That palm aloft, and shared the high respect,
The admiration, which consenting Greece
Paid to the imperial virtue of their country.

AMPHARES. Revolving time that system overthrew,
And changed the manners and the laws of Sparta.

AGIS. The laws have been neglected, not annulled,
And corrupt rulers have corrupted manners.
Authority will soon revive the laws,
And great example yet restore the manners,
In spite of those who have oppressed their country,
Deprived the people of their ancient rights,
And while the nation sunk beneath their sway,
Still strove for power in a declining kingdom,
Still sought for wealth in an impoverished land.
Even at this hour rapacious they persist,
And, like some wretches in a stranded vessel,
Plunder and riot in the midst of ruin.

AMPHARES. Moved by the present perils of the state,
This signal hour I chose, unknown as yet
The fortune of the field, to change my conduct,
And make an offer of my aid to AGIS.

AGIS. If I should judge the future by the past,
Thou must forgive me, though I doubt thy faith.

AGESISTRATA. Yet hear him, AGIS: in an hour like this
He who assistance offers is a friend.

AGIS. This hour may yet deceive their country's foes.
I know the base foundation of that hope
Which makes my baffled enemies presume.
LYSANDER's army in its ranks contains
The best and bravest of Laconia's sons;
The faction wish and hope defeat to them,
That Sparta's generous youth may never return
To guard that freedom which has made them brave.

AMPHARES. The boldness of their hopes their deeds will prove
In the assembly, if Achaia conquer.

AGESISTRATA. AMPHARES, say, what is their utmost aim?

AMPHARES. The old dependants of the exiled king,
And all the venal members of the state,
Won by SANDANE's arts and foreign gold,
Aim to restore LEONIDAS, who comes
With hostile armies to enslave his country:
Therefore SANDANE's proffers I rejected,
Have warned the king, and would have served him too;
But since resentment and distrust prevent me,
Neutral I stand, and will not seek that welcome
Which his more artful enemies would give.

AGIS. Thou speak more boldly than becomes AMPHARES.
Add that to the offenses I forgive.
It is the sacred maxim of my reign,
That in a prince's consecrated breast
Revenge and anger should not long remain.
These passions in a king afflict the state,
By driving rash offenders to despair.
This day decides your character with me.
Now let your actions prove your words sincere.

AMPHARES. No other terms I ask, and sure I am
Never shall AMPHARES need again forgiveness.
[Exit AMPHARES. Manent AGIS and AGESISTRATA.
AGIS. Well has he judged the season of submission.
He will assist us if LYSANDER conquers.

AGESISTRATA. May Jove avert the evils which I fear!
I dread the ruin of the Spartan state,
And fear the downfall of our ancient house.
The blackest fury of the Stygian realm,
The most destructive, is infernal Discord.
Bathed in the blood of kings she walks this world,
And tumbles states and empires to the ground.

AGIS. Nations often perish by their princes crime;
But now if Sparta's ancient state must fall,
Gods and good men shall witness for its king,
That he with fate contended for his people,
And on the ruins of their virtue sell.

AGESISTRATA. Think not I mean to blame your high design,
Age has not changed the tenor of my mind,
Nor palled my admiration of true glory.
Sprung, like thy father, from Alcides' blood,
I feel the spirit of the Spartan line.
Only let me adjure thee to beware,
And walk with caution through surrounding perils.
Though thou despisest every form of danger,
Think what a helpless train attends on thee,
An aged mother, and an infant son.

AGIS. Divine Alcides will protect his race.

AGESISTRATA. I will invoke the God; in times like these
Prayers are the arms of our defenseless sex.
A spotless choir of matrons and of virgins,
Who over their country mourn, myself will lead
To the high temple of the son of Jove.
He yet may hear the voice of supplication,
And stretch his arm to save the Spartan state.
[Exit AGESISTRATA.
AGIS alone. Without, the enemy; within, the faction.
What should I think? I have a thousand thoughts
That rise and fall like waves upon the shore.
I need thee now, LYSANDER! O my friend!
I lean on thee, and thou perhaps art fallen.
Ye ever-living gods, who know my heart,
I trust in you, for righteous are my thoughts,
All bent on raising up long-prostrate Sparta.
With Sparta too, I would be proud to rise,
And gain such glory as my fathers gained,
When Persia's tyrant trembled at their arms.
If in this just ambition I should perish,
My name shall go to nations yet unborn.
But I must change my strain; EUANTHE comes.
Alas, LYSANDER, led by love and thee,
She left her Athens for this land of broils.
Enter EUANTHE.
EUANTHE. No tidings from the camp?

AGIS. None, fair EUANTHE.
If we had lost the field, the flying rout
Ere this had reached our gates.

EUANTHE. Oh! many a dame,
Matron and virgin, tremble at this hour;
But who has cause like mine? The most forlorn
And desolate of women is EUANTHE!
If --

AGIS. Small the chance of what EUANTHE fears:
In the long wars of still-contending Greece
Leaders of armies have but rarely fallen.

EUANTHE. One thing I know, and with prophetic tongue
I speak it, Prince! if Sparta triumph not,
Never shall your eyes again behold LYSANDER.
Disdain in him is fatal as despair.

AGIS. When he returns victorious from the field,
Then shall he hear who best has spoke his praise.
But I must leave you now: The senate waits me.
Hereafter we shall speak of this, and smile
Like mariners who on the peaceful shore
Sit, and with pleasure talk of tempests past.
[Exit AGIS.
EUANTHE alone. This steadfast ease is all assumed, I see;
He staggers at the imminent event.
How dreadful is this interval to me,
Who am bereft and destitute of all
Those aids that stay affliction; and must bear
The weight of woe that is heavier every hour.
The queen, and generous AGIS too, discharge
The dues of kindred with unfeigned love.
But our acquaintance is not old enough
To yield a ripened sympathy, whose taste
Alone can comfort such a mind as mine.
Yet I repent me not in this extreme,
That I forsook my country and my friends.
They would have forced me to a loathed bed,
And torn me from the noblest of mankind.
If he should fall! my love! my only love!
Shall I survive thee; and return to Athens,
Be humbled there before my haughty kindred,
And hear them blame the ashes of LYSANDER?
Forbid it, fearless love! forbid it, shame!
Forbid it, honor, and my nature's pride;
Death shall forbid it, for I dare to die.
Enter RHESUS.
EUANTHE. RHESUS, Great Gods! Oh say, how fares LYSANDER?

RHESUS. As well as glorious victory can make him.

EUANTHE. Forgive my rash despair, my thanks accept,
Ye gracious powers who guard his daring breast.
Where is he now?

RHESUS. With AGIS in the senate.

EUANTHE. Already here; blessed be the Gods of Greece!

RHESUS. Soon as the trumpet from pursuit recalled
Our conquering Spartans, in the field arrived
A weary messenger, by AGIS sent;
LYSANDER strait bespoke the royal band:
"With all the speed of men to Sparta haste,
"Chastise bold treason, and defend your king,"
He said; and called to me. With a few horse
I followed him: And when he sought the king,
By his command to you I brought these tidings.

EUANTHE. Most welcome RHESUS. But has Sparta lost
None of her noble youth?

RHESUS. No man of note
Fell in the field but one, whose loss you will mourn,
LYSANDER's friend, Athenian POLYDORUS.

EUANTHE. Alas! alas! my joy is mixed with woe.
Unhappy youth! on my ill-omen'd head
The blame of thy untimely death will fall.
Conducting me, thou came to distant Sparta.
Fatal the honors Sparta's king bestowed
Upon the generous guardian of EUANTHE.

RHESUS. Lady, the people of my native land,
The warlike Thracians, hold it vain to mourn
For men who fall in battle; such they deem
The favorites of MARS, our country's God.
Those they bewail who die by dire disease.
Of youth and vigor full. But most of all
Lament old men, who drink the bitter dregs
Of life and woe, and in decrepit age
(Extremity of dotage) wish to live.

EUANTHE. Who are those men who near the temple stand?
Uncouth to me their garb, and strange their arms.

RHESUS. They are Thracians, lady.

EUANTHE. What seek they here?

RHESUS. I will accost the herald,
And learn his business.

EUANTHE. To the palace, RHESUS,
I go the willing messenger of joy.
This victory will free the anxious Queen
From many fears. I pray thee do not tarry,
But come and tell me what yon herald bears,
And what affairs still occupy the senate.

RHESUS. Depend on the unwearied zeal of RHESUS.
[Exit RHESUS.
Manet EUANTHE. AGIS and Sparta, and the public cares,
Detain LYSANDER from my longing eyes.
I see the happy change of my condition,
And share the triumphs of the man I love,
But yet the slightest circumstance creates
New fears to me. Why lingers thus LYSANDER!
My mind is not at rest; the winds are hushed,
But still my bosom quivers from the storm.
[Exit EUANTHE.
End of the first Act.
ACT II. SCENE I.
EUANTHE. THEIR tedious council now is at an end,
And surely he will hasten to EUANTHE.
What means this clamor?
[Shout of the People behind the Scenes. Ha! he comes, he comes!
Loud acclamations and the voice of joy
Proclaim the hero.
Enter LYSANDER.
LYSANDER. O my life! my love!
To meet thee here is happiness complete.
The Gods have blessed me to my utmost wish,
And brought me full of glory to EUANTHE.

EUANTHE. Thanks to the Gods who have preserved LYSANDER.
Athenian Pallas sure has heard my prayers.

LYSANDER. And mine; for mutual is the lover's prayer.
Another deity I now invoke,
Whose rites the god of war has long delayed,
With peace well-pleased shall golden Hymen come,
And crown at last our long eventful love.

EUANTHE. Speak not of Hymen now: his torch for me
He shall not light, whilst cruel Discord waves
Her horrid brand, and whilst unburied lies
Thy friend and mine, the generous POLYDORUS.

LYSANDER. Though love and glory both my breast inspire,
And fortune smiles on both, yet sorrow finds
A place to sit in: but it is tempered sorrow;
For never Grecian hero greater died.

EUANTHE. He fell the victim of his love to thee;
He followed thee when thou forsook'st EUANTHE,
Left me the day I touched the Spartan shore,
Though royal AGIS begged thee to remain.

LYSANDER. Unjust EUANTHE, thus to blame LYSANDER
Who sought the field, the soldier of his love
As of his sacred country: fought to gain,
With liberty, a rank and place of honor,
Such as becomes the husband of EUANTHE;
That tender name, and names that wait upon it,
Awake emotions as implacable
To tyranny, as generous and great,
As ever self-renouncing hero owned.
When the chief aim is right, all passions else
Of noble kind impell the self-same way.
The lover and the husband rouse and fire
The Spartan and the man.
Of common clay, and in one common mould
Mankind are made; but the celestial fire
That gives them life and soul, is liberty.
And I, Prometheus like, to gain that fire
For Sparta's sons, would brave the bolt of Jove.

EUANTHE. To me you need not vaunt your daring mind.
Alas! LYSANDER! I am still afraid
Of perils lurking in this troubled state.
O leave me not again to grief and fear,
And to AMPHARIS.

LYSANDER. Leave thee to AMPHARES!

EUANTHE. Yes, in thy absence he did talk of love,
Boasted his wealth, his clients, and his power;
Mentioned the ruin of thy father's fortunes,
And spoke contemptuous of thy rash designs.

LYSANDER. Immortal gods! Did I not hate this man
Enough?
Enter a HELOT. Whence, HELOT?

HELOT. Lord, from Celimene.
(Delivers a Letter.)
LYSANDER. (reads) Let AGIS stand upon his guard to day,
This to LYSANDER from a faithful friend. --
Helot, return, and tell the noble dame
That the remembrance of her generous mind
Shall live for ever in my grateful breast.

EUANTHE. Who is this faithful friend?

LYSANDER. A Spartan dame,
A gentle one, though wedded to a foe
Of royal AGIS. In her virgin state
She was the constant and the loved companion
Of fair DEIDAMIA, AGIS' short-lived queen.
Through all our various strife, the generous dame
Preserves the friendships of her early days.
This scroll the king must see. Farewell, EUANTHE.

EUANTHE. Its threatening strain awakes my former fears.
Would you had been, like me, content with love,
And never left Illyssus' flowery banks!
A fairer garland there you might have won,
Than ever war bestowed, the immortal wreath
Of PALLAS, queen of arts as well as arms.
But you forsook the vale, and left the shade
To climb ambition's bare and rocky height,
To stand the storms and tempests of the world.

LYSANDER. Your words, like melancholy music, take
My listening ear, and cause delusive sadness;
For vain the malice of our baffled foes,
And impotent will prove their last endeavors;
Past are the storms and tempests of our fortune;
Let not EUANTHE heed the rack of clouds,
Nor dread the murmurs of the falling main.

EUANTHE. Elate with victory, you scorn your foes.
I wish that RHESUS would return again
Before you go to AGIS.

LYSANDER. Where is RHESUS?

EUANTHE. I saw some warriors clad in horrid arms
Near yonder temple stand. Strait RHESUS knew
The garb and arms of his own native Thrace,
And, wondering at the sight, went forth to learn
Who and from whence they were.

LYSANDER. That should be known.
In yonder temple sit the Ephori,
Those factious magistrates who love not AGIS.
If RHESUS come to you, detain him not;
Our resolutions may on him depend.

EUANTHE. LYSANDER, stay; you go again to AGIS,
Perhaps to plan new perils to thy life;
If so, by all that is sacred I conjure thee
To let me know your purpose. Speak with me
Before you execute what you resolve.
The image of the stern AMPHARES haunts me;
Need I entreat thee to defend me from him.

LYSANDER. No! by the Gods! O urge me not, EUANTHE!
Nor rouse those thoughts a lover cannot bear.
Defend thee from AMPHARES! O my fair!
When thou art wronged, LYSANDER lives no more!
But see the king.

EUANTHE. Let caution show your love.
LYSANDER goes off toward that side of the stage where AGIS appears.
Manet EUANTHE. If nature teaches me aright to read
The mind of man, this is a powerful spell
To charm the daring spirit of LYSANDER,
And make him think of me as well as Sparta.
[Exit EUANTHE. Enter AGIS.
LYSANDER. Regard, O king, the warnings of a friend
Instructed in the counsels of thy foes.
Behold the steadfast faith of CELIMENE.
[Gives the letter.
AGIS. I cannot think so basely of the people.
For them I have unplum'd the regal power,
And decked their freedom with the spoils of kings.
If they betray me; of all creatures, man
Is most ungrateful to his benefactor.
The generous courser and the faithful dog
With true affection love their gentle master;
Nay even the heavy ox, the stubborn mule,
Dullest of beasts, they know the hand that feeds them.

LYSANDER. Humanity lives in thy breast, O king!
And dictates confidence unlimited;
Virtue approves the generous extreme,
And magnanimity this error loves.
Let private men indulge the glorious fault,
And set their lives and fortunes on the faith
And gratitude of those they have obliged;
But let severer prudence guard the heart
Of him whose brows are circled with a crown.
Enter an OFFICER.
OFFICER. O King! the captain of Amycla's gate
Informs you that he has this hour descried
A band of men who halted near his post;
A thousand Thracians, they report themselves,
Hired by AMPHARES for SELEUCUS' service.

AGIS. A thousand Thracians!

OFFICER. On their march to Sardis.

LYSANDER. By whose permission do they march this way?

OFFICER. Before the troops arrived, a herald came
Who to the Ephori a message bore.

AGIS. Your diligence in duty I commend.
[Exit OFFICER.
LYSANDER. The veil's withdrawn, and treason stands revealed.
Never shall AMPHARES need again forgiveness.
With what a double tongue the traitor spoke!
All-seeing Gods! how little do we know
The greatness of those blessings you confer.
Had we not fought to day, had we not conquered,
AGIS and Sparta had been lost for ever.

AGIS. This victory came like the bolt of Jove,
And levelled their designs.

LYSANDER. Yet if they dare
The worst of crimes, their treason may succeed.
Your troops, your conquering troops, are not arrived;
The assembly meets; unguarded there you stand;
What keeps the traitors from your noble life?

AGIS. My life! LYSANDER. No, I fear not that.
The ancient annals of this land record,
That barbarous foes revere the race divine,
And turn in battle from a Spartan king.

LYSANDER. The multitude may still revere their lord
Who from the blood of great Alcides springs;
And yet some impious hand may strike the prince,
Although of virtue as of race divine.

AGIS. I Will change the guards, and place at every gate
Some men of trust.

LYSANDER. Mount your Thessalian steed,
And meet the troops that hasten to your aid.
With eager steps the royal band advance,
And wish for nothing but their king to lead them.
Then if the furies in their wrath provoke
Your foes to rise in arms, let arms decide.
Never were the good and bad winnow'd so well,
And severed from each other. Such the hosts,
And such will be their fate, as when the rage
Of earth-born giants dared the sons of heaven.

AGIS. Thou reason'st like an anxious friend, LYSANDER:
Thy fears are all for me, mine for my people.
Enter RHESUS. Hail, gallant RHESUS! know thou ought of those
Thy countrymen, who thus unlook'd-for come,
And in a doubtful hour perplex our councils.

RHESUS. The Thracians are a thousand men complete.
From snowy Hemus and the northern hills
Of wild Odrysus the fierce warriors come.
RHINALCES leads them, of illustrious birth;
But, stern, imperious, and grown old in arms,
He knows no umpire but the sword, no law
Except obedience to the prince he serves.

AGIS. Such often are those that quit a needy home
To serve as hirelings in a tyrant's host.

RHESUS. Next in command, my brother EUXUS stands,
A Youth to MARS devoted; for he loves
Danger itself, not danger's rich reward.

LYSANDER. Have thou yet seen him?

RHESUS. No.

LYSANDER. Has he yet heard
That thou art here in Sparta?

RHESUS. He believes
That I am still in Athens, From the herald
I kept my name and quality concealed;
For I suspected that these Thracian troops,
Though hired for Asia, were for Sparta meant.
If it prove so, I may be useful here:
My valiant brother bears a generous mind,
And, though of arms enamored, justice loves.

AGIS. Haste to your valiant brother, and explain,
With an impartial tongue, the state of Sparta.
Show him where justice, and where honor stand.
If these are facred, as thou say they are,
To gallant EUXUS he may prove a friend.

LYSANDER. Exert the strong persuasion of a brother;
And tell him, RHESUS, if he loves bright arms,
And that immortal glory valor gains,
No more to wield a mercenary sword,
But plant himself with thee in Sparta's soil,
Where AGIS will his noble nature cherish,
And rear his courage to such lofty deeds,
As ancient story tells of Sparta's chiefs.
[Exit RHESUS.
AGIS. I hope that RHESUS will divide the Thracians:
This favors well the biass of my mind,
Averse to leave the city on suspicion,
And drive the wavering faction to extremes.

LYSANDER. O generous prince! whom I admire and blame.
The greatest foe, the foe LYSANDER dreads
Is the unequalled gentleness of AGIS.
Review the story of the Grecian states,
And mark how freedom fell in every land.
The brave asserters of the public cause
Have ever been too mild in evil times;
Have, like indulgent parents, spared the rod,
And let the vices of their children live
To kill the virtues. Hence, let AGIS learn
The only lesson that his nature needs.

AGIS. Uncertain is the peril if I stay,
But certain is the evil if I fly.
I will remain; but to assure my safety,
You must, LYSANDER, to the troops return.

LYSANDER. And leave my prince alone amidst his foes! --
Revoke the hard command. If you're resolved
To brave the peril, then my place I claim
Next to your person; by your side I stand;
Perhaps some noble service I may render,
Receive the mortal wound aimed at my prince,
And with my life redeem the life of AGIS.

AGIS. Your great imagination's up in arms;
But hear me, and let calmer reason judge.
I am determined not to quit the city,
The guilt of civil war shall not be mine.
LYSANDER's presence here without the troops
Would but embolden and excite my foes,
Who may be tempted by this fair occasion,
This mighty vantage, to surprise us both.
Without delay, once more, LYSANDER, arm,
And ostentatiously pass through the gate.
This victory, and the approaching host,
Will hush the threatened storm.

LYSANDER. So may it prove.
But there is something in my heart rebels
Against this counsel! Oh! I cannot leave you --
Nor ought I now to stay. Let never man
Say in the morning that the day's his own:
Things past belong to memory alone;
Things future are the property of hope.
The narrow line, the isthmus of these seas,
The instant scarce divisible, is all
That mortals have to stand on. O my prince!
LYSANDER leaves you with a heavy heart.

AGIS. Farewell, thou Spartan of the ancient mould,
Dear as the brother of his blood to AGIS!
[They embrace and part. LYSANDER!

LYSANDER. Ha! may heaven your purpose change!

AGIS. My will is fixed. But though my judgment too
Confirms the secret counsel of my heart,
Yet I may be deceived; perhaps, my friend,
We part this moment never to meet again.

LYSANDER. Let us not part at all. It Is inspiration,
The guardian God, the Demon of the mind,
Thus often presses on the human breast.

AGIS. Mistake me not, I feel no new impression,
Nor if I did, should I by that be altered;
For such presages, be they sad or joyful,
I deem them but the meteors of the mind,
Bred by the inward elemental strife,
When great events perplex and shake the soul.
My thoughts regard the state. If I should fall,
To thee, LYSANDER, I commit my son,
The only pledge of my DEIDAMIA's love.
Train up the boy to walk in the same path
Which we have trod together, the straight path
Of virtue and true glory. If he proves
Of noble nature, and I hope no less,
He will not shun the lofty path of honor,
Though fate should mark it with his father's blood.

LYSANDER. Hear this, immortal Gods! who rule the world,
And guard a prince the image of yourselves!
O never, never may his royal race
LYSANDER's aid require.
[Exit LYSANDER.
AGIS alone. Affection choaks his words,
His generous heart bursts at this solemn parting.
In times like these of a declining state,
Baseness infects the general race of men;
But yet these trying times rear up a few
More excellent, refined, and conscious spirits,
More principled, and fit for all events,
Than any in the good, but equal, mass
Of a far better age. Such is LYSANDER.
The hour draws near.
Enter SENATORS.
SENATORS. Assembled Sparta waits.

AGIS. I come, my friends! I will address the people,
Proclaim aloud mine actions which upbraid,
And soon shall silence, my despiteful foes.
My heart shall speak. This scepter of my fathers,
By long descent hereditary mine,
I would disdain to hold, did I not hope,
That by its sway I might recall those days
When Lacedaemon was the pride of Greece,
The gaze and terror of the wondering world:
For there, as in a chosen temple, dwelt
Valor and virtue, whilst attending same
And glory on the land of heroes shone.

First SENATOR. O Gods above! How happy were our fires,
In those bright days of ancient glory born.

AGIS. Those days shall yet return, Olympian Jove!
Or low in dust shall Spartan AGIS lie.
[Sound of musical instruments.
First SENATOR. What means this music?

AGIS. To the Gods of Greece
And Sparta's guardian deities it sounds.
Let us begone, nor stop the holy train.
[Exeunt. Enter a Procession. AGESISTRATA, EUANTHE, Priests of JUPITER and
HERCULES. CHORUS of Matrons and Virgins.
Woes approach, till now unknown;
Discord shakes the Spartan throne.
Heaven avert the ills we fear!
Jove, from high Olympus, hear!
Priests of JUPITER.
This day our foes embattled came,
And vowed to end the Spartan name:
Embattled near our gates they fought;
But Jove for us deliverance wrought.
He smote Achaia's host with fear,
He thundered in their trembling rear;
Jove's lightning flamed from Sparta's spear.
CHORUS of Matrons and Virgins.
Ever may his mighty arm
Save the Spartan state from harm!
Never may proud Invader boast
Glory from our glory lost.
Light, O Jove, that sacred fire
Which did Sparta's sons inspire,
When the prince and people strove,
Burning with their country's love.
Xerxes, lord of great alarms,
Xerxes roused the world to arms.
Priests of JUPITER.
The earth was troubled at his host,
The springs were dried, the rivers lost;
But Spartan valor checked his pride,
A slender band his host defied:
Thermopylae (immortal name!)
Beheld the Persian tyrant's shame.
CHORUS of all.
There the brave three hundred died,
Faithful, by their prince's side:
There they conquered, though they died.
Priests of HERCULES.
On earth below, in Heaven above,
Revered, victorious, son of Jove!
Hear, Alcides, hear our prayer,
Thy godlike offspring claims thy care.
CHORUS of all.
Bend thy bow, Tyrinthius, bend,
Lightly on the earth descend.
Fix an arrow on the string,
Stand beside the Spartan king,
AGIS of thy race divine,
Tried in labors like to thine.
Undaunted, like thee, with monsters he strives;
The fiercest of Hydras in faction revives.
If he falls a sacrifice,
Never more shall Sparta rise!
[Exeunt.] As the procession goes off. Enter AMPHARES. Thus may my pious foes
for ever strive.
Be theirs the airy aid of fabled Jove.
In nearer and more certain force I trust:
Of human race, I fight with mortal arms.
Yet praised be Fortune, goddess of my vows,
It Is she whose happy hand leads forth these dames;
Never to the palace shall their steps return.
The net I Have spread now covers all my foes,
Except LYSANDER. O had he been here!
Then I had stood, like mighty Atlas, firm;
Fate but reserves him to another day.
The time is almost come; my Thracians now
Have reached their posts; and many a daring eye
Looks for the signal. Here it is -- my sword.
When I appear thus armed, the furies rise;
This is the comet, the fierce blazing star,
On which commotion, change, and death attend.
[Exit AMPHARES.
End of the second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter EUANTHE. ATHENIAN Pallas! O my native Gods!
Protect your suppliant in a foreign land,
Where shall I fly? O AGIS! O LYSANDER!
Enter SANDANE. O Queen! a stranger thy protection claims,
Although thy lord, thy friends, are foes to mine,
Yet thou will sympathize with thy own sex,
And save me from the violence I fear.

SANDANE. Where is thy lover to defend thee now?
Where is the conquering valor of LYSANDER?
And virtuous AGIS? the reforming king
Whom thou wast wont to praise. Let me advise thee,
On brave AMPHARES try thy boasted charms;
So young, so fair a captive may subdue
The victor's heart.

EUANTHE. Are these a woman's words?

SANDANE. They are, and suited to a light adventurer,
Who left her parents, and her native land,
To seek a lover. Sure her roving mind,
True to its passion, may the object change,
And, pleased, accept AMPHARES for LYSANDER.

EUANTHE. Thou speak thy thoughts, and judge of EUANTHE
By the deceitful standard of thy heart.
Too soon thou have betrayed thy secret soul.
I am not yet a captive; I may live
To show thee, Queen, that pity thou deny'st me.
LYSANDER comes to rescue, or revenge.

SANDANE. LYSANDER soon shall be as AGIS is.
Thy wretched arrogance my soul contemns.
An enemy I have, the Spartan Queen,
Whose bitter tongue has often wronged my fame;
Her will I seek, and triumph over the ruin
Of her, and of her peace.

EUANTHE. Had thou ever felt
Sincere affection, thou would not insult me;
And had thou ever known a mother's pains,
Thou could not bear to grieve a mother's heart.

SANDANE. Minion, for this expect! thou pageant! thou!
That dare to brave, exasperate a Queen.
Thou shall repent thy pride, and kneel in vain.
[Exit SANDANE.
EUANTHE. The anger that supported me is gone.
I feel my weakness, and her threatenings fear. --
Enter LYSANDER in a HELOT' s garb. HELOT, if pity, or if gold --

LYSANDER. EUANTHE!

EUANTHE. O Heaven and earth! LYSANDER!

LYSANDER. Yes, my love!
Thou see LYSANDER, miserable man!
Does AGIS live?

EUANTHE. Amidst the clash of arms,
And cries of fighting men, I heard them shout
The name of AGIS. By-and-by a Spartan,
Flying and wounded, as he passed called out,
"The king is safe; the king has gained the temple."

LYSANDER. Then all is safe; for Sparta lives in him.

EUANTHE. But the good Queen!

LYSANDER. Her sex, her age protects her.

EUANTHE. Heaven grant they may; an impious band in arms
Pursued the holy train. Fear gave me speed,
For I outstript them all. But now, LYSANDER,
Betrayed, encompassed, now what shall we do?

LYSANDER. Were thou but safely placed, LYSANDER knows
What he should do. I must not tarry here.
There is a temple in this spacious city,
For sanctity above all others famed,
To Juno sacred, the avenging Queen!
Thither a trusty slave of AGIS' house
Will guide thy steps; by my command he waits
Without the palace.

EUANTHE. Whither do thou go?

LYSANDER. In this inglorious garb disguised, I wait
Till night and darkness come; then I attempt
The wall wherever I find it slightly guarded.
What mortal arm shall then oppose my way,
Urged as I am? Alas, my loved EUANTHE!
From my compliance with thy fond request
Springs the worst evil of this dreadful hour.
I have betrayed the confidence of AGIS:
But I Will repair my fault.

EUANTHE. What do thou mean?

LYSANDER. AGIS commanded me to leave the city,
And thinks, would to the Gods he thought aright!
That his LYSANDER heads the Spartan troops,
In whom his only hope of safety lies.
But I, EUANTHE! partial to thy will,
Sought thee in vain. In that unhappy time
They seized the gates, and shut me up in Sparta.
Fate punishes with too severe a doom
The human weakness of indulgent love.
AGIS! I come! -- For the deep voices now
Of duty, friendship, gratitude, and glory,
Sound through my breast, and from my beating heart
Their echo rings. Farewell! my love, farewell!

EUANTHE. Not yet, LYSANDER! AGIS is oppressed,
And Sparta too. Does duty, or does honor,
Require LYSANDER, like an eastern slave,
To fall attendant on the royal pile?
What can you do? The army will betray you:
So with the few, the faithful few that love you,
You Will do some desperate action, and be slain.
If you despise your life, yet think of me,
The prey of cursed AMPHARES.

LYSANDER. Infernal Gods!
Let me not think of that. Retire, EUANTHE,
And in the hallowed temple rest secure.
This night I Will force ill guarded Sparta's gates,
And save my prince, my country, and EUANTHE.

EUANTHE. Thy prince, thy country are already lost.
O listen, and preserve thyself and me:
The ship that bore me to the Spartan shore
Rides still at anchor: leave this wretched land.
Wherever thou go I will attend thy steps;
Thy gods shall be my gods; thy people, mine.

LYSANDER. Alas! EUANTHE does not see the shame,
The ruin of that counsel love inspires.
The eternal gods repose this hour in me
No common trust: Upon my deeds depend
The fate of AGIS, and the fate of Sparta.
My soldiers too, my brave, my faithful soldiers,
The meanest warrior of the royal band
Freely devotes his life to godlike AGIS.
And shall their leader, shall the friend of AGIS;
Forsake his prince? I will forget thy words;
Repeat them not.

EUANTHE. Is this LYSANDER's love?
Must I not speak? Is my reward reproach?
For you I left my friends and native land,
Defied all danger, and all censure scorned;
Now in my sore distress I call on thee
For whom I suffer, to protect my honor,
And in my sore distress do thou upbraid me?
If ever maid, like credulous EUANTHE,
Bursts all the bonds of nature for one man,
Let her beware that he be not a Spartan!
O wretched maid! O Athens lost in vain!
[Ready to faint.
LYSANDER. All-ruling powers! why am I thus distressed?
Why come calamities so thick upon me?
EUANTHE, hear me; you shall be obeyed.
I Will bear thee hence, and go with thee to Athens,
Restore thee to thy country and thy friends,
Of whom thou do complain I have bereft thee.
LYSANDER will acquit himself to thee,
And to mankind --

EUANTHE. Delude me not. Alas!
Thy tongue speaks comfort; but thy voice, thy looks,
Wild and unsettled, drive me to despair:
For thou, methinks, art desperate, LYSANDER.
Those lips that quiver, and those eyes that roll
Like dragon's eyes, those are not signs of love!
Thou say that thou will bear me back to Athens;
Will that acquit thee, if thou leave me there?
Is that thy purpose?

LYSANDER. Yes. I Will leave the world,
And death shall wipe dishonor from my name;
AGIS and Sparta shall forgive me then,
And every debt be paid.

EUANTHE. LYSANDER, no.
Love's victims are not of your sterner sex.
It is the destiny of womankind
Constant to live, and desolate to die.
To strong necessity EUANTHE yields.
If I should tear you from the side of AGIS,
I see my fate: you never would love me more:
Though you should live, yet you would die to me.
But I will rather stay and perish here
Than live without thee. Go, and fight for AGIS;
But in the hour of danger think of me!
Calm in the rear direct the course of battle,
The dreadful van let other warriors lead,
In whom nor AGIS nor EUANTHE lives.

LYSANDER. These words become my idolized EUANTHE!
And honor now approves the voice of love.
O thou first object of my young desires,
And through each period of my ripening years
Still more maturely and intensely loved,
Hear and believe my words. -- Beware -- Beware.
Enter AMPHARES. [To his people.] It Is she, by Venus! halt. Fear not, my fair,
Nor meditate escape from your AMPHARES.

EUANTHE. My AMPHARES!

AMPHARES. Thine, and thine alone!
Thou lowering slave, begone! Haste! urge me not
To stain my sword with thy ignoble blood.
[Exit LYSANDER.
EUANTHE. Is this thy love? Imperious, and in arms,
Recent from blood and treason, do thou come
To take by force and violence my heart?

AMPHARES. The love of thee, more powerful than ambition,
Inslam'd me to attempt the Spartan throne.
Thy beauty is the torch that lights the war:
For thee I conquer -- Smile not thus in scorn,
Deign to accept my hand and Sparta's crown.

EUANTHE. Do thou bestow the diadem of Sparta?
Where is thy lawful prince?

AMPHARES. LEONIDAS?

EUANTHE. AGIS.

AMPHARES. That AGIS is no more a king;
A suppliant, surrounded by my troops,
In Juno's temple, with the priests he dwells.
LEONIDAS, by me restored to power,
Will gladly share with me divided empire.
Or, if I please to reign alone, I may.
Through dark conspiracy and open strife,
For thee I strove; thou will reward my love.
Beauty, like thine, pertains not to the vanquished,
But still triumphant reigns the victors' queen.

EUANTHE. Think thou there is no truth in human breasts,
No faithful loyalty, no constant love?
Soon shall thou learn thine error. I begin
To teach thee first. Thee and thy love I scorn!
And may the gods reward thy base ambition
As I reward thy love.

AMPHARES. O womankind!
How well your passions teach us to be just!
You love LYSANDER still; a little time
Will from your mind erase the memory
Of that vainglorious, lost, and ruined man,
Who was my rival.

EUANTHE. Was! whatever he was
He is, and more. Thou and thy crimes contribute
To make him more illustrious, more beloved,
Thou giv'st him scope and vantage to his virtue.
Speak thou of crowns whilst royal AGIS reigns?
Of power in Sparta whilst LYSANDER lives?
The short dominion of this day is thine,
But vengeance and LYSANDER come tomorrow.

AMPHARES. Thou do instruct me. If my time is short
We should not part. I Will see thee safely placed
Where I command.

EUANTHE. I will not go with thee.

AMPHARES. Yield to necessity; for on my call
Compulsion waits. No other hand than mine
Should touch EUANTHE.
[Seizes her hand.]
EUANTHE. Help, Spartans! help!
If any hear me who regard LYSANDER.
Enter LYSANDER with a dagger, and runs at AMPHARES, who retires.
AMPHARES. Assist me, friends. Surround him -- It Is LYSANDER.
Take him alive.
[To his people who enter.]
LYSANDER. No. That they cannot, traitor!
[Snatches a sword from one of the soldiers. Now I am better armed.

AMPHARES. Kill him, EUXUS,
Unless he yield his sword.

LYSANDER. Come, brave AMPHARES!
Come to the front, and there direct my fate.

AMPHARES. Kill him!

EUANTHE. That would dishonor me for ever.
Advance on all sides, and close in upon him.

LYSANDER. Strangers, give way, and let the Spartan chiefs
Fight their own quarrels. I will give you all
The wealth of Sparta.

AMPHARES. Ha! he grows upon them!
Throw down year weapons, or I Will pierce her heart!
[Points his sword to EUANTHE'S breast.
EUXUS. Renowned LYSANDER! give thy sword to EUXUS.

EUANTHE. Defend thy noble life! Regard not mine.
[AMPHARES lifts his arm.
LYSANDER. Hold, hold.

AMPHARES. Thou know me. -- Choose.

LYSANDER. I cannot bear to see EUANTHE die!
[Throws down his sword. O AGIS! O my prince!

AMPHARES. Victorious chief,
Statesman and soldier, learned Athens' boast,
Where are thy glories now?

LYSANDER. The strife of tongues
I shun, as thou did shun the strife of arms.

AMPHARES. Yet let thy haughtiness grant one request.
Tell me what brought the great LYSANDER hither?
Some stratagem profound; which none but he
Could have contrived to hasten his destruction,
And add disgrace and ridicule to ruin.

LYSANDER. Had thou not fled, thou coward, from my sword,
And shrieked for help, this arm, this single arm,
Had baffled all the craft of false AMPHARES.

AMPHARES. This pride becomes thee, and thy lost condition.

LYSANDER. In this condition it becomes me best
To brave AMPHARES. Had he been a captive
I should have pitied him.

AMPHARES. Plead'st thou for pity?

LYSANDER. For none that thou can give. Hear me, then judge,
If what I speak is meant to win thy favor.
I should have pitied thee by fate subdued:
Oppressed with crimes, thy spirit would have shrunk
Under calamity, and guilt have marred
The noble vigor and the port of manhood.
Amidst thy triumph, does it not confound thee,
To think thou ow'st it to excess of baseness?
Thou have prevailed, because the generous AGIS
Would not believe there could be such a traitor.

AMPHARES. Often have I heard, and often seen thy folly,
But now to rail is madness. With one word
I could impose on thee eternal silence.

LYSANDER. And would -- I know thee -- if thou thought it wise.
Even then, as now, I should contemn thy power:
But know, I fear thee not. The king is safe,
And his victorious troops at break of day
Will thunder in thine ears: thou and thy band
Will ill sustain the shock of such an host.
My life is in thy hands, but yet beware,
Thy fate depends on mine. In Lacedaemon
A prince like AGIS soon will find LYSANDERS.

AMPHARES. Uncertain thy predictions of the future:
Small is thy prescience, witness thy condition.
EUXUS, conduct him to you corner tower.

EUANTHE. LYSANDER!

LYSANDER. Oh! I have withdrawn mine eyes
From thee, and to contention turned my heart.

EUANTHE. Yet look on me before we part for ever.

LYSANDER. At looks or words of tenderness, he will smile,
And over the sorrows of our love rejoice:
Forgive me still, I must not, cannot speak.

EUANTHE. But I will speak, and earth and heaven shall hear me.
AMPHARES too shall hear; for it will gaul him,
To hear EUANTHE now avow her love
And faith to her LYSANDER. Powerful words,
Emblems and figures of firm constancy,
Such as fond lovers lavishly employ
To sooth the pangs of parting and of absence.
Such music vows accord not with our state,
Our dreadful state: yet do not grieve thy heart,
Thy noble heart, too full of other sorrows,
With thoughts of what may happen to EUANTHE.
Nothing shall happen to debase EUANTHE.
The bondage and the shame that women suffer,
Who live the slave of those who slew their lords,
I never shall know, I never will endure.
If cruel destiny decrees thy fall,
Unspotted to the shades I Will follow thee,
For whom alone on earth I Would wish to live.

LYSANDER. Lead on. Farewell, EUANTHE.

EUANTHE. Gods above!

AMPHARES. Conduct her to the tower where late you lodged
The captive queen.

EUANTHE. Alas! no guarded tower,
Or vaulted dungeon, ever yet contained
Two more unhappy, or more helpless captives!
[Exeunt guarded.
AMPHARES. LYSANDER's fierce demeanor and his threats,
Proud as he is, spring not from pride alone;
I must stretch forth my arms to sheltered AGIS.
If I accomplish not this night his ruin,
Tomorrow's rising sun may see my fall.
Cursed be the temples! cursed the priests of Sparta!
Now I am like a man who has adventured
To cross the flats forsaken by the main,
And looking back sees not the shore he left;
Through deeps and shallows, rocks, and quaking sands
On he must go. To stop is sure perdition.
Enter SANDANE. Hail to the queen of Sparta!

SANDANE. Yes, AMPHARES!
Now fortune seems to smile upon SANDANE.
I saw the sullen captive led along,
His gloomy eye balls fixed upon the earth.

AMPHARES. This night, O queen! must see the bold conclusion
Of a design, thus far so bravely borne.
On hollow and deceitful ground we tread,
Whilst AGIS lives.

SANDANE. Thou speakst my very thoughts.
Seasons there are, AMPHARES, which suspend
All sanctimonious reverence and respect.

AMPHARES. Temples, and priests, and altars shall not save him,
If fate should drive us to the last extreme.
Meanwhile, I will employ more gentle means
To gain our ends: For sacrilege would rouse
The zealous multitude to rage and arms.
The temple is begirt with Thracian bands,
Who all access forbid; and AGIS knows not
What has befallen LYSANDER. I will send
A subtle Spartan in LYSANDER's name,
Who may by specious arguments persuade him
To quit the sanctuary; and then, O queen!
With all solemnity of pomp and form,
The assembled Ephori shall pass his doom,
And in the same decree include LYSANDER.

SANDANE. Think thou the Ephori will give the sanction
Of their authority to AGIS' death?

AMPHARES. They will. At midnight the stern judges meet
In Terror's temple; they have charged a herald
With orders to the troops not to advance
On pain of treason. The astonished people
Will crouch and tremble at that awful power,
Which draws the sword of justice on a king.
Then shall your lord's authority revive;
And like the sun, when bursting from a cloud,
With greater power and brighter splendour shine.
[Exeunt.
End of the third Act.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
LYSANDER as a Prisoner, the Thracian Guards at a distance. LYSANDER musing,
advances and speaks. HAS virtue no prerogative on earth?
And can the Gods permit the fall of AGIS?
They can. It Is man's own arrogance arrays him
In gorgeous titles of excelling nature,
Care of the Gods, and center of creation.
I fear, I fear man's life is but a dream;
His soul a subtle essence of the blood,
A rainbow beauty, made to shine a space,
Then melt and vanish into air.
Ye mighty minds of sages and of heroes!
Epaminondas, Plato, great Lycurgus!
Who once with such transcendent glory shone,
Brighter than all the stars that deck the heavens,
Is your celestial fire for ever quenched,
And naught but ashes left, the sport of chance,
Which veering winds still blow about the world?
I will not think so! Yet, alas! the while
I see and feel presages that alarm.
If they prove true. If man is like the leaf,
Which falling from the tree revives no more,
I shall be shortly dust. That will not hear
EUANTHE weep, nor see the shame of Sparta!
Now I Am a living man, my mind is free,
And, whilst I live and breathe, by heaven I Will act
As if I were immortal.
Enter RHESUS and EUXUS.
RHESUS. See where he stands! behold him! -- O my brother!
The bravest and the best of human kind. --
Oppressed with grief and shame, and fatal love,
Indignant virtue but augments his pain.
Will not my EUXUS give his aid to heave
This noble vessel from the rock it beats on?
[Goes up to LYSANDER. My lord! my leader! Oh!

LYSANDER. My faithful RHESUS!
Come thou to share the ruin the LYSANDER
Has brought upon himself, his prince, his country?

RHESUS. I come more eager and more proud to share
Thy present fortune, than thy former glory.
Alas, my lord! 'twou'd make a stranger weep,
To see the chief, whom conquest crowned to day,
A captive.

LYSANDER. RHESUS, thou have named the least
Of my calamities. I could endure,
With Spartan fortitude, my own disasters;
Bear to be hurled from meridian glory,
And, like a falling star, be seen no more.
But oh! the king! -- and desolate EUANTHE! --

RHESUS. Do not despair.

LYSANDER. Thou art my only hope.
This day thy generous brother saved my life;
At his request I yielded up my sword,
Eise had LYSANDER like a soldier fallen.
Thou art my friend in noble perils proved.
My fate, the fate of Sparta, and of AGIS,
Is in the hands of EUXUS --

RHESUS. Ah! my brother!

EUXUS. O chief of Sparta! EUXUS is distressed
On every side. Thy virtue, thy misfortunes
Have touched my heart: but here in trust I stand.
Would I had never seen the walls of Sparta!

LYSANDER. The Gods, the guardian Gods of Lacedaemon,
Have brought you hither to preserve a people,
And save from traitors' hands the best of kings.
Although at first you rashly drew the sword
In blind obedience to a leader's will,
The gallant EUXUS will not sure persist
In error known, in manifest injustice.
Thy trade is war, brave soldier; this is not
An office for thy sword.

EUXUS. True are thy words.
I was indeed deceived, and came not here
To mix in Sparta's strife; but honor now --

RHESUS. I will not hear thee plead so bad a cause.
Is there a bond in nature like the tie
Which binds the hearts of brothers? And will EUXUS,
From vain ideas of fidelity
To that detested traitor, false AMPHARES,
His brother murder?

EUXUS. No.

RHESUS. Then let thy arms
Defend LYSANDER. By our country's Gods
I swear, and by our warlike father's soul,
Whose well-beloved son thou ever were,
That with the Spartan chief thy brother dies.

LYSANDER. Might you not favor the escape of AGIS?
The guards are Thracians.

EUXUS. I might favor thine.
My power extends not to the guards of AGIS.

RHESUS. And will thou not?

EUXUS. Command thyself, my brother.

RHESUS. How can thou hesitate?

EUXUS. I must beware,
Inferior in command to bold RHINALCES,
And ever viewed by him with jealous eyes.
Whilst I deliberate no time is lost.
The light of day suits not with your designs;
Before the night comes on, I will determine.

LYSANDER, It Is almost night, the sun has left the heavens,
And doubtful twilight ushers in the gloom.
Perhaps the enemies of AGIS wait
The darkness of the night to cover deeds
They dare not act by day. This night I dread --

RHESUS. The Ephori have sent a herald forth,
Charged with some solemn menace, and command
To stop the army's march.

LYSANDER. If they obey,
The fane of Juno guards the king no more!
Eternal Gods! how wretched is LYSANDER!
From me that herald should have heard his answer.
Cannot my RHESUS find one gallant Spartan
To bear my orders to the royal band
To storm the city?

RHESUS. I myself will bear
These orders to the camp.

LYSANDER. Another task,
More difficult and dangerous, is thine.
Assume the arms and vesture of thy country,
And through the Thracians win thy way to AGIS.
RHESUS, the generous spirit of that prince
Is of a nature that excludes all fear,
Consideration, and respect of Self:
On earth he acts as if he were a God,
Immortal, and incapable of harm.
Think how the artful falsehood of AMPHARES
May operate on such a royal mind.
[Enter a Thracian.
THRACIAN. The Spartan lord draws near.

EUXUS. AMPHARES comes.
Retire, my lord, whilst I advance to meet him:
Our intercourse might lead him to suspicion.

LYSANDER. Nor vigilance nor care I recommend
To thee, my RHESUS! But let caution rule
Thy forward zeal.

RHESUS. It shall, my noble lord:
My heart beats high with hope to see thee rise
Once more, like Mars, in arms.

LYSANDER. Eternal Gods!
In Thracian breasts the Spartan virtue lives.
[LYSANDER enters into the tower. [Exit RHESUS.
Manet EUXUS. Enter AMPHARES. How does the haughty captive brook confinement?

EUXUS. Full of inquietude he seems, and sadness.
Now in some pensive posture sits awhile,
Then smites his breast, and, starting from his seat,
Walks to and fro with a disordered pace.

AMPHARES. Admit no Spartan of whatever sex,
Or whatsoever affinity they claim.

EUXUS. That strict command has been already given.

AMPHARES. It Is needful, EUXUS; for his furious mind,
In this extreme, will snatch at slight occasions
To make incredible and wild attempts.
Renew the charge; then go and search LYSANDER
For secret weapons. On his breast he wears
A curious gorget, rich with precious stones,
And a small portrait of surpassing beauty,
The image of the fair Athenian maid,
Drawn by an artist who has vied with nature
In sweet expression of her matchless charms:
That I must have.

EUXUS. You shall without delay.
[Exit EUXUS.
Monet AMPHARES. Let other men deprive themselves of pleasure,
And toil for bare ambition; I Will provide
A more luxurious banquet to my taste.
What though as yet EUANTHE loves me not,
It is the nature of her sex to change.
With wondrous ease the female kind submit
To destiny; and soon are reconciled
To persons and conditions once abhorred.
Like birds new caught, who flutter for a time,
And struggle with captivity in vain;
But by-and by they rest; they smooth their plumes,
And to new masters sing their former notes.
This facile temper of the beauteous sex
Great Agamemnon, brave Pelides, proved:
They sacked the cities, and they slew the sires,
The brothers, and the lovers of the fair,
Who weep'd awhile, then wiped their watery eyes,
And lost their sorrows in the hero's arms.
Enter SANDANE. The herald is returned. The royal band,
Inflamed with rage and scorn, the mandate tore;
And to the city bend their rapid march.

AMPHARES. Let them advance. They hasten to their fate.
A secret stratagem I have devised
To check these warriors in their bold career.

SANDANE. The Ephori in resolution faint --

AMPHARES. Their courage I Will restore; for AGIS yields
To the fallacious counselor I sent.
DEMOCHARES, in sacerdotal robes,
As if disguised to elude the Thracian guards,
Past in by my permission, and conjured
AGIS to quit the fane's uncertain shelter,
And seek the sure protection of the camp:
Himself he offered as his faithful guide.
This in LYSANDER's name. AGIS at first,
Irresolute and doubtful, balanced much:
At last this thought sprung up, and turned the scale:
That his escape would force us to submission,
And end the strife without the shock of arms.
DEMOCHARES at midnight is appointed
To come again; and goes with an addition
That will give certain credence to his words;
The gorget of LYSANDER.

SANDANE. Now, AMPHARES,
I see the snares of death are wrapped around him;
Our hated foe stands on the verge of fate:
He who despised SANDANE, and permitted,
With most insulting courtesy, my stay;
I would not have remained one day in Sparta,
But for the hope I had to work his ruin.
He is the root, with him the branches fall.

AMPHARES. Although his son is safe in Orchomenos,
Yet there in hopeless exile he must live.
But AGESISTRATA --

SANDANE. Shall not survive
To travel suppliant through the states of Greece,
And show her hoary hairs with ashes strewn,
To move compassion in the giddy Greeks.
She Is old, and fit to die.
Enter a Spartan messenger. The Thracian troops
Who guard the temple, faithful to their charge,
Have seized a spy; who, clothed and armed like them,
Attempted to pass through their ranks to AGIS.
RHINALCES for a while delayed the doom
That martial law decrees, till you yourself
Discourse and judge the captive.

AMPHARES. I approve
The vigilance and conduct of RHINALCES.
[Exit Messenger.
SANDANE. Still flows the tide of fortune; I Will dispatch
ORONTES to my lord. Joyful he comes
To reassume his scepter and his throne.
Farewell, restraint, and laws that bind a prince.
The people's majesty, the senate's power,
Shall shrink beneath their awful monarch's sword.
Fear is the only principle of rule,
Which man, like other animals, obeys.
[Exit SANDANE.
Manet AMPHARES. Why tarries EUXUS now?
Enter EUXUS. I must applaud
Thy countrymen for discipline and care,
As well as valor; they have seized a spy,
Who' mixed with them, disguised in Thracian arms.

EUXUS. In Thracian arms!

AMPHARES. Yes, to pass to AGIS.
Some bold adventurer of the royal band,
Whose life -- Why art thou troubled? Has LYSANDER
Escaped the guards?

EUXUS. No. I am pale with anger,
At the reproachful terms, the bitter taunts,
Which I have suffered from incensed LYSANDER,
In execution of thy late commands.
[Gives the gorget.
AMPHARES. Is that the cause?
He soon shall be no object of thy wrath.
[Exit. AMPHARES.
Manet EUXUS. My brother seized! I hesitate no more.
The voice of nature in my breast exclaims
Against the rigor of those guilty laws,
Which bind a soldier blindly to obey.
Son of my mother! Brother of my blood!
I fly to save thee. -- Now I Am thine, LYSANDER.
[Goes to the gate of the tower. Chief of Sparta!
Enter LYSANDER. Is EUXUS yet resolved?

EUXUS. That thou shall see, thy enemies are mine.
RHESUS is taken.

LYSANDER. My contagious fate
Infects my friends! my brave, my generous RHESUS!

EUXUS. Friend of my brother! first I set thee free.
An officer of mine commands that gate
At which the Thracians entered; haste thee thither,
Arrayed like one of those whom I will send
To guide thy steps.

LYSANDER. Ye guardian Gods of Greece!
Whose ways mysterious fondly I arraigned,
Forgive my rashness! Prosper now my sword --
Where are my arms?
[Whilst LYSANDER speaks, EUXUS beckons one of his soldiers.
EUXUS. Here enter, and obey
Without reply.
[Exeunt LYSANDER and the Thracian to the tower. The soldiers hearts are mine.
Their various toils and perils I have shared,
And more than shared, the first in hard extremes,
When signal danger claims a leader's sword.
No spoil, no treasure, have I ever reserved;
The wealth I covet is the soldier's love.
My bold Odrysians are a faithful band;
In this distress I Will throw myself on them,
They will support me.
Enter a Spartan messenger.
MESSENGER. Leader of Thracian bands!
AMPHARES and the magistrates of Sparta,
Met in the senate house, expect thy presence.

EUXUS. I will attend them.
[Exit messenger. Surely they have learned,
That I am brother to ill-fated RHESUS.
Enter LYSANDER in Thracian dress and arms.
LYSANDER. Once more at liberty! Once more in arms!
To thee, brave Thracian --

EUXUS. I am summoned hence
To meet the Ephori. I fear, my lord,
They have discovered RHESUS is my brother.

LYSANDER. That secret in your breast and his is lodged:
Nor can his altered features now betray him.
In early youth he left his native land;
The heat of summer, and the winter's cold,
In many a hard campaign, have chased his bloom.

EUXUS. Indeed, I knew him not.

LYSANDER. Then who could know him?
Calm and determined to the senate go:
Here I Will remain, and wait your quick return.
To know what they design imports us much.

EUXUS. Your stay is full of danger; risk it not.

LYSANDER. All necessary dangers must be risk'd.
Perhaps I am the subject of their councils,
Perhaps I may be called before the senate.
If I appear not, you must be discovered,
And my escape too soon to them be known.

EUXUS. Your reasons are of force. I am convinced.
Here, take my sword. Then, if we are betrayed,
My troops obey you. Now, my bold SITHONTES,
[To one of his Thracians. Draw your battalion nearer to the square,
And guard the person of this Spartan chief
As you would guard myself. If I Am detained,
Follow to death or victory LYSANDER.
[Exit EUXUS.
LYSANDER. Shall I obey the impulse of my heart,
And lead these Thracians to the tower that holds
My lost EUANTHE? No, let reason rule.
AMPHARES will not, dares not, wrong her honor,
Whilst undecided is the fate of AGIS.
It Is night, but never shall the morning rise
On -- Who can know the secret will of heaven!
Tell me, ye inextinguishable fires,
That light the counsels of eternal Jove,
Have you, since Time began his long career,
Beheld a mortal like LYSANDER tossed?
Down, down, enthusiasm! my heart be calm!
A little while, and thou shall beat no more.
Often have I wished for perilous occasions;
And, wandering in the academic grove,
Have roused myself with strong imagination
Of great exploits by ardent valor done:
But never did fancy's tempest match the truth,
The strong reality of such a storm.
O did I combat but for life alone,
Were Sparta and EUANTHE safe spectators,
How gaily should LYSANDER take the field. --
EUXUS draws near -- Upon the insect wing
Of a small moment ride the eternal fates.
Enter EUXUS. My fears were vain. The secret is unknown.
But RHESUS is condemned to die tomorrow.

LYSANDER. Tomorrow! Ere tomorrow men shall die
Who are not yet condemned.

EUXUS. It Is true by heaven!
Mortal designs and enterprises rise*
On every side. The Ephori resolve
At midnight to surprise the royal band,
And ordered me to hold my troops prepared
Their forces to sustain.

LYSANDER. It Is well! it is wondrous well!
They urge me now, and point the line of action.
Under the high up-lifted arm of fate
I Will rush, and strike before their blow can fall.
I Will storm the city while they force the camp.
Your troops --

EUXUS. Shall join you at the gate. The word?

LYSANDER. AGIS. Farewell! Now I shall save thee, AGIS,
Or leave my blood upon the stones of Sparta.
[Exeunt LYSANDER and EUXUS.
End of the fourth Act.
ACT V. SCENE I.
AMPHARES and the Ephori with the Officers, etc. The gate of the prison seen at
a distance. First EPHORE. THE hour is past.

Second EPHORE. I fear --

AMPHARES. Silence. He comes.
I hear the steps of wary treading feet.
Enter a Spartan, AGIS following.
AGIS. This way conducts not to Amycla's gate.
Ha! whither do thou lead me?

AMPHARES. To thy death.
The Ephori of Sparta have condemned thee.

AGIS. I am betrayed! What mockery is this
Of sacred justice? Lay aside the robes
And ensigns of authority profaned:
The pomp of magistracy suits not treason.

AMPHARES. The license of thy tongue affronts the laws,
Whose awful reverence our office guards.

AGIS. Know ye not this, ye guardians of the laws,
The meanest citizen of Lacedaemon
Without free trial cannot be condemned;
Much less your king. What law have I transgressed?
Point out my crime; produce my bold accusers.

AMPHARES. Thy crime is tyranny.

AGIS. Is that my crime?
Had AGIS been a tyrant, thou had been
His fawning slave, thou enemy of freedom.

AMPHARES. Behold the stubborn spirit of this man:
He breathes his native arrogance, and still
Insults his judges, and avows his crimes.

AGIS. Who made you judges of the life of AGIS?
But you have judged: yourselves, and earth, and heaven,
Know how unjustly. To the Gods above,
The sure avengers of a murdered king,
I make my last appeal. Their messenger
Is on the wing; LYSANDER comes apace;
And NEMESIS directs his righteous sword.

AMPHARES. Proceeds this boldness from thy trust in him?
Thy great avenger is, like thee, a captive,
And under the same mortal sentence lies.

AGIS. Ye powers above! LYSANDER too a captive!
Where was he taken?

AMPHARES. In the streets of Sparta,
Clad in the servile garment of a Helot.

AGIS. Alas! alas! LYSANDER! O my friend!
Thy love for me, thy generous, fearless love,
Has wrought thy fall. For me thou came to Sparta,
And* like the parent bird hovering too near
Its captive young, thy noble life is lost! --
Forgive these tears, my country! AGIS weeps
For thee. Alas! thy brave defender's gone!
O Lacedaemon^^ thou art fallen for ever!
Thy bad estate shall every day grow worse;
Successive tyrants shall exhaust thy strength,
Till all thy generous youths have bled in vain;
At last the consummation of thy woes
Shall come upon thee; some ambitious foe
Shall stretch the iron arm of conquest forth,
And grasp thee in the circle of his empire.
My native land, the kingdom of my fathers,
Shall be no more a nation! O my country,
How irretrievable is thy condition!
The Macedonian vulture hovers over thee,
Soon to descend, and on thy vitals prey.

AMPHARES. Thou may delay, perhaps avoid, thy death.
Send forth thy mandate to the royal band,
To halt till further orders.

AGIS. Ha! No more
I trust thee, traitor. Would I had ever been
Thus deaf to thee! No, let the royal band
Revenge their gallant leader and their king.

First EPHORE. Thou tempt'st thy fate.

AGIS. I scorn it. Since my hope
Of Sparta's lost, and my beloved friend
Has perished in my cause, why should I live?
In any period of my former days
I rather would have chose to die attempting
The glorious design, which you have ruined,
Than live the prince of a degenerate people,
The tame spectator of a falling empire.

First EPHORE. To Reason hearken.

AGIS. Reason bids me die,
As I have lived, unaltered in my love
To Sparta, and unconquered in my purpose.
You mean to take advantage of my state,
Without spectator, counselor, or friend:
You think I dread the stern approach of death,
Because the blooming season of my life
Still promises a long extent of years:
But my forefathers blood is in my veins,
The blood of heroes, and of Spartan kings,
Less only than the Gods. I dare your worst,
And with my dying breath acquit my people.
The people rose; they hearkened to the voice
Of Liberty, and blessed the name of AGIS.
But you, the nobles, an inglorious race,
Base as the dastard and unarmed Helots,
With foreign arms and mercenary aid,
Bore down the people, and oppressed your prince,
Whom death delivers. AGIS shall not see
The last convulsions of expiring Freedom.
For in the first he dies.

AMPHARES. We'll hear no more
Of these invectives. Bear him to the place
Of execution. Officers, advance
And do your duty.

OFFICERS. This is not our duty.

AMPHARES. What!

OFFICERS. Murder of a king is not our duty.

AMPHARES. Mutinous flaves! for you I Will find a time.
Sir.
[To AGIS.]
AGIS. Touch me not, for uncompell'd I go
To meet my destiny. Weep not for me,
[To an officer. O! thou whose nature suits not thy employment,
Weep not for me! I would not change conditions
With these bad men. I shall not feel the woes
That thou and all must feel, the woes of Sparta!
O! might my death avail my much-loved country,
I Would die as joyful then, as fearless now.
[Exit AGIS guarded.
AMPHARES. Atone your insolence by prompt obedience,
Or death's your portion.
[To an Officer. [Exeunt with AGIS. Manet AMPHARES, etc.
AMPHARES. Magistrates of Sparta!
This painful work of necessary justice
Will quickly end the troubles of the state.
LEONIDAS, who owes his crown to you,
Your faithful zeal and service will reward.
[Exeunt Ephori. Manet AMPHARES and the Spartan who entered with AGIS.
AMPHARES. Haste to the Thracian captain, and require him
To send his prisoner LYSANDER hither.
[Exit Spartan. AGIS removed, and turbulent LYSANDER,
Like snow along the shore, their army melts.
Enter Messenger from the dungeon.
MESSENGER. The executioners refuse their office:
Sacred they hold the person of a king,
A Spartan king descended from the Gods.

AMPHARES. Again those fables of the villain priests
Rise up to thwart me. Now, my trusty servant,
Approve thy faith, and win my lasting favor.
Each instant of delay is big with peril
Whilst AGIS lives Let thy good sword fulfill
The sentence of the law, and thy own tongue
Shall name the recompense.

MESSENGER. Shall it, my lord?
I am your instrument, and bind myself
By this bold deed still faster to your fortunes.
[Exit.
AMPHARES. Ye sons of bold ambition, learn of me:
Trust not the survey of another's eye:
Your dangerous voyage needs a pilot's care
Who never quits the helm.
Enter SPARTAN.
SPARTAN. We are betrayed.
LYSANDER --

AMPHARES. What of him? Speak -- faulter not.

SPARTAN. Is fled.

AMPHARES. Whither? With whom? -- Eternal Gods!

SPARTAN. The guards have set him free, the open gates
I saw, and entering searched the empty tower.

AMPHARES. That traitor EUXUS! -- Now let me resolve
And quickly too.

SPARTAN. The people are alarmed,
And gather to their tribes.

AMPHARES. Cursed be their tribes.
The deed is done already. Yet I have
One pledge of value.

SPARTAN. AGESISTRATA. --

AMPHARES. This hour she dies. I Have sent a trusty slave
To end her woes. But the Athenian maid,
Her I Will bear off in spite of frowning fortune.
Go to the turret, and conduct her hither.
[Exit Spartan.
Manet AMPHARES. Malignant powers! or blind unerring Fate,
This is your work: now you assert your empire.
Enter MESSENGER. My lord, the troops of EUXUS have revolted.
RHINALCES visited this night each post,
And near Amycla's gate some Thracians met,
Whose leader, questioned, answered with his sword.

AMPHARES. By heaven and earth, LYSANDER! -- Ha! proceed.

MESSENGER. The sudden onset, and the cloud of night
The traitors favored; some escaped our swords,
But many more in the sharp combat fell.

AMPHARES. Did their fierce leader fall?

MESSENGER. Above the rest
Conspicuous he fought; at him each sword
Was pointed. If he fell not on the spot,
Sure he received wounds that must fatal prove.

AMPHARES. Confirm me that, and I will mock at fate.
Command my troops, that in the Forum watch,
To join RHINALCES. I myself will follow.
[Exit MESSENGER. Enter EUANTHE. How beautiful she is! Should he survive,
Those charms divine he never shall enjoy.

EUANTHE. Why have thou called me hither to afflict
And torture me with spectacles of woe?
The Gate of the Prison opens, and AMPHARES's Slave advances. Eternal powers!
Why yawn yon dreadful gates?
And from what horrid deed stalks yonder villain?

MESSENGER. Thy orders are obeyed. He lives no more.

EUANTHE. Barbarian monster! have thou killed LYSANDER? --
But I will not reproach thee, nor complain
To the regardless Gods. My doom is past;
There is one only refuge for EUANTHE.
Once more I follow where LYSANDER leads,
Where murder and AMPHARES cannot come,
To part us more.
She runs toward th dunge on, AMPHARES seizes her.
AMPHARES. Some other season choose.
There is no leisure now for lamentation.
Forthwith conduct her to the Arcadian gate:
There with the horsemen wait.
Enter MESSENGER.
MESSENGER. My Lord, my Lord,
The royal band by Thracian EUXUS led --
(Shout.)
AMPHARES. My enemy prevails. -- This way with me.
My steps pursue, or by the Gods of Hell! --

EUANTHE. I will not leave this place. Draw forth thy sword,
And try if death can terrify despair.

AMPHARES. Drag her along.
(Shout.) Again! -- the foe draws near.
(Shout from the other side, AGIS and Liberty.)
AMPHARES. I am encompast; yet I Will mar their triumph.
Runs at EUANTHE with his sword. Enter LYSANDER followed by RHESUS. Infernal
dog, turn and behold LYSANDER.
Fly, RHESUS, to the king. Traitor accursed! Exit RHESUS.
Down, down, to Tartarus; there, villain, howl.
[AMPHARES falls.
EUANTHE. Amazing powers! alive! victorious! Oh!

LYSANDER. And have I come to fave thee, O EUANTHE!
But oh! I fear, I come too late for AGIS.
The dungeon-mouth is open.
Enter RHESUS. Tell me, RHESUS.

RHESUS. The king is murdered, in yon vault he lies.

LYSANDER. My prince! my friend! thy goodness, and thy virtue,
Thy clemency, thy mildness, have undone thee!
Fatal to nations is the dread example!
Hence monarchs, who with iron scepter rule,
Will justify their treatment of mankind;
And virtuous princes, born in evil times,
Will hesitate to stem corruption's tide,
Lest they should be like AGIS overwhelmed.

AMPHARES. He who preferred LYSANDER to AMPHARES,
Has paid me with his life. My dying hand
Has sowed the seeds of discord and distraction.
Peace never shall dwell in Sparta. Plagues on plagues
Shall rise to curse you, as --
(Dies.)
LYSANDER. Thy soul is cursed.
There the fell spirit of AMPHARES fled
In imprecations. Prophet of disasters,
Upon the dismal banks of Acheron,
Amidst the wailing ghosts, still curse thy country,
And end a speech the damned will hate to hear. --
Behold the mother of our murdered king.
Enter AGESISTRATA and EUXUS.
AGESISTRATA. Alas! I need not ask the fate of AGIS:
Your looks, your silence say, I have no son!
Yet speak to me, for I can hear the worst,
I have been long familiar with affliction;
I am the widow of the fire of AGIS.

LYSANDER. There lies the bloody author of his death
Slain by my hand.

AGESISTRATA. Alas! alas! my son!
Often has my anxious mind this hour foreseen,
And warned thee often. But thou the danger scorned,
When Sparta's glory was the price of peril.
O! son of Jove, great author of our race,
Sustain my soul. For he who was my stay,
My comfort, and my strength, is now no more.
Yet in the path his generous spirit chose,
He fell; and conscious virtue crowned his fall.

LYSANDER. So fell not false AMPHARES.

EUXUS. And SANDANE.

LYSANDER. SANDANE dead!

EUXUS. And dreadful was her death.
She fled, for refuge from the people's rage,
To the same turret where AMPHARES' troops
Guarded the queen, whose mantle on the ground
She spied, and wrapped it round her wretched head;
When suddenly a stern assassin came,
And stabbed her, as that queen whose robe she wore.
Arriving then, I heard her shriek for help,
Implore her country's Gods, with bitter cries,
And, in her agony divulge her crimes.
It was no wonder that she feared to die.

AGESISTRATA. O guilt! you are worst of all; he knew thee not,
For whom I mourn. Untimely was his fate;
Yet fall of high and pleasing thoughts he fell.
Great-hearted Virtue, in its swelling hour,
Scarce feels the blow that strikes at brittle life.
The painful part is mine, in grief to live.
Would I had died for thee, my son! my son!

EUANTHE. EUANTHE's tears shall ever flow with yours,
For her protector and her gentle friend.
Mysterious are the counsels of the Gods;
Together AGIS and AMPHARES fall.

LYSANDER. The son of AGIS lives, his infant years
Require a mother's care. Without delay
Proclaim the son of AGIS king of Sparta.
To him, the offspring of my prince adored,
Descend the love and faith I bore to AGIS.
Ye generous Thracians, who this day have shown
The matchless worth and honor of your minds,
Henceforth be Spartans. And, ye Spartan youths
Whom AGIS loved, and for whose rights he died,
Display the spirit of your dear-bought freedom;
With grateful valor guard the hero's son,
And prove that AGIS perished not in vain.

AGESISTRATA. Conduct me, Spartans, to his dear remains.

LYSANDER. Forbear awhile yon dismal vault. --
Enter MESSENGER.
MESSENGER. My Lord,
The people, headed by the priests of Jove
And Hercules, in long procession come,
Bearing the body of their royal lord,
From that base dungeon to the sculptured tomb
Which guards the sacred dust of Sparta's kings.
Enter the Procession with the Body of AGIS.
LYSANDER. O Destiny supreme!

EUANTHE. O sad remains
Of youth and majesty!

AGESISTRATA. My son! my son!
Nature is thwarted here; thou should have borne
Thy aged parent to the silent tomb.
CHORUS.
Mourn, ye sons of Sparta, mourn,
Pour the sad lamenting strain.
Wretched people! Land forlorn!
Mourn the best of princes slain.
Priest of JUPITER.
He fell not as the warrior falls,
Whose breast defends his native walls.
To treason Agis bowed his head,
And by his guilty subjects bled:
Betrayed by those his mercy spared;
Ingratitude was his reward.
CHORUS.
Shame is mixed with Sparta's woe,
Blood of kings the city stains.
Ever let our sorrows flow,
Shame indelible remains.
Priest of JUPITER.
Yet AGIS triumphed in his fall;
For Virtue triumphs over all:
Great, superior to his fate,
He only grieved for Sparta's state.
When Jove decrees a nation's doom,
He calls their heroes to the tomb.
Fearless they fall, immortal rise,
And claim the freedom of the skies.
CHORUS.
AGIS triumphed in his fall,
Virtue triumphs over all!
Such a king shall never return:
Our country and ourselves we mourn.
Priest of HERCULES.
AGIS fell, by fraud overcome;
A like was great Alcides' doom.
Yet then most worthy of his fire,
The son of Jove, when wrapped in fire,
Victorious crowned his labors past:
His noblest labor was the last.
CHORUS of all.
Now in peace our hero lies,
Ceased his toil, his race is run;
Freedom is the glorious prize
Agis for his people won.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. PRITCHARD.
A King in bloom of youth, for freedom die!
Our bard, though bold, durst not have soared so high.
This is no credulous admiring age;
But sacred sure the faith of Plutarch's page.
In simple style that ancient sage relates
The tale of Sparta, chief of Grecian states:
Eight hundred years it flourished, great in arms,
On dangers rose, and grow amidst alarms.
Of Sparta's triumph you have heard the cause,
More strong, more noble than Lycurgus' laws:
How Spartan Dames, by glory's charms inspired,
The son, the lover, and the husband fired.
Ye Fair of Britain's isle, which justly claims
The Grecian title, land of lovely dames,
In Britain's cause exert your matchless charms,
And rouse your lovers to the love of arms.
Hid, not extinct, the spark of valor lies;
Your breath shall raise it f^aming to the skies.
Now Mars his bloody banner hangs in air,
And bids Britannia's s^ns for war prepare.
Let each loved maid, ^ach mother bring the shield,
And arm their country's champions for the field.
Armed and inflamed each British breast shall burn,
No youth unlaurel'd shall to you return.
Then shall we cease t'exult at trophies won,
In glory's field, by Heroes -- not our own.
France yet shall tremble at the British sword,
And dread the Vengeance of her ancient Lord.

