AN ABSTRACT OF A BOOK lately PUBLISHED; ENTITLED, A TREATISE OF Human Nature,
etc. WHEREIN The CHIEF ARGUMENT of that BOOK is farther ILLUSTRATED and
EXPLAINED.

LONDON: Printed for C. BORBET, at Addison's Head, over against St. Dunstan's
Church, in Fleet Street. 1740. [Price six Pence.]

PREFACE.
MY expectations in this small performance may seem somewhat extraordinary,
when I declare that my intentions are to render a larger work more intelligible
to ordinary capacities, by abridging it. It Is however certain, that those who
are not accustomed to abstract reasoning, are apt to lose the thread of
argument, where it is drawn out to a great length, and each part fortified with
all the arguments, guarded against all the objections, and illustrated with all
the views, which occur to a writer in the diligent survey of his subject. Such
Readers will more readily apprehend a chain of reasoning, that is more single
and concise, where the chief propositions only are linkt on to each other,
illustrated by some simple examples, and confirmed by a few of the more
forcible arguments. The parts lying nearer together can better be compared, and
the connection be more easily traced from the first principles to the last
conclusion.

THE work, of which I here present the Reader with an abstract, has been
complained of as obscure and difficult to be comprehended, and I am apt to
think, that this proceeded as much from the length as from the abstractedness
of the argument. If I have remedied this inconvenience in any degree, I have
attained my end. The book seemed to me to have such an air of singularity, and
novelty as claimed the attention of the public; especially if it be found, as
the Author seems to insinuate, that were his philosophy received, we must alter
from the foundation the greatest part of the sciences. Such bold attempts are
always advantageous in the republic of letters, because they shake off the yoke
of authority, accustom men to think for themselves, give new hints, which men
of genius may carry further, and by the very opposition, illustrate points,
wherein no one before suspected any difficulty.

THE Author must be contented to wait with patience for some time before the
learned world can agree in their sentiments of his performance. It Is his
misfortune, that he cannot make an appeal to the people, who in all matters of
common reason and eloquence are found so infallible a tribunal. He must be
judged by the FEW, whose verdict is more apt to be corrupted by partiality and
prejudice, especially as no one is a proper judge in these subjects, who has
not often thought of them; and such are apt to form to themselves systems of
their own, which they resolve not to relinquish. I hope the Author will excuse
me for intermeddling in this affair, since my aim is only to increase his
auditory, by removing some difficulties, which have kept many from apprehending
his meaning.

I have chosen one simple argument, which I have carefully traced from the
beginning to the end. This is the only point I have taken care to finish. The
rest is only hints of particular passages, which seemed to me curious and
remarkable.

AN ABSTRACT OF A BOOK lately PUBLISHED, ENTITLED, A Treatise of Human Nature,
etc.
THIS book seems to be wrote upon the same plan with several other works that
have had a great vogue of late years in England. The philosophical spirit,
which has been so much improved all over Europe within these last fourscore
years, has been carried to as great a length in this kingdom as in any other.
Our writers seem even to have started a new kind of philosophy, which promises
more both to the entertainment and advantage of mankind, than any other with
which the world has been yet acquainted. Most of the philosophers of antiquity,
who treated of human nature, have shown more of a delicacy of sentiment, a just
sense of morals, or a greatness of soul, than a depth of reasoning and
reflection. They content themselves with representing the common sense of
mankind in the strongest lights, and with the best turn of thought and
expression, without following out steadily a chain of propositions, or forming
the several truths into a regular science. But it is at least worth while to try
if the science of man will not admit of the same accuracy which several parts
of natural philosophy are found susceptible of. There seems to be all the
reason in the world to imagine that it may be carried to the greatest degree of
exactness. If, in examining several phenomenon, we find that they resolve
themselves into one common principle, and can trace this principle into
another, we shall at last arrive at those few simple principles, on which all
the rest depend. And though we can never arrive at the ultimate principles, it is
a satisfaction to go as far as our faculties will allow us.

THIS seems to have been the aim of our late philosophers, and, among the rest,
of this author. He proposes to anatomize human nature in a regular manner, and
promises to draw no conclusions but where he is authorized by experience. He
talks with contempt of hypotheses; and insinuates, that such of our countrymen
as have banished them from moral philosophy, have done a more signal service to
the world, than my Lord Bacon, whom he considers as the father of experimental
physics. He mentions, on this occasion, Mr. Lock, my Lord Shaftsbury, Dr.
Mandeville, Mr. Hutchison, Dr. Butler, who, though they differ in many points
among themselves, seem all to agree in founding their accurate disquisitions of
human nature entirely upon experience.

BESIDE the satisfaction of being acquainted with what most nearly concerns us,
it may be safely affirmed, that almost all the sciences are comprehended in the
science of human nature, and are dependent on it. The sole end of logic is to
explain the principles and Operations of our reasoning faculty, and the nature
of our ideas; morals and criticism regard our tastes and sentiments; and
politics consider men as united in society, and dependent on each other. This
treatise therefore of human nature seems intended for a system of the sciences.
The author has finished what regard logic, and has laid the foundation of the
other parts in his account of the passions.

THE celebrated Monsieur Leibnitz has observed it to be a defect in the common
systems of logic, that they are very copious when they explain the operations
of the understanding in the forming of demonstrations, but are too concise when
they treat of probabilities, and those other measures of evidence on which life
and action entirely depend, and which are our guides even in most of our
philosophical speculations. In this censure, he comprehends the essay on human
understanding, le recherche de la verite, and l'art de penser. The author of
the treatise of human nature seems to have been sensible of this defect in
these philosophers, and has endeavored, as much as he can, to supply it. As
his book contains a great number of speculations very new and remarkable, it
will be impossible to give the reader a just notion of the whole. We shall
therefore chiefly confine ourselves to his explication of our reasonings from
cause and effect. If we can make this intelligible to the reader, it may serve
as a specimen of the whole.

OUR author begins with some definitions. He calls a perception whatever can be
present to the mind, whether we employ our senses, or are actuated with
passion, or exercise our thought and reflection. He divides our perceptions
into two kinds, viz. impressions and ideas. When we feel a passion or emotion
of any kind, or have the images of external objects conveyed by our senses; the
perception of the mind is what he calls an impression, which is a word that he
employs in a new sense. When we reflect on a passion or an object which is not
present, this perception is an idea. Impressions, therefore, are our lively and
strong perceptions; ideas are the fainter and weaker. This distinction is
evident; as evident as that betwixt feeling and thinking.

THE first proposition he advances, is, that all our ideas, or weak
perceptions, are derived from our impressions, or strong perceptions, and that
we can never think of any thing which we have not seen without us, or felt in
our own minds. This proposition seems to be equivalent to that which Mr. Lock
has taken such pains to establish, viz. that no ideas are innate. Only it may
be observed, as an inaccuracy of that famous philosopher, that he comprehends
all our perceptions under the term of idea, in which sense it is false, that we
have no innate ideas. For it is evident our stronger perceptions or impressions
are innate, and that natural affection, love of virtue, resentment, and all the
other passions, arise immediately from nature. I am persuaded, whoever would
take the question in this light, would be easily able to reconcile all parties.
Father Malebranche would find himself at a loss to point out any thought of the
mind, which did not represent something antecedently felt by it, either
internally, or by means of the external senses, and must allow, that however we
may compound, and mix, and augment, and diminish our ideas, they are all
derived from these sources. Mr. Lock, on the other hand, would readily
acknowledge, that all our passions are a kind of natural instincts, derived
from nothing but the original constitution of the human mind.

OUR author thinks, "that no discovery could have been made more happily for
deciding all controversies concerning ideas than this, that impressions always
take the precedence of them, and that every idea with which the imagination is
furnished, first makes its appearance in a correspondent impression. These
latter perceptions are all so clear and evident, that they admit of no
controversy; though many of our ideas are so obscure, that it is almost impossible
even for the mind, which forms them, to tell exactly their nature and
composition." Accordingly, wherever any idea is ambiguous, he has always
recourse to the impression, which must render it clear and precise. And when he
suspects that any philosophical term has no idea annexed to it (as is too
common) he always asks from what impression that idea is derived? And if no
impression can be produced, he concludes that the term is altogether
insignificant. It Is after this manner he examines our idea of substance and
essence; and it were to be wished, that this rigorous method were more
practiced in all philosophical debates.

IT IS evident, that all reasonings concerning matter of fact are founded on the
relation of cause and effect, and that we can never infer the existence of one
object from another, unless they be connected together, either mediately or
immediately. In order therefore to understand these reasonings, we must be
perfectly acquainted with the idea of a cause; and in order to that, must look
about us to find something that is the cause of another.

HERE is a billiard-ball lying on the table, and another ball moving toward it
with rapidity. They strike; and the ball, which was formerly at rest, now
acquires a motion. This is as perfect an instance of the relation of cause and
effect as any which we know, either by sensation or reflection. Let us
therefore examine it. It Is evident, that the two balls touched one another
before the motion was communicated, and that there was no interval betwixt the
shock and the motion. Contiguity in time and place is therefore a requisite
circumstance to the operation of all causes. It Is evident likewise, that the
motion, which was the cause, is prior to the motion, which was the effect.
Priority in time, is therefore another requisite circumstance in every cause.
But this is not all. Let us try any other balls of the same kind in a like
situation, and we shall always find, that the impulse of the one produces
motion in the other. Here therefore is a third circumstance, viz. that of a
constant conjunction betwixt the cause and effect. Every object like the cause,
produces always some object like the effect. Beyond these three circumstances
of contiguity, priority, and constant conjunction, I can discover nothing in
this cause. The first ball is in motion; touches the second; immediately the
second is in motion: and when I try the experiment with the same or like balls,
in the same or like circumstances, I find, that upon the motion and touch of
the one ball, motion always follows in the other. In whatever shape I turn this
matter, and however I examine it, I can find nothing farther.

THIS is the case when both the cause and effect are present to the senses. Let
us now see upon what our inference is founded, when we conclude from the one
that the other has existed or will exist. Suppose I see a ball moving in a
straight line toward another, I immediately conclude, that they will shock,
and that the second will be in motion. This is the inference from cause to
effect; and of this nature are all our reasonings in the conduct of life: on
his is founded all our belief in history: and from hence is derived all
philosophy, excepting only geometry and arithmetic. If we can explain the
inference from the shock of two balls, we shall be able to account for this
operation of the mind in all instances.

WERE a man, such as Adam, created in the full vigor of understanding, without
experience, he would never be able to infer motion in the second ball from the
motion and impulse of the first. It is not any thing that reason sees in the
cause, which make us infer the effect. Such an inference, were it possible,
would amount to a demonstration, as being founded merely on the comparison of
ideas. But no inference from cause to effect amounts to a demonstration. Of
which there is this evident proof. The mind can always conceive any effect to
follow from any cause, and indeed any event to follow upon another: whatever we
conceive is possible, at least in a metaphysical sense: but wherever a
demonstration takes place, the contrary is impossible, and implies a
contradiction. There is no demonstration, therefore, for any conjunction of
cause and effect. And this is a principle, which is generally allowed by
philosophers.

IT would have been necessary, therefore, for Adam (if he was not inspired) to
have had experience of the effect, which followed upon the impulse of these two
balls. He must have seen, in several instances, that when the one ball struck
upon the other, the second always acquired motion. If he had seen a sufficient
number of instances of this kind, whenever he saw the one ball moving toward
the other, he would always conclude without hesitation, that the second would
acquire motion. His understanding would anticipate his sight, and form a
conclusion suitable to his past experience.

IT follows, then, that all reasonings concerning cause and effect, are founded
on experience, and that all reasonings from experience are founded on the
supposition, that the course of nature will continue uniformly the same. We
conclude, that like causes, in like circumstances, will always produce like
effects. It may now be worth while to consider, what determines us to form a
conclusion of such infinite consequence.

IT IS evident, that Adam with all his science, would never have been able to
demonstrate, that the course of nature must continue uniformly the same, and
that the future must be conformable to the past. What is possible can never be
demonstrated to be false; and it is possible the course of nature may change,
since we can conceive such a change. Nay, I will go farther, and assert, that
he could not so much as prove by any probable arguments, that the future must
be conformable to the past. All probable arguments are built on the
supposition, that there is this conformity betwixt the future and the past, and
therefore can never prove it. This conformity is a matter of fact, and if it
must be proved, will admit of no proof but from experience. But our experience
in the past can be a proof of nothing for the future, but upon a supposition,
that there is a resemblance betwixt them. This therefore is a point, which can
admit of no proof at all, and which we take for granted without any proof.

WE are determined by CUSTOM alone to suppose the future conformable to the
past. When I see a billiard-ball moving toward another, my mind is immediately
carried by habit to the usual effect, and anticipates my sight by conceiving
the second ball in motion. There is nothing in these objects, abstractly
considered, and independent of experience, which leads me to form any such
conclusion: and even after I have had experience of many repeated effects of
this kind, there is no argument, which determines me to suppose, that the
effect will be conformable to past experience. The powers, by which bodies
operate, are entirely unknown. We perceive only their sensible qualities: and
what reason have we to think, that the same powers will always be conjoined
with the same sensible qualities?

IT IS not, therefore, reason, which is the guide of life, but custom. That
alone determines the mind, in all instances, to suppose the future conformable
to the past. However easy this step may seem, reason would never, to all
eternity, be able to make it.

THIS is a very curious discovery, but leads us to others, that are still more
curious. When I see a billiard ball moving toward another, my mind is
immediately carried by habit to the usual and anticipate my sight by conceiving
the second ball in motion. But is this all? Do I nothing but CONCEIVE the
motion of the second ball? No surely. I also BELIEVE that it will move. What
then is this belief? And how does it differ from the simple conception of any
thing? Here is a new question unthought of by philosophers.

When a demonstration convinces me of any proposition, it not only makes me
conceive the proposition, but also makes me sensible, that it is impossible to
conceive any thing contrary. What is demonstratively false implies a
contradiction; and what implies a contradiction cannot be conceived. But with
regard to any matter of fact, however strong the proof may be from experience,
I can always conceive the contrary, though I cannot always believe it. The
belief, therefore, makes some difference betwixt the conception to which we
assent, and that to which we do not assent.

To account for this, there are only two hypotheses. It may be said, that
belief joins some new idea to those which we may conceive without assenting to
them. But this hypothesis is false. For first, no such idea can be produced.
When we simply conceive an object, we conceive it in all its parts. We conceive
it as it might exist, though we do not believe it to exist. Our belief of it
would discover no new qualities. We may paint out the entire object in
imagination without believing it. We may set it, in a manner, before our eyes,
with every circumstance of time and place. It Is the very object conceived as it
might exist; and when we believe it, we can do no more.

Secondly, THE mind has a faculty of joining all ideas together, which involve
not a contradiction; and therefore if belief consisted in some idea, which we
add to the simple conception, it would be in a man's power, by adding this idea
to it, to believe any thing, which he can conceive.

SINCE therefore belief implies a conception, and yet is something more; and
since it adds no new idea to the conception; it follows, that it is a different
MANNER of conceiving an object; something that is distinguishable to the
feeling, and depends not upon our will, as all our ideas do. My mind runs by
habit from the visible object of one ball moving toward another, to the usual
effect of motion in the second ball. It not only conceives that motion, but
feels something different in the conception of it from a mere reverie of the
imagination. The presence of this visible object, and the constant conjunction
of that particular effect, render the idea different to the feeling from those
loose ideas, which come into the mind without any introduction. This conclusion
seems a little surprising; but we are led into it by a chain of propositions,
which admit of no doubt. To ease the reader's memory I shall briefly resume
them. No matter of fact can be proved but from its cause or its effect. Nothing
can be known to be the cause of another but by experience. We can give no
reason for extending to the future our experience in the past; but are entirely
determined by custom, when we conceive an effect to follow from its usual
cause. But we also believe an effect to follow, as well as conceive it. This
belief joins no new idea to the conception. It only varies the manner of
conceiving, and makes a difference to the feeling or sentiment. Belief,
therefore, in all matters of fact arises only from custom, and is an idea
conceived in a peculiar manner.

OUR author proceeds to explain the manner or feeling, which renders belief
different from a loose conception. He seems sensible, that it is impossible by
words to describe this feeling, which every one must be conscious of in his own
breast. He calls it sometimes a stronger conception, sometimes a more lively, a
more vivid, a firmer, or a more intense conception. And indeed, whatever name
we may give to this feeling, which constitutes belief, our author thinks it
evident, that it has a more forcible effect on the mind than fiction and mere
conception. This he proves by its influence on the passions and on the
imagination; which are only moved by truth or what is taken for such. Poetry,
with all its art, can never cause a passion, like one in real life. It fails in
the original conception of its objects, which never feel in the same manner as
those which command our belief and opinion.

OUR author presuming, that he had sufficiently proved, that the ideas we
assent to are different to the feeling from the other ideas, and that this
feeling is more firm and lively than our common conception, endeavors in the
next place to explain the cause of this lively feeling by an analogy with other
acts of the mind. His reasoning seems to be curious; but could scarce be
rendered intelligible, or at least probable to the reader, without a long
detail, which would exceed the compass I have prescribed to myself.

I have likewise omitted many arguments, which he adduces to prove that belief
consists merely in a peculiar feeling or sentiment. I shall only mention one;
our past experience is not always uniform. Sometimes one effect follows from a
cause, sometimes another: In which case we always believe, that that will exist
which is most common. I see a billiard-ball moving toward another. I cannot
distinguish whether it moves upon its axis, or was struck so as to skim along
the table. In the first case, I know it will not stop after the shock. In the
second it may stop. The first is most common, and therefore I lay my account
with that effect. But I also conceive the other effect, and conceive it as
possible, and as connected with the cause. Were not the one conception
different in the feeling or sentiment from the other, there would be no
difference betwixt them.

WE have confined ourselves in this whole reasoning to the relation of cause
and effect, as discovered in the motions and operations of matter. But the same
reasoning extends to the operations of the mind. Whether we consider the
influence of the will in moving our body, or in governing our thought, it may
safely be affirmed, that we could never foretell the effect, merely from the
consideration of the cause, without experience. And even after we have
experience of these effects, it is custom alone, not reason, which determines us
to make it the standard of our future judgments. When the cause is presented,
the mind, from habit, immediately passes to the conception and belief of the
usual effect. This belief is something different from the conception. It does
not, however, join any new idea to it. It only makes it be felt differently,
and renders it stronger and more lively.

HAVING dispatched this material point concerning the nature of the inference
from cause and effect, our author returns upon his footsteps, and examines anew
the idea of that relation. In the considering of motion communicated from one
ball to another, we could find nothing but contiguity, priority in the cause,
and constant conjunction. But, beside these circumstances, it is commonly
supposed, that there is a necessary connection betwixt the cause and effect, and
that the cause possesses something, which we call a power, or force, or energy.
The question is, what idea is annexed to these terms? If all our ideas or
thoughts be derived from our impressions, this power must either discover
itself to our senses, or to our internal feeling. But so little does any power
discover itself to the senses in the operations of matter, that the Cartesians
have made no scruple to assert, that matter is utterly deprived of energy, and
that all its operations are performed merely by the energy of the supreme
Being. But the question still recurs, What idea have we of energy or power even
in the supreme Being? All our idea of a Deity (according to those who deny
innate ideas) is nothing but a composition of those ideas, which we acquire
from reflecting on the operations of our own minds. Now our own minds afford us
no more notion of energy than matter does. When we consider our will or
volition a priori, abstracting from experience, we should never be able to
infer any effect from it. And when we take the assistance of experience, it
only shows us objects contiguous, successive, and constantly conjoined. Upon
the whole, then, either we have no idea at all of force and energy, and these
words are altogether insignificant, or they can mean nothing but that
determination of the thought, acquired by habit, to pass from the cause to its
usual effect. But who-ever would thoroughly understand this must consult the
author himself. It Is sufficient, if I can make the learned world apprehend,
that there is some difficulty in the case, and that who-ever solves the
difficulty must say some thing very new and extraordinary; as new as the
difficulty itself.

BY all that has been said the reader will easily perceive, that the philosophy
contained in this book is very skeptical, and tends to give us a notion of the
imperfections and narrow limits of human understanding. Almost all reasoning is
there reduced to experience; and the belief, which attends experience, is
explained to be nothing but a peculiar sentiment, or lively conception produced
by habit. Nor is this all, when we believe any thing of external existence, or
suppose an object to exist a moment after it is no longer perceived, this
belief is nothing but a sentiment of the same kind. Our author insists upon
several other skeptical topics; and upon the whole concludes, that we assent to
our faculties, and employ our reason only because we cannot help it. Philosophy
would render us entirely Pyrrhonian, were not nature too strong for it.

I shall conclude the logics of this author with an account of two opinions,
which seem to be peculiar to himself, as indeed are most of his opinions. He
asserts, that the soul, as far as we can conceive it, is nothing but a system
or train of different perceptions, those of heat and cold, love and anger,
thoughts and sensations; all united together, but without any perfect
simplicity or identity. Des Carts maintained that thought was the essence of
the mind; not this thought or that thought, but thought in general. This seems
to be absolutely unintelligible, since every thing, that exists, is particular:
And therefore it must be our several particular perceptions, that compose the
mind. I say, compose the mind, not belong to it. The mind is not a substance,
in which the perceptions inhere. That notion is as unintelligible as the
Cartesian, that thought or perception in general is the essence of the mind. We
have no idea of substance of any kind, since we have no idea but what is
derived from some impression, and we have no impression of any substance either
material or spiritual. We know nothing but particular qualities and
perceptions. As our idea of any body, a peach, for instance, is only that of a
particular taste, color, figure, size, consistence, etc. So our idea of any
mind is only that of particular perceptions, without the notion of any thing we
call substance, either simple or compound.

THE second principle, which I proposed to take notice of, is with regard to
Geometry. Having denied the infinite divisibility of extension, our author
finds himself obliged to refute those mathematical arguments, which have been
adduced for it; and these indeed are the only ones of any weight. This he does
by denying Geometry to be a science exact enough to admit of conclusions so
subtle as those which regard infinite divisibility. His arguments may be thus
explained. All Geometry is founded on the notions of equality and inequality,
and therefore according as we have or have not an exact standard of that
relation, the science itself will or will not admit of great exactness. Now
there is an exact standard of equality, if we suppose that quantity is composed
of indivisible points. Two lines are equal when the numbers of the points, that
compose them, are equal, and when there is a point in one corresponding to a
point in the other. But though this standard be exact, it is useless; since we can
never compute the number of points in any line. It is besides founded on the
supposition of finite divisibility, and therefore can never afford any
conclusion against it. If we reject this standard of equality, we have none
that has any pretensions to exactness. I find two that are commonly made use
of. Two lines above a yard, for instance, are said to be equal, when they
contain any inferior quantity, as an inch, an equal number of times. But this
runs in a circle. For the quantity we call an inch in the one is supposed to be
equal to what we call an inch in the other: And the question still is, by what
standard we proceed when we judge them to be equal; or, in other words, what we
mean when we say they are equal. If we take still inferior quantities, we go on
in infinitum. This therefore is no standard of equality. The greatest part of
philosophers, when asked what they mean by equality, say, that the word admits
of no definition, and that it is sufficient to place before us two equal
bodies, such as two diameters of a circle, to make us understand that term. Now
this is taking the general appearance of the objects for the standard of that
proportion, and renders our imagination and senses the ultimate judges of it.
But such a standard admits of no exactness, and can never afford any conclusion
contrary to the imagination and senses. Whether this question be just or not,
must be left to the learned world to judge. 'Twere certainly to be wished, that
some expedient were fallen upon to reconcile philosophy and common sense, which
with regard to the question of infinite divisibility have waged most cruel wars
with each other.

WE must now proceed to give some account of the second volume of this work,
which treats of the PASSIONS. It Is of more easy comprehension than the first;
but contains opinions, that are altogether as new and extraordinary. The author
begins with Pride and humility. He observes, that the objects which excite
these passions, are very numerous, and seemingly very different from each
other. Pride or self-esteem may arise from the qualities of the mind; wit,
good-sense, learning, courage, integrity: from those of the body; beauty,
strength, agility, good mein, address in dancing, riding, fencing: from
external advantages; country, family, children, relations, riches, houses,
gardens, horses, dogs, clothes. He afterward proceeds to find out that common
circumstance, in which all these objects agree, and which causes them to
operate on the passions. His theory likewise extends to love and hatred, and
other affections. As these questions, though curious, could not be rendered
intelligible without a long discourse, we shall here omit them.

IT may perhaps be more acceptable to the reader to be informed of what our
author says concerning free will. He has laid the foundation of his doctrine in
what he said concerning cause and effect, as above explained. " It Is
universally acknowledged, that the operations of external bodies are necessary,
and that in the communication of their motion, in their attraction and mutual
cohesion, there are not the least traces of indifference or liberty." --
"Whatever therefore is in this respect on the same footing with matter, must be
acknowledged to be necessary. That we may know whether this be the case with
the actions of the mind, we may examine matter, and consider on what the idea
of a necessity in its operations are founded, and why we conclude one body or
action to be the infallible cause of another."

"It has been observed already, that in no single instance the ultimate
connection of any object is discoverable either by our senses or reason, and
that we can never penetrate so far into the essence and construction of bodies,
as to perceive the principle on which their mutual influence is founded. It Is
their constant union alone, with which we are acquainted; and it is from the
constant union the necessity arises, when the mind is determined to pass from
one object to its usual attendant, and infer the existence of one from that of
the other. Here then are two particulars, which we are to regard as essential
to necessity, viz. the constant union and the inference of the mind, and
wherever we discover these we must acknowledge a necessity." Now nothing is
more evident than the constant union of particular actions with particular
motives. If all actions be not constantly united with their proper motives,
this uncertainty is no more than what may be observed every day in the actions
of matter, where by reason of the mixture and uncertainty of causes, the effect
is often variable and uncertain. Thirty grains of opium will kill any man that
is not accustomed to it; though thirty grains of rhubarb will not always purge
him. In like manner the fear of death will always make a man go twenty paces
out of his road; though it will not always make him do a bad action.

AND as there is often a constant conjunction of the actions of the will with
their motives, so the inference from the one to the other is often as certain
as any reasoning concerning bodies: and there is always an inference
proportioned to the constancy of the conjunction. On this is founded our belief
in witnesses, our credit in history, and indeed all kinds of moral evidence,
and almost the whole conduct of life.

OUR author pretends, that this reasoning puts the whole controversy in a new
light, by giving a new definition of necessity. And, indeed, the most zealous
advocates for freewill must allow this union and inference with regard to human
actions. They will only deny, that this makes the whole of necessity. But then
they must show, that we have an idea of something else in the actions of
matter; which, according to the foregoing reasoning, is impossible.

THROUGH this whole book, there are great pretensions to new discoveries in
philosophy; but if any thing can entitle the author to so glorious a name as
that of an inventor, it is the use he makes of the principle of the association
of ideas, which enters into most of his philosophy. Our imagination has a great
authority over our ideas; and there are no ideas that are different from each
other, which it cannot separate, and join, and compose into all the varieties
of fiction. But notwithstanding the empire of the imagination, there is a
secret tie or union among particular ideas, which causes the mind to conjoin
them more frequently together, and makes the one, upon its appearance,
introduce the other. Hence arises what we call the apropos of discourse: hence
the connection of writing: and hence that thread, or chain of thought, which a
man naturally supports even in the loosest reverie. These principles of
association are reduced to three, viz. Resemblance; a picture naturally makes
us think of the man it was drawn for. Contiguity; when St. Dennis is mentioned,
the idea of Paris naturally occurs. Causation; when we think of the son, we are
apt to carry our attention to the father. 'Twill be easy to conceive of what
vast consequence these principles must be in the science of human nature, if we
consider, that so far as regards the mind, these are the only links that bind
the parts of the universe together, or connect us with any person or object
exterior to ourselves. For as it is by means of thought only that any thing
operates upon our passions, and as these are the only ties of our thoughts,
they are really to us the cement of the universe, and all the operations of the
mind must, in a great measure, depend on them.

FINIS.

