THE Grecian Daughter.

[Price 1s. 6d.]

THE Grecian Daughter: A TRAGEDY: As it is acted at the THEATER ROYAL IN
DRURY LANE.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
SOPHOC. ELECT. LONDON: Printed for W. GRIFFIN, at GARRICK'S HEAD, in
Catharine-Street, Strand.

MDCCLXXII.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. WESTON. He peeps in at the Stage Door. HIP! music! music! --
Have you more to play?
Somewhat I Would offer -- Stop your cat-gut, pray.
Will you permit, and not pronounce me rude,
A bookseller one moment to intrude?
My name is Fools-cap: -- Since you saw me last,
Fortune has given me a rare helping cast.
To all my toils a wife has put a stop --
A devil then; but now I keep a shop.
My master died, poor man! -- He Is out of print!
His widow, -- she had eyes and took my hint.
A prey to grief, she could not bear to be,
And so turned over a new leaf with me.
I drive a trade; have authors in my pay,
Men of all work, per week, per sheet, per day.
TRAV'LLERS -- who not one foreign country know:
And PAST'RAL POETS -- in the sound of Bow.
TRANSLATORS -- From the Greek they never read
CANTABS and SOPHS -- in Covent Garden bred.
HISTORIANS, who cannot write; -- who only take
Scissars and paste; -- cut, vamp; a book they make.
I Have treated for this play; can buy it too,
If I could learn what you intend to do.
If for nine nights you will bear this tragic stuff;
I have a news-paper, and there can puff.
A news-paper does wonders! -- None can be
In debt, in love, dependant or quite free,
Ugly or handsome, well, or ill in bed,
Single or married, or alive or dead,
But we give life, death, virtue, vice with ease;
In short a news-paper does what we please.
There jealous authors at each other bark;
Till truth leaves not one glimpse, no, not one spark;
But lies meet lies and justle in the dark.
Our bard within has often felt the dart
Sent from our quiver, levelled at his heart.
I Have pressed him, ere he plays this desperate game,
To answer all, and vindicate his name.
But he, convinced that all but truth must die,
Leaves to its own mortality the lie.
Would any know, -- while parties fight pellmell,
How he employs his pen? -- his play will tell.
To that he trusts; that he submits to you,
Aimed at your tenderest feelings, -- moral, -- new.
The scenes, he hopes, will draw the heartfelt tear;
Scenes that come home to every bosom here.
If this will do, I Will run and buy it straight;
Stay -- Let me see; -- I think I Would better wait --
Yes; -- I Will lie snug, till you have fixed it is fate.

EPILOGUE.
Written by a FRIEND,
And Spoken by MISS YOUNG. THE GRECIAN DAUGHTER'S compliments to all;
Begs that for Epilogue you will not call;
For leering, giggling would be out of season,
And hopes by me you will hear a little reason.
A father raised from death, a nation saved,
A tyrant's crimes by female spirit braved,
That tyrant stabbed, and by her nerveless arm,
While Virtue's spell surrounding guards could charm!
Can she, this sacred tumult in her breast,
Turn Father, Freedom, Virtue, all to jest?
Wake you, ye fair ones, from your sweet repose,
As wanton zephyrs wake the sleeping rose;
Dispel those clouds, which over your eyelids crept,
Which our wise Bard mistook, and swore you wept.
Shall she to MACARONIES life restore,
Who yawn'd, half dead, and cursed the tragic BORE?
Dismiss 'em, smirking, to their nightly haunt,
Where dice and cards their moon-struck minds enchant?
Some muffled, like the witches in Macbeth,
Brood over the magic circle, pale as death!
Others, the cauldron go about -- about --
And Ruin enters, as the Fates run out!
Bubble, bubble,
Toil and trouble,
Passions burn,
And bets are double!
Double! double!
Toil and trouble,
Passions burn,
And all is bubble!
But jests apart, for scandal forms these tales,
Falsehood be mute -- let Justice hold her scales:
Britons were never enslaved by evil powr's;
To peace, and wedded love, they give their midnight hours;
From slumbers pure, no rattling dice can wake 'em!
Who make the laws, were never known to break 'em.
It Is false, ye fair, whatever spleen may say,
That you down Folly's tide are borne away;
You never wish at deep distress to sneer;
For eyes, though bright, are brighter through a tear.
Should it ever be this Nation's wretched fate
To laugh at all that is good, and wise, and great;
Armed at all points, let Genius take the field,
And on the stage afflicted Virtue shield,
Drive from the land each base unworthy passion,
Till Virtue triumph in despite of Fashion.

Dramatis Personae.
EVANDER, Mr. BARRY. PHILOTAS, Mr. REDDISH. MELANTHON, Mr. AICKIN. PHOCION, Mr.
J. AICKIN. DIONYSIUS, Mr. PALMER. ARCAS, Mr. HURST. GREEK HERALD, Mr. PACKER.
CALIPPUS, Mr. INCHBALD. GREEK SOLDIER, Mr. DAVIES. OFFICER, Mr. WHEELER.
EUPHRASIA, Mrs. BARRY. ERIXENE Miss PLATT.
Scene, SYRACUSE.

THE GRECIAN DAUGHTER:
ACT I.
Enter MELANTHON, and PHILOTAS. Melan. YET, yet a moment; hear, Philotas, hear
me.

Philo. No more; it must not be.

Melan. Obdurate man!
Thus will thou spurn me, when a king distressed;
A good, a virtuous, venerable king,
The father of his people, from a throne
Which long with every virtue he adorned,
Torn by a ruffian, by a tyrant's hand,
Groans in captivity? In his own palace
Lives a sequestered prisoner? -- Oh! Philotas,
If thou have not renounced humanity;
Let me behold my sovereign; once again
Admit me to his presence, let me see
My royal master.

Philo. Urge thy suit no further;
Thy words are fruitless; Dionysius' orders
Forbid access; he is our sovereign now;
It Is his to give the law, mine to obey.

Melan. Thou can not mean it -- his to give the law!
Detested spoiler! -- his! -- a vile usurper!
Have we forgot the elder Dionysius,
Surnamed the Tyrant? To Sicilia's throne
The monster waded through whole seas of blood.
Sore groaned the land beneath his iron rod,
Till roused at length Evander came from Greece,
Like Freedom's Genius came, and sent the tyrant
Stripped of the crown, and to his humble rank
Once more reduced, to roam, for vile subsistence,
A wandering sophist, through the realms of Greece.

Philo. Melanthon, yes; full clearly I remember
The splendid day, when all rejoicing Sicily
Hailed her deliverer.

Melan. Shall the tyrant's son
Deduce a title from the father's guilt?
Philotas, thou were once the friend of goodness;
Thou art a Greek; fair Corinth gave thee birth;
I marked thy growing youth; I need not tell,
With what an equal sway Evander reigned,
How just, how upright, generous and good!
From every region bards and sages came;
Whatever of science ancient Egypt stored,
All that the East had treasured; all that Greece
Of moral wisdom taught, and Plato's voice
Was heard in Sicily. Shall Dionysius
Extinguish every virtue in the land,
Bow to his yoke the necks of freeborn men,
And here perpetuate a tyrant's reign?

Philo. Whatever his right, to him in Syracuse
All bend the knee; his the supreme dominion,
And death and torment wait his sovreign nod.

Mel. But soon that Power shall cease; behold his walls
Now close encircled by the Grecian bands;
Timoleon leads them on; indignant Corinth
Sends her avenger forth, arrayed in terror,
To hurl ambition from a throne usurped,
And bid all Sicily resume her rights.

Philo. Thou were a statesman once, Melanthon; now
Grown dim with age, thy eye pervades no more
The deep-laid schemes which Dionysius plans.
Know then, a fleet from Carthage even now
Stems the rough billow, and, ever yonder sun,
That now declining seeks the Western wave,
Shall to the shades of night resign the world,
Thou Wilt see the Punic sails in yonder bay,
Whose waters wash the walls of Syracuse.

Melan. Art thou a stranger to Timoleon's name?
Intent to plan, and circumspect to see
All possible events, he rushes on
Resistless in his course! Your boasted master
Scarce stands at bay; each hour the strong blockade
Hems him in closer, and ever long thou wilt view
Oppression's iron rod to fragments shivered!
The good Evander then --

Philo. Alas, Evander! --
Will never behold the golden time you look for.

Melan. How! not behold it! Say, Philotas, speak;
Has the fell tyrant, have his felon murderers --

Philo. As yet, my friend, Evander lives.

Melan. And yet
Thy dark half-hinted purpose -- Lead me to him --
If thou have murdered him --

Philo. By Heaven he lives.

Melan. Then bless me with one tender interview.
Thrice has the sun gone down, since last these eyes
Have seen the good old king; say, why is this?
Wherefore debarred his presence? Thee, Philotas,
The troops obey that guard the royal prisoner;
Each avenue to thee is open; thou
Can grant admittance; let me, let me see him.

Philo. Entreat no more; the soul of Dionysius
Is ever wakeful; rent with all the pangs
That wait on conscious guilt.

Melan. But when dun night --

Philo. Alas! it cannot be -- But mark my words.
Let Greece urge on her general assault.
Dispatch some friend, who may o'er-leap the walls,
And tell Timoleon, the good old Evander
Has lived three days, by Dionysius' order,
Locked up from every sustenance of nature,
And life, now wearied out, almost expires.

Melan. If any spark of virtue dwell within thee,
Lead me, Philotas, lead me to his prison.

Philo. The tyrant's jealous care has moved him thence.

Melan. Ha! moved him, say thou?

Philo. At the midnight hour,
Silent conveyed him up the steep ascent,
To where the elder Dionysius formed,
On the sharp summit of the pointed rock,
Which overhangs the deep, a dungeon drear;
Cell within cell, a labyrinth of horror,
Deep cavern'd in the cliff, where many a wretch,
Unseen by mortal eye, has groaned in anguish,
And died obscure, unpitied, and unknown.

Melan. Clandestine murderer! Yes, there is the scene
Of horrid massacre. Full often I Have walked,
When all things lay in sleep and darkness hushed,
Yes, often I Have walked the lonely sullen beach,
And heard the mournful sound of many a corse
Plunged from the rock into the wave beneath,
That murmured on the shore. And means he thus
To end a monarch's life? Oh! grant my prayer;
My timely succor may protract his days;
The guard is yours --

Philo. Forbear; thou plead'st in vain;
I must not yield; it were assured destruction;
Farewell, dispatch a message to the Greeks;
I Will to my station; now thou know the worst.
Exit.
MELANTHON. Oh! lost Evander! Lost Euphrasia too!
How will her gentle nature bear the shock
Of a dear father, thus in lingering pangs
A prey to famine, like the veriest wretch
Whom the hard hand of misery has gripped!
In vain she will rave with impotence of sorrow;
Perhaps provoke her fate; -- Greece arms in vain,
All Is lost; Evander dies. --

Enter CALLIPPUS. Calip. Where is the king?
Our troops, that sallied to attack the foe,
Retire disordered; to the eastern gate
The Greeks pursue; Timoleon rides in blood;
Arm, arm, and meet their fury.

Melan. To the citadel
Direct thy footsteps; Dionysius there
Marshalls a chosen band.

Calip. Do thou call forth
Thy hardy Vetrans; haste, or all is lost.
Exit. Warlike mus^c.
MELANTHON. Now, ye just Gods, now look propitious down;
Now give the Grecian sabre tenfold edge,
And save a virtuous king.

Warlike music Enter EUPHRASIA. Euphra. War on ye heroes,
Ye great asserters of a monarch's cause!
Let the wild tempest rise. Melanthon, ha!
Did thou not hear the vast tremendous roar?
Down tumbling from it is base the eastern tower.
Burst on the tyrant's ranks, and on the plain
Lies an extended ruin.

Melan. Still new horrors
Increase each hour, and gather round our heads.

Euphra. The glorious tumult lists my towering soul.
Once more, Melanthon, once again, my father
Shall mount Sicilia's throne.

Melan. Alas! that hour
Would come with joy to every honest heart,
Would shed divinest blessings from it is wing;
But no such hour in all the round of time,
I fear, the fates averse will ever lead on.

Euphra. And still, Melanthon, still does pale despair
Depress thy spirit? Lo! Timoleon comes
Armed with the power of Greece; the brave, the just,
God-like Timoleon! ardent to redress,
He guides the war, and gains upon his prey.
A little interval shall set the victor
Within our gates triumphant.

Melan. Still my fears
Forebode for thee. Would thou had left this place,
When hence your husband, the brave Phocion fled,
Fled with your infant son.

Euphra. In duty fixed,
Here I remained, while my brave generous Phocion
Fled with my child, and from his mother's arms
Bore my sweet little one. -- Full well thou know
The pangs I suffered in that trying moment;
Did I not weep? Did I not rave and shriek,
And by the roots tear my dishevelled hair?
Did I not follow to the sea-beat shore,
Resolved with him and with my blooming boy
To trust the winds and waves?

Melan. Deem not, Euphrasia,
I ever can doubt thy constancy and love.

Euphra. Melanthon, how I loved, the Gods who saw
Each secret image that my fancy formed,
The Gods can witness how I loved my Phocion.
And yet I went not with him. Could I do it?
Could I desert my father? Could I leave
The venerable man, who gave me being,
A victim here in Syracuse, nor stay
To watch his fate, to visit his affliction,
To cheer his prison-hours, and with the tear
Of filial virtue bid even bondage smile?

Melan. The pious act, whatever the fates intend,
Shall merit heartfelt praise.

Euphra. Yes, Phocion, go,
Go with my child, torn from this matron breast,
This breast that still should yield it is nurture to him,
Fly with my infant to some happier shore.
If he be safe, Euphrasia dies content.
Till that sad close of all, the task be mine
To tend a father with delighted care,
To smooth the pillow of declining age,
See him sink gradual into mere decay,
On the last verge of life watch every look,
Explore each fond unutterable wish,
Catch his last breath, and close his eyes in peace.

Melan. I would not add to thy afflictions; yet
My heart misgives; -- Evander's fatal period --

Euphra. Still is far off; the Gods have sent relief,
And once again I shall behold him king.

Mel. Alas! this dream of hope at length may waken
To deep despair.

Euphra. The spirit-stirring virtue
That glows within me, never shall know despair.
No, I will trust the Gods. Desponding man!
Have thou not heard with what resistless ardour
Timoleon drives the tumult of the war?
Have thou not heard him thundering at our gates?
The tyrant's pent up in his last retreat;
Anon thou wilt see his battlements in dust,
His walls, his ramparts, and his towers in ruin;
Destruction pouring in on every side,
Pride and oppression at their utmost need,
And naught to save him in his hopeless hour.
A flourish of trumpets.
Melan. Ha! the fell tyrant comes -- Beguile his rage,
And over your sorrows cast a dawn of gladness.

Enter DIONYSIUS, CALIPPUS, OFFICERS, etc. Di. The vain presumptuous Greek! His
hopes of conquest,
Like a gay dream, are vanished into air.
Proudly elate, and flushed with easy triumph
Over vulgar warriors, to the gates of Syracuse
He urged the war, till Dionysius' arm
Let slaughter loose, and taught his dastard train
To seek their safety by inglorious flight.

Euphra. O Dionysius, if distracting fears
Alarm this throbbing bosom, you will pardon
A frail and tender sex. Should ruthless war
Roam through our streets, and riot here in blood,
Where shall the lost Euphrasia find a shelter?
In vain she will kneel, and clasp the sacred altar.
O let me then, in mercy let me seek
The gloomy mansion, where my father dwells;
I die content, if in his arms I perish.

Dion. Thou lovely trembler, hush thy fears to rest.
The Greek recoils; like the impetuous surge
That dashes on the rock, there breaks, and foams,
And backward rolls into the sea again.
All shall be well in Syracuse: a fleet
Appears in view, and brings the chosen sons
Of Carthage. From the hill that fronts the harbor,
I saw their canvas swelling with the wind,
While on the purple wave the western sun
Glanced the remains of day.

Euphra. Yet till the fury
Of war subside, the wild, the horrid interval
In safety let me soothe to dear delight
In a loved father's presence; from his sight,
For three long days, with specious feigned excuse
Your guards debarred me. Oh! while yet he lives,
Indulge a daughter's love; worn out with age
Soon must he seal his eyes in endless night,
And with his converse charm my ear no more.

Dion. Why thus anticipate misfortune? Still
Evander mocks the injuries of time.
Calippus, thou survey the city round;
Station the centiness, that no surprise
Invade the unguarded works, while drouzy night
Weighs down the soldier's eye. Afflicted fair,
Thy couch invites thee. When the tumult's over,
Thou Wilt see Evander with redoubled joy.
Though now unequal to the cares of empire
His age sequester him, yet honors high
Shall gild the evening of his various day.

Euphra. For this benignity accept my thanks.
They gush in tears, and my heart pours it is tribute.

Dion. Perdiccas, ever the morn's revolving light
Unveil the face of things, do thou dispatch
A well-oar'd galley to Hamilcar's fleet;
At the north point of yonder promontory
Let some selected officer instruct him
To moor his ships, and issue on the land.
Then may Timoleon tremble; vengeance then
Shall overwhelm his camp, pursue his bands
With fatal havoc to the ocean's margin,
And cast their limbs to glut the vulture's famine
In mangled heaps upon the naked shore.
Exit Dionysius.
EUPHRASIA, MILANTHON. Euphra. What do I hear? Melanthon, can it be?
If Carthage comes, if her perfidious sons
List in his cause, the dawn of freedom's gone.

Mel. Woe, bitt'rest woe impends; thou would not think --

Euphra. How! -- speak! -- unfold --

Melan. My tongue denies it is office.

Euphra. How is my father? Say, Melanthon --

Melan. He, --
Perhaps he dies this moment. -- Since Timoleon
First formed his lines round this beleaguered city,
No nutriment has touched Evander's lips.
In the deep caverns of the rock imprisoned
He pines in bitt'rest want.

Euphra. To that abode
Of woe and horror, that last stage of life,
Has the fell tyrant moved him?

Melan. There sequestered,
Alas! he soon must perish.

Euphra. Well, my heart, Well do your vital drops forget to flow.

Melan. Enough his sword has reek'd with public slaughter;
Now dark insiduous deeds must thin mankind.

Euphra. Oh! night, that often have heard my piercing shrieks,
Disturb thy awful silence; often has heard
Each stroke these hands in frantic sorrow gave
From this sad breast resounding, now no more
I mean to vent complaints; I mean not now
With busy memory to retrace the wrongs
His hand has heaped on our devoted race.
I bear it all; with calmest patience bear it:
Resigned and wretched, desperate and lost.

Melan. Despair, alas! is all the sad resource Our fate allows us now.

Euphra. Yet why despair?
Is that the tribute to a father due?
Blood is his due, Melanthon; yes, the blood,
The vile, black blood, that fills the tyrant's veins,
Would graceful look upon my dagger's point.
Come, vengeance, come, shake off this feeble sex,
Sinew my arm, and guide it to his heart.
And thou, O filial piety, that rul'st
My woman's breast, turn to vindictive rage;
Assume the port of justice; show mankind
Tyrannic guilt has never dared in Syracuse,
Beyond the reach of virtue.

Melan. Yet beware;
Control this frenzy that bears down your reason.
Surrounded by his guards, the tyrant mocks
Your utmost fury; moderate your zeal,
Nor let him hear these transports of the soul,
These wild upbraidings.

Euphra. Shall Euphrasia's voice
Be hushed to silence, when a father dies?
Shall not the monster hear his deeds accursed?
Shall he not tremble, when a daughter comes,
Wild with her griefs, and terrible with wrongs,
Fierce in despair, all nature in her cause
Alarmed and roused to vengeance? -- Yes, Melanthon,
The man of blood shall hear me; yes, my voice
Shall mount aloft upon the whirlwind's wing,
Pierce yon blue vault, and bring the thund'rer down,
Melanthon come; my wrongs will lend me force;
The weakness of my sex is gone; this arm
Feels tenfold strength; this arm shall do a deed
For Heaven and earth, for men and gods to wonder at:
This arm shall vindicate a father's cause.

END OF THE FIRST ACT. ACT II.
A wild romantic Scene amidst overhanging Rocks; a Cavern on one Side. ARCAS,
with a Spear in his Hand. THE gloom of night sits heavy on the world;
And over the solemn scene such stillness reigns,
As 'twere a pause of nature; on the beach
No murmuring billow breaks; the Grecian tents
Lie sunk in sleep; no gleaming fires are seen;
All Syracuse is hushed; no stir abroad,
Save ever and anon the dashing oar,
That beats the sullen wave. And hark! -- Was that
The groan of anguish from Evander's cell,
Piercing the midnight gloom? -- It is the sound
Of bustling prows, that cleave the briny deep.
Perhaps at this dead hour Hamilcar's fleet
Rides in the bay.
Enter PHILOTAS, from the Cavern. Philo. What ho! -- brave Arcas! -- ho!

Arcas. Why thus desert thy couch?

Philo. Methought the sound Of distant uproar chased affrighted sleep.

Arcas. At intervals the oar's resounding stroke
Comes ecchoing from the main. Save that report,
A death-like silence through the wide expanse
Broods over the dreary coast.

Philo. Do thou retire,
And seek repose; the duty of thy watch
Is now performed; I take thy post.

Arcas. How fares
Your royal prisoner?

Philo. Arcas, shall I own
A secret weakness? -- My heart inward melts
To see that suffering virtue. On the earth,
The cold, dank earth, the royal victim lies;
And while pale famine drinks his vital spirit,
He welcomes death, and smiles himself to rest.
Oh! would I could relieve him! Thou withdraw;
Thy wearied nature claims repose; and now
The watch is mine.

Arcas. May no alarm disturb thee.
Exit.
PHILOTAS. Some dread event is laboring into birth.
At close of day the sullen sky held forth
Unerring signals. -- With disastrous glare
The moon's full orb rose crimsoned over with blood;
And lo! athwart the gloom a falling star
Trails a long tract of fire! -- What daring step
Sounds on the flinty rock? Stand there; what ho!
Speak, ere thou dare advance?

Enter EUPHRASIA, with a Lanthorn in her Hand. Euphra. Thou need'st not fear;
It is a friend approaches.

Philo. Ha! what mean
Those plaintive notes?

Euphra. Here is no ambush'd Greek,
No warrior to surprise thee on the watch.
An humble suppliant comes -- Alas! my strength
Exhausted quite forsakes this weary frame,

Philo. What voice thus piercing through the gloom of night --
What art thou? -- Speak, unfold thy purpose; say,
What wretch, with what intent, at this dead hour --
Wherefore alarm'st thou thus our peaceful watch?

Euphra. Let no mistrust affright thee. -- Lo! a wretch,
The veriest wretch that ever groaned in anguish,
Comes here to grovel on the earth before thee,
To tell her sad, sad tale, implore thy aid,
For sure the power is thine, thou can relieve
My bleeding heart, and soften all my woes.

Philo. Ha! sure those accents --
(takes the light from her.)
Euphra. Deign to listen to me.

Philo. Euphrasia! --

Euphra. Yes; the lost undone Euphrasia;
Supreme in wretchedness; to the inmost sense,
Here in the quickest fiber of the heart,
Wounded, transfixed, and tortured to distraction.

Philo. Why, princess, thus anticipate the dawn?
Still sleep and silence wrap the weary world;
The stars in mid career usurp the pole;
The Grecian bands, the winds, the waves are hushed;
All things are mute around us; all but you
Rest in oblivious slumber from their cares.

Euphra. Yes, all at peace; I only wake to misery.

Philo. How did thou gain the summit of the rock?

Euphra. Give me my father; here you hold him fettered;
Oh! give him to me; -- in the fond pursuit
All pain and peril vanish; love and duty
Inspired the thought; despair itself gave courage;
I climbed the hard ascent; with painful toil
Surmounted craggy cliffs, and pointed rocks;
What will not misery attempt? -- If ever
The touch of nature throbb'd within your breast,
Admit me to Evander; in these caves
I know he pines in want; let me convey
Some charitable succor to a father.

Philo. Alas! Euphrasia, would I dared comply.

Euphra. It will be virtue in thee; thou, like me,
Were born in Greece; -- Oh! by our common parent --
Nay stay; thou shall not fly; Philotas stay --
You have a father too; -- think were his lot
Hard as Evander's; if, by felon hands
Chained to the earth, with slow consuming pangs
He felt sharp want, and with an asking eye
Implored relief, yet cruel men denied it,
Would thou not burst through adamantine gates,
Through walls and rocks, to save him? Think, Philotas,
Of thy own aged sire, and pity mine.
Think of the agonies a daughter feels,
When thus a parent wants the common food,
The bounteous hand of nature meant for all.

Philo. 'Twere best withdraw thee, princess; thy assistance
Evander wants not; it is fruitless all;
Thy tears, thy wild entreaties, are in vain.

Euphra. Ha! -- thou have murdered him; he is no more;
I understand thee; -- butchers, you have shed
The precious drops of life; yet, even in death,
Let me behold him; let a daughter close
With duteous hand a father's beamless eyes;
Print her last kisses on his honored hand,
And lay him decent in the shroud of death.

Philo. Alas! this frantic grief can naught avail.
Retire, and seek the couch of balmy sleep,
In this dead hour, this season of repose.

Euphra. And do thou then, inhuman that thou art,
Advise a wretch like me to know repose?
This is my last abode; these caves, these rocks,
Shall ring for ever with Euphrasia's wrongs;
All Sicily shall hear me; yonder deep
Shall echo back an injured daughter's cause;
Here will I dwell, and rave, and shriek, and give
These scattered locks to all the passing winds;
Call on Evander lost; and, pouring curses,
And cruel gods, and cruel stars invoking,
Stand on the cliff in madness and despair.

Philo. Yet calm this violence; reflect, Euphrasia,
With what severe enforcement Dionysius
Exacts obedience to his dread command.
If here you are found --

Euphra. Here is Euphrasia's mansion,
(falls on the ground.) Her fixed eternal home; -- inhuman savages,
Here stretch me with a father's murdered corse;
Then heap your rocks, your mountains on my head;
It will be kindness in you; I shall rest
In tomb'd within a parent's arms.

Philo. By Heaven,
My heart in pity bleeds.

Euphra Talk thou of pity?
Yield to the generous instinct; grant my prayer;
Let my eyes view him, gaze their last upon him,
And show you have some sense of human woe.

Philo. Her vehemence of grief o'erpow'rs me quite.
My honest heart condemns the barbarous deed,
And if I dare --

Euphra. And if you dare! -- Is that
The voice of manhood? Honest, if you dare!
It Is the slave's virtue! it is the utmost limit
Of the base coward's honor. -- Not a wretch,
There Is not a villain, not a tool of power,
But, silence interest, extinguish fear,
And he will prove benevolent to man.
The generous heart does more; will dare do all
That honor prompts. -- How do thou dare to murder? --
Respect the gods, and know no other fear.

Philo. Oh! thou have conquered. -- Yes, Euphrasia, go Behold thy father --

Euphra. Raise me, raise me up;
I Will bathe thy hand with tears, thou generous man!

Philo. Yet mark my words; if aught of nourishment
Thou would convey, my partners of the watch
Will never consent --

Euphra. I will observe your orders:
On any terms, oh! let me, let me see him.

Philo. Yon lamp will guide thee through the cavern'd way.

Euphra. My heart runs over in thanks; the pious act
Timoleon shall reward; the bounteous gods,
And thy own virtue shall reward the deed.
Goes into the cave.
PHILOTAS. Prevailing, powerful virtue! -- Thou subdu'st
The stubborn heart, and mould'st it to thy purpose.
Would I could save them! -- But though not for me
The glorious power to shelter innocence,
Yet for a moment to assuage its woes,
Is the best sympathy, the purest joy
Nature intended for the heart of man,
When thus she gave the social generous tear.
Exit.
Scene the Inside of the Cavern. Enter ARCAS and EUPHRASIA. Arcas. No; on my
life I dare not.

Euphra. But a small,
A wretched pittance; one poor cordial drop
To renovate exhausted drooping age.
I ask no more.

Arcas. Not the smallest store
Of scanty nourishment must pass these walls.
Our lives were forfeit else: a moment's parley
Is all I grant; in yonder cave he lies.

Evander (within the cell.) Oh! struggling nature! let thy conflict end.
Oh! give me, give me rest.

Euphra. My father's voice!
It pierces here; it cleaves my very heart.
I shall expire, and never see him more.

Arcas. Repose thee, princess, here, (draws a couch.) here rest thy limbs,
Till the returning blood shall lend thee firmness.

Euphra. The caves, the rocks, re-echo to his groans,
And is there no relief?

Arcas. All I can grant
You shall command. -- I will unbar the dungeon,
Unloose the chain that binds him to the rock,
And leave your interview without restraint.

(Opens a cell in the back scene.) Euphra. Hold, hold my heart! Oh! how shall I
sustain
The agonizing scene? (rises.) I must behold him;
Nature, that drives me on, will lend me force.
Is that his mansion?

Arcas. Take your last farewell.
His vigor seems not yet exhausted quite.
You must be brief, or ruin will ensue.
Exit.
Evan (raising himself.) Oh! when shall I get free? --
These lingering pangs --

Euphra. Behold, ye powers, that spectacle of woe!

Evan. Dispatch me, pitying gods, and save my child!
I burn; I burn; alas! no place of rest: Rises and comes out.
A little air; once more a breath of air;
Alas! I faint; I die.

Euphra. Heart-piercing sight!
Let me support you, Sir.

Evan. Oh! lend your arm. --
Whoever thou art, I thank thee -- That kind breeze
Comes gently over my senses -- Lead me forward --
And is there left one charitable hand
To reach it is succor to a wretch like me?

Euphra. Well may thou ask it. Oh! my breaking heart!
The hand of death is on him.

Evan. Still a little,
A little onward to the air conduct me;
It Is well* -- I thank thee; thou art kind and good,
And much I wonder at this generous pity.

Euphra. Do you not know me, Sir?

Evan. Methinks I know
That voice -- art thou -- alas! my eyes are dim!
Each object swims before me -- No, in truth
I do not know thee. --

Euphra. Not your own Euphrasia?

Evan. Art thou my daughter?

Euphra. Oh! my honored Sire!

Evan. My daughter, my Euphrasia! come to close
A father's eyes! -- Given to my last embrace!
Gods! do I hold her once again? -- Your mercies
Are without number -- (falls on the couch.)
This excess of bliss
O'erpow'rs -- it kills -- Euphrasia -- could I hope it?
I die content -- Art thou indeed my daughter?
Thou art -- my hand is moistened with thy tears --
I pray you do not weep -- thou art my child --
I thank you gods! -- in my last dying moments
You have not left me -- I would pour my praise --
You read my heart -- you see what passes there.

Euphra. Alas he faints; the gushing tide of transport
Bears down each feeble sense -- Restore him Heaven!

Evan. All, my Euphrasia, all will soon be well.
Pass but a moment, and this busy globe,
Its thrones, its empires, and its bustling millions,
Will seem a speck in the great void of space.
Yet while I stay, thou darling of my age --
Nay dry those tears --

Euphra. I will my father.

Evan. Where,
I fear to ask it, where is virtuous Phocion?

Euphra. Fled from the tyrant's power.

Evan. And left thee here Exposed and helpless?

Euphra. He is all truth and honor: He fled to save my child.

Evan. My young Evander!
Your boy is safe Euphrasia? -- Oh! my heart --
Alas! quite gone; worn out with misery;
Oh! weak, decayed old man!

Euphra. Inhuman wretches!
Will none relieve his want? -- A drop of water
Might save his life; and even that is denied him.

Evan. These strong emotions -- Oh! that eager air --
It is too much -- Assist me; bear me hence;
And lay me down in peace.

Euphra. His eyes are fixed!
And those pale quivering lips! -- He clasps my hand --
What, no assistance! -- Monsters will you thus
Let him expire in these weak feeble arms?

Enter PHILOTAS. Philo. Those wild, those piercing shrieks will give the alarm.

Euphra. Support him; bear him hence; it is all I ask.

Evan. (As he is carried off.) O Death! where art thou?
-- Death, thou dread of guilt,
Thou wish of innocence, affliction's friend,
Tired nature calls thee -- Come, in mercy come,
And lay me pillow'd in eternal rest.
My child -- where art thou? Give me -- reach thy hand --
Why do thou weep? -- My eyes are dry -- Alas!
Quite parched -- my lips -- quite parched -- they cling -- together.

Euphra. Now judge, ye Powers, in the whole round of time,
If ever you viewed a scene of woe like this.
Exeunt. Enter ARCAS.
Arcas. The gray of morn breaks through yon eastern clouds.
'Twere time this interview should end; the hour
Now warns Euphrasia hence; what man could dare,
I have indulged -- Philotas! -- ha! the cell
Left void! -- Evander gone! -- What may this mean?
Philotas, speak.

Enter PHILOTAS. Philo. Oh! vile, detested lot
Here to obey the savage tyrant's will,
And murder virtue, that can thus behold
It Is executioner, and smile upon him.
That piteous sight!

Arcas. She must withdraw Philotas;
Delay undoes us both. The restless main
Glows with the blush of day. Timoleon's fleet,
That passed the night in busy preparation,
Makes from the shore. On the high craggy point
Of yonder jutting eminence I marked
Their haughty streamers curling to the wind.
He seeks Hamilcar's fleet. The briny deep
Shall soon be dyed with blood. The fierce alarm
Will rouse our slumbering troops. The time requires
Without or further pause, or vain excuse,
That she depart this moment.

Philo. Arcas, yes;
My voice shall warn her of the approaching danger.

Exit. Arcas. Would she had never adventured to our guard.
I dread the event; and hark! -- the wind conveys
In clearer sound the uproar of the main.
The fates prepare new havoc; on the event
Depends the fate of empire. Wherefore thus
Delays Euphrasia? -- Ha! what means, Philotas,
That sudden haste, that pale disordered look?

Enter PHILOTAS. Philo. O! I can hold no more; at such a sight
Even the hard heart of tyranny would melt
To infant softness. Arcas, go, behold
The pious fraud of charity and love;
Behold that unexampled goodness; see
The expedient sharp necessity has taught her;
Thy heart will burn; will melt, will yearn to view
A child like her.

Arcas. Ha! -- Say what mystery
Wakes these emotions?

Philo. Wonder-working virtue!
The father fostered at his daughter's breast! --
O! filial piety! -- The milk designed
For her own offspring, on the parent's lip
Allays the parching fever.

Arcas. That device
Has she then formed, eluding all our care,
To minister relief?

Philo. On the bare earth
Evander lies; and as his languid powers
Imbibe with eager thirst the kind refreshment,
And his looks speak unutterable thanks,
Euphrasia views him with the tenderest glance,
Even as a mother doting on her child,
And, ever and anon, amidst the smiles
Of pure delight, of exquisite sensation,
A silent tear steals down; the tear of virtue,
That sweetens grief to rapture. All her laws
Inverted quite, great Nature triumphs still.

Arcas. The tale unmans my soul.

Philo. Ye tyrants hear it,
And learn, that, while your cruelty prepares
Unheard of torture, virtue can keep pace
With your worst efforts, and can try new modes
To bid men grow enamored of her charms.

Arcas. Philotas, for Euphrasia, in her cause
I now can hazard all. Let us preserve
Her father for her.

Philo. Oh! her lovely daring
Transcends all praise. By Heaven, he shall not die.

Arcas. And yet we must be wary; I Will go forth,
And first explore each avenue around,
Lest the fixed sentinel obstruct your purpose.

Exit. Philo. I thank thee, Arcas; we will act like men
Who feel another's woes -- She leads him forth,
And tremblingly supports his drooping age.

Goes to assist him. Enter EUPHRASIA and EVANDER. Evan. Euphrasia, oh! my
child! returning life
Glows here about my heart. Conduct me forward --
At the last gasp preserved! Ha! dawning light!
Let me behold; in faith I see thee now;
I do indeed: the father sees his child.

Euphra. I have relieved him -- Oh! the joy's too great;
It Is speechless rapture!

Evan. Blessings, blessings on thee!

Euphra. My father still shall live. Alas! Philotas,
Could I abandon that white hoary head,
That venerable form? -- Abandon him
To perish here in misery and famine?

Philo. Thy tears, thou miracle of goodness!
Have triumphed over me; these round gushing drops
Attest your conquest. Take him, take your father;
Convey him hence; I do release him to you.

Evan. What said Philotas! -- Do I fondly dream?
Indeed my senses are imperfect; yet
Methought I heard him! Did he say release me?

Philo. Thou art my king, and now no more my prisoner;
Go with your daughter, with that wondrous pattern
Of filial piety to after times.
Yes, princess, lead him forth; I Will point the path,
Whose soft declivity will guide your steps
To the deep vale, which these o'erhanging rocks
Encompass round. You may convey him thence
To some safe shelter. Yet a moment's pause;
I must conceal your flight from every eye.
Yes, I will save 'em -- Oh! returning virtue!
How big with joy one moment in thy service!
That wretched pair! I Will perish in their cause.

Exit. EUPHRASIA, EVANDER. Evan. Whither, oh! whither shall Evander go?
I Am at the goal of life; if in the race
Honor has followed with no lingering step,
But there sits smiling with her laureled wreath,
To crown my brow, there would I fain make halt,
And not inglorious lay me down to rest.

Euphra. And will you then refuse, when thus the Gods
Afford a refuge to thee?

Evan. Oh! my child,
There is no refuge for me.

Euphra. Pardon, Sir:
Euphrasia's care has formed a safe retreat;
There may thou dwell; it will not long be wanted;
Soon shall Timoleon, with resistless force,
Burst yon devoted walls.

Evan. Timoleon!

Euphra. Yes,
The brave Timoleon, with the power of Greece;
Another day shall make the city his.

Evan. Timoleon come to vindicate my rights!
Oh! thou shall reign in Sicily! -- My child
Shall grace her father's throne. Indulgent Heaven!
Pour down your blessings on this best of daughters;
To her and Phocion give Evander's crown;
Let them, oh! let them both in virtue wear it,
And in due time transmit it to their boy!
Enter PHILOTAS
Philo. All things are apt; -- the drowsy sentinel
Lies hushed in sleep; I Will marshal thee the way
Down the steep rock.

Euphra. Oh! Let us quickly hence.

Evan. The blood but loiters in these frozen veins.
Do you, whose youthful spirit glows with life,
Do you go forth, and leave this mouldering corpse.
To me had Heaven decreed a longer date,
It never had suffered a fell monster's reign,
Nor let me see the carnage of my people.
Farewell, Euphrasia; in one loved embrace
To these remains pay the last obsequies,
And leave me here to sink to silent dust.

Euphra. And will you then, on self-destruction bent,
Reject my prayer, not trust your fate with me?

Evan. Trust thee! Euphrasia? Trust in thee my child?
Though life's a burden I could well lay down,
Yet I will prize it, since bestowed by thee.
Oh! thou art good; thy virtue soars a flight
For the wide world to wonder at; in thee,
Hear it all nature, future ages hear it,
The father finds a parent in his child.

END OF THE SECOND ACT. ACT III.
Scene a Rampart near the Harbor. Enter MELANTHON and PHILOTAS. Melan. AND
lives he still?

Philo. He does; and kindly aliment
Renews the springs of life.

Melan. And does he know
The glorious work the destinies prepare?

Philo. He is informed of all.

Melan. That Greek Timoleon
Comes his deliverer, and the fell usurper
Pants in the last extreme?

Philo. The glorious tidings
Have reached his ear.

Melan. Lead on, propitious Power,
Your great design; second the Grecian arms,
And whelm the sons of Carthage in the deep.

Philo. This hour decides their doom; and, lo! Euphrasia
Stands on the jutting rock, that rock, where often
Whole days she sat in pensive sorrow fixed,
And swelled with streaming tears the restless deep.
There, now with other sentiments elate,
She views Timoleon with victorious prow
Glide through the waves, and sees the scattered navy
Of Carthage fly before him.

Melan. Blessed event!
Evander, if thou mock'st me not, shall live
Once more to see the justice of the Gods.
But will thou still protect my royal master?
Will thou admit me to his wished for presence?

Philo. Let it suffice that no assassin's aim
Can now assault him -- I must hence, Melanthon;
I now must mingle with the tyrant's train,
And, with a semblance of obsequious duty,
Delude suspicion's eye -- My friend, farewell.

Exit. MELANTHON. If he deceive me not with specious hopes,
I shall behold the sovereign, in whose service
These temples felt the iron casque of war,
And these white hairs have silvered over my head.
Enter EUPHRASIA. Euphra. See there; behold 'em; lo! the fierce encounter;
He rushes on; the ocean flames around
With the bright flash of arms; the echoing hills
Rebellow to the roar.

Melan. The Gods are with us,
And victory is ours.

Euphra. High on the stern
The Grecian leaders stand; they stem the surge;
Launched from their arm the missive lightnings fly,
And the Barbaric fleet is wrapped in fire.
And lo! yon bark, down in the roaring gulf;
And there, more, more are perishing -- Behold!
They plunge for ever lost.

Melan. So perish all,
Who from yon continent unfurl their sails,
To shake the freedom of this sea-girt isle!

Euphra. Did I not say, Melanthon, did I not
Presage the glories of Timoleon's triumph!
Where now are Afric's sons? The vanquished tyrant
Shall look aghast; his heart shall shrink appalled,
And dread his malefactions! Worse than famine,
Despair shall fasten on him! --

Enter DIONYSIUS, CALIPPUS, etc. Dion. Base deserters!
Curse on their Punic faith! Did they once dare
To grapple with the Greek? Ere yet the main
Was tinged with blood, they turned their ships averse.
May storms and tempests follow in their rear,
And dash their fleet upon the Lybian shore!

Enter CALIPPUS. Calip. My liege, Timoleon where the harbor opens
Has stormed the forts, and even now his fleet
Pursues its course, and steers athwart the bay.

Dion. Ruin impends; and yet, if fall it must,
I bear a mind to meet it, undismayed,
Unconquered even by Fate.

Calip. Through every street
Despair and terror fly. A panic spreads
From man to man, and superstition sees
Jove armed with thunder, and the Gods against us.

Dion. With sacred rites their wrath must be appeased.
Let instant victims at the altar bleed;
Let incense roll its fragrant coulds to Heaven,
And pious matrons, and the virgin train,
In slow procession to the temple bear
The image of their Gods.

Euphra. Ha! -- Does the tyrant
Dare with unhallowed step, with crimes and guilt,
Approach the sacred fane? -- Alas! my father,
Where now thy sanctuary? -- What place shall hide
Thy persecuted virtue? (Aside.)

Dion. Thou, Euphrasia,
Lead forth the pious band. -- This very moment
Issue our orders.

Euphra. With consenting heart
Euphrasia goes to waft her prayers to Heaven.
Exit.
Dion. The solemn sacrifice, the virgin throng,
Will gain the popular belief, and kindle
In the fierce soldiery religious rage.
Away, my friends, prepare the solemn pomp.
Exit CALIPPUS, etc. Philotas, thou draw near: how fares your prisoner?
Has he yet breathed his last?

Philo. Life ebbs apace;
Tomorrow's fun sees him a breathless corse.

Dion. Curse on his lingering pangs! Sicilia's crown
No more shall deck his brow; and if the sand
Still loiter in the glass, thy hand, my friend,
May shake it thence.

Philo. It shall, dread Sir; that task
Leave to thy faithful servant.

Dion. Oh! Philotas,
Thou little know the cares, the pangs of empire.
The ermin'd pride, the purple that adorns
A conqueror's breast, but serves, my friend, to hide
A heart that is torn, that is mangled with remorse.
Each object round me wakens horrid doubts;
The flattering train, the sentinel that guards me,
The slave that waits, all give some new alarm,
And from the means of safety dangers rise.
Even victory itself plants anguish here,
And round my laurels the fell serpent twines.

Philo. Would Dionysius abdicate his crown,
And sue for terms of peace?

Dion. Detested thought!
No, though ambition teems with countless ills,
It still has charms of power to fire the soul.
Though horrors multiply around my head,
I will oppose them all. The pomp of sacrifice
But now ordained, is mockery to Heaven.
It Is vain, it is fruitless; then let daring guilt
Be my inspirer, and consummate all.
Where are those Greeks, the captives of my sword,
Whose desperate valor rushed within our walls,
Fought near our person, and the pointed lance
Aimed at my breast?

Philo. In chains they wait their doom.

Dion. Give me to see 'em; bring the slaves before me.

Philo. What, ho! Melanthon, this way lead your prisoners.

Enter MELANTHON with Greek Officers and Soldiers. Dion. Assassins and not
warriors! do ye come,
When the wide range of battle claims your sword,
Thus do you come against a single life
To wage the war? Did not our buckler ring
With all your darts in one collected volley
Showered on my head? Did not your swords at once
Point at my breast, and thirst for regal blood?

Greek Of. We sought thy life. I am by birth a Greek,
An open foe in arms I meant to slay
The foe of human kind. -- With rival ardour
We took the field; one voice, one mind, one heart;
All leagued, all covenanted: in yon camp
Spirits there are who aim, like us, at glory.
Whenever you sally forth, whenever the Greeks
Shall scale your walls, prepare thee to encounter
A like assault. By me the youth of Greece
Thus notify the war they mean to wage.

Dion. Thus then I warn them of my great revenge.
Whoever in battle shall become our prisoner,
In torment meets his doom.

Greek Of. Then will thou see,
How vile the body to a mind that pants
For genuine glory. Twice three hundred Greeks
Have sworn, like us, to hunt thee through the ranks;
Ours the first lot; we have failed; on yonder plain
Appear in arms, the faithful band will meet thee.

Dion. Vile slave, no more. Melanthon drag 'em hence
To die in misery. Impaled alive
The winds shall parch them on the craggy cliff.
Selected from the rest let one depart
A messenger to Greece, to tell the fate
Her chosen sons, her first adventurers, met.
Exit.
Melan. Unhappy men! how shall my care protect
Your forfeit lives? -- Philotas, thou conduct them
To the deep dungeon's gloom. In that recess,
'Midst the wild tumult of eventful war,
We may ward off the blow. My friends, farewell;
That officer will guide your steps.

All follow PHILOTAS, except PHOCION. Pho. Disguised
Thus in a soldier's garb he knows me not.
Melanthon! --

Melan. Ha! -- Those accents! -- Phocion here?

Pho. Yes, Phocion here! Speak, quickly tell me, say
How fares Euphrasia?

Melan. Ha! beware; -- Philotas,
Conduct these prisoners hence; this soldier here
Shall bear the tidings to Timoleon's camp.

Pho. Oh! satisfy my doubts; how fares Euphrasia?

Melan. Euphrasia lives, and fills the anxious moments
With every virtue. -- Wherefore venture hither?
Why with rash valor penetrate our gates?

Pho. Could I refrain? Oh! could I tamely wait
The event of lingering war? With patience count
The lazy-pacing hours, while here in Syracuse
The tyrant keeps all that my heart holds dear?
For her dear sake, all danger sinks before me;
For her I burst the barriers of the gate,
Where the deep cavern'd rock affords a passage.
A hundred chosen Greeks pursued my steps,
We forced an entrance; the devoted guard
Fell victims to our rage; but in that moment
Down from the walls superior numbers came.
The tyrant led them on. We rushed upon him,
If we could reach his heart, to end the war.
But Heaven thought otherwise. Melanthon, say,
I fear to ask it, lives Evander still?

Melan. Alas, he lives imprisoned in the rock.
Thou must withdraw thee hence; regain once more
Timoleon's camp; alarm his slumbering rage:
Assail the walls: thou with thy phalanx seek
The subterraneous path; that way at night
The Greeks may enter, and let in destruction
To the great work of vengeance.

Pho. Would thou have me
Basely retreat, while my Euphrasia trembles
Here on the ridge of peril? She perhaps
May fall unknown, unpitied, undistinguished
Amidst the general carnage. Shall I leave her
To add that beauty to the purple heap?
No; I will seek her in these walls accursed,
Even in the tyrant's palace; save that life,
My only source of joy, that life, whose loss
Would make all Greece complotter in a murder,
And damn a righteous cause.

Melan. Yet hear the voice
Of sober age* Should Dionysius' spies
Detect thee here, ruin involves us all;
'Twere best retire, and seek Timoleon's tents;
Tell him, dismay and terror fill the city;
Even now in Syracuse the tyrant's will
Ordains with pomp oblations to the Gods.
His deadly hand still hot with recent blood,
The monster dares approach the sacred altar;
Thy voice may rouse Timoleon to the assault,
And bid him storm the works.

Pho. By Heaven I will;
My breath shall wake his rage; this very night,
When sleep sits heavy on the slumbering city,
Then Greece unsheaths her sword, and great revenge
Shall stalk with death and horror over the ranks
Of slaughtered troops, a sacrifice to freedom!
But first let me behold Euphrasia.

Melan. Hush
Thy pent-up valor; to a secret haunt
I Will guide thy steps; there dwell, and in apt time
I Will bring Euphrasia to thy longing arms.

Pho. Will thou?

Melan. By Heaven I will; another act
Of desperate fury might endanger all.
The tyrant's busy guards are posted round;
In silence follow; thou shall see Euphrasia.

Pho. Oh! lead me to her; that exalted virtue
With firmer nerve shall bid me grasp the javelin,
Shall bid my sword with more than lightning's swiftness
Blaze in the front of war, and glut its rage
With blow repeated in the tyrant's veins.
Exeunt.
Scene a Temple, with a Monument in the Middle. Enter EUPHRASIA, ERIXENE, and
other Female Attendants. Euphra. This way, my virgins, this way bend your steps.
Lo! the sad sepulcher where, hears'd in death,
The pale remains of my dear mother lie.
There, while the victims at yon altar bleed,
And with your prayers the vaulted roof resounds,
There let me pay the tribute of a tear,
A weeping pilgrim over Eudocia's ashes.

Erix. Forbear, Euphrasia, to renew your sorrows.

Euphra. My tears have dried their source; then let me here
Pay this sad visit to the honored clay
That moulders in the tomb. These sacred viands
I Will burn an offering to a parent's shade,
And sprinkle with this wine the hallowed mould.
That puty paid, I will return, my virgins.
She goes into the tomb.
Erix. Look down, propitious Powers! behold that virtue,
And heal the pangs that desolate her soul.

Enter PHILOTAS Philo. Mourn, mourn, ye virgins; rend your scattered garments;
Some dread calamity hangs over our heads.
In vain the tyrant would appease with sacrifice
The impending wrath of ill-requited Heaven.
Ill omens hover over us: at the altar
The victim dropped, ever the divining seer
Had gored his knife. The brazen statues trembled.
And from the marble, drops of blood distilled.

Erix. Now, ye just Gods, if vengeance you prepare,
Now find the guilty head.

Philo. Amidst the throng
A matron labors with the inspiring God;
She stares, she raves, and with no mortal sound
Proclaims aloud, "Where Phoebus am I borne?
"I see their glittering spears; I see them charge;
"Bellona wades in blood; that mangled body,
"Deformed with wounds and welt'ring in-its gore,
"I know it well; Oh! close the dreadful scene;
"Relieve me Phoebus, I have seen too much."

Erix. Alas! I tremble for Evander's fate;
Avert the omen, Gods, and guard his life.

Enter EUPHRASIA from the Tomb. Euphra. Virgins, I thank you -- Oh! more
lightly now.
My heart expands; the pious act is done,
And I have paid my tribute to a parent.
Ah! wherefore does the tyrant bend this way?

Philo. He flies the altar; leaves the unfinished rites.
No God there smiles propitious on his cause,
Fate lifts the awful balance; weighs his life,
The lives of numbers, in the trembling scale.

Euphra. Despair and horror mark his haggard looks,
His wild, disordered step -- He rushes forth;
Some new alarm demands him! -- Even now
He issues at yon portal! -- Lo! see there,
The suppliant crowd disperses; wild with fear,
Distraction in each look, the wretched throng
Pours through the brazen gates! -- Do you retire,
Retire Philotas; let me here remain,
And give the moments of suspended fate
To pious worship and to filial love.

Philo. Alas! I fear to yield: -- awhile I Will leave thee,
And at the temple's entrance wait thy coming.
Exit.
Euphra. Now then, Euphrasia, now thou may indulge
The purest ecstacy of soul. Come forth,
Thou man of woe, thou man of every virtue.

Enter EVANDER, from the Monument Evan. And does the grave thus cast me up again
With a fond father's love to view thee? Thus
To mingle rapture in a daughter's arms?

Euphra. How fares my father now?

Evan. Thy aid, Euphrasia,
Has given new life. Thou from this vital stream
Deriv'st thy being; with unheard of duty
Thou have repaid it to thy native source.

Euphra. Sprung from Evander, if a little portion
Of all his goodness dwell within my heart,
Thou will not wonder.

Evan. Joy and wonder rise
In mixed emotions! -- Though departing hence,
After the storms of a tempestuous life,
Though I was entering the wished for port,
Where all is peace, all bliss, and endless joy,
Yet here contented I can linger still
To view thy goodness, and applaud thy deeds,
Thou author of my life! -- Did ever parent
Thus call his child before? -- My heart's too full,
My old fond heart runs over; it aches with joy.

Euphra. Alas, too much you over-rate your daughter;
Nature and duty called me -- Oh! my father,
How did thon bear thy long, long sufferings?
How Endure their barbarous rage?

Evan. My foes but did
To this old frame, what Nature's hand must do.
In the worst hour of pain, a voice still whispered me
"Rouse thee, Evander; self-acquitting conscience
"Declares thee blameless, and the gods behold thee."
I was but going hence by mere decay
To that futurity which Plato taught,
Where the immortal spirit views the planets
Roll round the mighty year, and wrapped in bliss
Adores the ideas of the eternal mind.
Thither, oh! thither was Evander going,
But thou recall'st me; thou! --

Euphra. Timoleon too Invites thee back to life.

Evan. And does he still Urge on the siege?

Euphra. His active genius comes
To scourge a guilty race. The Punic fleet
Half lost is swallowed by the roaring sea.
The shattered refuse seek the Lybyian shore,
To bear the news of their defeat to Carthage.

Evan. These are thy wonders Heaven! -- Abroad thy spirit
Moves over the deep, and mighty fleets are vanished.

Euphra. Ha! -- hark! -- what noise is that! It comes this way.
Some busy footstep beats the hallowed pavement.
Oh! Sir, retire -- Ye Powers! -- Philotas! -- ha!
Enter PHILOTAS.
Philo. For thee, Euphrasia, Dionyfius calls.
Some new suspicion goads him. At yon gate
I stopped Calippus, as with eager haste
He bent this way to seek thee -- Oh! my sovereign,
My king, my injured master, will you pardon
The wrongs I Have done thee?
kneels to Evander.
Evan. Virtue such as thine,
From the fierce trial of tyrannic power,
Shines forth with added luster.

Philo. Oh! forgive
My ardent zeal -- there is no time to waste.
You must withdraw -- Trust to your faithful friends.
Pass but another day, and Dionysius
Falls from a throne usurped.

Evan. But ere he pays
The forfeit of his crimes, what streams of blood
Shall flow in torrents round! Methinks I might
Prevent this waste of nature -- I Will go forth,
And to my people show their rightful king.

Euphra. Banish that thought; forbear; the rash attempt
Were fatal to our hopes; oppressed, dismayed,
The people look aghast, and wan with fear
None will espouse your cause.

Evan. Yes all will dare
To act like men; -- their king, I gave myself
To a whole people. I made no reserve;
My life was their's; each drop about my heart
Pledged to the public cause; devoted to it;
That was my compact; is the subject's less?
If they are all debased, and willing slaves,
The young but breathing to grow gray in bondage.
And the old sinking to ignoble graves,
Of such a race no matter who is king.
And yet I will not think it; no! my people
Are brave and generous; I will trust their valor,
going.
Euphra. Yet stay; yet be advised.

Philo. As yet, my liege,
No plan is fixed, and no concerted measure.
The fates are busy: wait the vast event.
Trust to my truth and honor. Witness, Gods,
Here in the temple of Olympian Jove
Philotas swears --

Evan. Forbear: the man like thee,
Who feels the best emotions of the heart,
Truth, reason, justice, honor's fine excitements,
Acts by those laws, and wants no other sanction.

Euphra. Again, the alarm approaches; sure destruction
To thee, to all will follow: -- hark! a sound
Comes hollow murmuring through the vaulted isle,
It gains upon the ear. -- Withdraw; my father;
All Is lost if thou art seen.

Philo. And lo! Calippus
Darts with the light'ning's speed across the isle.

Evan. Thou at the Senate House convene my friends;
Melanthon, Dion, and their brave associates,
Will show that liberty has leaders still.
Anon I Will meet 'em there: my child farewell;
Thou shall direct me now.

Euphra. Too cruel fate!
The tomb is all the mansion I can give;
My mother's tomb!

Philo. You must be brief; the alarm
Each moment nearer comes. In every sound
Destruction threatens. Ha! by Heaven this way
Calippus comes -- Let me retard his speed.
Exit. EUPHRASIA coming forward. How my distracted heart throbs wild with fear?
What brings Calippus? Wherefore? Save me Heaven!
Enter CALIPPUS.
Calip. This lonely musing in these drear abodes
Alarms suspicion: the king knows thy plottings,
Thy rooted hatred to the state and him.
His sovereign will commands thee to repair
This moment to bis presence.

Euphra. Ha! what means
The tyrant? -- I obey (Exit Calippus.) and, oh!ye Powers
Ye ministers of Heaven, defend my father;
Support his drooping age; and when anon
Avenging Justice shakes her crimson steel,
Oh! be the grave at least a place of rest;
That from his covert in the hour of peace
Forth he may come to bless a willing people,
And be your own just image here on earth.

END OF THE THIRD ACT. ACT IV.
Enter MELANTHON and PHILANTAS. Melan. AWAY; no more; pernicious, vile
dissembler!

Philo. Wherefore this frantic rage?

Melan. Thou can not varnish
With thy perfidious arts a crime like this.
I climbed the rugged cliff; but, oh! thou traitor,
Where is Evander? Through each dungeon's gloom
I sought the good old king -- the guilt is thine;
May vengeance wait thee for it.

Philo. Still, Melanthon,
Let prudence guide thee.

Melan. Thou have plunged thee down
Far as the lowest depth of hell-born crimes;
Thou have out-gone all registers of guilt;
Beyond all fable have thou finn'd, Philotas.

Philo. By Heaven thou wrong'st me.
Did thou know, old man --

Melan. Could not his reverend age, could not his virtue,
His woes unnumber'd, soften thee to pity?
Thou have destroyed my king.

Philo. Yet will thou hear me?
Your king still lives.

Melan. Thou, vile deceiver! -- Lives!
But where? -- Away; no more. I charge thee, leave me.

Philo. We have removed him to a place of safety.

Melan. Removed! -- Thou traitor! what dark privacy --
Why move him thence? The dark assassin's stab
Has closed his days -- calm unrelenting villain!
I know it all.

Philo. By every Power above
Evander lives; in safety lives. Last night
When in his dark embrace sleep wrapped the world,
Euphrasia came, a spectacle of woe;
Dared to approach our guard, and with her tears,
With vehemence of grief, she touched my heart.
I gave her father to her.

Melan. How, Philotas!
If thou do not deceive me --

Philo. No, by Heaven!
By every Power above -- But hark! those notes
Speak Dionysius near -- Anon, my friend,
I Will tell thee each particular; -- thy king
Mean while is safe -- but lo! the tyrant comes;
With guilt like his I must equivocate,
And teach even truth and honor to dissemble.

Enter DIONYSIUS, CALIPPUS, etc. Dion. Away each vain alarm; the sun goes down,
Nor yet Timoleon issues from his fleet.
There let him linger on the wave-worn beach;
Here the vain Greek shall find another Troy,
A more than Hector here. Though Carthage fly,
Ourself -- still Dionysius here remains.
And means the Greek to treat of terms of peace?
By Heaven, this panting bosom hoped to meet
His boasted phalanx on the embattled plain.
And does he now, on peaceful councils bent,
Dispatch his herald? -- Let the slave approach.

Enter the HERALD. Dion. Now speak thy purpose; what does Greece impact

Herald. Timoleon, Sir, whose great renown in arms
Is equaled only by the softer virtues
Of mild humanity that sway his heart,
Sends me his deligate to offer terms,
On which even foes may well accord; on which
The fiercest nature, though it spurn at justice,
May sympathize with his.

Dion. Undfold thy mystery;
Thou shall be heard.

Herald. The generous leader sees,
With pity sees, the wild destructive havoc
Of ruthless war; he has surveyed around
The heaps of slain that cover yonder field,
And, touched with generous sense of human woe,
Weeps over his victories.

Dion. Your leader weeps!
Then let the author of those ills thou speak of,
Let the ambitious factor of destruction,
Timely retreat, and close the scene of blood,
Why does affrighted peace behold his standard
Uprear'd in Sicily? and wherefore here
The iron ranks of war, from which the shepherd
Retires appalled, and leaves the blasted hopes
Of half the year, while closer to her breast
The mother clasps her infant?

Herald. It Is not mine
To plead Timoleon's cause; not mine the office
To justify the strong, the righteous motives
That urge him to the war: the only scope
My deputation aims at, is to fix
An interval of peace, a pause of horror,
That they, whose bodies on the naked shore
Lie welt'ring in their blood, from either host
May meet the last sad rites to nature due,
And decent lie in honorable graves.

Dion. Go tell your leader, his pretexts are vain:
Let him, with those that live, embark for Greece,
And leave our peaceful plains; the mangled limbs
Of those he murdered, from my tender care
Shall meet due obsequies.

Herald. The hero, Sir,
Wages no war with those, who bravely die.
It Is for the dead I supplicate; for them
We sue for peace; and to the living too
Timoleon would extend it, but the groans
Of a whole people have unsheathed his sword.
A single day will pay the funeral rites.
To morrow's sun may see both armies meet
Without hostility, and all in honor;
You to inter the troops, who bravely fell;
We, on our part, to give an humble sod
To those, who gained a footing on the isle,
And by their death have conquered.

Dion. Be it so;
I grant thy suit: soon as tomorrow's dawn
Illume the world, the rage of wasting war
In vain shall thirst for blood: but mark my words;
If the next orient sun behold you here,
That hour shall see me terrible in arms
Deluge yon plain, and let destruction loose.
Thou know my last resolve, and now farewell.
Some careful officer conduct him forth.
Exit Herald. By Heaven, the Greek has offered to my sword
An easy prey; a sacrifice to glut
My great revenge. Calippus let each soldier
This night resign his wearied limbs to rest,
That ere the dawn, with renovated strength,
On the unguarded, unsuspecting foe,
Disarmed, and bent on superstitious rites,
From every quarter we may rush undaunted,
Give the invaders to the deathful steel,
And by one carnage bury all in ruin.
My valiant friends, haste to your several posts,
And let this night a calm unruffled spirit
Lie hushed in sleep -- Away, my friends, disperse.
Philotas, waits Euphrasia as we ordered?

Philo. She Is here at hand.

Dion. Admit her to our presence.
Rage and despair, a thousand warring passions,
All rise by turns, and piecemeal rend my heart.
Yet every means, all measures must be tried,
To sweep the Grecian spoiler from the land,
And fix the crown unshaken on my brow.

Enter EUPHRASIA. Euphra. What sudden cause requires Euphrasia's presence?

Dion. Approach, fair mourner, and dispel thy fears.
Thy grief, thy tender duty to thy father,
Has touched me nearly. In his lone retreat
Respect, attendance, every lenient care
To soothe affliction, and extend his life,
Evander has commanded.

Euphra. Vile dissembler!
Detested homicide! (Aside) -- And has thy heart
Felt for the wretched?

Dion. Urgencies of state
Abridg'd his liberty,; but to his person
All honor has been paid.

Euphra. The righteous Gods
Have marked thy ways, and will in time repay
Just retribution.

Dion. If to see your father,
If here to meet him in a fond embrace,
Will calm thy breast, and dry those beauteous tears,
A moment more shall bring him to your presence.

Euphra. Ha! lead him hither! Sir, to move him now,
Aged, infirm, worn out with toil and years --
No, let me seek him rather -- If soft pity
Has touched your heart, oh! send me, send me to him.

Dion. Control this wild alarm; with prudent care
Philotas shall conduct him; here I grant
The tender interview.

Euphra. Disastrous fate!
Ruin impends! -- This will discover all;
I Will perish first; provoke his utmost rage. (Aside.)
Though much I languish to behold my father,
Yet now it were not fit -- approaching night --
At the first dawn of day --

Dion. This night, this very hour,
You both must meet; the time forbids delay.
Together you may serve the state and me.
Thou see the havoc of wide wasting war;
And more, full well you know, are still to bleed.
Thou may prevent their fate.

Euphra. Oh! give the means,
And I will bless thee for it.

Dion. From, a Greek,
Torments have wrung the truth. Thy husband, Phocion --

Euphra. Oh! say, speak of my Phocion.

Dion. He; it is he
Has kindled up this war; with treacherous arts
Inflamed the states of Greece, and now the traitor
Comes with a foreign aid to wrest my crown.

Euphra. And does my Phocion share Timoleon's glory?

Dion. With him invests our walls, and bids rebellion
Erect her standard here.

Euphra. Oh! bless him Gods!
Wherever my hero treads the paths of war,
List on his side; against the hostile javelin
Uprear his mighty buckler; to his sword
Lend the fierce whirlwind's rage, that he may come
With wreaths of triumph, and with conquest crowned,
And his Euphrasia spring with rapture to him,
Melt in his arms, and a whole nation's voice
Applaud my hero with a love like mine!

Dion. Ungrateful fair! Has not our sovereign will
On thy descendant's six'd Sicilia's crown?
Have I not vowed protection to your boy?

Euphra. From thee the crown! From thee! Euphrasia's children
Shall on a nobler basis found their rights,
On their own virtue, and a people's choice.

Dion. Misguided woman!

Euphra. Ask of thee protection!
The father's valor shall protect his boy.

Dion. Rush not on sure destruction; ere too late
Accept our proffered grace. The terms are these;
Instant send forth a message to your husband;
Bid him draw off his Greeks; unmoor his fleet,
And measure back his way. Full well he knows
You and your father are my hostages;
And for his treason both may answer.

Euphra. Think thou then
So meanly of my Phocion? -- Do thou deem him
Poorly wound up to a mere fit of valor,
To melt away in a weak woman's tear?
Oh! thou do little know him; know but little
Of his exalted soul. With generous ardour
Still will he urge the great, the glorious plan,
And gain the ever honored bright reward,
Which fame intwines around the patriot's brow,
And bids for ever flourish on his tomb,
For nations freed and tyrants laid in dust.

Dion. By Heaven, this night Evander breathes his last.

Euphra. Better for him to sink at once to rest,
Than linger thus beneath the gripe of famine,
In a vile dungeon scoop'd with barbarous skill
Deep in the flinty rock; a monument
Of that fell malice, and that black suspicion
That marked your father's reign; a dungeon drear
Prepared for innocence! -- Vice lived secure,
It flourished, triumphed, grateful to his heart;
'Twas virtue only could give umbrage; then,
In that black period, to be great and good
Was a state crime; the powers of genius then
Were a constructive treason.

Dion. Ha! beware,
Nor with vile calumny provoke my rage.

Euphra. Whatever was laudable, whatever was worthy,
Sunk under foul oppression: freeborn men
Were torn in private from their household gods,
Shut from the light of Heaven in cavern'd cells,
Chained to the grunsel edge, and left to pine
In bitterness of soul; while in the vaulted roof
The tyrant sat, and through a secret channel
Collected every sound; heard each complaint
Of martyred virtue; kept a register
Of sighs and groans by cruelty extorted;
Noted the honest language of the heart;
Then on the victim's wreak'd his murderous rage,
For yielding to the feelings of their nature.

Dion. Obdurate woman! obstinate in ill!
Here ends all parley. Now your father's doom
Is fixed; irrevocably fixed; this night,
Thou shall behold him, while inventive cruelty
Pursues his wearied life through every nerve.
I scorn all dull delay. This very night
Shall sat my great revenge.
Exit.
Euphra. This night perhaps
Shall whelm thee down, no more to blast creation.
My father, who inhabit'st with the dead,
Now let me seek thee in the lonely tomb,
And tremble there with anxious hope and fear.
Exit.
Scene the Inside of the Temple. Enter PHOCION and MELANTHON. Pho. Each step I
move, a grateful terror shakes
My frame to dissolution.

Melan. Summon all
Thy wonted firmness; in that dreary vault
A living king is numbered with the dead.
I Will take my post, near where the pillar'd isle
Supports the central dome, that no alarm
Surprise you in the pious act.
Exit.
Pho. If here
They both are found; if in Evander's arms
Euphrasia meets my search, the fates atone
For all my sufferings, all afflictions past.
Yes I will seek them -- ha! -- the gaping tomb
Invites my steps -- now be propitious Heaven!
He enters the Tomb. Enter EUPHRASIA. All hail ye caves of horror! -- In this
gloom
Divine content can dwell, the heartfelt tear,
Which, as it falls, a father's trembling hand
Will catch, and wipe the sorrows from my eye.
Thou Power supreme! whose all-pervading mind
Guides this great frame of things; who now behold'st me,
Who in that cave of death art full as perfect
As in the gorgeous palace, now, while night
Broods over the world, I Will to thy sacred shrine,
And supplicate thy mercies to my father.
Who Is there? -- Evander? -- Answer -- quickly say --
Enter PHOCION from he Tomb.
Pho. What voice is that? -- Meranthon! --

Euphra. Ha! those founds! --
Speak of Evander; tell me that he lives,
Or lost Euphrasia dies.

Pho. Heart-swelling transport!
Art thou Euphrasia? -- It Is thy Phocion, love;
Thy husband comes. --

Euphra. Support me: reach thy hand --

Pho. Once more I clasp her in this fond embrace!

Euphra. What miracle has brought thee to me?

Pho. Love
Urged me on, and guided all my ways.

Euphra. Oh! thou dear wanderer! But wherefore here,
Why in this place of woe? -- My tender little one,
Say is he safe? -- Oh! satisfy a mother;
Speak of my child, or I go wild at once;
Tell me his fate, and tell me all thy own.

Pho. Your boy is safe, Euphrasia; lives to reign
In Sicily; Timoleon's guardian care
Protects him in his camp; dispel thy fears;
The Gods, once more will give him to thy arms.

Euphra. My father lives sepulchred ere his time.
Here in Eudocia's tomb; let me conduct thee --

Pho. I came this moment thence --

Euphra. And saw Evander?

Pho. Alas! I found him not.

Euphra. Not found him there!
Have there fell murderers -- Oh!
faints away.
Pho. I Have been too rash; revive, my love, revive;
Thy Phocion calls; the Gods will guard Evander,
And save him to reward thy matchless virtue.

Enter EVANDER and MELANTHON. Evan. Lead me, Melanthon, guide my aged steps;
Where is he? Let me see him.

Pho. My Euphrasia;
Thy father lives; -- thou venerable man!
Behold! -- I cannot fly to thy embrace.

Euphra. These agonies must end me -- Ah! my father
Again I have him; gracious Powers! again
I clasp his hand, and bathe it with my tears.

Evan. Euphrasia! Phocion too! Yes, both are here;
Oh! let me thus, thus strain you to my heart.

Pho. Protected by a daughter's tender care,
By my Euphrasia saved! That sweet reflection
Exalts the bliss to rapture.

Euphra. Why my father, Why thus adventure forth? -- The strong alarm
Overwhelmed my spirits.

Evan. I went forth, my child,
When all was dark, and awful silence round,
To throw me prostrate at the altar's foot,
To crave the care of Heaven for thee and thine.
Melanthon there --

Enter PHILOTAS. Euphra. Philotas! -- ha! -- what means --

Philo. Inevitable ruin hovers over you:
The tyrant's fury mounts into a blaze;
Unsated yet with blood, he calls aloud
For thee, Evander; thee his rage has ordered
This moment to his presence.

Evan. Lead me to him:
His presence has no terror for Evander.

Euphra. Horror! -- It must not be.

Philo. No; never, never:
I Will perish rather. -- But the time demands
Our utmost vigor; with the light'ning's speed
Decisive, rapid. -- With the scorpion stings
Of conscience lashed, despair and horror seize him,
And guilt but serves to goad his tortured mind
To blacker crimes. His policy has granted
A day's suspense from arms; yet even now
His troops prepare, in the dead midnight hour,
With base surprise, to storm Timoleon's camp.

Evan. And does he grant a false insidious truce,
To turn the hour of peace to blood and horror?

Euphra. I know the monster well: when specious seeming
Becalms his looks, the rankling heart within
Teems with destruction. Like our own mount Aetna,
When the deep snows invest his hoary head,
And a whole winter gathers on his brow,
Looking tranquillity; even then beneath
The fuel'd entrails summon all their rage,
Till the affrighted shepherd round him sees
The sudden ruin, the vulcano's burst,
Mountains hurled up in air, and molten rocks,
And all the land with desolation covered.

Melan. Now, Phocion, now, on thee our hope depends:
Fly to Timoleon -- I can grant a passport --
Rouse him to vengeance; on the tyrant turn
His own insidious arts, or all is lost.

Pho. Evander thou, and thou, my best Euphrasia,
Both shall attend my slight.

Melan. They must remain;
The attempt would hazard all.

Euphra. Together here
We will remain, safe in the cave of death;
And wait our freedom from thy conquering arm.

Evan. Oh! would the Gods roll back the stream of tim^
And give this arm the sinew that it boasted
At Tauromenium, when its force resistless
Mowed down the ranks of war; I then might guide
The battle's rage, and, ere Evander die,
Add still another laurel to my brow.

Euphra. Enough of laurell'd victory your sword
Has reaped in earlier days.

Evan. And shall my sword,
When the great cause of liberty invites,
Remain inactive, unperforming quite?
Youth, second youth rekindles in my veins:
Though worn with age, this arm will know it is office;
Will show that victory has not forgot
Acquaintance with this hand. -- And yet -- O shame!
It will not be: the momentary blaze
Sinks, and expires. -- I have survived it all;
Survived my reign, my people, and myself.

Euphra. Fly, Phocion, fly; Melanthon will conduct thee.

Melan. And when the assault begins, my faithful cohorts
Shall form their ranks around this sacred dome.

Pho. And my poor captive friends, my brave companions
Taken in battle, will thou guard their lives?

Melan. Trust to my care: no danger shall assail them.

Pho. By Heaven, the glorious expectation swells
This panting bosom! -- Yes, Euphrasia, yes;
A while! leave you to the care of Heaven. --
Fell Dionysius tremble; ere the dawn
Timoleon thunders at your gates -- The rage,
The pent-up rage of twenty thousand Greeks,
Shall burst at once; and the tumultuous roar
Alarm the astonished world. The brazen gates
Asunder shall be rent; the towers, the ramparts,
Shall yield to Grecian valor; death and rage
Through the wide city's round shall wade in gore,
And guilty men awake to gasp their last.
Melanthon, come.

Evan. Yet, ere thou go, young man,
Attend my words: though guilt may often provoke,
As now it does, just vengeance on it is head,
In mercy punish it. The rage of slaughter
Can add no trophy to the victor's triumph:
Bid him not shed unnecessary blood.
Conquest is proud, inexorable, fierce;
It is humanity ennobles all:
So thinks Evander, and so tell Timoleon.

Pho. Farewell; the midnight hour shall give you freedom.
Exit with Melanthon and Philotas.
Euphra. Ye guardian Deities, watch all his ways.

Evan. Come, my Euphrasia, in this interval
Together we will seek the sacred altar,
And thank the God, whose presence fills the dome,
For the best gift his bounty could bestow,
The virtue he has, given thee; there we'll pour
Our hearts in praise, in tears of adoration,
For all-the wondrous goodness lavished on us.

END OF THE FOURTH ACT. ACT V.
Enter DIONYSIUS and CALIPPUS. Dien. ERE the day closed, while yet the busy eye
Might view their camp, their stations and their guards,
Their preparations for approaching night,
Did thou then mark the motions of the Greeks?

Calip. From the watch tour I saw them: all things spoke
A foe secure, and discipline relaxed.
Their arms thrown idly by, the soldiers strayed
To one another's tents; their steeds no more
Stood near at hand caparison'd for war;
And from the lines numbers poured out, to see
The spot, where the besieged had fallied forth,
And the fierce battle raged; to view the slain
That lie in heaps upon the crimson beach.
There the fond brother, the afflicted father,
And the friend, sought some vestige of the face
Of him who died in battle; night came on;
Some slowly gained their tents; dispersed around
Whole parties loiter'd, touched with deep regret;
War, and its train of duties, all forgot.

Dion. Their folly gives them to my sword: are all My orders issued?

Calip. All.

Dion. The troops retired
To gain recruited vigor from repose?

Calip. The city round lies hushed in sleep.

Dion. Anon
Let each brave officer, of chosen valor,
Forsake his couch, and with delib'rate spirit,
Meet at the citadel. -- An hour at furthest
Before the dawn, it is fixed to storm their camp;
And whelm their men, their arms, and steeds, and tents,
In one prodigious ruin. Haste, Calippus,
Fly to thy post, and bid Euphrasia enter. Exit Calippus.
Evander dies this night* Euphrasia too
Shall be disposed of. Curse on Phocion's fraud,
That from my power withdrew their infant boy.
In him the seed of future kings were crushed,
And the whole hated line at once extinguished.

Enter EUPHRASIA. Dion. Once more approach and hear me* it is not now
A time to waste in the vain war of words.
A crisis big with horror is at hand.
I meant to spare the stream of blood, that soon
Shall deluge yonder plains. My fair proposals
Thy haughty spirit has with scorn rejected.
And now, by Heaven, here, in thy very sight,
Evander breathes his last.

Euphra. The truce you have granted
Suspends the rage of war: meantime send forth
The orators of peace with olive crowned.
Timoleon, good and just, and ever willing
To conquer rather by persuasive truth,
Than by devouring slaughter, will agree
In friendly parley to assert his rights,
And compromize the war.

Dion. And must I sue
For terms of peace? -- To an invader sue?
Since you* the fiend of Syracuse and Greece,
Since you thus urge me on to desperate daring,
Your father first -- of him I Will be assured --
Your father meets his fate.

Euphra. If yet there is wanting
A crime to fill the measure of thy guilt,
Add that black murder to the dreadful list;
With that complete the horrors of thy reign.

Dion. Woman, beware: Philotas is at hand,
And to our presence leads Evander. All
Thy dark complottings, and thy treacherous arts,
Have proved abortive.

Euphra. Ha! -- What new event?
And is Philotas false? -- Has he betrayed him?
Aside.
Dion. Evander's doom is sealed -- What ho! Philotas!
Now shall thou see him die in pangs before thee.

Enter PHILOTAS. Euphra. How my heart sinks within me!

Dion. Where Is your prisoner?

Philo. Evander is no more.

Dion. Ha! -- Death has robbed me
Of half my great revenge.

Philo. Worn out with anguish
I saw life ebb apace. With studied art
We gave each cordial drop -- Alas! in vain;
He heaved a sigh; invoked his daughter's name,
Smiled and expired.

Dion. Bring me his hoary head.

Philo. You Will pardon, Sir, my overhasty zeal.
I gave the body to the foaming surge
Down the steep rock despised.

Dion. Now rave and shriek,
And rend your scattered hair. No more Evander
Shall sway Sicilia's scepter.

Euphra. Mighty Gods!
The hardened heart, the man elate with pride
View with compassion! To the bad extend
Some portion of your mercy; crimes and blood
Have made their souls a seat of desolation,
Of woe, despair and horror! Turn to them
An eye of pity: whom your bounty formed
To truth, to goodness, and to generous deeds,
On them no more from your bright stores of bliss
You need dispense: their virtue will support them.

Dion. Now then thou feel'st my vengeance.

Euphra. Glory in it;
Exult and triumph. Thy worst shaft is sped.
Yet still the unconquered mind with scorn can view thee;
With the calm sunshine of the breast beholds
Thy power unequal to subdue the soul,
Which virtue formed, and which the Gods protect.

Dion. Philotas, bear her hence; she shall not live;
This moment bear her hence; you know the rest;
Go, see our will obeyed; that done, with all
A warrior's speed attend me at the citadel;
There meet the heroes, whom this night I Will lead
To freedom, victory, to glorious havoc,
To the destruction of the Grecian name.
Exit. Euphra.
Euphra. Accept my thanks, Philotas; generous man!
These tears attest the emotions of my heart.
But oh! should Greece defer --

Philo. Dispel thy fears;
Phocion will bring relief; or should the tyrant
Assault their, camp, he will meet a marshalled foe.
Let me conduct thee to the silent tomb.

Euphra. Ah! there Evander, naked and disarmed,
Defenseless quite, may meet some ruffian stroke.

Philo. Lo! here is a weapon; bear this dagger to him;
In the drear monument should hostile steps
Dare to approach him, they must enter singly;
This guards the passage; man by man they die.
There may thou dwell amidst the wild commotion.

Euphra. Ye pitying Gods, protect my father then!
Exeunt.
Scene the Citadel CALIPPUS and several Officers. First Officer. What new event
thus summons' us together?

Calip. It Is great occasion calls; -- Timoleon's ardor
Comes rushing on; his works rise high in air,
Advance each day, and tower above our walls.
One brave exploit may free us -- Lo! the king.

Enter DIONYSIUS. Dion. Ye brave associates, who so often have shared
Our toil and danger in the field of glory,
My fellow-warriors, what no god could promise,
Fortune has given us. -- In his dark embrace
Lo! sleep envelops the whole Grecian camp.
Against a foe, the outcasts of their country,
Freebooters roving in pursuit of prey,
Success by war, or covert stratagem
Alike is glorious. Then, my gallant friends,
What need of words? The generous call of freedom,
Your wives, your children, your invaded rights,
All that can steel the patriot breast with valor,
Expands and rouzes in the swelling heart.
Follow the impulsive ardour; follow me,
Your king, your leader; in the friendly gloom
Of night assault their camp; your country's love,
And fame eternal, shall attend the men
Who marched through blood and horror, to, redeem
From the invader's power, their native land.

Calip. Lead to the onset; Greece shall find we bear
Hearts prodigal of blood, when honor calls,
Resolved to conquer or to die in freedom.

Dion. Thus I Have resolved: when the declining moon
Has veiled her orb, our silent march begins.
The order thus: -- Calippus, thou lead forth
Iberia's sons with the Numidian bands,
And line the shore. -- Perdiccas, be it thine
To march thy cohorts to the mountain's foot,
Where the wood skirts the valley; there make halt
Till brave Amyntor stretch along the vale.
Ourself, with the embodied cavalry
Clad in their mail'd cuirass, will circle round
To where their camp extends its furthest line;
Unnumber'd torches there shall blaze at once,
The signal of the charge; then, oh! my friends,
On every side let the wild uproar loose,
Bid massacre and carnage stalk around,
Unsparing, unrelenting; drench your swords
In hostile blood, and riot in destruction.

Enter an Officer. Dion. Ha! speak; unfold thy purpose. --

Offi. Instant arm;
To arms, my liege; the foe breaks in upon us;
The subterraneous pass is theirs; that way
Their band invades the city sunk in sleep.

Dion. Treason's at work; detested, treacherous villains!
Is this their promised truce? Away, my friends,
Rouse all the war; fly to your several posts,
And instant bring all Syracuse in arms.

Exeunt. Warlike Music. Enter MELANTHON. Calip. Melanthon, now collect your
faithful bands.

Melan. Do thou pursue the King; attend his steps:
Timoleon lords it in the captive city.

Exit CALIPPUS. Enter PHILOTAS. Melan. Philotas, vengeance has begun its work.

Philo. The Gods have sent relief; dismay, and terror,
And wild amaze, and death in every shape,
Fill the affrighted city.

Melan. Tyrant, now
The inevitable hour of fate is come.
Philotas, round the dome that holds Evander
We will arrange our men; there fix our post,
And guard that spot, till, like some God, Timoleon
Still the wild uproar, and bid slaughter cease.
Exeunt.
Scene another Part of the City. Enter DIONYSIUS. Why sleep the coward slaves?
All things conspire;
The Gods are leagued; I see them raze my towers;
My walls and bulwarks fall, and Neptune's trident
From its foundation heaves the solid rock.
Pallas directs the storm; her gorgon shield
Glares in my view, and from the fleet she calls
Her Greeks enraged. -- In arms I Will meet 'em all.
What, ho! my guards -- Arise, or wake no more.
Enter CALIPPUS. Calip. This way, my liege; our friends, a valiant band,
Assemble here.

Dion. Give me to meet the Greek.
Our only safety lies in brave despair.
Exeunt*
Scene the Inside of the Temple. A Monument in the Middle. EUPHRASIA, ERIXENE,
and Female Attendants. Euphra. Which way, Erixene, which way, my virgins,
Shall we direct our steps? What sacred altar
Clasp on our knees?

Erix. Alas! the horrid tumult
Spreads the destruction wide. On every side
The victor's shouts, the groans of murdered wretches,
In wild confusion rise. Once more descend
Eudocia's tomb; there thou may find a shelter.

Euphra. Anon, Erixene, I mean to visit,
Perhaps for the last time, a mother's urn.
This dagger there, this instrument of death,
Should Fortune prosper the fell tyrant's arms,
This dagger then may free me from his power,
And that drear vault intomb us all in peace.

Puts up the dagger. Hark! -- how the uproar swells! Alas what numbers
In Dionysius' cause shall yield their throats
To the destructive sword! -- A loft I climbed
The temple's vaulted roof; the scene beneath
Is horrible to sight; our domes and palaces
Blaze to the sky; and where the flames forbear,
The Greeks enraged brandish the gleaming sword.
From the high roofs, to shun the raging fire,
Wretches precipitate their fall. But oh!
No pause, no mercy; to the edge of the sword
They give their bodies; butchered, gash'd with wounds
They die in mangled heaps, and with their limbs
Cover the sanguine pavement.
Erix. Hark!

Euphra. The Din
Of arms with clearer sound advances. Ha!
That sudden burst! Again! They rush upon us!
The portal opens -- Lo! see there -- The soldier
Enters; war invades the sacred fane;
No altar gives a sanctuary now.
Warlike music.
Enter DIONYSIUS and CALIPPUS, with several Soldiers. Dion. Here will I mock
their siege; here stand at bay,
And brave 'em to the last.

Calip. Our weary foes
Desist from the pursuit.

Dion. Though all betray me,
Though every God conspire, I will not yield.
If I must fall, the temple's ponderous roof,
The mansion of the Gods combined against me
Shall first be crushed, and lie in ruin with me,
Euphrasia here! Detested, treacherous woman!
For my revenge preserved! By Heaven it is well;
Vengeance awaits thy guilt, and this good sword
Thus sends thee to atone the bleeding victims
This night has massacred.

Calip. (Holding Dionysius's arm) My liege forbear;
Her life preserved may plead your cause with Greece,
And mitigate your fate.

Dion. Presumptuous slave!
My rage is up in arms -- By Heaven she dies. --

Enter EVANDER from the Tomb. Evan. Open, thou cave of death, and give me way^
Horror! forbear! Thou murderer hold thy hand!
The Gods behold thee, horrible assassin!
Restrain the blow; -- it were a stab to Heaven;
All nature shudders at it! -- Will no friend
Arm in a cause like this a father's hand?
Strike at this bosom rather. Lo! Evander
Prostrate and grovelling on the earth before thee;
He begs to die; exhaust the scanty drops
That lag about his heart; but spare my child.

Dion. Evander! -- Do my eyes once more behold him?
May the fiends seize Philotas! Treacherous slave!
It Is well thou liv'st; thy death were poor revenge
From any hand but mine.
Offers to strike.
Euphra. No, tyrant, no;
Rushing before EVANDER. I have provoked your vengeance; through this bosom
Open a passage; first on me, on me
Exhaust your fury; every Power above
Commands thee to respect that aged head;
His withered frame wants blood to glut thy rage;
Strike here; these veins are full; here is blood enough;
The purple tide will gush to glad thy sight.

Dion. Amazement blasts and freezes every power!
They shall not live. Ha! the fierce tide of war
A flourish of trumpets. This way comes rushing on.
Goes to the top of the stage.
Euphra. ( Embracing EVANDER) Oh! thus, my father,
We'll perish thus together.

Dion. Bar the gates;
Close every passage, and repel their force.

Evan. And must I see thee bleed? -- Oh! for a sword!
Bring, bring me daggers!

Euphra. Ha!

Dion. (Coming down the stage) Guards seize the slave, And give him to my rage.

Evan. (Seized by the guards) Oh! spare her, spare her.
Inhuman villains! --

Euphra. Now one glorious effort!
Aside.
Dion. Let me dispatch; thou traitor, thus my arm --

Euphra. A daughter's arm, fell monster, strikes the blow.
Yes, first she strikes; an injured daughter's arm
Sends thee devoted to the infernal gods. (Stabs him.)

Dion. Detested fiend! -- Thus by a woman's hand! --
(He falls)
Euphra. Yes, tyrant, yes; in a dear father's cause
A woman's vengeance towers above her sex.

Dion. May curses blast thy arm! May Aetna's fires
Convulse the land; to its foundation shake
The groaning isle! May civil discord bear
Her flaming brand through all the realms of Greece;
And the whole race expire in pangs like mine!
(Dies.)
Euphra. Behold, all Sicily behold! -- The point
Glows with the tyrant's blood. Ye slaves, (to the guards) look there;
Kneel to your rightful king: the blow for freedom
Gives you the rights of men! -- And, oh! my father,
My ever honored sire, it gives thee life.

Evan. My child; my daughter; saved again by thee!
He embraces her.
A flourish of trumpets. Enter PHOCION, MELANTHON, PHILOTAS, etc. Pho. Now let
the monster yield. -- My best Euphrasia!

Euphra. My lord! my Phocion! welcome to my heart.
Lo! there the wonders of Euphrasia's arm!

Pho. And is the proud one fallen! The dawn shall see him
A spectacle for public view. -- Euphrasia!
Evander too! -- Thus to behold you both --

Evan. To her direct thy looks; there fix thy praise,
And gaze with wonder there. The life I gave her --
Oh! she has used it for the noblest ends!
To fill each duty; make her father feel
The purest joy, the heart-dissolving bliss
To have a grateful child. -- But has the rage
Of slaughter ceased?

Pho. It has.

Evan. Where is Timoleon?

Pho. He guards the citadel; there gives his orders
To calm the uproar, and recall from carnage
His conquering troops.

Euphra. Oh! once again, my father,
Thy sway shall bless the land. Not for himself
Timoleon conquers; -- to redress the wrongs
Of bleeding Sicily the hero comes.
Thee, good Melanthon, thee, thou generous man,
His justice shall reward. -- Thee too, Philotas,
Whose sympathizing heart could feel the touch
Of soft humanity, the hero's bounty,
His brightest honors, shall be lavished on thee.
Evander too will place you near his throne;
And show mankind, even on this shore of being,
That virtue still shall meet its sure reward.

Philo. I am rewarded: feelings such as mine
Are worth all dignities; my heart repays me.

Evan. Come, let us seek Timoleon; to his care
I will commend ye both: for now, alas!
Thrones and dominions now no more for me.
To her I give my crown. Yes, thou, Euphrasia,
Shall reign in Sicily. -- And oh! ye Powers,
In that bright eminence of care and peril,
Watch over all her ways; conduct and guide
The goodnese you inspired, that she may prove
If ever distress like mine invade the land,
A parent to her people; stretch the ray
Of filial piety to times unborn,
That men may hear her unexampled virtue,
And learn to emulate THE GRECIAN DAUGHTER!

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
THE Tragedy, here offered to the Public, is founded on a passage in VALERIUS
MAXIMUS Vide Valor. Max. lib. 5, c. 4, de Pictate in Parents. 7.
. We are told by that Author, That a woman of ingenuous birth was convicted
before the PRAETOR of a capital crime, and delivered over to the TRIUMVIR to be
put to death in prison. The jailer received her into his custody, but, touched
with compassion, did not proceed immediately to execute the sentence. His
humanity went so far as to admit the daughter of the unhappy criminal into the
goal; but not without a previous search, left any nourishment should be
secretly conveyed. To starve the prisoner to death was his design. Several days
passed, when it became a matter of wonder how the poor woman subsisted so long.
The jailer's curiosity was excited: he watched the daughter narrowly, and saw
her give her breast to the famished mother, and with her milk supply the
cravings of nature. Touched by the novelty of so affecting a sight, he made his
report to the TRIUMVIR, from whom it reached the PRAETOR, and, the whole matter
being referred to the JUDICIAL MAGISTRATES, the mother received a free pardon.
What will not filial piety undertake? -- What place will it not penetrate? --
What will it not devise, when in a dungeon it finds unheard of means to
preserve a parent's life? -- Is there in the course of human affairs, a scene
so big with wonder, as a mother nourished at the daughter's breast? -- The
incident might, at the first view, be thought repugnant to the order of nature,
if TO LOVE OUR PARENTS were not the FIRST LAW stamped by the hand of Nature on
the human heart. Thus far VALERIUS MAXIMUS. He goes on in the same place, and
tells a Greek tale, in which the heroine performs the fame act of piety to a
father in the decline of life. For the purposes of the drama, the latter story
has been preferred. The painters long since seized the subject, and by them it
has been called ROMAN CHARITY. The Author has taken the liberty to place it in
the reign of DIONYSIUS the Younger, at the point of time when TIMOLEON laid
siege to SYRACUSE. The general effect, it was thought, would be better
produced, if the whole had an air of real history.

Atque ita mentitur, sic veris falsa remiscet,
Primo ne medium, medio ne discrepet imum.
The Author does not wish to conceal that the subject of his Tragedy has been
touched in some foreign pieces: but he thinks it has been only touched. The
ZELMIRE of Mons. BELLOY begins after the daughter has delivered her father out
of prison. The play indeed has many beauties; and if the sentiments and
business of that piece coincided with the design of THE GRECIAN DAUGHTER, the
Author would not have blushed to tread in his steps. But a new fable was
absolutely necessary: and, perhaps, in the present humor of the times, it is
not unlucky that no more than three lines could be adopted from Mons. BELLOY.
Every writer, who makes up a story with characters and incidents already
hackneyed on the English stage, and invents nothing, cries out with an air of
triumph, That he has not borrowed from the wits of FRANCE. In the Isle of Man,
it is said, there is an epitaph in these words: "He who lies here interred, was
never out of this island." The poor man was to be pitied: a similar inscription
upon the tombstone of a modern poet would, perhaps, do as little honor to the
memory of the deceased.

The Author cannot dismiss his Play, without declaring, that, though in love
with the subject, he has not satisfied even his own ideas of the drama: he
laments that he had neither time nor ability to make it better. To heighten it
with additional beauties was reserved for the decorations with which the zeal
of Mr. GARRICK has embellished the representation; for the admirable
performance of Mr. BARRY, and, above all, for the enchanting powers and the
genius of Mrs. BARRY.

Lincoln's Inn, Feb. 29, 1772.
This Day is Published, Price 1s. 6d.

A New Edition, being the THIRD, of ZENOBIA;

A Tragedy, written by the Author of this Play, and performed with universal
Applause, at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane,

Printed for W. GRIFFIN, at Garrick's Head, in Catharine-Street, Strand.

Where may be had New Editions of the following

PLAYS, OPERAS, and FARCES.
l. s. d. The Accomplished Maid, an Opera 0 1 6 The Beggars Opera with the
Music 0 1 6 The Brothers, a Comedy 0 1 6 The Countess of Salisbury, a Tragedy 0
1 6 Doctor Last in his Chariot 0 1 6 Earl of Warwick, a Tragedy 0 1 6 The
Good-natured Man, a Comedy, by Dr. Goldsmith 0 1 6 The Hypocrite, a Comedy 0 1
6 Lionel and Clarissa, an Opera 0 1 6 Love in the City, an Opera 0 1 6 The Maid
of the Mill, an Opera 0 1 6 Midas, an Opera 0 1 6 The Plain Dealer, a Comedy 0
1 6 The Perplexities, a Comedy 0 1 6 The Royal Merchant, an Opera 0 1 6 The
School for Fathers, an Opera 0 1 6 It Is well it is no Worse, a Comedy 0 1 6 The
West Indian, a Comedy 0 1 6 The Fashionable Lover, a Comedy 0 1 6 Artaxerxes,
an Opera 0 1 0 The Absent Man, a Farce 0 1 0 The Captive, an Operatical Farce 0
1 0 The Capricious Lovers, ditto 0 1 0 The Citizen, a Farce 0 1 0 Daphne and
Amintor 0 1 0 The Ephesian Matron 0 1 0 He Would if he Could 0 1 0 King Arthur
0 1 0 Midas, a Farce 0 1 0 The Padlock 0 1 0 Romeo and Juliet, Translated from
the Spanish 0 1 0 The Recruiting Sergeant 0 1 0 Thomas and Sally 0 1 0

ADVERTISEMENT.
Whereas several Booksellers and Printers, residing in EDINBURGH and the North
Parts of ENGLAND, have presumed, in Violation of the Laws for the Preservation
of Literary Property, to pirate large Editions of new Plays and other
Publications, to the great Loss and Detriment of the Fair Trader; W. GRIFFIN,
the sole Proprietor of the above List of Plays, Operas and Farces, hereby
offers a Reward of TEN GUINEAS to any Person or Persons, that will give
Information of any such pirated Editions of the above Plays, etc. to be paid by
him, immediately upon Conviction of the Offender or Offenders. And any Person
giving Information of Printed Editions of the above Plays, etc. being imported
from IRELAND, shall be entitled to the same Reward, to be paid by

WILLIAM GRIFFIN.
London, March 6, 1772.

