MR. WARD's Practice of Physic, As it Relates to the PUBLIC, Impartially
Considered.

IN A LETTER TO THOMAS CAREW, Esquire; Member of Parliament.

Quod si, quam audax est ad conandum, tam esset obscurus in agendo, fortasse
aliqua in re nos aliquando fefellisset: verum hoc percommode cedit, quod cum
incredibili ejus audacia singularis stultitia conjuncta est. Cic. in Ver.
LONDON: Printed for J. ROBERTS, at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. MDCCXLI.

[Price 4 d.

MR. WARD's Practice of Physic Impartially Considered.
SIR, Minehead, Dec. 14. 1740.
THE truly generous, noble, and indefatigable Spirit you have exerted on the
Behalf of the Commonwealth, during your sitting in Parliament, has drawn upon
you the Trouble of this Application. You have shown, not only Inclination, but
Ability to do real Service to your Country, by promoting and carrying on
several Bills, which will greatly contribute to the public Good, and transmit
your Name with Honor to Posterity. You are a true Patriot, in the purest Sense
of the Word; and, as such, I don't doubt, but you will think the following
Pages highly worthy of your serious Consideration; and if you find any Hint in
them fair, reasonable, and calculated for the Interest of your Fellow Subjects,
you will gladly improve it, and readily concur in building upon it such an
wholesome Law as may redress the Grievance complained of. I think it will be
easily granted, that the Health of the Body is full as valuable as the Property
of Estates. How difficult would it be for any Person to believe, that our
Legislature is of that Opinion, who should observe, that there are so many good
Laws enacted by every Parliament for the Defense of the one, and scarce ever
any Care taken of the Preservation of the other? Indeed, within a long Series
of Years, the Parliament has been most graciously pleased to cast an Eye
toward the Health of the People, by an Act impowering Physicians to inspect
Apothecaries Shops; by an Act for preventing the Retailing spirituous Liquors;
and by an Act for the Encouragement of the Publication of Mrs. Stephens's
Remedies. However, these Instances, few as they are, prove, that the Honorable
House does not think the Health of the Nation entirely below their Care and
Consideration; and therefore we ought to suppose, that the Reason why Acts of
Parliament for the like good Purposes are not more frequent, is, that the House
is not applied to on such Subjects in a proper manner; that the Grievances the
People labor under are not fairly and plainly laid before the Members, or
practical Methods of Redress are not pointed out.

The Health of a People can only be preserved by all the wholesome Laws the
Wisdom of a Legislature can contrive, to prevent Luxury, Debauchery, and every
kind of Immorality, which infallibly produce Diseases, or by frequent
Inspections into the State of Physic in their Country, because Abuses will
daily creep into every Society, or Set of Men, who find themselves under no
Restraint, from any Apprehensions of being called to an Account for their
Method of treating Mankind, in their most momentous Concernments. Though the
first Part of this general Plan is highly worth your Consideration, yet I shall
beg Leave to say a few Words to you in regard to the latter only.

The Reformation of the State of Physic in general is greatly wanting in this
Nation, and, I believe, most warmly wished by every honest Man, even of the
Faculty itself. But though general Reformations may be as difficult as they are
desirable, yet some crying Enormities may themselves point out the Method of
their own Redress.

If we consider the public Humor of the good People of England for these last
Twenty Years, one should be apt to conclude, that certain odd Conjunctions of
the heavenly Bodies brought on epidemical Follies, as well as Diseases. How
have Shakespeare, Johnson, Otway, and all the Plays capable of delighting the
Mind, instructing the Head, or mending the Heart, been totally neglected, or
coldly received, while dear Harlequin! charming Devil! has filled all our
Affections, triumphed over our Judgments, and emptied our Pockets! During an
Era like this, when such crowded Audiences, composed of the great Vulgar and
the small, gave such plain Demonstrations of their polite Taste, and profound
Wisdom, is it to be wondered, that there should appear, from the malign
Influences of the same Stars, Marks of an epidemical Madness in other Parts of
the Town, as well as in the Theater? No; Dr. Faustus will have the Honor to be
handed down to Posterity as the illustrious Contemporary of a Mapp, a Tailor,
and a Ward. The Historian of our Days will be able to inform his Readers, that
the Infatuation was so general, that Friend, Mead, and Pellet, were as much
eclipsed by this bright Constellation, as Shakespeare then was by a more happy
Genius; a Gentleman, who, with surprising Activity, could turn himself into all
Shapes, and appear to be any Animal but what he really was. Such are the
irresistible Charms of Delusion! Such the Happiness of being deceived, that all
our Applauses rise in Proportion to the Artfulness of the Imposition, and the
Difficulty of discovering the Cheat!

Let Mrs. Mapp's Bones rest in Peace, though she tortured so many in the Days of
her Fame.

Let the dexterous Dr. Tailor be able to purge the visual Ray of our neighbor
Nations, that they may see their true Interest to consist in treating
Great Britain with Honor and Respect.

Mr. Ward is the only medicinal Meteor which yet continues to shine amongst us,
whose Fame has raised him to the highest Degree of Esteem and Admiration with
the Gay and the Polite, on whose Authority and Judgment Thousands, and Tens of
Thousands, of the lower Part of Mankind, swallow his Medicines with implicit
Faith, and are said thereby to receive most wonderful Cures, in almost
incurable Distempers. The Influence of this Gentleman's Reputation being now
become so very extensive, his Manner of practicing Physic cannot be thought a
Subject unworthy the Notice and Consideration of the Legislature. I am sure,
Sir, you will afford it your Attention, for a few Minutes, as it is of
Importance to the Service of the Public, to which I well know how much every
Moment of your Time is dedicated.

I shall by no means take upon me to determine, whether the numberless Deaths
laid to this Gentleman's Charge by his Opposers, or the unparalled Cures he
is said to have performed by his Admirers, come nearest the Truth. What he owns
himself, and what all his Friends allow, may, I hope, be taken for granted. He
confesses, with great Candor, that he is wholly ignorant of the History and
Nature of Diseases; that he understands nothing of Anatomy, or the animal
Economy; and that he only pretends to some Knowledge in Chemistry, by which
Art he has discovered a few Medicines, of greater Efficacy in particular Cases,
than those in common Use among regular Physicians. Suppose then, that what this
Gentleman asserts is true, and that he has such powerful chemical Secrets in
his Possession; must they not be capable of doing as much Harm, when ignorantly
and promiscuously administered, as they would be of doing Good in the Hands of
a Person duly qualified to know in what Cases, how, and when, properly to apply
them? Will that noble christian Charity, which from this Gentleman's known
moral Character cannot but be believed to be the sole Motive of his great
Bounty to the Crowds of poor People who daily attend him, make amends for his
dealing out these powerful Medicines so indiscriminately to all who shall pay
him the Compliment of being willing to swallow them? Do the Multitude of
Patients whom he never saw before, or will see afterward, want no Attendance
during the violent Operation of their Physic? No Person acquainted with the
Nature of their Medicines, to relieve or correct any Accidents, which so often
attend the most common and gentle Remedies? Surely it must appear, to every
unprejudiced Person, that the most useful Drugs, under such Management, must be
a sore Evil, and therefore that nothing can be more uncharitable, than thus to
deceive and hurt a Multitude under the specious Pretense of Charity? But
however faulty this Gentleman's Method of Practice may be, yet his Medicines
may in themselves, and under proper Direction, be extremely valuable. Let us
grant, that they are so; Is it not then incumbent on those who have the Good of
the People at Heart, to endeavor to render these valuable Secrets a public
Benefit, which, under their present Circumstances, are so great a Calamity?
Every Man ought to be rewarded for his Discovery of any thing that may be
beneficial to Society. Mr. Ward should not be desired to part with his Property
(and his Nostrums are undoubtedly such) without a reasonable Equivalent. The
Parliament of Great Britain is able to grant him this Equivalent, and they have
a Right to demand the Knowledge of his Secrets on just and equitable Terms. An
Englishman, who possesses a Piece of Ground which interrupts the making a River
navigable, is obliged to part with his Property for the Good of the Community:
Surely Mr. Ward's Property in his Secrets is not more inviolable, than what
every Man has in his own Land; and therefore it cannot be looked upon as any
Hardship, if he should be forced to part with them on like Conditions. Should
such a Demand be made upon him by Parliament; should the Reward appointed be
ob^ainable only by the Proof, before competent Judges, of his Medicines, when
divulged, performing the same Cures on fair Subjects, which they are now said
to do on his private Patients; and should he refuse to stand that only Test,
what could be concluded from such a Refusal, but that he did not believe in his
own Conscience, that they would perform what he and his Friends do now persuade
the World to believe that they will do? Would not such a Refusal be a just and
equitable Ground for the Parliament to forbid his farther dealing out these
Medicines, (of which they would have Reason to believe that he had himself no
Opinion) and by a wholesome Law, to prevent hi^ Majesty's Subjects from being
any longer cheated of their Money, if no^ robbed of their Lives. But as thi^
Gentleman's great Cures are so wel^ attested by many Persons of Fashion, whose
Knowledge in such Matters cannot be disputed, I have no Reason to fear, that he
would at all suspect the Efficacy of his Medicines, in all the desperate Cases,
which he now so confidently undertakes. He will therefore undoubtedly submit
them to an impartial Trial with the greatest Cheerfulness, especially as he
will, over and above the Reward appointed by Parliament, be sure of gratifying
his most charitable Disposition in the Satisfaction of knowing, that, whereas
before only some Thousands of his Countrymen enjoyed the Fruits of his Labors,
then he will become a general Good to Mankind. The honorable Gentlemen who now
talk of his Medicines as divine, and of his Cures as little less than
miraculous, will all most heartily join in promoting this Publication; they
will congratulate their Country on the inestimable Possession of these Secrets,
which, but for the Care of our Legislature, might have slept in the single
Breast of their Author, and have been buried with him in Oblivion, to the
irreparable Loss of all future Ages!

As the Number of Inhabitants is the Riches of a Nation, while so many brave
Men are losing their Lives abroad in the Service of their Country, let us not
suffer those who remain at home to be daily thinned, either by the improper
Application of Mr. Ward's Medicines, under his present Administration of them,
or for want of their being made more universally useful by a speedy Publication.

The Gin Act is a glorious Instance of the tender Care of our Parliament for
the Lives and Healths of our People, to whom that pernicious Liquor was
promiscuously, and sometimes charitably, retailed, by such who preferred their
own wicked Gains to the Welfare of all human Creatures.

Mrs. Stephens's Act is a plain Proof of the true Sense your honorable House
has of the great Benefit of making any useful Discoveries in Physic; and it is
likewise a proper Precedent of the Manner in which such Publications should be
made, and of ^he Tests and Trials such discovered Medicines must undergo in
order to ^ntitle their Authors to their due Reward. What may be a reasonable
Sa^^sfaction for Mr. Ward's doing this signal Service to his Country, I cannot
guess at. If his Medicines will perform the Cures openly and fairly, which are
now attributed to them, I think the Parliament cannot pay too much for the
Knowledge of them, or Mr. Ward receive too great Honors from a grateful
People. But should this Gentleman be so blind to his own Interest as to refuse
to become this public Blessing, on any Terms, can he expect to enjoy the warm
Affections of hi^ Countrymen, to whom he will appea^ so charitable, and so
hard-hearted, a^ the same time? Should he refuse t^ comply with the generous
Desire (...) the Parliament, could he complain (...) they should exert their
just Authorit^* If he refuses to save Millions, he cannot surely think himself
ill-treated (...) the Guardians of the Public, if (...) should be forbid to
destroy even his Thousands!

But to You, Sir, I humbly submit the Consideration of this important Point; I
call it important; and what concerns the Lives of so many of the Innocent, and
the Ignorant, deserves to be so called. I speak as a Friend to Mr. Ward, as
well as to my Country. I propose a Method, by which, instead of being the Idol
of a Few, he shall become the Darling of a whole People! by which he shall
remove that huge Load of Scandal, which now lies upon him, to the great Chagrin
of his Enemies, who shall pine with Envy at the Brightness of his Glory. The
black List of his private Murders, which is now maliciously handed about by
Physicians, and their Emissaries, shall whiten into a pompous Register of
public Cures, performed by his Medicines, on the miserable Objects, who had
been delivered over to the iron Jaws of Death, by the Ignorance or Indolence of
those Doctors, falsely so called, who have had no Opportunity of understanding
Physic, but their having been bred to the Profession. By this means this
worthy Gentleman shall be freed from that Labor and Toil with which he now
serves his Country in his private Capacity. He shall do even more Good, and
yet, as is most meet and fit, he shall be able to retire from the World, full
of Days and Honors; he shall spend the few last Years he has to come in
Dignity and Ease, enjoying the calm Evening of a well-spent Life, conversing
with Nature in the most endearing Intimacy, to which he has arrived by
torturing her ten thousand Ways, till he made her confess those very Secrets,
which he has now communicated for the public Good, and which shall draw down
Blessings on him, and his Posterity, through all future Ages.

I beg therefore, Sir, for my Sake, as your Fellow-Citizen; for Mr. Ward's
Sake, who can do us all so much Service; and for your Country's Sake, whose
Interest you have so sincerely and warmly at Heart, that you will think
seriously on this Matter. What you see to be right, I know you will vigorously
pursue; and to your good Conduct the Whole is submitted, by, Sir,

Your most obedient humble Servant, PHILANTHROPOS.


