PATRICK in PRUSSIA, OR, LOVE IN A CAMP; A COMIC OPERA, IN TWO ACTS, WITH ALL
THE ORIGINAL SONGS, As performed at the Theaters Royal, Covent Garden and Smock
Alley.

BEING A SEQUEL TO The POOR SOLDIER.

Written by JOHN O'KEEFFE, Esquire.

AUTHOR OF THE Son-in-law, Agreeable-Surprize, Dead-Alive, Castle of Andalusia,
Young-Quaker, Poor-Soldier, Peeping-Tom, etc. etc.

DUBLIN. MDCCLXXXVI.

PRICE, A BRITISH SIXPENCE.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Darby, Mr. RYDER. Father Luke, Mr. OWENSON. Quiz, Mr. MOSS. Olmutz, Mr.
GLENVILLE. Marshal Fehrbellin, Mr. HAMERTON. Rupert, Mr. REMINGTON Greenbergh,
Mr. BARRET. Adjutant, Mr. KING. Drunmers, Messrs. LYNCH and SMITH. Captain
Patrick, Mr. WOOD.
WOMEN.
Flora, Mrs. HANNAM. Mabel Flourish, Mrs. O'NEIL. Norak, Miss HITCHCOCK.
PATRICK in PRUSSIA, OR, LOVE IN A CAMP.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A Camp at Silesia -- Tents, Soldiers cleaning their Arms, etc.
SONG and CHORUS, by Soldiers.
SO cheerful and happy we boys of the blade,
Prepare all to meet on the shining parade;
Then rub,
Then scrub,
Your muskets, your belts, and your bayonets bright,
We'll rub,
We'll scrub,
Our muskets, our belts, and our bayonets bright.
In spatterdash white, as he throws up his leg,
Each rank and file marches a bold Scanderbeg;
The Ladies admiring,
Our charging and firing,
U^r standing and kneeling
To right and left wheeling.
A smile from a woman's a soldier's delight,
They love as we love 'em, and for 'em we fight.
We'll jovially sing,
Drink a health to our King,
And make the campring, etc.
Exeunt soldiers. Enter PATRICK. Well, here I am near the camp of Silesia -- I
suppose I shall easily find out Marshal Fehrbellin's tent -- if I could meet my
old friend Darby -- he should conduct me to it -- but let us see -- what says
Darby's letter -- ay, here is his scrawl.

Takes out a letter, and reads. MY DEAR PATRICK,
I have left Ireland, and by your example have took up arms, and like the king
I serve, with a firm resolution to flay both man, woman and child -- I am in
high favor with our officers -- am a gentleman soldier, and in the high road
to preferment -- from your loving Friend till death.

DARBY.


Camp in Silesia.

H^y, who have we here? some poor devil going to (...) nogg'd.

Drum beats, Fise plays. Enter Adjutant, two Drummers with whips -- Darby
between two Soldiers. -- Soldiers as Guards. Dar. Oh, dear good Mr. Adjutant,
and you my good little drummers -- my dear friends, pot companions, brother
comrades and brother soldiers -- now how can you have the heart to flog poor
Darby?


Pat. Poor Darby -- and is this thy preferment? aside Pray, Sir, -- how came
this poor fellow in such disgarce?


Adj. A poor harmless devil, Sir -- but sometimes a little prone to mischief --
but for his arch tricks such a favorite with our officers, that though he
frequently deserves punishment, yet he generally gets forgiven -- and now, Sir,
we give him this whipping as private as possible out of pure lenity -- I have
myself a very great friendship for poor Darby -- so strip, you dog.


Dar. Lord Sir, I never strip but when I go to bed. -- What are you about there
Tommy, Tickleback?


Tom. Only tying knots.


Tying the lash of his whip. Dar. Tying knots -- now that is very childish of
you. And pray, what are you about, Neddy Nimblewrist?


Ned. Twisting whipcord and wire -- to give you a red waistcoat.


Dar. Whipcord and wire. Oh, dear -- well if I must be whipped -- If I don't
like it, you shall leave off.


Pat. Pray, Sir, what is his crime?


Adj. Only suspicion of drunkenness, and sleeping on his post.


Dar. Yes, sleeping on my post -- but I never dreamt that I should be flogg'd
for it.


Pat. Who is your Captain?


Adj. At present, Sir; we have no Captain, he that was our captain was
preferred prior to the review, and our new one is not arrived yet from Berlin.


Pat. Yes, Sir, but he is arrived, and honored with his Majesty's commission.
I am he.


Dar. Captain Pat -- Patty -- yes it is, did I not say I should see Captain
Patty?


Pat. Adjutant -- I think this business may be deferred.


Adj. Why, Sir, we had not the honor to knew of your arrival -- and, Sir, to
oblige you, we'll postpone his punishment.


Cap. By all means.


Dar. By all means -- Postpone, ay and pardon it too -- the devil a bit of hurt
will it do to any body.


Adj. Release him.


Dar. Ay release me -- don't you hear, my dear friends -- pot-companions,
brother messmates, and brother soldiers, Neddy Nimblewrist, and Tommy
Tickleback -- I am not for the red waistcoat -- so you may go and find another
mouse for your cat o-nine-tails. Get out, get along. Ah, ha!

Exeunt soldiers and drummers.
Adj. And if you please, Sir, I Will go and inform the Marshal of your arrival --
Sir, you are welcome to out corpse -- I am very glad to see you.


Exit. Dar. Yes, Sir, I am very glad to see you -- but my dear Pat, how you
came like my good guardian angel, to save me! -- let me see -- arn't you an
angel?


Looking round with pleasure and taking hold of his hand. Pat. But how is all
this, Darby? -- you ingenious rogue you, how did you bring all this about? -- I
left you at the plow tail in Ireland -- and here I find you at the whipping
post in Silesia.


Dar. Ay, 'twas you that did it -- for when Captain Fitzroy made you a present
of the colors, it set me all agog for a General's staff -- and when that jade
Kathleen jilted me.


Pat. Away went carts and wagons -- plows and flails. --


Dar. Ay, and because I could not do as I would, while I was worth a farthing,
sold off all -- and up to Dublin I came, mounted on a long tail'd dobin -- and
to be sure I did not do things neatly -- did not trim myself out in a smart
suit of clothes, and show them the soul of an Irish lad -- but hearing that
there were some pretty boys of the Shamrock in London, I thought I Would see that
too; I don't know how it was, but in taking leave of this body and that body, I
muddled a little, and the blundering waterman, instead of putting me into a
Parkgate Packet -- launched me on board a ship bound for the Baltic -- and I
never discovered the mistake 'till I found myself landed at Dantzick; but how
came you to sell your English commission, and turn Prussian soldier?


Pat. Why at present my country does not want my services, and I thought if it
should want them, that they would not prove less deserving of George by being
for the present under the tuition of so regular a disciplined a master as
Frederick. -- The Prussian arms were ever famed for regularity -- pray how
comes it they have made you so irregular?


Dar. Irregular -- the most regular -- as regular to my two half gallons every
day, as I was to Dermot's brown jug -- But Patty, though you are my Captain, you
and I may crack a joke now and then -- the devil a harm will it do our strict
Prussian discipline, for you and I, when we are snug, to talk over our merry
meetings with our singing pot companions, Dermot and Father Luke, at the
shoulder of murton. -- Oh your honor [seeing Olmutz.] likes a shoulder of
mutton --


Enter OLMUTZ. I shall give orders to the sutler to dress you a nice one.

Olm. Marshal Fehrbellin's complimenta -- glad -- hear of your arrival --
expect you at camp -- half an hour.


Pat. Give my respectful compliments, and I Will do myself the pleasure to wait
on him.


Olm. Tell him so.


Exit. Pat. Tall fellow -- but of very few words.


Dar. Very few, but he found enough to inform against me -- but if I am not
even with him for it, there are no potatoee in Munster.


Pat. Eh, Darby -- yonder is a fine lovely girl passing along there -- do you
know her?


Dar. Oh, yes, she is a very fine girl -- but we have flocks of such in Prussia
-- Lord, Sir, if you will come along with me, I Will introduce you a-la-millitare.


Darby going first, recollects himself, bows and follows. Pat. By all means,
Darby.


Exit. SCENE II. Front Grove.
Enter FLORA. Basket of Fruit on her Arm. SONG.
The tuneful birds, how sweet they sing,
How gay the dainty flowret's spring,
How light the milkmaid's briming pail,
As chaunting in the flowery dale;
It Is love that wafts her blithe along,
That paints the flowers, and tunes her song.
Flo. Now to count my money -- let me see -- I sold my pippins for two pence --
my strawberries for sixpence my peaches for ten pence, and my roses for four
pence: And now to tie it up in the corner of my handkerchief, lest any rude
fellow should insult me.


During this speech enter PAT. and DARBY. Pat. There she is Darby.


Dar. Oh, yes, there she is, and she is yours -- I know her -- her name's Flora,
she sells apples and flowers -- and collyflowers.


Pat. And she is the sweetest flower in her own garden -- My lovely girl. --


Flo. Did you call me, Sir?


Pat. Yes my pretty dear.


SONG.
Dans votre lit that bright patere,
Should Flora bloom a lilly fair:
A smilling jonquil I could be,
To blow, sweet flower, beside of thee.
Or nodding on the thorny bush.
You droop to hide the rose's blush;
The leafy umbrage make of me,
And in this breast you will sheltered be.
When every flower that paints the grove,
Throws smiles and odours all around;
Sweet flower, I Will prove thy faithful be,
And honey sip, from none but thee,
Dar. Pray, my dear, an't you a Whatecallum Girl -- and don't you live in --
Thingumy village?


Flo. Well, suppose I am a Whatecallum girl, and do live at Thingumy village,
what then?


Dar. What then -- oh, nothing at all -- only that is Pat -- and his honor
would be glad to see you in his honor's tent, to take a glass of wine with his
honor.


Flo. Honor, and honor -- I drink wine with his honor! The fellow's a fool, I
think.


Pat. So he is, my pretty dear -- but, my sweet rosebud, there is no harm, I
hope, in taking a glass of wine, my pretty Pomona.


TRIO.
Cap. My angel little girl,
With me a moment stop;

Flo. Do, stop me, at your peril!

Dar. Your tent, and then a drep.

Flo. Nay Sir, nay, Sir.

Cap Why so cold, my charmer?

Dar. Brilliant Burgundy shall warm her.

Cap. and Dar. My cherry, my plumb,
In finger and thumb;

Cap. You shall fold the waste
Of my blushing glass,
My sweet rosy lass,
While the nectar lip you taste,
Such joy will I sip,
From your ripe balmy lip,
Your charms thus I Will clasp,

Dar. Thus the bottle I Will grasp.

Flo. How can you serve me so?

Dar. Then up, my dear, you go,
Do let his honor bass.

Cap. My sweet a moment stay,

Flo. How dare you use me thus,
How dare you use me thus,
Upon the King's highway?

Dar. A turnpike-man am I,
To take C^pia's ^^ll,
A kiss.

Flo. I will pass by,

Dar. You cannot, upon my soul.

Cap. Lovely sylvan beauty!

Flo. What shall I do? oh! lack.

Dar. Sweet, pay her, the duty,

Flo. With a hearty, hearty smack.

Dar. Pies on your first, my beauty,
O'd dang it, 'twas a whack.

Flo. Your chaps may take the duty
Of such a deucing smack,
Your cheeks have had a hearty smack.

Dar. Oh, how sweet she would smack!


Pat. Do you think so, Darby?

Ironically.
Dar. Oh, yes, Sir -- she is yours, Sir, I Will get her for you.


Pat. Have a care, Darby, are you sure I shall not be guilty of seduction! -- I
would not for a transient pleasure bring lasting ruin upon a poor innocent girl.


Dar. Ruin! Oh, pray what have you done with Norah?


Pat. Norah I have left her to the care of Father Luke.


Dar. What, old two to one, that brings mutton to his mouth by means of the
multiplication table.


Pat. But, Darby -- where can I find apartments -- where can I put on my shoes?


Dar. We all wear boots in the camp -- we shoe none but the horses. -- But you
shall lodge for the present at Mable Flourishes, where the officers mess --
I Will order your baggage there, and to be sure tomorrow I will not ^it you up the
smartest booth in the camp -- so come along -- Pat -- come along Patty -- oh,
dear -- this way, Captain -- Captain Patty.


Exit Darby. Pat. Very well, Mr. Darby; you seem very accommodating truly --
and indeed if the girls are so handsome, and come much in my way, I shall stand
in need of all my constancy.


SONG.
Away, ye giddy smiling throng
Of tempting beauties, fair and young.
My heart be true, although my tongue
Should sing of lovely Flora;
Or should I gaze with fond desire,
Should breath of roses fan the fire;
And though I on a touch expire,
My soul is thine, sweet Norah.
The bonds of Hymen over my mind,
My constant soul must ever bind,
To that dear woman left behind,
My kind, my tender Norah;
But, Oh! I fear each mortal part,
Nay, even this true, this faithful heart,
Res^stless to the Urchin's dart,
Shot by the eyes of Flora.
Illusive vapor, transient blaze,
Oh! vanish, while I wandering gaze,
But shine like Dian's silver rays,
My passion chaste for Norah;
Yet Hymen winks, and Venus smiles,
And passion every sense beguiles,
And Cupid with his thousand wiles,
Assist my charming Flora.
Exit Pat. SCENE Outside of MABEL FLOURISHES.
Wrote over the Door -- The Officers Mess-House, by MABEL FLOURISH. Enter
DARBY. Dar. I am strangely puzzled how to get this girl for Pat -- she is so
very modest. Mabel.

Calls.
Enter PAT. Pat. Where are these apartments, where is Mabels?


Dar. Here, your honor -- Mabel -- Mabel.


Enter MABEL from the Door flat. Here Is a new guest for you; so clean up your
house, rub up the mohogany table -- turn the counterpane -- lay down the great
carpet -- get the trumpeter's great chair uncovered -- wash-ball and shippers
-- throw some sand upon the stairs, and kick the cat out of the way.

Exit Captain Patrick with Mabel. Dar. Devilish lucky Pat's coming -- let me
see -- I Will employ Olmutz to get Flora -- will draw him into a scrape, and I
shall be revenged on him for his attempt to get me tied to the halberts -- and
it he wants to excuse himself -- it will be by half sentences, so that nobody
will believe him. Eh, here he comes, and little Quiz with him -- that fellow
always keeps company with great people -- how high he carries his head with his
hairy cap. When he comes in at a door he is obliged to duck like a gander under
a gate -- drinks by half-gallons out of rummer glasses; eats with his broad
sword and picks his teeth with a bayonet.


Enter OLMUTZ and QUIZ. QUIZ dressed in an old red Waistcoat and a Fur Cap,
Quiz. I say Darby was shot from the mouth of a cannon.


Dar. Your cannon's a great gun.


Olm. No, no, I say he was only whipped.


Dar. No, nor he was not whipped.


Quiz. I say, when I am a trooper. --


Dar. Ay, when shrimps are lobsters.


Quiz. Shrimps and lobsters -- I say, spirit does not consist in size -- The
sword-fish is not a whale -- you shall see if Marshal Fehrbellin will refuse me
a place in the grenadier corpse.


Exit Quiz. Dar. Well, we shall soon see, for here he comes.


Quiz Does he? the first impression's a great deal -- I Will go and accoutre
myself, and appear before him ala-militare.


Dar. Oh, Quiz is gone -- he could not stay to speak to his Highness -- so
Mabel shall -- for Olmutz I want to talk to you -- soldiers, you know, should
not bear malice -- Your hand -- I Will make your fortune -- Mabel.


Enter MABEL from Flat. His Highness is coming to see your lodger -- Mabel do
you receive him.

Retires with Olmutz. Enter MARSHAL. Mar. Where Is the new officer, Captain
Patrick?


Mab. He is but just taking off his beard -- shall I call him to your Highness?


Mar. No, I will not have him disturbed -- I Will send my Aid-de-Camp to him -- A
good fine sized woman -- the proportion of our men has been for some time
diminishing -- now to match her with that tall fellow would produce soldiers
equal to the full standard. -- Are you married?


Mab. No, and please your Highness, I am a maid, at your service.


Mar. What Is your name?


Mab. Mabel Flourish, and please your highness -- my father was trumpeter
Flourish.


Mar. Yes, they will do very well -- Soldier.


Olm. Here.


Comes down. Mar. Are you married?


Olm. No, Highness.


Mar. Can you read?

Marshal takes out his pocketbook, and writes upon a loose leas.
Olm. Cannot say, never tried.


Mar. Yes, they will make an excellent match -- I Will give orders to Captain
Patrick to see the ceremony performed -- It will be an excellent lesson to him
of the strictness of our military discipline -- Here, deliver that to Captain
Patrick. -- Yes, they will be a very pretty couple.


Exit. Mab. His Highness was always very proud -- I never heard him talk so
sweet and condescending before. Bell rings Coming, coming.


Exit into house. Olm. What devil's this?

Looking at the paper.
Dar. What Is the matter, Olmutz?


Olm. Marshal desire me give this paper -- Captain Patrick.


Dar. That paper -- what is it?


Olm. Don't know -- cannot read.


Dar. Let me see -- Marshal Fehrbellin's compliments to Capt. Patrick --
desires he will, at sight of this, see the bearer married to Mabel Flourish,
with all dispatch; and, as a portion, he will give her 50 rix-dollars from the
military chest. -- Indeed! -- but Olmutz shall never touch the dollars --
Olmutz, you had better go about that business I was telling you of.


Olm. What, and leave Marshal's paper -- may be of consequence -- let us hear
what about.


Dar. Oh, you want to know what its about -- oh, you shall hear what its about
-- You cannot read, you say.


Olm. No.


Dar. Marshal Fehrbellin's compliments to Capt. Patrick; desires he will, at
fight of this, see the bearer ride the great horse, for one hour, with five
carbines tied to each leg.


Olm. Me! what have I done? Wooden horse -- five carbines!


Dar. Poor fellow! -- what a fine tall figure to ride the high horse -- Oh!
your poor legs.


Olm. For what? -- What have I done?


Dar. Poor devil! -- such legs to suffer so -- what did he say to you?


Olm. Asked if I could read.


Dar. And I suppose you told him no.


Olm. No -- didn't -- said -- never tried.


Dar. Never tried! Ay, that is done it.


Olm. Here comes Quiz strutting, so merry -- I obliged to ride great horse!


Dar. I Will have a good joke aside Olmutz, this paper don't mention your name:
it only says the bearer. -- Suppose we give it to Quiz to carry.


Olm. The very thing. -- Captain, make him ride the great horse.


Dar. So he will. Get a wafer: for Quiz can read, you know, and that would
spoil the joke. This is fine. Come, Olmutz, there --

Seals it.
Enter QUIZ strutting. Quiz. To be sure I shall cut a very foolish bit of a
figure at the grand review.


Dar. Ay, Quiz, better perhaps than you think: for I don't know how it comes
about, but the Marshal, on my speaking a good word for you, has made your
fortune -- Under this water lies your preferment.


Olm. Yes, he will soon be exalted.

Stifles a laugh.
Quiz. Ay, great merit cannot long lay hid. But what is under that wafer?


Dar. A letter the Marshal desired you would give to Captain Patrick I told him
you was a great man.


Quiz. So I am -- a high fellow.

Strutting.
Dar. So I said: -- six feet and an inch high, cap and all.


Olm. Yes, and he will be highly mounted -- a trooper.


Quiz. Ay, Sir, little as you may think me, I may look down tomorrow on people
taller than myself. I may, by the god of war


Olm. Yes, he will look down, Darby, -- perhaps today


Aside to Darby. Dar. You Will give the letter.


Exit Darby and Olmutz. Quiz. Do you think I Would neglect the Marshal's commands
-- I will give it, by the god of war.


Enter PATRICK from House. Pat. Hey day, what sort of a figure have we here?


Quiz. I am ordered by Marshal Fehrbellin to deliver this biller.


Pat. [Reads] "Bearer -- married -- Mable Flourish." A strange command this --
but this I suppose his Highness wants to replenish his race of drummers. --
Where, where is this Mable?


Enter MABLE from House. Mab. Here your honor -- your honor lest the key in
your great trunk.


Pat. Well, I suppose you are both determined.


Quiz. Yes, by the god of war -- honor's my mistress, and for her I Will die.


Pat. Well then, I Will send for a chaplain, and you shall both be married
directly.


Mab. Married!


Pat. Yes, I am ordered by the Marshal to see you both married.


Mab. I married to such a shrimp of a man! -- what does the Marshal mean?


Quiz. Yes, Darby has done my business for me.


Pat. What Is your name?


Quiz. Quiz Oddbody,


Pat. Then, Mrs Oddbody, I give you joy -- and as a portion, his Highness has
ordered you 50 rix-dollars out of the military chest.


Exit into house. Mab. Fifty rix-dollars! Oh, that alters the case -- that is
quite another thing.


Quiz. I had no thought of marrying; but this is such a prodigious great match
-- that I shall be proud to be Man of the House.

Kisses her ridiculously.
Mab. Well, I shall have the finest booth in the Camp; and so let us to the
Chapel.


Quiz. Chapel! No, we will be married in a Cathedral -- we will, by the god of
war -- And then for the -- grand review.


SONG.
Quiz. All fierce and military,
Cross buff-belt and regimental new,
With high cap, rough and hairy,
At cur grand review:
With spur and boot,
Adorn the foot.
To grace the field, while pateraroes shoot
Fire and smoke,
All a joke,
Bullets whiz,
Bully Quiz.
Erect as a sturdy cak.
On my charger prancing,
Rat, tat, tat, his hoofs shall beat the grounds
Creat glove and road sword glancing,
Salute the ladies round:
In the grand pas rear,
Up the pavement tear,
Like a Noble Col'nel, at my men I swear
Hey, they fight,
To the right,
Keep the rank,
Guard the stank,
Zounds, I Will soon be a brigadier.

Leads her off. SCENE The Outside of a Cottage.
Enter DARBY, OLMUTZ, and Soldiers. Dar. Softly, softly, our Captain shall get
her, my hoy -- this is the place to watch for her -- for that is her father's,
the old soldier's -- though, it seems, her head runs of one Rupert.


Olm. Cannot help laughing, to think little Quiz is now riding the big horse.


DAR Hush -- Hush -- here she comes. --


Enter FLORA from the House, crosses the Stage and exits. Now Olmutz, there she
goes amongst the bushes -- make haste.

Olm. Will Not you go?


Dar. My dear Olmutz, you shall have the glory of the action all yourself -- I
would not rob you of a single lash you rascal.


Exit Olmutz and soldiers. Enter MARSHAL and PAT. Mar. I am glad you are come,
Sir, for we are to have a grand review tomorrow -- the Emperor seems prepared
for hostile measures; therefore our wise and vigilant Master thinks it
necessary to be prepared for to oppose them.


Flo. [Without.] Oh, dear -- where is Rupert to protect me?


Mar. Who Is that running after a girl? -- call him here, call the raseal back.


Dar. Yes, your honor -- Here Olmutz -- come back his Highness want's you. Why
don't you come back, you rascal; -- he is a very bad fellow, he would run after
the girl, notwithstanding all I said to him.


Enter OLMUTZ. Mar. What have you been about? come here, you rascal.


Dar. Ay, what have you been about? -- come here, you rascal.


Olm. Please Highness -- corporal thought no harm to get pretty girl for
officer -- got her off though.


Aside to Darb, Mar. What officer, rascal?


Olm. New Captain, Highness.


Pat. Me, sirrah!


Mar. I thought Sir, I had found you different employment.


Olm. Highness -- very hard -- order man to ride great horse, 'cause he cannot
read.


Mar. Great horse -- I thought her a comely personable woman -- Bur, Sir, to
you I must say, that I am sorry an officer should be guilty of such an act of
dishonor -- whose duty it is to protect -- not to distress the fair.


Pat. Sir, give me leave. --


Mar. No, Sir, for the present I suspend your commission; when his Majesty
arrives, he may use his pleasure.


Dar. So then, Olmutz will not be punished after all.


Mar. What Sir, arn't you married?

To Olmatz.
Olm. Not I, Highness.


Dar. Here, your Highness, comes a pretty couple that are married.


Enter QUIZ and MABEL. Quiz. By the god of war, your Highness, I am come to
thank you for all favors.


Mab. I thank your Highness for my husband and great fortune.


Quiz Yes, your Highness, but mine is the biggest.


Mar. What is all this?


Pat. Your Highness desired me to see the wedding -- I have it from under your
own hand -- and there you are obeyed -- behold your well matched couple.


Quiz. Yes, we are a pretty couple, by the god of war.


Mar. Begone Sir.


Ext Quiz and Mabel. Olm. So, this is great horse, rascal?


To Darby, Exit, Dar. I think, I had best take off too -- or I may chance to
run against a whipping post.


Retires up the stage. Mar. Well, Sir, you are from Ireland -- where I know
they would call this a good jest -- and a joke is the leading feature of your
country -- I shall not on this occasion, differ in opinion from you -- but,
Sir, the young woman you have ordered to be carried away, must be restored --
and I hope your future conduct will not make me repent of the desire I have to be
your friend.


Exit. FINALE.
DARBY comes down. During the Finale QUIZ and MABEL enter. Dar. And is he gone?
oh, bug and bounds
How near I was a thrading;
But here is your Uncle, Father Luke,
In Berlin chaise came dashing.

Cap. God's Death, perhaps my Norah too,
We Are in a hopeful hoble;
But I must to my awl and end.
The matter up to cobble.

Cap. Disgraced, I cannot face my wise.


Dar. Who bid her now to come, Sir?


Cap And such a cause then, Father Luke,


Dar. My hand the priest I Will hum.


Cap. 'Till 'Im restored, amuse' em both;
Again my friend, I Will rank ye;

Dar. I wonder how is little Quiz?


Quiz. I Am pretty well, I thank ye.
My Mabel, by the god of war,
Is a celesttal Houry;
As fine a bride as man can wish,
When here you down her dowry.

Mab. Like scissars hung on apron string,
Or dangled here a locket;
But touch my cash, and that, and you,
I Will put into my pocket.

Cap. Come, come, agree,
Like man and wife,
And very well you will both do.

Mab. Aye, by the god of war, we will,


Quiz. Already get my cath too.


Dar. Friend Quiz, your hand, I give you joy,
Of spousy and her riches;
This comfort still is yours, my boy,
She never can wear the breeches.
Then let the Chine and Turkey smoke,
Goul cheer overspread the table;
The wedding, such a merry ^^ke,
Of little Quiz and Mabel.

Exeunt. END OF ACT I.
ACT II.
SCENE Mabel Flourishes.
Enter MABEL and OLMUTZ. Mab. Then it was you his Highness intended me for.


Olm. Yes, one of Darby's tricks -- sent me after Flora -- get her for officer.


Mab. Ay, Flora, and the poor girl is now in my room putting on a suit of
officer's clothes that I lent her, to elude the insults of the officers and
soldiers, and vows she will go through the world, till she find her sweetheart
Rupert. -- Ay, Darby's a sad villain, to lose so fine a tall fellow for little
Quiz.


Olm. Ay, to loose me for him -- be revenged -- come to my centry-box -- snug
by ourselves -- foot of Bridge.


Mab. Oh, fie! Olmutz -- But could I depend on your honor?


Olm. You may -- some one coming -- not seen together. Exit Mabel.] Fine woman
-- make Quiz believe Darby made this match to cover his own design on his wife.


Enter RUPERT. Rup. Rascal -- I am told you know where Flora is that you have
seized her. -- Tell me of her this instant.


Olm. Darby did it, ran off with her for his Captain. Come this way -- tell all
I know, -- now I shall be revenged on Darby for loss of wife -- make him rine
big horse.


Exeunt. SCENE discovers NORAH.
Two Chairs, a Dressing-Table. Norah. Here I am at Jast in Silesia -- and how
my coming must surprise my dear Patrick! But the more unexpected the more
welcome our meeting.


SONG.
Oh, come, my soldier, meet my sight,
Full far I Have come to thee;
No foe now dares you to the fight,
But gentle love and me.
My soldier doats on fierce alarms,
Where foes in battle join;
But when the trumpet sounds to arms,
Oh! let him fly to mine.
In camps how rough by Mars arrayed,
There fate attends his will;
At home you hear each tender maid,
Ah! was he sorm'd to kill?
In charms secure the fair advance,
And ere in arrow flies,
He looks around, and at each glance
A wounded maiden dies.
He looks around, etc.
Luke. (without) Very well, honey, I see the door; so perhaps I may find the
room myself -- You must know that I am Father Luke of Carton; but I left it to
follow Pat, because I found he was come to Silesia to have his full swing among
the girls.


Enter QUIZ, MABEL and FATHER LUXE. Quiz. My dear, I have got a most delicious
cordial. -- Darby gave it me.


Mab. Darby! he is a pretty fellow -- so keep your mouth shut.


Quiz. No, I Will open it once more.


Luke. Is that your husband!


Quiz. Yes, I am,


Luke. Who married you?


Quiz. The Parson; but I Am obliged to Darby. -- Darby helped me to the match.


Luke. Faith, and he helped you plentifully. But, do you hear? -- we would not
have Captain Patrick know of our arrival 'till we come smack upon him. So, do you
hear -- have you never a snug bit of a room in a corner, where you can put
Norah?


Mab. O yes, there is my room, and a young woman in it already, that has been
used ill by the soldiers.


Quiz. Soldiers use women ill -- who is the man of the house?


Luke. Ay, where is the man of the house?


Quiz. If you cannot see, put on your spectacles.


Luke. Faith and I must, for you are small print.


Quiz. Small print!


Luke. Come Norah -- in -- in -- Mabel, my dear, please to show the way.


Nor. Oh, sir, lose no time in finding out my husband -- only think of my
anxiety.


Exit Mabel and Norah. Luke. Come here -- what have you got in your square
bottle?


Quiz. It Is fine usquebaugh --


Luke. Usquebaugh! Where did you get it -- From Drogheda?


Quiz. No, I had it from Darby.


Luke. Then you had it from a wicked rogue, takes it from him. arn't you
ashamed to ask a clergyman to drink drams. It Is not good, nor it cannot be good
-- pours out -- nor it cannot be wholesome drinks Now, don't you be running your
nose into every neighbors -- both up and down the town, and bragging that you
have got father Luke in your house.


Quiz. No, my greatest pride is that I have got myselt in the house. Bell rings
loud Oh, that damned bell -- I Will have drums and drumsticks placed in every room
in the house -- I will, by the god of war.


Exit, Takes a chair, and sits down. Enter DARBY, unperceived. Luke I fancy I
shall soon get to the bottom of this, "For oh, it is heavenly liquor."

Sings.
Dar. "And as good for me as the vicar."

Sings.
Luke. Now, upon my soul, this is very comical, for you left me counting my
beads in Ireland, and here you find me conning my book in Silesia.


Dar. I think its my book you are conning; but if you please. I Will read a
chapter now, for I suppose by this time you have it by heart.


Luke. Oh, Darby, you are a wicked fellow; the last time I saw you was at
Carton -- to be fure you was in mighty haste, with the constables at your heels
-- but I did not think that you had so long a journey to take.


Dar. Constables! Oh, yes, very true -- but I gave them the slip -- I would not
keep such fellows company.


Luke. Ah, Darby, you was always a very great scapegrace -- a sad dog.


Dar. Oh, now you talk about dogs, father Luke, pray did my little dog come
back to the farm?


Luke. Your dog!


Dar. Ay, my Unicorn -- we used to call him Unicorn, you know, because he had
but one ear -- I had him from an attorney.


Luke. Don't ask me about your dog, you stupid fellow -- what is your dog to me?


Dar. Oh, he is not -- now you will hear.


SONG.
I Will sing you a song, faith I Am singing it now,
Here I don't mean to 'front either small or big,
Bow, wow;
Here the subject I Have chosen, it is the canine race,
To prove like us twe-logg'ddogs, they are a very fine race.
Bow, wow, wow,
Fall, lal, lal, ad di, ad di.
Wow, wow.
Like you and I, other dogs may be counted sad dogs.
At we will not drink water, some might think us mad dogs;
A courtier is a spaniel, a citizen's a dull dog,
A soldier is a mastiff, a sailor is a bull dog.
Bow, wow, wow,
Fall, lal, lal.
An old maid comes from church, the poor no lody kinder.
A lusty dog her footman, with prayer book behind her:
A poor boy asks a farthing, and gets plenty of good kicking,
But little Shock, her lap dog, must have a roasted chicken,
Bow, wow, wow,
Fall, lal, la.
When silly dogs for property, uncle, son, and brother,
Grind and snort, mighty gruff, and worry one another;
Should they a bit of equity, from Justice beg the lean of,
That cunning dog, the lawyer, Snap, carries quick the bone off.
Bow, wow, wow,
Fall, lal, la.
A port's a lank grey-bound, for the public he runs game down,
A critic is a cur, and strives to run his fame down;
And though be cannot follow, where the noble sport invites him,
"He slyly steals behind, and by the heel he bites him:
Bow, wow, wow,
Fall, lal, la.
"You Have a (...) pack of friends, while to feed them you are able,
"Your dog for his morsel, crouches under your table,
"Your friends turn tale in misfortune or disaster,
"But your poor faithful dog will never forsake his master,
Bow, wow, wow,
Fall, lal, la.
As your friends turn tail the moment that you need 'em,
My dog ran away when no longer I could feed him;
This cur so ungrateful, for sook me on my jow ney,
And for a moldy crust, went back to the attorney.
Bow, wow, wow,
Fall, lal, la.
But where is your niece, Norah -- how does she -- is she here, father?

Luke. Here! there is a question -- no, I left her at Potsdam.


Dar. And I saw her not half an hour ago -- but I Will be even with him.

aside.
Luke. But, you sly rogue, how did you find me out? -- where is her husband --
have you ever met him in your walks -- Pat, that run away?


Dar. Ah father! I am very sorry to tell you such bad news; but poor Pat's dead.


Luke. Dead!


Dar. Ay, sad intelligence for poor Norah.


Luke. How did he die?


Dar. A pistol fever -- a bullet did the business.


Luke. A pistol! -- when?


Dar. Last night -- Oh you're come time enough to preach the funeral sermon.


Luke. Oh, oh, where shall I find comfort -- oh!


Fills the glass. Dar. In the book.


Luke. Oh dear -- Pat dead -- Norah -- Norah!


Dar. Why, do you think she can hear you at Potsdam?


Luke. [drinks] Oh you hardened soul, you.


Dar. I Am sure you will not be hardened while there is a drop to soften you.


Luke. A drop! -- oh, you greedy creature, take the whole bottle. Poor Patt!


DUETT.
Luke. And oh is he gone, whirra strua poor Pat,
So sorry, look here, I Am so sorry for that;
[Darby shows the empty bottle. My grief is so great, not a tear can I cry;

Dar. And yet my good sir, you have a sup in your eye.

Luke. Go, go, take your liquor away from me.

Dar. Oh, ho, does it give you such pain?

Luke. And never bring your usquebaugh bottle again to me.

Dar. No.
speaks.
Luke. No, Darby, no, till you fill it again.

Exit Luke. Enter QUIZ. Quiz. Harkey, you -- do you know that I am a descendant
of the great Hercules Quiz? -- and as my great ancestor strangled a serpent in
the cradle; so did I, when in mine, throttle a kitten -- I was nursed in a
mortar -- have eat fire from a great gun -- and made a cannon my flute, by
blowing in at the touchhole.


Dar. Amazing! -- What a great hero -- I am thinking, Quiz that a wig-box will
make an excellent cradle for your first child.


Quiz. What do you mean by that, sir?


Dar. Lord, how big we are -- now I Would as lief a man would smack my face as call
me sir.


Quiz. And I Would as soon do one as the other if you would give me occasion -- I only
want occasion to fight with you -- I do, by the god of war.


Dar. I should think a Prussian soldier would think rascal sufficient occasion.


Quiz. 'I is by the god of war -- where shall we meet?


Dar. By the new bridge -- I Will borrow my master's pistols -- do you bring
yours; and then, with ourbacks to the certry-boxes, we will thunder away.


Quiz. We will -- and Darby I Will blow your head over the bridge into the river,
and save your dirty face a washing -- I will, by the god of war.


Exit Quiz and Darby. Enter FATHER LUKE and GREENBER. Luke. And so you are
father to this girl, you say.


Green. Yes, and she is engaged to one Rupert, a worthy fellow, who loves her;
and captain Patrick's taking her away just at the time when he is come home,
involves us all in great troub'e.


Luke. Who told you to?


Great. Darby said that Olmutz took her for the officer.


Luke. Oh, that Darby is a sad lying, drunken fellow. -- She Is safe enough. --
Norah, bring the young woman to her father.


Enter NORAH and FLORA from flat. FLORA dressed in breeches -- blue
regimentals. Luke. Eh, what is the meaning of all this? -- what have you been
about there? -- As I hope to live, you don't look like a Christian young woman.


Flo. Do I look like a Christian young man? -- for that is what I want to look
like.


Green. But what is the reason of this?


Flo. To show you a woman can run all risques, where she truly loves.


Green. Bat why this metamorphoses?


Flo. I was not safe in the absence of Rupert -- I have been insulted as a
female -- so assumed this habit -- being well assured, that those who are so
mean to insult a woman, will want the courage to attack a man.


Nor. True, Flora.


SONG.
With your sex, my sweet Flora, your blushes forget,
Though co^, you're no longer, no longer a maid;
In your bright burnished gorget a brazen face set,
Be a ball, hey allons, hey allons, your parade.
In your nice chicken gloves as you gallantly stand,
While the fiddles for action prepare;
For the dear pas de deux give the word of command,
And gracefully foot to the fair.
At your mess, when poor virtue in bumpers is drowned,
Though the toost give; a zest to each glass;
When Bacchus the temple of folly has crowned,
Be the god of your favorite lass.
Oh! never let her character die in a wink,
Even a chorus of laughter despise;
Your goddess as pure as the wine that you drink,
Let your sancy exalt to the skies.
Exeunt Norah, Flora, and Greenbergh. Luke. So they have had their jokes upon
me; but I Will be even with Pat -- for giving himself out for dead -- faith I Will
have a little bit of a joke with him.


Enter PAT and RUPERT. Arrah, and can you be Pat -- or are you his ghost? Now
if you are dead, my dear boy, tell me so.

Pat. Dead! What can this mean?


Luke. Faith Pat, it is well you are come; for we heald you was dead, and Norah
has been looking out for another husband -- Aye, and if you had staid half an
hour longer, she would have had one, and a smart fellow he is too -- and then he is
so attentive, leading her into the coach and out of the coach, at every place
we stopped at.


Pat. Dead! married in half an hour!


Luke. Aye, certainly, you would not have her live unmarried. Now ar'nt you a
pretty fellow -- I have heard of all your campaigning after a gooseberry girl
-- the Marshal putting you under an arrest, and taking the cockade out of your
hat.


Pat. Dear Sir, who told you this?


Luke. Who? why who but your own man Darby; and to crown the whole, said that
you had blown the roof off your head.


Enter DARBY. Crosses to PAT. Dar. Master, lend me your pistols.


Pat. Yes, you rascal, you shall have them with a brace of bullets through your
head. [ Collars him] For all your lies -- you told Father Luke, that I was
running after every wench -- you are the cause of all my disgrace, by setting
Olmutz after the flower girl.


Dar. I --


Rup. Ay, Sir, what have you done with my Flora? -- you are the villain that
took my Flora from her father's house.


Dar. I -- Oh dear, why did I sell my farm?


Enter FLORA, from Flat. Flo. Hey, what noise is all this -- your making a
disturbance in this chamber is what I don't understand -- damn me.


Dar. No, what I don't understand, damn me.


Gets behind her. Rup. [To Darby.] Pray where is Flora?


Draws his broad sword. Flo. Oh, what my little strawberry girl -- she is very
fond of me, a young fellow, though her father wants to give her to a swaggering
puppy -- one Rupert.


Rup. God's Death, take thy deserts.


Draws, Pat parts them. Flo. Oh, what, I suppose, this is Rupert. -- Oh, you
may have her again now -- I Will gladly resign her to you -- I assure you I want
to get rid of her -- for my heart is entirely devoted to another. -- This
night, I take the lovely Norah to my arms.


Pat. You shall take this to your heart first.


Draws. Rup. Nay, nay -- have patience.


Flo. Oh let him alone -- let me have fair play, and I shall be a match for
both of you.


TRIO.
Flo. The lovely fair within that room,
My wife shall be;

Cap. And how, Sir, are you sure of that?

Flo. Oh. she loves me.

Cap. God's Death and hell, Sir, what do you say?
Quick, answer speed^ly;

Rup. What of my Flora, tell me first?

Flo. Oh she loves me.

Rup. She loves thee.

Dar. He loves she.

Flo. And for her sweet sake,
You, Sir, or you I Will see.

Dar. To'em, my little cock a nouns,
Oh, you're my Gramaghree;

Cap. What my love love thee.

Flo. Ay, thy love loves me.

Dar. Knock their head, together;

Flo. Have at you, one to three.

Dar. Sir, leave me out a wicked rogue,
Our little Gramaghree.

Flo. Fire or swerd,
When love's the ward,
Have at ye, one to three, etc.

Cap. Satisfaction you must give,
Most swely, now to me, etc.

Dar. Oh, what a tearing hero!
What a tearing, tearing hero!
At ye, one, two, three,
Surely now to me,
Little Gramaghree.

Exeunt all but Darby. Dar. So I go on well here in the German wars -- My kind
countryman, Captain Patrick -- buries his nuckles in my throat, and never
thinks it will spoil my singing; another swings a scythe about my ears; -- and
little Quiz threatens to blow my head over the bridge. Oh, to be sure, I Am not
in a good thriving way; -- but I must contrive some method to frighten Quiz --
for I must confess, I have no great inclination to have my head blown into the
river. -- Oh, dear, oh, dear! -- I am like a blind fiddler, always in some
serape.


Exit. SCENE, A country Bridge, a Centry BON on each Side.
Enter QUIZ. Quiz. Darby is not come yet, -- I knew the fellow would be asraid
to meet me! How I Will disgrace him in the campl I Will switch him through the ranks
with a whale-bone ramrod -- Eh -- no -- this is he -- he is plaguey punctual.


Enter DARBY. Dar. Av, there is the enemy.


Quiz. Your mortal foe -- I am, by the god of war.


Dar. [Beckons on a man with a sack, a brace of blunderbusses, a pick axe, and
spade.] Put down the tools,


Quiz. Tools -- Take your ground.


Dar. Don't be rash -- in Ireland we always settle these sort of things very
cool -- now to fix the grand point. When people fight, as you and I do, without
seconds, if one should be killed, as is always the case, that the conqueror may
not fall a sacrifice to the law -- we have two ways of disposing of the dead
gentleman: -- Now you may take which you please -- one way is, we dig a hole on
the spot, and cover him up, sweet and wholesome uncer the sod -- this we call
the Galway kick -- but it he don't like that, the other is -- we put him into a
sack and tumble him into the river, this we call the Tipperary touch.


Quiz. Tipperary touch -- now damn me -- if I Will have either a Galway kick, or
a Tipperary touch.


Dar. And now give me the blunderbuss -- charged with razor blades.

The man gives him a blunderbuss.
Quiz. Razor blades -- I will not fight, by the god or war.


Dar. Not fight!


Quiz. No.


Dar. Why then, let me tell you, that it is not handsome of you to disappoint
me thus.


Quiz. I don't care -- I Will be as ugly as the devil -- but I don't like to be
put sweet and wholesome under the sod. -- Oh, I Am glad there is somebody coming.


Dar. Oh, this is the Priest, that I ordered to come and bury you like a
christian.


Quiz. I don't care, I will not be buried like a Christian.


Enter FATHER LUKE. Luke. Oh, you wicked reprobate -- not be buried like a
Christian!


Quiz. I will not, by the god of war.


Luke. What is all this about?


Quiz. What! why that wicked bloody ruffian has a design aga^^st ^he chastity
of my virtuous wife -- and when I (...) him ou^ a-la-militare, he comes to cut,
scarity and murder me with a brace of blunder bussen charged with razor blades
-- he does, by the god of war!


Dar. I a design! -- it is Olmutz has a design against your virtuous wife -- and
by her own appointment. --


Quiz. No, he is my true friend.


Dar. Is he then -- here goes at the centry box -- I Will not bring my Razor
blades for nothing.


Enter Olmutz and Mabel screaming from the Centry-box. Quiz. Hey! now I see how
it is, by the god of war!


Dar. Here Is your true friend, and virtuous wife.


Quiz. Darby your hand -- Do you give Olmutz a Galway kick, and l'll give my
wife a Tipperary touch.


Olm. Kick me! -- Why, I came to be your second.


Quiz. Get out, you rascal, or I Will shoot you, by the good of war!. -- Well,
and I suppose you came to be a second too.


Mab. No, indeed, husband, I was here first.


Luke. I dare be sworn you was -- ay, says, now, this is very comical -- here
comes Pat, and Rupert -- and their wives, as if they came by design.


Enter PAT. and RUPERT on one side -- NORAH and FLORA on the other. Pat. The
young bragg^rt -- and with North in his hand -- to come thus before my face --
I can contain myself no longer -- defend your worthless life.


Puts his hand to his sword. Flo. No, sir -- I Will not fight -- to you I resign
her, if she is willing.


Nor. Most willing -- my dear Patrick!


Flo. And to you Rupert I resign myself -- if Flora be worth accepting

Embraces -- as do Pat and North.
Pup. Worth accepting -- most dear to me.


Nor. My dear Patrick, why in a maze?


Pat. At this unexpected happiness, my lovely wife -- but now we'll for England
-- and if Darby will, he shall attend us, where we'll return to the service of
our gracious sovereign, whose life is a blessing to his people.


FINALE.
Cap. Oh, now let the drum
Beat company come,
And let the clarionets play;
And oh, little fife,
Now whisile for life,
While merry we foot it away.
For Fortune turns her wheel,
And with us she will dance a reel;
The late whining fellow,
Now jovial and mellow,
So jollity ring a peal,

Quiz. As sure as a gun
We'll show you such fun,
As never was seen before;
Like officers swear
And tatter and tear,
And like a cannon we'll roar.
Darby did you call?

Luke. You devils how loud you bawl,


Quiz. To house, bed and table -- of Quiz.


Mab. And poor Mabel,
You're heartily welcome all.
Oh, new let the drum, etc.

Flo. Oh, maidens take care,
By example beware,
If ruin you would wish to shun;

Nor. Nor trust to your charms
When once from your arms
You suffer your spousy to run,

Flo. Like birds held in a string,
They Will hop about, then take wing,

Nor. From twig to bough flying,
Your sobbing, your crying,
Never back can the wanton bring.
Oh, now let the drum, etc.

Luke. A sad wicked place,
A very sad case;
Here nothing I Will get to do.
Child, put on your cap,
And here is a slap,
I Will marry that younker and you.
If you don't take it amiss,
To Mab. Id like to bury poor Quiz;
Without any money,
Your hand, my dear honey,
To Quiz. So much I like your phiz.
Oh, Now let the drum, etc.

Dar. And now, my friends may,
Of your poor soldier say,
A word in your Poet's behalf,
Oh, do not then try,
To make the boy cry,
Who so often has made you laugh,
Success we cannot command,
But le^ your merciful hand
Now lend us a v^lley,
And pardon his folly,
For the honor of old Ireland.
Oh, now let the drum, etc.

FINIS.

