THE SEASONS. IN IMITATION OF SPENSER.

Annuus agricolis ordo breviorque laborum
Summa mihi tradenda.
Praedium Rusticum. LONDON: Printed for S. BAKER, at Chaucer's- Head, in
Russel Street, Covent Garden. 1751. [Price One Shilling.]

AN IMITATION OF SPENSER.
I.
YE baleful Follow'rs of the Blatant Beast,
Who censure Matters far beyond your Ken,
Behold, I now present you with a Feast;
Rush forth like Wolves from your sequestered Den,
And mangle all the Labors of my Pen.
Show, ye rude Louts your lewd unhallowed Rage,
In this I share the Fate of greater Men;
Pale Envy ever knaws the laureled Page,
And against all worthy Wight does War perpetual wage.
II.
If thee, sweet Nymph, these simple Lines Please.
aggrate,
If I may hope to merit thine Esteem,
Not with the proudest would I change my State
Of those who deeply drink Castalia's Stream,
And on Parnassus catch the inspiring Dream.
Say, thou dear Noursling of the Paphian Queen,
Will thou, ah! will thou patronize my Theme,
So shall this Measure blunt the tooth of Spleen,
Nor Critic's Tongue shall blast such favored Lines, I ween.
III.
See! how the Tribe of Witlings shun the Place,
And deep in Shades conceal their Fronts of Brass;
The Coxcomb talks of Feathers, Clothes, and Lace,
Nay Codrus un-impeach'd does let me pass,
Codrus, of Pride and Spite a mighty Mass.
Thus when a Set of Imps at Midnight play,
And tear the Coarses from the hallowed Grass;
Soon as the Sun unbars the Gates of Day,
They fear his heavenly Light, and melt in Air away.
SPRING. An IMITATION of SPENSER.
I.
ERE yet I sing the round-revolving Year,
And show the Toils and Pastime of the Swain,
At The late Mr. Thomson.
Alcon's Grave I drop a pious Tear;
Right well he knew to raise his learned Strain,
And, like his Milton, scorned the rhyming Chain.
Ah! cruel Fate, to tear him from our Eyes;
Receive this Wreath, albe the Tribute's vain,
From the green Sod may Flowers immortal rise,
To mark the sacred Spot where the sweet Poet lies.
II.
It is the Cuckoo that announceth SPRING,
And with his Revengeful.
wreakful Tale the Spouse does fray;
Mean while the Finches harmless Ditties sing,
And hop, in buxom Youth, from Spray to Spray,
Proud as Sir Paridel, of rich Array.
The little Wantons that draw Venus' Team
Chirp amorous through the Grove, in beavies gay;
And he, who erst gained Leda's fond Esteem,
Now sails on Thamis Tide, the Glory of the Stream!
III.
Proud as the Turkish Sultan, Chaunticleer
Sees, with Delight, his numerous Race around;
He grants fresh Favors to each Female near;
For Love as well as Chevisaunce renowned.
The waddling Dame that did the Gauls confound,
Her tawny Sons does lead to Rivers cold;
While Juno's Darling.
Dearling, with majestic Bound,
To charm his Lover.
Leman, does his Train unfold,
That glows with vivid Green, that flames with burning Gold.
IV.
The balmy Cowslip gilds the smiling Plain,
The virgin Snow-drop boasts her Silver Hue,
An hundred Tints the gaudy Daisy stain,
And the meek Violet, in amiss Blue,
Creeps low to Earth, and hides from public View:
But the rank Nettle rears her Crest on high;
So Ribaulds loose their Fronts unblushing show,
While modest Merit does neglected lie,
And pines in lonely Shade, unseen of vulgar Eye.
V.
See! all around the gall-less Doves.
Culvers bill,
Mean while the Nightingale's becalming Lays
Mix with the plaintive Music of the Rill
The which in various Circles, or Windings.
Gyres the Meadow Bathes.
bays,
Behold! the Welkin bursts into a Blaze!
Fast by the Car of Light the nimble Hours,
In Songs of Triumph, hail his genial Rays,
And, as they go.
wend to Thetis cooling Bowers,
They bound along the Sky, and strew the Heavens with Flowers.
VI.
And now the human Bosom melts to Love;
The raptured Bard awakes his skilful Lyre,
By running Streams, or in the Laurel Grove,
He tunes to amorous Notes his sounding Wire,
All, all is Harmony, and all Desire.
The happy Numbers charm the blooming Maid,
Her blushing Cheeks pronounce her Heart on Fire,
She now consents, then shuns the embow'ring Shade,
With faint Reluctance yields; desirous, yet afraid.
VII.
Now rustic Cuddy, with untutored Throat,
(Though much admired, I ween, of Nymph and Swain)
By various Songs would various Ends promote.
Seeks he to prove that Woman's Vows are vain?
He Bateman's Fortune tells, a baleful Strain!
And if, to honor Britain he be led,
He sings a 'Prentice bold, in Londs profane,
Who, all unarmed, did strike two Lions dead,
Tore forth their savage Hearts, and did a Princess wed.
VIII.
But hark! the Bag-pipe summons to the Green,
The jocund Bag-pipe, that awaketh Sport;
The blythesome Lasses, as the Morning sheen,
Around the flow'r-crown'd May Pole quick resort;
The Gods of Pleasure, here, have fixed their Court.
Quick on the Wing the flying Moment seize,
Nor build up ample Schemes, for Life is short,
Short as the Whisper of the passing Breeze.
Yet, ah! in vain I preach -- mine Heart is ill at Ease.
SUMMER. An IMITATION of SPENSER.
I.
BEneath yon Knotty.
snubby Oak's extended Shade
Safe let me hide me from the Eye of Day;
Nor shall the Dog Star this Retreat invade,
As through the Heavens he speeds his burning Way:
The sultry Lion rages for his Prey.
Ah Phoebus, quench thy wild destroying Fire,
Each Flower, each Shrub does sink beneath thy Ray,
Save the fresh Laurel, that shall never expire.
The leaves that crown a Bard, may brave celestial Ire.
II.
Or shall I hie to mine own Hermitage,
Round which the wanton Vine her Arms does wind,
There may I lonely turn the sacred Page,
Improve my Reason, and amend my Mind;
Here against Life's Ills a Remedy I find.
An hundred Flowers emboss the verdant Ground;
A little Brook does my sweet Cottage bind,
Its Waters yield a melancholy Sound,
And sooth to Study deep, or lull to Sleep profound.
III.
The play-ful Insect hopping in the Grass
Does tire the Hearer with his Sonnet shrill;
The pool-sprung Gnat on sounding Wing does pass,
And on the Starting, flying-out.
ramping Steed does suck his Fill;
Ah me, can little Creatures work such Ill!
The patient Cow does, to eschew the Heat,
Her Body steep within the neighboring Rill;
And while the Lambs in fainter Voices bleat,
Their Mothers hang the Head, in doleful Plight I weet.
IV.
Careless.
Rechless of Seasons, see the lusty Swains
Along the Meadow spread the tawny Hay;
The Maidens too undaunted seek the Plains,
Ne fear to show their Faces to the Ray;
But all, the honest Badge of Toil display.
See how they mould the Hay-cock's rising Head;
While wanton Colin, full of amorous Play,
Down throws Susan, who does shriek for Dread.
Fear not. -- Thou can be hurt upon so soft a Bed.
V.
At length the Sun does hasten to repose,
And all the Vault of Heaven is streaked with Light;
In flamy Gold the ruddy Welkin glows,
And, for the Noonday Heat, our Pains does Requite.
quite,
For all is calm, serene, and passing bright.
Favonius gentle skims along the Grove,
And sheds sweet Odors from his Pennons light.
The little Bat in giddy Orbs does rove,
And loud the Screech-owl shrieks, to rouse her blue-ey'd Love.
VI.
Menalcas came to taste the Evening Gale,
His Cheeks impurpl'd with the Rose of Youth;
He won each Damsel with his piteous Tale,
They thought they listened to the Words of Truth,
Yet their Belief did work them muchel Sorrow.
Ruth.
His Oaths were light as Gossimer, or Air,
His Tongue was poisonous as an Aspic's Tooth.
Ah! cease to promise Joy, and give Despair.
It Is brave to smite the Foe; it is base to wrong the Fair.
VII.
The gentle Thyrsis, mild as opening Morn,
Came to the Lawn, and Marian there was found,
Marian whom many Huswife Arts adorn,
Right well she knew the Apple to surround
With dulcet Crust; and Thomalin renowned
For Hardy, valiant.
prow Achievements in the Wrestling-ring;
He held at naught the Vantage of the Ground,
But prone to Earth the hardiest Wight would fling;
Such was Alcides erst, if Poets Truth.
Sooth do sing.
VIII.
From tree-crown'd Hill, from flow'r-enamel'd Vale,
The mild Inhabitants in Crowds appear
To tread a Measure; while Night's Regent pale
Does through the Sky her Silver Chariot steer,
Whose lucid Wheels were decked with Dew-drops clear,
The which, like Pearls, descended on the Plain.
Now every Youth does clasp his Mistress dear,
And every Nymph rewards her constant Swain.
Thrice happy he who loves, and is beloved again.
AUTUMN. An IMITATION of SPENSER.
I.
SEE jolly AUTUMN, clad in Hunter's Green,
In wholesome Vigor.
lusty-hed does mount the Sphere,
A leafy Girlond binds her Temples sheen,
Instudded richly with the spiky Ear.
Her right Hand bears a vine-incircl'd Spear,
Such as the Crew did wield whom Bacchus lad,
When to the Ganges he his Course did steer;
And in her left a Bugle-horn she had,
On which she often.
eft did blow, and made the Heart right glad.
II.
In slow Procession moves the tottering Wain,
The sunburned Hinds their finished Toil follow.
ensue;
Now in the Barn they house the glit'ring Grain,
And there the Cries of 'Harvest Home' renew,
The honest Farmer does his Friends salute.
salew;
And them with Jugs of Ale his Wife does treat,
Which, for that Purpose, she at Home did brew;
They laugh, they sport, and homely Jests repeat,
Then smack their Lasses Lips, their Lips as Honey sweet.
III.
On every Hill the purple-blushing Vine
Beneath her Leaves her racy Fruit does hide.
Although.
Albe she pour not Floods of foaming Wine,
Yet are we not Potations bland denied;
See where the Pear Tree does in Earth abide,
Bruise her rich Fruitage and the Grape disdain;
The Apple too will grant a generous Tide,
To sing whose Honors Thenot raised his Strain,
Whose soul-inchanting Lays still charm the listening Plain.
IV.
Through greyish Mists behold Aurora dawns,
And to his Sport the wary Fowler hies;
Crouching to Earth his guileful Pointer fawns,
Now the thick Stubble, now the Clover tries,
To find where, with his Race, the Partridge lies;
Ah! luckless Sire, ah! luckless Race, I ween,
Whom Force compels, or subtle Arts surprise;
More Daedalus envying Perdix his Nephew's Skill in Mechanics, threw him into
the Sea. He escaped Death by being changed into a Partridge.
Uncles wait to cause thee dol'rous Anguish, Pain.
Teen,
Doomed to escape the Deep, and perish on the Green.
V.
The full-mouthed Hounds pursue the timorous Hare,
And the Hills echo to the joyful Cry;
Ah! borrow the light Pennons of the Air,
If you're Reached, overtaken.
arraught, you die, poor Wretch, you die.
Naught will avail the pity-pleading Eye,
For our good 'Squire does much against you rail,
And says you often magic Arts do try;
At Times you wave Grimalkin's sooty Tail,
Or on a Beesom vild you through the Welkin sail.
VI.
The Stag is roused; he stems the threatening Flood
That shall ere long his matchless Swiftness quell;
And, to avoid the Tumult of the Wood,
Amongst his well-known Companions.
Pheers attempts to Mix.
mell:
With Horn and Hoof his Purpose they repel.
Thus, should a Maid from Virtue's Lore ystray,
Your Sex, my Daphne, show their Vengeance fell;
Your cruel selves with Gall the Shaft Bathe.
embay,
And lash from Pardon's Shrine the Penitent away.
VII.
Now Silence charms the Sages of the Gown,
To purer Air does speed each crafty Wight;
The well-squeez'd Client quits the dusty Town,
Grown gray in the asserting of his Right,
With Head yfraught with Law, and Pockets light,
Well pleased he wanders over the fallow Lea,
And views each rural Object with Delight.
Never be my Lot the brawling Courts to see;
Who trusts to Lawyer's Tongue does much Judges ill.
misween, perdy.
VIII
Right blessed the Man who free from bitter Sorrow.
Bale,
Does in the little, peaceful Hamlet dwell,
No loud Contention does his Ears assail,
Save when the Tempest whistles over his Cell;
The Fruitful Down, the flow'r-depainted Dell,
To please his Eyne are variously array'd';
And when in Roundelay his Flame he would tell,
He gains a Smile from his beloved Maid;
By such a gentle Smile, an Age of Pain's repaid.
WINTER. An IMITATION of SPENSER.
I.
THE little Brook that erst my Cot did lave,
And over its flinty Pavement sweetly sung,
Does now forget to roll her wanton Wave,
For Winter Hoar her icy Chain has flung
And stilled the babbling Music of her Tongue.
The lonely Woodcock seeks the splashy Glen,
Each Mountain Head with fleecy Snow is hung;
The Snipe and Duck enjoy the moorish Fen,
Like Hermits.
Eremites they live, and shun the Sight of Men.
II.
The Stupiffed.
wareless Sheep no longer bite the Mead,
No more the Plough-boy turns the stubborn Ground,
At the full Crib the horned Lab'rers feed,
Their Nostrils cast black Clouds of Smoke around;
A squalid Coat does the lean Steed surround.
The wily Fox does prowl abroad for Prey,
Rechless of Snares, or of the avenging Hound;
And trusty Liftghoot, now no longer gay, Line last but one, for Liftghoot,
read Lightfoot.

Sleeps at the Kitchen Hearth his cheerless Hours away.
III.
Where erst the Boat, and slowly moving Barge,
Did with Delight cut through the dimpling Plain,
Now wanton Boys, and Men do roam at large;
The River-Gods quit their usurped Domain,
And of the Wrong at Neptune's Court complain.
There mote you see mild Avon crowned with Flowers,
And milky Wey withouten Spot or Stain;
There the fair Stream that washes Hampton's Bowers,
And Isis who with Pride beholds her learned Towers.
IV.
Intent on Sport, the ever jocund Throng
Quit their warm Cots, and for the Game prepare;
Behold the restless Football whirls along,
Now near the Earth, now mounted high in Air.
Thus often Men, in Life's wild Lott'ry fare,
Who quit true Bliss to grasp an empty Toy.
Our honest Swains for Wealth nor Titles care,
But lusty Health in Exercise employ.
The distant Village hears the rude, tumultuous Joy.
V.
The careful Hedger looks the Fields around
To see what Labor may his Skill demand;
He mends the Fence, repairs the sinking Mound,
Or in long Drains he cuts the lower Land,
That shall henceforth all sudden Floods withstand.
Mean while at Home his Dame, with Silver Hair,
Does sit incircl'd by a goodly Band
Of lovely Maids, who various Works prepare,
All chaste as Jove's wise Child, as Cupid's Mother fair.
VI.
She them discourses not of Fashions nice,
Nor of the trilling Notes which Eunuchs sing,
Allurements vain, that prompt the Soul to Vice!
Ne tells she them of Kesar or of King;
Too great the Subject for so mean a Ring.
Her Lessons teach to swell the Capon's Size;
To make the Hen a numerous Offspring bring;
Or how the way-ward Mother to chastize
When from her vetchy Nest the weetless Vagrant hies.
VII.
When glist'ring Spangles deck the Robe of Night,
And all their Kine in Pens avoid the Cold,
The buxom Troops, still eager of Delight,
Round Damon's Eyne a A Linen Cloth.
Drapet white infold,
He darkling gropes 'till he some one can hold.
Next Corin hides his Head, and must impart
What wanton fair One smote his Hand so bold.
He Delia names, nor did from Truth depart;
For well he knew her Touch, who long had fired his Heart.
VIII.
Stay I conjure you by your Hopes of Bliss,
Trust not, my Daphne, the rough-biting Air,
Let not rude Winds those Lips of Softness kiss,
Will Eurus stern, the Charms of Beauty spare?
No, he will hurt my rosy-featur'd Fair,
If aught so bright dares rugged Carl invade,
Too tender thou such rough assaults to bear;
The Mountain Ash may stand though stripped of Shade,
But at the slightest Wound the silken Flower will fade.
FINIS.

