man seated in a room his foot on a skeleton J. L^d^^. sculp
FRONTISPIECE.
The Sick me with the Best Advice ^upply.
Who ^een may thro^^ their useless ^^utches by.
Trample on Death assisted by our Ar^.
His Glass Demolish, and destroy his (...).


Every Patient His own Doctor; OR, THE SICKMAN's TRIUMPH OVER DEATH AND THE
GRAVE.

CONTAINING, The most approved METHODS of curing every DISEASE incident to the
HUMAN BODY, internal or external; whether owing to Defects of Nature,
occasioned by Intemperance, contracted by Accident, or caused by Decay.

WITH THE BEST REMEDIES Prescribed by the Authority of the most eminent
Physicians for removing each Disorder, restoring Health, preserving it when
restored; and extending Life to an honorable Old Age.

INCLUDING An excellent Collection of the most eminent RECEIPTS for MAKING AND
PREPARING A great Number of cheap, easy, and efficacious MEDICINES.

AMONG THESE ARE That Admirable NEW DISCOVERY, by which the SCURVY, the Grand
English Disorder, IS EFFECTUALLY CURED: And for the successful Practice of
which, Captain COOK received the PREMIUM MEDAL from the ROYAL SOCIETY, for
having preserved himself and all his Men from this dreadful Distemper, during
the Space of Three Years and Eighteen Days, although he passed through all the
Varieties of Climate, and Seasons in his late Voyage round the World, performed.

By the Command of His MAJESTY.

ALSO The METHOD used by the HUMANE SOCIETY for the Recovery of Persons
apparently drowned or suffocated. -- A certain Cure for the Bite of a Mad Dog,
Viper, Adder, etc. -- An infallible Remedy against the Goal Distemper, Plague,
or any other pestilential Disorder, etc. etc.

BY LEWIS ROBINSON, M. D.

Read, and acquire the greatest Worldly Wealth,
A Flow of Spirits, and a Flush of Health;
Triumph over Pain, and conquer each Disease,
Enjoy your Life, and glory in your Ease.
LONDON: Printed for J. COOK, No 17, Paternoster Row.

Price ONE SHILLING.]

PREFACE.
AS Health is the noblest blessing of this life, the method of procuring it
should be our principal enquiry. While possessed of it, we seldom pay a proper
attention to its importance; when lost, we become sensible of its value, but
are frequently careless concerning its recovery. The reasons are plain; while
we have it we trifle with it till it flies us; when fled, we trifle with our
misfortune, because we suppose the recovery to be either impossible or
improbable.

For the benefit of mankind, we here furnish the public with some of the best
and easiest methods of recovering and securing health, and of preserving life,
which comprehend the greatest discoveries in the Medical Art. These will
equally suit all ranks of people; the Poor, because the Remedies may be cheaply
obtained; and the Rich, because they may be easily put in practice. Hence
Health may be recovered with Facility, and a Knowledge of the powers of
medicine obtained without Difficulty. So that our readers may at once cease to
be Patients themselves, or, if they please, become Practical Physicians to
others.

Every Patient his own Doctor. PART I. INTERNAL DISORDERS.
SCURVY.
THE Scurvy being the principal disease incident to the inhabitants of Great
Britain, and the source from whence many of their other disorders flow, we
thought it necessary to commence this salutary Work, with an account of the
nature of, and the remedies against, this fatal foe to ENGLISH CONSTITUTIONS.

SYMPTOMS.
THE symptoms or signs of this dangerous disease are a frequent laziness and
lowness of spirits, pains in various parts of the body, sometimes livid spots,
often a sallow complexion, a continual itching of the blood, difficulty of
breathing, swelling of the legs, bleeding at the nose, and spongy gums, subject
to pains and bleedings. But it is to be observed, that as constitutions differ,
the signs or symptoms of the disease vary; and people, according to their
years, situations in life, and manner of living, are attacked by this disease,
under several appearances; but some of the above symptoms always attend it
according to the constitution of those afflicted; for whose benefit we shall
point out the most approved and certain methods of cure hitherto discovered.

REMEDIES.
A Milk diet, with weak whey, greens of all kinds, fresh vegetables, fruits,
acids, scurvy grass ale, fresh beer and cider, tar water taken twice a day,
with camphire, one scruple, aethiops mineral, half an ounce, powder of
gum-guaiacum, two drachms, honey, one ounce, mix and make an electuary, and
take the bigness of a nutmeg every night going to rest. The patient may
likewise drink the decoction of the woods. Drinking seawater will be found
extremely beneficial, as will bathing in the sea.

But for the easiest and most efficacious remedy for this dreadful disease, we
may thank Capt. Cook, who in his late voyage round the world, by the command of
his present MAJESTY in the ship Resolution, preserved himself and all his men
from the Scurvy, by the use of a very simple medicine; though he passed through
the temperature, the frigid and the torrid zones, was absent from England three
years and eighteen days, and went through such a variety of climates, as were
sufficient to make the severest attacks on the most robust constitution. But as
his methods of proceeding will appear with most propriety in his own words, we
shall present our readers with his Letter to Sir John Pringle, Bart, President
of the Royal Society, which letter is dated March 5, 1776; and for which
Captain Cook received a Premium Medal.

SIR,
"AS many gentlemen have expressed some surprise at the uncommon good state of
health which the crew of the Resolution, under my command, experienced during
her late voyage; I take the liberty to communicate to you the methods that were
taken to obtain that end. Much was owing to the extraordinary attention given
by the Admiralty, in causing such articles to be put on board, as either by
experience or conjecture were judged to tend most to preserve the health of
seamen. I shall not trespass upon your time in mentioning all those articles,
but confine myself to such as were found the most useful.

"We had on board a large quantity of malt, of which was made sweet-wort, and
given (not only to those men who had manifest symptoms of the scurvy, but to
such also as were, from circumstances, judged to be most liable to that
disorder) from one to two or three pints in the day to each man, or in such
proportion as the surgeon thought necessary; which sometimes amounted to three
quarts in the twenty-four hours. This is without doubt one of the best
antiscorbutic sea-medicines yet found out; and if given in time will, with
proper attention to other things, I am persuaded, prevent the scurvy from
making any great progress for a considerable time: but I am not altogether of
opinion, that it will cure it in an advanced state at sea.

"Sour-krout, of which we had also a large provision, is not only a wholesome
vegetable food, but, in my judgment, highly antiscorbutic, and spoils not by
keeping. A pound of it was served to each man, when at sea, twice a week, or
oftener when it was thought necessary.

"Portable soup, or broth, was another essential article, of which we had
likewise a liberal supply. An ounce of this to each man, or such other
proportion as was thought necessary, was boiled with their peace three days in
the week; and when we were in places where fresh vegetables could be procured,
it was boiled, with them and with wheat or oatmeal, every morning for
breakfast, and also with dried peace and fresh vegetables for dinner. It enabled
us to make several nourishing and wholesome messes, and was the means of making
the people eat a greater quantity of greens than they would have done otherwise.

"Further, we were provided with rob of lemons and oranges; which the surgeon
found useful in several cases.

"Amongst other articles of victualling, we were furnished with sugar in the
room of oil, and with wheat instead of much oatmeal, and were certainly gainers
by the exchange. Sugar, I imagine, is a very good antiscorbutic; whereas oil,
such at least as is usually given to the navy, I apprehend has the contrary
effect. But the introduction of the most salutary articles, either as provision
or medicines will generally prove unsuccessful, unless supported by certain
rules of living.

"On this principle, many years experience, together with some hints I had from
Sir Hugh Palliser, the Captains Campbell, Wallis, and other intelligent
officers, enabled me to lay down a plan whereby all was to be conducted. The
crew were at three watches, except upon some extraordinary occasions. By this
means they were not so much exposed to the weather as if they had been at watch
and watch; and they had generally dry clothes to shift themselves when they
happened to get wet. Care was also taken to expose them as little as possible.
Proper methods were employed to keep their persons, hammocks, bedding, clothes,
etc. constantly clean and dry. Equal pains were taken to keep the ship clean
and dry between decks. Once or twice a week she was aired with fires; and when
this could not be done, she was smoaked with gunpowder moistened with vinegar
or water. I had also frequently a fire made in an iron pot at the bottom of the
well, which greatly purified the air in the lower parts of the ship. To this
and cleanliness, as well in the ship as amongst the people, too great attention
cannot be paid; the least neglect occasions a putrid offensive smell below,
which nothing but fires will remove; and if these be not used in time, those
smells will be attended with bad consequences. Proper care was taken of the
ship's coppers, so that they were kept constantly clean. The fat, which boiled
out of the salt beef and pork, I never suffered to be given to the people, as
is customary; being of opinion that it promotes the scurvy. I never failed to
take in water wherever it was to be procured, even when we did not seem to want
it; because I look upon fresh water from the shore to be much more wholesome
than that which has been kept for some time on board. Of this essential article
we were never at an allowance, but had always abundance for every necessary
purpose. I am convinced that with plenty of fresh water, and a close attention
to cleanliness, a ship's company will seldom be much afflicted with the scurvy,
though they should not be provided with any of the antiscorbutics
beforementioned. We came to few places where either the art of man or nature
did not afford some sort of refreshment or other, either of the animal or
vegetable kind. It was my first care to procure what could be met with of
either, by every means in my power, and to oblige our people to make use
thereof, both by my example and authority; but the benefits arising from such
refreshments soon became so obvious, that I had little occasion to employ
either the one or the other.

"These, Sir, were the methods, under the care of Providence, by which the
Resolution performed a voyage of three years and eighteen days, through all the
climates from 52 degrees north to 71 degrees south, with the loss of one man
only by disease, and who died of a complicated and lingering illness, without
any mixture of scurvy. Two others were unfortunately drowned, and one killed by
a fall; so that of the whole number with which I set out from England, I lost
only four.

"I have the honor to be, Sir, etc."


Extract of a Letter from Captain Cook to Sir John Pringle, Bart. dated
Plymouth Sound, July 7, 1776.
"I entirely agree with you, that the dearness of the rob of lemons and oranges
will hinder them from being furnished in large quantities, but I do not think
this so necessary; for though they may assist other things, I have no great
opinion of them alone. Nor have I an higher opinion of vinegar: my people had
it very sparingly during the late voyage; and toward the latter part, none at
all; and yet we experienced no ill effects from the want of it. The custom of
washing the inside of the ship with vinegar I seldom observed, thinking, that
fire and smoke answered the purpose much better."
To the above we shall subjoin the following remarks on Captain Cook's
judicious procedure; with some other interesting particulars; being a summary
of the discovery of the great antiscorbutic virtues of sweet-wort by Dr.
Macbride, etc.

"CAPTAIN COOK begins his lift of stores with malt: "Of this," he says, "was
made sweet-wort, and given not only to those men who had manifest symptoms of
the scurvy, but to such also as were judged to be the most liable to it." Dr.
Macbride, who first suggested this preparation, was led, as he says, to the
discovery by some experiments that had been laid before the Royal Society; by
which it appeared, that the air produced by alimentary fermentation was endowed
with a power of correcting putrefaction. The fact he confirmed by numerous
trials, and finding this fluid to be fixed air, he justly concluded, that
whatever substance proper for food abounded with it, and which could be
conveniently carried to sea, would make one of the best provisions against the
scurvy; which he then considered as a putrid disease, and as such to be
prevented or cured by that powerful kind of antiseptic. Beer, for instance,
has always been esteemed one of the best antiscorbutics; but as that derived
all its fixed air from the malt of which it is made, he inferred, that malt
itself was preferable in long voyages, as it took up less room than the brewed
liquor, and would keep longer sound. Experience has since verified this
ingenious theory, and the malt has now gained to much credit in the navy, that
there only wanted so long, so healthful, and so celebrated a voyage as this, to
rank it among the most indispensable articles of provision. For though Captain
Cook remarks, that "a proper attention to other things must be joined, and that
he is not altogether of opinion, that the wort will be able to cure the scurvy
in an advanced state at sea; yet he is persuaded, that it is sufficient to
prevent that distemper from making any great progress, for a considerable
time;" and therefore he does not hesitate to pronounce it, "one of the best
antiscorbutic medicines yet found out."

This salutary gas, or fixed air, is contained more or less in all fermentable
liquors, and begins to oppose putrefaction as soon as the working or intestine
motion commences.

In wine it abounds, and perhaps no vegetable substance is more replete with it
than the fruit of the vine. If we join the grateful taste of wine, we must rank
it first in the list of antiscorbutic liquors. Cider is likewise good, with
other vinous productions from fruit, as also the various kinds of beer. It has
been a constant observation, that in long cruizes or distant voyages, the
scurvy is never seen whilst the small-beer holds out at a full allowance; but
that when it is all expended, the disorder soon appears. It were therefore to
be wished, that this most wholesome beverage could be renewed at sea; but our
ships afford not sufficient convenience. The Russians however make a shift to
prepare at sea, as well as at land, a liquor of a middle quality between wort
and small-beer, in the following manner. They take ground malt and rye meal in
a certain proportion, which they knead into small loaves, and bake in the oven.
These they occasionally infuse in a proper quantity of warm water, which begins
so soon to ferment, that in the space of twenty-four hours their brewage is
completed, in the production of a small, brisk, and acidulous liquor, which
they call quas, palatable to themselves, and not disagreeable to the taste of
strangers. The late Dr. Mounsey, member of the Royal Society, who had lived
long in Russia, and had been Archiater under two successive sovereigns, says,
that the quas was the common and wholesome drink both of the fleets and armies
of that empire, and that it was particularly good against the scurvy. He added,
that happening to be at Moscow when he perused the "Observations on the
Jail-Fever," published here, he had been induced to compare what he read in
that treatise with what he should see in the several prisons of that large
city: but to his surprise, after visiting them all, and finding them full of
malefactors, for the late empress then suffered none of those who were
convicted of capital crimes to be put to death, yet he could discover no fever
among them, nor learn that any acute distemper peculiar to jails had ever been
known there. He observed that some of those places of confinement had a yard,
into which the prisoners were allowed to come for the air; but that there were
others without this advantage, yet not sickly: so that he could assign no other
reason for the healthful condition of those men than the kind of diet they
used; which was the same with that of the common people of the country, who not
being able to purchase flesh-meat live mostly on rye-bread, (the most acescent
of any bread) and drink quas. He concluded with saying, that upon his return to
Petersburg, he had made the same enquiry there, and with the same result.

Thus far my informer: from whose account it would appear, that the rye-meal
assisted both in quickening the fermentation, and adding more fixed air; since
the malt alone could not so readily produce so acidulous and brisk a liquor.
And there is little doubt, but that whenever the other grains can be brought to
a proper degree of fermentation, they will more or less in the same way become
useful. That oats will, I am satisfied, from what I have been told by one of
the intelligent friends of Captain Cook. This gentleman being on a cruize in a
large ship, in the beginning of the late war, and the scurvy breaking out among
his crew, he bethought himself of a kind of food, he had seen used in some
parts of the country, as the most proper on this occasion. Some oatmeal is put
into a wooden vessel, hot water is poured upon it, and the infusion continues
until the liquor begins to taste sourish; that is, till a fermentation comes
on, which in a place moderately warm may be in the space of two days. The water
is then poured off from the grounds, and boiled down to the consistence of a
jelly. This he ordered to be made, and dealt out in messes, being first
sweetened with sugar, and seasoned with some prize-wine he had taken, which,
though turned sour, yet improved the taste, and made this aliment no less
palatable than medicinal.

GOUT.
SYMPTOMS.
THE urine of the person afflicted is high colored, and has a sandy sediment
of a reddish cast; the part affected looks red and is swelled. The pain is
exceedingly acute, as if the bone was broken and, is succeeded by a slight
fever, and a chilness or shivering, which seizes the great toe, ancle, heel,
calf of the leg, etc.

REMEDY.
BEFORE the afflicted go to bed at night, they should take a tea spoonful of
volatile tincture of guaiacum in a glass of water: keep themselves warm, and
drink sack whey. Exercise is very requisite for those afflicted with this
disorder.

As the duke of Portland's Gout Powder is remarkably efficacious in the cure of
this disorder, we shall here transcribe the receipt for making it.

TAKE of round birthwort root and gentian root, of the tops and leaves of
germander, ground pine, and centaury: take of all these, well dried, powdered
and sifted as fine as possible, an equal quantity; mix them well together, and
take one dram of this mixed powder every morning fasting in a cup of wine and
water, broth, tea, or any other vehicle you like best; keep fasting an hour and
an half after it. Continue this medicine for three months without interruption,
then diminish the dose to three quarters of a dram for three months longer,
then to half a dram for six months more, taking it regularly every morning if
possible. After the first year, it will be sufficient to take half a dram
every other day. As this medicine operates insensibly, it will take, perhaps,
two years before you receive any great benefit; so you must not be discouraged,
though you do not perceive at first any great amendment; it works slow but
sure: it does not confine the patient to any particular diet, if he lives
soberly, and abstains from those meats and liquors that have always been
accounted pernicious in the gout; as champaign, drams, high sauces, etc.

RHEUMATISM.
SYMPTOMS.
FEVERISH and costive body, loss of appetite, coldness of the extreme parts,
heaviness of the joints, chilness, shivering, and racking pains in the limbs.

REMEDIES.
BE covered warm when you go to bed, and take a dram of powder of
gum-guaiacum. The duke of Portland's Gout Powder is likewise used in this
disorder; but it is to be observed, that in the rheumatism, which is only
accidental and not habitual, a few of the dram doses may do; but if habitual,
or has been of long duration, then you may take it as for the gout. The remedy
requires patience, as it operates but slow in both distempers.

PLEURISY.
SYMPTOMS.
HEAT, thirst, a troublesome cough, and a violent pain of the side. If the
patient is bled, the blood has a resemblance of tallow when melted.

REMEDIES.
FREQUENT bleedings, a blister on the side, and half a pint of the following
infusion taken twice a day: a quart of boiling penny royal water, poured en six
ounces of fresh horse dung, strain it when cold, and sweeten it with a quarter
of an ounce of Venice treacle.

FEVERS.
SYMPTOMS.
THERE are two principal sources of fevers, one comprehends the causes which
render the blood and other fluids of the body too thick; the other includes
those which make them too thin. Let us now examine how one sort may be
distinguished from the other.

It should be observed, that in all fevers of every kind, there is a morbid or
malignant quality introduced and subsisting in the blood as the productive
cause; and the proper means for curing them are such methods and medicines as
by experience have been found effectual for removing their morbid quality, and
recovering the sick in the shortest time.

In some persons, when there is too much blood, such bleeding may be advised as
will draw off the excess, except in pestilential distempers, in which
blood-letting has proved almost always mortal, even in the bodies fullest of
blood; this evacuation must be moderately used in pleurisies, as the extremity
of pain and difficulty of breathing shall acquire it.

That the common people (who generally know when persons have fevers) may have
a little more knowledge of these acute diseases, and how to distinguish one
kind of them from the other; the person who is to direct for the sick, should
carefully enquire into the state of his body; he should examine his pulse. Let
him feel the pulse of two or three that are in health, and his own pulse; and
then compare them with the pulse of the patient, and thereby he will come
nearly to know how much it differs from the healthful standard, as to quickness
or slowness, and as to its strength and weakness, and be able to deduce some
conclusions which may guide his conduct; then let him learn the degree of
febrile heat; and one way to do this may be by feeling the side of the neck
below the ears (through which the large blood vessels pass to and from the
brain) and thus the degree of the heat of the blood may be known; and the other
symptoms of the patient should be particularly enquired into.

If the heat of the body be excessive, the pulse quick and strong, the flesh
very dry, the pores of the skin very close, and the thirst very great, it may
be concluded that the cause which produced that fever has rendered the blood
too thick.

If the pulse is too quick, and not strong, and the heat of the body not great;
if the tongue is very black or dry, and the thirst is great, or it the patient
voids blood by urine, or spitting, or at his nose, or by stool; or if he has
flat spots on his skin, black or reddish in color, or if he has a great
looseness, with watery or thin stools; or if he has profuse sweats, with a
sensible sinking of his spirits, and decrease of strength, it may be inserted,
that the fever is of a putrid kind.

REMEDIES.
THE following general rules should be observed: to drink as plentifully as
possible some diluting liquor whenever thirsty, such as barley-water, mint and
balm and sage tea, thin water gruel, or beef tea made as follows:

Take a pound of lean beef, out it small, pour upon it two quarts of water,
boil it for the space of five minutes, then keep for use.

To use such nutritious food, as most freely may be taken, because it abates
the acrimony of the blood, repairs the waste of the body, and is one of the
best cordials; small whey made with Canary or Mountain wine may be frequently
used.

It may be necessary, before we proceed farther, to premise that in liquid, by
four table spoonfuls, is meant half a gill, or two ounces; two spoonfuls one
ounce, one spoonful half an ounce, or four drachms.

If seized with any feverish complaint, take the following mixture.

Salt of wormwood, two drachms, lemon juice, or any acid, a sufficient quantity
to make a neutral medicine, sugar about two drachms, common water about half a
pint, and about two ounces of nutmeg water, or any spirit; mix together, and
take two spoonfuls every three hours.

At night take a little sweat going to rest, and the next morning continue the
mixture. Or if inconvenient to make up the above medicine, or too poor to get
it, we recommend Salt Petre as an efficacious as well as cheap remedy.

We shall mention one instance of its utility. A poor woman asked advice for
her husband (a man about forty years of age) who had a fever, with a violent
pain in his side, and was lightheaded at times.

We advised her to get an ounce of saltpeter, and powder it; then to divide it
into four equal parts, and each of them into four others for so many doses,
each of which will contain about half a dram, directing that she should give
one of them, dissolved in a coffee dish of sage tea, sweetened with sugar to
his palate every three or four hours; and when he had taken this salt, she came
and said, that his fever was gone; but that his cough remained. We then advised
her to give him about twenty drops of balsam capivi, with powder sugar, night
and morning; and he happily recovered.

But if troubled with a cough, add, of sperma-ceti in powder two drachms;
dissolved with the yolk of an egg, to be taken in the same manner.

Or, if that cannot be had, the following powder.

Take sperma-ceti in powder, half an ounce; sugar and saltpeter each two
drachms; mixed together, and take as much as will lay on a shilling every three
or four hours in any liquid.

If bound, take the following opening mixture.

Take two drachms of senna leaves, boil in ten ounces of common water to eight
ounces; strain off, and add manna half an ounce, tincture of senna one ounce;
mix, and take two table spoonfuls every three hours, till it operates.

This medicine is easily prepared, and very handy on many occasions, especially
when the body calls for a remedy of this nature; it is cooling as well as
laxative; washes its passage through the bowels, without any griping or
disorder, and stands in need at the same time of no over strict regimen.

Thus far fevers in general; proceed we therefore to those more particular.

Of an Acute Inflammatory Fever.
THE young, robust plethoric habit, will ever be most liable to inflammations;
whilst, on, the contrary, in the weakly and infirm, the circulation cannot
readily be worked up to such a pitch as is requisite to constitute a disease of
an inflammatory kind; in both, cold or obstructed perspiration is almost the
only occasional cause. This fever may be easily known from the constitution of
the sick person; a quick, full and tense pulse, hard beyond its natural state;
florid countenance, with great heat and thirst, acute pains in the head, back
and loins, etc.

To the cure of an inflammatory fever therefore it is necessary, first, to take
away about six or eight ounces of blood, then give about fifteen grains of
Ipecacuanha in a cup of any liquid, and work it off with camomile flower tea,
having nothing after it that night, but a little mulled wine to settle the
stomach.

Tartar emetic two grains, diaphoretic antimony, ten grains, barley water,
eight ounces; mix and take two spoonfuls every four hours; and every now and
then about as much saltpeter as will lay on a shilling dissolved in the drink.

If all this should not open the body, it will be necessary to add an emollient
clyster.

If at the end of the disease the pulse should flag, discontinue the medicines,
and use cordials.

If an intermission should happen, with gentle sweats, and turbid urine; the
bark in small doses or rather a decoction of it, may be thrown in.

Of a nervous Fever.
THIS low nervous fever is directly opposite to the acute inflammatory, and
therefore must be differently treated.

It mostly happens from profuse evacuations, and to those of relaxed solids,
and dissolved watery fluids; the pulse, though quick, is here weak and low, the
heat of body but little beyond the natural, and the symptoms in general of the
spasmodic kind, and independent of inflammation.

In the one it becomes necessary to lower the impetus of the circulation, by
evacuations and coolers; in the other, the warm cordial, the stimulating
medicines are by all means advisable to excite the vis vitae, and promote such
a degree of fever as may suffice for its expulsion.

Evacuations of blood, and by stool, can then be, of no service in the cure of
a low fever, but a great detriment. A gentle vomit in the beginning, and a
breathing sweat throughout its continuance will be useful.

A warm, light, nourishing diet, and plenty of generous wine will be expedient,
with blisters and sinapisms, or mustard plasters and other drawers of the
feet, for the relief of the symptoms.

First then give the ipecacuanha vomit, with the mulled wine as before
described; and going to bed, half a dram of mithridate. The next day the
following mixture.

Take Venice treatle, two drachms, syrup of saffron, half an ounce, simple mint
water, eight ounces, strong cinnamon water, two ounces, volatile tincture of
valerian, two drachms, mix, and take two spoonfuls every three or four hours.

To these may be added, as occasion requires, a little opiate camphire,
contrayerva, valerian, cochineal, warm aromatics, and some volatile salts; and
when better, the gum pills; but if toward the latter end of the disease, when
gentle sweats break out, and the urine becomes turbid or thick, the bark will
be attended with great advantage, though there should appear no intermission.

INTERMITTING FEVER, OR AGUE.
SYMPTOMS.
ACCORDING to the air, constitution and strength of the patient, intermittents
frequently vary, some will have a tendency to the inflammatory, or degenerate
into an acute continual fever, especially if too hot a regimen has been used;
which if it should have been the case, gentle cooling purges will reduce it,
and then give the bark with nitre joined with it. On the contrary,
intermittents will urge on the nervous fever; in which case join the cordial
aromatics, such as snake root, contrayerva, myrrh, camphire, and the like, with
the bark.

REMEDIES.
TO cure an intermission, the following is advisable. -- Best bark, one ounce,
finely bruised; snake root, two drachms, finely bruised; boil in common water
from a pint and a half to one pint, strain it off, and take four spoonfuls
every three or four hours. If it should purge, add to each dose five or six
drops of liquid laudanum; if it should bind, about five or six grains of
powdered rhubarb; if want of appetite, about five or six drops of elixir of
vitriol.

A variety of different medicines have been found to succeed, but the
preference has ever been given to the bark; twelve drachms of which generally
puts by the fit, though it is necessary to continue a few doses more to prevent
a return.

One or two grains of Roman vitriol given, during the intermission, two, three,
or four times in the twenty-four hours; or about a dram of alum, with thirty
grains of nutmeg, or snake-root, in half a pint of warm ale or barley water has
succeeded well.

Intermitting Fevers, those especially whose fits return every other day, have
been often cured with a few doses of cochineal, by taking about half a dram
of it in powder, some time before the accession of each fit; and others have
been recovered, by taking five, six, or seven grains of the Virginian snake
root, three times on the days of intermission, at about four or five hours
distance; and I have with success advised some of the poor to drink a quarter
of a pint of tea, made with the root of burdock, every third or fourth hour,
during the intermissions, sweetened with sugar, or not sweetened, as the
patient chooses.

These sort of intermittents allow a good opportunity for taking the Peruvian
bark, and that the poor, those great objects of our compassion and charity, may
have the benefit of that excellent remedy, at the least expense, advise the
following method, viz.

To buy an ounce of the best bark in powder, then divide it into eight or
twelve equal parts, and take a dose of it every third hour, during the
intermissions, beginning as soon as they are quite free from a fit, in the
following manner, viz.

Mix a dose of the bark, with a tea cup of hot water, with which it will mix
easily; and when it is cool enough, then let the patient drink it, and take
after it a glass of punch, made in the common way, and take his meals at his
usual times. Suppose the time for taking the bark happens at the time of
dining, let him first take the bark, and then eat his dinner. I have done so
myself.

We advise the patient to take the bark in the night, as well as in the day,
which I have done myself several times, having a person to sit up and wake me,
when the time for taking the bark comes.

If the patient can take a dram of the bark for a dose, without finding his
stomach loaded, let that quantity be the dose; and when he has taken one ounce,
though he misses the fit, yet let the bark be prepared, and the doses taken at
four hours distance.

HECTIC FEVERS, attended with Coughs or Consumptions.
SYMPTOMS.
HECTIC Fevers with coughs, are commonly called Consumptions, on account of the
great waste, or decrease of the bodies afflicted with them.

The symptoms, which are obvious, and necessary consequences of an ulcerated
state of the lungs, are a cough, a copious spitting of a purulent-like matter,
which is thrown up night and morning, and if tried, sinks in water.

Oppression of the breast, bad appetite, thirst great, hectic fever,
colliquative sweats, which succeed night and morning alternately, a lowness,
and great discharge of urine, the pulse becomes quick and sharp, the body
pines, and is emaciated, and its several functions totally impaired and decayed.

REMEDIES.
THE air where the patient lies ought to be free and pure, the constitution
must be kept in action, and take as much exercise every day as it can bear.

Horse-riding, giving the body motion with little fatigue, if convenient, is
preferable to any carriage, which should be before dinner, else it proves
hurtful. Great care must be taken to prevent catching cold by damp things or
otherwise.

A southern voyage by sea frequently cures, when all things else fail, provided
the provisions are fresh; and as milk cannot there be easily obtained, fruits,
broths and balsamics must supply the place.

A proper regimen, with the patient's own endeavors, act mostly toward the
cure; a mind kept easy, with varying objects to divert the attention; yet it
may be necessary to subjoin some serviceable medicines.

First, I would recommend for diet, light, but restorative, and diluting drink.
Milk, asses milk, (if obtainable) water gruel made of meal, or fine white
flour, with a little butter or sugar, or cider whey, or barley water, or
ground ivy tea sweetened with sugar or honey, acidulated with the juice of
lemon, or an apple boiled in a pint of water, with one large spoonful of
brandy, and sweetened as before directed, as necessary to promote the spitting
up the phlegm.

Secondly, to remove the fever, give the following medicine:

Saltpeter, two drachms; cochineal, half a dram; pure water, half a pint;
syrup of balsam, or sugar, or honey, sufficient to palate; brandy, or rather
rum, two ounces; mix these and take two spoonfuls every third or fourth hour.

If there should be a flux, then the following:

Tincture of roses, one pint; liquid laudanum, twenty grains; drink a cupful
often.

If restless at night, take storax pill, four grains. When there is great
difficulty of breathing, the amnoniac medicine, with the oxymel of squills,
give the most relief.

ULCERATED LUNGS.
THE SYMPTOMS are described in the last article.

REMEDIES.
COMPOUND powder of gum-tragacanth, one scruple; saltpeter, ten grains; make a
powder to be taken in any soft liquid, four times a day.

If the chest or stomach should be sore, emultions of sperma-ceti, or oil of
almonds will be useful, as well as twenty drops of the balsam capivi, night and
morning, and continued for some weeks, even after well; and to strengthen all
the muscular fibers and vessels of the body, close with the preparation of the
bark, and elixir of vitriol.

PESTILENTIAL DISORDERS.
SYMPTOMS.
THESE disorders, which go under the different names of morbid, malignant,
putrid, pestilential, petechial, hospital, and goal fevers, differ only in a
degree from each other. They arise from many causes, such as foul air, or
putrid animal and vegetable effluvia, or from confined places, not properly
ventilated or kept clean, or frequently communicated by contagion.

The symptoms in general are lassitude and weakness, or loss of strength, an
oppression or pain in the stomach, pulse low or weak, bitter taste in the
mouth, drowth, foetid breath, a dejected mind, frequently sighing, wanting to
vomit, great pain in the head, back, and loins, tongue black, chaped, though at
first white, and small spots about the skin, resembling the measles, but of a
purple or livid color. Eyes heavy, yellowish and inflamed, and frequently
profuse sweating.

REMEDIES.
BLEEDING here is to be avoided as most dangerous: and the first thing, clear
the stomach by Ipecacuanha wine, about one ounce, worked off with camomile
flower tea, and mulled wine at night.

Then begin and take the recipe prescribed for intermitting fevers, and drink
weak mountain whey, with tincture of roses plentifully acidulated, with the
elixir of vitriol. Likewise the following bolus, three times a day, in some
tormentile root tea, and sweetened with the finest sugar.

Powder of valerian, ten grains; powder of snake root, ten grains, cochineal,
four grains, gum camphire, five grains; syrup of saffron, a sufficient quantity
to bind it.

If bound, the bowels should be gently opened by powdered rhubarb, in small
doles; and, if occasion, emolient clysters; if a diarrhoe, or purging, cordial
restringents, and gentle opiates occasionally; omit all volatiles as
prejudicial.

If any morbid quality of the blood discovers itself by any symptom on the
skin, it is an argument against every evacuating remedy, which makes a
revulsion from the surface of the body; therefore never use them for the cure
of any cutaneous disease.

ST. ANTHONY'S FIRE.
SYMPTOMS.
CHILLNESS, and shivering, great thirst, restlessness, the face suddenly
swelled, becomes painful and appears red and pimply, and the eyes are closed
with the swelling.

REMEDIES.
THE patient must lose eight or ten ounces of blood, which must be repeated if
the symptoms continue strong. Apply to the part a pultice of white bread and
milk, and a little hog's lard in it; let the pultice be changed twice in a day;
but flannels wrung out of a strong decoction of elder flowers applied warm
afford the speediest ease and relief; and every other morning take the
following purge, till the disorder is cured, viz.

Glaubers salt one ounce, manna, half an ounce, mix and dissolve it in warm
water for one dose.

The diet in this disease must be very low, chiefly water gruel, or at most
weak broth; all strong liquors and flesh meat must be avoided as poison.

APOPLEXY.
SYMPTOMS.
SHORT breathings, imaginary noises in the ears, drowsiness, loss of memory,
tremblings, staggerings, a giddiness in the head, and dimness of sight.

The disease at its height is a total deprivation of all sense and motion,
respiration excepted, and even that is performed with great difficulty. It
greatly injures the faculty both of the mind and body, and is seldom perfectly
curable.

REMEDIES.
CUPPING in the nape and sides of the neck is always useful, provided the
scarifications are deep enough to give a free passage to the blood; stimulating
clysters and warm purges are also of service, as is the following electuary.
Take half an ounce of powdered heath valerian, and one ounce and an half of
conserve of orange peel, and mix them together; the dose is the quantity of a
nutmeg every four hours, dissolved in a cup-ful of rosemary tea. Apply a strong
blister to the back and the legs. The diet must be very sparing.

ASTHMA.
SYMPTOMS.
A laborious breathing, or obstruction of the lungs attended with great
anxiety, and a straitness about the breast.

REMEDIES.
BLEEDING, gentle vomits, a large blister applied to the back or legs, slender
diet and malt liquors to be particularly avoided. Likewise frequently take
three large spoonfuls of the following mixture; two drachms of gum ammoniacum
in half a pint of pennyroyal water, intermixed with an ounce of oxymel of
squills.

BLOODY FLUX.
SYMPTOMS.
SHIVERING, coldness, gripings, quick pulse, intense thirst, greasy stools
frequently mixed with blood and filaments which appear like melted suet.

REMEDIES.
FIRST lose blood, then take the following vomit: Half a dram of powder of
ipecacuanha worked off with camomile tea: daily repeat this vomit three or four
times. Malt and spirituous liquors must be carefully avoided, and between the
vomitings the patient should every hour take a large spoonful warm of a drink
made thus: Dissolve half an ounce of gum arabic, and half an ounce of gum
tragacanth in a pint of barley water, over a gentle fire. Clysters made of fat
mutton broth are of great service.

STONE AND GRAVEL.
SYMPTOMS.
A suppression, or stoppage of urine, may proceed from various causes, such as
the kidneys, or the neck of the bladder being inflamed, small stones lodging in
the urinary passages, spasms or contraction of the neck of the bladder, etc.

In all obstructions, if the patient's strength will admit of it, draw off
about eight ounces of blood, give some cooling, gentle, opening medicines, with
a little sweet oil, and foment the part with a decoction of mallows, or
camomile flowers; let there be drank often some diluting liquor, with about
forty nitre drops in it, and every six hours, about one dram of Castile soap,
dissolved in any liquid, especially if small gravel comes away with the urine,
or it should be bloody; for when small stones are lodged in the kidneys, which
comes away with the urine, it is called gravel; but when they lodge some time
in the bladder, they collect together, form a body, and accumulate fresh
matter, begin to be too large to pass off with the urine, and then is called a
stone.

When afflicted with the stone, avoid all aliments of a windy or heating
nature, all salt meats, sour fruits, acids of all kinds, use every thing that
promotes the secretion of urine, and keeps the belly open, artichoaks,
asparagus, lettuces, etc. are proper; and to drink milk and water, barley
water, decoctions of marshmallows, parsley, liquorice, linseed, or gin and warm
water mixed, not too strong; use gentle exercise, and take soap lees, beginning
with thirty or forty drops, in a cup of lime water, every night and morning,
and increase the dose regularly to sixty drops, as the stomach will bear.
Likewise nitre drops in marshmallow tea, with gum arabic; or take broom seed,
finely ground, as much in quantity as will lay on a shilling, in a gill of the
best white port, morning and evening.

REMEDIES.
TAKE two scruples or calcined egg shells three times a day, in a glass of any
convenient liquor, drinking after each dose, a third part of the following
decoction:

Take two ounces of Castile soap, dissolve it in aquart of soft water, and
sweeten it according to your taste with honey, or loaf sugar, If this decoction
is made in a copper vessel, care must be taken that it is well tinned.

The taking of these medicines must be continued for some time after the
complaint is removed, lest any part of the stone should remain, which being
rough and unequal, might occasion exquisite pain.

It is common, after a few days use of these medicines, to have an increase of
pain in making water, at which time a soft diet, emollient drinks and rest are
proper. For common drink milk and water, or a decoction of marshmallow roots,
parsley and liquorice may be used; but if the person has been used to strong
liquors, small punch, made without acid, may be drank sparingly. Artichoaks,
asparagus, spinach, lettuces, succory, parsley, turnips, potatoes, radishes,
peace, etc. may be safely used; but onions, leeks, and celery, are to be
preferred to all other vegetables.

The patient ought to drink no more of any liquor than is sufficient to quench
his thirst, and he should hold his water as long as he can without great
uneasiness, that it may have the longer time to act in the stone.

If these medicines occasion costiveness, it will be necessary, now and then,
to take a dose of Glauber' salt and manna.

DROPSY.
SYMPTOMS.
THE dropsy is caused by many irregularities, from drinking strong liquors,
from want of exercise, from excessive evacuations, from too much loss of blood,
from fluxes, etc. It is so called from a preternatural swelling of the whole
body, occasioned by a collection of water therein.

REMEDIES.
THE Patient must take a vomit, working it off with a little camomile flower
tea, and once a week after, take jalop in powder, and cream of tartar each half
a dram, in a cup of tea, working it off with a little broth. In the
intermediate days, take salt of nitre, twenty grains, powder of squills ten
grains, mix together, take at night going to bed, and the first thing in the
morning, in a small glass of brandy, and let the belly be anointed with a
little warm oil twice every day, wearing a flannel next the skin, abstaining as
much as possible from drink, especially weak and watery liquors, and quench the
thirst with acids, such as juice of lemons, oranges, etc. Let the food be dry,
and of a healing quality; toasted bread, wild animals roasted with garlic,
mustard, onions, cresses, horse radish, and such like; tea biscuit dipped in
wine, or a little brandy, now and then, will not only quench the thirst, but
prove very nourishing; all diuretic medicines infused into Rhenish wine, are
very serviceable. Or take the large leaves that grow upon the stem of the
artichoak, wipe (not wash) them; bruise them in a mortar, and strain out the
juice through a linen cloth, forcing it out; then put a pint of the juice into
a quart bottle, with a pint of Madeira wine, or Mountain, if you cannot get
good Madeira. Take three spoonfuls every morning fasting, and three spoonfuls
likewise at going to bed; the dose may be increased to four or five, if the
case requires, and the stomach will bear it. Mind to shake the bottle well,
when you take it.

CONVULSIONS.
SYMPTOMS.
CONVULSIONS in children are thus to be distinguished. The face turns blackish,
the eyes are distorted, and the balls seem immovable, the mouth is drawn awry,
and the fist is clenched. It is to be observed that a drowsiness usually
intervenes between the fits.

REMEDIES.
A BLISTER applied to the nape of the neck is sometimes serviceable. Or give a
few hartshorn drops in a tea-spoonful of water frequently, or give three or
four drops of the tincture of wood soot in the same manner.

DIABETES.
SYMPTOMS.
A great discharge of urine, of the smell, color, and taste of honey, a decay
of the whole frame, and an intense thirst.

REMEDIES.
INFUSE for three days in one gallon of lime water, three ounces of liquorice
root, two ditto of the shavings of sassafras, and one of guaiacum. The dose is
half a pint, three times a day. Lime water is made by pouring twelve pints of
boiling water on one pound of unslacked lime, which is fit for use as soon as
cold.

Or make alum whey, by boiling four pints of milk over a slow fire, with three
drachms of alum, till it is turned into whey. When as much as will fill a four
ounce phial may be taken three times a day.

EAR-ACH.
SYMPTOMS.
A pain in the ear, arising from a cold, or a disorder of the nerves of the
head.

REMEDIES.
THE smoke of tobacco blown into the ear, or a roasted onion or salt put into
the ear, will take away the pain, but the head must be kept warm.

DRY BELLY ACH.
SYMPTOMS.
THE Symptoms of the dry belly ach, or in other words, the nervous cholic, are,
costiveness, violent pains in the bowels, coldness of the hands and feet,
faintings, a kind of paralytic disorder, great anxiety of mind, and tremblings.

REMEDIES.
THE warm bath is an admirable remedy, as is balsam of Peru, given inwardly
from twenty to forty drops in a spoonful of powdered loaf sugar, three or four
times a day; besides which you may give the following clyster. Boil in a pint
of water an ounce of dried mallow leaves, half an ounce of camomile flowers,
and half an ounce of sweet fennel seeds. Half a pint of this decoction, with
half an ounce of Epsom salts, and two spoonfuls of sweet oil must be used for a
clyster, and repeated as often as necessary.

YELLOW JAUNDICE.
SYMPTOMS.
A yellowness of the whole body, and more particularly about the eyes, urine of
a saffron color, stools almost white, bitterness of the tongue, vomiting of
galls, heaviness and lassitude of the limbs.

REMEDIES.
TAKE the white of an egg, and two glasses of spring water; beat them well
together, and drink the quantity off at a draught.

It cools the lungs, which in this distemper are always inflamed; expels the
asthmatic disorder, which also always, in some degree, afflicts the party
diseased; it speedily procures perspiration, invigorates the animal spirits,
causes digestion, and creates an appetite.

By these means the late lord Blakeney cured great numbers in Ireland, Minorca,
and in this kingdom; and said that he never knew it to fail.

INDIGESTION.
SYMPTOMS.
FREQUENT belchings, heart-burn, and an oppression or weight at the stomach.

REMEDIES.
PYRMONT and Spa waters. Or from ten to twenty drops of acid elixir of vitriol
in a glass of water, two or three times a day, or a large spoonful of tincture
of hiera picra, every day an hour before dinner.

INFLAMMATION OF THE BOWELS.
SYMPTOMS.
A feverish complaint, a vomiting, a great costiveness, and a burning pain in
the belly.

REMEDIES.
SPARE diets and weak broths should be used. Juice of lemons taken inwardly
affords surprising relief; or let the patient lose ten ounces of blood, and
have the bleeding repeated according to the urgency of the complaint. Then,
till the patient has had two or three stools, give twice every day the
following clyster:

Take of dried mallow-leaves an ounce; camomile flowers, and fennel seeds, of
each half an ounce; boil them in a sufficient quantity of water to strain off
about half a pint; then add two ounces of sweet oil, and it is fit for use.

To ease the pain, and stop the vomiting, give ten drops of liquid laudanum, in
a little broth, every six hours.

MEASLES.
SYMPTOMS.
THIRST, drowsiness, slight cough, chillness, shivering, accompanied by a
fever, great sickness, and an effusion of tears. The little red spots, which do
not rise above the surface of the skin, appear the fourth day.

REMEDIES.
THE diet and management to be the same as in the small pox; then bleeding and
frequent purging; and let the patient drink plentifully of the following
decoction, -- Take pearl barley, raisins and figs, of each two ounces, stick
liquorice bruised, half an ounce: boil them in four quarts of water, till the
water is reduced to two quarts; strain it for use, and tincture it with a
quarter of an ounce of salt prunella.

Every Patient his own Doctor. PART II. EXTERNAL DISORDERS.
PILES.
SYMPTOMS.
THE piles are of a twofold nature, the bleeding piles, and the blind piles;
the former, when there is any discharge, the latter, when there is not.

Persons of a bulky size, who lead an inactive life, and live high, are most
subject to this disease, though it is sometimes hereditary, and then it attacks
more early in life than when it is accidental. They may be occasioned by an
excess of bloody by strong aloetic purges, high seasoned foods, by drinking
great quantities of wines, the neglect of any customary evacuations, much
riding, great costiveness, or any thing that occasions hard or difficult
stools. Pregnant women are sometimes afflicted with them.

REMEDIES.
IF only little swellings within and without the fundament, touch them with a
little oil of amber. Or, take lime water, four ounces, liquid laudanum, half an
ounce, mix together, and make a linament so bathe the parts with it very often.

If they are bleeding piles, care must be taken not to stop them too soon,
especially if they are periodical, and return frequently, as they prove
salutary; but if they continue in such quantity as to waste the patient's
strength, hurt his digestion, or impair any functions, then a proper regimen
and astringent medicines must check the discharge.

A linen cloth dipped in camphorated spirits of wine, may be applied to the
parts, and a bread and milk poultice, if excessively painful, or a little
cooling ointment of elder, equal parts of each mixed together; a dose of manna
and salts, or sena tea, or some cooling physic given in the morning, and an
electuary made of one ounce of lenitive electuary, flower of brimstone, half an
ounce, of cream of tartar, two drachms, syrup of roses, a sufficient quantity
to mix together; then take the bigness of a nutmeg twice a day, occasionally.
Leeches applied to the part, or on the pile itself, gives great relief.

GREEN WOUNDS.
SYMPTOMS.
THE appearance and nature of green wounds must be various from the nature of
the accident by which they were occasioned, or the weapons from which they were
received.

REMEDIES.
DRESS them daily with yellow basilicon spread on fine lint, after fomenting
them with a fomentation made of southernwood and wormwood, camomile flowers, of
each an ounce; bay leaves dried, half an ounce. Boil them gently in six pints
of water, and strain it off for use. Foment all green wounds as well as old
sores with this before they are dressed every day.

BITE OF A MAD DOG.
SYMPTOMS.
IT is necessary to mention the signs by which a dog that is mad may be known.

A mad dog is seemingly rapacious and thirsty, yet eats and drinks nothing; his
eyes are fierce and flaming; he hangs down his ears, and thrusts out his
tongue; froths much at the mouth, and barks at his shadow; oftentimes runs
along sad and anxious without barking at all; frequently pants for breath, as
if tired with running; carries his tail bent inwards; runs without distinction
against all he meets, with great fury, and bites; hurrying on in an hasty and
uncertain course. Dogs that are well are afraid and fly, both at the sight and
barking of one that is mad. The first mad symptom in a dog, is an unusual
trembling.

With respect to the symptoms in persons bit, they are, principally, confused
and mischievous looks, and an utter abhorrence of water.

REMEDIES.
MIX one pound of common salt in a quart of water, and then squeeze, bathe, and
wash the wound with the same for an hour, and not drink any of it; then bind a
little salt to the part affected for twelve hours. But be very careful to apply
it instantly after the bite of the animal.

Take the leaves of rue, picked from the stalks and braised, six ounces; garlic
picked from the stalks and bruised, Venice treacle and mithridate, and the
scrapings of pewter, of each four ounces; boil all these over a slow fire, in
two quarts of strong ale till one pint be consumed; then keep it in a bottle
close stopped, and give nine spoonfuls to a man or woman, warm, seven mornings
following, fasting, and six spoonfuls to a dog.

This will not fail, if it be given within a few days after the biting of the
dog. Apply some of the ingredients from which the liquor was strained to the
bitten place.

Bathing in the sea, where the patient can be accommodated with conveniences,
is likewise deemed an admirable remedy.

To this we may add, that, ^o cure the bite of a viper or adder, if you will
rub the part bitten with some of the fat of the animal, it will prevent any bad
effects from arising; but if the fat of the animal cannot be procured, warm
sallad oil will be attended with the same good consequences.

CANCER.
SYMPTOMS.
THIS dreadful disorder originates from a small tumor, which often remains for
years without increasing, and does not change the color of the skin. However,
when the humor becomes more active, the swelling suddenly grows large, livid,
round, unequal, painful, then breaks, and sharp stinking sores succeed, which
eat away the sound parts, when the lips of the wound become exceeding
disgustful to the sight. This disorder generally affecs the breasts, but
sometimes attacks the privities, ears, nose, and armpits.

REMEDIES.
A quarter of a pound of guaiacum shavings must be boiled in six pints of
water, till the quantity is reduced to four pints, a pint of which, milk warm,
must be drank daily. Fomentations of milk and water, and poultices of white
bread and milk must be used externally, and the wounds should be defended from
the cold air by a piece of fine linen, spread with spermaceti ointment, which
should be renewed twice or thrice a day. This ointment is made thus. Take a
quarter of a pint of the best. sallad oil, a quarter of a pound of white wax,
and half, an ounce of spermaceti. Melt them together over a gentle fire, and
afterward keep them stirring till the whole is cold.

CHILBLAINS.
SYMPTOMS.
CHILBLAINS are swellings on the hands and feet, from excessive cold,
accompanied with intolerable pains, prickings, itchings, heat, and redness.

REMEDIES.
ON their first appearance bathe them with snow water, if that can be procured,
or hold them over the steam of boiling vinegar.

If they grow sore and break, use the fomentation mentioned, in the article of
green wounds, and then apply a dressing of yellow basilicon, mixed with a few
drops of spirits of turpentine, and spread on fine lint. A sparing diet should
be used, and the parts affected kept warm.

ITCH.
SYMPTOMS.
THE itch is mostly communicated by infection, and generally appears in small
watery pustules about the wrists, and between the fingers, and affects the
arms, legs, thighs, etc. is attended with intolerable itching, when sitting by
the fire, but more particularly when in bed; is never dangerous, unless
rendered so by neglect or improper treatment. It must not be suddenly drove in;
after cure, have proper evacuations.

REMEDIES.
THE best medicine is sulphur of brimstone used externally; or internally, take
flower of brimstone in treacle or milk, every night and morning, and rub the
parts every night, going to bed, with an ointment made of flower of brimstone,
two ounces, crude salt ammoniac in fine powder, half an ounce, hog's lard, a
quarter of a pound, mixed together; the smell, if disagreeable, may be taken
off by adding a few drops of essence of lemons: if necessary, rub the whole
body; let it be done at different times; the linen should not be changed, and
should afterward be well dried and fumigated with brimstone, to prevent a
fresh infection when cured, and three or four brisk purges, at different times,
taken; it will not be amiss to drink a glass of cream of tartar whey every
morning for a week or more, using wholesome food and observing cleanliuess.

SOREEYES.
SYMPTOMS.
THE symptoms of sore eyes are easily known, being redness, a stiff gumminess,
a salt rheum or water flowing from them, weakness of sight, dimness, a painful
heat in the eyelids, and many others unnecessary to relate, as those who feel
them must be well acquainted with their nature; proceed we therefore to the

REMEDIES.
WE shall here present our reader with the great Sir Hans Sloan's celebrated
remedies.

Take of prepared tutty, one ounce; of lapis haematitis prepared, two scruples;
of the best aloes prepared, twelve grains; of prepared pearl, four grains; put
them, into a prophyry, or marble mortar, and rub them with a pestle of the same
stone very carefully, with a sufficient quantity of viper's grease, or fat, to
make a liniment; to be used daily, morning or evening; or both, according to
the convenience of the patient.

The doctor prescribes bleeding and blistering in the neck, and behind the
ears, in order to draw off the humors from the eyes; and afterward, according
to the degree of inflammation, or acrimony of the juices, to make a drain by
issues between the shoulders, or perpetual blister. And for washing the eyes,
recommends cold spring water. And the best inward medicines, which he has
experienced, to be conserve of rosemary flowers; anti-epileptic powders, such
as Purvis ad Guttetam, betony, sage, rosemary, eyebright, wild valerian root,
castor, etc. washed down with a tea made of the same ingredients; as also drops
of spirit Lavandulae Composit, and sal. vol. oleos.

If the inflammation returns, the Dotor says, drawing about six ounces of blood
from the temples, by leeches, or cupping on the shoulders, is very proper.

The liniment is to be applied with a small hai^ pencil, the eye winking, or a
little opened.

FISTULA.
SYMPTOMS.
A deep, winding, callous ulcer, with a narrow entrance into a spacious bottom,
and yielding a sharp virulent matter.

REMEDIES.
A quarter of a pound of elecampane root, three quarters of a pound of fennel
seeds, and a quarter of a pound of black pepper; pound these separately, and
sift them through a fine sieve; take half a pound of honey and half a pound of
powder sugar, melt, the honey and the sugar together over the fire, scumming
them continually, till they become bright as amber, when they are cool, mix and
knead them into your powder, in the form of a small paste.

The dose is the size of a nutmeg, morning, noon, and night; drinking a glass
of wine or water after it.

If the above should not succeed, immediate recourse must be had to a skilful
surgeon.

MORTIFICATION.
SYMPTOMS.
THE juices lose their proper motion and ferment, and thereby destroy the
texture of the parts, and corrupt.

REMEDIES.
The part must be fomented every night and morning with hot flannels, wrung
out, with the following fomentation:

Take lime water a pint, and dissolve in it half an ounce of crude sal
ammoniac; then add three ounces of camphorated spirits of wine. Afterward
apply a poultice of stale beer grounds and oatmeal, moistened with a little
hog's lard: when the part begins to suppurate, apply under the poultice a
dressing of black basilicon inwardly.

Take a dram of the best Peruvian bark in fine powder, every four hours in a
gill of mountain wine.

OLD ULCERS.
SYMPTOMS.
ULCERS are wounds or sores of long Continuance, and their symptoms virulent
matter issuing from them.

When any ulcer is of long standing, it is dangerous to dry it up, without
substituting in the place of a discharge, (which is become almost natural,)
some others; such as purging from time to time, or cutting an issue near the
diseased part.

To forward the cure, salt meat, spices, and strong liquors must be most
avoided: the usual quantity of flesh meat should be lessened, and the body be
kept moderately open, by a vegetable, or milk diet; and if the ulcers are in
the legs, it is of great importance to keep in a lying posture; for negligence
in this material point changes the slightest wounds into ulcers, and the most
trifling ulcers into obstinate and incurable ones. To cure which,

Take a quarter of a pound of basilicon, and an ounce and an half of oil of
olives, and mix therewith half an ounce of verdigrease; dress the sore with
this ointment, spread open a little tow, after fomenting it well with a
decoction made of camomile flowers, and mallow leaves. Take frequently a dose
of cooling physic, and live regularly.

SUPPLEMENT. DISEASES, whose Symptoms are obvious; with some useful and
approved RECIPES.
BALDNESS.
RUB the part with an onion frequently till it looks red, or rub it with bear's
grease, which penetrates more than any other kind of fat.

BLEEDING AT THE NOSE.
APPLY to the back part and the sides of the neck, a linen cloth dipped in cold
water, in which salt prunella has been dissolved. In very obstinate cases
bleeding in the foot is useful. Internally, the quantity of a nutmeg of the
following electuary may be taken three or four times in a day. Take the seeds
of white henbane, and white poppies, each half an ounce; conserve of roses,
three ounces; and mix them into an electuary with syrup of diacodium.

SPITTING OF BLOOD.
TAKE red rose leaves dried, half an ounce; twenty drops of oil of vitriol; one
ounce and an half of refined sugar, and pour two pints and an half of boiling
water on these ingredients in an earthen vessel; let it stand to be cold, and
take half a quarter of a pint frequently. In this disorder, frequent bleeding
in small quantities is proper, not exceeding four, or, at the most, six ounces
at each time, according to the strength of the sick person.

A LIP SALVE.
THIS may be made by adding a quarter of an ounce of alkanet root to the
spermaceti ointment (mentioned among the remedies for a cancer) and letting
them simmer together a few minutes over a gentle fire.

BILES.
APPLY a plaster of diachylon with the gums, once every day, till they are
cured. To prevent their return, a few doses of cooling physic are proper.

BURNS AND SCALDS.
TAKE May butter unsalted, and white wax, of each six ounces; oil of olives,
half a pint; lapis calaminaris one ounce and an half; melt the wax and butter
with the oil, and stir in the lapis calaminaris finely powdered, till it is too
hard to let it settle. This is an excellent ointment for the above purposes,
and is to be applied once a day spread on a fine linen rag.

BRUISES, EXTERNAL.
BATHE the part with a little spirits of wine and camphire, which in slight
cases will effect a cure, but if that fails, it will be necessary to apply a
poultice of stale beer grounds and oatmeal, with a little hog's lard, which
must be applied fresh every day till the bruise is entirely cured.

BRUISES, INTERNAL.
TAKE a large spoonful of cold drawn linseed oil, two or three times in a day,
The patient must also be blooded to the quantity of eight or ten ounces: and if
the symptoms are violent, the bleeding must be repeated at discretion.

CHOLIC.
TAKE two ounces of Daffy's elixir, and repeat it as occasion may require; or
half a dram of powder of rhubarb toasted a little before the fire.

COLDS.
COLDS may be cured by lying much in bed, by drinking plentifully of warm
sack-whey, with a few drops of spirits of hartshorn in it, or any other warm
liquor; living upon puddings, spoon meats, chickens, etc. and drinking every
thing warm. In short, it must at first be treated as a small fever, with gentle
diaphoretics; such as half a dram of the compound powder of contrayerva,
taken night and morning; or half an ounce of Mindererus's spirit may be given
every night going to rest, drinking a plentiful draught of weak sack-whey after
it.

This is a much more easy, natural, and certain method, than the common
practice by balsamics, linctus's, and the like, which spoil the stomach,
destroy the appetite, and hurt the constitution.

ACHES AND PAINS.
RUB a little opodeldock upon the part affected, two or three times a day, and
wear a flannel upon it; if this does not give relief, take twenty drops of
volatile tincture of guaiacum every night and morning, in a glass of spring
water.

HOARSENESS.
TAKE an ounce of linseed oil, fresh drawn; half an ounce of spermaceti; six
drachms of white sugar candy in powder; and an ounce and a half of balsamic
syrup. Mix for an electuary. A spoonful of it to be taken now and then on the
occasion specified by its title.

COSTIVENESS.
TAKE the size of a nutmeg of lenitive-electuary every morning, or as often as
occasion requires.

DEAFNESS.
SYRINGE the ears well with some warm milk and oil: then take a quarter of an
ounce of liquid opodeldock, and as much oil of almonds; mix them well, and drop
a few drops into each ear, stopping them with a little cotton or wool; repeat
this every night going to rest.

CORNS.
AFTER, soaking them for a considerable time in warm water, pare away carefully
with a penknife the uppermost and hardest surface: then apply a plaster of
green wax, or diachylon with the gums, spread on thin leather; repeat this
method (which is perfectly safe) a few times, and it will seldom fail to
extirpate them entirely.

COUGH.
TAKE oil of sweet almonds, and syrup of balsam, of each two ounces; four
ounces of barley-water, and thirty drops of spirits of sal volatile; shake them
well together, and take two large spoonfuls when the cough is troublesome. If
this medicine does not remove the cough in a few days, it will be absolutely
necessary to be blooded.

EXCORIATIONS IN CHILDREN.
DISSOLVE a little white vitriol in spring water, dig a rag into the liquid,
and dab the part, which will heal it.

FAINTING.
GIVE a few drops of sal-armoniac in a wine glass of water inwardly, and apply
to the nostrils and temples some spirits of the same.

The METHODS pursued by the Humane Society for the Recovery of Persons
apparently dead by Drowning.
THE society established in London for the recovery of persons apparently
drowned, induced by a principle of humanity, have undertaken to make public the
following methods of treating such cases, which are now practiced in several
countries of Europe with amazing success; and which they earnestly recommend to
the attention of every man, but particularly to those who live in seaport
towns, or places adjacent to rivers, brooks, ponds, etc.

METHOD OF TREATMENT.
I. In removing the body to a convenient place, great care must be taken that
it be not bruised, nor shaken violently, nor roughly handled, nor carried over
any one's shoulders with the head hanging downwards, nor rolled upon the
ground, or over a barrel, nor lifted up by the heels, except with the greatest
caution. For experience proves, that all these methods are injurious, and often
destroy the small remains of life. The unfortunate object should be cautiously
conveyed by two or more persons, or in a carriage upon straw, lying as on a bed
with the head a little raised, and kept in as natural and easy a position as
possible.

II. The body being well dried with a cloth, should be placed in a moderate
degree of heat, but not too near a large fire. The windows or door of the room
should be left open, and no more persons be admitted into it than those who are
absolutely necessary, as the life of the patient greatly depends upon their
having the benefit of a pure air. The warmth most promising of success is that
of a bed or blanket, properly warmed. Bottles of hot water should be laid at
the bottoms of the feet, in the joints of the knees, and under the armpits;
and a warming-pan, moderately heated, or hot bricks, wrapped in cloths, should
be rubbed over the body, and particularly along the back. The natural and
kindly warmth of a healthy person lying by the side of the body, has been found
in many cases very efficacious. The shirt or clothes of an attendant, or the
skin of a sheep fresh killed, may also be used with advantage. Should these
accidents happen in the neighborhood of a warm bath, brew house, baker,
glass-house, saltern, soap-boiler, or any fabric where warm lees, ashes,
embers, grains, sand, water, etc. are easily procured, it would be of the
utmost service to place the body in any of these, moderated to a degree of
heat, but very little exceeding that of a healthy person.

III. The subject being placed in one or other of these advantageous
circumstances, as speedily as possible, various stimulating methods should next
be employed. The most efficacious are, to blow with force into the lungs, by
applying the mouth to that part of the patient, closing his nostrils with one
hand, and gently expelling the air again by pressing the chest with the other,
imitating the strong breathing of a healthy person: the medium of a
handkerchief or cloth may be used to render the operation less indelicate.
Whilst one assistant is constantly employed in this operation, another should
throw the smoke of tobacco up by the fundament into the bowels, by means of a
pipe or fumigator, such as are used in administering clysters: a pair of
bellows may be used until the others can be procured. A third attendant should,
in the mean time, rub the belly, chest, back and arms, with a coarse cloth or
flannel dipped in brandy, rum, gin, or with dry salt, so as not to rub off the
skin: spirits of hartshorn, volatile salts, or any other stimulating substance,
must also be applied to the nostrils, and rubbed upon the temples very
frequently. The body must at intervals be shaken also, and varied in its
position.

IV. If there be any signs of returning life, such as sighing, gasping,
twitching, or any convulsive motions, beating of the heart, the return of the
natural color and warmth; opening a vein in the arm or neck may prove
beneficial, but the quantity of blood taken away should not be large; nor
should any artery ever be opened, as profuse bleeding has appeared prejudicial,
and even destructive to the small remains of life. The throat should be tickled
with a feather, in order to excite a propensity to vomit; and the nostrils also
with a feather, snuff, or any other stimulant, so as to provoke sneezings. A
tea-spoonful of warm water may be administered now and then, in order to learn
whether the power of swallowing be returned: and if it be, a table-spoonful of
warm wine, or brandy and water, may be given with advantage, but not before, as
the liquor might get into the lungs before the power of swallowing returns. The
other methods should be continued with vigor, until the patient be gradually
restored.

We have been as circumstantial as possible in the above directions, that if
one convenience should be wanting, the attendants may not be at a loss for
others. Where the patient has lain but a short time senseless, blowing into the
lungs or bowels has been, in some cases, found sufficient; yet a speedy
recovery is not to be expected in general. On the contrary, the above methods
are to be continued with spirit for two hours, or upwards, although there
should not be the least symptoms of returning life. The vulgar notion; that a
person will recover in a few minutes, or not at all; and the ignorant, foolish
ridiculing of those who are willing to persevere, as if they were attempting
impossibilities, has most certainly caused the death of many who might
otherwise have been saved.

Most of the above rules are happily of such a nature, that they may be begun
immediately, and that by persons who are not acquainted with the medical art;
yet it is always advisable to seek the assistance of some regular practitioner
as soon as possible; not only as bleeding is proper, and frequently necessary;
but as it is to be presumed that such a one will be more skilful and expert,
and better able to vary the methods of procedure as circumstances may require.

N. B. It is proper to observe, that these means of restoration are applicable
to various other cases of apparent deaths; such as hanging, suffocation by damp
and noxious vapors, whether proceeding from coal-mines, the confined air of
wells, cisterns, caves, or the must of fermenting liquors; to those seized with
apoplectic and convulsive fits, and also to the frozen.

Wherever any good has been produced by the means recommended, the person who
has superintended the cure is desired to write a circumstantial account of it
to James Horsfall, Esquire; Treasurer, Middle Temple, or Mr. M. Robinson,
Garden-Court, Middle Temple, Secretary to the Society.

An Universal PRESERVATIVE against the PLAGUE, or any other INFECTION.
EVERY, person, who sees others languishing under any sickness or distemper, if
he has a mind to preserve himself from the infection, ought always to discharge
his saliva, or spittle, and never swallow it, whilst he remains in the sphere
of infected vapors; for the saliva is the first thing that very readily
attracts the infected vapors, which being swallowed with it, are carried, as
it were, by this vehicle into the stomach, where they occasion most fatal
effects.

The greater part of distempers, and particularly malignant fevers, are
contagious. This contagion, arising from the ferment that proceeds from the
sick person, diffuses itself as a vapor in the ambient air, and infects every
thing to a certain distance; so that these infected vapors, being drawn into
the mouth by respiration, are capable of corrupting the saliva, which being
swallowed, infects the stomach, and afterward the rest of the body. But when
one spits, the body is secured from infection.

For this reason tobacco, or spicey substances, or of a strong smell, kept in
the mouth and chewed, for exciting the saliva, may be of great service to all
those who visit infected persons.

Directions concerning BLEEDING.
OF all the remedies recurred to in relieving the diseased part of mankind,
there are none of such general service and advantage, as that of bleeding; as
there is no one, on the other hand, attended with more pernicious consequences
when indirectly and injudiciously ordered. A number of illnesses are absolutely
owing to too great a quantity of blood; in which case there is ever of course
an indispensable necessity for proportionably draining this fluid.

In all inflammatory distempers, it is next kin to a sacrilege to omit it: as
it is, on the contrary, exposing the patient to the utmost hazard, to injoin it
in a low, languid, depressed state, where the spirits before were too much
exhausted, and nature, consequently, unable to support the least evacuation.

In a word, wherever prevail sore-eyes, a sciatic, a dry, husky cough, an
headache, inflammations of the womb, or bladder, a virulent gonorrhoea, cordee,
venereal stricture, inflamed piles, hot rheumatism, dry gripes, sore throat, an
asthma, cholic, strangury, gravel, nephretic pains, haemorrhages, an inveterate
itch, and the like, the opening of a vein is of peculiar service. But in
dropsies, a jaundice, the gout, and all complaints arising from too great a
relaxation of the vessels, or obstruction of them, remedies adapted to the
respective disorders must be sought for from other specific quarters, without
the least thought of increasing those disorders, by abrupt and preposterous
bleeding.

FINIS.

