MY GRANDMOTHER; A MUSICAL FARCE, IN TWO ACTS, AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER
ROYAL, HAY MARKET.

THE MUSIC COMPOSED BY Mr. STORACE.

Printed for the CURIOUS, and sold by the Booksellers in general.

1794.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN,
Sir Matthew Medley,Mr. Waldron, Vapor,Mr. Bannister, Jun. Woodly,Mr.
Sedgwick. Gossip,Mr. Suett. Soussrance,Mr. Wewitzer. Tom,Mr. Bland. Servant,Mr.
Lions.
WOMEN
FlorellaSignora Storace. Charlotte,Mrs. Bland.
SCENE -- The Country.

MY GRANDMOTHER.
ACT -- I.
SCENE -- A Chamber of an Inn, Bells ringing, a violent noise ENTER TOM. COMING
-- coming, what the Devil is the matter, Souffrance-Souffrance --!


(Rings again,) Enter SOUFFRANCE (Napkin and fork) Hello, vat is de matter, I
can no eat my little bit of chicken i^ quiet.


Tom. Don't you hear?


Souf. Oh! da^ is my master.


Tom. I wish the Devil had your master then*


Souf. Vy, don't you know vat is d^ matt^r vid my master -- my master is
vimsical -- he fancy himself all manager of tings i^ de whole world, de sexton,
de grave-dig, de ploughman.


Tom. A ploughman.


Souf. Nui -- My master vas go to de masquerade, and (...) de picture of a
young lady, vich he fall so much in love vid, dat h^ is go to kill himself --
my master is vat you call de hypo -- chondria^


Tom. Hypo -- who.

(Ringing again)
VAPOR. (without) Waiter -- Souffrance -- Am I to wait here all day?


Souf. Here, take a de forcet -- give me my little bit of chicke^ though --


Exit To^ Enter VAPOR. Ah, Suffrance, I am going to drown myself.


Souf. Ah, No sair.


Vap. Yes -- I will -- I will drown myself -- there is the finest pond in the
garden.


Souf. Ah! sair, for vy you drown yourself?


Vap. What right have you to ask? you are my servant, and have no right to ask
questions -- I will drown myself.


Souf. Ah, sair, when you get into dis vay!


Vap. Yes, I know I am an ass, a fool, a blockhead, an idiot.


Souf. Me no right to contradict you sair, but sair, when your papa ^ie, you
fancy yourself every ting, in de vorld, you vas de sexton, de clerk, de grave
dig, and de coffin -- den you fancy yourself de great bell, and your head de
clappair and go ba -- ba -- ba.


Vap. Oh! that was folly -- but now I have reason -- cool reason on my side --
god's death, to think I should fall in love with a picture, picked up at a
masquerade, which perhaps represents no person living.

(Taking a miniature from his pocket. Look Souffrance what eyes?


Souf. Nui.


Vap. What a mouth!


Souf. Nui.


Vap. What a countenance!


Souf. Nui.


Vap. What expression!


Souf. Nui.


Vap. Oh! I will go drown myself.


Souf. Ah! no sair, you no drown yourself.


Vap. Ha! ha! ha! I cannot help laughing to think I should be such a fool, I
that swore never to be in love! -- Ha -- ha -- ha -- if I laugh too much, I
shall bring on the hystericks, I am very ill, my eyes are sunk.


Souf. Dey would be sunk if you vas fling yourself in de pond.


Vap. I am very weak.


Souf. Oh! sair, it is all fancy.


Vap. You lie, you rascal (strikes him) I Have no more strength than a mouse.


Souf. I am ver glad, dear be no more such mouse in de house, but sair, If I
might advise, I would throw de picture in de pond.


Vap. An excellent thought, Souffrance -- and yet how can I find in my heart to
do it! -- here you shall take it, find the deepest part of the pond, and -- why
don't you take it?


Souf. Oh! it is diamond, I will take care you shall never seel more.


Vap. Stay Souffrance -- there is more philosophy in getting the better of
one's folly, so give it me again.


Souf. No sair.


Vap. Give it me again, you rascal -- I Will go instantly to Sir Matthew, he has
expected me these two days, so get the horses ready directly.


Souf. Sair, dey have not eat dear little bit of corn -- I have no time to eat
my bit of chicken myself.


Vap. Why did you not give them their corn yesterday, I cannot stay, Sir Matthew
expects me?


Souf. You vill not go dat figure.


Vap. What is the matter with my figure, I am sure it will do very well?


Souf. Oh, sair! you be no dress -- you be no shave.


Vap. Damnation, it will take an hour to get a barber,


Souf. Sair, dare be one maitre Gossip vait at your appoint, dis half hour.


Vap, Show him in, I Will beshaved directly.


Souf. Maitre Gossip, you come shave my master.


Enter GOSSIP. Servant sir.


Vap. Come, shave me directly, don't prate, Sir Mattehew will be glad to see me.


Gos. I will not say a word, ah sir, -- ah sir -- I shaved your father's honor.


Vap. You did.


Gos. Yes sir, I shaved him every morning, when he was in hese parts.


Vap. Well sir -- very well sir.


Gos. Your father set me up here, sir.


Vap. Damn me, I Will set you down, if you don't shave me


Gos. I don't know any body I would sooner take by the nose and chin, although
he is dead.


Vap. I wish you would not bother me about my father's nose and chin, but shave
me.


Gos. Ah! sir, I shall have more pleasure in shaving you than you're aware of,
I have a respect for every hair in your chin.


Vap. Why don't you shave me.


Gos. Lord Sir, you're as queer as a quarten of soap after a week's wash --
your father would not use me in this manner, he liked to hear me talk, Dicky
Gossip, says he -- he always called me Dicky, you're my barbatic -- barbatic
was not that drole --


Vap. Damn me, why don't you shave me?


Gos. Shave you directly, Sir, did you hear of the news?


Vap. No sir, or do I wish to hear of it, I wish you would shave me?


Gos. Some very particular event likely to happen, I shall not fail to foretell,
at least by the time it will happen, for you must know, sir, I am a bit of a
star-gazer, a sort of an almanack-maker, a kind of a Poor Robin.


Vap. I did not send for a poor-Robin, I sent for a barber to have me.


Gos. Ah! sir, I am not only a barber, I am a man of many callings,


Vap. I wish you was a man of few words, with all my heart, -- you're razor
must be sharp enough.


Gos. Sharp, sir, why its as smooth as satin, cut like the wind.


Vap. Like the east wind, I suppose, cut my face in two.


Gos. That Is a good joke, come I like that, but it would not do in our shop, it
would be a forfeit.


Vap. Damn your shop -- why don't you shave me?


Enter TOM. Master Gossip -- master Gossip -- the grocer's is on fire in you're
street, you must make haste home or it will be at your house presently.


GOSSIP (draws a chair and sits down) I know it, saw it in the sky, I was sure
of it, I told them so in my almanac, says I, there will be a fire one day this
month.


Vap. I suppose sir, you expect me to shave you, now I shall never get shaved.


(walks about Gossip following. Gos. Oh sir! shave you directly,


Enter SOUFFRANCE. Sair, de horses are ready.


Vap. Then I Will go


Exit Vapor, Gos. Give me my napkin, he is gone with my napkin.


Tom. Master Gossip, make haste, or the village will be all on fire.


Gos. Cannot go without my napkin, must have my napkin.


Enter VAPOR. Damme, sir! why don't you come and shave me, am I to wait all
day?


(Snatches his wig and exit, followed by Gossip and Souffrance. SCENE -- A
Garden. Enter FLORELLA, gathering Roses. AIR FLORELLA -- Poesiello. ARE ye
fair, like opening roses? tender maidens, ah, beware?
When its bloom the heart discloses, love will find a dwelling there.
Prudence then in vain opposes; youth is never wise as fair.

Enter WOODLY. Florella, still in masquerade?


Flor. Don't mention it Mr. Woodly, still sighing and dying after my cousin
Charlotte, there she is, go and speak to her.


Wood. Such is the power she has over me, that I am not able to comply with
your commands.


AIR. WOODLY. CRUEL fair! who secret anguish can with wanton pride impart,
Can behold a lover languish, sporting with his faithsul heart.
Her, let every beauteous maiden, her, let every constant swain,
With her Woodly's fate upbraiding, banish from the smiling plain

(Exit Woodly. Enter CHARLOTTE. Well Florella, still in that masquerade dress.


Flor. Shall I never hear the last of going to a poor harmless masquerade!


Char. From which you confess, you returned with the loss of your heart and
picture, they are sufficient motives for your uncle's displeasure.


Flor. My dear cousin, I Will tell you, my heart I did loose to be sure, but as
for the picture --


Char. Hey day, what next!


Flor. Why, that, I put it Mr. Vapour's way, on purpose that he might pick it
up, and his eyes --


Char. Oh! his eyes to be sure!


Flor. We Are so fixed on it, that I had a great mind to unmask, and show him
the original, if it had not been for the dignity of the sex, my dear consin.


Char. You're a giddy mad girl, but what do you intend to do with Mr. Vapor?


Flor. Not treat him as you do poor Woodly.


Char. Would you have me run into his arms?


Flor. Which you would find no hard matter, for he has held them open to you
these two years.


Char. Well -- well -- I must go and prepare for the reception of Mr. Vapor.


Flor. But I wish you would let me go and ask my uncle's pardon now?


Char. No -- no! -- no man's temper's more mild, when taken at a proper season,
but now his head's as crowded as a newspaper, and in as much confusion as your
work-bag, what with the thoughts of his new varnish, and the expectation of Mr.
Vapor, -- I Will speak to him for you.


Flor. Well, speak to him soon.


Char. In the mean time, you keep out of Mr. Vapour's sight.


Exit Charlotte. FLOR. (Taking a mask from her arm. Oh! dear enchanting mask,
it is to you I owe all the delightful ^^easure I now feel!


AIR. FLORELLA. ^n the lightly sportive wing at pleasure's call we fly,
Hark! they dance, they play, they sing, in merry, merry revelry.
Hark! the tabor's lively beat, hark! the flutes in numbers sweet,
^ill the night, with delight, at the Masquerade,
Beneath this mask what tender woes we softly hear revealed,
Secure, that, while the bosom glows, our blushes lie concealed!
Let grave ones warn us as they may, of every harmless joy afraid!
While we are young while we are gay, let us frolic and play at the Masquerade
Hither trips along a beau so smart, -- dear heart; pretty lass, th^^ way --
soft, soft, stay here; -- my dear!
It Is a favor, Sir, I must deny. -- Oh fie! can I trust myself alone with you?
-- adieu!
Then amid the crowd we mix again, and join the motly train.
Let grave ones, etc.

(Exit FLORELLA SCENE -- A Saloon with pictures on each side, with curtains.
Enter SIR MATTHEW and CHARLOTTE. SIR MATTHEW. I wonder Mr. Vapor is not come!
but I am glad he did (...) come until I had varnish^d my pictures (walks up to
the pictures and draws the curtain) let us ^^e how they look -- very well --
(...) well indeed, another coat of varnish and then.


Char. Perhaps he has fell in love, and forgot his appointive


Sir Mat. Fell in love! no -- no -- he may have fell from horse perhaps, he
made a vow never to fall in love.


Enter SERVANT. Mr. Vapor, Sir.


Sir. Mat. Where is he? where is the dear boy

Enter VAPOR. Ah -- ah -- Mr. Vapor, I am glad to see you!


Vap. Happy to see you Sir Matthew, Madam, you're most obedient.

(Bows)
Sir Mat. Ah! that bow put me in mind of your father. Do you know Charlotte,
this gentleman's father was fond of pictures -- why, what is the matter Mr.
Vapor?


Vap. Nothing -- nothing, Sir Matthew!


Sir Mat. Why, you an't ill are you?


Vap. Never in better spirits in my life, do I look ill madam?


Char. You look as if you was in love.


Vap. If I do it is a symptom of the liver complaint.


Char. No, its the heart.


Vap. No, its the liver -- I know I shall be ill of an ague, or St. Anthony's
fire: or an attack on my c^est -- my throat seels queer, I am going to have the
mumps -- hem -- pray Sir Matthew, do I look billious?


Sir Mat. No, no.


Vap. Hectic.


Sir Mat. No -- no -- you're the picture of rude health.


Vap. Then I shall die of a plethora.


Sir Mat. Come, come, leave off this nonsense, and come and look at my picture
-- I am told you have a little love for a picture.


Vap. Zounds! has he discovered my weakness.


Sir Mat. Here Is one by Guido, and this by Salva^or Rosa, but here is a (drawing
the curtain) picture.

Vapor ^^arts.
Vap. The very same as the miniature in my pocket! ( runs to Sir Matthew) Oh!
my dear Sir Matthew!


Sir Mat. What is the matter? now some new disease.


Vap. Oh! Sir Matthew, by all types of friendship that ever subs^^^ed between
our families -- tell me who that divine picture represents.


Sir Mat. What, do you think it pretty?


Vap. Never (...) to equal its any of your family, Sir Matthew.


Sir Mat. (...), yes its my grandmother.


Vap. Your grandmother! is she living?


Sir Mat. No, why if she had been alive now, she had been, let me see -- aye --
a hundred and twenty-two.


Vap. Did she sing?


Sir Mat. Oh yes, our family were all musical.


Vap. Did she play on the guitar?


Sir Mat. Who?


Vap. Your grandmother.


Sir Mat. Why, you seem to have taken a great liking for my grandmother, but
come into the garden and see my improvements, and the gold and silver fish.


Exit Sir Matthew and Charlotte. Vap. I Will attend you Sir Matthew -- God's Death,
that I should live to years of discretion, and fall in love with an old
fellow's grandmother.


AIR. VAPOR. Ah, me! I am lost and forlorn! no hope can my anguish aslauge;
For, alas! long before I was born, my fair one had died of old age.
Ah, Wella -- day! Well-a-day!
Why, Time, should thou be so uncouth! why wither her beauties divine?
Why rob her of every tooth before I had cut one of mine.
Ah Well-a-day! Well-a-day;
At night, to her tomb I Will repair, bewailing, she never was my bride;
Cut a lock of her lovely gray hair, If any was left when she died.
Ah, Well-a-day! Well-a-day.

END OF FIRST ACT.
ACT. -- II
SCENE -- A Garden, Enter FLORELLA, CHARLOTTE, and WOODLY. Air Charlotte. Full
twenty times you have heard my mind, You're not the man I hope to find,
Or can for life approve;
In spite of all that you can say, I Am still inclined to answer nay,
And never think of love.
Give over your teazing, it is in vain; From me your suit will nothing gain,
My will you will never move;
When I resign my hand and heart, I Will have a had gay, brisk and smart,
Or never think of love.

Flor. Well, Charlotte, what do you think of Mr. Vapor.


Char. Think, why he is a thousand more whims than a fine lady, and in a little
time would fancy you some strange monster or other?


Flor. So he did not fancy himself one, I should not care, they say nervous men
make the best husbands, for you may fret them to death whenever you like, but
why don't you pity poor Woody, there?


Char. I must support the dignity of the sex.


Flor. The dignity of the sex is best supported by a good husband, and if Mr.
Vapor should like me --


Char. What then?


Flor. Why then, I would marry him, to support the dignity of the sex my dear
cousin.


Char. Well -- well, how goes on your scheme?


Flor. Oh! charmingly, you will not betray us Woodly?


Wood. No -- indeed, not I.


Char. Ah! no -- no -- you may rely on him, a look is enough.


Flor. Then he deserves kinder ones than yon have given him lately however.


Wood. I Am glad I have an advocate in you. Miss Florella, but why my dear
Charlotte, don't you believe these tender sighs?


TRIO. FLORELLA, CHARLOTTE, AND WOODLY. Flor, and Woodly. Ah! believe these
plaintive sighs,
Uneasing still, when you appear!

Charlotte. Ah! forbear these plaintive sights,
Uneasing still, when I appear!

Flor. Woodly. Tell not me, you can despise
A constant heart and vows sincere;

Charlotte. Tell not to me, that I despise,
A constant heart and vows sincere;
Faith, in native colors shown, wins at length our yielding heart;
Pleased an equal flame we own, pleased an equal joy impart

(Exeunt. SCENE -- A Hall. Enter GOSSIP, meeting SOUFFRANCE. Gos. Ah! at! my
old boy, give us your hand, how do you do, I am very glad to see you, where are
you going?


Souf. I was go to de apotecare of de village.


Gos. The apothecary, very well, stay where you are.


Souf. I can no stay, me must go for de apotecare for my master.


Gos. Stay where you are, stay where you are, I am the apothecary, I came here
on a bit of a carpentering job, for Miss Florella so I thought I might as well
bring the decoction for your master in my pocket.


Souf. Vat Apotecair, carpentair, barbere?


Gos. Dentist and tailor at you're service, ecce signum.

(Showing a flannel waistcoat)
Souf. Vat is dat?


Gos. Vat is dat -- why a flannel waistcoat to be sure, which every body knows
is designed for our brave troops abroad, who, while we are at home warm and snug
in our shops, defy cold, wet, and hunger, for the good welfare of old England.


Souf. Dat is ver good.


Gos. Very good, I believe it is indeed, its a very good thing for me I know, I
always carry one about me, ready cut out, that I may loose no time in the job,
I feel my heart so warm in the cause, that when I take my shiers in my hand,
and extend my finger and thumb, just to take my simple allowance of cabbage,
damn me they drop out my hand -- cannot take the cabbage.


Souf. Monsieur Gossip, how you be so many trade?


Gos. Why, as you are a foreigner, I Will tell you all about i^ first, you know
shaving was born with me, I was born a shaver -- bleeding follows of course.


Souf. Nui, I dare say ven you shave --


Gos. Now my other trades are took up by motives of convenience, for being an
apothecary, I sometimes keep my customer longer in the village than they
otherwise might wish to stay -- you know if they die, then I am a carpenter;
and so finish my own job but if they shoud happen to recover, then I am a
tailor, and make their cloaths-can't walk abroad you known without being
fashionable


Souf. You be great many trades for one man -- vy vas you no^ de sexton, and de
grave dig too


Gos. I should have been -- I should been, but I let my brother in-law have
them.


Souf. Oh! den'tis all in de family.


Gos. To be sure, never let any thing go out of the family -- never -- never.


Souf. Dat is right, dat is right.


Gos. Did you never see my sign?


Souf. No.


Gos. Never see my sign! its the prettiest sign in the village, hang over the
door, under the pole, its the sign of the four-outs.


Souf. Four-outs.


Gos. Ah four-outs, there is wrote in large letters, GOSSIP that is me, you know
my name's Gossip.


Souf. Ah! I know you Gossip.


Gos. Gossip, dentist, tailor, apothecary and Carpenter, I draw-out, I cut-out,
rout-out, and lay-out.


Souf. Den you never out.


Gos. Come that is a very good joke for Frenchman, Oh! I Would like to forget,
here is the decoction for master, mind and shake it, always shake it, for the
best is at the bottom.


Souf Vat is dis, vinegar and brickdust? will it no hurt my master.


Gos No -- no -- it will not hurt him, I take care never to hurt my nervous
customers, they are the best customers I have to my back, though they are always
ailing, they never die, so I don't get much out of them in the carpentering
line, but as long as I hammer something out of them, I don't care how it is; do
you know they wrote a song of me in these parts, they call me the wonderful
barber, or Jack of all trades? I Will sing it you.


AIR -- GOSSIP. When I was a younker, I first was apprentic'd
Unto a gay barber, so dapper and airy;
I next was a carpenter, then turned a dentist,
Then tailor good Lord! then an apothecary,
But for this trade or that, they all come as pat they can;
For shaving and tooth-drawing, bleeding, cabbaging, and sawing,
Dickey Gossip is the man.
Though tailor and dentist but aukwardly tether,
In both the vocations I still have my savings;
And two of my trades couple rarely together,
For barber and carpenter both deal in shavings.
So for this trade or that, They all come as pat, etc,
But blunders will happen in callings so various,
I fancy they happen to some who are prouder:
I once gave a patient, whose health was percarious,
A terrible dose of my best shaving powder,
But no matter for that, my trades come as pat, etc.

( Exeunt. SCENE -- The Salloon. Enter VAPOR I Have slipped from Sir Matthew to
take another look at the object of my passion, my passion! -- my folly -- Oh!
that I was born three generations after thee, (draws the other curtain) what is
here! his grandfather, this is my rival -- oh if I had him here -- this is the
lovely picture -- (Draws the curtain and discovers Florella dressed as the
picture, with a guitar) it looks fresher than ever, now I am such a fool I
could fancy it was alive, there seems life in the eyes, it seems to breathe,
Oh! my brain is certainly turned, I Will go back to Sir Matthew -- (she shams) I
could almost persuade myself, I heard her touch the guitar.


AIR -- FLORELLA. Say how can words a passion feign,
Where love never taught to languish?
Or, when we own the tyrant's reign,
What art can veil our anguish?
The God of love alike disdains
To lend his form, or wear our chains.

Vap. Oh! its alive -- its alive!


Enter SOUFFRANCE. Souf. Sair de horses are ready.


Vap. Souffrance, its alive -- its alive!


Soup. Vat is alive?


Vap. Why, Sir Matthew's grandmother, (pushes off Souffrance) now I Will have one
sweet embrace, (as he gets on the table, the picture drops down) -- Sweet
enchanting angelic, -- Oh! --


Enter Sir MATTHEW, CHARLOTTE, and WOODLY. Sir Mat. Here Mr. Vapor, -- Mr,
Vapor!


Vap. Oh! Sir Matthew, did you hear it?


Sir Mat. Hear what?


Vap. Hear her sing.


Sir Mat. You're a singing in your head, I fancy.


Vap. O yes, I am certainly crazy, well, good bye Sir Matthew, I Will go
immediately.


Sir Mat. Mr. Vapor, you're not going, there is all the neighbors coming to
pay their respects to you.


Vap. Yes -- yes Sir Matthew, I must go directly.


Sir Mat. Nay -- nay -- stay -- Charlotte, you told me somebody wanted to speak
to me, now I have a little time, let them come in.


Char. O sir, she is no strange.


Enter FLORELLA, kneeling to Sir Matthew. Flor. Pray sir, forgive. --


Vap. It Is she, -- it is she!


Sir Mat. It Is who?


Vap. Why, your grandmother.


Sir Map. Ha -- ha -- ha, this is all owing to the family resemblance of my
niece, to my grandmother.


Flor. Pray sir, forgive this juvenile indiscretion.

(kneeling.
Vap. Here am I rooted forever, unless you forgive whatever juvenile
indiscretion, your grandmother has been guilty of.


Sir Map. Rise -- rise, Mr, Vapor, I do forgive her, I do forgive my niece.

(embracing Florella.
Vap. O! this is alive, so you're Sir Matthews niece, are you?


Flor. Charlotte can answer you that.


Vap. And not his grandmother.


Flor. No -- that I can answer myself.


Vap. Oh! Sir Matthew, will you bestow you grand -- your niece on me in
marriage.


Sir Mat. Aye -- aye -- take her, and I will give you my grandmother into the
bargain. -- Charlotte, I see you like him too, so take her Woodly,


Vap. But what says my divine Florella?


Flor. Will you love, me, Mr. Vapor?


Vap. Yes, for ever, if its only for the sake of Sir Matthew's grandmother.


FINALE. FLORELLA, CHARLOTTE, WOODLY, AND CHORUS. FLOR. Though now betrothed in
early life, I died in days of yore,
And happy you will take to wife a grandam of fourscore.

WOOD. When blessed with Charlotte's hand and love, we'll kiss till we Grow old,
May she in time a grandam prove, but never prove a scold.

CHORUS. Since Wedlock must at last ensue, let us wed, and say no more
Our mother's and our grandams too, they all did so before.

VAPOR. Soon on my knee a boy may sit, and call me dear papa,
In fifty Years some little tit (To Florella) may squall out grand mama,

CHAR. Though former times were not amiss, We Are happier in our own
The type of England's nuptial bliss, now sits upon the throne.

CHORUS. Since Wedlock, etc.


FINIS.
LIST OF PLAYS.
Siege of Belgrade. Wild Oats. Prize. Son in Law. No song no supper. Notoriety.
Duenna. My Grandmother. School for Scandal. Mountaineers. Farmer Love Alamode.
Modern Antiques. Village Lawyer. Animal Magnetism. Battle of Hexham. Man of the
world. Haunted Tower, Agreeable Surprise Poor Soldier.

