THE SHAKSPEARE GALLERY, etc.

ERRATUM.
P. 10. l. 1. for o'erblane'd read o'erblanch'd.

THE SHAKSPEARE GALLERY, A POEM. BY MR. JERNINGHAM.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. ROBSON, NEW BOND-STREET.

M.DCC.XCI.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN BOYDELL, LORD MAYOR OF THE CITY OF LONDON, THIS
POEM IS INSCRIBED, BY HIS OBEDIENT, HUMBLE SERVANT,

EDWD. JERNINGHAM.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following Poem does not pass any judgment upon the Pictures that are now
exhibited in the Gallery; but attempts to point out new subjects for future
exhibitions: And, in the delineation of new subjects, attention is paid to the
principle laid down by our great Painter, (in his notes to the translation of
Fresnoy by Mr. MASON) That palpable situation is preferable to curious
sentiment, as the Painter speaks to the eye.

The encouragement that is now so liberally extended to Painting, will soon
decide the question, Whether or no our Painters are adequate to the task they
are called upon to perform. MACKLIN'S exhibition is also a splendid and arduous
undertaking: It is another Lyceum, in which riyal Artists may contend for fame
and emolument.

SHAKSPEARE GALLERY, etc.
As mused the Prophet near mild CHEBAR'S stream EZEKIEL, Chap. 8th.
,
And prayed his God to dart the enlight'ning gleam,
Abrupt-descending from his airy height,
A form angelic rushed upon his sight!
With smiling lip he cheered the hallowed Sire,
And bad his soul to Heaven's best gift aspire:
Then, with strong hand, he grasped his silver hair,
And swift conveyed him through the yielding air,
Along the unwinged region of the sky,
The dread, mysterious, deep abyss on high.
There Inspiration her bright cloud withdrew,
And poured her visions on his daring view:
Then on his rapture-kindled eye arose
Those forms of splendour, those terrific shows,
With which he peopled his celestial dream,
And swelled his proud magnificence of theme.
To ENGLAND's Leading Bard thus Genius came,
Envelop'd in a robe of holy flame,
And bore him, with a whirlwind's rapid force,
Beyond the solar road, and starry course;
From which far towering and tremendous height
(While now he hovers with suspended flight)
The Poet viewed, as on a spacious plain,
Of human passions the long shadowy train:
As flings the noon-sun his clear beams from high,
On the dim tribes he darts his radiant eye.
'Twas then the favored Bard received the lore,
(Whose mystic veil was never removed before)
That revelation to his instinct given,
That ray from GOD, the energy of Heaven.
To his illumined sight was then consigned
The deep recesses of the Human Mind;
The ever-varying path of tortuous Art,
And the dark passage to the Tyrant's heart;
The umbrageous winding of the thorny road,
That leads to quick-ey'd Jealousy's abode;
The gathering storms that over Resentment roll;
The swelling waves that toss the fearful soul;
The calm that breathes around the Infant's rest,
The rugged cavern of the Murd'rer's breast;
The dread materials by the Furies brought,
With which are forged Despair's tempestuous thought;
The shaft, that, mingling pleasure with the pain,
Bathes in the blood that warms the Lover's vein.
Oh Thou! the IMPERIAL GENIUS of our land!
Take a fresh garland from thy country's hand;
Triumphs unknown she hastens to proclaim,
And stamp a newborn era on thy fame!
Too long, as with the iron power of Fate,
Has Custom bolted the Historic Gate;
Enlightened BOYDELL bursts the opposing bar,
On their rude hinge the ponderous portals jar;
While the rapt Arts salute, with loud acclaim,
This rich accession to their rising name.
Genius of PAINTING! thy bright car ascend,
Bid glowing Energy thy steps attend,
Triumphant ride through the unrifled land,
And seize thy plunder with victorious hand.
Thou too, who favor'st the Promethean toil,
Genius of SCULPTURE! share the sacred spoil!
Let Fancy lift thy blazing urn on high,
Whose flame thy bold hand ravished from the sky;
And on its side, with flowerets breathing round,
Let the immortal name of BANKS be found See the alto-relievo in the front of
the gallery, which does honor to modern Statuary.

Often have we heard the pure of taste complain
Of mawkish Portraiture's eternal reign;
Of exhibitions which the art disgrace,
And pall the eye with many a vacant face.
Let Miniature erect her fairy school,
And 'mid her gewgaws unmolested rule;
Let her bright dome each pleased Narcissus seek,
To her let Beauty hold her summer cheek!
In fond allusion to the month of May,
Let her the youthful bride's gay form display;
Let her delineate, on her ivory plane,
The nuptial simper of the happy swain!
From these we turn to scenes of higher aim,
Where Eagle-Genius soars to nobler game;
Where Fancy, Reason, Taste, in one conjoined,
Unfold the workings of the impassioned mind.
Now to the laurell'd, academic band,
To every artist's emulative hand,
Munificence upholds her sacred prize,
And bids the daring reach it from the skies.
While Expectation lifts the thought on high,
Methinks I view, with a prophetic eye,
In solemn state ascend that splendid Dome,
Where the proud Arts shall find an equal home;
Where, at the opening of some glorious day,
The English mind its treasures shall display;
While they, whose taste is swayed by Rigor's rule,
Shall mark the wonders of the Albion School Another gallery is to be erected,
for the purpose of receiving the whole collection, when completed.

If time should ever obliterate the gold
Of SHAKSPEARE'S language, cast in Vigor's mould,
Here shall, invested in their various guise,
The throng of his departed Forms arise!
The splendid forms his mind luxuriant drew,
The bold creations he held forth to view,
As from their grave shall burst the numerous host,
And on these walls a new existence boast.
Here shall be seen, in all its charms arrayed,
The impressive figure of VERONA's maid: JULIET.

Closed in the dreary vault where sleep the dead,
Wrapped in the night-dress of the funeral bed,
She breaks abruptly from her iron trance,
And sends around a terror-rolling glance:
A mournful, solitary lamp shall throw
A sickly glimmering over the house of woe,
And shall the wretched PARIS give to view,
Stretched on te ground, with mien of ghastly hue:
Then shall a deeper spectacle display,
And hang over ROMEO with reluctant ray,
Disclosing his wan lips, devoid of breath,
And faint-ros'd cheek, still beautiful in death:
Then shall the beam, with weakened effort, shed.
A fading glory on the FRIAR's head.
She too shall ornament the pictured scene,
The destined victim of ITALIAN spleen IMOGEN.
:
See the base wretch perform his treacherous part,
With all the subtlety of finished art!
Behold him bending over the sleeping maid,
Her holy form to his research betrayed!
Eager some secret notice to retai!,
With ravenous aim he lifts the slender veil,
And leering marks, by Nature's hand impressed,
The mole cinque-spotted on her snowy breast;
Whose scattered drops to the rapt eye excel
The crimson spots within the cowslip's bell.
Here too, as patient as the meek-ey'd dove,
Shall stand the maid who "never told her love VIOLA.
";
Who, to her coy and fearful bosom true,
(As the unseen worm, that pales the blossom's hue)
Still let concealment on her beauty prey,
Like snow dissolving silently away.
Beneath the roof of a monastic pile,
Through the recesses of the lengthening isle,
A monument shall strike the mournful eye,
An imag'd Pity shall stand drooping nigh,
And (where the loved, lamented ashes sleep)
Unruffled Patience her long vigil keep.
Now, at the magic Painter's wild command,
Girt with the sea, ascends the Enchanted Land!
There stands Simplicity's endearing child MIRANDA.
,
That artless Maid! the flow'ret of the wild!
Beside the margin of the wave-vex'd shore,
While all around conflicting thunders roar,
With unbound tresses, fluttering to the wind,
Her eye expressive of her tortured mind,
She views the vessel, by the surges tossed,
Now seen -- now lost -- now found -- now once more lost:
Till, madly rushing on the pointed rock,
Its bosom riven with the forceful shock,
Beyond the stretch of naval art to save,
Down, down, it hurries to the watery grave!
Now PROSPERO comes, with magic arts endu'd,
His sable garb with hieroglyphics strewn;
Long care, long study, solitude profound,
Has deepen'd on his brow reflection's wound;
His long-descending hair, o'erblanch'd with age,
Becomes the Sorc'rer, and adorns the Sage:
Ah! view him at that dread, momentous hour,
While he abjures his necromantic power!
Within the ring of Incantation's ground,
Elves, Fairies, Spirits, Demons, flock around:
Beneath his foot behold the potent wand,
Doomed never again to grace his lifted hand!
Behold the volume, which (with mystery fraught)
Predestination's darkling edicts taught,
And breathed its solemn whispers on the mind,
With dust overspread, and to neglect consigned!
Yet then the distant scenery imparts
A dire remembrance of his former arts:
The bright sun fading in his full career,
The wild stars madly starting from their sphere,
The storm-encumber'd sky, the swelling main,
The uprooted cedars stretching over the plain,
The mountain loosened by convulsive throe,
With ruin rushing to the vale below,
And the pale wretch, reversing Nature's doom,
Abruptly rising from the rifted tomb!
What glowing Artist with bold hand shall claim
To draw, oh ARIEL! thy resplendent frame?
Thou tricksy Spirit with benignant smile,
Thou playful meteor of the Enchanted Isle!
Not like a sea-nymph, robbed in sickly green,
With dappled wings, as on the Stage you are seen,
A gay transparency shall thou appear,
Thy form celestial melting into air,
With foot light-touching some fantastic height,
Prompt to depart, and stretching to thy flight,
Yet, ere we sail from this Enchanted Isle,
Let other scenes our lingering steps beguile:
There stands ANTHONIO, the suggesting fiend,
And half reveals his purpose to his friend;
His bosom swells, his madd'ning eye balls roll,
And show the workings of his inmost soul.
All that his lawless, wild conceptions dare,
In various forms hang hovering in the air:
A sword fresh-tainted with ALONZO's blood,
A scepter swimming in a crimson flood,
A crown with dazzling ornaments overspread,
And lightly floating over SEBASTIAN's head;
While, in the distance, rising over the bay,
Imperial Naples shall her towers display.
Lo! now, advancing on the mimic scence,
Comes forth to view the famed Egyptian Queen ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA, Act 1st,
Scene 3d, at the end.
;
While anxious doubts her Soldier's mind perplex,
Behold her rise instructive to her sex!
Ah, not superior! for the female heart
Endures with fortitude the suffering part.
Towering beyond the flight of timorous love,
She bids her Warrior from her sight remove;
She points her finger to the martial plain,
Points to the active and the daring train:
The threatening axes which the Fasces bear;
The gorgeous streamers swelling to the air;
Of busy legions the thick murmuring swarms;
The thronging shields, and high-emblazon'd arms;
The encumbering elephant, the rapid steed,;
And spoils of former conquest, Glory's meed;
Flushed Conquest, riding in his trophied car,
And all the dread magnificence of war.
Now shall the fell, tremendous act be done,
The Thane MACBETH.
appears! -- the warning clock strikes One!
His daring, wild imaginings create
(Such the hot chaos of his mental state)
The air born dagger, and display to view
The point obscene, distained with crimson hue.
Still, as we gaze, shall new creations rise,
And varying sceneries prolong surprise:
Ere yet the sky-lark leaves his lowly bed,
Bright on the mist-encircled mountain's head,
See jocund Day on airy tiptoe strand,
And open the gates of Heaven with radiant hand!
Now, like two lions litter'd on one day JULIUS CAESAR, Act 4th, Scene 3d.
,
Who range the dreary wilds, and share the prey,
I see, in dreadful harmony combined,
The illustrious Pair who dignify mankind!
The summer-cloud, that dimmed their friendship's ray,
The passing summer-gale has borne away;
Yet CASSIUS then upbraids the unmanly grief,
That from the moral Porch claims no relief:
With lowering aspect, but with tearless eyes,
The grief-torn, inly-bleeding friend replies;
"Ah! not in vain was I with Stoics bred,
"For yet art thou to learn, that PORTIA's dead."
The hair-dishevell'd Prophetess of Troy TROILUS AND CRESSIDA, Act 5th, Scene
3d.

Shall next th Painter's hallowed hand employ:
She, with bold Divination's meteor-eye,
Pervades the awful secrets of the sky;
The woes of her loved country she foretells,
And on her brother's death prolixly dwells.
ANDROMACHE, impressed with tender fears,
At the prophetic strain dissolves in tears;
While HECTOR's scorn-denouncing looks upbraid
The vapoury day-dreams of the wild'ring Maid:
While PRIAM, bending at the weight of age,
Revered, parental, patriarchal Sage!
Half credits, half rejects, the tragic tale,
Till terrors over his fading hopes prevail.
Whence yonder radiant form that charms the eye?
It Is Expectation, riding through the sky!
A sword-like instrument she waves around,
Enwreath'd with coronets, with chaplets bound,
Prepared for HENRY and his faithful train,
Eager to urge the war over Gallia's plain.
Behold the Legate from the sacred Dome KING JOHN, Act 3d, Scene 4th.
,
In the rich garb of sacerdotal Rome! --
CONSTANCE approaches! spurning at relief,
Attired in all the negligence of grief:
In her fierce grasp she shows her rooted hair,
Presenting well the image of Despair;
And seems to cry aloud, in accents wild,
"He talks to me, who never had a child!"
Mark where the blood-fed lamps, with crimson ray HENRY SIXTH, Part II. Act
1st, Scene 4th.
,
The ragged entrails of a cave display:
There, on a craggy seat, the Wizard's throne,
Sits, in rude pomp, the emaciated Crone;
She lifts a pale and withered hand on high,
And on the Phantom rolls her savage eye,
Whose doubtful form confounds the enquiring sight,
One part revealed, the other lost in night:
From this abhorred interpreter of fate,
The Hag demands the future storms of state,
When the Sixth HENRY, prince of dim renown,
Shall lose, what ill becomes him -- England's crown.
Ye, who to martial fame your spirit yield,
Who pant to reap the honors of the field,
See the Third EDWARD, from the mountain's brow,
Survey, with madd'ning glance, the plain below:
He there beholds (by sacred Glory won)
In Danger's van his dear and godlike Son:
He views with wonder, and with mingled fear,
(His eyelid glist'ning with Affection's tear)
With pride, applause, and with a Father's joy,
The first achievements of the immortal Boy HENRY FIFTH, Act 1st, Scene 2d.
!
Lo! the Eighth HENRY, from his doubts released,
Devotes to infamy the aspiring Priest HENRY EIGHTH, Act 3d, Scene 2d.
:
The Monarch hails him as he passes by,
With ruin leaping from his threatening eye:
The Prelate, struck as by the blast of Death,
Looks the scath'd oak upon the naked heath.
The distant scene shall yield illumined night,
With one star falling from its airy height,
Thy emblem, WOLSEY! -- thou wast England's star,
And thy rich luster dazzled from afar;
Till thou (too daring) wast, by public hate,
Flung from the splendour of thy towering state.
With searful steps we now approach the bed
Where Scotland's King reclines his weary head:
Mark, mark the savage Thane's MACBETH.
more savage Wife,
Who brandishes aloft the thirsty knife!
One moment -- and the victim is no more;
One moment -- and he welters in his gore!
When sudden, through her soul's encircling night,
Flashes a glimmering of a moral light:
Over the calm features of the sleeping Guest
She sees her Father's image full expressed Act 2d, Scene 2d. -- LADY MACBETH.
"Had he not resembled my Father as he slept, I had don't."
!
It Is Nature's miracle! -- the Fiend relents,
Her altered mien a sickly smile presents;
Affection subjugates her lawless soul,
Her bosom heaves, and tears begin to roll.
Say, to whose proud ambition shall be given
A pencil glowing with the tints of Heaven,
With which the wild Enthusiast shall aspire
To body forth the ecstatic Muse of Fire? HENRY FIFTH, the Prologue. "O for a
Muse of Fire, that would ascend
"The brightest heaven of Invention!"

?
At the gay opening of the splendid sky
The Seraph enters, with commanding eye,
Her radiant visitant Invention hails,
And all her waste magnificence reveals:
A diamond-rock sustains the gorgeous Queen,
That flings a brilliance over the expansive scene;
The various Arts their sovereign Mistress own,
And bend with low obeisance at her throne:
See, to the Muse the Goddess holds a crown,
Bright on whose front is charactered "RENOWN!"
A subject now unfolds of meeker claim AS YOU LIKE IT, Act 2d, Scene 3d.
,
Yet seeks the heart with unresisted aim:
The faithful Servant on the scene appears,
Impressed, but not o'ercharg'd, with weight of years:
The glow of health still blushes on his cheek,
As on the winter-fruit the ruddy streak:
His tearful eyes his Master's wants behold,
And to those wants he yields the hoarded gold:
Methinks he says, "With this thy care assuage;
"For me, let Him be comfort to my age,
"Whose tender providence the Raven feeds,
"And to the Sparrow yields the daily seeds."
See where the chisel, with victorious strife,
Has urged the torpid matter into life!
Lo! the bold Roman to our view consigned,
His air reflective of his haughty mind;
Spite of the foldings of a mean disguise,
His frame majestic strikes the admiring eyes:
So the tall vessel, shattered by the storm,
Retains her native dignity of form:
Behold him, at the hour of conscious pride,
And prompting worth, to confidence allied,
What time he utters, with commanding air,
"My name breathes terror on a Volscian ear!"
This high, heroic task, by Genius planned,
Avows the impression of a female hand See the Basso-Relievo by the Honorable
ANN DAMER. -- CORIOLANUS, Act 4th, Scene 5th.
:
Illustrious DAMER! though thy splendid name
Decks, like a star, the pinnacle of fame,
Yet only they who mark, with aspect near,
The humbler orb of thy domestic sphere,
Can tell (from all the rougher parts refined)
How Learning sits enameled on thy mind;
How still, through various life's eventful scene,
Thy friendship wears the unfading robe of green! --
NOR shall each task unfold the solemn scene
Hung with the drap'ry of the Tragic Queen:
With airy step THALIA shall advance,
And dart around her grief-expelling glance,
Group the fantastic forms of Humour's court,
And bid the Pleasures over the landscape sport.
Wherever our Bard displays his magic powers,
Wherever he treads, arise spontaneous flowers,
Which over the pallet brighter tints shall throw,
While the live pencil drinks a richer glow.
See where the Birds forsake the realms of air See the Poems. -- "The
Passionate Pilgrim", at the end.
,
And to yon melancholy spot repair;
Where press the bier those images of love,
The radiant Phoenix and the faithful Dove:
Just over the summit of the funeral pyre,
Waked by the gale, ascends the sacred fire.
There Philomela swells her little throat,
To grace the requiem with her saddest note:
There too the pitying Red-breast shall be seen,
And in his bill a leaf of purest green:
The Swallow shall his circling sport forego,
And join this meek society of woe:
The joyous Sky-lark, by compassion won,
Shall check his wonted anthem to the sun,
And, swift-descending from his radiant height,
Devote his music to the hallowed rite.
Even birds shall here be seen of ampler form,
Who slowly sail, and dare the gathering storm:
The Vulture here shall come, at Sorrow's call,
And the dark Raven spread his hovering pall:
The Bird of JOVE shall from his heaven descend,
And with this train his awful presence blend.
Ye who, with finer sympathies impressed,
Avow the immaculate and seeling breast,
O white-stol'd Virgins! in long order move,
True to the ritual of the cypress grove;
And, while your souls with chaste affection burn,
With garlands deck the emblematic urn.
Ah! now the zeal that warms my throbbing heart
For all who honor the Poetic art,
Ferments my bosom to this strong desire,
That He who led the Bard's theatric quire,
Whom England mourns -- recording still his name,
Who grappled to his own his SHAKSPEARE's fame,
That He, by Sculptor imag'd, here may stand,
In act to speak what his great Idol planned.
Thus have we traversed the extensive plain,
Marked where the mine contains the swelling vein;
Marked where the chosen trees their branches shoot,
And plucked the leaves that veil the Golden Fruit!
FINIS.

