THE CASE OF ENGLAND, AND THE PROTESTANT INTEREST.
SInce the present condition of the Kingdom, and the whole Protestant Interest
by the conjunction of France and Spain abroad, and a a more horrid combination
of several at home, must needs affect with the most melancholy Reflections all
true English Hearts, such as have any real love or zeal for their Religion, or
their native Country. I cannot think it amiss to present a short and impartial
View ^o such as have not considered the same.

In the beginning of the last Age, the Protestant Interest in Europe was more
than a Match for the Roman Catholic; the Kingdom of Bohemia was almost all
Protestant; near half the Subjects of Hungary, of Austria and Moravia, were
Protestant (and did many times defend themselves by (...) against the Emperor
himself, when oppressed by him for the sake of their Religion.) That in
Germany, the Houses of Newburgh were Protestant, the Palatinates for the most
part of them Protestant, of the strictest sort; the Saxons entirely Protestant,
and being hearty unanimous, and seated in the midst of Germany, were a Bulwark
and Defense to the Protestants of many other lesser States as often as they
were oppressed for their Religion, by their own or their neighboring Princes:
That many of the Subjects of Bavaria, Bamburgh, Cologn, Wurtzburgh and Worms
were Protestants. Besides these, that the Protestants of France were so
powerful, as to maintain 8 or 9 Civil Wars in defense of their Religion, and
always came off with advantage. The Vaudois in Italy were all of them
Protestant, and great numbers of the Inhabitants of the Spanish Low Countries
were of the Reformed Religion. Besides, England and Holland, and the Northern
Kingdoms of Denmark and Sweden, and Duchy of Brandenburgh, were entirely
Protestant. But now instead of this, is not the Protestant Power destroyed
almost over Europe? The whole Kingdom of Bohemia entirely Popish? Are not the
Protestants of Poland, Austria, Moravia utterly destroyed? Is not their
destruction now carrying on, and almost finished in Hungary? In Germany, the
Newburghers of Protestants are become fierce Enemies of the Protestant
Religion. The Protestants of Bavaria, Bamburgh, Cologn, Wurtzburgh and Worms
are all destroyed. In France, the Spanish Low Countries, Savoy and Vaudois,
after long and mighty Struggles, the Religion is utterly extinguished. Against
the poor Palatinates the Persecution is now carrying on with its usual
barbarity, and their Neighbors the Saxons are so far from being able to help
them, that they are under the fearful Apprehensions of suffering the like from
their own Prince (lately turned Roman Catholic to obtain the Kingdom of
Poland) so soon as his Wars with Sweden, and other troubles created him by his
Polish and Lithuanian Subjects will give him leave. Besides this, two Northern
Princes have given great cause to suspect their conversion to the Romish
Religion: That Sweden by its separation from the rest of Europe by the Baltic,
is unable to give assistance to the Protestants in any part of Europe, without
the consent of the German Princes bordering on the Baltic, which will never be
granted by Papists in favor of the Protestants.

Thus the Protestant Religion which had spread it self over almost all Europe,
which had gained the entire possession of some Countries, the greater part of
others, and mighty Interest in most, has through the restless malice and
endeavors of its Enemies, been subverted and destroyed in Country after
County, till it is at last reduced to a little Corner of what it once possessed
(England and Holland) And do we think our Enemies will not accomplish (what
they have thus prosperously carried on so far) our utter Destruction? Is it not
high time then to think our selves in danger, to look about us to enquire what
it is has thus weakend us, brought us so near our ruin, what measures will
certainly accomplish it, and what we must take for the prevention of it?

The Romish Methods of converting the Protestants have been in all Countries
the same, viz. Confiscation of their Estates, Goals and Imprisonments, I^re,
and Sword, dragooning and massacring, and inflicting the most inhuman torments
that rage and fury could invent upon such, whose resolution and zeal for their
Religion could not be moved by the former means.

If this be the true case of England, and the Protestant Religion, then what is
wanting to give the finishing stroke to our destruction, but only an ability in
the King of France to break the Powers of England and Holland. And when we
consider how in the year 1672. the King of France marched his Army through the
midst of Flanders, fell directly upon Holland, then unprovided, entered their
strongest Towns like open Villages; some without defense, or almost denial,
most of them without any blows at all, and all of them with very few, and made
himself Master, of three parts of Holland in 2 months time; for which Sir W. T.
K. C. II's Ambassador (then in Holland) tells us the reason was, That the Dutch
then not suspecting such a thing, had no Field-Army sufficient to encounter
their Enemies, or succor any Town: That walled Towns will not defend the men
within, unless the hearts of the Men will defend their Walls: That no Garrison
will make any resolute defense, without the prospect or hopes at least of
relief. It Is true, that the French King having then all Flanders on his back,
garrisoned with Spanish Troops (then his implacable Enemies) a powerful Army of
the German Princes matching upon him down the Rhine; Spain and England (alarmed
by his successes) preparing to attack him on all quarters, was glad to vomit up
all again, and return home with as much precipitancy, as he had invaded them,
least the Provisions and retreat of his Army through Flanders should be cut
off. But now the case is otherwise, he has possessed himself of Flanders,
extended his Dominion to the very Frontiers of Holland; Spain is all united to
him, some German Princes (then his Enemies) are now become his Friends; others
entered into conditions of Neutrality with him: And should he now by a fatal
Battle (which God of his infinite mer^^ (...)) break the Dutch Army, which they
have with infinite Charge and matchless Vigor, gathered up from Denmark,
Brandenburgh, and other remote Countries of Germany, might he not enter the
heart of their Country? And whence then can their strong Cities and Towns
depend upon relief? May he not as formerly enter 'em like open Villages? May he
not as formerly possess himself of their whole Country in less than one
Campaign? It was the opinion of that great Statesman, Sir W.T. That Polland
would make a stout resistance in any quarrel remote from their own doors; but
that which enables them (their Wealth) to carry on a foreign War with Vigor,
would in a War at home render 'em defenseless Rich and populous Towns are not
fit for Sieges, or were ever known to make any long and resolute defense. If
this be our case, if the whole power of the Protestant Religion rests now in a
manner in England and Holland; if the destruction of England, as well as of our
holy Religion must inevitably follow the loss of Holland. If Holland by one
unfortunate Battle might happen to be lost in one Campaign or less, Are we not
in a most sad and deplorable Condition? and if some Men are without their
Fears, Have we not the greater reason to fear for our selves, our Religion, and
our Country. What should we judge of those who tell us, it is too early yet for
England to declare? The Enemy has raised his Armies, furnished his Magazines;
and it is too early for us to think of raising a Man. The Enemy is before our
Outworks, and it is too soon for us to prepare our selves to be on our guard:
Will not those Men tell us, when Holland is lost, 'twill then be too late? To
what purpose (will they say) now do you think of raising Forces? Is not the
French King Master of Holland? Possessed of all their Ports? Where will you
land 'em? To what use will you put 'em? Does not such Language as this plainly
show the intention of the Authors? Is it not plainly to deliver us blindfold,
bound hand and foot into the Enemies hand? Is not their design now so visible
as not to be disguised? Do not some of the Party begin to throw off the Mask,
and tell us, 'Twill not be well with us till our old Master returns, till the
Government returns to its natural Channel. And are not those that were the very
Tools and Instruments of Popery and Arbitrary Power in former Reigns, and that
owe their Lives to Acts of Indemnity in this, industriously represented by
some as the Patriots of their Country; and by a strange kind of Paradox those
that have been always hearty for the Church, and were for defending of it when
others were for pulling it down; that were hearty for the King's Accession to
the Throne, and to his Person and Government ever since, are represented as
betrayers of us, as having sold us to France: Would it not be a piece of rare
refined Policy, if France could hang up her greatest Enemies, under the Nation
of her dearest Friends, and give Encouragement to her ancient Frien^^ under the
Notion of being her Enemies.

Let us therefore while it is yet in our power (as we tender our Religion and
our Country) use our utmost Endeavors by all legal ways to assu^ his Majesty
and his Government, against all his and our Enemies both at home and abroad;
and in the words of our Liturgy, let us offer up our most servent Prayers to
God Amighty, Give peace in our time, O Lord, because there is none other that
figureth for us but only thou, O God!

FINIS.

