CASE, MR. MACKLIN LATE OF COVENT GARDEN THEATER, AGAINST Mess. Clarke, Aldys,
Lee, James, and Miles.

EDINBURGH: PRINTED FOR AND SOLD BY JOHN AND JAMES AINSLIES Booksellers, No 4,
St Andrew's Street, New Town.

PRICE THREEPENCE.

CASE.
1773. Nov. 18.
MR MACKLIN, who had attempted the character of Macbeth at the Theater in Covent
Garden, having given offense to the Town, by some hasty accusations, without
sufficient proof, against two or three brother players, for interrupting him in
his performance, was discharged from that Theater, by order of a numerous
Audience, assembled, as it should seem, for that purpose. On the curtain being
drawn up, the cry was, No Macklin! and it increased so much, that, to prevent
the house from being pulled to pieces, the Managers complied with their
desires, and publicly discharged him: after which, there being no play ready,
the money was returned, and the people dispersed.

1774. Feb. 11.
MR MACKLIN moved the Court of King's Bench, against several persons, for
hissing and otherwise insulting him, the last night he appeared in Covent
Garden Theater, to perform the part of Shylock; for preventing his going
through the character; and likewise for the loss of his bread. The motion was
rejected, it being observed, that as the Theaters were open for the reception
and entertainment of that part of the Public who paid for their admission, the
Audience had a right to applaud, condemn, nay reject what Performers they
thought proper; but if any unjust combination was formed previous to the
opening of the house, an action at Common Law might be grounded: But in the
instance then before the Court, there did not appear any room for such plea;
and therefore, he was advised to make his peace with the Town as speedily as
possible. Mr Macklin had retained the Attorney and Solicitor-General, besides
Mess. Dunning, Wallace, etc. -- It is said, Mr Macklin had 74 affidavits ready
to produce.

1774. May 2.
THE Court of King's Bench was moved by Mr Dunning on behalf of Mr Macklin, for
a Rule on six Gentlemen, to show cause why an information should not be filed
against them for a riotous conspiracy to deprive Mr Macklin of his livelihood,
by forcing the Managers of Covent Garden Theater to discharge Mr Macklin
therefrom on the 18th November last; which Rule the Court was pleased to grant
accordingly.

1774. June 11.
CAME on before the Court of King's Bench at Westminster, the Complaint of Mr
Macklin against six persons for a riotous conspiracy, founded on private
premeditated malice, to deprive the said Mr Macklin of his bread, by causing
him to be expelled the Theater last Winter. The Court was pleased to grant an
information against all but Mr Sparks. The Bench recommended it to the
Gentlemen to make restitution to Mr Macklin, and to compromise the matter
without bringing the cause to trial.

1775. Feb. 24.
CAUSE of Macklin against Clarke, Aldys, Lee, James, and Miles, came on to be
tried by way of indictment, in the Court of King's Bench, before Mr Justice
Aston and a special Jury. The indictment consisted of two counts; the first
specifying, That on the 18th November 1773, the defendants had been guilty of a
riot; -- the other, that they had been guilty of a conspiracy; both in order to
cause Mr Macklin to be dismissed from their Stage by the Patentees of Covent
Garden Theater. The Judge, after hearing the evidence, and summing it up with
accuracy and impartiality, desired the Jury to exercise their judgment: And if
they thought the defendants guilty of both counts, they were to find a verdict
generally; if only of one count, they should find accordingly. The Jury then
withdrew; and, in about twenty minutes, brought Clarke in guilty of the riot,
and the others of the conspiracy. -- But judgment was deferred till next term.

1775. May.
MR JUSTICE ASTON reported to the Court of King's Bench, his minutes of the
evidence on the trial of Messrs Leigh, Miles, James, Adys, and Clarke, on the
24th February last; the four first of whom were convicted of a conspiracy and
riot, and the latter of a riot only, in Covent Garden Theater, on the 18th
November 1773, with intent to drive Mr Macklin from the Stage. -- Lord
Mansfield observed on the nature of the offense, -- called it a national
disgrace, -- and, in very severe terms, reprobated the conduct of the parties
concerned in it. He said, In the first stage of the business, he had urgently
advised the defendants to make Mr Macklin an adequate compensation for the
great damage he had sustained; -- that he then particularly pointed out as an
advisable measure, the saving of the costs, by putting an end to the matter at
once; -- that the law-expences were now swelled to an enormous sum, which sum
the defendants themselves had given rise to, by their obstinacy and want of
prudence. -- Some time was spent in the Courts, endeavoring to make an
amicable adjustment of the matter, and a final conclusion of it. Mr Colman was
proposed as arbiter-general, which the defendants unanimously agreed to; but Mr
Colman declined the office. -- At length Mr Macklin, after recapitulating his
grievances, informed the Court, that to show he was no way revengeful, with
which he had been charged, he would be satisfied with the defendants paying his
law-expences, taking one hundred pounds worth of tickets on the night of his
daughter's benefit, a second hundred pounds worth on the night of his own
benefit, and a third on one of the managers nights when he should play. This
plan, he observed, was not formed on mercenary views: Its basis was to give the
defendants popularity, and restore mutual amity. -- Lord Mansfield paid Mr
Macklin very high compliments on the honorable complexion and singular
moderation of this proposal. His Lordship declared it did him the highest
credit; -- that generosity was universally admired in this country, and there
was no manner of doubt but the Public at large would honor and applaud him for
his lenity. His Lordship added further, that notwithstanding his acknowledged
abilities as an Actor, he never acted better in his life than he had that day.
The proposal was accepted by the parties, and the matter was thus ended. --
During the course of the business, Lord Mansfield took occasion to observe,
that the right of hissing and applauding in a Theater, was an unalterable
right; but that there was a wide distinction between expressing the natural
sensations of the mind as they arose on what was seen and heard, and executing
a preconcerted design, not only to hiss an Actor when he was playing a part in
which he was universally allowed to be excellent, but also to drive him from
the Theater, and promote his utter ruin.

SOON after the above decision, the Managers of Covent Garden Theater met, and
generously agreed to give up their claim to the hundred pounds worth of tickets.

FINIS.

