THE CAMPAIGN, A POEM.

THE CAMPAIGN, A POEM, To His GRACE the DUKE of MARLBOROUGH.

By Mr. ADDISON.

-- Rheni pacator and Istri.
Omnis in hoc Uno variis discordia cessit
Ordinibus; laetatur Eques, plauditque Senator,
Votaque Patricio certant Plebeia favori.
Claud. de Laud. Stilic. LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, within Gray's Inn
Gate next Gray's Inn Lane. 1705.

THE CAMPAIGN, A POEM, To His GRACE the DUKE of MARLBOROUGH.
WHile Crowds of Princes Your Deserts proclaim,
Proud in their Number to enroll Your Name;
While Emperors to You commit their Cause,
And ANNA'S Praises crown the vast Applause,
Accept, Great Leader, what the Muse indites,
That in ambitious Verse records Your Fights,
Fired and transported with a Theme so new:
Ten Thousand Wonders opening to my View
Shine forth at once, Sieges and Storms appear,
And Wars and Conquests fill The Important Year,
Rivers of Blood I see, and Hills of Slain;
An Iliad rising out of One Campaign.
The Haughty Gaul beheld, with towering Pride,
His ancient Bounds enlarged on every Side,
Pirene's lofty Barriers were subdued,
And in the midst of his wide Empire stood;
Ausonia's States, the Victor to restrain,
Opposed their Appenines and Alps in vain,
Nor found themselves, with strength of Rocks immured,
Behind their Everlasting Hills secured;
The rising Danube its long Race began,
And half its Course through the new Conquests ran;
Amazed and anxious for her Sov'raign's Fates,
Germania trembled through a Hundred States;
Great Leopold himself was seized with Fear,
He gazed around, but saw no Succor near,
He gazed, and half abandoned to Despair
His Hopes on Heaven, and Confidence in Prayer.
To BRITTAIN'S QUEEN the Nations turn their Eyes,
On Her Resolves the Western World relies,
Confiding still, amidst its dire Alarms,
In ANNA'S Councils, and in CHURCHILL'S Arms:
Thrice Happy BRITAIN, from the Kingdoms rent,
To sit the Guardian of the Continent!
That sees her Bravest Son advanced so high,
And flourishing so near her Prince's Eye;
Thy Favorites grow not up by Fortune's sport,
Or from the Crimes, or Follies of a Court;
On the firm Basis of Desert they rise,
From long tried Faith, and Friendship's Holy Ties:
Their Sov'raign's well-distinguish'd Smiles they share,
Her Ornaments in Peace, her Strength in War,
The Nation thanks them with a Public Voice,
By Showers of Blessings Heaven approves their Choice;
Envy it self is dumb, in Wonder lost,
And Factions strive who shall applaud 'em most.
Soon as soft Vernal Breezes warm the Sky
Brittania's Colors in the Zephyrs fly,
Her Chief already has his March begun,
Crossing the Provinces Himself had won,
Till the Moselle appearing from afar
Retards the Progress of the Moving War:
Delightful Stream, had Nature bid her fall
In distant Climes, far from the perjured Gaul;
But now a Purchase to the Sword she lies,
Her Harvests for uncertain Owners rise,
Each Vineyard doubtful of its Master grows,
And to the Victor's Bowl each Vintage flows:
The discontented Shades of slaughtered Hosts
That wandered on her Banks, her Heroes Ghosts
Hoped, when they saw Brittania's Arms appear,
The Vengeance due to their great Deaths was near.
Our God-like Leader, ever the Stream he past,
The mighty Scheme of all his Labors cast,
Forming the Wondrous Year within his Thought;
His Bosom glowed with Battles yet unfought:
The long laborious March he first surveys,
And joins the distant Danube to the Maese,
Between whose Floods such pathless Forests grow,
Such Mountains rise, so many Rivers flow:
The Toil looks lovely in the Heroes Eyes,
And Danger serves but to enhance the Prize.
Big with the Fate of Europe he renews
His dreadful Course, and the proud Foe pursues:
Amidst the sultry Gales his Temples beat,
Infected by the burning Scorpion's Heat,
'Till on the Borders of the Maine he finds
Defensive Shadows, and refreshing Winds:
Our British Youth, with in-born Freedom bold,
Unnumber'd Scenes of Servitude behold,
Nations of Slaves, with Tyranny debased,
(Their Maker's Image more than half defaced)
Hourly instructed, as they urge their Toil,
To prize their QUEEN, and love their Native Soil.
Still to the rising Sun they take their Way
Through Clouds of Dust, and gain upon the Day.
When now the Neckar on its friendly Coast
With cooling Streams revives the fainting Host,
That cheerfully its Labors passed forgets,
The Midnight Watches, and the Noonday Heats.
Over prostrate Towns and Palaces they pass,
(Now covered over with Weeds, and hid in Grass)
Breathing Revenge; whilst Anger and Disdain
Fire every Breast, and boil in every Vein:
Here shattered Walls, like broken Rocks, from far
Rise up in hideous Views, the Guilt of War,
Whilst here the Vine over Hills of Ruin climbs,
Industrious to conceal great Bourbon's Crimes.
At length the Fame of England's Hero drew
Eugenio to the glorious Interview;
Great Souls by Instinct to each other turn,
Demand Alliance, and in Friendship burn;
A sudden Friendship, while with stretched out Rays
They meet each other, mingling Blaze with Blaze.
Polished in Courts, and hardened in the Field,
Renowned for Conquest, and in Council skilled,
Their Courage dwells not in a troubled Flood
Of mounting Spirits, and fermenting Blood;
Lodged in the Soul, with Virtue overruled,
Inflamed by Reason, and by Reason cooled,
In Hours of Peace content to be unknown,
And only in the Field of Battle shown:
To Souls like these, in mutual Friendship joined,
Heaven dares entrust the Cause of Human kind.
Brittania's graceful Sons appear in Arms,
Her Harras'd Troops the Hero's Presence warms,
Whilst the high Hills and Rivers all around
With thundering Peals of British Shouts resound:
Doubling their Speed they March with fresh Delight,
Eager for Glory, and require the Fight.
So the stanch Hound the trembling Deer pursues,
And smells his Footsteps in the tainted Dews,
The tedious Track unrav'ling by degrees:
But when the Scent comes warm in every Breeze,
Fired at the near Approach, he shoots away
On his full Stretch, and bears upon his Prey.
The March concludes, the various Realms are past,
The Immortal Schellenberg appears at last:
Like Hills the aspiring Ramparts rise on high,
Like Valleys at their Feet the Trenches lie,
Batt'ries on Batt'ries guard each fatal Pass,
Threatening Destruction; Rows of hollow Brass,
Tube behind Tube, the dreadful Entrance keep,
Whilst in their Wombs Ten Thousand Thunders sleep:
Great CHURCHILL owns, charmed with the glorious sight,
His March o'er-paid by such a promised Fight.
The Western Sun now shot a feeble Ray,
And faintly scattered the Remains of Day,
Evening approached, but oh what Hosts of Foes
Were never to behold that Evening close!
Thick'ning their Ranks, and wedged in firm Array,
The close compacted Brittons win their Way;
In vain the Cannon their thronged War defaced
With Tracks of Death, and laid the Battle waste,
Still pressing forward to the Fight, they broke
Through Flames of Sulphur, and a Night of Smoke,
'Till slaughtered Legions fill the Trench below,
And bear their fierce Avengers to the Foe.
High on the Works the mingling Hosts engage,
The Battle kindled into Tenfold Rage
With Showers of Bullets and with Storms of Fire
Burns in full Fury, Heaps on Heaps expire,
Whole Nations trampled into Dirt, and bruised,
In one promiscuous Carnage lie confused.
How many generous Brittons meet their Doom,
New to the Field, and Heroes in the Bloom!
The Illustrious Youths, that left their Native Shore
To March where Brittons never marched before,
(O Fatal Love of Fame! O Glorious Heat
Only Destructive to the Brave and Great!)
After such Toils overcome, such Dangers past,
Stretched on Bavarian Ramparts breathe their last.
But hold, my Muse, may no Complaints appear,
Nor blot the Day with an ungrateful Tear:
While MARLBRO lives Britannia's Stars dispense,
A friendly Light, and shine in Innocence.
Plunging through Seas of Blood his fiery Steed
Where ever his Friends retire, or Foes succeed;
Those he supports, these drives to sudden Flight,
And turns the various Fortune of the Fight.
Forbear, Great Man, Renowned in Arms, forbear
To brave the thickest Terrors of the War,
Nor hazard thus, confused in Crowds of Foes,
Britannia's Safety, and the World's Repose;
Let Nations anxious for thy Life abate
This Scorn of Danger, and Contempt of Fate:
Thou liv'st not for thy self; thy QUEEN demands
Conquest and Peace from thy Victorious Hands;
Kingdoms and Empires in thy Fortune join,
And Europe's Destiny depends on Thine.
At length the long-disputed Pass they gain,
By crowded Armies fortified in vain;
The War breaks in, the fierce Bavarians yield,
And see their Camp with British Legions filled.
So Belgian Mounds bear on their shattered Sides
The Sea's whole weight, increased with swelling Tides,
But if the rushing Wave a Passage finds,
Enraged by watery Moons, and warring Winds,
The trembling Peasant sees his Country round
Covered with Tempests, and in Oceans drowned.
The few surviving Foes, dispersed in Flight,
(Refuse of Swords, and Gleanings of a Fight)
In every russling Wind the Victor hear,
And MARLBRO'S Form in every Shadow fear,
'Till the dark Cope of Night with kind Embrace
Befriends the Rout, and covers their Disgrace.
To Donnawert, with unresisted Force,
The gay Victorious Army bends its Course;
The Growth of Meadows, and the Pride of Fields,
Whatever Spoils Bavaria's Summer yields,
(The Danube's great Increase) Britannia shares,
The Food of Armies, and Support of Wars:
With Magazines of Death, destructive Balls,
And Cannons doomed to batter Landau's Walls,
The Victor finds each hidden Cavern stored,
And turns their Fury on their Guilty Lord.
Deluded Prince! how is thy Greatness crossed,
And all the gaudy Dream of Empire lost,
That proudly set thee on a fancied Throne,
And made Imaginary Realms thy own!
Thy Troops, that now behind the Danube join,
Shall shortly seek for Shelter from the Rhine,
Nor find it there: Surrounded with Alarms,
Thou hop'est the Assistance of the Gallic Arms;
The Gallic Arms in Safety shall advance,
And crowd thy Standards with the Power of France,
While to console thy Doom, the aspiring Gaul
Shares thy Destruction, and adorns thy Fall.
Unbounded Courage and Compassion joined,
Temp'ring each other in the Victor's Mind,
Alternately proclaim him Good and Great,
And make the Hero and the Man complete.
Long did he strive th'obdurate Foe to gain
By proffered Grace, but long he strove in vain,
'Till fired at length he thinks it vain to spare
His rising Wrath, and gives a Loose to War.
In Vengeance roused the Soldier fills his Hand
With Sword and Fire, and ravages the Land,
A Thousand Villages to Ashes turns,
In crackling Flames a Thousand Harvests burns,
To the thick Woods the woolly Flocks retreat,
And mixed with bellowing Herds confusedly bleat;
Their trembling Lords the common Shade partake,
And Cries of Infants sound in every Brake:
The listening Soldier fixed in Sorrow stands,
Loath to Obey his Leader's just Commands;
The Leader grieves, by generous Pity swayed,
To see his just Commands so well obeyed.
But now the Trumpet terrible from far
In shriller Clangors animates the War,
Confed'rate Drums in fuller Consort beat,
And ecchoing Hills the loud Alarm repeat:
Gallia's proud Standards, to Bavaria's joined,
Unfurl their gilded Lillies in the Wind,
The daring Prince his blasted Hopes renews,
And while the thick embattled Host he views
Stretched out in deep Array, and dreadful Length,
His Heart dilates, and glories in his Strength.
The fatal Day its mighty Course began
That the grieved World had long desired in vain:
States that their New Captivity bemoaned,
Armies of Martyrs that in Exile groaned,
Sighs from the Depth of gloomy Dungeons heard,
And Prayers in Bitterness of Soul preferred,
Europe's loud Cries, that Providence assailed,
And ANNA'S Ardent Vows at length prevailed;
The Day was come when Heaven designed to show
His Care and Conduct of the World below.
Behold in awful March and dread Array
The long Extended Squadrons shape their Way!
Death, in approaching terrible, imparts
An anxious Horror to the Bravest Hearts,
Yet do their beating Breasts demand the Strife,
And Thirst of Glory quells the Love of Life;
The British Souls low Images disclaim,
The Heat of Vengeance and Desire of Fame
O'er-look the Foe, advantaged by his Post,
Lessen his Numbers, and Contract his Host:
Though Fens and Floods possessed the middle Space,
That unprovoked they would have feared to pass,
Nor Fens nor Floods can stop Britannia's Bands,
When Her proud Foe ranged on their Borders stands.
But O, my Muse, what Numbers will thou find
To sing the furious Troops in Battle joined!
Methinks I hear the Drum's tumultuous Sound
The Victor's Shouts and Dying Groans confound,
The dreadful Burst of Cannon rend the Skies,
And all the Thunder of the Battle rise.
'Twas then Great MARLBRO'S mighty Soul was proved,
That, in the Shock of Charging Hosts unmoved,
Amidst Confusion, Horror, and Despair,
Examined all the Dreadful Scenes of War;
In peaceful Thought the Field of Death surveyed,
To fainting Squadrons sent the timely Aid,
Inspired repulsed Battalions to engage,
And taught the doubtful Battle where to rage.
So when an Angel by Divine Command
With rising Tempests shakes a guilty Land,
Such as of late over pale Britannia past,
Calm and Serene he drives the furious Blast;
And, pleased the Almighty's Orders to perform,
Rides in the Whirlwind, and directs the Storm.
But see the haughty Houshold-Troops advance!
The Dread of Europe, and the Pride of France.
The War's whole Art each private Soldier knows,
And with a Gen'ral's Love of Conquest glows;
Proudly He Marches on, and void of Fear
Laughs at the shaking of the British Spear;
Vain Insolence! with Native Freedom brave
The meanest Briton scorns the highest Slave,
Contempt and Fury fire their Souls by turns,
Each Nation's Glory in each Warrior burns,
Each fights, as in his Arm the important Day
And all the Fate of his great Monarch lay:
A Thousand glorious Actions, that might claim
Triumphant Laurels, and Immortal Fame,
Confused in Crowds of glorious Actions lie,
And Troops of Heroes undistinguished die.
O Dormer, how can I behold thy Fate,
And not the Wonders of thy Youth relate!
How can I see the Gay, the Brave, the Young,
Fall in the Cloud of War, and lie unsung!
In Joys of Conquest he resigns his Breath,
And, filled with England's Glory, smiles in Death.
The Rout begins, the Gallic Squadrons run,
And rush in Crowds to meet the Fate they shun,
Thousands of fiery Steeds with Wounds transfixed
Floating in Gore, with their drowned Masters mixed,
Midst Heaps of broken Spears and Standards lie,
And in the Danube's bloody Whirl-pools die.
Troops of bold Youths, born on the distant Soan,
Or sounding Borders of the Rapid Rhone,
Or where the Sein her flowery Fields divides,
Or where the Loire through winding Vineyards glides;
In Heaps the Rolling Billows sweep away,
And into Scythian Seas their bloated Corpse convey.
From Bleinheim's Towers the Gaul, with wild Affright,
Beholds the various Havoc of the Fight;
His waving Banners, that so often had stood
Planted in Fields of Death, and Streams of Blood,
So used the guarded Enemy to reach,
And rise Triumphant in the Fatal Breach,
Or pierce the broken Foe's remotest Lines,
The hardy Veteran with Tears resigns.
Unfortunate Tallard! Oh who can name
The Pangs of Rage, of Sorrow, and of Shame,
That with mixed Tumult in thy Bosom swelled!
When first thou saw thy Bravest Troops repelled,
Thine Only Son pierced with a Deadly Wound,
Choked in his Blood, and gasping on the Ground,
Thy self in Bondage by the Victor kept!
The Chief, the Father, and the Captive wept.
An English Muse is touched with generous Woe,
And in the unhappy Man forgets the Foe.
Greatly Distressed! thy loud Complaints forbear,
Blame not the Turns of Fate, and Chance of War;
Give thy Brave Foes their Due, nor blush to own,
The fatal Field by such great Leaders won,
The Field whence famed Eugenio bore away
Only the Second Honors of the Day.
With Floods of Gore that from the Vanquished fell
The Marshes stagnate, and the Rivers swell.
Mountains of Slain lie heaped upon the Ground,
Or 'midst the Roarings of the Danube drowned;
A Captive Host the Conqueror detains
In painful Bondage, and inglorious Chains;
Even those who 'scape the Fetters and the Sword,
Nor seek the Fortunes of a happier Lord,
Their raging King dishonours, to complete
MARLBRO'S Great Work, and finish the Defeat.
From Memminghen's high Domes, and Ausburg's Walls,
The distant Battle drives the insulting Gauls,
Freed by the Terror of the Victor's Name
The rescued States his great Protection claim;
Whilst Ulme the Approach of her Deliv'rer waits,
And longs to open her obsequious Gates.
The Hero's Breast still swells with great Designs,
In every Thought the towering Genius shines:
If to the Foe his dreadful Course he bends,
Over the wide Continent his March extends;
If Sieges in his laboring Thoughts are formed,
Camps are assaulted, and an Army stormed;
If to the Fight his active Soul is bent,
The Fate of Europe turns on its Event.
What distant Land, what Region can afford
An Action worthy his Victorious Sword;
Where will he next the flying Gaul defeat,
To make the Series of his Toils complete?
Where the swollen Rhine rushing with all its Force
Divides the Hostile Nations in its Course,
While Each contracts its Bounds, or wider grows,
Enlarged or straightened as the River flows,
On Gallia's Side a mighty Bulwark stands,
That all the wide extended Plain commands;
Twice, since the War was kindled, has it tried
The Victor's rage, and twice has changed its Side;
As often whole Armies, with the Prize o'erjoy'd,
Have the long Summer on its Walls employed.
Hither our mighty Chief his Arms directs,
Hence future Triumphs from the War expects;
And, though the Dog Star had its Course begun,
Carries his Arms still nearer to the Sun:
Fixed on the glorious Action, He forgets
The Change of Seasons, and Increase of Heats:
No Toils are painful that can Danger show,
No Climes unlovely that contain a Foe.
The roving Gaul, to his own Bounds restrained,
Learns to Encamp within his Native Land,
But soon as the Victorious Host he spies,
From Hill to Hill, from Stream to Stream he flies:
Such dire Impressions in his Heart remain
Of MARLBRO'S Sword, and HOCKSTET'S fatal Plain:
In vain Britannia's mighty Chief besets
Their shady Coverts, and obscure Retreats;
They fly the Conqueror's approaching Fame,
That bears the Force of Armies in his Name.
Austria's Young Monarch, whose Imperial Sway
Sceptres and Thrones are destined to obey,
Whose boasted Ancestry so high extends
That in the Pagan Gods his Lineage ends,
Comes from a-far, in Gratitude to own
The great Supporter of his Father's Throne:
What Tides of Glory to his Bosom ran,
Clasped in the Embraces of the God-like Man?
How were his Eyes with pleasing Wonder fixed
To see such Fire with so much Sweetness mixed,
Such easy Greatness, such a graceful Port,
So turned and finished for the Camp or Court!
Achilles thus was formed with every Grace,
And Nireus shone but in the second Place;
Thus the great Father of Almighty Rome
(His Features flusht with an Immortal Bloom
That Cytherea's fragrant Breath bestowed)
In all the Charms of his bright Mother glowed.
The Royal Youth by MARLBRO'S Presence charmed,
Taught by his Counsels, by his Actions warmed,
On Landau with redoubled Fury falls,
Discharges all his Thunder on its Walls,
Over Mines and Caves of Death provokes the Eight,
And learns to Conquer in the Hero's sight.
The British Chief, for mighty Toils renowned,
Increased in Titles, and with Conquests crowned,
To Belgian Coasts his tedious March renews,
And the long Windings of the Rhine pursues,
Clearing its Borders from Usurping Foes,
And blessed by rescued Nations as he goes.
Treves fears no more, freed from its dire Alarms,
And Traerbach feels the Terror of his Arms,
Seated on Rocks her proud Foundations shake,
While MARLBRO presses to the dire Attack,
Plants all his Batt'ries, bids his Cannon roar,
And shows how Landau might have fallen before.
Scared at his near Approach, Great Louis fears
Vengeance reserved for his declining Years,
Forgets his Thirst of Universal Sway,
And scarce can teach his Subjects to Obey;
His Arms he finds on vain Attempts employed,
The Ambitions Projects of his Race destroyed,
The Work of Ages sunk in One Campaign,
And Lives of Millions sacrificed in vain.
Such are the Effects of ANNA's Royal Cares:
By Her, Britannia, great in Foreign Wars,
Ranges through Nations, wheresoe'er disjoined,
Without the wonted Aid of Sea and Wind.
By Her the unfettered Ister's States are free,
And taste the Sweets of English Liberty.
But who can tell the Joys of those that lie
Within the constant Influence of Her Eye!
Whilst in diffusive Showers Her Bounties fall
Like Heaven's Indulgence, and descend on All,
Secure the Happy, succor the Distressed,
Make every Subject Glad, and a whole People Blessed.
Thus would I fain Britannia's Wars rehearse,
In the smooth Records of a faithful Verse;
That, if such Numbers can over Time prevail,
May tell Posterity the wondrous Tale.
When Actions, Unadorned, are faint and weak,
Cities and Countries must be taught to speak;
Gods may descend in Factions from the Skies,
And Rivers from their Oozy Beds arise;
Fiction may deck the Truth with spurious Rays,
And round the Hero cast a borrowed Blaze.
MARLBRO'S Exploits appear divinely bright,
And proudly shine in their own Native Light;
Raised of themselves, their genuin Charms they boast,
And those who Paint 'em truest Praise 'em most.
FINIS.
Books Printed for Jacob Tonson at Gray's Inn Gate.
THE Works of the late Famous Mr. John Dryden, in Four Volumes in Folio;
Containing all his Comedies, Tragedies and Operas, with his Original Poems and
Translations. The Satyrs of Decimas Junius Juvenalis, Translated into Engish
Verse. By Mr. Dryden, and several other Eminent Hands; together with the Satyrs
of Aulus Perseus Flaccus, made English by Mr. Dryden, with Explanatory Notes at
the end of each Satyr: To which is prefixed a Discourse concerning the Original
and Progress of Satyr, Dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles Earl of
Dorset, etc. By Mr. Dryden. The Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley, consisting of
those which were formerly Printed, and those which he designed for the Press;
now Published out of the Author's Original Copies. To this Edition are added
the Catter of Coalman Street, and several Commendatory Copies of Verses on the
Author, by Persons of Honor. The Ninth Edition. A Letter to Monsieur Boileau
Depreaux; occasioned by the Victory at Blenheim. The Third and Fourth Volumes
of the Roman History, being a Continuation of Mr. Echard's Roman History, with
his Recommendatory Preface. Memoirs of the Court of France and City of Paris;
Containing the Intrigues of their Court, and the Characters of the Ministers of
State, and other Officers, together with the Occurrences of the Town. In Two
Parts. Translated from the French. A Hymn to the Light of the World. With a
short Description of the Cartons of Raphael Urbin, in the Gallery at
Hampton Court. Double Dealer, Love for Love, Mourning Bride, and Way of the
World; all Written by Mr. Congreve. The Christian Hero, an Argument proving
that no Principles but those of Religion are sufficient to make a Great Man.
The Second Edition; to which is added, an Argument, proving that true Greatness
of Mind can be maintained by none but Christian Principles. The Funeral, or
Grief A-la-mode, a Comedy; as it is Acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane,
by Her Majesty's Servants. Both Written by Captain Steel. Tamerlane, Fair
Penitent, and the Biter; all Written by Mr. Row. The False Friend, a Comedy,
as it is Acted at the Theater Royal, by Her Majesty's Servants. A General
Ecclesiastical History from the Nativity of our Blessed Savior to the first
Establishment of Christianity by Human Laws, under the Emperor Constantine the
Great; containing the Space of about 313 Years: With so much of the Jewish and
Roman History as is necessary and convenient to illustrate the Work. To which
is added, A large Chronological Table of all the Roman and Ecclesiastical
Affairs, included in the same Period of Time. By Lawrence Echard, A. M.
Prebendary of Lincoln, and Chaplain to the Right Reverend James, Lord Bishop of
that Diocese. Several Orations of Demosthenes, to encourage the Athenians to
oppose the Exorbitant Power of Philip of Macedon. Englished from the Greek by
several Hands. To which is prefixed the Historical Preface of Monsieur
Tourreil. Tully's Five Books de Finibus; or, concerning the last Object of
Desire and Aversion. Done into English by S. P. Gent. Revised and compared with
the Original, with a Recommendatory Preface; by Jeremy Collier, M. A. Together
with an Apology for the Philosophical Writings of Cicero, in a Letter to the
Translator: By Henry Dodwell.

