THE SIXTH EPISTLE OF THE FIRST BOOK OF HORACE

By Mr. POPE.

DUBLIN: Printed by and for J. Jones in Clarendon-Sreet, opposite to
Coppinger's- Lane, 1738. (Price 2 d.)

Q. HORATII FLACCI EPIST. VI. LIB. I. AD NUMICIUM.
NIL Admirari, prope res est una, Numici!
Solaque, quae possit facere and servare beatum.
2 Hunc Solemn, and Stellas, and decedentia certis
Tempora momentis, sunt qui 3 formidine nulla
Imbuti, spectent. --
-- 4 Quid censes munera Terrae?
Quid Maris, extermos Arabas 5 ditantis, and Indos?
Ludicra quid, 6 plausus, and amici dona Quiritis,
Quo spectanda modo, 7 quo sensu credis, and ore?
8 Qui timet his adversa, fere miratur eodem
Quo cupiens pacto; pavor est utrique molestus;
Improvisa simul species exterret utrumque.
9 Gaudeat, an doleat, cupiat, metuatne, quid ad rem?
Si, quicquid vidit melius, pejusve sua spe,
Defixis oculis, animoque and corpore torpet?
10 Insani sapiens nomen ferat, aequus iniqui,
Ultra quam satis est, virtutem si petat ipsam.
11 I nunc, argen um and marmor 12 vetus, aeraque and arts
Suspice; cum gemmis 13 Tyrios mirare colores:
Gaude, quod spectant oculi te mill loquentem:
Gnavus 15 mane forum, and vespertinus pete tectum:
16 Ne plus frumenti dotalibus emetat agris
Mucius. Indignum, quod sit pejoribus ortus!
17 Hic tibi sit potius, quam tu mirabilis illi?
18 Quicquid sub terra est, in apricum proferet AEtas,
Defodiet, condetque nitentia. 19 Quum been notum
Porticus Agrippae, and via te conspexerit Appi,
Ire tamen restat Numa 20 duo devenit and Ancus.
21 Si latus, aut renes morbo tententur acuto,
Quaere fugam morbi --
-- 22 Vis recte vivere? quis non?
Si Virtus hoc una potest dare, fortis omissis
Hoc age deliciis --
-- 23 Virtutem verba putas, ut
Lucum ligna? 24 cave ne portus occupet alter,
Ne Cybiratica, ne Bityhina negotia perdas.
25 Mill talenta rotundentur, totidem altera: porro
Tertia succedant, and quae pars quadret acervum.
Scilicet 26 Uxorem cum dote fidemque, and 27 Amicas,
Et genus and formam regina 28 Pecunia donat:
Ac been nummatum decorat Suadela, Venusque.
Mancipiis locuples, eget aeris 29 Cappadocum rex;
Ne fueris hic tu --
-- 30 Chlamydes Lucullus (ut aiunt)
Si posset centum Scenae praebere rogatus,
Qui possum tot? ait: tamen and quaeram, and quot habebs
Mittam. Post paulo scribit, sibi millia quinque
Esse domi chlamydum: partem, vel tolleret omnes.
31 Exilis domus est, ubi non and multa supersunt,
Et dominum fallunt, and prosunt furibus. 32 Ergo,
Si res sola potest facere and servare beatum,
Hoc primus repetas opus, hoc postremus omittas.
33 Si Fortunatum species and gratia praestat,
34 Mercemur servum, qui dictet nomina, laevum
Qui fodiat latus, and cogat trans pondera dextram
Porrigere, 36 Hic multum in Fabia valet, ille Velina:
Cuilibet hic fasces dabit, eripietque curule
Cui volet importunus ebur. 37 Frater, Pater, add:
Ut cuique est aetas, ita quemque 38 facetus adopta.
Si, 39 been qui caenat, been vivit; "lucet, eamus
" Quo ducit gula: piscemur, venemur:" ut 40 olim
Gargilius, qui mane plagas, venabula, servos,
Differtum transire forum populumque jubebat,
Unus ut e multis populo spectante referret
Emptum mulus aprum --
-- 41 Crudi, tumidique lavemur,
Quid deccat, quid non, obliti: Cerite cera
Digni, 42 remigium vitiosum Ithacensis Ulyssei,
Cui potior 43 patria fuit interdicta voluptas.
44 Si (Mimnermus uti censet) sine amore, jocisque,
Nil est jucundum; vivas in amore, jocisque.
45 Vive, vale! si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti: si non, his utere mecum.
FINIS.
THE SIXTH EPISTLE OF THE FIRST BOOK OF HORACE.
" NOT to Admire, is all the Art I know,
" To make men happy, and to keep them so.
[Plain Truth, dear MURRAY, need no flowers of speech,
So take it in the very words of Creech.]
2 This Vault of Air, this congregated Ball,
Self-centred Sun, and Stars that rise and fall,
There are, my Friend! whose philosophic eyes
Look through, and trust the Ruler with his Skies,
To him commit the hour, the day, the year,
And view 3 this dreadful All without a fear.
Admire we then what 4 Earth's low entrails hold,
Arabian shores, or Indian seas infold?
All the mad trade of 5 Fools and Slaves for Gold?
Or 6 Popularity, or Stars and Strings?
The Mob's applauses, or the gifts of King's?
Say with what 7 eyes we ought at Courts to gaze,
And pay the Great our homage of Amaze?
If weak the 8 pleasure that from these can spring,
The fear to want them is as weak a thing:
Whether we dread, or whether we desire,
In either case, believe me, we admire;
Whether we 9 joy or grieve, the same the curse,
Surpised at better, or surpised at worse.
Thus good, or bad, to one extreme betray
The unbalanc'd Mind, and snatch the Man away;
For 10 Virtue's self may too much Zeal be had:
The worst of Madmen is a Saint run mad.
11 Go then, and if you can, admire the state
Of beaming diamonds, and reflected plate;
Procure a Taste to double the surprise,
And gaze on 12 Parian Charms with learned eyes:
Be struck with bright 13 Brocade, or Tyrian Dye,
Our Birthday Nobles splendid Livery:
If not so pleased, at 14 Council Board rejoice,
To see their Judgments hang upon thy Voice;
From 15 morn to night, at Senate, Rolls, and Hall,
Plead much, read more, dine late, or not at all.
But wherefore all this labor, all this strife?
For 16 Fame, for Riches, for a noble Wife?
Shall 17 One whom Nature, Learning, Birth conspired
To form, not to admire, but be admired,
Sigh, while his Chloe, blind to Wit and Worth,
Weds the rich Dullness of some Son of earth?
Yet 18 Time ennobles, or degrades each Line;
It brightened CRAGS'S, and may darken thine:
And what is Fame? the Meanest have their day,
The Greatest can but blaze, and pass away,
Graced as thou art, 19 with all the Power of Words,
So known, so honored, at the House of Lords;
Conspicuous Scene! another yet is nigh,
(More silent far) where Kings and Poets lie;
Where MURRAY (long enough his Country's pride).
Shall be no more than TULLY, or than HYDE!
21 Racked with Sciatics, martyred with the Stone,
Will any mortal let himself alone?
Rather than so, see Ward invited over,
And desperate Misery lays hold on Dover.
The case is easier in the Mind's disease;
There, all Men may be cured, whenever they please.
Would ye be 22 blessed? despise low Joys, low Gains;
Disdain whatever CORNBURY disdains;
Be Virtuous, and be happy for your pains.
23 But art thou one, whom new opinions sway,
One, who believes as Tindal leads the way,
Who Virtue and a Church alike disowns,
Thinks that but words, and this but brick and stones?
Fly 24 then, on all the wings of wild desire!
Admire whatever the maddest can admire.
Is wealth thy passion? Hence! from Pole to Pole,
Where winds can carry, or where waves can roll,
For Indian spices, for Peruvian gold,
Prevent the greedy, and outbid the bold:
25 Advance thy golden Mountain to the skies;
On the broad base of fifty thousand rise,
Add one round hundred, and (if that is not fair)
Add fifty more, and bring it to a square.
For, mark the advantage; just so many score
Will gain a 26 Wife with half as many more,
Procure her beauty, make that beauty chaste,
And then such 27 Friends -- as cannot fail to last.
A 28 Man of wealth is dubbed a Man of worth,
Venus shall give him Form, and Anstis Birth.
(Believe me, many a 29 German Prince is worse,
Who proud of Pedigree, is poor of Purse)
His Wealth brave 30 Timon gloriously confounds;
Asked for a great, he gives a hundred pounds;
Or if three Ladies like a luckless Play,
Takes the whole House upon the Poet's day.
31 Now, in such exigencies not to need,
Upon my word, you must be rich indeed;
A noble superfluity it craves,
Not for your self, but for your Fools and Knaves;
Something, which for your Honor they may cheat,
And which it much becomes you to forget.
32 If Wealth alone then make and keep us blessed,
Still, still be getting, never, never rest.
33 But if to Power and Place your Passion lie,
If in the Pomp of Life consist the Joy:
Then 34 hire a Slave, or (if you will, a Lord)
To do the Honors, and to give the Word;
Tell at your Levee, as the Crowds approach,
To whom 35 to nod, whom take into your Coach,
Whom honor with your hand: to make remarks,
Who 36 rules in Cornwall, or who rules in Berks;
" This may be troublesome, is near the Chair;
" That makes three Members, This can choose a May'r."
Instructed thus, you bow, embrace, protest,
Adopt him 37 Son, or Cozen at the least,
Then turn about, and 38 laugh at your own Jest.
Or if our life be one continued Treat,
If 39 to live well means nothing but to eat;
Up, up! cries Gluttony, it is break of day,
Go drive the Deer, and drag the finny-prey;
With hounds and horns go hunt an Appetite --
So 40 Russel did, but could not eat at night,
Called happy Dog! the Beggar at his door,
And envied Thirst and Hunger to the Poor.
Or shall we 41 every Decency confound,
Through Taverns, Stews, and Bagnio's take our round,
Go dine with Charters, in each Vice outdo
42 K^'s lewd Cargo, or Ty^y's Crew,
From Latian Sirens, French Circaean Feasts,
Return well traveled and transformed to Beasts,
Or for a Titled Punk, or Foreign Flame,
Renounce our 43 Country, and degrade our Name?
If, after all, we must with 44 Wilmot own,
The Cordial Drop of Life is Love alone,
And Swift cry wisely, "Vive la Bagatelle!"
The Man that love and laughs, must sure do well.
45 Adieu -- if this advice appear the worst,
Even take the Counsel which I gave you first:
Or better Precepts if you can impart,
Why do, I Will follow them with all my heart.
FINIS.

