THE HISTORY OF David's Troubles: OR, HUMAN FRAILTY DELINEATED.

A SACRED POEM.

THE HISTORY OF David's Troubles: OR, HUMAN FRAILTY DELINEATED.

A SACRED POEM.

HONOR and Shame from no Condition rise;
Act well your Part, there all the Honor lies.
Fortune in Men has some small Difference made,
One flaunts in Rags, one flutters in Brocade.
The Cobbler apron'd, and the Parson gown'd,
The Friar hooded, and the Monarch crowned.
"What differ more (you cry) than Crown and Cowl?"
I Will tell you, Friend: A Wise Man and a Fool.
You Will find, if once the Monarch acts the Monk,
Or, Cobler-like, the Parson will be drunk,
Worth makes the Man, and want of it the Fellow;
The rest is all but Leather or Prunella.
POPE's Fourth Epistle. -- Delirant Reges, plectuntur Achivi. Hor. OXFORD;
Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, near Eastgate, for SACKVILLE PARKER, opposite
Queen's- College, 1741.

(Price One Shilling.)

Imprimatur

T. LEIGH, Vice-Can. OXON.
Mart. 11. 1740.
ERRATA.
PAGE 1. for Pleasure how great, read, How fleeting's Joy. Page 8. for lost a
Scepter, read, gained a Scepter.
THE HISTORY OF David's Troubles: A POEM.
I SING the Causes of a Troubled Reign,
Pleasure how great, how permanent is Pain;
Reason unthron'd, rebellious Passion's Sway,
The fatal Produce of a Lustful Day:
The ANOINTED HEAD how vicious Joys expose,
A Soul in Anguish, and a King in Woes.
LIGHT Spots on Ermin are conspicuous shown,
And doubly glare the Follies of a Throne.
How then Thy Crimes, O DAVID! shall we scan?
Thou greatest Monarch! Thou most God-like Man!
Or how the Frailty of our Frame confess,
When GOD's distinguished Favorites thus transgress?
THE Sun adown the Steep of Heaven had rolled,
And fringed the purple Clouds with Skirts of Gold,
When shunning Grandeur, and the Noise of State,
On the High Turrets of the Royal Seat,
DAVID the Sweets of deep Rebellion sought,
Indulging all the Luxury of Thought.
ON Sion's Mount the Cedar-Fabrick stood,
The ruined Honors of the Tyrian Wood.
Hence stretched his Eye around his large Domain,
And much he joy'd him in his ample Reign;
Pleased could the Present with the Past compare,
The Regal Glories with the Rural Care:
The Rural Care fair Bethlem's Hill renewed,
Which gently rising in the South he viewed.
Life's Steps from that distinguished Day could trace,
When, though the youngest of the Sons of Jesse,
He first was destined by the Sacred Oil
To splendid Cares, and Eminence of Toil.
HOW did He once the Bear and Lion slay,
While yet a Swain, to save the fleecy Prey!
At Elah how a Beardless Stripling dare
The grim gigantick Terror of the War!
Harsh whiz'd the Sling, and with a thundering Sound
He fell enormous over a Length of Ground.
AND now resolved He, as new Scenes he chose,
How still new Labors, and new Dangers rose.
To Envy doomed a Sacrifice to fall,
How twice he 'scap'd the vengeful Hand of Saul;
And how he foiled the proud Goliah's Arms,
To merit Merab's falsely promised Charms.
HE next the Wonders of his Sword admired,
When gayly bold, by Michal's Beauty fired,
Two Hundred Foreskins of the Foe he paid;
A double Dow'ry for the Royal Maid!
The Royal Maid the daring Youth approved,
Met her new Lord, and unreserv'd She loved.
NOR yet was the relentless Father won
By the True Subject, or the Duteous Son.
The thirsted Blood still sought he to attain
By Fraud, by Force; but Fraud and Force were vain.
The faithful Michal bad her Spouse depart,
Mourned him as Sick with all the Woman's Art,
But through a Window secretly conveyed,
To seek at Ramah Holy Samuel's Aid. --
THENCE fled He, the Devoted Life to save,
Now to Adullam, now Engeddi's Cave,
To Paran's Desert, or the Ziphites Wood:
To Woods, to Caves, to Deserts, SAUL pursued.
TRUSTING a Foe before a Father's Wrath,
He sought Protection in the Land of Gath.
Through Nob He thither past, a fatal Guest,
GOLIAH'S Sword and hallowed Bread the Priest
Bounteous supplied; but for the well-meant Aid
The Lives of fourscore Priests to Saul were paid.
AT Gath Kind AKISH gave him Zicklag's Town,
And well the Hero merited the Boon,
Till SAUL at Gilboa fell, and by his Side
The Prince, the other Half of DAVID, died.
Much He the Father mourned, but more the Son,
He lost a Scepter, but the Friend was gone,
AND now what Wars he waged, what Labors bore,
Ever Israel's Crown at Ease the Monarch wore,
Employed his Thoughts; while Ishbosheth in vain
Labored a Lineal Title to maintain.
Murdered he fell, who ill aspired to rule,
A Traitor's Victim, and a Party's Tool!
The hated Crime the Murd'rers Lives atone,
And David mounts the uncontested Throne.
AMAZING Toils! but now the Toils were over,
And banished Sorrow should return no more.
United Israel gloried in his Reign,
And Heaven his Throne had promised to sustain;
Had destined to a long Successive Race,
Distinguished Glory, and peculiar Grace.
SION he sees, by his Victorious Hand,
The Seat of Worship, and of Empire stand.
The Philistines and Amleck dread his Sword,
And vanquished EDOM owns him as her Lord.
MOAB'S proud Sons a forced Submission bring,
And SYRIA mourns in Blood the Rashness of her King.
Before his Arms the Strength of Ammon falls,
And haughty Hanan trembles in his Walls,
Repents the Insult that his Pride returned,
The Friend provoked, and proffered Kindness scorned.
FEARED by his Foes, by his Allies caressed,
Loved by his GOD, and by his People blessed;
Remained there ought to fear? Or had there been
A Happier Prince among the Sons of Men?
UNHAPPILY secure! Untimely vain!
Sincerer Ills, and heavier Griefs remain.
That Hour, that Ease Thou boasts, shall hurt Thee more
Than all the Injuries in Fortune's Power.
A Frontier Town which crowded Forces shield,
Dares thus the gleamy Squadrons of the Field;
Secure in Arms on the High Walls they shine,
While the Foes labor in the secret Mine,
Till passed the gloomy Vaults they rise to Air,
Horribly dreadful in the proudest Square.
NEVER felt his Soul the sad Effects of Sin,
For all was pure, and all was calm within.
Tumultuous Passion, Lust, Deceit, Despair,
And black Remorse had never harbored there.
Naught feared He from Himself, nor understood
David was yet by David unsubdu'd.
Now was the Hour ill-fated he must know
That vicious Pleasures terminate in Woe.
URIAH's Garden near the Palace laid,
Where twining Trees a private Arbor made:
Yet from aloft the piercing Eye might trace
With Ease the Secrets of the dark Recess.
Hither a Rivulet was taught to glide,
Whose constant Store a Marble Bath supplied:
And here to bathe, about the Setting-Sun,
The Lovely Bathsheba retired alone.
Unconscious of a Witness She displayed
Luxuriant Beauty in the fraudful Shade,
Surveyed each Charm that could Uriah move,
And wandered over the Mystery of Love.
Her comely Limbs the curling Stream embraced,
And flowed, but Limpid flowed, around her Waste.
To the King's View her Snowy Charms were bare,
He saw Her naked, and he owned her Fair.
Fair! -- She was wondrous Fair! --
A Lot too great for any Subject's Bliss!
Oh, She was HEAVEN, -- and oh, that She were His!
NOW through his Soul an Earnest Wish there fled
Of furtive Joys, and an Adult'rous Bed;
The Hands-breadth Cloud from whence the blackning Storm
Arose to wreck his Peace, and all his Joys deform.
NOR Rest, nor Ease, the intruding Thought affords,
Till He reveals the Secret to his LORDS.
The Lords officious, with a Courtly Care,
Discharge the Message, and address the Fair.
In moving Terms the King's Desires conveyed,
With too much Ease were those Desires obeyed.
Soft Love invites, and proud Ambition warms,
Weak Woman yields, and meets the Monarch's Arms.
WHILE These in Love the flying Hours employ,
Revel secure, and give a Loose to Joy:
Laugh at the Ignorance of the injured Spouse,
The violated Bed, and cancelled Vows,
At Rabbah's Siege Uriah sought Applause,
Lavishly valiant in his Country's Cause;
Till the sad Wanton's News the King alarms,
That She was pregnant by the Royal Arms.
Now must He be to the false Bed beguiled,
The imagined Father of the spurious Child.
For this dispatched a feigned Express to bring
He leaves the Camp, attends the Lustful King.
Who wanted not (Credulity to force)
Artful Reception, and prepared Discourse.
Inquired the Monarch, with designed Address,
The Generals Welfare, and the War's Success.
Curious He seemed each Circumstance to know,
The Site, the Strength, the Number of the Foe.
Received the Answers with majestic Pride,
Forced a Kind Look, and with a Smile replied.
WELL have Thou satisfied our Royal Care,
Sure of our Favor to Thy House repair.
Indulge the Pleasures of the Court awhile,
A short Delay shall give Thee back to Toil.
Let the rough Labors of the Warrior cease,
And taste till then soft Love, and joyous Ease.
THESE I adjourn to Peace, the CHIEF replied,
Ill suit such Pleasures with a Martial Mind.
The Feast luxurious, and the flowing Bowl,
Unstring the Sinews, and debase the Soul.
SAY, shall Thy Soldier the fond Wife possess,
And melt inglorious in the soft Caress?
Or press the downy Bed in Silk enclosed,
While JUDAH sees Her Ark in Tents exposed?
And sheathed in Arms the Youths of Israel dare
The generous Hardships of the toilsome War?
May HEAVEN so bless Thee as I disapprove
This dull Inaction, and unmanly Love!
TO Him the King -- Enough is given to Fame,
At least a Night Domestic Sweets may claim.
Till Morrow's Dawn Thy purposed Have delay,
And take Thy Journey with returning Day.
HE said, -- resolved the Mirthful Feast to prove,
If ought might fire Him to the Joys of Love.
At his own Table caused the CHIEF to dine,
And the rich Goblet flowed with generous Wine.
In vain the Feast was served, the Goblet flowed,
And all his Arts the wily King bestowed.
Stretched on the lonely Couch the Night he sped,
Nor sought the Pleasures of the Nuptial Bed,
He slept; -- but Sleep the Royal Eyelids fled.
Uriah's Death the treacherous King designed,
And the black Thought deep labored in his Mind.
He rose, the rash Resolve to JOAB wrote,
Beneath whose Care His Hosts at Rabbah fought,
To place Him where the surest Danger lay,
In the sharp Conflict of the Doubtful Day.
Strict He enjoined, till by the Foes beset,
Then to retire, and leave Him to his Fate.
The Royal Signet closed the dire Command,
And safe consigned it to Uriah's Hand.
All heedless of the Murderous Charge he held,
Early the Hero hasted to the Field.
Took his last Orders with a joyous Mind,
And rushed impatient to the Post assigned.
He charged impetuous, till he saw, too late,
The Foes surrounding, and the Friends retreat.
Yet dear resolved the abandoned Life to sell,
Greatly he fought, as Loyally he fell;
And blessed, with the expiring Gasp of Life,
The ungrateful Sovereign, and the faithless Wife.
THE Monarch heard the News with Artful Care,
He blamed the Sword unknowing how to spare,
And undiscerning Chance of wasteful War.
But now avowed his Flame (the Husband dead)
And took the Widow to the Royal Bed.
A Son She bore, and for a transient Time,
Inly he joy'd at the successful Crime.
ABSURD Mankind! when in the Ways of Ill,
We for our Reason substitute our Will,
Fondly secure, and indolently gay,
In the smooth Calm of flattering Vice we play,
Till over our Heads the Thunder bursting loud
Echoes tremendous, and proclaims the GOD.
THUS David found his Sanguine Hopes recede,
And all the gaudy Dream of Pleasure fled;
When NATHAN came, a venerable Sage,
In the grave Majesty of Hoary Age.
Awful his Gesture, and his Words sincere,
Nor knew He ought to flatter, or to fear.
He bore his GOD'S Commission in his Look,
Hailed the vain King, -- and thus the Prophet spoke.
PLAINTIVE I come of Arbitrary Ill,
The sad Encroachment of the Lawless Will.
May Israel's King attend what I relate,
And say, what Vengeance meets a Crime so great?
WITHIN Thy Realm a Man there dwelt of late,
Blessed with the Plenty of a vast Estate.
So large his Herds, that the increasing Breed
Black'ned the Vales, and lowed in every Mead;
And Flocks so numerous were around him spread,
That scarce He knew the Hills on which they fed.
In the near Cottage lived a Laboring Hind,
Of scanty Fortune, but an Easy Mind.
Nor Sorrow He, nor Envy knew, though poor:
A Lamb was all his Joy, and all his Store.
This Darling Partner of his Board and Bed,
With Care he nursed, with fond Indulgence fed.
Bred with his Children, as a Child it fared,
Loved with a Parent's tenderest Regard.
Mean while it chanced that to the Neighboring Dome,
An unexpected Visitant was come:
The Lordly Master, for his Friend's Repast,
Nor from the Flock, nor Herd, selects the Feast.
His own he spared: the Little Favorite Ewe,
The Bosom-Comfort of the Lab'rer slew,
Feasting remorseless on a Neighbor's Woe.
SCARCE to the finished Tale the King suppressed
The rising Fury of the Royal Breast;
Incontinent He gave the incensed Reply: --
As the LORD lives the Man shall surely die!
The fourfold Value of the Lamb returned,
For Force injurious, and for Pity scorned.
THE Seer, stern Anger frowning on his Brow,
Replied; -- The Man, whom Thou condemn'st, art THOU.
Even David thus has sinned: -- and now prepare,
The Sentence of an Angry GOD to hear.
BY me He cites Thy Folly, and Thy Pride,
His Goodness slighted, and his Power defied.
Even Thee, O King! who durst that Power disdain,
Raised by my Favor from an abject Swain.
I gave Thee Grace, I gave Thee Strength in War,
And made Thy Safety my peculiar Care.
Lavishly bountiful I gave Thee All,
The Wealth, the Wives, the Diadem of SAUL.
Peace through Thy Land, and smiling Plenty flowed;
Foes spoke Thee Great, while Subjects spoke Thee Good.
These Blessings, why could Judah's King destroy,
For the short Transports of a guilty Joy?
Bethink, O King! for what have Thou resigned,
Thy Peace, thy sweet Serenity of Mind;
And Raptures which the Virtuous Soul bestowed,
Conscious of Worth, and conversant with GOD?
For the wild Cravings of the vicious Will,
And false Appearance of a specious Ill,
Pursued with Labor, purchased with Deceit,
Enjoyed with Shame, and finished with Regret.
Nor end the Evils of the Crime therein,
Lust's but the Threshold to the Gates of Sin.
This well Thou know; for Thou have found it led
To the Invasion of the Nuptial Bed,
The base Deception of the fraudful Word,
And the Friend murdered by the Hostile Sword.
For This, the insatiate Sword with Endless Rage
Shall haunt Thine House, and persecute Thine Age.
For This, Thy Wives estranged from David's Arms,
Shall to Thy Neighbor's Bed transfer their Charms;
Nor furtive shall, like Thine, their Joys be hid,
The Noontide SUN shall view the flagrant Deed.
ISRAEL the Justice of her GOD shall know,
Who makes the offending Crime the Offender's Woe.
WHAT wild Amazement seized the Monarch's Breast,
When Vice appeared in all her Shame confessed,
When now no more the glossy Varnish shone;
The wretched Mariner conceives alone
Who far has sailed, and at his wished Return
Has, through the Errors of a misty Morn,
With eager Joy imagined Land pursued:
But when the Splendour of the Sun renewed,
Has madly mourned the dear Delusion lost,
And the Ship bulging on the Rocky Coast.
HE wept his Folly, and his Crime he owned.
Thy Death remitted, and Thy Crime atoned,
Thy GOD declares, the Prophet said; the LORD
Slow to avenge, as righteous to reward.
Yet since by This Thou did his Name expose
To the rude License of opprobrious Foes;
Since Pleas for Vice the Libertine may bring,
From this Excess of Judah's Favorite King;
Die shall the Child of the Adult'rous Womb,
Fixed is his Fate, and unrevers'd the Doom.
THUS spoke the Seer; nor farther would disclose
The destined Series of the Monarch's Woes.
Though his Prophetic Soul in Time's dark Law
The Scene of Future Miseries foresaw.
The Royal Offspring what black Crimes should stain,
A Sister ravished, and a Brother slain.
Rash Amnon's Death by Absalom decreed,
For beauteous Tamar's violated Bed,
And DAVID grieving at the impious Deed.
How He the Slain and Fugitive should mourn,
Until the faithless Absalom return:
Return! accursed Ingratitude to show,
And plunge him farther in the Depth of Woe:
How forced over Jordan's Stream the Sire should shun
The impious Arms of the Rebellious Son;
Yet in the Anguish of a Father sad,
With Ashes sprinkled, and with Sackcloth clad,
Should grieve the Conquest that his Death must cost,
And all the Rebel in the Son be lost.
FARTHER, He saw him destined to sustain
A deeper Anguish, and a keener Pain;
When summoned by the unrelenting Seer
To the sad Choice of Famine, Plague, or War.
How each dire Shaft from the Almighty's Bow
Should pierce his Soul with the severest Woe,
While gasping he surveys, on every Side,
The guiltless Thousands for the Monarch's Pride.
OPPRESSED with Grief, He saw, his Hoary Age
By Adonijah's Plot, and factious Rage.
And even in Death transmitted with his Crown
Invidious Vengeance on his Favorite Son.
THESE He foresaw, yet wisely these suppressed
Safe in the close Recesses of his Breast.
For HEAVEN in Pity to our State conceals
From Human View the Course of Future Ills.
Reluctant else would wretched Man essay
The Toilsome Journey of the Thorny Way.
Inly the Fortunes of the King he mourned,
Restrained the rising Grief, and Home returned.
While David in the expiring Child beheld
The sad Prediction of the Seer fulfilled.
Apart in Bitterness of Soul He sat,
And his Repentance, as his Crime, was great.
Let us, by his EXAMPLE warned, beware
Of tempting Vice, and shun the fatal Snare.
Or, by the Frailty of our Passions led,
Atone with Sorrow for the loathed Misdeed.
On each Offense a sad Remembrance cast,
And mend the FUTURE, as we mourn the PAST.
FINIS.

