THE DRUMMER; OR, THE HAUNTED HOUSE. A COMEDY. As it is Acted at the
Theater Royal in Drury Lane, BY His MAJESTY's Servants.

-- Falsis terroribus implet
Ut Magus --
Hor. LONDON: Printed for Jacob Tonson at Shakespeare's- Head, over against
Katharine-Street in the Strand. MDCCXV



THE PREFACE.
HAving recommended this Play to the Town, and delivered the Copy of it to the
Bookseller, I think my self obliged to give some Account of it.

It had been some Years in the Hands of the Author, and falling under my
Perusal, I thought so well of it that I persuaded him to make a few Additions
and Alterations to it, and let it appear upon the Stage. I own I was very
highly pleased with it, and liked it the better, for the want of those studied
Similes and Repartees, which we, who have writ before him, have thrown into our
Plays, to indulge and gain upon a false Taste that has prevailed for many Years
in the British Theater. I believe the Author would have fallen into this Way a
little more than he has, had he, before the writing of it, been often present
at Theatrical Representations, and observed the Effect that such Ornaments
generally have upon the Town. I was confirmed in my Thoughts of the Play, by
the Opinion of better Judges to whom it was Communicated, who observed that the
Scenes were written very much after Moliere's Manner, and that an easy and
natural Vein of Humor ran through the whole.

I do not question but the Reader will discover this, and see many Beauties
that escape the Audience; the Touches being too delicate for every Taste in a
Popular Assembly. My Brother-Sharers were of Opinion, at the first reading of
it, that it was like a Picture in which the Strokes were not strong enough to
appear with Advantage at a Distance. As it is not in the common way of Writing,
the Approbation was at first Doubtful, but has risen every time it has been
Acted, and has given an Opportunity in several of its Parts for as just and
good Action as I ever saw on the Stage.

The Reader will consider that I speak here as the Patentee, for which Reason I
forbear being more particular in the Character of this Play, least I should
appear like one, who cries up the Wares of his own Shop to draw in Customers.

Richard Steel.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. Wilks. IN this Grave Age, when Comedies are few,
We crave your Patronage for one that is New;
Though 'twere poor Stuff, yet bid the Author fair,
And let the Scarceness recommend the Ware.
Long have your Ears been filled with Tragic Parts,
Blood and Blank-Verse have hardened all your Hearts;
If ever you smile, it is at some Party-Stroaks,
Roundheads and Wooden-shooes are standing Jokes;
The same Conceit gives Claps and Hisses Birth,
You're grown such Politicians in your Mirth!
For once we try (though it is, I own, unsafe)
To please you All, and make both Parties laugh.
Our Author, anxious for his Fame to Night,
And bashful in his First Attempt to write,
Lies cautiously obscure and unreveal'd,
Like Ancient Actors in a Masque concealed.
Cen^^re, when no Man knows who writes the Play,
Were much good Malice merely thrown away.
The mighty Critics will not blast, for Shame,
A raw young Thing, who dares not tell his Name:
Good-natured Judges will the unknown defend,
And fear to blame, least they should hurt a Friend:
Each Wit may praise it, for his own dear Sake,
And hint He writ it, if the Thing should take.
But, if you're rough, and use him like a Dog,
Depend upon it -- He Will remain Incog.
If you should hiss, he swears He Will hiss as high,
And, like a Culprit, join the Hue-and-Cry.
If Cruel Men are still averse to spare
These Scenes, they fly for Refuge to the Fair.
Though with a Ghost our Comedy be heightened,
Ladies upon my Word you shall not be frightened;
O, it is a Ghost that scorns to be uncivil,
A well-spread, lusty, Jointure-hunting Devil;
An Amorous Ghost, that is faithful, fond and true,
Made up of Flesh and Blood -- as much as you.
Then every Evening come in Flocks, undaunted;
We never think this House is too much Haunted.

Dramatis Personae.
Sir George Truman, Mr. Wilks. Tinsel, Mr. Cibber. Fantome the Drummer, Mr.
Mills. Vellum, Sir George Truman's Steward, Mr. Johnson. Butler, Mr.
P^^ket^man. Coachman, Mr. Miller. Gardener, Mr. Norris. Lady Truman, Mrs.
Oldfield. Abigal, Mrs. Saunders.
THE DRUMMER; OR, THE HAUNTED-HOUSE.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A Great Hall. Enter the Butler, Coachman, and Gardener. But. THERE came
another Coach to Town last Night, that brought a Gentleman to enquire about
this strange Noise, we hear in the House. This Spirit will bring a power of
Custom to the George -- If so be he continues his Pranks, I design to sell a
Pot of Ale, and set up the Sign of the Drum.


Coach. I Will give Madam warning, that is flat -- I Have always lived in Sober
Families. I Will not disparage my self to be a Servant in a House that is haunted.


Guard. I Will even marry Nell, and rent a bit of Ground of my own, if both of you
leave Madam; not but that Madam's a very good Woman -- if Mrs. Abigal did not
spoil her -- come, here is her Health.


But. It Is a very hard thing to be a Butler in a House, that is disturbed. He
made such a Racket in the Cellar last Night, that I Am afraid he will sower all
the Beer in my Barrels.


Coach. Why then, John, we ought to take it off as fast as we can. Here Is to
you -- He rattled so loud under the Tiles last Night, that I verily thought the
House would have fallen over our Heads. I durst not go up into the Cock-Loft
this Morning, if I had not got one of the Maids to go along with me.


Guard. I thought I heard him in one of my Bed-Posts -- I marvel, John, how he
gets into the House when all the Gates are shut.


But. Why look ye Peter, your Spirit will creep you into an Augre-Hole: --
he will whisk ye through a Keyhole, without so much as justling against one of
the Wards.


Coach. Poor Madam is mainly frighted that is certain, and verily believes it is
my Master that was killed in the last Campaign.


But. Out of all manner of Question, Robin, it is Sir George. Mrs. Abigal is of
Opinion it can be none but his Honor; he always loved the Wars, and you know
was mightily pleased from a Child with the Music of a Drum.


Guard. I wonder his Body was never found after the Battle.


But. Found! Why, ye Fool, is not his Body here about the House? Do thou
think he can beat his Drum without Hands and Arms?


Coach. It Is Master as sure as I stand here alive, and I verily believe I saw
him last Night in the Town-Close.


Guard. Ay! how did he appear?


Coach. Like a White-Horse.


But. Pho, Robin, I tell ye he has never appeared yet but in the Shape of the
Sound of a Drum,


Coach. This makes one almost afraid of one's own Shadow. As I was walking from
the Stable the other Night without my Lanthorn, I fell across a Beam, that lay
in my way, and Faith my Heart was in my Mouth -- I thought I had stumbled over
a Spirit.


But. Thou might as well have stumbled over a Straw; why, a Spirit is such a
little little Thing, that I have heard a Man, who was a great Scholar, say,
that he will dance ye a Lancashire Horn-Pipe upon the point of a Needle -- As I
sat in the Pantry last Night counting my Spoons, the Candle methought burnt
blue, and the spay'd Bitch looked as if she saw something.


Coach. Ay poor Cur, she is almost frightened out of her Wits.


Guard. Ay I warrant ye, she hears him many a time and often when we don't.


But. My Lady must have him Laid, that is certain, whatever it cost her.


Guard. I fancy, when one goes to Market, one might hear of some body that can
make a Spell.


Coach. Why may not the Parson of our Parish lay him?


But. No, no, no, our Parson cannot lay him.


Coach. Why not he as well as another Man?


But. Why, ye Fool, he is not qualified -- He has not taken the Oaths.


Guard. Why, do you think John, that the Spirit would take the Law of him? --
faith, I could tell you one way to drive him off.


Coach. How Is that?


Guard. I Will tell you immediately [drinks] -- I fancy Mrs. Abigal might Scold
him out of the House.


Coach. Ay, she has a Tongue that would drown his Drum, if any thing could.


But. Pugh, this is all froth! you understand nothing of the Matter -- the next
time it makes a Noise, I tell you what ought to be done, -- I would have the
Steward speak Latin to it.


Coach. Ay that would do, if the Steward had but Courage.


Guard. There you have it -- He Is a fearful Man. If I had as much Learning as
he, and I met the Ghost, I Would tell him his own! but alack what can one of us
poor Men do with a Spirit, that can neither Write nor Read?


But. Thou art always cracking and boasting, Peter, thou do not know what
Mischief it might do thee, if such a silly Dog as thee should offer to speak to
it. For ought I know, he might flea thee alive, and make Parchment of thy Skin
to cover his Drum with.


Guard. A Fidlestick! tell not me -- I fear nothing; not I! I never did harm in
my Life, I never committed Murder.


But. I verily believe thee, keep thy Temper, Peter; after Supper we'll drink
each of us a double Mug, and then let come what will.


Guard. Why that is well said John, an honest Man that is not quite sober, has
nothing to fear -- Here Is to ye -- why how if he should come this Minute, here
would I stand. Ha! what Noise is that?


But. and Coach. Ha! where?


Guard. The Devil! the Devil! Oh no, it is Mrs. Abigal.


But. Ay faith! it is she; it is Mrs. Abigal! a good Mistake! it is Mrs. Abigal.


Enter Abigal. Ab. Here are your drunken Sots for you! Is this a time to be
guzling, when Gentry are come to the House! why don't You lay your Cloth? How
come You out of the Stables? Why are not You at work in your Garden?


Guard. Why, yonder is the fine Londoner and Madam fetching a walk together, and
me-thought they looked as if they should say they had rather have my Room than
my Company.


But. And so forsooth being all three met-together, we are doing our Endeavors
to drink this same Drummer out of our Heads.


Guard. For you must know, Mrs. Abigal, we are all of Opinion that one cannot be
a Match for him, unless one be as Drunk as a Drum.


Coach. I am resolved to give Madam Warning to hire herself another Coachman;
for I came to serve my Master, do you see, while he was alive, but do suppose
that he has no further occasion for a Coach, now he Walks.


But. Truly, Mrs. Abigal, I must needs say, that this same Spirit is a very odd
sort of a Body, after all, to fright Madam and his old Servants at this rate.


Guard. And truly, Mrs. Abigal, I must needs say, I served my my Master
contentedly, while he was living; but I will serve no Man living (that is, no
Man that is not living) without double Wages.


Ab. Ay, it is such Cowards as you that go about with Idle Stories, to disgrace
the House, and bring so many Strangers about it; you first frighten your
selves, and then your Neighbors.


Guard. Frightened! I scorn your Words. Frightened quoth-a!


Ab. What you Sot! are you grown Pot-valiant?


Guard. Frightened with a Drum! that is a good one! it will do us no harm, I Will
answer for it. It will bring no Bloodshed along with it, take my Word. It
sounds as like a Train-Band Drum as ever I heard in my Life.


But. Prithee, Peter, don't be so presumptuous.


Ab. Well, these drunken Rogues take it as I could wish. [Aside.


Guard. I scorn to be frightened, now I am in for it; if old Dub-a-dub should come
into the Room, I would take him --


But. Prithee hold thy Tongue.


Guard. I would take him --

[The Drum beats, the Guard. endeavors to get off, and falls.
But. and Coach. Speak to it, Mrs. Abigal.


Guard. Spare my Life, and take all I have.


Coach. Make off, make off, good Butler, and let us go hide our selves in the
Cellar.

[They all run off.
Abigal Sola. Ab. So, now the Coast is clear, I may venture to call out my
Drummer. -- But first let me shut the Door, lest we be surpised. Mr. Fantome,
Mr. Fantome! [He beats.] Nay, nay, pray come out, the Enemy's fled -- I must
speak with you immediately -- don't stay to beat a Parley.

[The back Scene opens and discovers Fantome with a Drum.
Fan. Dear Mrs. Nabby, I have overheard all that has been said, and find thou
have managed this thing so well, that I could take thee in my Arms, and kiss
thee -- if my Drum did not stand in my way.


Ab. Well, OF my Conscience, you are the merriest Ghost! and the very Picture
of Sir George Truman.


Fan. There you flatter me, Mrs. Abigal; Sir George had that freshness in his
Looks, that we Men of the Town cannot come up to.


Ab. Oh! Death may have altered you, you know -- besides, you must consider,
you lost a great deal of Blood in the Battle.


Fan. Ay, that is right; let me look never so pale, this Cut cross my Forehead
will keep me in Countenance.


Ab. It Is just such a one as my Master received from a cursed French Trooper,
as my Lady's Letter informed her.


Fan. It happens luckily that this Suit of Clothes of Sir George's fits me so
well, -- I think I cannot fail hitting the Air of a Man with whom I was so long
acquainted.


Ab. You are the very Man -- I vow I almost start when I look upon you.


Fan. But what good will this do me, if I must remain invisible?


Ab. Pray what good did your being visible do you? the fair Mr. Fantome thought
no Woman could withstand him -- But when you were seen by my Lady in your
proper Person, after she had taken a full survey of you, and heard all the
pretty things you could say, she very civilly dismissed you for the sake of
this empty, noisy Creature Tinsel. She fancies you have been gone from hence
this Fortnight.


Fan. Why really I love thy Lady so well, that though I had no hopes of gaining
her for my self, I could not bear to see her given to another, especially to
such a Wretch as Tinsel.


Ab. Well, tell me truly Mr. Fantome, have not you a great Opinion of my
Fidelity to my dear Lady, that I would not suffer her to be deluded in this
manner, for less than a Thousand Pound?


Fan. Thou art always reminding me of my Promise -- thou shall have it, if thou
can bring our Project to bear; do not know that Stories of Ghosts and
Apparitions generally end in a Pot of Money?


Ab. Why, truly now Mr. Fantome, I should think my self a very bad Woman, if I
had done what I do, for a Farthing less.


Fan. Dear Abigal, how I admire thy Virtue!


Ab. No, no, Mr. Fantome, I defy the worst of my Enemies to say I love Mischief
for Mischief sake.


Fan. But is thy Lady persuaded that I am the Ghost of her deceased Husband?


Ab. I endeavor to make her believe so, and tell her every time your Drum
rattles, that her Husband is chiding her for entertaining this new Lover:


Fan. Prithee make use of all thy Art, for I am tired to Death with strowling
round this wide Old House, like a Rat behind a Wainscot.


Ab. Did not I tell you, 'twas the purest place in the World for you to play
your Tricks in; there is none of the Family that knows every Hole and Corner in
it, besides my self.


Fan. Ah Mrs. Abigal! You have had your Intrigues. --


Ab. For you must know when I was a romping young Girl I was a mighty lover of
Hide and Seek.


Fan. I believe, by this Time, I am as well acquainted with the House as your
self.


Ab. You are very much mistaken, Mr. Fantome; but no matter for that; here is
to be your Station to Night. This is the Place unknown to any one living
besides my self, since the Death of the Joyner; who, you must understand, being
a Lover of mine, contrived the Wainscot to move to and fro, in the manner that
you find it. I designed it for a Wardrobe for my Lady's cast Clothes. Oh! the
Stomachers, Stays, Pettycoats, Commodes, laced Shoes, and good things that I
have had in it! -- pray take care you don't break the Cherry-Brandy Bottle,
that stands up in the Corner.


Fan. Well Mrs. Abigal, I hire your Closet of you, but for this one Night -- a
thousand Pound you know is a very good Rent.


Ab. Well, get you gone; you have such a way with you there is no denying you
any thing!


Fan. I Am a thinking how Tinsel will stare, when he sees me come out of the
Wall: for I am resolved to make my Appearance to Night.


Ab. Get you in, get you in, my Lady's at the Door.


Fan. Pray take care she does not keep me up so late, as she did last Night; or
depend upon it I Will beat the Tattoo.


Ab. I Am undone, I Am undone -- [As he is going in] Mr. Fantome, Mr. Fantome,
you have put the thousand Pound Bond into my Brother's Hands.


Fan. Thou shall have it, I tell thee, thou shall have it.

[ Fantome goes in.
Ab. No more Words -- Vanish, Vanish.


Enter Lady. Ab. [opening the Door] Oh, dear Madam, was it you that made such a
knocking? my Heart does so beat -- I vow you have frighted me to Death -- I
thought verily it had been the Drummer.


Lady. I have been showing the Garden to Mr. Tinsel; he is most insufferably
witty upon us about this Story of the Drum.


Ab. Indeed, Madam, he is a very loose Man! I Am afraid it is he that hinders my
poor Master from resting in his Grave.


Lady. Well! an Infidel is such a Novelty in the Country, that I am resolved to
divert my self a Day or two at least with the Oddness of his Conversation.


Ab. Ah, Madam! the Drum begun to beat in the House as soon as ever this
Creature was admitted to visit you. All the while Mr. Fantome made his
Addresses to you, there was not a Mouse stirring in the Family more than used
to be --


Lady. This Baggage has some Design upon me, more than I can yet discover.
[aside] -- Mr. Fantome was always thy Favorite.


Ab. Ay, and should have been yours too, by my Consent! Mr. Fantome was not
such a slight fantastic thing as this is. -- Mr. Fantome was the best-built
Man one should see in a Summer's Day! Mr. Fantome was a Man of Honor, and
loved you! Poor Soul! how has he sighed when he has talked to me of my
hardhearted Lady -- Well! I had as lief as a thousand Pound, you would marry
Mr. Fantome!


Lady. To tell thee-truly, I loved him well enough till I found he loved me so
much. But Mr. Tinsel makes his Court to me with so much Neglect and
Indifference, and with such an agreeable Sauciness -- Not that I say I Will marry
him.


Ab. Marry him, quoth-a! no, if you should, you will be awakened sooner than
married Couples generally are -- You Will quickly have a Drum at your Window.


Lady. I Will hide my Contempt of Tinsel for once, if it be but to see what this
Wench drives at. [Aside.


Ab. Why, suppose your Husband, after this fair Warning he has given you,
should sound you an Alarm at Midnight; then open your Curtains with a Face as
pale as my Apron, and cry out with a hollow Voice, What do thou do in Bed
with this Spindle-shank'd Fellow?


Lady. Why will thou needs have it to be my Husband? he never had any reason to
be offended at me. I always loved him while he was living, and should prefer
him to any Man, were he so still. Mr. Tinsel is indeed very idle in his Talk,
but I fancy, Abigal, a discreet Woman might reform him.


Ab. That Is a likely matter indeed; did you ever hear of a Woman who had Power
over a Man, when she was his Wife, that had none while she was his Mistress!
Oh! there is nothing in the World improves a Man in his Complaisance like
Marriage!


Lady. He is indeed, at present, too familiar in his Conversation.


Ab. Familiar! Madam, in Troth he is downright rude.


Lady. But that you know, Abigal, shows he has no Dissimulation in him -- Then
he is apt to jest a little too much upon grave Subjects.


Ab. Grave Subjects! he jests upon the Church.


Lady. But that you know, Abigal, may be only to show his Wit -- Then it must
be owned, he is extremely Talkative.


Ab. Talkative do you call it! he is downright Impertinent.


Lady. But that you know, Abigal, is a Sign he has been used to good Company --
Then indeed he is very positive.


Ab. Positive! Why he contradicts you in every thing you say.


Lady. But then you know, Abigal, he has been educated at the Inns of Court.


Ab. A blessed Education indeed! it has made him forget his Catechism!


Lady. You talk as if you hated him.


Ab. You talk as if you loved him.


Lady. Hold your Tongue! here he comes.


Enter Tinsel. Tin. My dear Widow!


Ab. My dear Widow! marry come up! [Aside.


Lady. Let him alone, Abigal; so long as he does not call me My dear Wife,
there is no Harm done.


Tin. I have been most ridiculously diverted since I left you -- Your Servants
have made a Convert of my Booby. His Head is so filled with this foolish Story
of a Drummer, that I expect the Rogue will be afraid hereafter to go upon a
Message by Moonlight.


Lady. Ah, Mr. Tinsel, what a Loss of Billet-doux would that be to many a fine
Lady!


Ab. Then you still believe this to be a foolish Story? I thought my Lady had
told you, that she had heard it her self.


Tin. Ha, ha, ha!


Ab. Why, you would not persuade us out of our Senses?


Tin. Ha, ha, ha!


Ab. There Is Manners for you, Madam. [Aside.


Lady. Admirably rallied! that Laugh is unanswerable! Now I Will be hanged if you
could forbear being witty upon me, if I should tell you I heard it no longer
ago than last Night.


Tin. Fancy!


Lady. But what if I should tell you my Maid was with me!


Tin. Vapors! Vapors! Pray, my dear Widow, will you answer me one Question?
-- Had you ever this Noise of a Drum in your Head, all the while your Husband
was living?


Lady. And pray, Mr. Tinsel, will you let me ask you another Question? Do you
think we can Hear in the Country, as well as you do in Town?


Tin. Believe me, Madam, I could prescribe you a Cure for these Imaginations.


Ab. Don't tell my Lady of Imaginations, Sir, I have heard it my self.


Tin. Hark thee, Child -- art thou not an old Maid?


Ab. Sir, if I am, it is my own Fault.


Tin. Whims! Freaks! Megrims! indeed Mrs. Abigal.


Ab. Marry, Sir, by your Talk one would believe you thought every thing that
was good is a Megrim.


Lady. Why truly I don't very well understand what you meant by your Doctrine
to me in the Garden just now, that every thing we saw was made by Chance.


Ab. A very pretty Subject indeed for a Lover to divert his Mistress with.


Lady. But I suppose that was only a Taste of the Conversation you would
entertain me with after Marriage.


Tin. Oh, I shall then have time to read you such Lectures of Motions, Atoms,
and Nature -- that you shall learn to think as Freely as the best of us, and be
convinced in less than a Month, that all about us is Chance-work.


Lady. You are a very complaisant Person indeed; and so you would make your
Court to me, by persuading me that I was made by Chance!


Tin. Ha, ha, ha! well said, my Dear! why, faith, thou were a very lucky Hit,
that is certain!


Lady. Pray, Mr. Tinsel, where did you learn this odd way of talking?


Tin. Ah, Widow, it is your Country Innocence makes you think it an odd way of
talking.


Lady. Though you give no Credit to Stories of Apparitions, I hope you believe
there are such things as Spirits!


Tin. Simplicity!


Ab. I fancy you don't believe Women have Souls, do you Sir?


Tin. Foolish enough!


Lady. I vow, Mr. Tinsel, I Am afraid malicious People will say I Am in Love with
an Atheist.


Tin. Oh, my Dear, that is an old-fashioned Word -- I Am a Free-thinker, Child.


Ab. I am sure you are a Free-speaker!


Lady. Really, Mr. Tinsel, considering that you are so fine a Gentleman, I Am
amazed where you got all this Learning! I wonder it has not spoiled your
Breeding.


Tin. To tell you the Truth, I have not time to look into these dry Matters my
self, but I am convinced by four or five learned Men, whom I sometimes
over-hear at a Coffee-house I frequent, that our Forefathers were a Pack of
Asses, that the World has been in an Error for some Thousands of Years, and
that all the People upon Earth, excepting those two or three worthy Gentlemen,
are imposed upon, cheated, bubbled, abused, bamboozl'd --


Ab. Madam, how can you hear such a Profligate? he talks like the London
Prodigal.


Lady. Why really, I Am a thinking, if there be no such things as Spirits, a
Woman has no Occasion for marrying -- She need not be afraid to lie by her self.


Tin. Ah! my Dear! are Husbands good for nothing but to frighten away Spirits?
Do thou think I could not instruct thee in several other Comforts of
Matrimony?


Lady. Ah! but you are a Man of so much Knowledge, that you would always be
laughing at my Ignorance -- You learned Men are so apt to despise one!


Tin. No, Child! I Would teach thee my Principles, thou should be as wise as I
am -- in a Week's time.


Lady. Do you think your Principles would make a Woman the better Wife?


Tin. Prithee, Widow, don't be queer.


Lady. I love a gay Temper, but I would not have you rally things that are
serious.


Tin. Well enough faith! where is the Jest of rallying any thing else!


Ab. Ah, Madam, did you ever hear Mr. Fantome talk at this Rate? [Aside.


Tin. But where is this Ghost! this Son of a Whore of a Drummer? I Would fain hear
him methinks.


Ab. Pray, Madam, don't suffer him to give the Ghost such ill Language,
especially when you have Reason to believe it is my Master.


Tin. That Is well enough faith; Nab; do thou think thy Master is so
unreasonable, as to continue his Claim to his Relict after his Bones are laid?
Pray, Widow, remember the Words of your Contract, you have fulfilled them to a
Tittle -- Did not you marry Sir George to the Tune of 'till Death us do part?


Lady. I must not hear Sir George's Memory treated in so slight a Manner --
This Fellow must have been at some Pains make himself such a finished Coxcomb.
[Aside.


Tin. Give me but Possession of your Person, and I Will whirle you up to Town for
a Winter, and cure you at once. Oh! I have known many a Country Lady come to
London with frightful Stories of the Hall-House being haunted, of Fairies,
Spirits, and Witches; that by the time she had seen a Comedy, played at an
Assembly, and ambled in a Ball or two, has been so little afraid of Bugbears,
that she has ventured home in a Chair at all Hours of the Night.


Ab. Hum -- Sauce-box. [Aside.


Tin. It Is the Solitude of the Country that creates these Whimsies; there was
never such a thing as a Ghost heard of at London, except in the Playhouse --
Oh we'd pass all our time in London. It Is the Scene of Pleasure and Diversions,
where there is something to amuse you every Hour of the Day. Life's not Life in
the Country.


Lady. Well then, you have an Opportunity of showing the Sincerity of that Love
to me which you profess. You may give a Proof that you have an Affection to my
Person, not my Jointure.


Tin. Your Jointure! How can you think me such a Dog! But, Child, will not your
Jointure be the same thing in London as in the Country?


Lady. No, you're deceived! You must know it is settled on me by
Marriage-Articles, on Condition that I live in this old Mansion House, and keep
it up in Repair.


Tin. How!


Ab. That Is well put, Madam.


Tin. Why faith I have been looking upon this House, and think it is the
prettiest Habitation I ever saw in my Life.


Lady. Ay, but then this cruel Drum!


Tin. Something so venerable in it!


Lady. Ay, but the Drum!


Tin. For my part, I like this Gothic Way of Building better than any of your
new Orders -- it would be a thousand pities it should fall to Ruin.


Lady. Ay, but the Drum!


Tin. How pleasantly we two could pass our Time in this delicious Situation.
Our Lives would be a continued Dream of Happiness. Come, faith, Widow, let us go
upon the Leads, and take a View of the Country.


Lady. Ay, but the Drum! the Drum!


Tin. My Dear, take my Word for it it is all Fancy: Besides, should he drum in
thy very Bedchamber, I should only hug thee the closer.

Clasped in the Folds of Love, I Would meet my Doom,
And act my Joys, though Thunder shook the Room.

ACT II. SCENE I.
SCENE opens, and discovers Vellum in his Office, and a Letter in his Hand.
Vel. THIS Letter astonisheth; may I believe my own Eyes -- or rather my
Spectacles -- To Humphrey Vellum Esquire Steward to the Lady Truman.
Vellum,
I Doubt not but you will be glad to hear your Master is alive, and designs to
be with you in half an Hour. The Report of my being slain in the Netherlands,
has, I find, produced some Disorders in my Family. I am now at the George-Inn:
If an old Man with a gray Beard, in a black Cloak, enquires after you, give him
Admittance. He passes for a Conjurer, but is really

Your Faithful Friend, G. Truman.
P.S. Let this be a Secret, and you shall find your Account in it.




This amazeth me! and yet the Reasons why I should believe he is still living
are manifold -- First, Because this has often been the Case of other Military
Adventurers.

Secondly, Because the News of his Death was first published in Dier's Letter.

Thirdly, Because this Letter can be written by none but himself -- I know his
Hand, and manner of Spelling.

Fourthly, --


Enter Butler. But. Sir, here is a strange old Gentleman that asks for you; he
says he is a Conjurer, but he looks very suspicious; I wish he ben't a Jesuit.


Vel. Admit him immediately.


But. I wish he ben't a Jesuit; but he says he is nothing but a Conjurer.


Vel. He says right -- He is no more than a Conjurer. Bring him in and
withdraw. [Exit Butler.

And Fourthly, As I was saying, Because --


Enter Butler with Sir George. But. Sir, here is the Conjurer -- What a
devilish long Beard he has! I warrant it has been growing these hundred Years.
[Aside. Exit.


Sir G. Dear Vellum, you have received my Letter: But before we proceed lock
the Door.


Vel. It is his Voice.

[Shuts the Door.
Sir. G. In the next place help me off with this cumbersome Cloak.


Vel. It is his Shape.


Sir G. So, now lay my Beard upon the Table.


Vel. [After having looked on Sir George thro'd his Spectacles] It is his Face,
every Lineament!


Sir G. Well now, I have put off the Conjurer and the old Man, I can talk to
thee more at my Ease.


Vel. Believe me, my good Master, I am as much rejoiced to see you alive, as I
was upon the Day you were born. Your Name was, in all the Newspapers, in the
List of those that were slain.


Sir G. We have not Time to be particular. I shall only tell thee in general,
that I was taken Prisoner in the Battle, and was under close Confinement for
several Months. Upon my Release, I was resolved to surprise my Wife with the
News of my being alive. I know, Vellum, you are a Person of so much
Penetration, that I need not use any further Arguments to convince you that I
am so:


Vel. I am -- and moreover, I question not but your good Lady will likewise be
convinced of it. Her Ho -- nour is a discerning Lady.


Sir G. I Am only afraid she should be convinced of it to her Sorrow. Is not she
pleased with her imaginary Widowhood? Tell me truly, was she afflicted at the
Report of my Death?


Vel. Sorely.


Sir G. How long did her Grief last?


Vel. Longer than I have known any Widow's -- at least three Days.


Sir G. Three Days, say thou? Three whole Days? I Am afraid thou flatterest
me! -- O Woman! Woman!


Vel. Grief is twofold.


Sir G. This Blockhead is as methodical as ever -- but I know he is honest.
[Aside.


Vel. There is a real Grief, and there is a methodical Grief; she was drowned
in Tears 'till such time as the Tailor had made her Widow's Weeds -- Indeed
they became her.


Sir G. Became her! And was that her Comfort? Truly a most seasonable
Consolation!


Vel. But I must needs say she paid a due Regard to your Memory, and could not
forbear weeping when she saw Company.


Sir G. That was kind indeed! I find she grieved with a great deal of
Good-Breeding. But how comes this Gang of Lovers about her?


Vel. Her Jointure is considerable.


Sir G. How this Fool torments me! [Aside.


Vel. Her Person is amiable --


Sir G. Death! [Aside.


Vel. But her Character is unblemished. She has been as virtuous in your
Absence as a Penelope --


Sir G. And has had as many Suitors.


Vel. Several have made their Overtures.


Sir G. Several!


Vel. But she has rejected all.


Sir G. There thou reviv'st me -- But what means this Tinsel? Are his Visits
acceptable?


Vel. He is young.


Sir G. Does she listen to him?


Vel. He is gay.


Sir G. Sure she could never entertain a Thought of marrying such a Coxcomb!


Vel. He is not ill made.


Sir G. Are the Vows and Protestations that past between us come to this! I
cannot bear the Thought of it! Is Tinsel the Man designed for my worthy
Successor?


Vel. You do not consider that you have been dead these fourteen Months --


Sir. G. Was there ever such a Dog? [Aside.


Vel. And I have often heard her say, that she must never expect to find a
second Sir G. Truman -- meaning your Ho -- nour.


Sir G. I think she loved me; but I must search into this Story of the Drummer
before I discover my self to her. I have put on this Habit of a Conjurer, in
order to introduce my self. It must be your Business to recommend me as a most
profound Person, that by my great Knowledge in the curious Arts can silence the
Drummer, and dispossess the House.


Vel. I am going to lay my Accounts before my Lady, and I will endeavor to
prevail upon her Ho -- nour to admit the Trial of your Art.


Sir G. I have scarce heard of any of these Stories that did not arise from a
Love Intrigue -- Amors raise as many Ghosts as Murders.


Vel. Mrs. Abigal endeavors to persuade us, that it is your Ho -- nour who
troubles the House.


Sir G. That convinces me it is a Cheat; for I think, Vellum, I may be pretty
well assured it is not me.


Vel. I am apt to think so truly. Ha -- ha -- ha!


Sir G. Abigal had always an Ascendant over her Lady, and if there is a Trick
in this Matter, depend upon it she is at the Bottom of it. I Will be hanged if
this Ghost be not one of Abigal's Familiars.


Vel. Mrs. Abigal has of late been very mysterious.


Sir G. I fancy, Vellum, thou could worm it out of her. I know formerly
there was an Amor between you.


Vel. Mrs. Abigal has her Allurements, and she knows I have picked up a
Competency in your Ho -- nour's Service.


Sir G. If thou have, all I ask of thee in return is, that thou would
immediately renew thy Addresses to her. Coax her up. Thou have such a Silver
Tongue, Vellum, as 'twill be impossible for her to withstand. Besides, she is
so very a Woman, that she will like thee the better for giving her the Pleasure
of telling a Secret. In short, wheedle her out of it, and I shall act by the
Advice which thou give me.


Vel. Mrs. Abigal was never deaf to me, when I talked upon that Subject. I will
take an Opportunity of addressing my self to her in the most pathetick Manner.


Sir G. In the mean time lock me up in your Office, and bring me word what
Success you have -- Well, sure I am the first that ever was employed to lay
himself.


Vel. You act indeed a threefold Part in this House; you are a Ghost, a
Conjurer, and my Ho -- noured Master Sir George Truman; he, he, he! You will
pardon me for being jocular.


Sir G. O, Mr. Vellum, with all my Heart. You know I love you Men of Wit and
Humor. Be as merry as thou please, so thou do thy Business. [Mimicking
him.] You will remember, Vellum, your Commission is twofold, first to gain
Admission for me to your Lady, and secondly to get the Secret out of Abigal.


Vel. It suffices.


The Scene shuts. Enter Lady sola. Lady. Women who have been happy in a first
Marriage, are the most apt to venture upon a second. But for my part, I had a
Husband so every way suited to my Inclinations, that I must entirely forget
him, before I can like another Man. I have now been a Widow but fourteen
Months, and have had twice as many Lovers, all of 'em professed Admirers of my
Person, but passionately in love with my Jointure. I think it is a Revenge I
owe my Sex to make an Example of this worthless Tribe of Fellows, who grow
impudent, dress themselves fine, and fancy we are obliged to provide for 'em.
But of all my Captives, Mr. Tinsel is the most extraordinary in his kind. I
hope the Diversion I give my self with him is unblameable. I Am sure it is
necessary to turn my Thoughts off from the Memory of that dear Man, who has
been the greatest Happiness and Affliction of my Life. My Heart would be a Prey
to Melancholy, if I did not find these innocent Methods of relieving it. But
here comes Abigal. I must teaze the Baggage, for I find she has taken it into
her Head that I am entirely at her Disposal.


Enter Abigal. Ab Madam! Madam! yonder is Mr. Tinsel has as good as taken
Possession of your House. Marry, he says, he must have Sir George's Apartment
enlarged; for truly, says he, I hate to be straightened. Nay, he was so impudent
as to show me the Chamber where he intends to consummate, as he calls it.


Lady. Well! he is a wild Fellow.


Ab. Indeed he is a very sad Man, Madam.


Lady. He Is young, Abigal; it is a thousand Pities he should be lost; I should
be mighty glad to reform him.


Ab. Reform him! marry hang him!


Lady. Has not he a great deal of Life?


Ab. Ay, enough to make your Heart ache.


Lady. I dare say thou think him a very agreeable Fellow.


Ab. He thinks himself so, I Will answer for him.


Lady. He Is very good-natured!


Ab. He ought to be so, for he is very silly.


Lady. Do thou think he loves me?


Ab. Mr. Fantome did I am sure.


Lady. With what Raptures he talked!


Ab. Yes, but 'twas in Praise of your Jointure-House.


Lady. He has kept bad Company.


Ab. They must be very bad indeed, if they were worse than himself.


Lady. I have a strong Fancy a good Woman might reform him.


Ab. It would be a fine Experiment, if it should not succeed.


Lady. Well, Abigal, we'll talk of that another time; here comes the Steward, I
have no further Occasion for you at present.

[Exit Abigal.
Enter Vellum. Vel. Madam, is your Ho -- nour at Leisure to look into the
Accounts of the last Week? They rise very high -- Housekeeping is chargeable
in a House that is haunted.


Lady. How comes that to pass? I hope the Drum neither eats nor drinks? But
read your Account, Vellum.


Vel. [putting on and off his Spectacles in this Scene] A Hogshead and a Half
of Ale -- it is not for the Ghost's Drinking -- But your Ho -- nour's Servants
say they must have something to keep up their Courage against this strange
Noise. They tell me they expect a double Quantity of Malt in their Small-Beer
so long as the House continues in this Condition.


Lady. At this rate they will take care to be frightened all the Year round, I Will
answer for 'em. But go on.


Vel. Item, Two Sheep, and a -- Where is the Ox? -- Oh, here I have him -- and
an Ox -- Your Ho -- nour must always have a Piece of cold Beef in the House for
the Entertainment of so many Strangers, who come from all Parts to hear this
Drum. Item, Bread, ten Peck-Loaves -- They cannot eat Beef without Bread --
Item, three Barrels of Table Beer -- They must have Drink with their Meat.


Lady. Sure no Woman in England has a Steward that makes such ingenious
Comments on his Works. [Aside.


Vel. Item, to Mr. Tinsel's Servants five Bottles of Port Wine -- It was by
your Ho -- nour's Order -- Item, three Bottles of Sack for the use of Mrs.
Abigal.


Lady. I suppose that was by Your own Order.


Vel. We have been long Friends, we are your Ho -- nour's Ancient Servants,
Sack is an Innocent Cordial, and gives her Spirit to chide the Servants, when
they are tardy in their Business; he, he, he! pardon me for being Jocular.


Lady. Well, I see you will come together at last.


Vel. Item, a dozen Pound of Watch-Lights for the Use of the Servants.


Lady. For the Use of the Servants! What, are the Rogues afraid of sleeping in
the Dark? What an unfortunate Woman am I! This is such a particular Distress,
it puts me to my Wits End. Vellum, what would you advise me to do?


Vel. Madam, your Ho -- nour has two Points to consider. Imprimis, To retrench
these Extravagant Expenses, which so many Strangers bring upon you. --
Secondly, To clear the House of this Invisible Drummer


Lady. This learned Division leaves me just as wise as I was. But how must we
bring these two Points to bear?


Vel. I beseech your Ho -- nour to give me the hearing.


Lady. I do. But prithee take pity on me, and be not tedious.


Vel. I will be concise. There is a certain Person arrived this Morning, an
aged Man of a venerable Aspect, and of a long hoary Beard, that reaches down
to his Girdle. The common People call him a Wizard, a White-Witch, a Conjurer,
a Cunning-Man, a Necromancer, a --


Lady. No matter for his Titles. But what of all this?


Vel. Give me the hearing, good my Lady! he pretends to great Skill in the
Occult Sciences, and is come hither upon the rumor of this Drum. If one may
believe him, he knows the Secret of laying Ghosts, or of quieting Houses that
are haunted.


Lady. Pho, these are Idle Stories to amuse the Country People, this can do us
no good.


Vel. It can do us no harm, my Lady.


Lady. I dare say thou do not believe there is any thing in it thy self.


Vel. I cannot say, I do; there is no danger however in the Experiment. Let him
try his Skill; if it should succeed, we are rid of the Drum; if it should not,
we may tell the World that it has, and by that means at least get out of this
Expensive way of living; so that it must turn to your Advantage one way or
another.


Lady. I think you argue very rightly. But where is the Man? I would fain see
him. He must be a Curiosity.


Vel. I have already discoursed him, and he is to be with me, in my Office,
half an Hour hence. He asks nothing for his Pains, till he has done his Work;
-- no Cure, no Money.


Lady. That Circumstance, I must confess, would make one believe there is more
in his Art than one would imagine. Pray Vellum go and fetch him hither
immediately.


Vel. I am gone. He shall be forthcoming forthwith.

[Exeunt.
Enter Butler, Coachman, and Gardener. But. Rare News, my Lads, rare News!


Guard. What Is the Matter? have thou got any more Vales for us?


But. No, it is better than that.


Coach. Is there another Stranger come to the House?


But. Ay, such a Stranger as will make all our Lives easy.


Guard. What! is he a Lord?


But. A Lord! No, nothing like it, -- He Is a Conjurer.


Coach. A Conjurer! what, is he come a wooing to my Lady?


But. No, no, you Fool, he is come a purpose to lay the Spirit.


Coach. Ay marry that is good News indeed; But where is he?


But. He Is locked up with the Steward in his Office, they are laying their
Heads together very close. I fancy they are casting a Figure.


Guard. Prithee John, what sort of a Creature is a Conjurer?


But. Why he is made much as other Men are, if it was not for his long gray
Beard.


Coach. Look ye Peter, it stands with reason, that a Conjurer should have a
long gray Beard -- for did ye ever know a Witch that was not an Old Woman?


Guard. Why! I remember a Conjurer once at a Fair, that to my thinking was a
very Smock-fac'd Man, and yet he spewed out fifty Yards of green Ferret. I
fancy, John, if thou would get him into the Pantry and give him a Cup of Ale,
he would show us a few Tricks. Do think we could not persuade him to swallow one
of thy Case-Knives for his Diversion? He Will certainly bring it up again.


But. Peter! thou art such a Wise-acre! Thou do not know the Difference
between a Conjurer and a Jugler. This Man must be a very great Master of his
Trade. His Beard is at least half a Yard long, he is dressed in a strange dark
Cloak, as black as a Cole, your Conjurer always goes in Mourning.


Guard. Is he a Gentleman, had he a Sword by his Side?


But. No, no, he is too grave a Man for that, a Conjurer is as grave as a Judge,
-- but he had a long white Wand in his Hand.


Coach. You may be sure there is a good deal of Virtue in that Wand -- I fancy
it is made out of Witch Elm.


Guard. I warrant you if the Ghost appears, he will whisk ye that Wand before his
Eyes, and strike you the Drum-stick out of his Hand.


But. No; the Wand, look ye, is to make a Circle, and if he once gets the Ghost
in a Circle, then he has him -- let him get out again if he can. A Circle, you
must know, is a Conjurer's Trap.


Coach. But what will he do with him, when he has him there?


But. Why then he will overpower him with his Learning.


Guard. If he can once compass him, and get him in Lobs-Pound, he will make
nothing of him, but speak a few hard Words to him, and perhaps bind him over to
his good Behavior, for a Thousand Years.


Coach. Ay, ay, hell send him packing to his Grave again with a Flea in his
Ear, I warrant him.


But. No, no, I would advise Madam to spare no Cost. If the Conjurer be but
well paid, he will take pains upon the Ghost, and lay him, look ye, in the
Red Sea -- and then he is laid for ever.


Coach. Ay marry, that would spoil his Drum for him.


Guard. Why John, there must be a power of Spirits in that same Red Sea -- I
warrant ye they are as plenty as Fish.


Coach. Well, I wish after all that he may not be too hard for the Conjurer;
I Am afraid he will find a tough bit of work on it.


Guard. I wish the Spirit may not carry a Corner of the House off with him.


But. As for that, Peter, you may be sure that the Steward has made his Bargain
with the Cunning-Man beforehand, that he shall stand to all Costs, and Damages
-- But hark! yonder is Mrs. Abigal, we shall have her with us immediately, if we
do not get off.


Guard. Ay Lads! if we could get Mrs. Abigal well laid too -- we should lead
merry Lives.

For to a Man like me that is Stout and Bold,
A Ghost is not so dreadful as a Scold.

ACT III. SCENE I.
SCENE opens, and discovers Sir George in Vellum's Office. Sir G. I Wonder I
don't hear of Vellum yet. But I know his Wisdom will do nothing rashly. The
Fellow has been so used to Form in Business, that it has infected his whole
Conversation. But I must not find Fault with that punctual and exact Behavior
which has been of so much Use to me; my Estate is the better for it.

Enter Vellum. Well Vellum, I Am impatient to hear your Success.


Vel. First, let me lock the Door.


Sir G. Will your Lady admit me?


Vel. If this Lock is not mended soon, it will be quite spoiled.


Sir G. Prithee let the Lock alone at present, and answer me.


Vel. Delays in Business are dangerous -- I must send for the Smith next Week
-- and in the mean time will take a minute of it.


Sir G. But what says your Lady?


Vel. This Pen is naught, and wants mending -- My Lady, did you say?


Sir G. Does she admit me?


Vel. I have gained Admission for you as a Conjurer.


Sir G. That Is enough! I Will gain admission for my self as a Husband. Does she
believe there is any thing in my Art?


Vel. It is hard to know what a Woman believes.


Sir G. Did she ask no Questions about me?


Vel. Sundry. -- She desires to talk with you her self, before you enter upon
your Business.


Sir G. But when?


Vel. Immediately. This Instant.


Sir G. Pugh. What have thou been doing all this while! Why did not tell me
so? Give me my Cloak -- Have you yet met with Abigal?


Vel. I have not yet had an Opportunity of talking with her. But we have
interchanged some languishing Glances.


Sir G. Let thee alone for that Vellum, I have formerly seen thee ogle her
through thy Spectacles. Well! This is a most Venerable Cloak. After the
business of this Day is over, I Will make thee a Present of it. 'Twill become
thee mightily.


Vel. He, he, he! would you make a Conjurer of your Steward?


Sir G. Prithee don't be Jocular, I Am in haste. Help me on with my Beard.


Vel. And what will your Ho -- nour do with your cast Beard?


Sir G. Why, faith, thy Gravity wants only such a Beard to it; if thou would
wear it with the Cloak, thou would make a most complete Heathen Philosopher.
But where is my Wand?


Vel. A fine taper Stick! It is well chosen. I will keep this till you are
Sheriff of the County. It is not my custom to let any thing be lost.


Sir G. Come Vellum, lead the way. You must introduce me to your Lady. You Are
the fittest Fellow in the World to be a Master of the Ceremonies to a Conjurer.

[Exeunt
Enter Abigal crossing the Stage, Tinsel following. Tinsel. Nabby, Nabby,
whither so fast Child?


Ab. Keep your Hands to your self. I Am going to call the Steward to my Lady.


Tin. What? Goodman Two fold? I met him walking with a strange old Fellow
yonder. I suppose he belongs to the Family too. He looks very antique. He must
be some of the Furniture of this old Mansion House.


Ab. What does the Man mean? Don't think to palm me, as you do my Lady.


Tin. Prithee, Nabby, tell me one thing; What Is the reason thou art my Enemy?


Ab. Marry, because I Am a Friend to my Lady.


Tin. Do thou see any thing about me thou do not like? Come hither, Hussy,
give me a Kiss. Don't be ill-natured.


Ab. Sir, I know how to be civil. [Kisses her.] -- This Rogue will carry off my
Lady, if I don't take care. [Aside.


Tin. Thy Lips are as soft as Velvet, Abigal. I must get thee a Husband.


Ab. Ay, now you don't speak idly, I can talk to you.


Tin. I have one in my Eye for thee. Do thou love a young lusty Son of a
Whore?


Ab. Laud, how you talk!


Tin. This is a thundering Dog.


Ab. What is he?


Tin. A private Gentleman.


Ab. Ay! where does he live?


Tin. In the Horse-Guards -- But he has one Fault I must tell thee of. If thou
can bear with that, he is a Man for thy purpose.


Ab. Pray, Mr. Tinsel, what may that be?


Tin. He Is but five and twenty Years Old.


Ab. It Is no matter for his Age, if he has been well educated.


Tin. No Man better, Child; he will tie a Wigg, toss a Die, make a Pass, and
swear with such a Grace, as would make thy Heart leap to hear him.


Ab. Half these Accomplishments will do, provided he has an Estate -- Pray what
has he?


Tin. Not a Farthing.


Ab. Pax on him, what do I give him the hearing for! [Aside.


Tin. But as for that I would make it up to him.


Ab. How?


Tin. Why look ye, Child, as soon as I have married thy Lady, I design to
discard this old Prig of a Steward, and to put this honest Gentleman, I am
speaking of, into his place.


Ab. [aside.] This Fellow's a Fool -- I Will have no more to say to him. -- Hark!
my Lady's a coming!


Tin. Depend upon it, Nab, I Will remember my Promise.


Ab. Ay, and so will I too -- to your Cost. [Aside.

[Exit Abigal.
Tin. My Dear is purely fitted up with a Maid -- But I shall rid the House of
her.


Enter Lady. Lady. Oh, Mr. Tinsel, I am glad to meet you here. I am going to
give you an Entertainment, that will not be disagreeable to a Man of Wit and
Pleasure of the Town -- There may be something diverting in a Conversation
between a Conjurer, and this conceited Ass. [Aside.


Tin. She loves me to Distraction, I see that. [Aside.] -- Prithee, Widow,
explain thy self.


Lady. You must know here is a strange sort of a Man come to Town, who
undertakes to free the House from this Disturbance. The Steward believes him a
Conjurer.


Tin. Ay! thy Steward is a deep one!


Lady. He Is to be here immediately. It is indeed an odd Figure of a Man.


Tin. Oh! I warrant you he has studied the Black Art! Ha, ha, ha! Is not it an
Oxford Scholar? -- Widow, thy House is the most extraordinarily inhabited of
any Widow's this Day in Christendom. -- I think thy four chief Domestics are
-- a withered Abigal -- a superannuated Steward, -- a Ghost -- and a Conjurer.


Lady. [Mimicking Tinsel] And you would have it inhabited by a Fifth, who is a
more extraordinary Person than any of all these Four.


Tin. It Is a sure Sign a Woman loves you, when she imitates your Manner.
[aside] -- You Are very smart, my Dear. But, see! smoke the Doctor.


Enter Vellum, and Sir George in his Conjurer's Habit. Vel. I will introduce
this profound Person to your Ladyship, and then leave him with you -- Sir, this
is her Ho -- nour.


Sir G. I know it well.

[Exit Vellum. [Aside, walking in a musing Posture] That dear Woman! The Sight
of her un-mans me. I could weep for Tenderness, did not I, at the same time,
feel an Indignation rise in me, to see that Wretch with her: And yet I cannot
but smile to see her in the Company of her first and second Husband at the same
time.


Lady. Mr. Tinsel do You speak to him; you are used to the Company of Men of
Learning.


Tin. Old Gentleman, thou do not look like an Inhabitant of this World; I
suppose thou art lately come down from the Stars. Pray what News is stirring in
the Zodiac?


Sir G. News that ought to make the Heart of a Coward tremble. Mars is now
entering into the first House, and will shortly appear in all his Domal
Dignities --


Tin. Mars? Prithee Father Grey-beard explain thy self.


Sir G. The Entrance of Mars into his House, portends the Entrance of a Master
into this Family -- and that soon.


Tin. Do You hear that, Widow? The Stars have cut me out for thy Husband. This
House is to have a Master, and that soon -- Hark thee, old Gadbury, Is not Mars
very like a young Fellow called Tom Tinsel?


Sir G. Not so much as Venus is like this Lady.


Tin. A Word in your Ear, Doctor; these two Planets will be in Conjunction by
and by; I can tell you that.


Sir G. [aside, walking disturb'd] Curse on this impertinent Fop! I shall
scarce forbear discovering my self -- Madam, I am told that your House is
visited with strange Noises.


Lady. And I am told that you can quiet them. I must confess I had a Curiosity
to see the Person I had heard so much of; and, indeed, your Aspect shows that
you have had much Experience in the World. You must be a very aged Man.


Sir G. My Aspect deceives you; What do you think is my real Age?


Tin. I should guess thee within three Years of Methuselah. Prithee tell me,
Was It not thou born before the Flood?


Lady. Truly I should guess you to be in your second or third Century. I
warrant you, you have Great Grandchildren with Beards of a Foot long.


Sir G. Ha, ha, ha! If there be Truth in Man, I was but five and thirty last
August. O! the Study of the Occult Sciences makes a Man's Beard grow faster
than you would imagine.


Lady. What an Escape you have had, Mr. Tinsel, that you were not bred a
Scholar!


Tin. And so I fancy, Doctor, thou think me an illiterate Fellow, because I
have a smooth Chin?


Sir G. Hark ye, Sir, a Word in your Ear. You are a Coxcomb, by all the Rules
of Physiognomy: But let that be a Secret between you and me. [Aside to Tinsel.


Lady. Pray, Mr. Tinsel, what is it the Doctor whispers?


Tin. Only a Compliment, Child, upon two or three of my Features. It does not
become Me to repeat it.


Lady. Pray, Doctor, examine this Gentleman's Face, and tell me his Fortune.


Sir G. If I may believe the Lines of his Face, he likes it better than I do,
or -- than you do, fair Lady.


Tin. Widow, I hope now you are convinced he is a Cheat.


Lady. For my part I believe he is a Witch -- go on Doctor.


Sir G. He will be crossed in Love; and that soon.


Tin. Prithee, Doctor, tell us the Truth. Do not thou live in Moor-Fields?


Sir G. Take my Word for it, thou shall never live in my Lady Truman's
Mansion House.


Tin. Pray, old Gentleman, have thou never been plu^^'d by the Beard when thou
were saucy?


Lady. Nay Mr. Tinsel, you are angry! do you think I (...) marry a Man that
dares not have his Fortune told?


Sir G. Let him be angry -- I matter not -- He is (...) lived. He will soon die
of --


Tin. Come, come, speak out, old Hocus, he, he, he! this Fellow makes me burst
with Laughing.

[Forces a Laugh.
Sir G. He will soon die of a Fright -- or of the -- let me see your Nose -- Ay
-- it is so!


Tin. You Son of a Whore! I Will run ye through the Body. I never yet made the
Sun shine through a Conjurer --


Lady. Oh, fie. Mr. Tinsel! you will not kill an old Man?


Tin. An old Man! The Dog says he is but Five and thirty.


Lady. Oh, fie; Mr. Tinsel, I did not think you could have been so passionate; I
hate a passionate Man. Put up your Sword, or I must never see you again.


Tin. Ha, ha, ha! I was but in jest, my Dear. I had a mind to have made an
Experiment upon the Doctor's Body. I would but have drilled a little
Eyelet-hole in it, and have seen whether he had Art enough to close it up again.


Sir G. Courage is but ill shown before a Lady. But know, if ever I meet thee
again, thou shall find this Arm can wield other Weapons besides this Wand.


Tin. Ha, ha, ha!


Lady. Well, learned Sir, you are to give a Proof of your Art, not of your
Courage. Or if you will show your Courage, let it be at Nine a Clock -- for
that is the time the Noise is generally heard.


Tin. And look ye, old Gentleman, if thou do not do thy Business well, I can
tell thee by the little Skill I have, that thou will be tossed in a Blanket
before Ten. We'll do our Endeavor to send thee back to the Stars again.


Sir G. I Will go and prepare my self for the Ceremonies -- And, Lady, as you
expect they should succeed to your Wishes, treat that Fellow with the Contempt
he deserves.

[Exit Sir G.
Tin. The sauciest Dog I ever talked with in my whole Life!


Lady. Methinks he is a diverting Fellow; one may see he is no Fool.


Tin. No Fool! Ay but thou do not take him for a Con^^^^


Lady. Truly I don't know what to take him for; I am resolved to employ him
however. When a Sickness is desperate, we often try Remedies that we have no
great Faith in.


Enter Abigal. Ab. Madam, the Tea is ready in the Parlour as you ordered.


Lady. Come, Mr. Tinsel, we may there talk of this Subject more at leisure.

[Exeunt Lady and Tinsel.
Abigal sola. Sure never any Lady had such Servants as mine has! Well, if I get
this Thousand Pound, I hope to have some of my own. Let me see, I Will have a
pretty tight Girl -- just such as I was ten Years ago (I Am afraid I may say
twenty) she shall dress me and flatter me -- for I will be flattered, that is
pos! My Lady's cast Suits will serve her after I have given them the wearing.
Besides, when I am worth a Thousand Pound, I shall certainly carry off the
Steward -- Madam Vellum! -- how prettily that will sound! here, bring out Madam
Vellum's Chaise -- Nay I do not know but it may be a Chariot -- It will break
the Attorney's Wife's Heart -- for I shall take place of every Body in the
Parish but my Lady. If I have a Son, he shall be called Fantome. But see Mr.
Vellum, as I could wish. I know his Humor, and will do my utmost to gain his
Heart.


Enter Vellum with a Pint of Sack. Vel. Mrs. Abigal, don't I break in upon you
unseasonably?


Ab. Oh, No, Mr. Vellum, your Visits are always seasonable.


Vel. I have brought with me a Taste of fresh Canary, which I think is
delicious.


Ab. Pray set it down -- I have a Dram-Glass just by --

[Brings in a Rummer. I Will pledge you; my Lady's good Health.


Vel And your own with it -- sweet Mrs Abigal.


Ab. Pray, good Mr. Vellum, buy me a little Parcel of this Sack, and put it
under the Article of Tea -- I would not have my Name appear to it.


Vel. Mrs. Abigal, your Name seldom appears in my Bills -- and yet -- if you
will allow me a merry Expression -- You have been always in my Books, Mrs.
Abigal. Ha, ha, ha!


Ab. Ha, ha, ha! Mr. Vellum, you are such a dry jesting Man!


Vel. Why truly, Mrs. Abigal, I have been looking over my Papers -- and I find
you have been a long time my Debtor.


Ab. Your Debtor! For what, Mr. Vellum?


Vel. For my Heart, Mrs. Abigal -- And our Accounts will not be balanced
between us, 'till I have yours in Exchange for it. Ha, ha, ha!


Ab. Ha, ha, ha! You are the most gallant Dun, Mr. Vellum.


Vel. But I am not used to be paid by Words only, Mrs. Abigal; when will you be
out of my Debt?


Ab. Oh, Mr. Vellum, you make one blush -- My humble Service to you.


Vel. I must answer you, Mrs. Abigal, in the Country Phrase -- Your Love is
sufficient. Ha, ha, ha!


Ab. Ha, ha, ha! Well, I must own I love a merry Man!


Vel. Let me see, how long is it, Mrs. Abigal, since I first broke my Mind to
you -- It was, I think, Undecimo Gulielmi -- We have conversed together these
fifteen Years -- and yet, Mrs. Abigal, I must drink to our better Acquaintance.
He, he, he -- Mrs. Abigal, you know I am naturally jocose.


Ab. Ah, you Men love to make Sport with us silly Creatures.


Vel. Mrs. Abigal, I have a Trifle about me, which I would willingly make you a
Present of. It is indeed but a little Toy.


Ab. You are always exceedingly obliging.


Vel. It is but a little Toy -- scarce worth your Acceptance.


Ab. Pray do not keep me in Suspense; what is it, Mr. Vellum?


Vel. A Silver Thimble.


Ab. I always said Mr. Vellum was a generous Lover.


Vel. But I must put it on my self, Mrs. Abigal -- You have the prettiest Tip
of a Finger -- I must take the Freedom to salute it.


Ab. Oh fie! you make me ashamed, Mr. Vellum; how can you do so? I protest I am
in such a Confusion --

[A feigned Struggle.
Vel. This Finger is not the Finger of Idleness; it bears the honorable Scars
of the Needle -- But why are you so cruel as not to (...)?


Ab. Oh, I vow you press it so hard! pray give me my Finger again.


Vel. This Middle Finger, Mrs. Abigal, has a pretty Neighbor -- A Wedding Ring
would become it mightily -- -- He, he, he.


Ab. You're so full of your Jokes. Ay, but where must I find one for it?


Vel. I design this Thimble only as the Forerunner of it, they will set off
each other, and are -- indeed a twofold Emblem. The first will put you in mind
of being a good Huswife, and the other of being a good Wife. Ha, ha, ha!


Ab. Yes, yes, I see you laugh at me.


Vel. Indeed I am serious.


Ab. I thought you had quite forsaken me -- I am sure you cannot forget the
many repeated Vows and Promises you formerly made me.


Vel. I should as soon forget the Multiplication Table.


Ab. I have always taken your part before may Lady.


Vel. You have so, and I have Item'd it in my Memory.


Ab. For I have always looked upon your Interest as my own.


Vel. It is nothing but your Cruelty can hinder them from being so.


Ab. I must strike while the Iron's hot. [Aside.] -- Well, Mr. Vellum, there is
no refusing you, you have such a bewitching Tongue!


Vel. How? Speak that again!


Ab. Why then in plain English I love you.


Vel. I Am Overjoyed!


Ab. I must own my Passion for you,


Vel. I Am Transported!

[Catches her in his Arms.
Ab. Dear Charming Man!


Vel. Thou Sum Total of all my Happiness! I shall grow Extravagant! I cannot
forbear! -- to drink thy virtuous Inclinations in a Bumper of Sack. Your Lady
must make haste, my Duck, or we shall provide a young Steward to the Estate,
before she has an Heir to it -- prithee my Dear, does she intend to Marry Mr.
Tinsel?


Ab. Marry him! my Love, No, no! we must take care of that! there would be no
staying in the House for us if she did. That young Rake-hell would send all the
old Servants a Grazing. You and I should be discarded before the Honey Moon was
at an End.


Vel. Prithee, sweet one, does not this Drum put the Thoughts of Marriage out
of her Head?


Ab. This Drum, my Dear, if it be well managed, will be no less than a Thousand
Pound in our way.


Vel. Ay, say thou so, my Turtle?


Ab. Since we are now as good as Man and Wife -- I mean, almost as good as Man
and Wife -- I ought to conceal nothing from you.


Vel. Certainly my Dove, not from thy Yoke Fellow, thy Help-Mate, thy own Flesh
and Blood!


Ab. Hush! I hear Mr. Tinsel's Laugh, my Lady and he are a coming this way; if
you will take a turn without, I Will tell you the whole Contrivance.


Vel. Give me your Hand, Chicken.


Ab. Here take it, you have my Heart already.


Vel. We shall have much Issue.

[Exeunt.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Vellum and Butler. Vel. JOHN, I have certain Orders to give you -- and
therefore be attentive.


But. Attentive! Ay, let me alone for that. -- I suppose he means being Sober.
[Aside.


Vel. You know I have always recommended to you a Method in your Business, I
would have your Knives and Forks, your Spoons and Napkins, your Plate and
Glasses, laid in a Method.


But. Ah, Master Vellum, you are such a sweet-spoken Man, it does one's Heart
good to receive your Orders.


Vel. Method, John, makes Business easy, it banishes all Perplexity and
Confusion out of Families.


But. How he talks! I could hear him all Day.


Vel. And now John, let me know whether your Table-linnen, your Side-Board,
your Cellar, and every thing else within your Province, are properly and
methodically disposed for an Entertainment this Evening.


But. Master Vellum, they shall be ready at a quarter of an hour's Warning. But
pray Sir, is this Entertainment to be made for the Conjurer?


Vel. It is, John, for the Conjurer, and yet it is not for the Conjurer.


But. Why, look you Master Vellum, if it is for the Conjurer, the Cook-Maid
should have Orders to get him some Dishes to his Palate. Perhaps he may like a
little Brimstone in his Sauce.


Vel. This Conjurer, John, is a complicated Creature, an Amphibious Animal, a
Person of a Twofold Nature -- But he eats and drinks like other Men.


But. Marry, Master Vellum, he should eat and drink as much as two other Men,
by the Account you give of him.


Vel. Thy Conceit is not amiss, he is indeed a double Man, ha, ha, ha!


But. Ha! I understand you, He Is one of your Hermaphrodites, as they call 'em.


Vel. He is Married, and he is not Married -- He has a Beard, and he has no
Beard. He is Old, and he is Young.


But. How charmingly he talks! I fancy, Master Vellum, you could make a Riddle.
The same Man Old and Young! How do you make that out, Master Vellum?


Vel. Thou have heard of a Snake casting his Skin, and recovering his Youth.
Such is this Sage Person.


But. Nay it is no wonder a Conjurer should be like a Serpent.


Vel. When he has thrown aside the old Conjurer's Slough that hangs about him,
he will come out as fine a young Gentleman as ever was seen in this House.


But. Does he intend to sup in his Slough?


Vel. That Time will show.


But. Well, I have not a Head for these things. Indeed, Mr. Vellum, I have not
understood one Word you have said this half Hour.


Vel. I did not intend thou should -- But to our Business -- Let there be a
Table spread in the Great-Hall. Let your Pots and Glasses be washed, and in a
Readiness. Bid the Cook provide a plentiful Supper, and see that all the
Servants be in their best Liveries.


But. Ay! now I understand every Word you say. But I would rather hear you talk
a little in that the other Way.


Vel. I shall explain to thee what I have said by and by -- Bid Susan lay two
Pillows upon your Lady's Bed.


But. Two Pillows! Madam will not sleep upon 'em both! She is not a double Woman
too?


Vel. She will sleep upon neither. But hark, Mrs. Abigal, I think I hear her
chiding the Cook-Maid.


But. Then I Will away, or it will be my Turn next; She, I am sure, speaks plain
English, one may easily understand every Word She says.

[Exit Butler.
Vellum Solus. Vel. Servants are good for nothing, unless they have an Opinion
of the Person's Understanding who has the Direction of them. -- But see Mrs.
Abigal! she has a bewitching Countenance, I wish I may not be tempted to marry
her in good Earnest.


Enter Abigal Ab. Ha! Mr. Vellum.


Vel What brings my Sweet one hither?


Ab. I am coming to speak to my Friend behind the Wainscot. It is fit, Child,
he should have an Account of this Conjurer, that he may not be surpised.


Vel. That would be as much as thy thousand Pound is worth.


Ab. I Will speak low -- Walls have Ears. [Pointing at the Wainscot.


Vel. But hark you Ducklin! be sure you do not tell him that I am let into the
Secret.


Ab. That Is a good one indeed! as if I should ever tell what passes between you
and me.


Vel. No, no, my Child, that must not be; he, he, he! that must not be; he, he,
he!


Ab. You will always be waggish.


Vel. Adieu, and let me hear the result of your Conference.


Ab. How can you leave one so soon? I shall think it an Age till I see you
again.


Vel. Adieu my pretty one.


Ab. Adieu sweet Mr. Vellum.


Vel. My pretty one. -- [As he is going off.


Ab. Dear Mr. Vellum!


Vel. My pretty one!

[Exit Vellum.
Abigal Sola. Ab. I have him -- if I can but get this Thousand Pound.

[ Fantome gives three Raps upon his Drum behind the Wainscot.
Ab. Ha. Three Raps upon the Drum! the Signal Mr. Fantome and I agreed upon,
when he had a mind to speak with me.

[ Fantome raps again.
Ab. Very well, I hear you; come Fox, come out of your Hole.


Scene opens, and Fantome comes out. Ab. You may leave your Drum in the
Wardrobe, till you have Occasion for it.


Fan. Well, Mrs. Abigal, I want to hear what is a doing in the World.


Ab. You are a very inquisitive Spirit. But I must tell you, if you do not take
care of your self, you will be Laid this Evening.


Fan. I have overheard something of that Matter. But let me alone for the
Doctor -- I Will engage to give a good Account of Him. I am more in pain about
Tinsel. When a Lady's in the Case, I Am more afraid of one Fop than twenty
Conjurers.


Ab. To tell you truly, he presses his Attacks with so much Impudence, that he
has made more Progress with my Lady in two Days, than you did in two Months.


Fan. I shall attack her in another manner, if thou can but procure me
another Interview. There Is nothing makes a Lover so keen, as being kept up in
the Dark.


Ab. Pray no more of your distant Bows, your respectful Compliments -- Realy,
Mr. Fantome, you're only fit to make Love across a Tea-Table.


Fan. My dear Girl, I cannot forbear hugging thee for thy good Advice.


Ab. Ay, now I have some Hopes of you; but why don't you do so to my Lady?


Fan. Child, I always thought your Lady loved to be treated with Respect.


Ab. Believe me, Mr. Fantome, there is not so great a difference between Woman
and Woman, as you imagine. You see Tinsel has nothing but his Sauciness to
recommend him.


Fan. Tinsel is too great a Coxcomb to be capable of Love -- And let me tell
thee, Abigal, a Man, who is sincere in his Passion, makes but a very awkard
Profession of it -- But I Will mend my Manners.


Ab. Ay, or you will never gain a Widow -- Come, I must tutor you a little;
suppose me to be my Lady, and let me see how you will behave your self.


Fan. I Am afraid, Child, we have not time for such a piece of Mummery.


Ab. Oh, it will be quickly over, if you play your Part well.


Fan. Why then, dear Mrs. Ab -- I mean my Lady Truman.


Ab. Ay! but you have not saluted me.


Fan. That Is right; Faith I forgot that Circumstance. [Kisses her.] Nectar and
Ambrosia!


Ab. That Is very well --


Fan. How long must I be condemned to languish! when shall my Sufferings have
an end! My Life! my Happiness, my All is wound up in you --


Ab. Well! why don't you squeeze my Hand?


Fan. What, thus?


Ab. Thus? Ay -- Now throw your Arm about my Middle; Hug me closer. -- You are
not afraid of hurting me! Now pour forth a Volley of Rapture and Nonsense, till
you are out of Breath.


Fan. Transport and Ecstasy! where am I! -- my Life, my Bliss! -- I rage, I
burn, I bleed, I dye.


Ab. Go on, go on.


Fan. Flames and Darts -- Bear me to the gloomy Shade, Rocks and Grottoes --
Flowers, Zephyrs, and purling Streams.


Ab. Oh! Mr. Fantome, you have a Tongue would undo a Vestal! You were born for
the Ruin of our Sex.


Fan. This will do then, Abigal?


Ab. Ay, this is talking like a Lover. Though I only represent my Lady, I take a
Pleasure in hearing you. Well, of my Conscience when a Man of Sense has a
little Dash of the Coxcomb in him, no Woman can resist him. Go on at this rate,
and the thousand Pound is as good as in my Pocket.


Fan. I shall think it an Age till I have an Opportunity of putting this Lesson
in Practice.


Ab. You may do it soon, if you make good Use of your Time; Mr. Tinsel will be
here with my Lady at Eight, and at Nine the Conjurer is to take you in Hand.


Fan. Let me alone with both of them.


Ab. Well! fore-warned, fore-arm'd. Get into your Box, and I Will endeavor to
dispose every thing in your Favor.

[ Fantome goes in. Exit Abigal.
Enter Vellum. Vel. Mrs. Abigal is withdrawn. -- I was in hopes to have heard
what passed between her and her invisible Correspondent.


Enter Tinsel. Tin. Vellum! Vellum!


Vel. [aside.] Vellum! We are methinks very familiar; I am not used to be
called so by any but their Ho -- nours -- What would you, Mr. Tinsel?


Tin. Let me beg a Favor of thee, old Gentleman.


Vel. What is that, good Sir?


Tin. Prithee run and fetch me the Rent-Roll of thy Lady's Estate.


Vel. The Rent-roll?


Tin. The Rent-roll? Ay, the Rent-roll! Do not understand what that means?


Vel. Why? have you Thoughts of purchasing of it?


Tin. Thou have hit it, old Boy; that is my very Intention.


Vel. The Purchase will be considerable.


Tin. And for that reason I have bid thy Lady very high -- She is to have no
less for it than this entire Person of mine.


Vel. Is your whole Estate Personal, Mr. Tinsel -- he, he, he!


Tin. Why, you queer old Dog, you don't pretend to jest, do you? Look ye, Vellum,
if you think of being continued my Steward, you must learn to walk with your
Toes out.


Vel. [Aside.] An insolent Companion!


Tin. You Are confounded rich, I see, by that Dangling of thy Arms.


Vel. [Aside.] An ungracious Bird!


Tin. Thou shall lend me a couple of Thousand Pounds.


Vel. [Aside.] A very Profligate!


Tin. Look ye, Vellum, I intend to be kind to you -- I Will borrow some Money of
you.


Vel. I cannot but smile to consider the Disappointment this young Fellow will
meet with; I will make my self merry with him. [Aside.] And so, Mr. Tinsel, you
promise you will be a very kind Master to me? [Stifling a Laugh.


Tin. What will you give for a Life in the House you live in?


Vel. What do you think of Five Hundred Pounds? -- Ha, ha, ha!


Tin. That Is too little.


Vel. And yet it is more than I shall give you -- And I will offer you two
Reasons for it.


Tin. Prithee what are they?


Vel. First, because the Tenement is not in your Disposal; and Secondly,
because it never will be in your Disposal; and so fare you well, good Mr.
Tinsel. Ha, ha, ha! You will pardon me for being jocular.

[Exit Vellum.
Tin. This Rogue is as saucy as the Conjurer; I Will be hanged if they are not
akin.


Enter Lady. Lady. Mr. Tinsel! what, all alone? You Free-thinkers are great
Admirers of Solitude.


Tin. No faith, I have been talking with thy Steward; a very grotesque Figure
of a Fellow, the very Picture of one of our Benchers. How can you bear his
Conversation?


Lady. I keep him for my Steward, and not my Companion. He Is a sober Man.


Tin. Yes, yes, he looks like a Put -- a queer old Dog, as ever I saw in my
Life: We must turn him off, Widow. He cheats thee confoundedly, I see that.


Lady. Indeed you're mistaken, he has always had the Reputation of being a very
honest Man.


Tin. What? I suppose he goes to Church.


Lady. Goes to Church! so do you too, I hope.


Tin. I would for once, Widow, to make sure of you.


Lady. Ah, Mr. Tinsel, a Husband who would not continue to go thither, would
quickly forget the Promises he made there.


Tin. Faith very innocent and very ridiculous! Well then, I warrant thee,
Widow, thou would not for the World marry a Sabbath-breaker!


Lady. Truly they generally come to a bad End. I remember the Conjurer told
you, you were short-lived.


Tin. The Conjurer! Ha, ha, ha!


Lady. Indeed you're very witty!


Tin. Indeed you're very handsome.

[Kisses her Hand.
Lady. I wish the Fool does not love me! [Aside.


Tin. Thou art the Idol I adore. Here must I pay my Devotion -- Prithee, Widow,
have thou any Timber upon thy Estate?


Lady. The most impudent Fellow I ever met with. [Aside.


Tin. I take Notice thou have a great deal of old Plate here in the House,
Widow.


Lady. Mr. Tinsel, you are a very observing Man.


Tin. Thy large Silver Cistern would make a very good Coach, and half a Dozen
Salvers that I saw on the Side-board, might be turned into six as pretty Horses
as any that appear in the Ring.


Lady. You have a very good Fancy, Mr. Tinsel -- What pretty Transformations
you could make in my House -- But I Will see where 'twill end. [Aside.


Tin. Then I observe, Child, you have two or three Services of gilt Plate; we'd
eat always in China, my Dear.


Lady. I perceive you are an excellent Manager -- How quickly you have taken an
Inventory of my Goods!


Tin. Now hark ye, Widow, to show you the Love that I have for you --


Lady. Very well, let me hear.


Tin. You have an old-fashioned Gold Caudle-Cup, with the Figure of a Saint
upon the Lid on it.


Lady. I have, what then?


Tin. Why look ye, I Would sell the Caudle-Cup with the old Saint for as much Money
as they would fetch, which I would convert into a Diamond Buckle, and make you a
Present of it.


Lady. Oh you are generous to an Extravagance. But pray, Mr. Tinsel, don't
dispose of my Goods before you are sure of my Person. I find you have taken a
great Affection to my Movables.


Tin. My Dear, I love every thing that belongs to you.


Lady. I see you do, Sir, you need not make any Protestations upon that Subject.


Tin. Pho, pho, my Dear, we are growing Serious; and, let me tell you, that is
the very next Step to being Dull. Come, that pretty Face was never made to look
grave with.


Lady. Believe me, Sir, whatever you may think, Marriage is a serious Subject.


Tin. For that very Reason, my Dear, let us get over it as fast as we can.


Lady. I should be very much in haste for a Husband, if I married within
fourteen Months after Sir George's Decease.


Tin. Pray, my Dear, let me ask you a Question; Do not thou think that Sir
George is as dead at present, to all Intents and Purposes, as he will be a
Twelvemonth hence?


Lady. Yes, but Decency! Mr. Tinsel --


Tin. Or do thou think thou wilt be more a Widow then, than thou art now?


Lady. The World would say I never loved my First Husband.


Tin. Ah, my Dear, they would say you loved your Second; and they would own I
deserved it, for I shall love thee most inordinately.


Lady. But what would People think?


Tin. Think! why they would think thee the Mirror of Widowhood. -- That a
Woman should live fourteen whole Months after the Decease of her Spouse,
without having engaged herself. Why, about Town, we know many a Woman of
Quality's Second Husband several Years before the Death of the First.


Lady. Ay, I know you Wits have your commonplace Jests upon us poor Widows.


Tin. I Will tell you a Story, Widow; I know a certain Lady, who considering the
Craziness of her Husband, had, in case of Mortality, engaged her self to two
young Fellows of my Acquaintance. They grew such desperate Rivals for her,
while her Husband was alive, that one of them pink'd the the other in a Duel. But
the good Lady was no sooner a Widow, but what did my Dowager do? Why faith,
being a Woman of Honor, she married a Third, to whom, it seems, she had given
her first Promise.


Lady. And this is a true Story upon your own Knowledge?


Tin. Every Tittle, as I hope to be married, or never believe Tom Tinsel.


Lady. Pray, Mr. Tinsel, do you call this talking like a Wit, or like a Rake?


Tin. Innocent enough, he, he, he! Why! where is the Difference, my Dear?


Lady. Yes, Mr. Tinsel, the only Man I ever loved in my Life, had a great deal
of the one, and nothing of the other in him.


Tin. Nay now you grow vapourish; thou wilt begin to fancy thou hear'st the Drum
by and by.


Lady. If you had been here last Night about this time, you would not have been
so merry.


Tin. About this time, say thou? Come faith, for the Humour's sake, we'll
sit down and listen.


Lady. I will, if you will promise to be serious.


Tin. Serious! never fear me, Child. Ha, ha, ha! Do not hear him?


Lady. You break your World already. Pray, Mr. Tinsel, do you laugh to show
your Wit or your Teeth?


Tin. Why, both! my Dear. -- I Am glad, however, that she has taken notice of my
Teeth. [Aside.] But you look serious, Child; I fancy thou hear'st the Drum,
do not?


Lady. Don't talk so rashly?


Tin. Why, my Dear, you could not look more frighted if you had Lucifer's
Drum-Major in your House.


Lady. Mr. Tinsel, I must desire to see you no more in it, if you do not leave
this idle way of Talking.


Tin. Child, I thought I had told you what is my Opinion of Spirits, as we were
drinking a dish of Tea but just now. -- There is no such thing I give thee my
Word.


Lady. Oh, Mr. Tinsel, your Authority must be of great weight to those that
know you.


Tin. For my part, Child, I have made my self easy in those Points.


Lady. Sure nothing was ever like this Fellow's Vanity, but his Ignorance.
[Aside.


Tin. I Will tell thee what now, Widow -- I would engage by the help of a white
Sheet and a pennyworth of Link in a dark Night, to frighten you a whole
Country Village out of their Senses, and the Vicar into the bargain. [Drum
beats.] Hark! hark! what Noise is that! Heaven defend us! this is more than
Fancy.


Lady. It beats more terrible than ever.


Tin. It Is very dreadful! What a Dog have I been to speak against my
Conscience, only to show my Parts!


Lady. It comes nearer and nearer. I wish you have not angered it by your
foolish Discourse.


Tin. Indeed, Madam, I did not speak from my Heart; I hope it will do me no
hurt, for a little harmless Raillery.


Lady. Harmless, do you call it? it beats hard by us, as if it would break
through the Wall.


Tin. What a Devil had I to do with a white Sheet?

[Scene opens, and discovers Fantome.
Tin. Mercy on us! it appears.


Lady. Oh! it is he! it is he himself, it is Sir George! it is my Husband.

[She faints.
Tin. Now would I give Ten Thousand Pound that I were in Town.

[ Fantome advances to him Drumming.
Tin. I beg Ten Thousand Pardons. I Will never talk at this rate any more.

[ Fantome still advances Drumming.
Tin. By my Soul, Sir George, I was not in earnest [falls on his knees] have
Compassion on my Youth, and consider I am but a Coxcomb -- [ Fantome points to
the Door.] But see he waves me off -- ay with all my Heart -- What a Devil had
I to do with a white Sheet?

[He steals off the Stage, mending his Pace as the Drum beats.
Fan. The Scoundrel is gone, and has left his Mistress behind him. I Am mistaken
if he makes Love in this House any more. I have now only the Conjurer to deal
with. I don't question but I shall make his Reverence scamper as fast as the
Lover. And then the Day's my own. But the Servants are coming. I must get into
my Cup-board.

[He goes in.
Enter Abigal and Servants. Ab. Oh my poor Lady! This wicked Drum has frighted
Mr. Tinsel out of his Wits, and my Lady into a Swoon. Let me bend her a little
forward. She revives. Here, carry her into the fresh Air and she will recover.
[They carry her off.] This is a little barbarous to my Lady, but it is all for
her Good: and I know her so well, that she would not be angry with me, if she
knew what I was to get by it. And if any of her Friends should blame me for it
hereafter,

I Will clap my Hand upon my Purse, and tell 'em,
'Twas for a thousand Pound and Mr. Vellum.

ACT V. SCENE I.
Enter Sir George, in his Conjurer's Habit, the Butler marching before him with
two large Candles, and the two Servants coming after him, one bringing a little
Table, and another a Chair. Butler. AN't please your Worship, Mr. Conjurer, the
Steward has given all of us Orders to do whatsoever you shall bid us, and to
pay you the same Respect, as if you were our Master.


Sir G. Thou say well.


Guard. An't please your Conjurership's Worship, shall I set the Table down here?


Sir G. Here, Peter.


Guard. Peter! -- He knows my Name by his Learning. [Aside.


Coach. I have brought you, Reverend Sir, the largest Elbow Chair in the House;
it is that the Steward sits in when he holds a Court.


Sir G: Place it there.


But. Sir, will you please to want any thing else?


Sir G. Paper, and a Pen and Ink.


But. Sir, I believe we have Paper that is fit for your Purpose! My Lady's
mourning Paper, that is black'd at the Edges -- Would you choose to write with a
Crow Quill?


Sir G. There is none better.


But. Coachman, go fetch the Paper and Standish out of the little Parlour.


Coach. [To Guard.] Peter, prithee do thou go along with me -- I Am afraid -- You
know I went with you last Night into the Garden, when the Cook-Maid wanted a
handful of Parsley.


But. Why, you don't think I Will stay with the Conjurer by my self!


Guard. Come, we'll all three go and fetch the Pen and Ink together.

[Exeunt Servants.
Sir G. solus. There Is nothing, I see, makes such strong Alliances as Fear.
These Fellows are all entered into a Confederacy against the Ghost. There must
be abundance of Business done in the Family at this rate. But here comes the
Triple-Alliance. Who could have thought these three Rogues could have found
each of 'em an Employment in fetching a Pen and Ink!


Enter Gardener with a Sheet of Paper, Coachman with a Standish, and Butler
with a Pen. Guard. Sir, there is your Paper.


Coach. Sir, there is your Standish.


But. Sir, there is your Crow-quill Pen -- I Am glad I have got rid on it. [Aside.


Guard. [Aside.] He forgets that he is to make a Circle -- Doctor, shall I help
you to a Bit of Chalk?


Sir G. It is no matter.


But. Look ye, Sir, I showed you the Spot where he is heard oftenest, if your
Worship can but ferret him out of that old Wall in the next Room --


Sir G. We shall try.


Guard. That Is right, John. His Worship must let fly all his Learning at that
old Wall.


But. Sir, if I was worthy to advise you, I would have a Bottle of good October
by me. Shall I set a Cup of old Stingo at your Elbow?


Sir G. I thank thee -- we shall do without it.


Guard. John, he seems a very good-natured Man for a Conjurer.


But. I Will take this Opportunity of enquiring after a Bit of Plate I have lost.
I fancy, whilst he is in my Lady's Pay, one may hedge in a Question or two into
the Bargain. Sir, Sir, may I beg a word in your Ear?


Sir G. What would thou?


But. Sir, I know I need not tell you, that I lost one of my Silver Spoons last
Week.


Sir G. Marked with a Swan's Neck --


But. My Lady's Crest! He knows every thing. [Aside.] How would your Worship
advise me to recover it again?


Sir G. Hum!


But. What must I do to come at it?


Sir G. Drink nothing but Small-Beer for a Fortnight --


But. Small Beer! Rot-gut!


Sir G. If thou drink'st a single Drop of Ale before fifteen Days are expired
-- it is as much -- as thy Spoon -- is worth.


But. I shall never recover it that way; I Will even buy a new one. [Aside.


Coach. Do You mind how they whisper?


Guard. I Will be hanged if he be not asking him something about Nell --


Coach. I Will take this Opportunity of putting a Question to him about poor
Dobbing: I fancy he could give me better Council than the Farrier.


But. [to Guard.] A prodigious Man! he knows every thing: Now is the time to
find out thy Pick-ax.


Guard. I have nothing to give him: Does not he expect to have his Hand crossed
with Silver?


Coach. [to Sir G.] Sir, may a Man venture to ask you a Question?


Sir G. Ask it.


Coach. I have a poor Horse in the Stable that is bewitched --


Sir G. A bay Gelding.


Coach. How could he know that? -- [Aside.


Sir G. Bought at Banbury.


Coach. Whew -- so it was of my Conscience.

[Whistles.
Sir G. Six Year old last Lammas.


Coach. To a Day. [Aside.] Now, Sir, I would know whether the poor Beast is
bewitched by Goody Crouch or Goody Fly?


Sir G. Neither.


Coach. Then it must be Goody Gurton! for she is the next oldest Woman in the
Parish.


Guard. Have thou done, Robin?


Coach. [to Guard.] He can tell thee any thing.


Guard. [to Sir G.] Sir, I would beg to take you a little further out of hearing
-- --


Sir G. Speak.


Guard. The Butler and I, Mr. Doctor, were both of us in Love at the same time
with a certain Person.


Sir G. A Woman.


Guard. How could he know that! [Aside.


Sir G. Go on.


Guard. This Woman has lately had two Children at a Birth.


Sir G. Twins.


Guard. Prodigious! where could he hear that? [Aside.


Sir G. Proceed.


Guard. Now, because I used to meet her sometimes in the Garden, she has laid
them both --


Sir G. To Thee.


Guard. What a Power of Learning he must have! he knows every thing. [Aside.


Sir G. Have thou done?


Guard. I would desire to know whether I am really Father to them both?


Sir G. Stand before me, let me survey thee round.

[Lays his Wand upon his Head, and makes him turn about.]
Coach. Look yonder, John, the silly Dog is turning about under the Conjurer's
Wand. If he has been saucy to him, we shall see him puffed off in a Whirlwind
immediately.


Sir G. Twins, do thou say? [Still turning him.


Guard. Ay, are they both mine do you think?


Sir G. Own but one of them.


Guard. Ah, but Mrs. Abigal will have me take care of them both -- she is always
for the Butler -- If my poor Master Sir George had been alive, he would have
made him go Halves with me.


Sir G. What, was Sir George a kind Master?


Guard. Was he! Ay, my Fellow Servants will bear me Witness.


Sir G. Did ye love Sir George?


But. Every Body loved him --


Coach. There was not a dry Eye in the Parish at the News of his Death --


Guard. He was the best Neighbor --


But. The kindest Husband --


Coach. The truest Friend to the Poor --


But. My good Lady took on mightily, we all thought it would have been the
Death of her -- --


Sir G. I protest these Fellows melt me! I think the time long till I am their
Master again, that I may be kind to them. [Aside.


Enter Vellum. Vel. Have you provided the Doctor every thing he has Occasion
for? if so, -- you may depart.

[Exeunt Servants.
Sir G. I can as yet see no hurt in my Wife's Behavior; but still have some
certain Pangs and Doubts, that are natural to the Heart of a fond Man. I must
take the Advantage of my Disguise to be thoroughly satisfied. It would neither
be for her Happiness, nor mine, to make my self known to her till I am so
[Aside.] Dear Vellum! I am impatient to hear some News of my Wife, how does she
after her Fright?


Vel. It is a Saying somewhere in my Lord Coke, that a Widow --


Sir G. I ask of my Wife, and thou talk to me of my Lord Coke -- prithee
tell me how she does, for I am in Pain for her.


Vel. She is pretty well recovered Mrs. Abigal has put her in good Heart; and I
have given her great hopes from your Skill.


Sir G. That I think cannot fail, since thou have got this Secret out of
Abigal! But I could not have thought my Friend Fantome would have served me
thus --


Vel. You will still fancy you are a living Man --


Sir G. That he should endeavor to Ensnare my Wife --


Vel. You have no Right in her, after your Demise Death extinguishes all
Property, -- Quoad hanc -- It is a Maxim in the Law.


Sir G. A Pox on your Learning! Well, but what is become of Tinsel?


Vel. He rushed out of the House, called for his Horse, clapped Spurs to his
sides, and was out of sight in less time, than I -- can -- tell -- ten.


Sir G. This is Whimsical enough! my Wife will have a quick Succession of
Lovers, in one Day -- Fantome has driven out Tinsel, and I shall drive out
Fantome.


Vel. Even as one Wedge drives out another -- he, he, he! you must pardon me
for being Jocular.


Sir G. Was there ever such a provoking Blockhead! but he means me well. --
Well! I must have Satisfaction of this Traitor Fantome; and cannot take a more
proper one, than by turning him out of my House, in a manner that shall throw
Shame upon him, and make him ridiculous as long as he lives. -- You must
remember, Vellum, you have abundance of Business upon your Hands, and I have
but just time to tell it you over, all I require of you is Dispatch, therefore
hear me.


Vel. There is nothing more requisite in Business than Dispatch --


Sir. G. Then hear me.


Vel. It is indeed the Life of Business --


Sir G. Hear Me then, I say.


Vel. And as one has rightly observed, the Benefit that attends it is
fourfold. First --


Sir G. There is no bearing this! Thou art a going to describe Dispatch, when
thou should be practicing it.


Vel. But your Ho -- nour will not give me the hearing --


Sir G. Thou will not give me the hearing. [Angrily.


Vel. I am still.


Sir G. In the First place, you are to lay my Wigg, Hat, and Sword ready for me
in the Closet, and one of my Scarlet Coats. You know how Abigal has described
the Ghost to you.


Vel. It shall be done.


Sir G. Then you must remember, whilst I am laying this Ghost, you are to
prepare my Wife for the Reception of her real Husband; tell her the whole
Story, and do it with all the Art you are Master of, that the Surprise may not
be too great for her.


Vel. It shall be done -- But since her Ho -- nour has seen this Apparition,
she desires to see you once more, before you encounter it.


Sir G. I shall expect her impatiently. For now I can talk to her without being
interrupted by that impertinent Rogue Tinsel. I hope thou have not told Abigal
any thing of the Secret.


Vel. Mrs. Abigal is a Woman; there are many Reasons why she should not be
acquainted with it: I shall only mention Six --


Sir G. Hush, here she comes! Oh my Heart!


Enter Lady and Abigal. Sir G. [Aside, while Vellum talks in dumb Show to
Lady.] O that loved Woman! How I long to take her in my Arms! If I find I am
still Dear to her Memory, it will be a return to Life indeed! But I must take
care of indulging this Tenderness, and put on a Behavior more suitable to my
present Character.

[Walks at a distance in a pensive Posture, waving his Wand.
Lady. [to Vellum.] This is surprising indeed! So all the Servants tell me;
They say he knows every thing that has happened in the Family.


Ab. [Aside.] A parcel of credulous Fools! They first tell him their Secrets,
and then wonder how he comes to know them.

[Exit Vellum, exchanging fond Looks with Abigal.
Lady. Learned Sir, may I have some Conversation with you, before you begin
your Ceremonies?


Sir G. Speak! But hold -- first let me feel your Pulse?


Lady. What can you learn from that?


Sir G. I have already learned a Secret from it, that will astonish you.


Lady. Pray, what is it?


Sir G. You will have a Husband within this half Hour.


Ab. [Aside.] I Am glad to hear that -- He must mean Mr. Fantome; I begin to
think there is a good deal of Truth in his Art.


Lady. Alas! I fear you mean I shall see Sir George's Apparition a second time.


Sir G. Have Courage, you shall see the Apparition no more. The Husband I
mention shall be as much alive as I am.


Ab. Mr. Fantome to be sure. [Aside.


Lady. Impossible! I loved my first too well.


Sir G. You could not love the first better than you will love the second.


Ab. [Aside.] I Will be hanged if my dear Steward has not instructed him; he
means Mr. Fantome to be sure; the Thousand Pound is our own!


Lady. Alas! you did not know Sir George.


Sir G As well as I do my self -- I saw him with you in the red Damask Room,
when he first made Love to you; your Mother left you together, under Pretense
of receiving a Visit from Mrs. Hawthorn, on her Return from London.


Lady. This is astonishing!


Sir G. You were a great Admirer of a single Life for the first half Hour; your
Refusals then grew still fainter and fainter. With what Ecstasy did Sir George
kiss your Hand, when you told him you should always follow the Advice of your
Mamma!


Lady. Every Circumstance to a Tittle!


Sir G. Then, Lady! the Wedding Night! I saw you in your white Satin
Nightgown; you would not come out of your Dressing Room, till Sir George took
you out by Force. He drew you gently by the Hand -- You struggled -- but he was
too strong for you -- You blushed, He --


Lady. Oh! stop there! go no farther! -- He knows every thing. [Aside.


Ab. Truly, Mr. Conjurer, I believe you have been a Wagg in your Youth.


Sir G. Mrs. Abigal, you know what your good Word cost Sir George, a Purse of
Broad Pieces, Mrs. Abigal --


Ab. The Devil's in him. [Aside.] Pray, Sir, since you have told so far, you
should tell my Lady that I refused to take them.


Sir G. It Is true, Child, he was forced to thrust them into your Bosom.


Ab. This Rogue will mention the Thousand Pound, if I don't take care [Aside.]
Pray, Sir, though you are a Conjurer, methinks you need not be a Blab --


Lady. Sir, since I have now no Reason to doubt of your Art, I must beseech you
to treat this Apparition gently -- It has the resemblance of my deceased
Husband, if there be any undiscovered Secret, any thing that troubles his Rest,
learn it of him.


Sir G. I must to that End be sincerely informed by you, whether your Heart be
engaged to another; Have not you received the Addresses of many Lovers since
his Death?


Lady. I have been obliged to receive more Visits, than have been agreeable.


Sir G. Was not Tinsel welcome? -- I Am afraid to hear an Answer to my own
Question. [Aside.


Lady. He was well recommended.


Sir G. Racks! [Aside.


Lady. Of a good Family.


Sir G. Tortures! [Aside.


Lady. Heir to a considerable Estate!


Sir G. Death! [Aside] And you still love him? -- I Am Distracted! [Aside.


Lady. No, I despise him. I found he had a design upon my Fortune, was Base,
Profligate, Cowardly, and every thing that could be expected from a Man of the
vilest Principles! --


Sir G. I Am Recovered.


Ab. Oh, Madam, had you seen how like a Scoundrel he looked when he left your
Ladyship in a Swoon. Where have you left my Lady? says I. In an Elbow-Chair,
Child, says he. And where are you going? says I. To Town, Child, says he: For
to tell thee truly, Child, says he, I don't care for living under the same Roof
with the Devil, says he.


Sir G. Well, Lady, I see nothing in all this, that may hinder Sir George's
Spirit from being at Rest.


La. If he knows any thing of what passes in my Heart, he cannot but be
satisfied of that Fondness which I bear to his Memory. My Sorrow for him is
always fresh when I think of him. He was the kindest, truest, tenderest --
Tears will not let me go on --


Sir G. This quite o'erpowers me -- I shall discover my self before my time.
[Aside.] -- Madam, you may now retire and leave to me my self.


Lady. Success attend you!


Abig. I wish Mr. Fantome gets well off from this old Don -- I know he will be
with him immediately.

[Exeunt Lady and Abigal.
Sir George Solus. Sir G. My Heart is now at Ease, she is the same dear Woman I
left her -- Now for my Revenge upon Fantome. -- I shall cut the Ceremonies
short -- A few Words will do his Business -- Now let me seat my self in form.
-- A good easy Chair for a Conjurer this! -- Now for a few Mathematical
Scratches -- a good lucky Scrawl, that -- faith I think it looks very
Astrological -- These two or three magical Pot-hooks about it, make it a
complete Conjurer's Scheme. [Drum beats] Ha, ha, ha, Sir, are you there? Enter
Drummer. Now must I pore upon my Paper.


Enter Fantome, beating his Drum. Sir G. Prithee don't make a Noise, I Am busy.

[ Fantome beats.
Sir G. A pretty March! prithee beat that over again.

[He beats and advances.
Sir G. [Rising] Ha! you're very perfect in the Step of a Ghost. You stalk it
Majestically.

[ Fantome advances.
Sir G. How the Rogue stares, he acts it to Admiration; I Will be hanged if he
has not been practicing this half hour in Mrs. Abigal's Wardrobe.

[ Fantome starts, gives a rap upon his Drum.
Sir G. Prithee don't play the Fool!

[ Fantome beats.
Sir G. Nay, nay, enough of this good Mr. Fantome.


Fan. [Aside.] Death! I Am discovered. This Jade Abigal has betrayed me.


Sir G. Mr. Fantome, upon the Word of an Astrologer, your Thousand Pound Bribe
will never gain my Lady Truman.


Fan. It Is plain, She has told him all. [Aside.


Sir G. Let me advise you to make off as fast as you can, or I plainly perceive
by my Art, Mr. Ghost will have his Bones broke.


Fan. [to Sir G.] Look'ye, Old Gentleman, I perceive you have learnt this
Secret from Mrs. Abigal.


Sir G. I have learned it from my Art.


Fan. Thy Art! prithee no more of that. Look ye, I know you are a Cheat as much
as I am. And if thou wilt keep my Counsel, I Will give thee ten Broad Pieces. --


Sir G. I am not Mercenary! Young Man, I scorn thy Gold.


Fan. I Will make them up Twenty. --


Sir G. Avaunt! and that quickly, or I Will raise such an Apparition, as shall --


Fan. An Apparition, Old Gentleman! you mistake your Man, I am not to be
frightened with Bugbears. --


Sir G. Let me retire but for a few Moments, and I will give thee such a Proof
of my Art --


Fan. Why, if thou have any Hocus-pocus Tricks to play, why can not do them
here?


Sir G. The raising of a Spirit, requires certain Secret Mysteries to be
performed, and Words to be muttered in private. --


Fan. Well, if I see through your Trick, will you promise to be my Friend.


Sir G. I will -- attend and tremble.

[Exit.
Fantome Solus. Fan. A very solemn old Ass! But I smoke him, -- he has a mind
to raise his Price upon me. I could not think this Slut would have used me
thus. -- I begin to grow horribly tired of my Drum, I wish I was well rid of
it. However I have got this by it, that it has driven off Tinsel for good and
all; I shall not have the Mortification to see my Mistress carried off by such a
Rival, Well, whatever happens, I must stop this Old Fellow's Mouth, I must not
be sparing in Hush-Money. But here he comes.


Enter Sir George in his own Habit. Fan. Ha! what is that! Sir George Truman!
This can be no Counterfeit. His Dress! his Shape! his Face! the very Wound of
which he died! Nay, then it is time to decamp!

[Runs off.
Sir G. Ha, ha, ha! Fare you well, good Sir George -- The Enemy has left me
Master of the Field: Here are the Marks of my Victory. This Drum will I hang up
in my great Hall as the Trophy of the Day.


Enter Abigal. Sir George stands with his Hand before his Face in a musing
Posture. Ab. Yonder he is. OF my Conscience he has driven off the Conjurer. Mr.
Fantome, Mr. Fantome! I give you Joy, I give you Joy. What do you think of your
Thousand Pounds now? Why does not the Man speak?

[Pulls him by the Sleeve.
Sir G. Ha! [Taking his Hand from his Face.


Ab. Oh! it is my Master! [Shrieks.

[Running away he catches her.
Sir G. Good Mrs. Abigal not so fast.


Ab. Are you alive, Sir? He has given my Shoulder such a cursed Tweak! they
must be real Fingers. I feel 'em I Am sure.


Sir G. What do think?


Ab. Think, Sir? Think? Troth I don't know what to think. Pray, Sir, how --


Sir G. No Questions, good Abigal. Thy Curiosity shall be satisfied in due
time. Where Is your Lady?


Ab. Oh, I Am so frighted -- and so glad! --


Sir G. Where Is your Lady, I ask you --


Ab. Marry I don't know where I am my self -- I cannot forbear weeping for Joy
--


Sir G. Your Lady! I say your Lady! I must bring you to your self with one
Pinch more --


Ab. Oh! she has been talking a good while with the Steward.


Sir G. Then he has opened the whole Story to her, I Am glad he has prepared
her. Oh! here she comes.


Enter Lady followed by Vellum. Lady. Where is he? let me fly into his Arms! my
Life! my Soul! my Husband!


Sir G. Oh! let me catch thee to my Heart, dearest of Women!


Lady. Are you then still alive, and are you here! I can scarce believe my
Senses! Now am I happy indeed!


Sir G. My Heart is too full to answer thee.


Lady. How could you be so cruel to defer giving me that Joy which you knew I
must receive from your Presence? You have robbed my Life of some Hours of
Happiness that ought to have been in it.


Sir G. It was to make our Happiness the more sincere and unmixt. There will be
now no Doubts to dash it. What has been the Affliction of our Lives, has given
a Variety to them, and will hereafter supply us with a thousand Materials to
talk of.


Lady. I am now satisfied that it is not in the Power of Absence to lessen your
Love toward me.


Sir G. And I am satisfied that it is not in the Power of Death to destroy that
Love which makes me the happiest of Men.


Lady. Was ever Woman so blessed! to find again the Darling of her Soul, when she
thought him lost for ever! to enter into a kind of second Marriage with the
only Man whom she was ever capable of loving!


Sir G. May it be as happy as our first, I desire no more! Believe me, my Dear,
I want Words to express those Transports of Joy and Tenderness which are every
Moment rising in my Heart whilst I speak to thee.


Enter Servants. But. Just as the Steward told us, Lads! Look you there, if he
ben't with my Lady already?


Guard. He! he! he! what a joyful Night will this be for Madam!


Coach. As I was coming in at the Gate, a strange Gentleman whisk'd by me; but
he took to his Heels, and made away to the George. If I did not see Master
before me, I should have sworn it had been his Honor!


Guard. Have given Orders for the Bells to be set a ringing?


Coach. Never trouble thy Head about that, it is done.


Sir G. [to Lady.] My Dear, I long as much to tell you my whole Story, as you
do to hear it. In the mean while, I am to look upon this as my Wedding Day.
I Will have nothing but the Voice of Mirth and Feasting in my House. My poor
Neighbors and my Servants shall rejoice with me. My Hall shall be free to
every one, and let my Cellars be thrown open.


But. Ah! bless your Honor, may you never die again!


Coach. The same good Man that ever he was!


Guard. Whurra!


Sir G. Vellum, thou have done me much Service to Day. I know thou love
Abigal, but she is disappointed in a Fortune. I Will make it up to both of you.
I Will give thee a Thousand Pound with her. It is not fit there should be one sad
Heart in my House to Night.


Lady. What you do for Abigal, I know is meant as a Compliment to me. This is a
new Instance of your Love.


Ab. Mr. Vellum, you are a well-spoken Man: Pray do you thank my Master and my
Lady.


Sir G. Vellum, I hope you are not displeased with the Gift I make you.


Vel. The Gift is Twofold. I receive from you
A virtuous Partner, and a Portion too;
For which, in humble wise, I thank the Donors:
And so we bid Goodnight to both your Ho -- nours.

THE EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. Oldfield. TO Night, the Poet's Advocate I stand,
And he deserves the Favor at my hand,
Who in my Equipage their Cause debating
Has placed two Lovers, and a third in waiting;
If both the first should from their Duty swerve,
There Is one behind the Wainscote in reserve.
In his next Play, if I would take this Trouble,
He promised me to make the Number double:
In troth 'twas spoke like an obliging Creature,
For though it is Simple, yet it shows Goodnature.
My Help thus asked, I could not choose but grant it,
And really I thought the Play would want it,
Void as it is of all the usual Arts
To warm your Fancies, and to steal your Hearts:
No Court-Intrigue, nor City-Cuckoldom,
No Song, no Dance, no Music -- but a Drum --
No smutty Thought in doubtful Phrase expressed;
And, Gentlemen, if so, pray where is the Jest?
When we would raise your Mirth, you hardly know,
Whether in strictness you should Laugh or no,
But turn upon the Ladies in the Pit,
And if they redden, you are sure it is Wit.
Protect him then, ye Fair ones; for the Fair
Of all Conditions are his equal Care.
He draws a Widow, who of blameless Carriage
True to her Jointure, hates a second Marriage;


