THE Fatal Extravagance. A TRAGEDY. As it is Acted at the THEATER, in
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields.

Written by Mr. JOSEPH MITCHELL.



LONDON: Printed for T. JAUNCY, at the Angel, without Temple Bar. Price One
Shilling.

TO THE Most Noble PRINCE, JAMES, Duke HAMILTON, Duke of BRANDON, etc.
May it please Your Grace,
WHEN I reflect on your Dignity, as First Peer of Scotland, the oldest Monarchy
of Europe, I address you with Dread: And consider my own Ambition of throwing
my self, and my first Essay, in Tragedy, under the Protection of your
Illustrious Name, as a Presumption, which no Apology can excuse, unless I seek
it, in your Goodness.

But it is both natural and necessary, for Poets, to court the Favor of the
Great: And the Honor, which your Grace's Indulgence vouchsafes me, on this
Occasion, distinguishes you no less among the Patrons of the Muses, than your
high Birth, among the Noble; for, the smaller my Merit may be judged by the
World, the more glorious that Humanity, which excites your Grace, to encourage
it, till it is increased by your Influence. Many a Slip might have grown to a
tall Cedar, if it had been pal'd round, and watered, instead of being trampled
upon. The most invisible Spark may be gradualy blown to an illuminating Blaze,
and give Delight to its Nourisher.

How blessed should I conceive my self, might I ever become worthy this Regard
of a Patron, the very Dawn, of whose Life, is breaking out upon the World, with
a stronger Luster, from his Merit, than it received, from his State.

I snatched this Opportunity, to acknowledge, my Devotion to your Grace's Name
and Family, and to stand out the first public Predictor, that your innate
Princely Qualities will render you of more Consequence to your Country, than
the splendid Advantages of your Title, and great Power.

So glorious a Conjunction, of happy Circumstances, must be the Blessing of
your Grace's own Life, the Honor and good Fortune of your Friends and
Dependants, and the universal Admiration of the Country, that lays Claim to
you: A Country, which, I am sure, you will adorn, by your Councils, and your
Actions, after a Manner, which has never yet been reached, even by the Brave
and Illustrious, long, Line, of your Predecessors.

May the kindest Care of Heaven preserve your important Life from all Dangers,
and ill Accidents, to be the Ornament of your own Age, and the great Example,
and Emulation, of Posterity!

I am, with the profoundest Duty and Respect,

May it please your Grace, Your Grace's most Obedient, and most Devoted, Humble
Servant, JOSEPH MITCHELL.

THE PREFACE.
THERE are few Men of Learning, (except some of my own Country, misled by a
Zeal both indiscreet and unwarrantable) who do not readily acknowledge POETRY,
to be the Daughter of Religion, and originally designed, to tune Men's Minds to
Devotion. This is evident from the many noble Poems, in the Old Testament; to
say Nothing of other Writings. But the primitive Simplicity, becoming gradually
lost, as the Art was applied to Ends, unworthy its Institution, the Reformers
were obliged to take Advantage of Men's Passions, by giving it a new Turn,
which, under the Temptation of Delight, disguised the Doctrine they
recommended. TRAGEDY, in particular, was the Perfection of the Muse's Power.
Till that became known, there was wanting a kind of Poetry, which, imitating
the Actions of Mankind, might work a readier, and more sensible Effect, by a
Corvection of the Passions. The Prevalence of Vice, it is true, and Men's
natural Propensity to resist good Instruction, allowed not a Success to
TRAGIDY, so universal, as it merited. But since no better Help, than this, can
be devised, the Friends, of Virtue and Genius, must use the means it affords
them.

In Countries, where CHRISTIANITY is received and established, some may,
possibly, imagine, there is, now, no longer Need of the Assistance of TRAGEDY:
But Experience convinces us, That many frequent the STAGE, who would hardly be
prevailed upon, to receive Counsel from the PULPIT. The CLERGY, therefore,
should consider, as Auxiliaries and Fellow Laborers, those POETS, who preach
Virtue, from the Press, or the Theater. And since we seek not a Share of their
Revenues, for the Pains we take, in their Service, they ought, at least, in
Civility, to allow us their Countenance and Acknowledgement! Is there a
Kirkman, among my Adversaries, whose Zeal is so militant, as to fight without
Wages? Why, then, am I condemned, who, more generously, go to War, in a Way,
they could not take themselves, were they hindered from fighting against Vice
from the Pulpit! Who is so rude, as to blame an honest Volunteer, in a good
Cause? Or, if one deserves, to be a Commander in Chief, Why is he grudged
Preferment, beyond the List and Rate, of an Half-Pay-Officer.?

But some, who are moderate, because more wise, than those I have had to do
with, confess the STAGE capable of being made useful, yet condemn it, on
Account of the Abuses it indulges. -- Would they destroy the Being of an Art,
because its Use is corrupted? They argue, like those Zealous indeed, but weak
Reformers, who were for demolishing Churches, that they might be sure to leave
no Images. According to these Men's Way of Reasoning, every Thing, that is not
perfect, is dangerous and abominable; for there is nothing so excellent, where
Abuses may not enter. Preaching, they know well, is often abused, will they
allow me, therefore, to cry out, That all Preaching is unlawful?

I writ the following short TRAGEDY, to give my Countrymen, of the Kirk, an
Example, that sound and useful Instruction may be drawn from the Theater, and
that, only, the Abuse is blameable. I might, indeed, have referred my
over-rigid Adversaries to other Pieces of Dramatic POETRY, already extant: But
some Peculiarities, in my Case, (which the World is likely to know more of,
very soon,) obliged me, to give a Specimen, my self, of a Play, wherein
nothing, justly, can be condemned, by the Rules of Religion and Virtue. I am,
therefore, not afraid, to be tried by good Christians; and, I hope, to pass
uncensured by good Critics also, notwithstanding the uncommon Manner, in
which, I have attempted it.

Five Acts, I know, are Customary: But they can, by no means, be proved
necessary. On the Contrary, if any determinate Number were to be appointed, as
a Standard, Three Acts seem better than Five, by the Critick's own Rule. A
Beginning, a Middle, and an End, say these Gentlemen, are the Stages of the
Drama. A first Act, then, would open, and prepare, the Matter intended. A
Second would perfect, and heighten it to its Summit; and the Third, in a just,
and natural Descent, serves to clear up the Embarrasments, and bring on the
Catastrophe. Thus, may Three Acts he defended by Reason, better than Five from
Custom: But I intend not, hereby to promote the Introduction of a new Manner.

This Tragedy was writ so short, for want of Time to enlarge it, by Addition of
other Characters, and Episodical Incidents; yet, because I would not be subject
to the Reproaches of mistaken Petulance, I thought it necessary to observe,
that if a dramatic Story is complete, in its Preparation, Progress, and
Conclusion, it is of no great Importance, what Number of Acts it consists of.

But one general Error, if I mistake not, among Writers of TRAGEDY, is a
Failure in their very Principle. They teach not a Moral, but describe some
Piece of History. -- The Business of the STAGE, if I apprehend it rightly, is,
first, to intend some general and useful Instruction, how Men may avoid certain
Mischiefs in Life, by correcting those Passions, which must naturally produce
them; and then, to find, or invent, some Story, which may serve as an Example,
for strengthening that Precept, and show a Man made miserable by Effect of
those Passions, which the Writer would teach his Audience to resist, or keep
Guard against. Every Thing, in a Tragedy, which has not a direct, and visible,
Tendency to the Moral it is writ for, is superfluous, and monstrous; and,
however pompously embellished, serves for nothing, but to weaken the
Instruction, and distract the Attention, and Apprehension, of an Audience.

I took the Hint (and only the Hint, as the Reader may see) of that Story,
which I have fitted to the Moral of the following little Piece, from
SHAKESPEARE'S Yorkshire Tragedy, which was put into my Hands, on purpose, by my
good Friend, Mr. Hill, to whom I take this Occasion of expressing my Gratitude,
in the most public manner I can; all Endeavors, beside Acknowledgments, being
vain, to match the Instances of his Friendship, and that uncommon Humanity, and
Frankness of Spirit, so peculiar to himself, in his manner of bestowing
Favors: But it is needless, to tell the World, how much I am obliged to him,
and what just Sense I have of his generous Regard to me. They, who know him
well, and what a Waste of his important Time he has made for my Interest, will
be beforehand with my Acknowledgements, and enumerate the Advantages, which I
could not miss from his Friendship. -- I owe much, in the Scheme, in the
Sentiments, and Language, of this Piece, to the Direction of that accomplished
Gentleman, who, has either no Enemies, or they are such, because Strangers to
his good Qualities; for, it is only necessary to know him, to be, by Choice, or
Obligation, made inviolably his own. -- I embrace this Opportunity of thanking
him for his excellent Prologue, which so well prepared the Audience for the
Representation. Nor can I help thanking him even for the Epilogue, though not
less pleasant on my self, than on my Adversaries among the Scots Clergy; for
who would not be contented under a Stroke, or two, of his Satyr, whose Praise,
(as Juba says of Cato) I would rather have, than Worlds for my Admirers.

Before I end this Preface, I must not forget to thank the Generosity of my
Friends, of all Qualities, who, so nobly, graced the Action of my first
Endeavor, in TRAGEDY. I should have very little Merit, not to improve on such
Encouragement. -- Before so select, and illustrious an Audience, the admirable
Mrs. Seymour, and the Gentlemen, who so well performed the Parts, must have
felt a Satisfaction, equal to that Applause, which their Action deserved, and
met with.

PROLOGUE. Written by AARON HILL Esquire Spoken by Mr. RYAN.
Warmed, by a Kindred Sense of England's Woes,
A Caledonian Muse, with Pity, glows;
From ruined Hopes, a saving Moral takes,
And paints the Unhappy, for the Happy's Sakes.
Scotland's new Taste our meaning Scene supplies,
And a first Flight, on Tragic Pinions, tries.
Brave, and long famed in Arms, her warlike Race
Have trod* the Fields of Death, with dauntless Grace!
Fierce, and untir'd, in Blood, have, nobly, dared,
And every Toil, and every Danger, shared.
Now, fired by rifing Arts, she grasps the Boys,
And her old Cant, like falling Stocks, decays.
Her long-lost Muse new-lights her ancient Flame!
And our Scene blazes, with recovered Fame.
We teach, to Night, -- ah! would 'twere not too late,
How, rash, believing Avarice galls a State;
What private Sorrows, from wild Hazards, flow,
And how false Hope produces certain Woe.
This, -- the most natural Business of the Stage,
Will all your generous Hearts, it is bop'd, engage:
None can their Pity, for those Woes, conceal,
Which most, who hear, perhaps, too deeply, feel.
The Rants of ruined Kings, of mighty Name,
For pompous Misery, small Compassion claim.
Empires o'rturn'd, and Heroes, held in Chains,
Alarm the Mind, but give the Heart no Pains.
To Ills, remote from our Domestic Fears,
We lend our Wonder, but withold our Tears.
Not so, when, from such Passions, as our own,
Some Favorite Folly's, dreadful Fate is shown;
There the Soul bleeds, for what it feels within;
And conscious Pity shakes, at suffering Sin.
O! give Attention, to the moving Scene,
And shun what yet may be, by what has been.
THE EPILOGUE. Written by AARON HILL Esquire Spoke by Mrs. SEYMOUR.
You Have seen the Play: -- and I Will unfold the Poet,
To whom, -- (strayed Sheep, of a Pure Flock!) we owe it.
He Is a Chance-Blessing -- somewhat strangely flung us!
Dropped -- from the Clouds of Innocence, -- among us!
Slipped, through the Kirk's loose Pale, We gave him Quarter --
Poor Soul! -- He' had like to have been the Muse's Martyr.
When Stage Plays! -- and Abominations! -- took him,
Grace, and the Shepherds of the Saints forsook him.
'Twas given, thenceforth, to Satan's Power, to win him:
-- The Root of the Sound Matter -- was not in him!
Yet, though rebuked, full sore, -- he is no huge Sinner:
You Will scarce see One of his pure Brethren -- thinner.
Most sanctified of Face! Troth -- I Am afraid,
If his Looks lie not -- the poor Man's a Maid!
The Bard, not carnal-minded, -- say the Curious,
How come the unfleshly Folks, to be so furious?
Judge you the Quarrel, right. -- we'll, briefly, show it. --
-- Good plays give good Instruction -- said the Poet.
Vanity! cried the Brethren. -- Gross Defilement!
And, so, the War broke out, past Reconcilement.
Young Bays, provoked, here, drew his wrathful Pen --
Shine forth, said he, my Muse, on those dark Men;
And prove, by Dint of fair Example, whether
Much Goodness is not learnt, by coming hither?
But, what He teaches, be to Him alone, --
I Will teach a Secret Lesson, of my own.
-- Say they, of Plays, -- that Men learn Nothing by 'em?
I stand -- the Stage's Champion -- and defye 'em.
Who, that has seen, to Night, how I, a Wife,
Gave Counsel, fit to have saved my Spouse's Life,
Learns not this Moral, past all Contradiction,
That Disobedient Husbands -- meet Affliction?
That He Is most happy, who, his Fetters eases,
And lots his wiser Wife -- do -- what she pleases?
This, for our Sexe's Fame, his Play produccs --
You see -- all Doctrines have their hidden Uses.
To This -- if the bluff Brethren preach Resistance,
Let 'em, if they love Safety, keep their Distance.
For, should we catch 'em, in our wronged Dominion,
Stiff as they are, we'll make 'em change Opinion.
Dramatis Personae.
Bellmour. Mr. Quin. Courtney. Mr. Boheme. Bargrave. Mr. Ogden. Louisa. Mrs.
Seymour.


THE Fatal Extravagance.
SCENE Bellmour's House.
Enter Louisa and Courtney. IT WAS kind! this Speed of your Return. --

Louisa, But, tell me,
What Success had you? Was my Father moved?
Methinks, I read your News, in your sad Visage,
And my Heart trembles with prophetic Fears.

Courtney, It Is as I judged 'twou'd be His own Wants press him;
He sinks beneath your Husband's wastful Life,
Those boundless Dicings, and voluptuous Riots,
And this last, worst, Adventure, of lost Hope,
Which has, at once, dissolved a Wealth so vast!
That Pity scarce vouchsafes to feel his Sufferings!

Lou. But his late Conduct proves my Bellmour changed:
Misfortunes have instructed him to think,
And Thought has captived every madding Passion.

Court. Yet early Vice, by Custom, long indulged,
Leaves such Impression of habitual Ill,
As finds no Cure, but from severe Remorse,
And Time's slow working.

Lou. Nay, name not Bellmour's Vice --
He has no Vice -- His very Power is lost,
Even had he Taste for Follies -- Poor and despised,
The Slaves, for whose cursed Sakes he stands reproached,
Now shun his Converse. Villains, who betrayed him,
Start, when they meet him. Poverty, like his,
Spreads a Contagion round it. All Mankind
Cry "Lord have Mercy, and fly, frighted from him.
Did you lay open our incumbent Ruin?
Urged you my Father strongly? Want's cold Hand
Creeps over us, and it is now no Time for Counsel.

Court. I told him all, and moved his utmost Pity.
Still as he set, to view, your Husband's Failings,
I urged his Virtues, and bore down the Balance;
I praised his Wit, his Courage, his Humanity,
His fine frank Spirit, and his generous Nature:
But 'twas lost Hope -- Believe, his Brother knows him;
What he has done, already, weighs him down,
His struggling Will, to save you, has undone him,
And Bellmour's self would there beg Aid, in Vain.

Lou. O! he was never born to be a Beggar!

Heaven is too kind to Goodness, to forsake him!
He, whom soft Pity melts at other's Misery,
Deserves, himself, to live exempt from Woe.
Bellmour could never behold a Stranger wretched,
But he partook his Pain, 'till he could ease it.
How, then, will he support the weeping anguish,
Of three poor Children, all un^one by Him?

Court. His Good, and Ill, so chequer out his Nature,
That which excells, is doubtful. Nobly willed,
His pitying Heart flows out, in generous Purposes:
But, wanting Power, to stem the Tide of Pleasure,
Irresolute, he drives, and floats to Ruin.
Men must be rigid, and severe, in Virtue!
Serious, and noble Aims distinguish Reason!
To live for Taste is not to live at all.
The Man of Pleasure dreams away his Days,
And dies, to be forgotten -- Bellmour's Soul,
Had Contemplation bent it to a Byas,
Had given a Point to Fame's proud Pinnacle,
And purpled over his Name with deathless Glory!
Now, it lies lost in Dust! -- I would 'twere mine,
To skreen you from the Storm, that is gathering round you:
But I, unblessed with Power, can only wish,
And wonder, why the Strong have feeble Wills.

Lou. Oh! I shall tremble to behold his Face!
His ruined Family hangs on his Heart,
His helpless Children's future Fate distracts him,
And the once lively Bellmour smiles no more.
Silent, he walks, or stands with folded Arms,
And still looks down, as if his Soul were Earth.
If ever, by chance, his lifted Eyes meet mine,
The starting Tears glare dreadfully upon me,
And, quivering, struggle, to flow loose, in Sorrow.
Then Sighs, suppressed by Force, strive hard for Vent,
And heave, and swell, like Earthquakes, in his Bosom.
(...), at length, he breaks, in Whirlwind, from me,
Torn by ten thousand Pangs, raves, reddens, starts,
And frights me with a drea^ful burst of Passions!
O Uncle! what remains for Hope to snatch at?
Of all the wide Estate, that late enclosed us,
But th^s poor House is left us -- This too totters.
Soon Rain, with his palsied Hand, will seize
This ancient Pile, and shake it into Dust!
Not thrice the Worth of all that now is ours,
Will save poor Woodly from that fatal Bond,
He signed, to serve my Bellmour, All our Hope
Was in vour frie^dly Journey to my Father.
Woodly must sink, and Bellmour cannot bear it.
Bellmour will never live, to sink a Friend!
Look yonder, where, in pensive Grief, he walks,
Unhoping, and disconsolate!

Cour. Poor Bellmour
How changed, from that wild, noisy, joyful Rioter,
Which all his Friends have known him! Still extreme!
Enter Bellmour, walking Mellancholly.
Lou. My Life! my Bellmour! wound not thus my Soul,
I have more Woes to bear, that are my own,
Than my Strength matches -- add not thou thy Sorrow;
That would overwhelm me quite.

Bell. I pray forgive me.
Imprisoned in Thought, I could not look about me,
And my Soul missed thy Comfort. -- I was musing;

Lou. What sad Reflection held you?

Bell. A mournful Wandering!
No matter now --

Lou. Nay you must tell it me.

Bell. I was considering which of my three Boys,
Some few Years hence, when I Am dissolved in Death,
Will act the Beggar best! run, barefoot, fastest!
And, with most dextrous Shrugg, play Tricks for Charity!

Lou. O! for Heaven's Sake, forbear, by Starts! like This,
To image Horrors, Nature shrinks at Thought of.

Bell. Why, my Louisa! it is a Wretch's Duty,
To learn to bear his Misery -- to know it,
To use our selves to poize it, is the Means
To make it easy to us. -- Yet I Am to blame!
Thou had no share, in any Guilt of mine;
I ought alone to suffer -- 'Twas too cruel,
'Twas even unmanly, to afflict thy Innocence!

Cour. Oh! Sir, you sooth the Grief you should resist!
As the gross Atmosphere is shook by Tempests,
Which never ruffle the superior Regions;
Mean Spirits, only, buckle under Woe;
It is the great Man's Pride, to combat Fortune,
And rise against Oppression.

Bell. Sir, it is true --
And, I remember, you have often advised it,
While I had Power, to try my Virtue's Proof.
A Man may dye, unhelp'd -- but must not hope
To Conquer, without Arms. -- Talking of Help,
Will your good Brother lend it? -- Speaking Silence!
How could I hope it from him?

Cour. Yet despair not --
A time may come, when even your Woes shall prove
Great Benefits. Firm Spirits break Misfortunes!
To suffer well's the noblest way to Conquest.
On a smooth Sea, the Sailor shows no Skill,
But he displays it all, in Hurricanes.

Bell. He would not, sure, neglect to save his Daughter,
Had he the Power still left him -- Yet Friends,
Are more than Fathers! A Father cannot be sometimes,
More than a Friend! -- I had a Friend in Woodly!
Once he was happy -- what he shall be hereafter,
He owes to friendless Bellmour! Perish the Name;
To what a stinging Death is he reserved,
Who leaves a good Man wretched, whom he made so?
Sir, it would ease me of a galling Pain,
Would you disolve this disappointed Hope
In Woodly's Breast. -- 'Twere Sin to nourish it,
Since it is unstable -- He must know it soon:
Let it be told by any Tongue, but Bellmour's.

Cour. I Will visit him this Instant. -- Do you, mean while,
Bravely seek Comfort from a firm Belief,
That Heaven befriends your Virtues, and will save, you.
A Hand unseen these Clouds of Woe may clear,
And, into Triumph turn distracting Fear.
[Exit Courtney.
Bell. Louisa! I am Damned, while yet alive!

Loui. Alas! what mean you to distract me thus
With your wild Startings?

Bell. Nay, but mark me well, --
Want's the Damnation of a living Sinner --
What have I lived for, if I die a Beggar?
Why were my Ancestors renowned in War?
Why, with grave Judges, have they graced the Bench,
Or, with wise Votes, the Senate? -- In Me, must beg --
Mark that lean Word, Louisa! -- In Me must beg
That ebbing Name, which, through a length of Ages,
Has given a Kingdom Honor. Bear thou That?
How excellent art Thou! not to have scorned me!
Good Heaven! that Reason should give Madness way,
'Till Man finds Music, in a rattling Dice-box!
And has contracted thrice three thousand Acres,
To the cursed Compass of a narrow Table!
With what a thoughtless Rapture have I shook 'em!
Hung over the Throw! and hurled out my Posterity
Pimps, Thieves, or Beggars! -- But then at last,
This Madman's Hazard! of my treasured Remnant,
In the wild Lottery of a public Hope,
Where Reason had no Chance, and Villains governed,
Cursed! groundless, Rashness! -- Tear me Limb from Limb,
Some pitying Torturer! to die at once,
Were Comfort even in Agony! -- But I shall be
Whole Ages, after Death, in dying! -- Villains,
Dull, pityless, insulting, dirty Villains,
Will point at some poor ragged Child of mine,
And say, 'There's Pride and Name! There Is Bellmour's Honor!
'There's the blessed Remnant of a boasted Family!
Curse the keen Thought! It pours all Hell upon me!

Lou. Still will thou, thus, snatch at Despair's wild Shadows?
I thought, the manly Soul could Smile at Anguisn;
Woman's weak mind may bend beneath Adversity;
But Bellmour's Brow, methinks, should wear a Majesty,
And make Affliction awful.

Bell. Away with Counsel.
I cannot hear Thee! Thy moving Air! thy wisdom!
That Lovely Softness, which bewitches round Thee!
Each charm, which has a thousand times appeased me!
Now makes me mad! Like Oil, poured out on Flame,
I tower, in Blaze, and burn with tenfold Firceness.
Thy every word is Death! Each look thou giv'st me
Breaks through my Eye, comes rushing on my Soul,
And shoots sharp Arrows, through my bleeding Conscience.
Think thou, I am so mean, so lost a Wretch,
That my own Misery stings me? Cruel Woman!
What earthly Ills can Bellmour stoop to fear,
Which hurt but Bellmour? It Is true, indeed, thy Fate
I have not learned to bear -- There, Grief unmans me
Thine and thy helpless Infants Woes rise to me,
Glare on my Apprehension, like pale Ghosts!
And point me into madness! -- Oh! I Have wronged Thee!

Lou. It Is wronging me to say it -- Re-enter Courtney.

Bell. Courtney returned so soon!
I like not this --

Lou. Why look you pale, good Uncle?

Cour. To bring unwelcome Tidings, to the wretched,
Gives the sad Teller half the Hearer's Woe.

Bell. Friendly Preparative! What follows next
Can be but Woodley's Ruin!

Cour. He Is undone! --

Lou. Unhappy Bellmour!

Cour. Near your House I met him,
Hemmed by a swarthy Guard of licensed Villains,
The Laws grim Bloodhounds. With rapacious Talons,
They dragged him on, in merciless Serenity,
To shut him from his Hopes, in joyless Prison!

Bell. Oh!

Cour. At short distance, near the Sycamore,
That marks the Turning to that now-fall'n House
Of this poor Gentleman, I saw his Lady,
Wild, with a Storm of Grief! Her Hair disheveled!
And her loose Robes, blown, careless, by the Wind!
Struggling, with weeping Servants, to break free.
Fain would she follow him, to share Restraint:
But, by superior Force, held back, and hindered,
With straining Eyes, she kept him long in view;
And, when a gushing Flood obscured her Sight,
Still more to lengthen out a last, sad, Look,
She wiped away the Tears, and gazed, again!

Lou. Dreadful Description! -- Close it here, good Uncle!
It cuts too deep, and wounds my Bellmour's Soul.

Cour. No more remains to tell, but, that his House
Is filled with Russians, his rich Goods torn down,
And his grieved Wife, and Children, roam, unshelter'd,
Without a Home, to succor them.

Lou. O guide them hither.
Let me, with open Arms, fly to receive them,
And strive, if possible, to give them Comfort.

Bell. Louisa! -- As thou would preserve my Life,
Bring not their Grief too near me. -- My melting Soul
Flows into Air, as I but hear their Misery:
To see it, would distract me. -- Said he nothing?

Cour. Marking me, as I turned my Face aside,
He called, and counseled you to save yourself,
By sudden Flight: -- Since other Ruffians, brought
By Bargrave, your malicious Creditor,
Will presently be here, on the same Purpose.
As for my Fate, said he, bid him not mourn it:
To fall for Bellmour, would have given me Joy,
Had Bellmour's self not fallen.

Bell. He falls, indeed!

Cour. Now, as I entered, Bargrave, just arrived,
With his in fernal Crew, besets your Gates.
A barbarous Triumph glows on his proud Cheek,
And from beneath his Brows o'erjutting Lower,
Malicious Insults grin, in hollow Ambush!

Lou. Now, Bellmour! thou art lost! -- immediate Ruin
Will swallow Thee, and Me, and our dear Children!
All! All! must sink, together. -- Teach us good Uncle!
Which way to fly - What measures to pursue.

Cour. The Doors, fast barred, are guarded by your Servants;
And you may through the Grove, escape, unseen.

Bell. No-let him enter. -- This Bargrave taught me Vice,
And counseled even the Adventure, that undoes me!
He wrongs the Devil, who makes himself the Punisher
Of Ills, which he excited! Justice acts wisely!
Oh! She Is not Blind.-She chooses a fit Moment,
And throws him on my Vengeance. Let him enter,
Bring he as many Lives, as he has Crimes,
May Curses catch me, if he escape my Hand!

Lou. As thou love me, Bellmour! be not rash.
Should thou add Murder to our other Woes,
How wretched should we be? --

Cour. Persuade him rather,
Sooth him to Pity. Would he free your Friend,
And add some Weeks of Liberty, for Trial,
What Succor may be found; you have many Friends:
Who knows what unhop'd Aid may rise to save you?

Bell. No, Courtney! Friendship rises but with Fortune;
And sets when Men go downward, yet, I thank you.
Rage had obscured my Reason. -- Say, to Bargrave,
I have an Offer for his private Ear. --
I will instruct my Swelling Indignation,
To cool, and settle, like a Courtier's Passions.
What cannot Interest teach us?
Exit Courtney. Leave me, Louisa!
I would not have thee blast thy innocent Eyes,
With sight of such a monster. -- Nor brook I, well,
That thou, who have been taught to love Sincerity,
Should hear me flatter Infamy!

Lou. Do but think
It Is for their Sakes, whom most you wish to Succor,
And you will find it easy. Farewell! he comes.
Exit Louisa Enter Bargrave.
Bar. So Sir! I find, you make your House your Garrison!
Bold sowerfac'd Sentinels admit, with Caution,
Whom you vouchsafe your Pass to. -- It Is great, indeed!
Girt, Sovereign-like, within your Palace Walls,
The Law must beg Admission! But the Pride,
With which your State o'erlook'd me, will Instruct me,
Till I find Means to reach you. --

Bell. I sent not for you
Thus to revive old Hatred. 'Twas my Meaning,
To set before your Eyes the spreading Misery,
From which a Week's short Respite may, perhaps,
Free Woodly, and my self, nor do you wrong.

Bar. Oh, Sir! no doubt, it is likely, that Seven Days
Will pay a Bond, which twice Seven Months, and more,
Has drawn no Interest from you! -- Woodly may claim
Some little Pity. -- He Is a suffering Tool,
Who Fasts to feed your Riots. But for you,
No Plea bears Influence. What a mass of Wealth
Loaded your Youth! The Toil of careful Ancestors*
And, how it is consumed, let Thousands tell,
Whose lifted Eyes and Hands proclaim their Wonder.
I dare not whisper it. -- Men won'd think me Mad:
And laugh to hear, that the once liberal Bellmour
Is grown a Niggard, now; and, like a Miser,
Whines for a Day of Grace. -- And swears 'twill ruin him,
To pay his Creditors. -- Name it no more. --
Should it get Wind, 'twou'd lower your towering Topsails,
And lose you many a Cap, and Country Shout,
As vou ride through the Villages.

Bell. Insulting Wretch!
It grates my inmost Soul, to suffer this,
But my Friend's Fate depends on it. -- You seemed to speak,
As if you pitied Woodly. -- Give him Liberty:
And let me fill the Place, to which you have sent him,
I ask no more. -- For my own Miseries,
Perhaps, they merit not. -- I Am sure, they scorn,
What Pity thou can give them. --

Bar. Often, I remember,
Woodly, with zeal for holy Texts, transported,
Would preach, and cite Divinity. -- Dull! Dull!
How could he miss that Caution, which forbad him
To be another's Surety? What comes after,
He now, perhaps, has learnt. -- And will remember
When, next, he talks, to edify.

Bell. Nay, then,
Off, mean Hypocrisy! I Will make thee hear me,
In Words, which match thy Malice. Think, low Traitor!
How I, first, learned that Guilt, with which, but now,
Thy Tongue reproached me! Who, but the Villain Bargrave?

Bar. Ha! Villain! said you?
(offering to draw.)
Bell. Yes, the Villain Bargrave. --
Touch not thy Sword.-Should thou unsheath it, here,
Thy Guardian Devil, too weak to save his Minister,
Should rise, in vain, betwixt us!

Bar. I Will hear thee out. --

Bell. Who, but thy self, spread all those Snares about me,
Which, first, entangling, next o'erthrew my Virtue?
Who stained the Native Whiteness of my Soul,
And spotted it with Follies? Think, how this Bond,
Was fraudulently, and, by shameful Arts,
Won from my clouded Reason! when the Fumes,
Of madding Wine, had warmed my yielding Fancy,
Fit for a Knaves Impression! -Have thou Humanity?
And do not feel a Ruin thou have caused?
Have thou Reflection? and can thou sleep, unstung,
By guilty Startings, and remorseful Dreams?
Or have the Fiends, that haunt thy gloomy Bosom,
Unhumaniz'd thy Heart? seared up thy Conscience?
And left all Devil within thee? --

Bar. Now take Breath:
And hear me tell the Effect of this fine Pleading.
I find my self, with all these black Endowments,
Your Master, and your Scourge.-But that I scorn thee,
I could be angry.- Mark this silent Witness:
Look on this Bond.- And curse the woeful Hour,
That gave thy Friend, and thee, to my Disposal.
I Will leave our Wives, to scold the Quarrel out,
While I seek Vengeance, not from Words, but Action.
(He attempts to go out.)
Bell. By Action! did thou say? I thank thee, Bargrave!
Thou have instructed Me.- That fatal Bond
Shall never rise, in Judgment, against Woodly.
(Drawing his Sword, and putting himself before the Door.) Just Heaven, that
hates Oppression points a Way,
To case my wretchedness of half its Load,
By cutting through that Chain, that binds my Friend.
Now' if thou dare defend thy Villainies,
Unsheath thy Sword, and to this guarded Door,
Force thy wished Passage, through the Breast of Bellmour.
(They fight and Bargrave falls.)
Bar. Curses consume that all destroying Hand,
Spite of my wished Revenge, thou will escape me:
No Heir survives, to put the Bond in Proof,
And Woodly, and thy self, are free again.
(He dies.) Enter Courtney, surpised: And Louisa, at another Door.
Cour. What have you done? I feared this rash Effect
Of Rage, but half suppressed. And waited near:
But an Attempt, yon Bloodhounds made without,
To force an Entrance, called me off too fatally!

Lou. Was this, my Belmour! Speak, was this the way,
To ease our Wretchedness? Oh! this black Chance
Sinks us still deeper, Cuts us off from Comfort,
And we can never, now, be happy more!

Bell. Courtney! 'twere vain to wish this Act undone.
Scarce can it claim Repentance.- Secret and sudden,
Let me entreat thee, to convey this Parchment
(Taking the Bond from Bargrave's Pocket.) Into my Woodly's Hand.- Say how it
happened:
Tell him, whatever Fate may do with me,
I Am blessed, to give him Freedom.

Cour. Guard the Doors well.- There Is Danger near:
And I Will not leave you long.
Exit Courtney.
Lou. Fly; for Heaven's sake, begone.
One Hours delay prevents Escape for ever.

Bell. What would thou have me do?

Lou. Let me disguise thee. --
Then through the Grove, have; and, in some poor Cottage,
Entreat a short Concealment.- There, I Will find thee,
And we'll consult Relief from all our Woes.

Bell. Fixed as my Fate, I stand, unmoved to expect it.
I Will not stir hence, by Heaven.

Lou. Oh! do not Swear!
Think, how my Peace of Mind, my Hope, my Misery,
Depends on Thine.- Thus, on my Knees, I urge it,
Thou, being free, may find a thousand Ways,
To succor us; but if thou fall'st, a Family,
A Lost! a Friendless Family! falls with thee.
Oh! if I ever was beloved by Bellmour,
If all my Prayers, my Vows, my Tears, can move him,
Let him but grant me this.- Let him but leave me,
Rain then a world of Woes upon my Head!
Let Want, Reproach, Contempt, and all Life's Agonies
In ceaseless Bitterness of Soul, afflict me,
While thou art safe, if I but let one Sigh,
One Breath of Discontent escape my Lips,
Curse me thy self, and make me lost, indeed.

Bell. Excellent Woman!-rise.- To see thee thus
Is Torture beyond bearing!

Lou. I will not leave thee. --
Here, at thy Feet, thus humbled, as that Dust,
Which I shall shortly be, when I have lost thee,
Here will I grow for ever, till thou grant'st
This only Prayer I make thee. --

Bell. Thou bidst me fly:
What would thou I should fly from?

Lou. Danger and Misery.

Bell. With whom then must I leave that Misery?
Must not thy self, and those Three friendless Wretches,
Whose Being I was Cause of, and who expect
Aid and Protection from a Parent's Hand;
While I escape, must you not all be left?
Hell glows in that hot Thought! be left, exposed
To all the Miseries, which thou would^st have me
Fly, like a Coward from, and leave for Innocents,
Who owe 'em to my Baseness! no!- My Louisa,
Wretch, as I have been, I Am not fallen so low!

Lou. [rising] Lost, Lost, for ever:

Bell. No, there is a Judge on high,
Who sees, and loves, thy Goodness.- Let me entreat thee,
To give my Sorrows way, for a few Moments.
A Solitary Thought! a Turn or two,
Uninterrupted, in the Gallery,
Will teach me to resolve, and then I Will call thee.
Exit Bellmour.
Lou. Angels assist and guide thy silent Reasonings,
And, from this Labyrinth of Woes, unwind thee!
Dismal our Prospect! yet all may be well!
Heaven cannot err -- often guides us in the Dark --
And, when we least expect, affords relief.
As through black storms of Wind, and driving Rain,
Short, Sunny Beamings streak the harrass'd Main,
So, through deep Sorrows, Gleams of Comfort rise,
And spread smooth Heavens before the Sufferers Eyes.
[Exit Louisa.
SCENE changes to a Gallery.
Enter Bellmour, alone, Pensive. Bell. Why should I pause! Nothing can be a
Crime
Which puts a stop to Evil. A thousand Men
May have been poor as I, -- and yet lived happy!
Miseries, we make our selves, are born with Ease;
But He, who beggars his Posterity,
Begets a Race, to curse him -- Profuse in Ills,
He, propagating Ruin, with his Name,
Entails Descent of Anguish! -- Every Scorn,
Which wrings the Soul of any future Bellmour,
Whom Want shall pinch the Bones of, Ages hence,
Will mark, with Shame, my unforgotten Grave,
And reach my guilty Soul, where ever it wanders.
-- If to give Misery to those, to whom
We once gave Life, is an inhuman Crime
How can it be a Sin, to take Life back,
And put an End to Misery? To live,
Is to be racked, if Life must still be poor:
For Poverty gives up the Wise Man's Worth,
To the Contempt of tasteless Ignorance.
Oh! -- Could I feel no Misery, but my own!
How easy were it for this Sword, to free me,
From all that Anguish, which embitters Life?
But, when the Grave has given my Sorrows Rest,
Where shall my miserable Wife find Comfort?
Unfriended, and alone, in Want's bleak Storm,
Not all the Angelic Virtues of her Mind,
Will shield her, from the unpitying World's Derision.
Can it be kind to leave her so exposed,
And, while I sleep in Death, not dream of Her?
Better a thousand Times, to lead her with me,
Through the dark Doubtfulness of deep Futurity!
Whatever uncertain Fate attends, hereafter,
It can but be the worst of what is bad,
And that is our State, already. -- It shall be done!
But how? That asks some Thought -- Death, in it self,
Comes soft, and sweetly, as an Infant's Sleep,
When Nature, unalarm'd, expects it not.
From those dear, destined Breasts, the pointed Steel,
Must draw no Blood, to stain my blushing Hand;
Lest my Soul start, and that seem Cruelty,
Which I would fain think Pity. -- Hark! The Time presses me.
(Loud Knockings without.) What if I use th'unwounding Aid of Poison?
I have at Hand that Sovereign Remedy,
For all Diseases, Want and Woe can plague with.
Mixed with some unfear'd Draught 'twill gently Murder:
Bear off Death's painful Edge, and, in sweet Slumber,
Swim soft, and shadowy, over the misty Eye-ball.
Enter Louisa.
Lou. Will you forgive me, if Officious Love,
That anxious Pain I feel, till you are safe,
Obtrudes my Zeal, perhaps a few short Moments,
Before you would have wished to be disturbed?
Yon Villains grow impatient for Admission,
And scarce your Servants guard the Gates against them.
Storms of bold Oaths, and horrible Reproaches,
Mixed with loud Thunderings, and the Threa's of Law,
Make my Heart tremble, and have forced me hither,
Forced me to urge you, by all Ties of Love,
Of Interest, Honor, Hope, and future Happiness,
To fly this dangerous Roof, and save us All.

Bell. I thank thy gentle Care -- It is resolved.
I have bethought me of a Means, to evade
The Malice of my Fortune -- 'Twill be a Journey,
A little longer, than thy Love could wish it;
Yet not so far, but we shall meet again.

Lou. Oh! be the Distance wide, as Pole from Pole,
Let me but follow Thee, and I am blessed.

Bell. It shall be so, Louisa.

Lou. A thousand Angels
Spread their Wings over thee, and protect thy Steps,
Now thou art kind! -- But the dear little ones,
Shall They go too?

Bell. All! all! shall go!

Lou. Have then,
Let us be gone -- my bounding Heart leaps joyful,
And I shall smile again -- But ah me! Bellmour!
They are so Young! so Tender! is it possible,
That they should travel with us?

Bell. Moving Innocence!
My strong Heart bleeeds within me, at her Accents!
[Aside. A few short Steps will lodge us in a Place,
[To her. Of Rest and Safety -- we shall have Leisure there,
To weigh our future Hopes, and seek fit means,
To our wished end. -- Courtney will soon return;
Said he not so?

Lou. He did, and we'll inform him
Of our new Purpose, and begin our Flight.
I Will make Provision, such as best befits
Our Haste, and our Distresses.
[She is going.
Bell. S^ay, Louisa!
Those boasted Cordials, the French Marquis sent me,
Gave I to Thee, or no?

Lou. You spoke of such --
But still forgot (...) give 'em me -- and now,
They Are not worth Memory --

Bell, Nay, now, most useful!
Their Virtue is reported Sovereign,
Against the Body's [oil, or Mind's Disturbance.

Lou. Would Courtney were come.
(Exeunt severally. Enter Courtney, alone. Court. Strange! that a Man should
linger thus in Peril!
The pointed Sword, that, by a slender Hair,
Hung over the Head of Damocles, was Shadow
To sellmour's solid Danger. -- I was told
He walks this way -- I Will trace the Gallery round,
And urge him to escape -- Few Minutes more
May spread a Crowd of Eyes on every side,
And fatally prevent him.
(Exit. Re-enter Bellmour.
Bell. My baleful Hand, has mixed the deadly Draught,
To give it as a Cordial -- Give it! whom?
Start from thy burning Orb, thou conscious Sun,
And chill thy selt to Frost at my black Purpose,
Am I a Parent? a Protector? Lover?
Or has this Devil, that heaves about my Heart,
Transformed me to a Fiend? He has! He has!
Chain him, some Angel, millions of Fathoms down;
Heap him with Mountains, least, he rise again,
And in a Husband's and a Fathers Breast,
Brew horrid Murders! -- I am my self, once more --
Now let cool Reason's undistracted Search
Answer my bleeding Soul, which dreadful Ill
May best be born by Nature -- To leave our Friends,
To grinding Sorrow, Poverty and Scorn,
With sense of his not feeling any Pain,
Who gave them all; -- or, to quit Life together,
And, wanting Power to bless, make it some Merit,
Not to leave Curses to Surviving Innocence!
I Am mad again -- Reason her self betrays me,
And whispers, that this last is Cruelty,
And Murder grows a Mercy! --
Enter Louisa.
Lou. Found you the Cordial?
Your little wanderers are ready dressed
To act the Pilgrim with us; perhaps 'twill aid
Their Fainting Spirits, yet untried in Hardships.

Bell. I cannot move -- my Feet bound down, by Nature,
Rebel against my Heart. -- Oh! If one Moment,
One short Thought longer, She oppress me, thus,
With melting, Innocent, Talk -- I shall grow Soft,
Yield her to Want, and live to be a Beggar.

Lou. Still you are doubtful --
(aside.
Bell. No -- no -- I Am fixed -- Oh! Nature!
[aside I left my Closet open, -- on a Table,
In that Gold Cup, which was thy Father's Present,
When thy first Favorite Boy's last Birthday came,
Thou'llt find the fittest Cordial -- I tried 'em all,
And what seemed properest, for the Boys and Thee,
Waits, in that Cup, thy tasting. --

Lou. Courtney stays Long. --
All things are ready, and I wish him here.
Now for this boasted Cordial --
[Exit.
Bell. Be firm, my Heart!
Stop thy big Beat! Thaw, thaw this curdling Blood,
That, through my Icy Veins, creeps, cold as Death,
And freezes in its Passage. -- Where is Louisa?
But a few Moments, and she is no more!
Now! now! the unsuspecting Innocent
Lifts that last Cup -- Now, now, She tastes a Draught,
That snatches her, for ever, from my Sight,
And robs me of her Comfort! Never more,
Shall her sweet Voice enchant me! Never more,
Shall her soft Eyes look fondly into mine,
And shine with swimming Languor -- Never, never,
Will her unwearied Wit beguile my Cares,
Or hush me more to Peace, when Passion shakes me!
Open, engulph me, and conceal my Shame
Befriending Earth! -- Or, from thy yawning Depth,
Stream up a Night of Gloom, to blot out Memory,
And darken over Reflection! -- I feel my Blood
Cool, and grow thick, as melted Lead flows heavy,
And hardens, in it is motion -- A little longer,
And I, who have a Heart, already Marble,
Shall petrifie throughout, and be a Statue!

Lou. My Life! my Bellmour!
[within
Bell. Ha! it is her Voice that calls me --
It sounded not reproachful,

Lou. Look, look my Bellmour!
[within These little Strugglers will not quit the Cordial,
But Sip it to the Bottom --

Bell. Torturing Horror --
[aside Enter Louisa, with an empty Cup.
Lou. How could you be so rigid, not to come,
When I twice called you? 'Twou'd have been a Scene
Of Pleasure, to observe with how much Eagerness,
The little Wranglers quarreled for the Cup,
Which, having drank, my self, I brought to Them.
I bid em Taste it only -- and told the Pratlers,
It was their Father's Present: But that word
Transported them, to lift their pretty Hands,
And brought a War about me --

Bell. Furies tear me! --

Lou. Did you not give Permission they should taste it?
E're they began the Journey!

Bell. Alas! Louisa!
A Long, long, Journey is, indeed! begun,
But endless, as Eternity -- Thy self,
And those dear Infants, -- are poisoned by that Cordial.

Lou. Poisoned! by Thee? Thou say it but to try me!
If 'twere thy Wish that I should die, thy Love, --
At least, thy Pity, would have given some Warning.
Death is a dreadful Journey, and requires
Much length of Preparation. --

Bell. By those Charms,
Which I no more must gaze on, and be blessed,
Thou can not live an Hour -- A last, long Sleep
Will steal, in cold Advances, over thy Beauties,
And those two beamy Suns, which sparkle on me,
Anon, shall set in Death -- Even, while we talk,
The eternal Shade will rise, at once, between us,
And sever us for ever.

Lou. Dreadful Contraction!
Of that short Span, which at its longest stretch,
Was much too narrow, to allow me Scope,
To speak, or look, or think, my Love, for Thee:
What shall I say? -- A thousand tender Thoughts,
Struggle, at once, for Vent. -- I cannot speak --
Death is too hasty -- I have yet, undone,
Unspoke, unthought, a thousand weighty Things!
O! Heaven! my Little ones! -- Let me fly to them!
Have I so short a time, to gaze upon them?
Yet never must see'em more! -- I cannot leave Thee.
What shall I do? -- O Bring my Children hither;
Fly with them to my Arms! -- Dear, dying, Innocents!
Oh! Bellmour! Bellmour! Why has this been done?

Bell. That we might baffle Woe, and die together --
And leave no Beggars of our Race behind us.
See! my Louisa! I have a faithful Guide
[Drawing a Dagger. That will not let me lose thee --
(Stabs himself.
Lou. Oh! cruel Bellmour!
What have thou done? -- Now, I am killed indeed!
Help, help, -- Oh! Uncle! what a dreadful Scene
Are you returned to?
Enter Courtney.
Court. I have heard it all --
And had not that concealed, undreamt of, Dagger,
Prevented my near Vigilance, had saved
Unhappy Bellmour. --

Bell, Not unhappy, now --
We slide, united, from the Woes of Life,
And Want's too slow to reach us. --

Court. Mistaken Man!
The Hand of Heaven, however, from mortal Eyes,
Obsour'd in Clouds, still points direct at Justice!
Not thy three Children, nor thy guiltless Wife,
But Thou, alone, art fallen! whose single Crime
Drew down a single Vengeance!

Lou. Alas! what mean you? --

Bell. Thou little know the deadly Means I used,
If thou conceiv'st me frustrated --

Court. Hear, then, with Wonder --
And, trembling, mark the mazy Paths of Providence. Seeking you on the
Gallery's Garden Side,
I, in your Closet, spied a late filled Cup,
With a small Vial near it. -- To the Neck
There hung a Label. -- By the Name, inscribed,
I saw, with sad surprise, it had held Poison. Concluding, you had newly
mingled it,
With that rich Draught it stood by -- From a Window,
I threw it on the Garden -- refill'd the Cup,
Without its deadly mixture -- and stood, concealed,
To watch what happened -- when Louisa came,
And snatched it thence, I followed her, unmarked,
Pleased to have been a means, to intercept
Hers, and her Childrens Death. -- The Rest, you know too well.

Bell. Angels Surround thee, with unceasing Vigilance,
And, for this Friendship, ward off every evil.
Oh! I have erred! --

Lou. Oh! too, too, partial Blessing!
Faint Sweet! with more than poisonous Bitter mixed
Now Bellmour! tell me -- was it not a Crime,
To distrust Heaven? Else thou had lived -- and then,
We had all, perhaps, been blessed.

Cour. You had, indeed!
By a young Kinsman, landed, from a Ship,
That left her Consort scarce a Day behind,
Woodly has heard suprizing News -- your Brother,
Absent, so many Years, and long thought Dead,
Returning, Rich, from the remotest East,
Died but in sight of Land, and has bequeathd
His whole, heaped, wealth, to Bellmour.

Bell. Heaven! I Adore thee!
Would I had trusted thy Eternal Wisdom,
Thou best can clear thy Mystic Dispensations,
And make Confusion end in beauteous Order.
Oh thou art Just! and dreadful is thy Conduct;
Punished, with this Severity of Justice,
I feel, and own, thy Mercy -- Now live Louisa!
Live, and be happy -- and forget -- thy Bellmour,
[Dies.
Lou. Oh!
[she Swoons.
(...) Alas! She faints -- This Sudden Turn of Terror,
Rushes too strong, to be withstood by Nature.
I Will call her Wom^n, to her Aid, and watch her,
Till Time, and Thought, by slow Degrees, bring Comfort.
From this sad Story let Observers know,
That early Riot ends in lasting Woe.
Mean, and Ignoble, Pleasures break the Mind,
Un-nerve our Judgment, and our Reason blind,
'Till Heaven o'ertakes Us, with some dreadful Fate,
And the touched Soul grows sensible, too late.

FINIS.
Lately Published, by Mr. Mitchel.
THE Doleful Swains a Pastoral. Price 6d. Jonab: a Divine Poem adorned with
Curious Cuts, Pr. 1s.

An Ode on the Power of Music, Pr. 1 s

The Judgment Day a Poem by Aaron Hill Esquire Price 1 s.

The Last Guinea a Poem, Price 6 d.

A Theorico Pract. Discourse on the Plague by Dr. Rose, Price 1 s.

All Printed for T. Jauncy, at the Angel without Templebar.


