THE HISTORY OF Sir CHARLES GRANDISON. IN A SERIES of LETTERS Published from
the ORIGINALS, By the Editor of PAMELA and CLARISSA.

In SEVEN VOLUMES.

VOL. VII. and LAST.

To which is added, An Historical and Characteristical INDEX.

LONDON: Printed by S. RICHARDSON, AND DUBLIN, Reprinted, by and for H.
SAUNDERS at the Corner of Christ-Church Lane, M, DCC, LIVE.

THE HISTORY OF Sir CHARLES GRANDISON, Bart.
LETTER I. Mis;s LUCY SELBY, To Lady G.
Saturday, Nov. 25.
YOU enjoined me, my dear Lady G. at parting on Monday last, to write to you;
and to be very particular in what I wrote. I will, because I love and fear you.
Otherwise I would not write at all; first, because I had not the good fortune
to please you, in mine to Lady L.; and next, because I shall so soon have the
honor to attend you in town. Well then, I begin.

On Tuesday we women were employed in preparations for the tenants jubilee,
next day. Sir Charles, attended by my brother, paid a morning visit to Mr.
Greville, whom he found moody, reserved, and indisposed. My brother James says,
that he never saw such a manly, yet tender treatment, from one man to another,
as Sir Charles gave him; and that he absolutely subdued him, and left him
acknowledgeing the favor of his visit, and begging a repetition of it, as
often as he could, while he staid in these parts; and that, he said, as well
for his credit, as for his comfort. But when, Sir Charles, said he, do you
carry from us the Siren? I will call her names. I hate her. The sooner the
better. Curse me, if I shall be able to creep out of the house, while she is
visible on Northamptonshire ground -- Though I was a friend to the match -- Do
you mind that, young man (to my brother James): O Love! Love! added he, of what
contradictions art thou the cause! Though I hate her, I almost long to see her.
You Will allow me to visit you both, I hope when I have got over these plaguey
megrims?

The same day Sir Charles making a friendly visit, as going by Sir John
Holles's seat, to that family, found Miss Orme there, expecting her brother to
call for her in his post-chaise.

Great civilities passed between Sir Charles and Miss Orme. She was doubtful
whether her brother had, at that time, best see Sir Charles, as he was weak in
health and Spirits: But just as Sir Charles was at the gate, going to his
chariot, attended by Sir John and the young Ladies, poor Mr. Orme came.

The Liveries would not allow Mr. Orme to doubt who it was. He turned pale. Sir
Charles addressed himself to him with his usual polite freedom. Knowing, Sir,
said he, that Mr. Orme was expected by one of the best of Sisters, I presume to
salute you, as the Mr. Orme to whom I have been desirous, ever since I have
been in Northamptonshire, to pay my compliments.

Sir Charles Grandison, Sir --

At your service, Mr. Orme; taking his hand.

The happiest man in the world, replied Mr. Orme, with some emotion. The best,
the loveliest woman on earth calls you hers.

I am, I think myself, the happiest of men. But it will add to my joy, to have
it wished me by so good a man as Mr. Orme.

Ah, Sir! -- Could I wish joy to any man on this occasion, it would be to you,
because of your character; and in the reflection, that the most excellent of
women must be happier with you, than any other man could have made her. But
Self, Self, Sir! He is indeed a hero, who, with such a servent attachment as
mine, can divest himself of Self. I loved her, Sir, from her early infancy, and
never knew another Love.

The man, Mr. Orme, who loved Miss Byron, gave distinction to himself. Permit
me to present her to you, and you to her, as dear friends; and allow me a third
place in your friendship. You have a sister who justly claims a second. I dare
engage for the dear creature, from what I know of her value for Mr. Orme, that
she will allow of this friendship, on the foot of his own merits, were my
recommendation out of the question.

O Sir Charles! you are, you ought to be, the man. And will you allow me on
these terms to visit you, and visit her? -- But, alas! I fear, I fear, I cannot
soon --

At your own time, my dear Mr. Orme. -- At Mr. Selby's; at her house in London;
in Hampshire; wherever she is, and whether I am present or absent, Mr. Orme
will be received as her brother and my brother, as her friend and my friend.

Good God! Good God! -- He gushed into tears. He ran into the house to hide his
emotion; but in vain; for when he went in, he wept like a child! -- Forgive me,
forgive me, Sir John! (who just then came in from taking leave of his noble
guest) but there is no bearing this man's magnanimity! -- He is all I have
heard of him. Happy, happy Miss Byron! -- No man but this could deserve her.
But where is he? rising: I will ask his pardon for my abrupt departure from him.

He is gone, answered Sir John. I saw him in his chariot! Good Mr. Orme! he
called you, and sighed for you. Poor Mr. Orme declared, that he would wait upon
Sir Charles, and tell him, how acceptable to his heart, and what balm to his
mind, would be the tender he had the goodness to make him. Sister, said he, you
were at the gate, as well as the young Ladies; did he not hint, did he not say,
that Miss Byron spoke of me with tenderness?

Miss Kitty Holles supplied to us afterward my brother's account of what
passed in this accidental interview. These dear girls know not how to keep from
Selby-house. They are good girls; how then can they help admiring Sir Charles
Grandison?

I begin to fancy I am in a way to please you, Lady G. Of which* at taking up
my pen, I had little hopes, and therefore intended not to take much pains about
it. But the subject must warm the coldest genius. Is it not of your brother,
and my cousin?

In the afternoon, a Letter was brought from Sir Rowland Meredith. My cousin
intends to show it to you in town. Such a mix are in it, of joy and sadness; of
condolement and congratulation; I believe was never seen in one sheet of paper.
It is dated from Windsor. The good man was there in his way to town; resolving
to pay a visit to the wonderful man, as he calls ^im, of whom he had heard so
great a character; and who was probably to be the husband of his daug^^^r
Byron; and there he heard (from Lord W's do^^stics I suppose) that Sir Charles
was in Northamptonshire, and that the marriage was actually solemnized. He
therefore intended to set out directly for Bath, where Mr. Fowler was, or at
the Hot-well at Bristol, pursuing measures for his health; with a view to
console his poor boy.

This is a good old man. Methinks I am half ready to wish, that some of my
cousin's admirers would dry up their tears, and come among us: Yet we are nice
and dainty girls, some of us, let me tell you. -- It Is foolish, however, to
suggest leavings, and such sort of stuff; the Lady such as but one man could
deserve; his merit allowed universally.

Sir Charles acquainted his Lady with all that had passed between him and Mr.
Orme. She received his account with joy and thankfulness.

You are entered, Sir, said she, into a numerous family. I have called Sir
Rowland Meredith my Father; Mr. Fowler my Brother. Be pleased to read this
Letter.

I remember the relation, my dear, returned Sir Charles, and acknowledge it.
Mr. Fowler is another Mr. Orme. Sir Rowland is a very worthy man.

He read it -- What an excellent heart has Sir Rowland! My dearest Love!
cultivate their friendship* as I will Mr. Orme's. My pity for these worthy
objects, joining with yours, and the frankness of our mutual behavior to them,
will strengthen their hearts. We owe it to them, my dearest Life, as much as it
is in our power, to soften their disappointment. -- Could they have a greater?

O my Lady G! Who can think of a man after this -- Except one might hope, from
the personal knowledge of his charming behavior, that the men who addressed
us, might be improved by such an example?

The Tenants Jubilee, as they called it, was on Wednesday. It was a much more
orderly day than we expected. Sir Charles was all condescension and cheerful
goodness: My cousin all graciousness, was the word for her. Mrs. Shirley was of
the company How was she reverenced! She ever was! Once when the bride was
withdrawn, and Sir Charles was engaged in talk with Mr. Deane, she whispered
two or three of her tenants to tell the rest, that it was great joy to her, to
be assured, that after her departure, the tenants of her dear Mr. Shirley would
be treated with as much kindness (perhaps with more) as he, and as she, after
his example, had ever treated them. Yet one caution, I give, said she: My dear
son will see with his own eyes: He will dispense with his own hands. He will
not be imposed upon.

Thursday and Friday the Bride saw company. There was as little both days of
the impertinence that attends form, as, I believe, was ever known on the like
occasion; but more of sincere admiration. We had a vast number of people. Some
of them persons of fashion, with whom we had but slender acquaintance; but who
wished to see the happy pair.

We shall be this day at Shirley-manor in a family way: In that, my dear Lady
G. (after all the bustle and parade that we can make) lies the true, because
the untumultuous joy.

Tomorrow we shall serve God in our usual way.

Adieu, my dear Lady G. -- This is the sort of stuff you must be satisfied with
from a poor untalented girl, as is

Your ever-devoted, LUCY SELBY.
No end of duty, love, compliments, etc. I begin again to doubt I shall not please
you: -- So am (allowably) tired.



LETTER II. Lady G. To Miss SELBY.
Monday, Nov. 27.
COME, come, Lucy, you do pretty well. Don't be disheartened, child. Yet you are
not quite the clever girl I once thought you. You, that held such a part in the
correspondence of our Harriet. -- But you say, you cannot help it. Poor girl! I
am sorry for it. Your talents lie in speech, not in writing. -- Your account of
the interview between Orme and my brother, shows you cannot write at all. No,
not you -- Poor Lucy! But write one Letter more before you come to town. Do! my
dear! You have charming subjects before you, yet.

I, you see, have a talent to make subjects out of nothing: You, poor soul!
cannot follow them when made to your hand. I Will tell you a story of my good man
and his good woman. A short one. The poor man is very sensible of slight
ailments. Happy, as he is, in a wife, no wonder he is afraid of dying. He was
complaining to me just now [To whom but to a pitying wife should a man complain
when he ails anything?] that he had a troublesome disorder in the inside of
his mouth. I looked very grave; shook my careful head. I am afraid, my Lord,
something is breeding there, that should not. He started, and looked concerned.
The man will never know me. God sorbid! said he -- afraid of nothing less than
a cancer. Have I not told you a thousand times, my Lord, of your gaping? As
sure as you are alive, your mouth is fly-blown.

Expecting compassion, he found a jest, and never was man so angry. I was
forced to take his hand, and stroke his cheeks with mine, to be friends.

But, Lucy, let not any of these flippances meet my brother's eye, or invade
his ear: I shall be undone if they do.

Caroline is pure well. Her Lord is never out either of her chamber, or the
nursery.

Aunt Nell makes an admirable nurse. Her parrot and her squirrel are now
neglected for a little marmouset. Everybody but the real nurse likes aunt
Nell. The good creature is so understanding, so directing! I protest, these old
maids think they know everything. The nurse, I see, cannot endure her.

I interfere not. The boy is robust, and they leave him the free exercise of
his limbs, and he has a fine pipe, and makes the nursery ring whenever he
pleases; so will do well enough.

But high-ho, Lucy! all these nursery memento's, how do they sadden and mortify
me! The word mother, what a solemn sound has it to me now; Caroline's situation
before me! -- But, come, the evil day is at distance: Who Is afraid?

Beauchamp sighs for Emily: Emily for somebody else. Sir Hargrave is still
miserable. Poor Sir Harry! He still lives! But can life be life, when there is
no hope?

Write me one more Letter before you come up: If it be ever so short a one.
Don't be proud and saucy: You imagine, I suppose, that you cannot write as well
as Harriet and I. Granted. Attempt it not therefore. But write as well as you
can; and that, till Harriet can find herself at leisure to resume her pen,
shall content

Your true friend, and humble servant, CHAPTER G.
No end of your compliments to us in town, you say. -- No end of ours to you in
the country, were I to begin them: Therefore will not say a word about them.
You know my meaning by my gaping.



LETTER III. Miss SELBY, To Lady G.
Thursday Night, No. 30.
AND must I write your Ladyship one more Letter?

And will a short one content you?

Well then, I Will try for it.

On Sunday last, we hoped to be quiet and good: But the church was as much
crowded as it was the Sunday before.

Monday and Tuesday the Bride and Bridegroom returned the visits made them. At
one, they met Miss* Orme, and accompanied her to their seat called The Park, at
her request. You did not seem to like my account of Sir Charles's interview
with Mr. Orme in my last: So I will not tell you what passed on accasion of
this visit to that worthy man. I will be as perverse as you are difficult. I
don't care. Yet, as your new sister described the meeting and parting to me,
you would have been pleased with what I could have told you.

Yesterday we had a Ball given by Mrs. Shirley. Were I able to write to please
you, how I could expatiate on this occasion! How did the Bridegroom shine!
Everybody was in raptures with him, on his charming behavior to his Bride.
The notice he took of her was neither too little, nor too much, for the most
delicate observers. Every young Lady envied her; and how coldly did some of
them look on their own humble servants! They indeed were as regardful of him as
their mistresses; so bore the preference the better. My uncle Selby was all,
and more than all, he used to be. How happy, that he is a sober man! His joy,
raised by wine, would have made him mad.

This day we have been all happy together. A calm, serene day; at
Shirley-manor! And thus is the matter settled among us -- Your brother and new
sister; my uncle and aunt Selby; Mr. Deane, and your Ladyship's humble servant;
are to set out early tomorrow morning for London. My brother James would sain
accompany us; Sir Charles kindly inviting him: But I withstood it; so did my
aunt; the private reason because of Miss Jervois.

Sir Charles thinks to stay in town till the Friday following; and then
proposes to carry his Bride and all of us, to Grandison-hall.

A motion was made to Sir Charles by my grandmamma Selby; whether he would not
choose to be presented with his Lady to the King on their nuptials. Sir Charles
answered, that he was ready to comply with every proposal that should show his
duty to his Sovereign, and the grateful sense he had of the honor done him by
his Harriet.

We are to call on Lord and Lady W. at Windsor; and take them with us.

My cousin and I are to write constantly to our two grandmamma's. My sister
Nancy devotes herself to our grandmother Selby. Miss Holles's will constantly
visit Mrs. Shirley. Sir Charles is to bring down his Lady twice a year, or
oftener, if convenience permit.

He hoped, he said, after a while, to induce his Harriet to take a trip with
him to Ireland, to inspect the improvements making in his estate there. He will
find no difficulty, I believe, to prevail upon her to accompany him thither;
nor even, were he disposed to it, to the world's end.

He hopes for a visit from the Italian family, so deservedly dear to him; by
which he is to regulate many of his future motions.

His new-taken house in Grosvenor-square being, as you know, nearly ready, he
proposes to compliment with it those noble guests, for the time of their
residence in England; for he, will not, it seems, be so soon obliged to quit
his present London-house, as he had thought he must.

And thus, my dear Lady G. have I obeyed your commands. I know you will not be
satisfied with me. Had I been able to follow a subject that was made to my
hand, I should have attempted the parting scene between my cousin and her
grandmamma. Could I have borrowed your pen, I would have displayed the tender,
yet magnanimous parent, not once, though tottering with age and infirmities,
hinting that she might never again see the darling of her heart. She saddened
not hope; but encouraged it. All she said, demonstrated Love of her Harriet,
divested of Self, and a soul above the weaker passions; and well might she,
since she has already one foot among the stars, and can look down with pity,
unmixed with envy, on all those who by their youth, are doomed to toil through
the rugged road of life, in search of a happiness that is not to be met with in
it; and at the highest, can be compounded for, only by the blessing of a
contented mind. With the same pen, before I had resigned it, would I have
described the lovely grandchild embraceing the knees of the indulgent parent,
not satisfied with one, two, three blessings; and, less generously in the
purport, though not in the intent (judging from her own present happiness, that
there is still something worth wishing for to be met with in this world)
praying to God to preserve the over-ripened fruit still on the withered tree:
In which we all joined. But O how much less generously, as I hinted, because it
was altogether for our own sakes! -- But I know not whose pen I must have
borrowed, to have done justice to Sir Charles Grandison's behavior on this
occasion!

Excuse this serious conclusion, my dear Lady G. My cousin shall not see it.
May she know nothing but felicity! In hers is bound up that of Sir Charles
Grandison; and in his that of hundreds. I long, though we parted so lately, to
throw myself at your feet, and to assure you, that whatever defects there are
in my pen, there are none in the Love borne you, by

Your Ladyship's Most sincere admirer, and humble Servant, LUCY SELBY.

LETTER IV. Lady GRANDISON, To Mrs. SHIRLEY.
Thursday, December 7.
LUCY (my ever honored grandmamma) has given you the particulars of the
rapturous reception I met with on Saturday, from my dear Lady L. on the visit
we made her in her chamber. She, as well as her Lord, welcomed and
congratulated us, and herself, with such a grace! -- They are a charming pair!
-- We all rejoiced with her, on the addition she had made to two families so
worthy.

Mrs. Eleanor Grandison received us also in raptures.

How did the tenderly kind notice which Sir Charles took of the lovely little
infant (It is a fine child!) delight the happy mother, and everybody!

Lord and Lady G. met us at Lady L's; Emily, and the Earl of G. and Lady
Gertrude, with them. How affectionately did the dear girl welcome us, after a
few tears, which she endeavored to hide, and which we passed over as tears of
joy! But Lucy has given you all particulars This Letter of Miss Selby does not
appear.
; and the noble manner also, in which Sir Charles gave me possession of his
house, on our first arrival. Everybody was charmed with it. It cost my aunt
some tears.

The Christening was delayed till Monday; because Sir Charles was desirous it
should be performed at church. He had some few difficulties to get over, before
he carried his point; and this was the substance of his reasonings on the
subject: People of fashion, he said, should consider themselves as examples to
the lower orders of people. They should show a conformity to the laws of their
country, both ecclesiastical and civil, where they can do it with a good
conscience. In the present case, Baptism, said he, is one of our two
sacraments; and shall it not be performed, when it can, as the church directs;
the child in full health?

I will give you, my dear grandmamma, journalwise, I think, an account of our
proceedings; still referring myself to my Lucy for such particulars as now I
shall not have time to give. For you know, my dear grandmamma, that my time is
not now my own, as it used to be; though I shall think myself very ungrateful,
and undutiful too, if I permit my new duties so wholly to engross me, as to
furnish an excuse for the neglect of those which from my very birth I owe to
you.

I think Lucy has not mentioned to you the lively conversations that passed in
the evening, after the christening, between Sir Charles and Lady G. she
choosing to single out her brother (as she had threatened, unknown to him, to
do) in order to try once more her strength with him, in vivacity and raillery.
She delighted everybody with her wit: For it was not so rapid and so unguarded
as sometimes it is. He condescended, was Lucy's just observation, to return wit
for her wit, in order to follow her lead, as he saw the company was delighted
with their conversation; and was exceedingly brilliant. She complimented
herself on the merit of having drawn him out, though to her own disadvantage.
Finding herself overmatched, she shifted her attacks, and made one upon me; but
with so much decorum and complaisance, as showed she intended to do me honor,
rather than herself.

Tuesday evening.] Sir Charles is just returned from visiting Sir Harry
Beauchamp. The poor man numbers his hours, and owned, that the three the best
of men gave him, as by his own watch (though Sir Charles intended to be back in
one) were more happy ones than he had promised himself in this life. O madam!
How easy sits my Sir Charles's piety upon him! He can pity a dying friend,
without saddening his own heart; for he lives the life of duty as he goes
along, and fears not the inevitable lot!

Wednesday.] He is just returned from a visit to Sir Hargrave. Sir Hargrave, it
seems, complimented him, but with tears in his eyes, on his marriage. Great
God! said he, how are you rewarded! How am I punished! Is there not hope that I
have all my punishment in this life? I am sure, it is very, very heavy.

He visited the same day Mrs. Oldham, and her children.

He drank tea this afternoon with the Danby family in full assembly, at the
house of the elder brother; and came to my cousin Reeves's to supper. My uncle,
aunt, Mr. Deane, and Lucy, accompanied me thither to tea and supper, where, as
by promise, we were joined by Lord and Lady G. Lord L. Mrs. Eleanor Grandison,
my Emily, and Mr. Beauchamp. Mr. Reeves had also invited Lady Betty Williams.
What felicitations did she pour on me! She sighed, poor Lady! for the unhappy
step her daughter had taken: And I sighed for the mother; who, though she had not
given her daughter a bad example, had not set her a good one.

Lucy will tell you what a charming evening we had.

On Thursday,] Mr. Grandison presented his newmarried Lady to Sir Charles and
me, on account of our marriage, and dined with us. Sir Charles received the
Lady, as well as his cousin, with the utmost politeness. She is far from being
a dis^greeable woman: But, at first, the awe she had of the people of rank in
company, particularly of Lady G. as she owned to me, gave her an air of
aukwardness. But Sir Charles's polite notice of her soon made her easy.

Mr. Grandison found an opportunity to praise to me her good sense and fine
qualities; but in such a way, as if he were making apologies for having given
the honor of his name to a woman under his own rank (ungrateful!) who yet had
re-established him: He concluded his panegyric with letting me know, that she
had already presented him with 25,000 pounds: He looked as if he thought he
deserved it all: and actually called her a very discerning woman. I questioned
not, I told him, his gratitude to a Lady so deserving; and he as good as
promised to reward her by his Love; whispering, with an air of
self-sufficiency, sticking his hand in his side, and surveying himself to the
right and left, Her former Husband, madam, was a very plain, but an honest man.
But I do assure you she has taste! -- O dear! O dear! thought I to myself.

Sir Charles invited them both to Grandison-hall, and she seemed not a little
proud on his calling her, as he did several times, Cousin.

Lord L. and Lord and Lady G. dined with us, as did Mrs. Eleanor Grandison and
Emily. Lady G. in the main, behaved prettily enough to Mr. Grandison and his
Bride. But once a little forgetting herself, and putting on a supercilious air,
I whispered her, Dear Lady G. consider, you can give pride to others by your
condescension: You must not yourself condescend to be proud.

Be you, my Harriet, re-whispered she, always my monitress. It is the sorry
fellow, not his wife, that I look down upon, She, a widow Cit, might have done
still worse.

Cit! Lady G. And in a trading kingdom?

Ay, Cit, child! Have you not heard my brother say, that even in the republic
of Venice, there are young nobility and old nobility: Distinctions in blood
everywhere but at Amsterdam!

Who, and what, at first, made the distinction, my dear? asked I.

Be quiet, Harriet! -- I think I am very good --

And at the height of your goodness, Charlotte?

Be quiet, when I bid you? aloud.

Sir Charles a little jealous of our whispering, for the sake of his cousins,
turning to Mr. Grandison, Your cousin Charlotte, you know, Sir, is always hard
pressed, when she calls out, Be quiet.

I was always rejoiced, replied he, when my cousin was brought to that.

Sir Charles has been twice at the Drawing Room, since we have been in town. He
admires the integrity of heart of his Sovereign, as much as he reveres his
royal dignity. Once I remember, he wished that his Majesty would take a
summer's progress through his British, another into his Irish, dominions; but
expressly with this proviso, That every gentleman and woman of condition should
be welcome at his court, who came not in new dresses to pay their duty to him;
and this lest the gentry's vying with each other in appearance, should hurt
their private circumstances; and for the same reason, that he would graciously
treat, but not be treated by, any of the nobility at their houses.

Tomorrow morning, Sir Charles, his grateful Harriet, happy creature! my uncle
and aunt Selby, Mr. Deane, and Emily, are to set out by the way of Windsor for
Grandison-hall. We are to take an early dinner there with Lord and Lady W.;
who, on that condition, have promised to attend their beloved nephew, and his
friends, to the Hall.

Lord G. is allowed to stay a week with us, and no more. He is then to attend
his now but halfsaucy Lady, at one of the Earl of G's seats in Hertfordshire;
where, by promise of long-standing, she is to keep her Christmas: At which she
mutters not a little; because she would sain have been with us; and because she
imagines, it will be proper for her to confine herself at home, by the time
they will part with her.

My aunt Selby, and even my uncle, will write. He must, he says, the
over-flowings of his joy. Lucy loves to describe houses, furniture, gardens,
and such like. She says, she will sometimes give conversations too, at which I
shall not be present; but will leave to my pen persons, characters, and what
passes of the more tender sort in conversations where I am by. But as well
Lucy's Letters, as mine, are to be sent to Lady G. unsealed; and she, after
showing them to her sister, will hasten them to Northamptonshire. Referring
therefore to Lucy for more particular accounts, I subscribe myself, with all
duty and grateful love to my grandmamma, as well as with kindest remembrances
to all my dear friends,

Your happy, thrice happy, HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER V. Lady GRANDISON, To Mrs. SHIRLEY.
Grandison-hall, Saturday 12 o'clock, Dec. 9.
O My dearest, dearest grandmamma! Here I am! The declared mistress of this
spacious house, and the happiest of human creatures! This is all at this
instant I can write.

LORD and Lady W. honored us, as they had promised, with their company; but
detained us so long, that we were obliged to he one night on the road. But by
eleven this morning we arrived here.

At our alighting, Sir Charles clasping me in his arms, I congratulate you, my
dearest life, said he, on your entrance into your own house. The last Lady
Grandison, and the present, might challenge the whole British nation to produce
their equals. Then turning to every one of his guests, those of my family
first, as they were strangers to the place, he said the kindest, the politest
things that ever proceeded from the mouth of man. I wept for joy. I would have
spoken, but could not. Everybody congratulated the happy Harriet.

Dr. Bartlett was approaching to welcome us, but drew back till our mutual
congratulations were over. He then appeared. I present to you, my dear Dr.
Bartlett, said the best of men, the lovely friend, whom you have so long wished
to see mistress of this house. He then offered my hand to the Doctor.

God bless you, madam! tears in his eyes. -- God bless you both! Then kissed,
instead of myhand, which I withdrew, my offered cheek. He could say no more: I
could not speak distinctly.

My dear Sir Charles led me, followed by all our rejoicing friends, through a
noble dining room to the drawing room, called, The Lady's: The whole house, my
dear, said he, and every person and thing belonging to it, is yours: But this
apartment is more particularly so. Let what is amiss in it, be altered as you
would have it.

O Sir! grasping his presenting hand between both mine, was all I could say.

This room is elegantly furnished. It is hung with a light green velvet,
delicately ornamented; the chairs of the same; the frames of them gilt; as is
the frame of a noble cabinet in it. -- My mother's, my dearest life, whispered
he. It will be always fashionable: And you, I know, will value it on her
account. -- Indeed I shall. -- He presented me with the keys. Here perhaps will
you deposit your letters and correspondences; some of which (the continuation
of those I have had the honor to see) you will allow me to peruse. But of
choice, remember, madam. For your whole heart must be in the grant of the
favors you will confer upon me of this kind.

Dear Sir, said I, leave me power of speech; my will shall be yours, in
everything. But you will find a strange, strange heart, laid open to you, if
you command from me a sight of the papers, that probably will be reposited
here, when all my matters are brought from Northamptonshire.

You shall have all the Letters you ever wrote to me, and the venerable circle,
said Lucy; a loan, not a gift; if you will show them to Sir Charles.

Courage, Lucy, not inclination, will be only wanting.

Thank you, Lucy, said he. Thank you, my Love, to me. You must make marks
against the passages in the Letters you shall have the goodness to communicate,
which you would not have me read. I will give you my honor that I will not
pass the bounds you prescribe.

I will snatch another opportunity to proceed. -- My dear Sir Charles indulges
me. I have told him, that if he now-and-then misses, he must conclude that I am
doubling my joy, by communicating it as I have opportunity, to my dear
Grandmamma.

EVERYBODY admires the elegance of this drawing room. The finest japan china,
that I ever saw, except that of Lady G's, which she so whimsically received at
the hands of her Lord, took particularly every female eye.

Sir Charles led me into a closet adjoining -- Your Oratory, your Library, my
Love, when you shall have furnished it, as you desired you might, by your
chosen collection from Northamptonshire.

It is a sweet little apartment, my dear grandmamma; elegant book-cases,
unfurnished. Every other ornament complete. How had he been at work to oblige
me, by Dr. Bartlett's good offices, while my heart perhaps was torn, part of
the time, with uncertainty!

The housekeeper, a middle-aged woman, who is noted, as you have heard her
master say, for prudence, integrity, and obligingness, a gentlewoman (born)
appearing; Sir Charles presented her to me. Receive, my Love, a faithful, a
discreet gentlewoman, who will think herself honored with your commands. Mrs.
Curzon (to her) you will be happy in a mistress who is equally beloved and
reverenced by all who have the honor of her countenance, if she approve of
your services, and if you choose to continue with us.

I took her hand: I hope Mrs. Curzon, there is no doubt but you will. You may
depend upon everything that is in my power to make you easy and happy.

She looked pleased; but answered only with a respectful courtesy.

Sir Charles led the gentleman out to show them his Study. We just looked into
a fine suite of rooms on the same floor, and joined them there.

We found my uncle and Mr. Deane admiring the disposition of everything, as
well as the furniture. The glass-cases are neat, and, as Dr. Bartlett told us,
stored with well-chosen books in all sciences. Mr. Deane praised the globes,
the orrery, and the instruments of all sorts, for geographical, astronomical,
and other scientifical observations. It is ornamented with pictures, some, as
Dr. Bartlett told us, of the best masters of the Italian and Flemish schools,
statues, bustoes, bronzes: And there also, placed in a distinguished manner,
were the two rich cabinets of medals, gems, and other curiosities, presented to
him by Lady Olivia. He mentioned what they contained, and by whom presented;
and said, he would show us at leisure the contents. They are not mine, added
he: I only give them a place till the generous owner shall make some worthy man
happy. His they must be. It would be a kind of robbery to take them from a
family, that, for near a century past, have been collecting them.

LUCY says, she will be very particular in her Letters. This will take up time;
especially as Lady G. and Lady L. must see them in their way to
Northamptonshire; though they will not detain them. I shall have an opportunity
to send this to London on Monday. This makes me intent to snatch every
opportunity of writing. It will otherwise be too long before you will hear from
us by my hand.

I do not intend to invade this slow girl's province; yet I will give you a
slight sketch of the house and apartments, as I go along.

The situation is delightful. The house is very spacious. It is built in the
form of an H; both fronts pretty much alike. The hall, the dining-parlour, two
drawing-rooms, one adjoining to the study, the other to the dining-parlour
(which with the study, mentioned already, and other rooms, that I shall leave
to Lucy to describe, make the ground-floor) are handsome, and furnished in an
elegant, but not sumptuous taste; the hangings of some them beautiful paper
only. There is adjoining to the study, a room called The Music-parlour, so
called in Sir Thomas's time, and furnished with several fine musical
instruments: Sir Thomas was as great an admirer of music as his son; and a
performer.

It is no news to you, madam, that Sir Charles shows a great regard to every
thing, place, and disposition, that was his father's; and not absolutely
inconvenient, and inconsistent with the alterations he has thought necessary to
make: And which Dr. Bartlett praises highly, and promises to particularize to
me. We are to be shown this Music-parlour by-and-by.

The dining room is noble and well proportioned: It goes over the hall and
dining-parlour. It is hung with crimson-damask, adorned with valuable pictures.
The furniture is rich, but less ornamented than that of the Lady's drawing room.

The best bed chamber adjoining, is hung with fine tapestry. The bed is of
crimson velvet, lined with white silk; chairs and curtains of the same. Two
fine pictures drawn by Sir Godfrey, one of Sir Thomas, the other of Lady
Grandson, whole lengths, took my eye: O with what reverence, that of my Lady!
-- Lady L. Lady G. as girls, and Sir Charles as a boy of about ten years of
age, made three other fine whole lengths. I must contemplate them, when I have
more leisure.

The suit of rooms on the first floor which we just stepped into, are each
denominated from the color of the hangings, which are generally of damask.

Mrs. Curzon tells us, that, on occasion, they make fifteen beds, within the
house, in which the best Lord in the land need not disdain to repose. -- You
remember, madam, that Sir Charles, in his invitation to the Italian family,
tells them, he has room to receive them. The offices are said to be exceedingly
convenient.

The gardens and lawn seem from the windows of this spacious house to be as
boundless as the mind of the owner, and as free and open as his countenance.

[MISS Lucy Selby thus describes the situation of the house, and the park,
gardens, orchard, etc. in one of her Letters which does not appear.]

"THIS large and convenient house is situated in a spacious park; which has
several fine avenues leading to it.

"On the north side of the park, flows a winding stream, that may well be
called a river, abounding with trout and other fish; the current quickened by a
noble cascade, which tumbles down its foaming waters from a rock, which is
continued to some extent, in a kind of ledge of rock-work rudely disposed.

"The park itself is remarkable for its prospects, lawns, and rich-appearing
clumps of trees of large growth; which must therefore have been planted by the
ancestors of the excellent owner; who, contenting himself to open and enlarge
many fine prospects, delights to preserve, as much as possible, the plantations
of his ancestors; and particularly thinks it a kind of impiety to fell a tree,
that was planted by his father.

"On the south side of the river, on a natural and easy ascent, is a neat, but
plain villa, in the rustic taste, erected by Sir Thomas; the flat roof of which
presents a noble prospect. This villa contains convenient lodging-rooms; and
one large room in which he used sometimes to entertain his friends.

"The gardener's house is a pretty little building. The man is a sober diligent
man, he is in years: Has a housewifely good creature of a wife. Content is in
the countenances of both: How happy must they be!

"The gardens, vineyard, etc. are beautifully laid out. The orangery is
flourishing; everything indeed is, that belongs to Sir Charles Grandison;
alcoves, little temples, seats, are erected at different points of view: The
orchard, lawns, and grass-walks, have sheep for gardeners; and the whole being
bounded only by sunk fences, the eye is carried to views that have no bounds.

"The orchard, which takes up near three acres of ground, is planted in a
peculiar taste. A neat stone bridge in the center of it, is thrown over the
river: It is planted in a natural stope; the higher fruit trees, as pears, in a
semicircular row, first; apples at further distances next; cherries, plumbs,
standard apricots, etc. all which in the season of blossoming, one row
gradually lower than another, must make a charming variety of blooming sweets
to the eye, from the top of the rustic villa, which commands the whole.

"The outside of this orchard, next the north, is planted with three rows of
trees, at proper distances from each other; one of pines; one of cedars; one of
Scotch firs, in the like semicircular order; which at the same ti^e that they
afford a perpetual verdure to the eye, and shady walks in the summer, defend
the orchard from the cold and blighting winds.

"This plantation was made by direction of Sir Thomas, in his (...) of fancy.
We have heard that he had a poeti^^l, and consequently, a fanciful taste."
[Thus far from Miss Selby. Lady Grandison those proceeds.]

My uncle, once took my aunt out from the company, in a kind of hurry. I saw
his eyes glisten, and was curious on her return, to know the occasion. This was
his speech to her, unable to check his emotion; What a man is this, dame Selby!
We were surely wanting in respect to him when he was among us. To send such a
one to an inn! -- Fie upon us! -- Lord be good unto me! how are things come
about! -- Who would have thought it? -- Sometimes I wonder the girl is not as
proud as Lucifer; at other times, that she is able to look him in the face!

To this convenient house belongs an elegant little chapel, neatly decorated.
But Sir Charles, when down, generally goes to the parish church, of which he is
patron.

The gallery I have not yet seen -- Dr. Bartlett tells me, it is adorned with a
long line of ancestors.

AFTER dinner, which was sumptuous and wellordered, Sir Charles led us into the
Music-parlour. O, madam, you shall hear what honor was done me there. -- I
will lead to it.

Several of the neighboring gentlemen, he told us, are performers; and he
hopes to engage them as opportunities shall offer. My dear Dr. Bartlett, said
he, your soal is harmony: I doubt not but all these are in order -- "May I ask
you, my Harriet?" pointing to the harpsichord. I instantly sat down to it. It
is a fine Instrument. Lord G. took up a violin; Lord L. a German flute; Mr.
Deane a bass-viol; and we had a little concert of about half an hour.

Here is a noble organ: When the little concert was over, he was so good
himself, on my aunt's referring to him with asking eyes, to show us it was in
tune.

We all seated ourselves round him, on his prepareing to oblige us; I between
my aunt and Lucy; and he with a voice admirably suited to the instrument (but
the words, if I may be allowed to say so, still more admirably to the occasion)
at once delighted and surprised us all, by the following Lines:

I.
Accept, great SOURCE of every bliss,
The fullness of my heart,
Poured out in tuneful cestasies,
By this celestial art.
II.
My soul, with gratitude profound,
Receive a Form so bright!
And yet, I boast a bliss beyond
This angel to the sight.
III.
When charms of mind and person meet,
How rich our raptures rise!
The Fair that renders earth so sweet,
Prepares me for the skies!
How did our friends look upon one another, as the excellent man proceeded! --
I was astonished. It was happy I sat between my aunt and Lucy! -- They each
took one of my hands. Tears of joy ran down my cheeks. Every one's eyes
congratulated me. Every tongue but mine, encored him. I was speechless. Again
he obliged us. I thought at the time, I had a foretaste of the joys of heaven!
-- How sweet the incense of praise from a husband! That husband a good man! --
My surrounding friends enjoying it! -- How will you, madam, rejoice in such an
instance of a Love so pure, and so grateful! Long, long may it be, for the sake
of his Harriet, his and her friends, for the world's sake, before his native
skies reclaim him!

He approached me with tender modesty; as if abashed by the applause he met
with. But seeing me affected, he was concerned. I withdrew with my aunt and
Lucy. He followed me. I then threw myself at his feet; embraced his knees; and
had speech been lent me, would have offered him the fervent vows of a heart
overflowing with Love and Gratitude.

LETTER VI. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
THE Music-parlour [I can hardly mention it without breaking into raptures] is
adorned with a variety of fine carvings, on subjects that do honor to poetry
and music. Be it Lucy's task to describe them. Let me mention other instances
of his tender goodness to one of the happiest creatures on earth.

You know, madam, Sir Charles, when in Northamptonshire, offered me my choice
of servants of both sexes; and when I told him, that I chose not to take with
me any one of either but my Sally, he said, that when I came to Grandison-hall,
where they would be all together, I should choose which of the menservants I
would more particularly call my own. He gave me just now the names and
qualities of each. Frederic I had seen at Selby-house, an observant,
sensible-looking young man (but are not all his servants so?): I choose him. He
called him in (my aunt Selby present): All my servants, Frederic, said he, are
as much your Lady's as mine: But you will devote yourself more particularly to
her commands. I mean not, however, any distinction in your favor, where you
all equally merit distinction. The power, madam, of change or dismission through
the house is entirely yours.

Tomorrow, I am to go over all the bridal ostentation again at the
parish church. On Monday Lady Mansfield and her family are to be here. -- Your
guests, my dear, said Sir Charles, to me, before all our friends, I hope, for a
week at least. This was the first notice he gave of it to Lord and Lady W. What
joy and gratitude appeared in her countenance upon it.

Tuesday, by general approbation (Sir Charles submitting the choice of the day
to his guests) we are to have the neighboring gentry here to dinner, and for
the rest of the day. Sir Charles has been long wished by them all to reside
among them. He breaks through the usual forms, and chose this way, at once, to
receive the visits of all his neighbors, and in both our names gave the
invitation. He snewed us a list of the persons invited. It is a very large one.
My dearest life, said he, we shall be all half-familiarized to them, they to
us, even tomorrow, by the freedom of this invitation for the Tuesday following.

Mrs. Curzon came to me for directions about the bedchambers. I took that
opportunity to tell her, that I should add to the number of female servants,
only my Sally, of whose discretion I had no doubt. You must introduce to me,
said I, at a proper time, the female servants. If you, Mrs. Curzon, approve of
them, I shall make no changes. I am, myself, the happiest of women: Every one
who deserves it, shall find her happiness in mine.

You will rejoice all their hearts, madam, by this early declaration of your
good to them. I can truly say, that the best of masters has not the worst of
servants: But Dr. Bartlett would make bad servants good.

I shall want no other proof, said I, of their goodness, than their love and
respect to Dr. Bartlett.

In company of my aunt, Lady W. Lucy, Miss Jervois, attended by Mrs. Curzon, we
went to choose our rooms; and those for our expected guests of Monday. We soon
fixed on them. My aunt with her usual goodness, and Lady W. with that
condescension that is natural to her, took great notice of Mrs. Curzon, who
seemed delighted with us all; and said, that she should be the happier in the
performance of her duty, as she had been informed, we were managing Ladies. It
was a pleasure, she said, to receive commands from persons who knew when things
were properly done. You, my dearest grandmamma, from my earliest youth, have
told me, that to be respected even by servants, it is necessary to be able to
direct them, and not be thought ignorant in those matters that it becomes a
mistress of a family to be acquainted with. They shall not find me pragmatical,
however, in the little knowledge I have in family-matters.

Will nothing happen, my dear grandmamma -- But no more of this kind -- Shall I
by my diffidences lessen the enjoyments of which I am in full possession? My
joy may not be sufficient to banish fear; but I hope it will be a prudent one,
which will serve to increase my thankfulness to heaven, and my gratitude to the
man so justly dear to me.

But do you, my grandmamma, whenever you pray for the continuance of your
Harriet's happiness, pray also for that of Lady Clementina: That only can be
wanting in my present situation, to complete the felicity of

Your ever-grateful, ever-dutiful, HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER VII. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Sunday noon.
WHAT a crowded churchyard and church had I to pass through to the handsome
seat, which belongs to the excellent patron of it! -- How much exalted was I to
hear his whispered praises! How did my Northamptonshire friends rejoice in the
respectful approbation paid to the happy creature, to whom they are more
immediately related! I am always a little mortified by praises of my figure.
What a transitory thing is outward form! -- May I make to myself a more solid
and permanent foundation for that respect, which is generally more pleasing to
a female heart than it ought to be.

Sir Charles was not unhappy in his invitation for next Tuesday. It took off, I
imagine, some particular addresses to him. Yet several gentlemen at his
coach-side acknowledged the favor done them in it.

My uncle, who, you know, madam, loves everything that promotes good
neighborhood, is greatly delighted with the thoughts of the day. How proud is
he of his Harriet! How much more proud of his relation to the best of men!

I have looked upon what Lucy has written. I see there will be but little room
for me to say anything. She is delighted with the task. It employs all her
faculties; displays her fine taste in architecture, paintings, needle-works,
shell-works. She will give you a description of several charming performances
in the two latter arts, of the late Lady Grandison! -- How does the character
of that admirable Lady rise upon us! With what emulation does it fire me! On
twenty accounts, it was a very bold thing, my grandmamma, for your Harriet to
aspire to be Lady Grandison! -- Yet how does Sir Charles's goodness, his kind
acceptance of all my humble endeavors, encourage me! -- O, madam! he said
truth, when in courtship he told me, that I parted with power to have it
returned me with augmentation. I don't know how it is, but his freedom of
behavior to me is increased; yet his respectfulness is not diminished. -- And,
tender as he was before to me, his tenderness is still greater than it was: Yet
so much unaffected dignity in it, that my reverence for him is augmented, but
without any abatement of my Love. Then his cheerfulness, his more than
cheerfulness, his vivacity, shows, that he is at heart pleased with his
Harriet. Happy Harriet! -- Yet I cannot forbear now-and-then, when my joy and
my gratitude are at the highest, a sigh to the merits of Lady Clementina! --
What I am now, should she have been, think I often! -- The general admination
paid me as the wife of Sir Charles Grandison, should have been paid to her! --
Lady L. Lady G. should have been, her sisters! She should have been the
mistress of this house, the co-guardian of Emily, the successor of the late
excellent Lady Grandison! -- Hapless Clementina! -- What a strange thing, that
a love of religion in two persons so pious, so good, each in their way, should
sunder, for ever sunder, persons whose minds were so closely united!

Sir Charles, by Lucy, invites me, till dinner is ready, to walk with them, at
her request, in the gallery. Lucy wants, in describing that gallery, to give
you, my dearest grandmamma (in whom every other of my friends is included) a
brief history of the ancestors of Sir Charles, whose pictures adorn it. I come!
Lord of my heart! I attend you! --

How, madam, would you have been delighted, could you have sat in this truly
noble gallery, and seen the dear man, one arm round my waist, holding my
opposite hand in the hand of the same surrounding arm, pointing sometimes with
the other, sometimes putting that other arm round my Lucy's, and giving short
histories of the persons whose pictures we saw!

Some of the pictures are really fine. One of Sir Charles's, which is drawn
when he was about sixteen, is on horseback. The horse a managed, curvetting,
proud beast. -- His seat, spirit, courage, admirably expressed: He must have
been, as his sisters say he was, the loveliest, and the most undaunted, yet
most modest-looking, of youths. He passed his own picture so slightly, that I
had not time to take in half the beauties of it. You will not doubt, madam, but
I shall be often in this gallery, were only this one picture there.

What pleasure had I in hearing the history of this ancient family, from this
unbroken series of the pictures of it, for so many generations past! And will
mine, one day, thought I, be allowed a place among them, near to that of the
most amiable of them all, both as to mind and figure? How my heart exulted!
What were my meditations as I traced the imagined footsteps of dear Lady
Grandison, her picture and Sir Thomas's in my eye! as finely executed, as those
in the best bedchamber. May I, thought I, with a happier lot, be but half as
deserving! But, madam, did not Lady Grandison shine the more for the hardships
she passed through? -- And is it necessary for virtue to be called forth by
trials, in order to be justified by its fortitude under them? What trials can I
be called to with Sir Charles Grandison? But may I not take my place on the
footstep of her throne, yet make no contemptible figure in the family of her
beloved son? I will humbly endeavor to deserve my good fortune, and leave the
rest to Providence.

There are in different apartments of this seat, besides two in the house in
the town, no less than six pictures of Sir Thomas: But then two of them were
brought from his seat in Essex. Sir Thomas was fond of his person: They are
drawn in different attitudes. He appears to be, as I have always heard he was,
a fine figure of a man. But neither Lucy nor I, though we made not the compliment
to Sir Charles, you may suppose (who always speaks with reverence and
unaffected Love of his father) thought him comparable in figure, dignity,
intelligence, to his son.

We were called to dinner, before we had gone halfway through the gallery.

We had a crowded church again in the afternoon.

Sunday night.] This excellent Dr. Bartlett! And, this excellent Sir Charles
Grandison! I may say. -- Sir Charles having enquired of the Doctor, when alone
with him, after the rules observed by him before we came down, the Doctor told
him, that he had every morning and night the few servants attending him in his
antechamber to prayers, which he had selected out of the Church Service. Sir
Charles desired him by all means to continue so laudable a custom; for he was
sure master and servants would both find their account in it.

Sir Charles sent for Richard Saunders and Mrs. Curzon. He applauded to them
the Doctor's goodness, and desired they would signify, the one to the
menservants, the other to the women, that he should take it well of them, if
they cheerfully attended the Doctor; promising to give them opportunity, as
often as was possible. Half an hour after ten, Doctor, I believe is a good time
in the evening?

That, Sir, is about my time, and eight in the morning, as an hour the least
likely to interfere with their business. Whenever it does, they are in their
duty, and I do not then expect them.

About a quarter after ten, the Doctor slipped away. Soon after Sir Charles
withdrew, unperceived by any of us. The Doctor and his little church were
assembled. Sir Charles joined them, and afterward returned to company, with
that cheerfulness that always beams in his aspect. The Doctor followed him,
with a countenance as serene. I took the Doctor aside, though in the same
apartment, supposing the matter. Sir Charles joining us -- O Sir, said I, why
was I not whispered to withdraw with you? Think you, that your Harriet --

The company, my dearest Love, interrupted he, was not now to be broken up.
When we are settled, we can make a custom for ourselves, that will be allowed
for by everybody, when it is seen we persevere, and are in every other
respect, unform: Joshua's resolution, Doctor, was an excellent one As for me
and my house, we will serve the Lord, Josh. xxiv. 15.
. The chapel, now our congregation is large, will be the properest place; and
there, perhaps, the friends we may happen to have* with us, will sometimes join
us.

Monday morning.] Sir Charles has just now presented to me, in Doctor
Bartlett's presence, Mr. Daniel Bartlett, the Doctor's nephew, and his only
care in this world; a young gentleman of about eighteen, well educated, and a
fine accomptant, a master of his pen, and particularly of the art of shorthand
writing. The Doctor insisted on the specification of a salary, which he named
himself to be 40 l. a year, and to be within the house, that he might always be
at hand. He could not trust, he said, to his patron's assurances, that his
bountiful spirit would allow him to have a regard, in the reward, only to the
merit of the service.

Monday noon.] Lady Mansfield, Miss Mansfield, and the three Brothers, are
arrived. What excellent women, what agreeable young gentlemen, what grateful
hearts, what joy to Lady W. on their arrival, what pleasure to Lord W. who, on
every occasion, shows his delight in his nephew! -- All these things, with
their compliments to your happy Harriet, let Lucy tell. I have not time.

WHAT, my dear grandmamma, shall we do with Lord and Lady W.? -- Such a rich
service of gilt plate! Just arrived! A present to me! -- It is a noble present!
-- And so gracefully presented! And I so gracefully permitted to accept of it,
by my best, my tenderest friend! -- Let Lucy describe this too.

Tuesday morning] A vast company we shall have. Gentlemen and their Ladies are
invited: Your Harriet is to be dressed: She is already dressed. How kindly am I
complimented, by every one of my friends! -- Let Lucy, let my aunt (she
promises to assist Lucy) relate all that shall pass, describe the persons, and
give the characters of our visiters; our managements, our entertainments, the
Ball, that is to conclude the day and night. I shall not be able, I suppose, to
write a line.

Wednesday noon.] Our company left us not till six this morning. My uncle was
transported with the day; with the night.

I will only say, that all was happy; and decency, good order, mirth, and
jollity, went through the whole space. Sir Charles was everywhere, and with
everybody. He was almost as much every Lady's as mine. O how he charmed them
all! Sir William Turner said once, behind his back, Of what transports did my
late friend Sir Thomas* who doted upon his son, deprive himself by keeping him
so long abroad!

I could not but think of what my dear Lady G. once wrote, that women are not
so soon tired as men, with these diversions, with dancing particularly. By
three, all but Sir Charles and my uncle seemed quite fatigued: But recovered
themselves. My Emily delighted everybody. She was the whole night what I
wished her to be -- Dear madam, be not uneasy. We shall be very happy in each
other.

O that you were with us, my dearest grandmamma! But you, from your cheerful
piety, and joyful expectation of happiness supreme, are already, though on earth,
in heaven! -- Yet it is my wish, my aunt's, my uncle's, Lucy's, twenty times a
day, that you were present, and saw him, The Domestic man, The cheerful Friend,
The kind Master, The enlivening Companion, The polite Neighbor, The tender
Husband! Let nobody who sees Sir Charles Grandison at home, say, that the
private station is not that of true happiness.

How charmingly respectful is he to my uncle, aunt, and good Mr. Deane! To
Lucy, he is an affectionate brother. Emily, dear girl, how she enjoys his
tenderness to her!

My uncle is writing to you, madam, a Letter. He says, it will be as long as
his arm. My aunt will dispatch this day a very long one. Theirs will supply my
defects. Lucy is not quite ready with her first Letter. If there were not so
much of your Harriet in it, I would highly praise what she has hitherto written.

Thursday morning.] I leave to my uncle the account of the gentlemen's
diversions in the gardens and fields. They are all extremely happy. But Lord G.
already pines after his Charlotte. He will not be prevailed on to stay out his
week, I doubt, sweet-temper'd man! as I see him in a thousand little amiable
instances. If Lady G. did not love him, I would not love her. Lord W. is afraid
of a gouty attack. He is never quite free. He and his admirable Lady will leave
us tomorrow.

I think, my dear Lady G. with you, that discretion and gratitude are the
corner-stones of the matrimonial fabric. Lady W. had no prepossessions in any
other man's favor. My Lord loves her. What must be that woman's heart, that
Gratitude and Love cannot engage? But she loves my Lord. Surely she does. Is
not real and unaffected tenderness for the infirmities of another, the very
essence of Love; What is wanting where there is that? My Sir Charles is
delighted with Lady W's goodness to his uncle. He tells her often, how much he
reveres her for it.

In our retired hours, we have sometimes the excellent Lady abroad for our
Subject. I always begin it.

He never declines it. He speaks of her with such manly tenderness! He thanks
me, at such times, for allowing him, as he calls it, to love her. He regrets
very much the precipitating of her: Yet pities her parents and brothers. How
warmly does he speak of his Jeronymo! He has a sigh for Olivia. But of whom,
except Lady Sforza and her Laurana, does he not speak kindly! -- And them he
pities. Never, never, was there a more expanded heart!

Ah, madam, a cloud has just brushed by us! Its skirts have affected us with
sadness, and carried us from our sunshine prospects home; that is to say, to
thoughts of the general destiny! -- Poor Sir Harry Beauchamp is no more! A
Letter from his Beauchamp! Sir Charles showed it to me, for the honor of the
writer, now Sir Edward. We admired this excellent young man together, over his
Letter. What fine things did Sir Charles say on this occasion, both by way of
self-consolation, and on the inevitable destiny! But he dwelt not on the
subject. He has written to Lady Beauchamp, and to the young Baronet. How
charmingly consolatory! -- What admirable -- But Sir Charles, madam, is a
CHRISTIAN!

THIS event has not at all influenced his temper. He is the same cheerful man
to his guests; to his Harriet; to everybody. I am afraid it will be the cause
of his first absence from me: How shall I part with him, though it were but for
two days?

Friday noon.] What a vacancy! Lady Mansfield, and her sons, Lord G. and Lord
and Lady W. have left us. Miss Mansfield is allowed to stay with me some time
longer. Emily is very fond of her. No wonder: She is a good young woman.

We are busied in returning the visits of our neighbors, which Sir Charles
promised to do, as if they were individually made to us. We have a very
agreeable neighborhood. But I want these visitings to be over. Sir Charles and
his relations and mine, are the world to me. These obligations of ceremony,
though unavoidable, are drawbacks upon the true domestic felicity. One happiness,
however, results from the hurry and bustle they put us in: Emily's mind (though
she not always accompanies us) seems to be engaged: When we are not quite happy
in our own thoughts, it is a relief to carry them out of ourselves.

SIR Charles and I have just now had a short conversation about this dear girl.
We both joined in praising her; and then I said, I thought, that some time
hence Mr. Beauchamp and she would make a vary happy pair.

I have, said he, a Love for both. But as the one is my own very particular
friend, and as the other is my ward, I would rather he found for himself, and
she for herself, another Lover, and that for obvious reasons.

But, suppose, Sir, they should like each the other?

So as they made it not a compliment to me, but gave me reason to believe, that
they would have preferred each the other to every one else, were they strangers
to me, I would not stand in their way. But the man, who hopes for my consent
for Emily, must give me reason to think, that he would have preferred her to
any other woman, though she had a much less fortune than she is mistress of.

I am much mistaken, Sir, if that may not be the case of your friend.

Tell me, my nobly frank, and ever-amiable Harriet, what you know of this
subject. Has Beauchamp any thoughts of Emily? --

Ah, Sir, thought I, I dare not tell you all my thoughts; but what I do tell
you, shall be truth.

I really, Sir, don't imagine Emily has a thought of your Beauchamp --

Nor of any other person? Has she? --

Lady G. Lady L. and myself, are of opinion, that Beauchamp loves Emily.

I am glad, my dear, if any thing were to come of it, that the man loved first.

I was conscious. A tear unawares dropped from my eye -- He saw it. He solded his
arm about me, and kissed it from my check. Why, my Love! my dearest Love! why
this? and seemed surprised.

I must tell you, Sir, that you may not be surprised. I fear, I fear --

What fears m^ Love?

That the happiest of all women cannot say, that her dear man loved her first!
--

He folded me in his kind arms. How sweetly engaging! said he: I will presume
to hope, that my Harriet, by the happiest of all women, means herself -- You
say not no! I will not insult your goodness so much, as to ask you to say yes.
But, this I say, that the happiest of all men loved his Harriet, before she
could love him; and, but for the honor he owed to another admirable woman,
though then he had no hopes of ever calling her his, would have convinced her of
it, by a very early declaration. Let me add, that the moment I saw you first
(distressed and terrified as you were, too much to think of favor to any man)
I loved you: And you know not the struggle it cost me (my destiny with our dear
Clementina so uncertain) to conceal my Love -- Cost me, who ever was
punctiliously studious to avoid engaging a young Lady's affections, lest I
should not be able to be just to her; and always thought what is called
Platonic Love an insidious pretension.

O Sir! And I flung my fond arms about his neck, and, hiding my glowing face in
his bosom, called him, murmuringly, the most just, the most generous, of men.

He pressed me still to his heart; and when I raised my conscious face, though my
eye could not bear his, Now, Sir, said I, after this kind, this encouraging
acknowlegement, I can consent, I think I can, that the Lord of my heart shall
see, as he has more than once wished to see, long before he declared himself,
all that was in that forward, that aspiring heart. --

Lucy had furnished me with the opportunity before. I instantly arose, and took
out of a drawer a parcel of my Letters, which I had sorted ready, on occasion,
to oblige h m, which, from what he had seen before, down to the dreadful
masquerade affair, carried me to my setting out with his sisters to Colnebrook.

I think not to show him farther, by my own consent, because of the
recapitulation of his family story, which immediately follows; particularly
includeing the affecting accounts of his mother's death; his father's
unkindness to the two young Ladies; Mrs. Oldham's story; the sisters conduct to
her; which might have revived disagreeable subjects.

Be pleased, Sir, said I, putting them into his hands, to judge me favorably.
In these papers is my heart laid open.

Precious trust! said he, and put the papers to his lips: You will not find
your generous confidence misplaced.

An opportunity offering to send away what I have written, here, my dearest
grandmamma, concludes

Your ever-dutiful HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER VIII. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Saturday-morning, Dec. 16.
I Will not trouble you, my dear grandmamma, with an account of the
preparations we are making to benefit and regale our poorer neighbors, and
Sir Charles's tenants, at this hospitable season. Not even Sir Charles
Grandison himself can exceed you, either in bounty or management, on this
annual Solemnity. Sir Charles has consulted with Dr. Bartlett, and everything
will be left to the direction of that good man. My uncle and aunt have
dispatched their directions to Selby-house, that their neighbors and tenants
may not suffer by their absence.

The gentlemen are all rid out together, the Doctor with them, to reconnoitre
the country, as my uncle calls it. Emily and Lucy are gone with them, on
horseback. My aunt and I declined accompanying them; and took this opportunity,
attended by Mrs. Curzon, to go through the Offices.

In the housekeeper's room, I received the maidservants, seven in number; and,
after her, called each by her name, and spoke kindly to them all. I told them
how handsomely Mrs. Curzon spoke of them, and assured them of my favor. I
praised the cheerfulness with which Dr. Bartlett had told me they attended him
every day in his antechamber. They should have the opportunity given them, I
said, as often as possible. I hoped that my Sally behaved well among them.

They praised her.

Sally, said I, has a serious turn. Piety is the best security in man and woman
for good behavior. She will seldom fail of attending the Doctor with you. We
shall all be happy, I hope. I am acquainting myself with the methods of the
house. Nobody shall be put out of their good way by me. My aunt only said, My
niece proposes to form herself on the example of the late excellent Lady
Grandison.

They blessed me; tears in their eyes.

I made each of them a present for a pair of gloves.

We went through all the Offices, the lowest not excepted. The very servants live
in paradise. There is room for every thing to be in order Every thing is in
order. The Offices so distinct, yet so conveniently communicating -- Charmingly
contrived! -- The low servants, men and women, have Laws, which at their own
request, were drawn up, by Mrs. Curzon, for the observance of the minutest of
their respective duties; with little mulcts, that at first only there was
occasion to exact. It is a house of harmony, to my hand. Dear madam! What do
good people leave to good people to do? Nothing! Every one knowing and doing
his and her duty; and having, by means of their own diligence, time for
themselves.

I was pleased with one piece of furniture in the housekeeper's room, which
neither you, madam, nor my aunt, have in yours. My aunt says, Selby-house shall
not be long after her return without it. It is a Servants Library, in three
classes: One of books of divinity and morality: Another for housewifry: A third
of history, true adventures, voyages, and innocent amusement. I, II, III. are
marked on the cases, and the same on the back of each book, the more readily to
place and re-place them, as a book is taken out for use. They are bound in buff
for strength. A little sine is laid upon whoever puts not a book back in its
place. As new books come out, the Doctor buys such as he thinks proper to range
under these three classes.

I asked, if there were no books of gardening? I was answered, that the
gardener had a little house in the garden, in which he had his own books. But
her master, Mrs. Curzon said, was himself a Library of gardening, ordering the
greater articles by his own taste.

Seeing a pretty glass-case in the housekeeper's apartment, filled with
physical matters, I asked, If she dispensed any of those to the servants, or
the poor? Here is, said she, a collection of all the useful drugs in medicine:
But does not your Ladyship know the noble method that my master has fallen into
since his last arrival in England? What is that? He gives a salary, madam, to a
skilful apothecary; and pays him for his drugs besides (and these are his, though
I have a key to it); and this gentleman dispenses physic to all his tenants,
who are not able to pay for advice; nor are the poor who are not his tenants,
refused, when recommended by Dr. Bartlett.

Blessings on his benevolence! said I. O my aunt! What a happy creature am I!
God Almighty, if I disgrace not my husband's beneficence, will love me for his
sake! -- Dear creature, said my aunt -- And for your own two, I hope.

There lives in an house, madam, continued Mrs. Curzon, within five miles of
this, almost in the middle of the estate, and pays no rent, a very worthy young
man; brought up, under an eminent surgeon of one of the London hospitals, who
has orders likewise for attending his tenants in the way of his business -- As
also every casualty that happens within distance, and where another surgeon is
not to be met with. And he, I understand, is paid on a cure actually performed,
very handsomely. But if the patient die, his trouble and attendance are only
considered according to the time taken up; except a particular case requires
consideration.

And this surgeon, Mrs. Curzon, this apothecary --

Are noted, madam, for being good, as well as skilful men. My master's test is,
that they are men of seriousness, and good livers: Their consciences, he says,
are his security.

How must this excellent man be beloved, how respected, Mrs. Curzon!

Respected and beloved, madam! -- Indeed he is -- Mr. Richard Saunders, has
often observed to me, that if my master either rides or walks in company, though
of great Lords, people distinguish him by their respectful love: To the Lord,
they will but seem to lift up their hats, as I may say; or if women, just drop
the knee, and look grave, as if they paid respect to their quality only: But to
my master, they pull off their hats to the ground, and bow their whole bodies:
They look smilingly, and with pleasure and blessings, as I may say, in their
faces: The good women courtesy also to the ground, turn about when he has
passed them, and look after him -- God bless your sweet face; and God bless
your dear heart, will they say -- And the servants who hear them are so
delighted! -- Don't your Ladyship see, how all his servants love him as they
attend him at table? How they watch his eye in silent reverence -- Indeed,
madam, we all adore him; and have prayed morning, noon, and night for his
coming hither, and settling among us. And now is the happy time: Forgive me,
madam; I am no flatterer; But we all say, He has brought another angel to bless
us.

I was forced to lean upon my aunt -- Tears of joy trickled down my cheeks. O,
madam, what a happy lot is mine! --

My uncle wonders I am not proud -- Proud, madam! -- Proud of my inferiority!

We visited Mr. Bartlett in his new office. He is a modest, ingenious young
man. I asked him to give me at his leisure, a catalogue of the Servants
Library, for my aunt.

O my dear, said my aunt, had your grandpapa, had your papa, your mamma, lived
to this day! --

I will imagine, said I, that I see them looking down from their heaven. They
bid me take care to deserve the lot I have drawn; and tell me, that I can only
be more happy, when I am what and where they are.

DR. Bartlett, attended by his servant, is returned without the gentlemen. I
was afraid he was not very well. I followed him up, and told him my
apprehensions.

He owned afterward, that he was a little indisposed when he came in; but
said, I had made him well.

I told him, what had passed between Mrs. Curzon and me. He confirmed all she
said.

He told me, that Sir Charles was careful also in improving his estates. The
minutest things, he said, any more than the greatest, escaped not his
attention. He has, said he, a bricklayer, a carpenter, by the year; a sawyer,
three months constantly in every year. Repairs are set about the moment they
become necessary. By this means he is not imposed upon by incroaching or
craving tenants. He will do anything that tends to improve the estate; so that
it is the best conditioned estate in the county. His tenants grow into
circumstance under him. Though absent, he gives such orders, as but few persons
on the spot would think of. He has a discernment that goes to the bottom of
everything. In a few years, improving only what he has in both kingdoms, he
will be very rich, yet answer the generous demands of his own heart upon his
benevolence: All the people he employs he takes upon character of seriousness
and sobriety, as Mrs. Curzon told you; and then he makes them the more firmly
his, by the confidence he reposes in them. He continually, in his written
directions to his masterworkmen, cautions them to do justice to the tenants as
well as to him, and even to throw the turn of the scale in their favor. You
are, says he, my friends, my workmen: You must not make me both judge and
party. Only remember, that I bear not imposition. The man who imposes on me
once, I will forgive: But he never shall have an opportunity to deceive me a
second time: For I cannot act the part of a suspicious man, a watchman over
people of doubtful honesty.

The Doctor says, he is a great planter, both here and in Ireland: And now he
is come to settle here, he will set on foot several projects, which hitherto he
had only talked of, or written about.

Sir Charles, I am sure, said he, will be the friend of every worthy man and
woman. He will find out the sighing heart before it is overwhelmed with
calamity.

He proposes, as soon as he is settled, to take a personal Survey of his whole
estate. He will make himself acquainted with every tenant, and even cottager,
and enquire into his circumstances, number of children, and prospects. When
occasions call for it, he will forgive arrears of rent; and if the poor men
have no prospect of success, he will buy his own farms of them, as I may say,
by giving them money to quit: He will transplant one to a less, another to a
larger farm, if the tenants consent, according as they have stock, or
probability of success in the one or the other; and will set the poor tenants
in a way of cultivating what they hold, as well by advice as money; for while
he was abroad, he studied Husbandry and Law, in order, as he used to say, to be
his father's steward; the one to qualify him to preserve, the other to manage,
his estate. He was always prepared for, and aforehand with, probable events.

Dear, dear Dr. Bartlett, said I, we are on a charming subject; tell me more of
my Sir Charles's management and intentions. Tell me all you know, that is
proper for me to know.

Proper, madam! Everything he has done, does, and intends to do, is proper for
you, and for all the world to know. I wish all the world were to know him, as I
do; not for his sake, but for their own.

That moment (without any-body's letting me know the gentlemen were returned)
into the Doctor's apartment came Sir Charles. My back was to the door, and he
was in the room before I saw him. I started! Sir, Sir! said I, as if I thought
excuses necessary.

He saw my confusion. That, and his sudden entrance, abashed the Doctor. Sir
Charles reconciled us both to ourselves -- He put one arm round my waist, with
the other he lifted up my hand to his lips, and in the voice of Love, I
congratulate you both, said he: Such company, my dearest Life! such company, my
dearest friend! you cannot have every hour! May I, as often as there is
opportunity, see you together! I knew not that you were! The Doctor and I,
madam, stand not upon ceremony. Pardon me, Doctor. I insist upon leaving you as
I found you --

I caught his hand, as he was going -- Dear, dear Sir, I attend you. You shall
take me with you; and, if you please, make my excuses to my aunt, for leaving
her so long alone, before you came in.

Doctor, excuse us both; my Harriet has found, for the first time, a will. It
is her own, we know, by its obligingness.

He received my offered hand, and led me into company: Where my aunt called me
to account for leaving her, and begged Sir Charles would chide me.

She was with Dr. Bartlett, madam, said he: Had she been with any other person,
man or woman, and Mrs. Selby, alone, I think we would have tried to chide her.

What obligation, what sweet politeness, my dear grandmamma!

Such, madam, is the happiness of your Harriet.

Lucy has a charming Letter to send you! -- From that Letter, you will have a
still higher notion of my happiness, of the dear man's unaffected tenderness to
me, and of the approbation of a very genteel neighborhood, than I myself could
give you.

Lady G. and Lady L. have both made up for their supposed neglects. I had
written to each to charge them with having not congratulated me on my arrival
here. Two such charming Letters! -- I have already answered them. The love as
well as over (Thank heaven they do!)

Your HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER IX. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Monday, Dec. 18.
THE dearest, best of men, has left me! Just now left me! -- Did not everybody
keep me in countenance, I should be very angry with myself for wishing that
such a man should be always confined to my company! I must keep my fondness
within equitable bounds. But, kind man! he seemed, and, if he seemed, he was,
as loath to part with me. He is gone to London, madam: Poor Lady Beauchamp has
besought his presence, not at Sir Harry's funeral (He was to be interred, it
seems last night) but at the opening of the will: And his Beauchamp joined in
the request.

He hopes to be down with us on Thursday. Miss Mansfield took the opportunity
to return to her mother, who sent word, that she knew not how to live without
her.

Sir Charles was pleased to give to me the keys of his Study, and of Lady
Olivia's Cabinets. Lucy gave you, madam, an account of the invaluable contents.
And now I will amuse myself there, and sit in every chair, where I have seen
him sit, and tread over his imagined footsteps.

Tuesday.] My books are come, and all my trinkets with them. We have all been
busy in classing the books. My closet will be now furnished as I wish it: And I
shall look at these, my dear companions of Selby-house, and recollect the many,
many happy hours they gave me there.

Was I ever, ever unhappy, my dear Grandmamma? If I was, I have forgot the
time. I acquiesce cheerfully with your wishes not to dis-furnish your gallery,
by sending to me our family pictures. Let those of my benevolent father and my
excellent mother, of happy, happy memory, still continue there to smile upon
you, as you are pleased to express yourself. Nobody but you and my aunt Selby
have a right to each of those of mine, which are honored with a place in your
respective drawing-rooms. My dear Sir Charles, thank heaven! calls the original
his. But why would you load me with the precious gold box, and its contents;
less precious those, though of inestimable value, than my dear grandpapa's
picture in the lid? -- But I can tell you, madam, that Sir Charles is an
ungrateful man: He will not thank you for it. A remembrance, madam (I know what
he will say) "Does the best of women think my Harriet wants anything to remind
her of the obligations she is under to parents so dear?" -- He will be very
jealous of the honor of his Harriet. Forgive, madam, the freedom of my
expostulation, as if I were not your girl, as well as his.

What reasons have you found out (but this was always your happy, your
instructive way) to be better pleased with your absence from us, than if you
were present with us, as we all often wish you!

HERE, Lady L. Lady G. sisters so dear to me, since these Letters will pass
under your eye, let me account to you, by the following extract from my
grandmamma's last Letters, for the meaning of what I have written to that
indulgent parent, in the lines immediately preceding.

"You often, my dearest Harriet, wish me to be with you. In the first place I
am here enjoying myself in my own way, my own servants about me; a trouble, a
bar, a constraint, upon no one; but those to whom I make it worth while to bear
with me. I should think I never could do enough to strangers: No, though I were
sure they thought I did too much. In the next, were I to be with you at
Grandison-hall, I could not be everywhere: So that I should be deprived of
half the delightful scenes and conversations, that you, your aunt, and Lucy,
relate and describe to me by pen and ink: Nor should I be able perhaps to bear
those grateful ones, to which I should be present. My heart, my dear, you know
is very susceptible of joy; it has long been preparing itself for the
sublimest. Grief touches it not so much. The Losses I sustained of your father,
your mother, and my own dear Mr. Shirley; made all other sorrows light. Nothing
could have been heavy, but the calamity of my gentle Harriet, had she been
afflicted with it. Now, I take up the kind, the rapturous Letters, from my
table, where I spread them. When the contents are too much for me, I lay them
down; and resume them, as my subsided joy will allow. Then lay them down again,
as I am affected by some new instance of your happiness; bless God, bless you,
your dearest of men; bless everybody. -- In every Letter I find a cordial that
makes my heart light, and for the time, insensible of infirmity: -- Can you, my
Harriet, be happier than I?"

I am called upon by my aunt and Lucy. I will here, my dear grandmamma,
conclude myself,

Your for-ever obliged, and dutiful, HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER X. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
A Treasure, an invaluable treasure, my dear grandmamma! -- On the table in Sir
Charles's own closet, I took up a common prayer book, under which, on removing
it, I saw a paper written in Sir Charles's largest hand, the three last Lines
of which apppearing to be very serious (the first side not containing them) I
had the curiosity to unfold it: it contains Reflections, mingled and concluded
with solemn addresses to the Almighty. I asked leave to transcribe them. On
promise that a copy, as his, should not pass into any-body's hands but yours, I
obtained it.

What a comfort is it, on reflection, that, at his own motion, I joined with
him in the Sacramental Office, on occasion of our happy nuptials, the first
opportunity that offered! A kind of renewal, in the most solemn manner, of our
marriage vows; at least a confirmation of them. No wonder that the good man,
who could draw up such reflections, should make such a motion.

What credit did he do (may not one say so?) To religion on that happy day! A
man of sense, of dignity in his person, known to be no bigot, no superstitious
man; yet not ashamed to join in the sacred office with the meanest. It was a
glorious confession of his Christian principles. Whenever he attends on public
worship, his seriousness, his modesty, his humility, all show that he believes
himself in the presence of that God whose blessing he silently joins to invoke:
And when all is over, his cheerfulness and vivacity demonstrate, that his heart
is at ease in the consciousness of a duty performed. How does my mind sometimes
exult in the prospects of happiness with the man of my choice, extending,
through divine goodness, beyond this (...)

I will conclude this Letter with the copy of these reflections. What is sit to
come after them, that can be written by

Your HARRIET GRANDISON?

The REFLECTIONS.
WHAT, O my heart! overflowing with happiness! are the sentiments that ought to
spring up in thee, when admitted either in the solemnities of public worship,
or the retiredness of private devotion, into the more immediate presence of thy
MAKER! Who does not govern, but to bless! Whose divine commands are sent to
succor human reason in search of happiness!

Let thy Law, ALMIGHTY! be the rule, and thy glory the constant end, of all I
do! Let me not build virtue on any notions of honor, but of honor to thy
Name. Let me not sink piety in the boast of benevolence; my Love of God in the
Love of my fellow creatures. Can good be of human growth? No! It is thy gift,
Almighty, And All-good! Let not thy bounties remove the Donor from my thought;
nor the Love of pleasures make me forsake the Fountain from which they flow.
When joys entice, let me ask their title to my heart. When evils threaten, let
me see thy mercy shining through the cloud; and discern the great hazard of
having all to my wish. In an age of such license, let me not take comfort from
an inauspicious omen, the number of those who do amiss: An omen rather of
public ruin, than of private safety. Let the joys of the multitude less allure
than alarm me; and their danger, not example, determine my choice. What weigh
public example, passion, and the multitude, in one seal, against Reason, and
the Almighty, in the other?

In this day of domineering pleasure, so lower my taste, as to make me relish
the comforts of Life. And in this day of dissipation, O give me thought
sufficient to preserve me from being so desperate, as in this perpetual flux of
things, and as perpetual swarm of accidents, to depend on Tomorrow: A
dependence that is the ruin of Today; as that is of Eternity. Let my whole
existence be ever before me: Nor let the terrors of the grave turn back my
survey. When temptations arise, and virtue staggers, let imagination sound the
final trumpet, and judgment lay hold on eternal Life. In what is well begun,
grant me to persevere; and to know, that none are wise, but they who determine
to be wiser still.

And since, O Lord! the Fear of thee is the beginning of wisdom; and in its
progress, its surest shield; turn the world entirely out of my heart, and place
that guardian angel, thy blessed Fear, in its stead. Turn out a foolish world,
which gives its money for what is not bread; which hews out broken cisterns
that hold no water; a world in which even they whose hands are mighty, have
found nothing. There is nothing, Lord God Almighty, in heaven, in earth, but
thee. I will seek thy face, bless thy name, sing thy praises, love thy Law, do
thy will, enjoy thy peace, hope thy glory, till my final hour! Thus shall I
grasp all that can be grasped by man. This will heighten good, and soften evil
in the present life! And when death summons, I shall sleep sweetly in the dust,
till his mighty CONQUEROR bids the trumpet sound; and then shall I, through his
merits, awake to eternal glory.

LETTER XI. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Dec. 21.
SIR Charles, God be praised! arrived here in safety about two hours ago. He
has settled every thing between Lady Beauchamp and the now Sir Edward, to the
satisfaction of both; for they entirely referred themselves to him. This was
the method he took. -- As their interests were not naturally the same, he
enquired of each separately, what were the wishes of each; and finding the
Lady's not unreasonable, he referred it to Sir Edward, of his own generosity,
to compliment her with more than she asked.

Particularly she had wished to Sir Charles, that she might not be obliged to
remove under a twelvemonth from the house in Berkley-square: And when Sir
Charles had brought them together, and pronounced between them, making that an
article, Sir Edward, on one knee, thus bespoke her:

All that your Ladyship demands I most cheerfully comply with. Instead of the
year you wish to remain in Berkley-square, let me beg of you, still to consider
both houses as your own; and me your inmate only, as in the lifetime of my
father. I never will engage in marriage, but with your approbation: Let us,
madam, be as little as possible separated: Be pleased only to distinguish, that
I wish not this, but from pure and disinterested motives. I will be your
servant as well as son. I will take all trouble from you that you shall think
trouble; but never will offer so much as my humble advice to you in the conduct
of your own affairs, unless you ask for it.

She wept. We will henceforth, said she, have but one interest. You shall be
dear to me, for your father's sake. Let me, for the same dear sake, be regarded
by you: Receive me, excellent pair of friends, proceeded she, as a third in
your friendship. Should any misunderstanding arise, which, after so happy a
setting out, I hope, cannot be, let Sir Charles Grandison determine between us.
Justice and He are one.

Sir Charles invited down to us the Lady and his Beauchamp. He hopes they will
come. The young Baronet, I dare say, will. Emily says, she wants to see how he
will become his new dignity. Very well, I dare say, said I. Why yes; such an
example before him, I don't doubt but he will.

Lucy was present. Near 4000 l. a year, and a title, said she -- I think you
and I, my dear, were we nearer of an age, would contend for him.

Not I, Miss Selby: So that I have the Love of my Guardian and Lady Grandison,
you may be Lady Beauchamp for me. -- You will be of another mind, perhaps, some
time hence, said Miss Selby -- When I am, replied Emily, tell me of it.

Sir Charles, when he was in town, visited his two sisters. He gave me the
pleasure of acquainting me, that we shall be favored with the company of Lord
and Lady L. as soon as her Ladyship's visits and visitings are over.

Mind, my dear Lady G. what follows:

Lady L. said he, is all joy, that her great event is happily over; she and my
Lord rewarded with a dear pledge of their mutual Love. But is not Lady G. a
little unaccountable, my dear?

As how, Sir?

She hardly seems to receive pleasure in her happy prospects. She appears to me
peevish, even childishly so, to her Lord. I see it the more for her endeavors
to check herself before me. She submits but ungraciously to the requisites of
the circumstances, that lays him and me, and our several united families under
obligation to her. I was unwilling to take notice of her particular behavior,
for two reasons; first, because she wants not understanding, and would see her
own error before she went too far; and next, because she tacitly confessed
herself to be wrong, by being evidently desirous to hide her fault from me. But
is not our Charlotte a little unaccountable, my dear?

What, my dear Lady G. should I have answered? I hope you will allow me to be
just. I should have been most sincerely glad to have spoken a good word for
you: But to attempt to excuse or palliate an evident fault, looks like a claim
put in for allowances for one's own.

"Indeed, Sir, she is a very unaccountable creature! She is afraid of you, and
of nobody but you. You should, as she could not conceal from you her odd
behavior to one of the best of husbands, and sweetest-temper'd of men, who
loves her more than he loves himself; and who is but too solicitous to oblige
so unthankful a thing; have taken notice of it, and chidden her severely: I,
for my part, take liberties of this kind with her in every Letter I write; but
to no purpose. I wanted you, Sir, to find her out yourself; she will get a
habit of doing wrong things; and make herself more unhappy than she will make
anybody else; since it is possible for her to tire out her Lord. How
insupportable to her of all women, would it be, were the tables to be turned;
and were the man she treats so ungraciously, to be brought to slight her? The
more insupportable, as she has a higher opinion of her own understanding than
she has of his!" Cannot you form to yourself, my dear Lady, G. the attitude of
astonishment, that your brother threw himself into? --

But, ah, my dear grandmamma, do you think I said this to Sir Charles? -- No,
indeed! For the world, I would not have said one syllable of it. But let Lady
G. for a moment, as she reads my Letter, think I did. She loves to surprise;
why should she not be surprised in turn? Her displeasure would affect me
greatly: But if by incurring it I could do her good, and put her in a right
train of thinking, I would incur it, and on my knees afterward beg her to
forgive me.

He did make the above observation. A thousand excellent qualities has my
Charlotte. I particularized to her brother half a dozen, and those are more
than fall to the share of most of our modern people of quality; and he was
willing to be satisfied with them -- Why? Because he loves her. But, as she
now-and-then whispers her Harriet, in her Letters, let me whisper her, that she
is under great obligation to her brother, and still greater to her Lord, for
passing over so lightly her petulances.

Thursday afternoon.
WHO, madam, do you think, is arrived? Arrived just as we sat down to dinner;
and will stay with us this one night, but, he says, no more? -- Sir Rowland
Meredith! Good Man! and Mr. Fowler! The latter attended his uncle reluctantly,
it seems; but, thank God, he is in pretty good health. How kindly, how
affectionately, did Sir Charles receive them both! How has he already won the
heart of honest Sir Rowland!

LET me, madam, acquaint you with something generously particular of this
worthy man.

He desired Sir Charles to let him have me by himself for one quarter of an
hour. So fine a young gentleman would not, he hoped, be jealous of such a poor
old man as he.

We were in the dining room; and he rising to attend me, I led him to my
drawing room adjoining. He looked round him, and was struck with the elegance
of the room and furniture; disregarding me for a few moments -- Why, ay! said
he, at last; This is noble! This is fine! Stately, by mercy! And he bowed to
me, poor man! the more respectfully, as I thought, for what he saw. And will
you, madam, bowing again, and again, allow me to call you daughter? I cannot
part with my daughter* Nor would I, were you a queen.

You do me honor, Sir Rowland. Call me still your daughter.

Why then, you must allow me -- Forgive me, madam! -- And he saluted me. Joy,
joy, tenfold joy, attend my daughter! I don't know what to make of the present
fashions. Would Sir Charles have been affronted, had I taken this liberty
before him? The duce is in the present age; they reserve themselves to holes
and corners, I suppose. But I am sure no creature breathing could mean more
respect than I do. I think only of myself as of your father.

You are a good man, Sir Rowland. Sir Charles Grandison was prepared to love
you; he was prepared to value Mr. Fowler.

Prepared by your own respect for us, madam! -- God love you, say yes.

Yes indeed, I ever shall respect you both. Have I not claimed a father in you?
Have I not claimed a brother in your nephew? I never forget my relations.

Charming, charming, by mercy! And he stalked to the other end of the room,
wiping his eyes: The very same good young Lady that you ever were! But, but,
but, putting his hand in his pocket, and pulling out a little box, if you are
my daughter, you shall wear these for your father's sake! -- How now, madam!
Refuse me! I command you on your obedience to accept of this -- I will not be a
Jack-straw father --

Indeed, indeed, Sir Rowland, you must excuse me; I thought I might have
trusted myself with you alone. Your generosity, Sir, is painful to me.

I courtesied, and withdrew to the company in the dining room. The good man
followed me, te^rs upon his cheeks, the box in his hand: My face glowed.

She calls me father, Sir Charles; and refuses her obedience. Here I have
brought a toy or two, to show my fatherly Love to my daughter. Not a soul, not
my nephew there, knows a syllable of the matter; ^t was that made me call her
aside.

Sir Charles rose from his seat. My dearest Life is not used, said he, to make
light of a duty; taking my hand. You will excuse her from accepting the
present, Sir Rowland; that would look as if you thought it necessary to bribe
her to do her duty. She will always acknowledge her father: So will I mine. But
you do us honor enough in the relation.

What, Sir Charles, not of a present from her father to his daughter, on her
nuptials, and as a small token of his joy on the occasion; when I know not the
man living, out of my own family -- There he stopped.

My dearest Love, there is no resisting this plea: Your duty, yourgratitude, is
engaged.

Look you there now! Look you there now! God love you both everlastingly, Amen!
-- And there is the blessing of a father!

I took the box, courtsying low; but looked silly, I believe.

Forgive me, Sir Charles, said the Knight; but I must -- He took my hand, and
kissed it -- and looked as if he wished to salute me -- Fathers, my dear, must
be reverenced, said Sir Charles, by their children.

I bent my knee, and, in compliance with a motion of Sir Charles, leaned
forward my cheek, He saluted me* and again he blessed us both -- My dear
nephew, said he, hastening to Mr. Fowler, if you envy such a man as this his
good fortune, by mercy I will renounce you.

I may envy you, Sir Charles, said Mr. Fowler, addressing himself to him in an
agreeable manner; I don't know how it is possible to avoid it; but at the same
time I revere you for your character and accomplishments. You are the only man
in the world whom I could cordially congratulate, as I do you on your happiness.

True, nephew, true: I, any more than you, should never have enjoyed myself,
had any of the featherheaded creatures I saw formerly endeavoring to make an
interest in my daughter's favor, succeeded with her. But you, madam, have
chosen a man that everybody must prefer to himself.

The Knight, after tea, moved to have the box opened. When Sir Charles saw the
jewels, he was a little uneasy, because of the value of them. A costly diamond
necklace and earrings, a ring of price, a repeating watch finely chased; the
chain of which is richly ornamented; one of the appendages is a picture of Sir
Rowland in enamel, adorned with brilliants; an admirable Likeness: This I told
him was more valuable to me than all the rest: I spoke truth; for so rich a
present has made me uneasy. He saw I was. He knew, he said, that I could not
want any of these things: But he could not think of any other way to show his
Love to his daughter. It was nothing to what he had intended to do in his Will;
had I not intimated to him, that what he left me, should be given among his
relations. I am rich, madam, I can tell you: And what, on your nuptials, could
I do less for my daughter?

Sir Charles said, This must not end so, Sir Rowland: But I see you are an
invincible man. Mr. Fowler, I wish you as happily married as you deserve to be:
Your Lady will be entitled to a return of equal value.

Sir Rowland begged, that he might try on the ring himself. He was allowed to
do so, and was pleased it was not much too big. He said I should not pull it
off this night. I kept it on to humor the worthy man.

SUPPER over, and a cheerful glass going round with my uncle, Mr. Deane, and
the Knight, Sir Rowland made it his odd request, that I would permit Sir
Charles to put on the necklace for me. By all means, I said. But the Knight
being very earnest, and my uncle seconding him (for there was particularity
enough in the motion, to engage the dear odd man) and Sir Charles not
discouraging it, my aunt and Lucy smiling all the time, I thought I had better
comply, lest the Knight should take it into his head to request the putting it
on himself. Yet I was the more reluctant, on poor Mr. Fowler's account; for his
smiles were but essays to smile. Sir Charles, in his own graceful manner, put
it on; bowing low to me, in the gallantest manner, when he had done. I
courtesied to him, to Sir Rowland, and looked silly I am sure.

Friday noon.
SIR Rowland and Mr. Fowler have lest us. They would not stay to dinner. They
have business to dispatch in town, that will take them up some days: But they
were so well pleased with their reception, that they promise to see us before
they set out for Caermarthen.

At parting, Sir Rowland drew me aside: Your cousin Lucy, as you call her, is a
fine young Lady. They tell me, that she has a great fortune: But I matter not
that of a straw -- Would to God, my boy knew how to submit to his destiny like
a man -- Hem! You understand me, madam -- Mercy! I want to be akin to you --
You take me, madam.

We are akin. Sir Rowland Meredith is my father.

God bless you, madam! I love you dearly for that. And so we are: But you
understand me: A word to the wise: She is not engaged; is she? -- I love your
uncle of all men -- except the king of all men; your Lord and master -- God
bless him! With what good humor he eyes us -- Sir Charles, one word with you,
if you please.

I thought the Knight had his fingers ready to take hold of Sir Charles's
button; for his hand was extended; but suddenly, as from recollection,
withdrawn. He led Sir Charles to me -- And put the same question to him, as he
had done to me.

Let me ask you, my dear Sir Rowland, Was this in your thought before you came
hither?

No, by mercy! -- It just now struck me. My nephew knew not a syllable of the
matter. But why, you know, Sir Charles, should a man pine and die, because he
cannot have the she that he loves? -- Suppose, you know, six men love one
woman, as has been the case here, for aught I know; what a duce, are five of
them to hang, drown, or pistol themselves? Or are they to out-stay their time,
as I have done, till they are fit for nobody?

Women must be treated with delicacy, Sir Rowland. Miss Selby is a young Lady
of great merit. When questions are properly asked, you hardly need to doubt of
a proper answer.

But, Sir Charles, is Miss Selby, bona fide, engaged, or is she not? that is the
question I ask: If she be, I shall not say a word of the matter.

My dear? said Sir Charles to me.

I don't know that she is, answered I. But Lucy will never think of a man, be
his qualifications ever so great, if he cannot give her proofs of loving her
above all women.

I understand you, madam -- Well, well, and I should be nice too, I can tell
you, for my boy. But I Will sound him. I must have him married before I die, if
possible. But no more of that for the present. And now God Almighty bless,
preserve, and keep you both! -- I will pray for the continuance of your
happiness.

He kissed my hand: Wrung Sir Charles's: Wiped his eyes: Made his bow: And
stepped into the chariot to his nephew, who had taken leave of us all before.

Lucy, with an air so like some of dear Lady G's, put up her saucy lip, when I
told her of this; and bid me not write it to you: But I thought, were nothing
to come of it, it would divert my grandmamma, as I am sure it will Lady G.

God preserve the most indulgent and pious of Parents, and my two Sisters and
their Lords (including the honored Lord and Lady you Lady G. are with) prays

Her ever-dutiful, and their ever-affectionate, HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER. XII. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Tuesday, Jan. 9.
I Have been obliged, by the just demands made upon us by the equally-solemn
and joyful season, to be silent for many days. You, madam, and you, Ladies L.
and G. have, I doubt not, been engaged in consequence of the same demand; -- so
will excuse me; especially as Lucy and my aunt have both written, and that very
minutely, in the interim.

Mr. Deane, to our great joy, has signified to us his intention to live near
us; and to present his house at Peterborough to one of his two nephews.

Sir Charles has besought him to consider Grandison-hall as his own house. He
promises that he will. I hope, by my care of him, to be an humble means of
prolonging his life, at least of making his latter days cheerful.

What a happy season has this been to scores of people in our neighborhood!
but most to ourselves, as the giver is more blessed than the receiver! Such
admirable management! Such good order! -- But I told you, that all was left to
Dr. Bartlett's direction: What a blessing is he to us, and all around him!

Sir Charles has a Letter from Mr. Lowther, who is on his return from Bologna.
By the date it should have arrived a fortnight ago: So that he may be every day
expected.

Mr. Lowther lets him know, that the family at Bologna are all in spirits, on
the prospect they have of carrying their point with Lady Clementina; who,
however, for the present, declines the visits of the Count of Belvedere; and
they humor her in that particular.

Mr. Lowther is afraid, he says, that all is not quite right as to her mind.
Poor Lady! He judges so, from the very great earnestness she continues to
express to make a visit to England.

She received, he says, with great intrepidity, the news of Sir Charles's
marriage. She besought a blessing upon him and his bride: but since has been
thoughtful, reserved, and sometimes is found in tears. When challenged, she
ascribed, once, her grief to her apprehensions that her malady may possibly
return.

The physicians have absolutely given their opinion, that she should marry.

The General is expected from Naples to urge the solemnity; and vows, that he
will not return till she is actually Countess of Belvedere.

She begs, that she may be allowed again to pass the Apennines, and visit Mrs.
Beaumont at Florence, in order to settle her mind.

She dreads to see the General.

How I am grieved for her! -- Sir Charles must be afflicted too. Why, why, will
they not leave to time, the pacifier of every woe, the issue of the event upon
which they have set their hearts?

Mr. Lowther writes, that Signor Jeronymo is in a fine way.

Mr. Lowther in his Letter acquits Sir Charles of all obligation to himself. He
returns him bills for the sum he had advanced; and declares, that he never will
enter into his presence, if he refuses to accept of his acquittance. The
family, he tells him, have nobly rewarded him.

Dr. Bartlett applauds Mr. Lowther's spirit on this occasion. As Sir Charles,
he says, is not an ostentatious man, but judges of every thing, according to
the rules of right and prudence, he has no doubt (though he might not expect this
handsome treatment) but he will acquiesce with it. This, however, lessens not
the comparative merit of Mr. Lowther. There are men, I believe, who having
succeeded so well, would have accepted of a reward from both parties. Yet, on
recollection, Sir Charles stipulated with Mr. Lowther, that he should receive
no fee, but from himself: And his present to the worthy man was the ampler on
that account.

I have two charming Letters from the Countess of D. By her permission, I have
shown to Sir Charles the correspondence between that good Lady and me. He
greatly admires her. She desires, that he will be acquainted with her son; and
declares, she will always look upon me as her daughter, and call me so. Sir
Charles bids me tell her, that he cannot consent to her calling me so, unless
she will look upon him as her son, and unless my Lord will allow him to call
him brother. He bid me express his wishes of a friendship with both, answerable
to that desirable relation.

My uncle says, he knows not such a place as Selby-house. Shirley-manor indeed
he loves for the sake of the dear mistress of it: But, as long as he has with
him his Dame, his Harriet, Mr. Deane, and Sir Charles, he is happy. Yet my aunt
now-and-then gets upon a rising ground in the park, and asks, pointing, Does
not Northamptonshire lie off there?

Emily is very good in the main. Dear girl! I do pity her. Her young heart, so
early to be tried and tormented by the stings of hopeless Love! -- Her eyes
just now were fixed for several minutes, so much Love in them! on the face of
her guardian, that his modest eye sell under them.

I will give you, on this occasion, the particulars of a conversation, that
passed between us; which, at the conclusion, let in a little dawn of hope, that
the dear girl may be happy in time.

I had more than once been apprehensive, that her eyes would betray her to her
guardian; who at present imputes all her reverence for him to gratitude; and as
soon as he was withdrawn, with a true sisterly tenderness, Come hither, my
Love, said I. I was busy with my needle -- She came.

My dearest Emily, if you were to look with so much earnestness in the face of
any other man, as you sometimes do, and just now did, in that of your guardian,
and the man a single man, he would have hope of a wife.

High-ho! sighed she. Did my guardian mind me? -- I hope he did not so much,
madam, as you do.

So much as I do, my Love!

Yes, madam. When my guardian is present, you do look very hard at me: But I
hope, I am not a confident girl.

You are serious, my Emily!

And so is my dear Lady Grandison!

I was a little surprised. The child abashed me. Her Love, thought I, will make
her hardy, without intending to be so.

She was too innocent even for consciousness of having disconcerted me. She
looked upon my work: What would I give, madam, to be so fine a workwoman as
you? -- But why that sigh, madam?

The poor Lady Clementina! said I: I was really thinking of her.

Do you sigh for everybody, madam, that loves my guardian?

There are different sorts of Love, Emily.

Why so I think. Nobody loves my guardian better than I myself do: But it is
not the Love that Lady Clementina bears him. I love his goodness.

And does not Clemementina?

Yes, yes, but still the Love is different.

Explain, my dear, your kind of Love.

Impossible!

Why, now, sighs my Emily? You asked me why I sighed. I have answered it was
from pity.

Why, madam, I can pity Lady Clementina, and I do: But I sigh not for her;
because she might have had my guardian, and would not.

I sigh for her the more, for that very reason, Emily; her motive so great!

Pho, pho, her motive! When he would have allowed her to be of her own religion!

Then you sigh not now for Clementina, Emily?

I believe not.

For whom then?

I don't know. You must not ask. A habit, and nothing else.

Again sighs my Emily?

You must not mind me, madam. A habit, I tell you. But, believe me, Lady
Grandison (hiding her blushing face in my bosom, her arms about my neck) I
believe, if the truth were known --

She stopped, but continued there her glowing cheek --

What, my dear, if the truth were known?

I dare not tell you. You will be angry at me.

Indeed, my love, I will not.

O yes, but you will.

I thought we had been sisters, my dear. I thought we were to have no secrets.
Tell me, what, if the truth were known?

Why, madam, for a trial of your forgivingness, tell me, Are you not apt to be
a little jealous?

Jealous, my Emily! You surprise me! Why, of whom, of what, jealous? Jealousy
is doubt; of whom should I doubt?

People have not always cause, I suppose, madam.

Explain yourself, my dear.

Are you not angry with me, madam?

I am not. But why do you think me jealous?

You need not, indeed! My guardian adores you. You deserve to be adored. -- But
you should allow a poor girl to look upon her guardian now-and-then, with eyes
of gratitude. Your charming eye is so ready to take mine to task! -- I am, if I
know myself, a poor innocent girl. I do love my guardian, that is certain: So I
ever did, you know, madam: And let me say, before he knew there was such a Lady
in the world as yourself, madam.

I threw aside my work, and clasping my arms about her, And love him still, my
Emily. You cannot love him so well as he deserves. You are indeed a dear
innocent, but not a poor, girl. You are rich in the return of his Love. I will
ever, ever, be a promoter of an affection so innocent, so pure on both sides.
But jealousy, my dear! do you charge me with jealousy? Impossible I should
deserve it! My only concern is, lest, as the heart is guessed at by the eyes
(the hearts of young creatures especially, whose good minds are incapable of
art or design) you should give room for the censorious, who know not as I do,
that your Love is reverence next to filial, to attribute it to a beginning of
the other sort of Love; which yet in you, were it kindled, would be as bright
and as pure a flame as ever warmed a virgin heart.

O madam! how you express yourself! What words you have! They go to my heart!
-- I don't know how it is: But every day I reverence more and more my guardian:
Reverence! Yes, that is the proper word! I thank you for it! Filial reverence!
Just the thing! And let me say, that I never reverenced him so much as now,
that I see what a polite, what a kind, what an affectionate husband he makes my
dear Lady Grandison. Yet, let me tell you truth, madam, I should, I am afraid,
be such a little-minded poor creature, that if I were married, and had not a
husband that was very like him, I should envy you. I should be at least unhappy.

If you could be envious, my dear, you would be unhappy: But you must never
encourage the addresses of a man, who you think loves you not better than any
other woman: Who is not a good man upon principle: Who is not a man of sense:
and that has seen something of the world.

And where, madam, can such a man be found?

Leave it to your guardian, my dear. He if anybody, will find you a man that
you may be happy with, if your eye be not aforehand with your judgment.

That, madam, I hope it will not be: First, because the reverence I have for my
guardian, and his great qualities, will make all other men look little in my
eye; and next, as I have such a confidence in his judgment, that if he points
his finger, and says, That Is the man, Emily! I will endeavor to like him. But
I believe I never now shall like any man on earth.

It is early days, my Love; but is there not some one man, that, were you of
age to marry, you would think better of than of any other?

I don't know what to say to that. It is early days, as you say. I am but a
girl. But girls have thoughts. I will tell you, madam, that the man who has
passed some years in the company of Sir Charles Grandison; who is beloved by
him, on proof, on experience (as I may say) of his good heart -- She stopped.

Beauchamp, my dear?

Why yes Him, I mean: He is the most to be liked of any man but my guardian:
But he now is a great man; and I suppose may have seen the woman he could love.

I fansy not, my dear.

Why do you fansy not, madam?

Because, if I must speak as freely to you, as I would have you do always to
me, I think he shows great and uncommon respect to you, though you are so young a
creature.

That Is for my guardian's sake: But be that as it will; let me be secure of my
guardian's Love and yours, and I shall have nothing to wish for.

Her guardian, my guardian, my friend, my Lover, my HUSBAND, every sweet word
is one, coming in, put an end to the subject. I leave this conversation to your
own reflections, my dear grandmamma, Lady L. Lady G. But I have hopes from it.

LETTER XIII. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Saturday, Sunday, Jan. 20, 21.
ANOTHER long silence. Lucy will supply all my defects. She will tell you how
much I have been engaged. She has sent you a charming Letter, filled with
observations on the good order established here before our arrival by Dr.
Bartlett and Mrs. Curzon; with accounts of some particular charities, both
public and private, that deserve to be imitated by all who have ability; and of
our visit made last Wednesday at Mansfield-house.

The Lady of it would not part with us, till Thursday, the days being short,
and the weather unfavourable Mr. Dobson and his Lady were guests there. He is a
credit to his cloth; his wife to him. They are greatly beloved by all who know
them. Lady Mansfield and Miss Mansfield are all that is polite and good. The
three brothers were there. The eldest, who was once a melancholy man, is now
one of the chearfullest. With what pleasure did I meditate, as I looked upon
them, the restoration of such a worthy and ancient family to affluence! They
were born to it: Yet when they were deprived of it, how glorious was the
resignation of mother and daughters! And now, how easy sits the prosperity upon
them! Never saw I eyes more expressive of gratitude to a benefactor, than those
both of Ladies and Gentlemen, as they were often cast upon my dear Sir Charles.

I heartily wish Mr. Orme may find his expectations answered in the second
voyage Nancy tells me he is preparing for to Lisbon. She will make known my
best wishes for the restoration of his health. How good is his sister to
accompany him! -- I always loved her.

I received yesterday yours, madam, acquainting me with Mr. Greville's visit
and proposal, and asking my opinion of the latter; and whether I would choose
to mention it to Lucy and my aunt. What can I say? You once told me, madam,
that you believed Lucy would not have refused Mr. Greville, had he first
applied to her. Lucy's grandmother, you say, is not averse to the match; and
you think my uncle would not refuse his consent, because of the contiguity of
their respective estates, and in hopes, that he might resume with success, on
such an event, his favorite project of exchange of lands. Yet I am sure this
consideration would have no weight with him, if he thought Lucy could not be
happy with Mr. Greville.

I have mentioned it to my aunt. She says, Mr. Greville is not a bashful man.
He knows how to apply to Lucy himself. And she has no notion, in such a case,
of that pride which withholds him till he thinks himself sure of the
family-interest.

He will, if possible, he says, be related to me: Let that be mentioned to
Lucy, as one of his principal motives, and his business with her is done for
ever.

Lady G. would laugh at the notion of a difficulty from a first Love. First
Love she calls first nonsense. Too frequently it is so. Lucy is a noble girl.
She has overcome a first attachment; the more laudably, as it cost her some
struggles to do it. Mr. Greville, I doubt, has had several first Loves: This
transition, therefore, is nothing to him. So neither of them will be first Love
to the other. It may therefore be a match of discretion. Yet his character! The
reformation he boasts of! -- I hope he is reformed: But I have no notion of a
good young woman, as Lucy is, trusting her person, I may say her principles, to
the arbitrary will of an impetuous man, who has been an a vowed Libertine, and
pretend not to have reformed from proper convictions. A scoffer too! How came
he by his new Lights? -- You, madam, have told us young folks the difficulty of
overcoming evil habits. I own that Lucy always spoke of him with more faviour
than anybody else. She was inclined to think him a good-natured man; and was
pleased with what she called humor in him. Humor! I never could call it so.
Humor, I used to tell her, is a gentle, a decent, though a lively thing. Mr.
Greville is boisterous, impetuous, rude, I had almost said: His courtship to me
was either rant, or affront; the one to show his Plain-dealing, the other his
Love. He knows not what respectful Love is. In short, his mirth, his
goodnature, as it is called, has fierceness in it; it always gave me
apprehension.

As to worldly matters, there can be no exception to him: But I cannot be of
the opinion of Lucy's grandmother, that he is a generous man. He has only
qualities that look like generosity. His start to me, when he resigned his
pretensions to me, as they have been called (for I know not any he had) was
only a start. He could not hold it. But be all these things as they may, how
can I, who love Lucy as myself, propose to the dear girl a man, whom I could
not think of for myself? Lucy has a fine fortune, and surely there are men enough
in the world, who have never made pretensions to Lucy's cousin, who would think
themselves honored by her acceptance; otherwise, I should, after Sir Rowland's
hint, and earnest wishes in his nephew's favor, much sooner recommend Mr.
Fowler to her than Mr. Greville.

MY aunt had said, that, for her part, she should choose to leave the above
affair to its own workings: Yet could not forbear to acquaint Lucy with it. The
dear girl came to me, to demand a sight of your Letter, and of what I had
written upon it. I could not (though I had some little reluctance to show her the
latter) deny her. I will give you, madam, the substance of a short dialogue
that passed between us on the occasion; and leave it to you to draw such
conclusions from it, as you shall judge proper, with regard to my Lucy's
inclinations.

She did not know what I meant, she said, by writeing to you, that she had
always spoken of Mr. Greville with more favor than anybody else.

It is ungenerous, Lucy, if you are angry at what you would oblige me to show
you against my will.

I am not angry. But -- She stopped, and would not explain her half sullen BUT. O
Lucy, thought I, you are a woman, my dear!

As to what you write, said she, of his desire of being related to you; who
would not? -- If that be not his principal motive -- Very well, Lucy! thought I.

I know, said she, that my grandmamma Selby has often wished Mr. Greville would
make his addresses to her granddaughter! -- So! So! So! Lucy, thought I.

His Libertinism indeed is an objection -- But I have not heard lately of any
enormities --

Go on, Lucy, thought I: Hitherto appears not any reason for Mr. Greville to
despair.

He may have seen his folly.

No doubt but he has! thought I. He saw it all the time he was committing it:
But, perhaps, he is the more determined bad man for that. Is not purity of
heart, thought I, as well as of manners, an eligible thing?

If a woman is not to marry till she meet with a strictly virtuous man --

You have too often pleaded that argument, Lucy, to me -- I am sorry -- I
stopped; willing to hear her quite out; for she held before her what I had
written.

How came he, you ask, said she, by his new lights? I have nothing to do with
how he came by them. I should rather indeed he had them from proper convictions
-- But if he has them, that is enough.

Is it, my dear, let him have been what he will?

I am for judging charitably --

Charming! thought I -- judging charitably! So I have lost a virtue, and you,
Lucy, have found it*

Mr. Greville is nothing to me: Nor ever will be.

Not quite so sure of that, thought I to myself.

You say, Harriet, you have no notion of a good young woman, trusting her
principles to the arbitrary will of a man who has been a free Liver -- Must the
man be arbitrary? -- Were a husband a free Liver, must a wife's own principles
be endangered?

These questions from my Lucy! thought I.

A scoffer, you say, Harriet! -- The man's a fool for that! -- But what a poor
soul must she be that could not silence a scoffer!

Silence a scoffer! Ah Lucy! said I: And would you marry a man with a hope to
be able to silence him? Mr. Greville is a conceited man: My Lucy has six times
his sense; but he will not be convinced of that. You will have the less
influence upon him, if he is jealous of the superiority of your understanding.
Mr. Greville is obstinate as well as conceited. Few men, I believe, will own
conviction from a wife's arguments.

To be sure the man is not a Sir Charles Grandison. Who is? -- Let him, as my
aunt Selby says, apply to me; I shall give him his answer.

You would wish he should, Lucy?

I don't say so.

I fancy, Lucy, you would not be very cruel if he did.

You fancy I would not -- But I can, as you always did, treat the man who
professes to love me, with civility, yet not throw myself into his arms at the
first word --

First word, Lucy! No! The second, or third, or fourth, is time enough; so the
man is not mean time rendered quite hopeless.

Very well, Lady Grandison: But let me go on with what you have written --
Good-natured man! -- I do think he is not an ill-natured man.

So much the better for himself, and his future wife, Lucy.

That will not be I, Lady Grandison.

Perhaps not, Lucy.

-- Humor! I do think he is a humorous good-natured man. A little too vehement
perhaps in his mirth; a little too frolic: But who is faultless?

Proceed, my Lucy.

-- Generous! "Not a generous man! -- "Qualities that look like generous ones."
-- You are a nice distinguisher, Harriet; you always were -- But here you tell
your grandmamma, that you had rather I should have Mr. Fowler than Mr. Greville
--

Well, my dear, and what say you to that?

Why, I say, I think you are not so nice for me, in this case, as you are in
others.

How so?

How so! Why is there not a difference between the actual proposals made by Mr.
Greville to Mrs. Shirley; and Sir Rowland's undertaking to try to prevail upon
Mr. Fowler to make his addresses to me?

Granted, my dear! -- I have not a word more to say in behalf of Mr. Fowler.
Mr. Greville, Lucy --

Is a man I never will have --

No rash resolutions, my dear. And yet I believe a woman has seen the same man
in a very different light, when he has offered himself to her acceptance, from
what she did before.

I believe so -- But I had a mind to sound you, Harriet; and to come at your
opinion --

You were entitled to it, Lucy, without attempting to sound me for it.

True! But we women sometimes choose to come at a point, by the roundabouts,
rather than by the forerights.

That is, Lucy, either when we think the foreright way, as you call it, would
not answer our wishes; or when we are not willing to open our own hearts.

Your servant, my dear: But the cap fits not. Whenever I speak to you, my heart
is upon my Lips.

Let me try then, in this one doubtful instance, that I ever had from you of
its being so. Do you think of encouraging Mr. Greville's proposal?

It is not a proposal, till it comes in a direct way to myself.

Very well, my dear -- I say no more till it does.

SIR Charles has just now heard that Mr. Lowther, is arrived in London. He
longs (so I am sure do I) to know, how affairs are situated in Italy. O for
good news from thence! Then will my happiness in this Life be perfected.

LETTER XIV. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Grandison-hall, Thursday, Jan. 25.
MR. Lowther arrived here last night. Sir Charles gave him a most welcome
reception. He presented him to all our guests, with expressions of the warmest
friendship; and then retired with him to his Study. He soon led him back to
company, and seating him, drew a chair between my aunt, and me -- You must have
curiosity, my dearest Love, said he. Behold the sister-excellence of Lady
Clementina, Mr. Lowther! Not a person of her family is more concerned for the
happiness of that Lady, than this dearest and most generous of women. Every one
of my friends present (looking round him) is an admirer of her -- We cannot my
dear (applying to me) know for certainty, the destiny of that excellent Lady
from Mr. Lowther. He passed a week at Lions, a fortnight at Paris, on his
return to England. But my Jeronymo is in a fine way, thank God, and resolves to
visit us in the spring.

I hope, Sir, said my aunt, to Mr. Lowther, you left Lady Clementina well and
happy in her mind.

She was at Florence, answered he, when I left Italy. She has been pretty much
indisposed there. The General, the Bishop, and Father Marescotti, had been with
her. She was expected at Bologna very soon. By this time I have no doubt, she
is Countess of Belvedere.

By her own consent, I hope then, Mr. Lowther? said I eagerly.

He shook his head -- As to that, said he, she has the most indulgent of
parents --

They cannot be so, Mr. Lowther, if they would compel her to marry any man to
whom she has an indifference.

They will not compel her, madam --

Persuasion, Sir, in the circumstances this excellent Lady is in, is compulsion.

I think it may be justly called so, said Sir Charles. Mr. Lowther, they should
not have been so precipitating.

So you have always told them, Sir Charles. Signor Jeronymo is entirely of your
opinion: Yet is earnest in the Count of Belvedere's favor. The Count adores
her.

Adores her, Sir! said I. Adores himself! for so it should be said (pardon me,
Sir!) of a man who prefers not the happiness of the object beloved, to his own.
I felt my face glow.

Generous warmth! said Sir Charles -- laying his hand on mine.

For my part, replied Mr. Lowther, I am only afraid of the return of her
malady. If it do not return, and she can be prevailed on, her piety will
reconcile her to a duty --

A duty, Mr. Lowther, interrupted I -- So imposed! -- A duty! --

I knew not what I said. I thought, at that instant, I did not like Mr. Lowther.

My uncle, aunt, and the rest of us, thought Sir Charles and Mr. Lowther would
be glad to be left alone; and retired early.

My aunt, my Lucy, and I, had a good deal of discourse upon this interesting
subject; Emily present.

We all foresaw, that the situation of this admirable Lady would overcloud a
little (we hoped but a little) the happiest days that ever mortals knew. The
sincere value, said my aunt, that you have for so deserving a woman, and your
native generosity, will be your security for happiness, my dear; and will six
on a durable base your mutual Love: But this Lady's trials will, however, be
trials to you. God give her peace of mind! it is all we can hope for in her
favor; To you, the continuance of your present happiness: greater, cannot fall
to the lot of mortal.

She left me, I retired to my pen.

THUS far have I written. It Is late. Sir Charles is coming up -- And I am here
at my pen. I will compliment him with a place in my closet, while I retire. --
Goodnight, my dearest grandmamma. Pray for your Harriet, and pray for
Clementina.

Friday morning.
SIR Charles would have withdrawn to his Study, when he found me at my pen. I
besought him to sit down in my closet.

Remove your papers then, my dear.

No need, Sir, These (putting what I had been just writing, and those I had
written the day before, on one side of my desk) I would not, Sir, except you
have a curiosity, wish you to see at present: These, Sir, you may, if you
please, amuse yourself with.

I will take down one of your books, my Love. I will not look into any of your
written papers.

Dear, generous Sir, look into them all -- Look into both parcels. Something
about Lucy; something of what Mr. Lowther has talked of, in that parcel -- Read
any of the written papers before you.

A generous mind, my Love, will not take all that is offered by a generous
mind. Hasten, my Harriet: It is late. My mind is a little disturbed: Yours, I
am afraid, is generously uneasy. In your faithful bosom, will I repose all my
cares.

I pressed his hand between both mine, and would have pressed it with my lips:
But, kissing my hands, first one, then the other -- Condescending goodness!
said he. God continue to me my Harriet's Love, and make Clementina not unhappy,
and what can befall me, that will not add thankfulness to thankfulness?

With what soothing tenderness did he afterward open his generous heart to his
Harriet! He was indeed disturbed: For Mr. Lowther had told him, that the
General (I don't love him) was quite cruel -- At one time he threatened the
excellent creature: He called her ungenerous, ungrateful, undutiful! -- She
fell down at his seet, in a fainting fit: He left her in anger -- Staid not to
recover or sooth her -- Yet returned in about two hours (his conscience
stinging him) and on his knees besought her pardon -- Received it -- The dear
saint forgave the soldierly man -- Yet he persisted, and turned his
threatenings into worse, if possible, than threatenings, into persuasion.

If I have an enemy, said the dear creature to her brothers, who has conceived
a mortal antipathy to me, let him insinuate himself into the favor of those
most dear to me, and prevail upon them to attack me with all the powers of
persuading Love, in order to induce me to do the thing, whatever it be, most
contrary to my heart: And then will the instigator wreak upon me his whole
vengeance, and make me think death itself an eligible refuge.

Sir Charles sighed at repeating this. I wept. How happy, thought I, more than
once, are you, best of men, in your own reflections, that a woman so excellent,
who cannot be happy with any other man, herself refused you, and persisted in
her refusal; though you sought all ways, and used all arguments, to bring her
to a change of determination! What otherwise would have been your regret! And
how unhappy should I have been in the consciousness of being in her place; and
of having dispossessed her of a heart to which she had so much better
pretensions! Now has he no room for remorse; but for friendly pity only, and
for wishes to relieve her afflicted heart. Of what a blessing is that man
possessed, who, when calamity assails him, can acquit himself, his intentions
at least; and say, "This I have not brought upon myself: It is an inevitable
evil: A dispensation of Providence, I will call it, and submit to it, as such!"

Methinks, madam, I could spare this excellent woman some of my happiness. Have
I not more than mortal ever knew before?

Sir Charles mentioned to me, that Lady Olivia, in her last Letter to him,
intimated her desire to come over once more to England: But he hoped what he
had written to dissuade her from it, would have weight with her. I told him, I
wished that Lady the wife of some worthy man, whose gratitude and affection
she, by her great fortune, might engage. But, Sir, said I, I cannot, cannot
wish (be the Count of Belvedere ever so good a man) that Lady Clementina were
married.

What would my Harriet wish for Lady Clementina, circumstanced as she is?

I don't know. But the woman who has loved Sir Charles Grandison, with a heart
so pure, can never be happy with any other man.

You are ever obliging, my Love. You judge of Clementina as she deserves to be
judged of, as to the purity of her heart. But -- He stopped.

But what, my dear Sir? -- Alas! she says that you have strengthened the hands
of her friends: Am I forgiven before I go any further?

Not, my Harriet, if you think it necessary to ask such a question. Blame me
always, when you think me wrong: I shall doubt your Love, if you give me reason
to question your freedom.

Dear Sir, -- But answer me: Would you have Clementina, circumstanced as she
is, marry?

What answer can I return to my Harriet's question; when sometimes I am ready
to favor the parents pleas; at others, the daughter's? I would not have her
either compelled, or over-earnestly persuaded, The family plead, "That their
happiness, her health and peace, depend on her marriage: They cannot bear to
think of rewarding Laurana for her cruelty, with an estate that never was
designed for her; and to the cutting it off, as it may happen, from their
Giacomo and his descendants for ever, in case Clementina assumes the veil. The
health* of the father and mother are declining: They wish but to live to see
the alliance with the Count of Belvedere take place. The noble Lady gave
reasons that could be answered. She had, by her own magnanimity, got over a
greater difficulty, if I may presume to say so, than they had required her to
struggle with; how could I avoid advising her to yield to the supplications of
parents, of brothers, of an uncle, who, however mistaken in the means by which
they seek to obtain their wishes, love not their own souls, better than they
love their Clementina?

"It was, besides, a measure by which only at the time, I could demonstrate
(and the General, I know, considered it as a test) that I really gave up all
hopes of her myself. -- And when I had owned, that there was a woman, with whom
I had no doubt of being happy, could I engage her to accept of me, they all
besought me, for their sakes, for Clementina's, to court that acceptance,
having hopes, that though she could not set me an example, she would follow
mine."

This, my dearest Life, was the occasion, as I told your friends, of
accelerating my declaration to you. I could not else, either for the sake of
your delicacy or my own, so soon have made proposals, not even to Mrs. Shirley;
for, situated as I was, I could not think of applying to you till I had
strengthened myself, as I hoped to do, by her interest. Your generous
acceptance, signified to me by that good Lady, has for ever obliged me. I
regarded it, my Harriet, circumstanced as I had been, and shall ever regard it,
as a condescension, which, as I told that Lady, at the time, laid me under an
obligation that I never, by my utmost gratitude, shall be able to repay.

O Sir, well have you shown that you meant what you said. How poor a return,
hiding my face in his generous bosom, is my Love for so much goodness, and kind
consideration!

He clasped me to the faithfullest of human hearts.

But, dear Sir, I find, I find, on the whole, that you think Lady Clementina
has not so much reason on her side, as her parents have on theirs.

My tenderness for her, my dear, because of her unhappy malady, and my
apprehension of a return of it, together with my admiration of her noble
qualities, prejudice me strongly in her favor. If she could be convinced by
their motives, I should be ready to own my convictions in favor of these. But
if she cannot, neither can I; so partial am I in the cause of a Lady I so
sincerely admire, and who has been so much afflicted. But what, in the
situation they and she were in, remain for me to do, but to advise the family
to proceed with tenderness and patience; that their Clementina might have time
to weigh, to consider, their reasons, their indulgence? You, my dear, shall see
in the copies of the Letters I have written since I have been in England, my
remonstrances to them on their precipitating her. But they were in a train:
They presumed on the characteristic duty of their Clementina: They flattered
themselves, that sometimes she seemed to relent: They conceived hopes from the
expressions of compassion for the Count of Belvedere, which sometimes she let
fall. The General, who, though a generous man, can do nothing moderately, would
not be satisfied with cold measures, as he called them; and, not doubting his
sister's acquiescence with her duty, if once she could be prevailed upon to
think her compliance such, they were resolved to pursue the train they were in:
But in order to avoid their importunities, how has the dear Clementina shifted
the scene from Bologna to Florence from Florence to Bologna, and once, for that
purpose wanted to go to Urbino, once to Naples, and even, as you have seen, to
come to England! -- But now, by this time, most probably, they have succeeded.
God give happiness to the dear Clementina!

Most cordially did I join in the prayer.

The next Letters from Italy must acquaint us with the unwished-for success of
the family; and the poor Lady's thraldom. Can, my dear grandmamma, the Count of
Belvedere really be a good, a generous man, to solicit the favor of a hand,
that he knows will not be accompanied by a heart? Can the man be said to know
what true Love is, who prefers not the happiness of the beloved object to his
own; who can, in short, think he can be happy, though the person he professes to
love, shall be unhappy?

Thank God, this dreadful Lot has not been drawn by

Your HARRIET GRANDISON.
I am glad my dear Lady G. that you are returned to Grosvenor-square. Be easy,
be patient, my Charlotte. We shall have, I hope, many happy days together at
Grandison-hall, at Grosvenor-square; at every place where we shall be. You are
a dear fretful creature! -- But not half so petulant, I hope, in behavior, as
on paper to me. Let us think of nothing grievous, my Charlotte; but of the
unhappy situation of poor Lady Clementina: And let us join to pray for her
happiness.



LETTER XV. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Saturday morning, Feb. 3.
EMILY and I have had another conversation. She had been more grave and solemn
than usual from the time of the last, of which I gave you an account.

Her Anne had taken notice to Sally of a change in the temper of her young
mistress. She knew not how to please her, she said. From the best-natured young
Lady in the world, she was grown one of the most peevish; and she had taken the
Liberty to tell her, that she must quit her service, if she found her so hard
to be pleased.

Do then, was her answer; I will not be threatened by you, Anne. You seem to have
found out your consequence with me. Go, Anne, as soon as you will. I will not be
threatened, Anne. I have enough to vex me, without being disturbed by you.

The honest maid, who dearly loves her, and has been with her ever since she
was seven years old, and was much approved for her fidelity and good behavior
by her father, burst out into tears, and would, in a mild and humble manner,
have expostulated with her. Let me beseech you, madam, said she, to permit me a
word or two by way of dutiful expostulation. But she hurried from her -- I
will not hear you, Anne. You have begun at the wrong end. You should have
expostulated, and not threatened, first. And then going up to her closet. She
locked herself in.

I pitied the dear girl. Too well I thought I could account for this change of
temper in her: So exceeding good her guardian to her, her gratitude augmented
her Love [Don't I know how that might easily be?]: Yet, thought I, it would
half break her heart, if he were to assume reserve -- I would not for her sake
have him imagine there was a necessity for a change of his behavior to her.
And indeed if he were to be more reserved, what would that do? So good a man;
so uniform his goodness; the poor Emily must acquit him, and condemn herself;
yet have no cure for her malady.

Sally offered Anne to acquaint me with what had passed: But the good young
woman begged she would not. Her young Lady was so tenacious, she said (young
Lady like) of her authority, that she would never forgive her if she were known
to make an appeal to me, or to my aunt. And to complain without a probability
of redress, the prudent creature observed, except to her, as one Lady's woman
to another, would expose her beloved young mistress; when, perhaps, the present
grievance might be cured by time, assiduity, and patience.

This was necessary to premise.

Sir Charles, my Uncle, and Mr. Deane, having rode out pretty early this
morning to breakfast, at Sir William Turner's; and my aunt and Lucy retiring
after breakfast to write; and I to my closet for the same purpose; Emily came
and tapped at my door. I instantly opened it.

I intrude, madam. -- No, my dear.

I had observed at supper last night, and at breakfast this morning, that she
had been in tears; though nobody else did; for the above hints, privately given
me by Sally, made me more observant of her motions.

I took her hand, and would have placed her by me -- No, madam, said she, let
me stand: I am not worthy of sitting down in your presence.

Her eyes were brimful of tears; but as she twinkled in hopes to disperse them,
I would not take such full notice of them, as might make them run over, if they
could be dispersed: Yet mine, I believe glistened sympathetically.

In my presence, my Emily! my friend! Why, why, this?

I stood up. Your elder sister, my Love, sits not, while her younger stands.

She threw her arms about me, and her tears ran over. This goodness, this
goodness kills me! -- I am, I am, a most unhappy creature! -- Unhappy from the
grant of my own wishes! -- O that you would treat me severely! I cannot, cannot
support myself, under the hourly instances which I receive of your goodness!

Whence, my dearest Emily, these acknowlegements? I do love my Emily: And
should be either ungrateful or insensible to the merits of my beloved Sister,
did I not do all in my power to make her happy. What can I do for her, that is
not her due?

She struggled herself out of my embracing arms, withdrawing hers -- Let me,
let me go, madam! -- She hurried into the adjoining apartment. I followed her;
and taking her hand, Leave me not, in this perplexity, my Emily! I cannot, part
with you: If you love your Harriet, as she loves her Emily, you will put me in
the way of alleviating this anguish of the most innocent, and most amiable of
minds. Open your heart to me, my dear.

O Lady Grandison! the deserving wife of the best of men, you ought to hate me!

My dearest Emily! said I.

Indeed you ought.

Let us sit down on this Sofa, if you will not return to my closet.

I sat down. She sat by me, leaning her glowing face on my shoulder. I put one
arm round her neck; with the other hand, I grasped one of hers. Now, my dear, I
conjure you, by the friendship that is between us, the more than sisterly
friendship, open your whole heart to me; and renounce me, if it be in my power
to heal the wounds of your mind, and I do not pour into them the balm of
friendly Love.

What can I say? -- Yesterday, my dearest Lady Grandison, I received an answer
to a case I put to Dr. Bartlett, of a young creature, who -- I cannot tell you
--

She wept; raised her head; dried her eyes; again leaned her face on my
shoulder; again I put my arm round her neck -- Your case, my Love?

Ah, madam! My case -- Did you say, My case?

I asked, my dear, not as for your case, any other than as for the case you put
to the Doctor.

He has not told you* madam?

Indeed he has not said a word of your consulting him.

I had rather tell you myself. I am afraid he guesses who the young woman is. O
the poor cunning! -- I am a weak silly creature! -- He certainly guesses --

May I, my Love, see the case? -- May I see the answer to it?

I have burnt them both! -- In a fit of anger at myself, that I should expose
myself (for he certainly guesses who the young woman is) I threw them in the
fire.

But you can tell me the case. You can give me the substance of the answer.

How can I? You of all women! You, madam, whom I best love of all women; but
who ought to hate, to despise me!

Trust me, Love, with your secret. It shall never without your Leave pass this
faithful bosom, if it be a secret that already I do not guess at.

She started -- Guess at, madam!

Don't start at what I say, my Love.

O you cannot, cannot guess at it. If you did --

What if I did?

Then would you banish from your presence for ever the justly hated Emily: Then
would you make my guardian renounce me!

Shall I, my dear, tell you what I guess?

Whisper me then, throwing about me the hand I held not: But whisper me that I
may not hear.

You love your guardian, my Emily! -- He loves you!

O madam!

He will always love you; so will I.

Banish the criminal from your presence for ever; rising; yet again laying her
face on my shoulder -- and clasping her arms about me, Hide me, hide me from
myself.

No need, my dear Everybody loves your guardian. You cannot love him but with
innocence. Your Love is founded in gratitude. So was mine. Don't I know how to
allow for my Emily?

You will banish fear from my heart, madam, by this your goodness to me. I find
I may own all my weakness, my folly, to you; and the rather, as I shall entitle
myself by it to your advice. I wanted to do it; but was afraid you would hate
me. In the same circumstances I doubt I should not be so generous as you are. O
that I had not put my case to the Doctor!

The Doctor, my dear, is all goodness. He will keep your secret --

And not tell my guardian, madam* any thing about it? It would be worse than
death to me, if my guardian should mistrust me. He would hate the poor Emily,
if you did not.

He never shall know it, my dear. You have already engaged the Doctor to
secrecy, I doubt not.

I have.

He will inviolably keep your secret, no fear; especially as your charming
ingenuousness to me, will be a means of putting you and me, my Love, on finding
expedients, that shall equally secure your honor, and your guardian's regard
for you.

That, madam, is the very thing.

Open then to me your innocent heart, my dear. Regard me, as your friend, your
sister, and as if I were not the happy wife of your beloved guardian --

And so I will. -- I did not, madam, mistrust myself till the solemnity had
passed, that made you and my guardian one. Then I began to be uneasy with
myself; and the more, as I was for hiding myself from myself, as I may say; for
I was afraid of looking into my heart: Why so? thought I. Am I not an innocent
girl? What do I wish for? What can I hope for? Do I not love Lady Grandison? I
do. Yet now-and-then -- Don't hate me, madam! I will reveal to you all my
heart, and all my weakness.

Proceed, my Emily. This is indeed a token of your love, of your confidence in
me. What a compliment does my dearest younger sister make to her elder.

Yet now-and-then, something like Envy, I thought, arose in my heart: And can
your countenance forbear to change, when I tell you of Envy?

If it did, it would be from compassionate Love to my Emily. You don't know, my
dear, how my heart dilates on this your most agreeable confidence in me.

God bless that dear heart! -- There never was such a heart as yours. Well, but
I will go on if you please.

Do, my dear.

Here, thought I, once (that I was resolved to call myself to account) did I
ask the favor of being allowed to live with my guardian and his Lady, when
they were married: And what did I mean by it? Nothing but innocence, believe
me. Well, and my request is granted! This was all that I thought was wanting to
make me happy: But, said I to myself, am I happy? No. Do I love my guardian
less? No. Do I love Lady Grandison more for granting me this favor? I admire
her more, I think; and I have a grateful sense of her goodness to me: But, I
don't know how it is -- I think, though I dearly love her, yet I would be
sometimes glad I did not, quite so well. Ungrateful Emily! And severely I took
myself to task. Surely, pity, madam, is near akin to Love; for while your
suspenses lasted, I thought I loved you better than I loved my own heart: But
when you were happy, and there was no room for pity, wicked wretch that I was!
I wanted, methought, sometimes to lower you. -- Don't you hate me now?

No, no, my Emily; my Pity, as you say, increases my Love of you. Proceed,
child, your mind is the unsullied book of nature: Turn to another Leaf. Depend
upon my kindest allowances. I knew, before you knew it yourself, that you loved
your guardian.

Before I knew it myself! Why that might be. So I went on reasoning with myself
-- "What, Emily, can thou love thy guardian more; and Lady Grandison, with
all her goodness to me, not more -- And can thou mingle envy with admiration
of her? -- Ah, silly, and worse that silly, girl, where may this end? -- Lord
bless me! If I suffer myself to go on thus, shall I not be the most ungrateful
of creatures? Shall I not, instead of my guardian's love, incur his hatred?
Will not all the world despise me? -- And where may this stop?" -- Yet I went
on excusing myself; for I knew I had no vile meaning: I knew I only wanted my
guardian to love me, and to be allowed to love him. But what! thought I, at
last, can I allow myself inloving a married man, the husband of my friend? And
sometimes I trembled at the thought; for I looked back; and said to myself,
"Would thou, Emily, a year ago, have allowed in thyself but the same lengths
that thou have now run?" -- No; answered I my own question. "Is not this a fair
warning of what may be a year hence?" -- So I put a case, to Dr. Bartlett, as
of three persons of my Anne's acquaintance, two young women, one young man,
living in one house: The young man contracted to one of the young women; the
other knowing it; and though a person incapable of a criminal thought, yet
finding an increasing regard for the young man, though she dearly loved her
friend, began to be afraid her heart was not quite as it should be: What, I
asked, as for my Anne's friend, would he advise in the case?

And what, my dear, was the Doctor's advice?

I was a silly creature to put it to him. As I said, he certainly must guess.
If you, madam, could without such a case put, he certainly must. We young girls
think, if we put our hands before our eyes, nobody can see us. In short, the
Doctor pronounced the increasing regard to be a beginning Love. The consequence
would be, that the young woman would in time endeavor to supplant her friend;
though at present she might probably shudder at the thought. He bid me tell Anne
to warn her acquaintance against the growing flame. He said, she might entangle
her own heart, and without gaining her end, render unhappy a couple, who,
according to my representation from my Anne, deserved to be happy: And he
advised, by all means, that she should leave the contracted couple to
themselves, and for her own honor's, her own heart's sake, remove to as great
distance from them as possible.

Believe me, madam, I was shocked, I was frighted at myself: I threw the papers
in the fire; and have been, ever since I read them, more unhappy than usual. My
dear Lady Grandison, then thought I, I will, if you give me encouragement, open
my heart to you. You will hear of my folly, my weakness, one day or other. --
And now, dear good madam, forgive me: Keep my secret; and advise me what to do.

What, my dearest creature, can I advise you? I love you. I ever will love you.
I will be as careful of your honor as of my own. I will endeavor to cultivate
your guardian's affection to you.

He never, madam, I hope, guessed at the poor Emily's folly.

He never mentioned you to me, but with love and tenderness.

Thank God! -- But say, advise me, madam; my heart shall be in your hand; guide
it, as you please.

What, my dear, did you think of doing yourself?

I must not think of living with you now, madam.

Why not? You shall find me ever your true friend.

But I am sure Dr. Bartlett's advice to Anne's acquaintance is right. I tell
you, madam, that I must every day, and every hour of the day, that I see his
tender behavior to you; that I behold him employed in acts of beneficence;
that I see every one adoring him; admire him more. I see that I am less my own
mistress than I thought it was possible I could be: And if such a girl as I,
have so little command of myself, and his merit every hour spreading itself out
before me with increasing luster, my weak eyes will not be able to bear his
glory -- O madam, I ought to fly; I am resolved, whatever it cost me to fly.

How I admired, how I pitied, how I loved, the dear creature! I clasped both my
arms about her, and pressing her to my bosom -- What can I say, my Emily? What
can I say? Tell me, what would you wish me to say?

You are wise, madam: You have a tender and generous heart: O that I were half
as good! -- Advise me something -- I see the folly of my wishing to live with
you and my guardian.

And is it necessary, my dear, to a conquest of yourself, that we should not
live together?

Absolutely so: I am convinced of it.

Suppose, my dear, you go to the London house, and put yourself under Mrs.
Grandison's protection?

What, madam, my guardian's house still?

I hope a few weeks absence, by help of a discretion of which you have, in the
present conversation, given shining proofs, will answer all we wish; since you
never, my dear, could have thought but of admiring, and that at distance, the
great qualities of your guardian.

I have, it is true, but just found myself out, I never could have hope of being
looked upon in any other light, than as his daughter; and I hope, I have made
the discovery in time. But I must not be with him in his own house. I must not
be in the way of his constant conversation.

Admirable discretion! Amiable innocence! -- Well then suppose you request Lady
L. Lady G --

Ah, no, no! That would not do, neither. My guardianwould be the continual
subject of our conversation; and often, very often, his brotherly goodness
would lead him to them; them to him.

Charming fortitude! Heroic Emily! How I admire you! I see you have thought
attentively of this matter. What are your thoughts?

Cannot you guess?

I know what I wish -- But you must speak first.

Don't you remember what the blessed Mrs. Shirley (I must call her blessed!)
said to me on your weddingday, in the vestry?

I do, my dearest Emily! And are you inclined --

Shall I be received, madam, as a second Harriet in your family? It would be my
ambition to tread in your steps at Selby-house and Shirley-manor; to hear from
you; to write to you; to form myself by the model, by which you were formed; to
be called by Mrs. Shirley, by Mrs. Selby, their Emily.

How you would rejoice them all, my Emily! and, if we must part, me, to have my
Emily be to my dearest friends what their Harriet so happily was!

But, madam, will you undertake to procure my guardian's consent?

I will endeavor it.

Endeavor it! Then it is done. He will deny you nothing. Will good Mrs.
Shirley consent?

I have no doubt but she will, if your guardian do.

Will Mrs. Selby, will Mr. Selby, be my uncle and aunt?

We will consult them: They are happily with us, you know.

But, madam, there is one objection; a very great one.

What is that, my Love?

Your cousin James Selby! I should respect him, as your cousin, and as the
brother of the two Miss Selby's: But that is all.

I never, my dear, approved of any motion of that kind. Not one of my friends
think of it: They wish it not. He has met with discouragement from every one of
my family, and his own: He submits to the discouragement.

Then, madam, if you please to break the matter to Mr. and Mrs. Selby; and to
Mrs. Shirley, without letting them know the poor girl flies to them as for
refuge against herself; and satisfy Lady L. Lady G. and Mrs. Eleanor Grandison,
that I mean nothing of slight to them; then will I attend Mr. and Mrs. Selby in
their return home: And I shall be in a while a very happy girl, I doubt not.
But still remember, madam, I must love my guardian: But it shall be with a Love
that shall not exclude Lady Grandison from a large share of it; the largest, if
I can. And now, clasping her arms about my neck, let me beg your pardon for all
the strange things I have said. My heart will be the easier for having found a
confident, such a confident, however, as no girl ever found before -- But in
this instance of goodness, you more than equal Lady Clementina herself; and a
thousand, thousand thanks for your patience with me on such a subject! -- Yet
say, say, my dear Lady Grandison, you don't hate the poor girl, who has the
vanity to emulate you and Lady Clementina!

I wept over her from joy, pity, tenderness.

Will you not, my dear grandmamma, love my Emily more than ever? Will you call
her your Emily, and think of her, as your Harriet?

Lady L. Lady G. will you excuse the preference she has given to quiet
Northamptonshire, against noisy London, and its gay scenes, at so young a time
of Life? -- Excuse it! I am sure you will think that the reason she has given
for the preference, lifts her up above woman.

Monday, Feb. 5.
I HAVE already obtained my uncle's and aunt's, and Lucy's, high approbation of
Emily's proposal. They, at her request, asked Sir Charles's consent, as a
favor. He desired to see her upon it. She came in, bashful, her steps
unassured, looking down. He took her hand: My good Emily, said he, I am told
that you have a desire to restore to Mrs. Shirley, Mrs. Selby, and Mr. Selby,
the grand*daughter and niece I have robbed them of. They rejoice in your
proposal. You will be exceedingly happy in their protection. My Harriet will be
loath to part with you; but for their sakes, as well as yours, she will
cheerfully acquiesce: And though we wanted it not, we shall have an additional
pleasure in visiting Northamptonshire. -- It is your deliberate choice, my dear?

It is, Sir: And I hope I may be allowed to accompany Mrs. Selby down.

Settle the matter, Ladies, among yourselves. I have but one thing to add on
the subject. You have a Mother, my dear. We must not absolutely resolve till we
have her consent. She is good now: You must make a compliment to my sisters,
and their Lords also, and to my aunt Grandison* They love my ward: And she must
preserve every worthy person's Love.

The dear girl courtesied; wept -- You are all -- all goodness, Sir.

If your mind should change, my dear, don't be afraid to signify the
alteration. It will be the business of us all to make each other happy. You
will be always dear to my Harriet. Recollect, mean time, if there be anything
further in my power to oblige you.

O Sir! You must not (she ran to me, and in my bosom, weeping, spoke out her
sentence) be too good to me!

I kissed the dear girl's forehead -- Heroic Emily! whispered I, to confirm her
in her heroism.

And thus already, my dearest grandmamma, is this material article settled. My
aunt answers for your approbation; and Lucy for the pleasure that this
acquisition, as I may call it, will give to Nancy, to Miss Holles's, and all
our other kindred and acquaintance. But how, when the time comes, shall I part
with her?

What, I wonder, will Sir Edward Beauchamp say to this? -- He must get his dear
friend's leave to visit with us Shirley-manor and Selby-house, which I hope we
shall do twice a year at least.

My Uncle and Aunt, Lucy, and Mr. Deane, are exceedingly rejoiced on this
occasion: How fond are they of Emily! She of them! This gives them a relation
to each other, that I hope will produce a friendship which will last for ever.

My Aunt and Lucy have been asking my opinion, whether Sir Charles did not
discover something of the good girl's growing affection for him; so
undisguisedly sincere as she always was, and for some time not suspecting
herself; he so penetrating a man? Of this, said Lucy, I am sure, he would have
seen it with half an eye, had any other man been as much the object of her
regard.

If any thing would induce me, said I, to think he did, it would be his ready
acquiescence with her proposal, and from his being so little inquisitive after
her motives for leaving us: The case, continued I, is of so nice a nature, that
he never will say, even to me, what his thoughts are upon it, if such thoughts
he has. And as to myself, it would be dealing with Emily less delicately than I
was dealt with by the two noble sisters, should I presume to sound him on so
nice a subject.

And indeed there never could be a man in the world that had a greater regard
than he has to those real delicacies of our Sex, which border not upon what is
called Prudery.

Mr. Lowther is gone to London: He has given into Sir Charles's wishes, to
settle in this neighborhood. He said, he liked the country: He had no
particular attachment to any place; and made a fine compliment to Sir Charles
on the occasion. I need not say, it was a just one.

My uncle, my aunt, write. Lucy has another long Letter almost ready. I have
only further to say therefore, at this time, that I am and ever will be

Your most dutiful, HARRIET GRANDISON.
Sir Charles intends to write to you, madam, on Emily's proposal -- My uncle,
and aunt begin to be weary of us, as Sir Charles and I tell them; But they call
us both unreasonable. God give us good news from Italy!



LETTER XVI. Lady GRANDISON, To Ladies L. and G.
Grandison-hall, Tues. Feb. 13.
I Write to my dearest sisters now.

Nor will I ask you to send my Letters to my grandmamma for the present.

Lucy shall be lest to entertain my Northamptonshire friends.

The enclosed translation of a Letter written by Signor Jeronymo, will give you
the surprising news -- surprising indeed -- Poor, poor Lady!

I must tell you in my next, how we were all affected on the receiving it: No
more at present can I add, but that I am, my dear Ladies.

Your ever affectionate Sister, HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER XVII. Signor JERONYMO della PORRETTA, To Sir CHARLES GRANDISON.
My Grandison,
YOU will be surprised -- astonished -- The dear Clementina! How has she
tarnished all her glory! A young creature of her nice honor! -- Good God! --
And must I her brother, your Jeronymo, expose his sister?

We gave into almost every wish of her heart. The dear Scripturist had
requested a month's time to travel from place to place on the other side of the
Apennines, partly in imitation of the daughter of the famous Israelitish
General Jephthah. See Judges xi.
; and partly on pretense of establishing her health; implying, that she
considered the meditated marriage as a sacrifice: And we had hopes at the end
of it, that she would be brought to give her hand, not unchearfully, to the
Count of Belvedere, for whom she owned pity and gratitude.

We had consented to several trifling delays of her return to us before. Yet
besought her to excuse us from allowing her to visit Rome and Naples; and she
acquiesced with the reasons we gave her. She desired leave to take into her
service, as a page, an English youth, the nephew of a gentleman of the English
factory at Leghorn, who was well recommended by his uncle, on the enquiry Mrs.
Beaumont, at our desire, made into his character. We, supposing her motive to
be merely an innocent and grateful regard to the country of a man whom we could
allow her to respect, consented. She accordingly took him; and he attended her
in her excursions to Pistoia, Prato, Pratolina, Pisa, Sienna, etc.; to some of
which places she was accompanied by Mrs. Beaumont, and the Ladies her friends.
But being desirous to see the seacoast from Piombino to Lucca, according to a
plan she showed; and talking of stretching to Genoa, when at Lucca; which was
to conclude her excursions, and complete her month; she was left by those
Ladies to be attended by her own servants: These, all but her page and Laura,
she contrived (the high-soul'd Clementina stooped to art!) to send different
ways, ordering them to meet her at Lucca; but, instead of going thither, took a
short way to Leghorn; and there embarked on board an English ship ready cleared
out, and bound for the port of London; and it had sailed three days, before it
was known what was become of her. But then the contents of the following
Letter, directed to Mrs. Beaumont, astonished that Lady, and her friends; as
you will believe it did us, when it was transmitted to us in a Letter written
by Mrs. Beaumont, acquainting us with the particulars of her excursions and
flight; and the certainty, upon proper enquiries at Leghorn, that she was gone
to England.

"Forgive me, my dearest Ladies; my dearest Mrs. Beaumont, particularly,
forgive me! I am embarked in an enterprise, that will be enough my punishment.
Pity me, therefore, as well as pardon me! The impending evil is always the most
terrible. My heart is extremely averse to a married life. A fortnight of the
month is expired, at the end of which I am expected to give my vows to a man
not unworthy of them, could I think it in my power to make him happy, and could
I be so myself in the prospects before me: But how can that be? Persuasion,
cruel persuasion! A kneeling father, a fighing mother; generous, but entreating
brothers; how, how can I resist you, if I go to dear, once most dear Bologna?
All you, my friends, at Bologna, at Urbino, everywhere, forgive me! What have I
not suffered before I came to the resolution that must be pursued, though
repentance, when I have attained the proposed asylum, follow! My good Lord of
B. forgive me also. Change your attachment. You deserve a better wife, than
conscience, than honor, than justice (words that mean the same thing) tell me,
can be made you, by the unhappy Clementina. She dare not add Della Porretta. --
Ah my mother!" --

This Letter was left with a person at Leghorn, with orders, not to send it,
till the vessel had sailed three days. We are all distracted; but most my
mother.

For the sake of her peace of mind, we are come to a resolution to anticipate
our summers visit to you; and, unpropitious as the season is for such a
journey, we shall set out next week accordingly. God give my mother strength to
bear the fatigue! Courage she has, on this occasion, who never before could be
brought to go by sea any-where: No, not to Naples, to visit her Giacomo, and
his Lady, though in a more propitious season.

It was a long-laid scheme, we imagine; for she had dismissed her faithful
Camilla, on her urging her to a change of condition. I am afraid the good woman
was too sedulous in obeying the orders given her by my brother, to make use of
every opportunity to inspire her with tender sentiments, in favor of the Count
of Belvedere. Laura has for some time been her only favorite servant.

This youth, by name Antony Dagley, no doubt has managed this affair for her.

Mrs. Beaumont now recollects several circumstances, which, could she have
suspected Clementina to be capable of such an enterprise, might have given her
suspicion.

The vessel she is in, is called The Scanderoon: Alexander Henderson master.

How can the dear creature on her arrival in England look You, your Lady, your
Sisters, in the face? What may she suffer, in such a voyage, at such a season!
To what insults may she be exposed! So little as she knows of the English
tongue! Laura not a syllable of it! Depending on the fidelity of a
stranger-boy! So few changes of apparel as she had the opportunity to take with
her! -- Whether provided with any considerable sums of money, we know not!
England, in her opinion, a nation of heretics! -- Good Heaven! could Clementina
della Porretta be guilty of such a rashness?

But what an averseness must she have to marriage! We have certainly been too
precipitating. You cautioned us: Yet, I dare say, could not have believed, that
our Clementina could have taken such a step. But, alas! we conclude, that it is
owing more to the effects of her late unhappy malady, than to any other cause.
When once the mind is disordered, there is danger, it seems, of its showing
itself, on extraordinary occasions, even after the cure is supposed to be
perfected, capable of extravagance. Again I say, we have been too hasty. -- Our
brother Giacomo! -- But he is the most disinterested of men. He would not
otherwise be so urgent as he is for her marriage.

Dear, dear creature! How my heart bleeds for the distresses she may be thrown
into! -- But they cannot be equal to those which her mother feels for her.
Clementina knows how much the lives of her father and mother are bound up in
hers. But I repeat, she must be under the influences of her former malady, or
never, never, could she have done an act, that she must know would wound our
very souls.

From the lights I have held out, we hope you will be able to find her before
she can have suffered more than the inconveniences of the voyage; before she
can have wanted money, or other conveniences. If you do, your sisters will
give the rash one countenance and protection till we can arrive.

Our company will be, my Father, Mother, the Bishop, your Jeronymo, Father
Marescotti, and our two cousins Sebastiano and Juliano. Mrs. Beaumont has the
goodness, purely from motives of charity, to accompany my mother. Poor Camilla,
almost as inconsolable as my mother, attends her Lady.

We must give you the trouble of hiring for us as large a house as you can
procure. The circumstances we are in, allow us not to think of anything more
than common convenience, and to be incognito.

Our two cousins abovenamed may be in lodgings, if room be wanted.

We shall have no more than necessary attendants.

A lesser house, or handsome lodgings will content the Count of Belvedere.

These cares for us, my dear Grandison, we must throw upon you: Yet, if my
Lowther be in England, he will be so kind as to ease you of part of them. You
will have concern enough in sharing ours, for the occasion which carries us to
you, so much sooner than we intended, and in an inconvenient season;
circumstances that will sufficiently demonstrate the distress we are in.

The vessel we have hired, is called, The Leghorn Frigate. The master's name is
Arthur Gunning. If we are favored in our voyage, the master hopes to be in
your river Thames in about three weeks from our embarking.

God give us, my Grandison, a meeting not unhappy! May we find the dear
fugitive safe in your protection, or under the wings of one of your noble
sisters!

I hope this unhappy affair will produce no uneasiness between your Lady and
you. If it should, what an additional evil would the dear rash one have to
answer for!

The General is too much incensed against the unhappy girl, to think of
accompanying us, could he obtain permission of his sovereign.

The least reparation the dear creature can make us, the Bishop says, is,
cheerfully to give her vows to the good Count of Belvedere, who looks forward
to the issue of this affair, as the crisis of his fate.

I hardly know what I have written; nor how to leave off. It is to you, our
dear friend, our consoler, our brother, and, let me add, our refuge, next to
that Almighty, who we hope will guide us in safety to you, and give an issue
not greatly derogatory to the glory of our sister, and family. Join, my
Grandison, your prayers with ours, to this purpose. Noblest of friends, Adieu!

JERONYMO della PORRETTA.

LETTER XVIII. Lady GRANDISON, To Ladies L. and G.
Wedn. Febr. 14.
LET me now give you the promised particulars.

As we, and our beloved guests, were at dinner on Monday, all harmony, all
love; the dear Emily laying out the happy days she hoped to see in
Northhamptonshire; Sir Charles using generous arguments to prevail on my uncle
and aunt to stay a little longer with him; the Letter, the affecting Letter,
was given into Sir Charles's hands: "From my Jeronymo!" said he, looking at the
superscription. Asking excuse, he broke it open, and, casting his eye upon the
first lines, he started; and bowing to his guests, and to me, he arose from
table, and withdrew to his Study.

We had not half dined. I urged our friends, but could not set them the
example; and we arose by consent, and went into the adjoining drawing room.

Sir Charles soon joined us there: His face was in a glow: He seemed to have
struggled for a composure, for our sakes, which, however, he had not obtained.

I looked upon him with eyes, I suppose, that had speech in them, by his taking
my hand, and saying, Be not surprised, my Love: You will soon have guests.

From Italy! From Italy, Sir! -- "Yes, my life" -- Who? Who, Sir?

Dr. Bartlett was with us. He besought him to give a translation of that
Letter. The Doctor retired to do it: And Sir Charles said, It is not impossible
but Clementina may be soon in England: Perhaps before the rest of her family.
Be not surprised (for we all looked upon one another): Dr. Bartlett will give
you the contents of the Letter. Oblige me, my dearest Love, with your hand.

He led me into his Study; and there, in the most tender and affectionate
manner, acquainted me with the contents of the Letter.

My dearest Harriet, said he, his arms encircling my waist, will not, cannot
doubt the continuance of my tenderest Love. I am equally surprised and
disturbed at the step taken. God preserve the dear Clementina! Join your
prayers with mine for her safety. You can pity the unhappy Lady: She is, I am
afraid, desolate and unprotected: You can pity her equally unhappy friends.
They are following her: They are all good: They mean well. Yet over-persuasion,
as you lately observed, in such a case a hers, is a degree of persecution. In
the unhappy circumstances she had been in, she should have had time given her.
Time subdues all things.

Let me beseech you, Sir, said I, to give the unhappy Lady your instant
protection. Consider me as a strengthener, not a weakener, of your hands, in
her service. I have no concern but for her safety and honor, and for your
concern on the affecting occasion. Dear Sir, let me by participation lessen it.

Soul of my Soul, said he, clasping me more ardently to his bosom, I had no
doubt of your generous goodness. It would be doing injustice to the unhappy
absent, and to the knowledge I have of my own heart, as well as to you, the
absolute mistress of it, did I think it necessary to make professions of my
unalterable, my inviolable Love to you. I will acquaint you with every step I
take in this arduous affair. You must advise me as I go along. Minds so
delicate as your and Clementina's, must be allied. I shall be sure of my
measures when I have the approbation of my Harriet. All our friends (They have
discretion) shall be made acquainted with my proceedings. I will not leave a
doubt upon the mind of any one of them, that my Harriet is not, as far as it is
in my power to make her, the happiest of women.

What, Sir, is the date of the Letter? -- He looked; It has no date, my dear,
Jeronymo's grief -- The Lady, Sir, said I, may be arrived. Leave me here at
Grandison-hall, with my friends: I will endeavor to engage their stay a little
longer than they had designed; and do you hasten up to town: If you can do
service to the unhappy Lady, destitute as you apprehend she is at present of
protection, and exposed to difficulties and dangers, your Letters shall be, if
possible, more acceptable to me, than even the presence of the man who is as
dear to me as my own soul.

I was raised. It was making me great, my dear Ladies, to have it in my power,
as I may say, to convince Sir Charles Grandison, that my compassion, my love,
my a lmiration of the noblest of women, was a sincere admiration and love.

How happy a man am I! said he. You have anticipated me by your goodness. I
will hasten up to town. You will engage your friends. The man whose Love is
fixed on the mind, all loveliness as is the admirable person that thus I again
press to my fond bosom, must be as happy as a mortal man can be!

He led me back to the expecting company: Who all stood up, as by an
involuntary motion, at our entrance; each person looking eager to know our
sentiments. The Doctor had not finished the translation: But Sir Charles sent
up for the Letter; and* begged of the Doctor, who brought it down himself, to
read it in English to us all. He did so.

What, my dear Ladies, was there of Peculiarity in my generosity, as your
brother was pleased to call it? -- My uncle, my aunt, my Lucy, Mr. Deane, all,
before Sir Charles could well speak, besought him not to suffer their being
here to be one moment's hindrance to his setting out for London.

He generously applauded me to them for what had passed between us in his
Study, and told them, he would set out early in the morning, if they would
promise to keep me company here.

They said, they would stay as long as their convenience would permit; and the
longer, that he might be the easier on such a generous call to town.

One thing, dear Sir, said I, let me beg; Let not the sweet fugitive be
compelled, if you can help it, to marry. Let not advantage be taken, as they
seem, by a hint in this Letter, inclined to take it, of this seeming rash step,
to make her compliance the condition of their forgiveness and reconciliation.

He called me his generous, his noble Harriet; repeated, that he would be
governed by my advice, and that then he should be sure of his footing.

Your brother set out early this morning for London: Join your prayers, my dear
Ladies, with his and mine, and with those of all our friends here, for a happy
issue to the present afflictions of the dear Clementina. How I long, yet
half-fear, to see her! Shall I, do you think, be able to see her, without being
apprehensive, that she will look upon me as the invader of her right? She was
undoubtedly his first Love.

Your brother communicated to me his intention of completing the furnishing of
the new-taken house in Grosvenor-square, which was before in great forwardness,
and to have it well aired for the reception of his noble friends. He will
acquaint his sisters with his further intentions, as occasions arise. God
succeed to him his own wishes! -- He may be trusted with them.

Adieu, my dearest Sisters! How proud am I, that I can indeed call you so, by
the name of

HARRIET GRANDISON!

LETTER XIX. Sir CHARLES GRANDISON, To Lady GRANDISON.
St. James's Square, Thursday Feb. 15. My dearest Life,
ON my arrival here last Night I found a long Letter, dated Sunday last, from
the unhappy Lady, whom we both so much admire and pity. The contents too well
confirm her wandering state of mind, and account for the steps she has taken. I
will send you the Letter itself as soon as I have seen her, and can prevail
upon her to put herself into my protection. Till the hope of a happier state of
mind shall dawn upon us, the contents of it will afflict you.

She has been ten days in England: I wrote to her last night, to beg her to
admit me to her presence.

She expresses in her Letter a generous joy in our happiness, and in the
excellent character which she has heard of the beloved of my heart; of every
heart. In the midst of her affecting wanderings, she preserves the greatness of
mind that ever distinguished her. She wishes to see you; but unknown to us both.

It would not be difficult perhaps to find out the place of her abode; but she
depends on my honor, that I will not attempt it: Clementina loves to be
punctiliously observed. In the way she is in, she must be soothed, and as
little opposed as possible. She thinks too highly of my character, and
apprehends that the step she has taken, has lowered her own. She has great
sensibility, and only sometimes wanders into minutenesses that her
circumstances, which I find are not happy, oblige her to attend to. I have
great hopes, that I shall be able to sooth, conciliate, and restore her; her
mind seems not to he deeply wounded. God enable me to quiet the heart of the
noblest of your Sisters! Forgive me for my two beloved Sisters. They will, if
you do.

I hope our dear friends will make themselves and you happy, at Grandison-hall.
This cloud passed away, if God preserve us to each other, and our friends to
us, all our future days must be serene: At least as far as it is in my power,
they shall be so to my Harriet. Professions would disgrace my Love, and your
merits. All that your own heart can wish me to be, that, if I know it, will I
be; for am I not the happy husband of the best and most generous of women; and,
as such,

Wholly Yours, CHARLES GRANDISON.

LETTER XX. Lady CLEMENTINA, To Sir CHARLES GRANDISON.
[Mentioned in the preceding.]

Tuesday. Febr. 13. O. S.
BY this time, it is very probable, you have heard of the rashest step that the
writer of these presents (checkered and unhappy, as the last years of her life
have been) over took. She knows it to be rash: She condemns herself for taking
it. She doubts not but she shall be condemned by everybody for it: Nor is she
sure, that she shall have the better opinion of your justice, if you are not
one of the severest of her censurers: For you are a good man. Your goodness, I
hear, fills every mouth in this your own country; and it is not one of your
least praises, that you did your duty in the strictest manner, to a Father, who
was wanting in his to his whole family. It is, it seems, your principle, that
where a duty is reciprocal, the failure in it of the one, acquits not the other
for a failure in his. How then can I appear before you? I am covered with
blushes at the thoughts of it -- I, who am a runaway from the kindest, the most
indulgent, of parents -- God forgive me! -- Yet, can I say, I repent? -- I
think, I can. -- But at best, it is a conditional repentance only, that I boast.

I am here in your England; I cannot, cannot, tell you where; in a low
condition; my fortune scanty; my lodgings not very convenient; two servants
only my attendants; Laura (you remember her) one; weeping every hour after her
friends, and our Italy: My other you know not -- My page he was called in the
days of my state, as I may, comparatively, call them; but now my every thing:
Poor youth! But he is honest, he is faithful. God reward him! -- I cannot.

Yet in all this my depression of circumstances, if I may so express myself,
and sometimes (too often indeed) of spirits; I think I am happy in the thought
that I am a single woman.

Well, Sir! -- And what can I say further? A thousand things I have to say: Too
many, to know which to say first. I had better say no more: I am not, however,
sure, I shall send you this, or any other Letter.

I have been ten days in this great, and, as it seems to me, ugly city: A
vastly populous one: People very busy. I thought your London people were all
rich -- But what is this to write to you about?

I have been out but once, and that for a morning in one of your parks. I cannot
say, I like England, nor its people, much: But I have seen nothing of the one,
or the other.

I live a very melancholy life: But that befits me best.

They tell me, that your churches are poor, plain things. You bestow more upon
yourselves than you do upon your God: But perhaps you trust more to the heart,
than to the eye, in the plainness of your places of devotion. But, again, what
is all this stuff to you? -- Yet, I am apt to ramble too-too much!

The truth is, I am not very well: So excuse me.

But do you know how it comes about, that having the best of fathers, the best
of mothers, the most affectionate of brothers, I should yet think them
persecutors? How it comes about, that I, who love them, who honor them, as
much as daughter ever honored parents, or sister ever loved brothers, should
run away from them all, into a strange land, a land of heretics; yet once be
thought a pious kind of creature? Do you know how this comes about?

Once there was a man -- But him I renounced -- But I had a good reason for it.
And do you think I repent it? By my truth, Chevalier, I do not: I never did.
Yet I think of nobody half so often, nor with half the pleasure: For, though a
Heretic, he is a good man.

But hush! Dare I, in this country, say he is a Heretic? Perhaps, we Catholics
are looked upon as Heretics here. Idolaters I know we are said to be -- I grant
that I had like to have been an idolater once -- But let that pass. I believe
we Catholics think worse of you Protestants, and you Protestants think worse of
us Catholics, than either deserve: It may be so. But, to me, you seem to be a
strange people, for all that.

Of one thing, my good Chevalier, methinks I should be glad. -- Here I am told
you are married: That I knew before I left Italy: Else, let me tell you, I
never would have come hither: Yet I should have got away rather than be married
myself, I believe: But then perhaps it would have been to a Catholic country.

What was I going to say? -- One thing I should be glad of: It is to see your
Lady; but not if she were to see me. I came with very few clothes, and they
were not the best I had at Florence: My best of all are at Bologna. My father
and mother loved to see me dressed. I dressed many a time to please them more
than to please myself. For I am not a proud creature: Do you think I am? You
knew me once better than I knew myself: But you know little of me now. I am a
runaway: And I know you will not forgive me. I cannot help it. However, I should be
glad to see your Lady. She dresses richly, I suppose. Well she may!

I am told, she is one of the loveliest women in England: And as to her
goodness -- there is nobody so good. Thank God! You know, Chevalier, I always
prayed, that the best of women might be called by your name.

But Olivia, it seems, praises her; and Olivia saw her when she was a rambler
to England, as, God help me! I am now.

But Olivia's motive and mine were very different. Olivia went to England in
hopes of a husband -- Poor woman! I pity her.

But, Chevalier, cannot I see your Lady, and she not see me? I need not be in
disguise to see her. If you were with her, handing her, suppose, to church, (I
would not scruple to crowd myself into some unobserved corner of your church on
such an occasion) you would be too proud of her to mind me: And you would not
know me, if you saw me; for I would stoop in my shoulders, and look down; and
the clothes I should have on would be only an English linen gown and petticoat,
unadorned by ribbands or gew-gaw -- Not half so well dressed as your Lady's
woman*

But yet I should thank God, that you had not disgraced the regard I had once
for you: I had a great deal of pride, you know, in that hope. Thank you, Sir,
that you have married so lovely and so deserving a woman. She is of a good
family, I hope.

It wa a great disappointment to me when I came first to London, to find, that
you were not there. I thought, some how or other, to catch a sight of you and
your Lady, were it but as you stepped into your coach; and I to have been in a
chair, near, or even on foot. For, when I heard what a character you bore, for
every kind of goodness; I, a poor fagitive, was afraid to see you. So many good
lessons as you taught me, and all to come to this! Unhappy Clementina!

Where will your Ladyship (but I have forbidden that style) choose to take up
your residence? said Anthony when we first landed (My servant's name is
Anthony; but you shall not know his other name). We landed among a parcel of
guns, at the Tower, they called it, in a boat.

Laura answered for me; for he spoke in Italian; Somewhere near the Chevalier
Grandison's, will not you, madam? I will not tell you what was my answer; for perhaps
I am near the Thames -- I don't want you to find me out. I beseech you,
Chevalier, don't give yourself pain for me. I am a fugitive. Don't disgrace
yourself in acknowleging any acquaintance with a creature who is poor and low;
and who deserves to be poor and low; for is she not a runaway from the best of
parents? But it is to avoid, not to get, a husband; you will be pleased to
remember that, Sir.

But, poor Laura -- I am sorry for Laura; more sorry than for myself -- My
brother Giacomo would kill the poor creature, I believe, if ever she were to
come in his way. But she is in no fault. It was with great reluctance she
obeyed her mistress. She was several times as impertinent as Camilla. Poor
Camilla! I used ever hardly. She is a good creature. I used her hardly against
my own nature, to make her the easier to part with me. I love her. I hope she
is well. It is not worth her while to pine after me; I was an ungrateful
creature to her.

My Anthony is a good young man, as I told you. I think to save half his wages,
and give the other half to raise Laura's, to keep her a little in heart. The
poor young man hoped preferment in my service; and I can do nothing for him. It
will behove me to be a good manager. But I will sell the few jewels I have
left, rather than part with him, till he can get a better service. What little
things do I trouble you with! Little things to you; but not quite so little to
me now, as I have managed it. But so as I can do justice to this poor youth,
and poor Laura, I matter not myself. What I have done is my choice: They had no
option. I over-persuaded Laura, as my friends would have done me. I feel that
sting: It was not doing as I would be done by. Very, very wicked in me! I dare
say, you would tell me so, were you to find me out.

But, Chevalier, shall I send you, yes, or no, this scrawl, written to divert
me in a pensive mood? I would not, if I thought it would trouble you. God
forbid that your pupil Clementina should give you discomposure, now especially
in the early part of your nuptials! Yet if I could so manage, as that you would
permit your secretary (I would not ask the favor of your own pen) to send a
few lines to some particular place, where my servant could fetch them unknown
to you or any body, only to let me know, If you have heard from Bologna, or
Naples, or Florence (I was very ungrateful to good Mrs. Beaumont and the Ladies
her friends) and how they all do; my father, mother (my heart at times bleeds
for them) my dear Jeronymo, my two other brothers, and good Father Marescotti,
and my sister-in-law whom I have so much reason to love; it will be a great
ease to my heart; provided the account be not a very melancholy one* If it
should, poor Clementina's days would be numbered upon twice five fingers.

I am put in a way -- This shall be sent to your palace in town. You will order
your secretary to direct his Letter, to George Trumbull, Esquire to be left till
called for, at White's Chocolate-house in St. James's-street. I depend upon
your honor, Chevalier, that you will acquiesce with my desire to remain
incognita, till I shall consent to reveal to you the place of my abode, or to
see you elsewhere. I sign only

CLEMENTINA.

LETTER XXI. Sir CHARLES GRANDISON, To Lady GRANDISON.
Saturday, Feb. 17.
ALL day yesterday I was in pain that I heard not from Clementina. But I made
myself as easy as I could in visiting my sisters, and their Lords, and my aunt
Grandison. What blessings do they all pour forth on my Harriet! What compassion
do they express for the dear fugitive! How do they long to see her!

Yesterday I received a Letter from her.

The copy of that to which hers is an answer; of hers; and of my reply; and her
return to that; I enclose. You will read them to our friends in English.

You will find by the last of the four, that I am to be admitted to her
presence. I would not miss a post, or I should have delayed, till the interview
be over, the sending this to my Harriet. Hope the best, my dearest Love. The
purity of your heart, and of Clementina's, and the integrity of my own, if I
know my heart, bid us humbly hope for a happy dissipation of the present cloud,
which, hanging over the heads of a family I revere, engages our compassion, and
mingles a sigh with our joys.

Adieu, my best, my dearest Love. Answer for me to all my friends.

CHARLES GRANDISON.

LETTER XXII. Sir CHARLES GRANDISON, To Lady CLEMENTINA.
[Under Cover, To GEORGE TRUMBULL, Esquire etc.]

St. James's Square, Wedn. night, Febr. 14.
TEN days the noble Clementina in England, the native place of her fourth
brother, her equally admiring and faithful friend; yet not honor him with the
knowledge of her arival! -- Forgive me, if I call you cruel. -- It is in your
power, madam, to make one of the happiest men in the world a very unhappy one;
and you will effectually do it, if you keep from him the opportunity of
throwing himself at your feet, and welcoming you to a country always dear to
him, but which will be made still dearer by your arrival in it.

I have a Letter from your and my Jeronymo. I have a great deal to say to you
of its contents; of your father, mother, brothers -- But it must be said, not
written. For God's sake, madam, permit me to attend you in company of one of my
sisters, or otherwise, as you shall think best. You have in me a faithful, an
indulgent friend. I am no severe man: Need I tell you that I am not? If you do
not choose that anybody else shall know the place of your abode, I will
faithfully keep your secret. You shall be as much the mistress of your own
will, of your own actions, as if I knew not where to address myself to you. If
ever you had a kind thought of your fourth brother, if you ever wished him
happy, grant him the favor of attending you; for his happiness, I repeat,
depends upon it.

I received our Jeronymo's Letter but yesterday. Tender and affectionate are
the contents.

I have ridden post, to get hither this night, in hopes of being favored with
intelligence of you. In the morning I should have made enquiries at the proper
places: But little did I think my Sister could have been so many days in town.
Let not an hour pass after this comes to your hand, before you relieve the
anxious heart of,

Dearest Lady Clementina, Your most affectionate Brother, and faithful humble
Servant, CHARLES GRANDISON.

LETTER XXIII. Lady CLEMENTINA, To Sir CHARLES GRANDISON.
Friday morning, Feb. 16. O. S.
I Received yours but this moment. What can I say to the contents? I wish to
see you; but dare not. Your happiness, you say, depends upon an interview with
me. Why do you tell me it does? I wish you happy. Yet, if you wished me so, you
would have told me how my dear friends in Italy do. This omission was designed.
It was not generous in the Chevalier Grandison. It was made to extort from me a
favor, which you thought I should otherwise be unwilling to grant.

But can you forgive the rash Clementina? God is merciful as well as just. You
imitate him. But how can Clementina, humbled as she is, be sunk so low, as to
appear a delinquent, before the man she respects for a character which, great
as she thought it before, has risen upon her since her arrival in England?

But, Sir, can you, will you engage, that my friends will allow me to continue
single? Can you answer, in particular, for the discontinuance of the Count of
Belvedere's addresses? Can you procure forgiveness, not only for me, but my
poor Laura? Will you take into your service, or recommend him effectually to
that of some one of your friends, in some manner that is not altogether
servile, the honest youth who has behaved unexceptionably in mine? For he
wishes not to return to Italy.

Answer me these few easy and plain questions; and you shall hear further from

CLEMENTINA.

LETTER XXIV. Sir CHARLES GRANDISON, To Lady CLEMENTINA.
[Under Cover, directed as before.]

Friday morn. Febr. 16.
TO the questions of dear Lady Clementina I answer thus -- I will endeavor to
prevail upon your parents, and other friends, to leave you absolutely free to
choose your own state without using either compulsion, or over-earnest
persuasion.

Who, madam, can forbid the Count of Belvedere to hope? Leave him hope. if he
has not the over-earnest entreaties of your own relations to give weight to his
addresses, it will be in your power to give him either encouragement or despair.

I will engage for the joyful reconciliation to her of all the dear
Clementina's friends. I am sure I can.

Laura shall be forgiven, and provided for by an annuity equal to her wages, if
the continuance of her service be not accepted.

I will myself entertain your young man; and place and reward him according to
his merits.

And now, madam, admit to the honor of your presence,

Your Brother, your Friend, your ever-grateful and affectionate humble Servant,
CHARLES GRANDISON.

LETTER XXV. Lady CLEMENTINA, To Sir CHARLES GRANDISON.
Sat. morn. Febr. 17.
I Depend upon your honor, Sir, for the performance of the prescribed
conditions: Yet, on meditating my appearance before you, I am more and more
ashamed to see you. It was a great disappointment to me at my first arrival,
that you were at your country-seat. At that time my heart was full. I had much
to say, and I could have seen you then with more fortitude than now falls to my
share. However, I will see you. Tomorrow, Sir, about five in the evening, you
will find at one of the doors on the higher ground, on the left hand going up
St. James's street, from the Palace, as it is called, the expecting Laura, who
will conduct you to

CLEMENTINA.

LETTER XXVI. Sir CHARLES GRANDISON, To Lady GRANDISON.
Monday, Febr. 19.
YOU requested me, my dearest Harriet, to write minutely to you. Now I have
been admitted to the presence of Clementina, and have hopes that she will soon
recover her peace of mind, I can the more cheerfully obey you.

I was exactly at the hour at the appointed place. Laura guessed at my chair,
and my servants, as they crossed the way; and stood out on the pavement, that I
might see her. When she found she had caught my eye, she ran into the house,
wringing her clasped hands -- God be praised! God be praised! were her words,
as I followed her in, in her own language. Laura can speak no other. Show me,
show me, to your Lady, good Laura! said I, with emotion.

She ran up one pair of stairs before me. She entered the dining room, as it is
called. I stopped at the stairs head till I had Clementina's commands. Laura soon
came out. She held open the door for me, courtefying in silence.

The drawn window-curtains darkened the room: But the dignity of Clementina's
air and motion left me not in doubt. She stood up, supporting herself on the
back of an elbow chair.

On one knee, taking her trembling hand; Welcome, thrice welcome to England,
dearest Lady Clementina! I pressed her hand with my lips; and rising, seated
her: For she trembled; she sobbed; she endeavored to speak, but could not for
some moments.

I called to Laura, fearing she was fainting.

O that well-known voice! said she. And do you, can you, bid me welcome? -- Me,
a fugitive, an ingrate, undutiful! -- O Chevalier, lower not your unfullied
character, by approving so unnatural a step as that which I have taken!

I do bid you welcome, madam! Your brother, your friend, from his soul,
welcomes you to England.

Let me know, Chevalier, before another word passes, Whether I have a Father,
whether I have a Mother?

Blessed be God, madam, you have both.

She lifted up her clasped hand: Thank God! God, I thank thee! Distraction
would have been my portion, if I had not! I was afraid to ask after them. I
should have thought myself the most detestable of parricides, if either of them
had been no more.

They are in the utmost distress for your safety. They will think themselves
happy, when they know you are well, and in the protection of your brother
Grandison.

Will they, Sir? O what a paradox! They so indulgent, yet so cruel -- I, so
dutiful, yet a fugitive! But tell me, Sir; determined as I was against entering
into a state I too much honor to enter into it with a reluctant heart, could I
take any other step than that I have taken, to free myself from the cruelty of
persuasion? O that I might have been permitted to take the veil! -- But answer
my question, Chevalier?

Surely, madam, they would not have compelled you. They always declared to me
they would not.

Not compelled me, Sir! Did not my father kneel to me? My mother's eyes spoke
more than her lips could have uttered. The Bishop had influenced good Father
Marescotti (against the interests of Religion, I had almost said) to oppose the
wish of my heart. Jeronymo, your Jeronymo, gave into their measures: What
refuge had I? -- Our Glacomo was inexorable. I was to be met on my return from
Florence to Bologna, by the Count of Belvedere, and all those of his house; the
General was to be in his company: I had secret intelligence of all this: And I
was to be received as an actual bride at Bologna, or made to promise I would be
so within a few days after my arrival. My Sister-in-law, my only advocate among
my Italian friends, pitied me, it is true: But, for that reason, she was not to
be allowed to come to Bologna. I was at other times denied to go to Urbino, to
Rome, to Naples -- Could I do otherwise than I have done, if I would avoid
prosaning a Sacrament?

My dearest sister Clementina sometimes accuses herself of rashness, for taking
a step so extraordinary. At this moment, does she not receive her brother in
darkness? Whence this sweet consciousness? But what is done is done. Your
Conscience is a Law to you, who shall condemn? -- Let us look forward, madam. I
approve not of the vehemence of your friends persuasions. Yet what parents ever
meant a child more indulgence; what brothers, a sister more disinterested
affection?

I own, sir, that my heart at times misgives me. But answer me this: Are you of
opinion that I ought, at the instance of my parents and brothers, however
affectionate, however indulgent in all other instances, to marry against
inclination, against justice, against conscience?

Against any one of these you ought not.

Well, Sir, then I will endeavor to make myself easy as to this article. But
will you undertake, Sir, (A woman wants a protector) to maintain this argument
for me?

I will, madam, and shall hope for the more success, if you will promise to lay
aside all thoughts of the veil.

Ah, Chevalier!

Will my dearest Sister answer me one question? Is it not your hope, that by
resisting their wishes, you may tire out opposition, and at last bring your
friends to consent to a measure to which they have always been extremely averse?

Ah, Chevalier! -- But if I could get them to consent --

Dear madam! is not their reasoning the same -- If they could get you to
consent?

Ah, Chevalier!

May not this be a contention for months, for years? And --

I know, Sir, your inference: You think that in a contention between parents
and child, the child should yield. Is not that your inference?

Not against reason, against justice, against conscience. But there may be
cases, in which neither ought to be their own judge.

Well, Sir, you that have yielded to a plea of conscience (God has blessed you,
and may God continue to bless you, for it!)

Admirable Clementina!

-- Are fit to be a judge between us -- You shall be mine, if ever the debate
be brought on.

No consideration, in that case, shall bias me! -- But may I not hope, that the
dear Lady I stand before, will permit me to behold a person, whose mind I ever
revered?

Laura, said she, let the tea be got ready: I have been taught to drink tea,
Sir, since my arrival. The gentlewoman of the house is very obliging. Permit
me, Sir, to withdraw for a few moments.

She sighed as she went out, leaning upon Laura.

Laura returned soon after with lights. She set them on the table; and giving
way to a violent emotion, O my lord Grandison, said the poor girl, falling
down, and embracing my knees: For the blessed Virgin's sake, prevail on my Lady
to return to dear, dear Bologna!

Have patience, Laura: All will be well.

I, the unhappy Laura, shall be the sacrifice. The General will kill me -- O
that I had never accompanied my Lady in this expedition!

Have patience, Laura! If you have behaved well to your Lady, I will take you
into my protection. Had you a good voyage? Was the master of the vessel, were
his officers, obliging?

They were, Sir; or neither my Lady or I should have been now living. O Sir, we
were in a dying way all the voyage; except the three last days of it. The
master was the civillest of men.

I asked after her fellow servants, naming him from Jeronymo's Letters. Gone
out, was the answer, to buy some necessaries! O Sir, we live a sad life!
Strangers to the language, to the customs of the country, all our dependence is
upon this young man.

I asked her after the behavior and character of the people of the house (a
widow and her three daughters) that if I heard but an indifferent account of
them, I might enforce by it my intended plea to get her to Lady L's. Laura
spoke well of them. The Captain of the vessel who brought them over, is related
to them, and recommended them, when he knew what part of the town her Lady
chose.

What risques did the poor Lady run! Such different people as she had to deal
with, in the contrivance and prosecution of her wild scheme; yet all to prove
honest! how happy! Poor Lady! how ready was she to fly from what she
apprehended to be the nearest evil! But she could not be in a capacity to weigh
the dangers to which she exposed herself.

Often and often, said Laura, have I, on my knees, besought my Lady to write to
you. But she was not always well enough to resolve what to do; and when she was
sedate, she would plead, that she was afraid to see you: You would be very
angry with her: You would condemn her as a rash creature: And she could not
bear your displeasure: She was conscious that the act she had done, bore a
rash, and even a romantic, appearance: Had you been in town, Antony should have
made enquiries at distance, and she might have yielded to see you: But for
several days her thoughts were not enough composed to write to you. At last,
being impatient to hear of the health of her father and mother, she did write.

Why stays she so long from me, Laura? Attend your Lady, and tell her, that I
beg the honor of her presence.

Laura went to her. Her Lady presented herself with an air of bashful dignity.
I met her at her entrance -- My Sister, my Friend, my dearest Lady Clementina,
kissing her hand, welcome, welcome, I repeat, to England. Behold your fourth
Brother, your Protector: Honor me with your confidence: Acknowledge my
protection. Your honor, your happiness, is dear to me as my life.

I led her trembling, sighing, but at the moment speechless, to a seat, and sat
down by her, holding both her hands in mine: She struggled for speech: Compose
yourself, madam: Assure yourself of my tenderest regard, of my truest brotherly
affection.

Generous Grandison! Can you forgive me? Can you from your heart bid me
welcome? I will endeavor to compose myself. You told me I was conscious:
Conscious indeed I am: The step I have taken has a disgraceful appearance: But
yet will I not condemn, nor consent that you should, my motive.

I condemn not your motive, madam. All will, all must, be happy! Rely on my
brotherly advice and protection. My Sisters, and their lords, every one I love,
admires you. You are come to families of Lovers, who will think themselves
honored by your confidence.

You pour balm into the wounds of my mind. What is woman when difficulties
surround her! When it was too late, and the ship that I embarked in was under
sail, then began my terror: That took away from me all power of countermanding
the orders I had given; till the winds that favored my voyage, opposed my
return. Then was I afraid to trust myself with my own reflections, lest, if I
gave way to them, my former malady should find me out. But let me not make you
unhappy. Yet, permit me to observe, that when you mentioned the kind reception
I might expect to meet with, among your friends, you forbore to mention the
principal person -- What will SHE think of the poor Clementina? But be assured,
and assure her, That I would not have set my foot on the English shore, had you
not been married. O Chevalier! if I make you and her unhappy, no creature on
earth can hate me so much as I shall hate myself.

Generous, noble Clementina! -- Your happiness is indeed essential to that of
us both. My Harriet is another Clementina! You are another Harriet!
Sister-excellencies I have called you to her, to all her relations. In the
Letter you favored me with, you wished to know her: You must know her; and I
am sure you will love her. Your wishes that she would accept of my vows, were
motives with her to make me happy. She knows our whole history. She is prepared
to receive you, as the dearest of her sisters.

Generous Lady Grandison! I have heard her character. I congratulate you, Sir.
You have reason to think, that I should have been grieved, had you not met with
a woman who deserved you. To know you are happy in a wife, and think yourself
so, that no blame lies upon me for declining your addresses, will contribute
more than I can express, to my peace of mind. When I have more courage, and my
heart is eased of some part of its anguish, you shall present me to her. Tell
her, mean time, that I will love her; and that I shall hold myself
everlastingly bound to her in gratitude, for making happy the man, whom once,
but for a superior motive, I had the vanity to think I could have made so.

She turned away her glowing face, tears on her cheek. My admiration of her
greatness of mind, so similar to that of my own Harriet, would not allow me to
pour out my heart in words. I arose; and, taking both her hands, bowed upon
them. Tears more plentifully flowed from her averted eyes; and we were both for
one moment speechless.

It would be injurious to a mind equally great and noble as that which informs
the person of this your Sister-excellence, to offer to apologize for faithfully
relating to you those tender emotions of hearts, one of them not less pure than
my Harriet's, the other all your own.

I broke silence, and urged her to accept of apartments at Lady L's. Let me
acquaint the gentlewoman of the house, I beseech you, madam, that tomorrow
morning the sister I have named, and I, will attend you to her house. We will
thank her for you, as you have almost forgotten your English, for the
civilities which she and her daughters have shown you: And I will make it my
business to find out the honest Captain, who, Laura tells me, has been very
civil to you also, and thank him too in the names of all our common friends,
for his care of you.

I will think myself honored, now you have encouraged me to look up, by a
visit from either or both your sisters. But let me advise with you, Sir, is the
kind offer you make me, a proper offer for me to accept of? I shall be ready to
take your advice -- Little regard as I may seem, by the step I have taken, to
have had for my own honor; I would avoid, if possible, suffering a first error
to draw me into a second. Do you Sir, as my brother and friend, take care of
that honor in every step you shall advise me to take.

Your honor, madam, shall be my first care. I sincerely think this is the
rightest measure you can now pursue.

Now pursue! -- sighing.

This argument admitted of a short debate. She was scrupulous from motives too
narrow for a Clementina to mention. I made her blush for mentioning them; and,
in short, had the happiness to convince her, that the protection of the sister
of her fourth brother was the most proper she could choose.

I went down, and talked to the gentlewomen below. They were pleased with what
I said to them. They prayed for the Lady and her family, and for a happy
reconciliation between them; for Antony had given them briefly her story.

I requested them to make my compliments to her relation Captain Henderson, and
desire him to give me an opportunity to thank him in person for his civility to
a Lady beloved by all who have the honor of knowing her.

I went up again to the Lady; and sat with her most of the evening, Laura only
attending us.

I talked to Clementina of Mrs. Beaumont, and the Ladies at Florence; and
intimated, that her mother had prevailed on that Lady to come to England, in
hopes, as she is an English woman, that her company would be highly acceptable
to her. She blessed her mother! What an instance of forgiving goodness was
this! she said, with tears of gratitude; and blessed Mrs. Beaumont for her
goodness to her; and the Ladies at Florence for parting with one so dear to
them.

I was happy throughout this latter conversation in her serenity; not one
instance of wandering did I observe.

I chose not, however, so early, to acquaint her, with the intention of the
dearest and nearest of her friends, to come over with Mrs. Beaumont; though I
expressed my earnest hope, that if we could make England agreeable to her, I
should have the honor of the promised visit from some of the principals of her
family, before she left it.

This, my dearest Life, is a minute account of our interview. One of the
greatest Pleasures I can know is to obey the gentle, the generous commands of
my Harriet.

This morning I attended Lady L. to breakfast with the excellent Lady, as
proposed. My Sister and her Lord are charmed with their guest: Their guest she
is: And Lady Clementina is as much pleased with them. She is every hour more
and more sensible of the danger she has run; and censures herself very freely
for the rash step, as she calls it herself.

She longs, yet is ashamed to see you, my dearest life; and listens with
delight to the praises my Lord and Lady L. so justly give to my Harriet.

Monday afternoon.
I HAVE introduced Lord and Lady G. to Lady Clementina, at her own request;
being assured, she said, that the place of her refuge would be kept secret by
all my friends. Both sister, occasionally joining in praising my angel; How
happy, said she, are those marriages which give as much joy to the relations on
both sides as to the parties themselves!

Adieu, my dearest Love. With the tenderest affection I am, and ever will be,

Your most faithful and obliged CHAPTER GRANDISON.

LETTER XXVII. Sir CHARLES GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Thursday, Feb. 22.
WE are as happy here, as we can expect to be; Lady Clementina in her state of
suspense and apprehension; I without my Harriet.

You hinted to me once, my Love, something of our Beauchamp's regard for Emily.
He just now, after more hesitations than I expected from my friend, opened his
heart to me, and asked me to countenance his addresses to her. I chid him for
his hesitation -- and then said, Is my Beauchamp in this proposition so right
as he generally is? -- Emily, though tall and womanly, is very young. I am not a
friend to very early marriages. You know as well as any man, my dear friend,
the reasons that may be urged against such. Methinks I would give Emily an
opportunity, as well for her husband's sake, whoever shall be the man, as for
her own, to look round her, and make her own choice. The merit of Sir Edward
Beauchamp, his personal accomplishments, and character, to say nothing of his
now ample fortune, must make his addresses to any woman acceptable. You would
not, I presume, think of marrying her, if you might, till she is eighteen or
twenty: And would my Beauchamp fetter himself, by engagements to a girl; and
leave her who at present can hardly give him the preference he deserves, no
chance of choosing for herself, when at woman's estate?

He waved the discourse; and left me without resuming it. I am grieved, on
recollection; for I am afraid he is not satisfied with me, for what I said.

My dearest Life, you must advise me. I will not take any important step,
whether relative to myself or friends, but by your advice, and, if you please,
Dr. Barlett's. Whenever heretofore I have had time to take that good man's, I
have been sure of the ground I stood upon. His has been of infinite service to
me, as you have heard me often acknowledge. Yours and his, will establish my
judgment in every case: But in this of Emily's, yours, my dear, for obvious
reasons, I must prefer even to his. In the mean time I will seek Beauchamp. He
shall not be angry with his Grandison! -- But, good young man! Can it be, that
he is really in love with such a girl as to years?

This I dare say; Beauchamp's principal regard cannot be to her fortune: His
estate is unincumbered. I should think myself, as well as Emily, happy, and
that I had performed all my duty by her, were I to marry her to such a man.
But, methinks I want him to be sooner married, than I should wish my Emily to
be a wife. I think you told me, that Emily at present has not thoughts of him
-- But you, my dear, must advise me.

Thursday afternoon.
SIR Edward has just left me. He asked my excuse for having mentioned the above
subject to me. It is at present in your power, Sir Charles, said he, to silence
me upon it for ever. It might not have been so some time hence. I thought,
therefore, on examining the state of my heart, it was but honorable to open it
to you. Forbid me this moment to think of her, and I will endeavor to obey her
guardian.

My dear friend! You know Emily's Age -- Would you willingly -- I stopped that he
might speak.

Stay for her? I would, Sir Charles, till you and she -- He passed -- Then
resuming: My Love for her is not an interested Love. I would, if I might have
your permission to make my addresses to her (and that should be (...) honest
assiduities, before declaration) be wholly (...) by your advice for the good of
both I would make your conduct to Lady Clementina, when you last went over, my
pattern. I would be bound, she should be free. I never would be so mean as to
endeavor to engage her by promises to me. My pride will set her free, whenever
I perceive she balances in favor of another man.

But what, my excellent friend, shall we do? Can you condescend to court two
women, Emily so young, for her distant consent?

What means Sir Charles Grandison?

I will read to you without reserve, what I had just written to my Harriet, on
this topic; reciting to her, what passed in the conversation between you and
me, a little while ago.

I read to him accordingly, what I wrote to you, my dearest Love. He heard me
with great attention, not interrupting me once (nor did I interrupt myself); no
not by apologies for the freedom of my thoughts, on the subject. And when I had
done, he wrung my hand, and thanked me for my unreservedness, in terms worthy
of our mutual friendship.

You see, my dear Sir Edward, said I, how I am circumstanced: What I have
promised to my wife, is a Law to me, prudence and after-events not controuling.
She loves Emily: She has a high regard for you. Women know women. Go hand in
hand with her. I will save you the trouble of referring to me, in the progress
of your application to my wife and Emily. My Harriet will acquaint me with what
is necessary for me, as Emily's guardian, to know. I build on your hint of
assiduities, in preference to an early declaration. You, my Beauchamp, need not
be afraid of giving time to a young creature to look round her. Let me add,
that Emily shall give signs of preferring you to all men, as I expect from you
demonstrations of your preferring her to all women; or I shall make a
difficulty, for both your sakes, of giving a guardian's consent: And remember
also, that Emily has a mother; who, though she has not greatly merited
consideration, is her mother. We must do our duty you know, my Beauchamp, in
the common relations of life, whether others do theirs or not. But the address
of a man of your credit and consequence cannot give you any difficulty there,
when that of Miss Jervois's tender years is got over.

He was pleased with what I said. I asked him, if he approved of her motion to
go down with Mrs. Selby and Lucy? Highly, he said; and as it came from herself,
he thought it an instance of prudence in her, that few young creatures would
have been able to show.

Instance of prudence! my Love! How so! When, wise as our Northamptonshire
relations are, Emily would have wanted to benefit that her choice can give her,
were she to remain with us, in the instructions and example of my Harriet. --
But, my dear Life, does Emily hold her mind to attend Mrs. Selby and Lucy into
Northamptonshire? Let it be with her whole heart.

My cousin Grandison believes himself to be very happy. His wife, he says,
thinks herself the happiest of women I am glad of it. She has a greater opinion
of his understanding, than she has of her own: This seems to be necessary to
the happiness of common minds in wedlock. He is gay, fluttering, debonnaire;
and she thinks those qualities appendages of family. He has presented her with
a genealogical table of his ancestors, drawn up and blazoned by heraldry art.
It is framed, glazed, and hung up in her drawing room. She shows it to every
one. Perhaps she thinks it necessary to apologize, by that means, to all her
visiters, for bestowing her person and fortune on a ruined man. But what, in a
nation, the glory and strength of which are trade and commerce, is gentility!
What even nobility, where descendants depart from the virtue of the first
enobling ancestor!

Lord and Lady G. have invited Lady Clementina to dinner tomorrow. She has had
the goodness to accept of the Invitation. Lord and Lady L. and my aunt
Grandison, will attend her.

What, my dear, makes Charlotte so impatient (so petulant I had almost said)
under a circumstance, which, if attended with a happy issue, will lay all us,
her friends, under obligation to her? I asked once my Harriet, if Lord G. were
as happy in a wife, as Charlotte is in a husband? You returned me not a direct
answer. I was afraid of repeating my question, because I knew you would have
cheerfully answered it, could you have done it to my wishes. I see in my Lord's
behavior to her, respect and affection even to fondness; but not the polite
familiarity that becomes a wedded Love. Let her present circumstance be happily
over, and she will find her brother's eye a more observant one, than hitherto
she has found it. But be not, my dear over-solicitous for the friend you so
greatly value: True brotherly Love shall ever hold the principal seat in my
heart, when I sit in judgment upon a sister's conduct.

My fond heart throbs in expectation of soon presenting a Sister to each of the
two noblest women on earth. Allow for the perplexity of Clementina's mind; and
for the impolitic urgency of her friends; and you will not, when you see her,
scruple to hold out to a Sister-excellence, not happily situated, the hand that
blessed

Your ever-faithful, CHAPTER GRANDISON.

LETTER XXVIII. Sir CHARLES GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Sat. Feb. 24.
THE arrival of the Leghorn-frigate is every day expected. The merchants have
intelligence, that it put in at Antibes. If the journey by land from thence to
Paris, and so to Calais, could be made favorable to my dear friend Jeronymo, I
have no doubt but our expected guests landed there, at this season of the year,
so unpropitious to tender passengers.

The house in Grosvenor-square is now, thanks to good Lord G. quite ready for
their reception. There will be room, I believe, as they propose to be here
incognito, and with only necessary attendants, for the Marquis and his Lady,
for Mrs. Beaumont (who will be both their comforter and interpreter) for the
two Brothers, and Father Marescotti. Saunders has already procured handsome
lodgings for the Count of Belvedere. I wish with you, my Love, that the Count
were not to accompany them. The poor Lady must not know it, if it can be
avoided. The two young Lords, whom I invited when I was in Italy, must be more
immediately our own guests, if my dearest Life has no objection.

Assure yourself, my generous Harriet, that the Lady shall not be either
compelled, or too urgently persuaded, if I have weight with the family when
they arrive. They shall not know where she is, nor see her, but by her own
consent, and as I see their disposition to receive her as I wish. Excellent
creature! what a noble solicitude is yours for her tranquillity of mind!

I have not yet been able to break to her the daily expectation I have of
seeing in England her parents and brothers: Yet am uneasy, that she knows it
not. I want courage, my Harriet, to acquaint her with it. I have more than once
essayed to do it. Dear creature! she looks with so much innocence, and so much
reliance upon me; and is, at times, so apprehensive! -- I know not how to break
it to her.

She depends upon my mediation. She urges me to begin a treaty of
reconciliation with them. I defer writing, I tell her, till I have seen Mrs.
Beaumont. Little does she think they are upon their journey, and that I know
not where to direct to them. She longs for Mrs. Beaumont's arrival; and hopes,
she says, she will bring with her the poor Camilla, that she may have an
opportunity to obtain her excuse for the harsh treatment she gave her: And yet
Camilla, said she, was a teazing woman.

Were you ever sensible, my Harriet, of the tender pain that an open heart
(yours is an open and an enlarged one) feels; longing, yet, for its friend's
sake, afraid, to reveal unwelcome tidings, which, however, it imports the
concerned to know? How loath to disturb the tranquillity which is built upon
ignorance of the event! Yet that every tranquillity (contemplated upon) adding
to the pain of the compassionating friend; who reflects, that when the unhappy
news shall be revealed, Time, and Christian philosophy, only, will ever restore
it to the heart of the sufferer!

Lord and Lady L. are endeavoring to divert their too thoughtful guest by
carrying her to see what they think will either entertain or amuse her.
Tomorrow (Lady L. contributing to the dear Lady's proper appearance there)
they purpose to attend her to the drawing room. But hitherto she seems not to
have a very high opinion of the country. If her heart could be easy, every
thing would have a different appearance to her.

I HAVE this moment the favor of yours of yesterday. If our kind friends will
stay no longer with you at the Hall, do you, my dearest Love, as you propose,
accompany them up. They are extremely obliging in proposing to give me here two
or three days of their company, before they return to Northhamptonshire.

My consent, my Harriet! -- Why, if you have a choice of your own, do you ask
it? I must approve of whatever you wish to do. Could I have been certain, I
would have met my Love. But you will have many dear friends with you.

Tell my Emily, that I have had a visit from her Mother and Mr. O-Hara; and was
so much pleased with them, that I propose on Monday to return their visit at
their own lodgings.

Now I know I am to be soon blessed with the presence of my Harriet, I have
given way to all my wishes: One of them is, Never to be separated from the joy
of my heart. Such, I trust, will she ever be, to

Her grateful, ever-faithful, GRANDISON.

LETTER XXIX. Lady GRANDISON, To Mrs. SHIRLEY.
London, Friday, March 2.
AGAIN, my ever-honoured grandmamma, does your Harriet resume the pen. Lucy and
my aunt, between them, have given you an account of everything that passed
since my last.

We arrived last night. With what tenderness did the best of men, and of
husbands, receive his Harriet, and her friends!

This afternoon, at tea, I am to be presented to Lady Clementina at Lord L's.
Don't you believe my heart throbs with expectation? Indeed it does. Sir Charles
says, her emotions are as great on the occasion.

What honor does my dear Sir Charles do to his Harriet! He consults her, as if
he doubted his own judgment, and wanted to have it confirmed by hers. What
happiness is hers, who marries a good man! Such a one will do obliging things
for principle's sake: He will pity involuntary failings: He will do justice to
good intentions, and give importance to all his fellowcreatures; because he
knows they and he are equally creatures of the almighty. What woman, who
thinks, but will prefer a good man to all others, however distinguished by
rank, fortune, or person? But my Sir Charles is a good man, and distinguished
by all those advantages. What a creature should I be, blessed with a husband of
a heart so faithful, and so wellprincipled, if I were not able to let my Love
and compassion flow to a Clementina, though once (and indeed for that very
reason) the only beloved of his heart! -- Why are not real calls made upon me,
to convince such a man, that I have a mind emulative of his own, at least of
Clementina's? The woman who, from motives of Religion, having the heart of a
Sir Charles Grandison in her hand, loving him above all earthly creatures, and
all her friends consenting, could refuse him her vows, must be, in that act,
the greatest, the most magnanimous, of women. But could the noble Lady have
thus acted, my dear grandmamma, had not she been stimulated by that glorious
Enthusiasm, of which her disturbed imagination had shown some previous tokens;
and which, rightly directed, has heretofore given the palm of martyrdom to
Saints?

WE have just now been welcomed to town by Sir Edward Beauchamp. Sir Charles,
on presenting him to me, thus expressed himself: You remember, my dearest Life,
what I wrote to you of the last part of the conversation between Sir Edward and
me, in relation to my Emily. Your prudence, my Harriet, and love of the good
girl; your discretion and generosity, Sir Edward; will join you together as
counselors and advisers of your Grandison. My Wife and my Friend cannot err in
this instance, because you will both consider what belongs to the characters of
a Guardian, and a Ward so beloved by you both; and, if you doubt, have Dr.
Bartlett at hand.

My uncle, and aunt Lucy, are determined to set out next Wednesday for
Northamptonshire. Sir Edward desired to know of Sir Charles, If he had any
objection to his attending them down? None at all, surely, was Sir Charles's
answer.

Mr. Deane accompanies them, in order to adjust some matters at Peterborough,
preparative to the favor he does us of settling with us or near us, for the
remainder of his days. May that remainder be long and happy!

Sir Charles asked Emily just now, If she held her mind, as to going down?
Indeed she did, she said: Her heart was in it; and she would go that instant to
acquaint her mother with her intention, and to buy some things preparatory to
her journey: She should take it for a great favor, she told Lucy, if she would
go with her on both occasions.

Lucy has made to herself a great interest in Emily's heart. They are both sure
they shall be happy in each other. My aunt loves her: So does my uncle. Who
does not? I am sure you will, my dear grandmamma, and pity her too. Dear pretty
soul! She costs me now and then a tear. But had I not been in her way, it would
have been worse. She could have no hope: I am sure she knows she could not. But
what a sad gradation is there in that Love, which, though begun in hopelesness of
succeeding, rises by selfflattery, to a possibility, then to probability, to
hope; and, sinking again to hopelesness, ends in despair! -- But how coolly I
write on, for one who is by-and-by to see a Clementina!

I AM waiting Sir Charles's kind leisure to carry me to Lady L's. He has Mr.
Lowther with him just now; who, however, finding us engaged, will not stay.

Sir Charles approved my dress, as he passed by me to go to Mr. Lowther in the
study. He snatched my hand, and pressed it with his lips: My ever-lovely, my
ever-considerate Harriet* you want no ornaments: But I was sure you would not
give yourself any but those that flowed from a compassionate and generous
heart, when you were to visit a Lady who at present is not in happy
circumstances; yet is entitled by merit, as well as rank, to be in the happiest.

My aunt and Lucy long for my return, to have an account of the Lady* and what
passes between us. How my heart -- What is the matter with my heart?

LETTER XXX. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Sat. March 3.
LADY Clementina, my dearest grandmamma* must not, shall not, be compelled. If
I admired, if I loved her before now that I have seen her, that I have
conversed with her, I love, I admire her, if possible, ten times more. She is
really, in her person, a lovely woman, of middle stature; extremely genteel: An
air of dignity, even of grandeur, appears in her aspect, and in all she says
and does: Her complexion is fine without art: Indeed she is a lovely woman! She
has the finest black eye, hair, eyebrows of the same color, I ever saw; yet
has sometimes a wildish cast with her eye, sometimes a languor, that, when one
knows her story, reminds one that her head has been disturbed. Why, taking
advantage of her Sex, is such a person to be controuled, and treated as if she
were not to have a will; when she has an understanding, perhaps, superior to
that of either of her wilful brothers?

When we alighted at Lady L's, I begged Sir Charles to conduct me into any
apartment but that where she was. I sat down on the first seat. Lady L.
hastened to me -- My dearest sister, you seem disordered -- Fie! -- Lady
Grandison, and want spirits!

Sir Charles (not observing my emotion) had left me; and went to attend Lady
Clementina. She, it seems, was in some disorder. My Harriet (said he to her, as
he told me afterward) attends the commands of her Sister-excellence.

Call me not Excellence! Call me not her Sister! Am I not a fugitive in her
eye, in every-body's eye? -- I think, Chevalier, I cannot see her. She will
look down upon me. I think I am as much afraid to see her, as I was at first to
see you. Is there severity in her virtue?

She is all goodness, all sweetness, madam. Did I not tell you, that she is the
Clementina of England?

Well, Sir, you are very good. Don't let me be unpolite. I am but a guest in
this hospitable house -- Else I would have attended her at the first door. Is
she not Lady Grandison? Happy, happy woman!

Tears were in her eyes. She turned away to hide them. Then stepping forward; I
am now prepared to receive her: Pray, Sir, introduce me.

She is not without her emotions, madam -- She is preparing herself to see you.
Love, compassion, for Lady Clementina, fills her bosom -- I will present her to
you.

Lady L. went to her. Sir Charles came to me. -- My dearest Love, why this
concern? You will see a woman you cannot fear, but must love. She has been in
the like agitations -- Favor me with your hand.

No, Sir -- That would be to insult her.

My dearest Life! forget not your own dignity [I started]; nor give me too much
consequence with a Lady, who, like yourself, is all Soul. I glory in my wife: I
cannot desert myself.

I was a little awed at the time; but the moment I got home, and was alone with
him, I acknowledged his goodness and greatness, both in one.

He led me in. Lady L. only (at Sir Charles's request, for both our sakes) was
present. The noble Lady approached me. I hastened to meet her, with trembling
feet. Sir Charles, kissing a hand of each, joined them together.
Sister-excellencies, I have often called you! Dearest of women, love each
other, as I admire you both.

She threw her arms about my neck: Receive, O receive, to your Love, to your
Friendship, a poor desolate! Till within these few days, a desolate indeed! a
fugitive! a rebellious! an ingrate to the best of parents!

I embraced her -- Mistaken parents, I have called them, madam -- I have pitied
them; but most I have pitied you -- Honor me with your sisterly love. This
best of men had before given me two Sisters. Let us be four.

Be it so, my dear Lady L. said Sir Charles, bringing her to us: And, clasping
his arms about the three; You answer for the absent Charlotte and yourself; a
fourfold cord that never shall be broken.

Sir Charles led us to one settee, again putting a hand of each together, and
sitting down over against us; Lady L. on the other hand of him. We were both
silent for a few moments, each struggling with her tears.

My Harriet, madam, said Sir Charles, as I have told you, knows your whole
story. You two are of long acquaintance. Your minds are kindred minds. Your
griefs are hers: Your pleasures she will rejoice in as her own. -- My Harriet,
you now see, you now know by person, the admirable Clementina, whose
magnanimity you so much admired, whose character, you have so often said, is
the first among women.

We both wept: But her tears seemed tears of kindness and esteem. I put the
hand which was not in hers, on her arm. I wanted courage; my reverence for her
would not allow me to be so free, or it had again embraced the too conscious
Lady. Believe me, madam (excuse my broken Italian) I have ever revered you. I
have said often, very often, that your happiness, happy as I am, is necessary
to complete mine, as well as Sir Charles Grandison's.

This goodness to me, a fugitive, an alien to your country; not a lover of your
religion! O Lady Grandison, you must be as much all I have heard of you in your
mind, as I see you are in your person. Receive my thank for making happy the
man I wished to be the happiest of men; for well does he deserve to be made so.
We were Brother and Sister, madam, before he knew you. Let me be his Sister
still, and let me be yours.

Kindred minds, Sir Charles Grandison calls ours, madam. He does me honor. May
I, on further knowledge, appear to as much advantage in your eye, as you, from
what I know of you, do in mine; and I shall be a very happy creature!

Then you will be happy. I was prepared to love you. I love you already,
methinks, with a passion that wants not further knowledge of your goodness to
augment it. But can you, madam, look upon me with a true sisterly eye? Can you
pity me for the step I have taken, so seemingly deregatory to my glory? Can you
believe me unhappy, but not wicked, for taking it? O madam! my reason has been
disturbed -- Do you know that? -- You must attribute to that, some of my
perversenesses.

Heaven, dearest Lady Clementina, only knows how many tears your calamity has
cost me! In the most arduous cases, I have preferred your happiness to my own.
You shall know all of me, and of my heart. Not a secret of it, though yet
uncommunicated to this dearest of men* will I conceal from you. I hope we shall
be true Sisters, and true Friends, to the end of our lives.

My noble Harriet! said the generous man -- Frankness of heart, my dear
Clementina, is her characteristic. She means all she says; and will perform
more than she promises. I need not tell you, my Love, what our Clementina is:
You know her to be the noblest of women: Give her the promised proofs of your
confidence in her; and, whatever they be, they must draw close the knot which
never will be untied.

Already, thus encouraged, said the noble Lady, let me apply to you, madam, to
strengthen for me the interest I presume to have in the friendship of Sir
Charles Grandison. Let me not, Sir, let me not, I entreat you all three, be
compelled to give my vows to any man in marriage. All of you promise me; and I
shall with more delight look before me, than for a long, long time past, I
thought would fall to my Lot.

You, madam, must concede a little, perhaps: Your parents must a little relax.
Their reason, if you will not be too unconceding, shall not, if I am referred
to, be mine, unless it is reason in every other impartial judgment. Would to
Heaven they were at hand to be consulted!

What a wish! Then you would give me up! You are a good man: Will a good man
resist the authority of parents, in favor of a runaway child? Dear, dear
madam, clasping her arms about me, prevail upon your Chevalier Grandison to
protect me, to plead for me: He can deny you nothing: He will then protect me,
though my father, my mother, my brothers, should all join to demand me of him.

My dear Lady Clementina, said I, you may depend on your own interest with Sir
Charles Grandison. He has your happiness at heart, and will have, as much as I
wish him to have mine.

Generous, noble, good Lady Grandison! how I admire you! May the Almighty
shower upon you his choicest blessings! If you allow me an interest in his
services, I demand it of you, Chevalier.

Demand it, expect it, be assured of it, my dear Lady Clementina. I want to
talk with you upon your expectations, your wishes. As much as is practicable,
whatever they are, they shall be mine.

Well, Sir, when then shall we talk? -- Tomorrow will be too soon for my
spirits.

Do my Harriet then the honor of passing the day on Monday with her. The dear
friends we have for our guests will choose to pass it with Lord and Lady G. --
Yourself, Lady L. my Harriet, and I, will be all the company: You shall declare
your pleasure, and that shall be a Law to me At present, this affecting
interview has discomposed us all; and we will retire.

Kindly considered! said she: You are in England what you were in Italy -- I am
discomposed. I have discomposed you, madam! to me. I was born to give trouble
to my friends. Forgive me! I once was happy -- I may hope, madam, to Lady L.
your supporting presence at your brother's on Monday?

Lady L. bowed her assent. She understands Italian; but speaks it not.

The Lady stood up, yet trembling. I will withdraw, Ladies, Sir, if you please.
My head seems as if bound round by a tight cord (putting her hand to her
forehead). Then clasping her arms round me, thus in a high strain spoke she --
Angel of a woman, gracious as the blessed Virgin Mother, benign* all that is
good and great, I attend you on Monday. Adieu! -- She kissed my cheek, I
clasped my arms about her. Revered Lady Clementina! -- I could say no more.
Tears, and tenderness of accent, interrupted my speech. Lady L. conducted her
to her own apartment, and left her to her Laura.

We sat down, admiring, praising, praying for her. Dear, dear Sir. said I,
taking Sir Charles's hand, Lady Clementina must not be persuaded. Perfuasion is
Compulsion. Why comes over the Count of Belvedere? If she knows it, I will not
answer for her right mind.

My Uncle and Aunt, Lucy, Emily, were very curious after particulars, when we
came home, as we did to supper.

Sir Charles left it to Lady L. to manage with Lady G. who he knew expected a
day of our beloved guests; and he himself apologized to them for the freedom he
had taken of so disposing of them. They had the goodness to thank him for his
freedom with them. But yet they long to see the admirable Lady, who could
renounce the man of her choice from religious motives; yet love him still; fly
to him for protection; yet be able to congratulate him on his marriage; and
love his wife. She is great indeed! said my aunt -- Lucy praised my generosity
-- But what is that which is called generosity in me, who am in full possession
of all my wishes, to that of Clementina?

Join, my dear grandmamma, in prayers for her happiness; the rather, as in it,
from true affection, is concluded that of

Your HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER XXXI. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Monday, March 5.
LADY L. and Lady Clementina came, just as we were preparing for breakfast.

Lady L. had given her such an account of my friends, that she was desirous to
see them, and, as she was pleased to say, to bespeak their favor to the poor
fugitive. After the first salutations, she addressed my aunt Selby in French,
being told that she spoke not Italian: You are happy, madam, said she, in a
niece, who may challenge the world to show her equal; and still more happy in
her being blessed with such a husband. Merit is not always so well rewarded. --
My aunt was struck with the manner as well as with the words.

She made a very pretty compliment to my uncle; who, having forgot his French,
could only bow, and seem pleased. When Lucy was presented to her, as my uncle's
niece, and my favorite correspondent, You must not, mademoiselle, said she, be
angry with me, if I envy you.

To Emily, Happy, happy, young Lady! said she. I have heard of you in Italy.
Mrs. Beaumont spoke honorably of you to me, more than once. We both called you
happy in such a guardian.

She made polite compliments to Mr. Deane; and bespoke all their favor to her.
How does everybody admire her!

I hope, my dear grandmamma, you don't think I forget my cousin Reeves's, though
I mentioned them not before. I have already called in upon them twice: And they
have, with the kind freedom of relations, dropped in upon us several times. They
are invited guests at Lord G's: I will not say Lady G's, though everybody else does.

This is what I stole time to write, while Sir Charles is engaged in discourse
with the Lady, and our guests are preparing to be gone to Lord G's, Lady G.
requesting my aunt's company early. She is the veriest coward! These brave
spirits, she has said, are but flash. Indeed the very delicate, as well as very
serious, and even solemn, circumstances, which attend her case, must make the
liveliest woman, when the time approaches, think! -- The enclosed note of hers
to my aunt, brought late last night, is, however, in her usual style:

YOU and Lucy must be here early Tomorrow morning.

What wretched simpletons are we women! Daughters of gewgaw, solly,
ostentation, trifle! -- First, we show our sorry fellow, when not disapproved,
to our friends and relations; and take all their judgments upon him. If he has
their opinion in his favor, everybody, be he what he will, will praise him;
and give him riches, sense, ancestry, and I cannot tell what of qualities that
perhaps we shall never find out. Then we show our presents, our jewels, our
laces; and a smile spreads the mouth, and a sparkle gladdens the eye, of every
maiden that hangs admiring over them. Ah, filly maidens! if you could look
three yards from your noses, you would pity, instead of envying, the milk-white
heifer dressed in ribbands, and just ready to be led to sacrifice.

Well, then, what comes next? Why, the poor soul, in a few months, by the time
perhaps her gratulatory visits are half paid her, begins to find apprehension
take place of security. Then are she and all her virgins employed in the
wretchedest trifles -- If I thought you had forgot them, I would give you a
list of them -- And the poor fools, wrapping up their jewels in cotton, with
sighs that perhaps they have worn them for the last time, and doubtful whom
they may next adorn, cover the decked-out milk-white bed with their
baby-things. See here! and, See here! and, What is the use of this, and of
that? asks the curious, and perhaps too fearless maiden. "Why, this is for -- "
and "That is for -- " answer the matrons who have passed the Rubicon.

And to this is your Charlotte reduced! -- Aunt Selby, Lucy, come early, that I
may show you my baby-things! -- O dear! O dear! O dear! -- and that you may be
able to testify, that I had no design to overlay the little Marmouset. Adieu
till ten tomorrow morning.

C. G.

The moment our guests were gone, Sir Charles came to me; and, leading me into
my drawing room, where the Lady was, Comfort, my Love, said he, your Sister.

I hastened to her (poor Lady! she was in tears, and even sobbing); and
clasping my arms about her, Be comforted, be consoled, my dearest Lady
Clementina.

O madam! my Father, my Mother, my Jeronymo, are every day expected; who
beside, I know not: How shall I look my Father, my Mother, in the face!

Sir Charles withdrew. He was troubled for her. He sent in Lady L.

Your dear friend, madam, said I, and my dear friend, will protect you. Your
father and mother would not have had the thoughts of taking so long and
troublesome a voyage, had they not resolved to do every thing in their power to
restore you to peace, and to them.

So the Chevalier tells me.

At this time of the year, madam, such a voyage! your mamma so tender in her
health! Such a dislike to the sea! Her whole motive is tenderness and love. She
prefers your health, your tranquillity, to her own.

And is not this consideration enough to distress a grateful spirit? --
Unworthy Clementina! To every relation, in every action, of late unworthy! What
trouble have thou given thy parents! I cannot, cannot bear to see them! -- O my
Lady Grandison, I was ever a perverse creature! Whatever I set my heart upon, I
was uneasy, till I had compassed it. My pride, and my perverseness, have cost
me dear. But of late I have been more perverse than ever. My heart ran upon
coming to England. I could think of nothing till I came. I have tried that
experiment. I am sick of it. I do not like England, now I see I cannot be
unmolested here. But my favorite for years, was another project. That filled
my mind, and helped me to make the sacrifice I did. -- and here I am come to
almost the only country in Europe, which could render my darling wish
impracticable. Why went I not to France? I had with me sufficient to have
obtained my admission into any order of nuns: And had I been once professed! --
I will get away still, I think. Befriend me, my sister! I cannot, cannot, see
my mother!

Sir Charles came in just then. I heard what you last said, madam, said he:
Compose yourself, I beseech you. I dreaded to acquaint you with the expected
arrival of your parents. But are they not the most indulgent of parents? You
have nothing, you shall have nothing to fear, and you will have everything to
hope, from their presence.

Will you engage for their allowing of a divine dedication, Sir? Will you plead
that cause for me?

I cannot say what will, what can, be done, till I see them. But confide in my
zeal to serve you, madam. Lord L's house, I repeat, shall be your asylum, till
you shall consent to see them. I cannot be guilty of a prevarication: I will
own to them, that I know where you are; but, till you give leave, you shall be
as much concealed from their knowledge, as if you were still at your first
lodgings, and I myself ignorant of your abode.

A man of honor, said she, her hands lifted up, is more valuable to a woman in
trouble, than all the riches of the East! But tell me now, tell me upon your
never-forfeited honor, whom, besides my Father, Mother, and your Jeronymo, do
you expect?

My Lord the Bishop, madam --

Oh! Oh! said she, clapping her hands together, with an inimitable grace and
eagerness -- I am afraid -- But whom else?

Father Marescotti --

The good man! will he think it worth his while -- But for my father and
mother's sake he will -- Whom else?

Mrs. Beaumont, madam, never intended to set her ^oot on English ground again:
But she has broken through her resolution, to oblige your mother.

Good Mrs. Beaumont! -- But I am half afraid of her. Well, Sir?

Camilla, your poor Camilla, madam.

Poor Camilla! I used her hardly: But teazing never yet did good with me.
Remember, Sir, they are not to know were I am. Your house, madam, to Lady L. is
to be my asylum. -- Then seeing me affected, Gentlest of human hearts, said
she, what right have I thus to pain you! Well, Sir, drying her eyes, with looks
too earnest for her health of mind; tell me, is anybody else expected?

Your cousins Sebastiano and Juliano, madam; but not the General.

Thank Heaven for that! -- I love my brother Giacomo: But he is so determined a
man! -- His own Lady only can soften his heart.

Sir Charles, by his admirable address, made her tolerably easy by dinnertime,
on the subject of her friends expected arrival: And she once owned, that she
should be transported with joy to see her Father, Mother, and Jeronymo, could
she assure herself, that she could see them with forgiveness in their
countenances.

Sir Charles would only be attended at table by Saunders, whom she had seen in
Italy. She was much pleased to have it so; but desired Laura might be permitted
to attend at the back of her own chair.

I addressed myself to Laura three of four times, as she stood. The Lady was
pleased: And Laura seemed proud of my notice.

Now-and-then an involuntary tear filled the Lady's eye, as she fat. It was
easy to enter into her thoughts, p oor Lady! on her situation. She was grieved,
she said, at the trouble she gave me; and frequently sought to suppress a sigh.
Once, after a resverie of? few minutes; And am I here? said she; In England? At
the house of the Chevalier Grandison? Can it be a

After dinner, Lady L. and she and I, retiring to my drawing room; What a
generous Lady, said she, are you! I was afraid to see you, before I saw you:
But the moment I beheld you, I embraced a Sister. You will allow of my esteem
of your Grandison?

Of your Love, dear Lady Clementina, and thank you for it. A good man has an
Interest in every good person's affections.

Such generosity, snatching my hand with both hers, would confirm a doubtful
goodness. But indeed my esteem for him always soared above person. You know I
am a zealous Catholic. You know our doctrine of merits. I would have laid down
my life to save his soul. But surely God will be merciful to such a man, and no
less so to such a woman, as (putting her Arms about me) I have now the honor
to embrace.

Mercy, madam, said I, is the darling attribute of the Almighty. He is the God
of all men.

True -- But -- And was going to say something surther; but stopped on Sir
Charles's entrance.

Sir Charles, after sitting with us a little while, asked leave of absence for
an hour, to look on his friends at Lord G's. We had a charming conversation in
the mean time. Our subjects were various. The customs of Italian Ladies, and
their surprising illiterateness in general, were parts of it. A woman there, it
seems, who knew more than her own tongue, was a miracle till within these few
years, that the French customs seem prevailing there. Why, madam, the Ladies of
Italy, with genius's as fine as that classic climate ever produced, are
immersed in the pleasures of sense: Singing, dancing, and
conversation-gallantry, take up their whole time. One would imagine, that their
husbands and fathers thought them only children of this world, and not heirs of
a better hope, by the little care taken in improving their understanding: And
were it not for the religion of the country, which we call superstition, half
the Italian world of women would be looked upon merely as temporary idols for
men to worship for temporary gratifications only. Yet in their
conversation-assemblies, men see what they are capable of. But their country,
it seems, is in the same uncultivated state, as the minds of their women. The
garden of the world, as Italy is called, is overrun with weeds: And, for want
of cultivation, the very richness of its soil becomes its disease. But these
reflections I draw rather by deduction from what Lady Clementia said, than from
any direct confession of hers. She is fond of her country in its present state:
But sensible English travelers speak of it as I have written.

Sir Charles returned within his time. He is kind to be everywhere; for he is
the life of every company, and of every individual.

We passed a sweet evening together, and till near eleven o'clock. Were Lady
Clementina happy, how happy should we all be!

Sir Charles waited on the Ladies home. Lord L. was by that time returned from
Lord G's; but was the first of the friendly company that withdrew. Lady G. it
seems, was all alive in every part of the ontertainment. My uncle Selby and she
spared not each other. Her Lord, I sansy, fared the better or the presence of
the Earl and Lady Gertrude, and for her having my Uncle to shoot at.

God preserve my grandmamma, and all my dear friends in her neighborhood, prays

Her ever dutiful, HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER XXXII. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Wednesday, March 7.
OUR grief will be your joy, my dearest grandmamma! My Uncle, my Aunt Lucy,
Emily, Mr. Deane! -- They are just gone: Just left me.

What a parting! -- But Emily! Dear creature! what was her grief, her noble
struggle with herself, to conceal her anguish from her guardian!

She will now be yours, and my aunt Selby's; and, when once settled, will,
must, be happy; for she is good, and you all love her, and will love her the
more for this great instance of her nobleness of mind.

About half an hour before we parted, she begged to speak a few words to me in
my closet. I led her thither. When we entered it, she shut the door, and dropped
down on her knees. I would have raised her; but she would not be raised. I
clasped my arms about her neck. I have revealed all my folly to you, said she.
Forgive the weakness of a poor girl. A thousand, thousand thanks to you, madam,
for your indulgent goodness to me. I longed to live with you and my guardian. I
placed my whole happiness in the grant. You gave me an opportunity to try the
experiment. What I little expected happened: I was more unhappy than before. I
revere your grandmamma: She is a blessed Lady! How good was she on your
wedding day, to wish me, poor me! to supply to her the loss of her Harriet! Her
goodness, her condescension, that of all your family, overcame me: It would
not, perhaps, had I not tried the other experiment. All that I have now to beg
of you, is, to pardon me for the trouble I must have given to your noble heart:
It is a noble heart, or it could not have borne with me as it has done. But
promise to write a Letter to me once a fortnight -- and permit me to write to
you once a week; and I shall think myself a happy creature. Not a thought of my
heart but I will reveal to you.

I do promise, my Love, my Emily. The correspondence between us will delight
me. Nobody shall see any of our Letters, but at your choice.

Lady L. Lady G. may, madam: They love the poor Emily. Nobody else may, I
believe; I shall write so poorly! -- But I shall improve as I have more years,
and more sense. But my present concern is more for Lady Clementina than for
myself. Poor Lady! Pray write something of her friends behavior to her, and
hers to them, to me particularly, besides what you write to your grandmamma: I
shall take it for such a favor! And it will make me look so important! You
don't know how proud it will make me; and it will induce your Lucy, and
everybody, to show me everything you write to them; and I shall have it in my
power to read out of your Letters to me something in return; which will look
like an acquittal of obligation.

All that she wished me to do, and still more, as occasions offered, I promised.

She arose from her knees, called me by many tender names; kissed one cheek,
then the other; then one hand, then the other. I folded her to my fond heart:
My Sister, my Friend, my Emily, I called her. We wetted each other's Bosom with
our tears; and both went down with red eyes.

Extremely tender, but delicate, was the leave she took of her guardian. The
Brother, the affectionate Friend, and Father, I may say, appeared in his
unreserved tenderness to her. She hurried into my uncle's coach, which stood
ready, when she parted with him, that her emotion might not be too visible. I
hastening in after her, lest she should be too much affected; while my Aunt,
Lucy, and my Uncle, were taking their leaves in the hall.

My dearest Emily, I admire you! said I. Do you, do you! -- Best of wives, of
women, of friends, of sisters, do you say so? -- I behaved not amiss, then?

Amiss! No, my dear: Charmingly, my Love! You are great as ever woman was.

How you comfort me!

Adieu, adieu! my best Love! said I. -- My best Lady Grandison! said she: Both
in a breath, as from one heart, embracing; and quitting each other with regret;
her arms folded about herself, when I left her; as if I were still within them.

I gave my hand to Sir Edward Beauchamp, on stepping out of the coach; for he
was ready to attend them; and hurrying into the hall, threw myself into the
arms of my aunt. My Love, said she, take care of yourself: Emily shall not need
to be your concern: She will be our Harriet.

Indeed she shall, said Lucy. Dear girl, she shall be mine: And, thank God, I
now have two Harriets instead of one.

My uncle wept like a child at parting with me. He would have carried it off,
smiling in his tears. What, what, sobbed he, shall I do for my girl! I shall
miss, I shall miss, your sau-sau-sauciness sometimes -- Was I ever angry with
you in my Life?

Mr. Deane comforted himself, that he should but settle his affairs at
Peterborough, and then would make our residence his, wherever we should be.

All of them departed blessing us, and we them; hoping for a speedy meeting in
Northamptonshire. Every one expressed their solicitude for the happiness of
Lady Clementina, as well for her own sake, as for Sir Charles's and mine.

God give you, and my dearest, dearest friends, now on their journey to you, a
happy meeting, with every felicity that on this earth can fall to the lot of
persons so dear to the heart of

Your ever-dutiful HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER XXXIII. Signor JERONYMO, To Sir CHARLES GRANDISON.
Dover, Monday night, March 12. O. S.
HERE we are, my Grandison; my father and mother so indifferent in their
healths, that we shall have time to wait for your direction. My mother was so
incommoded, that we put in at Antibes; and by slow journeys, stopping a few
days at Paris, proceeded to Calais, where we hired a vessel to bring us hither.
My Brother, and Father Marescotti, are indisposed. Camilla is not well. Mrs.
Beaumont, to whom we owe infinite obligations, is the life of us all.

Have you heard of the dear fugitive, who has given us all so much disturbance,
and, at this season of the year, so much fatigue? God grant that she may be
safe in your protection, and in her right mind! Had she been so at the time*
she had never meditated such a wild, such a disgraceful flight. The heart of
the Count of Belvedere is torn in pieces by his impatience. He will soon follow
the man and horse whom we dispatch with this. Signor Sebastiano will accompany
him. Juliano will stay with us. The fatigue has been rather too much for your
Jeronymo: But he rejoices, that he has his foot on English ground; the country
that gave birth to his Grandison; and in his hopes of seeing his kind and
skilful Lowther. God grant us a happy meeting; and that no interruption may
have been given to your nuptial happiness, by the extravagance of a young
creature, which can only be accounted for in her, by the unhappy disorder of
her mind! Adieu, Adieu, my Grandison!

JERONYMO della PORRETTA.

LETTER XXXIV. Lady GRANDISON, To Mrs. SHIRLEY.
Tuesday morning, Eleven, March 13.
ABOUT two hours ago, Sir Charles received a Letter from Signor Jeronymo. The
man had rode all night. They are all at Dover.

Sir Charles is already set out; gone, with four coaches and six, of our own
and friends, for them, and their attendants; Mr. Lowther with him. Richard
Saunders is left to attend the Count of Belvedere to the lodgings taken for him.

The house in Grosvenor-square is ready for the reception of the illustrious
guests.

As soon as I can get quieter spirits, I will attend Lady Clementina, in order
to re-assure her, if I find sue has presence of mind enough to hear the news.
Sir Charles has already induced her to wish the crisis over. It is a crisis. I
am almost as much affected for her, as she can be for herself. Yet she has not
cruel friends to meet. May the dear Lady keep in her right mind!

In what a hurry of spirits I write! You will not wonder. I have not my
grandmamma's steadiness of mind. Never, never, shall I be like my grandmamma.

Tuesday, two o'clock.
In Lady L's closet.] I have, as gently as I could, broken the news of their
safe arrival at Dover, to Lady Clementina. She began the subject; and said, She
had been praying for the safety of her friends. What will become of me, said
she, should mishap befall any one of them? Should the fatigue be too much for
either my father or mother, their healths so precarious; or for my Jeronymo, so
lately ill?

After proper prefacings, I hoped, I said, her cares on that subject would soon
be over. Sir Charles had some intimation of the likelihood of their arrival at
a particular port; and was actually set out with coaches, in hopes of
accommodating them, when they did arrive, and to bring them to the house which
had been (as she knew before) got ready for their reception.

She looked by turns on me, and on Lady L. in speechless terror: At last, Then
I am sure, said she, you know they are come. Tell me, tell me, are they indeed
arrived? And are they all well?

I owned they were, and at Dover; and waited there to refresh themselves, and
to be informed of her health and safety before they would proceed further.

She wept, even to sobbing; inveighed against herself: Her tears were tears of
duty and tenderness. She comforted herself, that Sir Charles would be able to
soften their resentments against her; and she was sure he would make the best
conditions for her, that could be obtained.

Lord L. is all goodness, all compassion, to her. He greatly admires her. But
we observe, that there are some little traces of wildness now-and-then in her
talk, which carries her into high language and exclamation. May her mind be
quieted! May her intellects be preserved entire, in the affecting scenes before
her! -- I am sent for home in haste.

Tuesday night.
METHINKS I am half afraid of telling even you, my grandmamma, at this
distance, to whom I was sent for. It was to the Count of Belvedere. Signor
Sebastiano was with him. Lord G. happened to call in at St. James's Square,
when they arrived; and sending for me, entertained them till I came.

I asked Lord G. half out of breath with fear, at my first alighting, If he had
said anything of the Lady? Not a syllable, said he: I avoided answering
questions. The gentlemen were full of impatience to know something about her:
And this made me send for you: For, though cautioned, I was afraid of blundering.
-- Honest, modest, worthy Lord G! -- I prevailed on them to stay supper with
me. Lord G. was so obliging, as to send home to excuse himself to his Lady, at
my request.

They are both fine young gentlemen; extremely polite. We have been told, that
the Count is a handsome man. Indeed he is. Any Lady, with such a character as
he has, if she were not prepossessed, might like him. He is certainly a
gentle-dispositioned and good-natured man. He looks the man of quality. He
seems not to be above five or six-and-twenty: Has a foreign aspect, and a
complexion a sallowish brown; yet has a healthy look. His eyes, however, as I
knew his case, appeared to me to have a cast like those of a man whose mind is
disturbed.

I behaved to them with the greatest frankness I could show. I told them, that
Sir Charles set out in the morning, on the receipt of a letter from Dover, for
that port, and with what equipages. They gave but a poor account of the health
of the Marchioness: But if she could but hear good tidings, he said, and stopped
--

Sir Charles, I answered, would do his utmost to set their hearts at ease.

May I not ask a question, madam? said the Count. I find your Ladyship knows
everything of us, and our affairs. We heard in Italy, that you were all
goodness; and find you to be an angel. I make no compliment, said he, laying
his spread hand on his heart.

Lord G. with kind officiousness, said, that was the universal voice.

I answered in French, the language in which he spoke to me -- That I had the
pleasure of informing him, that Letters had passed between Lady Clementina and
Sir Charles. The account she gives of herself, said I, makes us not quite
unhappy.

Makes Us! said the Count to Signor Sebastiano, in Italian, his hands lifted
up: Heavenly goodness!

I imagined that he thought I understood not that tongue; and that I might not
mislead them into undue compliments: I said, in my broken-accented Italian, We
all here, Signors, are as much interested in the health and happiness of Lady
Clementina, as any of her friends in Italy can be.

They applauded all of us, who were, as they said, so generously interested in
the happiness of one of the most excellent of women.

I told the Count, that Sir Charles had, as desired, provided lodgings for him.
I hoped he would find them convenient, though Sir Charles thought them not
befitting his quality. He said, before he set out this morning (hearing that
their Lordships were then probably on their journey from Dover to London)
ordered his gentleman to attend him to them: You, Signor, said I, are, if you
please, with Signor Juliano, to be Sir Charles's own guests. We have another
house which will be honored with the residence of the Marquis and Marchioness,
their Sons, the good Father Marescotti, and their other friends.

Good Father Marescotti! repeated the Count -- Excellent Lady Grandison! -- But
you say well: Father Marescotti is indeed a good man.

I have by heart, my Lord, said I, the characters of all my dear Sir Charles's
good friends.

Again the two Lords looked upon each other, as admiring me.

Pity, my dear grandmamma, that different nations of the world, though of
different persuasions, did not, more than they do, consider themselves as the
creatures of one God, the Sovereign of a thousand worlds!

The Count expressed great impatience to know some particulars of Lady
Clementina. I took this opportunity to say, that as I had been informed of the
transcendent piety of the Lady, and of her great earnestness, from her earliest
youth, to take the veil, I presumed it would forward the good understanding
hoped for, if it were not at present known, that his Lordship was arrived; and
the rather, as several tender scenes might be expected to pass between her and
her other friends, which perhaps her present (easily to be supposed) weak
spirits, and turn of mind, might with difficulty enable her to support.

The Count sighed: But, bowing, said, He came with a very small retinue,
because he would be as private as possible. He had been for many months
determined to visit England: The family della Porretta, Signor Jeronymo, in
particular, had promised to visit Sir Charles in it likewise: They should
indeed have chosen a better season for it, had not their care and concern for
one of the most excellent of women induced them to anticipate their intentions.
He was entirely of my opinion, he added, that his arrival in England should not
at present be known by Lady Clementina.

He then, in a very gallant, but modest manner, owned to my Lord G. and me his
passion for her; and said, that on the issue of this adventure of the dear Lady
hung his destiny.

I told him, I had been the more free in giving my humble advice, as to the
keeping secret his Lordship's arrival, as, but for that reason, I could assure
him Sir Charles would not have permitted his Lordship, or any of his train, to
go into his lodgings: And I mentioned the high regard which I knew Sir Charles
had for the Count of Belvedere.

I ordered supper to be got early, as I supposed the two Lords would be glad to
retire soon, after the fatigue of their journey; for they had set out early in
the morning. I sent a note begging the favor of my cousin Reeves's company to
supper; apologizing, by the occasion, for the short notice. They were so kind
as to come. They admire the two young noblemen: for Signo r Sebastiano, as well
as the Count, is a sensible modest young man. Mr. Reeves and they entered into
free conversation in French, which we all understood, on their country, voyage,
and journey by land. Both gentlemen spoke of Sir Charles, and his behavior in
Italy, in raptures.

My cousin Reeves, attended by Saunders, was so good as to conduct the Count to
his lodgings, in his coach; Sir Charles having all our equipages with him.

You will soon have another Letter, my dearest grandmamma, from

Your ever-dutiful HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER XXXV. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Wedn. morn. March 14.
MR. and Mrs. Reeves were so kind as to breakfast, and intend to dine, with me.

They brought with them, as agreed upon overnight, the Count of Belvedere, who
has assumed the name of Signor Marfigli. After breakfast, Mr. Reeves, dropping
my cousin at Lady G's, carried the two noblemen through several of the greet
streets and squares of this vast town: To Westminster Hall; the houses of
parliament, etc.

I went in my chair, mean time, to pay my sincerest compliments to Lady
Clementina: I assured her, that she was, and should be, the subject of our
choicest cares.

Poor Lady! She is full of apprehensions. I owned to her the arrival of Signor
Sebastiano, and his prayers for her safety and health; and told her what I had
answered to his enquiries after her.

She was for removing to some distance from town, where she thought she could
be more private. Lord and Lady L. both assured her, it was impossible she could
be any-where so private as in this great town; nor so happily situated (should
she think fit, on a reconciliation, to own where she had been) as in the
protection, and at the house, of Sir Charles Grandison's brother and sister.

God be praised for the happy meeting you all have had. Lucy is very good to be
so particular about my Emily This Letter of Miss Lucy Selby appears not.
. Dear girl! She is an example to all young Ladies! Let Clementina be made
easy, and who will be so happy as your Harriet?

Thursday, March 15.
SIR Charles has been so good as to let me know, that he and Mr. Lowther
arrived yesterday morning at Dover. He found the Marchioness, Signor Jeronymo,
and the good Camilla, as he calls her, very much indisposed from the fatigues
they had undergone both in mind and body. The whole noble family received him
with inexpressible joy. Jeronymo told him, that his arrival, and Mr. Lowther's
with him, had given them all spirits; and health must follow to those who were
indisposed.

Sir Charles supposes, that they will be obliged to continue at Dover all this
day. Tomorrow if the Marchioness is able to bear the journey, they propose to
set out, and proceed as far on their way to London as her health will permit;
and to get to town as early on Saturday as possible.

The dear man thought his Harriet would be uneasy, if he had not written to
her, as he shall be two days longer out than he had hoped. To be sure she
should. If he had not thought so justly of her, as she knows no other method of
valuing herself than by his value of her, she must have been extremely sunk in
her own opinion.

He bids me assure Lady Clementina that she will find every one of her friends
determined to do all in their power to make her happy. Resentment, he says, has
no place in their bosoms: They breathe nothing but reconciliation and Love.

I will not, my dear grandmamma, dispatch this Letter to you, till I can inform
you that this worthy family are settled with us, and at Grosvenor-Square.

Sat. Evening, March 17.
I HAVE just received the following billet from Sir Charles.

Grosvenor-Square, Sat. 4 o'clock.
MY dearest Love will rejoice to know by this, that our friends are all arrived
here in safety. The Marchioness bore the journey better than we expected. My
Jeronymo is in fine spirits. I thought it would give my Harriet as well as them
less fatigue, if I put them into immediate possession of this house, than if I
brought them to pay their compliments to her, as they were very desirous to do,
at St. James's Square. Mrs. Beaumont has allotted to them their respective
apartment. There is room enough, and they are pleased to say, handsome room.
Signor Juliano will attend my Love with me. What an admirable forecast in my
dearest life! A repast so elegant, prepared (as your Murray informs me) by your
personal direction, to attend their hour. She tells me you have borrowed a
female servant of each of our sisters, and one of Mrs. Reeves, to join with two
of your own, in the service of this house. In everything, on every occasion,
you delight by your goodness and greatness of mind

Your ever-devoted CHAPTER GRANDISON.


I shall stay supper with them. But shall break away as soon as I can, to
attend the joy of my heart.

Am I not a happy creature, my dear grandmamma? By what little offices, if done
with tolerable grace, may one make a great and noble spirit think itself under
obligation to one! -- But had I known they would not have called first in St.
James's Square. I would not have contented myself, as I did, with a visit to
the other house in the middle of the day, to see everything was in order,
against they came: They should have found me there to receive and welcome them.

Signor Sebastiano is flown to them. I should have told you, that the Count, at
my request, dined and supped with me and Signor Sebastiano (they choosing to
comply with our English customs) every day of this week from that of his
arrival. They are really good young men. They improve upon me every hour. How
do they admire Lady Clementina! The Count yesterday complimented me, that for
piety, reading, understanding, sweetness of manners, frankness of heart, she
could only be equally in England. Italy knew not, he said, nor had known of
modern times, her mother excepted, such another woman. If I knew Lady
Clementina, he added, I would not wonder at his perseverance, he having besides
the honor of all her family's good opinion.

How I long to see every individual of this noble family! -- I know how
sincerely I love them all, by this one instance -- I have not now, for near a
week that my dearest friend has been absent from me, in their service, wished
once for his company; though had he not written to me on Thursday, I should have
been anxious for his health and theirs.

May they be indulgently, and not ungraciously, forgiving! -- Then will I
dearly love them. -- Poor Lady Clementina! How full of apprehensions has she
been all this week! She has not stirred out of her chamber since Wednesday
morning, nor designs it for a week or two to come.

Sunday.
MY dearest Friend, my Lover, my Husband, every tender word in one, left his
noble guests for their sakes early last night; and he was pleased to tell me,
for his own sake, longing to see, to thank, to applaud his Harriet. He brought
with him the two young noblemen, who are our own immediate guests.

He gave me, last night and this morning, an account of what passed between the
family and himself, from his arrival at Dover, to their coming to town last
night.

They confessed the highest obligations to him for attending them in person;
and for bringing Mr. Lowther with him. But when, on their eager questions to
him after their Clementina, he told them, that he had heard from her, and that
she had owned herself to be in honorable and tender hands, the Marquis lifted
up his eyes in thankful rapture: The Marchioness, with clasped hands, seemed to
praise God; but her lips only moved: All the rest expressed their joy in words
dictated by truly affectionate hearts.

Sir Charles found them all most cordially disposed to forgive the dear
fugitive, as the Bishop called her: But, depend upon it, added the Prelate,
nothing will secure her head, but our yielding to her in her long wished-for
hope of the convent, or on prevailing on her to marry: And if you, Grandison,
join with us, I question not, but the latter may be effected.

Sir Charles blamed them for having precipitated her as they had done.

That, said the Bishop, was partly the fault of our well meaning Giacomo; and
partly her own; for more than once she gave us hope that she would comply with
our wishes.

I besought Sir Charles, that he would not be prevailed upon to take part with
them, if she continued averse to a change of condition.

I waved the subject, my dearest Life, replied he, at the time. I have
continued to do so ever since, I want only to see them settled, and Lady
Clementina composed, and then I shall know what can be done. Till then,
arguments on either side, will rather strengthen than remove difficulties.

The Bishop, with great concern, told Sir Charles, that when the first news of
Clementina's flight was brought to Bologna, her poor mother was for two days as
unhappy in her mind, as ever her daughter had been; and when it was found
likely that Clementina was gone to England, she insisted so vehemently on
following her, that they had no other way to pacify her, but by promising that
they would out of hand, pay to Sir Charles the visit they intended, and some of
them had engaged to make him. Nor would she, when she grew better on their
promise, acquit them of it. This determined them to this winter excursion,
sorely against the will of some of them: And it was in compassion to this
unhappy state of the poor mother's mind, that Mrs. Beaumont consented to
accompany her.

Sir Charles is gone to attend Lady Clementina. He then proposes to welcome the
Count of Belvedere into England; and afterward to wait on the noble family,
and know when I shall be permitted to pay my devoirs to them.

Sunday, Two o'clock.
SIR Charles has found it very difficult to quiet the apprehensions of Lady
Clementina. He is grieved for her. God grant, he prays, that she keep in her
right mind. Lady L. thinks the poor Lady is already disturbed,

Sir Charles was joyfully received by Signor Marsigli. He owned to that Lord,
that he knew where to send Letters to Lady Clementina. He is to introduce me
by-and-by to his guests at Grosvenor-Square.

Sunday night.
SIR Charles presented me to this expecting family. I admire them all.

The Marquis and Marchioness are a fine couple. There is dignity in their
aspects and behavior. A fixed kind of melancholy sits upon the features of
each. The Bishop has the man of quality in his appearance; but he has something
more solemn in his countenance than even Father Marescotti; who, at a glance,
is not unlike our Dr. Bartlett: The more like, as goodness and humility both
shine in his countenance.

But Signor Jeronymo is an amiable young man: I could, almost at first sight
(and his winning grace confirmed me) have called him Brother. With signal
kindness did my Sir Charles present me to this his dear friend: and with equal
kindness did Signor Jeronymo receive me, and congratulate Sir Charles: They all
joined in the congratulation.

The amiable Mrs. Beaumont! -- She embraced me! She felicitated me, with such a
grace, as made her manner surpass even her words.

The good Camilla was presented to me. She has the look of a gentlewoman. How
many scenes did the sight of this good woman revive in my memory! Some of them
painful ones!

Signior Marsigli, as he is called, and the two young Lords, dined with them.
This being a first visit on my part, we made it a short one. We went from them
to Lady G's, and drank tea with her and her Lord. Sir Charles could not bear,
he said, to go immediately from the sighing parents to the sorrowing daughter;
they not knowing, nor being at present to know, she was so near them.

Lady G. was so petulant, so whimsical, when her brother's back was turned,
that I could not forbear blaming her: But I let her go her own way: She stopped
my mouth -- "So you think you shall behave more patiently, more thankfully, in
the same circumstance! -- Look to it, Harriet!"

Here, my dearest grandmamma, I will conclude this Letter. Pray for the poor
Clementina; for a happy reconciliation; and that the result may be tranquillity
of mind restored to this whole noble family; so necessary to that of your dear
Sir Charles, and

His and Your HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER XXXVI. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Thursday, March 22.
NOthing decisive yet, my dear grandmamma.

There have been some generous contentions between the family and Sir Charles.
He has besought them to make their hearts easy, and he will comply with all
their reasonable desires.

They think not of dining with, or visiting us, till they can hear some tidings
of their beloved daughter.

Lord G. Lord L. and Lady L. as also Mrs. Eleanor Grandison, have been
presented to them.

Sir Charles has begun to enter into a treaty, as I may call it, with the Lady
on one part, her Family on the second, and the Count of Belvedere on the third.
Lady Clementina, it seems, insists upon being allowed to take the veil; and
that in a manner that sometimes carries wildness with it. The Bishop, Sir
Charles thinks, seems less fervent in his opposition to it, than formerly.
Father Marescotti, in his heart, he believes, favors her wishes. But the
Marquis and Marchioness, and Signor Jeronymo, plead their own inclinations,
their Son the General's unabated fervor, in behalf of the marriage, were it but
to secure the performance of the grandfather's will, and to be an effectual
disappointment of the interested hopes of Lady Sforza and her daughter Laurana.
The Count of Belvedere's passion for the Lady (notwithstanding her unhappy
malady past, and apprehended) makes a great merit for him with the family; and
the two young Lords think so highly of him for his perseverance, that they are
attached to his interest; and declare, that the Conte della Porretta their
father is as strongly on the same side as the General himself.

In the mean time, the fond mother is so impatient to see her daughter, that
they are afraid of the consequences, as to health both of mind and body, if a
speedy determination be not come to: On the other hand, the young Lady grieves
to find herself, as she says, in such a situation, as to be obliged to insist
on conditions with her parents, before she can throw herself at their feet;
which she longs to do, though she dreads to see them. Sometimes (and they are
when she is calmest) she blames herself for the step she has taken; at others,
she endeavors to find excuses for it.

Sunday morning, Mar. 25.
SIR Charles has drawn up a paper at the request of all parties. He last night
gave a copy of it to the Lady; another to the Count: a third to the Bishop; for
them all to consider of the contents; and he will attend them tomorrow for
their answer. He has been pleased to give me also a copy of it; which is as
follows:

I. That Lady Clementina, in obedience to the will of her two deceased
grandfathers, in duty to her parents and uncle, and in compliance with the
earnest supplications of the most affectionate of brothers, shall engage her
honor to give up all thoughts of withdrawing from the world, not only for the
present, but for all future time, so long as she shall remain in her maiden
state.

II. She shall be at liberty to choose her way of Life; and shall be allowed,
at her own pleasure, to visit her Brother and his Lady at Naples; her Uncle at
Urbino; Mrs. Beaumont at Florence; and be put into the immediate perception of
the profits of the estate bequeathed to her, if she chooses it; that she may be
enabled to do that extensive good with the produce, that she could not do, were
she to renounce the world; in which case, that estate would devolve to one,
who, it is but too probable, would make a very different use of it.

III. She shall have the liberty of nominating her own attendants; and in case
of death, or removal by promotion, of Father Marescotti (whose merits must at
last render him conspicuous) to choose her own confessor: But that her Father
and Mother shall have their negative preserved to them, in either case, while
she continues in their palace: Nor will the dear Lady think this a hardship;
for she wishes not to be independent on parents, of whose indulgent goodness to
her she is most dutifully sensible; and it is reasonable, that they should be
judges of the conduct of every one who is to be a domestic in their family.

IV. As Lady Clementina, from some late unhappy circumstances, thinks she
cannot marry any man; and as a late extraordinary step taken by her, has shown,
that there is at present too much reason to attend to the weight of her plea;
it is hoped, that the Count of Belvedere, for his own sake; for the sake of the
composure of mind of the Lady, so dear to all who have the honor of knowing
her; will resolve to discontinue his addresses to her, and engage never to
think of resuming them, unless some hopes should arise, in course of time, of
his succeeding in her favor by her own consent.

V. Her ever-honoured parents, for themselves and for their absent brother the
Count of Porretta; her right reverend brother for himself, and, as far as he
may, for his elder brother; Signor Jeronymo for himself; will be so good as to
promise, that they will never with earnestness endeavor to persuade, much less
to compel, Lady Clementina to marry any man whatever; nor encourage her
Camilla, or any other friend or confident, to endeavor to prevail upon her to
change her condition: Her parents, however, reserving to themselves the right
of proposing, as they shall think fit, but not of urging; because the young
Lady, who is by nature sweettempered, gentle, obliging, dutiful, thinks herself
(however determined by inclination) less able to withstand the persuasions of
indulgent friends, than she should be to resist the most despotic commands.

VI. These terms conceded to, on all sides, it is humbly proposed, that the
young Lady shall throw herself (as she is impatient to do) at the feet of her
indulgent parents; and that all acts of disobligation shall be buried in
everlasting oblivion.

The proposer of the above six articles takes the liberty to add, on the
presumption that they may be carried into effect, that his noble guests will
allow him to rejoice with them on their mutual happiness restored, for months
to come, in his native country.

He hopes that they will accept of his endeavors to make England as agreeable
to them, as they heretofore made Italy to him.

He begs that they will consider their family and his, as one family, ever to
be united by the indissoluble ties of true friendly Love.

He hopes for their company at his country seat.

He will seek for opportunities to oblige and accommodate them in every
article, whether devotional or domestic.

And when they will be no longer prevailed upon to stay in England, he will (no
accidents, no events, preventing, of which themselves shall be judges) attend
them to Italy; and if his beloved Wife and Sisters, and their Lords, shall have
made to themselves, as he hopes they will, an interest in their affections, he
questions not to prevail on them to be of the party.

CHAPTER GRANDISON.

Monday morn. ten o'clock.
SIR Charles is gone to attend the Count at his Lodgings, in pursuance of his
request signified by a note last night.

Two o'clock.
THE following Billet is just now brought me.

MY dearest Love will have the goodness to excuse my dining with her this day.
Signor Marsigli, and her Ever-devoted, are hastening to Grosvenor-Square, where
we shall dine. This worthy nobleman deserves pity. Adieu, my dearest Life!

CHAPTER GRANDISON.


I am all impatience for the issue of these conferences: But I will not dine by
myself, when I can sit down at table with Lady L. and Lady Clementina at Lord
L's -- and with my Lord himself, so much my brother and friend. Here therefore
will I close this Letter. Forgive, my ever-honoured grandmamma, the abruptness
of

Your ever-dutiful HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER XXXVII. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Monday, March 26.
LADY L. when I was set down at her house, told me, that Lady Clementina had
been in great agitations on the contents of the proposals left with her. She
kept her chamber all day yesterday, and this morning. Lady L. had then but just
left her. I sent up my compliments to her. She desired me to walk up. She met
me on the stair-head in tears; and led me into her dressing room -- Have you
seen the Chevalier's proposals, madam? -- I owned I had.

-- Give up for ever, said she, my scheme, my darling scheme, for the sake of
which, I -- There she stopped.

It was easy to guess what the poor Lady was going to say. The subject was too
delicate for me to help her out.

Dearest Lady Clementina, said I, be pleased to consider the good it will be in
your power to do to hundreds, according to the second article, if you can
comply. How much has our dear Friend consulted your beneficent spirit! All my
fear is, that your parents will not subscribe to their part of it. If they
will, what a favorite scheme of their own will they give up!

She paused -- Then breaking silence -- And is it your opinion, Lady Grandison?
Your opinion, joined to the Chevalier's -- Let me consider --

She took two or three turns about the room: Then, thinking of Sir Charles's
intimation of a tour to Italy -- With what soothing, what consoling hope, said
she, does the next-to-divine man almost conciliate my mind to his measures! --
And could you, would you, madam, think of going with us to Italy? O how
flattering are these hints!

I should rejoice in such a tour, replied I: Love me but in your Italy, if I
should be allowed to go, as I do you in our England, and I shall be happy in so
fine a country, as I am told it is. But, dearest Lady, what shall we do to
obtain your friends compliance with these articles? Shall I cast myself on my
knees before your father and mother to beg theirs? You in my hand, I in yours?

Ever good, ever noble Lady Grandison! -- But how first shall I pacify my own
heart on yielding to my part of them?

Let it not stick there, madam. Will not Lady Clementina meet them one fourth
of the way? It is not more.

Well, I will consider of it. I shall hear what they will do. Your advice, my
dear Lady Grandison, shall have all the weight with me, that a Sister's ought.

I attended the summon to dinner. She excused herself. I took leave of her for
the day, declaring my intention of going home as soon as I had dined.

Monday night.
SIR Charles returned with a benevolent joy brightening his countenance. He
hopes to bring this affair to an issue not unhappy.

He was first with the Count of Belvedere, who received him with great emotion.
I apprehended, said he, that I was to be the sacrifice. O Grandison, did you
but know the hopes, the assurances, given me by the General, by everybody!

Sir Charles expatiated on every argument that could compose his mind.

Will she promise, will she engage, that if ever she marry, it will be the man
before you, Chevalier? Why did you not make that a stipulation in my favor?

I think such a stipulation would be of disadvantage to your Lordship: You
would be kept by it in suspense, whatever had offered, whether in Italy or
Spain; in both which countries you have considerable connexions. If Lady
Clementina can be brought to give up the veil, it may not be impracticable to
induce her in time (but time must be given her) to favor with her hand a man
of your Lordship's merit and consequence. If otherwise, your Lordship
(unfettered either by hope or obligation) will be free to make another choice.

Another choice, Sir! -- This to a man, who has so long adored her; and, through
the various turns of her unhappy malady, still preserved for her a Love that
never any other woman shared in! -- But, if you please, we will hear what her
father, her mother, and other friends, say to the articles you have drawn up.

They went to them. After dinner the important subject had a full and solemn
consideration.

Signor Jeronymo and Mrs. Beaumont only at first espoused the proposed plan in
all its articles; but everybody came into it at last. God be praised! Now
surely the dear Lady must be happy. But the poor Count of Belvedere! He has
not, in giving up his inclination, such a noble triumph of self-conquering duty
as she had to support her in the same arduous trial. But then he cherishes a
hope, that there remains a possibility; the Lady still unmarried.

Noblest of women! Is Harriet a bar? -- No! She is what you generously wished
her to be.

Tuesday, Mar. 27.
SIR Charles excused himself to Lady Clementina by a few lines last night, for
not waiting on her yesterday; and just as he was setting out to attend her this
morning, the following note was brought him from Signor Jeronymo; the contents
designed to strengthen his endeavors to prevail on the Lady to accept his plan.

My dearest Grandison, Tuesday morn.
YOU will make us all happy, if you can prevail upon our beloved Clementina to
accept, and subscribe to, your generous plan, as we all most cheerfully are
ready to do. "Restore yourself, my dearest Sister, this day, or tomorrow at
furthest, to the arms of the most indulgent of parents, and to those of the
most affectionate of brothers, two of us, who will answer for our third. How
impatiently shall we number the hours, till the happy one arrives, that we all
shall receive from the hand of the dearest of friends, and best of men, a
Sister so much beloved!" -- Ever, ever, my dear Grandison,

Your grateful JERONYMO.


O my dearest Lady Clementina! noblest of women! let your Sister Harriet
prevail upon you not to refuse the offered olive branch!

Tuesday two o'clock.
SIR Charles has just now acquainted me, that he has prevailed with Lady
Clementina. Tomorrow afternoon she will throw herself at the feet of her
father and mother. Rejoice with me, my dear grandmamma! All my friends, rejoice
with me! congratulate me! -- Is it not I myself that am going to be restored to
the most indulgent parents, brothers, friends!

Let me gratefully add, from the information of his aunt Grandison, whom he
brought home with him, that he was so good as to resist entreaty to dine at
Lord L's. And why? Because, as he was pleased to give the reason (and was
generously commended for it, by Lady Clementina) that I was alone. Lord L.
proposed to send to request my company: He was sure his Sister Grandison would
oblige them. And I, my Lord, said Sir Charles, am sure she would too: But the
time is so short, that it is not giving one of the most obliging women in the
world an option -- Tenderest of husbands! Kindest and most considerate of men!
-- He will not subject a woman to the danger of being a refusing Vashti; nor
yet will give her reason to tremble with a too-meanly mortified Esther.

Tuesday evening.
As Sir Charles and I were sitting at supper, sweetly alone; the whole world,
as it seemed, to each other (for Mrs. Grandison chooses to be at present at
Lord L's, and was gone thither); the following Billet was brought me, written
in Italian; which thus I English:

"Tomorrow, my dearest Lady Grandison, as the Chevalier has no doubt told you,
the poor fugitive is to be introduced to her parents. Pray for her. But if I am
to have the honor of being looked upon as indeed your Sister, you must do more
than pray for me. Was you in earnest yesterday, when you offered your
comforting hand to sustain me, if I consented to cast myself at the feet of my
Father and Mother? Lady L. is so good as to consent in person to acknowledge the
protection she has given me. Will you, my Sister, be my Sister on this awful
occasion? -- Will you lend me your supporting hand? -- If you, as well as Lady
L. credit the runaway penitent with your appearance in her favor, then will
she, with more courage than can otherwise fall to her share, look up to those
parents, and to those brothers, whose indulgent bosoms she has filled with so
much anguish. Till tomorrow is over, she dare not sign the respectable
addition to the name of

Tuesday evening. "CLEMENTINA."


Will I! repeated I, as soon as I had read it: Was I in earnest yesterday! --
Indeed I was: Indeed I will. Read it, my dearest Sir, and give me leave to
answer its contents, as my amiable Sister wishes.

He had looked benignly at his servants, and at the door; and they withdrew, as
soon as the billet was brought, on my saying, From my Lady!

Scenes that may be expected to be tender, said he, will not, I hope, affect
too much the spirits of my angel -- But it is a request as kindly made by
Clementina, as generously complied with by you. I will tell you, my dear, how,
if the Lady please, we will order it. After dinner you shall call upon your
worthily adopted Sister, and take her and Lady L. to Grosvenor-square. I will
be there to receive her, and present her to her friends, though I doubt not but
she will meet with a joyful welcome. I will acquaint her with this tomorrow
morning.

Wednesday morn. March 28.
LADY Clementina approves of my calling upon her and Lady L. and of Sir
Charles's being at Grosvenor-Square, ready to receive her. I am to attend her
about five in the afternoon. She is, it seems, full of apprehensions.

Wednesday night, Ten o'clock.
WE are just returned from Grosvenor-Square -- Dear Sir, I obey you. Sir
Charles, in tenderness to me, insists upon my deferring writing till tomorrow.
The first command he has laid upon me.

LETTER XXXVIII. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Thursday morn, March 29.
NOW for particulars of what passed yesterday. Sir Charles is gone to
Grosvenor-Square, to enquire after the health and composure of his noble guests
there.

When I called upon Lady Clementina yesterday, five o'clock, I found her
greatly distressed with her own apprehensions. I must, said she to me, be a
guiltier creature than I had allowed myself to think I was: Why else am I so
ashamed, so afraid, to see parents whom I ever honored, brothers and friends
whom I ever loved? -- O Lady Grandison! What a dispiriting thing is the
consciousness of having done amiss! And to a proud heart too!

Then looking upon the written plan, Let me see, said she, what I am to sign.
These were the remarks she made upon them, as she read:

(1.) Hard, hard article, the first! But your Grandison, madam, my fourth
brother, my friend, my protector, tells me, that I shall discharge all the
obligations he ever laid upon me, if I will sign it. -- I submit.

(2.) How flattering to my pride; to my hopes of doing good to the indigent and
unhappy!

(3.) Nominating my attendants -- my confessor -- Kind, considerate Grandison!
If I give up the first wish of my heart, I shall not insist upon these
stipulations in my favor. My parents shall have, in these cases, affirmative
and negative too. Indeed I desire not in any article to be independent of them.

(4.) A grateful article! I acknowledge, Chevalier, your protection with
gratitude, in this stipulation.

(5.) If my friends promise, they will perform. Ours is a family of untainted
honor. I hope my Brother Giacomo will be answered for by his Brothers in these
articles: But he will hate me, I fear.

Generous Grandison! what tempting proposals do you conclude with! And you,
Lady Grandison, are so good as to say, that my happiness is wanting to complete
yours -- That is a motive, I assure you. Lead me, madam, and do you, my dear
Lady L. (my hospitable other protectress) oblige me with your countenance too.
A woman of your honor and goodness, Sister of the Chevalier Grandison,
acknowleging me your guest, and answering for my behavior, will credit the
abject Clementina in the eyes of her forgiving relations. -- Sir Charles
Grandison there before me, to prepare them to receive graciously the fugitive!
-- Lead me on, while I can be led: I will attend you.

She looked wild and disordered; and, giving each of us a hand, we led her to
the coach. But, at stepping in, she trembled, faltered, and seemed greatly
disturbed. We consoled her all we could; and the coach drove to
Grosvenor-Square. When it stopped, she threw her arms about Lady L. and, hiding
her face in her bosom, called upon the Blessed Virgin to support her -- How,
how, said she, can I look my Father, my Mother, in the face!

Sir Charles, on the coach stopping, appeared. He saw her emotion. It is kind,
my Harriet! It is kind, Lady L. to accompany Lady Clementina. -- Your goodness
will be rewarded in being eyewitnesses of the most gracious reception that
ever indulgent parents gave to a long absent daughter.

Ah, Chevalier! was all she could say.

Let me conduct you, dearest Lady Clementina, into a drawing room, where you
will see no other person but whom you now see, till your recovered spirits
shall rejoice the dearest of friends.

I was afraid she was too much discomposed to attend to this considerate
expedient. I repeated, therefore, what Sir Charles last said. She was visibly
encouraged by it. She gave him her trembling hand; and he led her into the
prepared drawing room. Lady L. and I followed, and took our seats on each hand
of her; Sir Charles his over against her. Our offered salts, and soothing, with
difficulty kept her from fainting.

When she was a little revived -- Hush! said she, with her finger held up, and
wildness in her looks, casting her eyes to the doors and windows in turn: They
will hear us! -- Further recovering herself -- O Chevalier! said she, what
shall I say? How shall I look? What shall I do? -- And am I, am I, indeed, in
the same house with my Father, Mother, Jeronymo? Who else? Who else? with
quickness.

It is so ordered, my dearest Clementina, said Sir Charles, in love and
tenderness to you, that you shall only see your Mother first; then your Father
-- At your own pleasure, your Brothers, Mrs. Beaumont, Father Marescotti.

Sir Charles was sent for out -- Don't, don't leave me, Sir. Then looking to
Lady L. and then to me -- You are all goodness, Ladies -- Don't leave me.

Sir Charles instantly returned: Your Mamma, madam, all indulgence, is
impatient to fold you to her heart. What joy will you give her?

He offered his hand. She gave him hers; motioning for out attendance. Sir
Charles led her, we following, into the room where was her expecting Mother.
The moment each saw the other, they ran with open arms to each other. O my
Mamma! -- My Clementina! -- was all that either could say. They sunk down on
the floor, the Mother's arms about the Daughter's neck; the Daughter's about
the Mother's waist.

Sir Charles lifted them up, and seated them close to each other -- Pardon!
Pardon! Pardon! said the dear Lady, hands and eyes lifted up, sliding out of
her Mother's arms on her knees -- But at that moment could say no more.

The Marquis, not being able longer to contain himself, rushed in -- My
Daughter! my Child! my Clementina! Once more do I see my Child!

Sir Charles had half-lifted her up, when her Father entered. She sunk down
again, prostrate on the floor, her arms extended: O my Father! Forgive! --
Forgive me, O my Father!

He raised her up, by Sir Charles's assistance; and, seating her between
himself and his Lady, both again wrapped their arms about her. She repeated
prayers for forgiveness, in broken accents: Blessings, in accents as broken,
flowed from their hearts to their lips.

After the first emotions, when they could speak, and she now-and-then could
look up, which she did by snatches, as it were, her eyes presently falling
under theirs, Behold, madam, Behold, my Lord, said she, the hospitable Lady to
whom -- Looking at Lady L. Behold, looking at me, a more than woman; an Angel
-- More she would have said; but seemed at a loss for words.

We have before seen and admired, said the Marquis, in Lady Grandison, the
noblest of all women.

He arose to approach us: Sir Charles led us both to them.

Lady Clementina snatched first my hand, and eagerly pressed it with her lips;
then Lady L's: Her heart was full: She seemed to want to speak; but could not:
And Lady L. and I, with overflowing eyes, congratulated the Father, Mother,
Daughter; and were blessed in speech by the two former; by hands and eyes
lifted up, by Lady Clementina.

Sir Charles then withdrawing, returned with the Bishop, and Signor Jeronymo.
It is hard to say, whether these two Lords showed more joy, than Clementina did
shame and confusion. She offered at begging pardon: But the Bishop said, Not
one word of past afflictions! Nobody is in fault. We are all happy once more;
and happy on the conditions prescribed to both by this friend of mankind in
general, and of our family in particular.

My ever noble, my venerable brother, said Jeronymo (who had clasped his Sister
to his fond heart, his eyes running over) how I love you for this uncalled for
assurance to the dear Clementina! Every article of my Grandison's plan shall be
carried into execution. We will rejoice with the Chevalier in his England --
And he, and all who are dear to him, shall accompany us to Italy. We will be
all one family.

Sir Charles then introduced to the Lady his greatly and justly esteemed Mrs.
Beaumont. Clementina threw herself into her arms. Forgive me, my dear Mrs.
Beaumont! If you forgive me, Virtue will. Pardon the poor creature, who never,
never, would have so much disgraced your lessons, and her mamma's example, as
she has done, had not a heavy cloud darkened her unhappy mind. Say you forgive
me, as the best and most indulgent of parents, and the kindest of brothers,
have done.

It was not your fault, my dear Lady Clementina, but your misfortune. You never
was so much to be blamed as pitied. All here are of one sentiment. We came over
to heal your wounded mind: Be it healed, and every one will be happy; yes, more
happy perhaps (for now we all understand one another,) than if you had not left
us to mourn your absence.

Blessed be my Comforter, my Friend, my beloved Mrs. Beaumont! You always knew
how to blunt the keen edge of calamity: What a superior woman are you!

Father Marescotti was introduced by the Marquis himself, with a respect worthy
of his piety and goodness. I submit, Father, said Lady Clementina, before he
could speak, to any penance you shall inflict.

His voice would not befriend him: His action, however, showed him to be all
joy and congratulation.

I have been wicked, very wicked, continued she -- But Mrs. Beaumont says, and
she says justly, that I merited pity, rather than blame. Yet if you think not
so, you, who are the keeper of my conscience, spare me not.

Who, who, said the good man recovering speech, shall condemn, when father,
mother, and brothers, so zealous for the honor of their family, acquit! God
forgive you, my dearest Lady! And God forgive us all!

My dearest Chevalier Grandison, said Jeronymo, what gratitude, what
obligations, do we owe to you, and your admirable Lady and Sisters! Again I
acknowledge the obligation for a whole family, from this hour a happy one, I
hope.

It had been agreed between the family and Sir Charles, that not a word should
be mentioned to Lady Clementina of the Count of Belvedere. They requested Sir
Charles to take upon himself the breaking to her, that he was in England, in
his own manner, as opportunity should offer.

Every one having been greatly affected, Sir Charles proposed to take leave;
and that Lady Clementina should return to Lady L's for that night, as
preparation might not have been made for her stay in Grosvenor-Square: But all
the family, with one voice, declared they could not part with the restored
daughter and sister of their hopes: And she herself cheerfully consented to
stay; gratefully, however, with a bent knee, thanking Lady L. for her sisterly
treatment.

Who, in the general joy, said Sir Charles, has remembered the good Camilla? Let
Camilla congratulate her Lady and all of us, on this happy occasion.

Every-one called out for Camilla. In ran the worthy creature. On her knees she
embraced her young Lady's, and wept for joy. Ah! my Camilla, my friend Camilla!
said Clementina, clasping her arms about her neck, I have been cruel to you:
But it was not I -- Alas! alas! I was not always myself -- I will endeavor to
repair your wrongs.

Thank God that I once more clasp my dear young Lady to my heart! -- I have no
wrongs to complain of.

Yes, yes, you have, kind Camilla: I wanted to elude your watchful duty; and
was too cunning to be just to my Camilla.

Sir Charles forgot not to commend Laura to forgiveness and favor. Laura, said
Lady Clementina, is blameless. She obeyed me with reluctance. If I am myself
forgiven, forgive Laura.

My dearest Love, said the Marchioness, we have agreed, that you shall choose
your own servants. The Chevalier, we have no doubt, had Laura in his thoughts,
when he made that stipulation; the English youth too. You, my Clementina, must
have it in your power to do with these as you please.

May I be permitted, my Lords, said Sir Charles, to make one request for myself
to Lady Clementina; a request which shall be consistent with the articles you
will all sign?

I will agree to a request of yours, Chevalier, said the Lady, be it almost
what it will.

I will not, madam, make it today, nor tomorrow. After the hurry of spirits
we have all sustained, let tomorrow be a day of composure. Permit me to expect
you all at dinner with me on Friday. The articles then may be signed: And then,
but not before, I will mention my request, and hope it will be granted.

Sir Charles's invitation was politely accepted; and tomorrow --

Lady Clementina and Mrs. Beaumont below! -- Agreeable surprise!

SIR Charles had been out, and was just come in when the two Ladies alighted. I
was overjoyed to see them, and to see Lady Clementina serene, and seemingly not
unhappy. We are come, said Mrs. Beaumont, to make our earliest acknowlegements
for the happiness restored to a whole family. Lady Clementina could not be easy
till she had paid her personal thanks to Lady Grandison, for the support her
presence gave her yesterday.

Gratitude, said the Lady, fills my her: But how, Chevalier, shall I express
it? I beseech you, let me know your request. Tell me, dear Lady Grandison,
wherein I can oblige my fourth brother?

My dearest Lady Clementina, said Sir Charles, fortify your heart against a
gentle (I hope it will then be but a gentle) surprise. You have not yet signed,
your Relations have not, I presume, the articles to which you have mutually
agreed.

Sir! Chevalier! Sir!

Let me not alarm you, madam.

He put one of her hands in mine; and took the other in a very tender manner,
in his.

You intend to sign them? -- They do, I am sure. Tomorrow, when we are all
together, they will be signed on both sides.

I hope so -- They will not, Chevalier, be receded from?

They will not, madam: And hence you will be assured, that the Count of
Belvedere will never be proposed to you with any degree of urgency.

I hope not, I hope not, said she with quickness.

Should you, madam, on your return to Italy, be unwilling to see the Count as a
friend of your family, as a respecter of your great qualities, as a countryman?

I shall always regard the Count of Belvedere as a man of honor, as a friend
of my Brother Giacomo, of all our family -- But I cannot place him in any other
light. What means the Chevalier Grandison? Keep not my mind in suspense.

I will not. Your father, your mother, your brothers, came over in hopes, that
you might be prevailed upon in the Count's favor. They have given up that hope
--

They have, Sir!

And will absolutely leave you to your own will, to your own wishes, on the
condition to which you have agreed to sign -- But shall I ask you -- Were the
Count to be in France, would you allow him to come over, and take leave of your
family and you, before he sets out for the court of Madrid?

What, Sir! as a man who had hopes from me of more than my good wishes?

No, madam; only as a friend to the whole family -- not requesting any other
favor, now he sees you so determined, than your good wishes, your prayers, for
him, as you will ever have his for you.

I can consent in that view: But were any other favor to be hoped from me;
were my generosity to be expected to be prevailed upon -- O Chevalier! Lady
Grandison! Mrs. Beaumont! Let me not be attempted in this way: The articles
would be broken: This would be persuasion, and that compulsion.

Nothing, madam, of this kind is intended. The articles will be inviolably
observed on the part of your relations. But here Mrs. Beaumont, who never
intended to set her foot on the English shore, to oblige and comfort your
mother, is come to England: And in the general grief that was occasioned by
your absenting yourself, if the man, who was always deservedly esteemed by your
family, had accompanied, had attended, your father, your brothers --

Sir Charles stopped, and looked at the apprehensive Lady with such a sweet
benignity, and, on her eye meeting his, with such tender and downcast modesty
(all the graces of gentle persuasion are his!) --

O Chevalier! your request! your request! Tell me in what I can oblige the most
obliging of friends, of men!

I will tell you, madam -- bowing on the hand he held -- Consent, if it be not
with too much pain to yourself, to see the Count of Belvedere.

See him, Sir! How? When? Where? As what?

As a friend to your family -- a well-wisher to your glory, your happiness; and
as a man ready and desirous to promote the latter at the expense of his own. He
wishes but, while he stays here --

"Stays here," Sir!

To be allowed to visit your family, and to see you once, twice, thrice, as you
please -- but entirely under the conditions of the articles to be signed
tomorrow.

And is then the Count in England?

He is, madam. He attended his and your friends over. He has not once desired
to appear in your presence: He keeps himself close in private lodgings. Hence
judge of his resolution not to disturb or offend you. He will depart the
kingdom without an interview, if you will have it so: But I could not bear,
that so good a man should be obliged to depart disgracefully, as I may say, and
as if he were undeserving of pity, though he could not obtain favor.

O Chevalier!

Secured, madam, by the articles, though his emotion may be apprehended to be
great, yours cannot -- There is not the same reason for the one as for the
other: I make it my request, that the Count of Belvedere may be allowed, as one
of the chosen friends of your house, but as no more (more the articles forbid)
a place at my table tomorrow.

Tomorrow, Sir! and I at it! --

He bowed affirmatively.

O how the penetrating man looked into the heart of the Lady at her eyes! -- As
sure us you are alive, madam, he thought of guessing by her then emotion,
whether any hopes could distantly lie for the Count, by the consequence his
presence or absence would give him with her.

She paused -- At last -- And is this, Chevalier, the request you had to make
me?

It is, madam; and if my Harriet had not had the honor of this visit, I should
have made the same request for his admission in the evening tomorrow -- as now
I do to dinner.

Well, Sir; I can suspect no double-dealing from Sir Charles Grandison.

I ask for no favor for the Count more than I have mentioned, madam: I am
bound by the articles I have drawn, as if I were a party to them.

Well, Sir, I consent to see the Count. He will be prudent. I hope I shall be
so. In Italy, more than once, after you had left it, I saw him: And I always
wished him happy.

Now, my dearest Sister, said Sir Charles, my ever-to-be-respected friend, I am
easy in my mind. I could not bear in my thoughts, that anything I knew, which
it concerned you to know, should be concealed from you.

Tears stood in her eyes. O madam, said she to me, God and you only can reward
this excellent man for his goodness to me, and all the world that know him. --
You see your influence, Chevalier. In every way do I wish to show my gratitude.
But never, never, ask me to give my hand in marriage.

Ah! my dear Lady! thought I; a tear stealing involuntarily down my cheek; the
less, the less, I doubt, must you be asked, for having before you a man, who
having no equal, you cannot think of any other.

The two Ladies hurried away to Lady L's. How sincerely has the friendly heart
of dear Lady L. been affected in all these tender scenes!

LETTER XXXIX. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Thursday evening, March 29.
LADY G. has sent for me in all haste. She is taken ill. God give her a happy
hour!

O my grandmamma! there are solemn, there are awful, circumstances in the
happiest marriages. She begs to see her brother as well as me. I wait for him.
The Count of Belvedere is with him. -- They have parted -- I am gone.

Thursday night.
JUST returned. All happily over! A fine girl! -- Yet though a fine one, how are
the Earl and Lady Gertrude disappointed! -- Poor mortals! how hard to be
pleased!

The brave are always humane. Sir Charles's tender and polite behavior on this
occasion -- How does every occurrence endear him to everybody!

How dearly does Lord G. love his Charlotte! Till all was over, he was in
agonies for her safety. His prayers then, his thankfulness now, how ought they
to endear them to his Charlotte! And so they must, when she is told of his
anxiety, and of his honest joy, or I will not own her for my Sister. But in her
heart, I am sure, she loves him. Her past idle behavior to him was but play.
She will be matronized now. The mother must make her a wife. She will doubly
disgrace herself, if she loves her child, and can make a jest of her husband.

I have just now asked Sir Charles, whether, if he could prevail on Lady
Clementina, while they were all with us, to give her hand to the Count of
Belvedere, he would? By no means, said he, and that for both their sakes. Lady
Clementina has, on many occasions, shown that she may be prevailed upon by
generous and patient treatment: Let the Count have patience. If she recover her
mind, a train of cheerful ideas may take place of those melancholy ones, which
make her desirous of quitting society. She will find herself, by the articles
agreed to, in a situation to do more good, than it is possible she could do,
were her inclination to take the veil to be gratified. The good she will do,
will open and enlarge a mind which is naturally noble; and she will be grateful
for the indulgence given her, which will be the means of so happy a change: But
if the poor Lady's mind be not curable (which God forbid!) who will pity the
Count for not being able to obtain her hand? -- I think, my dear, I have made
him, though not happy, easy; and I hope he will be able to see her without
violent emotions.

Friday morn.
SIGNORS Sebastiano and Juliano are come back, rejoicing that they have been
introduced to, and kindly received by, Lady Clementina.

Sir Edward Beauchamp has just left me. How happy does the account he gives of
my Emily's cheerfulness make me! I knew you would all love her.

Sincerely do I rejoice in the news which my Nancy confirms, that Lucy has
absolutely rejected the addresses of Mr. Greville. She startled me once, I can
tell her: A naughty girl! what could she mean by it?

Will Not she give me the particulars under her own hand? I shall be afraid of her
till she does; so much was I impressed by her warmth in the argument she once
held with me, in his favor, as I thought. Yet I cordially wish Mr. Greville
well; but my Lucy better. Pray, madam, let me privately know, if the proposals
from the young Irish peer Lord Reresby, mentioned Vol. VI. p. 312.
, whom Nancy praises so much for his sobriety, modesty, learning, and other
good qualities, were made before or after the rejecting of Mr. Greville? I
half-mistrust the girls who have been disappointed of a first Love. Yet Lucy's
victory over herself was a noble one. She is in the way, I hope, to be rewarded
for it. God grant it -- Think you, my dear grandmamma, I can be solicitous (as
I am from the bottom of my heart) for the happiness of a new-adopted Sister,
and not be inexpressibly anxious for that of my Lucy, the faithful, the
affectionate friend of my earlier years?

Our guests are entering. -- May the same gracious Providence, which has more
than answered every wish of your Harriet's heart in her own situation, shower
down its blessings on Lucy, on you, and all the revered, the beloved circle!
prays, my dear grandmamma,

Your and their ever dutiful and affectionate HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER XL. Lady GRANDISON, To Mrs. SHIRLEY.
Sat. March 31.
NOW, my dear grandmamma, let me give you some account of what passed yesterday.

The Articles signed and witnessed, were put into Lady Clementina's hand, and a
pen given her, that she might write her name, in the presence of all her
surrounding friends here.

Never woman appeared with more dignity in her air and manner. She was
charmingly dressed, and became her dress. A truly lovely woman! But every one
by looks seemed concerned at her solemnity. She signed her name; but tore off,
deliberately, their names; and kissing the torn bit, put it in her bosom: Then,
throwing herself on her knees to her father and mother, who stood together, and
presenting the paper to the former; Never let it be said, that your child, your
Clementina, has presumed to article in form with the dearest of parents. My
name stands. It will be a witness against me, if I break the articles which I
have signed. But in your forgiveness, my Lord, in yours, madam, and in a
thousand acts of indulgence, I have too much experienced your past, to doubt
your future, goodness to me. Your intention, my ever honored parents, is your
act. I pray to God to enable your Clementina to be all you wish her to be. In
the single Life only indulge me. Your word is all the assurance I wish for. I
will have no other.

They embraced her. They tenderly raised her between them; and again embraced
her.

I would not, methinks, Sir, said she, turning to Sir Charles, for the first
time see the Count of Belvedere before all this company, though I revere every
one in it. Is the Count in the house?

He is in my Study, madam.

Will my mamma, said she, turning to her, honor me with her presence?

She gave her hand to Sir Charles, and took mine. -- Jeronymo followed her; and
Sir Charles led her into the next room. Too great solemnity in all this!
whispered the Marquis to Father Marescotti. She courtefied, invitingly, to Mrs
Beaumont. She also followed her.

Sir Charles, seating her and the Marchioness, by the young Lady's silent
permission, went into his Study; and, having prepared the Count to expect a
solemn and uncommon reception, introduced him. He approached her, profoundly
bowing: A sweet blush overspread her cheeks* You, my Lord of Belvedere, said
she, are one of those my friends, to whom I am, in some measure, accountable
for the rash step which brought me into this kingdom; because it has induced
you to accompany my brothers, whom you have always honored with your
friendship. -- Forgive me for any inconveniences you have suffered on this
occasion.

What honor does Lady Clementina do me to rank me in the number of the friends
to whom she thinks herself accountable! -- Believe me, madam --

My Lord, interrupted she, I shall always regard you as the friend of my
family, and as my friend. I shall wish your happiness, I do wish your
happiness, as my own; and I cannot give you a better proof that I do, than by
withholding from you the hand which you have sought to obtain with an
unshaken, and my friends think, an obliging perseverance, quite through an
unhappy malady, which ought to have deterred you, for many sakes, and most for
your own.

My dear mamma, throwing herself at her feet, forgive me for my perseverance.
It is not altogether owing (I hope it is not at all owing) to perverseness, and
to a wilful resistance of the wills and wishes of all my friends, that I have
withstood you. Two reasons influenced me, when I declined another hand:
Religion and Country, a double reason, was one; the unhappy malady which had
seized me, was another. Two reasons, rising with dignity, and turning from her
weeping mother, also influence me with regard to the Count of Belvedere; though
neither of them are the important articles of Religion and Country. I own to
you, before these my dearest friends, and let it be told to every one concerned
to know it, that justice to the Count of Belvedere is one -- What a wretch
should I be, if I gave my hand to a man who had not the preference in my heart,
which is a husband's due! -- And should I, who had an unhappy reason to refuse
one worthy man for his own sake, perhaps for the sakes of the unborn (I will
speak out on this important occasion) not be determined to do as much justice
to another? -- In one word, I refused to punish the Chevalier Grandison [Madam,
to me, you know my story]: What has the Count of Belvedere done, that I should
make no scruple to punish him? My good Lord, be satisfied with my wishes for
your happiness. I find myself, at times, very, very wrong. I have given proofs
but too convincing to all my friends, that I am not right. -- While I so think,
conscience, honor, justice (as I told you once before, my good Chevalier)
compel me to embrace the Single Life. -- I have, in duty to my nearest friends,
given up the way I should have chosen to lead it in -- Let me try to recover
myself in their way. My dearest, dearest, mamma (again dropping on her knees to
her) I will endeavor to make all my friends happy in the way they have agreed
to make me so. Pray for me, all my friends! -- looking round her, tears in big
drops trickling down her cheeks. Then rising, Pray for me, my Lord of
Belvedere: I will for you; and that you may do justice to the merit of some
worthier woman, who can do justice to yours.

She hurried from us, in a way which showed she was too much elevated for her
corporal powers. Sir Charles besought Mrs. Beaumont to follow her. Mrs.
Beaumont took my hand.

We found the Lady in the Study: She was on her knees, and in tears. She arose
at our entrance Each of us hastening to give her a hand, O my dear Lady
Grandison, said she, forgive me. -- My dear Mrs. Beaumont, am I, am I wrong?
Tell me, Have I behaved amiss?

We both applauded her. Well we might. If her greatness be owing to a raised
imagination, who shall call it a malady? Who, but for the dear Lady's own sake,
would regret the next-to-divine impulse, by which, on several occasions, she
has shown herself actuated?

She suffered herself to be led to her mother, who embracing her (Clementina
again kneeling to her) My dearest child, my blessed daughter, we all of us,
while such are your apprehensions, must acquiesce with your reasons. Be happy,
my Love, in your own magnanimity. I glory in my child.

And I in my Sister, said the noble Jeronymo -- Saint! Angel! kneeling to her
on one knee, notwithstanding his lameness, I next to adore my Sister.

She called him her brother, her true brother. Then, taking my hand; And will
you, Lady Grandison, said she, be my Sister? Shall Sir Charles Grandison be my
Brother? Will you return with us into Italy? Shall we cultivate on both sides a
family-friendship to the end of our lives?

I threw my arms about her neck, tears mingling on the cheeks of both: It will
be my ambition, my great ambition, to deserve the distinction you give me -- My
Sister, my Friend, the Sister of my best Friend, love him as he honors you;
and me for his sake, as I will you for your own, as well as his, to the end of
my life

Sir Charles clasped his arms about us both. His eyes spoke his admiration of
her, and his delight in each. Angels he called us. Then seating us, he took the
Count's hand; and, leading him to her, Let me, madam, present to you the Count
of Belvedere, as a man equally to be pitied and esteemed. He yields to your
magnanimity with a greatness of mind like your own. Receive then, acknowledge,
the friend in him. He will endeavor to forego a dearer hope.

Then will I receive him as my friend. I thank you, my Lord, for the honor you
have so long done me. May you be happy with a woman, who can deserve you! --
See that happy pair before you! May you be as happy as Sir Charles Grandison!
-- What greater felicity can I wish you?

He took her hand: On one knee he lifted it to his lips: I will tear from you,
madam, a tormentor. I must ask nothing of you; but, for myself, I can only
promise, in the words of the Chevalier Grandison, to endeavor to forego, a
dearer, the dearest, hope.

The Count arose, bowing to her with profound respect; his eyes full; as his
heart seemed to be. Signor Jeronymo motioned to return to the company. Lady
Clementina wished to retire with me, till what had passed was related to the
rest. I led her to my closet. There did we renew our vows of everlasting
friendship.

Sir Charles, thinking the relation would be painful to the Count, withdrew
with him into his Study. Mrs. Beaumont, and Signor Jeronymo, told those who
were not present at the affecting scenes, what had passed.

When we were summoned to dinner, every one received Lady Clementina as an
Angel. They applauded her for her noble behavior to the Count, and blessed
themselves for having taken the resolution of coming to England; and, most of
all, they blessed my dear Sir Charles; to whom they ascribed all their opening
happy prospects; and promised themselves that his family and theirs would be as
much one, as if the alliance, once so near taking place, had actually done so.

Sir Charles, at and after dinner, urged the carrying into execution the latter
part of his beneficent plan. He offered to attend them to the Drawingroom, to
the Play, to the Oratorios (and took that opportunity to give the praises which
everybody allows to be due to Mr. Handel); and to every place of Public
Entertainment which was worthy the notice of Foreigners; and left it to their
choice, whether they would go first to Grandison-hall, or satisfy their
curiosity in and about town.

The Marquis said, that as Sir Charles and I were brought out of the country by
the arrival of their Clementina, and our expectation of them, he doubted not
but it would be most agreeable to us, to return to our own seat; adding,
politely, that the highest entertainment they could have, would be the company
and conversation of us, and our friends; and that rather at our own seats, than
any-where else. The public diversions, he was pleased to say, might take their
attention afterward. Now they were here, they would not be in haste to return,
provided Sir Charles and his friends would answer the hope he had given of
accompanying them back to Italy.

There is no repeating the polite and agreeable things, that were said on all
sides.

Well then, my dear grandmamma, to cut short, thus it was at last agreed upon:

The Count of Belvedere, who, all the afternoon and evening, received the
highest marks of civility and politeness from the admirable Clementina (which,
by the way, I am afraid will not promote his cure) proposes, with Signors
Sebastiano and Juliano, to pass a month or six weeks in seeing everything
which they shall think worthy of their notice in and about this great city; and
then, after one farewel-visit to us, they intend to set out together for the
Court of Madrid; where the Count intends to stay some months.

We shall all set out, on Monday next, for Grandison-hall.

Lord and Lady L. will follow us in a week or fortnight.

How will the poor dear Charlotte mutter! whispered Lady L. to me: But she and
her Lord will join us as soon as possible.

Mrs. Eleanor Grandison loves not the Hall, because of the hardships she
received from the late owner of it, Sir Thomas; and thinks herself bound by a
rash vow which she made the last time she was there, Never again to enter its
gates: And she will be delighted, Lady L. says, in attending, in the absence of
the fathers and mothers, the dear little infants of her two nieces.

Lady Clementina whispered me more than once, how happy she should think
herself in these excursions; and hoped all their healths would be established
by them. She said the sweetest, the most affectionate things to me. Once she
said, bidding me call her nothing but my Clementina, that she should be happy,
if she were sure I loved her as much as she loved me. I assured her, and that
from my very heart, that I dearly loved her.

Surely it was a happy incident, my dear grandmamma, that Lady Clementina took
a step, which, though at first it had a rash appearance, has been productive of
so much joy to all round (to the poor Count of Belvedere excepted) and, in
particular, to

Your ever-dutiful, ever-grateful, HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER XLI. Lady GRANDISON, To Lady G.
Grandison-hall, Monday, April 9.
HOW happy, my dear Lady G. are we all of us here, in one another! How happy is
your Harriet! -- And yet when you can come, and partake of my felicity, it will
be still enlarged.

I have just now received a Letter from Lucy. The consents, as you will see
(for I shall enclose it) are a conversation that passed a few days ago at
Shirleymanor, upon a subject of which you are a better judge than your Harriet.
In short, it is a call upon you, as I interpret it, to support your own
doctrine; by which, in former Letters, you have made some of the honestest
girls in England, half-ashamed to own a first passion. You know how much I am
at present engaged. I would not have the dear girls neglected. Answer the
Letter therefore for me, and for yourself; yet, remember, that I do not engage
to abide implicitly by your determination. Ever, ever, my Charlotte,

Your most affectionate HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER XLII. Miss LUCY SELBY, To Lady GRANDISON.
[Inclosed in the preceding.]

Thursday, April 3.
EVERY hour in the day some circumstance or other makes me wish my dear Lady
Grandison in Northamptonshire. Emily charms us all -- But still every object
reminds us of our Harriet. Not that Harriet alone would content us now. Nor
could Sir Charles and Lady Grandison be at this time spared by their noble
guest. After all therefore, everything is best as it is. But indeed we all
wished for you yesterday evening, most particularly, at Shirley-manor. The
conversation was an interesting one to all us girls; and Emily, Nancy, and our
cousin Holles's, have brought me to give you an account of it, and to appeal to
you upon it; and through you to Lady G. And yet we are all of us more than half
afraid of a Lady, who has already treated but lightly, a subject that young
women think of high importance.

The conversation began with my cousin Kitty's greatly pitying Lady Clementina;
describing in her pathetic way, the struggles she had had between her first
duties and her inclination; the noble preference she had given to the former;
and the persecution, as she called it, of all her friends to induce her to
marry when she chose to live single all her life. Every one of us young folks
joined with my cousin Kitty.

But your grandmamma Shirley could not, she said, perfectly agree with us in
the hardship of Lady Clementina's situation; who having from noble motives
spontaneously rejected the man of her choice, was, from reasons of family
convenience, and even of personal happiness, urged to marry a nobleman, who, by
all accounts, is highly deserving and agreeable, and everyway suitable to her:
A man in short, to whom she pretended not an aversion; nor hoped nor wished to
be the wife of any other man; proposing to herself only the Single Life, and
having given up all thoughts of taking the veil.

Personal happiness! cried out Miss Kitty Holles: Can the woman be happy in a
second choice, whose first was Sir Charles Grandison?

And whom, for noble motives, she refused, said my aunt Selby, remember that,
Kitty; and whom she wished to be, and who actually is, the husband of another
woman.

The girls looked at one another: But Mrs. Shirley speaking, they were all
silent.

The happiness of human Life, my dears, replied your grandmamma, is at best but
comparative. The utmost we should hope for here, is such a situation, as, with
a self-approving mind, will carry us best through this present scene of trial:
Such a situation, as, all circumstances considered, is, upon the whole, most
eligible for us, though some of its circumstances may be disagreeable.

Young people set out with false notions of happiness; gay, fairy-land
imaginations; and when these schemes prove unattainable, sit down in
disappointment and dejection. Tell me now, Kitty Holles, and speak freely, my
Love [She would not address herself to some of us for a reason I, your Lucy,
for one, need not give] we are all friends; the gravest of us have been young;
tell us, Kitty, your ideas of happiness for a young woman just setting out in
Life.

Poor Emily answered only with a sudden blush, and a half-stifled sigh: But all
the rest, as with one voice, cried out Harriet, our Harriet, is the happy woman
-- To be married to the man of her choice; The man chosen by her friends, and
applauded by all the world.

And so, said Mrs. Selby, as there is but one Sir Charles Grandison in the
world, were his scheme of Protestant Nunneries put in execution, all the rest
of womankind, who had seen him with distinction, might retire into cloisters.

Were men to form themselves by his example, said Emily [No unfavourable hint
for Sir Edward] -- There she stopped.

Besides, said I (my own case in view) when our eye has led our choice,
imagination can easily add all good qualities to the plausible appearance. But
to give our hand where we cannot give a preference, is surely, madam, acting
against conscience in the most important article of Life.

A preference we ought to give, my Lucy: But need this be the preference of
giddy inclination? No version pre-supposed, will not reason and duty give this
preference in a securer and nobler way to the man who, upon the whole, is most
suitable to us? It is well known, that I was always for discouraging our
Harriet's declarations, that she never would be the wife of any other man than
him she is now so happy as to call hers. If (as we all at one time apprehended)
our hopes had been absolutely impracticable, the noble Countess of D. who gave
such convincing reasons on her side of the question See Vol. V. Letter xviii.
would have had my good wishes for the Earl of D. So, before him, had not ill
health been an objection, would Mr. Orme. You all know, that I wished but to
live to see my Harriet the wife of some worthy man. A single woman is too
generally an undefended, unsupported creature. Her early connexions, year by
year, drop off; no new ones arise; and she remains solitary and unheeded, in a
busy bustling world; perhaps soured to it by her unconnected state. Is not some
gratitude due to a worthy man, who early offers himself for her guide and
protector through Life? Gratitude was the motive even of Harriet's inclination
at first.

Nancy smiled. Why smiles my Nancy? asked your smiling grandmamma. I am sure
you think, child* there is weight in what I said.

Indeed, madam, there is -- Great weight -- But just as you gave us an idea of
the dreary unconnected Life of a single woman in years, I thought of poor Mrs.
Penelope Arby. You all know her. I saw her in imagination, surrounded with
parrots and lap-dogs! -- So spring-like at past fifty, with her pale pink
Lutestring, and back head -- Yet so peevish at girls! --

And she, resumed Mrs. Shirley, refused some good offers in her youth, out of
dread of the tyranny of a husband, and the troublesomeness of a parcel of
Brats! -- Yet now she is absolutely governed by a favorite maid, and as full
of the Bon-mots of her parrots, as I used to be of yours, my Loves, when you
were prattlers.

Yet let us not, said Mrs. Selby, with the insolence of Matrons or
Brides-expectant, be too severe upon Old Maids. Lady G* surely is faulty in
this particular. Many worthy and many happy persons in that class, have I
known: Many amiable and useful in society, even to their latest age -- You,
madam, to Mrs. Shirley, had a friend -- Mrs. Eggleton.

I had, my dear Mrs. Selby -- Never has any length of time, any variety of
scene, at all effaced the dear idea, though she died many years ago. She never
married; but that was not her own fault. She was addressed when near twenty, by
a young gentleman of unexceptionable character. She received his addresses, on
condition that both their friends approved of them. She was a visiter in town.
The relations of both lived in the country. The young couple loved each other:
But neither of their families, when consulted, approving the match, to the
great regret of both, it was broken off. The gentleman married, and was not
unhappy. In three or four years, another worthy man made his addresses to Mrs.
Eggleton. All her friends approved. She found him deserving of her affection,
and agreed to reward his merit. He was to make one voyage to the Indies, on
prospects too great to be neglected, and on his return they were to be married.
His voyage was prosperous to the extent of all his wishes. He landed in his
native country; flew to his beloved mistress. She received his visit with
grateful joy. It was his last visit. He was taken ill of a violent fever; died
in a few days, delirious, but blessing her.

She and I have talked over the subject we are upon a hundred times. In those
days I was young, and had my romantic notions.

Indeed, madam! said Patty Holles; Indeed, madam! said Emily -- Dear, dear
madam, said Kitty Holles, if it be not too bold a request, let us hear what
they were.

The reading in fashion when I was young, was Romances. You, my children, have,
in that respect, fallen into happier days. The present age is greatly obliged
to the authors of the Spectators. But till I became acquainted with my dear
Mrs. Eggleton, which was about my sixteenth year, I was overrun with the
absurdities of that unnatural kind of writing.

And how long, madam, did they hold?

Not till I was quite twenty. That good Lady cured me of so false a taste: But
till she did, I had very high ideas of first impressions; of eternal constancy;
of Love raised to a pitch of idolatry. In these dispositions, not more than
nineteen, was my dear Mr. Shirley proposed to me, as a person whose character
was faultless; his offers advantageous. I had seen him in company two or three
times, and looked upon him merely as a good sort of man; a sensible man -- But
what was a good sort of man to an Oroondates? He had paid no addresses to me:
He applied to my friends on a foot of propriety and prudence. They laid no
constraint upon me. I consulted my own heart -- But, my dear girls, what a
temptation have you thrown in the way of narrative old age!

All of us most eagerly besought her to go on.

The excellent Mrs. Eggleton knew my heart better than I did myself. Even now,
said she, you dislike not this worthy man. You can make no reasonable objection
to his offer. You are one of many Sisters [We were then a numerous family --
Alas! how many dear friends have I out lived!] A match so advantageous for you,
will be of real benefit to your whole family. Esteem, heightened by Gratitude,
and enforced by Duty, continued she, will soon ripen into Love: The only sort
of Love that suits this imperfect state; a tender, a faithful affection. There
is a superior ardor due only to Supreme perfection and only to be exercised by
us mortal creatures in humble devotion. My dear Henrietta, concluded she,
condescend to be happy in such a way as suits this mortal state.

I replied to her, with distress of mind, proceeded Mrs. Shirley, that I could
not depend upon my own sentiments. I had seen little of the world. Suppose,
after I have vowed Love to a man quite indifferent to me, I should meet with
the very one, the kindred soul, who must irresistably claim my whole heart? I
will not suspect myself of any possibility of misconduct, where the duty and
the crime would be so glaring; but must I not, in such a case, be for ever
miserable?

The mild Mrs. Eggleton did not chide: She only argued with me. Often
afterward did I with delight, repeat this conversation to the best of men, my
dear Mr. Shirley, when a length of happy years had verified all she said.

Dear madam, cried Kitty, tell us how she argued, or we shall all remain on
your side of the question.

O my children! said the venerable parent, in what talkativeness do you engage
me!

I fear, Henrietta, said Mrs. Eggleton, that though you are a good christian,
your opinions in this point are a little heathenish. You look upon Love as a
blind irresistible Deity, whose darts fly at random, and admit neither defense
nor cure. Consider the matter, my dear, in a more reasonable light. The
passions are intended for our servants, not our masters, and we have, within
us, a power of controuling them, which it is the duty and the business of our
lives to exert. You will allow this readily in the case of any passion that
poets and romance writers have not set off with their false colorings. To
instance in anger; Will my Henrietta own, that she thinks it probable, anger
should ever transport her beyond the bounds of duty?

I pleaded, that I was not naturally of an angry temper; and was asked with a
smile, whether I meant by that distinction, to own myself of a loving one.

I could not be angry with my good Mrs. Eggleton; yet I remember I was vexed to
the heart.

But why then, rejoined she, should you think yourself more likely to fall in
Love after you are married, than before?

At least, said I, a little peevishly, let me stay till I am in Love, as you
are pleased to call it, before I marry.

I would not by any means, replied she, have you marry a man for whom you have
not a preferable inclination; but why may you not find, on admitting Mr.
Shirley's addresses, young, agreeable, worthy, and every way suitable to you,
as he is, that he is that man whom your inclination can approve?

I never saw him yet, said I, with the least emotion. I have no aversion to
him: I might esteem him: But what is that to the Love one is so solemnly to vow
a husband? And should I, after that vow, behold an object whom I could indeed
have loved? --

A Duke de Nemours! said she, taking up the Princess of Cleves, that unluckily
lay on my table -- Ah, my Henrietta, have I found you out! -- That princess, my
dear, was a silly woman. Her story is written with dangerous elegance; but the
whole foundation of her distresses was an idle one. To fansy herself in Love
with a mere stranger, because he appeared agreeable at a Ball, when she lived
happily with a worthy husband, was mistaking mere Liking for Love, and
combating all her Life after with a chimera of her own creating. I do not tell
you it is impossible for you to meet hereafter with persons in some external
accomplishments superior to the deserving man whose wish is to make you happy:
But will you suffer your eye to lead you into misery then, when an additional
tie of duty forbids its wandering? If so, I must suppose it would equally
mislead you now. Tell me, Henrietta, What think you of those girls, who blast
all the hopes of their fond parents, by eloping with a well-drest captain, a
spruce dancingmaster, or a handsome player?

She struck me dumb with shame.

You see then, my dear, the filial duty, the duty of a reasonable and modest
woman, were she even without parents or friends, forbids fancy to be her guide,
as much as the sacred engagement of marriage forbids it to be her tormenter.

But have there not been instances, said I; do not you and I know one [We did]
in this neighborhood, where a truly good woman was made miserable for years,
by having her heart and hand differently engaged?

Mrs. Eggleton reminded me, that there were, in that case, such extremely
particular circumstances, as made it absurd to form from thence a general
judgment. In almost every thing, said she, we act but upon probabilities; and
one exception out of a thousand ought never to determine us. Even this
exception in the case you hint at, is owing, in some measure, to a pitiable
misguided imagination. Let us take our rules, my dear, from plain common sense,
and not from poetical refinements.

Say, my children, said the condescending parent, did my friend argue well?

I think, madam, answered Kitty, she argued poor Love out of doors. She did not
seem to allow the possibility of any person's being in Love at all.

I told her so, replied my grandmamma.

So far from it, said she, with a sigh, and a look expressive of the softest
tenderness, that my own affections, as you know, were deeply engaged. The
amiable youth, to whom I was to be united by marriage, died. His memory will
ever be dear to my heart. Love authorized by reasonable prospects; Love guided
and heightened by duty, is everything excellent that poets have said of it:
Yet even this Love must submit to the awful dispensations of Providence,
whether of death or other disappointment; and such trials ought to be met with
cheerful resignation, and not to be the means of embittering our lives, or of
rendering them useless: And every thing we ought to do, be assured, my dear, we
shall be enabled to do, if we set about it rightly, and with equal humility and
trust. As for that kind of Love, which in its very beginning is contrary to
Duty, to suppose that unconquerable, is making ourselves wretched indeed: And
for first-sight impressions, and beginning inclinations, though always
dangerous, and often guilty to indulge, they are absolutely trifles to overcome
and suppress, to a person of prudence and virtue.

How we dwelt upon every sweet document that fell from the lips of the dear
Mrs. Shirley!

But now, Harriet, for the appeals. After all, were you, or were you not, a
romantic girl, when you declared, that you never would be the wife of any man
living, if you were not Sir Charles Gaandison's; even at the time when neither
you nor we thought there could be any hopes of such a happy event? --

But had we not, however, better appeal to Lady G. than to you? You were always
so wise! -- Yet you could not be contented with the worthy Orme. You knew,
instinctively, as I may say, that your kindred mind dwelt in St. James's
Square. And Lady G. forty years hence will be looking back, I suppose, with
wonder, on the time when she gave her then fair hand of swan-skin, changed to
buff. [Her own slighty idea!] with reluctance, to her deserving Lord. So,
perhaps, we had best make no appeals at all. If we did, neither you nor she are
at leisure now to answer them. Yet we have one appeal more to make; but it must
be to our Harriet; not to Lady G. -- Was not even our venerable parent a little
too severe upon Old Maids? That wicked Nancy fell a laughing -- Does she know
what may be her own case? Here is a great parcel of girls of us -- Have not I,
her Elder, been crossed in Love already? But if no proper match ever offers,
must we take an improper one, to avoid the ridicule of a mere name? An
unsupported state is better than an oppressed, a miserable one, however: And
how many rashly-chosen husbands, and repentant wives, could I set against
Nancy's Mrs. Arby? -- But the post is just going out; so that, far from
entering on so copious a subject, I have barely time to add, that I am, with
the truest affection, my dearest creature,

Your faithful LUCY.

LETTER XLIII. Lady G. To Lady GRANDISON.
Thursday, April 12.
I AM very well -- What Is the matter with the woman! -- I will write! --
Fifteen days control and candle -- Why surely! --

They are impertinent, my dear; and would take my pen and ink from me! --

YOU do well, Harriet, to throw upon me your self-condemning task.

How conscious you are, when you tell me, before you know my opinion of the
contents of Lucy's Letter, that you will not subscribe implicitly to my
determination! -- But I will not spare you. In my condemnation of them, read
your own. I have written my answer, and shall enclose it: and no more at
present trouble myself about them.

But here, I, Charlotte G. who married with indifference the poor Lord G.; who
made the honest man, whenever I pleased, foam, fume, fret, and execrate the
hour that he first beheld my face, now stand forth, an example of true conjugal
felicity, and an encouragement for girls who venture into the married state,
without that prodigious quantity of violent passion, which some hare-brained
creatures think as essential of Love.

You, my dear, left us tolerably happy. But now we are almost in-tolerably so.
I had begun to recover my spirits, depressed, as they had been, for near a
month before, on finding myself, like any common woman, confined to my chamber,
while every other mouth sang O be joyful; and one was preparing, another was
set out, and half a score more were actually got to dear Grandison-hall. I bit
my lip, and raved at the wretch to whom I attributed my durance: When,
yesterday (after a series indeed of the most obliging and most grateful
behavior, that a man ever expressed for a Present made him, which he holds
invaluable) he entered my chamber; and surprised me, as I did him (for I
intended that he should know nothing of the matter, nor that I would ever be so
condescending); surprised me, as how? Ah, Harriet! In an act that confessed the
mother, the whole mother! -- Little Harriet at my breast; or, at my neck, I
believe I should say -- should I not?

The nurse, the nursery-maids, knowing that I would not for the world have been
so caught by my nimble Lord (for he is in twenty places in a minute) were more
affrighted than Diana's nymphs, when the goddess was surprised by Acteon; and
each, instead of surrounding me in order to hide my blushes, was for running a
different way; not so much as attempting to relieve me from the Brat.

I was ready to let the little Leech drop from my arms -- O wretch! screamed I
-- Begone! -- begone! Whence the boldness of this intrusion?

Never was man in a greater rapture. For Lady Gertrude had taught him to wish
that a mother would be a mother: He threw himself at my feet, clasping me and
the little varlet together in his arms. Brute! said I, will you smother my
Harriet -- I was halfashamed of my tenderness -- Dear-est, dear-est, dear-est
Lady G. -- Shaking his head, between every dear and est, every muscle of his
face working; how you transport me! -- Never, never, never, saw I so delightful
a sight! Let me, let me, let me (every emphatic word repeated three times at
least) behold again the dear sight. Let me see you clasp the precious gift, our
Harriet's Harriet too, to that lovely bosom -- The wretch (trembling however)
pulled aside my handkerchief. I tried to scold; but was forced to press the
little thing to me, to supply the place of the handkerchief -- Do you think, I
could not have killed him? -- To be sure, I was not half angry enough. I knew
not what I did, you may well think -- for I bowed my face on the smiling
infant, who crowed to the pressure of my lips.

Begone, Lord G. said I -- See! see! how shall I hold the little Marmouset, if
you devour first one of my hands, then the other?

He arose, took the little thing from me, kissed its forehead, its cheeks, its
lips, its little pudsey hands, first one, then the other; gave it again to my
arms; took it again; and again resigned it to me.

Take away the pug, said I, to the attendants -- Take it away, while any of it
is left -- They rescued the still smiling babe, and run away with it.

My Lord then again threw himself at my feet -- Pardon, pardon me, dearest
creature, said he, that I took amiss any thing you ever said or did -- You that
could make me such rich amends -- O let not those charming, charming spirits
ever subside, which for a fortnight together, till yesterday, I missed. I loved
you too well, proceeded he, to take any usage that was not quite what I wished
it, lightly. But for some time past I have seen that it was all owing to a
vivacity, that now, in every instants of it, delights my soul. You never,
never, had malice or ill nature in what I called your petulance. You bore with
mine. You smiled at me: Henceforth every thing you say, every thing you do,
will I take for a favor. O my Charlotte! Never, never more shall it be in your
power to make me so far forget myself, as to be angry!

My dear Lord G.! -- I had like to have said -- I believe I did say -- Then
will you ruin, absolutely ruin, me! What shall I do -- for my Roguery? --

Never, never part with what you call so! --

Impossible, my Lord, to retain it, if it lose its wonted power over you. I
shall have a new lesson to learn. O my Lord! why began you not this course
before Harriet and Caroline set out for Grandisonhall? I might by a closer
observation of their behavior, have made myself mistress of lessons that would
have far more delightfully supplied the old ones, than can be done without
their examples. But, my Lord, the time will soon come, when we shall be allowed
to fly to that benefit at Grandison-hall. Our little Harriet shall go with us:
The infant is the cement between us; and we will for the future be every day
more worthy of that, and of each other.

My Lord hurried from me in speechless rapture; His handkerchief at his eye --
Nurse, said I, bring me again our precious charge. I will be all the mother. I
clasped it to my bosom. What shall I do, my little Harriet! Thy father, sweet
one! has run away with my Roguery --

What a scene is here! -- I will not read it over. If it requires a blush, do
you, my dear, blush for me: I am hardened -- And shall not perhaps, were I to
re-peruse it, my maternity so kindly acknowleged, so generously accepted, by my
Lord G. be able to blush for myself.

But, that I may seem only to have changed the object, not wholly to have
parted with my levity, read the enclosed here, in answer to the appeal of the
young people; directed thus:

Lady G. To Miss LUCY SELBY, And the rest of the Girls at Selby-house,
Greeting.
YOU appeal to Harriet, and revoke your appeal: You appeal to me, and withdraw
it in the same Letter -- a parcel of chits! You know not what you would have;
what you would be; and hardly what you are: You can have the sauciness in more
places than one, to reflect upon me your judge. But are you not convinced by
the solid arguments of Mrs. Shirley? and her Mrs. Eggleton? If you are not,
what strange creatures are girls from sixteen to twenty-two! Don't boys read
romances as well as girls? Yet, in these latter days, do the glaring
absurdities influence them so much in Love-matters, or last so long? Foolish
things! would you give a preference against yourselves to the other Sex?

Harriet, I think, was a romantic girl, when she made her declarations of one
man only, or no one, for a husband. I did let her know my mind at the time by
hints: But had my brother actually married Clementina; not only I, but her
grandmother Shirley, and aunt Selby, and uncle too (odd soul as he is in some
things) would have spoken out, in favor of the young Earl of D. And had it not
been with success, after a proper time had passed, I, for my part, would have
set her down as a very silly girl; inferior, in this respect, to you, Lucy, and
to twenty more I could name: For how few of us are there, who have their first
Loves? And indeed how few first Loves are fit to be encouraged? You know my
thoughts, Lucy, of a beginning Love, in a young bosom Vol. VI. p. 162, 163.
-- A very, very silly and childish affair, believe me.

Let me enumerate a few chances that may render a first Love impracticable.

A young woman may fix her affections on a man, who may prove persidious -- On
a man, who may be engaged to another woman; as had like to have been my
brother's case -- On a man who may be superior to her in degree or fortune; or
who may be greatly inferior to her in both. -- If Love be not a voluntary
passion, why not upon an hostler, a groom, a coachman, a footman -- A
grenadier, a trooper, a footsoldier? -- She may be in Mrs. Eggleton's case: Her
Lover may be taken from her by death. In either, or any, of these cases, what
is to be done? Must a woman sit down, cry herself blind, and become useless to
the principal end of her being, as to this life, and to all family connexions,
when, probably, she has not lived one third of her time? -- Silly creatures! --
to maintain these nonsenses at their own expense, in favor of a passion that
is generally confined to the days of girlhood; and which they themselves would
laugh at in a woman after she was arrived at honest thirty, or at years of
discretion -- Thus narrowing their own use and consequence. -- I, for my part,
am, and ever will be, a friend of my Sex.

But hark ye, girls -- Let me ask you -- Do you find many of these constant
nymphs, when they have had their foolish way given them, and they have buried
the honest man of whom they were once so dotingly fond, refuse to marry again?
-- Do they wish, like the wives of some Pagan wretches, to be thrown into the
funeral pile, with the dead bodies of their Lords? -- No! They have had their
whimsey out. Their Fit of constancy is over; and, quiet good souls as they are
by that time become, they go on without Rantipoling, in the ordinary course of
reasonable creatures.

Not but Harriet was in earnest: I am sure she was. She believed, she certainly
believed, HERSELF. And were it given to us women always to be in one mind, she
would have made all her friends, the good Mrs. Shirley at the head of us,
despair of succeeding with her in our endeavors to induce her to change it.
But Harriet, with all her wisdom, could not know what Time would have done for
her. Time is the pacifier of every woe, the qualifier of every disappointment
-- Pity for the man [the Earl of D. suppose -- He would have thought it worth
his while to feign dying for her]; the Entreaty of her friends:-You see what
arguments her excellent grandmamma could have produced -- Pho, pho, never fear
but Harriet would have married before my Brother and Clementina had seen the
face of their second boy -- No girls shall he have, for fear they should be
Romancers.

And, do you think, that Clementina and the Count of Belvedere, a year or two
hence -- I have no fear of the matter; if they do not teaze, torment, oppose
her. If they do -- Why then, I will not be answerable for their success. For,
with excellences that none but she and Harriet among women ever boasted, there
is a glorious perverseness, which they miscall constancy and perseverance, in
the mind of that noble Lady (and indeed in the minds of most of us) that will
probably, as it has already done, carry her through all opposition -- In short,
no more teazing, tormenting from Friends, no more heroics from Girls -- Is not
opposition, is not resistance, the very soul and essence of all sorts of
heroism? -- My life therefore for Clementina's, admirable creature as she
undoubtedly is -- Leave her sea-room, leave her land-room, and let her have
time to consider; and she will be a Bride.

Did I ever mention to you a trick that an honest guardian put upon his ward?
Many a one have you heard of from dishonest ones. This briefly was it.

The girl was of the heroic stamp; as good a girl as an heroic girl could well
be. A match was proposed for her, much more considerable than she could have
expected, as to fortune; and as to the man's person and qualities of mind,
absolutely unexceptionable -- Young, handsome, gallant, and most ardently in
Love with her: But, unpolitic! he had let her know as much, before he had made
himself sure of the shadow of a return, or acceptance. Her guardian, from pure
Love of his ward, and a sense of the advantageousness of the offer, heartily
espoused the interests of the young gentleman. This was another unhappiness to
him. She gave him an absolute denial: Nor vouchsafed she to assign a reason for
it; having, indeed, no other man either in her head or heart.

Her guardian was a man who knew the world, and a little of her Sex: He saw
that Miss was in the very meridian of her heroics; and that the grievance most
probably was, that there was no likelihood of difficulty or opposition. He took
another course. He acquainted the young Lady, that he had altered his mind:
That he had objections to the address of Sir Arthur Poinings (the young
gentleman's name) and declared, that he never would give his consent. He
desired that she would by no means see him, or receive Letters from him; and he
talked of carrying her down to his country-seat in a full town-season; [The
girl had a taste for pleasure -- What girl has not?] not doubting, he said,
that the young Baronet would persecute her with his addresses while she
remained in London. He then actually forbid Sir Arthur his house; and, more
than once, read Miss a Lecture on the Authority of a guardian, and the Duty of
a ward. Words that naturally incite young girls to rebellion.

Sir Arthur sound means to write to the minx, as if unknown to her guardian.
Darts, flames, and distresses, were suggested in his Letter. The girl began to
relent; the guardian to suspect: He renewed his prohibition; cunning creature!
The affair now wore a face of difficulty. She answered the young gentleman's
Letters. It became a regular Loveaffair of the heroic kind. And, at last --
What at last! -- Why, the young Lady, attended only by her faithful DELIA, who
had been assistant to the Lovers in their correspondence, ran away from an
inexorable guardian, to Sir Arthur; married him; and, in a few days, writing an
humble Letter for her clothes, acknowleged rashness, which she laid at the door
of Love, and so-forth. The guardian desired a meeting with the Love-yers; now
no more Love-yers, but man and wife. They met, with trembling on her side, with
pretended apprehension on Sir Arthur's, for having disobliged so good a
guardian. The guardian was in high good humor. He forgave them both, at the
first word, and surrendered up his trust with pleasure. The girl was surprised
at his unexpected goodness; and had she not been actually nailed down by the
Solemnity, would very probably have again resumed her heroics.

Well, but I am charmed with Mrs. Shirley's Eggleton, as well as with her
account of herself in her heroic days. Little did I think that she ever was
girl enough to be infected: But, as she says, romances were the fashionable
reading of her youthful years.


Tell aunt Selby that I am not an enemy to old maids; but only to those ill
qualities which I should equally dislike in old or in young Any-bodies. I love
Lady Gertrude, and even aunt Eleanor, for those qualities that are love-able in
them. But you see that your Nancy, the mild, good-natured Nancy, could not
forbear laughing at the idea of the young-old Penelope Arby: Yet knows she not,
says the malicious Lucy, what may be her own case. But I have appealed for you;
and to whom? To Lady Gertrude. I was writing to her on a particular occasion,
when your packet was brought me; and, in order to enliven my subject,
transcribed three lines of Lucy's query upon defending the single state. She
was but at Enfield, and returned me the following by the same messenger; the
other part of my Letter requiring an immediate answer.

"Your question, my dearest niece, is whimsically asked: You tell me that a
whole room-full of young country ladies wait only the success of an appeal you
have referred to me, to know whether they shall out of hand dispose of
themselves to recruiting officers, mountebanks, and fox-hunters; or venture to
live on with the melancholy title of old maids, in an unsupported, undesended
state.

"One or two queries to be put, proceeds the Sage are, Whether the worthy
matches you have mentioned, or any unsuitable matches whatsoever, would be a
support and defense? Whether the woman who makes a rash and improper choice,
does not throw herself out of that protection and defense which every one may
depend upon in the state of life marked out to them by Providence? And whether
the single state is not thus marked out to the woman who never has it fitly in
her choice to change it?

"I, my dear, who am an old maid, must not write partially on that side of the
question. In general, I will fairly own, that I think a woman is most likely to
find her proper happiness in the married state. May you, my dear niece,
experience it every day more and more! -- But there are surely many exceptions:
Women of large and independent fortunes, who have the hearts and understanding
to use them as they ought, are often more beneficial to the world, than they
would have been had they bestowed them on such men as look for fortune only.
Women who have by their numerous relations many connexions in the world, need
not seek out of their own alliances for protection and defense. Ill health,
peculiarity of temper or sentiments, unhappiness of situation, of person,
afford often such reasons, as make it a virtue to refuse what it would
otherwise be right to accept.

"But why do I write seriously to such a lively creature? Only, my dear" --

But, girls, I will give you no more of Lady Gertrude. I have not done with you
myself yet.

Much to the same purpose, I remember, as Mrs. Shirley's, were the
expostulations of Lady D. in one of her Letters to Harriet; who only answered
her, (I also remember) like a girl. What could she say?

"You, my Harriet," (wrote that Lady,) "are pious, dutiful, benevolent --
Cannot you, if you are unable to entertain, for the man who now with so much
ardour addresses you, were you married to him, the passion called Love, regard
him as Gratitude would oblige you to prefer any other man who is assiduous to
do you service or pleasure? Cannot you show him as much good will, as you could
any other man, whom it was in your power to make happy? Would you esteem him
less than a person absolutely a stranger to you? The exertion of your native
benevolence, of your natural obligingness, of your common gratitude, of your
pity, is all that is asked of you. You have no expectation of the only man, who
is dearer to you than he. This exertion will make my Lord happy; and if you
retain that delight, which you have hitherto taken, in promoting the happiness
of others who are not undeserving, yourself not unhappy.

You have now before you, girls, the opinion of Mrs. Shirley, and the Countess
of D. on the ease you put. They both sit enthroned on the serene hill of
wisdom, which hardly one in fifty of their Sex attains. From thence they look
down with pity, and with beckoning singer, to the crowds below them, who with
aching eyes, and despairing hearts, emulate their starry heights; but in too
faintly attempting to gain the ascent, tumble down, some (shameful!) head over
heels, immersed in the miry puddles of sense; and others taking a supposed more
easy, though visibly run round-about way, are misled by mazy paths into dreary
deserts, till they lose even the distant sight of the sacred hill.

There, chits, I end romantically, figuratively at least, in compliment to your
fanciful tastes. And thus much as to you, girls, young Lady-expectants,
whimsicals, and so forth, from

Your CHARLOTTE G.
Friday, Saturday, April, 13, 14. My women are so impertinent, and my Marmouset
is so voracious, that I have been forced to take two days for what once I could
have performed in little more than two hours.



LETTER XLIV. Lady GRANDISON, To Mrs. SHIRLEY.
Grandison-hall, Monday, April 16.
AND must I, my dear grandmamma, be more particular in relation to ourselves,
our guests, our amusements, diversions, conversations -- Why then does not Lucy
write as usual, every tender, every engaging, every lively occurrence that
happens at Selby-house, and Shirely-manor? Is she so much taken up with her
agreeable Peer, that she must leave the obliging task wholly to Nancy and
Emily? I don't care. They shall be my best girls; and I will put down my Lucy
as a woman of mere quality before she has the title. Yet let me tell her, that
could honest Mr. Fowler have courted for himself, have suffered his heart to
rise to his lips, I should have wished by her means, to have been related to
him and Sir Rowland. But that matter, it seems, is as good as over; and I will
proceed to do my duty, whether she does hers or not.

I have told you, madam, how much our guests are pleased with us and the place.
How much we are charmed with them, I need not tell you. Every praise you have
heard of them, is confirmed and heightened, on a more intimate knowledge of them.

Lord and Lady L. are with us. Lord and Lady G. will come as soon as they can.
Lady L. has her sweet infant with her. And I hope Lady G. will not come without
my god-child.

Sir Edward Beauchamp is at present our guest. The good doctor, you know, is at
home here; and how beloved, how revered, by every one!

Sir Charles! The Soul of us all! -- O madam! never surely, was one spot
blessed with so many persons of one mind, as are now rejoicing together at
Grandison-hall.

And pray, my dear grandmamma, let me ask; Would it not be affectation rather
than modesty, were I to leave myself un-named in this noble circle? I will not.
Every body, for Sir Charles's sake, looks on me, with the kindest partiality,
and my heart tells me that being his as much as my own, it deserves that
partiality.

Except at certain devotional hours of retirement, we know not, but that we are
all of one faith. Nothing of religious subjects is ever mentioned among us, but
in those points in which all good Christians are agreed. You, madam, who have a
true catholic charity for the worthy of all persuasions, would be delighted to
see the affectionate behavior of the two fathers (I will call them) to each
other. When they are not in the general company, they are always together,
walking, riding out; or in the apartment of each other, reading, conversing.
The dear Clementina cannot but see, that charitable and great minds, however
differing in some even essential articles of religion, might mingle hearts and
love each other; and from Sir Charles's catholicism, that she might have been
happy with him, and kept her own faith. -- But no! it would in her notion, now
I recollect, have been a dangerous trial. She could not trust her own heart --
Great and noble Lady! how much is she to be revered!

The gentlemen ride out almost every day. -- Our conversations! It would be
endless to give you an account of the conversations that yet, I flatter myself,
would delight you all. The least interesting ones of those we hold, would have
made a great figure in my former Letters. Such the company, you may suppose we
know not what trifling subjects are.

Every one avoids mentioning the name of the poor Count of Belvedere in the
presence of Lady Clementina; yet we all pity him. We have reason to do so, from
the account Signor Jeronymo receives of his distress of mind, while he
endeavors to overcome his hopeless passion.

Allow me, madam, to conclude this Letter here. We are to have a little concert
this evening, and our company is beginning to assemble in the music-room. -- I
must go and attend the marchioness and Lady Clementina; who herself will be a
performer. She is an admirable one. I can only stay to add, that I am

Your ever-dutiful HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER XLV. Lady GRANDISON, To Mrs. SHIRLEY.
Grandison-hall, Saturday, April 28.
MY dearest grandmamma will not complain that my three last Letters These three
Letters do not appear.
were not filled with particulars of our engagements and Conversations here.
What a scene of happiness! What have I to pray for but the continuance of it?
Except that the admirable Lady Clementina were somehow settled to her own
liking, and that her indulgent relations could be satisfied with it? Something
seems to be wanting for her, and therefore for them. Yet can a lover of her, of
her fame, of her family, say, what that something should be? I, for my part,
ought to be the last who should decide for her; I, who never, I think (say Lady
G. what she pleases of my romancings) could have been happy with any man in the
world but Sir Charles Grandison, after I had known him, and once was led to
hope for so great a blessing and who have not that notion that she has, or
seems to have, of the dreariness, and disadvantages of a single state; on the
contrary, who think the married life attended with so many cares and troubles,
that it is rather (as it is a duty to enter into it, when it can be done with
prudence) a kind of faulty indulgence and selfishness, in order to avoid these
cares and troubles, to live single. But to leave this subject to the decision
of Lady G. and Lady Gertrude, the latter of whom has given some unanswerable
hints on her Side of the Question, I will proceed with my narrative.

And here let me observe, that had not Lady Clementina made her rejection of
the best of men her sole and deliberate Act, it is my humble opinion that her
loss of him would have been insupportable to her. That consideration, and her
noble motive for it, enable her to behave gloriously under the
self-deprivation, as I may call it. Yet, I can see, at times, by her studiously
avoiding his company, and frequently excusing herself from making one in little
parties of Sir Charles's proposing; and by her choosing at all times, my
company, that the noble Lady thinks self-denial necessary to her peace.

She was once for putting Jeronymo on proposing to leave England sooner than
they had intended; and take my promise to follow them. I was present. She had
tears in her eyes when she proposed it. We had been talking of Sir Charles in
raptures, on some of his noble charities which had but lately come to our
knowledge, and it was pretty evident to me, that she, at the time, was of
opinion, that distance from him would be a means to quiet her heart -- The dear
Emily finds it so, thank God!

Lady Clementina has been, however, tolerably cheerful since, amusing herself
with drawing up plans for her future life. Very pretty ones some of them: But a
little too ideal, if I may so express myself; and she changes them too often to
show that steadiness, which I want to see in her mind. Poor Lady! How I pity
her as I contemplate her, in her contrivances and proposals! I am often forced
to turn away my face, that she may not see the starting Tear.

Tuesday, May 1.
THE Count of Belvedere being returned to London from a country excursion, and
not very well, the Marquess was desirous of making a visit to him, and at the
same time to pass a few Days in London to see the Curiosities of the place, and
to be present at some of the public entertainments. The gentlemen at the first
Motion made a party to attend him, and Sir Charles, you may suppose, would not,
in complaisance, be excused. Dr. Bartlett and Father Marescotti, who are
inseparable, had formed a scheme of their own and the Ladies declared, that not
one of them would leave me.

The gentlemen accordingly set out yesterday morning. In the afternoon arrived
here, one of the most obliging of wives, tenderest of mothers, and amiable of
nurses-Who do you think, madam? -- No other than Lady G. and her Lord.
Ungovernable Charlotte! Her month but just up! We have all blamed her. We
blamed her Lord too for suffering her to come. -- But what could I do, said he,
innocently -- But they are both so much improved as husband and Wife! -- Upon
my Word, I am charmed with her in every one of the above characters. My Lord
appears, even in her company, now that his wife has given him his due
consequence, a manly, sensible Man: If he ever had any levities of behavior
they are all vanished and gone. She is all vivacity, as heretofore; but no
flippancy. Her liveliness, in the main, is that of a sensible, not a very saucy
wife, entirely satisfied with herself, her situation and prospects. Upon my
Word, I am brought over to her opinion, that if the second man be worthy, a
woman may be happy, who has not been indulged in her first Fancy: And I am the
rather induced to hope so for my Emily's sake.

Tuesday Evening.
MRS. Beaumont has received a Letter from the Ladies her friends at Florence,
expressing their fear that the love of her Country now she is in it, has taken
place in her heart, and weakened her Affection for them. They beg of her to
convince them of the contrary by hastening to them.

This Letter, it seems, mentions some severe reflections cast upon Lady
Clementina by the unhappy Olivia. Camilla, who is very fond of me, has hinted
this to me, and at the same time acquainted me with her young Lady's
earnestness to see it; Mrs. Beaumont having expressed to her her indignation
against Olivia on the occasion. Unworthy Olivia! What reflections can you cast
on the admirable Clementina! -- Yet I wish Mrs. Beaumont would let me see them.
-- But dear Mrs. Beaumont, impart not to Clementina any thing that may affect
her delicate and too scrupulous mind!

This over-lively Lady G. has been acquainting Lady Clementina with Emily's
story, yet intending to set forth nothing by it, she says, but the fortitude of
so young a creature.

She owns, that Lady Clementina often reddened as she proceeded in it; yet that
she went on -- How could she? -- I chid her for poor Emily's sake, for her own
sake, for Lady Clementina's, for Sir Edward Beauchamp's sake -- How could she
be so indelicate? Is there a necessity, dear Lady G. (thought I, as she
repeated what passed on the occasion) now you are so right in the great
articles of your duty, that you must be wrong in something?

Lady Clementina highly applauded Emily, however. A charming young creature she
called her. Absence, added she, is certainly a right measure. Were the man a
common man, it would not signify: Presence, in that case, might help her, as he
probably would every Day expose his Faults to her observation. But absence from
such a man as Sir Charles Grandison, is certainly right. Lady G. says, it was
easy to see that Lady Clementina made some self-applications upon it.

Wednesday Morning, May 2.
LADY G. has been communicating to me a conference which she says, she could
not but overhear, between Lady Clementina and Mrs. Beaumont, held in the closet
of the latter, which joins to a closet in Lady G's dressing room, separated
only by a thin partition. The rooms were once one -- A little of your usual
curiosity, I doubt, my dear Lady G. thought I. You were not confined to that
closet. You might have retired when their conversation begun. But, no;
Curiosity is a nail, that will fasten to the ground, the foot of an inquisitive
Person, however painful, what she hears may sometimes make her situation.

Mrs. Beamont had acquainted Lady Clementina with the contents of the Letter
she had received from her Friends at Florence. The poor Lady was in tears upon
it. She called Olivia cruel, unjust, wicked. The very surmize, said she, is of
such a nature, that I cannot bear to look either Lady Grandison, or any of her
friends in the face: For Heaven's sake, let it not be hinted to any one in the
family, nor even to my own relations, that Olivia herself could be capable of
making such a reflection upon me.

My dearest Lady Clementina, said Mrs. Beaumont, I wish --

What wishes my dear Mrs. Beaumont --

That you would change your system.

ARTICLES, Mrs. Beaumont! ARTICLES! -- If they are broken with me, I resume my
solicitude to be allowed to take the veil. That allowance, and that only, can
set all right. My heart is distressed by what you have let me see Olivia has
dared to throw out against me.

Allow me one observation only, my dear Clementina. What Olivia has hinted, the
world will hint. It behooves you to consider, that the Husband of Lady Grandison
ought not to be so much the object of any woman's attention, as to be an
obstacle to the address of another man really worthy.

Cruel, cruel Olivia! There is no bearing the thought of her vile suggestion.
None but Olivia -- Say not the world. Olivia only, Mrs. Beaumont, was capable
of such a suggestion --

For my own part, interrupted Mrs. Beaumont, I am confident that it is a base
suggestion; and that if Sir Charles Grandison had not been married, you never
would have been his. You could not have receded from your former objections.
You see what a determined Protestant he is; a Protestant upon principle. You
are equally steady in your Faith: Yet as matters stand; so amiable as he is;
and the more his private Life and manners are seen, the more to be admired;
must not your best friends lay it at the Door of a first Love, that you cannot
give way to the address of a man against whom no one other objection can lie?

ARTICLES, Mrs. Beaumont! ARTICLES! --

One word more only, my dear Lady Clementina, as the subject was begun by
yourself -- May it not be expected, now that no opposition is given you, you
will begin to feel, that your happiness, and peace, and strength of mind will
flow from turning your thoughts on principles of Duty (so the world will call
them) to other objects; and that the dwelling on those it will suppose you to
dwell upon, till your situation is visibly altered, will serve only to disturb
your mind, and fill your friends, on every instance that may affect it, with
apprehensions for you?

You have said a great deal, Mrs. Beaumont. But is not the veil the only
possible expedient to make us all easy?

ARTICLES, ARTICLES! my dear Clementina. I have been drawn in by yourself
insensibly to speak my mind on this subject. But I have no view, no design.
Your Parents, your Brothers, you see, inviolably adhere to the Articles. But,
consider, my dear, were you even allowed to assume the veil, that all such
recollections of your former inclination as would be faulty in a married state,
would have been equally contrary to your religious Vows. Would then the
assuming of the veil make you happy?

Don't you hint, Olivia-like, Mrs. Beaumont, at culpable inclinations? Do you
impute to me culpable inclinations?

I do not, neither do I think you are absolutely as yet an Angel. Would you, my
dear, refuse your vows to the Count of Belvedere, or any other man, for a
certain reason, yet think yourself free enough to give them to your God?

Will this Argument hold, Mrs. Beaumont, in the present case?

You will call upon ARTICLES, my dear, if I proceed. Your silence, however, is
encouraging. What were just now your observations upon the story of Miss Emily
Jervois: Is there not a resemblance between her case and yours?

Surely, madam, I am not such a girl! -- O Mrs. Beaumont, how am I sunk in your
opinion!

You are not, my dear Clementina, you cannot in any-body's. Miss Jervois is
under obligations to her guardian, that you are not.

Is that, Mrs. Beaumont, all the difference? -- That makes none. I am under
greater. What are pecuniary obligations to the preservation of a brother's
life? To a hundred other instances of goodness -- That girl my pattern! Poor,
poor Clementina! How art thou fallen! Let me fly this country. -- Now I see in
the strongest Light, what a rashness I was guilty of, when I fled to it. How
must the Chevalier Grandison himself despise me! -- But I tell you, Mrs.
Beaumont, that I am incapable of a wish, of a thought, contrary to those that
determined me when I declined the hand of the best of men. O that I were in my
own Italy! -- What must young Creatures suffer from the love of an improper
object, in the opinion of their friends, if, after the sacrifices I have made,
I must lie under disgraceful imputations from my gratitude and esteem for the
most worthy of human minds? -- O how I disdain myself!

It is a generous disdain, my dear lady Clementina. I end as I began -- I wish
you would think of changing your system. But I leave the whole upon your own
consideration. Your parents are passive. God direct you. I wish you happy. At
present you will not yourself say you are so. Yet nobody controuls you, nor
wishes to control you. Everybody loves you. Your happiness is the subject of
all our prayers.

Lady G. believes the conversation ended here.

Lady L. in Mrs. Beaumont's presence, has been just making me a compliment on
my generous Love, as she calls it, of Lady Clementina, and my security in Sir
Charles's affection. Dear madam, said I, where is the merit? A man of such
established principles and a woman of such delicate honor! They both of them
move my pity, and engage my love. With regard to Lady Clementina, this is my
consolation, that I stood not in her way: That your Brother never made his
addresses to me, till she, on the noblest motives, left him free to choose the
next eligible, as I have reason to think he allowed me to be. And let me tell
you, my dear Mrs. Beaumont, that in his address to me, he did her justice; and
dealt so nobly with me, that had I not before preferred him to all other men, I
should have done it then.

Thursday, May 3.
I HAVE received a Letter from Sir Charles. Lady Clementina and I were together
when it was brought. She seeing whom it came from, and that I mediated the seal
with Impatience, begged me to read it then, or she would withdraw. I opened it.
There were in it, I told her, the politest remembrances of her, and the other
ladies; and read what he wrote of that nature. She looked with so desiring an
eye at it, that I said, were you to read it, madam, you would find him the
kindest of men. Sir Charles and I have not a secret between us. But there are
in it a passage or two, relating to a certain gentleman, that, were you to read
it, might affect you. [By the way she reads English extremely well.] And is
that, Lady Grandison, your only objection? I should be glad to see, were it not
improper, how the politest of men writes to the best of wives.

I gave her the Letter.

She had greatness of mind to be delighted with his affectionate style --
Tender delicacy! said she, as she read: -- Happy, happy Lady Grandison! Tears
in her eyes, and clasping her arms about me, let me thus congratulate you. I
acted right in declining his address. I must have thought well of the religion
of the man, who could speak, who could write, who could act, who could live, as
he does,

I bowed my face on her Shoulder. To have expressed but half the admiration I
had in my heart of her nobleness of mind, would have been to hint to her the
delicate situation she had been in, and to wonder how she could overcome
herself.

What follows, said she, sitting down, I presume I may read: For my eye has
caught the name of a man my heart can pity.

She read to herself the passage, which is to the following effect: "The person
of the poor Count of Belvedere" (Sir Charles writes, in the Count's words) "is
loitering in town, endeavoring to divert itself there; while his soul is at
Grandison-hall. He cannot think of quitting England, till he has taken leave of
Lady Clementina; yet, dreading the pangs he shall feel on that occasion, he
cannot bring himself to undergo them."

The Marquess, the Bishop, Signor Jeronymo, all joined, Sir Charles writes, to
console him; yet wished him to pursue his better fortune at Madrid; and the
Count thinks of prevailing on himself to accompany them down, in order to take
this dreaded Farewell. Sir Charles expresses his pity for him; but applauds the
whole family for their inviolable adherence to their agreement.

When she read to that place, tears stole down her cheeks -- Agreement, said
she, -- Ah, Lady Grandison! It is true, they speak not: But I can read their
wishes in their eyes.

She read on Sir Charles's praises of the Count for his beneficent spirit. The
Count, said she, is certainly a good man -- But is not his, a strange
perseverance? Then, giving me the Letter, How few of us know, said she, what is
best for ourselves! There is a Lady in Spain of great honor and merit, who
would make him a much happier man, than she can do, on whom he has cast a
partial eye. And besides there is the poor Laurana --

She stopped. I suffered the subject to end there.

Sir Charles supposes it will be the latter end of next week before they
return, if the Marquis holds his purpose of being present at a Ball to which he
is invited by the Venetian ambassador -- Near a fortnight's absence on the
whole! -- O dear! O dear!

The following by Lady G.

And O dear! O dear! say I! This is Saturday, and not a word more written. So
taken up with her walks and walking-mate! -- Selfishs creature both. It was
with difficulty I procured a fight of this Letter. No wonder. You see how
freely she has treated me in it. I told her, it never would be finished, if I
did not finish it for her. Her excuse is, Sir Charles's absence, and that you,
madam, charged her not to write by every post, lest an accidental omission
should make you uneasy. -- Ungrateful for indulgence given! She must therefore
let several posts pass -- But get thee gone, Paper, now. And carry with thee
all manner of compliments from Charlotte G. as well as from [Here sign it, my
sweet Sister.]

HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER XLVI. Lady G. To Miss SELBY.
Grandison-hall, Sat. May 5.
YOUR complaining Letter This Letter does not appear.
reached me here, Lucy, but this day. I arrived here on Monday afternoon.
Ungracious Harriet! She chid me for coming. But I went to Church first. What
would they have?

My Lord and I are one now: If therefore I say, I arrived, it is the same as
saying, he did: My little Harriet with us, you may be sure.

But what does the girl complain for? Maiden creatures should send us married
women two Letters for one. Establish for me this expectation: You will soon
yourself be the better for the doctrine.

You tell me, that hardly any of your girls are satisfied with my imperial
decision on the appeal laid before me, though supported by the opinions of Mrs.
Shirley, Lady D. and every wise woman. I don't care whether you are or not.
Sorry chits! you decide among yourselves, and then ask for the opinions of
others: What for? In hopes they will confirm your own; if not, to be saucy, and
reject them.

You want me to tell you a hundred thousand things, of what is doing, what is
done, what is said, here? Not I. Harriet is writing a long, long Letter to her
grandmamma, she tells me; and journalwise Meaning the preceding Letter.
. -- Let that when you have it, content you. She says I must not see it. But I
will. Something saucy about me in it, I suppose.

My Brother, and his principal Men-guests, are in town. They went on Monday
morning. So I have not seen them. -- Will not come back till Friday next week.
Harriet is impatient for his return. O girls! girls! That a Church ceremony can
so soon make such a difference in the same person! -- But he is so generously
tender of her, that the wonder, in her case, is the less.

Lady Clementina is a noble creature. We are obliged to call both her and
Harriet to order; or they would never be asunder. The garden and park are the
places in which they most delight to walk. Make Harriet give you the
particulars of their conversations. -- Then I shall have them. I have demanded
them; but she only acquaints me in general, that she is delighted with Lady
Clementina's part in them. The other expresses no less admiration of Harriet's.
But, besides that they rob us of their company too often, which is ruder in the
mistress of the house than in the guest; Harriet does not enough consider her
own circumstances. Their walks are too long. She comes in, and throws herself
sometimes into a chair -- so tired! -- Yet, chidden for her long walks, such
engaging conversations! she cries out -- Heroines both, I suppose; and they are
mirrors to each other; each admiring herself in the other. No wonder they are
engaged insensibly by a vanity, which carries with it, to each, so generous an
appearance; for all the while, Harriet thinks she is only admiring Clementina;
Clementina, that she is applauding Harriet.

Well, Lucy -- But I find you will not be Lucy long -- Your day, it seems, will
soon be fixed: The day, happy may it be! which will set a coronet on your head.
A foolish kind of bawble, after all, but it looks not amiss on the outside of
one's coach -- if the inside contain not -- Did I say a monkey, Lucy? But that
will not be your case. My Lord knows your Lord, and esteems him. Lord G's
esteem (china and shells out of the question) is not contemptible, I can tell
you. His Love for his flippant Charlotte made him play monkey-tricks, which
lessened him in my eyes: but now I see he is capable of forgetting his
butterflies, and esteeming me, I remember my promise, and honor him: Obedience
will come -- when it can.

Well, but, Lucy, Dr. Bartlett knew your Lord Reresby abroad, and speaks well
of him. He has wished for this match ever since it was first mentioned; nay
before it was mentioned -- Ever since he was a brideman on my brother's happy
day: and you are a good girl, that you have not paraded, as Harriet did, and
Clementina does.

Have I any more to say? I think not. I will endeavor to get a sight of what
Harriet has written. Let her deny me, if she dare. If that suggests to me a
subject which she has not touched upon, well and good: If not, take it for a
conclusion, chits, that I wish you all well; and to our venerable Mrs. Shirley,
and respectable aunt Selby, and her honest man, health, happiness, and so-forth.

CHAPTER G.

LETTER XLVII. Lady G. To Miss SELBY.
Wednesday, May 9.
I AM afraid your brother James will terrify you all. Surprising; -- I am very
angry with him; for, however slight he might make of what I have to tell you, I
know, that none of you besides will. I therefore dispatch this by a man and
horse, on purpose to set your hearts at ease. -- The wretch left her in a
fainting fit. Had the dear creature ever any of these fits before? But why do I
ask? this is easily accounted for: She was over-satigued with a walk. Against
warning, against threatenings, she and Lady Clementina had taken a longer walk
than ever they did before, quite to the end of the park, to view some
alterations which Sir Charles was making there. They had forgotten that they
had the same length to walk back again. Halfway on their return, tired, and
each accusing herself, and apologizing to the other, they were surprised by a
sudden shower of rain; a violent one; a thunder-shower: No shelter: They were
forced to run for it toward a distant tree; which when they approached, they
found wet through; as they both were. So they made the best of their way to the
house; were seen at a little distance, making the appearance of frighted hares.
The servants ran to them with clokes, which, thrown over their wet clothes,
helped to load them. As Harriet entered the hall-door, which leads into the
garden, she was surprised with the sight of Sir Charles, entering at the other.
She expected him not till Friday or Saturday. Her complexion changed: She
sighed; sobbed: Her cheeks, her lips turned pale: Down she was sinking. My
brother was terrified; but he caught her in his arms, and saved her fall.

Lady L. and I were together, indulging ourselves with our little nurseries,
who were crowing at each other; I singing to both [by the way they are
surprising infants] when word was brought, that my Brother was come, and Lady
Grandison was dying. How were we both terrified! We, in our fright, each popt
her pug into the arms of the other, by way of ridding our hands of our own; and
the women being not at hand, threw the smiling brats into one cradle; and down
hurried we to our Harriet.

In the midst of all this bustle, this wise Brother of yours, Lucy, slipped away
without taking leave of us. What though his hour was fixed, and his post-chaise
waiting, could he not have staid one half-hour? O these inconsiderate,
hare-brain'd -- Don't be angry, Lucy, he has vexed us for you. I should
otherwise have left to herself the account of her indisposition and recovery.
She has got cold: So has her sisterexcellence, as my Brother justly calls her.
Is it to be wondered at? -- She was feverish all day yesterday; but made slight
of it; and would have come down to dinner; but we would not permit her to leave
her chamber.

How was Lady Clementina affected! She laid all at her own door: And last
night, Harriet being still more feverish, *we all talked ourselves into a
thousand panies. Lady Clementina was not to be pacified.

Today, she is, in a manner, quite well; and we are all joy upon it. But she
shall never again do the honors of the Park to Lady Clementina. Trust me for
that, grandmamma Shirley; and expect a Letter from the dear creature herself by
the post. Adieu, adieu, Lucy, every body, in a violent hurry subscribes

Your CHARLOTTE G.
P. S. My hurry is owing only to the demands of my Marmouset upon me. To
nothing else, upon my honor! For we are all safe, serene, and so-forth.



LETTER XLVIII. Lady GRANDISON, To Mrs. SHIRLEY.
Grandison-hall, Friday, May 11.
I AM sorry, my dearest grandmamma, you have all been so much alarmed by an
indisposition which is already gone off. My cousin James, foolish youth! I wish
he had not called upon us on his return from Portsmouth, or that he had staid
at Grandison-hall till now. Lady G. has given you, in her lively way, an
account of the girlish inconsideration, which might have been attended with a
fever, had not Mr. Lowther been at hand; who thought it advisable that I
should lose blood. But it was the joy on seeing Sir Charles after an absence of
eight days, and several days sooner than I had expected that pleasure, which
overcame me.

Never, never, was there so tender, so affectionate, so indulgent a husband! --
Lady G. has told you that I fainted away -- When recovered, I found myself in
his arms; all our friends and guests assembled round me; every one expressing
such a tender concern.

Harriet, be grateful! But can thou be enough so? How art thou beloved of
hearts the most worthy! -- And what new proofs have thou received of that Love
of all other the dearest! Every hour do I experience some new instance of his
tender goodness. He stirred not from my chamber for half an hour together, for
two whole days and nights. All the rest he took was in a chair by my bedside;
and very little was his rest: Yet, blessed be God! his health suffered not.
Every cordial, every medicine, did he administer to me with his own hands. He
regarded not anybody but his Harriet. The world, he told me, was nothing to
him without his Harriet. So amiably has he appeared in this new light, not in
my fond eyes only, but in those of all here; who are continually congratulating
me upon it; and every one telling me little circumstances of his kind
attention, and anxious fondness, as some happened to observe one, some another,
that though I wanted not proofs before of his affection for me, I cannot account
my indisposition an unhappiness; especially as it has gone off without the
consequences, of which you were so very apprehensive. -- "Dear Sir, I obey you:
But indeed, Sir, writing to my grandmamma does me good. But I obey." Only, let
thus far as I have written, be dispatched to my Northamptonshire friends,

From their ever-dutiful HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER XLIX. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Sat. Night.
I HAVE a constant attendant in Lady Clementina. She was not to be consoled
when I was at worst. Wringing her hands, O that she had never come to England!
was her frequent exclamation: And they apprehended, that her mind would be
again disturbed. She has not yet recovered her former sedateness. She gets by
herself, when she is not with me. She is often in tears, and wishes herself in
Italy. Sir Charles is concerned for her. She has something upon her mind, he
says; and asked me, if she had not disclosed it to me? He wondered she had not;
expressing himself with pleasure on the confidence each has in the other.

Sunday, May 13.
SIGNOR Jeronymo has been pitying to me the Count of Belvedere. The poor man
could not prevail upon himself to accompany Sir Charles and his noble guests
down. He owned to Jeronymo, that he had twice set out for Grandison-hall; but
both times, being unable to pursue his intention, turned back.

Jeronymo told me, that the Count had made his will, and left all that he could
leave, and his whole personal estate, to their family, in case he should die
unmarried. He would not leave it to Lady Clementina, left, if his bequests were
to come to her knowledge, she should think he was so mean, as to expect that
favor from his riches, of which he had no hope from her esteem.

The generous Belvedere declares, said Jeronymo, that should her malady be
renewed by means of our interesting ourselves in his favor, he should be the
most miserable of men. My dear Jeronymo, said he, at parting in town, tell that
Angel of a Woman, that I never will solicit her favor, while I shall have
reason to apprehend she has an aversion to me. May Clementina be happy, and
Belvedere must have some consolation from knowing her to be so, however
wretched he may be on the whole. But assure yourself, Jeronymo, that I will
never be the husband of any other woman, while she is unmarried.

I joined with Signor Jeronymo in pitying the Count: Yet, I must own, that my
compassion is still more deeply engaged for Clementina. But I was affected not
a little, however, when Jeronymo read a passage from a Letter of the Count,
which, at my request, he lest with me; and which I English as follows: -- After
his supplicatious put up to Heaven for her happiness, whatever became of him --
"But can she be happy," says he, "in her present situation? may there not be
always a struggle between her exalted notion of duty, and her passion (though the
noblest that ever warmed a human breast) which may renew the disorders of her
mind? -- Were she mine -- (Let me indulge, for one moment, the rapturous
supposition) I could hope to conduct, to guide, to compose, that noble mind. We
would admire, with an equal affection, that best of men, whose goodness is not
more the object of her Love, than of my veneration. Jealous as I am of my
honor, I would satisfy the charmer of my soul, that I approved of her sisterly
Love of a man so excellent. She would not then be left to the silent distress
of her own heart."

What say my Grandmamma, my Aunt, my Lucy? Shall I wish the noble Clementina
may be prevailed upon in favor of this really worthy man? should I, do you
think, be prevailed upon in her situation? -- A better question still -- Ought
I?

Monday, May 14.
MY Cousin James has seen me, and I have chid him too, for having been so hasty
to carry bad news to Northamptonshire, without staying a day or two, when he
might have carried better. It Is true, they will not permit me to quit my
chamber yet: But that is rather for precautionary than necessary reasons; and
they have given over chiding me for writing -- Their indulgence to me of my pen
will convince you, that I am quite well.

Lady Clementina most sincerely rejoices in my recovery. Yet she is every day
more and more thoughtful and solemn. She is grieved, she tells her mother (who
is troubled at her Solemnity) for her brother Jeronymo, who indeed is not well.
Mr. Lowther tells us, that he must not expect to be exampt from temporary pains
and disorder: But I am sure the worthy man would be easier in his own mind,
were his sister to give her hand to the Count of Belvedere.

I talked to Sir Charles on this subject an hour ago. Lady Clementina, my dear
Sir, said I, is not happy. I question whether she ever will, unless she is
allowed her own way, the veil.

And that, returned he, has been so long a familyobjection, that the compliance
with her wishes, would break the heart of her mother, at least; and greatly
afilict all the rest. It must not, for their sakes, be thought of.

What then, Sir, can be done?

We must have patience, my dearest life. Her malady has unsettled her noble
mind. She must try her own schemes; and if she find not happiness in any of
them, she will think of new ones, till at last she fixes. Nor, I hope, is the
time far off.

Do you think so, Sir?

Don't you see, my Love, that the poor Lady is more and more uneasy with
herself? Something is working in her mind. I have desired her mother to leave
that disturbed mind to its own generous workings. Her vehemence, raised by the
opposition she met with, which she considered as a persecution, has for some
time subsided; and she will probably fall upon reflections which she had not
time to attend to before.

Jeronymo thinks, proceeded he, that I might successfully plead in the Count's
favor -- But did I not draw the articles? Did I not propose the terms? Lady
Clementina shall not be prevaricated with. She shuns me of late -- In
apprehension, perhaps, that I will try my influence over her. She never seems
so easy, as when she is with my dearest Love. You must preserve that
consequence with her, which delicate minds will ever be of to one another. Some
little appearances of her malady will perhaps, now-and-then, show themselves,
and unsettle her: But I have no doubt, if it please God to preserve her reason,
that her present uneasinesses will be productive of some great change in her
schemes, which may end in a tranquillity of mind, that will make all us who
love her, happy. Meantime, my dear, let this be our rule, if you please: Let
her lead; let us only follow -- Persuasion against avowed inclination, you and
I, my Harriet, have always condemned as a degree of compulsion. Had the
admirable Lady been entreated to take the noble measure she fell upon, when she
rejected me, however great the motives, she would not have been so happy, as
she was, when she found herself absolute mistress of the question, and could
astonish and surprise us all by her magnanimity.

Who could resist this reasoning? How well does he seem to know this excellent
woman, when he considers her unhappy unfixedness, occasioned by a malady, which
will now-and-then (till she can be settled in some quiet and agreeable way)
show itself in her conduct, when she has any great part before her to act!

Tuesday Afternoon, May 15.
LADY Clementina, soon after dinner, sent up to me her Camilia (for I was not
at table) to desire a quarter of an hour's discourse with me in my chamber. I
gave direction, that nobody should come to me till I rang. She entered; saw me
seated; took her seat by me; and immediately, with a noble frankness in her
manner, thus began:

I could not, my dear Lady Grandison, ask the favor of your ear on the subject
I wanted to open my heart upon to you, till I saw you were perfectly recovered.
God be praised, that you are! What anxieties did your late indisposition give
me! I accused myself as the cause of it. -- I had engaged you, thoughtlesly, in
too long a walk. You know how Lady G. how Lady L. were terrified. I overheard
them once that evening talking over their fears to one another. Lady G. looked
with visible unkindness upon me. My aid ineffectual, my person in the way, I
hurried to my chamber: Good God! said I (every object looking strange about me)
Where am I? What am I? Can I be the same Clementina della Porretta that I was a
few months ago? Can I have brought misery to the family which was my only
resuge? To the man who -- [She paused: Then lifting up her eyes; Blessed
Virgin! said she, And is Clementina in the house of the man whom she has been
known to regard above all men; and whom she still does regard; but not as
Olivia supposes?] And then on my knees I offered up fervent prayers for your
health and happiness; and that it would please God to return me, with
reputation, to my native country. My eyes are now opened to the impropriety I
have been guilty of in taking refuge in England; and in remaining in it, and in
your house, and with a man whom I am known to value. The world had begun to
talk: Cruel Olivia! She will lead and point the talk, as she would have it
believed. I am under obligation to your goodness, and to that of all your
friends, that they and you think kindly of me, situated as I once was. I am
obliged (Mortifying consideration to a spirit like mine!) to Sir Charles
Grandison's generosity and compassion, that he does not despise me. A girl
(forgive me for mentioning it; it is to you only) has been, by my dear Mrs.
Beaumont, proposed, indirectly at least, for a Pattern to me. How am I sunk! My
pride cannot bear it. Had I been allowed to take the veil, all these
improprieties in my conduct had been prevented; all these mortifications would
have been spared the unhappy Clementina -- Tell me, advise me, May I not renew
my entreaties to be allowed to take the veil? Give me, as to your sister (no
sister ever loved her sister better than I love you) your advice: Counsel me
what to do, what course to steer, to recover myself in my own eyes. At present
I hate, I despise, myself.

With how little reason, my dearest sister, my excellent friend! All my family
revere you: Sir Charles, his Sisters, and I, love you: Lady G. particularly
admires you: She could not possibly look unkindly upon you. What has Olivia
dared to report? But did she ever forbear her rash censures? -- What can I
advise you? I see your delicate distress. But suppose you open your mind to the
Marchioness? To Mrs. Beaumont suppose? She is the most prudent of women.

I know their minds already. Their judgments are not with me. Mrs. Beaumont
(indeed without intending it) has terrified me. My mamma thinks herself bound
by the Articles, and will not speak.

Suppose, my dearest Lady, you advise with Sir Charles? You know he is the most
delicate-minded of men.

I shall ever honor him: But your indisposition has made me look upon him with
more reverence than familiarity. I have avoided him. An exquisite pain has
seized my heart, on being brought to meditate the impropriety of my situation:
A pain I cannot describe. Here it used to be (putting her hand to her
forehead); but here now it is (removing it to her heart); and at times I
cannot bear it.

Let me beg of Lady Clementina to lay that noble heart open to Sir Charles. You
know his disinterested affection for you. You know his regard for your glory.
You know that your own mother, your own Mrs. Beaumont, are not more delicate
than he is. You may unbosom yourself to him. But such is his fear of offending
you, that you must begin. A small opening will do. His nice regard for your
honor, for the honor of our sex, will, on a slight encouragement, spare you
all that would be irksome to you. He has no prejudices in favor or disfavour
of any body. He loves, it is true, he reveres your whole family; but you more
than all the rest. Shall I say that he made his court to me in your name, and
by your interest; yet acknowledged himself refused by an Angel?

Excellent man! -- I will consult him, and in your presence.

As to my presence, madam --

It must be so, interrupted she: I shall want your support. Do you be my
advocate with him; and if he will be an advocate for me, I may yet be happy. At
present, I see but one way to extricate myself with honor. I dare not propose
it. He may. The world and Olivia will not let me be, in that world, a single
woman, and happy. -- Why should I not be allowed to quit it by a divine
dedication?

I embraced her; soothed her: But thought of Sir Charles's advice, not to lead,
but follow as she led: Not one word, as I told her, would I say to him of what
had passed between us, that she might have his own unprejudiced advice.

I rang, by her permission. Sally came up. I made my request, by her, to her
master. He found us together. Sir Charles, said I, before he could speak, Lady
Clementina has something on her mind: I have besought her to consult you.

I must consult you both, said she. Tomorrow morning, Sir, as early as will
suit Lady Grandison, we will meet for that purpose.

May the issue of tomorrow's conference be tranquillity of mind to this
excellent Lady!

LETTER L. Lady GRANDISON. In Continuation.
Wednesday, May 16.
THE conference was held in Italian. It was but just turned of seven in the
morning, when we met in my drawing room.

I had told Lady Clementina that she must lead the subject; but Sir Charles,
seeing her in some confusion, relieved her -- You do me, madam, said he, great
honor (and it is worthy of our brotherly and sisterly friendship in proposing
to ask my opinion on any subject in which you are interested. Our dear
Harriet's recovery (God be praised for it!) has left no wish in my heart so
ardent as for your happiness. Permit me to say, my dear Lady Clementina, it is
necessary for that of us both.

Indeed, madam, it is, said I, taking her hand. Tenderness, love, respect, I am
sure, were in my countenance, if it spoke my heart. She condescendingly bowed
upon mine: Tears were in her eyes: You pain me, Chevalier, you pain me, madam,
by your goodness -- How many of my friends have I made unhappy!

For some days past, said Sir Charles, I have observed, that you have seemed
more uneasy than usual. Would to Heaven it were in my power to remove the cause!

Perhaps it may. Ah, Chevalier! I thought when I came into the compromise, that
I might have made myself happier in it, than I now find I can be.

Dear Lady Clementina! said Sir Charles; and stopped.

Be not displeased with me, Chevalier. I must hold myself bound by it, if it be
insisted on. But though my condescending friends urge me not by entreaties, by
persuasions, see you not that their wishing eyes, and sighing hearts, break
every hour the Articles agreed to?

Dear Lady Clementina!

I knew you would be angry with me.

I am not. It would be equally unfriendly and insolent if I were. But, my dear
Clementina, what an affecting picture have you drawn of the resignation of
parents to the will of their child, in an article which their hearts were fixed
upon.

Add not weight, Sir, to my uneasy reflections. I can hardly bear to see in them
the generous suppression of their own wishes.

She then addressed herself to me. -- Bear with me, dear Lady Grandison, if I
cast an eye back to former situations. You know my whole story. -- For a few
moments bear with me. -- I never, God is my witness, envied you. On the
contrary, I rejoiced to find those merits which I had not power to reward, so
amply rewarded by you; and that the Chevalier was so great a gainer by my
declining his vows. -- She stopped.

Proceed, dearest Lady Clementina, said I -- Are we not sisters? And do I not
know, that yours is the noblest of female minds?

I rejoice, Sir, from my heart, that I was enabled to act as I did. --

Again she stopped. Sir Charles bowed in silence.

But still I hoped, that one day my parents would have been overcome in favor
of the divine dedication. That was always my wish, till you, Sir, induced me to
come into a compromise. And then I was resolved to make myself, if possible,
happy, in the single Life allowed me. But what can I do? My former wishes
recur. I cannot help it: And it seems evident to me, that there is but one
measure, and that is the convent, which can make me happy.

Dear Lady Clementino! said Sir Charles, will you be pleased to allow me --

Olivia, Sir, interrupted she (you don't, perhaps, know that) reflects upon me.
It was indeed a rash step which I took, when I fled to England: How has it
countenanced the excursion she made hither? Though, God knows, our motives were
widely different: Hers was to obtain what mine was intended to avoid. But your
sudden indisposition, madam, pointed the sting, and carried it into my heart.
That flashed full upon me, the impropriety of my situation. Can there be, say,
Chevalier, can there be, any expedient which will free me from reflection, from
slander, except that of the veil?

You lead the question, madam, replied Sir Charles: I but follow you. Surely
there can.

You are not angry with me, Chevalier? You do not upbraid me with breach of
Articles?

I do not, madam, while we only reason, not resolve. Assure yourself that your
tranquillity of mind is one of the principal objects of my daily vows. Say,
Lady Clementina, all that is in your heart to say. Your friend, your brother,
hears his sister with all the tenderness of fraternal love.

How soothing! How kind! -- You say there is another expedient. What, excepting
marriage, is it?

Were it that, and that could be an acceptable expedient -- We are only
reasoning, madam; not resolving --

Do you, Chevalier, (with a look of impatience;) propose that to me.

I do not, madam -- I said we were reasoning only* -- But surely you may be
very happy in the single Life. You may have thought of plans, which, on
consideration, may not please you: But it is yet early. Lady Clementina has too
much greatness of mind to permit anything that may be said by malevolent
people to effect her. She knows her heart; and has reason to be satisfied with
it. Were your former wishes to take place, will not ill will and slander follow
you into the most sacred retirements? There are several tender points to be
considered in your past situation. These are considered by your parents. They
have no view but to your happiness. You and they indeed have different notions
of the means. They think marriage with a worthy man of your own faith, would
tend to establish it. You think assuming the veil the only expedient. This
subject has been much canvassed. They are determined not to urge you: Yet their
judgments are not changed. Shall they not be allowed to wish? Especially when
they urge not, speak not, their wishes? Your father was earnest with the count
of Belvedere, in my hearing, when last in town, to give up all expectations
from you. God preserve their lives till they see you happy! You must be
convinced, that they are not so intent upon the means as to obtain the end.

My father, my mother, are all goodness! -- God preserve their precious lives!
-- Tears trickled down her cheeks.

I am sure, my dear Lady Clementina, you cannot be happy in any state of life,
if your choice, pursued, would make your parent; unhappy. -- Could Lady
Clementina, were she even professed, divest herself of all filial, of all
family regards? Would not that very contemplative life, of which she is at
present so fond, make her, when it was too late to retrieve the step (and with
the more regret, perhaps, because it was too late) carry her thoughts, her
affections, with greater force, back to parents, if living, so deservedly dear,
to brothers so disinterestedly kind, to her; and who have all shared so largely
in her distresses?

She sighed. She wept. O Chevalier! was all she said.

You cannot, madam, live only to yourself, for yourself: And you may live to
your God in the world, perhaps, more efficaciously than in the convent, with
regard to your soul's health, as you have such large ability to do good: For,
wants not the world, as I have heretofore pleaded, such an example as you can
give it? -- The heart, madam, not the profession is the truly acceptable. Your
maternal grandfather, though a sound Catholic, would have it, that there were
many sighing hearts in convents; and on this supposition (confirmed to him by a
singular instance which affected him) he inserted in his will the clauses which
he thought would oblige you to marry. Your other grandfather joined in the
enforcement of them.

And what, Sir, was the penalty? Only the forfeiture of an estate, which I wish
not for; which none of us want. We are all rich. It is a purchased, not a
paternal estate.

And purchased with what view, madam? And for whom?

I would have my family superior to such motives.

Must they not, my dear Clementina, be judges for themselves?

I do not believe, proceeded she, that there are many sighing hearts in
convents: But if there were, and my friends would be satisfied (for that, I
own, is an essential point with me) I should not, I am sure, add to the number
of such. As to what you say of the world wanting such an example as I could set
it, I have not vanity enough to be convinced by that argument. Whether my
soul's peace could be best promoted in the world, or in the convent, must be
left to me to judge; who know that in the turmoils and disturbances I have met
with, both of mind and body, the retired, the sequestered life, is most likely
to recompose my shattered spirits.

Those turmoils, those disturbances, madam, thank God! are over.

I pity, I can forgive, I do forgive, the poor Laurana. Ah Sir! you know not,
perhaps, that LOVE, a passion which is often the cause of guilty meanness, as
sometimes indeed of laudable greatness, was the secret cause of Laurana's
cruelty to me. She hated me not, till that passion invaded her bosom. Shall I
remember the evil of her behavior, and not the good?

Admirable Clementina! said Sir Charles: Admirable lady! said his Harriet; both
in a breath.

She was the companion of my childhood, proceeded the exalted Lady. We had our
education together. I was the sufferer; thank God! not the aggressor. She has
made me great, by putting it in my power to forgive her. Let all my revenge be
in her compunction from my forgiveness, and from my wishes to promote her
welfare!

And a revenge indeed would that be, said Sir Charles, were she, who had acted
by an excellent creature, as she has done by you, capable of generous
compunction. But, noblest of women, can it be expected, if you can forgive her,
that your family should join, by giving up their reversionary expectance, to
reward her for her cruelty to their child, who was entrusted to her kindest
care and protection? Can you, madam, treat lightly those instances of your
parents and brother's Love, which have made them resent her barbarity to you?
-- My dear Lady Clementina, you must not aim at being above Nature. Remember
that your grandfather never designed this estate for Laurana. It was only to be
provisionally hers, in order to secure it the more effectually to you; and, on
failure of descendants from you, to your elder brother, who, however, wishes
not for it. His heart is in your marriage. He only wishes, that it may not be
the cruel Laurana's. If you can defeat the design of your grandfathers, with
regard to your own interest, ought you to do injustice to your brother's claim?

O Chevalier!

Ought you think of disposing of your brother's right? Has not he much better
reason to be considered by you for his affection, than Laurana has for her
cruelty? -- Abhorred be that sort of LOVE, my dear Lady Clementina, which is
pleaded in excuse of barbarity, or of any extravagant, undutiful, or unnatural
action!

She sighed. Tears again stole down her cheeks. After a short silence -- O
spare me, Chevalier! -- Despise me not, Lady Grandison! -- My enfeebled reason
may lead me into error; but when I know it is error, I will not continue in it.
I see that, with regard to my brother's interest in this estate, I reasoned
wrong. I was guilty, my dear Lady Grandison, I doubt, in your eye, of a false
piece of heroism. I was for doing less than justice to a brother, that I might
do more than justice to an unnatural relation.

All that Laurana can hope from you, my dear Lady Clementina, said Sir Charles,
is, that you will entitle her to the receipt of the considerable legacy your
grandfather bequeathed to her --

And how is that to be done, interrupted she, but by my marriage? -- Ah,
Chevalier!

Such, indeed, is the state of the case. Such was it designed to be. I, madam,
but state it. I advise nothing.

Still, Sir, the motive which may allowably have weight with my friends, ought
not to have principal weight with me. Consider, Sir: Is it not setting an
earthly estate against my immortal soul?

Far otherwise, madam. Can you so far doubt of the divine grace, can you so
disparage your own virtues, as to suppose they want the security of a convent?
Do justice, my dear Lady Clementina, to yourself. You have virtues which cannot
be exerted in a convent; and you have means to display them for the good of
hundreds. I argue not as a protestant, when I address myself to you. The most
zealous catholic, if unprejudiced, circumstanced as you are, must allow of what
I say.

Ah, Chevalier! how you anticipate me! I was going to charge you with arguing
like a protestant.

Did not your grandfathers, madam, in effect, argue as I argue, when they made
their wills? Did not your father, mother, uncle, brothers, thus argue, when
they wished you to relinquish all thoughts of the veil? And are not the one,
were not the others, all zealous catholics? Does not your brother the bishop,
does not your truly pious confessor, acquiesce in their reasonings, and concur
with (at least not oppose) the family-reasons?

She looked down, sweetly conscious. Sir Charles proceeded.

Has not your mother, madam, who gave you and your three brothers to the world,
a merit both with God and man, one of you dedicated, as he is, to God (you see,
madam, I address myself to you in the catholic style) which the cloistered life
could not have given her? Are not the conjugal and maternal duties (performed
as she has performed them) of higher account, than any of those can be, which
may be exerted in the sequestered life? Clementina would not wish to be a better
woman in the convent, than her mother has always been out of it.

She hesitated, sighed, looked down: At last, What can I say? said she. I have
signed to the waving of my wishes after the veil; and must, I see, abide by my
signing. It is, however, generous in you, Sir, not to plead against me that my
act; and to hear me with patience want to be absolved from it. But I am not
happy -- She stopped; and turned away her face to conceal her emotion.

Sir Charles was affected* as well as I.

She recovered her speech. I am, at times, said she, too sensible of running
into flight and absurdity. My late unhappy malady has weakened my reasoning
powers. You both can, I see you both do, pity me. Let me say, Chevalier, that
when I came into your proposed compromise (which, after so grievous a fault
committed, as the flying from my native country, and indulgent parents, I could
the less refuse) I promised myself happiness in a situation, in which, I now
see, it is not to be found. Your friendship, your united friendship for me,
happy pair! I thought (as I knew I deserved it by my disinterested affection
for you both) would contribute to it; I was therefore desirous to cultivate it.
My wounded reason allowed me not to consider, that there were improprieties in
my scheme, of which the world would judge otherwise, than I did: And when I
heard of vile and undeserved reflections cast upon me; but most when that sudden
indisposition seized you, my dear Lady Grandison, and seemed to my frighted
imagination to threaten a life so precious --

She paused: Then proceeded. -- I have told you, madam, my reflections. --
Before you, Chevalier, I have said enough. -- And now advise me what to do. --
To say truth, I almost as much long to quit England, as I did to fly to it. I
am unhappy. O my fluctuating heart! When, when, shall I be settled?

What, madam, can I say? answered Sir Charles: What can I advise? You say you
are not happy. You think your parents are not so. We all believe you can make
them so. But God forbid it should be to your own unhappiness, who have already
been so great a sufferer, though hardly a greater than every one of your friends
has been from your sufferings. I plead not madam, the cause of any one man. I
have told you, that your father himself advises a certain nobleman to give over
all hopes of you: And that person himself says, that he will endeavor to do
so; first, because he promised you, that he would; and next, because he is now
too well assured, that you have an aversion to him.

An aversion, Chevalier! God forbid that I should have an aversion to any hum n
creature! I thought my behavior to that Gentleman had been such -- She stopped.

It was great; it was worthy of Clementina. But this is his apprehension: And
if it be just, God forbid that Lady Clementina should think of him!

My dear Lady Grandison, do you advise me upon all that has passed in this
conference. You assured me at the beginning of it, that my peace of mind was
necessary to your happiness.

From my affection for you, my dear Lady Clementina, and from my affection
only, it is necessary. You cannot have a distress, which will not, if I know
it, be a distress to me. You know best what you can do. God give you happiness,
and make yours the foundation of that of your indulgent parents! They are of
opinion, that a settled life with some worthy man of your own country and
faith, will greatly contribute to it. Your mamma is firmly of opinion it will:
So is Mrs. Beaumont. You see that you cannot, in justice to your brother, and
to his children yet unborn, as well as in duty to your deceased grandfathers,
assume the veil: You see that the unnatural Laurana, whom you still are so
great as to love, cannot enjoy a considerable legacy bequeathed her, but on
your marriage. -- If you have a dislike to the nobleman who has so large a
share in the affections of all your family, by no means think of him. Rejoice,
madam, in a single life, if you think you can be happy in it, till some man
offer whom you can favor with your esteem. Let me be honored mean time with
the continuance of your Love, as I shall be found to deserve it. We are already
sisters. In presence, we will be one; in absence, we will not be divided; for
we will mingle souls and sentiments on paper. --

I was proceeding; but she wrapped her arms about my neck. She bathed my cheek
with her tears. -- O how generously did she extol me! how delighted, how
affected, was the dearest of men! how delicate was his behavior to both! the
tender friend in her, the beleved wife, were with the nicest propriety,
distinguished by him.

The dear Lady was too much disordered by her own grateful rapture, to recover
a train of reasoning. She told me, however, that she would ponder, weigh,
consider every thing that had passed.

God give her happiness! prays with her whole heart,

Your HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER LI. Lady GRANDISON, To Mrs. SHIRLEY.
Thursday, May 17.
LADY Clementina is thoughtful, solemn, and shuns company. Not one word will
anybody say to her of the Count of Belvedere: But as he is expected here
every-day to take his leave, Sir Charles thinks she ought not to be surprised
by his coming at unawares. She neither dined nor supped in company yesterday;
nor breakfasted with us this morning. She loves, as you have heard, to walk in
the garden. She diverts herself often with feeding the deer, which gather about
her, as soon as she enters the park. Sir Charles just now passed her in the
garden. He asked after her health. -- My mind is not well, Chevalier! -- God
Almighty heal it! said he, taking her hand, and bowing upon it. -- Thank you,
Sir! Continue your prayers for me. That last conversation, Chevalier -- But,
adieu.

She took a path that led to the park. He looked after her She turned once to
see if he did. He bowed, and motioned with his hand as for leave to follow her.
She understood his motion, and by hers forbid him. -- Poor Lady!

Thursday Evening, Six o'clock.
MR. LOWTHER returned from London about an hour ago. He has always been of
opinion with the physicians of Italy, that a disorder of mind not hereditary,
but circumstanced as Lady Clementina's was, will be in no danger of returning,
or of becoming hereditary, unless on some new distress like the former. He
expressed his wonder more than once. at her relations acquiescence with her
plea, as she made that the principal against marriage; though he allowed it to be
a noble and generous one in her. And now, in order to justify his opinion, he
has taken, of his own accord, the opinions of the most noted London physicians:
who entirely agree with him.

Saturday, May 19.
LADY Clementina has been generously lamenting to me the unhappiness of the
cruel Laurana. What I hinted to Sir Charles, said she, of her Love for the
Count of Belvedere, is but too true. I have been urged to have compassion, as
it is called, on him. He should have showed some for her. She was proposed to
him. He rejected the proposal with haughtiness: But, I believe, knew not how
much she loved him. I have faint remembrances of her ravings, as I may call
them, for him, to her mother and woman: Sometimes vowing revenge for slighted
Love -- Poor Laurana was another Olivia in the violence of her passion. In the
few lucid intervals I had when I was under her management. I always expected
that these ravings would end in harder usage of me. Yet even then, when I had
calmness enough to pity myself, I pitied her. O that the Count would make her
happy, and could think himself happy in her! --

She asked me if Sir Charles were not indeed inclined to favor the Count?

He wishes you, madam, to marry, answered I, because he thinks (and physicians
of Italy and England, and Mr. Lowther, concur with your parents wishes) if
there were a man in the world whom you could consent to make happy, the
consequence would not only make your whole family so, but yourself. But the
choice of the man, he thinks, should be entirely left to you: He thinks that
the count, so often refused, ought not to be insisted on; and that time should
be given you.

Let me ask you, Lady Grandison, as one sister to another, Could you, in my
situation, have resolved to give your hand -- She stopped, blushed, looked down.
I snatched her hand, and lifted it to my lips -- Speak your whole Heart, my
Clementina, to your Harriet. -- But yet I will spare you, when I understand
your meaning. Noblest of women, I am not Clementina. I could not, situated as
you once were, all my friends consenting, and the man -- such as you knew him
to be, have refused him my hands as well as heart. But what may not be expected
from a Lady, who, from a regard to her superior duties could make the most
laudable passion of inferior force? -- You have already overcome the greatest
difficulty; and when you can persuade yourself that it is your duty to enter
into new* measures, I am sure, whatever they may be. --

Dear Lady Grandison, say no more -- My duty -- How delicate are your
intimations! -- What a subject have we slid into! -- Believe me, I am incapable
--

Of any thought, of any imagination, interrupted I, that an angel might not
own. It would be an injury to your Harriet's emulative Love of you, were you
but to suppose any assurances of your greatness of mind necessary.

But I am at times pained, generous Lady Grandison, for what your friends may
think, may wish -- O that I were in my own country again!

They wish for nothing but your happiness. Lay down your own Plan, dear Lady:
Chalk out your future steps. Look about you, one, two, three years, in the
single life: Assure your indulgent parents --

Hush, hush, hush, hush, my dear Lady Grandison, gently putting her hand on my
Mouth: I will, I must, leave you! -- O my fluctuating heart! -- But whatever I
shall be enabled to do; whose-soever displeasure I may incur, do you continue
to love me; still call me Sister; and, through you, let me call Sir Charles
Grandison my Brother; and then shall I have a felicity that will counter
balance many infelicities.

She hurried from me, not staying to hear the affectionate assurances of my
admiring Love, that were bursting my lips from a heart fervently desiring to
comply with every wish of hers.

Sunday, May 20.
THE Marquis is slightly indisposed. The Marchioness is not well. Lady
Clementina applying to Mrs. Beaumont for consolation on the occasion, owned,
that were their indispositions to gather strength, she should be too ready for
her peace of mind, to charge them to her own account. Mrs. Beaumont generously
consoled her, without urging one syllable in favor of the man, who has so
large an interest in the hearts of all her family, her own excepted. She
herself mentioned with Approbation to Mrs. Beaumont, some particulars of the
Count's munificence, and greatness of mind, that had come to her knowledge: But
wished he could think of her cousin Laurana. Her Camilla came in. She asked
with anxious duty, after her Mother's health; and withdrew in Tears, to attend
her.

Monday, May 21.
WELL, but now, I Charlotte G. who have taken up Harriet's pen, say, these
tears will soon be dried up. The Marquis and his Lady are both better. The
Count is arrived; Signors Juliano and Sebastiano with him. Did you not see the
Count when he was in town, Lucy? A pretty man, upon my life, were he not quite
so solemn: But that very solemnity will make for him with the fair romancer; Is
he not come, as Lee says, in his Theodosius,

-- "To take eternal leave?
"Not to vouchsafe to see him, would be scorn,
"Which the fair soul of gentle CLEMENTINA
"Could never harbor."
Accordingly, on his arrival, not unsent to, but almost unnexpected, down she
came to tea; and with such a grace! -- Indeed, my dear and venerable Mrs.
Shirley, she will be a good Girl. All will come right. She was a little solemn
indeed in her serenity: But she plainly put herself forward to speak. She
seemed to pity the Count's confusion (who, poor soul! knew not how to speak to
her) and relieved it by enquiring after his health, as he had not been well.
She addressed herself to him once or twice on indifferent subjects; and pleased
everybody by her behavior to him. Nay, they talked together a good while at
the window, he, and she, and Mrs. Beaumont, very freely about England and
Italy, comparing in a few instances, these gardens with those of the Marquis at
Bologna. No very interesting conversation indeed; but the good Count thought
himself in paradise. Yet he fears he shall tomorrow be allowed to take a long,
long leave of her. He goes to France and Italy; not to Spain. I like him for
that, it would only be distressing himself, further, he says, were he to amuse
a worthy family who have invited him thither with a view that can never be
answered, while Clementina remains unmarried.

My brother continues to insist upon it, that not one word shall be said in the
Count's favor Searoom, and Land-room, Mrs. Shirely, as I said once before --
Where did he learn so thoroughly to understand the perverseness of a female
Heart?

By Lady Grandison.] You see, my grandmamma, what Lady G. has written. Her
sweetly playful pen may divert you. Her heart feels not, as mine does, the
perplexities of the de r Clementina: But I yield with grateful pleasure to a
pen so much more lively, than that of

Your HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER LII. Lady G. To Miss SELBY.
Tuesday, May 22.
AND so, Lucy, your day is fixed. May next Thursday be a happy one, and reward
the heroic girl who so nobly conquered a first Love, on the discovered
unworthiness of the man. And you own that your heart is far from being
indifferent to Lord Reresby -- Good girl! -- Confirmation of all my Doctrines.
We women prate and prate of what we can, and what we can-not; what we ought,
and what we ought-not, to do: But none of us stay-till-we-are-asked mortals
know what we shall, or can do, till we are tried by the power of determining
being put into our hands. Was it possible for me to have loved that sorry
wretch Anderson, so well as I really love my honest Lord G? It was not. But
though I name that creature myself, never do you presume to do it. I blush even
to this hour at looking back to certain giddinesses that debased my character
-- But let me quit a subject so disagreeable.

Lady Clementina has had a bad night* it seems -- Came not down to breakfast.
The poor Enamore to was in despair. I tried to hearten him up a little: But my
brother will not let any body flatter him with a hope that too probably may end
in disappointment.

Yonder [I am writing at my window, you must know] is the fair Inflexible
musing in the garden. I have a good mind to call to her; for I see by her
motions and downcast looks, that Resverie is no favorable sign for the Count
-- No need of my calling to her; my Prother has this minute joined her. As soon
as he came in sight, she went to him. -- Now, dear brother, put in a word for
the poor man.

Well, but Lucy, this Lord of yours must come among us. He snall not carry you
to Ireland this year. Let all who would be good husbands and good wives, come
to Grandison-hall, and learn: And, pray, let them come while I am here. Yet I
have something to say against our Harriet too. -- She is so taken up with her
heroic friendship, that Clementina is now almost the only subject of her pen.
What godlike instances of my brother's goodness does she leave untold though she
admires him for them, as much as ever! Every rising, every setting fun, are
witnesses of his divine Philanthropy. I suppose she looks upon his praises now
to be her own. Well she may. Never were hearts so united, so formed for one
another. But Harriet used to praise herself formerly; Did she not, uncle Selby?

Believe me, I will praise my honest man whenever he gives me cause. For
instance; Yesterday, I was well enough pleased with what he said to my brother.
-- You, Sir Charles, ought not to give yourself up to a private life. Your
country has a claim upon such a character as yours.

Without doubt, said I -- Shall we, my-Lord, make my brother an ambassador, or
a justice of peace? Lord G. rubbed his forehead; but seeing me smile, his
countenance brightened up. Don't you know, Charlotte, said my brother, that
nothing but the engagements our noble guests have given me, would have
prevented me from acting in the useful character you have last named?

O that you had, brother! What admirable causes would then have been brought
before US, en dernier ressort! How delightfully would your time have been taken
up with the appeals of scolding wives, forsaken damsels, and witches
presumptive!

L die G. most be herself, whatever be the subject, replied Sir Charles. You and
I love her, my Lord, for her charming vivacity. But think you, my sister, that
a day spent in doing good, be the objects of it ever so low, is not more
pleasing to reflect upon* than a day of the most elegant indulgence? Would
persons of sense and distinction (myself out of the question) more frequently
than they do, undertake the task, it would be lighter to every one, and would
keep the great power vested in this class of magistrates, and which is every
year increasing, out of mean and mercenary hands. And, surely, men of
consideration in the world owe it to their tenants and neighbors, and to those
of their fellow creatures to whose industry they are obliged for their
affluence, to employ in their service, those advantages of rank and education,
which make it perhaps easy for them to clear up and adjust, in half an hour,
matters that would be of endless perplexity and entanglement to the parties
concerned.

Mind this, uncle Selby; for I think you are too fond of your own ways and your
own ho^rs, to do your duty as an active justice, though of the quorum.

But I should have told you, Lucy, how this conversation began. I got the
occasion for it out of Dr. Bartlett af erwards. You must know, that I visit him
now and then as Harriet used to do, to learn some of my brother's good deeds,
that otherwise would not come to our knowledge; by which I understand that
notwithstanding he gives his guests so much of his company, and appears so easy
and free among us, yet, that every beneficent scheme is going on: Not one
improvement stands still: He knows not what it is to be one moment idle.

Dr. Bartlett tells me, that some gentlemen of prime consideration in the
county, have been offering my brother their interest against the next election.
He modestly acknowleged the grateful sense he had of the honor done him; but
declined it for the present, as having been too little a while returned into
his own country, after so long an absence, to be as yet fit for a trust so
important. We young men, said he, are apt to be warm: When we have not studied
a point thoroughly, we act upon hasty conclusions, and sometimes support,
sometimes oppose, on insufficient grounds. I would not be under Engagements to
any party: Neither can I think of contributing to destroy the morals and health
of all the country people round me, to make myself what is called an Interest.
Forgive me, gentlemen: I mean not to slight your favors: But on such an
occasion, I ought to be explicit.

But, after the gentlemen were gone. There is a county, Dr. Bartlett, said he,
of which I should be ambitious to be one of the representatives, had I a
natural interest in it; because of the reverence I bear to the good man, to
whom in that case I should have the honor to call myself a colleague. When I
can think myself more worthy than at present I am, of standing in such a civil
relation to him, I shall consider him, as another Gamaliel, at whose feet (so
long absent as I have been from my native country) I shall be proud to be
initiated into the service of the public.

It is not difficult to guess, who my brother -- But my Marmouset is squalling
for me; and I must fly to silence it.

Now, Lucy, that I have pacified my Brat, do I wish you with me at my window.
My Brother and his Harriet only, at this instant walking almost under it,
engaged in earnest conversation: Seemingly, how pleasing a one! admiration and
tenderness mingled in his looks: In her, while he speaks, the most delighted
attention: When she answers, love, affiance, modest deference, benevolence,
compassion; an expression that no pen can describe -- Knowing them both so
well, and acquainted with their usual behavior to each other, I can make it
all out. She is pleading, I am sure, for Clementina. Charming pleader! -- Yet,
my dear Mrs. Shirley, I fear her reasonings are romantic ones. Our Harriet, you
know, was always a little tinctured with Heroism; and she goes back in her mind
to the time that she thought she could never be the wife of any other man than
my brother (though then hopeless that he could be hers); and supposes Clementina
in the same situation.

When I looked first, I dare say, he was giving her an account of the
conversation that passed an hour ago, between him and Clementina. He had his
arm round her waist, sometimes pressing her to him as they walked; sometimes
standing still; and, on her replies, raising her hand to his lips, with such
tender possion -- But here she comes.

Harriet, if I am a witch, let Lucy know it. Here -- read this last paragraph
-- Have I guessed right at your subject of discourse? -- You will tell me, you
say, in a Letter by itself -- Do so.

LETTER LIII. Lady GRANDISON, To Miss SELBY.
[In Continuation of Lady G's Subject.]

YOU need not be told, my dear Lucy, that our charming Lady G. is mistress of
penetration. Your happy Harriet had been engaged in the most pleasing
conversation. The best of husbands conceals not from her one emotion of his
excellent heart. He is greatly distressed for Clementina. It would be unworthy
of his character, if he were not: Yet he seems to think she may be happy with
the Count of Belvedere: That is the point we have been debating. As Sir Charles
would have been the man of her choice, but for an invincible obstacle, is it
not owing, partly to his delicate modesty, that he thinks she may be so? What
think you, Lucy?

Lady G. says, I make Clementina's case my own. Be it so; because so it ought
to be. Could I have been happy with Lord D? -- Call it romantic, if you please,
Lady G.; I think it impossible that I could, even though I could not form to
myself, that Sir Charles Grandison himself would make the tender, the indulgent
husband he makes to the happiest of women.

Sir Charles gave me the particulars of the conversation that passed between
him and Lady Clementina in the garden. He observed, that she is not a stranger
to the Count's resolution, never to marry while she remains unmarried; and that
it is the intention of that nobleman to return to Italy, and not go to Spain at
all. Perhaps she had her information either from Camilla or Laura; who both
heard him declare as much. If she has condescended to hear them talk on a
subject which every body else has studiously avoided, she may also have heard
from them many other particulars greatly to the Count's honor; for they are
his admirers and well-wishers.

Sir Charles believes she will take a gracious leave of the Count before he
sets out.

The solemn, the parting interview, was to have been in my drawing room this
afternoon: But Lady Clementina has given the Count an unexpected, and joyful
reprieve.

She dined in company. We were all charmed with her free and easy deportment,
as well to the Count, as to everybody else. His was not so easy. He, intending
to bespeak the favor of half an hour's audience of her, in order to take leave
of her, when she arose from table, was in visible agitations. How the poor man
trembled! with what awe, with what reverence, as he sat, did he glance toward
her! How did everybody pity him, and by their eyes beseech her pity for him!
yet, in the same moment, our eyes fell under hers, as she looked upon each
person; we all seeming unwilling to have her think we entreated for him by
them. I thought I read in her lovely countenance more than once, compassion for
him; yet, the breath hard-fetched, as often showed a sigh suppressed, that
indicated, I imagined, a wish (also suppressed) after a life more eligible to
her than the nuptial.

At last, when we women arose from table, he, as a man who must address her in
haste, or be unable at all to do it, slept toward her; retreated, when near
her, as irresolute; and again advancing, profoundly bowing, Madam, madam, said
he, hesitatingly -- putting out his hand, as if he would have taken hers; but
withdrawing it hastily, before he touched it -- I hope -- I beg -- allow me --
I beseech you -- one parting moment.

She pit^ed his confusion: My Lord, said she, We see (...) tomorrow in the
afternoon [Allow me, madam, (...) me -- ]She courtesied to him, and withdrew
with some little precipitation; but with a dignity that never forsakes her.

Every man, it seems, congratulated the Count. Every woman (when withdrawn with
her) Clementina. The Marchioness folded her to her maternal bosom -- My
daughter! My beloved daughter! My Clementina! was all she said, tears trickling
down her cheeks -- O my mamma! kneeling (affected by her mother's tears) -- O
my mamma! -- was all the daughter could say. And rising, took Mrs. Beaumont's
hand, and retired with her to her own apartment.

We see her now in the garden with that excellent woman, arm, in arm, in
earnest talk, as we sit by the window.

Wednesday Night.
And now, my grandmamma, a word or two of dear Northamptonshire.

I have a Letter from Emily. I enclose it, with a copy of my answer. I hope it
is not a breach of confidence to communicate them both to you, and through you,
madam, to my aunt Selby. At present I wish the contents may be a secret to
everybody else.

Don't let Lucy repine at her distant residence, if it must be in Ireland. It
is generally the privilege of husbands to draw their wives after them. Sir
Charles says it is but a trip to that kingdom: And having an estate in it,
which he is intent upon improving, he will be her visitor; and so will his
Harriet, you need not question, if he make her the offer of accompanying him.
To you, my grandmamma, I know every part of the British dominions, where your
friends have a natural call, is Northamptonshire. Lucy's grandmother, however
will miss her: But has not she a Lucy in her Nancy? And has not her grandson
James a chance (if Patty Holles will favor him) to carry to her another
grandaughter? Besides, Lord Reresby, who is so good-natured a man, will not be
in haste to quit the country where he has obtained so rich a prize. Sir Charles
expects them both with him for a month at least, before they leave England.

Happy! happy! as the sixteenth of November to me, may be the twenty-fourth of
May to Lucy, prays,

Her Ever affectionate HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER LIVE. Miss EMILY JERVOIS, To Lady GRANDISON.
Sat. May 19.
I Have something to communicate to you, my dear Lady Grandison, and take your
advice about: yet, so young a creature as I am, I am quite ashamed. But you
must keep my secret from every living soul, and from my guardian too, for the
present, since in writing to you, I think I write to him, as you know all his
heart, and are so prudent a Lady. It is true, I was, (or I might have been, I
should rather say) a forward girl with regard to him: But then my whole heart
was captivated by his perfections, by his greatness of mind; that was all. May
not a creature, though ever so young, admire a good man's goodness? May she not
have a deep sense of gratitude for kindness conferred? That gratitude may
indeed, as she grows up, engage her too deeply; and I found myself in danger;
but made my escape in time. Thank God! -- and thank you, who assisted me! --
what an excellent Lady are you, that one can speak to you of these tender
matters! But you are the Queen of our Sex, and sit inthroned, holding out your
scepter in pity to one poor girl, and raising another, and another; for it is
glory enough for you to call the man yours, for whom so many hearts have sighed
in secret.

But this was always my way -- I never sat myself down to write to my guardian
or to you, but my preambles were longer than my matter -- To the point then --
but be sure keep my secret.

Here everybody is fond of Sir Edward Beauchamp. He is indeed a very agreeable
man. Next to my guardian, I think him the most agreeable of men. He is always
coming down to us. I cannot but see that he is particularly obliging to me. I
really believe, young as I am, he loves me: But every body is so silent about
him: yet they slide away, and leave us together very osten. It looks as if all
favored him; yet would not interfere. He has not made any declaration of love
neither. -- I am so young a creature, you know; and to be sure he is a very
prudent man.

My guardian dearly loves him -- who does not? His address is so gentle: His
words are so soothing: His voice -- To be sure he is a very amiable man! Now
tell me freely -- Do you think my guardian (but pray only sound him -- I am so
young a creature, you know) would be displeased if matters were to come to
something in time? -- Three or four years hence, suppose, if Sir Edward would
think it worth while to stay for so silly a creature? -- I would not think of
sooner. -- If not, I would not allow myself to be so much in his company, you
know.

He has a very good estate; and though he is ten or twelve years older than I;
yet he never will be more than that; since every year that goes over his head,
will go over mine likewise -- So you will be pleased to give me your opinion.

And here all the world is for marrying, I think. Miss Selby is as good as
gone, you know. Her brother courts Miss Patty Holles: Miss Kitty is not without
her humble servant. Nay, Miss Nancy Selby, for that matter -- But let these
intelligences come from themselves.

You, my dear Lady Grandison, have led up this dance -- So happy as you are --
I think it is a right thing for young women to marry when young men are so
desirous to copy Sir Charles Grandison.

Hasten to me your advice, if but in six lines. We expect Sir Edward down next
week. I must like his company, because he is always telling us one charming
thing or other of my guardian; and because he so sincerely rejoices in your
happiness and his.

God continue it to you both. This is our prayer night and morning, for our own
sakes, as well as yours, believe

Your ever-obliged and affectionate EMILY JERVOIS.

LETTER LV. Lady GRANDISON, To Miss JERVOIS.
Tuesday, May 22.
I HAVE a great opinion of your prudence, my Love: And I have as high a one of
Sir Edward Beauchamp's honor and discretion. His fortune, his merit are
unexceptionable. Your guardian loves him. If you could certainly love Sir
Edward above all men, and he you above all women, I am of opinion your guardian
will think no alliance can be happier for both, and for himself too: For you
know, my dear, that your welfare is near his heart. Let me, my sweet Emily,
refer you as to your conduct on this occasion, to my own almost-unerring
counselors, my grandmamma and aunt Selby. Don't be ashamed to open your heart
to them: Are you not under their wings? I will so manage, that they shall lead
the way to your freedom with them. Your difficulties by this means will be
lessened. Sir Charles will pay the greatest attention to their advice. But yet
I must insist, that the reference to them, shall not deprive of my Emily's
confidence,

Her ever-affectionate Sister, and faithful Friend and Servant, HARRIET
GRANDISON.

LETTER LVI. Lady GRANDISON, To Mrs. SHIRLEY.
Thursday, May 24.
I Begin this Letter, as I ended my last to Lucy -- May this day be a happy one
to her, and then it will be so to us all -- My dear aunt Selby will be so good
as to favor me with a line to acquaint me with the actual celebration; that I
may ground upon in my earliest felicitations.

I will proceed with an account of what so much engages the attention of every
one here.

I told you in one of my former, that Lady G. had shown to Mrs. Beaumont Lucy's
account of the conversation held at Shirley-manor, on the subject of a first
Love, with Lady G's sprightly decision upon it, and upon the appeal made to me.
-- I must now tell you, that Mrs. Beaumont prevailed upon Lady Clementina to
desire me to read it to her. She made her request; and I obeyed. Mrs. Beaumont
was present. Not a word by way of application did either she or I suggest, when
I had done reading. Lady Clementina's complexion often changed as I read. She
was not at all diverted with those lively parts of Lady G's decision, that I
ventured to read; though she is an admirer of her sprightly vein. She looked down
most of the time in solemn silence. And at last, when I had ended, she,
sighing, started, as if from a resverie, arose, courtesied, and withdrew; not
having once opened her lips on the subject.

THE Bishop, Signor Jeronymo, and the two young Lords, just now joined to
request Sir Charles to become avowedly an advocate for the Count to Lady
Clementina. They urged, that she was ballancing in his favor; and that Sir
Charles's weight would turn the scale: But Sir Charles not only desired to be
excused, but begged that she might not be solicited by anybody on that subject
-- May she not, asked he, by reasoning with herself, and considering what she
can do, with justice to the Count and herself? Her future peace of mind is
concerned that her determination now, shall be all her own. Leave her no room
for after-regret, for having been persuaded against her mind. If persuasion
only is wanting, will she not wrap herself up in reserve, to keep herself in
countenance for not having been persuaded before?

Pursuant to this advice, the Marchioness in a conversation with her beloved
daughter, that might have led to the subject on which their hearts are fixed,
declined it; saying, Whatever my child shall determine upon, with regard to any
plan for her future life, let her whole heart be in it: her choice shall be
ours.

Thursday Afternoon.
LADY Clementina excused herself from breakfasting with us; but obliged us with
her Company at dinner. At, and after dinner, Sir Charles directed himself to
all the company, in turn, in his usual agreeable manner. How does his benign
countenance always shine when he finds himself surrounded at table by his
friends the larger the circle, the more diffused is his cheerfulness. With what
delight does his Jeronymo meditate his every graceful motion! He dwells upon
what he says, and by his eyes cast with less complaceney on an interrupter,
seems to wish every one silent, when Sir Charles's lips begin to open.

After he had gone round his ample table, saying something obliging to all (in
a manner calling forth every one, to say something in his or her own way) he
addressed himself more particularly to the Count, and led him into subjects
both learned and familiar, in which he knew he could shine; and in which he d
d. It was doubly kind in Sir Charles to do so; for the poor man's reverence for
the mistress of his fate, had taken all courage from his love, and he wanted to
be drawn out. Never can bashful merit appear to so much advantage, as in Sir
Charles's address to it.

How much soul did Lady Clementina show in her eyes! she was very attentive to
every one that spoke. She asked the Count questions more than once on some of
the subjects he was led to talk of. My eyes, as I could feel, glistened when
she did, to see how those of her father and mother rejoiced, as I may say, on
the notice she took of him. Lady Clementina could not but observe how
delightfully her complaisance to the Count was received by all her family -- Is
it possible, thought I, more than once, were I in the situation of this
admirable Lady, to avoid obliging such indulgent parents with the grant of all
their wishes, that depended on myself; having given up voluntarily the man I
preferred to all others?

Signor Sebastiano dropped a hint once, of his own, and the Count's, and Signor
Juliano's intention of setting out; mentioning a care for their baggage, which
by this time, he supposed, had reached Dover: But Clementina turning an
attentive ear to what he said, Sir Charles was afraid she would take this hint
as a design to hasten her resolution; and said, We will not sadden our hearts
with the thoughts of parting with any of our friends.

Thursday Evening, Eight o'Clock.
A LETTER is this moment brought from town by an especial Messenger, to Signor
Jeronymo. The whole family, Lady Clementina excepted, are got together upon the
contents.

Ten o'Clock.
THE Marchioness, just now, taking my hand, tears starting in her eyes, Ah,
madam, said she, the poor wretch Laurana -- Just then the Bishop and Father
Marescotti entering, she put the Letter into my hand. I shall enclose a
translation of it.

To Signor JERONYMO DELLA PORRETTA.
May 6. N. S.
THE dear perverse Clementina may be now indulged, if she has not from
principles of gratitude already yielded to give her hand to our Belvedere. I
hope she has. One of our motives for urging her, is at an end. Laurana is no
more. Her mother kept from her as long as she could, the news of the Count's
accompanying you all to England: But when she was told that he was actually in
that kingdom; and that my sister was heard of; she doubted not but the
consequence would be the defeating of all her hopes with regard to him. A deep
melancholy first seized her; that was succeeded by raving fits; and it is
suspected that the poor creature, eluding the care of her attendants, came to a
miserable end. Lady Sforza is inconsolable. A malignant fever is given out --
so let it pass -- SHE, whom the wretched creature most cruelly used, will shed
a tear for the companion of her childhood: But who else, besides her own
mother, will? -- Yet, if the manner of her quitting life were as shocking as it
is whispered to me it was -- But I will not enquire further about it, for fear
I should be induced to show compassion for a wretch who (...) not any to show
to a near relation, entrusted to her care, and who had a right to her kindest
treatment.

What a glorious creature, as you paint him, as Fame, as father Marescotti, and
you a l report him, is your Grandison! Your Sister-in-law must, I believe, be
complied with. Ever since you all left Italy, she has been earnest to attend
you in England. She even threatens to steal from her husband, if he consent
not, and now Clementina has shown her the way, procure a passage thither, to
try my Love in following her, as that naughty girl has all yours, in a season
-- But what is the inclemency of season, what are winds, mountains, seas, to a
woman who has set her heart on an adventure? This I must allow in her favor,
if she should fly from me, it will be to the father, mother, brothers, from
whom her Sister fled -- Naughty, naughty Clementina! Can I forgive her? Yet if
her parents do, what have I to say?

I do assure you, Jeronymo, that I unfeignedly join with you in your joy, that
so deserving a man is not a loser by a disappointment, that we all know sat
heavily upon him, at the time. I even long to see upon one spot, two women, who
are capable of showing, as they have shown, a magnanimity so very rare in the
Sex: One of whom, let me glory, is my Sister. But Clementina ever was one of
the most generous, however, in some points, unpersuadable, of human creatures.

Let Belvedere know how much I love him. Whatever be his fate with one of the
perversest, yet noblestminded of women, I will ever look upon him as my brother.

Reverence, duty, love, and the sincerest compliments, distribute, as due, my
dear Jeronymo, from

Your GIACOMO.


LETTER LVII. Lady GRANDISON, To Mrs. SHIRLEY.
Friday, May 25.
UNHAPPY Laurana! Sir Charles expressed great concern for the manner of her
death. How can you, brother, said Lady G. (when we three only were together) be
concerned for so execrable a wretch!

Shall a human creature perish, replied he, and its fellow creature not be
moved? Shall an immortal Being fix its eternal state by an act dreadful and
irreversible; by a crime that admits not of repentance; and shall we not be
concerned? this indeed was owing to distraction: But how ill was such a soul as
Laurana's prepared to rush into Eternity? -- Unhappy Laurana!

It is not thought fit, for obvious reasons, to acquaint Clementina with the
contents of the general's Letter.

AT last, my dear grandmamma, the great point seems to be decided. Lady
Clementina had for some time been employing herself in drawing up, in two
opposite columns, the arguments for and against her entering into the
marriage-state. She showed them to me, and afterward to Mrs Beaumont; but
would not allow either of us to take a copy. She has stated them very fairly. I
could not but observe to her on which side the strength lay.

This morning she gave us her company at breakfast-time for a few minutes only.
She was in visible emotions; and seemed desirous of getting the better of them;
but was unable; and therefore retired, She shut herself up, and about noon,
sent, sealed up, a Letter; which I will English as well as I can; thus directed;

To her ever-honoured, ever-indulgent Father and Mother, CLEMENTINA DELLA
PORRETTA.
HOW did my whole Soul aspire after the veil! -- Insuperable obstacles having
arisen against the union of your child with one exalted man, how averse was I
to enter into covenant with any other!

It was your pleasure, my Lord; it was yours, madam; that I should not be
indulged in the aspiration. You had the goodness to oblige me in my averseness.

The Chevalier Grandison has since convinced me* by generous and condescending
reasonings, that I could not, in duty to the will of my two grandfathers, and
in justice to my elder brother and his descendants, renew my wishes after the
cloister. I submit.

But now, what is to be done; what can I do, to make you, my dearest parents,
and my brothers, happy? Olivia triumphs over me. My situation is disagreeable:
I, who ought to be a comfort to my friends, have been, I still am, a trouble to
them all. -- The Chevalier Grandison and his excellent Lady, have signified to
me, more than once, that they expect from me the completion of their earthly
happiness: And what is this life, but a short, a transitory passage to a better?

Have I not declined accepting the vows of the first of men? The only man I
ever saw with a wish to be united to him? Decline them on motives, that all my
friends think do me honor?

Have I ever, dear as the struggle cost me, repented the glorious self denial?
And what precedents of selfdenial (wholly yours by laws divine and human, as I
am) have you, my ever indulgent parents, set me?

Is there a man I would prefer to him whom my friends are solicitous to commend
to my favor?

Cannot I, in performing my duty to my parents, perform all those duties of
life, which performed, may entitle me to a blessed hope?

Shall I contend in and through life, to carry a point, that at the awful close
of it will appear to me, as nothing? --

Let me make a proposal -- On a supposition that you, Sir, that you, Madam
(whose patient goodness to me has been unexampled), and every one of my
friends, favor the Count of Belvedere as much as ever -- I have always
acknowledged his merits --

Permit me a year's consideration from the present time, to examine the state
of my head and heart; and at the end of that year, allow me to determine; and I
will endeavor, my dear parents, to make your wishes, and my duty, honor,
conscience, (divested of caprice, fancy, petulance) my sole guides in the
result, as well as in the discussion. The Chevalier Grandison, his Lady, Father
Marescutti, and Mrs. Beaumont, shall be judges between my relations and me, if
there be occasion.

But, as it would be unreasonable to expect, that the Count of Belvedere should
attend an issue so uncertain; for I would rather die, than give my vows to a
man to whom I could not do justice both with regard to head and heart; so, I
make it my earnest request to him, that he will look upon himself to be
absolutely free to make his own choice, and to pursue his own measures, as
opportunities offer. Rejoiced at my heart should I be, to have reason to
congratulate him on his nuptials with a woman of the soundness of whose mind he
could have no doubt, and whose heart never knew another attachment.

I would humbly propose, as a measure highly expedient, that the ever-obliging
Chevalier Grandison and his truly admirable Lady will permit us, as soon as
possible, to depart from England. [O my friends accuse me not of levity in your
hearts! I obeyed in the rash voyage hither, an Impulse that appeared to me
irresistable] And let us leave it to his never-forfeited honor, to bring over
to us, as soon as can be convenient, his Lady, his Sisters, and their Lords, as
they have made us hope: And that a family friendship may be cultivated among
us, as if a legal relation had taken place.

But allow me to declare, that if my cousin Laurana shall be found to have
entertained the least reason to hope that she might one day be Countess of
Belvedere, that that expectation alone, whatever turn my health may take, shall
be considered as finally determining the Count's expectations on me; for I
never will be looked upon as the rival of my cousin.

And now, blessed Virgin Mother of the God of my hope, do thou enable me to be
an humble instrument of restoring to the hearts of my honored and indulgent
parents, and to those of my affectionate brothers and other friends, the
tranquillity of which I have so unhappily and so long deprived them; prays, and
will every hour pray, my ever honored and ever indulgent Father and Mother,

Friday, May 25. Your dutifully devoted CLEMENTINA.


THE Marquis was alone with his Lady in her dressing room when Camilla carried
them this Letter. They opened it with impatience. They could not contain their
joy when they perused it. They both declared, that it was all that should, all
that ought to be exacted from het. The Bishop, Signor Jeronymo, and her two
cousins, on the contents being communicated to them, were in cestasies of joy.

All that the Count of Belvedere had wished for, was, that Lady Clementina
would give him hope, that if she ever married, he might be the happy man; and
for the sake of this distant hope, he was resolved to forego all other
engagements. Sir Charles was desired to acquaint him with the happy tidings. He
did, with his usual prudence: but his joy is extreme.

The Marquis and Marchioness were impatient to embrace and thank their beloved
Daughter. The moment she saw them she threw herself at their feet, as they sat
together on one settee, and were rising to embrace her -- O my father! O my
mother! Have I not been perverse in your eyes? -- It was not I! -- You can pity
me! -- It was not always in my power to think as I now do. My mind was
disturbed. I sought for tranquillity, and could no where find it. My brother
Guiacomo was too precipitating, yet, in his earnestness to have me marry,
showed his disinterestedness. He gave me not time, as you both, through the
advice of the common friend of us all have done. The nearest evil was the
heaviest to me: I sought to avoid that, and might have fallen into greater. God
reward you, my father, my mother, and all my dear friends, for the indulgence
you have shown me! -- To follow me too into foreign climates, at an
unpropitious season of the year -- And for what? -- Not to chide, not to punish
me; but to restore me to the arms of your parental love! -- And did you not
vouchsafe to enter into conditions with your child! -- How greatly disordered
in my mind must I be, if I ever forget such instances of your graciousness!

The tender parents pressed her to their bosoms. How did her two brothers and
Mrs. Beaumont applaud her! --

O how good, said she, are you all to me! What a malady! A malady of the
darkest hue! was mine, that it could fill me with such apprehensions, as were
able to draw a cloud between your goodness and my gratitude; and make even your
indulgence wear the face of hardship to me.

The Bishop thought it not advisable, that the Count, who hardly knew how to
trust himself with his own joy, should be presently introduced to her. The
rejoicing Lover therefore walked into the garden; giving way to his agreeable
contemplations.

Clementina, her mind filled with self-complacency on the joyful reception her
proposal had met with, went into the garden, intending to take one of her usual
walks, Laura attending her. The Count saw her enter, and fearing to disoblige
her, if he broke in upon her, in her retirements, profoundly bowed, and took a
different path, but she, crossing another alley, was near him before he was
aware. He started; but recovering, threw himself at her feet -- Life of my
hope! Adorable Lady Clementina! said he -- But could not at the moment speak
another word.

She relieved him from his confusion -- Rise, my Lord, said she, I crossed to
meet you, on purpose to exchange a few words with you, as you happened to be in
the garden.

I cannot, connot rise, till, thus prostrate at your feet, I have thanked you,
madam, with my whole soul --

No thanks are due, my Lord, interrupting him. God knows what may happen in the
next twelve months. Rise, my Lord. [He arose.] As a friend of our house, I will
respect you: So I have heretofore told you: But for your own sake, for
honor's, for justice sake, I think it necessary to tell you, you must not make
an absolute dependence on me from what I have written to my Parents, though I
repent not of what I have written.

I will not, madam: For one year, for many years; I will await your pleasure.
If at the end of any limited period, after that you have named, I cannot be so
happy as to engage your favor, I will resign to my destiny -- Only, mean time,
permit me to hope.

I mentioned, my Lord, that it was for your own sake, that I wished you not to
depend upon a contingency. Be you free to pursue your own measures. Who can
say, what one, two, or three years may produce? Maladies that have once seized
the head, generally, as I have heard say, keep their hold, or often returned.
Have I not very lately, been guilty of a great rashness? Believe me, Sir, if at
the end of the allowed year, I shall have reason to suspect myself, I will
suffer by myself. I ever thought you a worthy man: God forbid that I should
make a worthy man unhappy. That would be to double my own misery.

Generous Lady! exalted goodness! -- Permit me, I once more beseech you, but to
hope. I will resign to your pleasure whatever it shall finally be; and bless
you for your determination though it should doom me to despair.

Remember, my Lord, you are warned. You depend upon the regard all our house
have for you. I owe it duty next to implicit, for its unexampled indulgence to
me. Your reliance on its favor is not a w^ak one: But, O Count, remember I
caution you, that your dependence on me, is not a strong me. Be prudent: let me
not be vexed. My heart sickens at the thought of importunity. Opposition has
its root in importunity. If you are as happy as I wish, you will be very happy.
But at present I have no notion, that I can ever contribute to make you so.

He bent one knee, and was going to reply -- Adieu, adieu, said she -- Not
another word, my Lord, if you are wise. Are not events in the hand of
Providence?

She hurried from him. He was motionless for a few moments: His heart, however,
overflowed with hope, love, and reverence.

On his reporting to the Marchioness, Mrs. Beaumont, the two Brothers, and me,
what passed between the noble Lady and him, as above, we all congratulated him.

The warning Lady Clementina has given you my Lord, said Mrs. Beaumont, is of a
piece with her usual greatness of mind, since the event referred to, is not,
cannot be, in her own power.

There is not, said Signor Jeronymo, there can be but one woman greater than my
sister -- It is she, who can adopt as her dearest friend, a young creature of
her own Sex in calamity (circumstances so delicate!) and for her sake,
occasionally forget that she is the wife of the best, and most beloved of men.

Clementina, said the Bishop (the Count being withdrawn) will now complete her
triumph. She has, upon religious motives, refused the man of her inclination;
the man deservedly beloved and admired by all her friends, and by the whole
world: And now will she, from motives, of duty, accept of another worthy man;
and thereby lay her parents themselves, as well as the most disinterested of
brothers, under obligation to her. -- What a pleasure, madam, (to the
Marchioness) will it be to you, to my honored Lord, to my Uncle, and even to
our Giacomo, and still more to his excellent wife, to reflect on the patience
you have had with her, since her last rash step, and the indulgence shown her!
Clementina now will be all our own.

Every one praised Sir Charles, and attributed to him the happy prospects
before them.

LETTER LVIII. Lady GRANDISON, To Mrs. SHIRLEY.
Monday, May 28.
THE Marchioness having been desired to break to Lady Clementina the news of
Laurana's death, as of a favor, she did it with all imaginable tenderness this
morning: But the generous lady was affected with it. -- "O my poor cousin! said
she -- Once she loved me. I ever loved her! -- Had she time given her! -- On
what a sandy foundation do we build our schemes of worldly glory! -- Poor
Laurana! -- God, I hope, has taken her to the arms of his mercy!"

The pious lady and her confessor have shut themselves up in the oratory
appropriated for the devotions of this noble family, to pray, as I presume, for
the soul of Laurana.

Every thing is settled according to a plan laid down by Lady Clementina, at
the request of all her family. The Count and Signor Sebastiano, are to set out
for Dover on Thursday next. In less than a month from their departure, the rest
of our noble guests are to embark for France in their way home -- All but
Jeronymo. Sir Charles has prevailed, that he shall be left behind, to try what
our English baths may contribute to the perfect re-establishment of his health.

This tender point having been referred to his admirable sister, she generously
consented to his stay with us. She has still more generously, because unasked,
released Sir Charles from his promise of attending them back to Italy, in
consideration of his Harriet; since, at this time, he would not know how to
leave her; nor she to spare him. But the next summer, if it be permitted me to
look so forward, or the succeeding autumn to that, we hope to be all happy at
Bologna. Lady L. Lady G. and their Lords, have promised to accompany us: So has
Dr. Bartlett; and we all hope, that Sir Edward Beauchamp will not refuse to
re-visit Italy with his friends.

Friday, June 1.
SIX happy days from the date of the Letter which Lady Clementina wrote to her
father and mother, has the Count passed with us; the happiest he often
declared, of his life; for in every one of them, he was admitted with a freedom
that rejoiced his heart, to converse with the mistress of his destiny. She
called upon him more than once in that space of time, to behave to her, as a
Brother to his Sister; for this, she thinks, the uncertainty of what her
situation may be a twelvemonth hence, requires for both their sakes.

Sweetly composed, sweetly easy, was her whole behavior to him and to
everybody else, during these six days. The sisterly character was well
supported by her to him: But in the Count, the most ardent, the most
respectful, and even venerating Lover took place of the brotherly one. Signor
Jeronymo loves his Sister as he loves himself; but the eyes of the Count
compared with those of Jeronymo, demonstrated, that there are two sorts of
Love; yet both ardent; and Soul in both.

The parting scene between Clementina and the Count, was, on his side, a very
fervent, on hers, a kind, one. On his knees, he pressed with his lips, her not
withdrawn hand. He would have spoken; but only could by his eyes; which run
over -- Be happy, my Lord of Belvedere, said she. You have my wishes for your
health and safety -- Adieu!

She was for retiring: But the Count and Signor Sebastiano (of the latter of
whom she had taken leave just before) following her a few paces, she turned;
and with a noble composure, Adieu, once more, my two friends, said she: Take
care, my Lord, of Signor Sebastiano: Cousin, take care of the Count of
Belvedere; courtesying to both. The Count bowed to the ground, speechless. As
she passed me, Lady Grandison, said she, listing my hand to her lips, Sister of
my heart; the day is fine; shall I, after you have blessed with your good
wishes, our parting friends, invite you into the garden? I took a cordial leave
of the two noble youths, and followed her thither.

We had a sweet conversation there. And it was made still more delightful to us
both, by Sir Charles's joining us, in about half an hour; for the two Lords
would not permit him to attend them one step beyound the court yard; though he
had his horses, in readiness to accompany them some miles on their way.

When we saw Sir Charles enter the garden, we stood still, arm in arm,
expecting and inviting his approach. Sweet sisters! Lovely friends, said he,
when come up to us, taking a hand of each, and joining them, bowing on both;
Let me mark this blessed spot with my eye; looking round him; then on me; -- A
tear on my Harriet's cheek! -- He dried it off with my own handkerchief --
Friendship, dearest creatures, will make at pleasure a safe bridge over the
narrow seas; it will cut an easy passage through rocks and mountains, and make
England and Italy one country. Kindred souls are always near.

In that hope, my good Chevalier; in that hope, my dear Lady Grandison; will
Clementina be happy, though the day of separation must not be far distant. And
will you here, renew your promise, that when it shall be convenient to you, my
dear Lady Grandison, you will not fail to grace our Italy with your presence?

We do! -- We do! --

Promise me again, said the noble Lady. I, too, have marked the spot with my
eye (standing still, and, as Sir Charles had done, looking round her) The
Orangery on the right hand; that distant clump of Oaklings on the left; the
Villa, the Rivulet, before us; the Cascade in view; that Obelisk behind us --
Be This the spot to be recollected as witness to the promise, when we are far,
far distant from each other.

We both repeatexd the promise; and Sir Charles said (and he is drawing a plan
accordingly) that a little temple should be erected on that very spot, to be
consecrated to our triple friendship; and, since she had so happily marked it,
to be called after her name.

On Monday next, we are to set out for London. One fortnight passed we shall
accompany our noble friends to Dover -- And there -- O my grandmamma, how shall
we do to part!

It is agreed, that Mr. Lowther and Mr. Deane, though the latter, I bless God, is
in good health; will next season accompany Signor Jeronymo to Bath. Sir Charles
proposes to be his visitor there: And when I will give permission, is the
compliment made me. Sir Charles proposes, to show him Ireland, and his
improvements on his estate in that kingdom. Will not Lucy be rejoiced at that?
-- I am happy, that her Lord and she, take so kindly, the felicitations I made
them both. They are always, my dear grandmamma, my uncle and aunt, and all my
friends in Northamptonshire, sure of the heart of

Their and Your HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER LIX. Lady GRANDISON, To Mrs. SHIRLEY.
Sat. June 16.
I GAVE you, my dear grandmamma, in my two last Letters These do not appear.
, an account of our delightful engagements, among ourselves principally, and
now-and-then at public places. What a rich portion of time has passed: And we
have still the promise of a week to come. And how let me take a survey of our
present happy situation.

Every thing that can be adjusted, is. The Count of Belvedere, as by Letters to
Signor Jeronymo, is on his way to Italy, and not unhappy: Lady Clementina is
mistress of every question, and the more studious, for that reason, of obliging
all her friends. How joyfully do we all, in prospect, see a durable
tranquillity taking possession of her noble heart! The Marquis and Marchioness
have not one care written on their heretofore visibly anxious brows. Clementina
sees, as every one does, their amended health in their fine countenances;
wonders at the power she had over them, and regrets that she made not, what she
calls, a more grateful and dutiful use of it.

Father Marescotti, the Bishop, Signor Juliano, compliment the English air, as
if that had contributed to the alteration; and promise wonders from that and
its salubrious baths for Jeronymo.

The highest merit is given to the conduct of Sir Charles, and to the advice he
gave not to precipitate the noble Clementina.

Lord and Lady L. Lord and Lady G. when we are by ourselves, felicitate me more
than any body else on these joyful changes; for they rightly say, that I could
not but look upon the happiness of Lady Clementina, as essential to my own.

But your congratulations, my dearest grandmamma, I most particularly expect,
that in this whole critical event, which brought to England a Lady so deserving
of every one's Love, not one shadow of doubt has arisen of the tender,
inviolable affection of the best of men to his grateful Harriet.

So peculiarly circumstanced as he was, how unaffectedly noble has been his
behavior to his WIFE, and to his FRIEND, in the presence of both! How often,
though causelessly (because of the nobleness of the Lady's heart) have I silently
wished him to abate of his outward tenderness to me, before her, though such as
became the purest mind. -- Nothing but the conscious integrity of his own
heart, above disguises or concealments, as his ever was, could thus gloriously
have carried him through situations so delicate.

He had, from the first, avowed his friendly, his compassionating Love, as well
as Admiration, of this noble Lady: That generous avowal prepared his Harriet to
expect, that he should behave with tenderness to her, even had not her
transcendent worthiness done honor to every one who paid her honor. To her he
applauded, he exalted his Harriet: She was prepared to expect that he would
recognize, in the face of the sun, obligations that he had entered into at the
altar: And both knew, that he was a good man; and that a good man cannot allow
himself either to palliate or temporize with a duty, whether it regarded
friendship, or a still closer and more sacred union. How many difficulties will
the character and intervention of a man of undoubted virtue obviate! What
cannot he effect? What force has his example! Sir Charles Grandison's Love is a
Love to be gloried in. Magnanimity and tenderness are united in his noble
heart. Littleness of any kind has no place in it: All that know him are
studious to commend themselves to his favorable opinion; solicitous about what
he will think of them; and, suppressing common foibles before him, find their
hearts expand, nor know how to be mean.

O my God! do thou make me thankful for such a Friend, Protector, Director,
Husband! Increase, with my gratitude to THEE, my merits to him, and my power of
obliging him. For HIS SAKE, spare to him [ This, my grandmamma, he bids be my
prayer -- I know it is yours] in the awful hour approaching, his Harriet; whose
life and welfare, he assures her, are the dearest part of his own.

LETTER. LX. Lady GRANDISON, To Mrs. SHIRLEY.
St. James's-Square, Monday, June 18.
NOW, at last, my dearest grandmamma, is the day arrived, that we are setting
out for Dover. We shall lodge at Canterbury this night, and reach Dover
tomorrow. How sad our hearts!

Canterbury, Monday Night.
HERE we are! How we look upon one another! The parting of dear friends, how
grievous! -- How does Sir Charles endeavor -- But Lady Clementina is, to
outward appearance, an Heroine. What a grandeur of soul! She would not be
thought to be concerned at leaving Sir Charles Grandison: But I see she is
inwardly a sufferer. Jeronymo is silent. I hope he repents not his stay to
oblige his dear friend, and us all. The Marquis and Marchioness are continually
comforting themselves (and declare it to be needful) with the hope of seeing us
in a few months. Thank God* they have a finer season to go back, than they had
to come hither: And they have found the jewel they had lost.

I should have told you, that Lord and Lady L. and Lord and Lady G. took leave
of us at Rochester; thinking so large a train would be inconvenient to those to
whom they wished to do honor. How tender was the parting; particularly between
Lady Clementina and Lady L.!

Ten o'Clock Monday Night.
I AM in my chamber here. Know not what to do with myself. -- Yet, cannot
write. Must again join company -- Is not my Sir Charles in company?

Dover, Tuesday Night.
HERE, here, we are! How foolish to attempt the pen! I know not what to do with
myself. The vessel is ready; every one is ready. Tomorrow morning by
daylight, if the wind -- O what company to one another! How does the dear
Clementina now melt into tears and tenderness! -- Dear Lady! What prayers has
she put up for me! What tender blessings has she poured out upon me! How have
we blessed, soothed, and endeavored to console each other! What vows of more
than sisterly affection! -- Mrs. Beaumont! The excellent Mrs. Beaumont, She now
is also affected -- She never loved, at so short an acquaintance, she says, any
mortal as she loves me. She blesses my dear Sir Charles for his tender, yet
manly Love to me! -- We have engaged to correspond with each other, and in
Italian chiefly, as with Lady Clementina, in order to perfect myself in that
language, and to make myself, as the Marchioness fondly says, an Italian woman,
and her other Daughter.

Dover, Wednesday Morning.
CRUEL tenderness! They would not let me see them embark. Sir Charles laid his
commands upon me (I will call them so because I obeyed reluctantly) not to quit
my chamber. Overnight, we parted! What a solemn parting! Sir Charles and Mrs.
Beaumont only -- But are they gone? They are! Indeed they are -- Sir Charles,
to whom seas and mountains are nothing, when either the service or pleasure of
his friends call upon him, is embarked with them. He will see them landed, and
accommodated at Calais, and then will return to Dover, to his expecting
Harriet. His Jeronymo, his Beauchamp, and good Dr. Bartlett, are left to
protect and comfort her. What a tender farewell between the Doctor and Father
Marescotti last night: They, also, are to be constant correspondents: The
welfare of each family is to be one of their subjects.

Lady Clementina was not afraid of passing a boistrous Sea, and the Bay of
Biscay, in a wintry season, when she pursued the flight that then was first in
her view. Her noble Mother, while she was in search of her daughter, had no
fears: But now, the pangs of uncertainty and ardor of impatience being over,
they both very thankfully embraced Sir Charles's offer (his resolution, I
should say; for he would not have been refused) to accompany them over. The
Marquis complimented him, that every one would think themselves safe in the
company of so good a man! -- How will they be able to part with him! He with
them! -- But in a twelvemonth we shall all, God willing, meet again; and, if
the Almighty hear our prayers, have cause to rejoice in Lady Clementina's
confirmed state of mind.

Friday Morning.
THE best of Men, of Friends, of Husbands, is returned from Calais, cheerful,
gay, lively, lovely, fraught with a thousand blessings for his Harriet. We
shall set out, and hope to reach Canterbury this night on our return to town.

Sir Charles assures me, that he left the dear Sister of my heart not unhappy.
She was all herself at parting [His own words]; magnanimous, yet
condescendingly affectionate [His words also]; as one, who was not afraid or
ashamed of her Sisterly Love for him. He took leave of her with a tenderness
worthy of his friendship for her; a tenderness that the Brave and the Good ever
show to those who are deserving of their Love.

He particularly recommended it to her Father, Mother, the Bishop, and Father
Marescotti (the two latter to enforce it upon the General) that they would not
urge the noble Lady, not even upon the expectation she had given them; but
leave her wholly to her own will, and her own way. They all promised they
would; and, the poor Laurana being now no more, undertook for the General.

He tells me, that he had engaged the Court of Belvedere, on his departure from
England, to promise, to make his court to her only by silent assiduities, and
by those actions of beneficence and generosity which were so natural to him,
and so worthy of his splendid fortune.

St. James's-square, Sunday Morning.
LAST night, blessed be God, we came hither in health and spirits. We are
preparing for church. There shall we pray for the travelers, and be thankful
for ourselves.

I expect Lord and Lady L. Lord and Lady G. and my cousin Reeves's, according
to the following billet from the ever-lively Lady G.

"My Harriet, thank God, is arrived, and in health and spirits. Caroline and
Mrs. Reeves, I know, will long to congratulate you. I have therefore sent to
invite them to dinner with you. Their good men, and mine of course, must be
admitted. I know my Brother will not be displeased. He is indulgent to all the
whimsies of his Charlotte that carry in the face of them, as this does,
affectionate freedom. Besides, it is stealing time for him: I know he will not
long be in town, and must see us all before he leaves it. He will hasten to the
Hall, in order to pursue the glorious schemes of benevolence which he has
formed, and in which hundreds will find their account.

"But let the green damask bedchamber be got in a little sort of order, for a
kind of nursery: Where we dine, we sup. My marmouset must be with me, you know.
I have bespoke Lady L's -- Mrs. Reeves is to bring hers. They are to crow at
one another; and we are to have a squalling concern. As it is Sunday, I will
sing an anthem to them. My pug will not crow, if I don't sing. Yet I am afraid,
the little pagans will be less alive to a Christian hymn, than to the
sprightlier Phillida, Phillida, of Tom. Durfey. I long to see how my agreeable
Italian, poor thing! bears the absence of his father and mother. Bid him rub
himself up, and look cheerful, or I shall take him into our Nursery, to
complete the chorus, when our brats are in a squalling fit. Adieu till
tomorrow, my dear, and ever-dear, Harriet! -- "

Lady G. is a charming nurse. She must be extraordinary in whatever she does.
Signor Jeronymo admires her of all women. But she sometimes makes him look
about him. He rejoices that he is with us; and is in charming spirits. He is
extremely fond of children; particulary so of Lady G's -- It is indeed one of
the finest infants I ever saw: And he calls it, after her, His Marmouset,
hugging it twenty times a day to his good-natured bosom. It would delight you
to hear her sing to it, and to see her toss it about. Such a Setting-out in
matrimony; who would have expected Charlotte to make such a wife, mother,
nurse! -- Her brother is charmed with her. He draws her into the pleasantry
that she loves; lays himself open to it; and Lord G. fares the better for their
vivacity. Sir Charles generally contrives to do him honor, by appealing to
him, when Charlotte is, as he complains, over-lively with himself: But that is,
in truth, when he himself takes her down, and compliments her as if she were an
overmatch for him. She often, at these times, shakes her head at me, as if she
were sensible of his superiority in her own way.

But how I trifle! -- I am ready, quite ready, my dear Sir Charles. Lead your
ever-grateful Harriet to the house of the All-good, All-merciful, All-mighty.
There shall I, as I always do, edify by your cheerful piety!

Sunday Afternoon.
A NEW engagement, and of a melancholy kind calls Sir Charles away from me
again. In how many ways may a good man be serviceable to his fellow creatures!

About two hours ago, a near relation of Sir Hargrave Pollexfel came hither in
Sir Hargrave's chariat-and-six (the horses smoking) to beg he would set out
with him, if possible, to the unhappy man's house on the forest; where he has
been, for a fortnight past, resigned to his last hope (and usually the
physician's last prescription) The Air. The gentleman's name is Pollexfen. He
will, if the poor man die childless, enjoy the greatest part of his large
estate. Mr. Pollexfen is a worthy man, I belive, notwithstanding Sir Hargrave's
former disregard to him, and jealousies See Sir Hargrave's Letter to Dr.
Bartlett, Vol. VI. P. 210.
; for, after he had delivered his message from his cousin, which was to beseech
the comfott of Sir Charlee's presence, and to declare that he could not die in
peace, unless he saw him; he seconded Sir Hargrave's request, with tears in his
eyes, and an earnestness that had both honesty and compassion in it. Sir
Charles wanted not this to induce him to go; for he looks upon visiting the
Sick, in such urgent cases, as an indispensable duty: And waiting but till
horses had baited, he set out with Mr. Pollexfen with the utmost cheerfulness;
only saying to me -- It is a wonder, if the poor man be sensible, that he
thought not of Dr. Bartlett rather than of me,

Mr. Merceda, Mr. Bagenhall, and now Sir Hargrave Pollexfen, in the prime of
their Youth! -- So lately revelling in full health, even to wantonness! --
Companions in iniquity! -- In so few months! -- Thou, Almighty! comfort the
poor man in his last agonies! and receive him! From my very soul I forgive him
those injuries which I -- But well I may -- Since, great as they were, they
ptoved the means of my being brought acquainted with the Lord of my wishes; the
best of men.

Having filled my paper with the journal of near a week, I will conclude here,
my dear grandmamma, with every tender wish and servent prayer for the health
and happiness of all my dear friends in North-amptonshire, who so kindly
partake in that of

Their and Your HARRIET GRANDISON.

LETTER LXI. Lady GRANDISON, To Mrs. SHIRLEY.
Wednesday, July 4.
AH, my grandmamma! -- The poor Sir Hargrave! --

Sir Charles returned but this morning. He found him sensible. He rejoiced to
see him. He instantly begged his prayers. He wrung his hands; wept; lamented
his past free life. Fain, said he, would I have been trusted with a few years
trial of my penitence. I have wearied heaven with my prayers to this purpose. I
deserved not perhaps that they should be heard. My conscience cruelly told me,
that I had neglected a multitude of opportunities! slighted a multitude of
warnings! -- O Sir Charles Grandison! It is a hard, hard thing to die! In the
prime of youth too! -- Such noble possessions! --

And then he warned his surrounding friends, and made comparisons between Sir
Charles's happiness, and his own misery. Sir Charles, at his request, sat up
with him all night: He endeavored to administer comfort to him; and called out
for mercy for him, when the poor man could only, by expressive looks, join in
the solemn invocation. Sir Hargrave had begged he would close his eyes. He did.
He staid to the last painful moment. Judge what such a heart as Sir Charles's
must have felt on the awful occasion!

Poor Sir Hargrave Pollexfen! May he have met with mercy from the All-merciful!

He gave his will into Sir Charles's hands, soon after he came down. He has
made him his sole executor. Have you not been told, that Sir Charles had
heretofore reconciled him to his relations and heirs at Law? He had the
pleasure of finding the reconciliation sincere. The poor man spoke kindly to
them all. They were tenderly careful of him. He acknowleged their care.

I cannot write for tears. -- The poor man, in the last solemn act of his life,
has been intendedly kind, but really cruel, to me. -- I should have been a
sincere mourner for him (A life so misspent!) without this act of regard for me
-- He has left me, as a small atonement, he calls it, for the terrors he once
gave me, a very large Legacy in money (Sir Charles has not yet told me what)
and his jewels and plate -- And he has left Sir Charles a noble one besides. He
died immensely rich. Sir Charles is grieved at both Legacies: And the more, as
he cannot give them back to the heirs; for they declare, that he bound them
under a solemn oath (and by a curse, if they broke it) not to except back
either from Sir Charles, or me, the large bequests he told them he had made us:
And they assured Sir Charles, that they would be religiously bound by it.

Many unhappy objects will be the better for these bequests. Sir Charles tells
me, that he will not interfere, no, not so much as by his advice, in the
disposal of mine. You, madam, and my aunt Selby, must direct me, when it comes
into my hands. Sir Charles intends, that the poor man's memory shall receive
true honor from the disposition of his Legacy to him. He is pleased with his
Harriet, for the concern she expressed for this unhappy man. The most indulgent
of husbands finds out some reason to praise her for every thing she says and
does. But could HE be otherwise than the best of HUSBANDS, who was the most
dutiful of SONS; who is the most affectionate of BROTHERS; the most faithful of
FRIENDS: Who is good upon principle, in every relation of life?

What, my dear grandmamma, is the boasted character of most of those who are
called HEROES, to the un-ostentatious merit of a TRULY GOOD MAN? In what a
variety of amiable lights does such a one appear? In how many ways is he a
blessing and a joy to his fellow creatures?

And this blessing, this joy, your Harriet can call more peculiarly her own!

My single heart, methinks, is not big enough to contain the gratitude which
such a Lot demands. Let the overflowings of your pious joy, my dearest
grandmamma, join with my thankfulness in paying part of the immense debt for

Your undeservedly Happy HARRIET GRANDISON.

ERRATA.
Vol. II. p. 200. l. 7. after Calais, insert embarked. Vol. III. p. 204. l. 13.
for himself, read yourself. Vol. IV. p. 100. l. 7. from the bottom, dele the
passage between the Hooks []. Vol. IV. p. 217. l. 2, 3. for Allestree, read
Barnet. Vol. IV. p. 187. l. 7. from the bottom, for afternoon. read evening.
Vol. VII. p. 25. l. 6. read my Uncle a bass-viol; Mr. Deane a German-flute;
Vol. VII. p. 233. for your girls, read, you girls.
A Concluding NOTE BY The EDITOR.
THE Editor of the foregoing collection has the more readily undertaken to
publish it, because he thinks Human Nature has often, of late, been shown in a
light too degrading; and he hopes from this Series of Letters it will be seen,
that characters may be good, without being unnatural. Sir Charles Grandison
himself is sensible of imperfections, and, as the reader will remember, accuses
himself more than once of tendencies to pride and passion, which it required
his utmost caution and vigilance to rein-in; and many there are, who look upon
his offered compromise with the Porretta Family, in allowing the daughters of
the proposed marriage to be brought up by the mother, reserving to himself the
education of the sons only, as a blot in the character. Indeed, Sir Charles
himself declares to the General, that he would not have come into such a
compromise in a beginning address, not even with a princess.

Notwithstanding this, it has been observed by some, that, in general, he
approaches too near the faultless character which critics censure as above
nature: Yet it ought to be observed too, that he performs no one action which
it is not in the power of any man in his situation to perform; and that he
checks and restrains himself in no one instance in which it is not the duty of
a prudent and good man to restrain himself.

It has been objected by some persons, that a man less able by strength or
skill to repel an affront, than Sir Charles appears to have been, could not
with such honor have extricated himself out of difficulties on refusing a
challenge. And this is true, meaning by honor the favorable opinion of the
European world, from the time of its being overrun by Gothic barbarism, down
to the present. But as that notion of hon ur is evidently an absurd and
mischievous one, and yet multitudes are at a loss to get over it, the rejection
and con^utation of it by a person whom, it was visible, the consideration of
his own safety did not influence, must surely be of no small weight. And when
it is once allowed, that there are cases and circumstances in which these
polite invitations to murder may consistently with honor be disregarded, a
little attention will easily find others; vulgar notions will insensibly wear
out; and more ground be gained by degrees, than could have been attempted with
hope of success, at once; till at length all may come to stand on the firm
footing of reason and religion.

In the mean time, they who are less qualified to carry off right behavior
with honor in the eye of common judges, will, however, be esteemed for it by
every serious and prudent person; and, perhaps, inwardly by many who are mean
enough to join outwardly in blaming them.

Indeed, when a person has deserved harsh treatment, his acquiescence under
it, may generally be imputed to fear alone, and so render him an object at once
of hatred and ridicule, hardly possible to be borne: But he who supports a
conduct equally offensive, by ever so much brutal courage, though a less
contemptible, is a vastly more detestable, creature: Whilst an upright and
harmless man, suppose him ever so timorous, merits rather a kind sort of pity
than violent scorn.

But whoever declines forbidden instances of selfvindication, not from fear but
from principle; which is always to be presumed, if his regard to principle be
steady and uniform in other things; such a one, however inferior to Sir Charles
Grandison in advantages of nature and art, yet, if he shows real greatness of
mind in such things as all men may, needs not doubt but he shall be respected
by most, and may be sufficiently easy, though he is despised by some. He will
still have the satisfaction of reflecting, that the Laws of all nations are on
his side, It is so highly worth observing, that even the military Law of our
own country is strongly against duelling, that the Editor cannot help
subjoining an extract out of the articles of War, and recommending it to the
consideration of all military persons.

ARTICLE XX.
" -- Nor shall any officer or soldier presume to send a challenge to any other
officer or soldier, to fight a duel, upon pain of being cashired, if he be an
officer; or suffering the severest corporal punishment, if a noncommissioned
officer or private soldier: And if any officer, or non-commission officer,
commanding a guard, shall willingly and knowingly suffer any person whatever to
go forth to fight a duel, they shall be punished as above; and all Seconds also
and carriers of challenges, shall be taken as principals, and punished
accordingly. -- Nor shall any officer or soldier upbraid another for refusing a
challenge, since, according to these our orders, they but do the duty of
soldiers, who ought to subject th mselves to discipline: And we do acquit and
discharge all men who have quarrels offered, or challenges sent to them, of all
disgrace, or opinion of disadvantage, in their obedience hereunto: And
whosoever shall upbraid them, and offend in this case, shall be punished as a
challenger."


and only the usurped authority of a silly modern custom against him; that on
many occasions, worthy men in all ages, have patiently suffered false disgrace
for adhering to their duty; that the true bravery is to adhere to all duties
under all disadvantages; and that refusing a duel is a duty to ourselves, our
fellow creatures, and our MAKER. And whoever acts on these principles, the more
reproach he undergoes for it, father than be driven, like a coward, by the
scoffs of his fellow subjects, to rebel against the SOVEREIGN of the Universe,
will have the more delightful consciousness of a strong inward principle of
piety and virtue, and the more distinguished reward from the final Judge of
all, who alone disposes of that Honor which shall never fade.

It has been said in b half of many modern fictitious pieces, in which authors
have given success (and happiness, as it is called) to their heroes of vicious,
if not of profligate, characters, that they have exhibited Human Nature as it
is. Its corruption may, indeed, be exhibited in the faulty character; but need
pictures of this be held out in books? Is not vice crowned with success,
triumphant, and rewarded, and perhaps set off with wit and spirit, a dangerous
representation? And is it not made even more dangerous by the hasty reformation
introduced, in contradiction to all probability, for the sake of patching up
what is called a happy ending?

The God of Nature intended not Human Nature for a vile and contemptible thing:
And many are the instances, in every age, of those whom He enables, amidst all
the frailties of mortality, to do it honor. Still the best performances of
human creatures will be imperfect; but, such as they are, it is surely both
delightful and instructive to dwell sometimes on this bright side of things; To
show, by a series of facts in common life, what a degree of excellence may be
attained and preserved amidst all the infection of fashionable vice and folly.

Sir CHARLES GRANDISON is therefore in the general tenor of his principles and
conduct (though exerted in peculiarities of circumstances that cannot always be
accommodated to particular imitation) proposed for an Example; and, in offering
him as such were his character still more perfect than it is presumed to be,
the Editor is supported by an eminent Divine of our own contry.

"There is no manner of inconvenience in having a pattern propounded to us of
so great perfection, as is above our reach to attain to; and there may be great
advantages in it. The way to excel in any kind, is, optima quaeque exempla ad
imitandum proponere; to propose the brightest and most perfect Examples to our
imitation. No man can write after too perfect and good a copy; and though he can
never reach the perfection of it, yet he is like to learn more, than by one
less perfect. He that aims at the heavens, which yet he is sure to come short
of, is like to shoot higher than he that aims at a mark within his reach.

"Besides, that the excellency of the pattern, as it leaves room for continual
improvement, so it kindles ambition, and makes men strain and contend to the
utmost to do better. And, though he can never hope to equal the Example before
him, yet he will endeavor to come as near it as he can. So that a perfect
pattern is no hindrance, but an advantage rather, to our improvement in any
kind." Tillotson. Vol. II. Sermon. LVII. p. 577.

INDEX Historical and Characteristical TO THE Seven VOLUMES of this WORK.
A few only of the SENTIMENTS with which this Work abounds, are inserted in
this INDEX. There is only room to refer to the rest by Figures; under the
proper Heads; as in Advice to Women, Anger, etc.

A
ABsence of Lovers, vol. iii. p. 274. Promotive of a cure for Love, vii. 226.
ADAM; his complaisance to Eve, according to Milton, animadverted upon, v. 207.
ADDISON, Mr. the fair Sex under great obligations to him, iii. 150. Address to
men of sense in the gay world, iii. 200 to 207. Adventures of Love; women have
often more courage in them than men, vi. 265. Adversity is the trial of
principle, v. 67. Advice or Cautions to women, i. 13. 17. 19. 26 to 29. 37. 82.
151. 300. 302. ii. 11. 12. 96. 309. iv. 144. vii. 299. See Single Women.
Affectation, i. 50. 55. 56. ii. 290. iii. 143. 172. Age, the present, its
character, i. 253. 271. Much obliged to the Spectators, vii. 204. Age of fancy,
a dangerous time in a young woman's life, iii. 128. iv. 102. Aged persons
should study to promote in young people those innocent pleasures, which they
themselves were fond of in youth, vi. 266. See Mrs. Shirley. Ages, different,
at which women will think differently of entering into the state of wedlock,
iv. 140. Agreeableness preferable to mere beauty, i. 255. ALLESTREE, Miss, her
character, i. 18. ALLESTREE, Mr. a guest at Sir Charles Grandison's nuptials,
vi. 312. 320. ALLESTREE, Sir John, his character of Sir Hargrave Pollexfen, i.
83. ALTIERI, Count, misunderstanding between Sir Charles Grandison and him, v.
251. ALTIERI, family, v. 202. 227. ANDERSON, Captain, an unworthy suitor of
Miss Grandison, ii. 264. His history, ii. 267 to 286. Finds means, by her
father's ill policy, to engage her in a promise, ii. 274. Sir Charles
Grandison's conference with him, in which he disengages his Sister from it, ii.
309 to 318. See Miss Charlotte Grandison. Anger, i. 290. iii. 130. iv. 22. 23.
27. 59. 92. 177. v. 254 to 256. vii. 72. Apologies uncalled for, are tacit
confessions, iii. 172. Apprehensiveness as characteristic to the woman, as
courage to the man, ii. 284. ARBY, Mrs. Penelope, an affected old maid, vii.
202. 203. Artful men, ii. 268. 271. 274. iv. 59. 143. 144. Artful women, iii.
77, 78. Avarice, iii. 57. 66. 132. iv. 121. Attachments, guilty ones, the
inconvenience of pursuing them, politically as well as morally considered, iii.
70. 204. 206, 207. AUGUSTUS Caesar challenged by Mark Anthony, ii. 59. AUGUSTUS
I. king of Poland, an improper example to influence a good man to change his
religion, v. 52. AWBERRY, Widow, and her two daughters, agents of Sir Hargrave
Pollexfen, i. 176. See Wilson.
B.
B. Lord, his infamous character, v. 68. vi. 5. Bachelors Old. See Old
Bachelors. BADGER, Cicely, Mrs. Eleanor Grandison's woman, v. 121. 124.
BAGENHALL, James, Esquire a friend and companion in libertinism of Sir Hargrave
Pollexfen, i. 33. 170. 208. His profligate character from his agent Wilson, i.
240, 241. His letter to Miss Byron proposing terms between Sir Charles
Grandison, and Sir Hargrave, i. 277. Carries a challenge to Sir Charles, i.
290. Conference between them on that subject, i. 310 to 316. His importune
visit at Sir Charles's, ii. 6. Makes proposals as from himself, to forward a
reconciliation, ii. 24, 25. Sir Charles invites himself to breakfast with Sir
Hargrave at his own house, ii. 26, 27. What passes on that visit, 33 to 66. He
attends Miss Byron, with Sir Hargrave and Mr. Jordan, ii. 93 to 95. He, Sir
Hargrave, and other of their companions dine at Sir Charles's, and give some
Hope of reformation from his instructive conversation, ii. 97, 98. Seduces a
manufacturer's daughter at Abbeville, iv. 251. Obliged to marry her, iv. 269,
270. His miserable situation, and hatred of his wife, v. 290, 291. Ruined, and
becomes a fugitive; leaving his wife in the most destitute circumstances, vi.
210. 215. See Miss Byron, Sir Charles Grandison, Sir Hargrave Pollexfen.
BANNES, a Spanish jesuit, his opinion of duelling censured, ii. 63. BARCLAY,
Miss, a guest at Sir Charles Grandison's nuptials, vi. 306. 312. 320. BARNET,
Mr. his foppish character, i. 20. BARNEVELT, Miss her masculine airs displayed,
and character given by Miss Byron, i. 52, 53. Thanks God she is a woman, and
why, i. 53. Her free behavior to Miss Byron, i. 54. 74, 75. Enumerates her
heroes both ancient and modern, i. 79. Takes a tilt in heroies, i. 82. And
makes honest Singleton feel for his brains, i. 83. The character Miss Byron
supposes she would have given of her, had she written of her to her Bombardino,
i. 92. How, probably, she would have acted had she been of the other sex, vi.
265. Pleasantly censured by Sir Charles Grandison, vi. 361. BARNHAM, Mr. a
gentleman in the neighborhood of Grandisonhall, iii. 10. BARTLETT, Dr.
Ambrose, an excellent clergyman; his character from Sir Charles Grandison, ii.
3. Presented by him to Miss Byron* ii. 5. The fine gentleman and clergyman
united in him, ii. 7. His modest and polite behavior, ii. 13. Brachman's
prayer, ibid. Piety in his retirement, ii. 320. Sounded on the state of Sir
Charles's affection with regard to Miss Byron, ii. 322 to 327. His history, ii
345 to 354. Guesses at Miss Byron's love for Sir Charles, iii. 90. Instructs
her in geography, iii. 111. His friendship with young Mr. Grandison, afterward
Sir Charles, in his travels, to whom he stands in the place of a second
conscience, iii. 169, 170. His serious reflections on the short duration of
human life, iii. 374, 375. Visits Mrs. Oldham and her children, and comforts
that true penitent, iv. 5, 6. His opinion of chamber-marriages, iv. 101. Sir
Charles acknowleges his obligations to him as his monitor, v. 254. Gives Lady
G. an account of Sir Charles's motions in England, v. 287 to 293. His encomium
upon Lord G. written to his lively Lady, v. 290. And useful reflections on the
sameness of the lives, actions, and pursuits of Libertines, v. 291. Presented
by Sir Charles to his Bride at Grandison-hall, vii. 18. His method of family
devotion, vii. 32, 33. His account of Sir Charles's economy, vii. 44 to 46.
Directs the hospitality of the Christmas-season; a blessing to all around him,
vii. 62. His answer to a case put to him, by Miss Jervois, as if not her own,
vii. 90, 91. His advice, Sir Charles says, made him always sure of the ground
he stood upon, vii. 128, 129. He and father Marescotti, mutually admire and
love each other, notwithstanding the difference of religion, vii. 221, 222. Are
inseparable, vii. 224. Promises to accompany the Grandison family, when they
visit Italy, vii. 285. Tender farewell between him and father Marescotti, vii.
292. BARTLETT, Mr. nephew to Dr. Bartlett, and his amanuensis, gives Miss Byron
a transcribed account of the Doctor's history, ii. 321. Sir Charles Grandison's
scheme of providing for him, vi. 6. Genteelly supported in his service, vii.
33, 49. Baths in England restorative, v. 231. Beauchamp, Sir HARRY, keeps his
son abroad, to humor a mother-in-law, ii. 354. His undue complaisance to her
accounted for, ii. 355. Admires Sir Charles Grandison, ibid. Conversation
between him and Sir Charles, on the proposal of his son's return, iv. 21.
Leaves it to Sir Charles to bring his Lady to consent to it, iv. 22. Who
happily, though with difficulty, succeeds, iv. 29 to 38. Leaves Sir Charles again
to manage for him on his son's actual return, iv. 110. Conversation on that
subject, and tender behavior of Sir Harry to his Lady and his Son, iv. 110,
111. They bless Sir Charles as the author of their happiness, iv. 125. Sir
Harry declines in his health, v. 121. 200. 274. His solemn parting with Sir
Charles on the apprehension that he shall see him no more, v. 291 to 293. His
recovery despaired of, vi. 131. 169. Desires to see Sir Charles, vi. 213.
Recommends his Lady to him, and makes him a trustee in his will, vi. 225. Sir
Charles again attends him, vi. 265 vii. 13. He dies, vii. 36. Beauchamp, LADY,
in love with Mr. Beauchamp; but her advances slighted, conceives an hatred to
him, and marries his father in order to have both in her power, ii. 354, 355.
Conference between Sir Charles, Sir Harry, and her, on Sir Charles's proposal
for the young gentleman's return to England, iv. 22 to 38. Her kind reception
of her son-in-law, in consequence of Sir Charles's adroit management, iv. 110,
111. Her character from Mr. Beauchamp. iv 124. Her grateful behavior to Sir
Charles, and grief for her husband's illness, v. 292. Her affairs in her
widowhood regulated to her satisfaction, by Sir Charles, vii. 52, 53. Demands a
third place in the friendship between him and her son-in-law, vii. 53.
Beauchamp, Mr. EDWARD, son of Sir Harry, a distinguished friend of Sir Charles
Grandison; The commencement of their acquaintance, and the happy part he acted,
in saving the life of Dr. Bartlett at Athens, ii. 350, 351. His character from
Dr. Bartlett, and history, ii. 354 to 356. His character from Sir Charles
Grandison, iii. 140. Visits Sir Charles on his sister Charlotte's wedding day,
iv. 123, 124. His character from Miss Byron, iv. 125. 131. 214. In Love with
Miss Jervois, iv. 214, 215. His prudent behavior to her, iv. 270. His
veneration for Dr. Bartlett, v. 44. His character by Lady G. v. 122. Requests
Sir Charles to write to Lady Beauchamp, thanking her in his own name (as she is
a great admirer of him) for her kindness to himself, v. 200. Present at Sir
Charles's nuptials; particulars of his agreeable behavior in, and after, every
part of the solemnity, vi. 296. 305. 310. 321, 332, 333, 334. 337. 341. 350,
351. Defends the cause of the Ladies on the subject of Learning and Languages,
vi. 359. His generous as well as dutiful behavior to his widowed stopmother,
vii. 53. His application to Sir Charles for Miss Jervois in marriage, vii. 128.
What pass s between the two friends on that occasion, vii. 128. 130. Attends
Miss Jervois to Northamptonshire, vii. 154. Visits Sir Charles and his Italian
friends, at Grandison-hall, vii. 221. Miss Jervois consults Lady Grandison
concerning him, vii. 269. [ See Miss Jervois] Lady Grandison's answer, praising
him, vii. 271. Accompanies Sir Charles and his Lady, and their Italian friends,
to Dover, on the latter's leaving England, vii. 292. BEAUMONT, Mrs. a Lady of
an excellent heart and sine genius* cruelly deprived of her fortune, by a base
uncle her guardian, is prevailed upon to go as companion to Italian Ladies of
worth and honor, to Florence, iii. 187 Her management to induce Lady
Clementina to own, that a struggle between Love and her Superior daties, was
the cause of her melancholy, iii. 239 to 252. Her Letter describing the unhappy
way Lady Clementina is in, iii. 368 to 371. Another, recounting the severe
treatment that young Lady met with, iv. 53 to 60. Gives Sir Charles an account
of Clementina's amended health, v. 78. And of several conferences held with her
concerning him, v. 79 to 81. Her arguments with her, tending to dissuade her
from taking the veil, vi. 86. And in behalf of the Count of Belvedere, vi. 91.
Acquaints that Lady's family with the particulars of her flight, vii. 99, 100.
Accompanies the Porretta family to England in search of her, vii. 101. Arrives
at Dover with them, vii. 155. And at London, vii. 163. Felicitates Lady
Grandison, vii. 167. Introduced by Sir Charles to Lady Clementina, vii. 183.
That Lady's fine address to her, as soothingly and kindly answered by her. vii.
183. She always, Lady Clementina says, knew how to blunt the keen edge of
calamity, ibid. Visits Sir Charles and his Lady with Clementina, vii. 185.
Receives a Letter from her friends at Florence, urging her return and
acquainting her with Olivia's reflections on Clementina, vii. 225. Consers with
Clementina on the subject, vii. 227 to 230. Affected at parting with Lady
Grandison on her return to Italy, vii. 392. They agree to correspond with each
other, ibid. See Lady Clementina; Sir Charles Grandison, Miss Byron. Beauty, i.
1. 3. 13. 52. 103 ii. 77. 192. iii. 22. iv. 98. vi. 167. Beauty, without the
graces of the mind, will have no power over the heart of a wife and good man,
vi. 77. BECKFORD, Mrs. housekeeper of Sir Thomas Grandison, intercedes for her
young Ladies, laboring under their father's displ^^su^^ 173. 179. BELVEDERE,
Count of, characterized by Sir Charles Grandison, as an handsome, (...),
sensible man, of ample fortune, in love with Lady Clementina, iii. 130.
Conference held wi^h Lady Clementina, in his favor by Sir Charles, iii. 210,
and seq. Let Sir Charles, on his going back to Italy, know his unabated passion
for her, notwithstanding her malady, iv. 279. Gives Sir Charles an account of
the proposals made him in Laurana's favor, iv. 292. Enquires into Sir
Charles's expectations from Clementina, ibid. Visits him at Bologna, in
apprehension of his succeeding with Clementina, v. 130. His desperate
resolutions on such an apprehension, v. 132 to 135. By whom incited to this
visit, and desperation, v. 135. Visits him again with a pair of pistols; and is
subdued by Sir Charles's noble behavior to him, v. 163. Makes him another
visit; what passes in it, v. 192 to 194. Invites him to his palace at Parma, v.
199. Visited there by Sir Charles, v. 277. His character from Signor Jeronymo,
vi. 90. Accompanies the Porretta family to England, in search of Lady
Clementina, vii. 101, 102. Visits Lady Grandison in St. James's-square, vii.
157. His character by that Lady, greatly to his advantage, vii. 158. He highly
admires her, 158, 159. Assumes the name of Marsigli, in order to conceal his
being in England, vii. 161. His polite behavior to Lady Grandison, vii. 164.
Avows his continued Love for Clementina, ibid. He receives Sir Charles's
proposals of general reconciliation between that Lady and her friends (which
equally bind her to give up her favorite scheme of the sequestered life, and
her friends not to urge her to marry) with great emotion; but, still hoping,
gives way to the seeming necessity, vii. 174. His being in England, with the
greatest caution, broke to Lady Clementina, vii. 185 to 189. Interview with
her; affecting scenes on the occasion, vii. 192 to 197. He and Signors
Sebastiano and Juliano, propose to stay in town for some weeks, while their
friends accompany Sir Charles to Grandison-hall, vii. 197, 198. Indisposed,
vii. 224. Loiters in town; afraid to go to Grandison-hall, because his next
visit to Lady Clementina must be a parting one, vii. 231. Every one pities him,
yet endeavors to prevail on him to pursue his better fortune at Madrid, ibid.
Praised for his beneficent spirit, vii. 232. Makes his will, and leaves all in
his power to the Porretta family, if he die unmarried, vii. 239. Not to Lady
Clementina; his generous reason why, ibid. Declares, that if her malady should
be renewed by reason of her friends favor to him, he should be the most
miserable of men, ibid. Further generous declarations of his inviolable Love to
her, vii. 240. Never will marry while she remains single, ibid. Were she his,
he says, he would hope to conduct, to guide, to compose her noble mind, ibid.
He would admire, equally with her, that best of men, whose goodness is not more
the object of her Love than of his Veneration, ibid. Jealous as he is of his
honor, he says, he would satisfy the charmer of his soul, that he approved of
her sister'y Love to a man so excellent; nor should she be left to the silent
distress of her own heart, ibid. He goes down to Grandison-hall; description of
his person by Lady G. vii. 260. Declines going to Spain, as he had intended,
vii. 266. His confusion from reverence of her, at taking leave, vii. 267. She
pities him, and graciously invites his longer stay, ibid. Every one
congratulates him upon it, vii. 268. He is drawn out at table by Sir Charles
greatly to his advantage, vii. 274. Her Letter to her father and mother, giving
distant hopes of complying with their will, 278 to 280. General joy upon it,
280, 281. His generous acquiescence with her future will, whatever it shall be,
at the end of the time she has taken to judge of what the state of her mind
will then be, and to determine accordingly, vii. 283. Passes six happy days at
Grandison-hall, vii. 285, 286. The parting scene on his setting out to embark
for Italy, vii. 286. Beneficence, ii. 131. iii. 88. iv. 71. 111. v. 18. 288.
vii. 45. 263. See Sir Charles Grandison. Benevolence, ii. 55. iii. 89, 90. 196.
374. See Sir Charles Grandison. BEVER, Mr. Sir Thomas Grandison's English
steward; his dishonest policy, ii. 194. 220. BLAGRAVI, Mr. an attorney employed
against Sir Charles Grandison, by Mr. O-Hara, iii. 98 to 100. BOLTON, an
infamous steward of Mr. Calvert; his wicked contrivances, by which he defrauds
the right heirs of the estate of his superannuated master, iv. 13. 267.
Brought, by Sir Charles Grandison's means, to make proposals of restitution, v.
201. 267. vi. 3. 4. Affairs with him adjusted to the satisfaction of the right
heirs, vi. 267. See Mansfield. Brachman's Prayer, ii. 13. BRAMBER, Misses,
their characters, i. 18, 19. Bridal dresses, Sentiments on them, vi. 252. 293,
294. Brothers and Sisters, ii. 237. vii. 131. 132. See Sir Charles Grandison.
BURNET, Bishop, quotation from him relating to learning Latin, i. 76, 77.
BURGESS, a person employed by Sir Charles Grandison in beautifying his church,
iii. 10. BYRON, Mr. and Mrs. Parents of Miss Harriet; their excellent
characters, i. 6. 20. ii. 133. vi. 49. 340. BYRON, Miss Harriet, [VOL. I.]
courted by Mr. Greville, Mr. Orme, Mr Fenwick, 1, 2. Mr. Greville's description
of her person; and his character of her, 3 to 11. Her opinion of the flatteries
of men, 11. 18. Is averse to their dangling after her, 13. Her singular wish,
ibid. Her tenderness for her sick cousin, Miss Nancy Seiby, 13, 16. Behavior
of Mr. Greville and Mr. Fenwick, on escorting her part of the way to London,
14, 15. She pities Mr. Orme because he is a good man, 15. Describes her cousin
Reeves's house, and her apartment in it, ibid. Characterizes the company at her
cousin Reeves's, 18 to 22. Censures Lady Betty Williams for disavowing her own
personal care of her daughter's education, 22. Is to be introduced by that Lady
to all the places of public entertainment, 23 [ See Lady Betty Williams] Her
reasons for distiking Mr. Greville, 25. And Mr. Fenwick, 28. Loves Miss Orme;
but is afraid of her because of her continual pleas in her brother's favor,
29, 30. Raillied by her uncle Selby, 30 to 35. [ See Mr. Selby] Her account of
Mr. Fowler, a new Lover, 35 to 40. Her defense of occasional self-praise, 40,
41. Visited by Sir Rowland Meredith, in behalf of his nephew Fowler, 41 to 51.
Characterizes the company at Lady Betty Williams's, 51, and seq. Drawn into a
debate there with Mr. Waldon, on the subject of Learning and Languages, 55 to
74. Sir Hargrave Pollexfen declares himself her Lover, 80, 81. She apprehends
difficulties from him, 84. Her fanciful account of what the persons whom she
had characterized in that conversation, would write of her to their severa
friends, were they to write, as she does to hers, 90 to 97. Further account of
Mr. Fowler's address, 97 to 109. And of that of Sir Hargrave, 110 to 120. Lady
Betty insists on dressing her for a Ball in the Hay-market, 120. Sir Rowland
courts her for his nephew, in the presence of Sir Hargrave and Mr. Greville,
121 to 129. She declares to Sir Hargrave her dislike of him, because of his
faulty morals, 131. Conversation between her and Mr. Greville, with his odd
behavior in it, 135 to 139. Visits Miss Clements, and admires her, 140. Scenes
of courtship-conversations, between her, Mr. Greville, and Sir Hargrave, 142 to
147. She diverts the two Gentlemen from quarreling, 148. Conversation between
her and her cousin Reeves's, on the addresses of Mr. Orme and Mr. Fowler, 150
to 152. Conversation between her and Sir Hargrave, in which she gives him an
absolute denial, and he leaves her in a rage, 153 to 158. Her dress for the
Masquerade, 159. Carried off from thence, 161, 162. The terror of Mr. Reeves
and of her Northamptonshire friends on the occasion. [ See Mr. Reeves. See Mr.
Selby] Rescued; by whom, 178, 179. Interesting particulars of the whole affair,
given by Mr. Reeves, 167 to 209 -- by Sir Charles Grandison her deliverer, 192
to 199. -- by herself, when recovered from her fright, and the effects of her
injurious treatment, 209 to 236. -- and by Wilson, her persidious servant, 241
to 247. Will not allow that her gratitude to her diliverer shall be construed
into more than gratitude, 250. Gives the character of Miss Grandison, younger
Sister to Sir Charles, 251 to 253. -- of Sir Charles himself, 254 to 261.
Receives another visit from Sir Rowland, 263, 264. -- A flying one from Miss
Grandison, as that gay Lady terms it; what passes in it, 264, and seq. Applauds
Sir Charles's true heroism, 272. Concerned that he set out for Canterbury
without visiting her, 273. Gives suspicion that her gratitude will engage her
in a more tender passion, 274, 275. In terror on a challenge sent to Sir
Charles by Sir Hargrave, 276 to 280. Visited by Lord L. Lady L. (elder Sister
of Sir Charles) Miss Grandison, and Sir Charles himself, 282. 296. Gives the
character and description of Lady L. 296. Of Lord L. 297. Her answer to the
Countess of D's proposal of her Son the Earl of D. 306. Declares her
indifference to all men, except one; and that exception she ascribes to
gratitude only, 308. Her further observations on Sir Charles's true heroism,
315. BYRON, Miss [VOL. II.] dines at Sir Charles Grandison's, and gives the
conversations held there, 1 to 23. Her anxiety on what may yet happen between
Sir Charles and Sir Hargrave, on the intrepid visit of the former to the latter
at his own house, 24 to 31. [ See Sir Charles Grandison] Her terror on being
visited by Sir Hargrave, 66 to 71. Lively conversation between her, Lady L. and
Miss Grandison, on the number of her Lovers, and particularly on the Countess
of D's proposal, 71 to 77. The Countess's first visit to her: They are mutually
chumed with each other, 77 to 85. The Sisters railly and perplex her after the
Countess is gone, 86 to 90. She begins to apprehend that her gratitude is
growing into Love, yet is loath to believe it, 90 to 92. Receives another visit
from Sir Hargrave, 93. Lord and Lady L. invite her to their country-seat near
Colnebrook, 98. Her cousin Reeves's think her far gone in Love; but the
gentleman not having declared himself, she hopes they are mistaken, 102. Sir
Charles is charmed with her for her forgiveness of the penitent Wilson, 105,
106. Her comments on Letters written to her by her Aunt Selby and Grandmother
Shirley, on the Countess of D's proposal, 124 to 127. She thinks Sir Charles
severe on her Sex, 221. Complains to her Lucy of his absence, 240. Sounded by
Miss Grandison and Lady L. on her most favored Lover, since she has rejected
Lady D's proposal, 240, 241. Her thoughts of Love, 242. 244, 245. Her opinion
of Lady Anne S. who is in love with Sir Charles, 245, 246. Her fortune why not
so great as it might have been, 258. Her humorous apostrophe to the persons
whose characters (which now appear trifling to her) she had formerly
delineated, 280. Broke in upon, and excessively raillied in her dressing room
by the two Sisters, 287 to 298. Her reflections on her hopeless prospect from
their conference with Dr. Bartlett, 327, 328. She would choose to die rather
than be the means of Sir Charles's disturbance, 330. Suspects Dr. Bartlett of
designing to detach her from Sir Charles, in favor of Mr. Beauchamp, 357. What
would be her most malicious wish, ibid. BYRON, Miss [VOL. III.] Her invective
against Love, i. 2. Refuses to read a Letter of Sir Charles, clandestinely come
at by Miss Grandison, 3 to 6. Reflections on the temptation, and on her
resisting it, 7, 8. Will not d serve to be despised by Sir Charles, 22. Why she
calls Love an ignoble passion, 27. Interesting conversation with Miss Jervois
on their mutual regard for Sir Charles, 45 to 55. She is alarmed at Mr. Dean's
visit to him, 91. She likes not that Sir Charles should style himself her
Brother, 101 to 103. Obliges him with the sight of some of her Letters, 101,
102. Thinks his affections engaged, 113. Greatly embarrassed on the questions
put to him on that point in her presence, 117. Her apostrophe to Dr. Bartlett,
on Sir Charles's imagined reservedness, 120. Her supposed question to Sir
Charles, concerning the woman of his choice, 141. Betrays a degree of
captiousness before Sir Charles, 156, 157. The Library-conference, in which Sir
Charles gives her a brief history of Lady Clementina della Porretta, 162 and
seq. [ See Clementina Vol. III.] Is to receive from Dr. Bartlett, by Sir
Charles's permission, extracts from Sir Charles's Letters at the time, relating
to the interesting story of Lady Clementina, 192. She averrs, from experience,
that Love is a narrower of the heart, ibid. Yet pities and prays for Lady
Clementina, 193. Puzzled at Sir Charles's abrupt manner of leaving her in the
Library-conference, 195. Inveighs against the absurdity in the passion, which
compels Clementina to love against her inclination, 197. Accuses the Italian
family of want of discretion, 228. Parallel between her case and that of
Clementina, 230, 231. Accuses herself of forwardness, and is apprehensive that
Sir Charles has discovered her passion, 234. And of opinion, that justice
requires she should give up all hopes of him. 238. Wishes she had only heard of
him by fame, and not known him personally, 263. Her extreme humility, 312.
BYRON, Miss [VOL. IV.] Wishes Sir Charles were proud, vain, arrogant, that she
might the more easily throw off her acknowl^^^^ shackles, 2. Her apostrophe to
her heart on sighing for his absen e* 3. Supposes him to have but a slight
opinion of the Sex, and reckons that a blot in his character, 20. Visited by
the Earl and Countess of D. she owns to that Lady, her heart to be a wedded
heart, and that it disdains a second engagement, 40 to 46. Acts greatly on a
trying occasion, and prefers Clementina to herself, 60, 61. Yet thinks herself
beloved by him, 64, 65. Will endeavor to make herself worthy of his offered
friendship, whatever pangs she feels from a more tender passion, 86, 87. Her
contemplation of h^s worth, 88. Cheeks herself for urging Dr. Bartlett to
discover the secrets of his friend, 99. Apostrophe to Clementina, giving her
the preference to herself from a principle of justice, ibid. Every one sure
that Sir Charles loves her, 112. Her account of Miss Grandison's nuptials, 112,
115, and seq. Upon placing herself in Clementina's situation, she again prefers
that Lady to herself, yet owns, that her self-denial cost her dear, 135. She is
presented to Lady Olivia by Sir Charles, 152. [ See Lady Olivia] Avoids false
modesty in not for bearing to speak in a language she is not perfectly skilled
in, 161. Sir Charles's tender visit to her on his preparing to leave England,
103 to 167. From the manner in which he mentions to her with favor the Earl of
D. she concludes that he loves her himself, 168. Her reflections on his
departure from England, 169 to 172. Her charitable apostrophe to Dr. Bartlett
in favor of Olivia's character, iv. 171. She fi^^s the day of her setting out
for Northamptonshire, 174, 175. Visit paid her by the Countess of D. What
passes of a tender nature in it, 178 to 186. Explains the meaning of Sir
Charles's dark expressions in the Library-conference, with which she had been
formerly puzzled, 186, 187. Her Letter to Sir Rowland Meredith, in answer to a
paternal one of his, in which (considering him as her father) she avows her
regard for Sir Charles, notwithstanding his engagements with another Lady, and
disclaims the generous intentions of Sir Rowland in her favor, in his will,
211 to 213. [ See Sir Rowland Meredith] Takes leave of her friends in town, 214
to 218. Description of her journey; account of the friends who accompanied her
as far as Dunstable, and of those who met her there from Northamptonshire; of
Mr. Greville and Mr. Fenwick's collation for her at Stratford; of Mr. Orme
again saluting her by the high-way-side, as the coach passed by his park-wall;
and of her reception by her grandmother and other friends at Selby-house, 218
to 225. Reminds Lady G. of her and her Sister's teazing attack upon her in her
dressing room, at Colnebrook, 219. Applauded by all her family (Mr. Selby
excepted) for her generous preference of Lady Clementina to herself, 224. She
reproves Lady G. for the levity of her behavior to her Lord, 239. Is
disappointed in obtaining the ease of mind she hoped for at Selby-house, 240.
Visited by Mr. Fenwick, Mr. Greville, Mr. Orme, etc. on her return. Mr.
Greville's incivility; her magnanimity, 242 to 245. BYRON, Miss, [VOL. V.] Her
remarks on Sir Charles's first letter from Italy, 39 to 43. And on the
following. 43, 44. Her r^c^ption of Lord and Lady G. Miss Jervois, and Dr.
Bartlett, at Stony-Stratford and Selby-house, 69, 7^. Declines in her Health;
yet takes pains to be cheerful, 72, 73. Prudently restrains her talent for
raillery, ^3. Owns her Love for Sir Charles to Lady G. as frankly as when she
and Lady L. extorted the secret from her by their united raillery; and glories
in it, 73, 74. Her arguments on Love and Friendship, 74, 75. The general
concern of all her friends for her on the supposition of Sir Charles's speedy
marriage to Clementina, 103. Her magnanimous behavior on that occasion, 1 6 to
110. The pains she takes to conceal the heaviness of her heart, 112. Her
excellent Occonomy, 113, 114. She advises L die G. not to sport with the
infirmities of age in the case of old ma^ds, and with the understanding of her
husband, 1^^. Prave for blessings on Sir Charles and Clementina, now supposed
man and wise, 129. Her sentiments on the whole of Sir Charles's behavior with
respect to Clementina, on occasion of that Lady's noble refusal of him, 204 to
20^. Sir Charles returns to England; solicitously enquires after her health;
and is afflicted to hear of her being ill, 278 to 281. Her further reproofs to
Lady G. for her levity, 284, 285. Her pride awakened by the girlish supposition
of Sir Charles's divided Love son his application to her after his not
succeeding with Clementina, abates the joy she would otherwise have taken in
receiving his addresses, 286, 287. BYRON, Miss, [VOL. VI.] Mrs. Reaves
acquainting her by Letter, that she has no doubt of Sir Charles's Love of her,
and conpratulating her upon it, she answers with some petulance because of the
female notion of a divided Love; yet owns without reserve, her preference of
him to all the men in the world, 17 to 20. Under the fanciful supposition of
his ghost appearing to her grandmother, the acquaints Lady G. with her
brother's address to that venerable Lady for her interest in his favor with
her, 21, and seq. Her great sensibilities, and her friends congratulations on
the occasion, 26, 27. Her grandmother's Letter of general acceptance of him,
28, 29. She gives the substance of Sir Charles's two Letters written to her
grandmother and self, in answer to her grandmother's obliging L tter, 37. 39,
40. Her grateful remarks on Mr. Deane's Letter, and Sir Charles's answer
relating to her fortune, 55. Sir Charles expected at Selby-house: Instances of
her ^^^^able petulance, the natural effects of her situation, with respect to a
supposed double or divided Love, 58 to 61. Her spiritles reception of him. to
what owing, 60, 61. Debates between Mr. and Mrs. Selby on matters of decorum,
respecting Sir Charles, 62, 63. Her observations on delicacy and the tyranny of
custom, 65. Petulantly censures Sir Charles for his supposed prudence and
tranquillity, 66, 67. And for his absence when expected to breakfast, 69, 70.
Her censures obviated by his being detained by Mr. Greville's insult upon him,
71. Scenes of courtship, and tender and polite address, 75, 76. 78. 110, 111.
117. Sir Charles's exemplary behavior at church, 122. Mr. Greville's dying
speech, as he called it, to her, 123. [ See Mr. Greville.] A happy day at
Shirley-manor, in which Sir Charles's gallantry and politeness charms them all,
132 to 137. She takes a little tour with several of her friends, attended by
Sir Charles, 138. She praises him for his well-directed charities in the
excursion; and describes several tender scenes between him and herself, 138 to
144. Distressed by her uncle's forwardness, 139. She gives the particulars of
the half-fretful, half-humorous dialogue, that passed between her punctilious
aunt, and unpunctilious uncle, 141 to 143. Sir Charles urges her for an early
day, 144. She thinks him too precipitating, 148. She accidentally drops a paper
in which she had given an account of the tenderest part of their last
conversation, in which, to her great disturbance, he was seen to take up, 153.
But returns it to her unread, 154. She proposes Emily's living with them, 156
to 159. She chides Lady G. for the contents of a very free Letter, and defends
her own conduct to Sir Charles, which that Lady censured, as too punctilious,
172 to 176. Visited on their return from their little excursion, by Mr.
Greville, Mr. Fenwick, Miss Orme, 178, 179. Another tender conversation between
Sir Charles and her, in which she is laudably explicit, in acknowleging her
Love, yet adheres to her opinion, that he is too precipitating as to the day,
179 and seq. Bends his knee to her for the generous expression of her regard to
the merits of Clementina, 184. He appeals to her Grandmother, her Aunt, and
Lucy, on her thinking him too precipitating, 188, and seq. Their decree, 191.
Presents her with a set of jewels, 198. She humourously censures Lucy and Nancy
Selby on their tediousness in dressing, 201, 202. What passed at a
breakfast-visit at Miss Orme's, 202 to 204. Her magnanimity with regard to Lady
Clementina, 213, 214. Apprehends treachery from Mr. Greville, 216. Terrible
dreams, 216. 219. Pathetic apostrophe on his appearance in safety, 219. Tender
parting between them, on his taking leave to set out for London, 219 to 225.
His Letter to her from London, enclosing one from Jeronymo, acquainting him
with the wishes of Clementina and their family, for his speedy marriage,
including that Lady's address to them both on that subject; he re-urges her, on
this occasion, to accelerate his happy day, 225 to 241. Her grateful answer,
241 to 243. She is apprehensive of Mr. Greville's moodiness, 251. And still
more, on his message, that she will not be too secure, 254. Excessively
terrified by an anonymous note, giving ground to apprehend that Mr. Greville
would assassinate Sir Charles, on his return from London, 258 to 261. Her
extreme joy on his safe arrival, 262. The DAY fixed, 275, and seq. She further
shows her generous concern for Lady Clementina, 282. Her tender behavior to
Miss Jervois, 308, 309. Her emotion on signing the marriagearticles, 314, 315.
The nuptial procession: The celebration: The wedding-feast: The ball:
Retirement: Morning congratulations, benedictions, etc. 318 to 352. Lady G.
applauds their behavior to each other, 351. Their appearance at church, 367.
See Sir Charles Grandison, VOL. VI. BYRON, Miss, [VOL. VII.] Tenants jubilee,
5. The bride sees company, 6. Returns visits, 9. Ball at Shirley-manor, ibid.
Parting scene between her and her Grandmother, 10, 11. Her Uncle, Aunt, Lucy,
and Mr. Deane, accompany her to town; journal of her proceedings as Lady
Grandison, 12. and seq. Politely and tenderly put into possession of
Grandison-Hall as her own house, 17. Received with blessings by Dr. Bartlett,
18. Sir Charles's affectionate politeness to all her accompanying friends,
ibid. Mrs. Curzon the house keeper presented to her, 19. Description of the
Ladies drawing room, 18. Her oratory or library, ibid. Sir Charles's study, 20.
Music-parlour, 21. Dining Room, ibid. The park, garden, orchard, chapel,
gallery, etc. 22 to 24. He surprises her with singing verses in honor of her
to the organ, 25. She desires her grandmother, whenever she prays for the
continuance of her happiness, to include that of Lady Clementina, 28.
Appearance at church, 29. Desirous of emulating the late excellent Lady
Grandison, ibid. In the Picture-gallery is made acquainted with the history of
his ancestors, 30, 31. Methods of family-devotion, 32. Entertainment and Ball
for all the neighbouring-gentry, 34. She describes him in the character of The
domestic man, The cheerful friend, The kind master, The enlivening companion,
The polite neighbor, The tender husband, 35. He speaks to her of Clementina,
she says, with manly tenderness; regrets the precipitating of that Lady by her
friends; warmly remembers Jeronymo; has a sigh for Olivia; never was there, she
says, a more expanded heart than his, 36. A cloud has just brushed by them, in
the death of Sir Harry Beauchamp, ibid. Conference between her and Sir Charles
about Emily and Mr. Beauchamp, 37. Her delicate apprehensions, that she loved
him before he loved her, obviated by him, 38. Christmasseason to be hospitably
solemnized, 40. 62. Female servants presented to her by Mrs. Curzon, ibid.
Visits the offices, 41. Servants ^^^^rary, ibid. Method of dispensing physic to
the poor, by an honest Apothecary, 42. Accidents provided for, by retaining a
skilful Surgeon, ibid. Thinks she can, in heaven only, be happier than she is
now, ibid. Her supposed speech to him, reprehen^ing the ludicrous conduct of
Lady G. calculated to surprise that Lady in her own way, 55. Her courteous
behavior to Sir Rowland Meredith, on his visit to her, on her nuptials [ See
Sir Rowland Meredith] Her solicitude for Lady Clementina, on that Lady's great
earnestness to visit England, and what is mentioned of her in a Letter from Mr.
Lowther, 63. Admonishes Miss Jervois on her earnestly eying her guardian, 65. A
conversation between them on that occasion, 66, 67. Her opinion of Mr.
Greville's proposal for her cousin Lucy, and conversation with Lucy upon it, 70
to 75. Defends Lady Clementina's rejection of the Count of Belvedere against
Mr. Lowther, with warmth, 76, 77. Her noble commiseration of that Lady on the
harsh treatment she met with from the General, 78, 79. Affecting conversation
between her and Miss Jervois on that young Lady's Lovecase put to Dr. Bartlett;
as if not her own, but that of a third person, 83 to 94. On Lady Clementina's
flight to England, she beseeches (p. 97) Sir Charles to give her instant
protection, and willingly parts with him for her sake, 104 to 106. His tender
Letters to her in absence, 107. 114, 115. 118. 128. 132. She is introduced to
that Lady: Affecting scenes on that occasion, 138, and seq. Comforts Lady
Clementina on her apprehensions of her friends coming into England in quest of
her, 147 to 150, Parting scene between her and Emily, on the latter's going
down to Northamptonshire, 152 to 154. Arrival of the Porretta family at Dover,
155. Sir Charles sets out to bring them to town, 156. Her prudent conduct to
the Count of Belvedere and Signor Sebastiano, in his absence, 158 to 161.
Further instances of her affectionate goodness to Lady Clementina, 161, 162.
Arrival of the Porretta family at Sir Charles's house in Grosvenor-square, 165.
She beseeches Sir Charles that Lady Clementina may not be compelled to marry,
166. Is introduced to them, 167. Sir Charles's proposals of accommodation (See
Sir Charles Grandison, Vol. vii.) Urges Lady Clementina's acceptance of them,
173, 174. Applied to by that Lady to accompany her in the interview she is to
have with her family, 177. Her account of that tender meeting, 178 to 185. [
See Clementina.] A visit made to her and Sir Charles by Lady Clementina and Mr.
Beaumont, 185 to 189. Present at Lady G's labor, 189. Further solicitous that
Lady Clementina should not be compelled to marry, 190. Rejoices that her Lucy
has rejected Mr. Greville, 191. Applauds Lady Clementina for her great
behavior to the Count of Belvedere, 195. Happy with their guests at
Grandison-hall, 199. Refers to Lady G. a case put to her by her Lucy and the
other young Ladies at Selby-house, on the force of a first passion, ibid. In
which are included -- The case of Lady Clementina, 200. -- Her own case before
marriage, 201. -- That of Mrs. Penelope Arby, 202. -- Mrs. Eggleton's story,
ibid. -- Mrs. Shirley's when a young woman, 203 to 208. Particular application
of the subject to herself, 208, 209. Lady G's decision upon it, 213, and seq.
Particularizes their happiness at Grandison-hall, 220, 221. Reveres Lady
Clementina, 222. Has nothing to pray for but the continuance of her present
felicity, and that Lady Clementina were settled in some way to her own liking,
223. Reflections on marriage as a duty, ibid. Is of opinion that Lady Clementina
thinks distance from Sir Charles necessary for her peace of mind, 224. -- As
Emily, she thanks God, finds it, ibid. Pities Lady Clementina as she
contemplates her forming plans for her future life; but is forced often to turn
away her face to conceal her tears, ibid. She professes herself charmed with
Lady G. in the three characters of Wife, Mother, and Nurse, 225. Brought over
to her opinion, that if the second man be worthy, a woman may be happy who has
not been indulged in her first fancy, ibid -- The rather hopes this for Emily's
sake, ibid. Calls Olivia unworthy for casting reflections on Clementina, ibid.
Substance of a conference overheard by Lady G. between Lady Clementina and Mrs.
Beaumont, 226, and seq. Noble way of thinking with regard to the tenderness of
Sir Charles and Lady Clementina for each other, 230. A new occasion for her to
admire that great minded Lady, 231. In Sir Charles's absence, she and Lady
Clementina are hardly ever asunder, 234. Taken suddenly ill: Every one greatly
affected; Lady Clementina and Sir Charles particularly, 236, 237. His strict
attendance on her, and tender concern for her, 238. Lady Clementina's distress
on her illness, 239. And joy on her recovery, 241. Conversation between Sir
Charles and her, on that Lady's visible uneasiness of mind, 241, 242. Lady
Clementina opens her heart to her, and still wishes to assume the veil, 243 to
245. She refers her to Sir Charles's advice, 245. Conference between her and
him, in presence of Lady Grandison, 246 to 255. Lady Clementina refers herself
to her for advice on what passed in this conference, 255. Her prudent and
tender sentiments on the occasion, 255, 256. (See for further accounts of what
passed between this noble Lady, and her, and Sir Charles, the article
Clementina, Vol. vii. 256.) Lady G. humorously concludes for her one of her
Letters, 261. Emily's Letter to her, asking her advice on a certain affair,
269. Her answer, 271. Account of the death of Lady Laurana communicated to her
by the Marchioness, 275. Jeronymo allowed to stay in England after the rest of
his family, 285. She and Sir Charles are released from their promise of
attending the Poretta family back to Italy, 285. But the next summer or autumn,
both families are to meet at Bologna, ibid. Takes a survey of their present
happy situation, 288, 289. Rejoices in it, and is thankful for it, 290.
Accompanies, with Sir Charles and others of his family, the noble Lady and hers
to Dover, 293. Sir Charles attends them to Calais, and at parting there,
engages the whole Porretta family not to take advantage of the hopes Lady
Clementina had given to oblige them, at a certain period; but to leave her (as
he had before engaged the Count of Belvedere also to promise) entirely to her
own free will, 293, 294. Praises Lady G. 295. Sir Hargrave Pollexfen's death,
legacy to her, etc. 296 to the end.
C
CAJETAN, an Italian casuist; his opinion about Dueling censured, ii. 63.
CALVERT. Mr. Brother of Lady Mansfield; his dotage taken advantage of by his
infamous steward, iv. 13. Dies. See Bolton. See also Mansfield. CAMILLA. a
faithful and sensible attendant on Lady Clemenrina, from her infancy. See
Clementina. CANTILION, Miss, her flighty character, i. 52, 53. Envies Miss
BYRON, 54. Does not shine on the subjects in which she thought herself most
entitled to make a figure, 77, 78. An approver of Sir Hargrave Pollexfen's
levity, 70. Can hardly let her eyes be civil to Miss Byron, 80. Thinks Sir
Hargrave a very fine gentleman, 82. Runs away with a nominal captain, and is
unhappy, vi. 18, 19. Pitied by Miss Byron, vi. 20. Casino, at Bologna, v. 9.
Cautions to women in a beginning Love, i. 87 to 89. iii. 2, 3. 253. 285. vi.
162. vii. 202. 204. 205. Cenis, mount, an accurate account of passing it, iv.
271. Censure, i. 251 ii. III. 265. 303. 313, 314. iii. 57. 63. 69. 318. vi.
204. See Charity. Challenges, i. 291 to 293. 313, 314. ii. 26, 27. 38, 45, 46.
iii. 364. See Duelling. Chamber-marriages, iv. 100. vi. 280. Characters of the
persons in this work; See the respective articles. Charity, iii. 17. iv. 171.
v. 66. vi. 140. 350. 352. See Sir Charles Grandison. See also Censure. CHARLES
I. fatal consequences of his marriage with a Popish princess, iii. 318.
Chastity, iii. 76. iv. 137. v. 45. 282. 291. Children. See Parents and
Children. Christmas, how to be kept by people of condition, vii. 40. 62.
Citizens, apes of the gentry, ii. 159. Not to be despised in a trading kingdom,
vii. 15. CLARKE, Sir Samuel, a gentleman in the neighborhood of
Grandison-hall, iii. 10. CLARKSON Miss, a Yorkshire beauty, vi. 199. 203.
CLEMENTINA della Perretta, [VOL. III.] Her Story as told by Sir Charles
Grandison to Miss Byron, in Lord L's library at Colnebrook; containing her
first acquaintance with him -- Her proficiency in the English tongue -- Her
melancholy -- Her noble struggle between her Religion and Love -- Her
acknowlegement of Love for him to Mrs. Beaumont -- Terms proposed to him, with
which he cannot comply -- Her malady -- His distress -- Account of his being
desired to leave Italy -- Denied a parting interview with her -- Requested by
some of her friends to return to Italy, 169 to 190. Her Story continued by Dr.
Bartlett from Sir Charles's Letters, at the time; containing, I. The
particulars of a conference between Mr. Grandison and her; in which he pleads
the cause of the Count of Belvedere, Vol. III. 210 to 215. II. Conference which
he was put upon holding with her on her first being seized with melancholy, 215
to 228. III. Particulars accounting for Lady Clementina's cheerful behavior
after a course of melancholy, on Mr. Grandison's taking leave of her and her
family, 238. IV. An account of the management of Mrs. Beaumont, by which she
brought her to own her Love, after she had so long kept it a secret from her
mother, 238 to 252. V. Particulars of Mr. Grandison's reception by Lady
Clementina, and the Marchioness her mother, on his return, at Jeronymo's
request, to Bologna, 253 to 257. Conference between her and Mr. Grandison in
the garden, in which is shown her magnanimity, and his distress, on
apprehension that a change of Religion and the renouncing of his Country will
be proposed to him, 257 to 262. VI. Conference between him and her Brother, the
Bishop of Nocera, in which the Bishop (to Mr. Grandison's great concern)
insists on the apprehended change of Religion and Residence, 265 to 268. Her
resentment, yet great behavior on supposing herself refused, 268, 269. On a
visit of father Marescotti, she becomes solemn and gloomy, 269. Further
instance of her greatness of mind: Her delirium, 270. VII. Compromise proposed
by Mr. Grandison, with regard to the articles of Religion and Residence, 274,
275. Affecting scene of Lady Clementina's running into Jeronymo's chamber, to
avoid being let blood, 276 to 282. VIII. A spirited scene of a different
nature, between her Brother the General, and M. Grandison, 282 to 288. IX. He
is warned of his danger from the General, and advised to quit Bologna for a
time, 290 to 291. His answer to the friendly warnings, 291. She is earnest (in
her delirium) for an interview with him, in hopes of converting him -- Denied,
she disguises herself with a view to visit him in that hope. Her noble, though
distiacted behavior on that occasion procures for her the desired Interview,
292 to 296. Account of what passed on that affecting occasion, 296. Her great
behavior; His as great distress, 296 to 312. Her partly wild, partly sensible
conference with her Brother Jeronymo, in Mr. Grandison's favor, 313, 314. Her
delirious Letter to him, 320. Harsh measures taken with her, 323. X.
Particulars of the solemn leave Mr. Grandison took of the whole family, 333 to
344. Her great but wild behavior before all her friends, into whose presence
she had forced herself, after his departure, on supposing he had been
assassinated by the General, 347 to 353. Her earnest request to be allowed a
last parting interview with him: Refused; she makes an attempt that gives them
the utmost apprehensions; but which procured her not the so earnestly-requested
favor, 356, 357. She is intimidated by Lady Sforza, and by her daughter
Laurana, and used harshly by others of her family, 358, 359. XI Dr. Bartlett
concludes his extracts from Sir Charles's Letters with one from Mrs. Beaumont,
giving an account of the unhappy Lady's very unhappy state of mind, and with
the particulars of her deplorable situation at the time; but still persisting
in her wishes to see Mr. Grandison; her principal friends now, at last, request
his presence among them, as their last hope, 367 to 373. CLEMENTINA, [VOL. IV.]
Her Story pursued by Sir Charles Grandison. He acquaints Miss Byron that he is
invited over to Italy, as well by Signor Jeronymo, on his own account, as by
the Bishop of Nocera on his sister's 52, 53. He reads part of a Letter from
Mrs. Beaumont, giving an account of Lady Clementina's deplorable situation of
mind and person. -- Of her being put into the hands of her aunt Sforza, and
cousin Laurana -- Of their cruel usage of her; a shocking instance of it -- Of
her being taken out of their hands -- Of the General's adverseness to Sir
Charles's being invited over, 53 to 60. Miss Byron's greatness of mind on the
occasion. [ See Miss Byron] Sir Charles arrives at Bologna; understands that
Clementina will soon be there from Urbino, 285. Interesting conversation
between the Marchioness and him, relating to her, 285 to 287. Reasons why she
is not allowed to assume the veil, 288 to 290. Greatly emaciated; Picture of
silent woe: Terrified at the name of Laurana: Dialogue between her and Camilla,
about the Chevalier Grandison, 293 to 295. Arrives at Bologna, 296, and seq.
CLEMENTINA, [VOL. V.] Description of her solemn entrance among her assembled
friends, Sir Charles present, 4. Behavior on seeing him, 5, 6. Second
interview with him, 11. Affecting behavior, 11 to 16. Further account of the
state of her mind, 20, 21. Tried by a short absence of Sir Charles, 22, 23. Her
behavior to him on his return, 23, to 25. Day-breaks of her returning reason
2^. Conversation between her and him, in which she rambles, and shows loss of
memory: Consents to his absence of three weeks, 31 to 37. Favorable account of
hers and Jeronymo's health, 78 to 81. She dresses in colors to receive him,
82. Various effects of her disorder in the interview, 84 to 86. Wishes to talk
with him alone, 87. What passes on the occasion, 87 to 90. Her friends consent
that she shall be his: The conditions proposed, 91 to 102. Her heart (...) with
the greatness of her thoughts, 131. The agitations of her mind, in expectation
of his next visit, now she is left by her friends to determine for herself, 136
to 139. The affecting interview, 139 to 141. Unable to tell him the determined
purpose of her soul, she gives him a paper, which she had prepared for him, in
apprehension that she should not be able to speak her mind, 141. The contents
of the paper, urging him to desist from seeking her in marriage, by arguments
drawn from motives of the highest generosity and piety, 142 to 146. What passes
on the occasion between her family and him, 146 to 151. She gives the motives
of her noble conduct, 155. Conferences between her family and him, 157 to 160.
Another affecting interview with him, in which she declares her principal
regard for him is for the sake of his soul; and leaves him with wildness in her
manner, 161. Change of Religion proposed to him, by her desire, and servently
pressed upon him by them all, 167 to 171. Her conference with the Bishop and
father Marescotti, hoping that they might by arguments convince his judgment,
171 to 173. Her uniformly noble behavior set forth by Sir Charles, 173, 174.
He urges her by a last effort to yield to be his on the terms agreed upon with
her friends; she is almost overcome; but at last refers to her paper: He
acquiesces with her will, 177 to 183. She, in her turn, in presence of her
mother, makes one last effort to induce him to a change of his Religion;
offering in a noble manner her hand to him on that condition, 188 to 192. She
enquires into his intended rout, and proposes to correspond with him by Letter,
196 to 199. Letter I. in answer to his first, on the danger of a Roman-catholic
woman marrying a Protestant, 210 to 215. II. On her desire of taking the veil;
and urging him to marry some English Lady, 218 to 220. On his return, she
persists in her desire after a sequestered life, 229, 230. 236 to 239. In a
conversation with him accuses herself of pride, and fancifully talks to the
myrtles, 238, 239. Declares that she will preserve a seat in the garden
consecrated to his memory when he is gone; yet hears the news of the day of his
departure with tears, 240. The distressful attitude in which she receives his
parting visit, 245. She summons all her magnanimity, in order to be able to
tell him, before her assembled friends, that though never mortal loved another
with superior fervor, yet the UNSEEN is greater with her than the Seen, 247,
248. Their actual parting, 249. She faints away, 250. CLEMENTINA, [VOL. VI.]
Signor Jeronymo's Letter to Sir Charles in England, wishing that he would set
his Sister the example of marrying, 6, 7. Her Letter to him, implying her
adherence to her resolution, requesting him to second her solicitude after a
religious life, 8 to 10. Sir Charles's answer, 10 to 13. His answer to
Jeronymo's Letter, acquainting him with the character of Miss Byron; but
declaring, that though he has now, he sees, ^o hopes of Clementina's change of
resolution, yet, that from motives of delicacy regarding that young Lady, it is
not in his power to set the requested example, 13 to 17. [ See Sir Charles
Grandison, Vol. VI.] She gives hopes to her friends that she will yield to
their earnest entreaties in favor of the Count of Belvedere, 85 to 90.
Postpones the hopes she had given them, till she heard from Sir Charles, 229.
Receives the expected Letters from him. Her observations on the contents of
them, 232 to 234. Reads with pleasure the character he gives Miss Byron, and
generously wishes him happy with so excellent a young Lady, 235. Desires to
live single, 235, 236. Shows particularity; wishes to go to England, but not
till Sir Charles is married, 237. Allowed to visit Mrs. Beaumont at Florence,
238. Is uniform and steady in her wishes for Sir Charles's marriage, 238, 239.
Addresses herself in writing to Miss Byron to accelerate her own happiness and
his, 240. CLEMENTINA, [VOL. VII.] Her family in spirits, in hopes of prevailing
on her to marry the Count of Belvedere, 63. Supposed to be not right in her
mind, from her great earnestness to visit England, ibid. Receives with great
firmness the news of Sir Charles's nuptials, and implores a blessing on him and
his bride, ibid. The General expected from Naples to urge her to marry, she, in
apprehension of his coming, is desirous to go again to Mrs. Beaumont at
Florence, ibid. Mr. Lowther's account of her at his leaving Italy, 76. Lady
Grandison warmly espouses her cause [ See Miss Byron, vii. 76. and seq.] She is
threatened by her Brother the General, 78. Conversation between Sir Charles and
his Lady on her case, 80 to 82. Those violent measures end in her flight to
England, 97. The manner of her affecting it, 98, 99. Distraction of her
friends, who prepare to follow her, 100 to 103. Her affecting, but wandering
Letter written to Sir Charles, ten days after her arrival, 108 to 113. Letters
between him and her: Their affecting interview, 118 to 125. He prevails upon
her to put herself into Lady L's protection, on her own conditions, 127. Tender
interview between her and Lady Grandison, 138. Description of her person, ibid.
She requests Lady Grandison's interest with Sir Charles to prevent her being
compelled to marry, 142. Attracts the general admiration, 144, 145. Acquainted
with, and prepared for, the expected arrival of her family, 146 to 149.
Generous conversation between the two Ladies, 150, 151. Acquainted with her
family's arrival, 156, 157. Agrees, but with difficulty, to the articles of
accommodation drawn up by Sir Charles, 176. Entreats Lady Grandison's
supporting hand, on being to be introduced to her parents, 177. Her
observations on the proposed conditions, 179. Introduced to her family, and
joyfully received, 184, 185. Signs the articles herself; but dutifully refuses
to bind her parents, 192. Her interview with the Count of Belvedere, and
generous reasons for not admitting his address, 192 to 194. Every body next to
adores her for her great behavior on this occasion, 195, 196. She wishes the
Count as happy in marriage as Sir Charles Grandison, 196. Goes down with her
family to Grandison-hall, 198, 199. Lady Grandison's argumentations on her case
to her grandmother, 223. Desirous to leave England, 224. Draws up ideal plans
for her future life, ibid. H r self-applications on hearing Miss Jervois's
story, 226. Her conference with Mrs. Beaumont on that subject, and on Olivia's
(...) upon her, 228, and seq. Her observations on Sir Charles's letter to his
Lady, praising the Count of Belvedere, 23^, and (...) Accuses herself as the
cause of Lady Grandison's illness, 23^. 239. Conference with Lady Grandison, in
which she refuses her wishes to take the veil, 242 to 245. Consults Sir Charles
upon it; issue of that consultation, 248 to 256. Shuns company, even that of
Sir Charles, 257. Generously pities Laur^na for her slighted Love of the Count
of Belvedere, 257. Puts a home question to Lady Grandison, 258. Both Ladies
great and noble, 258, 259. Her interview with the Count on his coming down to
take leave of her, 260. Another in which she treats him with compassion, 267.
Shows him marks of complaisance 274. Her written proposal, to her parents, 278.
It is joyfully received by all the parties concerned, 280, 281. Another
interview between her and the Count, 282, 283. How she receives the news of her
cousin Laurana's death, 284, 285. Plan settled by her (at her family's desire)
with regard to the future visit of Sir Charles, his Lady, and his Sisters and
their Lords, to her family at Bologna, 285. Parting scene between her and the
Count, 286. An affecting conversation between her, and Sir Charles and his
Lady, in the garden, 287. Temple to be built on the spot, sacred to Friendship,
and to be called by her name, 288. Tranquillity seems to be taking possession
of her noble heart, 289. Sets out with her family for Dover, 291. Outwardly an
heroine, but inwardly a sufferer, ibid. As the parting hour draws near, melts
into tears and tenderness, 292. Sir Charles accompanies them to Calais, ibid.
Leaves her not unhappy, and her friends resolving, to the utmost of their
power, to make her happy, 293. CLEMENTS, Miss Pulcheria, her worthy character,
i. 52. 54. Praised by Mr. Walden, for a well-read Lady, 63. Observation that
the men who the least know how to argue, are the most addicted to dispute, i.
72. Visited by Miss Byron, i. 40. Writes finely, and is a Madame Sevign to her
correspondents, ibid. Has not suffered her reading to run away with her
housewifty, ibid. Her history, i. 141. Why objected to as a fit wife for Lord
W. iii. 131. Addressed to by a gentleman of Yorkshire, is going down to settle
there, iv. 270. CLEMSON, Lady Betty, a great talker of her own family, v. 72. A
Clergyman, who is an honor to his cloth, may be said to be an ornament to
human nature, ii. 15. See Dr. Bartlett. Communicativeness, ii. 109. iii. 241.
See Frankness of Heart. Companionableness in a husband, ii. 130. Compassion.
See Pity. Compliments, i. 95. 113. ii. 4. 14. 78. 103. v. 45. vi. 96, 97. 203.
See Flattery. See also Protestations. Compulsion, in Love-cases. See
Persuasion. Concealments, Lovers, i. 199. ii. 81. 86. 153. 162. iii. 21. 51,
52. vii. 90. Conceit, i. 47. 57, 58. vi. 172. vii. 14, 15. 131. Conscience,
iii. 70. v. 99. 271. vii. 120. Consolation, ii. 247. 288. iii. 374. iv. 166.
287. v. 39. 257. vi. 89. 222. vii. 63. 208. 215. Constancy, in the language of
Lovers to each other, too often men's obstinacy, with regard to every body else,
ii. 172. Coquets, vi. 204. COTES, Henry, a shorthand writer, takes minutes of
the conversation between Sir Charles Grandison and Mr. Bagenhall, i. 310. His
account of the conference at Sir Hargrave Pollexfen's, after the challenge, ii.
33 to 66. See Pollexfen. Courage, Sentiments upon it, i. 289. iv. 276. v. 68.
vi. 267. 274. See Magnanimity. Courtship, Sentiments relating to it, i. 38. 46
to 48. 51, 101. 106. 117. 110, 111. 113, 114, 117. 151, 156, 157. 202. ii. 25.
80. 244. 252. 261. 298, 302. iii. 124. 145. 232. 262. iv. 11. 33. 90. vi. 28.
31. 66, 122, 123, 135. 145, 146. 148. 157. 187. 203. 252. 268, 269. 284.
CREUTZER, Monsieur, Sir Charles Grandison's traveling governor in his younger
years; his vile character, ii. 238. Lays snares for the young gentleman's
virtue, ii. 239. The noble manner in which young Mr. Grandison complained of
him to his father, ibid. Further account of his profligacy, ii. 346. CROMWELL,
Thomas, the only grateful servant of Cardinal Wolsey, iii. 82. CURTIS, Dr. a
worthy clergyman of the church of England; introduces Mr. Milbourn, as worthy a
dissenting minister, to Sir Charles Grandison; who is greatly pleased with
their friendship to each other, vi. 206. Desirous to perform the matrimonial
office for Miss Byron, vi. 283. Officiates at her nuptials, vi. 328. CURZON,
Mrs. Sir Charles Grandison's prudent housekeeper, vii. 19, 20. 22. 27, 28. 40
to 44. Custom, ii. 47. 258. vi. 64, 65. See Affectation.
D
D. Countess dowager of, her private proposal to Mrs. Selby, in favor of her
Son's address to Miss Byron, i. 301 to 303. -- To the young nobleman himself,
i. 305. Her character from Lady L. ii. 73, 74. Visits Mrs. Reeves and Miss
Byron, ii. 77. Her frank and unreserved behavior to Miss Byron; whose favor
she entreats for her Son; and, in the same conversation, hints at the proper
behavior of a husband's mother to his wife, ii. 78 to 81. Wishes to be
acquainted with Sir Charles Grandison, ii. 82. Charmed with his character, ii.
83. Puts a close question to Miss Byron, ii. 84. Will not take a denial from
her, ii. 85. Mrs. Selby's Letter to Miss Byron on her proposal, ii. 114. 117.
Mrs. Shirley's on the same subject, ii. 121, 122. Miss Byron's answer, ii. 124
to 126. Visits Miss Byron and Mrs. Reeves; the Earl her Son with her, iii. 40.
Withdraws with Miss Byron; frank conversation between them, iii. 41 to 45. She
discourages her Son; but highly, to both their faces, praises Miss Byron, iii.
46. She visits Sir Charles Grandison on behalf of her Son, and acquaints Miss
Byron with the result, iv. 178 to 186. Her Letter dissuading Miss Byron against
the romantic notion of a friendship proposed to be held by her in the single
state, with Sir Charles and Lady Clementina in the married one, v. 115 to 118.
Expresses her wishes, that Sir Charles's marriage with Clementina were brought
to effect, v. 124. Visits Sir Charles, and claims his friendship, with that of
all his family, vi. 43. Claims also the continuance of Miss Byron's
correspondence with her, vi. 45, 46. Her reasonings against romantic notions in
Love, approved of by Mrs. Shirley, vii. 202. Her further reasonings on the same
subject, as quoted by Lady G. vii. 219. D. Earl of, his character from his
mother, i. 302. -- From Miss Grandison. ii. 74. -- From Miss Byron, iii. 47.
Sir Charles Grandison's good opinion of him, v. 101, 102. Mr. Greville's, vi.
125. DAGLEY, Antony, Lady Clementina's English servant, vii. 98. 100. His good
character from that Lady, vii. 109. 112. 116. DANBY, Mr. a merchant of eminence
and honor, comes over from France in hopes to regain his health, dies at
Canterbury, ii. 251, Interred, 330. Substance of his will in favor of Sir
Charles Grandison, and in disfavour of his nephews and niece, 331 to 333. His
reason for it, not wholly approved of by Sir Charles, ibid. Particulars at
large of Sir Charles's merits with him, by rescuing him from a villainous
attempt made upon his life by his profligate brother, iii. 152 to 155. His will
performed with regard to that part of his legacies bequeathed to the subjects
of France, v. 200. See Sir Charles Grandison. DANBY, John, the wicked brother
of the former, after his vile attempt on his brother's Life, flies to
Barbados, ii. 333. Further account of him and of his vile attempt, iii. 152.
DANBY, Mr. Thomas, Mr. Edward, and Miss Danby, nephews and niece of the
deceased Mr. Danby (concerned at their uncle's supposed unkindness to them)
decline attending his funeral, and to be present at opening his will: Sir
Charles's impartial Judgment on this occasion, ii. 330 to 332. Their gratitude
excited by his generosity, ii. 333. Description of each of them, ii. 334. Mr.
Thomas Danby's behavior on their attendance on Sir Charles, ii. 335 to 337.
Mr. Edward thinks it easy to obtain* wife, ii. 337, 338. Miss Danby's agreeable
simplicity in relating her circumstances and Love-affair, ii. 338 to 342. Their
grateful sense of Sir Charles's bounty to them all, ii. 343, 344.
Intermarriages proposed by Sir Charles in their favor, iii. 87, 88. Account of
the triple wedding, iv. 93, 94. Visited by Sir Charles, vii. 14. See Sir
Charles Grandison. See also Mr. Sylvester. Dancing, vi. 346. DARLINGTON, Miss,
a poetess, her character, i. 21. Daughters, i. 13. iv. 143, 144. 224. See
Advice to women. Libertine. Love. Lover. Parents and Children. Single women.
Daughters of decayed families, their difficult situation, iv. 14. DEANE, Mr. a
Lawyer of character, godfather to Miss Byron, i. 6. Prefers Milton to Homer,
74. His visit of curiosity to Miss Byron, ii. 328 to 330. Sounds Sir Charles
Grandison on her behalf, iii. 42, 43. His description of her as in Love iii.
44. He designs her for his principal heiress, v. iii. His Letter to Sir
Charles, informing him of her family and fortune, and of his
generously-intended addition to it, vi. 40. 48 to 51. He requests Sir Charles
to be his executor, vi. 150. Draws up the marriage-articles, and reads them to
her and her assembled friends, vi. 314. 320. Determines to reside near Sir
Charles, vii. 62. 137. Settles his affairs at Peterborough for that purpose,
vii. 154. Proposes to accompany Signor Jeronymo to Bath, vii. 288. Decorum, i.
49. Delicacy, Sentiments relating to it, i. 309. ii. 263. 296. iii. 1. 262. iv.
28. 133, 134. 212. 291. v. 25. 223. vi. 93. 112. 161. Delicate minds cannot be
united but by delicate observances, iv. 133. Demerit, consciousness of it, is
often the parent of jealousy iv. 8. DILLON, Major, a friend of captain
Anderson, ii. 300, and seq. Disappointment in Love is one of those cases in
which a woman can show fortitude iii. 65. iv. 1. Discretion and Gratitude the
corner-stones of the matrimonial fabric, vii. 35. See Prudence. Dismission of a
Lover, i. 108. 124. 131. 157. ii. 115. 118. ii. 111. 253. 257. v. 254. 278. vi.
119. Dissatisfaction will mingle with our highest enjoyments in this life, vi.
64. DOBSON, Reverend Mr. minister of Sir Charles Grandison's church in
Hampshire, iii. 10, 11. iv. 38. Worthy characters of him and his Lady, vii. 69.
DOLYNS, Miss, a visitant of Mrs. Reeves, i. 41, and seq. Dreams, terrible ones
of Miss Byron, vi. 216. No regard to be paid to those illusions, vi. 219, 287.
Dress, the taste of the present age, i. 57. Sir Hargrave Pollexfen's, ibid. Sir
Charles Grandison's, i. 256. ii. 9. Lady Clementina's and Miss Byron's
unaffected elegance in it, compared, v. 83. Sir Charles's notions on propriety
of dress; and reasons for modernizing in his own, vi. 181. Duelling, i. 291.
ii. 39. 46. 52, 53. Its barbarous rise, ii. 58. The subject embellished by
observations on the examples of that kind given -- by the Horatii and Curiatii,
ii. 59. -- by what passed between Tullus third king of Rome, and Albanus, ibid.
between Metellus and Sertorius, ibid. -- between Augustus and Mark Antony,
ibid. by the usages among the Turks, ibid, -- Jews, ii. 60. -- and Christians,
ibid. between Marshall Turenne and the Elector Palatine, ibid. Sir Charles's
syllogistical reasoning against it, ii. 61, 62. The Council of Trent express
against this barbarous practice, ii. 63. The edict of Lewis XIV. against it,
one of the greatest glories of his reign, ibid. See Challenges. See also vol.
vii. 301 to 303. DUNCAN, Captain, a justly rejected admirer of Miss Lucy Selby,
i. 88. See Miss Lucy Selby. Duties, i. 116. 120. ii. 122. 229. 231. 234. iii.
113. 287. vii. 108. 131. Duties of a good wife, ii. 97. 130, 131, 132. 184.
iii. 166.
E.
Early marriages, inconveniences of them, vii. 127. Early rising, i. 253. v.
114. Education, female, the time for it from seven to fourteen; and why, i. 10.
A religious one the best security for performance of the matrimonial
obligations, i. 36. Neither a learned, nor a fine one, of value, but as it
tends to improve the morals of men, and to make them wise and good, i. 62.
Genius to be consulted in it, v. 17. EGGLETON, Mrs. a friend of Mrs. Shirley in
her youth; her amiable character, and history, vii. 203 to 208. Elegance,
foundation of it, vii. 66. ELFORD, Mr. the first Lover of Miss Byron, i. 30.
ELIZABETH, Queen, her learning, vi. 358. EMILY Jervois. See Jervois, Miss
Emily. England, praised by Sir Charles Grandison for its temperate climate,
commerce, etc. v. 232. He hopes, when he is settled in it, to draw around him
such a number of worthies, as will make his neighborhood one of the happiest
spots in Britain, v. 236. English readers fond of story, whether probable or
improbable, vi. 332. English tongue, its excellence among the modern tongues,
iii. 240. Envy, a self-tormentor, ii. 90. Equivocation, ii. 116. Esteem, a
female word for Love, iii. 49. EVERARD Grandison, cousin to Sir Charles, his
character from Miss Grandison, i. 266, 267. From Sir Charles, ii. 2. His
flourishing speech to Miss Byron, ii. 5. She thinks him very uncivil with his
eyes, ii. 7. Further character from Miss Byron, ii. 10. His history, ii. 11,
12. Mistakes foppery for gallantry, ii. 103. His confident offer of himself to
Miss Byron, ii. 243. His penitence for his faulty morals, and frequent
relapses, iv. 38. 87. Ruined by gamesters, iv. 266 to 268. Yet, in a letter to
Sir Charles, values himself on his knowledge of the world, v. 18. Sir Charles's
letter of advice to him on the ruined state of his affairs, v. 66 to 69 [See
Gaming] He writes again to Sir Charles, v. 201. Sir Charles's verbal advice to
him at Paris; and description of his meager figure, and spiritless behavior,
v. 269 to 271. The gamesters triumph on his spoils, v. 282. Description of him,
by Lady G. v. 282, 283. His remorse on comparing Sir Charles's conduct with his
own. v. 288 to 290. And his own case with that of Mr. Bagenhall, v. 291. His
pride of name and family mortified, by his being obliged to make over his
estate to the gamesters, vi. 4. Difficulty of providing for a broken gentleman,
vi. 5. His behavior when vice-bitten, vi. 164. Released from his promise of
marriage; and his affairs likely to be reestablished, by his wine-merchant's
rich widow, vi. 165, 166. Her character from Lady Grandison, and from himself,
on a visit made by the new married pair to Sir Charles and his Lady, vii. 14,
15. They think themselves happy in each other; and she endeavors, by heraldry,
to justify her choice of a broken gentleman, vii. 131. Example, Sentiments on
the force of it, i. 200. 265. ii. 47. 344. iii. 86. iv. 121, 122. v. 91. vi.
38. 93. 116. 123. 205. 207. vii. 12. 14. Excuses, tacit confessions, iii. 202.
Extravagant men of family have few resources, vi. 5.
F.
FALCONBRIDGE, Mr. a guest at Sir Charles Grandison's nuptials, vi. 312. 320.
FALCONBRIDGE, Sir Thomas, a companion of Mr. Selby in his field-sports, vi.
312. False glory, and False shame, the great snares of virtue, i. 256. False
modesty, iii. 11. See Affectation. False shame, (...) 10. Families, little
communities; but few solid friendships out of them, ^. 28. Families decayed,
iv. 4. Family-devotion, vii. 32, 33. FARNBOROUGH, a Mistress of Sir Thomas
Grandison, ii. 146. Her death alarms him, ibid. Fashion, iv. 139. Has often
beat modesty out of doors, iv. 257. See Public places. Failers, gay and witty,
not always give daughters cause to thank then mothers for their fancies, ii.
140. Fear makes cowards loving, iii. 116. Female antipathies raillied, vi. 265.
Female delicacy is of a more delicate texture than that of men, vi. 11^: See
Delicacy. Female dignity, iii. 61. 63. 65. 204. 229. 260. ^. 175. 264. -- vi.
48, 49. 115. Female poetry, i. 21. iii. 307. Femality, a peculiar, but
expressive, word of Mr. Selby, v. 115, 140, 141. 143. 167. 346. 370. Femality,
Sentiments upon it, i. 30, 31, 32. 46. 48. 58. 2^5. 265, 266. 263. 270. 301.
ii. 170, 171, 172. 176, 1^^. 271, 272. 283. iii. 136 164. 172. 232. 285, 286.
iv. 29. 32, 33. 102. 255. v. ^53. vi. 9^, 93, 94. 98. 115. 125. 140, 141, 142,
143. 1^6. 161, 162. 164. 167. 179. 275. 285, 286, 287. 295. 346. 370. vii. 56.
201. 215, 216. Fencing, ii. 5^. FENWICK, Mr. a Lover of Miss Byron, threatens
to follow her to London, i. 2. Escorts her, with Mr. Greville, part of the way
thither, i. 14. Encounter, and compromise, between him and Mr. Greville, i. 5.
89. His character from Miss Byron, i. 28. 29. Meets her on her return from
London, iv. 220. Declares his determined perseverance, iv. 241. Yet, on failure
of success with her, hints at his design to address Miss Lucy Selby, vi. 46.
His report of the rencounter between Sir Charles Grandison and Mr. Greville at
Northampton, vi. 100 to 105. Offers himself as a suitor to Miss Lucy Selby, vi.
106. His account of Sir Charles's pleasant and lively behavior, among a large
company of gentlemen, at Mr. Greville's, vi. 201, 202. Rejected by Miss Lucy
Selby, resolves to bring a wife from Carlisle, vi. 224. FERDINAND of Medicis,
Cardinal, lays down the purple, and marries, vi. 12. Filial piety, vi. 181.
220. vii. 21. 23. See Sir Charles Grandison. FILMER, Mr. Sir Thomas Grandison's
Irish steward; his dishonest subtlety, ii. 191. Disappointed by find ng Sir
Thomas incapable of signing his accounts, ii. 220. Seeks to captivate Sir
Charles with the beauty of Miss Obrien, ii. 226. Fine Gentleman, i. 275. 272.
See Good man. See Sir Charles Grandison, throughout that article. First Love,
generally first folly, ii. 158. iv. 116. Few women have their first loves, vi.
45. vii. 213. 214. Few first loves fit to be encouraged, vii. 213. See
Vincibility of Love. Flattery, i. 12. 18. 21, 22. 38. 41. 47. 49. 95. 113. ii.
103. 262. Fleet parson, description of one, i. 215. And of his clerk, i. 218.
Frustrated in their designed service to Sir Hargrave Pollexfen, i. 222. A Fool
and a Wit equally unmanageable, ii. 30. 330. Fondness of a married pair in
public, a degree of immorality, iv. 194* 246. Fortune-bunters, iii. 12, 13. See
Libertines. See Public places. FOWLER, Mr. addresses Miss Byron, i. 35. His
character from her, i. 37. Visits her with Sir Rowland Meredith his uncle, i.
97 to 108. Despairs, i. 109. Plan of the tour which he proposes to take, in
order to conquer his passion, and establish his health, ii. 1. Carrries a
generous letter to her from Sir Rowland, iv. 207. Her kind behavior to him,
and pity of him, iv. 209, 210. [ See Miss Byron, vol. iv.] Desires to visit her
once more, vi. 46. Goes to Bristol for his health, vii. 5. Visit, with his
uncle, Sir Charles Grandison, and his Lady, at Grandison-hall; and pays a
handsome compliment to the merit of Sir Charles, vii. 58. His uncle's proposal
of marriage for him (but without his participation) with Miss Lucy Selby, vii.
60, 61. Lady Grandison's favorable opinion of him, with regard to her cousin
Lucy, vii. 71. 74. FRAMPTON, Lady, a relation and correspondent of Mr.
Greville, i. 3. Is earnest with Miss Byron in his favor, vi. 47. Frankness of
heart, ii. 98. 250. 257. iii. 141. 165. vi. 177. See Miss Byron 's character
throughout. Free Masonry, a great deal of it in Love, iv. 266. French fond of
Sentiment, English of Story, vi. 332. Friend of mankind, a much more glorious
character than that of the conqueror of nations, iii. 101. Friendly freedom
will ever be acknowleged as a favor by the worthy, vii. 80. Friendship is the
balm and seasoning of life, iii. 62. No motive of it can justify a wrong
action, iii. 92. Its essence, iii. 200. The basis of true love, iv. 65. A
delicate union of like minds, which exalts human nature, iv. 98. Love, even
when its motive is marriage, does not always in that state ripen into
friendship, ibid. Its power of lessening distance of place, vii. 287. See also,
for Sentiments on this noble perfection of the human mind. i. 259. ii. 23. 44.
161. 232. iii. 9. 15. 62. 69. 165, 166. 208. 241, 24^. v. 21. 26. 74. 83. 282.
vi. 7. vii. 80. Funerals, ii. 203.
G.
G. Earl of, Father of Lord G; his first visit, with Lady Gertrude his sister,
to Miss Charlotte Grandison, on his son's behalf, iv. 7 to 9. His earnestness
for his son's speedy marriage, iv. 81. Visits her a second time with lady
Gertrude, iv. 83. Rejoices in her consent to marry his son, iv. 84. His
presents to her, iv. 95. His letter urging Lady G. to return from
Northamptonshire, v. 119. G. Lord, an admirer of Miss Charlotte Grandison; his
character from Sir Charles Grandison, ii. 2. A connoisseur, ii. 7. Ridiculed by
Miss Grandison, for his collection of insects, ii. 8, 9. His character compared
by Sir Charles with that of Sir Walter Watkyns (another admirer of Miss
Grandison) and preferred to it, ii. 259, 260. His further character from Sir
Charles, iii. 123. 164. His marriage celebrated, iv. 115. and seq. [For their
frequent quarrels and reconcilements, see Miss Charlotte Grandison, Vols. IV.
and V.] His character, from Miss Byron, iv. 131. Ridiculed by his Lady for his
taste in moths, butterflies, shells, and china, iv. 231, 232. Presents his
collection of shells to Miss Jervois, iv. 233. Present: Lady G. with a parrot
and paroquet, v. 126. Miss Byron's favorable opinion of his understanding, v.
128. His fondness for his Lady, v. 273. Dr. Bartlett's advantageous character
of him to her, v. 290. More of her humerous flippancies to him, ibid. -- vi.
57. 296. 311. 317. 3^9* 340. 343. 346. -- vii. 7. Attends Sir Charles and Lady
Grandison to Grandison-hall, vii. 16. Prepares the house in Grosvenor-square
for the reception of the Porretta family, vii. 133. Receives the Count of
Belvedere at St. James's-square, vii. 1^^, 158. In agonies for his Lady's
safety in childbirth, vii. 19^. His transport on surprising her employed in the
tenderest office of a true mother, vii. 210 to 212. G. Lady. See Miss Charlotte
Grandison. GALLIARD, Mr. a worthy young merchant, married to Miss Danby, iii.
87. -- iv. 94. GALLIARD, Mr. senior, makes a proposal of marriage to Sir
Charles Grandison, iv. 130. GAMALIEL, who would be deemed such by Sir Charles
Grandison, were he in puliament, vii. 264. Gaming, S r Charles Grandison's
opinion of the payment of those debts which the world calls debts of honor, v.
60. 6^. In what cases he would have a loser call in to his aid the Laws of his
country, v. 67. Adversity the trial of principle, ibid. Two things to be
guarded against by every loser, ibid. Better to be a sufferer than a de^^ander,
ibid. A loser deserves his fate for putting to hazard a certainty, in hopes of
obtaining a share in the property of another, v. 68. Further reflections on
this pernicious practice, v. 269. Gaming-master necessary to complete the
education of a modern fine Lady, i. 23. Ga^^on, the blustering temper of one
described, iv. 269, 2^^. Generosity, Sentiments on that noble quality, i. 28^.
ii. 2^3. 231. iii. 2^. 82. 89. -- iv. 35. 114. 134. 213. -- v. 98. 130. 14^.
160. 268. 270. -- vi. 41. 50. 277. -- vii. 33. ^8. Generous Lover, ii. 162.
304. -- iii. 212. -- iv. 214. -- vi. 157, 221. 256. Genius's, different, given
by Providence for different ends, and that all might become useful links of the
same great chain, v. 16, 17. Gentleman, the difficulty of providing for a
broken one, vi. ^, 6. GERTRUDE, Lady, maiden-aunt to Lord G.; her (...) from
Miss Byron, iv. 7. Prepares some rich presents for Mis^ Grandison, on her
nuptials, iv. 96. Endeavors to shame him on the (...) of ^hamber marriages,
iv. 100, 101. Her (...) for remaining sin^le, iv. 139, 140. Her story of a
father who obliged his daughter to marry at the age of fifteen, for interested
iv. 144. Her solid remarks, by way of defense of the Single state, in
preference to imprudent marriage, vii. 218. GIACOMO della Porretta [VOL. III.]
a general officer in the service of the of the King of the Two Sicilies, eldest
Brother of Lady Clementina; his brave, but haughty character, 174. His civil
invitation of the Chevalier Grandison (so called in Italy) to Naples, 179.
Exasperated hy his refusal of becoming a Roman Catholic, withdraws his favor
from him, 191. The Chevalier cautioned not to meet him, 273, 274. His haughty
demeanor in a conference with him, upon a presumption that his Sister had been
refused by him, 282 to 287. Makes him a sullen visit at his lodgings on the
same misconception, 287, 288. Continuance of his resentment intimated to the
Chevalier by his Brother Jeronymo, 290. The Chevalier's resolution to avoid a
meditated rencounter, 291. He and the family determine that the Chevalier is
unworthy of their alliance, and of his resentment, 291, 292. Angry with his
Sister for her attachment to the Chevalier, he vents his displeasure on
Jeronymo, 327, 328. His indignant behavior to the Chevalier, in full assembly,
on the latter's taking leave of the whole family, 335, to 341. [ See Sir
Charles Grandison, vol. iii.] His violence subdued by the Chevalier's prudence,
they agree to meet at Naples, 342, 343. Advises the family to change the harsh
measures used with Clementina, 348. Endeavors to quiet his Sister's
apprehensions for the Chevalier's safety, 350. Prevents her escape by the
garden-wall, in the disorder of her mind, 357. Visited according to promise, by
the Chevalier, at Naples, 360. His cold behavior in it, 360, to 365. His civil
behavior at parting, 367. GIACOMO [Vol. IV.] visits his Sister at Florence, in
company with Lady Sforza; and takes her from thence. His reasons for it, 54,
55. Releases her from her confinement at Lady Sforza's, where she was cruelly
used, 58. [ See Lady Laurana.] Refuses to join in inviting the Chevalier to
return to Italy, 59. Consents to the invitation, and attends his Sister, with
his new-married Lady, to Bologna, 278. His insulting behavior excites the
Chevalier's indignation and contempt: Their angry conference, and
reconciliation, 298, and seq. GIACOMO [VOL. V.] his open and free behavior to
Sir Charles, 2. Relapses into his former incivility, 4, 5, 6. The Bishop makes
up the breach, 7. His behavior on the different changes of his Sister's
disorder, 11, to 16. He receives Sir Charles, on his second visit at Naples, as
his brother and friend, 78. Again receives him there with high civility, 227.
On his Sister's declining to marry, advises his family to accept of Sir
Charles's invitation to England, 232. Pities Sir Charles on his emotion at
parting with her, 245. GIACOMO [VOL. VI.] warmly urges his Sister to marry, 9.
86, 87. Offers to obtain the general consent to her marriage with Sir Charles,
if she will give up her wishes after the sequestered life, 229. Recants his
mistaken grounds for exception, and repents of his rude behavior, to Sir
Charles, 230. Fresh motives, from Sir Charles's letters to his Sister and
Jeronymo, for his urgency to her to marry, ibid. -- With a view to favor the
Count of Belvedere, 237. GIACOMO [VOL. VII.] terrifies his Sister, by too
violently urging her consent to marry the Count of Belvedere, 6;. Visits her at
Florence, 76. Threatens her; but, finding harsh measures ineffectual,
endeavors to persuade her to marry the Count, 78. His reason for desiring her
to marry, 80. His generous, yet violent, character, from Sir Charles, 82.
Incensed against his sister for her flight, 102. His absence agreeable to
Clementina, on account of his hasty and inexorable temper, 149. He continues
his zeal for her marriage with the Count, and the performance of their
grandfather's will, 168, 169. His letter to Jeronymo in England, acquainting
him with the unhappy end of the cruel Laurana, 275. High praises of Sir Charles
Grandison, 275, 276. GIFFARD, Mrs. a woman of mean birth, and low cunning,
manages Lord W. by teazing, more absolutely than a wife of birth and fortune
could have done by duty and affection, ii. 199. Lord W. (resolved to part with
her) applies to Sir Charles Grandison for his advice and assistance, iii. 59.
Her case properly distinguished by Sir Charles from that of Mrs. Oldham, iii.
60. Her Lord not inclining, however, to comply with the terms stipulated at
taking her into keeping, Sir Charles brings all to bear, in such a manner as
displays his justice, prudence, generosity, goodness, all at once, and attracts
the admiration and blessings of his uncle, iii. 59 to 82. See Sir Charles
Grandison. Girls, Sentiments concerning them, i. 55. -- ii. 149. -- iii. 44. --
iv. 228. -- The beginning and progress of Love in giddy ones, vi. 162, 163. --
vii. 214. Glory; great mischiefs occasioned by the word and thing so called,
ii. 284. GODFREY, Mr. a guest at Sir Charles Grandison's nuptials, vi. 312.
320. Good, goodness, ii. 116. -- iii. 65. 113. 167. 203. 206. 266. 267. -- iv.
68. -- v. 92. -- vii. 3. 214. Good man, i. 198. 2^4. 290. -- ii. 29. 45. 5^.
105. 106. 224. 229. 265. 323. 343, 344 -- iii. 12. 31. 101. 340. -- iv. 34. 70.
82. 112. 229. 232. -- v. 29. 36. 38. 133. 184. 237. 255. 290. -- vi. 67. 132.
202. 348. -- vii. 14. 33. 150. A good man will honor him who lives up to his
rel gious profession, whatever it be, ii. 62. Such a one lives to his own
heart; thinks it ill-manners to slight the world's opinion, yet will regard
that but in the second place, iii. 12. He will not, by his complaisance,
countenance the enormities of the great, iii. 25. A good man must have
difficulties to encounter with, by which a man of the world would not be
embarrassed, iii. 90. A good man's life is a continual warfare with his
passions, iii. 229. A good man is a prince of the Almighty's creation, iii.
343. See Sir Charles Grandison. Goodnature is the distinction of the true
satirist, i. 61. And the characteristic of youth iii. 345. Good wife, i. 28.
36. See Lady Grandison, mother of Sir Charles. Also Miss Byron, vol. vii. See
also Mrs. Selby. Mrs. Shirley. Good women reflect honor on all those who had
any hand in their education, and on the company they keep, i. 50. A good woman
is one of the greatest glories of the creation, ii. 279. -- iii. 133. See also
iii. 11. -- vi. 295, and alibi. Grandison, EVERARD. See Everard. Grandison, Sir
CHARLES, father of Sir Thomas; his frugal character, ii. 128. Grandison, Sir
THOMAS, father of Sir Charles [VOL. II.] 12. 54. A man of gaiety and
magnificence, 56. Desperately wounded in a duel, ibid. Designs to bring up his
son a soldier, 57. Further hints of the duel, 97. His fine person, and
profusion of expense, 128. His poetical vein of service to him in gaining his
Lady, 129. A complaisant but careless husband: Instances of the latter, 129 to
133. His opinion, that daughters are an encumbrance, 135. Parting scene between
him and his lady, on her deathbed, 136 to 140. Permits his son to travel, in
order to moderate his grief for the death of his mother, 141. Places Mrs.
Oldham over his daughters, 142. On their reluctance to receive her as their
governess (after his intimacy with her became known), he keeps her at his seat
in Essex, in as much state as if she were his wife, ibid. Becomes a slave to
his passions, and keeps another mistress in town, 143. Prohibits his daughters
and their brother corresponding, 144. His reason for it, 146. Avowedly keeps
his son abroad, because his good morals would disgrace his own, ibid. Temporary
remorse on the death of his town-mistress, 146, 147. His treatment of Lord L.
on his address to Miss Caroline, and of both his daughters, on that occasion,
more like a man of wit, than an indulgent parent, 147 to 187. [ See Earl of L.
Lady L. Miss Grandison]. High words (on Lord L's proposal) between him and Lord
W.; who hate each other for their contrary vices, 187. [ See Lord W.] Intends
to permit his son to return; but irresolate what to do with Mrs. Oldham, 188.
Leaves his two stewards to examine each other's accounts, being ashamed that
his son should inspect into the particular items, 191, 192. His proposed
reformation obstructed by his being newly captivated with Miss Obrien, 192.
Terms on which he was to take her into keeping, 193. He endeavors to find
excuses for keeping his son abroad, ibid. While he is treating with Mrs. Oldham
about parting with her, is seized with a violent fever, and becomes delirious:
Recovering his senses, he regrets his unkindness to his daughters; wishes for
time for repentance, which he finds most difficult when he stands most in need
of it; and dies in dreadful agonies, 194, 195. Grandison, late LADY, mother of
Sir Charles, her excellent character [VOL. II.] 12. 55. Instills into her son's
mind the principles of true magnanimity, benevolence, and forgiveness of
injuries, 55. Her instructions to him, with relation to the limited use of the
science of defense, 55, 56. He is commanded by his father to consider her as
his oracle in points of honor, since she could well distinguish between true
and false glory, and would not have her son a coward, 56. Her noble extraction,
and further character, 128 to 130. Endeavors, by her economy, to enable her
husband to support his extravagance, without injury to his family, 131. Her
generous, benevolent, and hospitable spirit; in which she assumes to herself
only the secondary merit of being her husband's almoner, ibid. Her tender
reception of him after a causeless absence of six months, 131, 132. Her dying
advice to her daughters to love their brother, 135, 136. Requests Sir Thomas to
join with her in blessing their three children, 137, 138. Refuses to permit him
to accuse himself. 138. Takes an affecting leave of him, 139. And dies, 140.
Grandison, Mrs. ELEANOR, Sister of Sir Thomas, ill-treated by him, ii. 175.
180. Visited at York by Sir Charles, ii. 238. Arrives in town, iv. 268.
Respects Dr. Bartlett, v. 44. Was a Methodist in Yorkshire, v. 45. Takes the
part of Lord G. against Lady G. her niece, v. 46. Detected by Lady G. in
hearing and countenancing his complaints against her, v. 47, 48. Obtains her
excuse for interfering between a man and his wife, v. 48, 49. Makes up a
quarrel between the married pair, v. 51 to 59. Instructs her niece to behave
better to her Lord, v. 76. Loses two of her fore teeth, v. 121. Gives a
relation to her niece of her disappointment in love, and lays it at the door of
her late brother, v. 124, 125. On Sir Charles's return to England, entertains
the company with her dreams, v. 273, 274. Enquires after Lady Clementina, and
hopes her nephew need not go out of England for a wife, vi. 31. 57. 58. The
various uses to which she puts her letter-case. vi. 167, 168. She regrets her
not being to be present at his wedding, vi. 289. Her delight in nursing Lady
L's infant, vi. 294. She pities Miss Byron on the near approach of her
nuptials, vi. 295. Officiously directs the nurse of Lady L's child in her
office, vii. 7, 8. Her rash vow, made in resentment for Sir Thomas's former
treatment of her, vii. 198. Grandison, Sir CHARLES [VOL. I.], his character, by
one of his servants, 180. His rescue of Miss Byron, ibid. Relates the
particulars of it to his Sister, and to Mr. Reeves, 191 to 199. Claims Miss
Byron for his third Sister, 201. Admired by Mrs. Reeves, Lady Betty Williams,
and Miss Clements, on his attending Miss Byron home from Colnebrook, 205, and
seq. Incloses in a letter to Mr. Reeves, Wilson's penitent letter; and gives
his reasons for forgiving him, 236, 237. His character, and description of his
person, by Miss Byron, 253 to 262. He visits* Miss Byron, 287. Expresses
himself with quickness, in apprehension that Miss Byron has given Mr.
Bagenhall's letter any of her attention, 289, 290. [ See Bagenhall.] Challenged
by Sir Hargrave Pollexfen, 290. His letter to Sir Hargrave on that subject, 292
to 294. Conference with Mr. Bagenhall on the same subject, with his noble
sentiments on the occasion, 310, and seq. His indifference with regard to
death, 314. Grandison, Sir CHARLES [VOL. II], praises his ward to Miss Byron,
3. [ See Miss Jervois.] His moderation and charity in speaking of bad people,
ibid. Can compliment one Lady without depreciating another, 4. Presents his
ward to Miss Byron, ibid. His kind behavior to his servants, 6. His serenity
on receiving a disagreeable message, ibid. His polite behavior to Dr.
Bartlett, 7. Endeavors to draw out into notice the Doctor's bashful merit, 13.
His compliment to Miss Byron on her musical accomplishments, 23. Another
conference with Mr. Bagenhall, 24, and seq. In which he gives his opinion of
the Laws of honor, 26. And intrepidly invites himself to breakfast with Sir
Hargrave, upon his challenge, 26, 27. The rules which he constantly observes on
a challenge, 28. Particulars of the conference between him and Sir Hargrave, at
the house of the latter, 35, and seq. Does honor to his mother's memory for
the care she took of his education, 55, 56. His great adroitness and diligence
in the management of business, 82, 83. What his employments are, 83. His
personal advantages, ibid. A friend to marriage, 99. Improves upon Miss Byron
in every conversation, 105. Induces Sir Hargrave and Mr. Merceda to do justice
to the penitent Wilson, ibid. 106. 248. His character, from Miss Grandison,
106. He has few secrets, 111. Grandison, Sir CHARLES [VOL. II. continued.] his
Sisters acquaint Miss Byron with some of his excellencies in his early youth,
134 to 136. And of his filial duty when abroad, 152, 153. 157. 189. 190.
Description of his person and manners at the age of seventeen, 200. Of his
tender behavior to them on his return, 200 to 202. Of his prudent care of his
father's funeral, and sentiments on the solemn subject, 203. Of his dexterity
in business, 204. Of his mother's bequest to him; and her character of him when
a youth, 214. Of his checking his Sisters for their haughty demeanor to Mrs.
Oldham, his father's late mistress; and of his great behavior to her 210, 211,
216 to 224. He has no vices of his own to cover, by the extensiveness of his
charity and beneficence, 225. They give an account of his conduct with regard
to his father's base stewards, ibid. Of his endeavor to conceal his father's
frailty from the knowledge of the world; and of his portioning and marrying off
Miss Obrien, an intended new mistress of his father, 226, 227. Of his
conferences with Lord W. in which he overcame that nobleman's prejudices
conceived against him on his father's account, 228 to 223. Of his generosity to
them, left, as they were, absolutely in his power, 234, 237. And, at Miss
Byron's request, they give the particulars of his manly and prudent conduct
toward his profligate governor, when he first went abroad, 238, 239.
Grandison, Sir CHARLES [VOL. II. continued.] his own benefaction to Wilson, and
reason for it, 248, 249. Attends Mr. Danby in his sickness, and at his death,
251. He tries his Sister Charlotte's Love-cause, 252, and seq. Is sounded by
his two Sisters on his inclinations as to, marriage, 293, 294. He warmly
praises Miss Byron, 296, 297. His notion of weighing the merits and demerits of
persons in opposite scales, and judging of them by the preponderating one, 303.
Lets a lease of his good opinion to persons at his first acquaintance with
them, which he either renews, or not, at the expiration of it, ibid. His
sentiments on Love and Courtship, 304, 305. On Libertines, 305. On retribution,
with regard to women who marry in hopes to bury their husbands, 306. On the
performances of young poetesses, 307. Extricates his Sister Charlotte from her
imprudent engagement with Captain Anderson, 309, and seq. Dr. Bartlett defends
him against the charge of reservedness, 324. His opinion of Miss Byron, 326.
The Doctor's and Lord L's account of the general estimation he stood in among
Ladies abroad, 327, 328. Why Miss Byron wishes he had some faults, 329. He
attends the funeral of his friend Mr. Danby, 330. His noble behavior to the
nephews and niece of that gentleman, 330, and seq. Account, extracted from Dr.
Bartlett's papers, of his examplary behavior in his younger years, when
abroad, 345, 346. Of his first acquaintance with the Doctor, 346. And with Mr.
Beauchamp. 350. Of his saving the Doctor from the bowstring, 350, 351. Of his
visiting Asia and Africa, 352. And of his furnishing his friend Beauchamp, from
his own finarces, with means to prosecute his travels, 352, 353. 355.
Grandison, Sir CHARLES [VOL. III.] first mentions advices from Bologna, 10.
Beautifies his church, ibid. Care for his ward Miss Jervois, 11 to 15. His high
opinion of Miss Byron, 15. purposes to go to Paris on the duties of his
executorship to his late friend Mr. Danby, 16. His scheme of portioning young
maidens: Other of his Charities, 16, 17. His few secrets such only as could not
yield pleasure to his friends, were they to know them, 26. How he deals with
his Sister Charlotte's humors curiosity, ibid. Calls his own behavior into
question, for exciting too much awe in his Sisters, 26, 27. Frustrates the base
design of Mrs. Jervois against her daughter, 38. His character, from Mr. Deane,
42. He joins Mr. Deane in the praises of Miss Byron, both as to mind and
person, 43. His readiness to undertake long and difficult journies, upon a
proper call, ibid. Difficulty of particularizing his virtues, 56. Frees his
uncle Lord W. from his insolent mistress [ See Giffard.]; and prevails upon him
(contrary to his own interest, as next heir) to resolve to marry, and to lead a
life of sobriety, 57, and seq. A friend to the Sex; and thinks not well of the
man who is not, 65. Confirms the happiness of the whole Danby family, 87, 88.
His goodness, when abroad, to another mercantile family, in cancelling a bond
for money lent by him, 88, 89. Infolently broken in upon by Mr. O-Hara, his
wife, and Captain Salmonet, he is grieved for giving way to passion, especially
in his own house, 92 to 99. He is not to be bribed even by beauty, 103. Again
regrets his passionate behavior, 105. His tenderness and indulgence to Miss
Jervois, and justice to her wicked mother, 104 to 111. Sounded by his Sister
Charlotte on his inclinations as to marriage, 115 to 120. He sounds her in
return; when she, by an air of coquetry, which he can not allow in his Sister,
makes him angry; but shows the most noble placability on the occasion, 121 to
129. His sentiments on Miss Byron's Letters, 133, 134. Resumes his enquiry into
his sister Charlotte's opinion of her two suitors; and, on her light answers,
refers himself to Miss Byron, to acquaint him with her mind, 134, and seq.
Pleasantly exposes the pompous and unnatural style of romance, 142. Gives an
account of the attempt made by instigation of the wicked father of the young
Danbies on the life of his late brother, 153 to 155. Receives Letters which
disturb him, and give occasion for exemplifying his patience and magnanimity,
155 to 158. His conference with Miss Byron in Lord L's Libarary; in which are
included his solicitude for the happiness of his Sister Charlotte, and the
first part of the history of Lady Olivia, of Lady Clementina, Signor Jeronymo
della Porretta, and their family; and in which are shown his bravery in
delivering Signor Jeronymo from assassins; his steadfastness in his religion;
and his patriotism, 161, and seq. Sets Dr. Bartlett before him as a second
conscience, 170. Considers himself, in his absence from his native country, and
from his father (whose paternal goodness he, however, gratefully acknowleges),
in the light of a banished man, 172. His dark expressions, that he cannot be
unjust, ungenerous, or selfish, 192. Obliged, by his own distress in telling
his affecting story, to leave Miss Byron abruptly, he holds a conference with
Dr. Bartlett on the difficulties of his situation, 193, 194. Grandison, Sir
CHARLES [VOL. III. continued.] p. 198. Dr. Bartlett, by his leave, gives
extracts to Miss Byron from his former Letters to the Doctor, of Lady
Clementina's story, and his embarrasments on her account. In these extracts are
contained the following particulars, as requested of the Doctor by Miss Byron,
besides those to be found under the article Clementina, Vol. III. p. 198; viz.
His expstulatory Letter to Signor Jeronymo against Libertinism, 200 to 207.
Another to the same, on his engaging in a dangerous amor, 208, 209. [ See
Jeronymo.] He avoids formal debates on religion in a country of a different
faith from his own, 226. The Doctor takes notice of the correctness of his
taste, as to following nature, rather than forcing it in works of art, 234.
Prevails upon himself to propose to allow Lady Clementina the free exercise of
her religion, her confessor, and to educate the future daughters of the
marriage, 267. 273. 275. 283. 284. -- But declares, that he would not have
begun an address upon those terms with a princess, 284. High words between the
General and him upon this subject, ibid. Owns his constitutional pride, on
being slighted by the proud family of Porretta, 323, 324. Further angry
conferences with the General; in which are displayed his patriotism, and
universal charity, 341 to 344. His intrepid conference with the General at
Naples, 360 to 367. At Florence settles the affairs of his late friend Mr.
Jervois, 367. Returns to England upon the death of his father, 372. See for
what relates to him, to Lady Clementina, and her Family, and to her situation
at the time he returned to England, the articles Clementina, Giacomo, Jeronymo.
Grandison, Sir CHARLES [VOL. IV.] Engagements, as enumerated by Miss Byron,
which engross his time, 3, 4. He takes tender notice of Mrs. Oldham, and her
sons, 5. Dines with Sir Hargrave Pollexfen, and his gay friends, 9. His
reflections on the riots and excesses frequently committed at jovial meetings of
gay and thoughtless youth, 9, 10. Wishes Dr. Bartlett would write upon this
subject, 10. Negociates a treaty of marriage for Lord W.; and resolves to
attempt the restoring of the oppressed Mansfield family to their rights, 10 to
19. Appeases the imperious Lady Beauchamp, 21 to 38. His further proceedings in
relation to the settlements on Lord W's match with one of the daughters of the
Mansfield family, 39. Disclaims ostentation in acts of beneficence, ibid. Owns
for Miss Byron a more tender friendship than that for a Sister, 62. Lays before
her his several engagements previous to his departure for Italy, 62 to 64. His
intentions with regard to his ward Miss Jervois, 65, 66. And with regard to the
marriage of his Sister Charlotte, before he leaves England, 66. His
condescension to Mrs. Oldham, who dines with him; and generousiy to young
Oldham, and to her two children by his father; with his prudent instructions to
the elder son, regarding the nature of true honor, 68 to 71. Overcomes, by his
prudence and generosity, Miss Jervois's wicked mother, and her husband; and
makes them happy; yet in such a manner as does honor to his ward, 72 to 79.
Engages Mr. Lowther, a skilful surgeon, to accompany him to Bologna, to assist
in the cure of Signor Jeronymo, taking also the written opinions of two learned
English physicians relative to the case of Lady Clementina, 80. Prevails on his
Sister Charlotte to fix her wedding day, 81 to 86. His reflections on his
cousin Grandison's temporary concealments of himself, 87. Begs his sister,
whenever he emerges, to receive him without reproaches, ibid. His joy in the
prospect of the happiness which is likely to gild the latter days of his
mother's brother, and in restoring from oppression the ancient and worthy
family of the Mansfields, 88. His agreeable behavior at the three weddings of
the Danbies, 92 to 95. Introduces Lord W. to Miss Mansfield, 108, 109. His
interview with his friend Beauchamp at Sir Harry's, 110, 111. He briefly lays
before his Sister Charlotte the duties of the married state, 115, 116. His
delicate behavior at Lord W's proposing Miss Byron to him in her presence, as
the only person capable of rewarding him for her virtue, 117. His cheerful
behavior on his Sister's wedding day, while his own heart is torn with
uncertainty, 123 to 129. Conference between him and Lord W. on the management
of Servants, 137, 138. -- With Lady G. on prudery, 139. -- With Lord L. on the
manners of the fine Ladies of the age, ibid. -- With Lord G. on the proper age
for marriage, with regard to women, 140. -- With Mrs. Reeves, on the helpless
state of Single women, ibid. Scheme for erecting Protestant Nunneries, and
places of retirement for Female Penitents, 140 to 142. Sentiments with regard
to parents who force their childrens inclinations in wedlock, and on other
interesting topics, 143 to 145. Owns himself naturally to be of an imperious
spirit; and ascribes the advantages imputed to him to considerations on his
mother's death, and to the good example and precepts of Dr. Bartlett, 145, 146.
What passes between him and Lady Olivia, on her unexpected arrival in England,
148, 149. 154, 155. 158 to 163. (See Olivia.) His tender behavior to Miss
Byron at Mr. Reeves's, a little before his setting out for Italy, 163, and seq.
He departs unexpectedly, from tender motives, 169. Presents a pair of colors
to the eldest of Mrs. Oldham's sons, 172. Never begins a journey on a Sunday,
except in pursuit of works of mercy, or necessity, 175. Is not ashamed to be
known to perform his religious duties; yet leaves to the Clergy their province
uninvaded; and why, 175, 176. His behavior on being assaulted by Olivia with a
poniard, 176 to 178. He declines endeavoring to engage Miss Byron's affections
from generous motives, 182. He complies with such customs of the world as are
of an indfferent nature; but is inflexible with regard to evil ones, how
fashionable soever, 189. Grandison, Sir CHARLES (Vol. IV. continued.) Delivers
Sir Hargrave Pollexfen, and Mr. Merceda, from severe, but deserved,
chastisement, on the road to Paris, 246 to 254. Is met at Parma by the Bishop
of Nocera and father Marescotti, 277. The Bishop's account of the hopeless way
his Brother and Sister are in, 278. The Count of Belvedere lets him know his
unabated passion for Lady Clementina, 279. He arrives at Bologna, ibid.
Affecting interview between him and Jeronymo, 280. His reception from the
Marquis and Marchioness, ibid. In Mr. Lowther's character he gives that of a
good Surgeon, 281. Brief history of Signor Jeronymo's case, 281 to 284. Lady
Clementina expected from Urbino; her Brother the General, and his new married
Lady, with her, 285. Conversation between the Marchioness and him, on
Clementina's case; and on his expectations from them, if she should recover her
reason, ibid. His generous declaration, that he looks upon himself as bound by
his former offers; upon them, and Lady Clementina, as free, 286, 287. He
rejoices that he had not, in pursuance of his own inclinations, sought to
engage the affections of Miss Byron, while he was in so great uncertainty, 287.
Is very solicitous for her happiness, ibid. Acquits himself as having nothing
to answer for from his conduct to either Lady, ibid. The Marchioness relates to
him the cruel treatment of her Clementina by Lady Sforza and Laurana, with
their interested motives for it, 288, 289. Reasons why the whole Porretta
family are averse to Clementina's assuming the veil, 290. His reflections on
Olivia's violent spirit; his regard to female delicacy, 291. Recommends to his
ward to follow Miss Byron's example, ibid. Is ashamed, for the sake of his
country, of the behavior of Sir Hargrave, Mr. Merceda, and Mr. Bagenhall, in
France, ibid. Visited by the Count of Belvedere (See Belvedere.) Affecting
particulars relating to Lady Clementina, and to his own sensibilities for her,
for Jeronymo, for Olivia, and his friends in England, 293 to 296. Lady
Clementina is brought from Naples and Urbino to Bologna, 296. Camilla attends
him, 297. He is visited by the Bishop and the General, 298. Spirited
conversation between him and the General, in which he compares the latter to
Naaman the Syrian, 299, 300. The General, overcome by his greatness of mind,
reconciles himself to him, 301. He is setting out for the palace of Porretta,
in expectation of being admitted to the presence of Clementina, 302. Grandison,
Sir CHARLES (VOL. V.) The General's and his Lady's polite behavior to him, 2.
Particulars of his first interview with Lady Clementina, in presence of her
assembled friends, and of her affecting and solemn behavior, 4, and seq. The
general and he again have angry words, 6. Again reconciled, 7. His generous
concern for Lady Clementina and Jeronymo, 9. Is indisposed from the harassings
he meets with, 10. For what further relates to his behavior to Clementina, and
to what relates to her in the different stages of her malady, See the article
Clementina, Vol. V. from p. 13 to p. 1^9. His further reflections on the
disgrace which Sir Hargrave Pollexfen, Mr. Merceda, and Mr. Bagenhall, have
brought upon themselves, 18, 19. He recommends the young Oldhams to the
kindness of Dr. Bartlett, 19. His generosity to a family in France, for whom,
it was his opinion, the late Mr. Danby would have provided, had he been
reminded of them, 19, 20. Some hopes of Jeronymo, which enliven his Sister, 25.
Conference between him, the Marchioness, and father Marescotti, on his
expectations from them, were Lady Clementina to recover, 26, and seq. He again
declares himself bound, their family free, 28. The Marchioness, and father
Marescotti, admire him in tears, 29. He thanks God, that he is enabled to do
his duty by others, though he meet not with grateful returns, ibid. Comforts, by
letter, his cousin Everard, who has ruined himself by gaming, 66. Tells him (in
order to encourage him to be free with him) that he should question the
rectitude of his own heart, if he had not reason to hope, that charity was the
principal of those virtues, which he attributes to him, ibid. [ See Gaming.]
Will consider him as entitled to a brother's share in his fortune, if he acquit
himself as a man of honor in his present difficulties, 68. The Porretta family
confer with him on the terms on which Clementina will be allowed to be his, 91.
Particulars of their conferences, and of his great and manly behavior and
sentiments, and of their generosity on this important occasion, 91 to 101.
Expresses to Dr. Bartlett, on his near prospect of marriage with Lady
Clementina, a tender concern for Miss Byron, 101. Recals his concern, in honor
to her, as the suggestions of his own presumption -- yet wishes that, before
Clementina receives his vows, he could know that Miss Byron had given her hand
to the Earl of D. 102. He receives a visit from the Count of Belvedere; who, in
despair, gives him a challenge, 132 to 135. (See Belvedere.) His address to
Lady Clementina, to confirm the honor designed him by the family, 139. For
what follows relating to her noble conduct, in preferring her Religion to her
Love; and the conversations upon it between her Family and him, and between the
Lady and him; See the article Clementina, Vol. V. from p. 139. to p. 250. He is
greatly indisposed, 152. He surprises father Marescotti listening to the
discourse between Clementina and him, 161. His superior demeanor to the father
upon it, 162. Visited by the Count of Belvedere, who, in a desperate mood,
brings pistols with him, for him to choose one, 163. His noble behavior, and
moderation, on the occasion, 164. He convinces that nobleman of his blameable
rashness, 164, 165. He is again visited by the Count, who makes great
acknowlegements to him for his last visit, 192. Greatly indisposed; but
endeavors to conceal his illness, lest it should be thought a lover's
artifice, 194. Affected for his cousin Everard. 201. Retrospects the three or
four past years of his life; and call upon Dr. Bartlett to acquit or censure
him with that freed m, which, he says, has been of inexpressible use to him in
his past life, 202. He gives Dr. Bartlett an account of what passed in an
interview between him and Lady Olivia, at Florence, and of an attempt made upon
him there, 225 to 227. (See Olivia.) Refers to his literary journal, 225, 223.
He is very urgent to prevail upon Signor Jeronymo to accompany him to England,
230. Extends his invitation to others of the family, ibid. Hope given him, that
the next spring they will accept of his invitation, 233. In his way to England,
he (...) the Count of Belvedere at Parma, 250, 251. Waits on Lady Sforza at
Milan, 251. What passes between him, that Lady, and Laurana, 251, 252. Writes
to Jeronymo from Lions, ibid. His expostulatory letter to Lady Olivia, on his
departure from Italy, 253 to 2^8. Her high-spirited answer to it, 258, to 266.
His reflections upon it, 267. His sentiments in relation to the accepting or
refusing of presents, 267 to 269. Finds at Paris, attending his arrival in that
city, his cousin Everard, 269. Describes the poor man's spiritless figure,
ibid. Useful observations on his case, and the pernicious practice of gaming,
ibid. Consoles and admonishes him, 269 to 271. Comparison of his cousin's
person and airs in the days of his prosperity, with those in his present
adversity, 271. Proposes to be in England very soon after Dr. Bartlett can
receive this letter; which shuts up, as he says, the account of his foreign
excursions, 272. Arrives at his house in London. ibid. Joy of all his friends
upon his arrival, 273, and seq. He takes pleasure in the praise every one gives
to Lady Clementina, 277, 278. Enquires after Miss Byron's health, and shows
emotion on hearing she is in a declining way, 278, and seq. Visits Mr. and Mrs.
Reeves, Lord and Lady W. 287 Sir Hargrave Pollexfen, in his illness, 288. The
Earl of G. and Lady Gertrude, 290. Visits also Sir Harry Beauchamp, whom he
finds in a swift decay, 292. His visit to Lady Mansfield, 293. He enables his
cousin to pay his debts, ibid. Grandison, Sir CHARLES (VOL. VI.) His management
of the Mansfields cause, against the Keelings, and the vile Bolton, 1 to 3. His
reflections on the chicaneries of wicked lawyers, 4. His concern for his cousin
Everard; and reflections on his case, 5. Proposes to provide genteelly for Dr.
Bartlett's only worldly care, his nephew, 6. Receives a letter from Signor
Jeronymo, in answer to his from Lions; in which he wishes he would set his
Sister an example of marriage, 6, 7. Lady Clementina's letter to him, in answer
to his to her from Lions; in which she complain of being vehemently urged by
all her friends to many; asks his advice, as a disinterested man; and is
earnest to assume the veil, 8 to 10. His answer, 10 to 13. His reply to Signor
Jeronymo's letter, 13. In which he tells him, that he had not till new, that
his sister in her letter, avowedly consults him as a brother only, given up all
hopes of her, 14. On Jeronymo's wishes, that he would set his Sister an example
by marrying, he (...) himself to him, in a manner equally just and delicate,
with regard to his Sister, and to an English Lady, whom, he says, he could have
loved above all women, had he never known Clementina, 14, 15. He visits Mr. and
Mrs. Reeves, 17, 18. He visits Mrs. Shirley, and entreats her interest with her
grandaughter, 21. For what relates to his address to Miss Byron, and what
passes between him, her, and her friends, at Selby-house, and Shirley-manor,
See the article Miss Byron, Vol. VI. from p. 20 to 367. Insulted by Mr.
Greville, he leaves that gentleman to relate, in his own way, the rencounter,
73. [ See Mr. Fenwick, Mr. Greville.] Another Letter from Jeronymo to him, 85,
and seq. [ See Clementina, Vol. VI.] Lady G. again praises him for his celerity
in business, 166. He is not one, she tells Miss Byron, who values a blessing
the more for its being dear, 169. He is, she says, above aiming at wit, 173. He
engages, by his gallant behavior, the esteem of Miss Orme against her will,
177, 178. Pursues his father's taste, where innocent to be followed;
particularly with regard to dress, and magnificence of spirit, 181. Pities Lady
Olivia to Miss Byron, and praises her for some good qualities, 183. Never
WILFULLY gave pain either to the motherly or sisterly heart; nor yet to that of
any other woman, ibid. His regard to truth in complimenting, 203. His high
character among the Ladies abroad, 204. Is as free from austerity and
uncharitableness, as from ostentation and affectation, 205. Disclaims preaching
himself to bad men who know their duty, and have proper monitors, ibid. Thinks
more is to be done with such by innocently relaxing than by strictness of
behavior; yet admires those who do not relax, if they have got above
moroseness, austerity, and uncharitableness, 206. Shows his benevolence to men
of different persuasions, ibid. His sentiments on schism, and on prescribing to
tender consciences, 207. Evades a question put to him about the Methodists, by
leading Miss Byron (oppressed by her Uncle's raillery) in a gallant manner out
of the company, ibid. He communicates to her a despairing Letter of Sir
Hargrave Pollexfen, who requests him, in it, to be his executor, 208, and seq.
Tender scene between them on this occasion, 211, 212. Her generosity with
regard to Lady Clementina engages his gratitude and admiration, 212, 213. His
munificence to Mr. Bagenhall's wife, on her husband's becoming a fugitive, 215.
His compassion for Sir Hargrave; His concern for his Beauchamp on his Father's
approaching destiny; pity for Lady Beauchamp; and dutiful regrets on remembering
his own Father, 219, 220. Tender parting between him and Miss Byron, on his
setting out for London, 221, 222. He visits Sir Harry Beauchamp in extremity;
who reveals certain secrets to him, and commits his Lady to his protection,
225. Visits the despairing Sir Hargrave, 226. Sends Miss Byron a Letter which
he has received from Signor Jeronymo; in which Lady Clementina, and several of
her friends, request him to marry, 228, 229, and seq. [ See Clementina, vol.
vi.] Miss Jervois writes to him, on her presenting her Mother, and Mr. O-Hara,
with a chariot, without consulting him or his Sisters, 243, and seq. His
indulgent answer, 248. 269. Her thankful reply, 250. [ See Miss Jervois.]
Extricates himself from Greville's gloomy machinations by his magnanimity, 272,
273. He makes the facetious Mr. Selby observe decorum, without intending it,
ibid. Encomium on his presence of mind, modesty, and vivacity, 307. The DAY is
come -- Lady G. and Miss Lucy Selby join to describe the dresses, the
cavalcade, the procession, the behavior, of the happy Pair, and the good
order, decency, and respect, observed by the applauding multitude, 318, and
seq. Debate on the superiority and inferiority of the two Sexes; in which he
vindicates the cause of learning and languages, but ill-supported formerly by
Mr. Walden, 353, and seq. Description of the Bride dressed for her appearance
at church, 367. His ease, dignity, and inattentiveness to his own dress on the
same occasion, though no stoical nonconformist to the fashion, ibid. His
behavior at church, 370. He says there will be a rite wanting, till he and she
have communicated at the altar, on this particular occasion, according to the
order of the Church, 371. Grandison, Sir CHARLES [VOL. VII.] visits Mr.
Greville, 1, 2. And Mr. Orme; and engages, by his politeness, the esteem of
that worthy man, 2, 3. Resolves to soften the disappointment of all his rivals,
5. Tenants jubilee at Selby-house: Mrs. Shirley's character of him to her
tenants, ibid. Ball at Mrs. Shirley's; everybody in raptures with him: Their
departure for London settled; to be accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. Selby, Mr.
Deane, and Miss Lucy Selby, 9, 10. On a motion made for the bride and
bridegroom to be presented to the King, he declares his readiness to comply
with every proposal that shall show his duty to his Sovereign, and his
gratitude for the honor done him by his Harriet, 10. Though, in the noblest
sense, he is a CITIZEN OF THE WORLD, yet he prefers the Manufactures, the
Tradesmen, the Servants, of his own country to those of any other, See the
omission at the end of the INDEX. Particulars of what passed on their coming to
town, 12, 13. He insists that the christening of Lord L's child should be
performed at church, ibid. His piety in visiting the Sick: Can pity a dying
friend without saddening his own heart, 13, 14. Visits the dispirited Sir
Hargrave; visits also Mrs. Oldham; and the Danby family assembled to receive
him, 14, Twice at the drawing room: Admires the royal qualities of his
Sovereign; wishes his Majesty would take a summer's progress through his
British, another through his Irish dominions; with an express proviso; which he
mentions, 16. He, as politely as affectionately, gives his bride possession of
Grandison-hall, 17. For other parts of his conduct and behavior in the
matrimonial and* domestic life, See the article Miss Byron, Vol. VII. from p.
17 to p. 42* Dr. Bartlett's account of his aeconomy, discernment, and dealings
with his tradesmen and master-workmen, 44, 45. A great planter, 45. Hastens to
find out the sighing heart before it is overwhelmed with calamity, ibid.
Intends to take a personal survey of his estate, ibid. Instances of his
prudence in his charity, ibid. Had studied husbaudry and law; the one to
qualify him to preserve, the other to manage, his estate, ibid. Always prepared
for, and aforehand with, probable events, ibid. His cheerfulness on the
performance of his superior duties, 50. Solemn address to the Almighty, in a
paper found under his commonprayer-book; an address proper to be made by a good
man, who lives up to his general duties, and who has nothing greatly wrong to
accuse himself of, 51. Settles everything to the satisfaction of Lady
Beauchamp, and her Son-in-law, on the demise of Sir Harry: His method of
arbitration, 53. Sir Rowland Meredith* and Mr. Fowler, arrive at
Grandison-hall, 56. [ F r what passed on the occasion, See Sir Rowland
Meredith. Se also Mr. Fowler]. A letter from Mr. Lowther, with news from
Bologna, ibid. [ See Lowther. See also Clementina, Vol. VII.] Sir Charles's
politeness, with regard to the Countess Dowager of D. and the Earl her son, 64.
Mr. Lowther arrives, (...). Sir Charles is greatly disturbed at the harsh
treatment Lady Clementina meets with from her friend: His Lady's generous
warmth in her favor, 76, 77. (See Miss Byron, Vol. VII.). Polite and tender
behavior to his Lady in retirement: Their subject the woes of Clementina, 77,
78. Encourages her freedom with him, if she thinks him blameable, 80. Accounts
for his conduct between that Lady's family and her; and for accelerating his
declaration to herself, 80 to 82. Consents that Miss Jervois shall reside with
Mrs. Shirley and Mrs. Selby, in Northamptonshire, at her own request, 95. (See
Miss Jervois.) His great regard to the real delicacies of the Sex, 96. Signor
Jeronymo, by letter, surprises him with the news, that Lady Clementina, in
order to avoid marrying, is fled to England, 97 to 103. His Lady's great
behavior on this news, and his admiration of her, 103 to 106. For the account
of his going to London is quest of Lady Clementina -- of the letters that
passed between her and him, and his Lady and him -- of his interview with
Clementina; and prevailing on her to reside with Lady L. -- of his tenderness
to his Lady on her comeing to town -- of the interview between the two Ladies
-- See the articles Byron and Clementina, Vol. VII. from p. 106 to p. 165. Sir
Edward Beauchamp declares to him his love for Miss Jervois: What passes between
them on this subject shows his tender regard for both, 128, 129. Refers him to
his Lady on the subject, 130. 136. Mr, and Mrs. O-Hara give him cause to be
pleased with them, 135. For what follows relating to the delicate and great
behavior of both Ladies -- to his true brotherly regard to Lady Clementina --
to the arrival of her friends -- to the part he acted in reconciling them -- to
the introducing her to them -- to her interview with the Count of Belvedere --
to the good understanding of both families at Grandison-hall -- to the
generosity, and fervent, yet despairing, love. -- the Count of Belvedere -- to
his tenderness to his Lady, when indisposed -- to Lady Clementina's distress on
the occasion; and grief on being reflected upon by Olivia -- to the different
conversations between her and Mrs. Beaumont, and him and his Lady -- In brief,
to whatever further relates to Lady Clementina -- See the articles Belvedere,
Byron, Clementina, from p. 165. Vol. VII. to the end. Lord G's opinion, that he
ought to enter into the public service of his country, 262, 263. He gives
consideration to the office of a Justice of Peace, lightly spoken of by Lady G.
263. His modest reasons for having hitherto declined a seat in parliament, 264.
What county he would wish to represent; and, were he in the House, whose
example he would propose to follow, 264, 265. His humane concern for the manner
of Laurana's death, 277. Engages, on the departure of the rest of the Porretta
family for Italy, his Jeronymo to stay with him, 285. Attends them to Dover,
and thence to Calais, 293. His prevailing solicitude for the future happiness,
and independence of will, of Lady Clementina, in case she should not incline to
marry, at the end of the time she had taken for consideration, 293, 294. Sir
Hargrave Pollexfen, on his deathbed, sends to implore a visit from him, 295,
296. He attends him, endeavors to comfort him, and, at his own request, closes
his eyes, 297. See Sir Hargrave Pollexfen. See for more of the actions of Sir
Charles Grandison, almost every article of this Index, illuminated by his
goodness and magnanimity. Grandison, LADY, Wife of Sir Charles. See Miss Byron,
Vol. VI. VII. Grandison, Miss CAROLINE, Sir Charles's eldest Sister. See
Countess of L. Grandison, Miss CHARLOTTE [Vol. I.] Sir Charles's younger
Sister; her billet to Mr. Reeves, informing him of Miss Byron's safety, 178,
179. She acquaints Mr. Reeves with Miss Byron's hopeful way, 181, 182. Her care
of, and tenderness to her, 185 to 188. Her praises of her Brother, 189. Her
character from Miss Byron, 251 to 253. Her lively visit to Miss Byron, 264, and
seq. She gives hints of her entanglement, 265. 269, 270. Invites herself and
Lady L. to Miss Byron's; they are followed by Lord L. and Sir Charles, 282 to
287. She invites Miss Byron, and her Cousins, to St. James's-Square, 296* Her
liveliness makes her too negligent about the opinion of the world as to matters
of prudence, 297. Grandison, Miss CHARLOTTE [Vol. II.] Visited by Miss Byron,
according to promise, at St. James's-Square: Lord G. professes himself her
admirer, 2. She falls upon Mr. Grandison for his first speech to Miss Byron, 5.
Raillies Lord G. for his collection of insects, 8. Gently reprimanded by Sir
Charles and Lady L. for her extreme vivacity, 19. Acknowleges her reverence for
her Brother, as coming from his travels a finished gentleman, 20. Sings and
plays Shakespeare's Cuckoo, to divert her Cousin Grandison, whom she had been
just before severely raillying, 21. Accuses Miss Byron of pride for the number
of her rejected Lovers; and particularly for declining Lord D's proposed
address, 71 to 75. In order to come at Miss Byron's secret, she relates how she
discovered her Sister's Love-secret; and how serviceable she was to her in that
affair, 75, 76. Praises her Brother for his fraternal love, 82, 83. Makes
further enquiries concerning Lord D's address to Miss Byron; and seems to
favor it, in order to worm out the real secret, 85 to 90. Her Letter inviting
Miss Byron to Colnebrook, 101, 102. Her reproof of Mr. Grandison for his
impertinent compliments to Miss Byron, 103. Again accuses Miss Byron of pride,
107. Censured by Mrs. Shirley for want of generosity in her raillery, 120, 121.
Requests the history of Miss Byron's family, and friends, in return for her own
communications, 133. Joins with her Sister in giving to Miss Byron their
family-history; Particularizing, The gaiety of their Father, 128. The
excellence of their Mother, 129, and seq. Affecting scene of their Mother's
death, 135, and seq. First grounds of dislike to Mrs. Oldham, 142. Their
Father's forbidding a correspondence between them and their Brother, 144. His
treatment of them on occasion of Lord L's address to her Sister, 152. 159, 160.
163 to 184. Recital of their severe treatment of Mrs. Oldham, on their Father's
death, 195. 197. Of their apprehensiveness of their Brother, in whose power
they were absolutely left, 198. Of his kind reception of them both on his
return from abroad, 200 to 202. Of their haughty demeanor to Mrs. Oldham, and
his different behavior to her, and gentle reprehension of both Sisters, 206 to
212. Of his dividing between them his Mother's jewels and select money, 213 to
215. Of their further unhandsome behavior to the unhappy woman, and his
goodness to her, 216, and seq. -- And to them, 223. They particularize his
goodness to them both, in making the one happy with Lord L. with a fortune
beyond his hopes; the other with an equal sum* and absolutely independent of
himself, 234 to 237. End of the family narrative, 240. Grandison, Miss
CHARLOTTE [Vol. II. continued.] Her two Lovers, Lord G. and Sir Walter Watkyns,
disapproved of by her, 237. She expresses a desire of disclosing her mind to
Miss Byron, 240. She, with her Sister, rebukes Mr. Grandison for his confident
declaration of Love to Miss Byron, 243. Her Trial, as it is called, on the
discovery Sir Charles had made of her engagement with Captain Anderson, 252,
and seq. Dr. Bartlett offers himself an advocate for her, 254. Description of
her vexation, 255. Of her fretful humility, 257. Disingenuousness with her
brother in relation to Captain Anderson, ibid. Her detection; confusion upon
it; and great generosity of her brother, 257 to 265. Gently blames her father's
conduct, and ascribes to the reason he gave her to think she would have but a
small fortune, her engagement with Captain Anderson, 266, 267. Gives the
character of that gentleman, 268. Relates her serious reflections with herself
at the time, upon the rash step she was taking, 268, 269. Gives particulars of
what had passed between them; of the promise he had extorted from her; and the
reasons she had to dislike him, more than ever she liked him, 271 to 275.
Rejoices that her Father knew nothing of her engagement, 276. Further
characterizes Captain Anderson, ibid. Sir Charles's sentiments on the subject
of promises, 277 to 280. His generous regard to her incliclinations, and advice
with respect to the promise made to Captain Anderson, 280 to 282. She shows
Miss Byron some of the Letters that passed between the Captain and her, ibid.
Her Letter of dismission to the Captain, 286. Before she is well recovered from
this mortification, she, joined by her Sister Lady L. challenges Miss Byron in
her dressing room with her Love for her Brother, 287 to 298. Enquires into Miss
Byron's sentiments of Masquerades; debate upon them, 299 to 303. Ridicules old
maids; her aunt Eleanor, in particular, 303. Enquires into her Brother's terms
of friendship granted to Ladies, 304. Sir Charles induces Captain Anderson to
release her from her promise, 309 to 319. Grandison, Miss CHARLOTTE [Vol. III.]
Endeavors to tempt Miss Byron to read a letter of Sir Charles, which she had
clandestinely come at, 3 to 6. Fails, and is mortified into self-condemnation;
yet shows, that nothing for half an hour together can keep down her vivacity,
8, 9. Gives Miss Byron an account of the visit of Major O-Hara, his wife, and
Captain Salmonet, at Colnebrook. 29. And of what passed in it, 29 to 40. Her
character, from Mr. Deane, 42, 44. Procures for Sir Charles the promise of
seeing some of Miss Byron's letters, 102, 103. Her tenderness to Miss Jervois,
on her affliction at her Mother's letter, 105. Sounds her Brother with regard
to the state of his affections, 114 to 120. And is sounded by him, in return,
with regard to her inclinations, 121 to 125. He is displeased with her
coquetish answer, 125, 126. She flies to her harpsichord, out of humor, 128.
Makes apologies to her Brother, and presents him Miss Byron's promised letters,
129. Further debate on the courtship of Lord G. and Sir Walter Watkyns, 134,
and seq. Gives a denial to Sir Walter, in her humorous way, 146. Her evasive
and ludicrous answers with regard to Lord G. 146 to 148. Her generous
preference of Miss Byron's excellencies to her own, 149. Sir Charles, not able
to know her mind from herself, desires her to reveal it to Miss Byron, 150. She
professes to delight in quarrelling and making up; and that she intends to
exercise her future husband's patience in that way, ibid. Declares, that she is
never concerned for any thing longer than the consequential inconvenience
lasts, 160. Impowers Miss Byron to consent for her to countenance Lord G. 163,
164. Her Brother cautions her, by Miss Byron, with regard to her! (...) ardour
to Lord G. if she accepts him for her husband, 166. She comforts Miss Byron,
afflicted with Sir Charles's story of the Porretta family in Italy, 193. Her
ludicrous behavior to Lord G. on his visit at Colnebrook, after receiving
encouragement from Sir Charles, 231 to 233. Grandison, Miss CHARLOTTE, [Vol.
IV.] Her ludicrous behavior to Lord G. 7. She is resolved to remember nothing
that will vex her, 7, 8. She gives Miss Byron an account of Sir Charles's
generesity to the Oldhams, with her censures upon him for it, 67 to 72. Her
wedding day, after many debatings, at last fixed, 81 to 86. Her account of the
triple wedding in the Danby family, 92 to 95. Instance of her generosity
designed to, but not accepted by, Miss Byron, 95, 96. Debate about the place in
which the ceremony is to be performed, 100, 101. Her haughty behavior to Lord
G. on his coming into her presence with too little ceremony, 101, 102. Account
of her marriage, 115, and seq. Her Brother's advice to her on the occasion,
115, 116. Retains her levity, even at the altar, 119, 120. Lord W. presents her
with a bank-note of a thousand pounds, 121. Her lively conversation with Lady
L. and Miss Byron, on the disposal of it, 131 to 134. Her opinion, that a
virtuous man, like her Brother, can distinguish more virtuous women than one by
his tenderness, 136, 137. Debate with her Brother concerning Love and
Courtship, 143, 144. Her quarrel with her Lord two days after marriage, 147.
Made up by Miss Byron, 149 to 152. Her opinion of Lady Olivia, 152. At her
request, Dr. Bartlett gives a short sketch of that Lady's history, 153. [ See
Olivia.] Again quarrels with Lord G. 190, and seq. Her first letter to Miss
Byron, now in the country, 225, and seq. She gives her opinion in it of Mrs.
Selby; of Miss Lucy Selby, 225. Of Mr. Selby, 226. Defends the attack she and
her Sister formerly made upon Miss Byron in her dressing room, 227, 228. Her
sentiments, and generous way of thinking, as to Miss Jervois, 228. Admires the
venerable Mrs. Shirley, 229. Raillies Lady Anne S. and receives from that Lady
a polite rebuke, 229, 230. Receives a letter of congratulation from her Aunt
Eleanor at York, 230. Raillies Lord G. for his collection of insects, 231.
Advises him to present his shells to Miss Jervois, ibid. He presents his Lady
with a set of fine old Japan china, 232. Her reflections on the modern women,
245. And on public di^^ersions, 25^. She pins her apron to Lord G's coat, and
obliges him to make excuses for her own fault, 255, 256. Her quarrel with him
about being presented at court on her marriage, 257, and seq She will not allow
her heart to be wrong, 267. Grandison, Miss CHARLOTTE, new Lady G. (Vol. V.)
Treats her Lord with air of seeming contempt; and, when she has enraged him,
runs to her harpsichord, 46. Discovers him complaining to her Aunt Eleanor; and
her Aunt reproaching him for bearing with her; for which she reprimands her
Aunt, and brings her to make apologies for interfering between man and wife, 47
to 49. Quarrels with her Lord for presuming to take an house without consulting
her, 49 to 51. How she proposes to revenge the affront, 51. Puts him into a
rage, which operates in his breaking her harpsichord, ibid. Serious debate
between her and her aunt Eealnor on her behavior to her Lord, 54 to 58. A
generous and affecting scene between her and him, 59 to 65* Account of her
journey to Northamptonshire, to visit Miss Byron. 69 to 71. Gives to Lady L.
the characters of Mrs. Shirley, Mrs. Selby, Miss Lucy and Miss Nancy Selby;
Miss Kitty and Miss Patty Holles; and young Mr. James-Selby, 71, 72. She
accounts sensibly to her Sister for the change of her behavior to her Lord,
75, 76. Relates how every one is affected at Selby-house, on the news that the
Italian affair is at a crisis, 77 to 111. (See Miss Byron, Vol. V.) Is of
opinion, that Miss Byron should accept of Lord D. in case of her brother's
marriage with Lady Clementina, 112. Gives an account in her ludicrous way, how
greatly she and her Lord improve upon each other, 112, 113. He is taken
suddenly ill: her serious reflections upon it, 114. Hints at a circumstance,
which, she says, will soon make her as grave as a cat, 115. Promises the Earl
of G. on his pressing letter, to return to town, 120. Account of her journey,
120, 121. Thinks Lady D's letter to Miss Byron on Miss Byron's supposed
romantic notions of Love, unanswerable; and exhorts her to follow the advice of
that Lady, 124. Her civility to her Lord, she says, is now become an habit,
125. She reflects on the women of the present age for their love of public
places: but more on the men, 126. Ridicules Lord G. for his present to her of a
parrot and paroquet, 126, 127. Calls for Miss Byron's congratulations on Sir
Charles's arrival, 272. Endeavors to account, in her manner, for her Lord's
joyful behavior on seeing Sir Charles, and for his Love of herself, 275, 276.
Conversation with her Brother, and the rest of the family, on Lady Clementina,
on Miss Byron, and others, 277 to 282. Grandison, Miss CHARLOTTE, or Lady G.
(VOL. VI.) Her description of Lord L's, Lord G's, and her Aunt Eleanor's joy,
on Sir Charles's communication of Mrs. Shirley's letter, accepting of his
address on the part of Miss Byron, 31. She visits Mr. and Mrs. Reeves, with
Miss Byron's letter in her hand; and humorously describes the joy of all three,
ibid. Miss Jervois particularly affected on hearing the news of Sir Charles's
address to Miss Byron, 32 to 34. Humorous description of Lady L. dictating a
letter for her to Miss Byron, 35 to 37. Her slight opinion of Love-matches, 43.
-- And of physicians, 44. She wonders what is become of her sauciness; and
thinks it might be the ruin of any indiscreet woman who should find it, 57. Her
remarks on the treatment of her brother at Selby-house; and on his noble
behavior and address, 92 and seq. Her description of two bashful Lovers
increasing their own difficulties, 96. Defends the magnanimity of her Brother
in his behavior to Clementina, 96 to 98. And cautions Miss Byron to avoid
affectation, 99. Her further observations on Miss Byron's conduct, 161, 162.
Praises Miss Jervois, 162, 163. Her observations on the Susceptibility of young
girls, miscalled Love, 162, 163. Her favorable opinion of marriages of
discretion, such as she supposes was Mr. Selby's, 163, 164. Her description of
her Cousin Grandison's conscious behavior in her presence, and account of his
intended marriage, 164 to 166. Her further instructions to Miss Byron, as to
Sir Charles's which she puts her Letter-case, 167, 168. Lends Miss Jervois
money, and thinks her extravagant, 170. Her ludicrous observations on the
gratitude of male birds, and ingratitude of husbands, 171. Retracts her hasty
censure of Miss Jervois for extravagance, 283. (See Miss Jervois.) Is of
opinion, that Lady Clementina will marry the Count of Belvedere, 285, 286. Is
an enemy to the Poets, and why, 288. Congratulates Miss Byron on her
nuptial-day's being fixed, ibid. Her description of the joy occasioned by a
wedding, to the workwomen employed on the occasion, 293, 294. Raillies her
brother, 302. -- And Miss Byron, 304. Gives an account of what passed on the
day preceding the marriage, 305 to 318. -- And of the wedding day, 318, and
seq. -- And, in conjunction with Lucy Selby, of the order of procession, 319,
320, 323 to 325. -- Of her brother's noble behavior during the ceremony, 328,
329. -- And in the vestry, 330, 331. Her preferable opinion of marriages of
prudence, to those that follow the romantic kind of Love, 331, 332. Gives an
account of the rest of the transactions of the day, 334 to 346. She raises a
debate on the natural independency of women, 350, 353 to 367. Grandison,
CHARLOTTE, or Lady G. [VOL. VII.] Raillies Miss Selby for her affectation in
disclaiming the talents she is mistress of, 6, 7. Her contempt of citizens
checked by Lady Grandison, 15, 16. Sir Charles's censure of her petulance in
her present circumstance: Lady Grandison's pretended confirmation of it to him,
54 to 56. She ludicrously describes the circumstances of a young woman from her
wedding day to her childbed preparations, 145, 146. Raillies Lady Grandison on
the Subject, 168. Brought to bed of a daughter, 189. Appealed to in a debate at
Selby-house, on the reasonableness or unreasonableness of a young woman's
adhering to a first passion, 208. Surprised by her joyful Lord in nursing her
infant, which she did not intend he should know, 210. Her judgment given on the
appeal from Selby-house, 213, and seq. Enumerates cases that may render a first
Love impracticable, 214. Her story of the trick put on a girl overrun with
false heroics, by her honest guardian, 215, and seq. Arrives at Grandison-hall,
greatly amended in her behavior to her husband, 225. Her humorous letter to
Miss Lucy Selby, 233. Another to the same, on Lady Grandison's sudden illness,
135. Confesses, that it was not possible for her to have loved Captain Anderson
so well as she loves Lord G. 261. Invites all who would be good husbands and
wives to Grandison-hall while she is there, 262. Praises her own Lord, ibid.
Pleased with him for putting her brother on becoming a public man, 263. Her
account of a conversation on that subject, 263 to 265. Makes light of Lady
Laurana's dreadful catastrophe; and is reproved for it by her brother, 277.
Invites her Sister, and Mrs. Reeves, to what she calls a squalling concert,
294. Raillies Jeronymo; and makes him look about him, 295. Becomes an excellent
mother, nurse, and wife, ibid. Grandison, EVERARD, See Everard. Grandison-hall
described, vii. 22 to 24. Gratitude, i. 20 ii. 32. 327. 332. iv. 18. 65. vii.
164. Gratitude, in a generous mind, will supply the place of Love, vii* 219.
GREVILLE, Mr. a Lover of Miss Byron, threatens to follow her to London, i. 1.
His letter to Lady Frampton, describing her person, i. 2, and seq. Relation of
his encounter and compromise with Mr. Fenwick, i. 5. Beseeches her to declare
her Hatred of him, if she will not her Love, i. 14. His character and history
from Miss Byron, i. 26, 27. Miss Byron's relation of his encounter with Mr.
Fenwick, i. 89. Visits Miss Byron, i. 135 to 139. Threatens to devour her, and
pretends to begin with her hand, i. 139. Another visit of his, i. 142, and seq.
His scorn of Mr. Orme, and Mr. Fowler, i. 142, 143. He again desires her to
declare that she hates him, i. 143, 144. High language between him and Sir
Hargrave Pollexfen, i. 145 to 148. Suspected of carrying off Miss Byron from
the Masquerade, i. 162, 163. 167. Menaces Sir Charles Grandison, iv. 88. His
joyful behavior to Miss Byron, on her return from London, iv. 220. Further
instances of his contempt of Mr. Orme, iv. 221. Again absolutely rejected: his
insolent behavior upon it, iv. 242. Menaces both Sir Hargrave and Sir Charles,
iv. 244, 245. Perseveres in his suit, and repeats his menaces, vi. 46 to 48.
Forces himself into Sir Charles's company, and affronts him, vi. 72. The issue
of his insult disgraceful to himself, vi. 100 to 106. His character from Sir
Charles, vi. 119. Grave (...) that he received a fall from his horse, to
silence the report of the sod given him by Sir Charles, vi. 120. 123. His
uncommon behavior to Miss Byron at Selby-house, in presence of all her friends
and of Sir Charles Grandison, vi. 124 to 130. He sickens when get home, having
acted a part too great for his powers, vi. 131. Visited by Sir Charles, who
thinks, that Miss Byron might have reformed him, vi. 132, 133. His visit at
Selby-house, vi. 177. Visited again by Sir Charles, vi. 198 to 202. Wishes that
Miss Byron's wedding day were over; and becomes gloomy and disconsolate, vi.
251. Resolves to hate her, vi. 251. 253. His threatening message to her by Miss
Orme, NOT TO BE TOO SECURE, vi. 253. Denounces destruction to Sir Charles; and
sets out with armed servants to meet him on his return to Northamptonshire. vi.
259. His continued moodiness, and ill temper, vi. 264. Overcome by Sir
Charles's magnanimity, vi. 273, 274. Instance of his sullen complaisance, vi.
369, 370. His various behavior on Sir Charles's kind visit to him, vii. 2.
Debate between Lady Grandison and Miss Lucy Selby, on the propriety, or
otherwise, of the latter's accepting his address, vii. 70 to 75. Absolutely
rejected by Lucy, vii. 191. GRAY, Lady Jane, vi. 358. Grief, i. 15. 287. ii.
136. v. 125. 193. vi. 317. Guardian, caution to a young one, iii. 13. What a
worthy one will and will not do, iv. 66. 78. vi. 41. 156. vii. 37. See Sir
Charles Grandison. GUNNING, Arthur, captain of the ship which conveys the
Porretta family to England, vii. 102.
H.
HALDEN, Mr. Steward to Lord W. iii. 10. Rejoices at Mrs. Giffard's dismission,
iii. 81, 82. See more of him, iv. 39. HANDEL, Mr. his just praises. i. 146. ii.
22. vii. 197. Handsome man, i. 300. Happiness, iii. 112. 269. -- iv. 103. vi.
117. vii. 6, 35, 37. 201. Harmony between a wedded pair gives them credit in
every eye, v. 175. HARRINGTON, Mrs. Aunt to Miss Danby, ii. 339. Visited by Sir
Charles on her Niece's wedding, iv. 93. HARTLEY'S, two brothers, of service to
Sir Charles Grandison in the cause of the Mansfields, vi. 1, 2. HAWKINS, Mr.
Steward to Mr. Selby, appointed to direct at the tenants feast, vi. 292.
HENDERSON, Alexander, a polite seaman, captain of the ship which conveys Lady
Clementina to England, vii. 100. 125, 126. HENRY IV. of France, v. 92. 99.
HENRY VIII. of England, iii. 330. Herculaneum, visited by Sir Charles
Grandison, v. 202. Hero; He is a real one who can subdue his passions on
receiving an injury, ii. 47. What is there in the boasted character of most of
those called heroes, compared with the un-oftentatious merit of a good man?
vii. 299. See Challenges, Duelling. Heroes, ancient and modern, enumerated by
Miss Barnevelt as her favorites, i. 79. See Miss Barnevelt. Heroic girl,
innocently cheated by her guardian, vii. 215 to 217. Heroism, whether in Love
or Chivalry, owes its Being to opposition and resistance, vii. 215, 216. False
heroism, vii. 252. HERVEY Mr. a worthy merchant, master of the elder Danby,
gives his Niece in marriage, iv. 94. History of Miss Hurste. See Hurste.
History of a politic guardian, and romancing ward, vii. 215 to 217. See Sir
Arthur Poinings. HOLLES, Sir John, a gentleman of Northamptonshire, related to
the Selby's, vii. 2 to 4. Holles, Miss KITTY and PATTY, daughters of Sir John,
their characters from Lady G. v. 72. Guests at Sir Charles Grandison's
nuptials, vi. 306. 312. 320. Cannot think of marrying, after having seen his
graceful behavior to his Lady, vi. 348. By their frequent visits, declare
their admiration of him, vii. 4. Miss Patty Holles addressed by Mr. James
Selby, vii. 270. Miss Kitty by another Lover, ibid. Home, the devil there,
conjectural meaning of that phrase, i. 270. HOMER, descant on him, i. 73.
Justly admired for his writing to nature, i. 260. Raved at by Lady G.; and why
vi. 288. Honest man, i. 121. ii. 220. See Sir Charles Grandison. Honest woman,
the peculiar sense of that word in Lancashire, iv. 251. Honesty is good sense,
politeness, amiableness, all in one, i. 121. Honor, the abuse of the word, i.
278. Honor should be paid to men for better reasons than for either their
riches or ancestry, iii. 267. A man of honor, who is not himself disengaged,
will be careful of engaging the affections of a young woman, vii. 39. Hoops,
the indecency of wearing large ones, vi. 134, 135. Hopeless Lover, i. 276. ii.
105. v. 183. vii. 137. Horotio and Curiatii. See Duelling. Horses, why Sir
Charles Grandison decks not his, i. 256, 257. vi. 67. Hospital for female
penitents, iv. 142, 143. Human nature, its character not to be taken from the
overflowings of dirty imaginations, ii. 184. Not so bad as some disgracers of
their own species have seemed to suppose, v. 17. See also the concluding note
to the work. Humanity inseparable from true bravery, vi. 20. vii. 190. 293. See
the character of Sir Charles Grandison throughout. Humility, i. 52. 256. 346.
Humor and Raillery difficult to be reined-in, iii. 18. True humor is a
gentle, a decent, though a lively, talent, vii. 71. See Raillery. HURSTE, Miss;
her story, a proof of the indelicacy and indiscretion of a Lady's giving way to
first impressions, v. 123. Thinks herself, because of the inferior
understanding of the man she suddenly fell in Love with (as it is called), and
married, under obligation to every one who took but civil notice of him, v.
123, 124. Husband, the best, for a woman of wit, ii. 74. Miss Jervois's
etymology of the word, vi. 343. Husband and wife, i. 111. 255. ii. 30. 74. 79.
97. 130 to 132. 184. iii. 14^. 166. iv. 90, 91. 115. v. 113, 114. 275. 285. vi.
152. vii. 36, 37. 73. 131. 219. Husbandry and Labor, of more use to society,
for the children of the poor to be brought up to, than to Letters, v. 16.
Hyaena, male and female; which the most dangerous, i. 26.
I, J.
Idleness, a great friend to Love, iii. 43. Jealousy, its quick-sightedness,
iv. 157. -- See also for this tormenting passion, vi. 130. 254. JERONYMO della
Porretta, third son of the Marquis of that name, an officer in the service of
the king of Sardinia, VOL. iii. 174. For the account of his friendship with the
Chevalier Grandison -- breach of amity, and the occasion of it -- for the
account of the attack made upon him by Brescian bravoes; and rescue from them
by the Chevalier -- of his penitence, and gratitude -- and for the brief
history of him; of his Sister; of the rest of his family; as told by Sir
Charles Grandison to Miss Byron, in the library at Colnebrook -- See Vol. iii.
from p. 74 to 192. [ See also Lady Clementina, Vol. iii. Sir Charles Grandison,
Vol. iii. p. 170. For the account of his story, as extracted from Sir Charles's
Letters by Dr. Bartlett -- of his friendship for Mr. Grandison; of the part he
took in his Sister's afflictions; of his regard for his safety, when threatened
by his Brother the General; for instances of the General's rough treatment of
him for his grateful attachment to the Chevalier; and the unhappy way he is in,
by reason of his wounds -- See Vol. iii. from p. 192 to 374. See also Lady
Clementina; Signor Giacomo; Sir Charles Grandison. JERONYMO [VOL. IV.] Mournful
letter from him to Sir Charles, then in England, concerning the dangerous way
he is in from the unskilfulness of his surgeons, 52, 53. Further intimation of
his danger, as given by the Bishop his Brother, 278. His case discoursed of
between the Bishop, Sir Charles, and Mr. Lowther, on Sir Charles's arrival at
Parma, in his way to Bologna, 279. His affectionate reception of Sir Charles,
on his return to Bologna, 280. Commended to the skill of Mr. Lowther, ibid.
History of his case, 281 to 284. Gives hopes of amendment, 293. 295 to 298.
JERONYMO [VOL. V.] Congratulates Sir Charles on the reconciliation between him
and his passionate Brother, 1, 2. Generously forgets his own weak state, through
the hopes he conceives of his Sister's recovery, from her change of symptoms,
9. Ascribes his Sister's amendment to Sir Charles's presence, 16. Some hopes of
him, 20. Favorable accounts of the state of his wounds, 78, 79. 81. Greatly
disturbed at his Sister's paper of rejection of Sir Charles, 149. Insists that
she shall be his, 150. 153. Entreats him to wait the result of her caprice,
157. With the utmost earnestness entreats him to be a Roman catholic, and the
husband of Lady Clementina, 168. But admires him for his noble refusal, 170.
Suspects that the Bishop his Brother, and father Marescotti, have contributed
to the turn in his Sister's mind, 185. Favorable accounts of his amended
health, 228. He still wishes to call Sir Charles his Brother, ibid. Sir
Charles's request to the family, that Jeronymo may be permitted to accompany
him to England, 230. His pathetic observation, that Sir Charles has brought Mr.
Lowther to heal him, in order to have the killing of him himself by his
generosity, ibid. His grief on Sir Charles's parting visit, 249, 250. and
illness upon it, 250. JERONYMO [VOL. VI.] Letters from him to Sir Charles in
England; in which he begs his interposition in support of the family-measures
to induce his Sister to marry the Count of Belvedere, 6 to 8. Gives particulars
concerning Lady Clementina; and urges Sir Charles to marry, in order to set her
the example, 85 to 92. Further account of her adherence to her former
resolution, and written request to Sir Charles to marry, 229 to 241. JERONYMO
[VOL. VII.] His relation of his Sister's flight to England, 97 to 103. Gives
advice of his own and the family's arrival there, 155, 156. Visited at Dover by
Sir Charles, 162. Presented to Lady Grandison, 167. His billet to Sir Charles,
including the general wishes of his family, that Clementina would restore
herself to their arms, 176. Presented to her by Sir Charles, 182. Reverences
her for her noble behavior in the audience she gives to the Count of
Belvedere, 195. Stays in England, after the departure of the rest of the
family, for the more perfect restoration of his health, 285. Agreeably raillied
by Lady G.; admires her vivacity; and is extremely fond of her little Harriet,
295. JERVOIS, Mr. an Italian merchant of great worth, driven out of England by
the wicked temper and viciousness of his wife, ii. 3. Dies at Florence, and
bequeaths his only daughter to the wardship of Mr. Grandison, ibid. His
character from Sir Charles Grandison, and extreme indulgence to his wicked
wife, iii. 106, 107. His information to Mr. Grandison in relation to Lady
Olivia, iii. 171. See Mrs Jervois. See Miss Jervois. JERVOIS, Mrs. Hellen, Wife
of Mr. Jervois: her abandoned character, ii. 3. Wants to have her Daughter in
her power, ii. 239, 240. Demands her from him, iii. 13. 21. Her vile behavior
to her late husband, iii. 23. Declares herself married to Major O-Hara; and
threatens Sir Charles with the resentments of her new husband, iii. 24. Goes
with Major O-Hara, and Captain Salmonet, to demand her daughter at Colnebrook,
knowing Sir Charles to be in London, iii. 28. Her and their behavior there;
and what passed on the occasion, iii. 28 to 33. Copy of a Letter she left
behind her at Colnebrook, on her not seeing her daughter, iii. 39. She, with
the pretended Major and Captain, visit Sir Charles in town, iii. 92, and seq.
Their insolent behavior; and the affray that happened upon it, iii. 93 to 97.
Allowed to visit her daughter in Sir Charles's presence, she behaves decently;
as also do her husband and Salmonet; and are overcome by his generosity, iv. 72
to 78. Now made her interest to be good, iv. 165. she behaves tenderly to her
daughter, iv. 236, 237. Turns Methodist, vi. 32. -- And converts her husband to
Methodism, vi. 169. 244. Their prudence in refusing to accept of a chariot
presented to them by Miss Jervois, because she had not consulted either her
Guardian or his Sisters upon it, vi. 246. Pays a respectful visit to Sir
Charles, vii. 135. JERVOIS, Miss Emily, a young Lady of fourteen, ward to Sir
Charles Grandison, ii. 2. Her character from him, ii. 4. Her person described
by Miss Byron, ibid. Sir Charles's kindness to, and regard for, her, ii. 106.
Her character further given by Miss Byron, ii. 167: Her great fortune, ii. 240.
In Love with her guardian, unknown to herself, ii. 329. Her wicked mother
demands her of Sir Charles, iii. 22 to 24. Miss Byron contrives to withdraw her
from the bad woman, on her visit at Colnebrook, iii. 33. Discourse between her
and Miss Byron in the Chariot, on her mother's former cruelty to her, and her
patience under it, iii. 35, and seq. Her grateful heart, iii. 36, 37. She begs
the benefit of Miss Byron's occasional advice, iii. 37. Her affecting attitude
in telling her story, ibid. Character of her from Mr. Deane, who imagines that
she is in Love with her guardian, iii. 44, 45. Affecting conversation between
her and Miss Byron, in which she innocently gives an account of the state of
her heart, and how it is affected on her guardian's presence, iii. 45. Writes,
by Sir Charles's direction, to invite her Brother to his house, iii. 110.
Dislikes Lady G's behavior to her Lord, iv. 129, 130. Her concern at her
guardian's departure for Italy, iv. 167, 168. 172. Mr. Beauchamp in Love with
her, iv. 214, 215. She attends Miss Byron part of her way to Northamptonshire,
iv. 215. Young Mr. James Selby also in Love with her, iv. 219. Description of
her thankfulness for Lord G's present of his collection of shells, iv. 233. Her
Letter to Miss Byron, praising her Guardian, and Mr. Beauchamp; blaming Lady G.
for her conduct to her Lord; and giveing an instance of her dutiful behavior
to her mother, on seeing her in a mercer's shop, iv. 234 to 239. Beseeches Lady
G. to condescend to her Lord, because, she says, it looks pretty in a woman to
condescend, iv. 264. Goes with Lord and Lady G. and Dr. Bartlett, to visit Miss
Byron in Northamptonshire, v. 65. Her shy behavior to Mr. James Selby, v. 70.
Improved in her notions of economy by the example of Miss Byron, v. 113, 114.
Out of extreme joy to see Sir Charles on his return to England, faints away, v.
275. Her emotion on hearing of his approaching marriage, vi. 32 to 34. Tenderly
pitied by Miss Byron, vi. 41, 42. Her request made to Miss Byron to be
permitted to live with her guardian and her, when married, vi. 156. Borrows
money of Lady G. vi. 170, 171. For what purpose, explained by herself in a
confessional Letter to her guardian, vi. 243 to 248. Her guardian's indulgent
answer to her, vi. 248, 249. Her grateful reply, vi. 250. Writes to her
guardian for leave to be present at his nuptials, vi. 297, 298. Her emotion on
her arrival at Selby-house, vi. 300 to 302. Description of Miss Byron and her
in the most amiable attitudes, in a select conversation, vi. 308, 309. A
bride-maid at the nuptials, at her own request, vi. 321. For her behavior on
the marriage, see vi. 334. 336. 341 to 343. 347. More of her, vi. 350, 351.
vii. 12, 13. Sir Charles's tenderness to her, vii. 35. Conversation concerning
her and Sir Edward Beauchamp between Sir Charles and his Lady, vii. 37, 38.
Sounded by Miss Lucy Selby, in relation to Sir Edward, vii. 54. Conversation
between Lady Grandison and her, on her too earnestly eying her guardian, vii.
64 to 69. Grows peevish with her servant Anne, vii. 83, 84. She suspects her
veneration for her guardian to be Love; and puts a case to Dr. Bartlett, as
that of a third person, vii. 86. The Doctor's answer determines her, vii. 90,
91. She is nobly resolved to avoid her guardian's presence; and makes it her
request to be permitted to go to Northamptonshire to Lady Grandison's friends,
vii. 91. Her only objection, vii. 93. Removed, ibid. She endeavors to emulate
Lady Clementina and Lady Grandison, vii. 94. Her request approved of, vii. 94,
95. Lady Grandison admires her as an heroine, vii. 95. She prepares for her
journey to Northamptonshire, vii. 137. Affecting scene at parting with her
Guardian and Lady Grandison, vii. 152 to 154. She charms all her
Northamptonshire friends by her prudence and good behavior, vii. 199. A hint
from her construed as not unfavourable to Sir Edward Beauchamp, vii. 201. Her
Letter to Lady Grandison for her advice in relation to the visits of Sir Edward
Beauchamp to Selby-house, vii. 269. -- and to his particularly obliging
behavior to her, vii. 269 to 271. Referred by Lady Grandison to the wise
counsel of Mis. Shirley and Mrs. Selby on this head, vii. 271, 272. Illiterate,
a person may be, yet not ignorant, ii. 310. Immodest men may be made decent, at
least, by modest and discreet women, ii. 16. Impartiality, i. 31. ii. 190. 209.
v. 43. Indulgence, i. 38. 45. vi. 266. vii. 90. See Parents and Children.
Infants, the advantages of their crying, if not immoderately, vi. 305.
Inferiority and Superiority of the two Sexes, i. 259. iii. 205. 264. vi. Letter
LV. Ingenuousness, i. 16. 290. iv. 27. 295. v. 7. Innocence gives dignity to an
injured person, ii. 67. Equally attracts the attempts of wicked men and devils,
ii. 92. Innocent man's comfort in calamity, iii. 66. Insects, the study of them
how far useful, ii. 8. Integrity, the consciousness of it, and a firm trust in
Providence, will carry a man through the greatest difficulties, vi. 213.
Intellects of men and women, difference between them, i. 259. vi. 265. See also
Letter LV. in vol. vi. Intemperance, or intoxication, leaves a woman addicted
to it, no guard, iii. 106. Sir Charles Grandison's observations on young men
led into it by false shame, iv. 9, 10. JORDAN, John, Esquire a friend of Sir
Hargrave Pollexfen, present at the conference between Sir Charles Grandison and
Sir Hargrave, on occasion of the challenge given by the latter, ii. 34, and
seq. Advises Sir Hargrave, before Sir Charles enters, to hear what so gallant a
man can say for himself, ii. 35. Proposes to Sir Charles to ask pardon of Sir
Hargrave, ii. 37. Ascribes to him airs of superiority, ii. 38. Caprivated by
his magnanimity, advises Sir Hargrave to make it up with him, ii. 39. 41. 45.
Begs the honor of his acquaintance; acknowleges duelling to be criminal; but
alleges that few have the courage to break through a bad custom, ii. 47.
Enquires of Sir Charles by what means he got above this barbarous practice, ii.
48. Admires him for his fortitude with regard to the Pandours, ii. 50. -- and
for his chastising, without drawing his sword, the young Venetian nobleman, who
gave him the highest provocation, ii. 51, 52. Makes a motion to Sir Hargrave to
offer his hand in friendship to Sir Charles, ii. 54. Owns that he never saw an
hero till he saw Sir Charles, ii. 60. Ascribes Mr. Bagenhall's turning Papist
to the dispensations allowed by the Church of Rome, ii. 63. Tells Sir Hargrave,
that he has but ill-profited by Sir Charles's noble sentiments, if he thinks
his yielding to him dishonorable, ii. 64. Rejoices at the amicable ending of
the challenge, ii. 65. Pays a respectful visit to Miss Byron out of curiosity,
ii. 94. Sir Hargrave, in his desperate illness (being uneasy in his own
reflections) calls in question the sincerity of his friend Mr. Jordan's
reformation, on his forbearing to visit him, vi. 210. Joy, description of the
sober and extravagant kinds of it, iv. 220. Italians much altered of late, with
regard to freedom of manners, iii. 229. Surprising illiterateness of their
women, vii. 150, 151. Italy, the Land of Harmony, iv. 168. JULIANO, Signor, a
relation of the Porretta family, his character, iii. 334. Proposes to visit
England, iii. 355. Accompanies the Porretta family thither, vii. 101. More of
him, vii. 155. 163. Justice, ii. 258, 259. 263. 343. iii. 9. 69. 108. 110, 111.
166. iv. 24. 65. vi. 39. vii. 252. Justices of Peace; the usefulness of worthy
ones, vii. 263. By what means the office might be kept out of mean and
mercenary hands, ibid.
K.
KEELING family engaged in a lawsuit with the Mansfields, iv. 267. In a way of
accommodation, v. 200, 201. Sir Charles Grandison's conferences on this subject
with them and their friend Sir John Lambton, vi. 1, 2, and seq. Insolence of
the younger Keeling, vi. 3. Accommodation brought forward, vi. 168. See
Mansfield. Keepers, Kept women, ii. 195. 199. iii. 68 to 76. 85. 204. 208.
Kindred minds will soon recognize one another, i. 204. iv. 41. Knocker at the
door, the footman's musical instrument, i. 126.
L.
L. Earl of, Brother-in-law to Sir Charles Grandison, to whose house at
Colnebrook Miss Byron is carried after her rescue from Sir Hargrave Pollexfen,
i. 179. Visits her, with Sir Charles, at Mr. Reeves's, i. 287. His character
from Miss Byron, i. 297. -- From Sir Charles, ii. 2. Defends Sir Charles from
the charge of reservedness, ii. 98, 99, 100. His character from Miss Grandison,
ii. 112. Narrative of his Love-affair with Miss Caroline Grandison; of his
application to her father; and of Sir Thomas's treatment of him upon it, ii.
157. His character given by young Mr. Grandison to his Father, ii. 190. After
Sir Thomas's death, he receives Miss Caroline from the hands of her brother,
with a fortune beyond his expectation, ii. 234, 235. 237. Pities Miss Grandison
on her trial with relation to Captain Anderson, ii. 254. His story of the
disappointment of a Lady who married an old man in hopes of burying him, ii.
305, 306. What passes between him and Mrs. O-Hara, her Husband, and Captain
Salmonet, at Colnebrook, iii. 28 to 34. His character from Mr. Deane, iii. 42.
Promises to be careful of Miss Byron's punctilio, iii. 91, 92. His opinion of
Lord G. as an admirer of Miss Charlotte Grandison, iii. 123. He blames Miss
Grandison for her coquetish airs, which had displeased her Brother, and sets
before her the contrary demeanor of Miss Byron, iii. 126, 127. His and his
Lady's happiness accounted for by Miss Byron, iii. 143. Admires Miss Grandison
for her vivacity, and Sir Charles for his patience, iii. 151. Thinks that in
little instances, the characters of the heart are displayed far more than in
great ones, iii. 158. Is of opinion, with his Lady and Miss Grandison, that
Lady Clementina is the object of Sir Charles's compassion, Miss Byron of his
love, iii. 197. 237. Congratulates Miss Byron on Sir Charles's compliments and
communications made to her, iv. 79. Urges Miss Grandison to fix her wedding-pay
in compliance with Sir Charles's desire, iv. 83. Gives his opinion in favor of
Miss Grandison's being married at church, iv. 100. His gratitude to Lord W. for
his handsome present to his Lady, iv. 122. He and his Lady have but one
interest, iv. 132. Two keys to their money-drawer, ibid. He observes that men
of merit are neglected by the Ladies at public places, iv. 139. Displeased
with Lady G. for her behavior to her Lord, iv. 190 to 192. 246. 257 to 265.
Lord and Lady L's joyful reception of Sir Charles on his return to England, v.
274, 275. His respectful behavior to his Lady does credit to himself, vi. 152.
For more of this worthy nobleman, see vol. vi. 294. 296. 331. 343. 350, 351.
vii. 7. 12. 54. 127. 134. 151. 157. 162. 168. 198. See also, L. Countess of,
eldest Sister of Sir Charles Grandison, i. 184 Her character from Sir Charles,
i. 200. Visits Miss Byron, i. 283, and seq. Description of her person: Her
prudent character from Miss Byron, i. 296, 297. Her indulgence of her Sister
Charlotte's vivacities, ii. 19, 20. Sounds Miss Byron on the address of Lord
D.; and gives an advantageous character of the Countess his mother, ii. 73, 74.
Gives an account of her Father's unhappy duel, which cost the life of her
excellent Mother; and demonstrates the domestic usefulness of women, ii. 97.
Hints at several Ladies who are in love with Sir Charles, ii. 99, 100. Called
by her Sister Charlotte a Morning-killer, ii. 101. Enters, with her Sister,
into the detail of their family history, to oblige Miss Byron, ii. 128. For the
particulars of This -- for those of her Love-affair with Lord L. -- of her
Father's severe treatment of her on that account -- of Lord L's laudable
conduct both to her and her Father -- of her Father's death; of her brother's
arrival -- of the behavior of both Sisters to Mrs. Oldham -- of their
Brother's humanity to the penitent woman; and generous kindness to them -- and
other matters relating to her and her Lord -- See the articles Miss Charlotte
Grandison, Sir Charles Grandison, Lord L. The part she took in the trial of her
Sister on the affair of Captain Anderson, ii. 254, 255. 272. 276. 278, 279,
280. Her pleasant reason why women, who make soldiers their choice, deserve a
rank with heroes, ii. 284. Joins with her Sister to railly Miss Byron in her
dressing room, ii. 287 to 298. Her character from Mr. Deane, iii. 42. Her good
opinion of Lord G. as a suitor to her Sister, iii. 123. Censures her Sister for
her airs of coquetry shown on Sir Charles's serious questions about that Lord's
proposal, iii. 126 to 128. Revives the subject of Lord G. by Miss Grandison's
desire, iii. 134, and seq. Presented by Lord W. with a bank-note for a thousand
pounds, iv. 121. Her manner of disposing of it, and Lady G's raillery of her
upon it, iv. 131 to 134. Pleased with her Sister for her observation on Sir
Charles's supposed divided Love, iv. 136, 137. Accompanies her Brother on a
visit to Lady Olivia, just arrived in England, iv. 149. That Lady confesses to
her her Love for her Brother, iv. 154 to 158. Invites Lady Olivia and Lady
Massei to her house, on Sir Charles's being ready to leave England, iv. 163.
(See further of her, during her Brother's absence, in the article Charlotte
Grandison, when Lady G.) Joy at his return, v. 274, 275. At his communicating
his intention to make his addresses to Miss Byron, vi. 30, 31. Humourously
dictates to her Sister a Letter to that young Lady, vi. 35 to 37.
Brought-to-bed of a Son, vi. 290. 294. Lady Clementina prevailed upon to be her
guest, vii. 134. (See Clementina) Presented to the family of Porretta, on their
arrival, vii. 168. Accompanies Lady Clementina on her being restored to her
relations, vii. 180, and seq. Her friendly heart worthily affected with the
preceding tender seenes, vii. 189. She and her Lord attend the Porretta family
to Rochester, on their return to Italy, vii. 291. LAMBTON, Sir John, a mediator
in the lawsuit between the Mansfields and Keelings, iv. 267. v. 201. vi. 2, 3.
LANE, Mrs. a gentlewoman with whom Miss Jervois some time boarded, ii. 233.
iii. 16. Defends her from the insults of Miss Jervois's unhappy Mother, iii.
3^. Language of Nature, one throughout the world, i. 260. Languages but a
vehicle to Science, i. 67. Languages and Science two things. See Learning. Last
wills, ii. 216. 219. 234, 236, 237. v. 19. Latin authors, their excellence, i.
77. LAURA, a female servant of Lady Clementina, appointed at Lady Sforza's
desire to attend her in the room of Camilla, iv. 55. Affected with the cruelty
used to her Lady by Laurana, iv. 57. Attends her Lady in her flight to England,
vii. 98. 100. 112. Conducts Sir Charles Grandison to her, vii. 118, 119.
Implores his protection, and gives an account of their voyage, vii. 121, and
seq. Afraid of the General's vengeance, vii. 122. Expresses high satisfaction
at the notice Lady Grandison is pleased to take of her, vii. 149. Reinstated at
Lady Clementina's intercession, vii. 184, 185. LAURANA, Lady, Daughter of Lady
Sforza, and Cousin of Lady Clementina, inveighs against the Chevalier
Grandison, iii. 329. Is moved, nevertheless, in his favor by his noble address
to the whole assembled family of Porretta, iii. 339. Her barbarous treatment of
her Cousin, committed to the care of her Mother and her in her delirium, iv. 55
to 59. In love with the Count of Belvedere, iv. 289. Refused by him, iv. 291.
At variance with the family of Porretta, who are all incensed against her for
her cruelty to her unhappy Cousin, v. 251. Sees Sir Charles Grandison at Milan,
v. 252. Her dreadful catastrophe, and the cause of it, vii. 275. Sir Charles's
humanity engages him to deplore her unhappy exit, vii. 277. Bewailed by her
injured Cousin, though the manner of her death was concealed from her, vii.
285. See more of her in the articles Clementina, Signor Giacomo, Father
Marescotti, Lady Sforza. Law, not made for a man of conscience, ii. 219. Method
of compromise between two litigating parties, vi. 2, 3. A good man will not
support an unjust cause, vi. 5. Sir Charles Grandison's method of arbitration,
vii. 52, 53. Learned men, as they are called, are not always men of sense, i.
302. Learned women, i. 63. 66. 74. 77. 79. 140, 141. 245. ii. 307. Learning,
preference of the ancient or modern debated, i. 66 to 77. Learning, of itself,
never made any man happy, v. 17. The cause of Learning and Languages supported
by Sir Charles Grandison, vi. Letter LV. Letter-writing, characteristic, runs
into length, i. 79. iii. 130. Letters sometimes expose those who might pass
tolerably in conversation, iv. 239. LEWIS XIV. what the greatest glory of his
reign, ii. 63. See Duelling. Libertines, i. 26, 27. 143. 223. ii. 113. 175,
176. 184, 185. 195, 196. 244, 245. iii. 76. iv. 47. 87. vi. 47. 135. 164.
Libertines, sameness in the lives, actions, and pursuits, of men of that cast,
v. 291. Liberty, a word falsely applied by the keepers of women, ii. 199.
Library for servants, judiciously selected by Dr. Bartlett, vii. 41. Linguists,
what rank they bear among the Learned, i. 71. See Learning. LOCK, Mr. his
method for a Mother to teach her Son Latin, i. 77. LORIMER, Mr. a profligate
and treacherous youth; his history, ii. 345 to 354. Love, laudable, i. 48. 87.
89. 122. 143. 245. ii. 340. iii. 171, 197. 312. iv. 118. v. 117. the whole
Letter; 291. vii. 202. 204. 208. Love not laudable, i. 151. ii. 67. 96. 161.
193. 245. vi. 43. 45. 332. Love may be selfish, but friendship cannot, ii. 161.
Love a selfish Deity, ii. 242. 341. iii. 27. 192. Love at first must indicate a
mind prepared for impressions, iv. 144. It is generally owing to a sudden gust
of passion; and that of the ignoble kind; since it affords not an opportunity
of knowing the merits of the object, ibid. In a man, is it an indelicate
paroxysm; but in a woman, who expects protection and instruction from an
husband, much more so, ibid. See also v. 129. 262. vi. 96. 289. 332. Love on
one side, discretion on the other, is better than Love on both, vi. 164. Love,
debate concerning the reasonableness of indulging a first, to the exclusion of
all secondary offers, according to the rules of romance, argued at large, vii.
199 to 209. The question decided by Lady G. vii. 213. The arguments shown to
Lady Clementina, who receives them in conscious silence, vii. 272. The
brotherly and passionate kinds distinguished by Lady Grandison, vii. 286.
Love-matches generally foolish things, vi. 43. If the second man be worthy, a
woman may be happy, who has not been indulged in her first fancy, vii. 225.
Lover, i. 6. 12. 37. 253. 276. ii. 319. iii. 235. 246. 316. v. 182. Lover; one
who has generosity will not put a young woman upon doing a wrong thing, whether
respecting her duty, or her interest, ii. 162. LOWTHER, Mr. a skilful surgeon;
his character from Sir Charles Grandison, iv. 63. 281. Describes his passage
over Mount Cenis, iv. 271 to 276. The success of his art on Jeronymo, v. 78.
His further character from Sir Charles; who expresses his desire of engaging
him to fix in his neighborhood, v. 235, 236. Sends an account to Sir Charles
of the state of affairs in the family of Porretta since his departure from
Italy, vii. 62, 63. Returns Sir Charles's presents, on being amply rewarded by
his patie* vii. 63, 64. Arrives in England, and gives further particulars
relating to Lady Clementina, vii. 75 to 77. Agrees to settle in Sir Charles's
neighborhood, vii. 96. Consults the London physicians on the case of Lady
Clementina, vii. 257. Luxury of the age, and women's undomesticating themselves,
increase the number of bachelors, ii. 11. See Modern taste; Public places.
M.
MACDERMOT, The two Irish chairmen employed to carry off Miss Byron from a
masquerade, i. 170. MACPHERSON, The two Irish chairmen employed to carry off
Miss Byron from a masquerade, i. 170. MACKENSIE, Colonel, a friend of Captain
Anderson, ii. 309, and seq. MAFFEI, Lady, Aunt to Lady Olivia, attends her to
England, iv. 148, and seq. Incautiously informs Miss Jervois of Lady Olivia's
drawing her poniard upon Sir Charles Grandison, iv. 177. Freely blames her
Niece for her excursion, iv. 199. Magnanimity, ii. 158. 225. iii 63. 65. 71.
168. v. 192. 194. 209. vi. 82. See Sir Charles Grandison. Magnanimity, one of
the greatest instances of it that can be shown by a woman, iii. 65. v. 192.
Making love, as it is called, an ungenerous abuse of a young woman's ear, i.
113. Man, a rational and immortal agent, iii. 205. Cannot complain, cannot ask
for compassion, as a woman can, iv. 168. Man of gratitude, of principle, whose
love is founded in reason, and whose object is Mind rather than Person, must
make a worthy woman happy, i. 151. Man of honor, i. 183. 255. ii. 47 to 50.
62. iii. 341. vii. 148. See Sir Charles Grandison. Man of the town, and Pedant,
two extreme points in the comparison with each other, i. 58. Managing women,
not always the best to live with, ii. 79. MANSFIELD, Sir Thomas, and his Lady
and Family: He is lest by his Father involved in a lawsuit, which being
unjustly determined against him, hastens his death, iv. 12. Leaves four Sons
and two daughters, and a very prudent Lady, ibid. His eldest Son dies of grief,
ibid. His second falls into deep melancholy, ibid. The third a Cornot of horse,
ibid. The fourth unprovided for, ibid. Amiable characters of the two daughters,
ibid. Their Mother's expectations and theirs with regard to fortune frustrated
by the weakness of their Uncle Mr. Calvert, and the villainy of his steward,
iv. 13. [ See Calvert. See Bolton.] Their cause undertaken by Sir Charles
Grandison, ibid. A match proposed by him between the elder Daughter and his
Uncle Lord W. iv. 14. His conversation with the Mother and Daughter on that
subject, iv. 15. and seq. The family's joyful acceptance of the proposal, iv.
18, 19. They are visited by Lord W. and Sir Charles, who puts them into high
spirits upon the hopeful success of their cause, iv. 108. The lawsuit brought
into a prosperous way by the agency of Sir Charles, iv. 267. v. 200, 201.
Preparations made for the Marriage between Lord W. and Miss Mansfield, iv. 266,
267. The happiness of the new married pair, v. 17. 200. Miss Mansfield's (now
Lady W.) moving expression of her gratitude to Sir Charles on her knees, v.
287, 288. Her character from Dr. Bartlett, v. 288. Sir Charles's further
proceedings in the cause of the Mansfields, vi. 1 to 4. That family begin to
visit, and to be visited by, the Keelings, their late adversaries, vi. 168.
Visit Sir Charles at Grandison-hall, and characterized by his Lady, vii. 33.
36. They are visited by Sir Charles and his Lady; the melancholy Brother is now
one of the chearfullest*; and the glorious resignation of the Mother and
Daughters is rewarded, vii. 69. Their gratitude to Sir Charles, vii. 69, 70.
See Lady W. MARESCOTTI, Father, Confessor to the Porretta family, described by
Lady Clementina to be a good but a severe man, iii, 224. Apprehensive of the
consequences to her religion, from her conversing with the Chevalier Grandison,
iii. 225. 248, 249. Presses her to accept of the Count of Belvedere, iii. 269.
His conduct in that point censured by Signor Jeronymo, iii. 273. He visits the
Chevalier from the generous motive of convincing him of the infelicities
attending marriages between Protestants and Roman-catholics, iii. 317 to 319.
Piously, at parting, offers up a prayer for his conversion, iii. 319.
Acknowledges Lady Clementina might have been happy with him, iii. 320. Assures
him of his esteem, in warm terms, iii. 342. Tenderly affected with Lady
Clementina's wild apprehensions for the safety of the Chevalier, iii. 351.
Gives his opinion in favor of her Interview with the Chevalier; which is
denied by her family, iii. 357. Is the instrument of freeing Lady Clementina
from her confinement at Lady Sforza's, iv. 58. More of his laudable behavior
on the critical situation of Sir Charles and the young Lady, v. 26 to 29.
Cannot in conscience consent to the marriage; but finds himself, from his
gratitude, not capable of opposing it, v. 92. Conditions proposed to him, as
Lady Clementina's Confessor in England, v. 93. Detected by Sir Charles
Grandison in listening to the discourse which passes between him and Lady
Clementina; and generously treated by Sir Charles, is covered with confusion,
v. 161, 162. His and the Bishop's conference with Lady Clementina on her
wished for conversion of Sir Charles, v. 171 to 173. He makes an affectionate
visit to Sir Charles on his departure from Italy, v. 250. Endeavors to
persuade Lady Clementina, that her late disorder was a judgment, vi. 89.
Introduced to Lady Clementina in England, whither he had attended her family in
search of her, vii. 183. Firm friendship commenced between him and Dr.
Bartlett, notwithstanding the difference in religion, vii. 221. 224. He and
Lady Clementina retire to pray for the soul of Laurana, vii. 285. Friendly
parting between him and Dr. Bartlett, vii. 292. Marriage, Mr. Selby's Opinion
that a woman out of it is half-useless to the end of her being, i. 27. 34.
Twenty-four the proper age for that of women, in the opinion of Sir Rowland
Meredith and Miss Byron, i. 46. 151. Is the highest state of friendship that
mortals can know, i. 259. Growing out of fashion among the moderns, iii. 14.
Sir Charles Grandison's arguments for the marriage of his uncle Lord W. though
advanced in years, iii. 83, 84. Marriage in advanced years, or with persons of
unequal age, better undertaken by men than by women, iii. 84, 85. 131. iv. 16.
Lady G's debate on the proper place for celebrating it, iv. 100, 101. 103, 104.
A duty, when it can be entered into with prudence, vii. 223. Marriage of the
two Danby's, and their Sister, iv. 92. -- Of Lord W. to Miss Mansfield, iv.
109. -- Of Lord G. to Miss Grandison, iv. 115. -- Of Sir Charles Grandison to
Miss Byron, vi. 318. -- Of Lord Reresby to Miss Lucy Selby, vii. 272.
Marriage-proposals, iv. 15, 16, 17. vi. 49. Marriage-settlements, v. 65.
Marriage-treaty, what is not required in it by persons of generosity, v. 51 to
53. See Smithfield bargains. Marriages entered into by the young with the old
for sordid reasons, often punished in kind, ii. 305, 306. -- Between
Protestants and Papists, argued, iii 318. 327. 330. -- And generally
disapproved, v. 234, 235. Marriages, Clandestine, ii. 269. 285.
Chamber-marriages neither decent nor godly, according to Mr. Selby, vii 280.
Married people, in their debates, should not choose either mediator or
witnesses, iv. 258. MARSIGLI, Signor, the assumed name of the Count of
Belvedere, vii. 161, 166, 167. MARTIN, Colonel, takes notice to Sir Charles
Grandison of his Sister Charlotte's Love affair with Captain Anderson, which
was supposed a secret, ii. 316. Gives an high character of Sir Charles to his
friend Colonel Mackenzie, ii. 317. is desired to be present at the agreement
between Sir Charles and Captain Anderson; and to engage that the affair shall
be buried in silence, ii. 318. MARULLI, Count, clandestinely seeks to address
Lady Clementina, iii. 216. Rejected by her, with a spirit worthy of herself,
iii. 217. Masquerades, the most foolish of all diversions, i. 165. Not suited
to the genius of the English Commonalty, i. 199. 261. A conversation on them
between Sir Charles Grandison, his Sisters, and Miss Byron, ii. 299 to 303.
Masters and Servants, i. 23. 134. 238. ii. 6, 7. iii. 46, 47. 49. 317. How a
man should treat his servants to have them good, iv. 138. v. 95. Matrimonial
bickerings, iv. 28. 30 to 32. 34. 116. 256. 258. v. 61. Matrimony and Liberty,
a girlish connection of two contrary ideas, ii. 271. Matronly State, i. 28. When
the happiest in female life, v. 71. vi. 30. Meannesses, i. 290. ii. 110. 232.
iii. 59. 82. 212. v. 162. vi. 212. Mediator, a method by which such an one may
succeed in making up differences, vii. 53. Melanchely, iii. 262. vi. 226. Men
and Women, Sentiments relating to them, i. 259. 266. 271. 272. 273. ii. 3. 100.
181. 184. 281. 284. 298. 319. iii. 11. 65. v. 23. vi. 26. 27. 285. Men's chief
strength lies in the weakness of women, i. 26. MERCEDA, Solomon, a Portuguese
Jew, and an intimate of Sir Hargrave Pollexsen and Mr. Bagenhall; his wicked
character by Wilson, i. 240. The worst of the three intimates, i. 241. Sends
his footmen to help on the design against Miss Byron, i. 243. Present at the
conference held in Sir Hargrave's house with Sir Charles Grandison, upon the
challenge, ii. 34. His opinion of Sir Charles, ii. 37. Overcome by his
magnanimity, avers that he had rather have Sir Charles for his friend than the
greatest prince on earth, ii. 41. He and Mr. Bagenhall reproach each other, as
not knowing what honor was till now, ii. 42. Will become a Christian when he
finds another like Sir Charles Grandison, ii. 44. More of him, ii. 46, 47. 52.
56. 63. 65. 95. 165. 248, 249. iii. 239. iv. 9, 10. He and Sir Hargrave
delivered by Sir Charles, on the road to Paris, from the effects of a private
revenge, iv. 246 to 253. Desperately wounded, iv 254. Vows penitence, iv. 269.
Dies miserably, v. 289. Sir Hargrave affected with his sad catastrophe, v. 289.
-- vi. 210. His exit full of horror and despair, vi. 215. Mercy and Justice,
Sister-graces, in a virtuous bosom, will never be separated, ii. 208. MEREDITH,
Sir Rowland, the qualifications he proposes in a wife for his Nephew Fowler, i.
35, 36. Requests Mr. Reeves to favor his nephew's suit to Miss Byron, i. 41.
Conversation with her on that subject. i. 42 to 51. Visits her with his Nephew,
i. 9^, and seq Would be contented with 100 l. a year out of his estate of
3,000l. if she will consent to be his Niece, and suf^er him to discourse with
her once a day, i. 102. Calls her face one of God Almight's wonders in a little
compass, i. 103. On his knees implores Miss Byron's compassion on his Nephew,
i. 121, 122. Accepts of the characters of a Daughter from her to him, and a
Sister to his Nephew, i. 124, 125. Alarmed on seeing Sir Hargrave Pollexsen, i.
126. -- And Mr. Greville, i 127 to 129. Opinions of him given by Sir Hargrave
and Mr. Greville, i. 129. His generous Letter to Miss Byron, after having heard
of her hopeless attachment to Sir Charles Grandi on, iv. 20^. [ See Miss Byron,
vol. iv. p. 211.] Sends her another Letter full of professions of paternal
love, vi. 46. His Letter condo^ing his Nephew, and congratulating her on her
marriage, vii. 4, 5. His visit at Grandison hall, vii. 56. Presents her with
jewels, vii. 57, and seq. Propose from himself a match between his Nephew and
Lucy Selby, vii. 60, 61. See Fowler. METELLUS and Sertorius. See Duelling.
Methodists, their influence over the more profligate part of mankind, vi. 32.
See Mrs. Eleanor Grandison. See Mrs. Jervois. Milaners, their flattery of their
young customers, vi. 245. MILBOURNE, Mr. a worthy dissenting minister,
hand-in-hand with Dr. Curtis, as worthy a minister of the established church,
make a visit to Sir Charles Grandison at Selby-house, vi. 206. Sir Charles
wants no other proof of the goodness of both, than their friendship for each
other, ibid. See Dr. Curtis. Military men, ii. 57. 268. 283, 284. See Captain
Anderson, and Signior Giacomo. MILTON; opinion of him by Miss Byron and Mr.
Walden, i. 72, 73. A particular passage of his observed upon by Sir Charles
Grandison, iii. 141, 142. Lectures from his Paradise Lost given by Sir Charles
to Lady Clementina, iii. 179. Miss Byron thinks Sir Charles would not have
behaved so complaisantly to his Eve, had he been the first man, as Milton
supposes Adam to his, iii. 207. Mr. Deane thinks he has less perspicuity than
Shakespeare, though living after him, vi. 358. Sir Charles questions the truth of
that opinion; and accounts for it, if fact, ibid. MITCHELL, Dr. physician to
Miss Nancy Selby, i. 16. MODENA, Duke of, his works, erected to strengthen his
Signory, visited by Sir Charles Grandison, v. 202. Modern taste, i. 23. 253.
ii. 9. 11. iii. 13. 15. iv. 139. 231. 244. v. 76. 126. Modern wives, iv. 90,
91. Modern women want not courage, iv. 245. Modest Loves, iv. 114. Modesty is
easily alarmed, i. 50. A pure heart will be always pure, ibid. A modest man
must have merit, i. 104. 304. Modesty in a man gives an agreeable
self-confidence to a woman, iii. 162. 168. All men, good and bad, admire
Modesty in women: Shall women like men the worse for having that grace? iv. 13.
Modesty and meekness characteristic qualities in women, iv. 93. See also iv.
131. v. 275. vi. 146. Mutteration, a word of Lady G. iv. 258.
N.
N. Lady Frances, Daughter of the Earl of N. falls in Love young Mr. Grandison,
ii. 188. His father earnest to bring about the match, ibid. Treaty suspended at
his son's request, 190. Broken off after Sir Thomas's death, 228. The Earl's
and his Son's high opinion of Sir Charles, ibid. His saying of him, ibid. The
Earl recommends to him Sir Arthur Brandon, on his going abroad, v. 124. NEDHAM,
Misses, two young Ladies present at Sir Charles Grandison's nuptials, declare
for public weddings from the good order and decorum observed in his, vi. 335.
NESBIT, Sir Alexander, recommended by Sir Charles Grandison to Dr. Bartlett, v.
203. New-converts, iii. 271. New-married Pair, their proper behavior to each
other, vi. 251. New-married Women; hints to such. vii. 27, 28. 30. 35. 40, 41.
132. 135. 177. The parturient circumstance a reducer of excentric spirits, vii.
190. -- And a cement to the matrimontal union, ibid. No, the word, more easily
said by a young Lady courted than Yes; i. 86. Wilson complains, that the first
beginning of his unhappiness was, that he could not say No to the wicked
commands of his employers, i. 238. NOCERA, Bishop of, second Brother of Lady
Clementina, one day likely to be a Cardinal, iii. 174. Very fond of Mr.
Grandison, and desirous of learning English, iii. 179. His proposal of a change
of religion to Mr. Grandison, in order to be allowed to marry his Sister, iii.
265. Angry and surprised at his refusal, iii. 265, 266. His polite address to
Mr. Grandison, on his appearance among the assembled family, on his intended
departure from Italy, iii. 333. 335. He pronounces him a Prince of the
Almighty's creation, iii. 343. His tender behavior to his Sister after Mr.
Grandison was gone, iii. 349. Writes to England to Sir Charles Grandison to
make them one more visit at Bologna, iii. 373. iv. 52. Meets him on his return
to Italy at Parma, iv. 277. -- And conducts him and Mr. Lowther to Bologna, iv.
279. Mediates between the General and Sir Charles, iv. 298 to 302. v. 6, 7.
Wishes Sir Charles would be a catholic, v. 30. His part in the conversation on
the terms of marriage proposed to Sir Charles, v. 91, 92. 95. 97, 98. 100. His
honorable dealings with him, 151. See for this Prelate's further History the
articles Clementina, Giacoms, Sir Charles Grandison, Vols. v. vi. vii.
Nunneries, Protestant, Sir Charles's ^chen^^ for erecting such, iv. 140 to 142.
Not to be of perpetual obligation, vi. 12. Ouths of office, lightly considered,
are often the occasion of a disregard to all sacred and civil sanction, i. 238.
OBRIEN, Miss, a beautiful young creature brought over from Ireland, with a view
to captivate Sir Thomas Grandison, by one of his false stewards; who was
disappointed by Sir Thomas's untimely death, ii. 192, 193. The hopes of her
vile Mother, Aunt, and the Steward, to fascinate Sir Charles by her beauty, ii.
226. He counterplots them, saves his father's name from obloquy in this
particular, and the young woman from ruin; and gives a fortune with her to an
honest tradesman, to whom (her beauty lost in the smallpox) the makes a good
wife, ii. 227. Obstinacy, i. 58. ii. 218. 265 iv. 33. See Constancy in Love.
Economy, ii. 79. 230. 339. iii. 58. A shining instance of it given by the
daughters of Lady Mansfield, iv. 12, 13. See also vii. 42, 44, 45. O-HARA,
Major, a man of the town, married to Miss Jervois's Mother, joins with her, and
Captain Salmonet, to demand a sight of Miss Jervois at Colnebrook: What passes
between Lord L. and them on this occasion, iii. 28 to 35. Chastifed by Sir
Charles Grandison for his insolent behavior to him, iii. 92 to 98. Employs an
attorney to fue Sir Charles, iii. 98. His application by his attorney for
forgiveness, iv. 6. Sir Charles allows him, his wife, and Salmonet, to visit
Miss Jervois at his house, ibid. He is overcome by Sir Charles's goodness to
him and his wife, iv. 72, and seq. Turns Methodist, vi. 32. O-HARA, Mrs. See
Mrs. Jervois. Old Batchelors generally insist upon too many good qualities in a
wife, i. 36. Increase of bachelors of late years accounted for, ii. 11. When
long single, looked upon as houses long empty, which nobody cares to take, ii.
300. Close observers of the behavior of married people to each other, iii.
138. 145. OLDHAM, Mrs. a kept mistress of Sir Thomas Grandison; her history,
ii. 141 to 143. Designs from compunction to leave him, ii. 193, 194.
Compassionately treated by Sir Charles; not so by his Sisters, ii. 205, and
seq. Her case advantageously distinguished by Sir Charles from that of Mrs.
Giffard iii. 60. Her penitential gratitude, iv. 5, 6. She, and her Son by Mr.
Oldham, and the two she had by his Father, dine with Sir Charles, at his
invitation, before he goes abroad, iv. 68, and seq. Visited by Sir Charles,
vii. 14. Old Maids, ii. 247. iv. 212. v. 278. 284, 285. vii. 202, 209. Old
Maids; Miss Byron thinks that the women who ridicule them ought not to be
forgiven, ii. 11. It is unjust and cruel to ridicule them at all, ii. 303.
OLIVIA, Lady; hints given of her by Lord L. ii. 326. Question put by Lord L. to
Dr. Bartlett about her, answered by the Doctor, ii. 356. Some account of her by
Sir Charles Grandison, iii. 118. Her further character from him, iii. 171. Her
violent resentments, iii. 182. In Love with Sir Charles, iii. 288. Goes to his
lodgings at Bologna in disguise, iii. 345. Engages his promise to visit her at
Florence, iii. 356. Comes to England, iv. 147, 148. Miss Byron presented to
her, iv. 152, 153. Her person described by Miss Byron, iv. 153. Her history in
brief, ibid. Owns her Love of Sir Charles to Lady L. iv. 154, 155. Believes
Miss Byron loves him, iv. 157. Sir Charles praises her for some good qualities,
iv. 164. As hinted by Dr. Bartlett, would have lived with him without
condition, iv. 171. Her haughty behavior to Mr. Beauchamp, iv. 173. Makes an
attempt, in rage, on Sir Charles's life, iv. 176. Visits Miss Byron after Sir
Charles was gone abroad, iv. 198, 199. Corresponds with Lady L. iv. 229. Miss
Jervois's sentiments about her, iv. 237, 238. Visits Miss Byron at Selby house;
says, that Sir Charles has resisted the highest temptations; and wishes he may
be Miss Byron's, v. 37 to 39. Hearing that Sir Charles is likely to succeed at
Bologna, resolves to return to Italy, v. 115. Her frantic behavior on taking
leave of Lady L. v. 12^. Arrives at Florence, and sends a threatening letter to
Sir Charles, v. 201. Her alternately violent and submissive behavior to him at
her own palace, v. 225 to 227. He modestly hints at his being obliged to refuse
her, v. 227. She threatens to have him overtaken with her vengeance; and causes
an attempt to be made on his person, ibid. His fraternal letter to her on
leaving Italy, v. 253, and seq. Her high-spirited answer, v. 258. Highly
praises Miss Byron in it, v. 262, 263. And entreats his acceptance of the
magnificent present she will cause to be embarked for him, v. 264. 266.
Desirous of returning to England, vii. 79. -- Yet casts reflections on another
Lady for her voyage thither. See Clementina, vol. vii. ORME, Mr. his gentle
spirit, i. 2. His concern on Miss Byron's intended visit to London, ibid.
Contemptibly spoken of by Mr. Greville. 5, 6. Takes leave of Miss Byron by the
high-way-side, i. 15. Though preferable in her esteem to Mr. Fowler, i. 106. 108.
Yet she has objections to him, i. 151, 152. His discon olate behavior on
seeing her pass by in her return to Selby-house, iv. 221. His reiterated
address smally rejected; but still compassionately valued by her, iv. 242 to
244. Falls into a languishing malady, iv. 243. v. 128. Returns from Lisbon
somewhat amended in health, vi. 251, 252. Visits Miss Byron, who receives him
kindly, vi. 254. Intends to go abroad again, vi. 291. On an accidental
interview between him and Sir Charles Grandison, soon after Sir Charles's
nuptials, he is affected by his generosity and kindness, vii. 2, 3, 4. His
infirm health, Mrs. Shirley says, was at one time, her only objection to him,
vii. 202. ORME, Miss, Sister of Mr. Orme, esteemed by Miss Byron, i. 29. Why
called by her artless'y artful, i. 30. Pleads for her brother, iv. 223. Her
reserve on the first sight of Sir Charles Grandison dissipated by his gallant
behavior, vi. 177, 178. Invites him to her Brother's, vi. 199. Account of that
visit, vi. 202 to 204. She tells Miss Byron, that her Brother has some pleasure
on reflecting, on his own rejection, that neither Fenwick nor Greville is to be
the happy man, vi. 252. What passed between Greville and her on the near
approach of Miss Byron's nuptials, vi. 253. Affected, in tenderness to her
Brother, on the nuptial day being set, vi. 291, -- However, blesses Miss Byron
on the occasion, and calls her happy. vi, 291, 292. Applauded by Miss Byron for
her sisterly affection, in determining to attend her Brother to Lisbon, vii.
70. Over-generosity, vi. 50, 51. 151. vii. 252.
P.
Pandours, marauding savage soldiers, made by Sir Charles Grandison's presence
of mind, and address, his guards through a wood, in which they seemed resolved
to murder him, ii. 49, 50. Parents and children, Sentiments relating to them,
ii. 12, 13. 2^. 129. 132 134, 135. 144. 145. 190. 210. 26^, 268. 272. 276. 282.
308. 341. iii. 21. 32. 58. 132. 212. 240. 256. 297. iv. 160. 290. v. 187 189.
223. vi. 17. 20. 246, 247. vii. 169. Parents who sigh for an unhappy step taken
by their children should sigh also for themselves, if, though they may not have
let them a bad example, they have not given them a good one, vii. 14, 15.
Parliament Man, vii. 263. Partiality, i. 33. 189. 273. iii. 73. Passions, ii.
282. iv. 72. 86. v. 217. 254. Passions, properly directed, are the glory of the
human nature, v. 241. None of them uncontrollable, vii. 205. See Vincibility.
Passion of Love, generally confined to the days of girl-hood, vii. 214.
Patience, ii. 209. Pecuniary Surprises, oftentatiously made, are double taxes
on the gratitude of a worthy heart, iv. 37. Pedants, i. 58. 79. See Walden.
Penitence, i. 236. 315. ii. 196. 207. 270. iii. 76. 78. iv. 6. Penitents,
female, Sir Charles Grandison's scheme of an hospital for them, iv. 142.
Perseverance; Had even the noble Clementina been entreated by her friends to
refuse the Chevalier Grandison, she would not, in all probability, if she had
complied with them at all, have been so happy as she was, when, finding herself
absolute mistress of the question, she could astonish and surprise every one by
her magnanimity, vii. 242. Persuasion, in certain cases, more cruel than
compulsion, iv. 66. v. 239. vi. 87. vii. 76. 99. 104. 119. 143. Perverseness,
iv. 101 v. 50. Philanthropist; the extensive meaning of that word when applied
to Sir Charles Grandison, ii. 245. iii. 88 Friend of mankind, a character
superior to that of Conqueror of nations, iii. 101. Physicians, English, their
skill in nervous maladies supposed to be superior to those of the physicians of
all other nations, and why, iv. 80. Physiciaus, iv. 282 to 284. vi. 44. 169.
Physiognomy, in a woman what, 1 8. Judgments formed from it as a science not to
be depended upon, i. 210. Pity, i. 39. 125. ii. 264. 265 iii. 72. Difference in
the pity of a man and woman in love-cases, iii. 237. A pitiless heart deserves
not pity, iv. 55. God will pity him who pities his fellow creature, v. 34. In
what case a woman in Love may ac^ept of a man's pity, v. 214. It is the glory
of the human heart to melt at another's woe, v. 256. We cannot be angry at the
person whom we pity, v. 263. Who would not so act as to invite the admiration,
rather than the pity, of a worthy man? vi. 100. Pity and Love next door
neighbors, vi. 317. Platonic Love, iv. 282 to 284. vi. 44. 169. Platonic Love,
an insidious pretension, vii. 39. Pleasure and pain often mistake each other's
house, iii. 335. Ploughmen, from the contractedness of the sphere they move in,
generally make fewer mistakes in the conduct of life, than scholars, v. 17.
Pactical Ladies, hints to them, i. 21. Sir Charles Grandison's opinion relating
to such, ii. 307. Poets censured for their descriptions of women's eyes, i. 9.
The imaginations of poets often run away with their judgments, ii. 129.
Dangerous for a poet's wife to excel him in poetry, iii. 123. Inveighed against
by Lady G and excluded her commonwealths for their inflaming descriptions, vi.
288. See HOMER. POININGS, Sir Arthur, history of his courtship to a young Lady,
who had no notion of the Love, which was not attended with difficulties, vii.
216. Polite, Politeness, i. 120. ii. 328. iv. 101. 189. 216. v. 268. vi. 115.
167. POLLEXFEN, Sir Hargrave, visits Lady Betty Williams, on hearing Miss Byron
was to dine with her, i. 54. His first speech to Miss Byron, ibid. His
character, i. 57. and seq Difference, on the comparison, between him, as a man
of the town, and Mr. Walden, as a man of the college, i. 59. Despises Mr.
Walden, and is despised by him, i. 61, and seq. Declares himself Miss Byron's
Admirer, i. 75. 80, 81. His bad character, from Sir John Allestree, i. 83.
Visits her at Mr. Reeves's, and receives a denial from her, i. 110 to 119.
Discovers malice on being accused of want of morals, and wonders a Lady should
reject him on that account, i. 131. 135. Pays Mr. Reeves another visit, i. 134.
135. Another short and sullen one, i. 141, 142. Another, in which pass mutual
affronts between him and Mr. Greville, i. 145 to 149. An angry one to Miss
Byron, i. 153 to 158. Appears at the masquerade as an harlequin, i. 162.
Suspected of carrying off Miss Byron, i. 164. 166. 175 The suspicion confirmed,
i. 177. Miss Byron rescued from him by Sir Cha les Grandison, i. 192, and seq.
Wounded; keeps his chamber, i. 208. Sends by Mr. Bagenhall a challenge to Sir
Charles, i. 276. Particulars of his hurt, i. 281. Practices with a
fencing-master, i. 282. Sends Mr. Bagenhall with another message to Sir
Charles, requiring a meeting at Kensington Gravel-pits, i. 310. Again sends Mr.
Bagenhall to Sir Charles, ii. 6. Accepts of Sir Charles's intrepid offer to
breakfast with him at his own house, ii. 28, 29. His behavior in the
conference that fol^owed the^; in which he was subdued by Sir Char es's
magnanimity, ii 35, and seq. Visits Miss Byron, and implores her pardon, ii. 66
to 71. Visits her again, with his friends Bagenhall and Jordan ii. 93 to 95.
Dines at Sir Charles's, ii. 98. Intends to go abroad; is induced by Sir Charles
to act generously by Mr. Bagenhall, and justly by the penitent Wilson, ii. 105,
106. 248, 249. Entertains Sir Charles at his own house in the forest; a riotous
day there, iv 9, 10. He, and Mr. Merceda are attacked by several Frenchmen on
the road between St. Deny and Paris, to revenge themselves for insulting the
Wife of one of them at Abbeville: narrow escape after the severest treatment:
delivered by the man whose life he once sought, iv. 246 to 254. Is in a
dange^ous and low-spirited way, iv. 269. One of the most miserable of men. v.
288. Visited and comforted by Sir Charles and Dr Bart ett, ibid. Con^^^^es in a
dep^orable way, vi. 1^9. Hi^ desponding letter to Dr. Bartlett; in which he
requests Sir Charle to be his executor, vi. 20^ to 211. Visited again, and
soothed by Sir Charles, vi. 224. Drags on life without hope, vii. 8. 14.
Requests, in extremity, anoth r visit from Sir Charles, vii. 296. Account of
what passed in that visit, vii. 297. His penitence, ibid. Unwillingness to die,
ibid. Dies; leaving Sir Charles hi^ sole executor, and great ^gacre^ to him,
and his Lady, vii ^8. Poor, education of their children, v. 16, 17. Characters
of great men may be gathered from the behavior of their poor neighbors to
them as they come in their way, vii. 45. PORRETTA, a noble Italian family;
history of it in its several branches, iii. 174, and seq. See the part^culars
of it under their proper articles. Power, an ill use of it. will take
reputation from the aggressor, and give it to the o^p^essed, iv. 24. Pra se,
ii. 77. 3^^. iii. 62. 132. 165. 346. iv. 39. 124. v. 40. 122, 123 175. vi. 193.
vii. 26 Praises, on what occasions a lowable to repeat the praises given us, i.
40. v. 83. Precept, les^ effectual with men of abandoned principles than
example, vi. 205. Presents, Sir Charles Gradison's opinion in relation to them,
v. 267, 268. PRESTON, Mrs. a Lady of Sir Hargrave Pollexfen's acquaintance, to
whom he gives a false account of Mr. Greville, in order to screen himself from
detection in carrying off Mis^ Byron from the masquerade, i. 174. Pride, ii.
90. v. 238. A not illaudable one, v. 257. She who can give pride to others by
her condescension, should not condescend to be proud, vii. 15, 16. Princess of
Cloves, a dangerous no^e, vii. 2^6. Promises should never be made between
Lovers, vii. 178. 274. 281. 311, 312. Protector of innocence, his duty, ii. 70.
Protestants, those among them censured who favor persecution, iii. 224. v. 94.
Have their prejudices, iii 243. Caluminated, iii. 330. Have more charity for
persons differing from them than Roman catbolics can have, v. 95. 99. 217.
Represented by Clementina as more intent on adorning their houses than their
churches, vii. 109. Protestations, large, to be suspected, i. 80. 95. 113. 117.
iii. 232. iv. 62. 69. 286. See Flattery. Prude, the dangerous misapplication of
that word, iv. 199. vi. 148. Prudence, i. 36. 40, 41. ii. 10. 78. 90. 120. 223.
228. iii. 16. 85. 119. v. 2. 8. 207. vi. 51, 52. 165. 332. vii. 28. 45.
Prudery, ii. 102. iv. 139. vi. 148. The Public, iv. 3. Public Places, i. 125.
146. 253 ii. 173. 301, 302. iii. 11. iv. 255. vi. 223. vii. 35. See Modern
Taste. Punctilio, iii. 108. 235. vi. 185. 188.
Q.
Qualifications in the human mind, that will generally attract universal love
and reverence, i. 255. Qualities in both Sexes, that will make the married
state happy, iii. 143, 144. iv. 109. v. 74. Quarrels, matrimonial, iv. 28. 30,
31. 34. 116. 256. 258. v. 61.
R.
R. Countess dowager of, proposed to Sir Charles Grandison for a wife, iii. 62.
Raillery of men less delicate than that of women, i. 275. A talent of humor or
raillery difficult to be reined-in, iii. 18. Railliers of others seldom can
stand raillery themselves, v. 42. Some men cannot appear to advantage, unless
they make their friend a butt to shoot at, vi. 124. Rake, ii. 305. See
Libertine. Recommendation, ii. 318. Recrimination should not be used to a
forgiven penitent, except on repeating the offense, iii. ^10. 127. 165. REEVES,
Mr. and Mrs. of opinion that Mr. Orme will succeed with Miss Byron, i 15. He is
a friend of Mr. Fowler and Sir Rowland Meredith i. 38. Acts as moderator in the
debate about learning and languages, i 76 He is thought to be of too mild a
temper, i. 119. 135. Goes with his wife, Miss B^^on, and Lady Betty Williams,
to the masquerade, i. 16^. Hi distrcction on Miss Byron's being carried off
from thence, i. 16^ to 178. H^^rs of her, i. 178. And attends her at
Colnebrook, i. 18^. (...) concern for the issue of Sir Charles Grandison's
visit to Sir Har^^^ve, 28, 2^. [See furthe^ of him and his (...) in the
artiticles Miss Byron, Miss Charlotte Grandison, and Sir Charles] Reformat^on,
^23^. (...) 1^ (...) v ^0. relation, pe^sonal, ^nfe^ior (...) i 122. In what
cases relations have a claim upon relations for assistance, iv. 39. Religion,
iii. 224. 253. 320. iv. 139. 266. v. 45. 82. 158. 160. vi. 206. vii. 40. 159,
160. Religion will make charitable and great minds, however differing even in
some essential articles, love one another, vii. 222. A day spent in doing good,
be the objects of it ever so low, is more pleasing to reflect upon, than a day
of the most elegant indulgence, vii. 263. Remorse, iv. 58. vi. 164. 169. 208.
221. RERESBY, Lord, his character, vi. 312. A brideman at Sir Charles
Grandison's nuptials, vi. 312. 320. Courts Miss Lucy Selby, vii. 191. 220. His
good character, vii. 234, 235. Marriage-day fixed, vii. 261. Married, vii. 272.
Reserve, iii. 51, 52. 143. Retribution, ii. 306. Riot. See Intemperance.
ROBERTS, Mr. a guest at Sir Charles Grandison's nuptials, vi. 312. 320.
Romances, the favorite reading of the last age, vii. 204 to 207.
S.
S. Lady Anne, proposed to Sir Charles Grandison for a wife; and has the good
wishes of his Sisters, ii. 241. She makes a visit at Colnebrook, Miss Byron
present: what passes in it, ii. 245, 246. Sir Charles's Sisters found him as to
his intention with regard to her, ii. 293. She properly rebukes Lady G. for
raillying her on her hopeless Love, iv. 229, 230. More of her, vi. 41. 44, 45.
302. SALMONET, Captain, a pretender to a French extraction, iii. 28 to 34.
Chastised by Sir Charles Grandison for his insolent behavior to him, iii. 93
to 97. See O-Hara. SAUNDERS, Richard, Sir Charles Grandison's gentleman, often
his almoner, vi. 140, 141. Carries relief to Mrs. Bagenhall from Sir Charles,
vi. 215. His and Mrs. Curzon's description of the voluntary distinction
everywhere paid their master, for his goodness, by people of low degree, vii.
43. Satirist, marks of a true one, i. 61. Scholar, true signification of that
word, i. 60. Scotland, rebellion therein in 1745, what hoped for from it in
Italy, iii. 181. Scots women, their beauty commended by Sir Charles Grandison,
ii. 17. Miss Byron a little piqued at the distinction paid them by him, ii. 18.
SEBASTIANO, Signor, nephew of the Marquis of that name, present at the solemn
leave Mr. Grandison took of the family, iii. 334. Invited, with his brother
Juliano, by Mr. Grandison, to England, iii. 341. They both lament that Mr.
Grandison cannot be their relation, iii. 345. Visit Mr. Grandison before he
quits Bologna, iii. 355. They accompany the Count of Belvedere to England, vii.
101. 155. 157. Signor Sebastiano visits Lady Grandison, vii. 157. His
character, from her, vii. 158. 161. 164. Lady Clementina's address to him and
the Count, on their taking leave of her, vii. 286. Secrets, ii. 89. 109, 110.
256. iii. 2. ^6. 241. iv. 99. vii. 134. Seduction, iii. 204. iv. 268. v. 68.
SELBY, Mrs. grandmother of Miss Lucy and Nancy Selby, her civility to Mr.
Greville, i. 2. 3. Present at Sir Charles Grandison's nuptials, vi. 320. 343.
SELBY family, some account of it, v. 75. SELBY, George, Esquire a facetious
gentleman, uncle of Miss Byron by marriage: she is apprehensive of his
censures, i. 16. His observations on the vanity of women, i. 17. His letter of
ironical blame of his niece, i. 31 to 35. Amuses himself with making
observations on his niece's letters, i. 87. His half-distracted letter to Mr.
Reeves, on her being carried off at the masquerade, i. 165. (See Mr. Reeves
Miss Byron, etc. on that subject.) Raillied by Lady G. v. 70. Reflects on Sir
Charles Grandison for going over to Italy, v. 105. Raillies Miss Byron, vi. 60.
67. 68. 115. 149. Debates between him and his Lady, on the manner of receiving
Sir Charles Grandison at Selby-house, vi. 62 to 64. Vexed at Sir Charles's
supposed slight; teazes his Lady and Niece, vi. 68. Petulant on the same
supposition, vi. 69. Sullen to Sir Charles, vi. 72. Entirely satisfied; and
throws all the fault on his Lady and Niece, vi. 73. Desires to live upon good
terms with Mr. Greville; and why, vi. 120. Difficult to restrain his honest
zeal in favor of Sir Charles, vi. 139. Humorous, but earnest dialogue between
him and his Lady, on this subject, vi. 141, and seq. A zealous man for the
Church, vi. 206. Whimsically declares his dislike of the Methodists, vi. 207.
By his good-natured jests, throws Miss Byron into confusion, ibid. Called home
on an alarming occasion, vi. 259. Strengthens unintendedly the alarm, vi. 260.
Out-argued on the subject of punctilio, vi. 269 to 272. Why pleasantly
preferred by Lady G. to the rest of the family, vi. 284. His headstrong joy on
his Niece's approaching nuptials, vi. 291. His preparations for the solemnity,
vi. 292. Kept in order by Sir Charles, unknown to himself vi. 303. His
character, from Lady G. vi. 304. Marshals the nuptial procession, vi. 319, 320.
His behavior in the procession, vi. 324, 325. In the Church, as nuptial
father, vi. 328. In the vestry, vi. 331. In returning from Church, vi. 333. On
coming home, vi. 335. His archness diverted by Sir Charles, vi. 337. Insists on
the bridegroom's waiting on the bride at dinner, as he had formerly done on
his, vi. 338, 339. The part he bears at the ball, vi. 343. Gently reprimanded
by Sir Charles, for endeavoring to put the bride out of countenance, vi. 349.
His admiration of his Niece, dressed for her bridal appearance at Church, vi.
369. With his Lady and Lucy, and Mr. Deane, is to attend the bride and
bridegroom to town, and to Grandison-hall, vii. 9. Admires Sir Charles more and
more, at Grandison-hall; and thinks they were not respectful enough to him in
Northamptonshire, vii. 24. Charmed with the expectation of a jovial day with
all the neighboring people of condition, vii. 28. Delighted with Sir Charles's
noble behavior, and with the happiness of his Niece, he says, he knows not
such a place as Selby-house, vii. 64. His emotion at parting with her, vii.
154. See Mrs. Selby, Lady G. etc. SELBY, Mrs. Aunt of Miss Byron; her character
by M. Greville, i. 10. Pleasant debates between her and Mrs. Shirley on one
part, and her husband on the other, on the superior excellencies of the Sexes,
and on Miss Byron's particular ones, i. 31, and seq. Is apprehensive of her
Niece's growing affection to Sir Charles Grandison, i. 298 to 301. Her answer
to the Countess of D's proposal of marriage between the Earl her son and Miss
Byron, i. 303, 304. Endeavors to dissuade her Niece from thinking further of
Sir Charles, ii. 114 to 117. Her character from Lady G. v. 71. For further
accounts of this Lady, See Miss Byron, Mr. Selby etc. SELBY, Mr. James, in Love
with Miss Jervois; but discouraged, though he will have a fine fortune, iv. 219.
v. 70. His character from Lady G. v. 72. Fired with emulation of Sir Charles
Grandison's accomplishments, he expresses a desire to travel, vi. 75. 118.
Blamed by Lady G. and why, vii. 235, and seq. Addresses Miss Patty Holles, vii.
268. 270. SELBY, Miss Lucy, Niece of Mrs. Selby, and favorite correspondent of
Miss Byron, gives an account of the regrets of Miss Byron's three Lovers, on
her intentions of going to London, i. p. 1 to 3. Thought to favor Mr. Greville
in his address to Miss Byron, i. 1. 25 to 28. Conquers her first Love, on
finding the object unworthy, 1. 88. Her character, from Miss Byron, iv. 218,
219. From Lady G. v. 72. Her and her Sister's billet of congratulation to Miss
Byron, on Sir Charles's arrival at Selby-house, vi. 66. She pleasantly charges
him with being a designer, vi. 108. Further mention of her overcoming her
passion for an undeserving Lover, vi. 164. Offers to correspond with Lady G.
vi. 257. Proceeds with a letter begun by Miss Byron; but through terror, left
unfinished, vi. 258, 259. Raillies her Uncle Selby for his indelicacy, vi. 271.
Her reason why her cousin Byron's wedding day will be a wicked day, vi. 282.
Her account of the preparations to entertain the tenants, and the poor, on that
occasion, vi. 292, 293. Writes, in concert with Lady G. an account of the
nuptials, vi. 318 to 334. Describes the appearance at Church, vi. 367 to 372.
Seemingly displeased with Lady G. for her pretending, that she thought her
description unequal to the subject, vi. 371, 372. Gives to Lady G. accounts of
transactions during the stay of the bride and bridegroom in Northamptonshire,
vii. 1 to 6. p. 8, and seq. Thinks Sir Charles could not have been happy with
an Italian wife; and why, See the omission at the end of the Index. Parting
scene between Mrs. Shirley and her beloved grandaughter, vii. 10, 11.
Accompanies the bride and bridegroom to London, and Grandison-hall, vii. 12.
Her talent at describing works of art, buildings, prospects, vii. 17. 26. 29.
Describes Sir Charles's seat, vii. 22 to 24. Gives doubtful answers to Lady
Grandison, with regard to her acceptance or refusal of Mr. Greville's offered
address to her, vii. 72 to 75. Her appeal to Lady Grandison and Lady G. for
their judgments on the force of first impressions in Love, and an invincible
adherence to them, vii. 199. Blamed by Lady Grandison for neglecting to write
to her, vii. 220. Courted by Lord Reresby, vii. 191. 220. 234, 235. Her
wedding day fixed; and Lady G's descants on the subject of first Love, vii.
261, 262. Nuptials solemnized, vii. 270. SELBY, Miss Nancy, Sister of the
above, in bad health, tenderly pitied by Miss Byron, i. 2. 13. 16. Pleasing
hopes of her recovery, i. 16. 17. Her sarcasm on Mr. Greville, vi. 131. Assists
at Miss Byron's nuptials, vi. 320. Is not without her Lover, vii. 270.
Self-diffidence, i. 304. iii. 201. Selfishness, iii. 1. 152. v. 98. vi. 7. vii.
77. 82, 83. Self-partiality, iii. 57. 178. iv. 186. v. 123. Self praise, in
what cases lawful to repeat, i. 40. v. 83. vi. 125. See Praise. Sensual men are
always in the power of women, iii. 208. See Address to men of sense in the gay
world. Sentimental, what, vi. 332. SERTORIUS and Metellus. See Duelling.
Servants, Miss Byron's opinion of them, i. 24. Mercenary disposition of
servants in England, iii. 344. Sir Charles's management of servants, iv. 138. A
pleasure for servants to be directed by those, who know when things are
properly performed, ibid. Lady Grandison resolves, that her new ones shall not
find her pragmatical, ibid. Piety the best security for the good behavior of
servants, vii. 40. The happiness of Sir Charles's, vii. 41. Servants Library,
vii. 41. Sexes, whether equal or not by nature, vi. 365. 366. SFORZA, Lady,
dowager-aunt of Lady Clementina, to be present at Mr. Grandison's solemn leave
of the Porretta family, iii. 326. She and her Daughter Laurana, inveigh against
him, and are for using harsh measures with Lady Clementina, iii. 331, 332. She,
in his presence, desires the General to be pacific, iii. 335. -- Yet blames the
mother for having permitted Mr. Grandison to see Clementina, iii. 336.
Addressed to by Mr. Grandison to interest her in behalf of the tender measures,
iii. 338. She highly commends him in his absence, iii. 346. Compassionates her
unhappy Niece, iii. 348. Severe to her, iii. 358. Takes a Letter out of her
bosom, which she had hid there, iii. 359. And a paper, transcribed from the
Canticles, ibid. Is earnest to have her Niece entrusted to her care, iii. 370.
Prevailed once to have her put into a Nunnery for a trial, iii. 373. Obtains
her wish, and connives at her Daughter Laurana's cruel treatment of her, iv.
54, and seq. (See Laurana). Clementina taken out of her hands, a breach ensues
between her and the rest of the family, iv. 58. Her and her Daughter's
particular inducements for endeavoring to drive Lady Clementina into a
Nunnery, iv. 288. Her high spirited and artful character, v. 135. She finds
means to stimulate the Count of Belvedere to challenge Sir Charles Grandison,
on his return to Italy, ibid. However at her own request, receives a visit from
him, on his again leaving Italy, v. 251. See Clementina. See Sir Charles
Grandison. SHAKESPEARE, a favorite of Miss Byron, i. 24. Mr. Walden's opinion
of him, i. 78. His great genius, unaided, as some suppose, by learning, vi.
358. SHIRLEY, Mr. grandfather of Miss Byron, his polite and worthy character,
i. 9. His personal care of her education, i. 10. 64. Desires his Lady will keep
up the hospitality he practiced, vi. 49, 50. Extolled by his tenants, vi. 340.
History of his courtship to his Lady, vii. 204. 208. SHIRLEY, Mrs. called by
every one an ornament of old age, i. 6. Her billet to borrow her
Granddaughter, as a cordial to raise her spirits, i. 10. Is afraid that Miss
Byron will be entangled in a hopeless passion, i. 300. Her Letter on the
Countess of D's proposal for her Son, ii. 118 to 124. Her pathetic address of
thankfulness to Heaven on the safe return of her beloved child to
Northamptonshire, iv. 222. Her character, from Lady G. iv. 30. 229. Her
excellencies (and indulgence to the foibles of youth) further displayed, v. 71.
73. Her great behavior, when it was thought Sir Charles was on the point of
marriage with Clementina, v. 106 to 108. Sir Charles's first visit to her, to
tender himself as a Lover to her Granddaughter, vi. 21, 22. Her Letter,
accepting gratefully of his proposals, vi. 28, 29. Her encomium from Mr. Deane,
vi. 49. Her billet of congratulation to Miss Byron, on Sir Charles's arrival in
Northamptonshire, vi. 65. Further instances of her cheerfully promoting the
innocent diversions of youth, vi. 74. Sir Charles addresses her with a
reverence that does credit to his own heart, vi. 107. Her lively turns in
conversation, vi. 108, 109. Urges Sir Charles to speak unreservedly of the
merits of Lady Clementina, vi. 116. Picture to be drawn of Sir Charles and her
conversing, vi. 133, 134. Further instance of her pleasure in promoting that of
young people, vi. 136. Decision on the appeal brought to her by Sir Charles and
Miss Byron, vi. 191. A fine conversation between her and Sir Charles, vi. 205.
Visited, hand in hand, by Dr. Curtis, a Church of England Clergyman, and Mr.
Milbourne, a Dissenting Minister, whom she had formerly brought to a good
understanding, vi. 206. Makes pious and instructive observations on the
desponding Letter of Sir Hargrave Pollexfen, vi. 214. Fine instance of her
tender love to Sir Charles, and of his pious reverence to her, vi. 220. 268.
Gives the Day (left to her) for the celebration of the nuptials, vi. 278. 279.
Description of her withdrawing from company, supported by Miss Byron, vi. 313.
The meritorious occasion of her lameness, ibid. Supports her Grand-daughter's
spirits on the wedding day, vi. 321, 322. Blesses her at her setting out to
Church, vi. 323. The spectators bless Sir Charles for his tender and respectful
care of her, vi. 326, 327. She blesses him in the vestry, after the
solemnization; and give^ an instructive lesson to the young Ladies, present,
vi. 330. 331. Furth^^ lesson to the young Ladies, advising them to make a good
man their choice, vi. 348, 351. Tells her tenants, that they will be happy
after her death in the goodness of Sir Charles Grandison; but that he will see
with his own eyes, and not be imposed upon, vii. 5, 6. Gives a ball, vii. 8, 9.
Magnanimity in parting with her Granddaughter, vii. 10 to 12. Presents her
with a gold box, in which was her beloved Mr. Shirley's picture, highly valued
by herself, vii. 48. Her superior method of enjoying herself in the absence of
her Granddaughter, who had wished her to be an eyewitness of her happiness,
vii. 49. Gives her opinion as to the supposed hardship of Lady Clementina's
case, urged, as the lately was, to marry a man, to whom she had an
indifference, and choosing to live a single life, vii. 200. Illustrates, by
solid reasonings, her opinion, and extends it to her Granddaughter, when she
used to declare, that, if she was not the wife of Sir Charles Grandison, she
would never marry, vii.-201, 202. Gives briefly the history of the excellent
Mrs. Eggleton, vii. 203. Owns a fondness for romance in her younger days, vii.
203, 204. But that her false heroism lasted not till she was twenty, vii. 204.
Relates the debates between Mrs. Eggleton and her on her then romantic taste,
vii. 204 to 206. Exposes the notion of those, who, marrying without a vehement
passion, are apprehensive, that such a one will seize them, after marriage, in
favor of a stranger, vii. 206, 207. She describes the Love that is truly
excellent and laudable, vii. 208. Her and Mrs. Eggleton's reasonings supported
by Lady G. vii. 213, and see, Shirley-manor, some account of it, v. 75. vi. 50.
Signs of Love, i. 80. ii. 82. 92. 99. 169. 315. iii. 20. 43, 44. 47. 49. 50.
51. 129. 162. 220. 221. 232. iv. 9. 235. Sincerity, i. 115. ii. 193. iii. 2.
iv. 63. v. 80. 227. Single Life capable of the noblest tendernesses, iv. 212.
SINGLETON, Mr. his character, i. 52, 53. What Miss Byron supposes he would have
written to his Grandmother about her, i. 96. Single women, Sentiments for their
benefit, i. 13. 84, 85, 86. 121. 150. 151. 153 ii. 76. 84. 85. 128. 151. 155.
159. 166. 185. 275. 278 to 280. 313. 319. iii. 12. 260. iv. 102. 160. vi. 74.
348, 349. vii. 261. Single women, their defenseless condition, iv. 14. 140. vi.
362. vii. 202. Yet an unsupported state is better than an oppressed, a
miserable one, with a bad husband, vii. 209. Singularity, i. 121. vi. 181.
Sisters, two, agreed to manage a Love affair, have advantages over a Lady and
her woman, ii. 76. 117. Hardships of Sisters from Brothers, in certain cases,
vii. 138. Smithfield Bargains, vulgarly so called, an odium too often cast upon
prudence by selfish persons, vi. 40. See Marriage Settlements. Soldiers,
English, their difficulties with respect to the practice of Duelling, ii. 57.
Women's favor for soldiers accounted for, ii. 283, 284. Soliloquies and Asides
in a play censured, iii. 140. SOMNER, Mr. his conceited character, i. 19.
Spirit, iii. 323. 333. 343. iv. 168. 301. v. 198. STEEL, Mr. a guest at Sir
Charles Grandison's nuptials, vi. 312. 320. STEVENS, Miss, her character, i.
21. Story, in works of imagination, is at this day hunted after by the English;
Sentiment by the French, vi. 332. Suicide, vii. 277. Sumptuary Laws, their
revival to be wished for, vi. 181. See Dress. Sunniness of complexion, what, i.
254. Supererogatotion, a word of Mr. Selby, i. 32. Superstition, vi. 219.
Surgeon, the qualities of a good one, iv. 281. 284. Surprises, i. 287.
Susceptibilities, v. 275. Suspense, ii. 294. 335. iii. 101. 173. 239. SWIFT,
Dr. censured by Miss Byron, ii. 184. SYLVESTER, Mr. a worthy attorney, attends
Sir Charles Grandison for the Danby's, ii. 331. Compliments Sir Charles on his
great windfal, as he calls it, ii. 33^. Gives him a good account of the two
Nephews and Niece of the late Mr. Danby, his clients, ii. 333. Sir Charles
desires him to tell them his kind intentions toward them, ibid. Desires leave
to introduce them to him, ibid. Presents them to Sir Charles, an honest
pleasure shining in his eyes, ii. 334. Weeps for joy at Sir Charles's goodness
to them all, ii. 343. Declares, that he shall be impatient till he has done
some little good, after such a self-rewarding example, ii. 344. Joins with the
two Brothers in invoking blessings upon Sir Charles, ibid. Further account of
this affair, and of his honest sensibility, iii. 87, 88.
T.
Talents of youth, if properly applied, thousands will make a figure in life,
who otherwise would be outcasts of the world, v. 17. Taste, iii. 11. 234.
Tears. See Grief. Temptation, iii. 6, 7 v. 21. Time, at what period of their
age it stands still with women, i. 46. TOLSON, Mr. his declared antipathies to
red hair, a widow, and particularly a widow with a child; yet marries to a
widow with red hair, and an idiot daughter, i. 36, 37. Tradesmen, when they
fail in the world, have advantages which reduced gentlemen have not, vi. 5, 6.
Tradesmen, not to be despised in a trading nation, vii. 15, 16. Sir Charles
Grandison chooses men of approved principles to deal with, that he may not be a
watchman over people of doubtful honesty, vii. 44, 45. Traveling, its uses and
abuses, i. 259. 262. 274. iii. 58. 226. 229. iv. 47, 48. 97. v. 83. 172. 180.
208. See Lorimer. See Youth. Trifles, insisted upon, make frequently the widest
breaches, iv. 190. TULLUS and Albanus. See Duelling. TURENNE, Marshall, his
answer to a challenge sent him by the Elector Palatine. See Duelling. TURNER,
Sir William, a gentlemen in the neighborhood of Grandison-hall, iii. 10.
Censures Sir Thomas Grandison for keeping such a son as Sir Charles so long
abroad, vii. 34. Visited by Sir Charles, etc. vii. 85.
V.
Vanity. See Conceit. Venice, a young nobleman of, chastised by Sir Charles
Grandison, ii. 51 to 53. Vice is a coward, when it knows it will be resolutely
opposed, i. 197. Vice, ii. 192. 195. iii. 71. vi. 123. Virtue. The cause of
Virtue, and that of the Sex, can hardly be separated, iii. 204. Virtue, ii.
162. 224. iv. 136, 137. 171. 187. vi. 123. vii. 31. Virtuous Love looks beyond
this temporary scene, iii 205. Vincibility of Love, ii. 191. iv. 44. 46. 50. v.
125, 126. 211. vii. 208. 214. Unchastity, iv. 69. 70. v. 290, 291. University,
the world the great one, i. 62. Caution to those who are brought up in the
lesser, ibid. What is to be wished to be propagated in the latter more than is,
i. 71, 72. 76. Voice sometimes denotes the qualities of the mind, i. 43.
Volubility of speech generally owing to want of doubt, i. 56.
W.
W. Lord, Uncle to Sir Charles Grandison, his libertinism, ii. 146. Avarice,
ii. 187. Governed by his mistress more absolutely than he would have been by a
wife, ii. 199. (See Mrs. Giffard, for what relates to his quarrels, and parting
with that woman, and the just part his Nephew acted by her, and noble one by
him). His pathetic apostrophe to his deceased Sister for blessing him with such
a Nephew, iii. 86. His character summed up by Miss Byron, iv. 113. He puts her
into confusion, iv. 114. 117. Fired by Sir Charles's magnanimity, he presents a
thousand pounds to each of his two Nieces, iv. 120, 121. His happiness with the
wife obtained for him by Sir Charles, v. 200. 287. 288. [ See Miss Mansfield].
Arrives with his Lady at Selbyhouse, to assist in the celebration of Sir
Charles's nuptials, vi. 305. A different man to what he once was, lifted up
from low keeping to a wife, who, by her behavior, good sense, politeness,
gives him consequence, vi. 308, 309. His joy on Sir Charles's nuptials, vi.
331, 332 They accompany Sir Charles and his Bride to Grandison-hall, vii. 16,
17, 18. Presents Lady Grandison with a rich service of gilt plate, vii. 33, 31.
Their affection to each other founded on love and gratitude on his side; on
gratitude, and compassion for his infirmities, on hers, vii. 35, 36. W. Lady,
corresponds with Lady G. vi. 43, 44. Her friendship greatly valued by Miss
Byron, vi. 46. Her fine compliment to Sir Charles on his prospect of happiness
with Miss Byron, vi. 308. Her relation of an East India officer silencing a
pedant, vi. 356, 357. Loves her Lord on the best principles, vii. 34, 35. See
Miss Mansfield. See also Sir Charles Grandison. W. General, Brother of Lord W.
in the Imperial service, desirous to make young Mr. Grandison a soldier, ii.
57. vi. 138. WALDEN, Mr. an Oxford student, his character, i. 52. His
supercilious behavior to Sir Hargrave Pollexfen, i. 55. 58. Admired by Mr.
Singleton, i. 60. Compels Miss Byron to enter into a dispute about Learning and
Languages, i. 63, and seq. A mere Student, and of no account in the University,
i. 65. Sneers at Mr. Addison, i. 73. His opinion of Skakespeare, and the
Moderns when compared with the Ancients; and proposal for introducing the
Spartan jacket for the Ladies, i. 78 Miss Byron supposes him in the character
of Pasquin writing her character to his Marsorio, i. 92, and seq. This debate
observed upon by Sir Charles Grandison, who thinks the cause of Learning
suffered in Mr. Walden's hands, vi. 357. 359. 364. Ward. See Guardian. Sir
Charles Grandison. Miss Jervois. WATKYNS, Sir Walter, an admirer of Miss
Grandison, ii. 9. His character compared by Sir Charles Grandison with that of
Lord G. with a preference to the latter, ii. 259, 260. Miss Grandison reflects
upon him for his bad spelling, though he can talk Italian and French, iii. 124.
Sir Charles writes, at his Sister's request, to put an end to his hopes, iii.
167, 168. WATEON, Miss, vi. 306. A bride-maid at Sir Charles Grandison's
nuptials, vi. 320. Widows. ii. 123. The refuge of battered takes, and younger
brothers, vi. 165. Mr. Everard Grandison likely to be re-established by the
kind widow of his wine-merchant, ibid. Lady G's reflections upon that subject,
and upon the rich widows of tradesmen setting up for taste, and marrying
reduced gentlemen, vi. 166. See Everard Grandison. Wife; description of an
affectionate one receiving a long-absent husband, ii. 30. What wife the most
suitable to a man laboring under bodily infirmities, iii. 131. See Husband and
Wife. WILLIAMS, Lady Betty; a relation of Mr. Reeves; her slight notions of a
mother's duty in the education of children, i. 22. Offers to conduct Miss Byron
to the places of general entertainment, i. 23. Her complaisance to Sir Hargrave
Pollexfen, i. 53, and seq. Congratulates Miss Byron on a conquest made of him,
i. 80, 81. Insists upon dressing Miss Byron for the masquerade, i. 120.
Particulars of the dress, i. 159. Causelessly suspected by Mr. Selby of being an
accomplice in the carrying off Miss Byron from one, i. 166. Greatly admires Sir
Charles Grandison, i. 207, 208. Declares that Miss Byron ought to marry Sir
Hargrave, in order to prevent a duel between him and Sir Charles Grandison, i.
278. Visits her with Miss Clements at Colnebrook, iii. 131. Character of her
and her Daughter, iv. 216, 217. Her Daughter's misconduct owing in a great
measure to her careless education of her, vi. 20. Pitied by Lady Grandison,
vii. 14, 15. WILLIAMS, Miss, Daughter of the former; a forward girl, i. 22. Her
further character, iv. 216, 217. Runs away with an ensign, whose colors were
all his fortune; yet both extravagant, vi. 18. Pitied by Miss Byron, vi. 20.
WILSON, William, proposed as a servant to Miss Byron, 1. 134. Entertained by
her, 1. 141. Suspected of being concerned in the surprisal of her at the
masquerade, i. 164. 168. How he effected it, i. 170 to 173. Courts the Daughter
of the widow Awberry, to whose house his young Lady was carried, i. 223. His
historical and penitential Letter, i. 237 to 247. Sir Charles engages his vile
principals to perform their promises to him, ii. 248. Is to marry the honest
girl he courted, and to enter partner with his Sister in her Inn in Smithfield,
ii. 249. Wise man, iii. 19. iv. 166. vi. 116. Wit, i. 20. 47. 53 iii. 125. 167.
232. iv. 226. v. 125. 285. vii. 172. Witty men, ii. 163. 266. Witty women, i.
53. iii. 137, 138. 145. 162. iv. 134. WOLSEY, Cardinal, in his fall found but
one faithful Cromwell among all his numerous and better-descended attendants,
iii. 82. Women, English; comparison between them and the French, i. 7.
Reflected upon by Mr. Selby for their vanity, and love of admiration, i. 17.
30. Pride and cunning the sum-total of their virtue, according to Sir Thomas
Grandison, ii. 184. The hearts of artful women easily discoverable, iii. 77.
Women's sphere is the house, and their shining-place the sick chamber, iii. 84.
Modern women can divert themselves abroad, which only men were used to do
formerly, when any thing crossed them at home, iv. 91. 245. Women may be
eloquent in their grief, when a man must hardly be heard to complain, v. 206.
Women want protection; therefore love men of courage, vi. 264, 265. Silly
antipathies of women to beetles, spiders, frogs, etc. exposed, vi. 265. Daring
in adventures, vi. 265. 289, 390. Affect procrastination in certain cases, vi.
293. They love hurry-skurries, in Lady G's language, vi. 293, 294. What is the
inclemency of season, what are winds, mountains, seas, asks the elder Brother
of Lady Clementina, to a woman who has set her heart on an adventure? vii. 276.
The World, i. 39. 102. 260. 279. v. 187. 229. 254.
Y.
Youth, the season of cheerfulness, i. 10. Should never take advice in
Love-cases of youth, iv. 144. Youth, i. 10. 21. 238. iii. 88. 169. 345. v. 119.
203. vi. 220. 327. vii. 201. 264. See Single women. See Traveling.
Z.
Zeal will be zeal in persons of whatever denomination, iii. 243. A religious
zeal, says Jeronymo, is a strengthener, a confirmer, of all the social
sanctions, vi. 90. Religious zeal, says Sir Charles Grandison, is too generally
a fiery thing, vi. 207.
SIMILES, and ALLUSIONS, in the foregoing SEVEN VOLUMES.
BAchelors, old, and old maids, compared To hunted houses, ii. 303. BARTLETT,
Dr. surrounded by three inquisitive ladies, To Adam, ii. 322. BEAUCHAMP, Sir
Harry, in the quarrel with his Lady, To a parading officer, iv. 29. Beauty, To
flowers, vi. 77. 167. 203. BELVEDERE, Count of, To Varanes, in the tragedy of
Theodosius, vii. 260. Brides adorned for the nuptial ceremony, To heifers
decked out for sacrifice, vi. 344. vii. 146. Brother, polite, To a black swan,
ii. 4. 326. BYRON, Miss, To a Parthian, i. 68, 69. [See also vi. 143.] To a
frighted bird, i. 96. ii. 299. Drawing of characters, To throwing of squibs,
ii. 289. On a particular occasion, To a child put out of its lesson, vi. 61.
Urged, as she thought; too pressingly, To a snail shrinking into its shell, vi.
179. In the prudery attributed to her by Lady G. To a pretty cow, with a
careless heel, vi. 285. And by the same, To a see-sawed infant, ibid. To
Minerva, vi. 309. To the Blessed Virgin, by Lady Clementina, vii. 143. To the
middle-character between Vashti and Esther, vii. 177. CLEMENTINA, Lady,
bleeding, To Iphigenia, iii. 281. To Jephtha's daughter, vii. 98. Traveling to
England, to Lady Olivia, vii, 111. To a lost jewel, vii. 291. Conjugal
affection, compared To Aaron's rod, devouring all other Loves, i. 253. Courted
Lady, who, having several Lovers, prefers the worst, To a Lady in a mercer's
shop, i. 30. 107. Courteous woman's general civility, To a stream sluiced off
into several channels, i. 89. Curiosity diverted, To a whale playing with a tub,
ii. 252. To a nail, that fastens to the ground the foot of an inquisitive
person, vii. 226. Death, To a river, iii. 309. To a cloud, vii. 36. Discretion,
To late-blowing flowers, vi. 246. Dissembling men, To the Hyaena, i. 25, 26.
Friendship, To an indissoluble knot, vii. 140. 142. G. Lord, with his
collection of insects, To the mountain and mouse in the fable, by his
over-lively Lady, ii. 19. His face, To a new moon in a frosty night, v. 48.
Himself, To Mr. Singleton, vi. 304, 305. To Acteon, vii. 210. G. Lord and Lady,
To Saul and David, 4. 198. G. Lady, and her broken harpsichord, To Epictetus,
and his snapped leg, v. 51. To a caged bird, v. 54. To a builder on a faulty
foundation, v. 55. To Lady Betty Clemson, v. 72. To a kitten, vi. 311. Her
maids, crouding about her on a certain occasion, To Diana's nymphs, vii. 210.
GIACOMO della Porretta, To Naaman the Syrian, iv. 299. GIFFARD, Mrs. in her
disgrace, To a fallen minister of state, iii. 82. GRANDISON, Sir Thomas,
designing to make over his estate to his son, To King Victor Amadeus, ii. 189.
GRANDISON, Sir Charles, and Miss Jervois, To Cadenus and Vanessa, ii. 9. Sir
Charles, To Noah's good sons, ii. 138. To the sunshine, ii. 224. To Ceasar,
with a preference, ii. 329. By Clementina, To the spouse in the Canticles, iii.
359. Sir Charles and Olivia, To Rinaldo and Armida, iv. 171. Sir Charles, To
the first man, v. 207. To a prince traveling incognito, vi. 59. To the Sun,
vi. 192, 193. To a certain King of Egypt, by Mr. Selby, vi. 206, 207. His look,
To a sunbeam, vi. 310. His friends in the nuptial procession, To the
Satellites attending a primary planet, vi. 327. GRANDISON, Everard, reproved by
Miss Grandison, compared To a sullen boy, ii. 104. Ruined by sharpers, To St.
Denis without his head, iv. 267. GREVILLE, Mr. To a serpent, vi. 123. To the
prophet Balaam, blessing those whom he came to curse, vi. 129. 254. Heirs,
succeeding their fathers in their estates, and reversing their fathers tastes,
To the faces on the royal coin, each succeeding prince looking the contrary way
to that of his antecessor, vi. 181. Hope, To a crevice that lets in day, vi.
221, 222. Husbands, by the lively Lady G. To the male blackbirds and sparrows;
with a preference to the birds, vi. 171. JERVOIS, Miss, on a disliked address,
To the sleekness of a new caught bird, v. 70. L. Earl of, proud of his infant
son, To a peacock, vi. 290. L. Countess of, her indulgence to her Sister
Charlotte's vivacity, To that of an indolent parent, ii. 20. Learned woman, To
an owl among the birds, i. 63. 65. Legacy-hunters, To savages at a wreck, iii.
132. Life, the present, to a short and dark passage, ii. 247. Love, To a pacing
horse, ii. 176. To water, iii. 233. To freemasonry, iv. 256. vi. 94. 161. 270.
To a be, vi. 163. Love concealed, To a smothered fire, vi. 295. To gunpowder,
tinder, and gauze, vi. 332. Lovers, To babies, i. 269. To spaniels, iii. 232.
Bashful Lovers, To two parallel lines, vi. 95. [See also vi. 143.] To dunghill
cocks, vi. 95. Trembling Lovers, To people in an ague-fit, vi. 96. Negligent
Lovers, To lazy people gaping, vi. 167. Gentle Lovers, To shepherds and
shepherdesses, ibid. Marriage, To passing the Rubicon, vi. 286. vii. 146.
O-HARA, Mrs. her face, To a withering John-apple, iii. 30. OLIVIA, Lady, To
Medusa, iv. 188. ORME, Miss, her reserve vanishing on Sir Charles's polite
address, To the sunshine emerging from a cloud, vi. 177. Pedants, To
livery-servants, i. 69. To conjurers, i. 112. POLLEXFEN, Sir Hargrave, compared
To a keen knife, i. 111. To Prince Prettiman in the Rehearsal, vi. 293. Pride,
and Love, To fire, that, though endeavored to be hidden by a barrel, will flame
out at the bung, i. 31. Both contending for mastery, To a coat torn in
struggling, vi. 174. Quarrel ending with spirit (by Lady G.) To a coachman
coming in with a lash, iv. 205. Matrimonial quarrels, in their beginnings, To
thunder rumbling at a distance, iv. 259. Accumulated quarrels, To the contents
of a woman's work-bag, v. 61. Scholar disputing with a Lady, To a grown-up man
fighting with a boy, i. 94. SELBY, Mr. in an hurry, To King William Rufus
ordering a wall to be pulled down, vi. 28. To an horse at liberty, vi. 306. To
a person in a coach, pointing out to, yet hindering a prospect; vi. 324. To a
Lady displeased at guessing her true age, vi. 325. SELBY, Miss Lucy, by her
uncle, in pleasantry, To a toad; Miss Byron says why, vi. 291. SHIRLEY, Mrs. To
ripened fruit, vii. 11. Tears of tenderness, To the fertilizing dew, ii. 136.
Vice, To weeds, i. 274. Bad habits, by Lady G. To the Jerusalem artichoke, vi.
165. Visiters, kind, to persons in distress, To a physician expected by the
friends of the desperate sick, i. 283. Understanding, To a tree, i. 259. W.
Lord, parting with Mrs. Giffard, To a prince dismissing a rapacious minister,
iii. 82. To King Henry VIII. iii. 84, 85. His sudden generosity, To a miser's
feast, v. 17. Wit, vicious, To a person leading her friend through a bad road,
when a good one was before her, vi. 173. Women out of character, To bats, i.
53. And To excentric planets, vi. 366. But, containing themselves within their
proper bounds, To doves, ibid. Those boundaries, To the prohibited tree in
Paradise, ibid.
The following unlucky omission in Letter III. of this Volume, written by Miss
Lucy Selby to Lady G. is thought proper to be supplied here.
P. 10. That young Lady thus writes: "He [Sir Charles] hopes for a visit from
the Italian family, so deservedly dear to him, by which hers to regulate many
of his future motions: [Then follows the omission.]

I cannot say I wish for this visit. I love, I admire, I pity them; and would,
had I wings, take a flight into Italy, with all my heart, to see them
incognita. Clementina must be a charming creature -- but, for Harriet's sake, I
have been used to think of her with terror.

For your Brother's sake also, Lady G. I rejoice, and so, you know, do Dr.
Bartlett and Mrs. Shirley, that she can now be only a Visiter. How could Sir
Charles, so thorough an Englishman, have been happy with an Italian wife? His
heart indeed, is, generously open and benevolent to people of all countries: He
is, as I have often heard you say, in the noblest sense, a Citizen of the
World: But, see we not, that his long residence abroad, has only the more
endeared to him the Religion, the Government, the Manners of England? You know,
that on a double Principle of Religion and Policy, he encourages the
Trades-people, the Manufactures, the Servants, of his own Country. Do I not
remember a charmingly lively debate between you and him, on the subject of
those Elegancses in Dress and Appearance which you said (and I thought you
naughty for saying it) were only to be acquired by employing the better taste
of Foreigners?

He concluded it seriously. I recollect nearly his Words: "The Error, Lady G.
is growing too general, is authorized by too many persons of figure, not to
make one afraid of fatal consequences, from what in its beginning seemed a
trifle. Shall any one pretend to true Patriotism, and not attempt to stem this
torrent of Fashion, which impoverishes our own honest Countrymen, whilst it
carries Wealth and Power to those whose National Religion and Interest are
directly opposite to ours!"

Good Heaven, thought I, at the time, how was this noble-minded man entangled
by delicacies of situation, by friendship, by compassion, that he should ever
have been like to be engaged in a family of Roman Catholics, and lived half of
his days out of his beloved Country! And the other half to have set, as to the
world's eye, such an Example in it!

I know, Lady G. he would have made it his study to prevent any mischief to his
neighbors from the active zeal of his Lady's Confessor, had a certain
compromise taken effect. I remember the hint he gave to Father Marescotti: But
would even that good man have thought himself bound to observe Faith with
Heretics in such a case?

Whither am I rambled! I was going to tell you, that if this Italian Family
comes over, his new taken house, etc.

BOOKS Printed and sold by HENRY SAUNDERS, at the Corner of Christ-Church-Lane,
in High Street.
BOADICIA. a Tragedy, as it is acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane, by Mr.
Glover. Price 6d-halfp.

Virginia, a Tragedy, as it is acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane, Price
6d-halfp.

The Life and History of Mary Queen of Scots, and Dowager of France, together
with an impartial Account of her Behavior before and at her Execution, Price
6d-halfp.

Love Tales, for the Use of the fair Sex: Exemplified in sundry Histories.
Taken from real Life, Price 1s. 1d.

The second Edition of the LIFF and HISTORY of a PILGRIM, By G -- W --

Quorum Pars magna fui
Quaeque ipse miserrima vidi.
Price, bound 4s 4d. sewed 3s. 3d.

The Office and Authority of Sheriffs, under Sheriffs, Deputies, Country Clerks
and Coroners in Ireland, collected from the Books of Common Law; and also from
the Acts of Parliament of Force in this Kingdom, touching this Subject,
digested under Alphabetical Titles, by Matt. Dutton, Esquire (Price bound 6s. 6d.)

The CIRCLE of the SCIENCES in Eight Vols. (neatly bound in read Leather and
filleted with Gold, being a most useful and genteel Present for the Youth of
both Sexes, and written for the Instruction of the British Princes and
Princesses, Sons and Daughters to his Royal Highness Frederick, late Prince of
Wales,) Price 8s. 8d.

Letters on the Use and Study of History, by the Right Hon. Henry St. John,
Lord Viscount Bolingbroke, (Price bound 2s. 2d. sewed 1s. 7d. half.)

The JEWISH SPY; being a Philosophical, Historical and Critical Correspondence,
by Letters which lately passed between certain Jews in Turkey, Italy, France,
etc. in Four Vols. (Price bound 10s. 10d. sewed 8s. 8d.)

Little Masters and Misses MISCELLANY: or, Divine and Moral Essays, in Prose
and Verse, adapted to the Capacities, and designed for the Improvement of the
Youth of both Sexes, adorned with a Number of curious Cuts. To which is added,
Select Fables, Entertaining Stories, Moral Sentences and Facetious Jests, by a
Lover of Children (Price bound in red Leather, and filleted with Gold, 1s. 1d.)

AMELIA, by Henry Fielding, Esquire in Four Vols. (Price bound 4s. 4d. sewed 3s. 3d.

The Life and entertaining Adventures of Mr. Cleveland, natural Son of Oliver
Crommell, written by himself in 2 Vol. Price bound 6s.


