Who Is the Dupe? A FARCE: As it is ACTED at the THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE.

By Mrs. COWLEY, AUTHOR of the RUNAWAY, a COMEDY.

LONDON: Printed for J. DODSLEY, L. DAVIS, W. OWEN, S. CROWDER, T. LONGMAN, T.
CADELL, T. BECKET, and Messrs. CARNAN and NEWBERY. MDCCLXXIX.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Reader will find Passages in the following Scenes, which are not spoken on
the Stage. Actors of skill and ability, acquainted with the ideas of the
Writer, and assisted by all the advantages of Stage-representation, give
impressions of character and situation with more expedition and certainty than
can be done by Words alone; elucidations, which may be necessary for the
Reader, are therefore very frequently and properly omitted by them.

The Author owes too much to the very excellent manner in which the Farce is
acted, not to seize this opportunity of acknowledging her obligations to the
Performers.

Judging from her own experience, as well as her observation on that of others,
she feels that Authors are so far from having reason to join in the common
clamor on the declension of the Stage, that there has been no period in which
performances in the Comic line have been represented with such uniform
strength: and though it is impossible for her to form distinctions on the merit
of so perfect a representation, yet she cannot omit expressing her particular
obligations to Mr. King, for accepting, from the best motives, and in the most
polite and candid manner, a part not perfectly agreeable to himself, but which
owes its effect principally to his performance.

CHARACTERS OF THE DRAMA.
MEN.
DOILEY Mr. Parsons SANDFORD Mr. Aickin GRANGER Mr. Palmer GRADUS Mr. King
WOMEN.
ELIZABETH Mrs. Brereton CHARLOTTE Mrs. Wrighten
[The AUTHOR was disappointed of a promised Prologue -- The following was
sketched the evening previous to the representation of the Farce, but not
spoken, on account of the length of the several entertertainments on that
night. -- It is printed, as an explanation of the principal idea on which the
plot was formed.]

IN days of yore lived doughty Knights,
Enchanters, 'Squires, and valiant Wights --
Scamp'ring over mountains, seas, and land,
Prompt at their haughty Fair's command.
Castles were razed, and Giants killed,
Volcanos sunk, or Rivers filled:
No Ravisher dared stalk the earth;
No faithless Lover turned to mirth
The oaths his fondness once had swore --
Is he inconstant? -- He Is no more.
Rare times were these! yet some there were
Who even then against the Fair,
Fearless of Conj'rer, 'Squire, or Knight,
Could show their teeth, and vent their spite.
These were your Learned Men -- your Writers,
Whom no age ever marked for Fighters;
But war with Women they could wage,
And fill their bold, satyric page
With petty foibles -- Ladies faults --
Who still endure their rude assaults;
For even now it is the way,
In this our polished modern day,
On Female Follies to be witty,
From the Court Beauty to the City.
Those who cannot rhyme, in weighty Prose
Their whims and vanity expose:
In Epigrams Sir Witling's folio
Makes of the sex a perfect olio --
Of noise, caprice, and pride, composed,
To every thing outre disposed --
Whilst Cards, and Dress, and studied Airs,
More than good Housewifery, or Prayers,
Engross their time, their hearts, their cares.
Thus have they borne, from distant ages,
The lash of Wit, the frown of Sages. --
Sure then it is fair one hour to give --
It Is all she asks -- a Woman leave
To laugh at those same learned Men!
The gall of whose sarcastic pen
By Youth, and Beauty, is supplied,
Nor spares the Matron, Maid, nor Bride.
If any from the musty Halls,
Or the chill gloom of College-walls,
To bask in Pleasure's tempting ray,
Have Phaeton-like obtained a day,
And, throned in yonder circle, sit,
Deciding on the claims of Wit --
Think not that you, our Author means,
When through her saucy Farcic scenes,
A Pedant she has dared to scan
From Alma Matter -- spick and span.
No; in her name she bids me swear
You are chief favorites of the Fair --
You Have blood and spirits in your veins,
And give -- ge-heup -- to joy the reins;
Skim Life's sweet surface, and pursue
The flying blessings, still in view --
For Pleasure ever on the beat,
And roasted SQUARE CAPS -- think a treat.
WHO IS THE DUPE?
ACT I.
SCENE, the Park.
Flower Girls, and several persons passing. First Girl. I Vow I have not had a
customer today. Summer is coming, and we shall be ruined. When flowers are
plenty, no body will buy 'em.


2d. Girl. Aye, weary true -- people talks of summer; but for my part, give me
Christmas. In a hard frost, or a deep snow, who is dressed without flowers and
furs? Here Is one of the Captains.

Enter SANDFORD. Flowers, Sir!


Sand. I have no silver.


2d. Girl. Bless your Honor! I Will take gold.


Sand. Indeed!


2d. Girl. Here Is hyacinths, and a sprig of myrtle.


Sand. I Would rather have roses. What will you take for these? [Pinching her
cheek.]


2d. Girl. I cannot sell them alone -- the tree and the roses must go together.


Enter GRANGER. Sand. Ah! Granger, by all that is fortunate! I wrote to you last
night in Devonshire, to hasten your return.


Grang. Then your letter and I jostled each other at two o'clock, on this side
Hounslow. My damned postillion -- nodding, I suppose, over the charms of some
Greasalinda -- run against the letter-cart, tore off my hind wheel; and I was
forced to mount his one-ey'd hack, and, in that curious equipage, arrived at
three this morning.


Sand. But how has the negotiation with your Brother ended? Will he put you in
a situation to --


Grang. Yes, to take a sweating with the Gentoos. He Will speak to Sir Jacob
Jaghire to get me a commission in the East Indies -- "and, you know, every body
grows rich there -- and then you know you're a Soldier, you can fight." [In a
tone of mimickry.]


Sand. Well, what answer did you give him?


Grang. Yes, Sir Bobby, I can fight [mimicking]; but I cannot grow rich upon the
smell of gunpowder. Your true East India Soldier is a different genius from
those who strewn Minden with Frenchmen, and must have as great a fecundity of
character, as a Dutch Burgomaster. Whilst his sword is in his hand, his pen
must be in his cockade: he must be as expert at Fractions, as at Assaults;
today mowing down ranks of soft Beings, just risen from their Embroidery;
tomorrow, selling Pepper and Beetle-nut -- this hour a Son of Mars, striding
over heaps of slain; the next, an Auctioneer -- knocking down Chintz and
Callico to the best bidder.


Sand. And thus your negotiation ended?


Grang. Except that I was obliged to listen to some very wise dissertation
about running out, as he calls it. "Five Thousand -- enough for any younger
Son, but the Prodigal." [mimicking] Really, Sandford, I cannot see how I could
help it. Jack Spiller, to be sure, had Nine Hundred. The poor fellow was
honest; but he married a Fine Lady, so died insolvent. I had a few more
accidents of the same kind; my Captaincy cost a Thousand -- and the necessary
expenses in America, with the distresses of my fellow Soldiers, have swallowed
the rest.


Sand. Poor Granger! So, with a spirit to do honor to Five Thousand a year,
thou art not worth Five Shillings.


Grang. C'est vrai. Should my affairs with Elizabeth be crossed, I am the most
undone Dog on earth.


Sand. Now, tell me honestly, is it Elizabeth, or the fortune, which is your
object?


Grang. Why look'ee Sandford! I am not one of those sighing Milksops who could
live in a cottage on love, or sit contentedly under a hedge, and help my wife
to knit stockings; but, on the word of a Soldier, I had rather marry Elizabeth
Doily with Ten Thousand Pounds, than any other woman on earth with an Hundred.


Sand. And the woman must be very unreasonable, who would not be satisfied with
such a distinction. But do you know, that Elizabeth's Father has taken the
liberty to choose a Son-in-law without your permission?


Grang. Ha! a Lover! That then is the secret my Charmer hinted, and which
brought me so hastily to Town. Who -- what is he?


Sand. Every thing that you are not.


Grang. There is such a mixture of jest and earnest --


Sand. Upon my soul, it is confoundedly serious. -- Since they became my
neighbors in Suffolk, I am in the secrets of the whole family, and, for your
sake, have cultivated an intimacy with Abraham Doiley, Citizen and Slop-Seller.
In a word, the Father consults me, the Daughter complains to me, and the
Cousin, fille-dechambre, romps with me -- Can my importance be increased?


Grang. My dear Sandford! [impatiently.


Sand. My dear Granger! the sum total is this: old Doily -- bred, you know, in
a Charity-school -- swears he will have a Man of LARNING for his Son. His caprice
makes him regardless of fortune; but Elizabeth's husband must have Latin at his
fingers' ends, and be able to teach his Grandsons to sputter in Greek.


Grang. Oh! I Will study Hebrew, and write Odes in Chaldee, if that will content
the old Gentleman -- but, may I perish, if all the Pedants in England, with the
Universities to back 'em, shall rob me of my Elizabeth! -- See here [producing
a Letter] -- an invitation, from her own dear hand. -- This morning -- this
very hour -- in a moment I shall be at her feet [Going] -- Go with me through
the Park -- Oh, no -- I cry you mercy -- You walk, but I fly.

[Exit.
Sand. Propitious be your flight! -- Egad! there are two fine Girls -- I Will try
'em -- half afraid -- the Women dress so equivocally, that one is in danger of
attacking a Countess, when one only means to address a Nymph of King's-Place.

[Exit.
An Apartment at Mr. DOILEY's.
Mr. and Miss DOILEY at Breakfast. Doil. Here, take away -- take away.
Remember, we are not at home to nobody but to Mr. Gradus.


Serve. The formal Gentleman, that was here last night, Sir?


Doil. Yes, [snappishly] the Gentleman that was here last night. [Exit Servant]
What! I see you are resolved for to have poor Gradus's heart, Elizabeth! -- I
never saw you so tricked out in a morning before. But he is n't none of your
Chaps that is to be caught with a Mountainhead, nor knots, nor gew-gaws. -- No,
no; you must mind your Ps and Qs with him, I can tell you. And don't laugh now
when he is with you. -- You Have a confounded knack at laughing; and there is
nothing so odious, in the eyes of a wise man, as a great laugher.


Miss Doil. Oh! his very idea is as reviving as burnt feathers in hysterics. --
I wish I had seen him last night, with all the rust of Oxford about him! he
must have been the greatest provocative to mirth.


Doil. How! what! a provokive to mirth! why, Hussy, he was recommended to me
by an antikary Doctor of the Royal Society -- he has finished his Larning some
time; and they want him to come and drink and hunt in Shropshire -- not he --
he sticks to Al-mater; and the College-heads have been laid together many a
time to know whether he shall be a great Judge, a larned Physician, or a
Civility Doctor.


Miss Doil. Nay then, Sir -- if he is all this, laughing will be irresistible.


Doil. Don't put me in a passion, Betty -- don't go for to put me in a passion.
What, would you have a Man with an eternal grin upon, his face, like the head
of a knocker? and hopping and skipping about like a Dutch Doll, with
quicksilver in its heels? If you must have a Husband of that sort, so be it, so
be it -- you know the rest.


Miss Doil. Surely, Sir, it is possible for a Man who does not move as if cut in
wood, or speak as though he delivered his words by tale, to have Breeding, and
to --


Doil. May be -- may be; but your Man of Breeding is not fit for old Doiley's
Son. What! shall I go for to give the labor of thirty years to a young
Jackanapes, who will come into the room with a Dancing-school step -- and prate
of his Grandfather Sir Thomas, his Great-Grandfather the General, and his
Great-great-great-Grandfather -- merely because I cannot tell whether I ever had
one, or no?


Miss Doil. I hope, Sir, that such a Man could never engage my --


Doil. Pshaw, pshaw! you cannot pretend for to judge of a Man; all Hypocrites
and Deceivers.


Miss Doil. Except Mr. Gradus.


Doil. Oh, He! He Is very different from your Men of Breeding, I assure you --
The most extraordinary Youth that was ever turned out of College. None of your
Randans, up all night -- not drinking and wenching -- No -- in his room --
poring, and reading, and studying. Oh, the joy that I shall have in hearing him
talk! I do love LARNING. I was grieved -- grieved to the soul, Betty, when thou
were born. I had set my heart upon a Boy -- and if thou'd'st been a Boy, thou
should have had Greek, and Algebra, and Jometry enough for an Archbishop.


Miss Doil. I am sorry --


Doil. No, no; don't be sorry -- be obedient, and all will be as it should be.
You know I dote on you, you young Slut. I left Eastcheap for Westminster, on
purpose to please you. Hav'n't I not carried you to Bath, Brimigem, and
Warley-Common, and all the genteel places? I never grudge you no expense, nor
no pleasure whatsomever.


Miss Doil. Indeed, Sir, you are most indulgent.


Doil. Well then, don't thwart me, Betty -- don't go for to thwart me; that is
all. Since you came into the world, and disappointed your Father of a Son, it is
your duty to give him a wise Son-in-law to make up his loss.


Enter CHARLOTTE. Char. Mrs. Taffety, the Mantua-maker, is in your
dressing room, Ma'am.


Doil. Then send her away -- She has'nt no time now for Mrs. Taffety.


Miss Doil. Aye, send her away, Charlotte -- what does she want? I didn't send
for her.


Char. Bless me -- it is the Captain. [Apart.


Miss Doil. Oh Heavens! [aside] Yes, I do remember -- aye, I did -- I did send
for her about the painted lutestring.


Doil. Bid her come again tomorrow, I say.


Char. Lord bless me! Sir, I dare say she cannot come again tomorrow -- such
Mantua-makers as Mrs. Taffety will not wait half-a-dozen times on people -- Why,
Sir, she comes to her Customers in a Chair of her own; and her Footman beats a
tattoo at the door, as if she was a Countess.


Doil. A Mantua-maker with her Footman and Chair! Oh lud! o lud! I should as
soon have expected a Duchess in a Wheel-barrow.


Miss Doil. Pray, Sir, allow me just to step and speak to her -- It is the
sweetest gown -- and I Would give the world were you as much charmed with it as I
am.


Doil. Coaxing slut! [Exeunt Miss D. and Charlotte.] -- Where the devil can
Gradus be now? -- Well, good fortune never comes in a hurry. -- If I Would pitched
upon your Man of Breeding, he would have been here an hour ago -- sipt his
jocklate, kissed Elizabeth's fingers, hopped into his carriage, and away to his
wench -- to divart her with charatures of the Old Fellow and his Daughter. Oh!
before I Would give my gains to one of these Puppies, I Would spend 'em all in building
hospitals for lazy Lacquies, and decayed Pimps.

[Exit.
SCENE, a Dressing Room.
Miss DOILEY and GRANGER. Miss Doil. A truce to your transports! Perhaps I am
too much inclined to believe all you can swear -- but this must be a moment of
business -- To secure me to yourself, are you willing to enter into measures
that --


Gran. Any thing! -- every thing! -- I Will have a chaise at the Park-gate in
five minutes; and we'll be in Scotland, my Elizabeth, before your new Lover has
settled his first address.


Miss Doil. Pho, pho! you're a mere bungler at contrivance; if you will be guided
by me, my Father shall give me to you at St. James's Church, in the face of the
world.


Grang. Indeed!


Miss Doil. Indeed.


Grang. I fear to trust to it, my Angel! -- Beauty can work miracles with all
mankind, but an obstinate Father. --


Miss Doil. It is you who must work the miracle. -- I have settled the whole
affair with my Cousin, who has understanding and wit -- and you have only to be
obedient.


Grang. I am perfectly obedient -- pray give me my lesson!


Miss Doil. Why, luckily, you know my Father has never seen you -- he left Bath
before you had the sauciness --


Enter CHARLOTTE with a Bundle. Char. There! -- you're finely caught! -- Here Is
your Father and Mr. Gradus actually upon the stairs, coming here.


Grang. Zounds! Where Is the closet?


Miss Doil. Oh Lord! here is no closet -- I shall faint with terror.


Grang. No back stairs? -- No clothes-press?


Char. Neither, neither! -- But here -- I Am your guardian angel -- [untying the
bundle] -- I told 'em Mrs. Taffety was here; so without more ceremony clap on
these -- speak broken English, and, my life for it, you will pass muster with my
Uncle.


Grang. What! make a Woman of me! -- by Jupiter --


Char. Lay your commands on him -- if he does not submit, we are ruined.


Miss Doil. Oh, you shall, I protest -- here -- I Will put his cap on.


Doil. [without] This way, Sir -- come this way -- We'll take her by surprise
-- least preparation is best -- [pulling at the door] Open the door!


Miss Doil. Presently, Sir.


Doil. [knocking] What the dickens are you doing, I say? -- open the door!


Char. In a moment -- I am only pinning my Cousin's gown -- Lord bless me! you
hurry one so, you have made me prick my finger. There -- now you may enter.

[Opens the door, and exit.]
Doil. Oh! only my Daughter's Mantua-maker. Here, Elizabeth, this is that Mr.
Gradus I talked to you about. Bless me! I hope you a'n't ill -- you look as
white as a candle.


Miss Doil. No, Sir -- not ill -- but this woman has fretted me to death -- she
has spoiled my gown.


Doil. Why then make her pay for it, do you hear? It Is my belief, if she was to
pay for all she spoils, she would soon drop her Chair, and trudge a-foot. Mr.
Gradus -- beg pardon -- this is my Daughter -- don't think the worse of her,
because she is a little dashed, or so.


Grad. Bashfulness, Mr. Doiley, is the robe of Modesty -- and Modesty, as has
been well observed, is a Sunbeam on a Diamond -- giving force to its beauty,
and exalting its luster.


Doil. He was a deep one, I warrant him, that said that -- I remember something
like it in the Wisdom of Solomon. Come, speak to Elizabeth there -- I see she
will not 'till you have broke the ice.


Grad. Madam! -- [bows] -- hem -- permit me -- this honor -- hem -- believe
me, Lady, I have more satisfaction in beholding you, than I should have in
conversing with Graevius and Gronovius. I had rather possess your approbation
than that of the elder Scaliger; and this apartment is more precious to me,
than was the Lycean Portico to the most zealous of the Peripatetics.


Doil. There! -- Show me a Man of Breeding who could talk so! [aside]


Grang. Mon Dieu! Madame! is dis de Gentilhomme for whom you vant de Bride
Clothes? -- He speak like a Dictionary-maker, and look like a Physician.


Doil. Hold your tongue, Mrs. Skain of Silk! What, a dickens! must you put in
your oar? Why don't you pack her off? [to Miss Doiley.]


Miss Doil. Pray make haste, Mrs. Taffety -- How could you presume to speak? I
believe all you have said to be very fine, Sir; but, unfortunately, I don't
know the Gentlemen you mentioned. The education given to Women shuts us
entirely from such refined acquaintance.


Gradus. Perfectly right, Madam, perfectly right. The more simple your
education, the nearer you approach the pure manners of the purest ages. The
charms of Women were never more powerful -- never inspired such achievements,
as in those immortal periods, when they could neither read, nor write.


Doil. Not read, nor write! Zounds, what a time was that for to bring up a
Daughter! Why, a Peeress in those days did not cost so much as a Barber's
Daughter in ours. Miss Friz must have her Dancing, her French, her Tambour, her
Harpsicholl, her Jography, her Stronomy -- whilst her Father, to support all
this, lives upon Sprats; or, once in two years, calls his Creditors to a
composition.


Grad. Oh, tempora mutantur! but these exuberances, Mr. Doiley, indigitate
unbounded liberty.


Doil. Digitate, or not -- ifackens, if the Ladies would take my advice, they would
return to their distaffs, and grow notable -- to distinguish themselves from
their Shopkeepers Wives.


Grad. Ah! It was at the Loom, and the Spinning-wheel, that the Lucretias and
Portias of the world imbibed their virtue; that the Mothers of the Gracchi, the
Horatii, the Antonines, caught that sacred flame with which they inspired their
Sons, and with the milk of their own pure bosoms gave them that fortitude, that
magnanimity, which made them Conquerors and Kings.


Grang. En verite, Madame! if you marry dis Gentilhomme, he will make you spin
his shirts, dat he may become de Fader of young Emperors.


Doil. Hoity, toity! why, you impudent, insolent --


Grang. Impudent! Pardie, Monsieur, he be only fit for un. Cocu. Vat, Monsieur!
you marry un pretty Lady! You make good Doctor de Sorbonne -- but Husband -- Oh
mon Dieu! de Men will rejoice -- de Women will laugh -- de Town will --
[following Gradus, who retreats.


Grad. Prithee, good Woman! -- Mr. Doiley, I am really --


Doil. In all my life I never saw so much. Why, you French Trollop! you,
insolent, insignificant, dirty --


Grang. No French Trollop me, Monsieur! By gar, it is insult on my country --
and mon Cousin de Friseur shall give you de challenge.


Doil Challenge! what a dickens are ye coming the mad Marquis over us? March,
Madam! Troop, I say! It does not signify hanging back, Woman, for you shall out;
[exit Granger] and [bawling after him] if ever I catch you at my door again,
you and your Chair shall both be jirk'd in the kennel -- This comes of
employing your parler voos.


Grad. Be not disconcerted, Mr. Doiley -- Impertinence and wonder are the
birthright of the ignorant.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir, here is a Lord! Lord Pharo!!


Doil. Lord Pharo! hum, then the four Aces run against him last night. Well,
the ill luck of some, and the fine taste of others, makes my money breed like
rabbits. [Aside.


Serve. Sir --


Doil. Well, well, I Am coming -- when a Lord wants money, he will wait as
patiently as any body. Well, Mr. Gradus, I Am your humble sarvant. Elizabeth! --
you understand me.

[Exit.
Grad. How unlucky the old Gentleman should be called away! Hem! [addressing
himself to speak to her] There is something in her eye so sarcastic, I Would rather
pronounce the Terraefilius, than address her. Madam! -- What can I say? Oh, now
-- that is fortunate [pulling out some papers] Hem! I will venture to request
your ideas, Madam, on a little Autographon, which I design for the world.


Miss Doil. -- Sir!


Grad. -- In which I have formed a new Chronometer, to prove that Confucius and
Zoroaster were the same person; -- and that the pyramids are not so ancient, by
two hundred years, as the world believes.


Miss Doil. To what purpose, Sir?


Grad. Purpose! -- Purpose, Madam! Why, really, Miss, our Booksellers shelves
are loaded with volumes in the unfruitful road of plain sense and nature; and
unless an Author can clance himself from the common track, he stands as little
chance to be known as a Comet in its Aphelion. Pray, Ma'am, amuse yourself.


Miss Doil. O Lord, Sir! you may as well offer me a sheet of Hieroglyphics --
Besides, I hate reading.


Grad. Hate reading!


Miss Doil. Aye, to be sure; what is reading good for, but to give a stiff,
embarrassed air? It makes a man move as if made by a Carpenter, who had forgot
to give him joints -- [observing him] he twirls his hat, and bites his thumb,
whilst his hearers -- his beholders, I mean, are gaping for his wit.


Grad. The malicious creature! It Is my picture she has been drawing, and now
it is more impossible for me to speak than ever.


Miss Doil. For my part -- for my part, if I was a Man, I Would study only Dancing,
and Bon-Mots. With no other learning than these, he may be light and
frolicksome as Lady Airy's Ponies -- but loaded with Greek, Philosophy, and
Mathematics, he is as heavy and dull as a Carthorse.


Grad. Foemina cum voce Diaboli.


Miss Doil. Bless me, Sir! why are you silent? My Father told me you was a
Lover -- I never saw such a Lover in my life. By this time you should have said
fifty brilliant things -- found an hundred similes for my Eyes, Complexion, and
Wit. Can your memory furnish you with nothing pat? -- No Poetry -- no Heroics?
What subject did Portia's Lovers entertain her with, whilst she sat spinning --
aye?


Grad. The Lovers of that age, Madam, were ignorant of frothy compliments.
Instead of being gallant, they were brave; instead of Flattery, they studied
Virtue and Wisdom. It was these, Madam, that nerved the Roman arm; that
empowered her to drag the nations of the world at her chariot-wheels, and that
raised her to such an exalted height --


Miss Doil. That down she tumbled in the dust -- and there I beg you will leave
her. Was ever any thing so monstrous! I ask for a Compliment, and you begin an
Oration -- an oration on a parcel of stiff Warriors, and formal Pedants. Why,
Sir, there is not one of these brave, wise, godlike Men, but would appear as
ridiculous in a Modern Assembly as a Judge in his long wig and a Maccaroni
jacket.


Grad. Now I am dumb again. Oh, that I had you at Brazen-nose, Madam! -- I
could manage you there. [Aside.


Miss Doil. What! now you're in the pouts, Sir? It Is mighty well. Bless us!
what a life a Wife must have with such a Being! forever talking sentences, or
else in profound silence. No delightful nonsense, no sweet trifling -- all must
be solemn, wise, and grave. Hang me if I would not sooner marry the Bust of
Seneca, in bronze -- then I should have all the gravity and coldness of Wisdom,
without its impertinence.


Grad. The impertinence of Wisdom! -- Surely, Madam, or I am much deceived, you
possess a mind capable --


Miss Doil. Now I see, by the twist of your chin, Sir, you are beginning
another Oration -- but, I protest, I will never hear you speak again; 'till you
have forsworn those tones, and that manner. Go, Sir -- throw your books into
the fire, turn your study into a Dressing Room, hire a Dancing Master, and grow
agreeable.

[Exit.
Grad. Plato! Aristotle! Zeno! I abjure ye. A Girl bred in a Nursery -- in
whose soul the sacred lamp of knowledge has scarcely shed its faintest rays --
has vanquished, and struck dumb, the most faithful of your disciples. [Enter
Charlotte.] Here Is another She-devil -- I Would as soon encounter a She-wolf.
[Going]


Charl. Stay, Sir, pray, an instant! Laud bless me! am I such a scarecrow? I
was never run from, by a young man, before in my life. [Pulls him back.]


Grad. I resolve henceforward to run from your whole sex -- Youth and Beauty
are only other names for Coquettry and Affectation. Let me go, Madam -- you
have beauty, and doubtless all that belongs to it.


Charl. Lud! you have a mighty pretty whimsical way of complimenting. -- Miss
Doiley might have discerned something in you worth cherishing, in spite of
that husk of Scholarship. -- To pass one's life with such a Being, seems to me
the very Apex of human felicity. I found that word for him in a book of
Geometry this morning. [Aside.


Grad. Indeed!


Charl. Positively. I have listened to your conversation, and I cannot help
being concerned, that Talents which ought to do you honor, should, by your
mismanagement, be converted into downright ridicules.


Grad. This Creature is of a genus quite different from the other. She has
understanding! [aside] I begin to suspect, Madam, that, though I have some
knowledge, I have still much to learn.


Charl. You have, indeed -- Knowledge, as you manage it, is a downright Bore.


Grad. Boar! What relation can there be between Knowledge and a Hog?


Charl. Lord bless me! how ridiculous! You have spent your life in learning the
dead languages, and are ignorant of the living -- Why, Sir, Bore is all the Ton.


Grad. Ton! ton! What may that be? It cannot be Orthology: I don't recollect
its root in the parent languages.


Char. Ha! ha! ha! better and better. Why, Sir, Ton means -- Ton is -- Pho!
what signifies where the root is? These kind of words are the shorthand of
conversation, and convey whole sentences at once. All one likes is Ton, and all
one hates is Bore.


Grad. And is that divine medium, which pourtrays our minds, and marks us first
in the animal climax -- is speech become so arbitrary, that --


Char. Divine medium! -- Animal climax! [contemptuously] You know very well,
the use of language is to express one's likes and dislikes -- and a Pig will do
this as effectually by its squeak, or a Hen with her cackle, as you with your
Latin and Greek.


Grad. What can I say to you?


Char. Nothing; -- but yield yourself to my guidance, and you shall conquer
Miss Doiley.


Grad. Conquer her! she is so incased with ridicule, there is not a single
vulnerable spot about her.


Char. Pshaw, pshaw! What becomes of her ridicule, when you have banished your
absurdities? One can no more exist without the other, than the mundane system
without air. There Is a touch of my science for you. [Aside.


Grad. Madam, I Will take you for my Minerva -- Cover me with your shield, and
lead me to battle.


Char. Enough. In the first place, [leading him to a glass] in the first place,
don't you think you are habited a la mode d' Amor? Did you ever see a Cupid in
a grizzle wig, curled as stiffly as Sir Cloudsley Shovel's in the Abbey? -- A
dingy brown coat, with vellum button-holes, to be sure, speaks an excellent
taste; but then I would advise you to lay it by in lavender, for your
Grandson's christening -- and here is cambrick enough in your ruffles to make
his shirt.


Grad. I perceive my error. The votaries of Love commence a new childhood; and
dignity would be as unbecoming in them, as a hornpipe to a Socrates -- But
habit is so strong, that, to gain an Empress, I could not assume that careless
air, that promptness of expression --


Char. Then you may give up the pursuit of Miss Doiley -- for such a wise piece
of uprightness would stand as good a chance to be Secretary to the Coterie, as
her Husband.


Grad. It is Mr. Doiley, who will --


Char. Mr. Doiley! Ridiculous -- Depend on it, he will let her marry just whom she
will -- This Mr. Gradus, says he -- why I don't care a groat whether you marry
him or no, says he -- there are fifty young fellows at Oxford, who can talk
Greek as well as he --


Grad. Indeed!


Char. I have heard a good account of the young man, says he. But all I ask of
you is, to receive two visits from him -- no more than two visits. If you don't
like him -- so; if you do, I Will give you half my fortune on the day of
marriage, and the rest at my death.


Grad. What a singularity! to limit me to two visits -- One is already past,
and she hates me -- What can I expect from the other?


Char. Every thing. It is a moment that decides the fate of a Lover. Now, fancy
me Miss Doiley -- look at me as if your soul was in your eyes -- swear I Am a
divinity -- then take my hand and press it -- thus.


Grad. Heavens! her touch has thrilled me.


Char. And if I should pout, and resent the liberty, make your apology on my
lips. [Gradus catches her in his arms, and kisses her] So, so! you have fire, I
perceive.


Grad. Can you give me any more lessons?


Char. Yes; but this is not the place. I have a friend -- Mr. Sandford, whom
you saw here last night -- you shall dine with him; he will initiate ye at once
in the fashionable rage, and teach you to trifle agreeably. You shall be
equipped from his wardrobe, to appear here in the evening a Man of the World --
Adieu to Grizzles, and --


Grad. But what will the Father think of such a metamorphosis?


Char. Study your Mistress only -- your visit will be to her, and that visit
decides your fate. Resolve then to take up your new character boldly -- in all
its strongest lines, or give up one of the richest Heiresses in the kingdom.


Grad. My obligations, Madam --


Char. Don't stay now, to run the risk of meeting Mr. Doiley -- for, if he
should discover that you have disgusted his Daughter, Sandford, the dinner, and
the plot, will be worth no more than your gravity. Away! I Will meet you at
Story's Gate to introduce you.

[Exit Gradus.
Enter Miss DOILEY. Miss Doil. Excellent Charlotte! you have out-gone my
expectation -- Did ever a woodcock run so blindly into a snare?


Char. Oh, that is the way of all your great Scholars -- take 'em but an inch
out of their road, and you may turn 'em inside out, as easily as your glove.


Miss Doil. Well, but have you seen Sandford? -- Is every thing in train? --
Will Gradus be hoodwinked?


Char. Hoodwinked! Why, don't you see he is already stark blind? or if he has
any eyes, I assure ye they are all for me.


Miss Doil. My heart palpitates with apprehension -- we shall never succeed.


Char. Oh, I Will answer for the Scholar, if you will undertake the Soldier. Mr.
Sandford has engaged half a dozen of the Savoir vivres; all in high spirits at
the idea of tricking old Leather-purse -- and they have sworn to exhaust wit
and invention, to turn our Solon out of their hands a finished Coxcomb.


Miss Doil. Blessing on their labors! My Granger is gone to study his rival;
and will make, I hope, a tolerable copy. -- Now follow Gradus, my dear
Charlotte, and take care they give him just champagne enough to raise him to
the point, without turning over it.

Exeunt.
END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, An Apartment.
DOILEY asleep. A Table before him, with Bottles, etc. Enter a SERVANT.
Servant. SIR! Sir! [jogging him] Sir! What a pise! sure my Master has drained
the bottles, he sleeps so found. -- Oh, no -- [pours out a glass] -- Here Is
to ye, old Gentleman! cannot think why they sent me to wake thee -- am sure the
house is always quietest when you're a snoring. -- [Drinks; then awakens him.]


Doil, Hey! -- how! -- what! Is Mr. Gradus come?


Serve. No, Sir -- but Mr. Sandford's above stairs, and a mortal fine Gentleman.


Doil. Fine Gentleman! -- aye -- some Rake, I suppose, that wants to sell an
annuity -- I wonder where Gradus is -- Past seven. [Looking at his watch.]


Serve. His friends keep the gentleman over a bottle, mayhap, Sir, longer than
he thought for.


Doil. He over a bottle! -- more liker he is over some crabbed book -- or
watching what the Moon's about, through a Microscope. Come, move the things;
and empty them two bottoms into one bottle, and cork it up close -- do you hear?
-- I wish Gradus was come -- Well, if I succeed in this one point, the devil
may run away with the rest. Let the world go to loggerheads; grass grow upon
'Change; land tax mount up; little Doiley is snug. Doiley, with a Hundred
Thousand in annuities, and a Son-in-law as wise as a Chancellor, may bid
defiance to wind and weather.

[Exit.
SCENE, a Drawing Room.
Enter GRADUS, led by CHARLOTTE, and followed by Mr. SANDFORD. Charlotte. Well,
I protest this is an improvement! -- Why, what with sattins and tassels, and
spangles and foils, you look as fine as a Chymist's shop by candlelight.


Grad. Madam, do you approve --


Charl. Oh, amazingly -- I Will run and send Miss Doiley to admire you.


Grad. [looking in a glass.] Oh, if our Proctor could now behold me! he would
never believe that figure to be Jeremy Gradus.


Sand. Very true -- and I give ye joy. No one would conceive you would ever been
within gunshot of a College.


Grad. What must I do with this?


Sand. Your chapeau bras -- wear it thus. These hats are for the arm only.


Grad. A hat for the arm! what a subversion of ideas! Oh, Mr. Sandford -- if
the sumptuary laws of Lycurgus --


Sand. Damn it! will you never leave off your College cant! I tell you once
more -- and, by Jupiter, if you don't attend to me, I Will give you up -- I say,
you must forget that such fellows ever existed -- that there was ever a
language but English -- a classic but Ovid, or a volume but his Art of Love.


Grad. I will endeavor to form myself from your instructions -- but tarry with
me, I entreat you -- if you should leave me --


Sand. I will not leave you. Here Is your Mistress -- Now, Gradus, stand to your
arms.


Grad. I Will do my best -- but I could wish the Purse-keeper was Miss Charlotte.


Enter Miss DOILEY. Sand. Hush! Your devoted. Allow me, Madam, to introduce a
Gentleman to you, in whose affairs I am particularly interested -- Mr. Gradus.


Miss Doil. Mr. Gradus! Is it possible?


Grad. Be not astonished, oh lovely Maiden, at my sudden change! Beauty is a
talisman which works true miracles, and, without a fable, transforms mankind.


Miss Doil. Your transformation, I fear, is too sudden to be lasting --


Grad. Transformation! Resplendent Virgo! brightest constellation of the starry
Zone! I am but now created. Your charms, like the Promethean fire, have warmed
the clod to life, and rapt me to a new existence.


Miss Doil. But may I be sure you will never take up your old rust again?


Grad. Never. Sooner shall Taurus with the Pisces join, Copernicus to Ptolemy
resign the spheres, than I be what I was.


Miss Doil. I shall burst. [Walking aside]


Sand. Well, you have hit it off tolerably, for a coup d'essai -- But prithee,
Gradus, cannot you talk in a style a little less fustain? You remember how those
Fine Fellows conversed, you saw at dinner -- no sentences, no cramp words --
all was Ease, and Impudence.


Grad. Yes, I remember. Now the shell is burst, I shall soon be fledged. [
Doiley coming in, starts back.]


Doil. Why, who the dickens have we here!


Sand. So -- there is the old Genius!


Miss Doil. But I am convinced now -- I am sure all this is put on -- in your
heart you are still Mr. Gradus.


Grad. Yes, Madam, still Gradus; but not that stiff, scholastic Fool you saw
this morning -- No, no -- I have learned that the acquisitions of which your
Father is so ridiculously fond, are useless lumber -- that a man who knows more
than his neighbors, is in danger of being shut out of society -- or, at best,
of being invited at dinner once in a twelvemonth, to be exhibited like an
antique Bronze -- or Porridge-pot from Herculaneum.


Doil. Zounds! it is he! I Am all over in a cold sweat. [Behind]


Miss Doil. And don't you think Learning the greatest blessing in the world?


Grad. Not I, truly, Madam -- Learning! a vile Bore!


Doil. Do I stand upon my head, or my heels?


Grad. I shall leave all those fopperies to the Grey-beards at College -- let
'em chop logic, or make English hashes out of stale Hebrew, 'till they starve,
for me.


Sand. This is your resolution?


Grad. Fixed as Ixion on his wheel -- I have no study now but the Ton.


Doil. Indeed!


Grad. You shall confess, my Friend, in spite of prejudice, that it is possible
for a Man of Letters to become a Man of the World. You shall see, that he can
dress, grow an adept in the science of Taste, ogle at the Opera, be vociferous
at the Playhouse, suffer himself to be pigeon'd with an easy air at Boodle's,
and lose his health for the benefit of his reputation in King's Place.


Miss Doil. Bless me! one would suppose you had been familiar in the Bon-ton
all your life -- you have all the requisites to make a figure in it, by heart.


Grad. The mere force of Beauty, Madam -- I wished to become worthy of you, and
that wish has worked a miracle.


Doil. A miracle with a vengeance! Jacquet Droz' wood and wire-work was nothing
to it.


Miss Doil. How different from what you was this morning!


Grad. Oh, mention it not -- this morning! -- may it be blotted from Time's
Ledger, and never thought on more! I abhor my former Self, Madam, more than you
can -- witness now the recantation of my errors. Learning, with all its tribe
of solemn fopperies, I abjure -- abjure for ever.


Doil. You do?


Grad. The study of what is vulgarly called Philosophy may suit a Monk; but
it is as unbecoming a Gentleman, as Loaded Dice, or a Brasshilted Sword.


Doil. Larning unbecoming a Gentleman! -- Very well.


Grad. Hebrew I leave to the Jew Rabbis, Greek to the Bench of Bishops, Latin
to the Apothecaries, and Astronomy to Almanack-makers.


Doil. Better, and better.


Grad. The Mathematics -- Mixed, Pure, Speculative, and Practical, with their
whole circle of Sciences, I consign, in a lump, to Old Men who want Blood, and
to Young ones who want Bread -- and now you have heard my whole abjuration.


DOILEY rushing forward. Doil. Yes -- and I have heard too -- I have heard. Oh,
that I should ever have been such a dolt as to take thee for a Man of Larning!


Grad. Mr. Doiley! [Confounded.]


Doil. What! don't be dashed, Man -- go on with your objurations, do. Yes,
you will make a shine in the Tone! -- Oh, that ever I should have been such a
Nincompoop!


Sand. My dear Mr. Doiley, don't be in a heat -- how can a Man of your
discernment -- now look at Gradus -- I am sure he is a much prettier fellow than
he was -- his figure and his manner are quite different things.


Doil. Yes, yes, I can see that -- I can see that -- Why, he has turned little
Easop upside down -- he is the Lion in the skin of an Ass.


[Walking about] Grad. I must retrieve myself in his opinion. The skin, Mr.
Doiley, may be put off; and be assured, that the mind, which has once felt the
sacred energies of Wisdom, though it may assume, for a moment --


Miss Doil. So! so! [Angrily]


Sand. [Apart] Hark ye, Sir! that will not do. By Heaven, if you play retrograde,
I Will forsake you on the spot. You are ruined with your Mistress in a moment.


Grad. Dear Madam! believe me, that as for -- what can I say -- how assimilate
myself to two such opposite tastes? I stand reeling between two characters,
like a Substantive between two Adjectives.


Doil. You! you for to turn Fop, and Maccaroni! Why, 'twould be as nateral for
a Jew Robin to turn Parson. An Elephant in pinners -- a Bishop with a rattle
and bells, couldn't be more posterous.


Sand. Nay now, my dear Mr. Doiley --


Doil. Dear me no dears. Why, if I wanted a Maccaroni, I might have had choice
-- every alley from Hyde-Park to Shadwell-Dock swarms with 'em -- genuine; and
do you think I Will have an amphiberous thing -- half-and-half, like the Sea-calf
at Sir Ashton's?


Sand. Oh, if that is all, an hundred to ten, Gradus will soon be as complete a
character, as if he had never learnt his Alpha Beta; or known more of the
Classics than their names.


Doil. Oh, I warrant him. Now what do ye think of the Scratchi, the Horsi, and
the rest of 'em? aye!


Grad. Oh, a mere Bore -- a parcel of brawny untaught fellows, who knew no more
of life than they did of Chinese. If they would stood Candidates for rank in a
College of Taste, they would have been returned ignorantur -- would they not, Madam?


Miss Doil. Oh certainly -- I could kiss the fellow, he has entered into my
plot with such spirit.

[Exit.
Doil. Why, you have been in wonderful haste to get rid of the igranter part --
but as it happened, that was the only part I cared for -- so now you may carry
your hogs to another market; they will not not do for me.


Grad. My Hogs!


Doil. Aye -- your Boars -- your improvements -- your fashionable airs -- your
-- in short, you are not the Man I took you for; so you may trot back to
College again -- go, Mister, and teach 'em the Tone, do -- Lord, how they will
stare! Jeremy Gradus, or the Monkey returned from travel.


Sand. Upon my honor, you are too severe. Leave us, Man -- leave us -- I Will
settle your affair, I warrant. [to Gradus.


Grad. No so easily, I fear -- he sticks to his point, like a rusty
Weathercock -- All my dependence is on the Lady.


Sand. You Will allow Gradus to speak to Miss Doiley.


Doil. Oh, aye, to be sure -- the more he speaks, the less she will like him.
Here -- show Mr. Gradus to the dressing room [Exit Gradus]. Give her another
dose -- surfeit her by all means. Why, sure, Mr. Sandford, you would no hand in
transmogrifying the --


Sand. Yes, faith, I had -- I couldn't endure the idea of seeing your charming
Daughter tied to a collection of Greek Apophthegms and Latin Quotations -- so I
endeavored to English him.


Doil. English him! I take it shocking ill of you, Mr. Sandford -- that I must
tell you. -- Here are all my hopes gone, like a whiff of Tobacco!


Sand. Pho! my dear Mr. Doiley, this attachment of yours to Scholarship is a
mere whim --


Doil. Whim! well, suppose it is -- I will have my whim. Worked hard forty
years, and saved above twice as many Thousand Pounds -- and if so much labor,
and so much money, will not entitle a Man to whim, I don't know what the devil
should.


Sand. Nor I neither, I Am sure.


Doil. To tell ye a bit of a secret -- lack of Larning has been my great
detriment. If I Would been a Scholar, there is no knowing what I might have got --
my Plumb might have been two -- my --


Sand. Why, doubtless, a little Classical knowledge might have been of use, in
driving your Bargains.


Doil. Aye, to be sure! -- and I do verily believe it hindered me from being
Lord Mayor -- only think of that -- Lord Mayor of London!


Sand. How so?


Doil. Why, I tended the Common Council, and all the Parish-meetings, for
fifteen years, without daring for to make one arangue -- at last a Westry was
called, about choosing of a Turncock. So, now, thinks I, I Will show 'em what I Am
good for -- our Alderman was in the Purples -- so, thinks I, if he tips off,
why not I, as well as another? -- so I Will make a speech about Patrots, and then
ax for their votes.


Sand. Very judicious!


Doil. If you will believe me, I got up three times -- Silence! says Mr. Crier --
and my tongue grew so dry with fright, that I couldn't wag it -- so I was
forced to squat down again, 'midst horse-laughs -- and they nicknamed me
Dummy, through the whole Ward.


Sand. Wicked Rogues! Well, I ask your pardon -- I had no idea of these
important reasons, Yet, how Men differ! Now the Family of Sir Wilford Granger
are quite distressed by the obstinate attachment to the Sciences, which has
quite spoiled that fine young Fellow I told you of this morning.


Doil. Aye! What Is he Sir Wilford Granger's Son? Knew his Father very well --
kept a fine Study of horses, and lost many Thousands by it -- lent him money
many a time -- good Man -- always punctual.


Sand. Aye, Sir! but this Youth disappointed all his hopes. Mighty pleasant, to
see a young Fellow -- formed to possess life in all its points, and bewitching
varieties -- shrink from the World, and bury himself amidst obsolete Books,
Systems, and Schisms -- whilst Pleasure wooes him to her soft embrace, and joys
solicit him in vain! -- Oh, it gave his Father great trouble.


Doil. Great trouble! Dear me, dear me! I always thought Sir Wilford had been a
wiser man -- why, I would have given the world for such a Son.


Sand. He swallows it rarely! [aside.] -- Oh, he piques himself on such trifles
as reading the Greek and Latin Authors in their own tongue, and mastering all
the quibbles of our English Philosophers --


Doil. English Philosophers! I wou'd'nt give a farthing for them.


Sand. Why, sure you have heard of a Bacon, a Lock, a Newton --


Doil. Newton! oh aye -- I have heard of Sir Isaac -- every body has heard of
Sir Isaac -- Great Man -- Master of the Mint.


Sand. Oh, Sir! this Youth has found a dozen mistakes in his theories, and
proved him wrong in one or two of his calculations -- in short, he is advised
to give the world a system of his own -- in which, for aught I know, he will
prove the earth to be concave instead of spherical, and the moon to be no
bigger than a punch-bowl.


Doil. [Aside] He Is the Man -- he is the Man! -- Look'ee. Mr. Sandford -- you have
given a description of this young Fellow, that is set my blood in a ferment. Do
you -- now, my dear Friend, do you think now that you could prevail upon him to
marry my Daughter?


Sand. Why, I don't know -- neither beauty nor gold has charms for him.
Knowledge -- knowledge is his Mistress.


Doil. Aye! I Am sorry for that -- and yet I Am glad of it too. Now, see what ye
can do with him -- see what ye can do with him!


Sand. Well, well, I Will try. He promised to call on me here this evening, in
his way to the Museum -- I don't know whether he is'nt below now.


Doil. Below now! Isackins, that is lucky -- hang me if it is'nt! Do go and --
and speak to him a bit -- and bring him up -- bring him up. Tell him, if he will
marry Elizabeth, I Will give him, that is, I Will leave him every farthing I have
in the world.


Sand. Well -- since you are so very earnest, I Will see what I can do.

[Exit.
Doil. Thank'ee, thank'ee! Icod! I Will buy him twice as many books as a College
Library, but what I Will bribe him -- that I will. What the dickens can Elizabeth
be about, with that thing there! that Gradus! -- He a Man of Larning! -- Hang
me if I don't believe his head's as hollow as my Cane. Shure she cannot have
taken a fancy to the smattering Monkey! Ho, there they are -- here he comes!
Why there is Greek and Algebra in his face.

Enter SANDFORD, and GRANGER dressed in black. Mr. Granger, your very humble
sarvant, Sir -- I Am very glad to see you, Sir.


Grang. I thank you, Sir. [Very solemnly.]


Doil. I knew your Father, Sir, as well as a Beggar knows his Dish. Mayhap Mr.
Sandford told you that I wanted for to bring you and my Daughter acquainted --
I Will go and call her in.


Grang. It Is unnecessary.


Doil. He seems a mighty silent Man. Apart, to Sandford.


Sand. Studying -- studying. Ten to one he is forming a discourse in Arabic, or
revolving one of Euclid's problems.


Doil. Couldn't you set him a talking a bit? I long for to hear him talk.


Sand. Come, Man! forget the old Sages a moment -- Cannot the idea of Miss
Doiley give a fillip to your imagination?


Grang. Miss Doiley, I am informed, is lovely as a Woman can be -- But what is
Woman? -- only one of Nature's agreeable blunders.


Doil. Hum! That smacks of something! [Aside.] Why, as to that, Mr. Granger, a
Woman with no potion but her whims, might be but a kind of a Jew's bargain --
but when Fifty Thousand is popt into the Scale, she must be bad indeed if her
Husband does not find her a Pen'worth.


Grang. With Men of the World, Mr. Doiley, Fifty Thousand Pounds might have
their weight; but, in the balance of Philosophy, gold is light as
phlogisticated air.


Doil. That Is deep -- I can make nothing of it -- that must be deep. [aside.]
Mr. Granger! the great account I have heard of your Larning, and what not, has
made me willing for to be akin to you.


Grang. Mr. Sandford suggested to me your design, Sir -- and, as you have so
nobly proposed your Daughter, as the prize of Learning, I have an ambition to
be related to you.


Doil. [Aside] But I Will see a bit farther into him, though, first. Now pray,
Mr. Granger! pray now -- a -- I say -- [To Sand.] Ax him some deep question,
that he may show himself a bit.


Sand. What the devil shall I say? Granger! is it your opinion that the ancient
Antipodes walked erect, or crawled on all four?


Grang. A thinking man always doubts -- but the best informations concur, that
they were Quadrupedes during two revolutions of the Sun, and Bipedes ever after.


Doil. Quadpedes! Bipedes! what a fine Man he is! [Aside.


Sand. A surprising transformation!


Grang. Not more surprising than the transformation of an Eruca to a Chrysalis
-- a Chrysalis to a Nymph, and a Nymph to a Butterfly.


Doil. There again! I see it will do -- I see it will do -- aye, that I will --
hang me if I don't.

[Aside. [Exit, chuckling and laughing.
Grang. What Is he gone off for, so abruptly?


Sand. For his Daughter, I hope -- Give ye joy, my dear fellow! the Nymph, the
Eruca, and the Chrysalis, have won the day.


Grang. How shall I bound my happiness? My dear Sandford -- that was the
luckiest question, about the Antipodes!


Sand. Yes -- pretty successful. Have you been at your studies?


Grang. Oh, I Have been in the Dictionary this half-hour -- and have picked up
cramp words enough to puzzle and delight the Old Gentleman the remainder of his
life.


Sand. Here he is, faith --


Grang. And Elizabeth with him -- I hear her dear footsteps! Oh, how shall I --


Doil. without. Come along, I say -- what a plague are ye so modest for? Come
in here. [Pulls in Gradus by the arm.] Here, I Have brought him -- one of your
own kidney -- ha! ha! ha! Now I Will lay a gallon you cannot guess what I Have
brought him for. I Have brought him -- ha! ha! ha! -- for to pit him against you
[to Granger] to see which of you two is the most larned -- ha! ha!


Grang. Ten thousand Devils, Plagues, and Furies!


Sand. Here Is a blow-up!


Doil. Why, for all he looks so like a Nincompoop in this pye-pick'd jacket,
he is got his noddle full of Greek, and Algebra, and them things. Why, Gradus,
don't stand aloof, Man -- this is a Brother Scholar, I tell ye.


Grad. A Scholar! all who have earned that distinction, are my Brethren.
Carissime frater, gaudeo te videre.


Grang. Sir -- you -- I -- most obedient. I wish thou were in the bottom of the
Red Sea, and the largest folio in thy library about thy neck. [Aside.


Sand. For Heaven's sake, Mr. Doiley, what do you mean?


Doil. Mean! why, I mean for to pit 'em, to be sure -- and to give Elizabeth to
the winner. Touch him up -- touch him up! [to Grang.] show him what a fool he
is.


Sand. Why, sure, you will not set them together by the ears!


Doil. No, no -- but I Am resolved for to set 'em together by the tongues. To
cut the business short -- Mr. Gradus! you are, to be sure, a great dab at
Larning, and what not; but I Will bet my Daughter, and Fifty Thousand to boot,
that Granger beats ye -- and he that wins, shall have her.


Grang. Heavens! what a stake! It Is sufficient to inspire a dolt with the
tongues of Babel.


Sand. My dear Friend, think of the indelicacy --


Doil. Fiddle-de-dee! -- I tell you, I will have my whim -- and so, Gradus, set
off. By Jenkins, you will find it a tough business to beat Granger -- he is one of
your great Genis Men -- going to write a book about Sir Isaac, and the Moon,
and the Devil knows what.

[Miss Doil. and Charl. enter at the back of the stage.
Grad. If so, the more glorious will be my victory. Come, Sir! let us enter the
lists, since it must be so, for this charming prize [pointing to Miss Doiley.]
Choose your weapons -- Hebrew -- Greek -- Latin -- or English. Name your
subject; we will pursue it syllogistically, or socratically, as you please.


Grang. [aside] Curse your Syllogisms, and Socraticisms!


Doil. No, no, I Will not have no English -- What a plague! every Shoe-black
jabbers English -- so give us a touch of Greek to set off with -- Come, Gradus,
you begin.


Miss Doil. Undone! undone!


Grad. If it is merely a recitation of Greek that you want, you shall be
gratified. An epigram that occurs to me, will give you an idea of that sublime
language.


Charl. [aside] Oh, confound your sublime language!


Grad. Panta gelos, kai panta konis, kai panta to meden
Panta gar exalagon, esti ta ginomena.

Doil. Panta, tri pantry! Why, that is all about the Pantry. What, the old
Grecians loved Tidbits, may hap -- but that is low! aye, Sandford!


Sand. Oh, cursed low! he might as well have talked about a Pig-stye.


Doil. Come, Granger, now for it! Elizabeth and Fifty Thousand Pounds!


Grang. Yes, Sir. I -- I -- am not much prepared -- I could wish -- I could
wish -- Sandford! [Apart.


Sand. Zounds! say something -- any thing!


Char. [Aside.] Eigh! it is all over. He could as easily furnish the Ways and
Means, as a word in Greek.


Doil. Hoity, toity! What, at a stand! Why sure you can talk Greek as well as
Gradus?


Grang. It Is a point I cannot decide -- you must determine it. Now, Impudence,
embrace me with thy sevenfold shield! Zanthus, I remember, in describing such
a night as this --


Grad. Zanthus! you surely err. I remember but one being of that name, and he
was a Horse.


Grang. Sir, he was an Orator -- and such an one that, Homer records, the Gods
themselves inspired him.


Grad. True, Sir, -- but you wo'n't deny --


Doil. Come -- come! I sha'n't have no brow-beating -- nobody offered for to
contradict you -- So begin [to Granger.] What said Orator Zanthus?


Grang. Yon lucid orb, in ether pensile, irradiates th'expanse. Refulgent
scintillations, in th'ambient void opake, emit humid splendour. Chrysalic
spheroids th'horizon vivify -- astifarious constellations, nocturnal sporades,
in refrangerated radii, illume our orb terrene.


Miss Doil. I breathe again! [Aside.


Doil. There! there! -- Well spoke, Granger! -- Now, Gradus, beat that!


Grad. I am enrapt in astonishment! You are imposed on, Sir -- instead of
classical language, you have heard a rant in English --


Doil. English! Zounds! do you take me for a fool? Do You think I don't know my own
Mother Tongue! -- 'Twas no more like English, than I am like Whittington's Cat.


Grad. It was every syllable English.


Doil. There Is impudence! -- There was'nt a word of it English -- If you take
that for English, devil take me if I believe there was a word of Greek in all
your tri pantrys.


Grad. Oh! the torture of Ignorance!


Doil. Ignorant! -- Come, come, none of your tricks upon travelers. I thought
you meant all that as a skit upon my edication -- but I Will have you to know,
Sir, that I Will read the Tenth Chapter of Nehemiah with you for your ears.


Grad. I repeat, that you are imposed on. Mr. Sandford, I appeal to you.


Grang. And I appeal --


Sand. Nay, Gentlemen, Mr. Doiley is your Judge in all disputes concerning the
Vulgar Tongue.


Doil. Aye, to be sure, I am. Who cares for your Peals? I peal too; and I tell
you, I wo'n't be imposed on. Here, Elizabeth -- I have got ye a Husband, at
last, to my heart's content --


Miss Doil. Him, Sir! You presented that Gentleman to me this morning, and I
have found such a fund of merit in him --


Doil. In he! what in that Beau-bookworm! that argufies me down, I don't know
English? Don't go for to provoke me -- bid that Mr. Granger welcome to my house
-- he will soon be Master on it.


Miss Doil. Sir, in obedience to the commands of my Father -- [significantly.]


Doil. Sha'n't say Obedience -- say something kind to him of yourself -- He Is a
Man after my own heart.


Miss Doil. Then, Sir, without reserve, I acknowledge your choice of Mr.
Granger is perfectly agreeable to mine.


Doil. That Is my dear Bet! -- [kissing her] -- We'll have the wedding directly.
There! do you understand that, Mr. Tri-Pantry? -- is that English?


Grad. Yes, so plain, that it has exsuscitated my understanding -- I perceive I
have been dup'd.


Doil. Aye, well! I had rather you should be the Dupe than me.


Grad. Well, Sir, I have no inclination to contest -- if the lovely Charlotte
will perform her promise.


Char. Agreed! provided that, in your character of Husband, you will be as
singular and old-fashioned as the Wig you wore this morning.


Doil. What, Cousin! have you taken a fancy to the Scholar? Egad! you're a cute
Girl, and mayhap may be able to make something of him -- and I don't care if I
throw in a few Hundreds, that you may not repent your Bargain. Well, now I Have
settled this affair exactly to my own mind, I am the happiest man in the world
-- And, do you hear, Gradus? -- I don't love for to bear malice- If you will trot
back to College, and larn the difference between Greek and English, why you may
stand a chance to be Tutor -- when they have made me a Grandfather.


Grad. I have had enough of languages. You see I have just engaged a Tutor to
teach me to read the World; and if I play my part there as well as I did at
Brazen-Nose, your indulgence will grant me applause.


THE END.

