AN ODE TO THE NAIADS OF FLEET-DITCH.

By ARTHUR MURPHY, Esquire

Out with it, Dunciad, let the Secret pass,
That Secret to each Fool that he is an Ass.
POPE. Aspice number mage sit nostrum penetrabile telum. VIRG. LONDON: Printed for
M. COOPER, in Paternoster Row. MDCCLXI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT is a just image given us by Mr. Congreve of the situation of an author,
where he mentions a POET ambitious of praise, and a CRITIC picking his pocket.
It is, indeed, almost impossible for any man to distinguish himself in the
literary world, without having a gang of these people swarming about him;
though he has at the same time this consolation, that all such petty larceny
attempts are a mark of his fame; and the unprovoked abuse of ill-designing
persons is, in its own nature, involuntary praise.

The author of the following trifle has had his share of this kind of trouble
ever since his name has been heard of: he has boasted, upon a former occasion,
of the honor a certain reverend writer did him by his calumny; but, as if that
was not sufficient, his name is now adorned with a PARSON CHURCHILL. This last
person's hand he has felt in his pocket twice in a very short time: in the
Rosciad it was but a dip, and away; but as if this astonishing genius, who has
lately amazed mankind, had improved in his trade, in his Apology he has
attempted to make an entire rummage. Whether he has taken any thing out of the
present writer's pocket, is a point not very certain; so that the loss,
however, cannot be very great.

But it may be asked, Can the Reverend Mr. Churchill, Curate of St. John's,
Westminster, be considered as Mr. Murphy's literary pickpocket, when he boldly
owns his name, and shows himself to the public? -- In answer to this, it should
be considered, that these people have various ways of doing their business.
Some of them sneak in alleys, and little lurking holes, and, as a gentleman
passes by, they make a snatch at his pocket; and should they prove so
unfortunate as to give an alarm, and meet with a short turn, " Pray remember
the poor -- for the love of -- " Others of them go more daringly to work --
Bob, do you see that gentleman yonder? -- shall I DO him? -- Ay! ay! cries Bob,
do him by all means. -- So I will -- Link your honor -- light your honor
across the street -- my name is CHARLEY DUNGHILL -- I ply here every night,
your honor -- Then on he runs, twirling his link almost in your face; -- gives
you an unlucky splash, and, in your sudden confusion, makes a snap at your
handkerchief: his friends admire his dexterity; he is proclaimed abroad for a
notable clever fellow; you are told he is a bruiser into the bargain, and
handles an OAK-STICK wonderfully! This will be acknowledged to be the case
among the pilferers in our common streets; and among their brethren of the
quill the conduct is so similar, that the writer of the subsequent Ode cannot
consider the REVEREND CHARLES CHURCHILL in any other light than that of a
CRITIC PICKING HIS POCKET; and as he is well informed that Mr. John Fielding
has attained many points, highly serviceable to society, by quick notice and
sudden pursuit among the nimble-fingered race, who infest this metropolis, he
is in hopes that the same means will operate equally in the literary world. For
this purpose, he now thinks proper to celebrate the egregious endowments of
this New Adventurer; desiring it may be remembered, that this is the first
notice he has given of him: for, notwithstanding the insinuations of Mr.
Churchill and his friends, be it hereby known, that Mr. Murphy never wrote, or
caused to be written, directly or indirectly, a single line in the Critical
Review. In justice, however, to the public, and himself, he thinks it now
incumbent on him to give the best description he can of the man who has, at two
different times, made an attempt upon him. Should this furious Drawcansir,
after this, think proper to proceed in his design, Mr. Murphy, in consideration
of his being unbeneficed, and reflecting how hard the present dearness of
provisions, and the late Tax upon PORTER, must bear upon the Reverend Bard,
most heartily gives his consent to be abused by him "Body, Soul, and Muse," as
often as thirst or hunger shall prompt his genius: and should he be told
hereafter, that the author of unpoetic libels is not hurt in his preferment,
but that "to one bishop, Churchill seems a wit," he promises him to repine less
at his success, though provoked, than Mr. Churchill and his little faction
seem, unprovoked, to have done at Mr. Murphy's.

Lincoln's End, 11 th June, 1761. P. S. To some particular ideas and modes of
expression, which will be found in the following lines, the author persuades
himself, that they who are acquainted with the style and coloring of Mr.
Dryden in the Mac Flecknoe, and Mr. Pope in the Dunciad, will take no
exception, unless they should choose to criticize the too manifest inferiority
of his genius.



ODE TO THE NAIADS OF FLEET-DITCH.
I.
YE nut-brown Naiads of that sable flood,
To which auxiliar sewers their homage pay,
And little rills, meand'ring over the mud,
Wind from a thousand urinals their way,
To swell his course, what time the king of dykes
Into the silver Thames impetuous strikes;
Each weed, that on the margin grows,
Drinks life and stench as on he flows:
Now the rich stream of Nuisance, foul and strong,
With kennel-drains confederated, pours along;
Over filth, and Cloacina's yellow reign;
Now, swelling over his banks amain,
See him devolve, in sullen pride,
Dead cats and dogs, and drunken bards, down headlong with the tide.
II.
Yes, nymphs, ye black-ey'd daughters of Fleet-ditch,
When Midnight in her mantle, black as pitch,
Led forth her shadowy train,
On Parnassus' high domain,
The Muse has heard your piteous cry,
Has heard ye pierce the vaulted sky,
And, like ten thousand grinding scizzars shrill,
Your screams her ears with discord harsh did fill;
While you performed, through all the mire,
The orgies of your sooty quire;
Then sitting on the swampy bank,
With sable ooze your tresses dank,
Dirt still inspiring all your throng,
From every breast burst forth the miserable song.
III.
"Perdition, quick perdition, seize
"The caitiff, the pernicious man
"Who first the citizens to please
"Of a new bridge devised the plan!
"No longer our much-loved domain
"In dear stagnation shall remain;
"No more the mud-nymphs here shall keep
"Their lazy courts; no more shall sleep
"In puddle here; but over the bed
"Where gentle SMEDLEY plunged his head;
"Where famed OLDMIXON, awful sire!
"Souc'd in, and wallow'd in the mire;
"Where all our favorites loved to sink
"Inhaling vigor from the stink;
"This bed, the scene of all our joys
"In evil hour you bridge destroys!
"May quick perdition seize the man
"Who big with ruin formed the plan!
IV.
These were the notes that reached the Muse's ears;
The Muses marked your unmelodious "Without the meed of some melodious tear."
MILTON.
tears.
Then saw ye headlong down the steep
Explore the bottom of the deep,
Plunged into endless night;
Even now in every cell beneath
Where toads obscene and adders breathe,
Concealed from human sight!
The virgins of poetic eye
Can your disastrous state descry;
Can see from your dripping hair
The faded honors rend away,
Each feature fell with dire dismay,
And all your slattern bosoms bare.
V.
Your screams too pierced the watchman's soul,
Soho! he cried, and couched his quivering pole!
Ah! Naiads, cureless is your woe,
Then let your sorrows flow;
Yes rant, and rave, and yell, and hiss,
The more you cry, the less you will --:
Yes, over your heads a street shall rise
Through which fair Albion, with surprise,
Shall see rough Industry with eye intent,
Adown his cheek, while wholesome dew-drops roll,
Urge eager on, on schemes of riches bent,
And lay his burden at the wished for goal.
Thither Pomona her first fruits shall send,
The gifts of Golden CERES that way bend;
Well-loaded Commerce over your heads shall bound,
And with the gilded carr the ecchoing pavement shall resound.
VI.
Ah! deem not, burghers of the dyke!
That to insult ye all forlorn
My willing hand the lyre does strike;
Alas! you have full cause to mourn!
To you no more shall much-loved SHIRLEY come,
No more reveal the honors of his bum:
No more you will see him drunk with gin,
No more admire his ghastly grin;
With him no longer now you will flirt,
And fling the mud, and fling the dirt:
No more, alas! you will bruise the toad,
For him its venom to unload,
And fill him with rank poison to the brim;
But now he will look both impotent and grim;
His eyes sunk hollow in their pit,
And nothing from his mouth to spit.
VII.
Where shall your CHURCHILL, in that dismal hour,
When stopped are all your sewers, and all your power,
Where shall he wander? Not thy warbling fount
Aonian Aganippe; not thy shades
Laurell'd Parnassus; nor thy sacred mount
Thrice-honour'd Pindus; not the tuneful maids
That with sweet airs bid Isis banks resound,
Or, knit in dance, where Camus winds along,
With the young Graces, over the enameled ground,
Move to some measure of immortal song;
Not these could ever charm, not these detain
His steps unhallowed from your drear domain;
Your dripping arches, where the lazy flood
Just oozes through, and stagnates into mud,
He still preferred;
There often was heard
To your delighted ears to read his page,
His modern Atalantis of the Stage;
How wanton LUCY spreads her charms,
And clasps her favorite in her arms;
He told of wounds obscene, and amorous scars,
In the soft conflict gained of Venus' wars;
Of the sweet thefts, and kind deceits,
The falsehoods, perjuries, and cheats,
Of every actress and her crony
Through the whole DRAMATIS PERSONAE;
Through your vast courts, while all your strumpet brood
Heard the lewd loves with wanton glee,
And testified their joy in frantic mood,
From ha! ha! ha! -- to he! he! he!
VIII.
Not even the solemn bell that tolls,
The signal of departed souls,
And bodies waiting funeral rite,
Withheld him from his dear delight,
Though the pale corse, from every sable shroud,
Called for the last sad obsequies aloud!
"Inter us, Doctor, by the Powers above,
"Nor grudge malignant to our clay-cold limbs,
"One particle of earth; -- so lightly fall
"Whatever the Critical Review indites;
"Whatever the MIMIC, in his pleasant vein,
"Conceives of clumsy Curates; -- so may Flexney,
"For each dull work, afford thee half a crown;
"And in St. Giles's none be happier thought
"Than thy unclassic Muse: -- though now in haste,
"Yet tarry, Doctor, in mere pity, tarry;
"The dust thrice thrown, you then may wing your flight."
He wings his flight, all-heedless of their prayer;
No dirge he mutters over the tomb;
But wages war with every nameless play'r,
Irrev'rend war! -- but now his doom
With yours impends; -- what shall he do?
With tears, and sighs, and groans he will rue
Your empire's fall -- no more he will sit
In foremost row before the astonished pit,
In brawn OLDMIXON'S rival as in wit;
And grin dislike,
And kiss the spike;
And twist his mouth, and wreath his head awry,
The arch absurd quick glancing from his eye,
And giggle,
And wriggle,
And fiddle,
And piddle,
And piddle-paddle,
And fiddle-faddle,
And show with pious leer, and double chin,
That arrogance and gospel dwell within,
IX.
Ah! Parodissa! Ironissa too!
Soft Simperilla! mild, but never true,
Envyna pale! Waggilla once a maid,
But now called in to each lewd scribbler's aid,
Oh! all, ye mud-nymphs! Ah! the hours are fled
When at his well-known voice your every head
Above the filth you raised, and at the sight
Of the dear Bard with frantic cries
Of hideous joy the realms of light
You pierced, then headlong from the skies
(As Arethusa her son sprung from Gods)
You led him flound'ring to your drear abodes.
From hollow cells he heard the adders hiss,
As first he entered on this world of p --.
No water there from limpid sources springs,
To chafe his head no nymph the towel brings.
Far other rites your sisterhood employ,
Far other orgies of obscener joy.
With ordure fresh his body one anoints,
And wakes new vigor in his languid joints;
Another stradling over his head, with grace
Lets fly the briny torrent in his face;
The briny torrent down his temples ran;
He breathed Fleet-ditch, and stunk above a man.
Then rolled his eyes, and star'd tremendous wit;
Though to mere mortals but a priest b --.
Then bowed his uncouth form and smiled,
And with soft prate the hours beguiled;
With wonder eyed the secret store
Of Inf'rence sly, and quaint conceit
Like embryos on the swampy floor
Waiting from him their birth to meet.
He saw where essays against each good play,
And much of libel upon merit lay;
Against Gray and Mason much pert flimsy ode,
Of yellow-tinctur'd ROSCIAD many a load;
Much Gazetteer, much Craftsman struck his view,
Much of himself, and much of Shirley too!
He saw where scandal's streams arise,
And wind their urinary course along
From Grubstreet bards; the fount of lies!
Scanty at first, but swelling strong
From tributary urns;
Joy over his visage burns,
As a view around he takes
Of Criticism's dull stagnate lakes;
As Defamation pours and stinks along,
As Inuendo's rills creep softly by,
As Irony its bottom to the eye
Betrays all foul! and Malice, deep and strong,
Now flows amain with tide profound,
Now shallow grown just murmurs over the ground.
X.
Joy fills his soul; joy sheds a mellower grace
Over the brown horrors of his walnut face;
Of every stream he quaffs deep drafts immense,
And drinks oblivion of all truth and sense;
Intoxicates his brains, until in fuming rills
At Flexney's door he all again distills.
But ah! ye Naiads, now your reign is over,
And now your Unborn Bard no more
To your beloved haunts shall go,
And woo his loves impure in grots of mud below;
No more seek inspiration at your shrine,
But all alone, unheard, unknown he will pine!
Mirth shall no more revisit those dim eyes,
Unless he hear when patient Merit sighs;
But Merit still shall hold her steady flight,
Though Malice all her deadliest shafts should aim;
Though clouds often interpose shall rise to light,
And soar on wings, which her own hands have formed, to Fame.
FINIS.

