A COLLECTION Of the Best English Poetry, BY Several HANDS. (Viz.) Duke of
Devon, Lord Rochester, Mr. Dryden, Sir John Denham, Lord Roscommon, Earl of
Mulgrave, Sir Robert Howard, Mr. Phillips, Dr. South, Bp. Spratt, Mr. Waller,
Dr. Swift, Mr. Addison, Sir Richard Blackmore, Mr. Milton, Mr. Congreve, Sir
John Beaumont, etc.
In Two Vol's Octavo.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by T. Warner, at the Black Boy in Paternoster Row,
1717. (Price 10 s.)

The True-Born Englishman. A SATYR.

Statuimus Pacem, and Securitatem, and Concordiam Judicium and Justitiam inter
Anglos and Normannos, Francos, and Britones Walliae and Cornubiae, Pictos and
Scotos Albaniae, similiter inter Francos and Insulanos Provincias, and Patrias,
quae pertinent ad Coronam nostram, and inter omnes nobis Subjectos, firmiter
and inviolabiliter observari.

Charta Regis Willielmi Conquisitoris de Pacis Publica, Cap. 1.

Printed in the Year 1708.

(Price Three Pence.)

THE PREFACE.
THE End of Satyr is Reformation: And the Author, though he doubts the Work of
Conversion is at a general Stop, has put his Hand to the Plow.

I expect a Storm of Ill Language from the Fury of the Town, and especially
from those whose English Talent it is to Rail: And without being taken for a
Conjurer, I may ven^ure to foretell, That I shall be Cavil'd at about my Mean
Style, Rough Verse, and Incorrect Language; Things I might indeed have taken
more Care in. But the Book is Printed; and though I see some Faults, it is too
late to mend them: And this is all I think needful to say to them.

Possibly Somebody may take me for a Dutchman; in which ^hey are mistaken: But
I am one that would be glad to see Englishmen behave themselves better to
Strangers, and to Governors also; that one might not be reproached in Foreign
Countries, for belonging to a Nation that wants Manners.

I assure you, Gentlemen, Strangers use us better abroad; and we can give no
reason but our Ill Nature for the contra^y here.

Methinks an Englishman, who is so proud of being called ^ Goodfellow, should
be civil: And it cannot be denied but ^e are in many Cases, and particularly to
Strangers, the hurlishest People alive.

As to Vices, who can dispute our Intemperance, while an Honest Drunken Fellow
is a Character in a Man's Praise? ^ll our Reformations are Banters, and will be
so, till our Magistrates and Gentry Reform themselves by way of Example; then,
and not till then, they may be expected to punish others without blushing.

As to our Ingratitude, I desire to be understood of that particular People,
who pretending to be Protestants, have all along endeavored to reduce the
Liberties and Religion of this Nation into the Hands of King James and his
Popish Powers: Together with such who enjoy the Peace and Protection of the
present Government, and yet abuse and affront the King who procured it, and
openly profess their Uneasiness under him: These, by whatsoever Names or Titles
they are dignified or distinguished, are the People aimed at: Nor do I disown,
but that it is so much the Temper of an Englishman to abuse his Benefactor,
that I could be glad to see it rectified.

They who think I have been guilty of any Error, in exposing the Crimes of my
own Countrymen to themselves, may among many honest Instances of the like
nature, find the same thing in Mr. Cowly, in his Imitation of the second
Olympic Ode of Pindar: His Words are these; But in this Thankless World the
Givers
Are envied even by the Receivers:
It Is now the Cheap and Frugal Fashion,
Rather to hide than pay an Obligation.
Nay, it is much worse than so;
It now an Artifice does grow,
Wrongs and Outrages to do,
Lest Men should think we Owe.


THE INTRODUCTION.
SPeak, Satyr, for there is none can tell like thee,
Whether it is Folly, Pride, or Knavery,
That makes this discontented Land appear
Less happy now in Times of Peace, than War:
Why Civil Feuds disturb the Nation more
Than all our Bloody Wars have done before.
Fools out of Favor grudge at Knaves in Place,
And Men are always honest in Disgrace:
The Court-Preferments make Men Knaves in course:
But they which would be in them would be worse.
It Is not at Foreigners that we repine,
Would Foreigners their Perquisites resign:
The Grand Contention's plainly to be seen,
To get some Men put out, and some put in.
^or this our S -- rs make long Harangues,
and florid M -- rs whet their polished Tongues.
^tatesmen are always sick of one Disease;
and a good Pension gives them present Ease.
^hat's the Specific makes them all content
^ith any King, and any Government*
^ood Patriots at Court-Abuses rail,
and all the Nation's Grievances bewail:
^t when the Sovereign Balsam's once applied,
^he Zealot never fails to change his Side.
and when he must the Golden Key resign,
^e Railing Spirit comes about again.
Who shall this Bubbl'd Nation disabuse;
While they their own Felicities refuse?
Who at the Wars have made such mighty Pother,
And now are falling out with one another:
With needless Fears the Jealous Nation fill,
And always have been saved against their Will:
Who Fifty Millions Sterling have disburs'd,
To be with Peace and too much Plenty cursed.
Who their Old Monarch eagerly undo,
And yet uneasily obey the New.
Search, Satyr, search, a deep Incision make;
The Poyson's strong, the Antidote's too weak.
It Is pointed Truth must manage this Dispute,
And downright English Englishmen confute.
Whet thy just Anger at the Nation's Pride;
And with keen Phrase repel the vicious Tide.
To Englishmen their own beginning show,
And ask them why they slight their Neighbors so.
Go back to Elder Times, and Ages past,
And Nations into long Oblivion cast;
To Old Britannia's Youthful Days retire,
And there for True-Born Englishmen enquire.
Britannia freely will disown the Name,
And hardly knows her self from whence they came:
Wonders that They of all Men should pretend
To Birth and Blood, and for a Name contend.
Go back to Causes where our Follies dwell,
And fetch the dark Original from Hell:
Speak, Satyr, for there is none like thee can tell.
The True-Born Englishman. PART I.
Wherever God erects a House of Prayer,
The Devil always builds a Chapel there:
And 'twill be found upon Examination,
The latter has the largest Congregation:
For ever since he first debauched the Mind,
He made a perfect Conquest of Mankind.
With Uniformity of Service, he
Reigns with a general Aristocracy.
No Nonconforming Sects disturb his Reign,
For of his Yoke there is very few complain.
He knows the Genius and the Inclination,
And matches proper Sins for every Nation.
He needs no Standing-Army Government;
He always rules us by our own Consent:
His Laws are easy, and his gentle Sway
Makes it exceeding pleasant to obey.
The List of his Vicegerents and Commanders,
Outdoes your Caesar's, or your Alexanders.
They never fail of his infernal Aid,
And he is as certain never to be betrayed.
Through all the World they spread his vast Command,
And Death's Eternal Empire's maintained.
They rule so politickly and so well,
As if they were L -- J -- of Hell.
Duly divided to debauch Mankind,
And plant Infernal Dictates in his Mind.
Pride, the first Peer, and President of Hell,
To his share Spain, the largest Province, fell.
The subtle Prince thought fittest to bestow
On these the Golden Mines of Mexico;
With all the Silver Mountains of Peru;
Wealth which would in wise hands the World undo:
Because he knew their Genius was such;
Too Lazy and too Haughty to be Rich.
So proud a People, so above their Fate,
That if reduced to beg, they will beg in State.
Lavish of Money, to be counted Brave,
And proudly starve, because they scorn to save.
Never was Nation in the World before,
So very Rich, and yet so very Poor.
Lust chose the Torrid Zone of Italy,
Where Blood ferments in Rapes and Sodomy:
Where swelling Veins overflow with livid Streams,
With Heat impregnate from Vesuvian Flames:
Whose flowing Sulphur forms Infernal Lakes,
And human Body of the Soil partakes.
There Nature ever burns with hot Desires,
Fanned with Luxuriant Air from Subterranean Fires*
Here undisturbed in Floods of scalding Lust,
The Infernal King reigns with Infernal Gust.
Drunk'ness, the Darling Favorite of Hell,
Chose Germany to rule; and rules so well,
No Subjects more obsequiously obey,
None please so well, or are so pleased as they.
The cunning Artist manages so well,
He lets them Bow to Heaven, and Drink to Hell.
If but to Wine and him they Homage pay,
He cares not to what Deity they pray,
What God they worship most, or in what way.
Whether by Luther, Calvin, or by Rome,
They sail for Heaven, by Wine he steers them home.
Ungoverned Passion settled first in France,
Where Mankind lives in haste, and thrives by Chance.
A Dancing Nation, Fickle and Untrue:
Have often undone themselves, and others too:
Prompt the Infernal Dictates to obey,
And in Hell's Favor none more great than they.
The Pagan World he blindly leads away,
And Personally rules with Arbitrary Sway:
The Mask thrown off, Plain Devil his Title stands;
And what elsewhere he Tempts, he there Commands.
There with full Gust the Ambition of his Mind
Governs, as he of old in Heaven designed.
Worshipped as God, his Painim Altars smoke,
Embru'd with Blood of those that him Invoke.
The rest by Deputies he rules as well.
And plants the distant Colonies of Hell.
By them his secret Power he maintains,
And binds the World in his Infernal Chains.
By Zeal the Irish; and the Rush by Folly:
Fury the Dane: The Swede by Melancholy:
By stupid Ignorance, the Muscovite:
The Chinese by a Child of Hell, called Wit:
Wealth makes the Persian too Effeminate:
And Poverty the Tartars Desperate:
The Turks and Moors by Mah'met he subdues:
And God has given him leave to rule the Jews:
Rage rules the Portuguese; and Fraud the Scotch:
Revenge the Pole; and Avarice the Dutch.
Satyr be kind and draw a silent Veil,
Thy Native England's Vices to conceal:
Or if that Task's impossible to do,
At least be just, and show her Virtues too;
Too great the first, Alas! the last too Few.
England unknown as yet, unpeopled lay;
Happy, had she remained so to this Day,
And not to every Nation been a Prey.
Her Open Harbors, and her Fertile Plains,
The Merchants Glory these, and those the Swains,
To every Barbarous Nation have betrayed her,
Who conquer her as often as they Invade her.
So Beauty guarded but by Innocence,
That ruins her which should be her Defense.
Ingratitude, a Devil of Black Renown,
Possessed her very early for his own.
An Ugly, Surly, Sullen, Selfish Spirit,
Who Satan's worst Perfections does inherit:
Second to him in Malice and in Force,
All Devil without, and all within him Worse.
He made her Firstborn Race to be so rude,
And suffered her to be so often subdued:
By several Crowds of Wandering Thieves o'er-run,
Often unpeopl'd, and as often undone.
While every Nation that her Powers reduced,
Their Languages and Manners introduced.
From whose mixed Relics our compounded Breed,
By Spurious Generation does succeed;
Making a Race uncertain and unev'n,
Derived from all the Nations under Heaven.
The Romans first with Julius Caesar came,
Including all the Nations of that Name,
Gauls, Greeks, and Lombards; and by Computation,
Auxiliaries or Slaves of every Nation.
With Hengist, Saxons; Danes with Sueno came,
In search of Plunder, not in search of Fame.
Scots, Picts, and Irish from the Hibernian Shore:
And Conquering William brought the Normans over.
All these their Barbarous Offspring left behind,
The Dregs of Armies, they of all Mankind;
Blended with Britains who before were here,
Of whom the Welsh have blessed the Character.
From this Amphibious Ill-born Mob began
That vain ill-natured thing, an Englishman.
The Customs, Sirnames, Languages, and Manners,
Of all these Nations are their own Explainers:
Whose Relics are so lasting and so strong,
They have left a Shiboleth upon our Tongue;
^y which with easy search you may distinguish
Your Roman-Saxon-Danish-Norman English.
The great Invading William the Conqueror.
Norman let us know
What Conquerors in Aftertimes might do.
To every Or Archer.
Musqueteer he brought to Town,
He gave the Lands which never were his own.
When first the English Crown he did obtain,
He did not send his Dutchmen home again.
No Reassumptions in his Reign were known,
D'avenant might there have let his Book alone.
No Parliament his Army could disband;
He raised no Money, for he paid in Land.
He gave his Legions their Eternal Station,
And made them all Freeholders of the Nation.
He cantoned out the Country to his Men,
And every Soldier was a Denizen.
The Rascals thus enriched, he called them Lords,
To please their Upstart Pride with new-made Words;
And Doomsday-Book his Tyranny records.
And here begins the Ancient Pedigree
That so exalts our Poor Nobility:
It Is that from some French Trooper they derive,
Who with the Norman Bastard did arrive:
The Trophies of the Families appear;
Some show the Sword, the Bow, and some the Spear,
Which their Great Ancestor, forsooth, did wear.
These in the Heralds Register remain,
Their Noble mean Extraction to explain.
Yet who the Hero was, no Man can tell,
Whether a Drummer or a Colonel:
The silent Record blushes to reveal
Their Undescended Dark Original.
But grant the best, How came the Change to pass;
A True-Born Englishman of Norman Race?
A Turkish Horse can show more History,
To prove his Well-descended Family.
Conquest, as by the Dr. Sherl. de Facto.
Moderns it is expressed,
May give a Title to the Lands possessed:
But that the longest Sword should be so Civil,
To make a Frenchman English, that is the Devil.
These are the Heroes that despise the Dutch;
And rail at new come Foreigners so much;
Forgetting that themselves are all derived
From the most Scoundrel Race that ever lived.
A horrid Crowd of Rambling Thieves and Drones,
Who ransacked Kingdoms, and dispeopl'd Towns.
The Pict and Painted Britain, Treacherous Scot,
By Hunger, Theft, and Rapine, hither brought.
Norwegian Pirates, Buccaneering Danes,
Whose Red-hair'd Offspring every where remains.
Who joined with Norman-French, compound the Breed
From whence your True-Born Englishmen proceed.
And lest by Length of Time it be pretended,
The Climate may this Modern Breed have mended,
Wise Providence, to keep us where we are,
Mixes us daily with exceeding Care:
We have been Europe's Sink, the Iakes where she
Voids all her Offal Outcast Progeny.
From our Fifth Henry's time, the Strolling Bands
Of banished Fugitives from Neighboring Lands,
Have here a certain Sanctuary found:
The Eternal Refuge of the Vagabond.
Wherein but half a common Age of Time,
Borr'wing new Blood and Manners from the Clime,
Proudly they learn all Mankind to contemn,
And all their Race are True-Born Englishmen.
Dutch, Walloons, Flemmings, Irishmen, and Scots,
Vaudois and Valtolins, and Hugonots,
^n good Queen Bess's Charitable Reign,
Supplied us with Three hundred thousand Men.
Religion, God we thank thee, sent them hither,
Priests, Protestants, the Devil and all together:
Of all Professions, and of every Trade,
^ll that were persecuted or afraid;
Whether for Debt or other Crimes they fled,
David at Hackelah was still their Head.
The Offspring of this Miscellaneous Crowd,
^ad not their new Plantations long enjoyed,
^ut they grew Englishmen, and raised their Votes
^t Foreign Shoals of Interloping Scots.
The K. J. I.
Royal Branch from Pict-land did succeed,
With Troops of Scots and Scabs from North-by-Tweed.
The Seven first Years of his Pacifick Reign,
Made him and half his Nation Englishmen.
Scots from the Northern Frozen Banks of Tay,
With Packs and Plods came Whigging all away:
^hick as the Locusts which in Egypt swarmed,
With Pride and hungry Hopes completely armed:
With Native Truth, Diseases, and No Money,
^under'd our Canaan of the Milk and Honey.
^ere they grew quickly Lords and Gentlemen,
and all their Race are True-Born Englishmen.
The Civil Wars, the common Purgative,
Which always use to make the Nation thrive,
^ade way for all that strolling Congregation,
which thronged in Pious K. C. II.
Ch -- s's Restoration.
^e Royal Refugee our Breed restores,
^ith Foreign Courtiers, and with Foreign Whores:
and carefully repeopled us again,
^hroughout his Lazy, Long, Lascivious Reign.
^ith such a blessed and True-born Englsh Fry,
(...) much Illustrates our Nobility.
A Gratitude which will so black appear,
As future Ages must abhor to hear:
When they look back on all that Crimson Flood,
Which streamed in Lindsey's, and Caernarvon's Blood:
Bold Stafford, Cambridge, Capel, Lucas, Lisle,
Who crowned in Death his Father's Funeral Pile.
The Loss of whom, in order to supply
With True-Born English N -- ty,
Six Bastard Dukes survive his Luscious Reign,
The Labors of Italian C -- n,
French P -- h, Tabby S -- t, and Cambrian.
Besides the Numerous Bright and Virgin Throng,
Whose Female Glories shade them from my Song.
This Offspring, if one Age they multiply,
May half the House with English Peers supply:
There with true English Pride they may contemn
S -- g and P -- d, new-made Noblemen.
French Cooks, Scotch Pedlars, and Italian Whores,
Were all made L -- ds, or L -- ds Progenitors.
Beggars and Bastards by his new Creation,
Much multiplied the P -- ge of the Nation;
Who will be all, ever one short Age runs over,
As True-Born L -- ds as those we had before.
Then to recruit the Commons he prepares,
And heal the latent Breaches of the Wars:
The pious Purpose better to advance,
H' invites the banished Protestants of France:
Hither for God's sake and their own they fled,
Some for Religion came, and some for Bread:
Two hundred thousand Pair of Wooden Shoes,
Who, God be thanked, had nothing left to lose;
To Heaven's great Praise did for Religion fly,
To make us starve our Poor in Charity.
In every Port they plant their fruitful Train,
To get a Race of True-Born Englishmen:
Whose Children will, when riper Years they see,
Be as Ill-natured, and as Proud as we:
Call themselves English, Foreigners despise,
Be Surly like us all, and just as Wise.
Thus from a Mixture of all Klnds began,
That Het'rogeneous Thing, An Englishman:
^n eager Rapes, and furious Lust begot,
^etwixt a Painted Britton and a Scot:
Whose gend'ring Offspring quickly learnt to bow,
and yoke their He^fers to the Roman Plough:
from whence a Mongrel half-bred Race there came,
^ith neither Name nor Nation, Speech or Fame.
(...) whose hot Veins new Mixtures quickly ran,
^fus'd betwixt a Saxon and a Dane.
^hile their Rank Daughters, to their Parents just,
^eceiv'd all Nations with Promiscuous Lust.
^his Nauseous Brood directly did contain
^he well-extracted Blood of Englishmen.
Which Medly cantoned in a Heptarchy,
Rhapsody of Nations to supply,
among themselves maintained eternal Wars,
and still the Ladies loved the Conquerors.
The Western Angles all the rest subdued;
^ bloody Nation, barbarous and rude:
^ho by the Tenure of the Sword possessed
^ne part of Britain, and subdued the rest.
and as great things denominate the small,
^he Conquering Part gave Title to the Whole.
^he Scot, Pict, Britain, Roman, Dane submit,
and with the English-Saxon all unite:
and these the Mixture have so close pursued,
^he very Name and Memory's subdued:
(...) Roman now, no Britain does remain;
^les strove to separate, but strove in vain:
^he silent Nations undistinguished fall,
^d Englishman's the common Name for all.
^te jumbl'd them together, God knows how;
that ever they were, they are True-Born English now.
The Wonder which remains is at our Pride,
(...) value that which all wise Men deride.
For Englishmen to boast of Generation,
Cancels their Knowledge, and lampoons the Nation.
A True-Born Englishman's a Contradiction,
In Speech an Irony, in Fact a Fiction.
A Banter made to be a Test of Fools,
Which those that use it justly ridicules.
A Metaphor invented to express
A Man akin to all the Universe.
For as the Scots, as Learned Men have said,
Throughout the World their Wandering Seed have spread;
So open-handed England, it is believed,
Has all the Gleanings of the World received.
Some think of England 'twas our Savior meant,
The Gospel should to all the World be sent:
Since when the blessed Sound did hither reach,
They to all Nations might be said to Preach.
It Is well that Virtue gives Nobility,
Else God knows where we had our Gentry;
Since scarce one Family is left alive,
Which does not from some Foreigner derive.
Of Sixty thousand English Gentlemen,
Whose Names and Arms in Registers remain,
We challenge all our Heralds to declare
Ten Families which English-Saxons are.
France justly boasts the Ancient Noble Line
Of Bourbon, Mommorency, and Lorrain.
The Germans too their House of Austria show,
And Holland their Invincible Nassau.
Lines which in Heraldry were Ancient grown,
Before the Name of Englishman was known.
Even Scotland too her Elder Glory shows,
Her Gourdons, Hamiltons, and her Monroes;
Douglas, Mackays, and Grahams, Names well known,
Long before Ancient England knew her own.
But England, Modern to the last degree,
Borrows or makes her own Nobility,
And yet she boldly boasts of Pedigree:
^epines that Foreigners are put upon her,
and talks of her Antiquity and Honor:
^er S -- lls, S -- ls, C -- ls, De -- M -- rs,
^ -- ns and M -- ues, D -- s, and V -- rs,
^ot one have English Names, yet all are English Peers.
^our H -- ns, P -- llons, and L -- liers,
^ss now for True-Born English Knights and Squires,
and make good Senate-Members, or Lord-Mayors.
^ealth, howsoever got, in England makes
^ords of Mechanics, Gentlemen of Rakes
^ntiquity and Birth are needless here;
^is Impudence and Money makes a P -- r.
^ Innumerable City-Knights we know,
^om Bluecoat Hospitals and Bridewell flow:
^raymen and Porters fill the City Chair,
and Footboys Magisterial Purple wear.
^ate has but very small Distinction set
^etwixt the Counter and the Coronet.
^arpaulin L -- ds, Pages of high Renown,
^ise up by Poor Men's Valor, not their own.
^reat Families of Yesterday we show,
and Lords, whose Parents were the Lord knows who.
The True-Born Englishman. PART II.
THE Breed's described: Now, Satyr, if you can,
Their Temper show, for Manners make the Man*
Fierce as the Britain, as the Roman Brave;
And less inclined to Conquer than to Save:
Eager to fight, and lavish of their Blood;
And equally of Fear and Forecast void.
The Pict has made 'em Sour, the Dane Morose;
False from the Scot, and from the Norman worse.
What Honesty they have, the Norman gave them,
And That, now they grow old, begins to leave them*
The Climate makes them Terrible and Bold;
And English Beef their Courage does uphold:
No Danger can their Daring Spirit pall,
Always provided that their Belly's full.
In close Intriegues their Faculty's but weak,
For gen'rally whatever they know, they speak:
And often their own Councils undermine
By their Infirmity, and not Design.
From whence the Learned say it does proceed,
That English Treasons never can succeed:
^or they are so open-hearted, you may know
Their own most secret Thoughts, and others too.
The Laboring Poor, in spite of Double Pay,
^re Saucy, Mutinous, and Beggarly:
^o lavish of their Money and their Time,
that want of Forecast is the Nation's Crime.
^ood Drunken Company is their Delight;
and what they get by Day, they spend by Night*
^ull Thinking seldom does their Heads engage,
But Drink their Youth away, and hurry on Old Age.
Empty of all good Husbandry and Sense;
and void of Manners most, when void of Pence.
their strong Aversion to Behaviour's such,
^hey always talk too little or too much.
(...) dull, they never take the pains to think;
and seldom are good-natured, but in Drink.
In English Ale their dear Enjoyment lies,
^or which they will starve themselves and Families.
^n Englishman will fairly drink as much
^s will maintain Two Families of Dutch:
^ubjecting all their Labors to the Pots;
^he greatest Artists are the greatest Sots.
The Country Poor do by Example live;
^he Gentry lead them, and the Clergy drive!
that may we not from such Examples hope?
^he Landlord is their God, the Priest their Pope
Drunken Clergy, and a Swearing Bench,
^as given the Reformation such a Drench,
^ wise Men think there is some cause to doubt,
^ill purge Good Manners and Religion out.
Nor do the Poor alone their Liquor prize,
^he Sages join in this great Sacrifice.
^he Learned Men who study Aristotle,
^orrect him with an Explanation Bottle;
^aise Epicurus rather than Lysander,
^d The Drunkards Name for Canary.
Aristippus more than Alexander.
The Doctors too their Galen here resign,
And gen'rally prescribe Specific Wine.
The Graduates Study's grown an easier Task,
While for the Urinal they toss the Flask.
The Surgeons Art grows plainer every Hour,
And Wine's the Balm which into Wounds they pour.
Poets long since Parnassus have forsaken,
And say the Ancient Bards were all mistaken.
Apollo's lately abdicate and fled,
And good King Bacchus governs in his stead;
He does the Chaos of the Head refine,
And Atom-Thoughts jump into Words by Wine:
The Inspiration's of a finer Nature;
As Wine must needs excel Parnassus Water;
Statesmen their weighty Politics refine,
As Soldiers raise their Courages by Wine.
Caecilia gives her Choristers their Choice,
And lets them all drink Wine to clear the Voice.
Some think the Clergy first found out the way,
And Wine's the only Spirit by which they pray.
But others less profane than so, agree,
It clears the Lungs, and helps the Memory:
And therefore all of them Divinely think,
Instead of Study, it is as well to drink.
And here I would be very glad to know,
Whether our Asgilites may drink or no.
The Enlightening Fumes of Wine would certainly
Assist them much when they begin to fly:
Or if a Fiery Chariot should appear,
Inflamed by Wine, they would have the less to fear.
Even the Gods themselves, as Mortals say,
Were they on Earth, would be as drunk as they:
Nectar would be no more Celestial Drink,
They Would all take Wine, to teach them how to Think.
But English Drunkards, Gods and Men outdo,
Drink their Estates away, and Senses too.
Colon's in Debt, and if his Friends should fail
To help him out, must dye at last in Gaol:
His Wealthy Uncle sent a Hundred Nobles,
To pay his Trifles off, and rid him of his Troubles:
^ut Colon, like a True-Born Englishman,
^rank all the Money out in bright Champaign;
and Colon does in Custody remain.
^runk'ness has been the Darling of the Realm,
^er since a Drunken Pilot had the Helm.
In their Religion they are so unev'n,
That each Man goes his own By-way to Heaven.
Tenacious of Mistakes to that degree,
that every Man pursues it sep'rately,
and fancies none can find the Way but he:
^ shy of one another they are grown,
^s if they strove to get to Heaven alone.
^igid and Zealous, Positive and Grave,
and every Grace, but Charity, they have:
^his makes them so Ill-natured and Uncivil,
that all Men think an Englishman the Devil.
Surly to Strangers, Froward to their Friend;
^ubmit to Love with a reluctant Mind;
^esolv'd to be ungrateful and unkind.
^ by Necessity reduced to ask,
^he Giver has the difficultest Task:
^or what is bestowed they aukwardly receive,
and always Take less freely than they Give.
^he Obligation is their highest Grief;
and never love, where they accept Relief.
^ sullen in their Sorrows, that it is known,
^hey'll rather dye than their Afflictions own:
and if relieved, it is too often true,
that they will abuse their Benefactors too:
^or in Distress their Haughty Stomach's such,
^hey hate to see themselves obliged too much.
^ldom contented, often in the wrong;
^ard to be pleased at all, and never long.
If your Mistakes their Ill Opinion gain,
^o Merit can their Favor reobtain:
And if they are not Vindictive in their Fury,
It Is their unconstant Temper does secure ye:
Their Brain's so cool, their Passion seldom burns:
For all is condensed before the Flame returns:
The Fermentation's of so weak a Matter,
The Humid damps the Fume, and runs it all to Water.
So though the Inclination may be strong,
They Are pleased by Fits, and never angry long.
Then if Good Nature shows some slender Proof,
They never think they have Reward enough:
But like our Modern Quakers of the Town,
Expect your Manners, and return you none.
Friendship, the abstracted Union of the Mind,
Which all Men seek, but very few can find:
Of all the Nations in the Universe,
None talk on it more, or understand it less:
For if it does the Property annoy,
Their Properry their Friendship will destroy.
As you discourse them, you shall hear them tell
All things in which they think they do excel:
No Panegyric needs their Praise record;
An Englishman never wants his own good Word.
His Long Discourses gen'rally appear
Prologu'd with his own wondrous Character:
But First to illustrate his own good Name,
He never fails his Neighbor to defame:
And yet he really designs no wrong;
His Malice goes no further than his Tongue.
But pleased to Tattle, he delights to Rail,
To satisfy the Lech'ry of a Tale.
His own dear Praises close the ample Speech,
Tells you how Wise he is; that is, how Rich:
For Wealth is Wisdom; he that is Rich is wise*
And all Men Learned Poverty despise.
His Generosity comes next, and then
Concludes that he is a True-Born Englishman;
And they it is known, are Generous and Free,
Forgetting, and Forgiving Injury:
Which may be true, thus rightly understood,
^orgiving Ill Turns, and Forgetting Good.
Cheerful in Labor when they have undertook it;
^ut out of Humor, when they are out of Pocket.
^ut if their Belly and their Pocket's full.
They may be Phlegmatic, but never Dull:
And if a Bottle does their Brains refine,
(...) makes their Wit as sparkling as their Wine.
As for the general Vices which we find
They Are guilty of in common with Mankind,
^atyr, forbear, and silently endure;
^e must conceal the Crimes we cannot cure.
^or shall my Verse the brighter Sex defame;
^or English Beauty will preserve her Name.
^eyond dispute, Agreeable and Fair;
And Modester than other Nations are:
^or where the Vice prevails, the great Temptation
^s want of Money, more than Inclination.
^n general, this only is allowed,
They Are something Noisy, and a little Proud.
An Englishman is gentlest in Command,
Obedience is a Stranger in the Land:
Hardly subjected to the Magistrate;
^or Englishmen do all Subjection hate.
Humblest when Rich, but peevish when they are Poor;
and think whatever they have, they merit more.
The meanest English Plowman studies Law,
And keeps thereby the Magistrates in Awe:
Will boldly tell them what they ought to do,
And sometimes punish their Omissions too.
Their Liberty and Property's so dear,
They scorn their Laws or Governors to fear:
^o bugbear'd with the Name of Slavery,
They cannot submit to their own Liberty.
^estraint from Ill is Freedom to the Wise;
^ut Englishmen do all Restraint despise.
^laves to the Liquor, Drudges to the Pots,
The Mob are Statesmen, and their Statesman Sots.
Their Governors they count such dangerous things,
That it is their Custom to affront their Kings:
So jealous of the Power their Kings possessed,
They suffer neither Power nor Kings to rest.
The Bad with Force they eagerly subdue;
The Good with constant Clamours they pursue:
And did King Jesus reign they would murmur too.
A discontented Nation, and by far
Harder to rule in Times of Peace than War:
Easily set together by the Ears,
And full of causeless Jealousies and Fears:
Apt to revolt, and willing to rebel,
And never are contented when they are well.
No Government could ever please them long,
Could tie their Hands, or rectify their Tongue.
In this to Ancient Israel well compared,
Eternal Murmurs are among them heard.
It was but lately that they were oppressed,
Their Rights invaded, and their Laws suppressed:
When nicely tender of their Liberty,
Lord! what a Noise they made of Slavery.
In daily Tumults showed their Discontent;
Lampoon'd their King, and mocked his Government.
And if in Arms they did not first appear,
'Twas want of Force, and not for want of Fear.
In humbler Tone than English used to do,
At Foreign Hands for Foreign Aid they sue.
William the Great Successor of Nassau,
Their Prayers heard, and their Oppressions saw:
He saw and saved them: God and Him they praised;
To This their Thanks, to That their Trophies raised.
But glutted with their own Felicities,
They soon their New Deliverer despise;
Say all their Prayers back, their Joy disown,
Unsing their Thanks, and pull their Trophies down*
Their Harps of Praise are on the Willows hung;
For Englishmen are never contented long.
The Reverend Clergy too! and who'd have thought,
That they who had such Non-Resistance taught,
Should ever to Arms against their Prince be brought?
Who up to Heaven did Regal Power advance;
Subjecting English Laws to Modes of France.
Twisting Religion so with Loyalty,
^s one could never live, and the other dye.
And yet no sooner did their Prince design
Their Glebes and Perquisites to undermine,
^ut all their Passive Doctrines laid aside;
The Clergy their own Principles denied:
^npreach'd their Non-resisting Cant, and prayed
To Heaven for Help, and to the Dutch for Aid.
The Church chym'd all her Doctrines back again,
and Pulpit-Champions did the Cause maintain;
^lew in the Face of all their former Zeal,
and Non-Resistance did at once repeal.
The Rabbis say it would be too prolix,
To tie Religion up to Politics:
The Church's Safety is Suprema Lex.
and so by a new Figure of their own,
Their former Doctrines all at once disown.
^s Laws Post Facto in the Parliament,
(...) urgent Cases have obtained Assent;
^ut are as dangerous Presidents laid by;
Made Lawful only by Necessity.
The Reverend Fathers then in Arms appear,
and Men of God became the Men of War.
^he Nation, fired by them, to Arms apply;
^ssault their Antichristian Monarchy;
To their due Channel all our Laws restore,
and made things what they should have been before.
^ut when they came to fill the Vacant Throne,
and the Pale Priests looked back on what they would done;
^ow English Liberty began to thrive,
and Church of England Loyalty outlive:
^ow all their persecuting Days were done,
^d their Deliv'rer placed upon the Throne*
The Priests, as Priests are wont to do, turned Tail;
They Are Englishmen, and Nature will prevail.
Now they deplore the Ruins they have made,
And murmur for the Master they betrayed.
Excuse those Crimes they could not make him mend;
And suffer for the Cause they cannot defend.
Pretend they would not have carried things so high;
And Proto-Martyrs make for Popery.
Had the Prince done as they designed the thing,
Have set the Clergy up to rule the King;
Taken a Donative for coming hither,
And so have left their King and them together,
We had, say they, been now a happy Nation.
No doubt we had seen a Blessed Reformation:
For Wise Men say 't's as dangerous a thing,
A Ruling Priesthood, as a Priest-rid King.
And of all Plagues with which Mankind are cursed,
Ecclesiastic Tyranny's the worst.
If all our former Grievances were feigned,
King James has been abused, and we trepanned;
Bugbear'd with Popery and Power Despotick,
Tyrannick Government, and Leagues Exotic:
The Revolution's a Phanatick Plot,
W -- a Tyrant, S -- a Sot:
A Factious Army and a Poisoned Nation,
Unjustly forced King James's Abdication.
But if he did the Subjects Rights invade,
Then he was punished only, not betrayed;
And punishing of Kings is no such Crime,
But Englishmen have done it many a Time.
When Kings the Sword of Justice first lay down,
They are no Kings, though they possess the Crown.
Titles are Shadows, Crowns are empty things,
The Good of Subjects is the End of Kings;
To guide in War, and to protect in Peace;
Where Tyrants once commence, the Kings do cease:
For Arbitrary Power's so strange a thing,
It makes the Tyrant, and unmakes the King.
If Kings by Foreign Priests and Armies reign,
and Lawless Power against their Oaths maintain,
^hen Subjects must have reason to complain.
If Oaths must bind us when our Kings do ill;
^o call in Foreign Aid is to rebel.
^y force to circumscribe our Lawful Prince,
^ wilful Treason in the largest Sense:
and they who once rebel, most certainly
their God, and King, and former Oaths defy.
(...) we allow no Maladministration
^ould cancel the Allegiance of the Nation;
^et all our Learned Sons of Levi try,
^his Eccles'astick Riddle to unty:
^ow they could make a Step to call the Prince,
and yet pretend to Oaths and Innocence.
By the first Address they made beyond the Seas,
^hey're perjured in the most intense Degrees;
and without Scruple for the time to come,
May swear to all the Kings in Christendom.
And truly did our Kings consider all,
^hey'd never let the Clergy swear at all:
their Politic Allegiance they would refuse;
^or Whores and Priests will never want excuse.
But if the Mutual Contract was dissolved,
The Doubtss explained, the Difficulty solved:
That Kings, when they descend to Tyranny,
Dissolve the Bond, and leave the Subject free.
The Government's ungirt when Justice dies,
And Constitutions are Non-Entities.
The Nations all a Mob, there is no such thing
As Lords or Commons, Parliament or King.
A great promiscuous Crowd the Hydra lies,
Till Laws revive, and mutual Contract ties:
A Chaos free to choose for their own share,
What Case of Government they please to wear:
^f to a King they do the Reins commit,
All Men are bound in Conscience to submit:
But then that King must by his Oath assent
To Postulata's of the Government;
Which if he breaks, he cuts off the Entail,
And Power retreats to its Qriginal.
This Doctrine has the Sanction of Assent,
From Nature's Universal Parliament.
The Voice of Nations, and the Course of Things,
Allow that Laws superior are to Kings.
None but Delinquents would have Justice cease,
Knaves rail at Laws as Soldiers rail at Peace:
For Justice is the End of Government,
As Reason is the Test of Argument.
No Man was ever yet so void of Sense,
As to debate the Right of Self-Defence;
A Principle so grafted in the Mind,
With Nature born, and does like Nature bind:
Twisted with Reason, and with Nature too;
As neither one nor the other can undo.
Nor can this Right be less when National;
Reason which governs one, should govern all.
Whatever the Dialect of Courts may tell,
He that his Right demands, can never rebel.
Which Right, if it is by Governors denied,
May be procured by Force, or Foreign Aid.
For Tyranny's a Nation's Term for Grief;
As Folks cry Fire, to hasten in Relief.
And when the hated Word is heard about,
All Men should come to help the People out.
Thus England groaned, Britannia's Voice was heard;
And Great Nassau to rescue her appeared:
Called by the Universal Voice of Fate;
God and the Peoples Legal Magistrate.
Ye Heavens regard! Almighty Jove look down,
And view thy Injured Monarch on the Throne.
On their Ungrateful Heads due Vengeance take,
Who sought his Aid, and then his part forsake.
Witness, ye Powers! it was our Call alone,
Which now our Pride makes us ashamed to own.
^ritannia's Troubles fetched him from afar,
^o court the dreadful Casualties of War:
^ut where Requital never can be made,
^cknowledgment's a Tribute seldom paid.
He dwelt in Bright Maria's Circling Arms,
^efended by the Magic of her Charms,
^om Foreign Fears, and from Domestic Harms.
^bition found no Fuel for her Fire,
^e had what God could give, or Man desire.
^ll Pity roused him from his soft Repose,
^s Life to unseen Hazards to expose:
^ll Pity moved him in our Cause to appear;
^ty! that Word which now we hate to hear.
^t English Gratitude is always such,
^o hate the Hand which does oblige too much.
Britannia's Cries gave Birth to his Intent,
^d hardly gained his unforeseen Assent:
^s boding Thoughts foretold him he should find
^he People Fickle, Selfish and Unkind.
Which Thought did to his Royal Heart appear
^ore dreadful than the Dangers of the War:
^or nothing grates a generous Mind so soon,
^s base Returns for hearty Service done.
Satyr, be silent, awfully prepare
^ritannia's Song, and William's Praise to hear.
^and by, and let her cheerfully rehearse
^er Grateful Vows in her Immortal Verse.
^oud Fame's Eternal Trumpet let her sound;
^sten ye distant Poles, and endless Round.
^ay the strong Blast the welcome News convey
^s far as Sound can reach, or Spirit fly.
^o Neighboring Worlds, if such there be, relate
^r Hero's Fame, for theirs to imitate.
^o distant Worlds of Spirits let her rehearse:
^or Spirits without the helps of Voice converse.
^ay Angels hear the gladsome News on high,
^ix'd with their everlasting Symphony.
And Hell it self stand in Suspense to know
Whether it be the Fatal Blast, or no.
BRITANNIA.
The Fame of Virtue it is for which I sound,
And Heroes with Immortal Triumphs crowned.
Fame built on solid Virtue swifter flies,
Than Morning-Light can spread my Eastern Skies.
The gathering Air returns the doubling Sound,
And loud repeating Thunders force it round:
Echoes return from Caverns of the Deep:
Old Chaos dreams on it in Eternal Sleep.
Time hands it forward to its latest Urn,
From whence it never, never shall return,
Nothing is heard so far, or lasts so long;
It Is heard by every Ear, and spoke by every Tongue.
My Hero with the Sails of Honor furled,
Rises like the great Genius of the World.
By Fate and Fame wisely prepared to be
The Soul of War, and Life of Victory.
He spreads the Wings of Virtue on the Throne,
And every Wind of Glory fans them on.
Immortal Trophies dwell upon his Brow,
Fresh as the Garlands he has won but now.
By different Steps the high Ascent he gains,
And differently that high Ascent maintains.
Princes for Pride and Lust of Rule make War,
And struggle for the Name of Conqueror.
Some fight for Fame, and some for Victory:
He Fights to Save, and Conquers to set Free.
Then seek no Phrase his Titles to conceal,
And hide with Words what Actions must reveal.
No Parallel from Hebrew Stories take,
Of God-like Kings my Similies to make:
No borrowed Names conceal my living Theme;
But Names and Things directly I proclaim.
^is honest Merit does his Glory raise;
whom that exalts, let no Man fear to praise,
^f such a Subject no Man need be shy;
^irtue's above the Reach of Flattery.
^e needs no Character, but his own Fame,
^or any flattering Titles, but his Name.
William's the Name that is spoke by every Tongue:
^illiam's the darling Subject of my Song.
^sten ye Virgins to the Charming Sound,
^d in Eternal Dances hand it round:
^ur early Offerings to this Altar bring;
^ake him at once a Lover and a King.
^ay he submit to none but to your Arms;
^or ever be subdued, but by your Charms.
^ay your soft Thoughts for him be all sublime;
^d every tender Vow be made for him.
^ay he be first in every Morning-Thought,
and Heaven never hear a Prayer where he is left out.
^ay every Omen, every boding Dream,
^e Fortunate by mentioning his Name.
^ay this one Charm Infernal Powers affright,
and guard you from the Terrors of the Night.
^ay every cheerful Glass as it goes down
^o William's Health, be Cordials to your own.
^et every Song be Chorust with his Name,
and Music pay her Tribute to his Fame*
^et every Poet tune his Artful Verse,
and in Immortal Strains his Deeds rehearse.
and may Apollo never more inspire
^he Disobedient Bard with his Seraphick Fire*
^ay all my Sons their grateful Homage pay;
^is Praises sing, and for his Safety pray.
Satyr, return to our Unthankful Isle,
^cur'd by Heaven's Regard, and William's Toil.
^o both Ungrateful, and to both Untrue;
^ebels to God, and to Good Nature too.
If ever this Nation be distressed again,
^o whomsoe'er they cry, they will cry in vain.
To Heaven they cannot have the Face to look;
Or if they should, it would but Heaven provoke.
To hope for Help from Man would be too much;
Mankind would always tell 'em of the Dutch:
How they came here our Freedoms to maintain,
Were Paid, and Cursed, and Hurried home again.
How by their Aid we first dissolved our Fears,
And then our Helpers damned for Foreigners.
It Is not our English Temper to do better;
For Englishmen think every Man their Debtor.
It Is worth observing, that we never complained
Of Foreigners, nor of the Wealth they gained,
Till all their Services were at an end.
Wise Men affirm it is the English way,
Never to Grumble till they come to pay;
And then they always think their Temper such,
The Work too little, and the Pay too much.
As frighted Patients, when they want a Cure,
Bid any Price, and any Pain endure:
But when the Doctor's Remedies appear,
The Cure's too Easy, and the Price too Dear.
Great Portland never was banter'd when he strove
For Us his Master's kindest Thoughts to move.
We never lampoon'd his Conduct, when employed
King James's Secret Councils to divide:
Then we caressed him as the only Man,
Which could the doubtful Oracle explain:
The only Hushai able to repel
The dark Designs of our Achitophel.
Compared his Master's Courage to his Sense;
The Ablest Statesman, and the Bravest Prince.
On his wise Conduct we depended much,
And liked him never the worse for being Dutch.
Nor was he valued more than he deserved;
Freely he ventured, faithfully he served.
In all King William's Dangers he has shared;
In England's Quarrels always he appeared:
The Revolution first, and then the Boyne;
(...) both his Counsels and his Conduct shine.
^is Martial Valor Flanders will confess;
and France Regrets his Managing the Peace.
^aithful to England's Interest and her King:
^he greatest Reason of our murmuring.
^en Years in English Service he appeared,
and gained his Master's and the World's Regard:
^t it is not England's Custom to Reward.
^he Wars are over, England needs him not;
^ow he is a Dutchman, and the Lord knows what.
(...) Schonbergh, the Ablest Soldier of his Age,
With Great Nassau did in our Cause engage:
^oth joined for England's Rescue and Defense,
The Greatest Captain, and the Greatest Prince.
With what Applause his Stories did we tell?
^ories which Europe's Volumes largely swell.
We counted him an Army in our Aid:
Where he commanded, no Man was afraid.
^is Actions with a constant Conquest shine,
from Villa-Vitiosa to the Rhine.
^rance, Flanders, Germany, his Fame confess;
and all the World was fond of him, but Us.
^ur Turn first served, we grudged him the Command*
^itness the Grateful Temper of the Land.
We blame the K -- that he relies too much
^n Strangers, Germans, Hugonots, and Dutch;
and seldom does his great Affairs of State,
^o English Counselors communicate.
^he Fact might very well be answered thus*
^e has so often been betrayed by us,
^e must have been a Madman to rely
^n English G -- ns Fidelity.
^or laying other Arguments aside,
^his thought might mortify our English Pride,
that Foreigners have faithfully obeyed him,
and none but Englishmen have ever betrayed him.
They have our Ships and Merchants bought and sold,
And bartered English Blood for Foreign Gold.
First to the French they sold our Turky-Fleet,
And Injured Talmarsh next at Camaret.
The King himself is sheltered from their Snares,
Not by his Merit, but the Crown he wears.
Experience tells us it is the English way,
Their Benefactors always to betray.
And lest Examples should be too remote,
A Modern Magistrate of Famous Note,
Shall give you his own History by Rote.
I Will make it out, deny it he that can,
His Worship is a True-born Englishman,
In all the Latitude that empty Word
By Modern Acceptation's understood.
The Parish-Books his Great Descent record,
And now he hopes ever long to be a Lord.
And truly as things go, it would be pity
But such as he should represent the City:
While Robb'ry for Burnt-Offering he brings,
And gives to God what he has stole from Kings.
Great Monuments of Charity he raises,
And good St. Magnus whistles out his Praises.
To City-Goals he grants a Jubilee,
And hires Huzza's from his own Mobilee.
Lately he wore the Golden Chain and Gown,
With which Equipped he thus harangu'd the Town.
His Fine Speech, etc.
WITH Clouted Iron Shoes and Sheep-skin Breech
More Rags than Manners, and more Dirt than Rich
From driving Cows and Calves to Layton-Market,
While of my Greatness there appeared no Spark yet,
Behold I come* to let you see the Pride
With which Exalted Beggars always ride.
Born to the Needful Labors of the Plow,
^he Cart-Whip graced me as the Chain does now*
nature and Fate in doubt what course to take,
Whether I should a Lord or Plough Boy make;
^indly at last resolved they would promote me,
and first a Knave, and then a Knight they vote me.
that Fate appointed, Nature did prepare,
and furnished me with an exceeding Care.
^o ^it me for what they designed to have me;
and every Gift but Honesty they gave me.
And thus Equipt, to this proud Town I came,
(...) quest of Bread, and not in quest of Fame.
^ind to my future Fate, an humble Boy,
^ree from the Guilt and Glory I enjoy.
The Hopes which my Ambition entertained,
^ere in the Name of Footboy all contained.
The Greatest Heights from Small Beginnings rise;
The Gods were Great on Earth, before they reached the Skies.
B. -- well, the Generous Temper of whose Mind,
^as always to be bountiful inclined:
^hether by his ill Fate or Fancy led,
first took me up, and furnished me with Bread.
The little Services he put me to,
^eem'd Labors rather than were truly so*
^ut always my Advancement be designed;
^or 'twas his very Nature to be kind.
^arge was his Soul, his Temper ever free;
The best of Masters and of Men to me.
and I who was before decreed by Fate,
^o be made Infamous as well as Great,
With an obsequious Diligence obeyed him,
^ill trusted with his All, and then betrayed him.
All his past Kindnesses I trampled on,
^uin'd his Fortunes to erect my own.
^o Vipers in the Bosom bred, begin
To hiss at that Hand first which took them in.
With eager Treach'ry I his Fall pursued,
And my first Trophies were Ingratitude.
Ingratitude's the worst of Humane Guilt,
The basest Action Mankind can commit;
Which like the Sin against the Holy Ghost*
Has least of Honor, and of Guilt the most,
Distinguished from other Crimes by this,
That it is a Crime which no Man will confess.
That Sin alone, which should not be forgiven
On Earth, although perhaps it may in Heaven.
Thus my first Benefactor I o'erthrew;
And how should be to a second true?
The Public Trust came next into my Care,
And I to use them scurvily prepare:
My Needy Sovereign Lord I played upon,
And lent him many a Thousand of his own;
For which, great Interests I took care to charge,
And so my Ill-got Wealth became so large.
My Predecessor Judas was a Fool,
Fitter to have been whipped, and sent to School,
Than sell a Savior: Had I been at hand,
His Master had not been so cheap trepanned;
I would have made the eager Jews have found,
For Thirty Pieces, Thirty Thousand Pound*
My Cousin Ziba, of Immortal Fame,
( Ziba and I shall never want a Name:)
Firstborn of Treason, nobly did advance
His Master's Fall, for his Inheritance.
By whose keen Arts old David first began
To break his Sacred Oath to Jonathan:
The Good Old King, it is thought, was very loath
To break his Word, and therefore br -- ke his Oath --
Ziba's a Traitor of some Quality,
Yet Ziba might have been informed by me:
Had I been there, he never had been content
With half the Estate, nor half the Government.
In our late Revolution 'twas thought strange,
That I of all Mankind should like the Change,
But they who wondered at it, never knew,
That in it I did my old Game pursue*
^or had they heard of Twenty thousand Pound,
which never was lost, nor never yet was found.
Thus all things in their turn to Sale I bring,
^od and my Master first, and then the King:
^ill by successful Villainies made bold,
thought to turn the Nation into Gold;
and so to Forg -- ry my Hand I bent,
^ot doubting I could gull the Government;
^ut there was ruffl'd by the Parliament*
and if I escaped the Unhappy Tree to climb,
It Was want of Law, and not for want of Crime.
But my The Devil.
Old Friend, who printed in my Face
^ needful Competence of English Brass,
^aving more Business yet for me to do,
and loath to lose his trusty Servant so,
Managed the Matter with such Art and Skill,
^s saved his Hero, and threw out the B -- l.
And now I Am graced with unexpected Honors,
^or which I Will certainly abuse the Donors:
^ighted, and made a Tribune of the People,
Whose Laws and Properties I Am like to keep well:
^he Custos Rotulorum of the City,
and Captain of the Guards of their Banditti.
^rrounded by my Catchpoles, I declare
against the Needy Debtor open War.
^hang poor Thieves for stealing of your Pelf,
and suffer none to rob you, but my self.
The King commanded me to help Reform ye,
and how I Will do it, Miss M -- n, shall inform ye.
(...) keep the best Seraglio in the Nation,
and hope in time to bring it into Fashion.
^o Brimstone Whore need fear the Lash from me,
that part I Will leave to Brother Jeffery.
^ur Gallants need not go abroad to Rome.
I keep a Whoring Jubilee at Home.
Whoring's the Darling of my Inclination;
A'n't I a Magistrate for Reformation?
For this my Praise is sung by every Bard,
For which Bridewell would be a just Reward.
In Print my Panegyricks fill the Street,
And hired Gaol-Birds their Huzza's repeat.
Some Charities contrived to make a show,
Have taught the Needy Rabble to do so:
Whose empty Noise is a Mechanic Fame,
Since for Sir Beelzebub they would do the same.
THE CONCLUSION.
THEN let us boast of Ancestors no more,
Or Deeds of Heroes done in Days of Yore,
In latent Records of the Ages past,
Behind the Rear of Time, in long Oblivion placed.
For if our Virtues must in Lines descend,
The Merit with the Families would end:
And Intermixtures would most fatal grow;
For Vice would be Hereditary too;
The tainted Blood would of Necessity,
Involuntary Wickedness convey.
Vice, like Ill Nature, for an Age or two,
May seem a Generation to pursue:
But Virtue seldom does regard the Breed;
Fools do the Wise, and Wise Men Fools succeed.
What is it to us, what Ancestors we had?
If Good, what better? or what worse, if Bad?
^amples are for Imitation set,
^et all Men follow Virtue with Regret.
Could but our Ancestors retrieve their Fate,
and see their Offspring thus degenerate;
^ow we contend for Birth and Names unknown,
and build on their past Actions, not our own;
^hey'd cancel Records, and their Tombs deface,
and openly disown the vile degenerate Race:
^or Fame of Families is all a Cheat,
It Is Personal Virtue only makes us great.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of Poems, etc. Printed and Sold by H. Hill in Black-Fryars, near
the Waterside; where seven more may be had that are not here Inserted.
A Congratulatory Poem on Prince George of Denmark, etc. on the Success at Sea.
Marlborough Still Conquers. The Flight of the Pretender. Honesty in Distress, a
Tragedy. The Kit-Cats a Poem, etc. Wine, a Poem, etc. Cider, a Poem, in 2
Books, with the Splendid Shilling, etc. The Pleasures of a Single Life, etc.
Faction Displayed. Moderation Displayed. The Duel of the Stags. etc.
Coopers-Hill, by Sir J. Denham. An Essay on Poetry, by the Earl of Murlgrave.
Absalom and Achitophel. The Plague of Athens. A Satyr against Man and Woman.
The Forgiving Husband. Instructions to Vanderbank. The Temple of Death. An
Essay on Translated Verse, by the Earl of Roscomon. Horace: Or the Art of
Poetry. The History of Insipids. The Swan-Trip-Club. Lucretius on Death, etc.
The Medal against Sedition. Bellizarius a great Commander. Daphnis, or a
Pastoral Elegy, etc. A Poem on the Countess of Abingdon. Nundinae
Sturbrigiences. Tunbrigialia. An Ode on the Incarnation, etc. Hoglandiae
Descriptio. Milton's, Sublimity on Cider. Bosworth-feild, a Poem, by Sir John
Beaumount Bar. Milton's Sublimity asserted, in answer to Cider, a Poem. Canary
Birds Naturalized. Baucis and Philemon, etc. Circus, a Satyr: Or the Ring Hide
Park. St. James's Park, a Satyr. The Spleen, a Pindarique Ode, (...) Philips's,
Pastorals. A Letter from Italy, to my Lo^^ Halifax, with other Poems. Blenheim,
a Poem, by Phillips Mac-Flecknoe, by J. Dryden; (...) Spencer's Ghost, by J.
Oldham The Female Reign, an Ode, Sam. Cobb. The Upstart, a Satyr. A Poem on the
Taking St. Mar^* Windsor Castle, a Poem. The Servitor, a Poem. The Pulpit War.
The Campaign, a Poem, by ^ Addison. The Counter-Scuffle, a Poem. Don Francisco
Sutorioso. Consolation to Mira mourning* A Panegyric on Oliver Cromw^^^ with
three Poems on his Death A Poem in Defense of the Chur^^ of England. The
Apparition, a Poem. The Hind and Panther Transve^^ to the Story of the Coun^^^
Mouse and City Mouse. Dr. Gath's Dispensary. The Memoirs on the Right
V^^lainous John Hall, the late Fam^^^ and Notorious Robber, etc. Mr Shaftoe's
Narrative giving Account of the Birth of the P^^tended Prince of Wales, etc.
An ELEGY ON THE AUTHOR OF THE True-Born- Englishman. WITH AN ESSAY On the
Late STORM.

By the AUTHOR of the HYMN to the PILLORY.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1708.

The PREFACE.
THOUGH these Sheets have been Wrote several Months, and in a time that seemed to
make them something more suitable than now: Yet the Occasion renewing it self
every day, who can refrain from speaking?

Had the scribbling World been pleased to leave me where they found me, I had
left them and Newgate both together; and as I am metaphorically Dead, had been
effectually so, as to Satyrs and Pamphlets.

It Is really something hard, that after all the Mortification they think they
have put upon a poor abdicated Author, in their scurrilous Street Ribaldry, and
Bear Garden Usage, some in Prose, and some in those terrible Lines they call
Verse, they cannot yet be quiet, but whenever any thing comes out that does not
please them, I come in for a share in the Answer, whatever I did in the
Question, every thing they think an Author deserves to be abused for, must be
mine.

Several plentiful Showers of Railery I have quietly submitted to, an thought I
had a Talent of Patience as large as might serve me in common with my
Neighbors, but there is a time when a Man can bear n^ longer, and if the Man
is in a little Passion, he thinks he ought to b^ born with.

I tried Retirement, and banished my self from the Town: I thought as the Boys
used to say, 'twas but fair they should let me alone, while did not meddle with
them.

But neither a Country Recess, any more than a Stone Doublet, on secure a Man
from the Clamor of the Pen.

In the following Sheets I endeavor to state the Case in order to Truce; for
shame, Gentlemen, let him alone, why the Man's Dead: 't^^ a Cowardly Trick to
beat a Man when he is down, but to fight a Dea^ Man is the Devil.

And with Submission, Gentlemen, the Allegory is just: for if bei^^tied under
Sureties and Penalties not to write, at least not to write wh^^ some People may
not like, be not equivalent to being Dead, as to the P^^ I know not what is.

But how do these People treat Mankind, that they pretend to Indict^ Man for
every thing they please, as if they had Power to Read his Countenance in
Letters, and swear to a Style as they would to his Face?

It Is easy to prove the Authors of Books, and no Man can be conceal^^ in such
Cases; but for a Man to be charged with other Men's Faults, w^^ has too many of
his own, is a method newly practiced, and more up^ me than any Body; and yet
the Grief of this Usage does not stick so (...) upon me, but that I may tell my
Antagonists, if any think themselv^^ deserving that Name, that they are very
welcome to go on their own w^^ and use me as they please, I shall always be
ready to reply, or by my^^lence let them see I do not think it worth my while.

An ELEGY on the Author of the True-Born Englishman.
SATYR sing Lachrime, you are dead in Law,
Thy fatal Hour draws on,
The Lines of thine own Exit draw,
And tell how you are undone.
^end for the Priest, and ask Advice,
Reflect upon thy Time misspent;
When Wit upon its Death-B^d lies,
It Is high time to repent.
What can thou say old Pluto to appease?
^hy Hymns in that dark World will never please:
^ilence, eternal S^lence is thy Lot,
and all thy Rhymes and all thy Hymns forgot:
^ury'd in dark Oblivion, there thou wilt lie
^or seven long Years, a Wit's Eternity.
Little thou thought in Verses past,
those Songs of thine would be thy last:
It Is hard thy vigorous Muse should lie,
^ all her Strength of Thought, condemned to dye:
It Is hard to have her perish in her Prime,
and most Men think she died before her time.
With Patience, Satyr, to thy Fate submit,
and show thy Courage can outdo thy Wit;
With Calmness meet the Sentence of thy Death,
and yield with Temper thy Poetic Breath.
that though to Silence they condemn thy Rhymes,
^en that Silence shall condemn the Times.
The World shall blush when ever they Read,
and thou be still a Satyr, though you are Dead.
When Malefactors come to dye,
They claim uncommon Liberty:
Freedom of Speech gives no distaste,
^hey let them talk at large, because they talk their last;
It Is hard thy dying Words should give Offense,
And neither please in Language nor in Sense;
He that must never open more,
Dearly attones for what he said before.
Departed Satyr! let thy Ghost appear,
To keep the vicious Town in fear;
Verses shall from thy injured Ashes rise,
And Satyrs always pointed at their Vice:
No Man shall sin in peace,
And Virtue only shall thy Shade appease.
But since, dear Satyr* it is thy Lot
Thus to dye upon the spot,
In softest Notes sing thine own Elegy,
Be silent Dead, but never silent dye.
The ELEGY.
Circled in Newgate's cold Embrace,
And reconciled to Death by such a place,
I from the horrid Mansion fled,
And, as concerning Poetry, am dead:
To seven long Years of silence I betake,
Perhaps by then I may forget to speak:
And thus I died, and yield Satyrick Breath,
For to be Dumb, in Poetry is Death.
If you demand a Reason of my Fate,
Whether it came too soon, or came too late;
Whether Wise Heaven did this permit,
For want of Manners, or else for want of Wit;
Whether I said too little or too much,
Or loaded any with too just Reproach,
If you would know the latent Cause,
Go search the hidden Secret in the Laws.
Let not my Verse my Verses Crimes debate,
Go ask the powerful Engines of the State.
Besides he must be void of Sense,
Who dare stand up in my Defense:
Behold that Power, which Men call Law,
Can keep even Innocence in awe.
Let it suffice this Elegy to read,
And though you see the Man,
All his Poetic Fancy's dead,
Nothing but Carcass can remain:
The Shadow of the Poet may appear,
No Substance can be there:
A walking Spectrum, with his Fancy fled,
And he that raised the Devil, the Devil has laid.
Yet I have Reason to complain,
I can not quiet in my Grave remain:
The World's disturbed about my Memory,
They Will neither let me live, nor let me dye.
If an ill-natured Muse
Attempts the Nation to abuse,
If some unhappy Truths they tell,
which might have been concealed as well,
My Ghost's arraigned, and I am said
^ready to be Risen from the Dead.
The Mob of wretched Writers stand
With Storms of Wit in every Hand,
^hey bait my Memory in the Street,
and charge me with the Credit of their Wit;
I bear the scandal of their Crimes,
^y Name's the Hackney Title of the Times;
^ some new Wit in Satyr lies concealed,
And lately in Lampoon revealed,
^y silent Ashes are disturbed to know
Whether it is dated from below;
Whether it is mine or no.
^ some in Pasquinades affront the State,
^d tempt their yet unpitied Fate,
^ willing to be cautious till too late,
^e subtle Mimicks to this Shadow fly,
Conceal their Guilt, and say it is I:
^ Man can Satyrize a Man of Fame,
^t daily Curses rise against my Name.
^mn, Song, Lampoon, Ballad, and Pasquinade,
My recent Memory invade;
^ Muse must be the Whore of Poetry,
^d all Apollo's Bastards laid to me.
If any Poet has but writ,
With an Exuberance of spite,
^s he the mighty Vices of the Age,
^d mighty Men too, brought upon the Stage;
As who can with his Pen forbear
^ dress the S -- s M -- n in the Robes they are fond to wear?
^ey search the deep Recesses of my Grave,
^en to hear the sleeping Genius rave:
Such is the Folly of their hate,
^at Death cannot their Jealousies abate;
Such is the Force of Guilt, they see
^h Reason to expect Reproach from me,
Their Fancy harbors the Mistake,
^eam in Death, and send my Ghost to speak.
Yet undisturbed I safely sleep,
And calm as Death my Silence keep;
^gh at all the Anger of Mankind,
(...) loath to bear the T --, my Pen confined:
(...) smile at Human Policy,
^o always stop that Mouth, whose words they cannot deny:
Yet let them not their Crimes conceal,
New Satyrs will their Crimes reveal;
More Poets from my Monument shall rise,
Who shall like me their Power despise.
Who shall condemn a vicious Court,
And make the Nation's Knaves the Nation's sport.
Naked as Nature's first Original
Vice shall before the Bar of Truth appear,
Keen Satyrs shall to Judgment call,
And Power shall not protect them there;
Satyr shall mighty Crimes rehearse,
No Rogue's above the Quality of Verse.
Satyr shall keep those Knaves in awe,
Who are too cunning for the Law;
And shall at least expose the Cheat
Of those that think themselves too great.
Fleets shall not spend a Seventeen Months advance,
To take the Air upon the Coast of France;
No sham Descents shall ever be made,
The Money spent, and Majesty betrayed,
But lasting Verse shall make the matter clear,
And what the Nation feels, the World shall hear.
Nor will there ever be wanting to this Age,
Poets to spread their Errors on the Stage;
Oppression makes a Poet; Spleen Endites,
And makes Men write by force, as G -- n fights.
Was ever such broken Voyages made?
Was ever War so much a Trade?
If Fleets to Italy shall go,
And hardly tell the Foe
Whether they have been there or no:
Come back to let us know the Mony's spent,
And hardly knew for what they went;
The Nation never can want a Poet long,
To turn such juggling into Song.
When Traitors creep into the Affairs of State,
Poets will always prophecy their Fate;
When Villains serve the Queen by halves,
And fleece the Nation to enrich themselves;
Her Majesty may strive in vain,
Make Peace with Portugal, and War with Spain.
Fit Armies out, send Fleets to Sea,
The Mony's all but thrown away:
Unless the Heroes who command
Would learn to do as well as understand.
When the new Leagues with Portugal appear,
All honest Men rejoice;
^ut had they been secured before the War,
'T had been at half the price:
Had not the Nation been betrayed,
^isbon had long ago embraced Madrid;
^he Bourbon Laurels had abandoned Spain,
And Anjou's Triumphs been in vain.
Were I alive again, and could but hear
^he hopes we have of this Algarvian War,
My Satyr could no more forbear
^o pay the due to William's Character;
^he early Measures of this War he laid,
But 'twas his Fate to be betrayed;
^e formed the League the Queen has now retrieved,
And had he been believed,
^he Queen had not been now embroiled with Spain,
and forced to purchase Portugal again.
^ain had long since an Austrian Monarch known:
^d rightful Princes had possessed their own.
If some bold Satyr does not soon revive,
(...) let them know that Poetry's alive;
^ we must always be embraced by Knaves,
and all the Nation's Work be done by halves;
^ every Year endeavoring to be poor,
^ always mending what we marred before;
^ave always something to retrieve,
and always doing something to deceive;
Vast Navies fitted out to Fight
A Foe that is always out of fight;
and yet the French in flying Squadrons Reign,
^sult our Trade, and Bully all the Main,
and bravely dare our Ships to fight in vain:
If our Sea Captains when they run away,
Shall only forfeit three Months Pay;
If no new Genius rises up to show,
And let the injured Nation know
By whom they are thus betrayed, and how;
^ fear, in spite of all that has been said,
shall be forced to speak, although I Am Dead,
^ean while let Mercenary Poets strive
^o make their Malice my Decease outlive.
Let them reproach my Memory,
and write; for now they are sure of no Reply:
^et them their True-Born English Temper show,
^en in distress are always treated so:
^et them with wretched Satyrs glut the Town,
^xpose my Morals, and forget their own;
This shall my Quiet never discompose,
Contempt's a Cure which present help bestows;
Silence shall answer their Reproach,
For Silence is a Debt to such.
But if some Satyrs shall assault my Hearse,
And raise my frighted Ghost with their more frightful Verse,
Let such revengeful Wretches understand
I Will answer, when they will satisfy my Bond:
If they my Pledges will defend,
I Will from this Grave arise,
I Will Reassume my Satyrs, and
Leave off those Elegies;
The World shall have their Errors plainly shown,
I Will blast their Vices, and Reform my own.
Of all the Men that ever died before,
Mine Is the severest Case,
The Grave till now was always taken for
A place of Peace:
But I, as if some secret Power I had,
Give Bond to be at quiet when I Am dead;
My Enemies are not content to kill,
But take Security that I Will lie still:
Jealous, it seems, my busy Head
Should make me talk when I am dead.
Here Is all the Reason I can make them give,
That though the Poet's dead, the Man's alive.
To which, as gravely I have said,
That though the Man's alive, the Poet's dead.
He Is bad indeed, who when he dies
Has none to mourn his Obsequies;
And of the Virtuous find me one,
But some rejoices when he is gone;
So I have Mourners who lament my Verse,
And some Triumph upon the Satyr's Hearse:
Some think I die without a Crime,
Some like my Fate, and think 'twas time.
But this Just Calculation I can make,
And there I think I cannot mistake,
The Wise and Virtuous Sorrow's Tribute pay,
And Vice alone keeps Holy Day;
This does my Judgment satisfy,
For so would every wise Man die:
So let the Censure of my Works be past,
So let me die, when I must die my last;
Let wise Men's Sorrow be my Choice,
And let the Knaves and Fools rejoice.
It Is true there is some Reason in the case,
Vice now has room to show her Face;
^or now my walking Ghost is laid,
The Grand Contagion may the Nation spread;
Reproofs may cease,
And all Men be as wicked as they please.
Cities may Magistrates Elect,
That may the Crimes they practice, there protect;
That all their D -- men may out-swear,
And with exalted Drunk'ness Grace the Chair.
No more departed Satyr can reproach,
No more the Crimes or Persons touch.
S -- May blast the Root from whence he came,
and load his Family with Pride and Shame.
The high exalted wretch untouched may live,
^ide in his Coach, and make his Father drive:
and lest his Insolence should ever fail,
^as laid his own Progenitor in Jail.
Let future Poets blame the Law,
That keeps less Villains more in awe:
^ut suffers such a Wretch to brave the State,
and sin above the reach of Magistrate:
My Satyr, Silenced by the Times,
^ill cease to Check the most unnatural Crimes.
Degenerate M -- may now disown
^is Mother's Sense, in hopes to show his own.
^ut sure the Devil must be in the Cheer,
^o tell him he could make it pass for Wit,
and make him prove with such excessive pains,
^is want of Manners by his want of Brains.
^he young unnatural Fop has strove too long,
^ith empty Head, and inconsistent Tongue.
nature to make amends for want of Sense,
^as thronged his Head with clear Impertinence.
^is Gay Out-side's a Satyr on the Fair,
and let us know what is most obliging there.
The Ladies who in Beaus delight,
^ake shift by Day, so they are but pleased at Night.
The Charms which please a vicious Bed,
Lie somewhere else than in the Head;
and if the suited Blockheads parts will hit,
They Will always bear with want of Wit.
^is own dear Jest he labors to enjoy,
and studies how to live and die a Boy.
nature that left the unfinished Fop too soon*
^st lent him Sense enough to be undone;
And now he keeps a mighty pother,
And for Hereditary Wit indicts his Mother:
Rails that he is of his Brains bereft,
And yet pretends that she has little left.
Bedlam some Title to him had,
But Fools, they say, are never Mad.
Were not my Satyr lately dead,
His juster Character should here be read;
Mean time would but his Mother take advice,
The vile unnatural Monster to despise:
Nature the viperous Wretch would soon discard,
And in his Vices show him his Reward.
G -- may his weighty Sense prepare,
G -- 's An Elbow of the City Chair.
He boasts himself the Churches chief support,
I think the Church her self should thank him for it:
Though most suppose his Notions were but wild,
To fetch the Jew to Gospellize his Child.
The Hebrew Rake from Synagogue dismissed,
Came in to Circumcise the Feast,
And made the Godfather, but spoiled the Jest.
Some say 'twas looked upon as a Reproach,
And interloping on the Church:
But others say the Jew was rathet
A better Christian than the D -- Father,
And all agree
The Babe well Taught may be the best of all the three.
Let the uncircumsised alone,
The Israelite and he are much at one;
Both their Religions now they show,
The Hebrew Christian, and the Christian Jew,
Some say my former Satyrs show,
The Ebb of vicious Characters run low;
But if they will please to think again,
They Will find I never Tyth'd the Men,
Nor never thronged my Verse with one in Ten.
Why else should S. and T. escape,
This for his Parricide, that his Incestuous Rape,
How came prodigious D -- to be un-nam'd,
For Crimes unheard of lately famed.
Of all the Beaus and Brutes that crowd the Town,
My modest Satyr chose but one,
And he to all Men but himself unknown.
I never touched great M --
Whose Follies have not been a few;
Nor told the World of half the Crimes,
Which a fine House can harbor from the Times.
L -- and W -- t in spite of me,
^ave been as Lewd as R -- and D --
I spared them for their Modesty:
Because their Vice was something new,
and made one Whore between them serve the two.
Old lying B -- never met with my Reproof,
Though he gave always room enough.
My Satyr strove to whet her Pen
Against the Crimes, and spared the Men:
But now the Fashion of the Times,
Makes Poets Damn the Men without the Crimes.
If I have been too backward here,
To make the Vices of the Times appear,
If ever I come to rise again,
I Will make ye all amends, and name the Men.
Young S -- t shall not the House of God debauch*
And meet with neither Censure nor Reproach.
If ever my Satyr should revive,
They shall reform, or be ashamed to live.
But now my sleeping Satyr quits the Stage,
And leaves untouched the vicious Age.
The eager Rakes may unreprov'd sin on,
There Is time enough to be undone.
No more my Satyr shall those Follies touch,
No more the Crimes, no more the Men reproach.
M -- may hug the Shortest Way,
And for its Execution pray:
Next to the Sacred Books he placed the Scheme,
And loved the Practice better than the Theme.
He always for his Sovereign prayed,
But 'twas to have her be a Tyrant made;
To have her dip her hands in Blood,
And ruin all the Nation for their good.
But when the Hair-brained Zealot found
The Plot lay deeper under ground;
When he first felt the Satyr bite,
And found 'twas writ to expose, and not excite,
He changed his Ecclesiastic Look,
And damned the Author, though he loved the Book.
My Satyr has the hardest Fate,
Her Book's the Contradiction of the State.
Riddle Aenigma double Speech,
Dark Answers, doubtful Scriptures, which
Puzzle the Poor, and pose the Rich:
Are plain Explicit things to these,
Who punish Authors, when the Subjects please.
Nothing but this can such dark Steps explain;
They like the Doctrine, but they hate the Man*
Grave Authors now may write Essays,
That with one Face look several ways,
Of Peace at home, and War abroad,
And damn the Subject which they would applaud.
Banter the Queen with Dedications,
And call that Peace which will embroil three Nations.
S -- may new Harangues endite,
To set Conformity in clearer Light:
Learned Quotations bring by Rote,
Wise as the Nations he thought fit to Quote,
Whose Laws he knew, but had their Names forgot.
'Twas his strong Forecast which foresaw,
To damn Dissenting by a Law,
Would make our fatal Quarrel cease,
And bring the Nations all to Peace.
Ye Sons of Vice advance your Wit,
It Is now your turn to reign;
Satyr's subdued, and must submit,
And never like to raise again:
My Fate will dictate to the rest,
In me, they know how they shall be oppressed
My Doom will learn 'em to be wise,
And never attempt Impossibilities.
The Magistrate may now be lewd,
The saucy Satyr shall no more intrude:
A Vicious Clergy may the Church supply,
Debauch the Gown, and give their Text the Lie*
Smother their Morals in the Vine,
And prove the Bottle's Origin Divine.
Religion may be in a Blanket tossed,
From Hand to Hand, 'till it is as good as lost*
'Till Fate restore some Justice to the Times,
Satyr shall leave 'em to grow Old in Crimes.
Atheists may, unmolested, now Blaspheme,
Slight Human Power, and banter the Supreme:
Allmighty Drunkenness bear Imperial Sway,
And Mankind be debauched the Shortest Way.
The Poor, alone, find in their Crimes their Fate*
And mock the Duty of the Magistrate;
They suffer for the Crimes the Rich commit,
For want of Money, not for want of Wit.
Guilt may in splendour through the City ride,
With all the Court of Elders by her side;
Those true Reformers need not fear,
A silent Satyr can do nothing here.
Their sham of Reformation they may Print,
With much of Canting Nonsense in it;
Cajole the People to believe they care
What Lewder Scenes are drawn in Smithfield Fair.
For having damned Profaneness first,
Then they proclaim the Fair, and bid them do their worst.
In grand Procession to the place they go,
Was ever God Almighty banter'd so?
Let 'em go on, absurdly act,
First Vice condemn, then Vice protect;
My buried Satyr can no more reprove,
Leave them to Justice from above;
Refer them to their Orders for the Fair,
Profaneness sinks beneath the City Chair;
But raised by Proclamation lives again,
And every Booth's a Libel on the Men.
Yet let young Poets Reverence the Chair,
^or God's Vicegerent's Deputy sits there:
With Annual Pomp, and Majesty Enthroned,
But how does Vice connived his Seat surround!
What though no personal Crimes there could appear.
To soil the Brightness of his Character:
His weak pursuit of Vice the Law defeats,
For Negatives are Crimes in Magistrates.
Yet from my Ghost take this Prophetic Curse,
The next the City chooses shall be worse.
Let 'em expect those days to come.
When Vice shall be embraced, and Satyr dumb.
My Verse beneath this Tomb contented lies,
^eproof's a Blessing none but Fools despise,
And they that hate it, never will be wise.
Ye Men of Might and muckle Power,
Who Rule Mankind, and all Mankind devour;
^f you would have my quiet Ghost remain,
Locked in the Laws too mighty Chain,
Obey the Nation's Interest and your own,
Learn to protect, and not betray the Throne.
Witness ye Powers! I promise now,
For ever Sacred be the Vow!
As long as Magistrates forbear,
In Crimes they punish to appear.
While Parsons cease to Drink and Whore,
P -- s to be Proud, Debauched, and Poor*
While Lawyers cease to talk Mankind to Death*
and Murder Men with mercenary Breath.
While C -- rs Promises regard,
And Princes Men of Faith reward.
My Satyr shall in quiet sleep,
Her Sentenced silence keep;
Withold her Rage,
No more disturb the Age;
No more the mighty Vices of the mighty Men engage.
When Soldiers hasten to dispatch the War,
Their Country's Service to their Pay prefer;
Cease to give thanks for Victory when they fly,
And give Almighty Truth the Lie.
As long as Navies, Fleets, and Men,
Come shattered home, and hasten out again:
While they protect our Trade, defend our Coast,
And bravely fight, what ever it cost.
While Actions good or ill have due regard,
The Coward Punishment, the Brave Reward.
While all our Publicans are just,
And faithfully discharge the People's Trust;
Receivers due Accounts give in,
And duly pay it out again.
While needful Charges are defraid,
The Navy Manned as well as paid.
And no Commission Officers presume,
To take the Nation's Pay and stay at home.
When ever these happy Articles appear,
There'll be no business for a Satyr here.
I may lie still without Security,
There can be no occasion then for me;
I shall have nothing left to say,
For this would stop my Mouth the Shortest Way.
I was in hopes with this Poetic Death.
Slander would die, and let me take some Breath:
But Envy never sleeps, Report begins
To charge my Memory with my Neighbors sins,
As if they had not known
I have too many of my own:
They tell me how the Party did combine
To bear my Charges, and to pay my Fine.
Malice is always Retrograde to Sense,
And judges things without their Consequence;
Willing her mischievous Intent to show,
She always goes too fast, or else too slow.
They that this empty Notion raised,
Not me, but all the Party Satyriz'd.
Since all Men that know how to judge by Rules,
Know that the Men they mean were never Fools.
And their worst Enemies would never try,
To brand them with the blame of Generosity.
But to remove this modern Doubt,
^'ll give five hundred Pound they will make it out.
Thus like Old Strephen's Virtuous Miss,
Who, foolishly too coy,
Died with the scandal of a Whore,
And never knew the Joy.
So I, by Whigs abandoned, bear
The Satyr's unjust Lash,
Dye with the Scandal of their help,
But never saw their Cash.
No Man of Crime that suffered Death
Was ever used like me,
^n Thefts and Treasons, Rapes and Blood,
All Men have leave to die.
No Sentence sure was half so hard as mine,
That could not die till I had paid my Fine.
Methinks to make me poor had been enough,
For when they had my Pelf,
Perhaps if they had given me Time
I might have hanged my self:
But this, and I should think they needs must know it,
^s not The Shortest Way to kill a Poet.
In vain they spend their Time and Breath
To make me starve, and die a Poet's Death:
Butler's Garret I shall never appear,
Neither his Merit nor his Fate I fear.
Heavens keep me but from Bullet, Sword and Gun,
I Am not afraid of being undone;
^'m satisfied it never shall be said,
But he that gave me Brains, will give me Bread.
Some People ask if I was fairly stain?
Though I think not, I shall not complain
Till I have slept my Time, and rise again.
But they that are concerned at this
Are freely left to guess
Why I am doomed to write no more,
^f something wan't too true I wrote before.
Why should they thus deny
To let me write my Truer History?
Why seven long Years of Silence now impose,
^f I had nothing to disclose,
Nothing to make appear,
Nothing to say they cannot bear to hear.
But it is enough I lost my Life by Law,
And still by Rules am kept in Awe.
The Manner all Exact and Regular.
Whatever the Consequences are,
Never demand if it were Just,
For if the Forms are right, the Matter must.
Law is a great Machine of State
With Hooks and Screws to make it Operate;
Which as they are wound up by Art,
With ease perform the Fatal Part;
Exactly answer to the Workman's Skill,
This way 'twill work to save, or that to kill.
Crime in this Management has no Concern,
No Man can Right from Wrong discern.
The Movement is so subtle, and so sure,
And does such certain Fate procure.
The Mathematics are in vain,
Defensive Study useless must remain.
This Monster, whom it pleases will devour,
For Law is but a Heathen Word for Power;
A Metaphor, invented to confess
The Methods by which Men Oppress;
By which with Safety they destroy Mankind,
While Justice stands before, and Fraud behind.
Thousands of little Wheels, and unseen Parts
Of perjured Promises, and wheedling Arts,
This mighty Thing compose,
And no Man half its crooked Turnings knows.
The wild Meanders none can Trace,
Nor no Man knows it by its Face.
It learns to change with every Turn of Times,
And rings the Tune it is set to, like the Chimes.
It Is by this Engine I thought fit to die,
And so has many a wiser Man than I;
And by their broken Promises betrayed,
Satyr is thus upon its Deathbed laid.
If ever I come to Life again,
Coleman for that; I Will put no Faith in Man:
I that did on fair Quarter yield,
Laid down my Arms, and left the Field,
Did from my own Defense withdraw,
Thinking that Honesty was Law,
Have lost my Rhiming Life by this Deceit,
And I deserve it for my want of Wit.
Had I remembered Days of Yore,
When we complained of Arbitrary Power,
When Lawyers were the Tools of State,
And hurried Men to hasty Fate.
When the great Engine was screwed up too high,
And Men were hanged they knew not why;
Had I remembered Scrogg's Fame,
And known that Lawyers are in every Reign the same,
I never had ventured to believe
Men, whose Profession's to deceive.
Memento Mori here I stand
With Silent Lips, but Speaking Hand;
A walking Shadow of a Poet,
But bound to hold my Tongue, and never show it:
A Monument of Injury,
A Sacrifice to Legal T -- y.
I beckon to Mankind to have a Care,
And pointing, tell how I was lost, and where;
I show the dangerous Shore,
Where I have suffered Shipwreck just before.
If among Poets there remains a Fool,
That scorns to take this Notice for a Rule,
But ventures the Fidelity
Of those whose Trade and Custom it is to L --,
Let Men no Pity to him show;
Let him to Bedlam, not to Newgate, go.
The STORM. An ESSAY.
I AM told, for we have News among the Dead,
Heaven lately spoke, but few knew what it said;
The Voice, in loudest Tempests spoke,
and Storms, which Nature's strong Foundation shook,
felt it hither, and I Would have you know
^eard the Voice, and knew the Language too.
Think it not strange I heard it here,
(...) Place is so remote, but when he speaks, they hear.
Besides, though I am dead in Fame,
I never told you where I am.
Though I have lost Poetic Breath,
I Am not in perfect State of Death:
^m whence this Popish Consequence I draw,
I Am in the Limbus of the Law.
(...) me be where I will I heard the Storm,
^m every Blast it echoed thus, REFORM;
^t the mighty Shock, and saw the Night,
^hen Guilt looked pale, and owned he Fright;
And every time the Raging Element
^ok London's lofty Towers, at every Rent
^e falling Timbers gave, they cried, REPENT.
I saw, when all the stormy Crew,
Newly commissioned from on high,
Newly instructed what to do,
In Lowering, Cloudy, Troops drew nigh:
They hovered over the guilty Land,
As if they had been backward to obey;
As if they wondered at the sad Command,
And pitied those those they should destroy.
But Heaven, that long had gentler Methods tried.
And saw those gentler Methods all defied,
Had now resolved to be obeyed.
The Queen, an Emblem of the soft, still, Voice,
Had told the Nation how to make their Choice;
Told them the only way to Happiness
Was by the Blessed Door of Peace.
But the unhappy Genius of the Land,
Deaf to the Blessing, as to the Command,
Scorn to the high Caution; and contemn the News,
And all the blessed Thoughts of Peace refuse.
Since Storms are then the Nation's Choice,
Be Storms their Portion, said the Heavenly Voice:
He said, and I could hear no more,
So soon the obedient Troops began to roar:
So soon the blackning Clouds drew near,
And filled with loudest Storms the trembling Air:
I thought I felt the World's Foundation shake,
And looked when all the wondrous Frame would break.
I trembled as the Winds grew high,
And so did many a braver Man than I:
For he whose Valor scorns his Sense,
Has changed his Courage into Impudence.
Man may to Man his Valor show,
And it is his Virtue to do so.
But if he is of his Maker nor afraid,
He Is not courageous then, but mad.
Soon as I heard the horrid Blast,
And understood how long 'twould last,
Viewed all the Fury of the Element,
Considered well by whom 'twas sent,
And unto whom for Punishment:
It brought my Hero to my Mind,
William, the Glorious, Great, and Good, and Kind.
Short Epithets to his Just Memory;
The first he was to all the World, the last to me.
The mighty Genius to my Thought appeared,
Just in the same Concern he used to show,
When private Tempests used to blow,
Storms which the Monarch more than Death or Battle feared.
^hen Party Fury shook his Throne,
^d made their mighty Malice known,
I have heard the sighing Monarch say,
The Public Peace so near him lay,
It took the Pleasure of his Crown away.
It filled with Cares his Royal Breast;
^ten he has those Cares Prophetickly expressed,
That when he should the Reins let go,
^aven would some Token of its Anger show,
To let the thankless Nation see
^w they despised their own Felicity*
This robbed the Hero of his Rest,
^sturb'd the Calm of his serener Breast.
When to the Queen his Scepter he resigned,
With a resolved and steady Mind,
^o' he rejoiced to lay the Trifle down,
^ pitied Her to whom he left the Crown:
Foreseeing long and vigorous Wars,
^reseeing endless, private, Party Jarrs,
Would always interrupt Her Rest,
^d fill with Anxious Cares Her Royal Breast.
For Storms of Court Ambition rage as high
Almost as Tempests in the Sky.
Could I my hasty Doom retrieve,
^d once more in the Land of Poets live,
I Would now the Men of Flags and Fortune greet,
And write an Elegy upon the Fleet.
^st, those that on the Shore were idly found,
whom other Fate protects, while better Men were drowned,
^ey may thank God for being Knaves on Shore,
^t sure the Q -- will never trust them more.
They who rid out the Storm, and lived,
^t saw not whence it was derived,
^sless of Danger, or the mighty Hand,
^at could to cease, as well as blow, command,
Let such unthinking Creatures have a Care,
For some worse End prepare.
Let them look out for some such Day,
^hen what the Sea would not, the Gallows may.
^ose that in former Dangers shunned the Fight,
^ met their Ends in this Disast'rous Night,
Have left this Caution, though too late,
That all Events are known to Fate.
^wards avoid no Danger when they run,
^d Cowards scapes the Death it would not shun;
The Nonsense from our Fate to fly,
Men must once have Heart enough to die.
Those Sons of Plunder are below my Pen,
Because they are below the Names of Men;
Who from the Shores presenting to their Eyes
The Fatal Goodwin, where the Wreck of Navies lies,
A Thousand dying Saylors talking to the Skies.
From the sad Shores they saw the Wretches walk,
By Signals of Distress they talk;
There with one Tide of Life they are vexed,
For all were sure to die the next.
The Barbarous Shores with Men and Boats abound,
The Men more Barbarous than the Shores are found;
Off to the shattered Ships they go,
And for the Floating Purchase Row.
They spare no Hazard, or no Pain,
But it is to save the Goods and not the Men.
Within the sinking Supplaints Reach appear,
As if they would mock their dying Fear.
Then for some Trifle all their Hopes supplant,
With Cruelty would make a Turk relent.
If I had any Satyr left to write,
Could I with suited Spleen Indite,
My V^rse should blast that Fatal Town,
And Drowned Saylors Widows pull it down;
No Footsteps of it should appear,
And Ships no more cast Anchor there.
The Barbarous Hated Name of Deal should die,
Or be a Term of Infamy;
And till that is done, the Town will stand
A just Reproach to all the Land.
The Ships come next to be my Theme,
The Men's the Loss, I Am not concerned for them;
For had they perished ever they went,
Where to no Purpose they were sent,
The Ships might have been built again,
And we had saved the Money and the Men.
There the Mighty Wrecks appear,
Hic Jacent, Useless things of War.
Graves of Men, and Tools of State,
There you lie too soon, there you lie too late.
But O ye Mighty Ships of War!
What in Winter did you there?
Wild November should our Ships restore
To Chatham, Portsmouth, and the Nore,
So it was always heretofore,
For Heaven it self is not unkind,
If Winter Storms he will sometimes send,
Since it is supposed the Men of War
Are all laid up, and left secure.
Nor did our Navy feel alone,
The dreadful Desolation;
It shook the Walls of Flesh as well as Stone,
And ruffl'd all the Nation.
The Universal Fright
Made Guilty H -- expect his Fatal Night;
His hardened Soul began to doubt,
And Storms grew high within, as they grew high without.
Flaming Meteors filled the Air,
But Asgil missed his Fiery Chariot there;
Recalled his black blaspheming Breath,
And trembling paid his Homage unto Death,
Terror appeared in every Face,
Even Vile Blackbourn felt some Shocks of Grace;
Began to feel the Hated Truth appear,
Began to fear,
After he had Burlesqu'd a God so long,
He should at last be in the wrong.
Some Power he plainly saw,
(And seeing, felt a strange unusual Awe;)
Some secret Hand he plainly found,
Was bringing some strange thing to pass,
And he that neither God nor Devil owned,
Must needs be at a loss to guess.
Fain he would not have guest the worst,
But Guilt will always be with Terror Cursed.
Hell shook, for Devils dread Almighty Power,
At every Shock they feared the Fatal Hour,
The Adamantine Pillars moved,
And Satan's Pandemonium trembled too;
The tottering Seraphs wildly roved,
Doubtful what the Almighty meant to do;
For in the darkest of the black Abode,
There Is not a Devil but believes a God.
Old Lucifer has sometimes tried
To have himself be Deify'd;
But Devil nor Men the Being of God denied,
Till Men of late found out New Ways to sin,
And turned the Devil out to let the Atheist in.
But when the mighty Element began,
And Storms the weighty Truth explain,
Almighty Power upon the Whirlwind Rode,
And every Blast proclaimed aloud
There is, there is, there is, a God.
Plague, Famine, Pestilence, and War,
Are in their Causes seen,
The true Originals appear
Before the Effects begin:
But Storms and Tempests are above our Rules,
Here our Philosophers are Fools.
The Stagyrite himself could never show,
From whence, nor how they blow.
It Is all Sublime, it is all a Mystery,
They see no manner how, nor Reason why;
All Sovereign Being is the amazing Theme,
It Is all resolved to Power Supreme;
From this first Cause our Tempest came,
And let the Atheists spite of Sense Blaspheme,
They can no room for Banter find,
Till they produce another Father for the Wind.
Satyr, thy Sense of Sovereign Being declare,
He made the Mighty Prince of the Air,
And Devils recognize him by their Fear.
Ancient as Time, and Elder than the Light,
Ever the first Day, or antecedent Night,
Ever Matter into settled Form became,
And long before Existence had a Name;
Before the Expance of indigested Space,
While the vast No where filled the Room of Place.
Lived the First Cause The First Great Where and Why,
Existing to and from Eternity,
Of His Great Self, and of Necessity.
This I call God, that One great Word of Fear,
At whose great Sound,
When from his Mighty Breath it is ecchos'd round,
Nature pays Homage with a trembling bow,
And Conscious Men would faintly disallow;
The Secret Trepidation racks the Soul,
And while he says, no God, replies, thou Fool.
But call it what we will,
First Being it had, does Space and Substance fill.
Eternal Self-existing Power enjoyed,
And whatsoever is so, That same is God.
If then it should fall out, as who can tell,
But that there is a Heaven and Hell,
Mankind had best consider well for fear
'T should be too late when their Mistakes appear;
Such may in vain Reform,
Unless they do it before another Storm.
They tell us Scotland escaped the Blast;
No Nation else have been without a Taste:
All Europe sure have felt the Mighty Shock,
'T has been a Universal Stroke.
But Heaven has other Ways to plague the Scots,
As Poverty and Plots.
Her Majesty confirms it, what She said,
I plainly heard it, though I Am dead.
The dangerous So and has raised me from my Sleep,
I can no longer Silence keep,
Here Satyr's thy Deliverance,
A Plot in Scotland, Hatched in France,
And Liberty the Old Pretense.
Prelatick Power with Popish join,
The Queen's just Government to undermine;
This is enough to wake the Dead,
The Call's too loud, it never shall be said
The lazy Satyr slept too long,
When all the Nations Danger claimed his Song.
Rise Satyr from thy Sleep of Legal Death,
And reassume Satyrick Breath;
What though to Seven Years Sleep thou art confined,
Thou well may wake with such a Wind.
Such Blasts as these can seldom blow,
But they are both formed above and heard below.
Then wake and warn us now the Storms are past,
Lest Heaven return with a severer Blast.
Wake and inform Mankind
Of Storms that still remain behind.
If from this Grave thou lift thy Head,
They Will surely mind one risen from the Dead.
Though Moses and the Prophets cannot prevail,
A Speaking Satyr cannot fail.
Tell 'em while secret Discontents appear,
There'll never be Peace and Union here.
They that for Trifles so contend,
Have something farther in their End*
But let those hasty People know,
The Storms above reprove the Storms below,
And it is too often known,
That Storms below do Storms above Forerun;
They say this was a High-Church Storm,
Sent out the Nation to Reform;
But the Emblem left the Moral in the Lurch,
For It blew the Steeple down upon the Church.
From whence we now inform the People,
The Danger of the Church is from the Steeple.
And we have had many a bitter stroke,
From Pinnacle and Weathercock,
From whence the Learned do relate,
That to secure the Church and State,
The Time will come when all the Town
To save the Church, will pull the Steeple down.
Two Tempests are blown over, now prepare
For Storm of Treason and Intestine War.
The High-Church Fury to the North extends,
In haste to ruin all their Friends.
Occasional Conforming led the Way,
And now Occasional Rebellion comes in Play,
To let the Wondering Nation know,
That High-Church Honesty's an Empty Show,
A Phantosm of Delusive Air,
That as Occasion serves can disappear,
And Loyalty's a senseless Phrase,
An Empty Nothing which our Interest sways,
And as that suffers this decays.
Who dare the Dangerous Secret tell,
That Churchmen can Rebel.
Faction we thought was by the Whigs Engrossed,
And Forty One was banter'd till the Jest was lost.
Bothwel and Pentland-Hills were famed,
And Gilly-Cranky hardly named.
If Living Poets dare not speak,
We that are Dead must Silence break;
And boldly let them know the Time's at Hand,
When Ecclesiastic Tempests shake the Land.
Prelatick Treason from the Crown divides,
And now Rebellion changes sides.
Their Volumes with their Loyalty may swell,
But in their Turns too they Rebel;
Can Plot, Contrive, Assassinate,
And spite of Passive Laws disturb the State.
Let fair Pretenses fill the Mouths of Men,
No fair Pretense shall blind my Pen,
They that in such a Reign as this Rebel
Must needs be in Confederacy with Hell.
Oppressions Tyranny and Pride,
May give some Reason to Divide;
But where the Laws with open Justice Rule,
He that Rebels Must be both Knave and Fool.
May Heaven the growing Mischief soon prevent,
And Traitors meet Reward in Punishment.
FINIS.
A HYMN TO THE PILLORY.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1708.

A HYMN TO THE PILLORY.
HAIL Hi'roglyphick State Machin,
Contrived to punish Fancy in:
^n that are Men, in thee can feel no Pain,
^d all thy Insignificants Disdain.
Contempt, that false New Word for shame,
Is without Crime an empty Name,
A Shadow to Amuse Mankind,
never frights the Wise or Well-fix'd Mind*
Virtue despises Human Scorn,
And Scandals Innocence adorn.
Exalted on thy Stool of State,
at Prospect do I see of Sovereign Fate;
How the Inscrutables of Providence,
Differ from our contracted Sense;
Hereby the Errors of the Town,
The Fools look out and Knaves look on.
Persons or Crimes find here the same respect,
And Vice does Virtue often Correct,
The undistinguished Fury of the Street,
Which Mob and Malice Mankind Greet:
No Bias can the Rabble draw,
But Dirt throws Dirt without respect to Merit, or to Law.
Sometimes the Air of Scandal to maintain,
Villains look from thy Lofty Loops in Vain:
But who can judge of Crimes by Punishment,
Where Parties Rule, and L -- s Subservient.
Justice with Change of Interest Learns to bow,
And what was Merit once, is Murder now:
Actions receive their Tincture from the Times,
And as they change are Virtues made or Crimes.
Thou art the State-Trap of the Law,
But neither can keep Knaves, nor Honest Men in Awe*
These are too hard'nd in Offense,
And those upheld by Innocence.
How have thy opening Vacancys received,
In every Age the Criminals of State?
And how has Mankind been deceived,
When they distinguish Crimes by Fate?
Tell us, Great Engine, how to understand,
Or reconcile the Justice of the Land;
How Bastwick, Pryn, Hunt, Holingsby and Pie,
Men of unspotted Honesty;
Men that had Learning, Wit and Sense*
And more than most Men have had since,
Could equal Title to thee claim,
With Oats and Fuller, Men of lat^ Fame:
Even the Learned Seldom saw,
A Prospect of thee, through the Law:
He had thy Lofty Pinnacles in view,
Bur so much Honor never was thy due:
Had the Great Seldom Triumphed on thy Stage,
Seldom the Honor of this Age;
No Man would ever shun thee more,
Or grudge to stand where Seldom stood before.
Thou art no shame to Truth and Honesty,
^or is the Character of such defaced by thee,
Who suffer by Oppressed Injury.
Shame, like the Exhalations of the Sun,
Falls back where first the motion was begun:
and they who for no Crime shall on thy Brows appear,
^ar less Reproach than they who placed 'em there.
^t if Contempt is on thy Face entailed,
Disgrace it self shall be ashamed;
^andal shall blush that it has not prevailed,
To blast the Man it has defamed.
^et all that merit equal Punishment,
and there with him, and we are all Content.
There would the Famed S -- ll stand
^ith Trumpet of Sedition in his Hand,
^unding the first Crusado in the Land.
He from a Church of England Pulpit first
All his Dissenting Brethren Cursed;
Doomed them to Satan for a Prey,
And first found out the shortest way;
^ith him the Wise Vice Chancellor of the Press,
^ho though our Printers Licenses defy,
Willing to show his forwardness,
Blessed it with his Authority;
^ gave the Church's Sanction to the Work,
(...) Popes bless Colors for Troops which fight the Turk.
Doctors in scandal these are grown,
^ Red-hot Zeal and Furious Learning known:
^fessors in Reproach and highly fit,
^ Juno's Academy, Billingsgate.
Thou like a True born English Tool,
Have from their Composition stole,
^d now art like to smart for being a Fool:
And as of English Men, 'twas always meant,
They Are better to Improve than to Invent;
Upon their Model thou have made,
A Monster makes the World afraid.
With them let all the Statesmen stand,
Who Guide us with unsteady hand:
Who Armies, Fleet, and Men betray,
And Ruin all the shortest way,
Let all those Soldiers stand in sight,
Who Are Willing to be paid and not to fight.
Agents, and Colonels, who false Musters bring,
To Cheat your Country first, and then your King:
Bring all your Coward Captains of the Fleet;
Lord! what a Crowd will there be when they meet?
They who let Pointi 'scape to Breast,
With all the Gods of Carthagena Blessed.
Those who betrayed our Turkey Fleet;
Or Injured Talmash Sold at Camaret.
Who missed the Squadron from Thouloon,
And always came too late or else too soon;
All these are Heroes whose great Actions Claim,
Immortal Honor to their Dying Fame;
And ought not to have been Denied.
On thy great Counterscarp, to have their Valor tried.
Why have not these upon thy swelling Stage,
Tasted the keener Justice of the Age;
If it is because their Crimes are too remote,
Whom leaden-footed Justice has forgot?
Let Us view the modern Scenes of Fame,
If Men and Management are not the same;
When Fleets go out with Money, and with Men,
Just time enough to venture home again?
Navyes prepared to guard the insulted Coast,
And Convoy's settled when Our Ships are lost.
Some Heroes lately come from Sea,
If they were paid their Due, should stand with thee;
Papers too should their Deeds relate,
To prove the Justice of their Fate:
Their Deeds of War at Port Saint Mary's done,
And see the Trophy's by them, which they won:
Let Or -- d's Declaration there appear,
He Would certainly be pleased to see 'em there.
Let some good Limner represent,
The ravished Nuns, the plundered Town,
The English Honor how misspent;
The shameful coming back, and little done.
The Vigo Men should next appear,
To Triumph on thy Theater;
They, who on board the Great Galoons had been,
Who robbed the Spaniards first, and then the Queen*
Set up their praises to their Valor due,
How Eighty Sail, had beaten Twenty two,
Two Troopers so, and one Dragoon,
Conquered a Spanish Boy, a Pampalone.
Yet let them Or -- d's Conduct own,
Who beat them first on Shore, or little had been done*
What unknown spoils from thence are come,
How much was brought away, How little home,
^ all the Thieves should on thy Scaffold stand
Who robbed their Masters in Command:
The Multitude would soon outdo,
The City Crowds of Lord Mayors show.
Upon thy Penitential stools,
Some People should be placed for Fools:
As some for Instance who while they look on;
^ee others plunder all, and they got none.
Next the Lieutenant General,
To get the Devil, lost the De'll and all;
And he some little badge should bear,
Who ought in justice to have hanged 'em there:
This had his Honor more maintained,
Than all the Spoils at Vigo gained.
Then Clap thy wooden Wings for joy,
And greet the Men of Great Employ;
The Authors of the Nations discontent,
And Scandal of a Christian Government.
Jobbers, and Brokers of the City Stocks,
With forty Thousand Tallies at their Backs;
Who make our Banks and Companies obey,
Or sink 'em all the shortest way.
The Intrinsic Value of our Stocks,
Is stated in our Calculating Books;
The Imaginary Prizes rise and fall,
As they Command who toss the Ball;
Let 'em upon thy lofty Turrets stand,
With Bear-skins on the back, Debentures in the hand,
And write in Capital upon the Post,
That here they should remain,
Till this Aenigma they explain,
How stocks should Fall, when Sales surmount the Coast,
And rise again when Ships are lost.
Great Monster of the Law, Exalt thy Head;
Appear no more in Masquerade,
In Homely Phrase Express thy Discontent,
And move it in the Approaching Parliament:
Tell 'em how Papers were instead of Coin,
With Interest eight per Cent. and Discount Nine.
Of Irish Transport Debt unpaid,
Bills false Endors'd, and long Accounts unmade.
And tell them all the Nation hopes to see,
They Will send the Guilty down to thee:
Rather than those who write their History.
Then bring those Justices upon thy Bench,
Who vilely break the Laws they should defend;
And upon Equity Entrench,
By Punishing the Crimes they will not Mend.
Let every vicious Magistrate,
Upon thy sumptuous Chariot of the State;
There let 'em all in Triumph ride,
their Purple and their Scarlet laid aside.
^et no such Bride-well Justices Protect,
(...) first debauch the Whores which they Correct:
Such who with Oaths and Drunk'ness si^,
and Punish far less Crimes than they Commit:
These certainly deserve to stand,
^ith Trophies of Authority in Each Hand.
^oon thy Pulpit, see the Drunken Priest,
^ho turns the Gospel to a daily Jest;
^et the Fraternity Degrade him there,
Lest they like him appear:
^here let him, his Memento Mori Preach,
and by Example, not by Doctrine, Teach.
Next bring the Lewder Clergy there,
Who Preach those Sins down, which they cannot forbear;
those Sons of God who every day Go in,
^oth to the Daughters and the Wifes of Men;
^here Let 'em stand to be the Nation's Jest,
and save the Reputation of the rest.
^ -- ll who for the Gospel left the Law,
and deep within the Cleft of Darkness saw;
Let him be an Example made,
Who durst the Parsons Province so Invade;
To his new Ecclesiastic Rules,
We owe the Knowledge that we all are Fools:
Old Charon shall no more dark Souls convey,
A -- ll has found the shortest way:
Vain is your funeral Pomp and Bells,
Your Grave-stones, Monuments and Knells;
Vain are the Trophyes of the Grave,
A -- ll shall all that Foppery save;
And to the Clergy's great Reproach.
shall change the Hearse into a Fiery Coach:
What Man the Learned Riddle can receive,
Which none can Answer, and yet none Believe;
Let him Recorded, on the List remain,
Till he shall Heaven by his own Rules obtain.
If a Poor Author has Embraced thy Wood,
Only because he has not understood,
They Punish Mankind but by halves,
Till they stand there,
Who against their own Principles appear:
And cannot understand themselves.
Those Nimshites, who with furious Zeal drive on.
And build up Rome to pull down Babylon;
The real Author of the shortest way,
Who for Destruction, not Conversion pray*
There let those Sons of Strife remain,
Till this Church Riddle they Explain;
How at Dissenters they can raise a Storm,
But would not have them all Conform;
For there their certain Ruin would come in,
And Moderation, which they hate, begin.
Next bring some Lawyers to thy Bar,
By Inuendo they might all stand there;
There let them Expiate that Guilt,
And pay for all that Blood their Tongues have spilt;
These are the Mountebanks of State,
Who by the slight of Tongues can Crimes create,
And dress up Trifles in the Robes of Fate.
The Mastives of a Government,
To worry and run down the Innocent;
There Sat a Man of Mighty Fame,
Whose Actions speak him plainer than his Name;
In vain he struggled, he harangu'd in vain,
To bring in Whipping Sentences again:
And to debauch a Milder Government;
With Abdicated kinds of Punishment.
No wonder he should Law despise,
Who Jesus Christ himself denies;
His Actions only now direct,
That we when he is made a Judge, expect:
Let L -- ll next to his Disgrace,
With Whitney's Horses staring in his Face;
There let his Cup of Penance be kept full,
Till he is less Noisy, Insolent and Dull.
When all these Heroes have past once thy Stage,
And thou have been the Satyr of the Age;
Wait then a while for all those Sons of Fame,
Whom present Power has made too great a name:
Fenced from thy hands, they keep our Verse in Awe,
Too great for Satyr, and too great for Law*
As they their Commands lay down,
They all shall pay their Homage to thy Cloudy Throne:
And till within thy reach they be,
Exalt them in Effigy.
The Martyr of the bypast Reign,
For whom new Oaths have been prepared in vain;
She -- k's Disciple first by him trepan'd,
He for a K -- and they for F -- s should stand.
Though some affirm he ought to be Excused,
Since to this Day he had refused;
And this was all the Frailty of his Life,
He Damned his Conscience, to oblige his Wife.
But spare that Priest, whose tottering Conscience knew
That if he took but one, he would Perjure two:
Bluntly resolved he would not break 'em both,
And Swore by G -- d he would never take the Oath;
Hang him, he cannot be fit for thee,
For his unusual Honesty,
Thou Speaking Trumpet of Men's Fame,
Enter in every Court thy Claim;
Demand 'em all, for they are all thy own,
Who swear to Three Kings, but are true to none*
Turn-Coats of all sides are thy due,
And he who once is false, is never true:
To Day can Swear, to Morrow can Abjure,
For Treachery's a Crime no Man can Cure:
Such without scruple, for the time to come,
May Swear to all the Kings in Christendom;
But he is a Mad Man will rely
Upon their lost Fidelity.
They that in vast Employments rob the State,
See them in thy Embraces meet their Fate;
Let not the Millions they by Fraud obtain,
Protect 'em from the Scandal, or the Pain:
They who from Mean Beginnings grow
To vast Estates, but God knows how;
Who carry untold Sums away,
From little Places, with but little Pay:
Who Costly Palaces Erect,
The Thieves that built them to protect;
The Gardens, Grotto's, Fountains Walks, and Groves
Where Vice Triumphs in Pride, and Lawless Loves:
Where mighty Luxury and Drunk'ness Reigned,
Profusely Spend what they Profanely Gained:
Tell 'em there is Mean Tekel's on the Wall*
Tell 'em the Nations Money paid for all:
Advance by double Front and show,
And let us both the Crimes and Persons know:
Place them aloft upon thy Throne,
Who slight the Nation's Business for their own;
Neglect their Posts, in spite of Double Pay,
And run us all in Debt the shortest way.
Great Pageant, Change thy Dirty Scene,
For on thy Steps some Ladies may be seen;
When Beauty stoops upon thy Stage to show
She laughs at all the Humble Fools below.
Set Sapho there, whose Husband paid for Clothes
Two Hundred Pound a Week in Furbulo's:
There in her Silks and Scarlets let her shine,
She Is Beauteous all without, all Whore within.
Next let Gay URANIA Ride,
Her Coach and Six attending by her side:
Long has she waited, but in vain,
The City Homage to obtain:
The Sumptuous Harlot longed to Insult the Chair,
And Triumph over our City Beauties there.
Here let her Haughty Thoughts be Gratified,
In Triumph let her Ride;
Let DIADORA next appear,
And all that want to know her, see her there.
What though she is not a True-Born English Who -- re?
French Harlots have been here before;
Let not the Pomp nor Grandeur of her State
Prevent the Justice of her Fate,
But let her an Example now be made
To Foreign Wh -- s who spoil the English Trade.
Claim 'em, thou Herald of Reproach,
Who with uncommon Lewdness will Debauch;
Let C -- upon thy Borders spend his Life,
Till he Recants the Bargain with his Wife:
And till this Riddle both Explain,
How neither can themselves Contain;
How Nature can on both sides run so high,
As neither side can neither side supply:
And so in Charity agree,
He keeps two Brace of Whores, two Stallions she.
What need of Satyr to Reform the Town?
Or Laws to keep our Vices down?
Let 'em to Thee due Homage pay,
This will Reform us all the Shortest Way.
Let 'em to thee bring all the Knaves and Fools,
Virtue will guide the rest by Rules;
They Will need no Treacherous Friends, no breach of Faith,
No Hired Evidence with their Infecting Breath;
No Servants Masters to Betray,
Or Knight of the Post, who Swear for Pay;
No injured Author'l on thy Steps appear,
Nor such as would be Rogues, but such as are.
The first Intent of Laws
Was to Correct the Effect, and check the Cause;
And all the Ends of Punishment,
Were only Future Mischiefs to prevent.
But Justice is Inverted when
Those Engines of the Law,
Instead of pinching Vicious Men,
Keep Honest ones in awe;
Thy Business is, as all Men know,
To Punish Villains, not to make Men so.
When ever then thou art prepared,
To prompt that Vice thou should Reward,
And by the Terrors of thy Grisly Face,
Make Men turn Rogues to shun Disgrace;
The End of thy Creation is destroyed,
Justice expires of Course, and Law's made void.
What are thy Terrors? that for fear of thee,
Mankind should dare to sink their Honesty;
He Is Bold to Impudence, that dare turn Knave,
The Scandal of thy Company to save:
He that will Crimes he never knew confess,
Does more than if he knew those Crimes transgress:
And he that fears thee more than to be base,
May want a Heart, but does not want a Face.
Thou like the Devil do appear
Blacker than really thou art by far:
A wild Chimerick Notion of Reproach,
Too little for a Crime, for none too much:
Let none the Indignity resent,
For Crime is all the shame of Punishment.
Thou Bugbear of the Law stand up and speak,
Thy long Misconstru'd Silence break,
^ll us who it is upon thy Ridge stands there,
So full of Fault, and yet so void of Fear;
And from the Paper in his Hat,
Let all Mankind be told for what:
All them it was because he was too bold,
^d told those Truths, which should not have been told.
Extol the Justice o^ the Land,
^o Punish what they will not understand.
Tell them he stands Exalted there,
For speaking what we would not hear;
And yet he might have been secure,
^d he said less, or would he have said more.
Tell them that this is his Reward,
And worse is yet for him prepared,
^ause his Foolish Virtue was so nice
(...) not to sell his Friends, according to his Friends Advice;
And thus he is an Example made,
To make Men of their Honesty afraid,
That for the time to come they may,
More willingly their Friends betray;
Tell 'em the Men that placed him here,
^re Friends unto the Times,
But at a loss to find his Guile,
They cannot commit his Crimes.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of Poems, etc. Printed and Sold by H. Hill in Black-Fryars, near
the Waterside; where seven more may be had that are not here Inserted.
A Congratulatory Poem on Prince George of Denmark, etc. on the Success at Sea.
Marlborough Still Conquers. The Flight of the Pretender. Honesty in Distress, a
Tragedy. The Kit-Cats a Poem, etc. Wine, a Poem, etc. Cider, a Poem, in 2
Books, with the Splendid Shilling, etc. The Pleasures of a Single Life, etc.
Faction Displayed. Moderation Displayed. The Duel of the Stags, etc.
Coopers-Hill, by Sir J. Denham. An Essay on Poetry, by the Earl of Murlgrave.
Absalom and Achitophel. The Plague of Athens. A Satyr against Man and Woman.
The Forgiving Husband. Instructions to Vanderbank. The Temple of Death. An
Essay on Translated Verse, by the Earl of Roscomon. Horace: Or the Art of
Poetry. The History of Insipids. The Swan-Trip-Club. Lucretius on Death, etc.
The Medal against Sedition. Bellizarius a great Commander. Daphnis, or a
Pastoral Elegy, etc. A Poem on the Countess of Abingdon. Nundinae
Sturbrigiences. Tunbrigialia. An Ode on the Incarnation, etc. Hoglandiae
Descriptio. Milton's Sublimity on Cider. Bosworth-feild, a Poem, by Sir John
Beaumount Bar. Canary Birds Natural^z'd. Poems on the Death of the (...) Queen
Mary. Baucis and Philemon, etc. Circus, a Satyr: Or the Ring Hide Park. St.
James's Park, a Satyr. The Spleen, a Pindarique Ode, (...) Philips's Pastorals.
A Letter from Italy, to my Lo^^ Halifax, with other Poems. Blenheim, a Poem, by
Phillip^ Mac-Flecknoe, by J. Dryden; (...) Spencer's Ghost, by J. Oldham The
Female Reign, an Ode, Sam. Cobb. The Upstart, a Satyr. A Poem on the Taking St.
M^^^ Windsor Castle, a Poem. The Servitor, a Poem. The Pulpit War. The
Campaign, a Poem, by Addison. The Counter-Scuffle, a Poem Don Francisco
Sutorioso. Consolation to Mira mourning A Panegyric on Oliver Crom^^^^ with
three Poems on his De^^^ A Poem in Defense of the Ch^^^^ of England. The
Apparition, a Poem. The Hind and Panther Trans^^^^^ to the Story of the Cou^^^^
Mouse and City Mouse. Dr. Gath's Dispensary. Memoirs on John Hall, the F^^^^
Robber, etc. Mr Shaftoe's Narrative giving (...) Account of the Birth of the
tended Prince of Wales, etc. The True-Born Englishman. The Husband, a Poem. The
Commoner, a Poem.
ABSALOM AND ACHITOPHEL. A POEM.

-- Si Proprius stes
Te Capiet Magis --
LONDON: ^rinted and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-fryars, near the Waterside,
For the Benefit of the Poor. 1708.

TO THE READER.
IT IS not my intention to make an Apology for my Poem: Some (...) think it
needs no Excuse; and others will receive none. The (...) sign, I am sure, is
honest: but he who draws his Pen for one Party, (...) expect to make Enemies of
the other. For, Wit and Fool, are Conquences of Whig and Troy: And every man is
a Knave or an Ass (...) contrary side. There Is a Treasury of Merits in the
Phanatick Church as well as in the Papist; and a Pennyworth to be had of
Saintship, H^^sty and Poetry, for the Lewd, the Factions, and the Blockheads:
But (...) longest Chapter in Deutoromy, has not Curses enough for an Anti-
Bi^mingham. My Comfort is, their manifest Prejudice to my Cause, (...) render
their Judgment of less Authority against me. Yet if a Poem h^^ a Genius, it
will force its own reception in the World. For there is a sw^^^ness in good
Verse, which Tickles even while it Hurts: And no man (...) be heartily angry
with him, who pleases him against his will. The Commendation of Adversaries, is
the greatest Triumph of a Writer; b^^ it never comes unless Extorted. But I can
be satisfied on more easy term If I happen to please the more Moderate sort I
shall be sure of an h^^^ Party; and, in all probability, of the best Judges:
for the least C^^cern'd, are commonly the least Corrupt. And, I confess, I have
laid for those, by relating the Satyr (where Justice would allow it) from
ca^rying too sharp an Edge. They, who can Criticize so weakly, as to im^gine I
have done my worst, may be convinced, at their own Cost, that can write
Severely, with more ease, than I can Gently. I have but laugh at some men's
Follies. when I could have declaimed against their Vice and, other men's Virtues
I have commended, as freely as I have taxed the Crimes. And now, if you are a
Malicious Reader, I expect you should turn upon me, that I affect to be thought
more Impartial than I am. B^ if men are not to be judged by their Professions,
God forgive you Comm^^wealths-men, for Professing so plausible for the
Government. You ca^^ be so Unconscionable, as to charge me for not Subscribing
of my Name; ^^ that would reflect too grossly upon your own Party, who never
dare; then they have the advantage of a Jury to secure them. If you like not
Poem, the fault may, possibly, by in my Writing: (though it is hard an Author to
judge against himself;) But more probably it is in y^^^ Morals, which cannot
bear the truth of it. The Violent, on both si^^ will condemn the Character of
Absalom, as either too favorably, or ^ardly drawn. But they are not the
Violent, whom I desire to please. ^he fault, on the right hand, is to
Extenuate; Palliate and Indulge, ^d, to confess freely. I have endeavored to
commit it. Besides the res^ct which I owe his Birth, I have a greater for his
Heroic Virtues: ^d, David himself, could not be more tender of the Young man's
Life, ^an I would be of his Reputation. But, since the most excellent natures
^e almost the most easy; and, as being such. are the soonest perverted (...)
ill Counsels, especially when baited with Fame and Glory; it is no ^ore a wonder
that he withstood not the temptations of Achitophel, than was for Adam, not to
have resisted the two Devils, the Serpent and the ^oman: The Conclusion of the
Story, I purposely forbore to prosecute: ^cause, I could not obtain from my
self, to show Absalom Unfortunate. ^e Frame of it was cut out, but for a
Picture to the Waste; and, if (...) Draught be so far true, it is as much as I
designed.

Were I the Inventor, who am only the Historian, I should certainly ^nclude the
Piece, with the Reconcilement of Absalom to David. And, ^ho knows but this may
come to pass? Things were not brought to an ^xtremity where I left the Story;
There seems, yet, to be room left for a ^mposure; hereafter, there may be only
be for Pity. I have not so ^^ch as an uncharitable wish against Achitophel;
but, am content to be ^cus'd of a good natured Error; and to hope with Origin,
that the ^vil himself may, at last, be saved. For which reason, in this Poem,
(...) is neither brought to set his House in order, nor to dispose of his
Person ^^terwards, as he in Wisdom shall think fit. God is infinitely merciful:
^d his Vicegerent is only not so, because he is not Infinite.

The true end of Satyr, is the amendment of Vices by correction. And (...) who
writes Honestly, is no more an Enemy to the Offender, than the ^hysician to the
Patient, when he prescribes harsh Remedies to an inverate Disease: for those,
are only in order to prevent the Chyrurgeon's ^rk of an Ense rescindendum,
which I wish not to my very Enemies. To ^nclude all; If the Body Politic have
any Analogy to the Natural, (...) my weak judgment, an Act of Oblivion were as
necessary in a Hot, ^istemper'd State, as an Opiate would be in a Raging Fever.

THE KEY.
^avid, King Charles II. Absalom, D. Monmouth, Annabel, Duchess of Monmouth.
Achitophel, Earl of Shaftsbury, Zimri, L. Gray. Balaam, Sidney. Caleb,
Armstrong. Nadab, Ferguson. Shimei, Sheriff Bethel. Corah, Stephen College.
Bethsheba, D. Porthsmouth, or any other Concubine.
Absalom and Achitophel.
IN pious Times, ever Priestcraft did begin,
Before Polygamy was made a Sin;
When Man on many, multiplied his kind,
Ever one to one was, cursedly, confined:
When Nature prompted, and no Law denied
Promiscuous use of Concubine and Bride;
Then, Israel's Monarch, after Heavens own heart,
His vigorous warmth did variously, impart.
To Wives and Slaves: and, wide as his Command,
Scattered his Makers Image through the Land.
Michal, of Royal Blood, the Crown did wear;
A Soil ungrateful to the Tiller's care:
Not so the rest; for several Mothers bore
To God-like David, several Sons before.
But, since like Slaves his Bed they did ascend,
No true Succession could their Seed attend.
Of all the numerous Progeny was none
So Beautiful, so Brave as Absalom.
Whether, inspired by some diviner Lust,
His Father got him with a greater Gust;
Or that his conscious Destiny made way,
By manly Beauty to Imperial Sway.
Early in foreign Fields be won Renown,
With Kings and States Allied to Israel's Crown:
In Peace the thoughts of War he could remove,
And seemed as he were only born for Love.
What ever he did, was done with so much ease,
In him alone, 'twas Natural to please:
His motions all accompanied with grace:
And Paradise was opened in his Face.
With secret Joy, indulgent David viewed
His Youthful Image in his Son renewed:
To all his wishes nothing he denied;
And made the Charming Annabel his Bride.
What faults he had (for who from faults is free?)
His father could not, or he would not see*
Some warm excesses, which the Law forbore,
Were constin'd Youth that purged by boiling over:
And Amnon's Mother by a specious Name,
Was called, a just Revenge for injured Fame.
Thus praised, and loved, the noble Youth remained,
While David, undisturbed in Sion reigned.
But Life can never be sincerely blessed:
Heaven punishes the bad, and proves the best.
^he Jews, a Headstrong, Moody Murmuring race,
^s ever tried the extent and stretch of grace;
^od's pampered People whom, debauched with ease,
^o King could govern, nor no God could please;
Gods they had tried of every shape and size,
that God-smiths could produce, or Priests devise:)
^hese Adam-wits, too fortunately free,
^gan to dream they wanted Liberty,
and when no rule, no president was found,
^f men, by Laws less circumscribed and bound;
They led their wild desires to Woods and Caves;
And thought that all but Savages were Slaves.
They who, when Saul was dead, without a blow,
^ade foolish Ishbosheth the Crown forego;
^ho banished David did from Hebron bring,
^d, with a General shout, proclaimed him King:
those very Jews, who, at their very best,
their Humor more than Loyalty expressed,
^ow, wondered why, so long, they had obeyed
and Idol-Monarch which their hands had made:
^hought they might ruin him they could create;
(...) melt him to that Golden Calf, a State.
^t these were random bolts: No formed Design,
^or Interest made the Factious Crou'd to join:
^he sober part of Israel, free from stain,
^ell knew the value of a peaceful Reign;
and, looking backward with a wise affright,
(...) seams of wounds, dishonest to the sight:
(...) contemplation of whose ugly Scars,
^hey cursed the memory of Civil Wars.
^he moderate sort of Men, thus qualified,
^clin'd the Balance to the better side:
and, David's mildness managed it so well*
^e bad found no occasion to Rebel.
^t, when to Sin our byast Nature leans,
^e careful Devil is still at hand with means;
^d providently Pimps for ill desires;
^e Good Old Cause revived, a Plot requires.
^ots, true or false, are necessary things*
(...) raise up Commonwealths, and ruin Kings.
The Inhabitants of Old Jerusalem
^ere Jebusites: the Town so called from them;
^d their's the Native right --
^t when the chosen People grew more strong,
^e rightful Cause at lenght became the wrong:
^d every loss the men of Jebus bore,
^ey still were tought God's Enemies the more.
^us, worn and weakened, well or ill content,
^mit they must to David's Government:
Impoverisht and deprived of all Command,
Their Taxes doubled as they lost their Land;
And, what was harder yet to flesh and blood,
Their Gods disgraced, and burnt like common Wood.
This set the Heathen Priesthood in a flame;
For Priests of all Religions are the same:
Of whatso'er descent their Godhead be,
Stock, Stone, or other homely Pedigree,
In his Defense his Servants are as bold,
As if he had been born of beaten Gold.
The Jewish Rabbis, though their Enemies,
In this conclude them honest men and wise:
For 'twas their Duty, all the Learned think,
T'espouse his Cause by whom they eat and drink.
From hence began that Plot, the Nation's Curse,
Bad in it self, but represented worse.
Raised in extremes, and in extremes decry'd;
With Oaths affirmed, with dying Vows denied.
Not weighed, or winnow'd by the Multitude;
But swallowed in the Mass, unchew'd and crude.
Some truth there was, but dashed and brewed with Lies,
To please the Fools, and puzzle all the Wise.
Succeeding Times did equal Folly call,
Believing nothing, or believing all.
The Egyptian Rites the Jebusites embraced;
Where Gods were recommended by their Taste.
Such sav'ry Deities must needs be good,
As served at once for Worship and for Food.
By force they could not introduce these Gods;
For Ten to One, in former days was odds.
So Fraud was used, (the Sacrificer's Trade,)
Fools are more hard to conquer than persuade.
Their busy Teachers mingled with the Jews;
And raked for Converts, even the Court and Stews,
Which Hebrew Priests the more unkindly took,
Because the Fleece accompanies the Flock.
Some thought they God's Anointed meant to slay
By Guns, invented since full many a day:
Our Author swears it not; but who can know
How far the Devil and Jebusites may go?
This Plot, which failed for want of common Sense,
Had yet a deep and dangerous Consequence:
For as when raging Fevers boil the Blood,
The standing Lakes soon floats into a Flood;
And every hostile Humor; which before
Slept quiet in its Channels, bubbles over:
So, several factions from this first Ferment,
Work up to Foam, and threat the Government.
^ome by their Friends, more by themselves thought wise,
^ppos'd the Power, to which they could not rise.
^ome had in Courts been great, and thrown from thence,
^ike Fiends, were hardened in Impenitence.
^ome, by their Monarch's fatal mercy grown
from pardoned Rebels, Kinsmen to the Throne;
^ere raised in Power and public Office high:
^rong Bands, if Bands ungrateful men could tie.
^f these the false Achitophel was first:
(...) Name to all succeeding Ages cursed.
^or close Designs, and crooked Counsels fit;
^igacious, Bold, and Turbulent of Wit:
^estless, unfixt in Principles and Place;
(...) Power unpleas'd, impatient of Disgrace.
(...) fiery Soul, which working out its way,
^retted the Pigmy-Body to decay;
and over informed the Tenement of Clay.
(...) daring Pilot in Extremity;
^eas'd with the Danger, when the Waves went high
^e sought the Storm: but for a Calm unfit,
^ould steer too nigh the Sands, to boast his wit.
^reat Wits are sure to Madness near allied;
and thin Partitions do their Bounds divide;
^se, why should he, with Wealth and Honor blessed,
^efuse his Age the needful hours of Rest?
^unish a Body which he could not please;
^ankrupt of Life, yet Prodigal of ease?
and all to leave, what with his Toil he won,
^o that unfeather'd, too legged thing, a Son:
^ot, while his Soul did huddl'd Notions try;
and born a shapeless Lump, like Anarchy.
(...) Fr'endship false, implacable in Hate:
^esolv'd to Ruin or to Rule the State.
^o compass this, the Triple Bond he broke;
The Pillars of the Public Safety shook:
and fitted Israel for a Foreign Yoke.
^hen seized with Fear, yet still affecting Fame,
^surp'd a Patriot's All-attoning Name.
^o easy still it proves in Factious Times,
^ith public Zeal to cancel private Crimes:
^ow safe is Treason, and how sacred Ill,
Where none can sin against the Peoples Will?
Where Crowds can wink; and no offense be known,
^nce in another's guilt they find their own.
^et, Fame deserved, no Enemy can grudge;
The Statesman we abhor, but praise the Judge.
(...) Israel's Courts never sat an Abbethdin
With more discerning Eyes, or Hands more clean;
Unbrib'd, unsought, the Wretched to redress;
Swift of Dispatch, and easy of Access.
Oh, had he been content to serve the Crown,
With Virtues only proper to the Gown;
Or, had the rankness of the Soil been freed
From Cockle, that oppressed the Noble Seed:
David, for him his tuneful Harp had strung,
And Heaven had wanted one Immortal Song.
But wild Ambition loves to slide, not stand;
And Fortunes Ice prefers to Virtues Land:
Achitophel, grown weary to possess
A lawful Fame, and lazy Happiness;
Disdained the golden Fruit to gather free,
And lent the Crowd his Arm to shake the Tree.
Now, manifest of Crimes, contrived long since,
He stood at bold Defiance with his Prince:
Held up the Buckler of the Peoples Cause,
Against the Crown; and sculk'd behind the Laws.
The wished occasion of the Plot he takes;
Some Circumstances finds, but more he makes.
By buzzing Emissaries, fills the ears
Of listening Crowds, with Jealousies and Fears
Of Arbitrary Counsels brought to light,
And proves the King himself a Jebusite.
Weak Arguments! which yet he knew full well,
Were strong with People easy to Rebel.
For, governed by the Moon, the giddy Jews
Tread the same Track when she the Prime renews:
And once in twenty years, their Scribes Record,
By natural Instinct they change their Lord.
Achitophel still wants a Chief, and none
Was found so fit as Warlike Absalom:
Not, that he wished his Greatness to create,
(For Politicians neither love nor hate:)
But, for he knew, his Title not allowed,
Would keep him still depending on the Crowd:
That Kingly power, thus ebbing out, might be
Drawn to the Dregs of a Democracy.
Him he attempts, with studied Arts to please,
And sheds his Venom, in such words as these.
Auspicious Prince, at whose Nativity
Some Royal Planet ruled the Southern Sky;
Thy longing Countries Darling and Desire;
Their cloudy Pillar, and their guardian Fire:
Their second Moses, whose extended Wand
Divides the Seas, and shows the promised Land:
Whose dawning Day, in every distant Age,
His exercised the Sacred Prophet's rage:
The Peopl's Prayer, the glad Diviner's Theme,
^he Young men's Vision, and the Old men's Dream!
^hee, Savior, Thee, the Nations Vows confess;
and, never satisfied with seeing, bless:
^wift, unbespoken Pomps, thy steps proclaim,
and stammering Babes are taught to lisp thy Name.
^ow long will thou the general Joy detain;
^arve, and defraud the People of thy Reign?
^ontent ingloriously to pass thy days
^ke one of Virtue's Fools that feeds on Praise;
^ll thy fresh Glories, which now shine so bright,
^row Stale and Tarnish with our daily sight.
^elieve me, Royal Youth, thy Fruit must be,
(...) gathered Ripe, or rot upon the Tree.
^eav'n has to all allotted, soon or late,
^me lucky Revolution of their Fate:
those Motions, if we watch and guide with Skill,
For humane Good depends on humane Will,)
^ur Fortune rolls as from a smooth Descent,
and, from the first Impression, takes the Bent:
^t, if unseiz'd, she glides away like wind;
and leaves repenting Folly far behind.
^ow, now she meets you with a glorious prize,
^d spreads her Locks before her as she flies.
^d thus Old David, from whose Loins you Spring,
^t dared, when Fortune called him, to be King,
(...) Gath an Exile he might still remain;
^d Heavens Anointing Oil had been in vain.
^t his succesful Youth your hopes engage;
^t shun the example of Declining Age:
^hold him setting in his Western Skies,
^e shadows lengthning as the Vapors rise.
(...) is not now, as when on Jordan's Sand
^e joyful People thronged to see him Land,
^'ring the Beech, and blackning all the Strand:
^t, like the Prince of Angels from his height,
^omes tumbling downward with diminished light:
^tray'd by one poor Plot to public Scorn:
Our only blessing since his cursed Return:)
those heaps of People which one Sheaf did bind,
^own off, and scattered by a puff of Wind.
that strength can he to your Designs oppose,
^ked of Friends, and round beset with Foes?
Pharaoh's doubtful Succor he should use,
Foreign Aid would more incense the Jews:
^oud Egypt would dissembled Friendship bring;
^ment the War, but not support the King:
Nor would the Royal Party ever unite
With Pharaoh's Arms, t'assist the Jebusite;
Or if they should, their Interest soon would break.
And, with such odious Aid, make David week.
All sorts of men, by my successful Arts,
Abhorring Kings, estrange their altered Hearts
From David's Rule: And it is their general Cry,
Religion, Commonwealth, and Liberty.
If you, as Champion of the Public Good,
Add to their Arms a Chief of Royal Blood;
What may not Israel hope, and what Applause
Might such a General gain by such a Cause?
Not barren Praise alone, that Gaudy Flower,
Fair only to the sight, but solid Power:
And Nobler is a limited Command,
Given by the Love of all your Native Land,
Than a successive Title, Long and Dark,
Drawn from the Moldy Rolls of Noah's Ark.
What cannot Praise effect in Mighty Minds,
When Flattery Sooths, and when Ambition Blinds!
Desire of Power, on Earth a Vicious Weed,
Yet, sprung from High, is of Celestial Seed:
In God it is Glory: And when Men Aspire,
It Is but a Spark too much of Heavenly Fire.
The Ambitious Youth, too Covetous of Fame,
Too full of Angels Metal in his Frame;
Unwarily was led from Virtues ways;
Made Drunk with Honor, and debauched with Praise.
Half loath, and half consenting to the Ill,
(For Royal Blood within him struggled still)
He thus reply'ed. -- And what Pretense have I
To take up Arms for Public Liberty?
My Father Governs with unquestioned Right:
The Faith's Defender, and Mankind's Delight:
Good, Gracious, Just, Observant of the Laws;
And Heaven by Wonders has espoused his Cause.
Whom has he wronged in all his Peaceful Reign?
Who sues for Justice to his Throne in vain?
What Millions has he pardoned of his Foes,
Whom Just Revenge did to his Wrath expose?
Mild, Easy, Humble, Studious of our Good;
Inclined to Mercy, and averse from Blood.
If Mildness ill with Stubborn Israel Suit,
His Crime is God's beloved Attribute.
What could he gain, his People to Betray,
Or change his Right, for Arbitrary Sway?
Let haughty Pharaoh Curse with such a Reign,
His Fruitful Nile, and Yoke a Servile Train.
David's Rule Jerusalem Displease,
^e Dog Star heats their Brains to this Disease.
^hy then should I, encouraging the Bad,
^rn Rebel, and run Popularly Made?
^ere he a Tyrant who, by Lauless Might,
^pprest the Jews, and rais^d the Jesubite,
^ell might I mourn; but Natures holy Bands
^u'd Curb my Spirits, and restrain my Hands:
^he People might assert their Liberty;
^t what was Right in them, were Crime in me.
^s Favor leaves me nothing to require;
^events my Wishes, and out-runs Desire;
that more can I expect while David Lives?
^l but his Kingly Diadem he gives*
and that: But there he paused; then Sighing, said,
Justly destin^d for a Worthier Head.
^r when my Father from his Toyls shall Rest,
and late Augment the Number of the Blessed:
^is Lawful Issue shall the Throne ascend;
(...) the Collat'ral Line where that shall end.
^is Brother, though Oppressed with Vulgar Spite,
^et Dauntless and Secure of Native Right,
^f every Royal Virtue stands possessed;
^ill dear to all the Bravest, and the Best.
^is Courage Foes, his Friends his Truth Proclaim,
^is Loyalty the King, the World his Fame.
^s Mercy even the Offending Crowd will find;
^or sure he comes of a Forgiving Kind.
^hy should I then Repine at Heavens Decree;
which gives me no pretense to Royalty?
^et oh that Fate, Propitiously Inclined,
^ad raised my Birth, or had debased my Mind,
^o my large Soul, not all her Treasure lent,
and then betrayed it to a mean Descent.
^ find, I find my mounting Spirits Bold,
and David's Part disdains my Mothers Mold.
Why am I scanted by a Niggard Birth?
^y Soul disclaims the Kindred of her Earth;
and, made for Empire, Whispers me within;
^esire of Greatness is a God like Sin.
Him Staggering so when Hells dire Agent found,
While fainting Virtue scarce maintained her Ground,
^e pours fresh Forces in, and thus Replies:
^h' Eternal God, Supremely Good and Wise,
^parts not these Prodigious Gifts in vain;
that Wonders are Reserved to bless your Reign?
against your will your Arguments have shown,
^ch Virtue's only given to guide a Throne.
Not that your Father's Mildness I contemn;
But manly Force becomes the Diadem.
It Is true he grants the People all they crave;
And more perhaps than Subjects ought to have:
For lavish grants suppose a Monarch tame,
And more his Goodness than his Wit proclaim.
But when should People strive their Bonds to break,
If not when Kings are Negligent or Weak?
Let him give on till he can give no more,
The Thrifty Sanhedrin shall keep him poor:
And every Sheckle which he can receive,
Shall cost a Limb of his Prerogative.
To ply him with new Plots, shall be my care;
Or plunge him deep in some Expensive War;
Which when his Treasure can no more supply,
He must, with the Remains of Kingship, buy:
His faithful Friends, our Jealousies and Fears,
Call Jebusites; and Pharaoh's Pensioners:
Whom, when our Fury from his Aid has torn,
He shall be naked left to public Scorn.
The next Successor, whom I fear and hate,
My Arts have made obnoxious to the State;
Turned all his Virtues to his Overthrow,
And gained our Elders to pronunce a Foe.
His Right, for Sums of necessary Gold,
Shall first be Pawned, and afterward be Sold:
Till time shall Ever-wanting David draw*
To pass your doubtful Title into Law:
If not the People have a Right Supreme
To make their Kings; for Kings are made for them.
All Empire is no more than Power in Trust:
Which when resumed, can be no longer Just.
Succession, for the general Good designed,
In its own wrong a Nation cannot bind:
If altering that, the People can relieve,
Better one suffer than a Nation grieve.
The Jews well knew their power* ever Saul they chose,
God was their King, and God they durst Depose.
Urge now your Piety, your Filial Name,
A Father's Right, and Fear of future Fame.
The Public Good, that Universal Call,
To which even Heaven submitted, answers all.
Nor let his Love Enchont your generous Mind;
It Is Nature's trick to propagate her Kind.
Our fond Begetters, who would never die,
Love but themselves in their Posterity.
Or let his Kindness by the Effects be tried,
Or let him lay his vain Pretense aside*
^d said he loved your Father; could he bring
better Proof, than to Anoint him King?
^surely showed he loved the Shepherd well,
^ho gave so fair a Flock as Israel.
^ould David have you thought his Darling Son?
that means he then, to Alienate the Crown?
^e name of Godly he may blush to bear:
^s after God's own heart to Cheat his Heir.
^ to his Brother gives Supreme Command;
^ you a Legacy of Barren Land.
^haps the old Harp on which he thrums his Lays;
^ some dull Hebrew Ballad in your Praise.
^en the next Heir, a Prince, Severe and Wise,
^ready looks on you with Jealous Eyes;
^es through the thin Disguises of your Arts,
^d marks the Progress in the Peoples Hearts.
^ough now his mighty Soul its Grief contains;
^ meditates Revenge who least complains.
^d like a Lion, Slumbring in the way,
^ Sleep dissembling, while he waits his Prey,
^s fearless Foes within his Distance draws;
^nstrains his Roaring, and contracts his Paws:
^ll at the last, his time for Fury found,
^ shoots with sudden Vengeance from the Ground:
^e Prostrate Vulgar, passes over, and Spares,
^it with a Lordly Rage, his Hunters tears.
^our Case no tame Expedients will afford:
^solve on Death, or Conquest by the Sword,
which for no less a Stake than L^fe, you Draw;
^d Self-defence is Nature's Eldest Law.
^ave the warm People no Considering time:
(...) then Rebellion may be thought a Crime.
^evail your self of what Occasion gives,
^t try your Title while your Father lives:
and, that your Arms may have a fair Pretense,
^oclaim, you take them in the King's Defense:
those Sacred Life each minute would Expose,
^ Plots, from seeming Friends, and secret Foes.
^d who can sound the depth of David's Soul?
^rhaps his fear, his kindness may Control.
^ fears his Brother, though he loves his Son,
^r plighted Vows too late to be undone.
^so, by Force he wishes to be gained:
^ke Women's Leachery, to seem Constrained:
^ubt not: but, when he most affects the Frown.
^mmit a pleasing Rape upon the Crown.
^cure his Person to secure your Cause;
^ey who possess the Prince, possess the Laws.
He said, And this Advice above the rest,
With Absalom's Mild Nature suited best;
Unblam'd of Life, (Ambition set aside)
Not stained with Cruelty, nor post with Pride.
How happy had he been, if Destiny
Had higher placed his Birth, or not so high!
His Kingly Virtues might have claimed a Throne;
And blessed all other Countries but his own.
But charming Greatness, since so few refuse;
It Is Juster to Lament him, than Accuse.
Strong were his hopes a Rival to remove,
With Blandishments to gain the public Love;
To head the Faction while their Zeal was hot,
And Popularly prosecute the Plot.
To further this Achitophel Unites
The Malcontents of all the Israelites:
Whose differing Parties he could wisely Join,
For several Ends, to serve the same Design.
The Best, and of the Princes some were such,
Who thought the power of Monarchy too much:
Mistaken Men, and Patriots in their Hearts;
Not Wicked, but seduced by Impious Arts.
By these the Springs of Property were bent,
And wound so high, they Cracked the Government.
The next for Interest sought to embroil the State,
To sell their Duty at a dearer rate;
And make their Jewish Markets of the Throne;
Pretending Public Good, to serve their own.
Others thought Kings and useless heavy Load,
Who cost too much, and did too little Good.
These were for laying Honest David by,
On Principles of pure good Husbandry.
With them joined all the Haranguers of the Throng,
That thought to get Preferment by the Tongue.
Who follow next, a double danger bring,
Not only hating David, but the King;
The Solymaean Rout; well Versed of old,
In Godly Faction, and in Treason bold;
Cowring and Quaking at a Conqu'ror's Sword,
But Lofty to a Lawful Prince Restored;
Saw with Disdain an Ethnic Plot begun,
And Scorned by Jebusites to be Outdone.
Hot Levites Headed these; who pulled before
From the Ark, which in the Judges days they bore,
Resumed their Cant, and with a Zealous Cry,
Pursued their old beloved Theocracy.
Where Sanhedrin and Priest enslaved the Nation,
And justified their Spoils by Inspiration:
For who so fit for Reign as Aaron's Race.
If once Dominion they could found in Grace?
These led the Pack; though not of surest scent,
Yet deepest mouthed against the Government.
A numerous Host of dreaming Saints succeed;
Of the true old Enthusiastic Breed:
Against Form and Order they their Power employ:
Nothing to Build, and all things to Destroy.
But far more numerous was the Herd of such,
Who think too little, and who talk too much.
These out of more instinct, they knew not why,
Adored their Father's God, and Property:
And, by the same blind Benefit of Fate,
The Devil and the Jebusite did hate:
Born to be saved, even in their own despite;
Because they could not help believing right.
Such were the Tools; but a whole Hydra more
Remains, of sprouting heads too long to score.
Some of their Chiefs were Princes of the Land:
In the first Rank of these did Zimri stand:
A man so various, that he seemed to be
Not one, but all Mankinds Epitome.
Stiff in Opinions, always in the wrong;
Was every thing by starts, and Nothihg long;
But, in the course of one revolving Moon,
Was Chemist, Fiddler, Statesman and Buffoon:
Then all for Women, Painting, Rhiming, Drinking:
Besides ten thousand Freaks that died in thinking.
Blessed Madman, who could every hour employ,
With something New to wish, or to enjoy!
Railing and praising were his usual Themes;
And both (to show his Judgment) in Extremes:
^o over Violent, or over Civil,
That every Man, with him, was God or Devil.
In squandering Wealth was his peculiar Art:
Nothing went unrewarded, but Desert.
^eggar'd by Fools, whom still he found too late:
^le had his Jest, and they had his Estate.
^e laughed himself from Court; then sought Relief;
^y forming Parties, but coul'd never be Chief:
^or spite of him, the weight or Business fell
On Absalom, and wise Achitophel:
Thus, wicked but in Will, of Means bereft,
^e left not Faction, but of That was left.
^ Titles and Names 'twere tedious to rehearse
Of Lords, below the dignity of Verse.
^its, Warriors, Commonwealths men, were the best:
and Husbands, and mere Nobles all the rest.
And therefore, in the name of Dullness, be
The well hung Balaam and cold Caleb free.
And Canting Nadab let Oblivion damn,
Who made new Porridge for the Paschal Lamb*
Let Friendships holy Band some Names assure:
Some their own Worth, and some let Scorn secure.
Nor shall the Rascal Rabble here have Place,
Whom Kings no Titles gave, and God no Grace:
Not Bull-fac'd Jonas, we could Statutes draw
To mean Rebellion, and make Treason Law.
But he, though bad, is followed by a worse,
The Wretch, whose Heavens Anointed dared to Curse,
Shimei, whose Youth did early Promise bring
Of Zeal to God, and Hatred to his King;
Did wisely from Expensive Sins refrain,
And never broke the Sabbath, but for Gain:
Nor ever was he known an Oath to vent,
Or Curse, unless against the Government.
Thus, heaping Wealth, by the most ready way
Among the Jews, which was to Cheat and Pray;
The City, to reward his pious Hate
Against his Master, chose him Magistrate:
His Hand a Vare of Justice did uphold;
His Neck was loaded with a Chain of Gold.
During his Office, Treason was no Crime.
The Sons of Belial had a Glorious Time:
For Shimei, though not prodigal of Pelf,
Yet loved his wicked Neighbor as himself:
When two or three were gathered to Declaim
Against the Monarch of Jerusalem,
Shimei was always in the midst of them.
And, if they Cursed the King when he was by,
Would rather Curse, than break good Company.
If any durst his Factious Friends accuse,
He pact a Jury of dissenting Jews:
Whose fellow-feeling in the godly Cause,
Would free the suffering Saint from Humane Laws.
For Laws are only made to punish those
Who serve the King, and to protect his Foes.
If any leisure time he had from Power,
(Because it is Sin to mis-employ an hour:)
His Business was, by Writing to persuade,
That Kings were Useless, and a Clog to Trade:
And, that his noble Style he might refine,
No Rechabite more shunned the fumes of Wine.
Chaste were his Cellars; and his Shrieval Board
The Grossness of a City Feast abhorred:
(...) Cooks, with long difuse, their Trade forgot;
^ol was his Kitchen, though his Brains were hot.
^ch frugal Virtue Malice may accuse;
^t sure 'twas necessary to the Jew:
^ Towns once burnt, such Magistrates require
^ dare not tempt God's Providence by Fire.
^ith Spiritual Food he fed his Servants well,
^t free from Flesh, that made the Jews rebel:
^d Moses's Laws he held in more account,
^r forty days of fasting in the Mount.
^ speak the rest, who better are forgot,
^ould tire a well breathed Witness of the Plot:
^t, Corah, thou shall from Oblivion pass;
^ect thy self thou Monumental Brass:
^gh as the Serpent of thy Metal made,
^hile Nations stand secure beneath thy shade.
That though his birth were base, yet Comets rise
^om Earthly Vapors e're they shine in Skies.
^odigious Actions may as well be done
^ Weaver's Issue, as by Prince's Son.
^is Arch-Attestor for the Public Good,
^ that one Deed Enobles all his Blood.
^ho ever asked the Witnesses high Race,
those Oath with Martyrdom did Stephen grace?
^urs was a Levite, and as times went then,
^s Tribe were God Almighty's Gentlemen.
^k were his Eyes, his Voice was harsh and loud,
^e signs he neither Choleric was, nor Proud:
^is long Chin proved his Wit; his Saint-like Grace
^ Church Vermillion, and a Moses's Face.
^s Memory miraculously great;
^ou'd Plots, exceeding Man's belief, repeat*
which therefore cannot be accounted Lies,
^or Human Wit could never such devise.
^ome future Truths are mingled in his Book;
^t where the Witness failed, the Prophet spoke:
^ome things like Visionary flights appear;
^he spirit caught him up the Lord knows where:
and gave him his Rabinical Degree,
Unknown to Foreign University.
(...) Judgment yet his Memory did excel;
Which piec'd his wondrous Evidence so well:
and suited to the temper of the Times;
Then groaning under Jebusitick Crimes.
Let Israel's Foes suspect his Heavenly call,
and rashly Judge his Writ Apocryphal:
^r Laws for such affronts have Forfeits made:
^e takes his Life, who takes away his Trade.
Were I my self in Witness Corah's place,
The Wretch who did me such a dire disgrace*
Should whet my memory, though once forgot,
To make him an Appendix of my Plot.
His Zeal to Heaven, made him his Prince despise*
And load his Person with indignities:
But Zeal peculiar privilege affords;
Indulging latitude to Deeds and Words.
And Corah might for Agag's Murder call:
In terms as course as Samuel used to Saul.
What others in his Evidence did join,
(The best that could be had for love or coin,)
In Corah's own predicament will fall:
For Witness is a Common Name to all.
Surrounded thus with Friends of every sort,
Deluded Absalom, forsakes the Court:
Impatient of high hopes, urged with Renown,
And Fired with near Possession of a Crown:
The admiring Crowd are dazzled with surprise,
And on his Goodly Person feed their Eyes:
His joy concealed, he sets himself to show;
On each side bowing popularly low:
His looks, his gestures, and his words he frames,
And with familiar case repeats their Names.
Thus formed by Nature, furnished out with Arts,
He glides unfelt into their secret hearts.
Then, with a kind compassionating look,
And sighs, bespeaking pity ever he spoke,
Few words he said; but easy those and fit,
More slow than Hybla-drops, and far more sweet.
I mourn, my Countrymen, your lost Estate;
Though far unable to prevent your Fate:
Beholt a banished Man, for your dear Cause
Exposed a Prey to Arbitrary Laws!
Yet oh! that I alone could be undone,
Cut off from Empire, and no mare a Son!
Now all your Liberties a Spoil are made;
Egypt and Tyrus intercept your Trade,
And Jebusites your Sacred Rites invade.
My Father, whom with Reverence yet I name,
Charmed into ease, is careless of his Fame:
And bribed with petty sums of Foreign Gold,
Is grown in Bathsheba's Embraces old:
Exalts his Enemies, his Friends destroys:
And all his power against himself employs.
He gives, and let him give my Right away:
But why should he his own, and yours betray?
He only, he can make the Nation bleed,
And he alone from my Revenge is freed.
Take then my Tears (with that he wiped his Eyes)
It Is all the Aid my present power supplies:
No Court-Informer can these Arms Accuse;
These Arms may Sons against their Fathers use;
And it is my wish the next Successor's Reign
May make no other Israelite complain.
Youth, Beauty, Graceful Action, seldom fail:
But Common Interest always will prevail:
And Pity never ceases to be shown,
To him, who makes the Peoples wrongs his own.
The Crowd, (that still believe their Kings oppress,)
With lifted hands their young Messiah bless:
Who now begins his progress to ordain;
With Chariots, Horsemen, and a numerous Train:
From East to West his Glories he displays:
And, like the Sun, the Promised Land surveys*
^ame runs before him, as the Morning Star;
And shouts of Joy salute him from afar:
^ach house receives him as a Guardian God;
And Consecrates the Place of his abode:
But hospitable Treats did most commend
Wise Issachar, his wealthy Western Friend.
This moving Court, that caught the Peoples Eyes,
And seemed but Pomp, did other Ends disguise:
Achitophel had formed it, with intent
To sound the dephts, and fathom where it went,
The Peoples hearts; distinguish Friends from Foes;
And try their strength, before they came to Blows.
Yet all was colored with a smooth pretense
Of specious Love, and Duty to their Prince.
Religion, and Redress of Grievences,
Two names, that always cheat, and always pleases,
Are often urged; and good King David's life
Endangered by a Brother and a Wife.
Thus in a Pageant Show; a Plot is made;
And Peace it self is War in Mesquerade.
Oh foolish Israel! never warned by ill!
^ill the same bait, and circumvented still!
^d ever men forsake their present ease,
^o midst of Health imagine a Disease;
^ake pains Contingent mischiefs to foresee,
Take heirs for Monarchs, and for God decree?
What shall we think! Can People give away,
^uch for themselves and Sons, their native Sway?
^hen they are left defenseless to the Sword
^f each unbounded arbitrary Lord:
And Laws are vain, by which we Right enjoy,
If Kings unquestioned can those Laws destroy.
Yet if the Crowd be judge of fit and Just,
And Kings are only Officers in Trust,
Then this resuming Covenant was declared
When Kings were made, or is for ever barred:
If those who gave the Scepter could not tie
By their own deed their own Posterity,
How then could Adam bind his future Race?
How could his forfeit on Mankind take place?
Or how could Heavenly Justice damn us all,
Who never consented to our Father's Fall?
Then Kings are slaves to those whom they command,
And Tenants to their Peoples pleasure stand.
Add, that the Power for Property allowed,
Is mischievously seated in the Crowd:
For who can be secure of private Right,
If Sovereign Sway may be dissolved by Might?
Nor is the Peoples Judgment always true:
The most may err, as grossly as the Few.
And faultless Kings run down, by Common Cry,
For Vice, Oppression, and for Tyranny.
What Standard is there in a fickle Rout,
Which flowing to the Mark, runs faster out?
Nor only Crowds, but Sanhedrins may be
Infected with this Public Lunacy:
And Share the madness of Rebellious Times,
To Murder Monarch's for Imagined Crimes.
If they may give and take whenever they please,
Not Kings alone, (the God head Images,)
But Government it self at length must fall
To Nature's State, where all have Right to all.
Yet, grant our Lords the People Kings can make,
What prudent men a settled Throne would shake?
For whatsoever their sufferings were before,
That Change they Covet makes them suffer more.
All 'others Errors but disturb a State;
But Innovation is the Blow of Fate.
If ancient Fabrics nod, and threat to fall,
To patch the Flaws, and Buttress of the Wall,
Thus far it is Duty; but here fix the Mark;
For all beyond it is to touch our Ark.
To change Foundations, cast the Frame anew,
Is work for Rebels who base ends pursue:
At once Divine and Humane Laws control;
And mend the Parts by ruin of the Whole.
The tamp'ring World is subject to this Curse,
To Physic their Disease into a Worse.
Now what Relief can Righteous David bring?
^ow Fatal it is to be too good a King!
^iends he has few, so high the madness grows;
^ho dare be such, must be the Peoples Foes:
^et some there were, even in the worst of days;
^me let me Name, and Naming is to Praise.
In this short File Barzillai first appears;
^rzillai crowned with Honor and with Years;
^ong since, the rising Rebels he withstood
(...) regions Waste beyond the Jordan's Flood:
^nfortunately Brave to buoy the State;
^t sinking underneath his Master's Fate:
Exile with his God-like Prince he mourned:
^r him he Suffered, and with him Returned.
^e Court he practiced, not the Courtier's Art:
^rge was his Wealth, but larger was his Heart:
which, well the Noblest Objects knew to choose,
^he Fighting Warrior, and Recording Muse.
^s Bed could once a fruitful Issue boast;
^ow more than half a Father's Name is lost.
^s Eldest Hope, with every Grace adorned,
(...) me (so Heaven will have it) always Mourned,
^d always honored, snatched in Manhoods prime
(...) unequal Fates, and Providence Crime:
^et not before the Goal of Honor own
^l Parts fulfilled of Subject and of Son;
^ift was the Race, but short the Time to run.
(...) Narrow Circle, but of Power Divine,
^anted in Space, but perfect in thy Line!
(...) Sea, by Land, thy matchless Worth was known;
^ms thy Delight, and War was all thy Own:
^hy force, infused, the fainting Tyrians prop'd:
and haughty Pharaoh found his Fortune stopped.
(...) Ancient Honor, Oh unconquered Hand,
whom Foes unpunished never could withstand!
^t Israel was unworthy of his Name:
^ort is the date of all Immoderate Fame*
(...) looks as Heaven our Ruin had designed,
and durst not trust thy Fortune and thy Mind,
^ow free from Earth, thy disencumbred Soul
^ounts up, and leaves behind the Clouds and Starry Pole:
^om thence thy kindred Legions may thou bring,
(...) aid the Guardian Angel of thy King.
^ere stop, my Muse, here cease thy painful flight;
(...) Pinions can pursue Immortal height:
^ll good Barzillai thou can sing no more,
^d tell thy Soul he should have fled before;
Or fled she with his Life, and left this Verse
To hang on her departed Patron's Hearse?
Now take thy steepy flight from Heaven, and see
If thou can find on Earth another He;
Another He would be too hard to fin^,
See then whom thou can see not far behind
Zadoc the Priest, whom shunning, Power and Place,
His lowly mind advanced to David's Grace:
With him the Sagan of Jerusalem,
Of hospitable Soul, and noble S^em;
Him of the western dome, whose weighty sense
Flow in fit words and heavenly eloquence.
The Prophets Sons by such Example led,
To Learning and to Loyalty were bred:
For Colleges on bounteous Kings depend,
And never Rebel was o Arts a Friend.
To these succeed the Pillars of the Laws:
Who best could plead, and best can judge a Cause.
Next them a train of Loyal Peers ascend,
Sharp judging Adriel, the Muses Friend.
Himself a Muse: -- In Sanhedrins debate
True to his Prince; but not a Slave of State.
Whom David's Love with Honor did adorn,
That from his disobedient Son were torn.
Jotham of piercing Wit, and pregnant Thought.
Endu'd by Nature and by Learning taught
To move Assemblies, who but only tried
The worse awhile, then chose the better side:
Nor chose alone, but turned the Balance too;
So much the weight of one Brave man can do.
Hushai the Friend of David in distress,
In public storms of manly stedfastness;
By Foreign Treaties he informed his Youth;
And joined Experience to his Native Truth.
His frugal care supplied the wanting Throne
Frugal for that, but bounteous of his own:
It Is easy Conduct when Exchequers flow:
But have the task to manage well the low?
For Sovereign Power is too deprest or high,
When Kings are forced to sell, or Crowds to buy*
Indulge one labor more, my weary Muse?
For Amiel; who can Amiel's praise refuse
Of ancient Race by birth, but nobler yet
In his own worth, and without Title Great:
The Sanhedrin in long time as Chief he ruled,
Their Reason guided, and their passion cooled:
So dextrous was he in the Crown's defense,
So formed to speak a Loyal Nation's Sense,
That as their Band was Israel's Tribessman
So fit was he to represent them all.
Now rasher Charioteers the Seat ascend,
Whose loose Careirs his steady Skill commend
They, like the unequal Ruler of the Day*
Mssguide the Seasons, and mistake the Way
While he withdrawn at their made Labo^ smile
And safe enjoys the Sabbath of his Toil
These were the chief; a small but faithful Band
Of Worthies, in the Breach who dared to stand
And tempt the united Fury of the Land.
With grief they viewed such powerful ^g^nes b^
To batter down the Lawful Governme^
A numerous Faction with pretended ^rig^
In Sanhedrins to plume the Regal Righ^
The true Successor from the Court remov^
The P^ot, by hireling Witnesses, improv^
These Ills they saw, and as their Duty B^
They showed the King the danger of (...) Wo^
That no Concessions from the The would ple^
But Lenitives fomented the Disease:
That Absalom, ambitious of the Crown
Was made the Lure ^o draw the P^ d^
That false Achitophel's pernicious Hate,
Had turned the Plot to ruin Church (...) St^
The Council violent, the Rabble worse:
That Shimei taught Jerusalem to Curse.
With all these loads of Injuries op^
And long revolving in his careful Brea^
The event of things; at last, his Pati^ t^
Thus, from his Royal Throne, by He^ ins^
The God-like David spoke; with awful (...)
His Train their Maker in their Master h^
Thus long have I by Native Mercy sway
My wrongs dissembled, my Revenge (...) say
So willing to forgive the Offending Age
So much the Father did the King Asswa^
But now so far my Clemency they sligh^
The Offenders question my Forgiv^ Rig^
That one was made for many, they conte^
But it is to Rule, for that is a Monarch's E^
They call my tenderness of Blood, my Fe^
Though manly Tempers can the Long be^
^et, since they will divert my Native course,
It Is time to show I am not good by Force.
those heaped Affronts that haughty Subjects bring,
^re Burdens for a Camel, not a King:
^ings are the public Pillars of the State,
^orn to sustain and prop the Nation's weight:
(...) my young Samson will pretend a Call
^o shake the Column, let him share the Fall:
^ut, oh, that yet he would repent and live!
^ow easy it is for Parents to forgive!
With how few Tears a Pardon might be won
^om Nature, pleading for a Darling Son!
^or, pitied Youth, by my Paternal care,
^ais'd up to all the height his Frame could bear:
^ad God ordained his Fate for Empire Born,
^e would have given his Soul another turn:
^ull'd with a Patriot's name, whose Modern sense
(...) one that would by Law supplant his Prince:
^he Peoples Brave, the Politicians Tool;
^ever was Patriot yet, but was a Fool.
Whence comes it that Religion and the Laws,
should more be Absalom's than David's Cause?
^s old Instructor, ever he lost his Place,
Was never thought indu'd with so much Grace.
^ood Heavens, how Faction can a Patriot Paint!
^y Rebel ever proves my Peoples Saint:
Would They impose an Heir upon the Throne?
^et Sanhedrins be taught to give their Own.
(...) King's at least a part of Government;
and mine as requisite as their Consent:
Without my leave a future King to choose,
^fers a Right the Present to Depose:
^rue, they petition me to approve their Choice:
^t Esau's Hands suit ill with Jacob's Voice.
^y pious Subjects for my Safety pray,
Which to secure, they take my Power away;
^om Plots and Treasons Heaven preserve my Years,
^t save me most from my Petitioners.
^^satiate as the barren Womb or Grave;
^^d cannot grant so much as they can crave.
that then is left, but with a jealous Eye
(...) guard the small Remains of Royalty?
^he Law shall still direct my peaceful Sway,
and the same Law teach Rebels to obey:
^^tes shall no more Established Power control,
^^^h Votes as make a Part exceed the Whole:
(...) groundless Clamours shall my Friends remove,
^t Crowds have Power to punish ever they prove:
For Gods, and God-like Kings their Care express,
Still to defend their Servants in distress.
Oh, that my Power to Saving were confined!
Why am I forced like Heaven against my mind,
To make Examples of another Kind?
Must I at length the Sword of Justice draw?
Oh, cursed Effects of necessary Law!
How ill my Fear they by my Mercy scan,
Beware the Fury of a Patient Man.
Law they require, let Law then show her Face;
They could not be content to look on Grace
Her hinder Parts, but with a daring Eye
To tempt the Terror of her Front, and Die,
By their own Arts, it is Righteously decreed,
Those dire Artificers of Death shall bleed.
Against themselves their Witnesses will swear,
Till, Viper-like, their Mother Plot they tear:
And such for Nutriment that bloody Gore
Which was their Principle of Life before.
Their Belial with their Beelzebub will fight;
Thus on my Foes, my Foes shall do me right:
Nor doubt the Event: for Factious Crowds engage
In their first Onset, all their Brutal Rage.
Then let 'em take an unresisted Course:
Retire and Traverse, and Delude their Force:
But when they stand all Breathless, urge the Fight,
And rise upon 'em with redoubled Might:
For lawful Power is still Superior found,
When long driven back, at length it stands the ground.
He said. The Almighty nodding gavent consent;
And Peals of Thunder shook the Firmament.
Henceforth a Series of new Time began,
The mighty Years in long Procession ran:
Once more the God-like David was restored,
And willing Nations knew their Lawful Lord.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
TO prevent the Publicks being imposed on; this is to give notice, to the Book
lately Published in 4to is very Imperfect and Uncert^in to much that above
Thirty Lines are omitted in several Places, and ma^^ gross Errors committed,
which pervert the Sense.

THE TEMPLE OF DEATH, A POEM.

By the Right Honorable the Marquis of NORMANBY: A Translation out of French.

With an ODE in Memory of Her late Majesty Queen MARY.

By a Person of Quality.

-- Poema
Est Pictura loquens.
LONDON: ^^inted and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-Fryars, near the Waterside.
1709.

THE TEMPLE OF DEATH.
IN those cold Climates, where the Sun appears
Unwillingly, and hides his Face in Tears;
A dreadful Vale lies in a Desert Isle,
On which indulgent Heaven did never smile.
There a thick Grove of Aged Cypress Trees,
Which none without an awful horror sees,
Into its withered Arms, deprived of Leaves,
Whole Flocks of ill-presaging Birds receives:
Poisons are all the Plants the Soil will bear,
And Winter is the only Season there.
Millions of Graves cover the spacious Field,
And Springs of Blood a thousand Rivers yield;
Whose Streams oppressed with Carcasses and Bones,
Instead of gentle Murmurs, pour forth Groans.
Within this Vale a famous Temple stands,
Old as the World it self, which it commands:
Round is its Figure, and four Iron Gates
Divide Mankind, by order of the Fates.
There come in Crowds, doomed to one common Grave,
The Young, the old, the Monarch, and the Slave.
Old Age, and Pains, which Mankind most deplores,
Are faithful Keepers of those sacred Doors;
All clad in mournful Blacks, which also load
The sacred Walls of this obscure Abode;
And Tapers of a pitchy Substance made,
With Clouds of Smoke increase the dismal Shade.
A Monster, void of Reason and of Sight,
The Goddess is, who sways this Realm of Night.
Her Power extends over all Things that have Breath;
A cruel Tyrant, and her Name is Death.
The fairest Object of our wondering Eyes,
Was newly offered up her Sacrifice;
The adjoining Places where the Altar stood,
Yet blushing with the fair Almeria's Blood.
When grieved Orontes, whose unhappy Flame
Is known to all that ever converse with Fame;
His Mind possessed by Fury and Despair,
Within the Sacred Temple made this Prayer:
Great Deity! Who in thy Hands do bear
That trusty Scepter, which poor Mortals fear;
Who wanting Eyes, thy self respectest none,
And neither spares the Laurel, nor the Crown!
Oh thou, whom all Mankind in vain withstands!
Each of whose Blood must one day stain thy Hands!
Oh thou, who every Eye which sees the Light,
Closest again in an Eternal Night!
Open thy Ears, and hearken to my Grief,
To which thy only Power can give Relief:
I come not hither to prolong my Fate,
But wish my wretched Life a shorter Date;
And that the Earth would in its Bowels hide
A Wretch, whom Heaven invades on every side:
That from the sight of Day I could remove,
And might have nothing left me but my Love.
Thou only Comforter of Minds oppressed,
The Port, where wearied Spirits are at Rest;
Conductor to Elysium! take my Life;
My Breast I offer to thy Sacred Knife:
So just a Grace refuse not, nor despise
A willing, though a worthless Sacrifice.
Others their frail and mortal State forgot,
Before thy Altars are not to be brought
Without Constraint; the noise of dying Rage,
Heaps of the Slain of every Sex and Age,
The Blade all reeking in the Gore it shed,
With severed Arms confusedly spread,
The Rapid Flames of a perpetual Fire,
The Groans of Wretches ready to expire:
This Tragic Scene makes them in Terror live,
Till that is forced which they should freely give,
Yielding unwillingly what Heaven will have,
Their Fears eclipse the Glory of their Grave.
Before thy Face they make undecent Moan,
And feel a hundred Deaths in fearing one;
The flame becomes unhallowed in their Breast,
And he a Murderer, who was a Priest;
His Hands profaned in breaking Nature's Chain,
By which the Body does the Soul detain:
But against me thy strongest Forces call,
And on my Head let all the Tempest fall;
No shrinking back shall any weakness show,
And calmly I Will expect the fatal blow;
My Limbs not trembling, in my mind no fear,
Plaints in my Mouth, nor in my Eyes a Tear.
Think not that time, our wonted sure relief,
That universal Cure for every grief,
Whose Aid so many Lovers often have found,
With like success can ever heal my wound;
Too weak's the Power of Nature, or of Art;
Nothing but Death can ease a broken heart.
And that thou may behold my helpless state,
Learn the extremest rigor of my Fate.
Amidst the innumerable beauteous Train,
Paris the Queen of Cities, does contain,
The fairest Town, the largest, and the best,
So fair Almeria shined above the rest.
From her bright Eyes to feel a hopeless flame,
Was of our Youth the most ambitious aim;
Her Chains were marks of Honor to the brave,
She made a Prince whenever she made a Slave.
Love under whose Tyrannick power I groan,
Showed me this Beauty ever 'twas fully blown;
Her timorous charms, and her unpracticed look,
Their first assurance from my Conquest took,
By wounding me, she learnt the fatal Art,
And the first sigh she had, was from my heart;
My Eyes with Tears moist'ning her snowy Arms,
Rendered the Tribute owing to her Charms:
But as I soonest of all Mortals paid
My Vows, and to her Beauty, Altars made;
So among all those Slaves that sighed in vain,
She thought me only worthy of my Chain.
Love's heavy Burden, my Submissive Heart
Endured not long, before she bore her part;
My violent flame melted her frozen Breast,
And in soft Sighs her Pity she expressed;
Her gentle Voice allayed my raging Pains,
And her fair hands sustained me in my Chains;
Even Tears of Pity waited on my moan,
And tender Looks were cast on me alone*
My hopes and dangers were less mine, than hers,
Those filled her Soul with Joys, and these with Fears:
Our hearts united, had the same desires,
And both alike, burned in impatient Fires.
Too faithful Memory! I give thee Leave
Thy wretched Master kindly to deceive;
Make me not once Possessor of her Charms;
Let me not find her languish in my Arms;
Past Joys are now my Fancies mournful Theams;
Make all my happy Nights appear but Dreams:
Let not that Bliss before my Eyes be brought:
Oh! hide those Scenes from my tormenting Thought,
And in their place, disdainful Beauty show,
If thou would not be cruel, make her so;
And something to abate my deep Despair,
Oh, let her seem less Gentle, or less Fair.
But I in vain, flatter my wounded Mind,
Never was Nymph so lovely or so Kind:
No cold Repulses, my Desires suppressed,
I seldom sighed but on Almeria's Breast;
Of all the Passions which Mankind destroy,
I only felt Excess of Love and Joy:
Numberless Pleasures charmed my Sense, and they
Were as my Love, without the least Allay.
As pure, alas, but not so sure to last,
For like a pleassing Dream, they all are past.
From Heaven her Beauty like fierce Lightning came,
Which breaks through Darkness with its glorious Flame:
A while it shines, a while our Sight it chears,
But soon the short-lived Comfort disappears;
And Thunder follows, whose resistless Rage,
None can withstand, and nothing can assuage.
So often the Light which those bright Flashes gave,
Serves only to conduct us to our Grave.
When I had just begun Loves's Joys to taste,
(Those full Rewards for Fears and Dangers past)
A Fever seized her, and to nothing brought
The richest Work that ever Nature wrought.
All Things below, alas, uncertain stand;
The firmest Rocks are fixed upon the Sand:
Under this Law both Kings and Kingdoms bend,
And no Beginning is without an End.
^ Sacrifice to Time, Fate dooms us all,
and at the Tyrant's Feet we daily fall:
^ime, whose bold Hand alike does bring to Dust
^ankind, and all those Powers in which they trust.
Her wasted Spirits now begin to faint,
^et Patience ties her Tongue from all Complaint;
and in her Heart, as in a Fort, remains,
^ut yields at last to her resistless Pains:
Thus while the Fever, amorous of his Prey,
Through all her Veins makes his delightful Way;
^or Fate's, like Semile's, the Flames destroy
that Beauty they too eagerly enjoy.
^er charming Face is in its Spring decayed,
^ale grow the Roses, and the Lillies fade;
^er Skin has lost that Luster which surpast
The Sun's, and did deserve as long to last;
^er Eyes, which used to pierce the firmest Hearts,
^re now disarmed of all their Flames and Darts;
Those Stars now heavily and slowly move,
and Sickness triumphs in the Throne of Love.
The Fever every moment more prevails;
^s Rage her Body feels, and Tongue bewails;
^he, whose Disdain so many Lovers prove,
^ighs now for Torment, as they sigh for Love,
And with loud Cries will rend the neighboring Air,
Wounds my sad Heart, and wakens my Despair.
^oth Gods and Men I charge now with my Loss,
And wild with Grief, my Thoughts each other cross;
My Heart and Tongue labor in both extremes,
That sends up slighted Prayers, while this blasphem
I ask their help, whose malice I defy,
And mingle Sacrilege with Piety:
But that which does yet more perplex my mind,
To love her truly, I must seem unkind:
So unconcerned a Face my Sorrow wears,
I must restrain unruly floods of Tears.
My Eyes and Tongue put on dissembling forms,
I show a calmness in the midst of Storms,
I seem to hope, when all my hopes are gone,
And almost dead, with Grief, discover none.
But who can long deceive a loving Eye,
Or with dry Eyes behold his Mistress die;
When Passion had with all his Terrors brought
The Approaching danger nearer to my thought,
Off on a sudden fell the forced disguise.
And showed a sighing heart in weeping Eyes,
My apprehensions now no more confined,
Exposed my Sorrows, and betrayed my mind.
The fair afflicted, Soon perceive my Tears,
Explains my Sighs, and thence concludes my Fears
With sad Presages of her hopeless Case,
She reads her Fate in my dejected Face;
Then, feels my torment, and neglects her own,
While I am sensible of hers alone;
Each does the others burden kindly bear,
I fear her Death, and she bewails my Fear;
Though we thus suffer under Fortune's Darts,
It Is only those of Love which reach our hearts.
^ean-while the Fever mocks at all our Fears,
^ows by our Sighs, and rages at our Tears:
^ose vain effects of our as vain desire,
^ke Wind and Oil increase the fatal fire.
Almeria, then, feeling the Destinies
^out to shut her Lips, and close her Eyes,
^eeping, in mine fixed her fair trembling hand,
^d with these words, I scarce could understand;
^er Passion in a dying Voice expressed
^alf, and her Sighs alas, made out the rest.
^is past; this pang, Nature gives over the strife;
^hou must thy Mistress lose, and I my Life;
^dye, but dying thine, the Fates may prove
Their Conquest over me, but not my Love;
Thy Memory, my Glory, and my Pain,
^ spite of death it self, shall still remain:
^h! Dear Orentes, my hard Fate denies
That hope is the last thing which in us dies:
from my grieved Breast all those soft thoughts are fled,
and Love survives, although my hope is dead;
^yield my Life, but keep my Passion yet,
and can all thoughts but of Orontes quit;
^y flame increases as my strength decays,
^eath, which puts out the Light, the heat does raise;
That still remains, though I from hence remove,
^lose my Lover, but I keep my Love.
The Sigh, which sent forth that last tender Word,
^p toward the Heaven's like a bright Meteor soared,
And the kind Nymph bereft of all her Charms,
Fell cold and breathless in her Lover's Arms;
Which shows, since Death could deny him Relief,
That it is in vain we hope to die with Grief.
Goddess, who now my Fate has understood,
Spare but my Tears, and freely take my Blood;
Here let me end the Story of my Cares,
My dismal Grief enough the rest declares.
Judge thou by all this Misery displayed,
Whether I ought not to implore thy Aid:
Thus to survive, reproaches on me draws,
And my sad Wishes have too just a Cause.
Come, then, my only Hope; in every Place
Thou visitest, Men tremble at thy Face,
And fear thy Name; once let thy fatal Hand
Fall on a Swain, that does the Blow demand.
Vouchsafe thy Dart: I need not one of those,
With which thou do unwilling Kings depose;
Thy weakest, my desired Release can bring,
And free my Soul already on her Wing.
But since all Prayers and Tears are vain, I Will try,
If, spite of thee, it is possible to die.
AN ODE in Memory of Her MAJESTY Queen MARY.
I.
LONG our divided State
Hung in the Balance of a doubtful Fate,
^hen one bright Nymph the gathering Clouds dispelled
^d all the Griefs of Albion healed.
^r the united Land obeyed,
^o more to Jealousies inclined,
^or fearing Power with so much Virtue joined.
^e knew her Task, and nicely understood
^o what intentions Kings are made,
^ot for their own, but for their Peoples good:
^was that prevailing Argument alone,
^etermin'd Her to fill the vacant Throne.
and yet with Sadness she beheld
(...) Crown devolving on her Head,
^y the Excesses of a Prince misled)
^hen by her Koyal Birth compelled
To what her God, and what her Country claimed
(Though by a Servile Faction blamed)
How graceful were the Tears she shed!
II.
When waiting only for a Wind,
Against our Isle the Power of France was armed:
Here ruling Arts in all their Luster shined,
The Winds themselves were by her Influence charm'^
Whilst her Authority and Care supplied,
That Safety which the want of Troops denied.
Secure and undisturbed the Scene
Of Albion seemed, and like her Eyes, Serene:
Vain was the Invader's Force, Revenge and Pride;
Maria Reigned, and Heaven was on our Side.
The Scepter by her self unsought,
Gave double Proofs of her Heroic Mind;
With Skill she swayed it, and with Ease resigned:
So the Dictator, from Retirement brought,
Repelled the Danger that did Rome alarm,
And then returned contented to his Farm.
III.
Fatal to the Fair and Young,
Accursed Disease, how long
Have wretched Mothers mourned thy Rage,
Robbed of the Hopes and Comfort of their Age?
From the unhappy Lover's side,
How often have thou torn the blooming Bride!
Now like a Tyrant rising by degrees
To worse Extremes, and blacker Villainies.
^^^ctis'd in Ruin for some The Smallpox is said to have Reigned in England
about 250 Years.
Ages past,
^ou have brought forth a general one at last!
^mmon Disasters, Sorrow raise,
(...) Heavens severest Frowns amaze!
^e QUEEN -- a Word, a Sound,
(...) Nations once the Hope, and firm Support;
^ealth of the Needy, Guard of the Oppressed,
^e Joy of all, the wisest and the best;
Name that Echoes did rebound
^ith loud Applause from Neighboring Shores,
their Admiration, the Delight of ours)
^comes unutterable now!
^he Crowds in that defected Court
^here languishing MARIA lay,
^ant Power to ask the News they came to know;
^ent, their drooping Heads they bow:
^ence it self proclaims the approaching Woe.
^'en He ( MARIA's latest Care)
whom Winter-Seasons nor Foul Weather.
contending Jove,
^or watchful Fleets, could from his glorious Purpose move,
^trepid in the Storms of War,
and in the midst of flying Deaths sedate,
^ow Trembles, now he sinks beneath the mighty Weight,
^he Hero to the Man gives way.
IV.
Unhappy Isle, for half an Age a Prey
^o fierce Dissension, or Despotick Sway.
Redeemed from Anarchy to be undone
By the mistaken Measures of the Throne;
Thy Monarchs meditating dark Designs,
Or boldly throwing off the Masque,
(Fond of the Power unequal to the Task)
Thy self without the least remaining Sings
Of ancient Virtue so depraved
As even they wished to be enslaved:
What more than Humane Aid
Could raise thee from a State so low,
Protect thee from thy self, thy greatest Foe?
Something Celestial, sure a Heroine
Of matchless Form, and a majestic Mein;
By all respected, feared, but more beloved,
More than her Laws, her great Example moved:
The Bounds that in her God-like Mind,
Were to her Possions set, severely shined,
But that of doing Good was unconfined.
So Just, that absolute Command,
Destructive in another Hand;
In hers had changed its Nature, had been useful made.
Oh! had she longer staid!
Less swiftly to her Native Heaven retired,
For her the Harps of Albion had been strung:
The Harmonious Nine could never have aspired
To a more lofty and immortal Song.
FINIS.
A Congratulatory POEM To His Royal Highness Prince GEORGE OF DENMARK, Lord
High Admiral of Great Britain, UPON THE Glorious Successes at Sea.

By N. TATE Esquire Poet-Laureat to Her Majesty.

To which is added Happy Memorable SONG, on the Fight near Audenarde, between
the Duke of Marlborough and Vendome, etc.

LONDON: ^^inted by Henry Hills, in Black-fryars, near the Waterside. 1708.

To His Royal Highness The Most Illustrious Prince GEORGE of Denmark
Blessed Prince! in Whom the Graces seem combi^^^
To raise the sinking Glories of Mankind;
Our Iron Age with Virtues to Adorn,
Like the infant World's, ever Guilt and Grief were bo^
How dares a Rural Muse approach your Court,
From Vales, where homebred Nymphs and Swains s^
There let her entertain the pensive Hours
With sympathizing Songs, in shady Bowers;
There let her act her Shepherdess's Part,
Where Innocence is Wit, and Nature Art.
To Villagers, in that forlorn Retreat,
Her Serious Antiquated Streins repeat,
And leave gay Rivals to caress the Great.
Pretending Poet, (the grieved Muse replies)
With uncommission'd Boldness you advise:
Without Offense I pay Attendance here,
When it is on Duty's Summons I appear;
For, though retired to solitary Groves,
The Palace still my Sylvan Song approves:
ANNA and GEORGE indulge the generous Lays
I sing (Unrivaled) in poor Virtue's Praise.
I love the Shades; but, from Elysian Bowers
When Winter wreaths his hoary Head with Flowers;
When starting Spring forestalls the Bloom of May,
And Summer's Sweets, to crown the The 6th of February, her Majesty's Birth Day.
Royal Day;
Or when I hear our British Ocean roar
His GEORGE's Conquest to the shouting Shore,
Must only I in shady Silence rest,
And hear my Prince by all but me addressed?
No, Shepherd; since such charming Themes invite,
And I (though Rural) have a Muse's Right;
Since sure Disgrace attends upon Despair,
And nobly they may Do, who nobly Dare:
Mounted on Rapture, and Devotion's Wing,
^ll sally, and my Prince's Triumph sing.
When vying Arts their proud Memorials raise,
^anes, Arches, Trophies, Pyramids of Praise,
that Time may in His doting Days repeat
^vading Gallia's scandalous Defeat,
^er Bold Pretender, and his Base Retreat:
^l fix my Pillar too, not wreathed with Gold,
^ut such a dazzling Verse, so justly bold,
^s in the Front of Fame's Records shall place
^EORGE's Renown, and Lewi^'s Disgrace;
His Babel-Project in Confusion hurled,
And from Ambition's giddy Chariot, whirled
The Phaeton he raised to fright and fire the World.
Then think how graceful, how almost divine,
The generous Guardian's Character will shine!
Therefore on Rapture, and Devotion's Wing,
I Will sally, and the Best of Princes sing.
What Is that? The Best of Princes did you say?
See how your rustic Breeding you betray:
That an Encomium for a Muse to pay?
Give Him the Title to his Station due,
The Best of Kings; yes, and of Emp'rors too;
Supreme without the Pageantries of State,
Crowns, Scepters, that on vulgar Monarchs wait;
For Heaven does to this Favorite impart
The Noblest Empire, -- That of ANNA's Heart;
That Virtue's sacred Provinces contains;
Where all the Bliss of Paradise remains,
And of that Eden He sole Monarch Reigns.
Therefore proclaim Him (Muse) from Pole to Pole,
Far as his Fleets can Sail, or Ocean roll:
Tell Eastern Courts, for Grandeur so renowned,
Great Britain's GEORGE with ANNA's Love is Crowned
Hail! Royal PAIR, (thus Hymen's heard to say;)
Hail! happy PAIR, that keep my Garland gay
And flourishing, as on the Nuptial-Day.
Fresh Glories spring with each advancing Hour;
Peace, Amity, and every gentle Power,
For ever Smile, and Bless the Royal Bower.
Great Britain's Tutelary GEORGE proclaim,
Successor to Her Sacred Champion's Name,
And more than a Successor to his Fame.
The First did Error's creeping Serpent quell;
Discord's winged Dragon by the Second fell:
The First prevailed by Truth's refulgent Arms,
The next by Truth's and Moderation's Charms;
Charms, that with ANNA's Sovereign Influence joined,
(...) Like Dew in some Celestial Sphere refined)
Distilling from the Balmy Wings of Peace,
Made our Domestic Conflagrations cease.
O! Fame, no longer boast your Grecian Powers,
And mournful Fall of Priam's stately Towers.
Must Mischief a Maeonion Muse employ?
Then what should Piety, that quenched our flaming Troy?
This Triumph for his riper Years Remained,
Whose Youth, in Field, the foremost Laurels gained
But it is not for a Past'ral Muse to sing
The rescued Brother, and protected King.
O Courage! that Bellona's Self amazed,
And startled Mars upon the Wonder gazed;
Applauding Europe Blessed her Northern Star,
The Phospher to Her Just and Glorious War;
The Leading Light, that fired Her Sons of Fame;
From Hence Marlburian, and Eugenian Flame.
In Camps let those Illustrious Chiefs pursue
Their Glorious Game, with Conquests still in View;
Storm Hostile Forts, Confed'rate Cities shield,
But, Britain, to your GEORGE's Conduct yield
Your Floating Castles, and the Watery Field.
Enamored Thetis courts Him with Success,
And Victory, in every Change of Dress;
Sometimes She meets Him in Her Purple Pride,
Her Azure Waves in Crimson Slaughter Died:
Sometimes with Bloodless, Smiling Laurels crowned*
Like Those our Caledonian The Chassing the French Fleet, etc. from the Coast
of North Britain, by Admiral Bing.
Coast renowned.
With prouder Pomp Old Oceon never swelled,
Than when the British Squadron He beheld;
No, not when Venus, with the Watery Powers,
Sprang from the Cristal Cells, and Coral Bowers;
Whilst Glist'ring Gems did such a Luster dart
As dazzled Day, and made to Sun the start,
But when He sends his awful Summons round,
Europe and Africa tremble at the Sound.
Fame's Pillars shake on Her Atlantic Shore,
To hear Our GEORGE's Naval Thunder roar
In fresh Exploits, where Hercules gave over.
The Sea, that Barrier to Alcides Toils,
Opens Her Guardian GEORGE, a new vast World of The Man of War, and Barks with
Provisions, Ammunition, etc. lately taken from the French in the Mediterranean,
by Admiral Leake: And the rich Merchant-Ships, by the lord Dursley, etc.
Spoils.
Yes, Muse, with such delightful Terror Blazed
Our Furnished Fleet, and in an Instant Raised;
Nor sooner the bold Leopard did Advance,
But Her first Broadside, from their flattering Trance,
Scared into shameful Flight the Threatening Fiends of France.
When Tyrant-Courts plot some enormous Crime,
The Prodigy must be the Work of Time.
Law, Justice, Reason, Conscience, Honor, All
Sad Victims to the Rising Moloch fall.
But pious Princes, from Above are Taught
To give their Just Efforts the Speed of Thought,
And Miracles are in a The wonderful Expedition in setting forth that Fleet.
Moment wrought.
Such Wonders wait on his Electing Skill
Of Of the Admiralty
Council and Commanders, to fulfill,
With Faith and Fame, their Great Director's Will.
And You (replies the Muse) would here Retreat?
No, Swain; your Garland is but half Complete:
Arrears of Tribute you have yet to raise,
Will riffle all your Flowery Fields of Praise:
Your Elogy, to perfect this Essay,
Must, with the Prince, the Glorious Man display.
Besides Prerogatives of Power and Birth,
Vast Provinces of Independent Worth,
Inherent Charms, that on His Person wait,
With Genuine Grandeur, and Pacifick State.
His Frame a graceful Palace, and designed
The Mansion of a Truly Royal Mind;
Where Reason reigns, and Passions never move,
But by adjusted Orders from above.
Hence inward Peace the pious Prince enjoys,
And with Success Abroad, His Thoughts employs;
Taught by Superior Judgment to Advance
Beyond the boasted Progresses of France:
Yet Policy, to Truth's straight Course confines,
By Honor's Compass steers his vast Designs;
Shunning those Rocks, where shifting Statesmen split,
With double Wreck of Honesty and Wit.
While He, with favoring Gales of Fortune drives,
And Prosp'rously at the wished Port arrives.
A close Spectator of the World's great Stage,
Yet never Transported with its Mirth or Rage;
But from its Failures, Observation draws
To act a Part that wins the World's Applause;
Does Precedents to every Station give,
How Monarchs ought to Reign, and Subjects Live;
How Clemency can Princely Port maintain,
And Sov'reignty, by Condescending, gain:
In Court, more Morals has to Practice brought,
Than Cynick Schools and Cloisters ever Taught.
Only the Virtue's and the Grace's Train,
Into His Favor can Admittance gain,
While Syren-Pleasures Sing, and Smile, in Vain.
Where Pride Controuls, Duty at distance stands,
But a close Waiter on his just Commands;
Pleased with his Mandates, to her Post she moves,
Like Zephyrs, ordered to the Myrtle Groves
On this loved Theme I could for ever dwell,
Might I but here, as at my Rural Cell;
Far from my Prince's Ear, in bold Essays
Launch out on the wide Ocean of his Praise;
While Philomel forgets her Savage Wrong,
And widowed Turtles listen to my Song;)
But modest Merit, charmed with just Applause,
When paid to others, from its own withdraws.
Well; I desist; but my Devoted Heart
Insists on Privilege, and will not part;
She cries, it is Lukewarm Passion, that will press
No longer than encouraged to Address.
But Raving Love will all Occasions seize,
And sometimes bravely venture to displease:
At least the Generous Queen will intercede,
And for a fond Offender's Pardon plead:
ANNA, the Gracious ANNA, will forgive,
And kindly bid his poor Admirer live.
Why should he with extensive Luster Shine,
And think our Admiration to Confine?
Whose Presence, like the Sun, Our Grief beguiles,
And sullen Care at his Appearance smiles:
The Pride of Nature, and the World's delight,
Admired Vespatian a less Charming Sight.
As Citizens Besieged to Turrets throng,
To see their succ'ring Champion march along;
When he approaches, our roused Spirits rise,
And wait him at the watch-tow'rs of our Eyes.
The Stars, that with auspicious Aspect Blaze,
Look down, and with delightful wonder gaze
On Hours, might be in Royal Ease enjoyed,
So Gen'rously in public cares employed!
Yet as we see the vast Machine above
Of Spheres and Stars, in tuneful order move,
He works his Orb of Business in a Course
Of charming movement, and harmonious force.
Such is my Prince, mild as a Morning Ray,
As Evening Calm, yet Active as the Day:
In public, for Majestic Grace Admired;
But more; oh! more than Mortal when retired.
Might I his Closet's blessed recess display,
New Scenes of dazzling Wonders you would survey!
O Swain! that Sanctu'ry unveiled would show
Descended Seraphs, and a Heaven below.
There Europe's Patron her just Cause supports,
By Correspondence with Celestial Courts.
It Is there the prosperous Schemes --
-- Rash Muse, forbear;
It Is Hallowed Ground, and you approach too near.
I know it: -- Yet Zeal, fond Zeal, would still aspire;
But Awful Reverence warns us to Retire,
And at just Distance silently Admire.
POSTSCRIPT.
THE same Zeal and Veneration, that put the Muse on this Essay of his Royal
Highness's Character, made her timorous of publishing her Performance, though
^ensible that a pourtraict of so Incomparable a Prince may be very short of the
Original, yet anagreeable Picture.

And although 'twas impossible to come up to the Graces ^f the Life, she has set
the most distinguishing Features (...) the foremost Light, and particularly His
Patronnizing ^f Piety and Public Welfare.

For, when we have Summed up the Achievements ^f Heroes Renowned by Antiquity,
We shall find their ^ffusive Praise All Center in These Sovereign Virtues.

'Twas to These they Raised Statues and Temples; and ^ot satisfied with those
mouldring Monuments of Fame, ^erpetuated their Memory by ever-living Histories,
Pa^egyricks, and Poems.

To which Honor nothing can be added, But that which transcends them all; that
they are persuant to ^^e principle and practice of the Best of Queens, Her
Ma^^sty of Great Britain.

Therefore, under so National a Happiness, it is the ^oper province of Poets to
present the people with the ^est Memorials they can raise, to excite them to a
thank^^l Remembrance of such Blessings, That being one ^^rely means of having
them long continued.

And if on the present occasion, the delightfulness of the Subject has
transported me beyond my usual Reservedness, I shall only repeat my plea
already made for pardon from the worthy Dr. Gibbons.
Person, to whole Learning and Judgment I am most obliged, and therefore most
accountable, in any matter of the Muses.

Forgive me, great Director of my Song;
Long may you live, that others may live long;
Whose Skilful Search of Learning's Secret Store,
Furnished my Favored Muse, and taught her more
Than Horace and Roscommon had before.
Forgive, if now the Classic Road she quit,
For Precipices of Adventurous Wit:
If Fancy has a Daring Flight Aspired,
It Is what the Theme, the Glorious Theme, required.
To Celebrate the Worthies of her own Age and Nation, is certainly one of the
usefullest Methods in which a Muse can employ her Talent; because it is doing
Justice to living Merit, and Transmitting its Glorious Example to Posterity.

Mine, I confess, has but too much Reason to drea^ the difficulty of such
Attempts; yet in this Effort o^ Duty and Respect to his Royal Highness, she can
justl^ challenge that Ancient Privilege for a Favorable Reception, viz. In
Magnis Rebus vel Conatus Laudari debe^

Claudian has mentioned the two principal Pillars o^ Panegyric, which he
thought singly sufficient to support^ his Prince's Encomium -- Ingenium Autoris
vel Stilico^nis Amor. And however I may have failed in the former, I am
assured, that no Person can surpass me i^ the latter.

In a Season of continued Sunshine, it is Natural for Ha^ycons to exert their
Harmony; and in so bright a train of Naval Successes, as have, so early in the
Year, Oc^asion'd a In his intended Invasion of North-Britain, and breaking his
Measures Spain.
double disappointment of the common Enemies Designs, together with a fresh and
signal Vi^tory by the Conduct and Bravery of his Grace the Duke of Marlborough;
in these prosperous and promi^ng Circumstances of speedily seeing the pious
Endea^ours, of our most Gracious Queen and Prince com^leated in a happy
Restoration of the Peace and Liber^y of Europe, It Is no wonder to hear the
Congratulating Muses sing --.

Through Field and Flood our Royal pair maintain
^acifick Empire, just as here they Reign;
^ake Foreign Courts by their decisive Doom,
^ractice the Justice which they act at home.
^ence all with Joy their rising Glories see,
^uch Strength entrusted with such Piety;
While from their well-plac'd power Protection flows,
And with their Grandeur the World's Welfare grows.
FINIS.
A Happy Memorable Ballad, On the Fight near Audenarde, between the Duke o^
Marlborough, of Great Britain, and the Duke o^ Vendome, of France. As also the
strange an^ wonderful manner how the Princes of the Blood Royal of France were
found in a Wood. In allusion to the Unhappy Memorable Song common^^ called
Chevy-Chace.
GOD prosper long our gracious Queen,
Our Lives and Safeties all,
A woeful Fight of late there did
Near Andenard befall.
To drive the French with Sword and Gun,
Brave Marlborough took his way,
Ah! woe the time that France beheld
The Fighting of that day.
The Valiant Duke to Heaven had swore
Vendome should pay full dear,
For Ghent and Bruges, e're his Fame
Should reach his master's Ear.
And now with Eighty Thousand bold,
And chosen men of might,
He with the French began to wage
A sharp and bloody fight.
The Gallant Britains swiftly ran
The French away to chase,
On Wednesday they began to fight,
When Daylight did decrease.
And long before high-Night, they had
Ten thousand Frenchmen slain,
And all the Rivers Crimson flowed,
As they were died in grain.
The Britains through the Woods pursued,
The nimble French to take,
And with their Cries the Hills and Dales,
And every Tree did shake.
The Duke then to the Wood did come,
In hopes Vendome to meet,
When lo! the Prince of Carignan
Fell at his Grace's Feet:
Oh! gentle Duke forbear, forbear,
Into that Wood to shoot;
If ever pity moved your Grace,
But turn your Eyes and look;
See where the Royal Line of France,
Great Lewis's Heirs do lie;
And sure a Sight more piteous was
Never seen by mortal Eye.
What Heart of Flint but must relent,
Like Wax before the Sun,
To see their Glory at an end.
E're yet it was begun.
When as our General found your Grace
Would needs begin to fight,
As thinking it would please the Boys,
To see so fine a Sight,
He straitway sent them to the top
Of yonder Church's Spire,
Where they might see, and yet be safe
From Swords, and Guns, and Fire.
But first he took them by the Hand,
And kissed them e're they went,
Whilst Tears stood in their little Eyes,
As if they knew the Event.
Then said, he would with speed return,
Soon as the Fight was done,
But when he saw his men give ground,
Away he basely run,
And left these Children all alone,
As Babes wanting Relief,
And long they wandered up and down,
No hopes to cheer their grief.
Thus hand in hand they walked, till
At last this Wood they spied,
And when they say the Night grow dark,
They here lay down and cried.
At this the Duke was inly moved,
His Breast soft pity beat,
And so he streightway ordered
His men for to retreat.
And now but that my Pen is blunt,
I might with ease relate,
How Fifteen Thousand French were took,
Besides what found their Fate.
Nor should the Prince of Hanover
In Silence be forgot,
Who like a Lion fought on foot,
After his Horse was shot.
And what strange Chance likewise befell,
Unto these Children dear,
But that your Patience is too much
Already tired I fear.
And so God bless the Queen and Duke,
And send a lasting Peace,
That Wars and foul Debate henceforth
In all the World may cease.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
WHEREAS the Printer hereof did receive two Letters by the General Post from an
unknown Hand; the last dated July the 1st, 1708. If the Gentleman that sent
them shall be pleased to communicate any such Copies as there mentioned, they
shall be justly and faithfully Printed and Published, and the Favor most
thankfully acknowledged, by

H. H.

WINDSOR-CASTLE: A POEM.

^nscrib'd to the Immortal Honor of our most Gracious Sovereign, ANNE, Queen
of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.

To which is added, BRITAIN's JUBILEE; A New Congratulatory SONG, etc.

-- Majora Canamus. LONDON, ^^^nted and Sold by H. Hills, in the Black-fryars,
near Waterside, For the Benefit of the Poor. 1708.

WINDSOR-CASTLE A POEM.
AFTER Great Nassaw taught this Nation Wa^
And led them out with conduct, and with ca^
Britain's ungrateful Sons forgot the Hand
That had preserved them by his wise Command:
When haughty Frenchmen pressed his Troops in va^
'Till Landen's Plains were covered with the Slain;
While through their fiercest and conquering Cohorts, ^
Made his bold Passage, like a Diety.
No Terrors could his fiery Passion cool;
His Armor was the Courage of his Soul:
Nor will the Power from whom this Hero fought,
Permit his Memory to be e're forgot;
For'midst the eternal Monuments of Fame,
None will exceed Immortal William's Name.
He lived in foreign Camps, for Arms renowned,
And died with never-fading Laurels crowned.
While Europe did in Sorrow bathe their Eyes,
And Clouds with mourning Sables decked the Skies,
Till ANNA like another Sun did rise.
ANNA, whose pious Name tunes every Lyre,
And does my Muse with boundless Thoughts inspire,
From Royal Race her sacred Breath she drew,
And Britain well her Great Forefathers knew.
Divinely bright her glorious Actions shine,
^uch as descended from her ancient Line.
Upon her Brow a thousand Graces meet,
Where they in Thrones of spotless Goodness sit.
^o every Heart with Pleasure she commands;
No Heart, no Soul, her Lordly Power withstands.
Of Royal George she lives the Virtuous Wife,
^ree from the Jars of Matrimonial Strife.
Heaven such a Bridegroom never yet descried;
Nor ever Earth so good and chaste a Bride.
Their Hearts, like rolling Spheres, still constant move,
^wimming in Waves of Joy and mutual Love;
While all the Soldiers round their Marlbro' throng,
^o bring him home with Triumph and a Song.
Near where of Old Isis and Tame abode,
^ecurely tended by their Guardian God;
^here sands a lofty Pile, which looking high, [ Windsor Castle]
^ears up its stately head to meet the Sky.
^he beauteous Frame with curious Art is wrought,
With Stone from Portland, and Roch-Abbey brought:
With tallest Oaks, that do the Forests shade,
Whereof the Beams and Rafters all are made.
^ch wondrous Architrave the Structure shows,
^s must the happy Architect disclose.
One towering Oak of huge Gigantick Size,
That did on Windsor's shady Forest rise,
Does, by its Native Strength alone support
The ascending Ladder of this spacious Court.
A hundred Paces to the Floor you mount,
And twice two Hundred afterward may count.
The Ceiling of stupend'ous Height does seem,
Showing no Crack, or Flaw, or artless Beam.
But in the noblest Paintings, there divine,
Does all the glorious Acts of Europe shine.
Nor are the wondrous Deeds of William here forgot,
And all the mighty Battles which he bravely fought.
A Lordly Dome raises its Antique Head, S. George Ha^

Which over the Center of the Buildings spread;
Two Hundred Cubits 'bove the Roof does rise,
And the same Number spans the bulky Size;
With ponderous Lead the Pile is covered over.
And Tuscan Marble paves the inner Floor.
There Verrio's Skill in lasting Colors lives;
And there Immortal William still survives:
There you may see the great Desighner dress
Art, as 't exceed ev'en Nature in Distress:
There Colors do by bold Expressions, tell
How the great Hero stood, when Schomberg fell:
How the firce Boyn could never stem the Tide
Of VVillam's Fire; he through the Flood would ride,
And force the Waves stand still on either Side.
Beneath the Glories of this painted Sky,
Statues of lasting Fame stand mounting high,
At whose proud Feet numberless Trophies lie.
There Edward with his Garter-Knights is shown
In daring Forms, that does their Boldness crown.
Their Images appear of Giants Size;
Grim are their Looks, and Soldier like their Eyes.
No smiling Aspects do the Heroes grace,
But grizly Death stares wildly in each Face.
Under these huge Colossus's you may see
Twelve spacious Arches for the Hierarchy:
^ence, by ascending Steps you mount a Throne
^ut-shines the Chariot of the blazing Sun.
^ix'd over it is set a high Imperial Crown,
Which naught but Tyranny can tumble down.
There hangs on high a Canopy of State,
Where Anna like a powerful Monarch sat.
Beneath this Palace flows fair Thames's Streams.
Where spreading Elms shade from the Sun's hot Beams;
Where beauteous Sea-Nymphs on the Waters sport,
and bulky Tritons grace the splendid Court.
Here Ships from Indai safe at Anchor ride;
^ere Men of War bear out the foaming Tide,
While wanton Skiffs at Pleasure over it glide.
^ere seasoned Ashes makes the Sailors Oars,
And Oaks and Firs the Merchant hoards in Stores.
Experienced Workmen hew the Timber down,
And Naval Carpenters the Labor crown,
^am'd British Pilots steer her Ships to Land.
When in the Midst, Masts of tall Fir-Trees stand.
Up Thames resurging Flood, swift sailing come
Merchants from both the Indies, laden Home,
Coral and Agat they with Baubles buy,
And Guiny-Merchants trade in Ivory.
^or finest Wollen-Manufacture, they
^ring Gold and precious Stones from Raamah.
^weet Eastern Spices are exchanged for Horn,
And for choice Rice and Coffee, barter Corn.
With Tin and Lead, Cornwall and Derby Trade,
And with fine Silver Home our Shipping lade.
^or Honey, wax, and Wheat of Minuith's Soil,
We bring back Olives, Cassia, Wine, and Oil.
Thus are Thames flowing Streams more fruitful far
Than either East or Western Oceans are:
^lenteous in all the Riches of the West,
And stored with fine Apparel from the East.
In rich Embroideries from Turkey, shine,
And India's softer Linen makes us fine.
Windsor-Park.
Near hence the most delightful Prospect, lies
That with fresh Objects gratifies the Eyes.
Here well secured from Envy, Flattery, Hate,
And Discontent, that often on Great Men wait;
No clamorous Laws can deaf the silent Ear,
Or noisy Tumults raise up enxious Fear.
Here lavish Nature, prodigal of Bliss,
Show us what Pleasure in her Bosom lies;
What to the Earth her kindly Off spring bring,
And how her beauteous Blossoms freshly spring.
Here Nature triumphs, and Heaven's smiling Brow
Does all the Sweets of infant Beauty show.
The jovous Birds in little Songs conspire
To raise De^ight, and melt us to Desire.
All perfumed Odours, that delight the Sense,
Are here poured out in lavish Affluence.
Not Ida's Fields, or Tempe's flowery Plain,
On which the streaming Floods of Heaven rain,
Or Hybla's Thyme, but must compare with thee in vain.
To all these, Nature did some Sweets bestow,
But in this 'Closure every Sweet does grow;
With various Mixtures every Bank she is died,
And damask'd all the Field with odorous Pride.
In this fair Plain, such Charms engage the Eye,
We scarce regard the Luster of the Sky,
Here Evening Breezes freshly fan the Air,
Quench the hot Flame, and cool the Rage of Care.
But now the thoughtful Queen, by Heaven inspired,
And with the public Good divinely fired,
Fixed in her mind, her People's Cares revolved,
At last her teeming Thouhts she thus resolved.
The insulting Gauls have long this Land perplexed,
and long with treacherous Arts have Europe vexed.
^uis, their haughty Monarch, every where
^akes all then neighboring Countries, by Fear,
^y from his conquering Troops with base Despair.
^hile all the Nations tremble at their flight,
^one dare resist the Fury of his Might:
^or like some monst'rous Tiger now o'er-grown,
^e lords it over the Forest, having none
That dare oppose his Tyranny alone.
^ll must submit, or his Displeasure find
(...) Rancour suited to his savage Kind.
When this was said, a Message soon she sent,
^o call Great Britain's Council to her Tent.
Mean time, her wearied Soul, with Cares oppressed,
Drew down the Curtains of her Eyes, to rest;
^xtended on a flowery Couch she lay,
^ntranc'd, as Death had winged her Soul away,
While thus the Royal Dame took her Repose,
A sudden Vision to her Fancy rose.
A Form appeared, but so amazing bright,
^s Luster flashed intolerable Light:
Her Knees together knocked, her upright Hair,
With trembling Heart, confessed unusual Fear.
His Garments seemed thin as the upper Air;
^weet was his Mein, his Face divinely Fair;
^oft as a Cloud, but more aetherial bright
His Image shone, like springing Tides of Light:
Down on his Shoulders with an easy Care,
A flaming Meteor flowed like Silver Hair:
His Cheeks were blushing as the Morning Sun;
His Eyes more darting than his Rays at Noon:
His Voice like Zephirs, that on Violets play,
Refreshing Odours all the scorching Day.
Such Harmony his Numbers did inspire,
Her Soul was tuned to her melodious Lyre;
When thus the sacred Bard his Message told:
ANNA, thou favorite Friend of Heaven, rise,
Dispel all Fears, wipe Sorrow from thy Eyes;
The Great Jehovah, Founder of this State,
The God that did on your Forefathers wait,
Will still the wonders of his Mercy show,
And make proud superstitious Nations know,
There is a Power to whom they do not bow.
By thee, best of thy Sex, and most divine,
By thee --
Thou shall in all thy glorious works succeed:
Obey my Words, for they are by Heaven decreed.
Heaven which makes even Kings descend their Thrones,
Stripped of their Purple, and their shining Crowns,
Who boast of Strength, and trust in that alone,
Are by the Breath of Heaven soon tumbled down.
Mysterious Truths hid in the Veil of Night,
Are by his Power produced to open Light.
In Plenty now the hap^y Nation lives,
And like a spreading Vine, the Country thrives*
When sudden desolation, unforeseen,
Reduces all her Pride to want again.
It Is prosperous Villainy, that now bears Sway;
The Rich though bad, the Vulgar still obey.
The Robber fattens at the Land's Expense,
And thrives upon the Spoils of Providence;
Securely ^ins, while Heaven regardless smiles,
And seems to drive the Prey into his Toils.
The savage Kine, and those that wing the Air,
If thou will ask, the Secret can declare
Whence this proceeds. The Tenants of the Sea,
Or Earth it self, can show the Mystery.
Without God's Leave, nothing ever was, or is;
Or Good, or Bad, Unhappiness, or Bliss.
Fate is his Slave, and does the Nod obey,
And only acts as he prescribes the way.
^ll that have Life are in his powerful Hand,
and flourish or decay at his Command.
^s by the Organs of the Ear, we try
and judge of Discord, or of Harmony;
^s by the Palate we distinguish Food,
^hun what is Bab, and choose whatever is good;
^o by Old age, Experience does arise,
and Silver Hairs confirm the Owner wise.
The ancientest of Days, the God of all
(...) Wisdom's Self, its great Original.
(...) full perfection Wisdom there does shine:
And Power and Judgment do with Wisdom join.
At his Command the Waters backward fly,
Their Fountains seek, and leave the Channel dry;
When at a sign, again their Torrents pour,
And roll their curling Heads above the Shore.
Houses and Flocks are by the Deluge drowned,
And Desolation wastes the neighboring Ground.
Thus spoke the Angel, and then thus went on:
Call Britain's great Assembly instant here,
And tell this Message in the People's Ear,
That ANNA's Sword shall curb the growing Power
Of Proud aspiring France, that waits each Hour
The Liberties of Europe to devour.
Of British Race, Churchill's the Hero's Name,
^mmortal Queen! that shall exalt thy Fame,
And bring on Louis everlasting Shame.
^end for the Warrior, let the People know,
To Marl'brough's Genius, Burgundy must bow:
Consult your Council for the dreadful War,
With all the Strength of your Allies prepare:
For French and Spaniards are united Friends,
And hatred Nations join for Hated Ends.
Then haste to Arms, thou best of thy fair Race,
Let War thy Mind, while Smiles adorn thy Face:
Wake, glorious Princess, from thy rest, and see,
Thou for a Guardian have a Deity.
Swift from her Eyes the Phantom made its way,
And naught remained to Sight, but lightsome day:
When all alone, she was surpised to find,
Such strong Impressions on her feeble Mind.
No sooner were the Clouds of Sleep dispelled,
And Morpheus loosed the Fetters which he held,
But the great Council waited at her Tent,
To understand the Message she had sent.
A goodly Frame raised high of carved wood,
Leaning its lofty Head, on Pillars stood
Near an old venerable Pile -- Westminster.
Adorned with curious work of antique Hands.
There all the States in full Assembly met,
Where they in Princely Robes of Scarlet sit;
Shining in costly Gems, each takes his place,
And fills the Senate with Majestic Grace.
There hangs the Balance of the weighty State,
And there Rewards and Punishments do wait
A rigorous, or an equitable Fate.
There arbitrary Laws are curbed and chained,
And there the summit of all Justice gained.
Judges themselves, if Lawless, are not free
From this tribunal Seat of Equity.
Just Judgment there does without Brib'ry reign,
And wholesome Laws all Violence restrain.
Blessed Liberty in Triumph sits her down,
Nor hurts the State, nor shakes the Imperial Crown.
All now were met, the Council filled a-pace,
And every Statesman took his wonted Place,
When thus the Queen began --
My Lords, the Cause why you're assembled here,
'S to advise about the Business of the War.
Louis, you know, his Threatenings spreads around,
And Victory has sometime his Armies crowned.
The slavish French deflow'r their Neighbors Fields,
Whilst tamely they to their Incursions yields:
And Japhet's Race, with heavy Burdens bent, The Spaniards.
Submit to haughty Louis's Government.
The Might of this great Prince I need not tell,
Or all his vast Designs, you know too well,
Europe has felt the Fury of his Power,
When God like William rescued you before.
But now more potent by his Allies grown,
He triumphs e're the Battle is begun:
While all his numerous Squadrons do prepare
For dreadful mischief, and destructive War.
Whom shall I choose among my mighty Men,
The Hazard of a Battle to sustain?
Who dare against Burgundy his Courage try,
To conquer bravely, or as bravely die?
Then a bold Britain answered thus, and said,
Churchill is only fit for such a Head;
Who has the illustrious Chiefs of Europe led,
And often for his Country's Honor Bled.
Courage and Conduct both in him remains;
By wise designs, as well as Blood he gains.
For he that singly does to Battle go,
With Courage only beats but half his Foe.
Mature in Councils Generals ought to be,
Not filled with Fire so much as Policy;
For Life's of more Concern than Victory.
Then Marlbro' humbly spoke --
Great Princess, and you Lords of Britain, hear
Who make Europe's Concern your constant Care;
You may remember when her Armies fled,
And German Princes stood like Statues dead,
^hen Churchill propt that proud ungrateful Race,
That now in Britain Marlbro' would disgrace.
Oh' hear me Lords; spare your Reproaches now;
Did not all Europe to proud Louis bow?
Did not they cringe below the Tyrant's Feet,
And to the Laws his Arms prescribe, submite?
What then has Marlbro' done? Do British Peers
Despise the Man, that has dispelled their Fears?
Not for my Self did I this Honor seek,
My Country's Danger 'twas that made me speak.
But since I find in faithless Britain, few,
When pressing Dangers call, that dare be true,
I shall my Courage, for the future spare:
Cowards can boast, when Dangers seem not near.
With that, a noble Peer, though young, yet wise,
Stood up, and thus in Council did advise:
Though gray Experience has not reached my Years,
Nor have I been alarmed with foreign Fears,
Yet I am sensible all Europe's Fate
Does much on our wise Councils wait:
Great Britain's Safety in our Conduct lies,
And Strength is nothing, if we are not wise.
Therefore, my Lords, I must my Judgment give
For Marlbro' which I hope you will all receive.
Then all the Council moved with willing Ears,
Attended to the Wisdom of his Years.
While thus the noble Youth continued on,
The brave Discourse he had so well begun:
I am amazed, from this wise Board, to hear
One Soul of ancient British Race appear
Against Marlbro': Did he not all Europe save?
Are not his Looks, his Words, his Actions, brave?
Don't we, by good Experience know, how great
He stood, at Great Ba^aria's last Defeat?
And what we by his prudent Councils gain,
Are like the Glories of a Monarch's Reign.
The pompous Luxury of Camps he flies,
While downy Rest their Rioting supplies,
Who Are chained in Sleep, when Sleep forsakes his Eyes.
He said, --
And as the hollow Caverns of some Wood,
Send back, in Eccho's, the still Voice, aloud,
^o from the Silence of the Council rose,
^o all his Words, a general Applause.
^ut Malice in the Assembly still remains,
Whilst Maroc's Blood fermented in his Veins:
Who thus with cloudy Aspect sowr'd, spoke, --
O, Princess! and you Lords of Britain, hear
What reverend Age is able to declare.
Has not Great France's powerful Monarch seen
Britain divided; Anna made their Queen?
What then remains for us to seek, but Peace?
At these base Words, the Queen in Passion rose,
And with becoming Zeal did thus oppose;
Though she was with the softest Nature blessed,
Like sleeping Doves, when on their downy Rest.
For Europe's Cause she was divinely fired,
And spoke these moving Words by Heaven inspired.
Though War, of all our Evils, is the worst,
And brought on Man, when Man by Heaven was cursed;
Yet such the State of Britain is this day,
^ sought your Aid, knowing no other Way.
For Anna was expedient to maintain.
The Glories was expected from my Reign.
But wondering now I gaze with much Surprise,
And scarcely can believe the Object of my Eyes.
Is not that Maroc, Prince of British Blood?
That once for Britain like a Bulwark stood?
And can his Courage dwindle into Fear,
Cause Louis threats, and Burgundy draws near?
Have we not often their boasting Courage tried?
And triumphed over that saucy Monarch's Pride?
What have I heard pronounced from Maroc's Tongue,
Of Peace, who always has of Battles sung?
What Peace from perjured Louis can we find?
Louis, the Monster of the Monarch-kind.
Has he not all his Ties of Friendship broke,
When he was fettered once with William's Yoke;
When he to Belgir's Lion su'd for Peace,
But only kept it for his Soldiers Ease?
At this a general Murmur filled the Room,
Like whistling Winds, that from deep Caverns com
When strait, behold through all the secred Place,
Consent sat cheerfully on every Face;
And every One now strove to loose his Tongue
To Anna, then to Marlbro' make their Song.
Who can forget, O Queen! the happy Day
Thou blessed our Isarel with thy glorious Sway?
When Britain slept, thou saved us from our Foes,
And as our leading Star, at Midnight rose.
Heaven did it self in bright Apparel dress,
And tuneful Angels sung soft Hymns of Peace
In dancing Airs, Stars from their Spheres were sent,
And springing Joy spread over your Royal Tent.
Why then should we ungratefully oppose
Our Royal Mistress? Why her Favors lofe,
Who such vast Bounties on her Land bestows?
Since Marlbro' is the Man by Heaven decred,
Anna no more shall frown, or Marlbro' bleed;
For if nor Heaven, nor yet the Queen had said,
Marlbro' should lead out Europe as their Head,
Is not his Courage and his Conduct known
To Britain, that we choose him for our own?
FINIS.
BRITAIN's Jubilee: A new Congratulary BALLAD, on the Glorious Victories
obtained by the Duke of MARLBOROVGH, over the French: Writ by the Famous
Comedian, Mr. Escourt, and Sung by him to most of our Nobility, with great
Applause.
YOU Tell me Dick you have lately Read,
That we are beaten in Spain;
But prithee Boy hold up thy Head,
We'll beat 'em twice for it again:
With a fall la la la la la la la la la la la la, etc.
Is this the Courage you used to Boast,
Why thou art quite cast down;
You can reflect on what we have Lost;
But never think what we have Won.
With a fall, etc.
In War and Gaming it is the same,
According to the old saying;
Who Is sure to Conquer every Game,
Quite loses the pleasure of Playing.
With a fall, etc.
Then prithee Boy hold up thy Head,
For if we are beaten in Spain;
As sure as Scarlet Color is Red,
We'll beat 'em twice for it again.
With a fall, etc.
Thank God we have a Man of our own,
A Man if I may call him so;
For after those great Deeds he has done,
I may question if he is so or no.
With a fall, etc.
But there is a Man whose Name,
Is Johnny MARLBOROUGH;
The beaten French have felt his Fame,
And so shall the Spaniard too.
With a fall, etc.
Though now Jack Spaniard pretends to Bounce,
He never shall do so again:
We took last Year as many Towns,
As they now have taken Men.
With a fall, etc.
Since Justice now we cannot do,
To every Victory:
Our hearty Zeal in Wine let us show,
To our General Family.
With a fall, etc.
For he has Eight Fair Daughters,
And each of them is a Charmer:
Lady Rialton, Bridgewater,
Fine Sunderland, Lady Mount-Hermer*
With a fall, etc.
And as for the other Younger four,
They will with Raptures fill ye;
There Is Lady Hochstet, Schellenburgh,
Bright Blenheim, and Lady Ramillie.
With a fall, etc.
These last are begotten so Fair and Strong*
As never in story was told;
The other four shall still be Young,
But these last shall not be Old.
With a fall, etc.
Now to make thy hopes more Strong,
And make thee look like a Man;
Remember all these do belong,
To the Queen of Great Britain.
With a fall, etc.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
WHEREAS the Printer hereof did receive two Letters, by the General Post from
an unknown Hand; the last dated July the 1 st 1708. If the Gentleman that sent
them shall be pleased (...) communicate any such Copies as there mentioned,
they shall be justly a^ faithfully Printed and Published, and the favor most
thankfully ackno^ledged, by

H. H.

AN ESSAY ON Translated VERSE. BY THE EARL of ROSCOMON.

-- Fungar vice Cotis, acutum
^eddere quae ferrum valet Exsori ipsa secandi.
Hor. de Art. Poet. Cape Dona Extrema Tuorum.

V. 3. AE. LONDON: ^^^nted and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-fryars, near the
Waterside. 1709.

TO THE Earl of ROSCOMON, On his Excellent ESSAY ON Translated VERSE.
WHether the fruitful Nile or Tyrian Shore,
The seeds of Arts and Infant Science bore,
It Is sure the noble Plant translated first,
^dvanc'd its head in Grecian Gardens nursed.
The Grecians added Verse, their tuneful Tongue
Made Nature first, and Nature's God their Song.
Nor stopped Translation here: For conquering Rome
With Grecian Spoils, brought Grecian Numbers home;
^nrich'd by those Athenian Muses more,
Than all the vanquished World could yield before.
Till barbarous Nations and more barbarous Times
^ebas'd the Majesty of Verse to Rhimes;
Those rude at first: kind of hobbling Prose:
That limp'd along, and tincl'd in the close:
^^t Italy reviving from the Trance
^f Vandal, Goth, and Monkish ignorance,
With pauses, cadence, and well vowell'd words,
and all the Graces a good Ear affords,
^ade Rhyme and Art, and Dante's polished page
^estor'd a silver, not a golden Age:
Then Petarch followed, and in him we see,
What Rhyme improved in all its height can be;
At best a pleasing sound, and fair barbarity:
The French pursued their steps, and Britain, last
In Manly sweetness all the rest surpassed.
The Wit of Greece, the Gravity of Rome
Appear exalted in the British Loome;
The Muses Empire is restored again,
In Charles his Reign, and by Roscommon's Pen*
Yet modestly he does his work survey,
And calls a finished Poem an ESSAY;
For all the needful Rules are scattered here;
Truth smoothly told, and pleasantly severe;
(So well is Art disguised, for Nature to appear)
Nor need those Rules to give Translation light;
His own Example is a Flame so bright;
That he, who but arrives to copy well,
Unguided will advance: unknowing will excel.
Scarce his own Horace could such Rules ordain;
Or his own Virgil sing a nobler strain.
How much in him may rising Ireland boast,
How much in gaining him has Britain lost!
Their Island in revenge has ours reclaimed,
The more instructed we, the more we still are shamed,
It Is well for us his generous Blood did flow
Derived from British Channels long ago,
That here his Conquering Ancestors were nursed;
And Ireland but translated England first:
By this Reprisal we regain our right,
Else must the two contending Nations fight,
A nobler quarrel for his Native Earth,
Than what divided Greece for Homer's Birth.
To what perfection will our Tongue arrive,
How will Invention and Translation thrive
When Authors nobly born will bear their part,
And not disdain the inglorious praise of Art!
Great Generals thus descending from Command,
With their own toil provoke the Soldiers hand.
How will sweet Ovid's Ghost be pleased to hear
His Fame augmented by an Engilsh Peer, The Earl of Mulgrave.

How he embellishes his Helen's loves,
Out does his softness, and his sense improves?
When these translate, and teach Translators too,
Nor Firstling Kid, nor any vulgar vow
Should at Apollo's grateful Altar stand;
Roscomon writes, to that auspicious hand,
Muse feed the Bull that spurns the yellow sand.
Roscomon, whom both Court and Camps commend,
True to his Prince, and faithful to his Friend;
Rosscomon first in Fields of Honor known,
First in the peaceful Triumphs of the Gown;
Who both Minerva's justly makes his own.
Now let the few beloved by Jove, and they,
Whom infused Titan formed of better Clay,
On equal terms of ancient Wit engage,
Nor mighty Homer fear, nor sacred Virgil's page:
Our English Palace opens wide in state;
And without stooping they may pass the Gate.
John Dryden.

AN ESSAY ON Translated VERSE.
HAppy that Author, whose correct Essay,
Repairs so well our old Horatian way;
And happy you, who by propitious Fate
On great Apollo's Sacred Standard wait.
And with first Discipline instructed right,
Have learnt to use your Arms before you fight.
But since the Press, the Pulpit and the Stage
Conspire to censure, and expose the Age;
Provoked too far we resolutely must
To the few Virtues that we have be just.
For who have longed, or who have labored more
To search the Treasures of the Roman Store,
Or dig in Grecian Mines for purer Oar?
The noblest Fruits transplanted in our Isle,
With early Hope, and Fragrant Blossoms smile.
Familiar Ovid tender Thoughts inspires,
And Nature seconds all his soft Desires;
Theocritus does now to us belong;
And Albion's Rocks repeat his rural Song.
Who has not heard how Italy was blessed,
Above the Mede, above the wealthy East?
Or Gallus Song, so tender and so true,
As even Lycoris might with Pity view.
When mourning Nymphs attend their Daphnes's Hearse
Who does not weep, that reads the moving Verse.
But hear, O hear, in what exalted Strains
Scicilian Muse through these happy Plains,
Proclaim Saturnian Times, our own Apollo reigns?
When France had breathed after intestine Broils,
And Peace and Conquest crowned her Foreign Toils,
Their ( cultivated by a Royal Hand)
Learning grew fast, and spread, and blessed the Land;
The choicest Books that Rome and Greece have known,
Her excellent Translators made her own,
And Europe still considerably gains,
Both by their good Example and their Pains.
From hence our generous Emulation came,
We undertook, and we performed the same:
But now we show the World a nobler way,
And in Translated Verse do more than they.
Serene and clear harmonious Horace flows,
With Sweetness not to be expressed in Prose.
Degrading Prose explains his meaning ill,
And shows the Stuff but not the Workman's Skill
(...) who have served him more than Twenty years,
Scarce know my Master as he there appears,
Vain are our Neighbors hopes, and vain their Cares,
The fault is more the Languages than theirs.
^Tis courtly florid, and abounds in Words,
Of softer sound, than ours perhaps affords;
But who did ever in French Authors see
The comprehensive English Energy?
The weighty Bullion of one Sterling Line,
Drawn in French Wire would through whole Pages shine.
(...) speak my private but impartial Sense,
With Freedom, and I hope without Offense;
For I Will recant, when France can show me Wit,
^s strong as ours, and as succinctly writ.
^Tis true Composing is the Noble Part,
But good Translating is no easiy Art:
For though Materials have long since been found,
Yet both your Fancy and your Heads are bound.
And by improving what was writ before,
^nvention labors less, but Judgment more.
The Soil intended for Pierian Seeds,
Must be well purged from rank Pedantick Weeds,
Apollo starts, and all Parnassus shakes,
At the rude rumbling Barulipton makes.
For none have been with Admiration read,
But who beside their Learning were well bred.
The first great work (A Task performed by few)
Is that your self may to your self be true:
No Masque, no Tricks, no Favor, no Reserve;
Dissect your Mind, examine every Nerve.
Whoever vainly on his Strength depends,
Begins like Virgil, but like Maevius ends.
That Wretch (in spite of his forgotten Rhymes)
Condemned to live in all succeeding times;
With pompous Nonsense, and a bellowing Sound,
Sung lofty Ilium, tumbling to the Ground.
And (if my Muse can through past Ages see)
That nauseous noisy, gaping Fool was he.
Exploded when with universal Scorn,
The Mountains labored, and a Mouse was born.
Learn, learn Gotona's brawny wrestler cries,
Audacious Mortals, and be timely wise!
It Is I that call, remember Millo's end,
Wedged in that Timber which he strove to rend.
Each Poet with a different Talent writes,
One Praises, one Instructs, another bites.
Horace did never aspire to Epick Bays,
Nor lofty Maro stoop to Lyrick Lays.
Examine how your Humor is inclined,
And which the Ruling Passion of your Mind;
Then, seek a Poet who your way does bend,
And choose an Author as you choose a Friend.
United by this Sympathetick Bond,
You grow Familiar, Intimate and Fond;
Your thoughts, your Words, your Styles, your Souls agree,
No longer his Interpreter but He.
With how much ease is a young Muse betrayed,
How nice the Reputation of the Maid!
Your early kind, paternal care appears,
By chaste Instruction of her Tender Years.
The first Impression in her Infant Breast
Will be the deepest, and should be the best.
^et no Austerity breed servile Fear,
^o wanton Sound offend her Virgin-Ear.
^ecure from foolish Pride's affected state,
and specious Flattery's more pernicious Bait,
^abitual Innocence adorns her Thoughts
^ut your neglect must answer for her Faults.
Immodest words admit of no defense;
^or want of Decency, is want of Sense.
What moderate Fop would rake the Park, or Stews,
Who among Troops of faultless Nymphs may choose?
^ariety of such is to be found;
^ake then a Subject proper to expound:
^ut Moral, Great, and worth a Poet's Voice,
^or Men of sense despise a trivial Choice:
and such Applause it must expect to meet,
^s would some Painter, busy in a Street,
^o Copy Bulls and Bears, and every Sign
that calls the staring Sots to nasty wine.
Yet it is not all to have a Subject Good,
^ must delight us when it is understood.
^e that brings fulsome Objects to my view,
As many Old have done, and many New)
^ith nauseous Images my Fancy fills,
and all, goes down like Oxymel of Squils.
^struct the listening World how Maro sings
^f useful Subjects, and of lofty Things.
^hese will such true, such bright Idea's raise,
^ merit Gratitude, as well as Praise.
^t foul Descriptions are offensive still,
^ther for being Like, or being Ill.
^r who, without a Qualm, has ever looked,
^n Holy Garbage, though by Homer Cookt?
those Railing Heroes, and whose wounded Gods,
^ake some suspect, he Snores, as well as Nods.
^t I offend -- Virgil begins to frown,
^d Horace looks with Indignation down:
My blushing Muse with Conscious fear retires,
And whom they like, Implicily Admires.
On sure Foundations let your Fabric Rise,
And with attractive Majesty surprise,
Not by affected, meritorious Arts,
But strict harmonious Symetry of Parts.
Which through the whole, insensibly must pass,
With vital Heat to animate the Mass.
A Pure, an Active, an Auspicious Flame,
And bright as Heaven, from the Blessing came;
But few, oh few, Souls, praeordain'd by Fate,
The Race of Gods, have reached that envied Height.
No Rebel Titans sacrilegious Crime,
By heaping Hills on Hills can thither climb.
The Greisly Ferry-man of Hell denied
Aeneas entrance till he knew his Guide;
How justly then will impious Mortals fall,
Whose Pride would soar to Heaven without a call?
Pride (of all others the most dangerous fault;)
Proceeds from want of Sense, or want of Thought.
The Men who labor and digest things most,
Will much apter to despond than boast.
For if your Author be profoundly good,
Will cost you dear before he is understood,
How many Ages since has Virgil writ;
How few are they who understood him yet?
Approach his Altars with Religious fear,
No vulgar Deity inhabits there;
Heaven shakes not more at Jove's Imperial Nod,
Than Poets should before their Mantuan God.
Hail mighty Maro! may thy Sacred Name,
Kindle my Breast, with thy celestial flame;
Sublime Ideas, and apt words infuse,
The Muse instruct my Voice, and thou inspire my Muse.
What I have instanced only in the best,
Is in Proportion true of all the rest.
Take Pains the genuine meaning to explore,
Their Sweat, there Strain, there lug the laborious Oar.
^earch every Comment that your Care can find,
^ome here, some there, may hit the Poet's Mind;
Yet be not blindly guided by the Throng;
The Multitude is always in the wrong.
When Things appear unnatural, and hard,
Consult your Author with himself compared;
Who knows what Blessing Phoebus may bestow,
and future Ages to that Labor owe?
^uch Secrets are not easily found out,
^ut once discovered leave no room for Doubt,
Truth stamps Conviction in the ravished Breast,
and Peace and Joy attend the glorious Guest.
Truth still is one, Truth is divinely bright,
No cloudy Doubts obscure her Native Light;
While in your Thoughts you find the least Debate,
You may confound, but never can Translate.
Your Style will this through all Disguises show,
^or none explain more clearly than they know.
^e only proves he understands a Text,
Whose Exposition leaves it unperplext,
They who too faithfully on Names insist,
^ather create, than dissipate the Mist;
and grow unjust by being over nice,
For Superstitious Virtue turns to Vice)
^et Crassus Ghost, and Labienus tell,
^ow twice in Parthian Plains their Legions fell,
^ince Rome has been so jealous of her Fame,
^ew know Pacorus or Monaeses Name.
Words in one Language elegantly used,
Will hardly in another be excused:
and some that Rome admired in Caesar's time,
^ay neither suit our Genius, nor our Clime.
^he genuine Sense intelligibly told,
^hews a Translator both Discreet and Bold.
Excursions are inexpiably bad,
and it is much safer to leave out, than add.
^bstruce and Mystic Thoughts you must express,
^ith painful Care, and seeming Easiness,
^r Truth shines brightest through the plainest Dress, And
The Aenean Muse, when she prepares in state.
Makes all Jove Thunder on her Verses wait.
Yet writes sometimes as soft, and moving Things,
As Venus speaks, or Philomesa signs.
Your Author always will the best advice,
Fall when he falls, and When he rises rise.
Affected noise, is the most wretched Thing,
That to Comtempt, can empty Scriblers bring.
Vowels and Accents regularly placed,
On even Syllables, (and still the last.
Though gross innumerable Faults abound,
In spite of Nonscence never fail of Sound.
But this meant of even Verse alone,
As being most harmonious and most known.
For if you will unequal Numbers try,
Their Accents on odd Syllables must lie.
Whatever Sister of the Sacred Nine,
Does to your Suit a willing Ear incline,
Urge your Success, deserve a lasting Name,
She Will crown a grateful, and a constant Flame.
But if a wild Uncertainty prevail,
And turn your vearing Heart with every Gale,
You lose the Fruit of all your former Care,
For the sad Prospect of a sad Despair.
A Quack (too scandalously mean to Name)
Had by Man-midwifry got Wealth and Fame;
As if Lucina had forgot the Trade,
The laboring Wife invokes the surer Aid.
Well seasoned Bowls, the Gossips Spirits raise,
Who while she guzzles, chats the Doctor's Praise.
And largely what she wants in Words, supplys.
With Maudling Eloquence of trickling Eyes.
But what a thoughtless Animal is Man,
(How very Active in his own Trepan!)
For greedy of Physicians frequent Fees,
From Female Mellow Praise he takes Degrees?
Struts in a new Unlicens'd Gown and then,
From saving Women falls to Killing Men.
another such had left the Nation Thin,
^ spite of all the Children he brought in.
^is Pills, as thick as Hand Grenades flew,
and where they fell, as certainly they slew.
^is Name struck every where as great a Damp
^s Archimedes through the Roman Camp.
^ith this, the Doctors Pride began to Cool,
^or Smarting soundly may convince a Fool.
^ut now Repentance came too late, for Grace;
and meager Famine star'd him in the Face.
^in would he to the Wives be reconciled,
^t found no Husband left to own a Child.
^he Friends, that got the Brats were poisoned too;
(...) this sad case what could our Vermin do?
^orry'd with Debts and past all Hope of Bail,
^h' unpitied wretch lies Rotting in a Jail.
and there with Basket-Alms, scarce kept alive,
^hews how Mistaken Talents ought to Thrive.
I pity, from my Soul, Unhappy Men,
^ompell'd by want to Prostitute their Pen;
Who must, like Lawyers either starve or plead,
and follow, right or wrong, where Guynny's lead;
^ut you, Pompilian, wealthy, pampered Heirs,
Who to your Country owe your Swords and Cares.
^et no vain hope your easy mind seduce,
^or Rich Ill Poets are without Excuse.
It Is very Dangerous, Tampring with a Muse.
^he Profit's small, and you have much to lose;
^or, though true Wit adorns your Birth, or Place,
^egenerate lines degrade the attainted Race,
^o Poet any Passion can Excite;
^ut what they feel trasport them when they write.
^ave you been led through Cumaean Cave.
and heard the Impatient Maid Divinely Rave?
^hear her now; I see her Rolling Eyes;
and panting; Lo! the God, the God she cries;
^ith words, not Hers and more then humane sound,
^e makes the obedient Ghosts peep trembling through the Ground,
But though we must obey when Heaven Commands,
And Man in vain the sacred Call withstands,
Beware what Spirit rages in your breast.
For ten inspired ten thousand are possessed.
Thus make the proper use of each Extreme,
And write with Fury, but correct with Phleam.
As when the Cheerful hours too freely pass,
And sparkling Wine smiles in the tempting Glass.
Your Pulse advises, and begins to beat
Through every swelling Vein a loud retreat.
So when a Muse propitiously invites
Improve her favors, and Indulge her flights,
But when you find that vigorous heat abate,
Leave off, and for another Summons wait.
Before the Radiant Sun a Glimmering Lamp,
Adult'rate Metals to the Sterling Stamp,
Appear not meaner, than mere humane Lines,
Compared with those whose Inspiration shines;
These, Nervous, bold; those Languid, and remiss;
There, cold salutes, But here, a Lover's kiss,
Thus have I seen a Rapid, headlong tide,
With foaming Waves the Passive Soan divide
Whose Lazy Waters without motion lay,
While he, with eager force, urged his Impetuous way.
The Privilege that ancient Poets claim
Now turned to License by too just a Name,
Belongs to none but an Established Fame,
Which scorns to take it --
Absurd Expressions, crude, Abortive Thoughts,
All the lewd Legion of exploded fau'ts,
Base Fugitives to that Asylum fly,
And sacred Laws with Insolence defy.
Not thus our Heroes of the former Days,
Deserved and Gained their never fading Bays:
For I mistake, or for the greatest part,
Of what some call Neglect was studied Art.
When Virgil seems to Trifle in a Line,
It Is like a Warning-piece, which gives the Sign.
^o Wake your Fancy, and prepare your Sight,
^o reach the noble Height of some unusual Flight.
^ose my Patience, when, with Saucy Pride,
^y untuned Ears I hear his Numbers tried.
^^verse of Nature! shall such Copies, then
^rraign the Originals of Maro's Pen!
and the rude Notions of Pedantick Schools,
^laspheme the sacred Founders of our Rules!
The Delicacy of the nicest Ear
^inds nothing harsh, or out of Order there.
^ublime or low, unbended or intense,
^he sound is still a Comment to the Sense.
A skilful Ear, in Numbers should preside,
and all Disputes without Appeal decide.
^his Ancient Rome and Elder Athens found,
before mistaken stops debauched the sound.
When, by Impulse from Heaven, Tyrtaeus sung,
(...) drooping Soldiers a new Courage sprung.
^eviving Sparta now the fight maintained,
and what Two Generals lost, a Poet gained.
^y secret influence of Indulgent Skies,
^mpire, and Poesy together rise.
^rue Poets are the Guardians of State,
And when they fail, portend approaching Fate.
^or that which Rome to Conquest did inspire,
Was not the Vestal, but the Muses fire;
Heavens joins the Blessings, no declining Age,
Ever felt the Raptures of Poetic Rage,
Of manv faults, Rhym is (perhaps) the Cause,
Too strict to Ryhme we slight more useful Laws.
For that, in Greece or Rome, was never known,
Till by Barbarian Deluges o'reflown;
^ubdu'd, Undone, They did at last, Obey,
And change their own for their Invaders way.
I grant that from some Mossie Idol Oak
^n Double Rhymes our Thor and Woden spoke;
And by succession of unlearned Times,
^s Bards began, so Monks rung on the Chimes.
But now that Phoebus and the sacred Nine,
With all their Beams on our blessed Island shine,
Why should not We their ancient Rites restore
And be, what Rome or Athens were before?
Have we forgot how Raphaels Numerous Prose
Led our exalted Souls through heavenly Camps,
An Essay on blank Verse out of the 6th Book of Paradise lost.
And marked the ground where proud Apostate Thrones,
Defied Jehovah! Here, 'twixt Host and Host,
(A narrow but a dreadful Interval)
Portentous sight! before the Cloudy Van,
Satan with vast and haughty strides advanced,
Came towering armed in Adamant and Gold.
There bellowing Engines with their fiery Jubes
Dispersed aetherial Forms, and down they fall,
By thousands, Angels, on Archangels rolled;
Recovered, to the Hills they ran they flew,
Which (with their ponderous Load, Rocks, Waters, Woo^
From their firm Seals torn by their shaggy Tops
They bore, like Shields before them through the Air,
'Till more incensed, they hurled them all their Fees.
All was Confusion, Heaven's Foundations shook,
Threatening no less then universal wrack.
For Michael's Arm main Promontorys flung,
And overprest their Legions weak with Sin;
Yet they blasphemed, and struggled as they lay,
'Till the great Ensign of Massiah blazed,
And (armed with Fengeance) God's Victorious Son.
(Effulgence of Paternal Deity)
Grasping ten thousand Thunders in his hand.
Drove the old original Rebels headlong down,
And sent them flaming to the vast Abyss.
O may I live o hail the glorious day,
And sing loud Poems through the crowded way,
When in triumphant state the British Muse,
True to her self all barbarous Aid refuse.
And in the Roman Majesty appear,
Which none knew better, and none came so near:
FINIS.
THE ^LEASURES OF A Single LIFE, OR, THE MISERIES OF MATRIMONY.

Occasionally Writ upon the many DIVORCES lately Granted by Parliament.

WITH THE CHOICE, OR, THE ^leasures of a Country- LIFE,

Dedicated to the Beaus against the next Vacation.

^don: Printed and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-fryars, near the Waterside.
1709. Price One Penny.

THE Pleasures of a Single LIFE OR, The Miseries of Matrimony. Occasionally
Writ upon the many DIVORCE^ lately Granted by Parliament.
WEdlock, oh! Cursed uncomfortable State,
Cause of my Woes, and Object of my hate,
How blessed was I? Ah, once how happy me?
When I from those uneasy Bonds were free;
How calm my Joys? How peaceful was my Breast,
Till with thy fatal Cares too soon oppressed,
The World seemed Paradise, so blessed the Soil
Wherein I lived, that Business was no Toil;
Life was a Comfort, which produced each day
New Joys, that still preserved me from decay,
Thus Heaven first launched me into pacifick Seas,
Where free from Storms I moved with gentle Breeze
My Sails proportioned, and my Vessel tite,
Coasting in Pleasures-Bay I steered aright,
Ballac'd with true Content, and fraighted with deligh^
Books my Companions were wherein I found
Needful Advice, without a noisey Sound,
But was with friendly pleasing silence taught,
Wisdom's best Rules, to fructify my Thought,
Raised up our Sage Forefathers from the dead,
And when I pleased invoked them to my Aid,
Who at my Study-Bar without a Fee would plead:
Whilst I Chief Justice sat, heard all their Suits,
And gave my Judgment on their learned Disputes;
Strove to determine every Cause aright,
And for my Pains found Profit and Delight,
Free from Partiality; I feared no blame,
Desired no Brib'ry, and deserved no Shame,
^it like an upright Judge, grudged no Expense
(...) time, to fathom Truth with Diligence,
^^ading by Day, Contemplating by Night,
^ll Conscience told me that I judged aright,
^^en to my Paper-World I Would have recourse,
(...) by my Maps run over the Universe;
^ll round the Globe, and touch at every Port,
^^vey those Shoars where Men untamed resort,
^^ew the old Regions where the Persian Lord
^^ught Wooden Deities first to be Adored,
^^snar'd at last to Sacrifice his life
(...) the base Pride of an Adult'rous Wife,
(...) where the Grecian Youth to Arms inured,
(...) hungry Soil with Persian Blood manured,
There bold Busephilus brutal Conduct showed,
(...) force of monstrous Elephants withstood,
(...) with his Rider waded through a purple Flood.
Then would I next the Roman Field survey,
There brave Fabricius with his Army lay:
^^m'd for his Valor, from Corruption free,
^^de up of Courage and Humility.
^^at when Encamped the good Man lowly bent,
^^ok'd his own Cabbage in his homely Tent:
(...) when the Samnites sent a Golden Sum,
^^tempt him to betray his Country Rome,
(...) Dross he scoffingly returned untold,
(...) answered with a Look serenely bold,
^^at Roman Sprouts would boil without their Grecian Gold:
^^en eat his Cale-worts for his Meal designed,
(...) beat the Grecian Army when he would dined.
Thus would I range the World from Pole to Pole,
(...) increase my Knowledge, and delight my Soul;
^^vel all Nations, and inform my Sense;
^^th ease and safety, at a small Expense:
Storms to plough, no Passengers Sums to pay,
Horse to hire, or Guide to show the way,
Alps to climb, no Deserts here to pass,
Ambuscades, no Thief to give me chase,
No Bear to dread, or ravenous Wolf to fight,
No Flies to sting, no Rattle-Snakes to bite;
No Floods to ford, no Hurricans to fear;
No dreadful Thunder to surprise the Ear;
No Winds to freeze, no to Sun scorch or fry,
No Thirst, or Hunger, and Relief not nigh.
All these Fatigues and Mischiefs could I shun;
Rest when I pleased, and when I please Jog on,
And travel through both Inides in an Afternoon.
When the Day thus far pleasingly was spent,
And every Hour admin'stred Content,
Then would I range the Fields, and flowery Meads*
Where Nature her exub'rant Bounty spreads,
In whose delightful Products does appear
Inimitable Beauty every where;
Contemplate on each Plant, and useful Weed,
And how its Form first lay involved in Seed,
How they are preserved by Providential Care,
For what designed, and what their Virtues are.
Thus to my Mind by dint of Reason prove,
That all below is owed to Heaven above,
And that no Earthly Temporals can be,
But what must Center in Eternity.
Then gaze aloft, whence all things had their Birth
And mount my prying Soul 'twixt Heaven and Ear^^
Thus the sweet Harmony of the whole admire,
And by due Search new Learning still acquire,
So nearer every day to Truths Divine aspire.
When tired with thought, then from my Pocket pl^^
Some friendly dear Companion of a Book,
Whose homely Calves-skin fences did contain
The Verbal Treasure of some Old good Man:
Made by long study and experience wise,
Whose piercing thoughts to Heavenly knowledge (...)
Amongst whose Pious Relics I would find,
Rules for my Life, Rich Banquets for my mind,
Such pleasing Nectar, such Eternal Food,
That well digested, makes a Man a God;
and for his use at the same time prepares
(...) Earth a Heaven in spite of worldly Cares,
^he day in these Enjoyments would I spend,
(...) choose at Night my Bottle and my Friend,
^^ok prudent care that neither were abused,
(...) with due Moderation both I used.
and in one sober Pint found more delight,
^han the insatiat Sot that swills all Night;
^e'er drown my Senses, or my Soul debase,
(...) drink beyond the relish of my blass
(...) in Excess good Heavens design is Croft,
(...) all Extremes the true Enjoyments lost,
^ine chears the Heart, and elevates the Soul,
^t if we surfeit with too large a Bowl,
^anting true Aim we the happy Mark over Shoot,
(...) change the Heavenly Image to a Brute.
(...) the great Grecian who the World subdued,
and drowned whole Nations in a Sea of Blood;
(...) last was Conquered by the Power of Wine,
and died a Drunken Victim to the Vine.
^y Friend, and I, when over our Bottle sat,
^x'd with each Glass some inoffensive Chat,
^lk'd of the World's Affairs, but still kept free
^om Passion, Zeal, or Partiality;
^ith honest freedom did our thoughts dispense,
(...) judged of all things with indifference;
(...) time at last did our Delights invade,
(...) in due season separation made,
^^en without Envy, Discord or Deceit,
(...) like true Friends as loving as we meet.
^e Tavern change to a domestic scene,
^^at sweet Retirment, though it is never so mean.
^^us leave each other in a Cheerful Plight,
(...) enjoy the silent Pleasures of the Night,
^hen home returned, my Thanks to Heaven pay,
(...) all the past kind Blessing of the Day;
(...) haughty Help-mate to my Peace molest,
(...) treacherous Snake to harbor in my Breast;
No fawning Mistress of the Female Art,
With Judas Kisses to betray my Heart;
No light tail'd Hypocrite to raise my Fears,
No vile Impert'nence to torment my Ears;
No molted Offspring to disturb my Thought,
In Wedlock born but G -- d knows where begot;
No lustful Massalina to require
Whole Troops of Men to feed her Brutal Fire?
No Family Cares my quiet to disturb;
No Headstrong Humors to assuage or Curb
No Jaring Servants, no Domestic strife,
No Jilt, no Termagent, no Faithless Wife,
With Vinegar or Gall, to sour or bitter Life.
Thus freed from all that could my Mind annoy,
Alone my self, I did my self enjoy:
When Nature called, I laid me down to rest,
With a sound Body, and a peaceful Breast;
Hours of Repose with Constancy I kept,
And Guardian Angels watched me as I slept,
In lively Dreams reviving as I lay,
The Pleasures of the last precedent day,
Thus whilst I singly lived, did I possess
By Day and Night incessant Happiness,
Content enjoyed awaked, and sleeping found no less.
But the Cursed Fiend from Hell's dire Regions sen^
Ranging the World to Man's Destruction bent,
Who with an Envious Pride beholding me,
Advanced by Virtue to Felicity,
Resolved his own Eternal wretched state,
Should be in part revenged by my sad Fate;
And so at once my happy Life betray
Flung Woman, Faithless Woman in my way:
Beauty she had, a seeming Modest Mein,
All Charms without, but Devil all within,
Which did not yet appear, but lurked, alas unseen.
A fair Complexion far exceeding Paint,
Black sleepy Eyes that would have Charmed a Saint;
Her Lips so soft and sweet, that every Kiss,
Seemed a short Taste of the Eternal Bliss;
^er set of Teeth so Regular and White,
^hey'd show their Luster in the darkest Night;
^ound her Seraphick Face so fair and young,
^er Sable Hair in careless Dresses hung,
which added to her beauteous Features, showed
^ike some fair Angel peeping through a Cloud?
^er Breasts, her Hands, and every Charm so bright,
^e seemed a Sun by Day, a Moon by Night;
^er shape so ravishing, that every Part,
^roportion'd was to the nicest Rules of Art:
^o awful was her Carriage when she moved,
^one could behold her, but he feared and loved,
^he danced well, sung well, finely played the Lute,
Was always witty in her Words, or Mute;
^bliging, not reserved, nor yet too free,
^ut as a Maid divinely blessed should be;
Not vainly gay, but decent in Attire,
^he seemed so good, she could no more acquire
Of Heaven, than what she had, and Man no more desire:
^ortune, like God and Nature too was kind,
And to these Gifts a copious Sum had joined.
Who could the power of such Temptations shun,
What frozen Synick from her Charms could run.
What Cloistered Monk could see a Face so bright,
But quit his Beads and follow Beauty's Light,
And Its Luster hope to shun Eternal Night.
(...) so bewitched, and poisoned with her Charms,
Believed the utmost Heaven was in her Arms,
Methoughts the Goodness, in her Eyes I see,
Spoke her the Offspring of some Deity.
Now Books and Walks, would no content afford,
She was the only Good to be Adored
In her fair Looks alone delight I found,
Love's raging Storms all other Joys had drowned.
By Beauty's Ignus fatuus led astray,
Bound for Content, I lost my happy way
Of Reason's faithful Pilot now bereft,
Was amongst Rocks and Shelves in danger left,
There must have perished, as I fondly thought,
Lest her kind Usage my Salvation wrought;
Her happy Aid I labored to obtain,
Hoped for Success, yet feared her sad Disdain,
Tortured like dying Convicts whilst they live,
'Twixt fear of Death, and hopes of a Reprieve.
First for her smallest Favors did I sue,
Crept, Fawned and Cring'd, as Lovers used to do?
Sighed ever I spoke, and when I spoke looked (...)
In words confused disclosed my mournful T^le?
Unpractised and Amour's fine Speeches co^^d,
But could not utter what I well design^d.
Warmed by her Charms against Bash^ strove,
And trembling sat, and stammer'd out my Love;
Told her how greatly I admired and fear^d,
Which she 'twixt Coyness and Compassion heard,
Grutch'd no Expense of Money, or of Time,
And thought that not to adore her was a Crime;
The more each Visit I acquainted grew,
Yet every time found something in her new.
Who was above her Sex so fortunate,
She had a Charm for Man in every State;
Beauty for the Youthful Prudence for the Old,
Scripture for the Godly, for the Miser Gold;
Wit for the Ingenious, silence for the Grave,
Flattery for the Fool, and Cunning for the Knave:
Compounded thus of such Varieties,
She had a knack to every Temper please.
And as her self thought fit was every one of these.
I loved, I sighed and vowed, talked, whin'd, and prayed
And at her Feet my panting Heart I laid;
She smiled, then frowned, was now reserved, then fre^
And as she played her part, often changed her Key;
Not through Fantastic Humor but Design,
To try me thoroughly ever she should be mine,
Because she wanted in one Man to have,
A Husband, Lover, Cuckold, and a Slave.
So Travelers, before a Horse they buy,
His Speed, his Paces, and his Temper try,
Whether h'ell answer Whip and Spur, thence Judge,
If the poor Beast will prove a patient Drudge:
When she by wiles had heightened my Desire,
And feigned Lov's sparkles to a raging Fire;
Made now for Wedlock, or for Bedlam fit,
Thus Passion gained the upper-hand of Wit,
The Dame by pity, or by Interest moved,
Or else by Lust, pretended now she loved;
After long sufferings, her Consent I got,
To make me happy, as I hoped and thought,
But oh, the wretched hour I tied the Gordian Knot.
Thus through mistake I rashly plunged my Life
Into that Gulf of Miseries a Wife.
With joyful Arms I thus embraced my Fate,
Believed too soon, was undeceived too late;
So hair-brained Fools to Indian Climates rove,
With a vain hope their Fortunes to improve;
There spend their slender Cargoes, then become
Worse Slaves abroad than ever they were at home.
When a few Weeks were wasted I compared,
With all due moderation and regard,
My former freedom, with my new restraint,
Judging which State afforded most content,
But found a single Life as calm and gay,
As the delightful Month of blooming May,
Not chil'd with Cold, or scorched with too much heat.
Not plagued with flying Dust, nor drowned with wet,
But pleasing to the Eyes, and to the Nostrils sweet.
But Wedlock's like the blustering Month of March,
That does the Body's Maims and Bruises search,
Brings by cold nipping Storms unwelcom Pains,
And finds, or breeds Distempers in our Veins;
Renews old Sores, and hastens on Decay,
And seldom does affords one pleasant Day.
But Clouds dissolve, or raging Tempest blow,
And untile Houses, like the wrangling Shrow;
Thus March and Marriage justly may be said,
To be alike, then sure the Man is Mad,
That loves such changling Weather where the best is bad.
Though I once happy in a single Life,
Yet Shipwrack'd all upon that Rock a Wife.
By Gold and Beauties Powerful Charms betrayed,
To the dull drudgery of a Marriage Bed;
That Paradise for Fools, a Sport for Boys,
Tiresom its Chains, and brutal are its Joys,
Thou nauseous Priestcraft that too soon appeared,
Not as I hoped, but worse than what I feared,
All her soft Charms which I believed divine,
Marriage I thought had made them only mine;
Vain hope, alas for I too early found,
My Brows were with the Throne of Wedlock crowned,
Jealousies, first from Reason raised a doubt,
And Fatal Chance the unhappy Truth brought out;
Made it so plain from all Pretenses freed.
That wicked Woman no Excuse could plead;
And if she wants device to hide her Shame,
Hell can no Umbrage for Adult'ry frame.
I thought it prudence the Disgrace to hide,
Though raved and Stormed, she Pardon begged and Cried.
Yet with false Protestations strove to Charm:
The Cuckold to believe she would done no harm,
Though taken by surprise (O curse the Day)
Where all the Marks of past Enjoyment lay,
And she disordered by her lustful freeks
Had Shame and Horror struggling in her Cheeks:
Yet, made Essays to clear her Innocence,
And hide her guilt with Lies and Impudence;
For lustful Women like a vicious State,
Often stifle Ills by others full as great,
But I convinced too plainly of her Guilt,
All her false Oaths and quick inventions spoilt,
Which when she would used in vain she blushed and cried,
And owned her fault she found she could not hide.
This I forgave, she promised to reclaim,
Vowed future truth if I Would conceal the shame;
But what Strange Adamantine Chain can bind,
Woman corrupted to be just or kind:
Or how can Man to an adultress show
That Love, which to a faithful Wife is due,
I strugled hard, and all my Passions checked,
And changed Revenge into a mild Respect,
That Good for Ill returned might touch her near,
And Gratitude might bind her more than fear;
My former Love I every day renewed;
And all the Signals of Oblivion showed;
Winked at small Faults, would no such Trifles mind,
As accidental Failings not designed.
I all things to her Temper easy made,
Scorned to reflect, and hated to upbraid;
She chose (and rich it was) her own Attire,
Nay, had what a proud Woman could desire.
Thus the new Covenant I strictly kept,
And often in private for her Failings wept,
Yet bore with seeming Cheerfulness those Cares,
That bring a Man too soon to grisled Hairs.
But all this kindness I dispensed in vain,
Where Lust and base Ingratitude remain.
Lust, which if once in Female fancy fixed,
Burns like Salt Petre, with dry Touchwood mixed:
And though cold Fear for time may stop its force,
'Twill soon like Fire confined, break out the worse,
Or like a Tide obstructed, reassume its course.
No Art could ever presume the stinking Stote,
Or change the lecherous Nature of the Goat.
No skilful Whitster ever found the slight,
To wash or bleach an Ethiopian White.
No gentle Usage truly will Assuage,
A Tyger's fierceness, or a Lyon's rage,
Stripes and severe Correction is the way,
When once they are thro'ly Conquered, they will obey,
It Is Whip and Spur, Commanding Reign and Bit,
That makes the unruly headstrong Horse submit,
So stubborn faithless Woman must be used,
Or Man by Woman basely be abused.
For after all the Endearments I should show,
At last she turned both Libertine and Shrow,
From my Submission grew perverse and proud,
Crabbed as Varges, and as Thunder loud;
Did what she pleased, would no Obedience own,
And ridiculed the Patience I had shown.
Feared no sharp threatenings, valued no disgrace,
But flung the wrongs she would done me in my Face;
Grew still more headstrong, turbulent and Lewd,
Filling my Mansion with a spurious brood.
Thus Brutal Lust her humane Reason drowned,
And her loose Tail obliged the Country round;
Advice, Reproof, Prayers, Tears, were flung away,
For still she grew more wicked every day;
Till by her equals scorned, my Servants fed,
The Brutal Rage of her adultrous bed.
Nay, in my absence trucled to my Groom,
And hugged the servile Traitor in my Room;
When these strange Tidings, Thunder struck my Ear,
And such Inhumane Wrongs were made appear,
On these just Grounds for a Divorce I su'd,
At last that headstrong Tyrant Wife subdued,
Canceled the marriage-bonds, and bastardiz'd her brood
Woman, thou worst of all Church-plagues, farewell;
Bad at the best, but at the worst a Hell;
Thou truss of wormwood, bitter Teaz of Life,
Thou Nursery of humane cares a wife.
Thou Apple-Eating Trayt'riss who began
The Wrath of Heaven, and Miseries of Man,
And have with never-failing diligence,
Improved the Curse to humane Race ever since.
Farewell Church-juggle that enslaved my Life,
But bless that Power that rid me of my Wife.
And now the Laws once more have set me free,
If Woman can again prevail with me,
My Flesh and Bones shall make my Wedding-Feast,
And none shall be Invited as my Guest,
TO attend my Bride, but the Devil and a Priest.
FINIS.
THE CHOICE, OR, THE Pleasures of a Country-LIFE, etc.
IF Heaven the grateful Liberty would give,
That I might choose my Method how to live:
And all those Hours propitious Fate should lend,
In blisful Ease and Satisfaction spend.
Near some fair Town I Would have a private Seat,
Built Uniform, not little, nor too great:
Better if on a rising Ground it stood,
Fields on this side, on that a Neighboring Wood.
It should within no other things contain,
But what are Useful, Necessary, Plain:
Methinks it is Nauseous, and I Would never endure
The needful pomp of gaudy Furniture:
A little Garden, grateful to the Eye,
And a cool Rivulet run murmuring by:
On whose delicious Banks a stately Row,
Of shady Limes, or Sicamores, should grow.
At the end of which a silent Study placed,
Should with the Noblest Authors there be graced.
Horace and Virgil, in whose mighty Lines,
Immortal Wit, and solid Learning shines.
Sharp Juvenal, and amorous Ovid too,
Who all the turns of Loves soft passion knew:
He, that with Judgment reads his Charming Lines,
In which strong Art, with stronger Nature joins,
Must grant* his Fancy does the best excel:
His thoughts so tender, and expressed so well;
With all those Moderns, Men of steady Sense,
Esteemed for Learning, and for Eloquence:
In some of these, as Fancy should advise,
I Would always take my Morning Exercise.
For sure, no Minutes bring us more Content,
Than those in pleasing useful Studies Spent.
I Would have a clear and competent Estate,
That I might live Genteely, but not Great.
As much as I could moderately spend,
A little more sometimes to oblige a Friend.
Nor should the Sons of Poverty Repine
Too much at Fortune, they should taste of mine,
And all that Objects of true Pity were,
Should be relieved with what my Wants could spare;
For what our Maker has too largely given,
Should be returned in gratitude to Heaven.
A frugal Plenty should my Table spread,
With healthful, not luxurious Dishes fed:
Enough to satisfy, and something more
To feed the Stranger, and the Neighboring Poor*
Strong Meat indulges Vice, and pampering Food
Creates Diseases; and inflames the Blood.
But what is sufficient to make Nature Strong,
And the bright Lamp of Life continue long,
I Would freely take, and as I did possess.
The bounteous Author of my Plenty bless.
I Would have a little Cellar, Cool and Neat,
With Humming Ale, and Virgin Wine Repleat.
Wine whets the Wit, improves its Native Force,
And gives a pleasant Flavor to Discourse;
By making all our Spirits Debonar,
Throws off the Lees, the Sedement of Care.
But as the greatest Blessing Heaven lends
May be debauched, and serve ignoble Ends;
So, but too often, the Grapes refreshing Juice,
Does many mischievous Effects produce,
My House, should no such rude Disorders know,
As from high Drinking consequently flow,
Nor would I use what was so kindly given,
To the Dishonor of Indulgent Heaven.
If any Neighbor came he should be free,
Used with Respect, and not uneasy be,
In my Retreat, or to himself or me.
What Freedom, Prudence, and Right Reason give,
All Men may with impunity receive;
But the least swerving from their Rules too much,
For what is forbidden us, it is Death to touch.
That Life might be more comfortable yet,
And all my Joys refined, sincere and great,
(...) choose too Friends, whose Company would be
(...) great Advance to my Felicity.
Well born, of Humors suited to my own;
^iscreet, and Men as well as Books have known.
^rave, Generous, Witty, and exactly free
from loose Behavior or Formality,
^iry, and Prudent, Merry, but not Light,
Quick in discerning, and in Judging Right;
^ecret they should, be faithful to their Trust,
(...) Reasoning Cool, Strong, Temperate and just.
^bliging, Open, without Huffing. Brave;
^risk in gay talking, and in sober Grave.
Close in dispute, but not tenacious, tried
^y solid Reason, and let that decide;
Not prone to Lust, Revenge, or envious Hate;
Nor busy Medlers with Intrigues of State.
Strangers to Slander, and sworn Foes to spite,
Not Quarrelsom, but Stout enough to Fight:
Loyal and Pious, Friends to Caesar true
As dying Martyrs to their Maker too.
^n their Society I could not miss,
A permanent, sincere, substantial Bliss,
Would bounteous Heaven once more indulge, I Would choose;
For, who would so much satisfaction lose,
As witty Nymphs in Conversation give)
Near some obliging modest-fair to live;
For there is that sweetness in a female Mind.
Which in a Man's we cannot find;
That by a secret, but a powerful Art,
Wind up the Spring of Life, and does impart
Fresh Vital Heat to the transported Heart.
I Would have her Reason, and her Passions sway,
Easy in Company, in private Gay.
Coy to a Fop, to the deserving free,
Still Constant to her self and Just to me.
A soul she should have for great Actions fit,
Prudence, and Wisdom to direct her Wit,
Courage to look bold danger in the Face,
No Fear, but only to be Proud, or Base:
Quick to advise by an Emergence pressed,
To give good Counsel, or to take the best.
I Would have the Expression of her Thoughts be such,
She might not seem Reserved, nor talk too much;
That shows a want of Judgment, and of Sense;
More than enough is but Impertinence.
Her Conduct Regular, her Mirth refined,
Civil to Strangers, to her Neighbors kind.
Averse to Vanity, Revenge and Pride,
In all the Methods of Deceit untried:
So faithful to her Friend, and good to all,
No Censure might upon her Actions fall.
Then would even Envy be compelled to say,
She goes the least of Woman kind astray.
To this fair Creature I Would sometimes retire,
Her conversation would new Joys inspire,
Give Life and Edge so keen no surly Care
Would venture to assault my Soul, or dare
Near my Retreat to hide one secret Snare.
But so Divine, so Noble a Repast,
I Would seldom, and with Moderation taste.
For highest Cordials all their Virtue lose,
By a too frequent, and too bold an use;
And what would cheer the Spirits in distress*
Ruins our Health when taken to Excess.
I Would be concerned in no litigious Jarr,
Beloved by all, not vainly popular:
Whatever Assistance I had power to bring
TO oblige my Country, or to serve my King,
Whenever they called, I Would readily afford,
My Tongue, My Pen, my Counsel, or my Sword.
Lawsuits I Would shun with as much Studious Care;
As I would Dens where hungry Lions are;
And rather put up Injuries than be
A Plague to him, who'd be a plague to me.
I value Quiet at a Price too great,
To give for my Revenge so dear a Rate:
For what do we by all our bustle gain,
But counterfeit Delight for real Pain.
If Heaven a date of many Years would give,
Thus I Would in Pleasure, Ease and Plenty live.
And as I near approached the Verge of Life,
Some kind Relation (for I Would have no Wife.)
Should take upon him all my Worldly Care,
While I did for a better State prepare.
Then I Would not be with any Trouble vexed,
Nor have the Evening of my Days perplexed.
But by a silent, and a peaceful Death,
Without a sigh Resign my Aged Breath:
And when committed to the Dust, I Would have
Few Tears, but Frindly dropped into my Grave.
Then would my Exit so propitious be,
All Men would wish to live and dye like me.
FINIS.
INSTRUCTIONS TO VANDER BANK, A Sequel to the Advice to the Poets: A POEM,
Occasioned by the Glorious Success of Her Majesty's ARMS, under the Command of
the Duke of MARLBOROVGH, the last Year in Flanders.

LONDON: ^^^nted and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-fryars, near the Waterside.
1709.

Instructions to Vander Bank, etc.
HAve all thy Bards, Britannia, spent their Vein?
Not one rich Genius left that can sustain
The expensive Task of Marlbro's last Campaign?
^uin'd by Conquests do they pray for Peace,
That the hard Taxes on the Muse may cease?
Then, Artist, who do Nature's Face express
(...) Silk and Gold, and Scenes of Action dress;
^ost figured Arras animated leave,
^pin a bright Story, or a Passion weave;
By mingling Threads can mingle Shade and Light,
Delineate Triumphs, or describe a Fight;
^o thou relate the Hero's Toil, record
The Train of new Events, that crowned his hardy Sword.
Since Thou will some Illustrious Patron need,
^ANN propitious Smile, Thou must succeed:
Her High Command inspired with Martial Flame
The Warrior's Breast. She by her powerful Name
^repar'd half-beaten Foes to yield the Day,
And for advancing Vict'rys made the Way.
Belgiam attend; and from thy noble Loom
^et the Great Chief August in Triumph come:
^or Blenheim's lofty Walls the Work design,
^n every Piece let Art and Labor shine;
^et Glorious Deeds the Briton's Palace crown,
Not those of ancient Heroes, but his own;
(...) the bright Series of his Story show
What Albion, what Mankind to Marlbro' owe.
I only rude Materials can suggest,
^ome by thy Art too hard to be expressed;
Choose what is proper, and neglect the rest.
^f thou with Care, and that thy Genius may
^mprove these Hints, refine this crude Essay;
Thou may Illustrious lasting Scenes contrive,
At least the Work will by its Subject live.
Let the first Labor on this lofty Theme
Express the Chief on Scalda's wondering Stream:
From him that Flood immortal Fame derives,
Rivals the Danube, and with Dola strives.
Describe his Steed, not patient of the Rein,
Champing his Foam, and bounding on the Plain;
Arch his high Neck, and graceful spread his Mane.
Give ample Nostrils breathing inbred Fire,
Eyes that confess the generous Mare and Sire:
Such Life and Pride, as in the Race appear,
Which Great Arabian Lords, and Persian Monarchs bear.
But with their chief Delight our Eyes to feed,
Mount the brave Leader on his managed Steed.
Give him a noble Seat, a Martial Mein,
Scornful of Danger. and in Arms serene:
Let his Right Hand his Sword vindictive sway,
Grasped with vast Strength, and spreading dreadful Day,
By which the Tyrant Monsters are subdued,
Who surfeited with Spoil, and riotous in Blood,
Oppression's howling Wilderness defend,
And Desolation's empty Realms extend.
The Looks of Justice to the Warrior give,
Where Wrath and Mercy for Dominion strive.
Intrepide Ardour well to Gallia known,
A Courtier Hero's Grace the mighty Briton's own.
When you express the Leader's Face and Eyes,
Studious with daring Labor to surprise,
Could you with inwrought Glory charm the Sight,
And interwoven Threads of labored Light,
You might succeed, and do the Conqueror Right.
Let Fame and Victory, in inferior Sky,
Hover with balanced Wings, and smiling fly,
Above his Head, and on his Function wait,
Assiduous to pronounce Europa's Fate.
On adverse Banks of Scalda's Silver Tide,
Delineate Gallia's Military Pride;
^xpress the Cohorts covering all the Plain,
^hick as the Waves that spread the troubled Main.
^how them advancing swift to Gaula's Walls,
Where Lesia's Current into Scalda falls:
^ill Marlbro's Marches did their Speed out do,
and stopped their Progress, to sustain the Foe.
(...) when a Stag, the Glory of the Wood,
^f beautous Limbs, and branching Antlets proud,
^ears the shrill Horn, and hallowing Huntsman's Cries,
^ing through the Forest, and embroil the Skys;
^e in experienced airy Feet secure,
^stens and mocks the Foe's collected Power.
^he Noise augments; then fleeter than the Wind
(...) flys, and leaves the clamorous Bland behind:
^^ll spent, he stands at Bay, he turns his Face,
and to a Fight decrees to change the Chase;
^etermined he expects the invading War,
^eluctant stays, and combats from Despair.
O Belgian, work a Piece by this Cartone,
and be this Picture by thy Art out done.
(...) confluent Nations spread a spacious Loom,
and give the mighty Host sufficient room;
^here more Brigades form each extended Wing,
^^an Eastern Monarchs to the Combat bring:
^ow the wide Van, the unmeasurable Rear,
^moderate Terror, and exuberant War.
^^re let the Flower and Strength of Spain advance,
(...) there the Belgian Slaves that courted France.
(...) the Helvian Martial Yout compose
(...) threatening Front, fierce mercenary Foes
^ho trade in Blood and Rapine, let the Gaul
(...) to the Rear, a safer Station, fall.
^how bow the Chief sprung ardent to the Fight,
Arms refulgent, as Meridian Light;
(...), if the Loom this Labor will allow,
(...) Hero in distinct Compartments show,
^^porting here his Friends, and breaking there the Foe.
(...) him in every Place surprise the Sight,
(...) dispersed and multiplied in Fight:
As if the Leader, watchful to protect
His Squadrons, did Ubiquity affect.
Here let him stand, intrepid and sedate,
Dispensing high Commands, the Messages of Fate:
There let his Arms his reeking Fauchion weild,
Triumph in Slaughter, and pollute the Field
With glorious Spoil, while like the fabled God
Of War, through thick embattled Deaths he rode:
Let him the Vale with Rout and Ruin fill,
Lik Torrents rushing from an Alpine Hill;
Or a high Wind, that over the Desert sweeps,
Lays wast the Woods, and rolls the Sand in Heaps:
Where his destructive Sword the Foe pursued,
Express the Lanes the glittring Feller hewed
Wide, as the Openings in a wasted Wood.
Let Streams of Blood the Victor's Wrath attest,
A Purple Vintage from the Slain expressed.
Show Warriors quivering in the Pangs of Death,
Rolling their Eyes, and gasping out their Breath:
While scattered Arms, and Horse and Horsemen slain
And ignominious Medly spread the Plain.
Weave Desolation, let prodigious Wast,
And Tracks of Death mark where the Victor past,
As Conflagrations are by Ruins traced.
On a new Scene attentive Care bestow,
A Princely Youth in polished Armor show:
Let him advance, and as a Seraph bright,
Ravish at once, and terrify the Sight.
Place him conspicuous midst the hostile Troops,
Hanover's Pride, and Albion's distant Hopes:
Whose early Deeds and blossoming Renown;
To wondering Europe have the Hero shown;
With brave Impatience let him seek the Fight,
Eager of Fame, and trembling with Delight.
As when the Eaglet, whom the Parent trys,
Not used to soar, nor conscious of the Skys,
Against the brighest Radiance of the Sun
Mount bold, and makes the genuine Offspring know^
^o the you Hero's Eyes undazled bear
The Beams of Glory, and the Blaze of War.
Through glittring Deaths, Storms of exploded Flame,
Ardent aspires to the bright Mark of Fame,
And makes his first Effort his high Descent proclaim.
^how how he flew intrepid on the Foe,
^lung'd deep amidst the Files, and forced hi Passage through.
^ow the great Youth with Veteran Captains vy'd,
What Trophys crowned a Sword till then untried:
^o a young Lion, of his matchless Power
Yet ignorant, but grown for Fight mature,
^f he by Chance a shaggy Bear descrys,
Determined to the Combat rapide flys;
Lashing his Sides he roars, and from afar,
Through ecchoing Hills, denounces dreadful War.
An easy Conquest crown his first Campaign;
The Yellow Warrior, Master of the Plain,
Now in his vast discovered Strength secure,
Wonders, and grieves he proved it not before.
Then let Germania's Angel, and his Own,
Each bearing high a Shield and Laurel Crown,
Fly watchful over his Head, with one to guard
His Life, with one his Valor to reward.
Artist record, how fair Britannia's Isle,
When first she heard th Youth's adventrous Foil,
Scarce pleased with Glory from too daring Fight,
Felt proffered Joy suspended by Affright:
While her tall Oaks shake on the Mountain's Brow,
And refluent Streams their Consternation show.
Work a new Piece, describe the Gallic Powers
Quitting the Field to reach Gandava's Towers;
Affright and Horror in their Looks express
Finished Confusion, and the last Distress.
Form pale Amazement's undissembled Air,
And the wild Features of extreme Despair:
^how how their Generals, to restore the Fight,
Confirm their Legions, and prevent their Flight,
Ashamed, enraged and griev', did these upbraid,
Encourage those, some threaten, some persuade.
But how their fruitless Accents beat th Air?
What Words can charm inexorable Fears?
Can Terror listen? Can Distraction hear?
Show how the Gauls disordered Cohors fled,
Express their Anguish, an perplexing Dread;
While Horse and Foot strove each to have the Van,
And Chiefs, Companions of the private Man,
Promiscuous Shame, disregimented ran.
So, when incumbent tempests press the Deep,
And rouse the frighted Billows from their Sleep,
The liquid Legions crouding fly so fast,
And shove each other with such headlong have,
That sometimes they are rid, and sometimes ride,
By turns exalt their Heads, by turns subside,
Overwhelm each other, and distress the Tide.
The mighty General, whom the Gauls adore,
To Belgia's Plains called from Ausonia's Shore,
Gallia's declining Empire to restore,
To teach her Troops new Laurels to acquire,
And in their Breasts rekindle Martial Fire,
Reluctant fled, in adverse Fortune great,
Caught in the Eddy of his Monarch's Fate.
He blamed the Stars, that on his Conduct frowned,
And Marlbro, thy Superior Genius owned.
So a fierce Boar, on Mauritania's Plain,
The Lion's Fury does a while sustain,
Till torn and sunk with vast Expense of Blood,
He quits the Field, and seeks the sheltering Wood;
He grinds his Teeth, impatient of Defeat,
Indignant foams, fain would the War repeat,
Looks back and threatens in his four Retreat.
Then show the Conqueror in another Scene,
Protecting with his Arms the brave Eugene;
While he the matchless Strength of Lisle assailed,
And over her haughty Towr'rs with loud applause prevailed
Witness ye six times twenty thousands Gauls,
Who when advanced near Lilla's lofty Walls
To face the Foe, were honored with the Sight
Of the brave Cohorts, which you felt in Fight:
Witness ye Generals, and ye Princes, proud
Of Veins distended with Imperial Blood,
For your Spectators of the Action stood.
Next let the Chief advance to Scalda's Banks,
To drive the unactive Gaul, whose warlike Ranks
Spread thick as Locusts, on the adverse Side,
Did in their Guardian Flood, and high-rais'd Works confide.
It Is done; for when their Outgaurds saw from far
The Briton's Arms, and cried, for Fight prepare;
The boastful Warrious Hearts inglorious melt,
And struck with his Approach, their well-known Passion felt.
Assured no more, while Marlbro's Sword invades,
By Rivers, Lines, and numberless Brigades;
As Terror dictates, they direct their Flight,
Spread all the Plain with Marks of wild Affright,
And ignominuous Rout, but none of Fight,
Let Churchill next his Conquering Cohorts lead,
To save Brussella, fair Brabantia's Head:
To break the united Arms of France and Spain,
And make the Threats of proud Bavaria vain.
Show how the Foe the Scheld's Contagion caught,
Gave cheap Renown, and left the Field unfought:
And how the Boian Prince, enraged to find
The Laurels blasted for his Brow designed,
With troubled Pride, and Anguish in his Eyes,
Chased a third time before the Briton flys:
He cu^s'd the Victo who his Arms repel'd,
And cruel Fate, that still Success withheld,
But more the Coward and Guardians of the Scheld.
So when a rav'ning Wolf has long patrol'd,
And found at length a Placr to leap the Fold,
He seems already of his Prey possessed,
And licks his Jaws preluding to the Feast:
If then the Master Shepherd with his Band
Arrives their brandished Weapons in their Hand,
The prowling Robber shuns unequal Fight,
And grins, and growls, and rages in his Flight.
While Gallia's cantoned Troops inglorious rest,
With constant Flights, and long unactive Toil oppressed,
O Britain! thy Great Chief his Ease denis,
Patient of Labor and inclement Skys,
Still with new Ardour, to new Conquest flys.
Here fresh Materials for the Loom prepare,
And weave a cold white Winter-Piece of War.
Even then a Bloom of spreading Glory show
And verdant Laurels forced from Beds of Snow.
Confed'rate Powers of Flandria, Gallia, Spain,
A numerous Army destined to sustain
The Invading Foe, did Ganda's Walls maintain.
Much in their Lines, and in the River's Tide,
Much in their Chiefs and Numbers they confide,
But more they trusted to the intemperate Air,
And growing Rigor of the expiring Year:
They hoped that Tempests, armed with Snow and Sleet,
Winds, that from Hyperborean Mountains beat
With furious Wings the bleak untrodden Plain,
And Crystal Deserts of the frocen Main,
That all the embattled Meteors would conspire
To charge and force the Briton to retire.
In vain -- even then the Hero undismayed,
Advanced his Ensigns, and his wrath displayed:
Against perfidious Ghent his Batt'ry reared,
And Winter-Thunder for her Walls prepared,
The Gallic Generals saw, and Marlbro's Arms revered
To pay due Honor to their Royal Head
Burgundia's Lord, they in his Footsteps tread,
Of Gallic Blood Effusion to decline,
Yield without Combat, and the Town resign.
How Marlbro's Deeds ring through the Belgian Skys!
How swift their Terror propagated flys!
How soon it reached the listening Towns around!
How Bruges Turrots trembled at the Sound!
How frighted, how amazed her Warriors stood,
Their Sinews slackened, and congealed their Blood!
Show, Artist, how their Cohorts, winged with Fear,
Fled from the Foe, ever yet he did appear.
Thus Churchill sends abroad a conquering Name,
And wounds at distance by his missive Fame.
So often whem Storms from Barbary's Sunburned Soil,
Advance impetuous, and the Deep embroil,
The flying Waves the Infection swift convey,
And with their pannic Dread distract Hesperia's Sea,
Which rolls and works beneath a Sky serene,
Disturbed by Winds unheard, and wrathful Clouds unseen.
Then show how Burga's Counselors, of State,
And Lords deputed, on the Briton wait,
To make their low Submission, and implore
His Mercy to protect them from his Power.
The Hero's Triumphs equal thus appear,
Crowning alike each Season of the Year;
Even Winter's self, whose frozen hoary Head
Was never before with Martial Honors spread,
For want of Deeds Illustrious cannot complain,
Sharing the Glory of this Great Campaign.
An Arch of Triumph in another Piece,
Artist, contrive, like those of Rome or Greece.
What Master-Sculptors from in Basse Relieve,
Do thou in bold expressive Figures weave.
Let Horsemen first in long Procession bear
Unnumber'd Ensigns, high displayed in Air,
The Glorious Trophys of successful War:
Bavaria's Standards, Emblems of the Fall
Of Neighbor Power's that aid the faithless Gaul;
False Flandria's Colors and Castilia's Pride,
And with thy VVarriors Blood, vain King, thy Lillys died.
Next let the Train that bear the Spoils of France,
Augment the Triumph, and in Turn advance;
Describe them laboring with the unweildy Prize,
Their tortured Sinews, and their starting Eyes:
Let them beneath their rich Oppression bow,
And seem to groan and stagger as they go.
Show how the Throng with Hands upheld adore
Justice Divine, that has, by ANNA's Power,
Compelled the Gaul his Rapine to restore:
That has avenged the injured Realms around,
Restrained licentious Might, and proud Ambition bound.
In a high Car the laureled Victor place,
Drawn by the noblest steeds of Belgic Race:
Through deep applauding Crowds on either side
Sublime, yet unelated, let him ride.
The seraph Chiefs such Moderation showed,
When to the Gates of Hell their Host pursued
The Rebel powers, and through the unlightsom way
Returned in Triumph to the Coasts of day.
Of various Nations let a confluent Throng
Hang on his Wheels, as slow they roll along:
Let them, like crouding Waves, each other press,
And strain their eager Eyes to see and bless.
Add to the Martial Pomp an endless Train
Of Warrior Slaves that drag the Conqueror's Chain.
Let Lords and Chiefs, impatient of disgrace,
With haughty Grief and melancholy Pace,
With scornful, sullen shame their Fetters wear,
And pant amidst the Crowd behind the Hero's Car.
Let high Augusta's Sons transported meet,
And with loud Joy the advancing Victor greet;
And let her Speaker, for Superior Sense
Renowned, as well as Charming Eloquence,
A while the Progress of the Triumph stay,
While he Augusta's Thanks does to the Conqu'ror pay.
Then let the Bards in humble manner stand,
With Distichs, Sonnets, Prologues in their Hand,
In Marlbro's Praise: It Is all, alas! we know
That from their duty exhausted Springs can flow.
Let all the Pomp of Decoration grace
The high Pillasters, and the Structure's Face;
Let curious Motto's, Hieroglyphic Art,
And mystic Emblems shine on every Part.
Here Liberty in all her Heavenly Charms,
With her gay Offspring plenty in her Arms,
With humble Gesture, and a cheerful Grace,
May Homage pay, and Marlbro's Feet embrace;
Who broke her Chains, restored her Rights Divine,
And in her native Beautys bid her shine.
There, to extend the Briton's just Renown,
Show dungeons opened, prisons broken down,
Fetters and Chains in heaps neglected thrown:
Which late tormented Slaves and Captives wore,
But, O auspious Day! shall wear no more.
Let shouting Throngs of these late rescued Slaves,
Frequent as sailing Clouds, or rolling Waves;
With Flowers and verdant Branches spread his Road,
And prostrate kiss the Ground their brave deliv'rer trod
Then raise in Piles the Gibbet, Rack and Wheel,
And all the Tortures wrought of Cord or steell;
Plenty of death, and Luxury of Pain,
Which Master Tyrants from their fertile Brain,
And cursed Projectors of destruction find,
Curious in Torment to afflict Mankind.
Let these congested Engines, set on fire
By Marlbro's generous Hand, in Flames aspire:
Let them as Fires of public Joy arise,
With their applauded ruin fill the Skys,
To heaven and Liberty a grateful Sacrifice.
Attempt another noble work, and raise
A lofty Column to the Hero's Praise.
What tho Augusta's Sons, who still reveal
In Liberty's defense an ardent Zeal,
Studious of Truth and Justice, never adore
Thy Alters, Rome, nor, Gaul, thy lawless Power,
Should, as they ought, a stately Pillar rear,
That may the Victor's weight of Glory bear;
Be this allowed, do thou thy Task pursue:
For should not all the Arts conspire to show
To the great Briton's Deeds the Honors due?
Then with the sculptor and the Architect,
Artist, contend, and the proud Pile erect.
With Marlbro's wondrous story fill the space
Between the Spires, which the high Column grace,
Ascending to the summit from the Base.
Be first his swit and glorious Course expressed,
When he from Belgia's Regions to the East
Transferred the hardy War, did bold advance
To whelm the Danube o'ere the pride of France:
Through distant Empires to extend the Fame
Of Albion's Arms, and ANNA's awful Name.
Immortal Deeds at Schelenbrug display;
The Miracles of Blenheim's Glorious day,
Down all the Ebb of Time to Men unborn convey.
Next show the Hero on Ramillia's plain,
His deathless Laurels, and the Illustrious Train
Of famed Events, which crowned that Great Campaign.
The Wonders done at Oudenard repeat,
The Briton's Triumphs, and the Gaul's defeat;
The matchless Conduct and the hardy Toil,
That wrested from the Foe his darling Lisle;
The Honor won in passing Scalda's Flood,
Brussella saved, and Ganda's Towers subdued.
The Angle of the Pedestal you will grace
With Figures proper to adorn each place;
Choose of the following which shall please you best,
If by the Loom all cannot be expressed,
Chained Tyranny expose, delineate well
The odious Features of this Fiend of Hell.
To form a Figure, horrible to Sight,
All Scythia's Terrors Lybia's plagues unite,
A dreadful Combination of Affright.
Give to her Eyes a red malignant Glare,
And let the Monster's threefold Head for Hair,
The Ornament of Fiends, long curling Vipers, wear.
Let them enraged their crested Necks erect,
And forked Deaths with cloven Tongues eject,
The Poets, who in Arms their Pallas dressed,
Had in their Fiction greater Art expressed;
If in her fatal Schield they had displayed
Fierce Tyranny's, and not the Gorgon's Head.
Give her the surest Weapons to destroy,
Which salvage Beasts, and rav'ning Birds employ:
The dragon's Teeth, the Alligator's Jaws,
The Eagle's pounces, and the Lion's paws;
Distend her hedious Belly with a Load
Of Limbs devoured, and Seas of guiltless Blood.
On the next Corner, with ingenious pains,
Show vanquished Envy bound with brazen Chains;
Let her lean Face infernal Features wear,
A spleenful Aspect, and a scornful Air:
With its last dregs let a black Jaundice taint
Her hateful Skin, and loathsome Visage paint.
Make her fietce Eyes, like livid Flames of Hell,
Burn bloodshot in their urns, and backward dwell,
Deep in their Caves, like Furys in their Cell.
Let her, with endless self-tormenting Care,
Gnaw her own Heart, and her own Bowels tear:
Show how her Jaws her meagre Limbs devour,
Green Floods of Hemlock, Gall and Wormwood pour
Down her wide Throat, to poison every Vein,
Inflame her Bosom, and distract her Brain.
Show with what Rage the Captive Fury views
The spreading Laurels on the Victor's Brows;
While she, as pale and hideous as despair,
Gnashes her Teeth, and grasps her snaky Hair.
Next on the Base, dissimulation bind,
A mild and courteous, but an odious Fiend;
VVo labors most to win us to believe
Her Vows unfeigned when most she would deceive.
Give her a plain and unaffected Air,
Well imitated Truth, and Eyes sincere,
and dropping here and there a faithless Tear.
Express her artful smiles, that hide the Art,
^ Friendly manner that ensnares the Heart.
^n her Right Hand a Monarch's Scepter place,
And her long Robe of State with Lillys grace;
Torn Treatys interweave, and solemn Leagues
Broke, or eluded by refined Intrigues:
^he mocks the Faith that once did Princes bind,
As the base Virtue of a Vulgar Mind:
Masks with her sacred Vows deliberate Fraud,
And to attest her Guilt dares invocate her God.
Express Ambition next in Fetters bound,
Sunk from her towering height, and groveling on the Ground^
Let thwarted pride sit sullen on her Brow,
And Indignation in her Eyeballs glow.
Let anxious Looks her inward Care atttest,
And prove that deep designs are laboring in her Breast;
That warring Passions strive within for vent,
Cruel Revenge, and haughty discontent:
Passions, that still the Fury wakeful keep,
As turbulent as Winds, and restless as the deep.
In some fit place let pleased Spactators see
The Marks of blasted pomp, and ruined Dignity:
Rich purple Robes polluted, broken Crowns,
Fragments of Scepters, and subverted Thrones;
Sad VVrecks of Power, which on the Aspiring wait
In troubled Empires, and in Storms of State.
Her adverse Fate reluctant let her bear,
Her Fetters spurn, her Limbs in Anguish tear:
Show how she raves to find her pomp depressed,
Her Foes exalted, and her Frinds distressed;
That she compelled must Spoils immense restore,
Acquired by fraud, or grasped by greedy power;
Contract her Fronter, and her Slaves release,
And beg the Conqueror to prescribe a Peace.
FINIS.
DAPHNIS: OR, A Pastoral Elegy Upon the Unfortunate DEATH OF Mr. THOMAS CREECH.
WITH A POEM ON The Despairing Lover, and The Despairing Shepherd.

LONDON: ^rinted and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-Fryars, near the Waterside,
1709.

Daphnis, etc.
THYRSIS. ALEXIS. THE Rosy Morning with prevailing Light
Had now dispelled the humid Shades of Night,
and smiling Phoebus spread his Thirsty Beams
^o drink the Dew, and taste the Silver Streams:
When on a rising Mountain's fragrant Side
(...) Flora decked in all her gaudy Pride;
^he mourning Shepherd, young Alexis lay,
^^ck'ning at Light, and weary of the Day:
^n conscious Heaven he fixed his weeping Eyes,
(...) if he sought his Daphnis in the Skies.
^aphnis, who from the Earth was lately fled;
^aphnis, (he living) loved and mourned for Daphnis dead.
^hen Generous Fortune kindly brought that way
(...) Thyrsis to assist the pensive Boy,
^o be the kind Companion of his Woe;
that both their Tears might in one Current flow:
^hus then the Youth began a doleful Strain,
and thus bespoke the Sympathizing Swain.
Alexis. Ah Thyrsis! have thou heard the dismal Tale?
^ow Daphnis died in yonder Gloomy Vale!
(...), could thou think that he, whose Verse could move
Rock to Pity, or a Stone to Love:
^ho could, like Ovid, tenderest Thoughts instill
^ould fall a Victim to a Woman's Will?

Thyrsis. Yes, Shepherd, yes; the Story is too true!
Look, how the Groves have changed their verdant Hue!
The withered Leaves he scattered all around,
And blasted Flowers disgrace the Sacred Ground.
Yes, he is dead! the poor unhappy Swain,
Loved beauteous LALAGE, but loved in vain;
Fantastic, proud, and conscious of her Charms,
She scorned his Love, and fled his wishing Arms.
Naught could prevail, though all Love's Arts he tried:
She sacrificed the Shepherd to her Pride.
Ungentle Nymph, to thee we owe his Death,
'Twas LALAGE that robbed poor Daphnis of his Breath

Alexis. Ah cruel Nymph! we have lost the learned Swa^
That ever sung on our Arcadia's Plain:
What sprightly Thoughts, what Joy did he inspire!
When with such Art he touched the Roman Lyre?
What tender Pity did our Souls invade,
When he bewailed the Royal Grecian Maid?
How well his Muse the Fatal Story told,
When she the poor Lucretia's Fate condol'd?
When Daphnis Sung, how did our Groves rejoice,
And Grotto's Echo to his charming Voice?
How slow did silent Ousa roll along,
When Daphnis taught us great Lucretia's Song?
Where wandering Atoms in Confusion hurled,
Agreed by Chance, and so composed a World.
Whilst Nervous Numbers with harmonious Feet,
In such a soft, and tuneful Cadence meet;
As (to his lasting Honor) fully prove
Chance could not in such Beauteous Order move.
Then, Cruel Nymph, how could thy Pride refuse
So soft a Lover and so sweet a Muse?
Had thou but yielded to our Daphnis Love,
On every Green, in every blooming Grove,
The Nymphs and Swains had blessed thy happy Name,
And LALAGE, and Daphnis filled the Mouth of Fam^
But now both Nymphs, and Swains unite their Breath,
To Curse thy Scorn, and mourn the Shepherd's Death:
Whose Shade now wandering in the pensive Grove,
^till, still complains of LALAGE, and Love.
Daphnis farewell, farewell unhappy Swain!
May thou in Lethe's Lake forget thy Pain,
and in Oblivion sleep, till thou no more
Remember what thou did, or what thou were before.

Thyrsis. See yonder Sheep, how ragged now and bare,
^ happy Flock, whilst they were Daphnis Care,
^ut now they mope, and straggling over the Plain
Lament all Day, and mourn their absent Swain:
No more they Joy to crop the tender Buds,
Nor seek at Noon cool Springs, and shady Woods.
^n neither Sun, nor Shade, they now delight,
Nor dread the Foxes, or the Wolves by Night.
Here pined to Death, a harmless Lambkin lies,
and there for Grief his bleating Mother dies:
^s if she did with her departing Breath
^nvoke just Heaven t'avenge her Master's Death.

Alexis. And Pan will sure revenge the Shepherd's Fate
^ltho' perhaps his Vengeance comes but late.
Last Night returning home, in yonder Grove,
Where we were used to sing and talk of Love,
^ heard great Pan, and all the Sylvan Train
Of Daphnis Love, and Daphnis Death complain.
The weeping Heavens a Shower of Tears distilled,
And all the Woods were with loud Sorrow filled.
Whilst mournful Echoes all their Sighs rebound,
Wishing they had been something more than Sound.
Pan most of all the Shepherd's Death deplored,
He Daphnis loved, and Daphnis him adored.
Oh (my dear Boy) he cried, why would thou dar^
To view a Face so tempting, and so Fair?
Why, why did thou indulge the secret Fire?
Ah! why would thou admit the ^ond Desire,
And hope the imperious LALAGE to move?
Why did thou die? (alas!) why did thou Love?
But it is in vain to ask; 'twas so decreed,
So I coy Syrinx chased, and caught a trembling Reed.
Fair Fatal Sex! who can our Souls surprise
With tender Looks, and soft bewitching Eyes,
Were you but half as pitiful and kind,
The God of Love had not been counted blind.
On you we Gaze, and feel a pleasing Pain
Steal to our Hearts, and glide through every Vein.
Till drunk with Love our Weakness we betray;
And die, if you refuse to yield the Joy!
More had he spoke; but Words began to fail,
And breathless Echoes murmured in the Vale;
Convulsive Sorrow swelled his throbbing Breast,
Adieu! adieu! he cried, and sighed the rest.

Thyrsis. But say what Chance, what luckless Fortune die
The scornful Virgin to the Shepherd's View?
Where did his fatal Passion first begin?
Ah! Where was she by wretched Daphnis seen?

Alexis. Beneath a Shade to shun the Heat of Day,
On Ousa's flowery Banks our Daphnis lay;
Whilst his glad Flocks around their Master feed,
Charmed with the Music of his Voice, and Reed:
Of Chaos first he sung, and boundless Space,
Before the Birth of Matter, Time, or Place:
Before Old Night had felt the piercing Ray
Of Light, and yielding to invading Day.
Then, how the wondrous Universe began,
What Order through the new-made Structure ran?
The Birth of Nature, and the Birth of Man.
Then changed his Subject, and in softer Strains
Discovered Grecian Loves, to British Swains.
Whilst LALAGE from an adjacent Glade,
(Where trembling Boughs composed a moving Shade)
With Pleasure listened to his warbling Airs,
And drunk the pleasing Tales with greedy Ears:
Then over the Lawns she trips with nimble Feet
To know who 'twas sung so divinely Sweet;
And as she passed along, the impatient Maid
With curious Eyes each secret Place surveyed,
Still following Echo as a faithful Guide,
Till she at distance had the Shepherd spied:

Thyrsis. Ah happy Swain!
Had thou but fled from that unhappy Place,
And never seen her fair enchanting Face,
Thou yet had been the Lord of all our Plains,
And we yet heard thy soft harmonious Strains.

Alexis. But Daphnis to his Fate with Pleasure run,
He saw the Nymph, he loved, and was undone.
With haughty Looks, and a disdainful Mien
Apace she walked, and crossed the shaded Green;
The Shepherd viewed her as she passed along,
Dropped down his Reed, and strait forgot his Song,
With wishing Eyes he gazed upon her Charms,
And would have died to have died within her Arms;
Deep Draughts of Love he drunk, and strong Desire,
His Breast, like Aetna, glowed with inward Fire;
Which when the Nymph perceived, more proud and coy
She looked, and smiled with a malicious Joy.
Nor could he since the cruel Tyrant move
(Obdurate Maid) to Pity or to Love.
The sad, the direful Passion still increased,
Ten Thousand raging Thoughts distract his Breast.
His Flock and darling Muse no longer were
His dear Delight, his Pleasure, and his Care;
The Nymph, the Nymph, he thinks of naught but her.
But hapless Youth! --
The more he loved, the more she scorned his Flame,
And seemed to hate both Love and Daphnis Name.
Then from our Groves to yonder Wood he flies,
(Strange Power of Love!) and there despairing dies.

Thyrsis. The last time I the wretched Swain beheld,
Was on a Sunny Bank in Aegon's Field;
All Fire himself, he minded not to shun
The Heat of Day, or fly the scorching Sun,
Wildly he star'd, his Face looked pale, and wan,
He sighed and languish'd like a dying Man.
When to him thus I spoke --
Uhappy Youth! -- and can there be no Cure,
What Tortures do thou feel, what Pains endure?
Whilst by a cruel unrelenting Maid,
Thou art to Misery, and Death betrayed.
Ah, can thou not forget her fatal Charms,
And take some kinder Beauty to thy Arms?
Return, return to our abandoned Grove;
And there thou may be happy in thy Love.
For thee in amorous Fires Lycoris burns,
For thee the lovely Galatea mourns.
Were thou from this inglorious Bondage free,
A Thousand Blessings wait to fall on thee.
The Jolly Troops that used to hear thy Lays,
And crown thy Brows with Wreaths of verdant Bays:
In Sighs and Tears of thy hard Fate complain,
Begging kind Heaven to break the subtle Chain
Which holds thy Heart; and thy sweet Muse restore;
That thou may charm them as thou did before.
Thy scattered Flocks too over the Forests roam,
Wanting their Shepherd to compel them home.
Rise then, dear Daphnis, give this Fondness over,
And think of cruel LALAGE no more.
Thus I -- and thus replied the sighing Swain,
Ah Thyrsis, if thou would remove my Pain,
Give me my Love, so I may sooth my Grief,
Forget my Cares, and grow more fond of Life*
For though so proud, disdainful, and unkind,
Without her I can hope no Peace to find;
My wandering Thoughts her Form does still pursue,
And still my Soul has LALAGE in view.
Ah savage Fair! would thou this Bounty give,
(For since thou will not Love, I cannot Live)
Would thou but deign to close my trembling Eyes,
Or drop a Tear or two, as Daphnis dies:
With Joy, I Would meet the cold Embrace of Death,
And bless my Charmer with my latest Breath.
Did thou but Rage with such a fierce Desire,
I Would rush through foaming Seas, and Storms of Fire,
^ttempt the greatest Dangers, and not grieve
To part with Life, so LALAGE might Live.
But thou malicious Fair one, with Disdain!
Laughs at my Grief, and smiling mock'st my Pain.
Be gone ye Quacks, your Arts no longer boast,
^n spite of all your Medicines I am lost;
Be gone ye Cheats, who with vain Charms pretend
To make departed Shades again ascend:
Be gone ye Zealots, who at Altars bow;
The Gods are deaf, and cannot hear you now.
(...) rave, I rage, I burn, oh! let me fly
To some dark desert Place, and there I Will die.
Thus spoke the Swain, and acted as he said,
Raving to yonder gloomy Wood he fled.
Where, for a while, with piercing Sighs and Groans
He fills the Shades, and his dire Fate bemoans;
Repeating still the cruel Charmer's Name,
And on each Tree records his hapless Flame.
Till quite overwhelmed with Woe and drowned in Grief,
He thus gave up the sad remains of Life.
Farewell ye Swains! to Death's dark Courts I go
To mourn amongst the weeping Shades below.
Farewell ye Streams, and conscious Groves, he cried:
So did the dreadful Work of Fate, and died.

Alexis. Unhappy Youth! What could the Fates design
To bless the World with such a Muse as thine,
Yet suffer Death to ravish her away,
^'er she could half her smiling Charms display?
What Star, what baleful Planet ruled thy Birth?
^hedding malignant Rays upon the Earth,
That thou should die amidst thy Vernal Bloom,
before thy Muse had brought her Harvest home!
But 'twas a dismal, sad, untimely Death
That robbed so soon the Shepherd of his Breath.
Thus blooming Trees are nipt with killing Frost,
Thus budding Flowers harsh Mildews often blast.
Had thou survived, what Wonders had we seen!
What listening Crowds had thronged each Grove and Green
Upon thy Voice the Nymphs and Swains had hung,
As when before great Tyt'rus sweetly sung.

Thyrsis. But Tytyrus is gone, and Daphnis fled,
And all our Hopes are with the Shepherds, dead.
Farewell dear Youth, so fast my Tears do flow,
That Words are wanting to express my Woe.
As Hebrus stopped for Grief his golden Side,
When on its Banks the tuneful Orpheus died;
So do our Groves, and Rivers seem to mourn,
In silent Sorrow, for their Swains return.
But thou can never return --
For thou have crossed the irreameable Lake,
And Chaeron's Boat comes always empty back.
Here did the Swains their mournful Theme give over,
Sighs stopped their Words, and they could speak no more.

THE Despairing Lover.
WIth inauspicious Love a wretched Swain
Pursued the fairest Nymph of all the Plain;
Fairest indeed, but prouder far than fair,
^he plunged him hopeless in a deep Despair:
Her Heavenly Form too haughtily she prized,
His Person hated, and his Gifts despised:
Nor knew the Force of Cupid's cruel Darts,
Nor feared his awful Power on humane Hearts;
But either from her hopeless Lover fled,
Or with disdainful Glances shot him dead.
No Kiss, no Look, to cheer the drooping Boy:
No Word she spoke, she scorned even to deny.
But as a hunted Panther casts about
Her glaring Eyes, and pricks her listening Ears to scour,
^o she, to shun his Toils, her Cares employed,
And fiercely in her savage Freedom joy'd.
Her Mouth she writhed, her Forehead taught to frown,
Her Eyes to sparkle fires to Love unknown:
Her sallow Cheeks her envious Mind did show,
and every Feature spoke aloud the Curstness of a Shrew.
Yet could not he his obvious Fate escape,
His Love still dressed her in a pleasing Shape:
and every sullen Frown, and bitter Scorn
But fanned the Fuel that too fast did burn.
Long time, unequal to his mighty Pain,
He strove to curb it, but he strove in vain:
At last his Woes broke out, and begged Relief
With Tears, the dumb Petitioners of Grief.
With Tears so tender, as adorned his Love;
And any Heart, but only hers would move:
Trembling before her bolted Doors he stood;
And there poured out the uprofitable Flood:
Staring his Eyes, and haggard was his Look;
Then kissing first the Threshold, thus he spoke.
Ah Nymph! more cruel than of humane Race,
Thy Tygress Heart belies thy Angel Face:
Too well thou show'st thy Pedigree from Stone;
Thy Grandames was the first by Pyrrha thrown:
Wnworthy thou to be so long desired;
But so my Love, and so my Fate required,
I beg not now (for it is in vain) to live;
But take this Gift, the last that I can give.
This friendly Cord shall soon decide the Strife,
Betwixt my lingering Love and loathsome Life;
This Moment puts an end to all my Pain;
I shall no more despair, nor thou disdain.
Farewell Ungrateful and Unkind, I go
Condemned by thee to those sad Shades below.
I go the extremest Remedy to prove,
To drink Oblivion, and to drench my Love.
There happily to lose my long Desires:
But ah, what Draught so deep to quench my Fires!
Farewell ye never opening Gates, ye Stones
And Threshold guilty of my Midnight Moans;
What I have suffered here you know too well;
What I shall do the Gods and I can tell.
The Rose is fragrant, but it fades in time,
The Violet sweet, but quickly past the Prime;
White Lillies hang their Heads and soon decay,
And whiter Snow in Minutes melts away:
Such is your blooming Youth, and withering so;
The time will come, it will, when you shall know
The Rage of Love; your haughty Heart shall burn
In Flames like mine, and meet a like return.
Obdurate as you are, oh, hear at least
My dying Prayers, and grant my last Request!
When first you open your Doors, and passing by
The sad ill Omend Object meets your Eye,
Think it not lost, a Moment if you stay;
The breathless Wretch, so made by you, survey:
Some cruel Pleasure will from thence arise,
To view the mighty ravage of your Eyes.
I wish, (but Oh! my Wish is vain, I fear,)
The kind Oblation of a falling Tear:
Then loose the Knot, and take me from the place,
And spread your Mantle over my grizly Face;
Upon my livid Lips bestow a Kiss:
O envy not the dead, they feel not Bliss!
Nor fear your Kisses can restore my Breath;
Even you are not more pitiless than Death.
Then for my Corpse a homely Grave provide,
Which Love and me from public Scorn may hide.
Thrice call upon my Name, thrice beat your Breast,
And hail me thrice to everlasting Rest:
Last let my Tomb this sad Inscription bear,
A Wretch whom Love has killed lies buried here;
Oh, Passengers, Aminta's Eye's beware.
Thus having said, and furious with his Love;
He heaved with more than humane Force, to m^^e
A weighty Stone, (the Labor of a Team,)
And raised from thence he reached the Neighboring Beam*
Around its Bulk a sliding Knot he throws;
And fitted to his Neck the fatal Noose:
Then spurning backward took a Swing, till Death
Crept up, and stopped the passage of his Breath.
The Bounce burst open the Door; the Scornful Fair
Relentless looked, and saw him beat his quivering Feet in Air.
Nor wept his Fate, nor cast a pitying Eye,
Nor took him down, but brusht regardless by:
And as she passed, her Chance or Fate was such,
Her Garments touched the Dead, polluted by the touch.
Next to the Dance, thence to the Bath did move;
The Bath was sacred to the God of Love:
Whose injured Image, with a wrathful Eye,
Stood threatening from a Pedestal on high:
Nodding a while; and watching of his Blow,
He fell; and falling crushed the ungrateful Nymph below:
Her gushing Blood the Pavement all besmeared;
And this her last expiring Voice was heard;
Lovers farewell, Revenge has reached my Scorn;
Thus warned, be wise, and Love for Love return.
THE Despairing Shepherd.
ALEXIS shunned his Fellow Swains,
Their rural Sports, and jocund Strains.
(Heaven guard us all from Cupid's Bow,)
He lost his Crook, he left his Flocks,
And wandering through the lonely Rocks,
He nourished endless Woe.
The Nymphs and Shepherds round him came,
His Grief some pity, others blame,
The fatal Cause all kindly seek;
He mingled his Concern with theirs,
He gave 'em back their friendly Tears,
He sighed, but would not speak.
Clorinda came among the rest,
And she too kind Concern expressed,
And asked the Reason of his Woe;
She asked but with an Air and Mein
That made it easily foreseen,
She feared too much to know.
The Shepherd raised his mournful Head,
And will You pardon me, he said,
Wh^^e I the cruel Truth reveal?
Which nothing from my Breast should tear,
Which never should offend your Ear,
But that You bid me tell.
It Is thus I rove, it is thus complain,
Since You appeared upon the Plain,
You are the Cause of all my Care;
Your Eyes ten thousand Dangers dart,
Ten thousand Torments vex my Heart,
I love and I despair.
Too much, Alexis, I have heard,
It Is what I thought, it is what I feared:
And yet I pardon you, she cried;
But you shall promise never again
To breath your Vows, or speak your Pain:
He bowed, obeyed, and died.
FINIS
^USICA INCANTANS, SIVE POEMA EXPRIMENS Musicae Vires, Juvenem in Insaniam
adigentis, ET MVSICI inde PERICVLVM.

^^thore ROBERTO SOUTH, Art. Bac. nunc S. T. P. and Aedis Christi Canonico.

LONDINI: ^pis and Impensis H. Hills, in Black-Fryars, prope Thamesin. Pretium
2 d.

ARGUMENTUM.
Juvenis quidam audita, quam ipse enixe impetrarat, Harmonia, in Isaniam actus
est, and seipsum in Mare Praecipitavit: Citharaedus Judicio sistitur, accusatur
Homicidii; ex Musico, tum Orator factus, seipsum defendit, and absolvitur.

NON, Ego, Caesareas Acies; non Arma virumque
Sed Citharam, Plectrumque cano: nec inutile Numen
Invoco in auxilium: me vivus Anhelitus ille,
Quod solet inflari vocalis Tibia, pleno
Inspirat Genio: Sed quae depingere Vocem
Dextra potest, Oculisque Echo signare Videndam?
In sua poscebant antiqui carmina Vates
Centum Ora and Linguas: nos Centum poscimus Aures,
Totque etiam Voces; quis enim laudare Choraulem.
Et Lyricam, poterit, nisi Centum vocibus, artem?
Doctus in Arcadicis vivehat Musicus oris,
Clarus circa urbes, and famae Voce Lyraeque;
Illum laetus Hymen, plausu, juvenumque Choreis
Vicina quondam late celebratus in urbe,
Cum Lyricis aliis, tanta ad Solennia traxit,
Spe pretii, pariterque dapis; pro more jugales
Ut caneret Ritus: nam quamvis nubere Musa
Ignoret, celebrare tamen Connubia gaudet:
Et si Musa silet, torpent epulaeque Venusque;
Bacchus and ipsa Ceres frigent sine Apolline: festa
Quis melius Lyrico celebret Convivia, qui cum
Voce sua traxisse feras, Volucresque solebat,
Non tantum Cithara novit Celebrare, sed ipso
Instaurare etiam potuit Convivia Cantu?
At tandem urgente die, festoque peracto,
Nota reversurus cum jam per prata rediret,
Elysiis spatians olim velut Orpheus agris,
Incidit in Juvenem, qui post transacta serenus
Tempora coenandi, vicina exibat in arva:
Cui Juvenis (quis enim sua non habet Obvia Fata?)
Inscius occurrit: Venientem agnoscit ab Ore,
Jamque Videre juvat, quia sic Audire placebat:
Heu Miser ignarus nim^um, quod noster hic Orpheus
Non tam Saxa trahat Secum, quam triste Sepulchrum!
At cito colloquio facto, dictaque salute,
Aggreditur Juvenis precibusque, and laud Choraulem,
Et Citharae Vocem, facunda Voce precatur:
Solicit sua damna rogans: pretiumque petenti
Spondet, and oblato sua Fata pasciscitur Auro.
Tum Fidicen, sumpta Cithara, trepidantia tentat
Fila manu, plectroque p^^u^ quam pangere carmen
Incipit, immutat chordas, and in ordini fili
Explorat cujusque sonum, cernitque peritus
Concordare fides quamvis diversa sonantes;
Tam placida, and Concors fuit haec discordia fratrum.
Saepe levi digito dum stringit fila, feritque
Transiliente manu* minime meditatus, and Ultro
Incidit in Cantus, and prodit Nescius artem.
Sic instruxit Ebur, suntque haec proludia cantus
Artifices testata manus; dum nititur omnes
In Carmen citharaeque suosque intendere Nervos.
Sic postquam instituit chordas in carminis Usum
^ptatas; atque Art Viam patefecit ad Artem:
^tius insonuit, vox Crescit and instar Alaudae,
^um canit, Exurgit. Digito Chelys icta loquaci
^c postquam sonuit; leva huic in part mamillae
^or Salit, and peragit Cithara modulante Choreas:
^on aliter, quam si salienti pollicis ictu
^ercuteret Cordis Fibras, vis tantaque plectri est,
^t valeat Filo captivam ducere mentem.
^umque animo Juvenis Victo succumberet, uno
Concentu Vicit Fidicen, cecinitque Triumphum.
^extra facit cantum, sonus exit ab ungue, videri
Possit ut a digito fluxisse melodia; Vocem
^psa manus profert, arguta Vicaria linguae.
Non Aures solum rapuit vis musica, totum
Sed Juvenem; membroque miser mutatur in omni:
Nunc rubuit Vultus, nunc palluit, utque solebat
Vox variare sonos, sic hic Variare colores:
Pes saltar quidem potuit, sed victus abire
Non tulit: in Venis ipsum Saliisse cruorem
Plus solito aspiceres: ita demum quilibet artus,
Si non audire, at poterat Sentire canentem:
Den^que sic motus, sic toto est corpore raptus,
Ipso animata putes ut Corporis Organa Cantu.
Anxius interea, Caeco se Verbere carpi
Miratur, Fidicenque Lyrae quos incutit ictus,
Se sentire putat Juvenis: sic Verbera sentit
Quae non ipse tulit; misera dum Vulnera plectrum
Dat Magico quodam Cantu, parterq, potenti
Ac Medea olim permulcet Carmine mentem.
Multa quidem cantat, quae vel Narrata placerent,
Scilicet imprimis Philomelae flebile fatum,
Et querulam historiam referunt modulantia Fila,
Quam Virgo narravit Acu, nunc furta deorum,
Innumerosque Jovis recinit lascivus amores:
Sed tamen haec Juvenis licet audiat omnia, solo
Captus Amore lyrae est; and cum divina canuntur
Furta, rapi a Cithara potius sua pectora credit,
Vimque sibi inferri: quoties hinc fila Choraules
Percutit; hic geminat, maestosque reciprocat ictus
Pectora percutiens: sic sensim in corda furorem
Incauta immittit fidicen, mentemque per aures Evocat.
At postq^am citharae vim sic Cantando probasset,
Ipse simul cantat, pleno and modulantior ore
Naturae pariter Vires conjungit, and Artis.
Vox,, fateor, diversa sonat lyricique lyraeque
Sed sonat interea Juvenis Vox una gementis.
Et quia Conjuncti Cantus Vis fortius urget,
Non tulit ulterius, sed dum canit ille cruentus,
Concentusque suos citharae Concentibus addit,
Prorumpit subito rabies: and Musicus ipso
Enecat afflatu, mortemque effundit ab ore.
Ac tanquam in lingua clausum cantantis inesset
Nescio quid, linguae soleat quod inesse Caninae,
Progignens rabiem, subiti mala causa furoris
Dementat Juvenem; rabiesque infusa per aurem
Invadit Cerebrum, geminique potentia cantus
Obruit invalidas aures: hoc ergo furorem
Intulit, audita modulantis voce Choraulis,
Credibile est propria saltasse e sede Cerebrum.
Prodit inassueto jam se dementia gestu,
Huc, illuc oculos rotat, ardet, and indice vultu
Attoniti dat signa animi, cerebroque soluto
Excurrunt profugi ruituro e Vertice Sensus.
Saepe caput quassat, tanquam Vestigia cantus,
Quae vel adhuc retinet, quae mente tenaciter haerent,
Ex animo Excuteret: saepe ore, and vertice coelos
Suspicit Erecto, jurans timerarius illuc
Se non venturum, quia dicitur aetheris axis
Circumagi Harmonia, and volvi concentibus orbs.
Sic loquitur rabies: celeri mox littora passu
Acer adit, totumque animo jam concipit aequor,
^rque furit pelagi, turbati and pectoris aestus.
^ec fervente freto plus fluctus spumeus albet,
^uam spuma, huic madido rabies quam fudit ab ore.
(...) jam ferales cum pervenisset ad Undas,
^^rte fuit Refluxus aquae; solitoque relapsu
(...) tulit, and tanquam scelus hoc foret unda preosa,
^isa fuit regredi, timidioque recedere fluctu.
Constitit hic Amens, and tali Littora Vultu.
^ectat, quali Ajax olim Sigeia vidit.
^umq^e memor nimium, fixam tenet auribus Echo,
^ethes optat Aquas, sed cum contingere Lethen
^on datur, aequoreis Oblivia quaerit in undis;
^iluat ex animo ut cantus, denturque dolenti,
^^ltem inter mutos sibi tuta silentia Pisces.
^um spectat fluctus, Rabiem, mentisque tumultum
^omparat Aequoreo; nunc lata per aequora Demens
^e cupit, Curasque animi committere Ventis.
^ulta quidem mala Pontus habet; tamen omnia spernit,
^um nullas videt hic Citharas: Crescente furore
^ox Amens ubi sit nescit; qualique Charybdis
(...) Gyrum rapitur; tali huic Vertigine fertur,
^orripiturque Caput, Cerebrumque Natare videtur,
Quamvis nondum ullas, nisi visu, tangeret undas
^aepe timet mortem. saepe optat, and Aequoris instar,
Nunc Animus Fluxus peragit, dubiosque Reflexus.
Haec volvens subito se mittit in aequora Saltu,
Et minus insanis demens se mergit in undis.
Hinc praeter Scyllae Rabiem, furor additus alter,
^ccessi que mari Rabies, nova: fluctibus haustus
^rendet adhuc, ultroque licet modo fata petebat,
^am tamen oppugnat, certatque obsistere morti.
Tandem Vorticibus raptus, victricibus undis
^ymphatus cessit: Citharaeque Lyraeque valete
^ixit, and acceptum bibulis trahit auribus aequor,
Occluditque Oculos vere hac in morte Natantes.
Haud aliter. memini, facilem cum durior Echo
Narcissus fugeret, periturum immerserat Amens
Dilecti se fontis aquis; aequalia fata
Huic quoque contigerant, dulcem furiosior Echo
Qui fugiens, pariter cecidit fatalibus undis:
Par hic morte fuit, par and novitate furoris,
Et dum prospiceret vitreum moriturus in aequor,
Vel sua Narcissum non plus referebat Imago
Quem sic lethiferis occidit musicus Odi^,
Credo hujus dirum primis Natalibus omen
Non fauste Cecinistis Aves. In funera Musae
Conspirant; sic Fata Novem ferus armat in Unum.
Vere erat hic Siren, non tam quia Voce sonorus,
Et liquido aequoreos superans modulamine cantus,
Quam quoniam Harmonia, Sirenum more, Furentos
In mare deducat, cantuque impellat in aequor
Alter hic Amphion, nam vites artis uterque
Edidit aequales, nisi quod tamen ille Ferarum
Mulcebat Rabiem; dedit Hic Cantando Furorem.
Hei mihi! quod tam dulce melos, plectrumque Canoru^
Non foret innocuum, nec Ternae sola sororis,
Sad Citharae fuerint etiam Fatalia fila!
Qua non Versatur Lachesis, levis ictus in aurem
Si sit lethalis, valeatque occidere cantus.
Et tenues jugulare soni, si vulneret Echo!
Quin Arcus igitur, Lyricorum Antistes Apollo,
Projice, si Nervus plus ipso Vulneret Arcu.
Dum cantu occumbunt prostrati; credimus ipsas
Nunc bellare Tubas; nec jam res mira putetur,
Si gallus Superet, solum cantando, Leonem.
O Vox saeva, necem peragens, and funeris Author!
Qua non, Harmonici crudelior ipsa Neronis
Vox fuit, and qua non sonat aptior ulla Tyranno:
Talis erit Fidicen saevus Nero, funebre cantans
Lethiferumque melos, and caede notabile carmen.
Hunc olim Empedocles, si plectro, and voce canentem
Audisset quamvis jam tum properasset ad Aetnam;
Fata, necisque modum mutasset, and igne relicto,
Aetnaeisque rogis, ultro periisset in undis.
Si foret hic Pastor, placidoque Armenta, gregesque
Carmine mulceret, cantuque per avia capras
Cogeret errantes, miri Vi carminis actus,
In freta grex rueret praeceps, puluresque videret
Per mare Phryxus Oves, pelagusque immane Natantes
Si post Stagnantem lethali gurgite mundum,
Tertius elapsus, communi e Strage superstes
Mansisset Fidicen, Tritonis numine Salvus;
Et tibi Deucalion simili lenire parasset
Concentu Cutas, etiam ipse immersus in aequor
(Creed mihi,) irrueres, and Te quoque pontus haberet.
Ignis Apollinei qui Vi liquefactus in altos,
Icare, concideras fluctus; velocius isses
In medium, Cithara compulsus Apollinis, aequor.
Si Cithara occidat, si fila sonantia praestent
Officium gladii: cum bella Pelasga reliquit
Sumeret and Lyricum projecta cuspide plectrum,
Non arma abjecit, verum Mutavit Achilles.
At jam Fama loquax, quae tam memorabile fatum
Et miras citharae voces, taciturna silere
Non poterat, subito tanquam Vocalior Echo
Auditos iterat Cantus: and ut omnia mendax
Aucta refert; sic and pariter cum cantibus auget
Cantantis Crimen; portatque ad Judicis aures.
Et jam Causidicus, miserandi in fata paratus
Fortiter Accusat, Vexat, certatque ruentem
Harmoniae causam, rauca Subvertere Voce.
Convertens igitur Vultus, ad triste Tribunal,
Concilium rigidum tail Sermon salutat.
Oration Causidici Fidicinem Accusantis.
'DA veniam (Praeses Reverende) exponere paucis
'Hoc scelus; ante tuas quam Musicus occupat aures.
'Sistimus adductum huc, mirum Citharaeque Necisque
'Artificem, cui non, hominem est Occidere major
'Quam Cantare, labor: sed enim non possumus ultra
'In Terris Sirena pati, monstrum Aequore majus.
'Dulce sonant Citharae, verum Sonat altius illis
'Caedes; nec pariter Cantatis Crimina possunt
'Cum levibus transire Sonis: Se Musicus ipse
'Voce sua prodit, proprio condemnat and Ore.
'Si Citharae haec vis est; merito discerpitur Orpheus,
'Dignus and Amphion tantum Comes esse Ferarum.
'Quod si sic Volucres cantarent, quilibet esset
'Vultur; Voce sua, non Rostro pectora laedens.
'Sic struit insidias, mortemque Infernus hic Orpheus,
'Atque aufert Juveni mentem: qui protinus Amens
'Aequor amat, veluti quaedam Venus esset in illo,
'Deceptusque Sono, dulces putat aequoris undas.
'Quid faceret Juvenis, quem prensis fata tenebant
'Auribus? audito hoc Cantu, non Daedalus ipse
'Aequora fugisset, nisi Ceram aptasset ad aures.
'Sic nec Terra satis Sceleri, simul adjicit aequor,
'Et juvenem mergens, ipsa quoque polluit undas
'Dum late Spatians crimen trans aequora currit.
'Sed non ulterius tantum durare sub undis
'Sustinuit facinus, surgit, lucetque per ipsas
'Crimen aquas: and justa diu quia poena Cruentum
'Non rapit, ipse fremit Nereus; quoniamque moratur
'Vindicta, iratis secum mare murmurat undis.
'Si tamen haec natura lyrae est, ut Musica mergat,
'Cur fuit in medio pelago tam tutus Arion?
'At Tu, si Juvenem misisti invitus in aequor,
'Saltem etiam poteras Cithara Delphina parasse.
'Nulla igitur sonti remanet defensio: Jura
'Exclamant, contraque reum juncta omnia Voce
'Justitiam resonant: atque haec est Musica Legum
Dixit: at hic tanquam damnato quisque timebat
Pro lyrico; neqne enim quisquam responsa daturum
Crediderat; verum res haec miranda fuisset.
Musica si taceat, si nil respondeat Echo
Nec mora, Clamosi Praeconis Voce citatus,
(Quamvis Harmoniam nullam Vox ista ferebat,)
Accedit Fidicen trepidans, timideque labanti
Voce loquens, (tanquam Termor hic quoque Musicus
Artis enim saepe est tremulas effingere Voces;)
Sic prodit, plectrumque humero lethale sinistro
Suspendens, Causam dicit; Vitamque disertus
Quam prope Cantando amisit, Dicendo tuetur.
Hiud secus ac Gracchus, qui cum suggesta Patronus
Facundus premeret, cithara post terga Sonanti
Composuit Vocem; plectroque docente, loquelam
Formavit Variam. Tandem ipsa silentia servat
Lex, and Jura tacent: Fidicen dum talia ^atur
Oration Fidicinis se defendentis.
DET Misero mihi Voce, precor, Sors mitis Eadem
Qua rapui alterius, propriam defendere Vitam.
At quia nulla unquam revocat Palinodia mortem,
Et pro Demerso lacrymas dare, jure Vocetur
In mare fundere aquas: nulla revocabilis art
Sit mea Culpa licet, forsan tamen Art tuenda est.
Et certe cantus morienti impendere, caedem
Non facere est, querula sed deplorare perempti
Exequias Cithara: Verum quia Carminis Author
Phoebus, and Inventor Citharae, pro more sub undis
Fertur, and Hesperium tuto descendit in aequor;
Crediderim quod aquas simili ratione faventes
Harmoniae Dominus, pariterque Auditor haberet.
Finge tamen nostro se projecisse Furentem
Impulsu in fluctus: haec Sola est Culpa? quis unquam
Navigat Anticyras, Cerebri medicamina quaerens,
Nec tamen intrat Aquas, nec se commiserit undis?
At, been si memini, Vitae cum traditur ortus,
Harmoniam esse Animam, Veterum mihi dogmata suadent;
Caedem ergo fecisse Lyra, facilique cruentam
Cantu infer necem, nimia est occidere Vita.
Esse tamen Lethale potest audire Canentem,
Cum neque nos unqam Mors ipsa Audita Necaret?
Sed quia Mersus erat, caedem Lustralibus aequor
Purgat aquis; mortisque genus mortem expiat ipsam,
Quae caedem fecitque eadem quoque diluit Unda.
At Vos o fluctus, quoniam sic cuncta soletis
Mergere Crudeles, nostrum quoque mergite crimen.
Si tamen hoc moriar damnatus crimine quonam
Extinguar fato? number quae me Sylva secuta est,
Arboreumque nemus, tandem in suspendia cedant,
Inque Cruces abeant? and sic me Sylva sequatur,
Ut saepe a tergo sequitur Vindicta Nocentem?
Anne etiam terra obruerit? Lapidesque canenti
Qui fuerant Comites, fient mihi saxa sepulchra?
Si mihi causa Necis Lyra sit, tunc instar Oloris,
Et salutem hoc, videar dicendus, nomine, Cygnus,
Carmina quod cecini propriae praenuntia mortis.
Crimen Ego Audivi, superest audire probatum;
An quia Mersus obit Juvenis, nos mersimus? ipse
An feci, ut fureret, quia me cantate furebat?
Quod si dum canerem cecidisset Stella, quid ergo
Carmina de Coelo deducere Sydera credes?
Par certe furor est, in me transfer furorem
Alterius: Musas tam stultum est dicere mortis
Fortuitae causas; Artique ascribere casum.
Nullum ego Carnifice effudi unquam Vocem cruorem;
Vos soli Legum Domini, qui jura tenentis,
Vos soli miseros, occidere Voce potestis.
Sic fatus; Misero, Exclamat, nec fata merenti,
Parcite clementes: Et Parcite rettulit Echo.
Dixit; and hanc, memini, facili candore jocosus
Imposuit Judex dicto pro crimine poenam,
Ut, quoniam Lyricum superaverat Orphea cantu,
Accepta cithara Stygias inviseret oras,
Et simili art canens, quem demisisset ad Umbras
Cantu, illum rursus Cantu revocaret ab Umbris.
Si quis forte roget, mihi cur dementia versus
Materiam dederit; Furor ille Poeticus, inquam,
Impulit: and prohibens Musarum in Font morari,
Proluere immenso me jussit in aequore Labra.
Add, quod excludit Sanos Helicone Poeta.
^nclyte Nervorum Rector, citharaeque magister,
Quis Te digna canat? regiones Musicus Orpheus
^bat ad infernas: Tu vertice Sydera tangis:
Et Lyricus Vates superas mea Carmina, solum
Dircaei Cygni, Calamoque, and Voce sonandus.
Famae implere Tubam valet haec Vox Sola trahebat
^lla quidem Sylvas; Lauri te sponte sequuntur.
Dignus es ut vivas post funera, Memnonis instar,
Vocali insignis Statua; tibi ut ipse superstes
Te Solus recinas, tua ut ipse Epicedia cantes;
Qui, post Demersum hunc, monumenta perennia Vocis,
Et citharae lauds, ipsis inscripseris undis,
Cum mea, per latum hoc Pelagus laudumque tuarum
Aequor, Vela feram, paene hic immergor and ipse.
Nam patet in lauds vastus tibi Campus Aquarum;
Sed praestat regredi, and motos componere fluctus.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of Poems, and. Printed and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-Fryars, near
the Waterside; where several more may be had that are not here Inserted.
A Congratulatory Poem on Prince George of Denmark, etc. on the Success at Sea.
Marlborough Still Conquers. The Flight of the Pretender. Honesty in Distress, a
Tragedy. The Kit-Cars a Poem, etc. Wine, a Poem etc. Cider, with the Splendid
Shilling. The Pleasures of a Single Life, etc. Faction Displayed. Moderation
Displayed. The Duel of the Stags. etc. Coopers-Hill, by Sir J. Denham. An Essay
on Poetry, by the Earl of Murlgrave. Absalom and Achitophel. The Plague of
Athens. A Satyr against Man and Woman. The Forgiving Husband. Instructions to
Vanderbank. The Temple of Death. An Essay on Translated Verse, by the Earl of
Roscomon Horace: Or the Art of Poetry. The History of Insipids. The Swan-Trip
Club. Lucretius on Death, etc. The Medal against Sedition. Bellizarius a great
Commander. Daphnis, or a Pastoral Elegy, etc. A Poem on the Countess of
Abingdon. Nundinae Sturbrigiences. Tunbrigialia. An Ode on the Incarnation,
etc. Hoglandiae Descriptio. Milton's Sublimity on Cider. Bosworth-feild, by Sir
John Beaumount, Bar. Canary Birds Naturalized. Art of Poetry, by Boileau. Poems
on the Death of the late Queen Mary. Baucis and Philemon, etc. Circus, a Satyr:
Or the Ring in Hide Park. St. James's Park, a Satyr. The Spleen, a Pindarique
Ode, etc. Philips's Pastorals. A Letter from Italy, to my Lord Halifax, with
other Poems. Blenheim, a Poem, by Phillips. Mac Flecknoe, by J. Dryden; etc.
The Female Reign, an Ode, A Poem on the Taking St. Mary's. Windsor Castle, a
Poem. The Servitor, a Poem. The Campaign, by Mr. Addison. The Counter-Scuffle,
a Poem. Don Francisco S^torioso. Consolation to Mira mourning, A Panegyric on
Oliver Cromwell, with three Poems on his Death. A Poem in Defense of the Church
of England. The Apparition, a Poem. The Hind and Panther Transvers'd to the
Story of the Country Mouse and City Mouse. Dr. Gath's Dispensary. Memoirs on
John Hall, the Famous Robber, etc. Mr Shaftoe's Narrative giving an Account of
the Birth of the Pretended Prince of Wales, etc. The True-Born Englishman. The
Husband, a Poem. The Commoner, a Poem. A Hymn to the Pillory. The Rambling
Fudle-Caps. D Foe* on the Storm. The Wife, a Poem. The Long Vacation.
A Catalogue of Sermons Printed and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-fryars, near the
Water-aside, where are several others too numerous to insert.
12 JOhn Tillotson, late Archbishop of Canterbury. 4 Sir William Daws, Bishop
of Chester, 14 his Volume. 11 Offspring Blackall Bishop of Exeter (8 Esquire Boyl's
Lectures. 5 Wedding Sermons. 1 William Wake, B. of Lincoln. 10 John Sharp
Archbish. of York. 5 Robert Moss, D. D. 5 Tho. Knaggs M. A. 5 White Kennet, D
D. 4 Hen. Sacheverel M. A. 1 Rob. Lightfoot, B. D. 3 William Beveridge, D. D. 3
George Stanhope, Dean of Cant. 3 Rich. Willis Dean of Lincoln. 2 Phill. Stubs,
M. A. 1 Mr. Robert Parsons, Earl of Rochester's Funeral Sermon. 1 Ralph
Lambert, D. D. 1 William Savage, B. D. 1 Simon Partrick, M. A. 6 Fr. Atterbury,
Dean of Carlisle with a Letter, and large Vindication with a 2 d Letter in
Answer. 3 George Smaldridg, D. D. 1 John Haslewood, D. D. 1 Dr. Moore, Bish. of
Ely. 1 Wll. Talbot. Bishop of Oxford. 2 Will. Nicholson. Bp of Carlisle. 3 W.
Fleetwood, B of St. Asaph. 1 Anth. Horneck, D. D. 6 John Adams, D. D. 1 P
Downs, M. A. 4 Benj. and J. Hoadly, M. A. 3 Tho. Tennison, A.B. of Canterbury.
4 S. Clark, M. A. 1 Blackburn, Dean of Exeter. 1 Rich. Jenks, M. A. 1 Fran.
Gastrell, D. D. 1 Mr Cornwallis. 1 John Stilsman, B. D. 3 T. Manningham, D. D.
1 called the Last Century. 1 Robert Air, D. D. 4 Th. Trimnal, D.D. now B. of
Norw. 1 S. Dunster A. M. 1 J. Sharp, A. M. 1 T. Sherlock, M. A. 1 R. Nelson, 2
Bisse, M. A. and D. D. 1 J. Trap, M. A. 1 J. King, M. A. 1 W. Wotton, B. D. 3
W. Tilly. 1 Willett, M. A. 1 H. Stephens. 1 Character of a Virtuous Woman,
Christianity in short. 2 Sprat, B. Rochester. 1 J. Rawson, D. D. 1 T. Rennell,
M. A. 1 W. Whitfield. 2 T. Bray, D. D. 2 Ed. Stillingfleet, D. D. 1 J. Pelling,
D. D. 1 Fr. Hare, A. M. 3 S. Colby, M. A. A Letter from the Pastors and
Professors of Geneva to the King of Prussia, with the King's Answer. 1
Wheatly's Passing Bell. 1 Jackson 1 Nichols, D. D. 1 The Virgin Mary. 1 Loyd's
30. Jan. 1 Peter's Pattern. 1 Harrison. 1 Lake, D. D. 1 Nath. Wheyley, M. A. 1 Samuel Hilliard, M. A. 1 Hough Bp. of Lichfield. 1 Smalbroke. 1 Chishull. 1
Buck's 30th. of Jan.
Moderation DISPLAYED: A POEM.

-- Neque tempore in ullo
Esse queat duplici natura, and corpore bino
Ex alienigenis membris compacta potestas.
Lucret. lib. 5. By the Author of Faction Displayed.

LONDON: ^^^nted and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-fryars, near the Waterside.
1709.

PREFACE.
AT a Time when we are Celebrating the Successes of our Arms Abro^ and the
Wisdom of our Councils at Home; when there seems to b^ no room left for
Complaints, and the Nation is only prepared to receiv^^ Panegyric; I am
sensible a Piece of this kind will be severely Censur'^^ For those, that are
taken up with the present appearances of Things who are, by much the greatest
part of the World, will be apt to say is Unseasonable at least, if not False
and Malicious. But, I hope, other who are not content with such superficial
Views, (and to such only would write) will see the Reason and Truth of what I
have said, an^ own that it could not be more Seasonably Vtter'd than at this
(...) Juncture, when we are lulled with too much Security, and by the means may
give Opportunity to a New Set of Men to Ruin bo^^ Church and State with their
New Politics. But if this Poem ca^^ out with all the Advantages imaginable, I
am not yet grown so Erra^^ an Author, as to think because the First Part met
with a favourab^^ Reception, that I am now therefore Privileged to Dictate to
the Re^^der's Judgment, and to ascribe to my own Merit what was only ^ing to
his Candor, or perhaps Partiality. Be that the Business DEDICATING POETS. I
have no Ambition of gai^^ing the Reputation of one. It Is the last Thing I
should desire.

My Aim is of another sort, and I am abundantly Rewarded, if have been able to
Contribute any thing to the Public Service, by D^^tecting the Principles and
Practices of this New Party, who ha^^ Assumed to themselves a very Specious
Name and Character, and wou^^ be thought the only Patriots of their Country.
But False Friends a^ the most Dangerous Enemies, and they are yet much more so,
wh^ they are Invested with Power, and the Ministration of Affairs who put into
their Hands.

It Is to be wished there were no Occasion for Invectives of this kin^ that
Great Men did always Execute their Trusts, and perform the Duty, and were only
the Objects of our Esteem and Admiration. B^ when the Case is quite otherwise,
when they become Treacherous a^ Betray the Authority Delegated to them; it is
fit they should hear their Faults, and the People be undeceived, who are grossly
impo^^ upon by the servile Flatteries of Hireling Scriblers. A Genera^ ^f
Animals, that always Infest the Doors of Men in Power; and ^ho' one would think
their Trash could never pass upon the Moderate, the Grave, and the Wife, yet
they are sometimes thought worthy of Pensions, and Places of 1200 l. a Year.

It is indeed the just Prerogative of the Throne to be approached with Humility
and Petitions, even where the Subjects have Grievances to Represent. But I know
of no such Homage due to its Officers. Nor can I yet be convinced, that it is
an Arrogant Presumption in private Persons (as some would have it) to examine
and censure the Actions of Public Ministers, who (say they) being nearest the
Helm, are consequently best able to judge of what ought, and ought not to be
done; whereas Men in a Remote Sphere, and at a distance, cannot possibly ^nter
into the Councils of State, and must therefore determine rashly, and without
knowledge. This is a Doctrine necessary to be Preached ^p in Despotick and
Arbitrary Governments, where all is Transacted in the Cabinet, where the Will
and Choice of the Prince gives a Sanction to his Creatures, and cannot be
controverted without Treason. But in a mixed and limited Monarchy, where the
deepest Resorts of Policy and Turns of Government are in some measure known to
Men ^f Rank and Condition, and where a right of Impeachment is lodged in the
House of Commons, it can never be maintained; for that it ^rou'd destroy the
Constitution, and render the Accusation of Great Officers, though never so
Guilty, Impracticable. But I would not here be supposed to countenance that
Scandalous Principle of Appealing to the Mob. I leave such Maxims to the
Relations and Friends of a certain Lawyer, who at the Observator's Trial had
the Impudence (as the Attorney General very justly called it) to insinuate that
the Crown was in the Disposal of the People. Nor would I be thought in the
least to detract from the Prerogative, which no Man living has in higher
Veneration than my self. For I think it never violated but by a profligate
abandoned Nation, and I wish, for the Honor of the English Name, our Annals
had Recorded no Instances of that kind.

But after all this New-Moderation Policy is not more pernicious and tending to
the Destruction of the Government, than it is Absurd and Ridiculous in it
self. For how can Men of Understanding pretend to look Two Ways at once, to
blow Hot and Cold, and fancy that every Body does not see through the pitiful
Disguise and Artifice? They call themselves True Sons of the Church, and yet
make no scruple of opposing a Bill, which is absolutely necessary for its
Preservation; because forsooth it is offered at an unseasonable time; as if it
was not as seasonable to make wholesome Laws, as to engage in a just and
Honorable War for the Security of our Constitution; Can they hope for a better
Opportunity than the Reign we now enjoy? They would be thought great Favorers
of the Church Party, when upon all Occasions they take care to Discountenance
them, and Encourage only the Professed Enemies of Church and State, under a
shallow Pretense, that they are a numerous and formidable Body of Men, and
ought therefore to be preferred to Places of Honor and Profit, that they may
not grow Mutinous and complain of Persecution; which methinks should rather be
a strong Argument for using all possible Means to suppress such Turbulent
Aspiring Spirits. Nay, so Tender are they of their DISSENTING BRETHREN, that I
am told it has lately been delivered as Law by a Great Man in W -- -- -- -- --
-- -- -- -- r-Hall, that a Notorious Perjured Vagabond, with Two Wives at once,
being possessed of a Separate Congregation, though without any License, or Legal
Qualification to Preach to them, shall for that Reason only be exempt from the
late Act for listing Vagrants. I must confess I cannot imagine how they would
define it, or what Moderation according to these Practices is. The Logicians
have stated no Medium that I know of, between Truth and Falsehood, nor the
Moralists any between Virtue and Vice: Every Proposition and Principle must
necessarily fall under one of these Heads.

There is no need of a Prophetic Spirit to foresee, That they will render
themselves Odious, and cannot Subsist long. I heartily Pity some young
Gentlemen, who are unwarily drawn in; for they will fi^^ themselves Deceived by
their Crafty Leader, and cannot expect to be received by their old Friends
again. It Is much to be Lamented that a late Great Character Stained the latter
part of his Life. -- but De Mortuis nil nisi bonum.

I hope some Paragraphs in the close of his Poem will at least prove that I
have not writ with Partiality, but have equally commende^ Merit wherever I
found it, without any regard to a Party.

Moderation DISPLAYED.
AGain, my Muse -- Nor fear the steepy Flight,
Pursue the Fury through the Realms of Night;
Explore the Depth of Hell, the secret Cause,
Whence the New Scheme of Moderation rose.
Now Faction re-assum'd her Native Throne,
Which prostrate Fiends with awful Homage own.
A Crown of Eating Flame her Temples bound,
Darting a Blew Malignant Radiance round.
An Iron Scepter in her Hand she bore,
Emblem of Vengeance and Destructive Power.
A bloody Canopy hung over her Head,
Where the Four falling Empires are portrayed.
Monarchs Deposed beneath her footstool lie,
And all around is Hell and Anarchy.
Whilst thus she towering sat, the Subject Train
With Shouts proclaimed the Triumphs of her Reign.
Then they the Chaos sung, and Nature's Jars,
How the first Atoms urged their Medley Wars,
How Civil Discord and Intestine Rage
Have boiled in every Nation, every Age.
They sung Divided Albion's hapless State,
Her Clashing Senate's Feuds, her laboring Church's Fate:
And as her coming Ruin they expressed,
A sullen Rapture swelled in every Breast.
For such the Bent of their Distorted Will,
Only to know Delight in Thoughts of ill.
But on a sudden, Lo! descending flew,
A Meagre Ghost, which soon the Fury knew,
Cethego newly Dead, her Darling Pride,
Whose Firm Unwav'ring Faith she long had tried,
Long in her Secret Councils had retained,
By which her Empire over our Isle she gained.
No sooner was arrived the Welcome Guest,
But him in soothing Terms, she thus addressed:
Hail best Beloved of all my Sons, Receive
What Praise, what Joy these Gloomy Realms can give
For it is to thy Successful Arts I owe
My Reign Above, my Triumph here below.
This said, the Unbodied Shade obsequious kneeled,
Struck with Amazement, and with Rapture filled.
O Mighty Queen! permit me to Adore
Thy Awful Shrine, thy all Informing Power,
Whose nearer Influence my Breast Inspires
With Glorious Rage, and Mischievous Desires.
'Twas in Thy Cause I sunk a mouldring Frame,
Unequal to the Hardy Task of Fame.
But still my Mind released from Mortal pains,
Her innate Faculty of Ill retains.
More he had said, but the surrounding Throng,
Impatient of delay, pursued their Noisy Song.
Mean time the Fiend revolving in her Thought
The mighty Change Cethego's Death had wrought,
Resolved at length to Summon to her Aid
Each plotting Devil, each Seditious Shade.
She gave the Signal, and a Dreadful Sound
Ran Bellowing through all the Abyss profound.
Then thus she eased her anxious Soul --
O dearest Friends! O faithful Ministers!
Ye mutual Partners of my Joys and Cares,
New Ways, new Means my restless Thoughts employ,
How Albion to reduce, her Peace destroy.
Long have I labored, but alas! in vain,
For now Succeeds the Heavenly Anna's Reign;
Who watchful Guards a Stubborn People's Good,
By Fears not staggered, nor by Force subdued.
Such are the Gifts of her Capacious Mind,
Where Justice, Mercy, Piety are joined.
As Motion, Light and Heat, combined in one,
Make up the Glorious Essence of the Sun.
But still she Mortal is, nor will I cease.
Till my Revenge be Crowned with wished Success.
First then, suppose we should divest the Throne
Of Friends, whose Souls are kindred to her own,
Celsus Disgraced, Hortensio next appears,
Whose Vigilance still Baffles all my Cares;
To whom by Right of Ancestry belong
A Loyal Heart, and a persuasive Tongue.
Now Plots are formed, and public Tempests roll,
He boasts a strong unshaken Strength of Soul.
Fearless against her Foes the Church sustains,
Alike their Friendship and their Hate disdains,
Disdains their Clamor and Seditious Noise,
Secure in the Applauding Senate's Voice.
Of Noble Stem, in whose Collat'ral Lines
Virtue with equal Force and Luster shines.
when Suada pleads, Success attends the Cause,
Suada the Glory of the British Laws.
Not the Famed Orators of Old were heard
With more attentive Awe, more deep Regard,
When Thronging round them, their Charmed Audience hung
On the attracting Music of their Tongue.
Nor Hell to Laelio can her Praise refuse,
Whose Worth deserves his own recording Muse;
Who in Sophia's Court, with just Applause,
Maintained his Sovereign Rights, his Country's Cause.
For it is in him, with Anguish that I find
All the Endowments of a Generous Mind,
Whatever is Great and Brave, whatever Refined
For it is in him Fame doubly does Commend
An Active Patriot, and a Faithful Friend.
Then from his near Attendance be removed
Urbano, though by All Admired and Loved;
Though his sweet Temper and obliging Port,
Become his Office, and Adorn the Court
He seems by Nature formed Mankind to please,
So Free, so Unconstrained in his Address,
Improved by every Virtue, every Grace.
Senato too, who Bravely does deride
Sempronia's little Arts, and Female Pride;
Whose Lofty Look, and whose Majestic Mein
Confess the towering God-like Soul within.
A Speaker of unparalled Renown,
Long in the Senate, long in Council known.
Allied to Celsus by the Noblest Claim,
By the same Principles, by Worth the same.
Old as he is, still Firm his Heart remains,
And dauntless his declining Frame sustains.
So, poised on its own Base, the Center bears
The Nodding Fabric of the Universe.
Be these, and such as these, discharged from Court*
The Better Genii that the Crown support.
Then in their stead, let Moderate Statesmen reign,
Practice their new pretended Golden Mean.
A Notion undefin'd in Virtue's Schools,
Unrecommended by her sacred Rules.
A Modern Coward Principle designed
To stifle Justice, and unnerve the Mind.
A Trick by Knaves contrived, imposed on Fools,
But Scorned by Patriot and Exalted Souls.
For Moderate Statesmen, like Camelions wear
A different Form in every different Air.
^hey stick at nothing to Secure their Ends,
^aress their Enemies, betray their Friends.
Their Medley Temper, their Amphibious Mind
(...) fraught with Principles of every kind,
Nor ever can from Stain and Error free,
Assert its Native Truth, and Energy;
As the four Elements so blended were
^n their first Chaos, so united there,
That since they never could fully be disjoined,
Each retains something of each other's Kind.
Nor this is wholly Air, nor that pure Flame,
But still in both some Atoms are the same.
Let Jano, second of his Trimming Band,
Next to Volpone decked with Honors stand.
Like him for secret Policy Renowned,
Like him with all the Gifts of Cunning crowned.
None better can the Jarring Senate guide,
Or lure the Flying Camp to either side.
Of an invet'rate old Fanatic Race,
Or Canting Parents, sprung this Child of Grace.
In Show a Tory, but a Whig in Heart,
For Saints may safely act the Sinner's part.
Once he was ours, and will be ours again,
For Art to stifle Nature strives in vain,
For every thing, when from its Center born,
Still thither tends, still thither will return.
Let him with these Accomplishments supply
Hortensio's steady Faith, and Loyalty.
B^u^bus, for he has Wealth to buy a Place,
Shall wear Urbano's Key, his Post disgrace.
A worthy Son, in whom collected shine
The Follies of his Mad and Idiot Line.
Lord of the woeful Countenance, whose Skin
Seems feared without, and putrified within,
A Dapper Animal, whose Pigmy Size
Provokes the Ladies Scorn, and mocks their Eyes.
But Balls and Music are his greatest Care,
So willing is the Wretch to please the Fair.
It Is strange, that Men, what Nature has denied,
Should make their only Aim, their only Pride.
Let Britono, who from the Parent Moon
Derives his Welsh Descent directly down,
Succeed Senato in his High Command,
And bear the Staff of Honor in his Hand.
A fluttering empty Fop, that every Night,
Sits Laughing loud, and Jesting in the Pit,
Whilst a surrounding Crowd of Whores and Bawds,
His sprightly Converse, and his Wit applauds.
An Atlas proper to sustain the Weight
Of an Encumbered and declining State.
Let these, as Useful Tools, a while possess
The Court Preferments, and Indulge their Ease,
But they shall fly, like Mists, before the Sun,
When my Designs to full Perfection grown,
Exert their Power, and make the ruined World my own.
When thus the Fury had her Scheme displayed,
Assenting Hell a low Obeisance paid.
Moloch, Protector of the Papal Chair,
Author of the Massacres and Christian War,
Was now Convinced that Sanguinary Laws
Could nere the Reformation's Growth oppose,
Could nere in Albion's Church advance his Cause.
He therefore, urged with his old constant Hate,
By Moderate Means consents to work her Fate.
He finds how soon by Toleration's Aid,
Her Power is weakened, and her Rights Betrayed.
Nor doubts Occasional Conformity
Will by degrees her Essence quite destroy.
Then Satan, Prince of the Fanatic Train,
Who formed the Conduct of their Glorious Reign.
Approve the Scheme, not hoping to Restore
His Subjects to their late unbounded Power.
^or well he knew, their Avarice and Pride
^ad weaned the Bankrupt Nation from their side.
^ut these Auspicious Moderation Times,
^y not Detecting, Sanctify their Crimes,
^y Baffling Justice, and eluding Law,
Make Vice insult, and Sin Triumphant grow.
Nay such the Effects of Moderation are,
The Guilty to Reward, as well as Spare.
Hence Foes to Prelacy are Clad in Lawn,
Hence Rebels are the Favorites of the Throne.
What could they more desire, than thus to pass
The blessed Remainder of their happy Days,
^atted with Plunder, and dissolved in Ease?
Nor Belial, the Atheist's Patron could Complain,
^or Moderation would enlarge his Reign,
Where all unpunished Talk and live Profane.
Where Irreligion Providence denies,
Nor dreads the Laws of Earth, nor Thunder of the Skies.
Mammon, the Traders and the Courtier's God,
No sooner heard the Project but allowed;
For hence his two Vot'ries uncontrolled might live,
And endless Frauds commit, and endless Bribes receive.
But most Cethego the Design approves,
Who dead and Living in Maeander's moves.
He knew how he deluded hapless James,
By the same wily Arts, and subtle Schemes.
Proposes then, that he alone be sent,
To execute the Fury's New Intent.
When he had ended, thus she soon replies,
Blessed be the Shade, that can so well advise,
On thee thy Goddess smiles, on thee relies.
Fly, nimbly to thy Native Soil repair,
Urge and Enforce the well formed Council there.
Occasion favors, the Cabal is met
At thy own Mansion, thy beloved Retreat,
The Muses Darling Theme, the Graces Seat.
There Clodio's and Sigillo's anxious Thoughts,
Are brooding over Imaginary Plots:
Whilst Bibliopolo with his awkard Jests
Deserves his Dinner, and diverts the Guests.
Bathillo, in his own unborrow'd Strains,
Young Sacharissa's Angel Form profanes:
Whilst her dull Husband, senseless of her Charms,
Lies lumpish in her soft encircling Arms.
For he to Wisdom makes a Grave Pretense,
But wants alas! his Father's Depth of Sense.
Howere, supplying all Defects of Wit,
He shows a true Fanatic Zeal and Heat.
She spoke -- the Spectre in a moment gains
Altropia's Balmy Air, and Flowery Plains.
At his approach the Dome's Foundation shook,
When 'midst their Revels rushing in he broke.
Involved in Wreaths of Smoke, awhile he stood,
Seeming at distance an unshapen Cloud.
But soon, the Cloud ascending to the Skies,
He manifest was seen before their Eyes.
Horror and Guilt shook every Conscious Breast,
But Bibliopolo most his Fears expressed,
Fainting he tumbled -- Pass we ore the rest.
Clodio alone fixed and unmoved appeared,
And what the Phantom said undaunted heard.
Forbear, my Friends, your Hot pursuits restrain,
Behold your loved Cethego once again.
From Faction's dark unbottom'd Cell I come,
Fraught with Britannia's Fate, and final Doom.
For, Meditating Vengeance in her Mind,
At length a Finished Plan she has designed.
Nor doubts by Moderate Methods to obtain,
What she by rougher Arts has sought in vain,
That Whigs should Triumph in a To^y Reign.
Thus he began, and then proceeds to tell
What Faction had before revealed in Hell.
Clodio was Raptured, and in Terms like these,
^is Joy and Approbation did express.
^nce thy Divided State permits, be thou
^s once a Friend, a Guardian Genius now.
^ive us to execute this Grand Design,
^hine be the Conduct, and the Glory thine.
^ttempts that often Baffle Human Care,
^y aiding Spirits soon effected are;
their Knowledge in immediate Intuition lies,
Nor does, like ours, from long Deduction rise.
Pleased with this Answer, the retiring Ghost
Condensed the ambient Air, and in a Cloud was lost.
Here cease thy Satyr, Muse, and from thy Tongue
^o louder Numbers and Heroic Song:
Here Celebrate, unbiased as thou art,
The Triumphs of Sempronia's other Part,
Nor let her Stain the Hero's High Desert.
Now the Imperial Eagle hung her Head,
^rooping she Mourned her wonted Thunder fled,
Now was she fitted for a foreign Yoke,
Her Scepter nodded, her Dominion shook.
Such was the tottering State of Ancient Rome,
When Conquering Hannibal pronounced her Doom*
When yet the fatal Capua was unknown,
That blasted all the Laurels Cannae won.
Where shall she Succor seek? Or whither fly?
Shall she for ever in Confusion lie?
Shall the first Kingdom of the Christian World
Be un-reliev'd in endless Ruin hurled?
Not so? her Aid Auspicious Anna brings,
Anna the Angel of unhappy Kings.
She sends Camillo with an English Force,
To stem the Ravaging Invader's Course.
France and Bavaria now in vain Combine,
In vain their Fierce unnumber'd Legions join,
In vain the Thunderbolts of War oppose:
Eugenio and Camillo are their Foes.
Like Caesar, both for Stratagems Renowned*
Like Alexander, both with Martial Fury crowned.
At length the Great Decisive Day drew near,
On which alone depended all the War.
At length the Fight began, the Canon roared,
Nor knew the Empire yet her Sovereign Lord.
But soon Camillo with resistless Arms,
With doubled Rage, the Hostile Troops alarms.
The Troops, that thought no Valor matched their ow^
Till English Courage bore them headlong down.
Before his Conquering Sword they Vanquished fly,
Or in the Field, or in the Danube die.
The Danube reeking ran a Purple Flood,
Swelled and distained with Deluges of Blood.
O were I Poet equal to thy Theme!
The Future World should wondering read this Stream;
Where many Thousand Warriors more were slain,
Or than on Xanthus Banks, or the Pharsalian Plain:
Though these to all Exploits are far preferred,
One by the Grecian, one the Roman Bard.
Hence is the Empire to it self restored,
Revolting Nations Recognize the Lord.
Lewis no more shall God-like Titles Claim,
Nor Europe awed and Trembling dread his Name.
Hence a new Scene of Happiness appears,
A long Successive Train of Golden Years.
So saved Demetrius the Athenian State,
Oppressed by Foes, and sunk with adverse Fate.
No sooner was the Bloody Battle won,
But all his Fame with Adoration own;
But on the mighty Victor they bestowed,
The Sacred Style and Honors of a God.
But though no Altars we profanely raise,
But though a less, we pay a juster Praise,
All but the Blind Idolatry intend,
Which ridicules the Glorious Worth it would commend.
When with his Eastern Spoils, returning home,
Augustus entered his applauding Rome,
^irgil and Horace waited on his Fame,
Glad to record the Muses Patron's Name;
And well could they in everliving Strains,
Describe his Triumphs, and Reward his Pains.
But Modern Heroes, though as truly Brave
As those of Old, not equal Poets have.
No Virgils now, nor Horaces to raise
Trophies proportioned to their Deathless praise.
An Addison perhaps, or Tate may write;
^olp^ne pays them for their Venal Wit.
But since my Muse, warmed with a Generous Flame,
Unbrib'd would eternize Camillo's Name;
Let him accept such Homage as she brings,
Nor think that wholly uninspir'd she Sings.
But, Goddess, still one Labor more remains,
Still Nereo claims thy Tributary Strains;
Tune thy Harmonious Voice to Nereo's Praise,
A Subject pregnant with immortal Lays.
It Is he extends the Hev'nly Anna's Reign,
High as the Stars, unbounded as the main.
^Tis he, whose Valor the Batavian Wars
^nur'd to Glory, from his greener Years.
It Is he Le Hogue's opposing Ord'nance bore,
Nor feared the Lightnings blasts, nor Thunders roar.
It Is He, with Scipio Darling of our Isle,
From vanquished Vigo forced the Indian Spoil.
It Is He the Streights Defense so lately stormed,
A Tow by Nature fortified and armed.
It Is He, unequal far in force, o'recame
A Fleet secure of Conquest and of Fame,
A Flee by vast Expense for Fight prepared*
At once the Spaniards Terror and their Guard.
For what can English Bravery withstand,
When Nereo or Camillo do Command?
It Vindicates the Sea, and Triumphs ore the Land.
It Is He Detraction's Baleful Breath has born,
But with a Noble and Heroic Scorn.
For let his Foes this just Monition have,
Envy's the Coward's Homage to the Brave.
So Aristides long with Malice strove,
Nor could his Virtue win a Factious Peoples Love.
FINIS.
THE HIND AND THE PANTHER, TRANSVERS'D To the Story of the Country-Mouse and
the City-Mouse.

^uch Malice mingled with a little Wit.

Hind. Pan. Nec vult Panthera domari.

Quae Genus. LONDON: ^^^inted and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-fryars, near the
Waterside. 1709. Price Three Pence.

THE PREFACE.
THE Favorers of the Hind and Panther will be apt to say in its Defense, That
the best things are ^apable of being turned to Ridicule; that ^omer has been
Burlesque'd, and Virgil ^ravested without suffering any thing in their
Reputation from that Buffoonry; and that in like manner, the Hind and the
Pan^er may be an exact Poem, though it is the Subject of our Raillery: But there
is this diffe^ence, that those Authors are wrested from their true Sense, and
this naturally falls in^ Ridicule; there is nothing Represented ^ere as
monstrous and unnatural, which is ^ot equally so in the Original. First as to
^he General Design Is it not as easy to ima^ine two Mice bilking Coachmen, and
sup^ing at the Devil; as to suppose a Hind ^tertaining the Panther at a
Hermit's Cell, ^iscussing the greatest Mysteries of Religion, ^d telling you
her Son Rodriguez writ very ^od Spanish? What can be more improbable and
contradictory to the Rules and Example^ of all Fables, and to the very Design
an^ Use of them? They were first begun and raised to the highest Perfection in
the Easter^ Countries; where they wrote in Signs an^ spoke in Parables, and
delivered the mos^ useful Precepts in delightful Stories; which for their
Aptness were entertaining to the most Judicious, and led the vulgar into
Understanding by surprising them with their Novelty, and fixing their
Attention. A^ their Fables carry a double meaning; the Story is one and entire;
the Characters the same throughout, not broken or changed and always
conformable to the Nature of the Creatures they introduce. They never te^ you
that the Dog which snapt at a Shadow lost his Troop of Horse, that would be
unintelligible; a piece of Flesh is proper for hi^ to drop, and the Reader will
apply it t^ Mankind; they would not say that the Da^ who was so proud of her
borrowed Plume^ looked very ridiculous when Rodriguez cam^ and took away all the
Book but the 17th, 24th, and 25th Chapters, which she stole from him: But this
is his new way o^ telling a Story, and confounding the Mora^ and the Fable
together.

Before the Word was written, said the Hind,
Our Savior Preached the Faith to a^ Mankind.
What relation has the Hind to our Savior? or what Notion have we of a
Pan^her's Bible? If you say he means the Church, how does the Church feed on
Lawns, or range in the Forest? Let it be always a Church, or always the
cloven-footed Beast, ^or we cannot bear his shifting the Scene every Line. If
it is absurd in Comedies to ^ake a Peasant talk in the Strain of a Hero, ^r a
Country Wench use the Language of the Court; how monstrous is it to make a
Priest ^f a Hind, and a Parson of a Panther? To bring 'em in disputing with all
the For^alities and Terms of the School? Though ^s to the Arguments themselves,
those, we ^onfess, are suited to the Capacity of the Beasts, and if we would
suppose a Hind ex^ressing her self about these Matters, she ^ould talk at that
Rate.

As to the Absurdity of his Expressions, ^here is nothing wrested to make 'em
ridiculous, the Terms are sometimes altered to make the Blunder more visible;
Knowldge misunderstood is not at all better Sense ^han Understanding
misunderstood, though it is confessed the Author can play with words ^o well, that
this and twenty such will pass off ^t a slight reading.

There are other Mistakes which could not ^e brought in, for they were too
gross for Bays himself to commit. It Is hard to conceive how any Man could
censure the Turk^ for Gluttony, a People that debauch in Coffee are voluptuous
in a Mess of Rice, and keep the strictest Lent, without the Pleasures of a
Carnival to encourage them. But it is almost impossible to think that any Man,
wh^ had not renounced his Senses, should rea^ Duncomb for Allen: He had been
told that Mr. Allen had written a Discourse o^ Humility; Difference betwixt a
Protestant and Socinian, p. 62.
to which he wisely answers, Tha^ that magnified Piece of Duncomb's was
Translated from the Spanish of Rodriguez, and to set it beyond dispute, makes
the infallible Guide affirm the same thing. There are few Mistakes, Page 92.
but one may imagine how a Man fell into them, and at least what he aimed at;
but what likeness is there betwee^ Duncomb and Allen? do they so much as Rhyme?

We may have this Comfort under the Severity of his Satyr, to see his Abilities
equally lessened with his Opinion of us; and that he could not be a fit
Champion against the Panther till he had laid aside all his Judgment. But we
must applaud his Obedience to his new Mother Hind; she Disciplined him
severely, Page 90.
she commanded him it seems, to Sacrifice his Darling Fame, and to do it
effectually he published this learned Piece. This is the favorable Construction
we would put on his Faults, though he takes care to inform us, Pref.
that it was done from no Imposition, but out of a natural Propensity he has to
Malice, and a particular Inclination of doing Mischief. What else could provoke
him to Libel the Court, Blaspheme Kings, abuse the whole Scotch Nation, Page 87.
rail at the greatest Part of his own, and lay all the Indignities imaginable
on the only established Religion? And we must now Congratulate him this
Felicity, that there is no Sect or Denomination of Christians, whom he has not
abused.

Thus far his Arms have with Success been crowned.

Let Turks, Jews and Infidels look to themselves, he has already begun the War
upon them. When once a Conqueror grows thus dreadful, it is the Interest of all
his Neighbors to oppose him, for there is no Alliance to be made with one that
will face about, and destroy his Friends, and like a second Almanzor, change
Sides merely to keep his hand in ure. This Heroic Temper of his, has created
him some Enemies, that did by no means affect Hostility; and he may observe
this Candor in the Management, that none of his Works are concerned in these
Papers, but his last Piece; and I believe he is sensible this is a Favor. I
was not ambitious of Laughing at any Persuasion, or making Religion the Subject
of such a Trifle; so that no Man is here concerned, but the Author himself, and
nothing ridiculed but his way of arguing.

But, Gentlemen, if you will not take it s^ you must grant my Excuse is more
reasonabl^ than our Author's to the Dissenters.

THE HIND AND THE PANTHER, Transvers'd to the Story of the COUNTRY and the
CITY-MOUSE.
Bays, Johnson, Smith. Johnson. HAH! my Old Friend Mr. Bays, What lucky
Chance has thrown me upon you? Dear Rogue, ^et me embrace thee.


Bays, Hold, at your Peril, Sir; stand off, and ^ome not within my Sword's
Poin^ For if you ^re not come over to the Royal Party, Pref. p. 1^
I expect neither fair War, nor fair Quarter from you


John's. How, draw upon your Friend, assault your Old Acquaintance! OF my
Conscience, ^y Intentions were Honorable.


Bays, Conscience! Ay, ay, I know the Deceit of that Word well enough: Pref.
ib.
Let me have the Marks ^f you Conscience before I trust it; for if it be not of
the same Stamp with mine, Gad I may b^ knocked down for all your fair Promises.


Smith. Nay, prithee Bays, what damned Villainy have thou been about, that
you are under these Apprehensions? Upon my Honor I Am thy Friend yet thou
look as sneaking and frighted as a Do^ that has been worrying Sheep.


Bays, Pref. ib.
Ay, Sir, The Nation is in too high a Fe^ment for me to expect any Mercy, or
I'gad, to tru^ any Body.


Smith. But why this to us, my Old Friend, wh^ you know never trouble our Heads
with Nationa^ Concerns, till the third Botlle has taught us as much of
Politics as the next does of Religion?


Bays. Ah! Gentlemen, leave this Prophanenes^ I am altered since you saw me,
and cannot be^ this loose Talk now. Mr. Johnson, you are (...) Man of Parts,
let me desire you to read the Gui^ of Controversy; and Mr. Smith, I would
recommend to you the Considerations on the Council (...) Trent, Page 5.
and so Gentlemen your humble Servant. -- Good Life be now my Task.


John's. Nay, Faith, we will not part so: Belie^ us, we are both your Friends; let
us step to the Rose for one quarter of an Hour, and talk ov^ old Stories.


Bays. I ever took you to be Men of Honor and for your sakes I will
transgress as far as o^ Pint.


John's. Well, Mr. Bays, many a merry Bo^ have we had in this House, and shall
have again, hope: Come, what Wine are you for?


Bays. Gentlemen, do you as you please, for (...) part he shall bring me a
single Pint of any thing.


Smith. How so, Mr. Bays, have you lost yo^ Pallat? you have been more curious.


Bays. True, I have so; but Senses must (...) starved, Page 21.
that the Soul may be gratified. Men (...) ^our Kidney make the Senses the
supreme Judge, and therefore bribe 'em high, but we have laid ^o^h the Use and
Pleasure of 'em aside.


Smith. What, is not there good Eating and Drinking on both sides? You make the
Separation ^reater than I thought it.


Bays. No, no, whenever you see a Fat Rosie-^olour'd Fellow, take it from me,
Ibid.
he is either a ^rotestant or a Turk.


John's. At that rate, Mr. Bays, one might sus^ect your Conversion; methinks
thou have as much ^e Face of an Heretic as ever I saw.


Bays. Such was I, such by Nature still I am. Page 5.
^ut I hope ever long I shall have drawn this pam^er'd Paunch fitter for the
straight Gate.


Smith. Sure, Sir, you are in ill hands, your Confessor gives you more severe
Rules than he ^ractices; for not long ago a Fat Friar was ^ought a true
Character.


Bays. Things were misrepresented to me: I ^onfess I have been unfortunate in
some of my Writings: But since you have put me upon that ^ubject, I Will show you
a thing I have in my Pock^ shall wipe off all that, or I am mistaken.


Smith. Come, now thou art like thy self again. ^ere's the King's Health to
thee -- Communicate.


Bays. Well, Gentlemen, here it is, and I Will be ^old to say, the exactest
Piece the World ever saw, (...) Non Pareillo In Faith. But I must bespeak your
^ardons if it reflects any thing upon your Perswa^on,


John's. Use your Liberty, Sir, you know we are ^o Bigots.


Bays. Why then you shall see me lay the Refor^ation on its Back, I'gad, and
justify our Religion ^y way of Fable.


John's. An apt Contrivance indeed! What do ^ou make a Fable of your Religion?


Bays. Ay, I'gad, and without Morals too; so^ I tread in no Man's Steps; and
to show you how far I can outdo any thing that ever was writ in thi^ kind, I
have taken Horace's Design, but I'gad, have so outdone him, you shall be
ashamed for your Old Friend. You remember in him the Story of the
Country-Mouse, and the City-Mouse; wha^ a plain simple thing it is, it has no
more Life an^ Spirit in it, I'gad, than a Hobbyhorse; and hi^ Mice talk so
meanly, such common stuff, so lik^ mere Mice, that I wonder it has pleased the
Worl^ so long. But now will I undeceive Mankind, and teach 'em to heighten, and
elevate a Fable. I'l^ bring you in the very same Mice disputing the Depth of
Philosophy, searching into the Fundamentals of Religion, quoting Texts,
Fathers, Councils and all that, I 'gad, as you shall see either of 'e^ could
easily make an Ass of a Country Vicar. Now whereas Horace keeps to the dry
naked History, (...) have more Copiousness than to do that, I'gad Here, I draw
you general Characters, and describ^ all the Beasts of the Creation; there, I
lanch ou^ into long Digressions, and leave my Mice for twenty Pages together;
then I fall into Raptures, and make the finest Soliloquies, as would ravish you
Will Not this do, think you?


John's. Faith, Sir, I don't well conceive you all this about two Mice?


Bays. Ay, why not? Is it not great and Heroical? But come, you will understand
it better when you hear it; and pray be as severe as you can, I'ga^ I defy all
Critics. Thus it begins: Page 1.
A Milk-white Mouse immortal and unchanged,
Fed on soft Cheese, and over the Dairy ranged;
Without, unspotted; innocent within,
She feared no danger, for she knew no Gin.



John's. Methinks, Mr. Bays, soft Cheese is a little too coarse Diet for an
immortal Mouse; were there any necessity for her eating, you should have
consulted Homer for some Celestial Provision.


Bays. Faith, Gentlemen, I did so; but indeed I have not the Latin one, which
I have marked by me, and could not readily find it in the Original.

Yet had She often been scared by bloody Claws Page 1.

O^ winged Owls, and stern Grimalkins Paws
Aimed at her destined Head, which made her fly, Page 2.

Though She was doomed to Death, and fated not to dye.

Smith How came She that feared no Danger in the Line before, to be scared in
this, Mr. Bays?


Bays. Why then you may have it chased if you will; for I hope a Man may run
away without being afraid, may not he?


John's. But pray give me leave; how was She doomed to Death, if She was fated
not to die; are not Doom and Fate much the same thing?


Bays. Nay, Gentlemen, if you question my Skill ^n the Language, I Am your
humble Servant; the Rogues the Critics, that will allow me nothing else, give
me that; sure I that made the Word, ^now best what I meant by it: I assure you,
doomed and fated, are quite different things.


Smith. Faith, Mr. Bays, if you were doomed to ^e hanged, whatever you were
fated to, 'twould ^ive you but small Comfort.


Bays. Never trouble your Head with that, Mr. Smith, mind the Business in hand.

Not so her young; their Linsy-woolsy Line, Page ^.

Was Hero's make, half humane, half Divine.

Smith. Certainly these Hero's, half Humane, half Divine, have very little of
the Mouse their Mother.


Bays. Gadsokers! Mr. Johnson, does your ^riend think I mean nothing but a
Mouse by all this? I tell thee, Man, I mean a Church, and these young Gentlemen
her Sons, signify Priests, Martyrs and Confessors, that were hanged in Oats's
Plot. There Is an excellent Latin Sentence, which I had a mind to bring in
Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae, and I think I have not wronged it in the
Translation.

Of these a slaughtered Army lay in Blood,
Page 2.
Whose sanguine Seed increased the sacred Brood;
She multiplied by these, now ranged alone,
Page 3.
And wandered in the Kingdoms once her own.

Smith. Was She alone when the sacred Brood wa^ increased?


Bays. Why thy Head's running on the Mous^ again; but I hope a Church may be
alone, tho^ the Members be increased, may not it?


John's. Certainly, Mr. Bays, a Church which i^ a diffusive Body of Men, can
much less be said to be alone.


Bays. But are you really of that Opinion? Take it from me, Mr. Johnson, you
are wrong; however to oblige you, I Will clap in some Simile or other, about the
Children of Israel, and it shall do.


Smith. Will you pardon me one Word more, Mr. Bays? What could the Mouse (for
I suppose you mean her now) do more than range in the Kingdoms, when they were
her own?


Bays. Do! Why She reigned; had a Diadem, Scepter and Ball, till they deposed
her.


Smith. Now her Sons are so increased, She may try the other pull for it.


Bays. I'gad, and so She may before I have done with Her; it has cost me some
pains to clear He^ Title. Well, but Mum for that, Mr. Smith.

The Common Hunt, She timorously past by,
Page 5.
For they made tame, disdained Her Company;
They grin'd, She in a Fright tript over the Green,
For She was loved, wherever She was seen.

John's. Well said little Bays, In Faith the Critic must have a great deal of
leisure, that attacks those Verses.


Bays. I'gad, I Will warrant him, whoever he i^, ^ffendet solido; but I go on.

The Independent Beast. Page 3.
--
Smith. Who is that, Mr. Bays?


Bays. Why a Bear: Pox, is not that obvious enough? -- In Groans Her hate
expressed. Which, I'gad, is very natural to that Animal. Well! there is for the
Independent: Now the Quaker; what do you think I call him?


Smith. Why, A Bull, for ought I know.


Bays. A Bull! O Lord! A Bull! No, no, a Hare, a quaking Hare. -- Armarillis,
because She wears Armor, it is the same Figure; and I am ^roud to say it, Mr.
Johnson, no Man knows how ^o pun in Heroics but my self. Well, you shall ^ear.

She thought, and reason good, the quaking Hare
Her cruel Foe, because She would not swear, Page 3.

And had professed Neutrality.

John's. A shrewd Reason that, Mr. Bays; but what Wars were there?


Bays. Wars! why there had been bloody Wars, ^ho' they were pretty well
reconciled now. Yet to ^ing in two or three such fine things as these, I ^o'nt
tell you the Lyon's Peace was proclaimed till ^fty Pages after, though 'twas
really done before I ^ad finished my Poem.

Next Her, the Buffoon Ape his Body bent, Page 3.

And paid at Church a Courtier's Complement.
That Gauls somewhere; I'gad I cannot leave* off, though I were cudgel'd every Day
for it.

Page 4.
The brisl'd Baptist Boar, impure as he.


Smith. As who?


Bays. As the Courtier, let 'em even take it a^ they will, I'gad, I seldom
come amongst 'em.

Page 10.
Was whitened with the Foam of Sanctity.
The Wolf with Belly-gaunt his rough Crest rears,
And pricks up. -- Now, in one Word, will abuse the whole Party most damnably
-- an^ pricks up. -- I'gad, I am sure you will laugh -- his predestinating Ears.
Prithee, Mr. Johnso^ remember little Bays, when next you see a Presbyterian,
and take notice if he has not Predestination in the Shape of his Ear: I have
studied Men (...) long. I Will undertake to know an Arminian, (...) the setting
of his Wig.

His predestinating Ears. I'gad, there is never Presbyterian shall dare to show
his Head without Border: I Will put 'em to that Expense.


Smith. Pray, Mr. Bays, if any of 'em shou^ come over to the Royal Party,
would their E^ alter?


Bays. Would they? Ay, I'gad, they would she their Fanatical Lugs, and have
just such we^ turned Ears as I have; mind this Ear, this is a tr^ Roman Ear,
mine are much changed for the bett^ within this two Years.


Smith. Then if ever the Party should chance fail, you might lose 'em, for what
may change, m^ fall.


Bays. Mind, mind --

Page 11.
These fiery Zuinglius, meagre Calvin bred.
Smith. Those, I suppose, are some Out-Lan^ish Beasts, Mr. Bays?


Bays. Beasts; a good Mistake! Why they w^ the chief Reformers, but here I put
'em in so b^ Company because they were Enemies to my Mo^ and anon when I am
warmed, I'gad you shall hear me call 'em Doctors, Captains, Page 39.
Horses and Horsemen in the very same Breath. You shall hear how I go on now.

Or else reforming Corah spawned this Class,
When opening Earth made way for all to pass. Page 11.


John's. For all, Mr. Bays?


Bays. Yes, They were all lost there, but some of 'em wre thrown up again at
the Leman-Lake: As a Catholic Queen sunk at Charing Cross, and ^ose again at
Queenhithe. The Fox and he came shuffled in the dark, Page 11.

If ever they were stowed in Noah's Ark.
Here I put a Quaere, Whether there were any So^inians before the Flood, which
I Am not very well satisfied in? I have been lately apt to believe that ^he
World was drowned for that Heresy; which among Friends made me leave it.
Quickened with Fire below, these Monsters breed
In Fenny Holland, and in Fruitful Tweed. Page 12

Now to write something new and out of the way, ^o elevate and surprise, and
all that, I fetch, you see, this Quickening Fire from the Bottom of Bogs and
Rivers.


John's. Why, Faith, that is as ingenious a Con^rivance as the Virtuoso's making
a Burning-Glass ^f Ice?


Bays. Why was there ever any such thing? Let ^e perish if ever I heard of it.
The Fancy was ^eer new to me; and I thought no Man had re^oncil'd those
Elements but my self. Well Gen^lemen! Thus far I have followed Antiquity, and
^s Homer has numbered his Ships, so I have ranged ^y Beasts. Here is my Boar and
my Bear, and ^y Fox, and my Wolf, and the rest of 'em all against my poor
Mouse. Now what do you think I do with all these?


Smith. Faith I don't know; I suppose you make 'em fight.


Bays. Fight! I'gad, I Would as soon make 'em Dance. No, I do no earthly thing
with 'em, nothing at all, I'gad: I think they have played their Parts
sufficiently already; I have walked 'em out, showed 'em to the Company, and
raised your Expectation. And now whilst you hope to see 'em bated, and are
dreaming of Blood and Battles, they sculk off, and you hear no more of 'em.


Smith. Why, Faith, Mr. Bays, now you have been at such Expense in setting
forth their Characters, it had been too much to have gone through with 'em.


Bays. I'gad so it had: And then I Will tell you another thing, it is not every
one that reads a Poem through. And therefore I fill the first part with
Flowers, Figures, fine Language, and all that and then I'gad sink by degrees,
till at last I write but little better than other People. And wherea^ most
Authors creep servilely after the Old Fellows and strive to grow upon their
Readers; I take another Course, I bring in all my Characters together, and let
'em see I could go on with 'em; bu^ I'gad, I will not.


John's. Could go on with 'em, Mr. Bays! there'^ no Body doubts that; You have
a most particula^ Genius that way.


Bays. Oh! Dear Sir, You are mighty obliging: But I must needs say at a Fable
or an Emble^ I think no Man comes near me, indeed I have studied it more than
any Man. Did you ever tak^ notice, Mr. Johnson, of a little thing that has
taken mightily about Town, a Cat with a Top-knot?


John's. Faith, Sir, it is mighty pretty, I saw (...) at the Coffee-House.


Bays. It Is a Trifle hardly worth owning; I was the other Day at Will's throwing
out something of that Nature; and I'gad, the hint was taken, and out came that
Picture; indeed the poor Fellow was so civil to present me with a dozen of 'em
for my Friends, I think I have one here in my Pocket; would you please to
accept it, Mr. Johnson?


John's. Really it is very ingenious.


Bays. Oh Lord! Nothing at all, I could design ^wenty of 'em in an Hour, if I
had but witty Fel^ows about me to draw 'em. I was proffered a Pension to go
into Holland, and contrive their Emblems. But hang 'em, they are dull Rogues,
and would spoil my Invention. But come, Gentlemen, let us return to our
Business, and here I Will give you a delicate Description of a Man.


Smith. But how does that come in?


Bays. Come in? very naturally. I was talking of a Wolf and that supposes a
Wood, and then I clap an Epithet to it, and call it a Celtic Wood: Now when I
was there, I could not help thinking of the French Persecution, and I'gad from
all these Thoughts I took occasion to rail at the French King, and show that he
was not of the same Make with other Men, which thus I prove.
The Divine Blacksmith in the Abyss of Light, Page 15.

Yawning and lolling with a careless beat,
Struck out the mute Creation at a Heat.
But he worked hard to Hammer out our Souls,
He blew the Bellows, and stirred up the Coals;
Long time he thought and could not on a sudden
Knead up with unskim'd Milk this Reasoning Pudding: P^ge 16.

Tender, and mild within its Bag it lay
Confessing still the softness of its Clay,
And kind as Milk-Maids on their Wedding Day.
Till Pride of Empire, Lust, and hot Desire
Did over-boil him, like too great a Fire,
And understanding grown, misunderstood,
Burned Him to the Pot, and sour'd his curdle^ Blood.



John's. But sure this is a little profane, Mr. Baye^


Bays. Not at all: Does not Virgil bring in hi^ God Vulcan working at the
Anvil?


John's. Ay, Sir, but never thought his Hand the fittest to make a Pudding.


Bays. Why do you imagine Him an Earthly dirty Blacksmith? 'Gad you make it
profane indeed. I Will tell you there is as much difference betwixt 'em, I'gad,
as betwixt my Man and Milton'^ But now, Gentlemen, the Plot thickens, he^ comes
my the other Mouse, the City Mouse.

Page 19.
A spotted Mouse, the prettiest next the White,
Ah! were her Spots washed out, as pretty quite,
^ag. 23. Page 22.
With Phylacteries on her Forehead spread,
Crozi^r in Hand, and Mitre on her Head.
Page 84.
Three Steeples Argent on her Sable Shield,
Lived in the City, and disd^in'd the Field.

John's. This is a glorious Mouse indeed! but, a^ you have dressed her, we don't
know whether s^ be J^w, Papist or Protestant.


Bays. Let me embrace you, Mr. Johnson, for that* you take it right. She is a
mere Babel ^ Religions, and therefore she is a spotted Mouse her^ and will be a
Mule presently. But to go on.

This Princess --
Smith. What Princess, Mr. Bays?


Bays. Why this Mouse, for I forgot to tell yo^ an Old Lion made a Left Hand
Marriage with h^ Mother, Page 20.
and begot on her Body Elizabeth Schis^ who was married to Timothy Sacriledg,
and ha^ Issue Graceless Heresy. Who all give the sa^ Coat with their Mother,
Three Steeples Argent, (...) I told you before.

This Princess though estranged from what was best,
Was least Deformed, because Reformed the least. Page 23.

There Is De and Re as good I'gad as ever was.
She in a Masquerade of Mirth and Love, Page 22.

Mistook the Bliss of Heaven for Bacchinals above,
And grub'd the Thorns beneath our tender Feet,
To make the Paths of Paradise more sweet.
There Is a Jolly Mouse for you, let me see any Body ^lse that can show you such
another. Here now ^ave I one damnable severe reflecting Line, but I ^ant a
Rhyme to it, can you help me, Mr. Johnson.

She --
Humbly content to be despised at Home,

John's. Which is too narrow Infamy for some.


Bays. Sir, I thank you, now I can go on with it.

Whose Merits are diffused from Pole to Pole, Page 63.

Where Winds can carry, and where Waves can roll.

John's. But does not this reflect upon some of our Friends, Mr. Bays?


Bays. It Is no matter for that, let me alone to ^ring my self off. I Will tell
you, lately I writ a ^amn'd Libel on a whole Party, sheer Point and ^atyr all
through, I'gad: Called 'em Rogues, Dogs, and all the Names I could think of,
but with an ^xceeding deal of Wit; that I must needs say. ^ow it happened
before I could finish this Piece, ^e Scheme of Affairs was altered, and those
People were no longer Beasts: Here was a Plunge ^ow: Should I lose my Labor,
or Libel my ^riend? ^Tis not every Body's Talent to find a ^alvo for this: But
what do I but write a smooth ^elicate Preface, wherein I tell them that the
Satyr ^as not intended to them, and this did the Business.


Smith. But if it was not intended to them against whom it was writ, certainly
it had no meaning ^ all.


Bays. Poh! There Is the Trick on it. Poor Fool^ they took it, and were
satisfied: And yet it maul'^ 'em damnably, I'gad.


Smith. Why Faith, Mr. Bays, there is this ver^ Contrivance in the Preface to
Dear Joys Jests.


Bays. What a Devil, do you think that l' steal from such an Author? Or ever
read it?


Smith. I cannot tell, but you sometimes read a bad, I have heard you quote
Reynard the Fox.


Bays. Why there is it now; take it from me Mr. Smith, there is as good
Morality, and as soun^ Precepts, in the Delectable History of Reynard (...)
Fox, as in any Book I know, except Seneca. Pra^ tell me where in any other
Author could I have found so pretty a Name for a Wolf as Isgrim? B^ prithee,
Mr. Smith, give me no more trouble, an^ let me go on with my Mouse. Page 29.
One Evening, when she went away from Court,
Levee's and Couchee's past without resort.
There Is Court Language for you; nothing gives Verse so fine a turn as an Air
of good Breeding.


Smith. But methinks the Levee's and Couchee of a Mouse are too great,
especially when she walking from Court to the cooler Shades.


Bays. I'gad, now have you forgot what I tol^ you that she was a Princess. But
pray mind; he^ the two Mice meet.

Page 16.
She met the Country Mouse, whose fearful Face
Beheld from far the common watering Place,
Nor durst approach --

Smith. Methinks, Mr. Bays, this Mouse strangely altered, since she feared no
Danger.


Bays. Godsokers! Why no more she does n^ yet fear either Man or Beast: But,
poor Creatur^ she is afraid of the Water, for she could not swi^ as you see by
this. Nor durst approach, till with an awful Roar. Page 30.

The Sovereign Lion bad her fear no more.
^ut besides, it is above thirty Pages off that I told ^u she feared no Danger;
and I'gad if you will ^ve no Variation of the Character, you must have ^e same
thing over and over again; it is the Beauty ^ Writing to strike you still with
something new. We, but to proceed. But when she had this sweetest Mouse in
view, Page 30.

Good Lord, how she admired her Heavenly Hiew!
^ere now to show you I am Master of all Styles, I (...) my self down from the
Majesty of Virgil, to the ^weetness of Ovid. Good Lord, how she admired her
Heavenly Hiew! What more easy and familiar! I writ this Line for ^e Ladies:
The little Rogues weill be so fond of ^e to find I can yet be so tender. I hate
such a ^ough unhewen Fellow as Milton, that a Man ^ust sweat to read Him;
I'gad, you may run over ^is and be almost asleep. The Immortal Mouse who saw
the Viceroy come
So far to see Her, did invite her Home.
There Is a pretty Name now for the Spotted Mouse, ^e Viceroy!


Smith. But pray why do you call her so?


Bays. Why! Because it sounds prettily: Page 55.
I Will ^all her the Crown-General presently if I Have a mind ^o it. Well. -- did
invite her Home
To smoke a Pipe, and over a sober Pot
Discourse of Oats and Bedloe, and the Plot. Page 31.

She made a Court'sy, like a Civil Dame,
And, being much a Gentlewoman, came. Page 32.

Well, Gentlemen, here is my first part finished, and ^ think I have kept my
Word with you, and given (...) the Majestic turn of Heroic Poesy. The rest
being matter of Dispute, I had not such frequent oc^asion for the Magnificence
of Verse, though I'gad they speak very well. And I have heard Men, and
considerable Men too, talk the very same things, a great deal worse.


John's. Nay, without doubt, Mr. Bays, they have received no small advantage
from the smoothness of your Numbers.


Bays. Ay, ay, I can do it, if I list: though you must not think I have been so
dull as to mind these things my self, but it is the advantage of our Coffee
house, that from their Talk one may write a ver^ good Polemical Discourse,
without ever troublin^ one's Head with the Books of Controversy. For can take
the slightest of their Arguments, and cl^ 'em pertly into four Verses, which
shall stare an^ London Divine in the Face. Indeed your knou^ Reasonings with a
long Train of Majors and M^nors, and the Devil and all, are too barbarous f^ my
Style; but I'gad, I can flourish better with on^ of these twinkling Arguments,
than the best of 'e^ can fight with the other. But we return to our Mous^ and now
I Have brought 'em together, let 'em 'e^ speak for themselves, which they will do
extremely well, or I Am mistaken: And pray observe, Gentlemen, if in one you
don't find all the Delicacy (...) a luxurious City-Mouse, and in the other all
the plain Simplicity of a sober serious Matron. Dame, Page 32.
said the Lady of the Spotted Muff,
Methinks your Tiff is sour, your Cates mere stuf^
There, did not I tell you she would be nice?

Your Pipe's so foul, that I disdain to smoke;
And the Weed worse than ever Tom. I -- s took.

Smith. I did not hear she had a Spotted Muff before.


Bays. Why no more she has not now: but s^ has a Skin that might make a
Spotted Muff. There a pretty Figure now unknown to the Ancients.

Leave, leave ( Poeta Loquitur.
she is earnest you see) this hoary Shed and lonely Hills.
And eat with me at Groleau's, smoke at Will's.
What Wretch would nibble on a Hanging-shelf,
When at Pontack's he may Regale himself?
Or to the House of cleanly Renish go;
Or that at Charing Cross, or that in Channel-Row?
Do you mark me now? I would by this represent the Vanity of a Town-Fop, who
pretends to be acquainted at all those good Houses, though perhaps he never was
in 'em. But hark! she goes on.

Come, at a Crown a Head our selves we'll treat,
Champain our Liquor, and Ragousts our Meat.
Then hand in hand we'll go to Court, dear Cuz,
To visit Bishop Martin, and King Buz.
With Evening Wheels we'll drive about the Park,
Finish at Locket's, and reel home ^'th' Dark.
Break clattering Windows, and demolish Doors
Of English Manufactures -- Pimps, and Whores. Page 63.


John's. Methinks a Pimp or a Whore, is an odd sort of a Manufacture, Mr. Bays.


Bays. I call 'em so, to give the Parliament a hint not to suffer so many of
'em to be exported, to the decay of Trade at home.

With these Allurements Spotted did invite
From Hermits Cell, the Female Proselyte.
Oh! with what ease we follow such a Guide,
Where Souls are starved, and Senses gratified.
Now would not you think she is going? But I'gad, you're mistaken; you shall
hear a long Argument about Infallibility, before she stirs yet.

Page 69.
But here the White, by Observation wise*
Who long on Heaven had fixed her prying Eyes.
With thoughtful Countenance, and grave Remark,
Said, or my Judgment fails me, or it is dark.
Lest therefore we should stray, and not go right,
Through the brown horror of the Starless Night,
Page 37.
Have thou Infallibility, that Wight?
Sternly the Savage grin'd, and thus replied:
That Mice may err, was never yet denied.
That I deny, said the Immortal Dame,
Page 37.
There is a Guide -- Gad, I Have forgot his Name.
Who lives in Heaven or Rome, the Lord know^ where,
Spotted Mouse Loquitur.
Had we but him, Sweetheart, we could not err.
But hark you, Sister, this is but a Whim;
For still we want a Guide to find out Him.
Here you see I don't trouble my self to keep on the Narration, but write white
Speak^ or dappl^ Speaks by the side. But when I get any nobl^ Thought which I
envy a Mouse should say, I clap it down in my own Person with a Po^ta Loquitur;
Page 69*
which, take notice, is a surer sign of a fi^e thing in my Writings, than a
Hand in the Magent anywhere else. Well, now says White, What need we find Him,
we have certain proof
That he is somewhere, Dame, and that is enough:
For if there is a Guide that knows the way,
Although we know not him, we cannot stray.


That Is true, I'gad: Well said White. You se^ her Adversary has nothing to say
for her self, and therefore to confirm the Victory, she shall make (...) Simile.


Smith. Why then I find Similes are as good after Victory, as after a Surprise.


Bays. Every Jot, I'gad, or rather better. Well, she can do it two ways, Page
37.
either about Emission or Reception of Light, or else about Epsom-waters, but I
think the last is most familiar; therefore speak, my pretty one.

As though it is controverted in the School,
If Waters pass by Urine or by Stool.
Shall we who are Philosophers, thence gather
From this Dissension that they work by neither.
And I'gad, she is in the right on it; but mind now, she comes upon her swop!

All this I did, your Arguments to try. And I'gad, if they had been never so
good, this next Line confutes 'em.

Hear, and be dumb, thou Wretch, Page 54.
that Guide am I. There Is a Surprise for you now! How sneakingly the other looks?
Was not that pretty now, to make her ask for a Guide first, and then tell her
she was one? Who could have thought that this little Mouse had the Pope and a
whole General Council in her Belly? Now Dapple had nothing to say to this; and
therefore you will see she grows peevish.

Come leave your Cracking Tricks, and as they say,
Use not, that Barber that trims time, delay
Which I'gad is new, and my own.
I Have Eyes as well as you to find the way. Page 101.

Then on they jogged, and since an Hour of Talk
Might cut a Banter on the tedious Walk;
As I remember, said the sober Mouse,
I Have heard much talk of the Wits Coffee House.
Thither, says B^indle, thou shall go, and se^
Priests sipping Coffee, Sparks and Poets Tea;
Here rugged Freeze, there Quality well dressed,
These baffling the Grand-Seigniour; those the Test.
And hear shrewd Guesses made, and Reasons given,
Page 111.
That humane Laws were never made in Heaven.
But above all, what shall oblige thy Sight,
And fill thy Eye-B^lls with a vast Delight;
Is the Poetic Judge of Sacred Wit,
Who does in the Darkness of his Glory sit.
Page 28.
And as the Moon who first receives the Light,
With which she m^kes these neither R^gions bright;
So does he shine, refl^cting from afar,
The Rays he borrowed from a better Star:
For Rules which from Corneille and Rapin flow,
Admired by all the scribbling Herd below.
From French Tradition while he does dispense,
Unerring Truths, it is Schism, a damned Offense,
To question his, or trust your private Sense.
Hah! Is not that right, Mr. Johnson? Gad forgive me he is fast asleep! Oh the
damned Stupidity of this Age! asl^ep! Well, Sir, Since you are so drousy, your
humble Servant.


John's Nay, Pray Mr. Bays, Faith I heard you all the while. The White Mouse.


Bays. The White Mouse! ay, ay, I thought how you heard me. Your Servant, Sir,
your Servant.


John's. Nay, Dear Bays, Faith I beg thy Pardon, I was up late last Night,
Prithee lend me a little Snuff, and go on.


Bays. Go on! Pox, I don't know where I was, well I Will begin. Here, mind, now
they are both come to Town.

But now at Peccadille they arrive,
And taking Coach, toward Temple Bar they drive;
But at St. Clement's Church, eat out the Back;
And slipping through the Palsgrave, bilkt poor Hack.
There Is the Utile which ought to be in all Poetry, Many a Young Templer will
save his Shilling by this Stratagem of my Mice.


Smith Why, will any Young Templer eat out ^he Back of a Coach?


Bays. No, I'gad, but you will grant it is mighty natural for a Mouse.

Thence to the Devil, and asked if Chanticleer,
Of Clergy kind, or Counselor Chough was there; Page 133.

Or Mr. Dove, a Pigeon of Renown,
By his high Crop, and corny Gizzard known, Page 126.

Or Sister Partle^, with the Hooded Head; Page 130.

No, sir. She Is hooted hence, said Will, and fled.
Why so? Because she would not pray a-Bed.

John's. aside. 'Sdeath! Who can keep awake at ^uch Stuff? Pray, Mr. Bays, lend
me your Box ^gain.


Bays. Mr. Johnson, How do you like that Box? ^ray take notice of it, 'twas given
me by a Per^n of Honor for looking over a Paper of Verses; and indeed I put in
all the Lines that were worth any thing in the whole Poem. Well, but where ^ere
we? Oh! Here they are, just going up ^airs into the Apollo; from whence my
White ^kes occasion to talk very well of Tradition.

Thus to the Place where Johnson sat we climb,
Learning on the same Rail that guided him*
And whilst we thus on equal Helps rely,
Our Wit must be as true, our Thoughts as high.
Page 45.
For as an Author happily compares
Tradition to a well-fixt pair of Stairs,
So this the Scala Sancta we believe,
By which his Traditive Genius we receive.
Thus every step I take my Spirits soar,
And I grow more a Wit, and more, and more.
There Is Humor! Is not that the liveliest Imag^ in the World of a Mouse's
going up a pair of Stairs More a Wit, and more and more?


Smith. Mr. Bays, I beg your Pardon heartily I must be rude, I have a
particular Engagemen^ at this time, and I see you are not near an en^ yet.


Bays. Gods^kers! Sure you will not serve me so All my finest Descriptions and
best Discourse is ye^ to come.


Smith. Troth, Sir, if 'twere not an Extraordinary concern I could not leave
you.


Bays. Well; but you shall take a little more and here I Will pass over two
dainty Episodes of Swallows, Swifts, Chickens, and Buzzards.


John's. I know not why they should come in except to make yours the longest
Fable that eve^ was told.


Bays. Why, the Excellence of a Fable is in the Length of it. Aesop indeed,
like a Slave as h^ was, made little, short, simple Stories, with a dr^ Moral at
the end of 'em; and could not form an^ Noble Design. But here I give you Fable
upon Fable; and after you are satisfied with Beasts i^ the first Course, serve
you up a delicate Dish o^ Fowl for the second; now I was at all this pains t^
^buse one particular Person; for I'gad I Will tell you what a Trick he served me.
I was once translating ^ very good French Author, Varillas;
but being something ^ong about it, as you know a Man is not always in ^he
Humor; What does this Jack do, but puts out ^n Answer to my Friend before I
had half finished ^he Translation: So there was three whole Months ^ost upon
his Account. But, I think, I have my Revenge on him sufficiently, for I let all
the World ^now, that he is a tall, broad backed, lusty Fellow, Page 137.
of a Brown Complexion, fair Behavior, a Fluent ^ongue, and taking amongst the
Women; and to ^op it all, that he is much a Scholar, more a Wit, and owns but
two Sacraments. Don't you think ^his Fellow will hang himself? But besides, I
have ^o nickt his Character in a Name as will make you ^plit. I call him --
I'gad I will not tell you unless remember what I said of him.


Smith. Why, that he was much a Scholar, and more a Wit --


Bays. Right; and his Name is Buzzard, Ha! ha! ha.


John's. Very proper indeed, Sir.


Bays. Nay, I have a farther fetch in it yet ^han perhaps you imagine; for his
true Name begins with a B, which makes me sl^ly contrive him ^his, to begin
with the same Letter: There Is a ^retty Device, Mr. Johnson; I learned it, I
must ^eeds confess, from that ingenious Sport, I love my Love with an A,
because she is Amiable; and (...) you could but get a Knot of merry Fellows
to^ether, you should see how little Bays would top ^m all at it, I'gad.


Smith. Well, but good Faith, Mr. Bays, I ^ust leave you, I am half an hour
past my time.


Bays. Well, I Have done, I Have done. Here are ^ght hundred Verses upon a rainy
Night, and (...) Bird's-Nest; and here is three hundred more, Translated from
two Paris Gazettes, in which the Spotted Mouse gives an account of the Treaty
(...) Peace between the Czars of Muscovy, and the Emperor, which is a piece of
News. White do^ not believe, and this is her Answer. I am resolv^ you shall
hear it, for in it I have taken occasion (...) prove Oral Tradition better than
Scripture. No^ you must know. it is sincerely my Opinion, that (...) had been
better for the World, if we never had an^ Bibles at all.

Ever that Gazette was printed, said the White,
Our Robin told another Story quite;
This Oral Truth more safely I believed,
My Ears cannot, your Eyes may be deceived.
By word of Mouth unerring Maxims flow,
And Preaching's best, if understood, or no.
Page ^.
Words I confess bound by, and trip so light,
We have not time to take a steady sight;
Yet fleeting thus are plainer than when writ,
To long Examination they submit.
Hard things -- Mr. Smith., if these two Lin^ don't recompense your stay, never
trust John Bay^ again.

Hard things at the frist Blush are clear and full,
Page 15.
God mends on second thoughts, but Man grows du^
I'gad, I judge all Men by my self, it is so wi^ me, I never strove to be very
exact in any thi^ but I spoiled it.


Smith. But allowing your Character to be tru^ is it not a little too severe?


Bays. It Is no matter for that, these gene^ Reflections are daring, and savor
most of a No^ Genius, that spares neither Friend nor Foe.


John's. Are you never afraid of a drubbing for that daring of your Noble Genius?


Bays. Afraid! Why, Lord, you make so much of a Beating, I'gad, it is no more
to me than a Flea biting. No, no, if I can but be witty upon 'em, let 'em 'en
lay on, In Faith, I Will never baulk my Fancy to save my Carcass. Well, but we
must dispatch, Mr. Smith.

Thus did they merrily carouse all day,
And like the gaudy Fly their Wings display;
And sip the Sweets, and bask in great Apollo's ray.
Well, there is an end of the Entertainment; and Mr. Smith, if your Affairs
would have permitted, you would have heard the best Bill of Fare that ever was
served up in Heroicks: But here follows a Dispute shall recommend it self, I Will
say nothing for it. For Dapple, who you must know was a Protestant, all this
while trusts to her own Judgment, and foolishly dislikes the Wine; upon which
our Innocent does so run her down, that she has not one word to say for her
self, but what I put in her Mouth; and I'gad, you may imagine they will not be
very good ones, for she has disobliged me, like an Ingrate.

Sirrah, says Brindle, Thou have brought us Wine,
Sour to my Taste, and to my Eyes unfine.
Says Will, all Gentlemen like it, ah! says White,
What is approved by them must needs be right.
It Is true, I thought it bad, Page 38.
but if the House
Commend it, I submit, a private Mouse.
Mind that, mind the Decorum and Defference, which our Mouse pays to the
Company.

Nor to their Catholic Consent oppose
My erring Judgment, and reforming Nose.
Ah! ah! there she has nick't her, that is up to thee Hilts, I'gad, and you
shall se^ Dapple res^nts it.

Why, what a Devil shall not I trust my Eyes?
Must I drink Stum because the Rascal lies?
And palms upon (...) Catholic Consent,
To give sophisticated Brewings vent.
(...) 5.
Says White, What ancient Evidence can sway,
If you must Argue thus and not obey?
Drawers must be trusted, through whose hands conveyed,
You take the Liquor, or you spoil the Trade.
For sure those Honest Fellows have no knack
Of pu^ting of^ stum'd Clar^t for Pon^ack.
How long, alas! would the poor Vintner last,
If all that drink must judge, and every Guest
Be allowed to have an understanding ^ast?
Thus she: Nor could the Panther well enlarge,
With weak defense against so strong a Charge.
There I call her a Panther, because she'^ spotted, which is such a Blot to the
Reformation, as I warrant 'em they will never claw off, I'gad.

But with a weary Yawn that showed her Pride,
Said, Spotless was a Villain, and she lied.
White saw her cankered Malice at that Word,
And said her Prayers, and dr^w her Delphic Sword
The Other cried Murder, and her Rage restrained:
And thus her passive Character maintained.
But now alas! --
Mr. Johnson, Pray mind me this; Mr. Smith (...) you to stay no longer, for
this that follow is so engaging; hear me but two Lines, I'gad, and go away
afterward if you can.

But now, alas, I grieve, I grieve to tell
What sad Mischance these pretty things befell
These Birds of Beasts. --
There Is a tender Expression, Birds of Beasts: it is the greatest Affront that
you can put upon any Bird, to call it, Beast of a Bird: Page 129.
and a Beast is so fond of being called a Bird, as you cannot imagine.

These Birds of Beasts, these learned Reasoning Mice,
Were separated, banished in a trice.
Who would be learned for their sakes, who wise?
Ay, who indeed? There Is a Pathos, I'gad, Gen^lemen, if that will not move you,
nothing will, I can assure you: But here is the sad thing I was ^fraid of.

The Constable alarmed by this Noise,
Entered the Room, directed by the Voice,
And speaking to the Watch, with Head aside, Page 135.

Said, Desperate Cures must be to desperate Ills applied.
Th^se Gentlemen, for so their Fate decrees,
Can n^'er enjoy at once the But and Peace. Page 115. Page 144.

^hen ^ach have separate Interests of their own,
Two Mice are one too many for a Town.
By Schism they are torn; and therefore, Brother,
^^ok you to one, and I Will secure the the other.
^^w whither Dapple did to Bridewell go,
O^ in the Stocks all Night her Fingers blow, Page 98.

Or in the Compter lay, concerns not us to know.
^ut the immortal Matron, spotless White,
^orgetting Dapple's Rudeness, Malice, Spite,
^ook'd kindly back, and wept, and said, Good Night.
Page 145.
Ten thousand Watchmen waited on this Mouse,
With Bills, and Halberde, to her Country House.
This last Contrivance I had from a judicious Author, that makes Ten thousand
Angels wait upon hi^ Hind, and she asleep too, I'gad. --


John's. Come, let us see what we have to pay.


Bays. What a Pox, are you in such have? Yo^ han't told me how you like it.


John's. Oh, extremely well. Here, Drawer.


FINIS.
THE EAGLE and the ROBIN. AN APOLOGUE. ^ranslated from the Original of Aesop,
written Two Thousand Years since, and now rendered in familiar Verse. By H. G.
L. Mag. With an OLD CAT'S PROPHECY. ^^ken out of an Old Copy of Verses,
supposed to be writ by John Lidgate, a Monk of Bury.

LONDON. ^^^nted and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-fryars near the Waterside.
1709.

THE PREFACE,
GOOD Precepts and true Gold are more valuable for their Antiquity. And here I
present my good Reader with One, deliver^ by the first Founder of Mythology,
Aesop him^^^f. Maximus Planudes takes Notice of it, as a ^ery excellent Part of
his Production; and Phoe^us, Cameratius, and others, seem to agree, that ^s
Eagle, and five others not yet translated, are ^^al to any of his that are
handed down to us. ^ho' Mr. Ogleby and Sir Roger L'Estrange had the ^nhappiness
to be unacquainted with them, yet I ^d the good Fortune to discover them by the
re^oval of my old Library, which has made me a^ends for the Trouble of getting
to where I now each. They were Written, or Dictated at least, (...) Aesop, in
the fifty fourth Olympiad: And though I ^signed them chiefly for the use of my
School, (this ^ing translated by a Youth designed for a Greek Pro^ssor,) yet no
Man is so Wise as not to need Instru^ion, ay, and by the way of Fable too;
since the ^doly Scriptures themselves, the best Instructors, ^ach us by way of
Parable, Symbol, Image and ^igure; and David was more moved with Nathan's --
Thou art the Man. than all the most rigid Lectures in the World would have
done. Whoeve^ will be at the Trouble of comparing this Vers^ with the Original,
let them begin at the tenth Lin^ and they will find it Metaphrastically done,
Verbu^ verbo, as the best way of Justice to the Author.

Those that are mere Adorers of (...) w^^^ not be angry that it is in this sort
of Meter, s^ which I gave leave, the Lad having a turn to the sort of Measure,
which is Pleasant and Agreeabl^ though not Lofty. For my own part, I concur with
m^ Master Aristotle, that (...), are ve^^ far from being unnecessary or
unpleasant.

May this be of use to thee, and it will please.

Thine in all good Wishes, Horat. Gran^

THE EAGLE and the ROBIN. A FABLE.
A Lady lived in former Days,
That well deserved the utmost Praise;
For Greatness, Birth, and Justice famed,
and every Virtue could be named.
Which made her course of Life so even,
that she is a Saint (if dead) in Heaven.
This Lady had a little Seat
^st like a Palace, 'twas so neat,
^om ought (but Goodness) her Retreat.
One Morning in her giving way,
^s was her Custom every Day,
^o cheer the Poor, the Sick and Cold,
^r with Apparel, Fookd, or Gold,
^here came a gazing Stranger by,
^n whom she quickly cast an Eye.
The Man admiring, made a stand;
^e had a Bird upon his Hand:
What Is that, says she, that hangs it Head,
^nking and faint? It Is almost dead.
^adam, a Red-Breast that I found,
(...) this Wet Season almost drowned.
^h! bring him in, and keep him warm;
^obins do never any harm.
They soon obeyed, and chopped him Meat,
Gave him whatever he would Eat;
The Lady Care her self did take,
And made a Nest for Robin's sake:
But he perkt up into her Chair,
In which he plenteously did fare,
Assuming quite another Air.
The Neighbors thought, when this they spied,
The World well mended on his side.
With well-tuned Throat he whistl'd long,
And every body liked his Song;
At last, said they, this little Thing
Will kill it self, so long to sing.
Well, Closet him among the rest
Of those my Lady loves the best;
They little thought, that saw him come,
That Robins were so quarrelsome:
The Door they opened, in he pops,
And to the highest Perch he hops;
The party-colored Birds he chose.
The Gold-Finches, and such as those;
With them he would Peck, and Bill, and Feed,
And very well (at times) agreed:
Canary Birds were his Delight,
With them he would Test a Test all Night;
But the brown Linnets went to pot,
He killed 'em all upon the spot.
The Servants were employed each Day,
Instead of Work, to part some Fray,
And wished the aukard Fellow cursed
That brought him to my Lady first.
At last they all resolved upon it,
Some way to tell my Lady on it.
Mean while he would had a noble Swing,
And ruled just like the Galli^ King;
Having killed or wounded all,
Unless the Eagle in the Hall;
With whom he durst but only Jar*
He being the very Soul of War:
But hated him for his Desert,
And bore him Malice at his Heart.
This Eagle was my Lady's Pride,
The Guardian Safety of her Side:
He often brought home Foreign Prey,
Which humbly at her Feet he lay.
For Color, Pinions and Stature,
The fairest Workmanship of Nature.
^Twou'd do one good to see him move,
^o full of Grandeur, Grace and Love:
He was indeed a Bird for Jove.
He soared aloft in Brucum's Field,
And thousand Kites and Vultures killed;
Which made him Dear to all that flew,
(Unless to Robin and his Crew)
One Day poor Bob, puffed up with Pride,
Thinking the Combat to abide,
A Goose-quill on for Weapon tied,
Knowing by Use, that, now and then,
A Sword less Hurt does than a Pen.
As for Example -- What at home
You Have well contrived, to do at Rome,
A Pen blows up -- before you come.
You are supposed to undermine
The Foe, -- in some immense Design.
A Pen can bite you with a Line;
There Is forty ways to give a Sign.
Well, -- all on Fire away he stalked,
Till come to -- where the Eagle walked.
Bob did not shill I shall I go,
Nor said one word of Friend or Foe;
But flirting at him made a Blow,
As Game-Cocks with their Gauntlets do.
At which the Eagle gracefully
Cast a disdaining, sparkling Eye;
As who should say, -- What Is this, a Fly?
But no Revenge at all did take,
He spared him for their Lady's sake;
Who pondered these things in her Mind,
And took the Conduct of the Eagle kind.
Upon Reflection now -- to show
What harm the least of things may do,
Mad Robin, with his cursed Flirt,
One of the Eagle's (...) amongst the Greeks, signifies Honor as tender the
Eye.
Eyes had hurt;
Inflamed it, made it red and sore:
But the Affront inflamed it more.
Oh! how the Family did tear,
To fire the House could scarce forbear:
With Scorn (not Pain) the Eagle fired,
Murmured Disdain, and so retired.
Robin, to offer some Relief,
In words like these would heal their Grief.
Should the Eagle die, -- which Heaven forbid,
We ought some other to provide.
I do not say that any now
Are fit, but in a Year or Two.
And should this mighty Warrior fall,
They should not want a General.
As Men have long observed, that one
Misfortune seldom comes alone;
Just in the Moment this was done,
Ten Thousand Foes in sight were come.
Vultures, and Kites, and Birds of Prey,
In Flocks so thick -- they darkened Day.
A long-concerted Force and strong,
Vermin of all kinds made the Throng;
Foxes, were in the Faction joined,
Who waited their Approach to ground.
By every Hand, from common Fame,
The frightful Face of Danger came.
One cries, What help now -- who can tell?
I Am glad the Eagle's here, and well:
Another, out of Breath with fear,
Says, Thousands more near Sea appear;
They Will swop our Chickens from the Door.
We never were so set before:
We are glad the Eagle will forget,
And the Invaders kill or beat.
Reserved and Great, his Noble Mind
Above all petty things inclined;
Abhorred the Thoughts of any thing,
But what his Lady's Peace could bring.
Who Blessed him first, and bad him do,
As he was wont, and beat the Foe.
Burning and restless as the Sun,
Until this willing Work was done;
He whets his Talons, stretched his Wings,
His Lightning, Darts, and Terror flings:
Towers with a flight into the Sky,
These Million Monsters to descry,
Prepared to Conquer, or to Dye.
The Party, that so far was come,
Thought not the Eagle was at home:
To Fame and Danger used in Field,
They knew he would quickly made 'em yield:
But on Assurance he was near,
Encumbered, Faint, and Dead with fear;
They made with Hurry toward the Lakes,
And he his Pinions over 'em shakes;
They had not (with such Horror filled)
The Courage to let one be killed:
They fled, and left no Foe behind,
Unless it were the fleeting Wind:
Only -- a Man by Water took
Two fine young Merlins, and a Roo^^
The Family had now Repose:
But with the Sun the Eagle rose;
The Imperial Bird pursued the Foe,
More Toil than Rest inured to know.
He winged his Way to Latian Land,
Where first was hatched this murdering Band;
He darted Death wherever he came,
Some of 'em dying at his Name.
Their mighty Foe -- a fatal Pledge,
Their Bowels tore through every Hedge:
They Flutter, Shriek, and Caw, and Hiss;
Their Strength decays, and Fears increase:
But most the Chevaliers, the Geese.
So many slaughtered Fowl there was,
Their Carcasses blockt up the Ways;
The rest he drove, half spent, Pell-mell,
Quite to the Walls of Pontifell.
Robin at home, though mad to hear
He should so Conquer every where,
Expostulated thus with Fear.
Ungrateful I, that so have stirred
Against this Generous, Noble Bird,
Wast thou not first by him preferred?
Let Us leave him in his Gall to burn,
And back to Pontifell return.
There some to Chimney-Tops aspire,
To Turrets some that could fly higher;
Some 'bove a Hundred Miles were gone,
To Roost them at Byzantium.
Alas! in vain was their Pretense,
He broke through all their strong Defense:
Down went their Fences, Wires and all;
Perches and Birds together fall.
None hoped his Power to withstand,
But gave the Nest to his Command;
They told him of Ten Thousand more,
In Flocks along the Ganges Shore:
Safe in their Furrows, free from Trouble,
Like Partridges among the Stubble*
He spreads himself, and cuts the Air,
And steady Flight soon brought him there.
Lord, how deceived and vexed he was!
To find they were but mere Jackdaws.
A Hundred Thousand all in sight,
They all could Chatter, not one Fight.
I Will deal by them as is their due:
Shough, cried the Eagle; off they flew.
His flashing Eyes their Hearts confounds,
Though by their flight secure from Wounds;
Which was a signal, fatal Baulk,
To a late swift Italian Hawk.
The Eagle would no Rest afford,
Till he had sent my Lady word;
Who when she heard the dear Surprise,
Wonder and Joy stood in her Eyes.
My Faithful Eagle, have thou then
My Mortal Foes destroyed again?
Return, return, and on me wait;
Be thou the Guardian of my Gate;
Thee and thy Friends are worth my Care,
Thy Foes (if any such there are)
Shall my avenging Anger share.
So -- lest new Ills should intervene,
She turned the Robin out again.
The Samians now in vast Delight,
Bless their good Lady Day and Night;
Wish that her Life might never be done,
But Everlasting as the Sun.
The Eagle high again did soar,
The Lady was disturbed no more,
But all things flourished as before.
Robin Red Breast, with the Beasts.
ONE that had in her Infant State,
While playing at her Father's Gate,
Seen, and was most hugely smitten
With young Dog and dirty Kitten,
Had took them up and lug'd 'em in,
And made the Servants wash 'em clean.
When she to a fit Age was grown,
To be sole Mistress of her own,
Then to her Favor and strange Trust,
She raised these two; in rank the first
The Dog: who with gilt Collar graced,
Strutted about. The Cat was placed
Over all the House to domineer,
And kept each Wight of her in fear;
While he over all the Plains had power.
That savage Wolves might not devour
Her Flocks. She gave him charge great Care
To take: But Beasts uncertain are.
Now see by these what Troubles rise
To those who in their Choice unwise
Put trust in such; for he soon joined
With Beasts of Prey the Dog combined,
Who killed the Sheep, and tore the Hind:
While he would stand, and grin and bark,
Concealing thus his Dealings dark.
A Wolf, or so, sometimes he would take,
And then, O what a Noise he would make!
But with wild Beasts o'er-run yet are
The Plains: Some die for want of Fare,
Or torn, or killed; the Shepherds find
Each day are lost of every kind.
Thy silly Sheep lament in vain,
Of their hard Fate, not him complain*
The Shepherds, and the Servants all,
Against the Traitor loudly baul:
But there was none that dared to tell
Their Lady what to them befell;
For Puss, a Fox of wondrous Art,
Brought in to help, and take their part,
By whose Assistance to deceive,
She made her every Lie believe.
One lucky Day, when she was walking
In her Woods, with Servants talking,
And stopped to hear how very well
A Red-Breast sung, then him to dwell
With her she called: He came, and took
His place next to a Favorite Rook.
Where Robin soon began to sing
Such Songs as made the House to ring;
He sung the Loss and Death of Sheep,
In Notes that made the Lady weep:
How for his Charge the Dog unfit,
Took part with Foes, and Shepherds bit;
Even from his Birth he did him trace,
And show him Cur of shabby Race;
The first by wandering Beggars fed,
His Sire advanced, turned Spit for Bread;
Himself each trust had still abused;
To steal what he should guard, was used
From Puppy: known wherever he came,
Both vile and base, and void of Shame.
The Cat he sung that none could match
^or venomed Spite, or cruel Scratch;
That from a Witch transformed she came,
Who kitten'd three of equal Fame:
This first, one dead, of Tabby Fur
The third survives, much Noise of her
Had been: A Cat well known, with ease
On Errands dark, over Land and Seas,
She Would Journeys take to Cub of Bear,
From these intriguing Beasts, who swear
They Will bring him to defend the Wrong
That they have done. Again he sung,
How Tabby once, in Moonlight Night,
Trotted with Letter Fox did write;
In which he sends his best Respects
To the She-Bear, and thus directs:
"Madam, said he, your Cub safe send,
"None shall his Worship soon offend;
"It Is all I can at present do
"To serve him, as his Friends well know.
At this the Beasts grew in such Rage,
That none their Fury could assuage;
Nay, Puss her Lady would have scratched,
And tore her Eyes, but she was watched;
For she would set up her Back, and mew,
And thrice even in her Face she flew.
The Dog, like an ungrateful Spark,
At her would dare to snarl and bark.
Her Tenants wondering stood to hear
That she their Insolence would bear;
And offered their Assistance to
Soon make them better manners know:
But she, to avoid all farther Rout;
Her Window opening, turned Bob out;
Hoping that then her Beasts would live
In Peace, and no Disturbance give.
Yet nothing she can do avails,
Their Rage against her still prevails*
Though Puss was warned to fear their Fate
^n Lines (by old Prophetic Cat,
Writ before her Transformation,
When she was in the Witch's Station)
Foretelling thus: "When Beasts are grown
"To certain heights, before unknown
"Of Human Race, some shall aloud
"Inflame and arm a dreadful Crowd,
"Who in vast Numbers shall advance,
"And to new Tunes shall make them dance:
"When this begins, no longer hope,
"For all remains is Ax and Rope.
But not detered by this they dared,
With some who of their Plunder shared,
TO affront their Lady, and conspire
To many with her Money hire,
Contemning her, to pay undue
Regards unto this Bestial Crew:
Though these resembled Human Shapes,
They were indeed no more than Apes;
Who some in House, and some in Wood,
And others in high Boxes stood,
That chatt'ring made such noise and stir,
How all was due to Fox and Cur:
Till by their false deluding way,
She found her Flocks begin to stray.
Still Robin does for her his Care
And Zeal express, on whom yet are
His thoughts all fixed. On her he dreams
Each Night. Her Praises are his Themes
^n Songs all day. Now perched on Tree,
Finding himself secure and free,
He pertly shakes his little Wings;
^ets up his Throat: Again he sings,
That she had left no other way
^o save her Flocks, and end this Fray*
But soon to her Assistance take
One who could make these Monsters shake;
A well-known Huntsman who has Skill
The fiercest Beasts to tame or kill:
At her Command he would come, and he
Would make her great, and set them free;
That should these Beasts some evil day
Bring Cub into her Grounds, she may
Depend that not her self they will spare,
Since to insult her now they dare:
All she at best can hope for then,
Is to be safe shut up in Den;
Since by sure signs all these Ingrate
Are known to bear her deadly Hate.
He ends his Song, and prays to Heaven,
That she may have the Wisdom given,
Before it be too late to take
Such Resolutions, as may make
Her safe, and that these Beasts no more
To ravage in the Plains have power.
FINIS.
A HYMN TO PEACE.

^ccasion'd, by the Two Houses Joining in One Address to the QUEEN.

BY THE Author of the True-born Englishman.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCCIX.

A HYMN TO PEACE.
HAIL Image, of the Eternal Mind,
The only perfect Blessing of Mankind;
Thou Emblem of the Sacred Rest,
And surest Pledge, it shall be once possessed;
Where e're thou dwell, it is always Calm and Clear,
Bright like thy Glorious self and Fair:
No Clouds thy Heavenly Climates know,
Thou find'st it all Serene, or make it so.
If Nations thou, or Souls have once possessed,
From all their Broils and Burdens they are released,
All Human Happiness attends on thee,
In Gaol thou sets the Prisoner Free,
^f thou Unlock'st the Fetters of the Mind,
(...) spite of Bars and Bolts it is unconfined.
Tell us, bright Nymph, by what strange Art,
Thou fan'st the heated Souls of Men Oppressed;
Cool'st all the Fury of the Heart,
And guid'st the Mind to Light and Rest?
Tell us, Great Interposing Something, how,
To thy Great Influence, all the Passions bow;
How thou deny'st the Gust of sweet Revenge,
Can all to Calms and Softness change?
In the least Moment act thy part,
And lock up all the Lab'rinths of the Heart?
Filled with just Rage, the Furious Spirits take Arms,
When Injury and Power to hurt Combine,
What Mind can once resist the Unhappy Charms,
Where wished Revenge, with wished Occasion join.
When the Exasperated Passions rage,
And all the Man against himself Engage;
The mighty Tempests rise within,
And strong Convulsions, act the swelling Spleen.
When Fury leads him to the Fatal Brink,
Thou turn'st him round but once, and make him think;
The Ungoverned Wretch in Arms appears,
Against his Eyes, against his Ears;
Judges of nothing, Scorns his Sense,
Lampoons his Nature, Bullies Providence;
Headlong he seeks to give his Fury vent,
Bursting with Rage, and swelled with Discontent.
Then thy soft showers distill upon the Soul,
And all the Frenzy of the Mind control;
Reduce the Wretch, by Rage and Passions blind,
To Exercise the Optics of his Mind;
Thy balmy Dews, the raging Storms restrain,
And Cool the Fermentations of his Brain;
Assisting Reason in her just Defense,
And Hand in Hand, Conduct him to his Sense;
Disperses all the Vapors that remain,
Brings him to act, and so restores the Man.
Touched with thy Scepters Golden point,
The Hypochondraick Poisons lose their Taint;
The Infecting Venom of inflamed desire,
Flows back, and of it self puts out the Fire:
The Soul returns to Rectitude, and shows,
That Heaven within, from whence that Influence flows.
Blessed Peace! May every Soul that knows thy Name,
^an thy just Fires and keep alive the Flame;
^o their due Homage, to thy Blessing pay,
^o banish Storms, and banish Crimes away.
Hail, Virgin Peace, thou Branch of Innocence,
How art thou sunk in early Crimes of Men,
How hard to be restored again,
And only art obtained in Penitence.
Thou bright Effluvium, of the Heavenly Ray,
^reat Emanation, from Eternal Day;
The Guilty only from thee run,
Like Storms and Darkness from the Sun;
Darkness and Storms, with Guilty pace,
^ee from the Glorious Luster of thy Face,
And Hell it self's Enraged to know,
^hy Absence helps to make her so.
When Men by Pride, and wild Ambition led,
^or wild Ambition, often distracts the Head;
Contend for Trifles, and make War,
To be less Happy than they are.
^hen thus against their Native Happiness,
^hey Fight with Plenty, and fall out with Peace;
^ow soon does War, its vile Effects Explain,
and his own Miseries inform the Man;
Damned to Repentance, and his Fate
Shows him his Follies, but too late.
With Crowds of consequential Harms Oppressed,
He Learns the Sweetness of unvalu'd Rest,
But Learns it at a price so Dear,
As makes his Early Follies soon appear:
Both sides well Beaten, call for Peace,
And find too late their Happiness.
Their Mutual Mischiefs, Mutual Wits restore,
And show them both, that both were Fools before;
Then, Godd^ss, to thy Courts they sue,
With Penitence, most likely to be true,
For none Repent, like those that feel,
The Smart of doing Ill.
Blessed Peace! when Heaven, for Crimes of Guil^y Me^
Commands thy Absence, whether do Nations run!
Kindoms in Tumults, and Confusions Dye,
And sink in Undirected Anarchy.
Societies with Justice cease,
For what is our Property, without our Peace?
Contentions all Prosperity invade,
Like two fixed Stocks, to one East India Trade;
Both Languish, while they strive and Fight,
And both Succeed, when they Unite.
Not Heaven it self, could Strife of Parties bear,
The first Attempt Un-Angel'd Lucifer;
The mighty Seraph from his Glory fell,
And want of PEACE made up his Hell.
That was the Fire and Brimstone of the Place,
No Thoughts can form a more Distracted Case*
Not Devils feel worse Punishment,
Nor Words more Terror represent.
Nature in no worse Figure can appear,
It Is more than Natures self can bear;
Debate no more the Place of Woe,
It Is Mystery all, and best it should be so.
^l me no more of wild Philosophy,
^ere weak aspiring Nature soars too high;
which Handmaid Sense, bewilders and Confounds,
With Reasons ill adapted Tools:
Attempts to square the Extent of Souls,
Men mark Lands, by Butts and Bounds.
Would the Great Be, and not to Be Divide,
^d all the Doubts of Entity decide;
^e mighty Maze of Wondrous Nothing Tread,
^d form the wild Ideas in his Head:
^ou'd fathom Chaos, Life and Sp'rit dissect,
And all Superior Light reject.
Scorn the mean Helps of Speculations,
^d bring down God himself to Demonstrations.
The two Great Ends of Nature twine,
^d Generation to Corruption join;
^st up the Hours beyond the Death of Time,
^d make the Humane comprehend Sublime;
^lineate Heaven, the Hills of Glory show,
^d all the Vales of Darkness stretched below:
^escribe the Depth of these, of those the Height,
Give the Square-Root of Infinite;
Unlock the Chain of Cause and Consequence,
Dismiss Almighty Providence;
^he Bounds of Bright Eternal Day descry,
and form a Mathematical Eternity.
It Is all in Vain, too short the Reach of Sense,
Embrance the high Dimesions of the Immense:
No Rules can square, what we call GOD,
^o Geography describe the Dark abode.
Bow, mighty Reason, to thy Maker's Name,
For GOD and PEACE, are just the same;
Heaven is the Emanation of his Face,
and want of Peace, makes Hell in every place.
Tell us, ye Men of Notion, tell us why,
You seek for Bliss and wild Prosperity,
In Storms and Tempests, Feuds and War,
Is Happiness to be expected there?
Tell us what sort of Happiness,
Can Men in want of Peace possess?
Blessed Charm of Peace, how sweet are all those Ho^
We spend in thy Society!
Afflictios lose their Acid Powers,
And turn to Joys when joined to thee.
The Darkest Article of Life with Peace,
Is but the Gates of Happiness;
Death in its blackest shapes can never fright,
Thou can see Day, beyond his Night;
The Smile of Peace, can Calm the Frown of Fate,
And, spite of Death, can Life Anticipate;
Nay, Hell it self, could it admit of Peace,
Would change its Nature, and its Name would ce^
The Bright Transforming Blessing would Destroy
The Life of Death, and Damn the Place to Joy;
'The Metamorphosis, would be so strange,
Twould fright the Devils, and make them bless (...) Chan^
Or else the Brightness would be so intense,
They Would shun the Light, and fly from thence.
Let Heaven, that Unknown Happiness,
Be what it will, it is best described by Peace.
No Storms without, or Storms within;
No Fear, no Danger there, because no Sin.
It Is bright Essential Happiness,
Because He dwells within, whose Name is PEAC^
Who would not Sacrifice for thee,
All that Men call Felicity!
Since Happiness, is but an empty Name,
A Vapor without Heat or Flame;
But what from thy Original derives,
And Dies with thee by whom it Lives.
When Kingdoms to the Laws of Peace submit,
What mighty Blessings crowd about her Seat!
Under the Ministry of Peace,
How soon will all a Nations Mischiefs cease!
How soon the Mighty Scepter in her Hand,
Scatters the Plagues and Sorrows of a Land!
From her bright Face how soon,
Will all Oppressions, and Injustice run!
The Plots and Parties of a State,
In her bright Book may quickly read their Fate;
Nations and Men, when to their Sense restored,
Will set the Scepter up to Rule the Sword.
Even Hypocrites, to thee pay Sacrifice,
Borrow thy Name for their Disguise;
By thee conceal the Seeds of Strife,
And Sanctify the Villainies of Life.
Thou art the great Pretense of War,
When Tyrants in thy Robes appear,
When Kings by Lust of Rule, and Power misled,
Pampered by Providence and over fed;
Fall out for Power to Oppress,
And then pretend it is all for PEACE.
Ambition, that Old Painted Whore of State,
That she may look as Fair as Great;
Wears thy old Clothes, and in that Gaudy Dress,
With Ease obtains the Name of Peace.
Clothed in thy Robes, how Fair she looks and Bright,
And shines Delusive Beams of borrowed Light.
Makes gilded Injury appear,
With Charms of Right, and Sanctifies the War;
As Princes, when they weaker Powers Oppress,
First give them Poverty, then call it Peace.
War, Devastation, Violence, and Blood,
As guilty Men would have them understood;
All in their turn pretend to Peace,
And cry out Property, when they Oppress;
Chaste Nymph, how is thy Name Profaned,
When Villains tack thee to their wild Designs;
Till the Unnatural End's obtained,
And time the mighty Fraud explains!
In strong Alliance, see the World combined.
To Injury and Wrong inclined,
The Embattl'd Squadrons, spread the Field of War,
The plundered Towns in Flames appear;
The General Ruin like a Flood,
Condemns the ravaged Plains, to Barrenness and Blood:
The Royal Firebrands of the World appear,
And plead the Conscientious Cause of War,
Blast Nations with their wild Success,
And still pretend it is all for Peace.
In Ecclesiastic Quarrels it is the same,
Where Hierarchy's the thing, and Peace the Name;
The Enthusiastic Errors mad Men broach,
All cry the Peace and Union of the Church.
The mighty Cheat's in strong Delusions dressed,
And Peace becomes the Church's Jest;
The Holy Varnish colors the Deceit,
And High-Church Projects work beneath the sacred Cheat.
Thus all the Tyranny of Priests.
Covered with Clouds, and Ecclesiastic Mists,
In zealous Masks for Conscience sake oppress,
And damn Men's Souls to purchase Peace.
If Reason prompts an injur^d Land,
To take their due Defense in hand;
If Nations fly to Nature's Laws,
However provoked, or whatsoever the Cause:
Wild Power dressed up like Justice takes the Sword,
Oppressions the Design, and Peace the Word;
The Innocent, as for Rebellion, dye,
The double Mask deceives the Eye:
Nations deluded hunt an empty Name,
Abused by ^ustom, and debauched by Fame,
Nature's brought in a Rebel to her own Laws,
And stoops ^o wild Pretense instead of Cause.
Yet Peace is still the same, the Chaste, the Fair,
Her i^^tive Beauties will appear:
^n spite of Clouds and Counterfeits, her Name
Breaks through the Cheat, and well secures her Fame;
Wherever her Balmy Couch is spread,
Wherever she makes her Flowery Bed,
Plenty, her Handmaid, brings her Clusters in
The grateful Tribute of the Vine:
C^res brings laden Sheaves, and N^ptun^ Fleets,
And Foreign Wealth, with Native meets:
Celestial Odours crown her Spicy Bed,
And Rays of Goodness shine about her Head.
The Obsequiours Seasons at her Elbow stand,
And Streams of Fullness flow from either Hand.
The Enlivening Sunbeams join their cheerful Aid,
And wanton Nature sports beneath her Shade.
Blessed Peace, the highest Treasure Men possess,
How happy are the Nations thou will bless!
How doubly Cursed, if that can be,
And blind to his own Happiness, is he;
That courts eternal Feuds, and loves to Jar;
That sucks in native Strife, and feeds on War;
That covets Storms, and seeks to live in Flames,
And shuns the gilded Streams;
The gentle Calms of thy Pacifick Sea,
Where all is Delight and Harmony!
Next her, the very Image of her Face,
Her Sister Union takes her Place;
Twin-births of Wisdom, he the Son of Time,
Of Genealogy Sublime:
God like the Race, and of Enlightened Birth,
And rarely, very rarely found on Earth.
The genial Flame from Heaven impregnate stands
And all the Kinds of Happiness commands;
No Song their Luster can rehearse.
When hand in hand they gild the Universe:
They make the meanest Actions shine,
And Humane Wisdom seems Divine.
When struggling with the Lusts and Pride of Men,
Peace strives to bless a Land in vain;
But, crushed with Clamor and Ungoverned Rage,
She quits the Embarrass'd Stage:
When War prevails, that Frenzy of the Mind,
That General Lunacy of all Mankind;
When thus the Bloody Scenes are drawn,
And all Restraints are gone;
Reason and Justice quit the Stage,
And Sense it self submits to Tyrant Rage;
Her Sister Union turns the happy Scale,
It Is whom she pleases shall prevail;
She only can the Strife decide,
And bias Victory to the Weakest Side.
Union is Natures strong Cement,
The Life of Power, and Soul of Government:
Without it, all the World's a Mob;
Confusion's Universal Monarch of the Globe;
Armies are Crowds of Lunaticks got loose,
Whose Power for want of Reason's out of Use;
Mere Hoords of Tartars, Wild and Rude,
Dissolved in Mother Multitude.
Even Government it self must Dye,
^n Wild Uncultivated Anarchy;
The Bond dissolves, what should the Parts retain?
When once the Union of the whole's Destroyed;
The Engine's useless, all the Parts remain,
Like Native Chaos, Vast and Void.
^nion's, the mighty Guide of Humane Things,
The Bond of Nations, and the Power of Kings.
Crowns without thee sit loose, and Tottering show,
To what strange Influence they their Safety owe:
The High Precarious gilded Trifles stand,
^ubject to every Tumults Vile Command:
The dangerous Precipice of Discord lies,
The Gulf of Princes, and of Monarchy's;
The Ill supported State of Humane Power,
Destroys it self, and must it self Devour.
^ion once broke, the Power Dissolves of Course,
and Laws and Constitutions lose their force.
Chaos Succeeds on either Hand,
None can Obey, and none Command;
^he Fate of Government must soon appear,
^bble will Govern here, or Tyrants there.
Bright Charming Sisters, whither are you Fled?
Where is your bright Pavilion spread?
that Halcyon Climates close your blessed Abodes?
(...) it is with Men, you make those Men like Gods!
There be my Portion, with what-e're Mischance,
^o Ills can Countervail the Difference,
^o Ills can reach the Mind, that Peace secures,
Unmoved, he Fortunes Storms endures.
and Fortune's Storms they shall endure, that Place
In thy blessed Smiles their Happiness:
Peace, while eclipsed with Fear and Doubt,
^hey that have most within, have least without.
Of all thy blessed admiting Train,
It Is hard that I alone should wish in Vain!
That I at Distance view thy Shade;
Am Lean with Expectation made!
When to the World thou make a short return,
Me only thou have seemed to shun!
Me thou re-visit'st not; but Storms of Men,
Voracious and unsatisfied as Death,
Spoil in their Hands, and Poison in the Breath,
With Rage of Devils hunt me down,
And to abate my Peace, destroy their own.
Assassins, Men of Fire and Blood,
And that worst Murder, Slander and Reproach,
Ages of Time my Soul has stood
The bitter Blasts and Rage of such;
Untainted yet with Vice, at War with Crime,
My strong Appeal's to Truth, to Heaven, and Ti^
Besieged by Men of Cruelty and Law,
Who kill by Rules, and call it just,
Who Right with Cords of Interest draw,
Till Justice is with Humane Rage oppressed:
That bind the Hands from Industry,
Pinion the willing Wings, and bid Men fly.
These, like the Hussars on the Rhine,
Whose Plund'rings are Compassions all to mine;
Ravage the Villages, lay wast the Land,
And still their Contributions they Demand;
So first they rifle me the shortest Way,
And when they have stripped me Naked, bid me Pay!
In all their Fury, Rage, and Heat,
My Morning Vows, even for them I make.
I neither seek not wish their Fate,
Within my self, I find a safe Retreat;
And Peace, no Power of Hell can shake.
In forty Gaols, this Halycon Beam will shine,
The Malice shall be theirs, the Peace be mine.
It Is vain to Conquer me by Fear,
I scorn the baseness of Despair;
Brought up in Teaching Sorrows -- School,
In Peace and Patience, I possess my Soul;
Am Master of my mind,
And there the Heaven of Satisfaction find.
Let them ten thousand barbarous Methods try,
When they will no longer let me live, I Will die;
Of all their Fury I shall have
An Uncontested Conquest in the Grave.
Till then, blessed Angel of Eternal Light,
Soft Peace, be thou the Day's Delight,
Be thou my Solace in the Night:
It Is thou alone inspir'st my Pen,
And calm'st my Soul, and keep'st it smooth within;
Witness the daily Tribute that I pay,
Witness this very Hymn to thee.
The noisie World distracts my Head no more,
Than raging Billows shake the shore;
The Foam and Froth they leave behind,
Tell us there have been Waves and Wind.
But the eternal Bound remains the same,
Fixed by the Eternal Voice, and like his Name:
Unmoved, it all their Watery Rage defies,
And sends them back to quarrel with the Air;
So I the Rage of Men despise,
Unmoved by Desperation, or by Fear.
Firm as the Rocks, in rolling Seas abide,
When Floods of Doubts, and Dangers pass beside:
When Griefs Assault me, or when Comfort flows,
I Am Undepress'd by these, Unrais'd by those;
Mischance can find no Footing to begin,
I Am Calm without, because I Am Clear within.
Enquiring Poet search among the dead;
It Is thither Peace and Union fled;
However Rivall'd here, they are sure to have,
An uncontrolled Dominion in the Grave,
There all the Parties will unite;
No more for Air and Shadows fight,
Enlightened by the Change of Scenes they see,
Through all our Politic Hypocrisy.
All the Religious Shams we make,
When we the Nations Peace, for trifles break;
Naked and bare Pretence^ there are seen,
The empty Shams of Weak Wise Men.
No Mists of State can cloud those Skies,
Souls see without the Agency of Eyes:
Mediums and Hieroglyphick Nature cease,
And all Men know what all will not possess.
The Vails of thin Mortality withdrawn,
A bright eternal Day begins to Dawn.
A different Face of things appears in View,
And all false glimmering Lights, give way to true*
Actions of Men, however concealed, must there,
In all their Native Nudities appear.
There Hypocrites will freely cease,
To watch for Blood, and cant of Peace.
Unhappy England! How from thee,
Do crowds of blinded Fools, go there to see;
That Wedded to their Follies, part from hence,
Under the strong Invasions of their Sense.
Hag-rid by party Prejudice,
And prompted to depend on Lies;
Are sent to Graves and Darkness for their Eyes:
Could they return from that Dark shore,
And talk of what they Acted here before,
^hey'd be like Men, from Holland lately come,
^hey that go High Church Out, come Low Church Home!
There Corion's Picture, will at large be shown,
^ho swears by forty Gods, believes in none;
and all his Cants of Liberty and Church,
^etected by himself, himself Reproach.
^ -- ly Unmasked there, in his Native Dress,
^oes what he is appear, not what he does Profess;
^here they the strange Aenigma's understand,
That harrass this divided Land.
must be as Ridiculous as Plain,
and Mists of Parties interpose in Vain.
What L -- ly means, when he pretends,
First to disown the Church that he defends?
And how he would have that Meaning known,
When he defends the Church that he will disown.
Was ever Nation mocked with Peace like this?
^eace both our Happiness, and our Disease!
^ll Men the mighty Benefit pretend,
And those that mock the Means, will bless the End.
^nhappy Englishmen! at last be wise,
No more your proper Happiness despise;
No more be led by Knaves in Fools Disguise*
^ummon your Reason in to be your Guide,
Or let your Sense the mighty Cause decide.
Can Persecution bring forth Peace?
And Miseries be tacked to Happiness?
^laspheme no more the Light of common Sense,
Nor let your Actions clash with Providence;
^or Consequence will always Cause obey,
And guide the World, as Light directs the Eye.
Confusions never fail to p^ague a Land,
Where wild Precipitations go before;
Nature and Providence go Hand in Hand,
And this perm^ts, what that does first procure.
Blessed Article of Humane Good,
How will thou have thy Name be understood?
Unmask the noisie Clamours of the Age,
And show thy dazzling Face upon our Stage.
How would our Hypocrites avoid thy Face!
Purple and Scarlet quit the Place!
How void would be the Pulpit, Bench, and Bar,
Where all thy Mimicks now appear!
How would they blush, when thy blessed Face they see,
Withdraw their awkward Pageantry;
Pay their just Debt to Guilt in Shame,
And give due Homage to thy Reverend Name!
In every Province of this Land,
Heaven stop in Mercy his Revenging Hand!
What Monsters thy Commission bear!
In thy Defense and Name, what R -- -- kes appear!
That act the Mountebank of State,
And mock the Name of Magistrate!
Cover the Bench with Frauds and Vice,
With boasted Bribes, and Partialities.
See the Illiterate Wretch enrob'd with Power,
The poor Man's Property devour;
Debauched with Pride, and wise by Chance,
He boasts of Gravity and Ignorance.
Eternal Violence adorns his Gate,
The Motto of the Barren Magistrate;
Yet when by Law he studies to oppress,
He Is called a Justice of the Peace.
Thee Momus, Patron of the half-taught Race,
To our Surprise, and thy Disgrace;
What Rabble have thou clothed with Power and Law
To keep Inferior K -- s in Awe!
Exalting Fools to make the Nations Wise,
And hoodwink Justice with the vile Disguise.
Momus makes Justices, and lists the Band,
That should reform the vicious Land;
And from the huge Bordelloes of the Nation,
Sets Humane Devils up for Reformation.
Were all the Rabble of his Magistrates,
Upn the Stage of Shame do take their Seats;
Never was such a Cavalcade of Sin,
So grave without, so black within*
Never was Peace buffoon'd at such a r^te,
Or Crime so courted by the Magistrate.
See, sleepy Momus, see thy chosen Race,
Hell in the Heart, and Justice in the Face!
The Country's Scandal, and thy Shame,
Lewd in their Manners, Vile in Name.
In Aspect Grave, and dissolute in Life,
Correct the Husband, and debauch the Wife.
Never was Bench of Justice so supplied,
And Peace by her own Sons defied!
With Beaus and Boys, with Bullies and Buffoons!
Just so the French reform by their Dragoons.
Momus in strict Confed'racy with Crime,
Too plain his Project, and too long his Time;
With sublimated Spleen, and Party-Strife,
Debauched in Politics, but grave in Life,
The Bench, the Pulpit, and the Bar,
Supplies with High Church Sons of War:
The Party, not the Manners, he enquires,
And thus he kindles High Church Fires.
W -- h now no more shall modest Men alarm,
Debauched by Custom, when he thinks no harm;
Ancient in Vice, and Inn^cent in Crime,
And quite worn out with Sin and Time.
Be Hell born Ch -- s now the Satyr's Mark.
That swears by Daylight, murders in the dark;
Supplies his want of Vice by want of Wit,
and boasts of Crimes he never could commit;
that Balances his old Accounts with Hell
With L -- s that no ^ an but himself can tell;
^angier, the Guard^, and thirty Years Debauch,
^ompleated him a Champion of the Church;
^ray for that Town, good People, whose Consent,
^low'd his Vices, their's should Represent,
and strove to send the Wretch to Parliament*
Could stupid Momus find no Wretch but this,
To Bully Justice on a Bench of Peace.
Our hardened Sinners are but Fools to him,
He lives up to the Dignity of Crime,
Bawdy and Blasphemy supply his Tongue,
Hurry the vile Distempered Wretch along;
To Villainies of such uncommon size,
Makes Nature blush, and fills Men's surprise.
And should he thirty Years command the Peace,
Our Verse secures him this one Happiness;
The hardened, self-condemned, abandoned Elf,
Shall never punish V -- n like himself.
Such, Momus, is thy Chequer-work, and Art,
So have thou Spangl'd every part,
Such Prodigies of Crime possess,
The high deputed Government of Peace.
Momus himself can never Name,
Though Sleepy Momus does not know,
Whether he can or no,
In forty Justices, one Man of common Fame.
Some are so scandalous in Lives,
Their History has no Negatives:
Here from the Bawdy House, to the Bench they go,
And Fine the W -- s, they first made so.
There W -- field Justices, at Sessions meet,
Sit Drinking over the Judgment Seat,
Till Country Squire gets too Drunk to pay,
Then Bilks the House, and Quorum sneaks away.
These Momus, are thy blessed Reforming Crew,
For whose Advancement all the Whigs withdrew;
And you with hard Mouthed Wretches fill their Plac^
That Swear by Pistol-Light to Faces,
That Forge and Bribe, and Perjure all Mankind,
To carry on the Mischief they designed.
Yet, Momus, all things answer not thy End,
In B -- gate's part, the Devil was not thy Friend;
Satyr, must B -- gate's Modesty protect,
Who knew himself too drunk to act;
He blushed to execute the vast extent
Of Power, that Momus never blushed to grant;
It Is hard his Drink should Sense refine,
But see the Modesty of Wine;
B -- gate, the first Converting Church Dragoon,
first mounts his Horse, to pull Dissenters down;
See him into the Assembly Ride,
The Justice tell the Priest he Ly'd.
The Language like the Posture very Wise,
^ust as he acted Peace, in Grave Disguise.
He knows his Name's too scandalous, to bear,
That Badge of Justice, which he ought to fear;
He cannot Conform his Vicious Will,
^exert that Whip, he knows he ought to feel;
Some Men have Modesty in Vice,
And he is a Fool indeed, that is never Wise.
But we'll no more the Catalogue Survey,
Momus himself, has led the way:
May the Black List, of his infernal Troop,
Like him to wiser Agents stoop.
The blushing Nation long has seemed to wait,
When Guilt should make him Abdicate;
That meaner Men of Justice, may take Place,
That have it more in Head, and less in Face.
Nor shall our Verse, examine here the Lists,
Of his exalted Modern-Priests;
How like the rest in Morals and in Sense,
And how by sadder Consequence:
Religion Languishes, and Justice Dies,
Over run with Vice, and Immoralities;
How sacred Oracles decay,
And Vice pulls down the Church the shortest way.
Tell us no more of Crown and Church,
No more our Loyalty Reproach:
The Men of God pull down your Fabric more,
Than all the Sons of Hell, that went before:
When Laws with Ignorance over run,
And Justice Dies, the State's undone;
When sacred Vestments, sacred Villains hide,
And Crime's by Habit sanctified.
Religion Prostitute the Text profaned,
Good God, how can we think the Church should stand!
These her Foundations undermine,
And then to hide the Vile Design;
The Innocent in Ruder Terms Reproach,
And cry the Danger of the Church!
Nor let our ^harity be censured here,
Because we Crowds o^ Characters forbear.
The Bead Roll of whose Crimes would show,
Too back for our Posterity to know;
And are concealed in mere Compassion,
Not to themsel^es a one, but all the Nation;
That Foreign Countries may not see,
Our Ecclesiastic Nudity;
And it become a New Proverbial Jest,
To be as Wicked, as an English Priest.
And yet our Lines must to our selves be Just,
Some Crimes may not be told, but others must;
When Men cannot their own D^sgrace withold,
What cannot be avoided, must be ^old:
Blush, Readers, for a bleeding Nation's Fate,
When we the Name of A -- ^ relate;
A modest Pen can hardly bear to write,
The Crimes he never blushes to commit.
It Is hard when Men run up to such a Height,
What Poets would conceal, themselves will write.
Their Actions such a Vein of Crime contain,
It Is their own Satyr, and they are spared in vain.
And should I this one Character forbear,
The Stones themselves the horrid Facts would speak,
How he with Hypocritick Prayer,
His Peoples Sundays Blessing can prepare,
And damns them all the Week.
Covered with Sacred Robes, he is White and Clean
But, black with Slander, 's all debauched within;
Yet, lest the Church's Cause should sink,
He dares to tread on the Commandments Brink;
Usurps upon the Keeper of the Fold,
And swears his Curacy's a good Freehold.
And yet this Wretch with horrid Front pretends,
To rank himself among the Church's Friends.
Scandal to all Religions! Were the Church
Once freed from that too just Reproach;
That she does not such Sons of Crime expel,
She Would stand in Spite of all the Gates of Hell.
Was ever Nation thus Buffoon'd,
By her own Teachers she is Lampoon'd.
Ye Hypocrites! If you can understand,
Reform your Clergy, and your Church will stand.
Vice is the Church's Danger and Disease.
It Is Crime alone destroys her Peace;
It Is Crime lets Error in, and Error Strife,
You Would soon reform her Doctrine in her Life.
^f you would then the Church's Fame restore,
Give her but Peace she asks no more:
Peace would turn all her Men of Scandal out,
Tell me the Church that ever stood without!
It Is done! Heaven said Amen, the mighty Blow
Was heard where Discord reigns below.
The August Assemblies Hand in Hand proclaim
Their Homage PEACE to thy Eternal Fame;
With Joint Assent approach the Throne,
Such Thunder needs must strike the Hydra down,
To think their High Allies had lost the Day,
And must to hated PEACE give way.
Hell trembled when the weighty News came down,
It shook the Black Imperial Throne;
^t struck the Fallen Seraph with Surprise,
He knew the Dying Party never could rise.
When to his Oracle their Crowds repair,
The best Advice he gives them is, Despair.
He spoke, and all hi^ Party has obeyed.
^ome Trifling Hopes indeed their Fear delayed;
But when Britannia's Sons addressed their Queen,
Despair, that Mark of Hell, was plainly seen;
Pale with the Anguish of their Minds,
Their Envy no Emission finds;
But dumb with Rage, they view the Hated PEAC^
That fixes England's Happiness
Pity their weakened Rage, and take some Care,
Watch 'em, Good People all, lest in Despair
They obey the Dey'l, and hang themselves for Fear
It Is done! Bright PEACE has got the D^
The Mists of Parties flee away.
The Dazzling Beams of Heavenly Glory shine,
Immortal PEACE, the Victory's fairly thine.
Where are those Sons of Belial, bring them down,
That grudged the Angelick Saint her Crown
That boldly said she should not Reign.
Satyr -- produce them, let them all the slain.
Let all those Sons of God and Men appear,
Who Levied first this High-Church War.
Let them the wondrous Declaration read,
That struck their Hydra through his Hundredth Head.
Let them their Pulpit-Ecchoes contradict.
'Twas there they did just PEACE reject.
'Twas there that Noise of Nothing first they broac^
Their Country and their Queen reproached;
Frighted our Children wi^h the uncouth Cry
Of Danger to the Church and Monarchy.
Alarmed the Nation, roused Britannia's Sons,
Each Hero to the Place of Hazard runs;
But to their Joy surpised no less,
They found 'twas all in perfect PEACE.
Safety and PEACE in thriving Posture grow,
And none saw Danger here, but those that wished i^
Let all those Mountebanks of State
Receive for PEACE is to Death to them, their (...)
Let all the Healing Breezes of thy Air,
Stagnate their Hopes of Party-War.
Let Men of Strife and Chagrin feel within
The strong Convulsions of Expiring Sin.
The Nation felt it like a Man possessed,
And strong Exorcisms dislodge the Dreadful Guest.
The Struggles of Departing Feud
Will make perhaps some Ravings in the Blood,
Which vented at the Tongue with Rage and Pain,
May cause long Speeches to be made in vain.
It Is but the Pangs of their Departing Breath,
Are there no Thunders, Tremblings of the Earth,
Day-Stars, and Comets to presage?
Horror often stirs when Devils quit the Stage.
Al^'s vanished here, the Fiends withdrew,
Their Party-struggles mean and few.
Some small Vulcano's belched their Stench and Fire,
But 'twas en passant, f -- t, and so expire.
Like Meteors in the Air that fly,
As soon as they are Inflamed they die;
Or Guns, where soon as Air has Vent,
Just as the Noise is made, it is spent;
So had our Clamours at the Approach of PEACE,
Just Life enough to hiss, and then decease.
They Are Dead! The blazing Aspect of thy Face,
Immortal PEACE, has cleared the Place.
See daily how their Fugitives come in,
And Crowds of Captives bow before thy Queen;
The Leaders own the fair Defeat,
And all their Bubbl'd Votaries submit;
Pride boils in some, and makes them scorn to yield,
But Shame has bid them quit the Field,
Submit to unexpected Fate,
And own their Party-Fortunes Desperate;
Nor is this all, Misfortune's never alone,
Now they are in Danger to be quite undone,
The Circumstance is very Dark,
They cannot bite and must not bark;
Or if they do, it is Frenzy all, and Feud,
And is but laughed at by the Multitude.
Hard Fate of Madmen, that when they are in Pain,
No Men regard when they complain.
Thus Feud and Party-Strife suppressed and dead,
Millions of Mischiefs with them fled.
Envy with Teeming Prospects swelled, and big,
Does now the Grave of her own Off spring dig.
Abortive P^ojects daily come,
The Nauseous Froth of her Miscarrying Womb;
Like Monsters by their Parents Hands they die,
And PEACE does calmly all their Rage defy.
What wild Effort? What strange delirious Dreams?
What undigested half-drawn Schemes?
What Inconsistent unsubsisting Thought
Have they from unperforming Envy brought?
What Brainless unconcocted things proceed,
The Effects of Windmills in the Head?
What Engines without Form or Shape
The Great Machine of Government to ape?
What Shifts, what Shams, what artless Terms of State,
That hasten rather than prevent their Fate?
Have all our Men of Speeches tried
Before their sickening Party died?
Was ever Head with Brain and Learning stored,
That did of old such wondrous things afford?
At one half Turn so gravely mad!
So many mean Incongruous Nothings said:
How weak are all Disg^ises to conceal,
That Folly which its own Defects reveal!
Nonsense infallibly affords
Something that cannot be concealed by Words.
And Inconsistence will in Spite of Rule,
If it conceals the K -- -- e, betray the F -- -- -- -- l.
Therefore to judge them Termagant and Mad,
Are the best Natured things that can be said;
For he that can his Native Country curie,
If he is (...) Di^t^acted, must be worse.
Soft Gentle PEACE, p^cu^iar to thee,
How (...) less, is thy Victory*
The Rebels that withstand thy Law,
Are only bound from Harms, and kept in Awe.
Their Schemes indeed are balked, their Projects slain,
Their Persons all in Life remain,
Are safe in their Subjection to thy Name,
Only receive their Punishment in Shame.
Nor does the Gentle Conqu'ror only spare
Her Rebels, but those Rebels taste her Care;
Under he^ Soft and Gentle Shade,
^he keeps them happy that her Realms Invade;
Prevents them only of that Harm
They Would do themselves, and with her Gentle Charm
^he ^^ts them all her Subjects Blessings Share,
And learns them thus the Difference of Peace and War.
Victorious PEACE, how happy are those Lands
Where willing Princes bow to thy Commands!
No Nations are by far so blessed as they
That seek to stoop to thy Eternal Sway;
Thy Kingdom Form, and thy Commands obey.
Britannia, yet a Stranger to thy Fame,
How does she Glory now she knows thy Name.
(...) vain shall War remoter Empires pierce,
And Men of Terror vex the Universe;
^ thy blessed Scepter Governs US at home,
Naio^s will here to pay thee Tribute come;
The Wealth of all the World will round thee flow,
and Empires to Britannia's Scepter bow.
Nations with Envy shall our Safety see,
While Britain's Glorious QUEEN shall rule by thee.
CONCLUSION. TO THE QUEEN
HAil, Queen of PEACE, the Nation's best Defen^
Terror of Crime, and Shade of Innocence;
They Joy, the Pride, the Pleasure of the Land,
Which You in Plenty guide, in PEACE comman^
Calm as that Heaven whose Circle bounds the Eye,
And bright from true Celestial Majesty.
You Reign admired, the Helm with Glory steer,
And give us PEACE amidst the Storms of War.
When we the Course of England's Fate review,
We find no Monarch guided right like You;
Your Majesty by Heaven's securer Hand,
Has learnt the True Arcana of Command.
Your Ancestors by Policy or Power,
Strove our resigned Subjection to secure,
And made the Obedient Nation tamely bear
Some Loads for Quietness, and some for Fear.
The Tottering Throne was Canker like maintain'^
By feeding on the Vitals of the Land;
The feeble Carcass of the Government,
By Tyranny and wild Oppression rent,
Died of that Hectic Fever, DISCONTENT.
Revived in You, its Resurrection shows,
What Government to Application owe^:
How Justice calls a Nation from the Dead,
And how the Body's influenced by the Head?
They Ruled by Politics and studied Arts,
But You have found the Passage to our Hearts.
Despotick Rule can there do Grievance prove,
For Arbitrary Power's no Crime in Love.
MADAM, this Title makes yon absolute,
Where Love's the Bondage, Subjects never Dispute;
^rerogatives and Laws are Foreign things,
The Hearts of Subjects are the Strength of Kings.
Your Majesty when You Invite to PEACE,
^roves that You can, Heaven Grant You due Success;
^oth seek and understand our H^ppiness.
It Is Peace and Union, makes the Nation Thrive,
Give Laws their Birth, and keeps those Laws alive;
^nion's the Nation's Life, and Peace the Soul;
^nion preserves the Parts, and Peace the whole;
^is Peace and Union that Support the Throne,
Union the Peoples Part, and Peace the Crown;
When Bodies Politic seem Sick and Dead,
Union revives the Members, Peace the Head;
The Sisters always Hand in Hand proceed,
Union to fortify, and Peace to feed.
^o Nation can our Happiness Invade,
Union our Hearts secures, an^ Peace our Trade;
^eligion shares the Blessing these procure,
This will Dissenters, That the Church secure;
and Christian Graces in Conjunction move,
^eace, Charity procures; and Union, Love.
Union is Freedom joined to Government,
and Peace is Property in due Extent.
(...) every Article the Blessing's seen,
^nion's a Parliament, and Peace the QUEEN:
There Peace and Union once a Land possess,
^he Houses always Join, when they Address.
^om the same Cause, to the same End they move,
^hey arm at Safety, and commence in Love;
^he Constituted Parts make up one whole,
^fferent in Body, but the same in Soul.
^nion's your Lords and Commons Hand in Hand,
^ating the steady Posture of the Land.
^ce is the People's Joy, which they express,
^outing a loud Amen to that Address.
^on's your Living Spring, of Means and Ways,
^d Peace an unexhausted Fund of Praise;
^nion with Hands up lift, seeks Aid from Heaven,
^d Peace returns with Thanks, for Aid that is given.
Union's a People, willingly in awe,
And Peace a Princess, Governing by Law.
Union's a People, joined with just Assent,
To bless their Maker for the Government;
Peace is a Prince, that Joys in that Success,
Of which his People all the Fruits possess.
Thus Princes, when they Invite a Land to Peace,
Both seek and understand their Happiness.
MADAM, when You our Party Peace propose,
You S^ab the Mighty Projects of your Foes;
Your Healing Words, as from your Lips the fall,
Are Wounds struck deep, into their Party-Gall;
But when you stoop to argue and persuade,
Your Words like Darts, the very Soul invade;
The moving Eloquence in Words of Peace,
When Princes Court their Peoples Happiness,
Having something so Unusual, and so Great,
Such soft Impressions in the Soul Create;
As leave no room to Speak, but wonder at.
Peace like the Sun, when it draws near the Pole,
This melts the Frozen Zone, and that the Soul;
Mountains of Party-Fend and Rage give way,
And fly from Peace, as Night absconds the Day.
The strange Transforming Power of Peace appears,
And while You Speak, You mould the Soul that hears:
Thus MADAM, Heaven it self You imitate,
And while You talk of Peace, Your Words Create:
Legions of Human Dev'ls Your Voice Transforms,
And at one Word You laid Three Nations Sto^ms.
Even Satyr feels the Sovereign Influence,
Satyr provoked, in Virtue's just Defense;
Engaged with Devils and the Crimes of Men,
Yet while I Write of Peace, it Calms my Pen.
The Whips and Scorpions, MADAM, thrown away,
You call for Peace, and Satyr must Obey;
What though with Injury and Crowds Oppressed,
Unhappy only as by You Unblessed;
Yet in his Breast he Crushes his Designs,
And Writes for Peace in his Serenest Lines.
Your Majesty the Pen it self reforms,
And makes him Write of Peace, that Lives in Storm^.
Compassed with Parties, and the Rage of Men,
You Check the just Resentment of his Pen;
To Temper turns, and with the calmest Air,
He sings that Peace, of which he reaps no share.
Peace is the Basis of Your Glorious Throne,
And Peace, the Brightest Jewel in your Crown,
^Tis Peace* would make your Enemies Despair;
^Tis Peace they more than all your Armies fear.
Union and Peace, Compose the high Intent,
This the End of Justice, That of Government,
Kings that to any other purpose Reign,
The Sword they bear is always born in Vain,
By differing ways your Government's secured,
You by the Scepter Reign, and they the Sword.
These we call Tyrants, though a King's the Name,
A Mask of Glory, on a Mock of Fame.
Your MAJESTY, while You to Peace Incline,
Has made your Scepter really Divine;
Kings that like You, the Ends of Ruling know,
^re truly Sacred, Heaven Declares them so:
While Heaven and You the self same thing intend,
^ou Bless the Means, as You pursue the End.
The Royal Scepter which You timely bore,
And none ever Graced that Royal Scepter more:
^o far's Divine, as by the High Decree,
The Means and End Join in Your Majesty;
^or Crowns and Dignities are given in Vain,
Where Kings for any End but Justice Reign;
^ower thus concurs to General Happiness,
^or Justice always ends in Calms and Peace.
Suffer the Poet, MADAM, to aspire,
And hear the Blaze, where You have raised the Fire;
Prophetic Ardour makes the strong Impress,
It Is You gave Pinions to his Artless Verse,
^umble and Mean, he never used to soar,
and never could say, he was Inspired before.
That Secret Hand, that did your Thoughts incline,
^or Heaven both moved the Act and the Design;
^as joined Your own, to all Your Peoples Peace.
and on their Blessings, raised Your Happiness;
^or is this all, for Heaven never acts by Parts,
But forms at once his Empire in our Hearts.
That Hand that thus Your Soul to Peace must move,
Will never deny the Peace he made You Love.
The Calm You move us to, You Will feel within,
There, MADAM, Your Celestial Crowns begin;
^eaven there Anticipated You Will Enjoy,
that Peace must all Your meaner Joys Destroy;
^he Satisfactions that may there be known,
^rpass the Envied Pleasures of Your Crown:
That Heaven has formed You his Blessed Instrument,
To Heal this Heart-sick Nation's Discontent,
That all their Happiness comes handed down,
From Him that gave, by You that wear the Crown;
That Heaven reserved this Hour, till You should Reign,
And Chose You from the Bright Descended Train;
And suffered WILLIAM's self to aim at it in Vain.
That he reserved the Glory and Success
For You, whom he Delights and has resolved to Bless;
What Transports, MADAM, must possess your Mind!
What Prospects of the Glories still behind!
What Wonders Heaven has yet for You to do!
What vast Rewards of Glory to bestow!
No Pen the soft Impressions can present,
Numbers are vastly short, and Language faint;
No Simile due Parallel affords,
The Thoughts surpass the Agency of Words;
The Poet that conceives it cannot rehearse,
It Is above the Inspiration of his Verse;
The Wings of Fancy never soared so high,
It Is only Sacred to Your MAJESTY.
It Is You alone can feel the amazing Joy,
Which like the Sun, does fainter Fires Destroy;
No Heart but Yours the Mystery can unfold,
The Story must be felt, it cannot be Told.
It Is all a Heaven, as it from Heaven descends,
And only where that Heaven begins, it ends.
For Peace within is Heaven Anticipate,
And does Similitude to Heaven Create;
'Twill open that Blessed Peace at once, and show
That Presence there, whose Glory makes it so.
'Twill Fire Your Soul with Beams of Sovereign Grace,
And You Will grow Ripe for Heavenly Crowns apace:
There in Your Brightest Glory You Will appear,
And You that give us PEACE, shall find it there.
FINIS.
THE Female Reign: AN ODE, Alluding to Horace, B. 4. Od. 14. Quae Cura Patrum,
quaeve Quiritium, etc. Attempted in the Style of Pindar. Occasioned by the
wonderful Successes of the Arms of Her Majesty and Her Allies. With a LETTER to
a Gentleman in the University.

By Samuel Cobb, M. A.

LONDON: Printed by H. Hills, and Sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster, 1709.

A LETTER to a Gentleman in the University.
SIR,
THIS comes to Congratulate You on the agreeable News of some late
extraordinary Successes, which have blessed the Arms of Her Majesty, and Her
Allies. I leave you to the Printed Papers for a particular Account of those
Actions, which have surpised the World; and, we hope, given the last Stroke to
the languishing Power of the Common Enemy of Europe. They will furnish noble
Topics for the Wits of an University, like yours, who can embellish (if that
can be done) the Glories of a Female Reign with a juster Sublimity of Verse,
than what you will find in the following Performance, which was written several
Months ago, and not run over with a hasty Negligence. The Ode, from whence I
take my Hint, is accounted by some Critics not inferior to the 4th of the same
Book, which begins thus, Qualem ministrum fulminis alitem, etc. And was written
in Complement to Augustus, on occasion of a famous Victory gained by Tiberius,
as this, which I have aimed to imitate, was written on the Praise of Claudius
Nero. I need not inform Men of your Reading and Letters what occasioned both.
The Poet, as he does in almost all his Odes, has shown a peculiar Artfulness
and Elegance, and turns all the Panegyric on the Emperor (who was not in the
Action) with Te concilium, and tuos Praebente Divos. If You ask wherein I have
trod in the Steps of Horace, You will find it in the Beginning. I have only
kept him in view, and used him only where he was serviceable to my Design. He
took the same liberty with Alcaeus, as appears from some Fragments of that
Greek Lyriac, quoted by Athenaeus. In my Digressions and Transitions I have
taken care to play always in sight, and make every one of them contribute to my
main Design. This was the Way of Pindar, to read whom, according to Rapin, will
give a truer Idea of the Ode, than all the Rules and Reflections of the best
Critics. I will not pretend to have dived into him over Head and Ears, but I
have endeavored to have made my self not the greatest Stranger to his Manner
of Writing; which generally consists in the Dignity of the Sentiments, and an
elegant Variety, which makes the Reader rise up with greater Satisfaction than
he sat down. And that which affects the Mind in Compositions of any sort, will
never be disagreeable to a Gentleman of Ingenuity and Judgment. I have avoided
Turns, as thinking that they debase the Loftiness of the Ode. You will easily
perceive whether I have reached that acer Spiritus and Vis, recommended by
Horace, as the Genius of Poetry. Whether you will call the following Lines a
Pindaric Ode, or Irregular Stanza's, gives me no Disturbance: For however the
seeming Wildness of this sort of Verse ought to be restrained, the Strophe,
Antistrophe, etc. will never bear in English, and it would show a strange^
Debauchery in our Taste, if it should, as may be witnessed by the servile
Imitation of the Dactyles and Spondees used by Sir P. Sidney. But to make an
e^^ of this tedious Epistle; you will see through the Whole, that Her MAJESTY is
the Chief Heroine of the Ode; and the Moral, at the End, shows the solid
Glories of a Reign which is not founded on a pretended Justice, or Criminal
Magnanimity.

Yours, etc. S. C

THE FEMALE REIGN: AN ODE.
I.
WHAT can the British Senate give
To make the Name of ANNA live
By Future People to be sung,
The Labor of each grateful Tongue.
Can faithful Registers or Rhyme
In charming Eloquence, or sprightly Wit,
The Wonders of her Reign transmit
To the unborn Children of succeeding Time?
Can Painter's Oil, or Statuary's Art
Eternity to Her impart?
No -- Titled Statues are but empty things
Inscribed to Royal Vanity,
The Sacrifice of Flattery
To Lawless Nero's, or Bourbonian Kings.
True Virtue to Her kindred Stars aspires,
Does all our Pomp of Stone and Verse surpass,
And mingling with Aetherial Fires,
No useless Ornament requires
From Speaking Colors, or from Breathing Brass.
II.
Greatest of Princes! where the wandering Sun
Does over Earth's habitable Regions roll,
From the Eastern Barriers to the Western Goal,
And sees Thy Race of Glory run
With Swiftness equal to his Own:
Thee on the Banks of Flandrian Scaldis sings
The jocund Swain, released from Gallic Fear;
The English Voice unused to hear,
Thee the repeating Banks, Thee every Valley rings.
The Gaul, untaught to bear the Flames
Of those who drink the Maese or Thames,
From the Britannick Valor flies,
No longer able to withstand
The Thunderbolt launched by a Female Hand,
Or Lightning darted from Her Eyes.
III.
What Treble Ruin Pious ANNA brings
On False Electors, Perjured Kings,
Let the twice Fugitive Bavarian tell,
Who from His Airy Hope of better State
By Lust of Sway, irregularly Great,
Like an Apostate Angel, fell.
Who, by Imperial Favor raised,
In The highest Rank of Glory blazed;
And had till now, unrivaled, shone
More than a King, contented with His Own.
But Lucifer's bold Steps he trod,
Who durst Assault the Throne of GOD,
And for contented Realms of blissful Light;
Gained ^he sad Privilege to be
The First in Solid Misery,
Monarch of Hell, and Woes, and Endless Night.
Corruption of the Best is Worst,
And foul Ambition, like an Evil Wind,
Blights the fair Blossoms of a Noble Mind;
And if a Seraph fall, He Is doubly Cursed.
IV.
Had Guile and Pride, and Envy grown
In the black Groves of Styx alone,
Nor ever had on Earth the baleful Crop been sown^
The Swain, without Amaze, had Tilled
The Flandrian Glebe, a guiltless Field:
Nor had He wond'red, when He found
The Bones of Heroes in the Ground.
No Crimson Streams had lately swelled
The Dyle, the Danube, and the Scheld.
But Evils are of Necessary Growth
To Rouse the Brave, and Banish Sloth.
And some are Born to win the Stars
By Sweat, and Blood, and Worthy Scars.
Heroic Virtue is by Action seen,
And Vices serve to make it keen;
And as Gigantick Tyrants rise
NASSAU'S and ANNA'S leave the Skies
The Earth-born Monsters to Chastise;
While Cerberus and Hydra grow
For an Alcides, or a MARLBOROUGH.
V.
If, Heavenly Muse, you burn with a Desire
To Praise the Man whom all admire:
Come from thy Learnd'd Castalian Springs,
And stretch aloft thy Pegaseian Wings;
Strike the loud Pyndaric Strings,
Like the Lark, who soars and sings:
And as you sail the Liquid Skies,
Cast on The Menapii were the ancient Inhabitants of Flanders.
Menapian Fields your weeping Eyes:
(For weep they surely must
To see the bloody Annual Sacrifice;
To think how the neglected Dust
Which, with contempt, is basely trod,
Was once the Limbs of Captains, Brave and Just,
The Mortal Part of some Great DEMY-GOD:
Who for thrice Fifty Years of stubborn War,
With slaught'ring Arms, the Gun and Sword,
Have dug the Mighty Sepulcher,
And fell as Martyrs on Record
Of Tyranny Revenged, and Liberty Restored.)
VI.
See, where at Audenard, with Heaps of Slain
The Heroic Man, inspir'dly Brave;
Mowing across, bestrews the Plain,
And with new Tenants crowds the wealthy Grave.
His Mind unshaken at the frightful Scene,
His Looks as cheerfully serene
The routed Battle to pursue,
As once adorned the Paphian Queen,
When to Her Thracian Paramour she flew.
The gathering Troops He kens from far,
And with a Bridegroom's Passion and Delight
Courting the War, and Glowing for the Fight,
^e new Salmoneus meets, the Celtic Thunderer.
Ah cursed Pride! Infernal Dream!
Which drove him to this wild Extreme
That Dust a Deity should seem.
^hought, as through the wondering Streets he rode,
The Immortal Man, or Mortal God.
With rattling Brass, and trampling Horse
Should counterfeit the Inimitable Force
Of Divine Thunder: horrid Crime!
But Vengeance is the Child of Time,
And will too surely be repaid
On his profane, Devouted Head,
Who durst affront the Powers above,
And their Eternal Flames Disgrace,
Too Fatal, brandished by the Rightful Jove,
Or (a) Pallas, who supplies his place.
VII.
The British Pallas! who as Homer in his Fifth Iliad, because the Hero of that
Book is to do ^nders beyond the Power of Man, premises in the beginning, that
Pallas (...) pecularly fitted him for that Day's Exploits.
Homer's did
For her loved Diomed,
Her Hero's Mind with Wisdom fills,
And Heavenly Courage in his Heart instills.
Hence through the thickest Squadrons does He ride,
With ANNA's Angels by his side.
With what uncommon Speed
He spurs his foaming, fiery Steed!
And pushes on through midmost Fires
Where France's Fortune with Her Sons retires.
Now here, now there, the sweepy Ruin flies;
Indomit as prope qualis undas
Exercet Auster, Pleaidum choro
Scindente nubes, impiger hostium
Vexare turmas, and frementem
Mittere equum meaios per ignes.
Sic tauriformis volvitur Ausidu
Qui regna Dauni praefluit Appul^
Cum saevit, horrendamque cultis
Diluviem meditatur agris.

As when the Pleiades arise,
The Southern Wind afflicts the Skies.
Then, muttering over the Deep, buffets the unruly B^
Till Clouds and Water seem to join.
Or as a Dyke, cut by malicious Hands
Overflows the Fertile Netherlands;
Through the wide Yawn, the Impetuous Sea
Lavish of his new Liberty,
Bestrides the Vale, and with tumultuous Noise
Bellows along the deluged Plain,
Destructive to the ripening Grain
For as the Horizon he destroys:
The weeping Shepherd from an Hill, bewa^s the Wa^ Rei^
VIII.
So rapid flows the unprison'd Stream!
So strong the Force of MINDLEHEIM!
In vain the Woods of Audenard
Would shield the Gaul, a fenceless Guard.
As soon may Whirlwinds be withheld
As His Passage over the Scheld.
In vain the Torrent would oppose,
In vain armed Banks, and numerous Foes,
Who with inglorious haste retire,
Fly faster than the River flows,
And Swifter than our Fire.
^endosm from far upbraids their nimble Shame,
And pleads his Royal Master's Fame.
by Conde's Mighty Ghost* he cries,
By Turenne, Luxemburg, and All
Those Noble Souls, who fell a Sacrifice
At Near this Place the Prince of Conde gave the Spaniards a very great ^throw,
1648.
Lens, at Fleurus, and at Landen Fight,
^top, I conjure, your ignominious Flight:
But Fear is deaf to Honor's Call.
Each frowning Threat and soothing Prayer
Is lost in the regardless Air.
As well He may
The Billows of the Ocean stay,
While CHURCHILL, like a driving Wind,
Or High Springtide, pursues behind,
^d with redoubled Speed urges their forward Way.
IX.
Nor less, Euginious, Thy Important Care,
Thou Second Thunderbolt of War!
Partner in Danger and in Fame,
With Marlborough's the Winds shall bear
To distant Colonies Thy conquering Name.
Nor shall the Muse forget to sing
From Harmony what Blessings spring.
To tell how Death did enviously repine
To see a Friendship so Divine.
When in a Ball's destroying shape she past,
And marked Thy threatened Brow at last.
But durst not touch that Sacred Brain
Where the Concerns of Europe Reign;
For straight she bowed her ghastly Head,
She saw the Mark of Heaven, and fled.
As Cruel Brennus once, insulting Gaul,
When he, at Allia's fatal Flood,
Had filled the Plains with Roman Blood,
With conscious Awe forsook the Capitol,
Where Jove, Revenger of Profaneness, stood
X
But where the Good and Brave Command,
What Capitol, what Castle can withstand?
Virtue, as well as Gold, can pass
Through Walls of Stone, and Towers of Brass.
LISLE, like a Mistress, had been courted long,
And always yielded to the Bold and Young:
The fairest Progeny of Vauban's Art,
Till Savoy's Warlike Prince withstood
Her frowning Thunders, and through Seas of Blood
Tore the bright Darling from the Old Tyrant's Hea^
Such He bore a considerable share in the Glory of that Day on w^ B^da was
taken.
Buda saw Him, when Proud He was Bassaw of the City, and lost his Life on the
Br^ach.
Apti fel^
Unhappy, Valiant Infidel!
Who, Vanquished by superior Strength,
Surrendered up his haughty Breath,
Upon the Breach measuring his manly Length*
And should the Bow-string by a Nobler Death.
XI.
Such This was a fatal Battle to the Turks in the Year 1687. Prince Eugene the
Regiments of his Brigade was the first who entered the Trenches* for that
reason had the Honor to be the first Messenger of this happy ^to the Emperor.
Harscham's Field beheld Him in his Bloom,
When Victory bespoke him for her Own,
Her Favorite, immortal Son,
And told of better Years revolving on the Loom^
How He should make the Turkish Crescent wane,
And choke Vicem gerit ill^ Tonantis.
This Battle was fought on the 10th of October 1697; where Prince ^e Commanded
in Chief; in which there never happened so great and ^^ible a Destruction to
the Ottoman Army; which sell upon the Princi-Commanders more than the Common
Soldiers; for no less than Fit^ee^ (...), (Five of which had been Viziers of
the Bench) were killed, besides Supreme Vizier.
Tibiscus with the Slain.
While Viziers lay beneath the lofty Pile
Of slaughtered Bassaws who over Bassaws rolled)
And all his numerous Acts she told
From Latian Carpi down to Flandrian LISLE.
Where every Day new Conquests should produce,
Labor for Envy, and a Muse.
Where with her rattling Trumpet's sound
Fame should shake the Hills around;
Should tell how WEBB, nigh woody Wynendale.
Argued each Inch of the important Ground.
So much in Virtue's Scale
True Valor Numbers can outdo,
And Thousands are but Ciphers to a few.
XII.
Honor with open Arms receives at last
The Heroes, who through Virtue's Temple past.
And showers down Laurels from Above
On those whom Heaven and ANNA Love.
And some, not sparingly, she throws
For the Young Eagles, who could try
The Faith and Judgment of the Sky,
And dare the Sun with steady Eye,
For Hanover's and Prussia's Brows,
Eugenes in bloom, and future Marlboroughs.
To Hanover, Brunswiga's Second Grace,
Descendant from a long Imperial Race,
The Muse directs an unaffected Flight,
And Prophecies, from so serene a Morn,
To what clear Glories He is Born,
When blazing with a full Meridian Light
He shall the British Hemisphere adorn.
When Mars shall lay his battered Target down,
And He (since Death will never spare
The Good, the Pious, and the Fair)
In his ripe Harvest of Renown,
Shall after his Great Father sit,
(If Heaven so long a Life permit)
And having swelled the flowing Tide
Of Fame, which he in Arms shall get,
The Purchase of an Honest Sweat,
Shall safe in stormy Seas Britannia's Vessel guide.
XIII.
Britania's Vessel, which, in ANNA's Reign
And prudent Pilocy, enjoys
The Tempest, which the World destroys,
And rides Triumphant over the Subject Main,
O may She soon a quiet Harbor gain!
And sure the Promised Hour is come,
When in soft Notes the Peaceful Lyre
Shall still the Trumpet and the Drum,
Shall play what Gods and Men desire,
And strike Bellona's Music dumb.
When War, by Parents cursed, shall quit the Field
Unbuckle his bright Helmet, and to rest
His weary Limbs, sit on his idle Shield
With Scars of Honor plowed upon his Breast.
But if the Gallic Pharoah's stubborn Heart
Grows fresh for Punishment, and hardens still,
Prepared for the irrecoverable Ill.
^d force the Unwilling Skies to act the Last Ungrateful Part:
Thy Forces, ANNA* like a Flood, shall whelm
(...) Heaven does Sceptered Innocence maintain)
His famished, desolated Realm,
and all the Sons of Pharamond in vain
(Who with dishonest Envy see
^he sweet forbidden Fruits of distant Liberty)
^ Curse their ^igid Salic Law, and wish a Female Reign.
XIV.
A FEMALE REIGN, like Thine,
O ANNA, British Heroine!
To Thee afflicted Empires fly for Aid
Where ever Tyrannic Standards are displayed,
From the wronged Iber to the threatened Rhine.
Thee, Where the Golden-sanded Tagus flows
Beneath fair The Old Name of Lisbon, said to be Built by Ulysses.
Ulyssippo's Walls
The frighted Lusitanian calls;
Thee, they who drink the Sein, with those
Who plow Iberian Fields, implore
To give the laboring World Repose,
And Universal Peace Restore.
Thee Gallia, mournful to survive the Fate
Of her fallen Grandeur, and departed State,
By sad Experience taught to own
That Virtue is a safer Way to Rise,
A shorter Passage to the Skies
Than Pellion upon Ossa thrown:
For they who by denied Attempts presume
To reach the Starry Thrones, become
Sure Food for Thunder, and condemned to how^
In The Old Name of Lisbon, said to be Built by Ulysses.
Aetna, or in Two Mountains where Jupiter Lodged the Giants.
Arima to roll
By an inevitable Doom,
Gain but a Higher Fall, a Mountain for their Tomb.
FINIS.
THE MEDAL. A SATYR AGAINST SEDITION. By the Author of ABSALOM and ACHITOPHEL.

Per Graiu populos, mediaeque per Elidis Urbem
Ibat ovans; Divumque sibi poscebat Honores.
LONDON: ^rinted and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-Fryars, near the Waterside,
1709. Price One Penny.

UPON THE AUTHOR of the MEDAL.
ONCE more our awful Poet Arms, to engage
The threatening Hydra Faction of the Age:
Once more pr^pares his dreadful Pen to wield,
And every Muse attends him to the Field:
By Art and Nature for this Task designed,
Yet modestly the Fight he long declined;
Forbore the Torrent of his Verse to pour,
Nor loosed his Satyr till the needful Hour:
His Sov'reign's Right by Patience half betrayed,
Waked his Avenging Genius to its Aid.
Blessed Muse, whose Wit with such a Cause was Crowned,
And blessed the Cause that such a Champion found.
With chosen Verse upon the Foe he falls,
And black Sedition in each Quarter galls;
Yet, like a Prince with Subjects forced to engage,
Secure of Conquest he rebates his Rage;
His Fury not without Distinction sheds,
Hurls mortal Bolts but on devoted Heads:
To less infected Members gentle found,
He spares, or else pours Balm into Wound.
such generous Grace the ungrateful Tribe abuse,
And trespass on the Mercy of his Muse;
Their wretched dogrell Rhimers forth they bring
To snarl and bark against the Poets King;
A Crew, that scandalize the Nation more
Than all their Treason-canting Priests before;
On these he scarce vouchsafes a scornful Smile,
But on their Powerful Patrons turns his Style.
A Style so keen, as even from Faction draws
The vital Poison, stabs to the Heart their Cause.
^ake then, great Bard, what Tribute we can raise;
Accept our Thanks, for you transcend our Praise.
N. TATE.

EPISTLE TO THE WHIGS.
FOR to whom can I dedicate this Poem, with so much Justice as to you? 'T^s the
Representation of your own Hero: it is the Picture drawn at length, which you
prize and admire so much i^ little. None of your Ornaments are wanting; neither
the Landscap^ of the Tower, nor the Rising Sun; nor the Anno Domini of your Ne^
Sovereign's Coronation. This must needs be a grateful Undertaking (...) your
whole Party: Especially to those who have not been so happy (...) to purchase
the Original. I hear the Graver has made a good Marks of it: all his Kings are
bought up already; or the value of the R^mainder so inhanc'd, that many a poor
Polander, who would be gl^ to worship the Image, is not able to go to the Cost
of him: But must (...) content to see him here. I must confess I am no great
^rtist; but Sig^ Post painting will serve the turn to remember a Friend by;
especial when better is not to be had. Yet for your Comfort the Lineame^ are
true: and though he fate not five times to me, as the did to (...) yet I have
consulted History; as the Italian Painters do, when the would draw a Nero or a
Galigul^; though they have not seen t^^ Man, they can help their Imagination by
a Statue of him, and s^ out the Coloring from Suetomus and Tacitus. Truth is,
you mig^ have spared one side of your Medal: the Head would be seen to m^^
advantage, if it were placed on a Spike of the Tower; a little nearer^ the Sun.
Which would then break out to better purpose. You tell (...) your Preface to
the No-Protestant Plot, that you shall be forced (...) after to leave off your
Modesty: I suppose you mean that little which (...) left you: for it was worn
to Rags when you put out this Medal. (...) ^ver was there practiced such a
piece of notorious Impudence in the f^ of an Establish^d Government. I believe,
when he is dead, you (...) wear him in Thumb-Rings, as the Turks did
Scanderbeg; as if (...) were Virtue in his Bones to preserve you against
Monarchy. Yet (...) this while you pretend not only Zeal for the Public Good,
but a due (...) ^eration for the Person of the King. But all Men, who can see
an (...) before them, may easily detect those gross Fallacies. That it is
necessa^y for Men in your Circumstances to pretend both, is granted you; for
without them there could be no ground to raise a Faction. But I would ask you
one civil Question, what right has any Man among you, or any Association of
Men, (to come nearer to you,) who out of Parliament, cannot be considered in a
public Capacity, to meet, as you daily do, in Factious Clubs, to vilify the
Government in your Discourses, and to libel it in all your Writings? Who made
you Judges in Isra^l? Or how (...) it consistent with your Zeal of the Public
Welfare, to promote Sedition? Does your Definition of Loy^l, which is to serve
the King according to the Laws, allow you the License of traducing the
Executive Power, with which you own he is invested? You complain that his
Majesty has lost the Love and Confidence of his People; and by your very urging
it, you endeavor what in you lies, to make him lose them. All g^od subjects
abhor the thought of Arbitrary Power, whether it be in one or many: if you were
the Patriots you would seem, you would not at this ^ate incense the Multit^de
to assume it; for no sober Man can fear it, either from the King's Disposition,
or his Practice; or even, where you would odiously lay it, from his Ministers.
Give us leave to enjoy the Government and the Benefit of Laws under which we
were born, and which we desire to transmit to our Posterity. You are not the
Trustees of the public Liberty: and if you have not right to petition in a
Crowd, much less have you to intermeddle in the Management of Affairs; or to
arraign what you do not like: which in effect is every thing that is done by
the King and Council Can you imagine that any reasonable Man will believe you
respect the Person of his Majesty, when (...) apparent that your Seditious
Pamphlets are stuffed with particular Reflections on him? If you have the
Confidence to deny th^s, it is easy to ^e evinced from a thousand P^ssages,
which I only forbear to quote, because I desire they should d^e and be
forgotten. I have perused many of ^^ur Papers; and to show you that I have, the
third part of your No-Protestant Plot is much of it stolen from your dead
Author's Pamphlet ^^ll'd the Growth of Popery; as manifestly as Mil^on's
Defense of the English People, is from Bucha^a^ de jur^ regn^ apud Sco^os: or
your first Covenant, and new Associa^ion, from the holy League of the French
Guisards. Any one who reads D^vila, may trace your Practices all a^ong. There
were the same pretenses for Reformation, and Loyalty, the ^ame Aspersions of
the King, and the same grounds of a Rebellion. I ^^ow not whether you will take
the Historian's word, who says it was ^eported, that P^ltrot a Hugonot,
murdered F^ancis Duke of Guise by ^he Instigations of Theodore Reza: or that
it was a Hug^ot Minister, ^therwise called a Presbyterian, (for our Church
abhors so devilish a ^enet) who first writ a Treatise of the Lawfulness of
d^p^sing and mur^hering Kings, of a different Persuasion in Religion: But I am
able to ^rove from the Doctrine of Calvin, and Principles of Bu^h^man, that
^hey set the People above the Magistrate; which if I mistake not, is your own
Fundamental; and which carries your Loyalty no farther than your liking When a
Vote of the House of Commons goes on your side you a^e as ready to observe it,
as if it were passed into a Law: But wh^^ you are pinched with any former, and
yet unrepealed Act of Parli^ment you declare that in some Cases, you will not
be obliged by it. The Passage is in the same third part of the No-Protestant
Plot; and is (...) plain to be denied. The late Copy of your intended
Association, you neither wholly justify nor condemn: But, as the Papists, when
they are u^ opposed* fly out into all the Pageantries of Worship; but in times
(...) War when they are hard press^d by Arguments, ly close intrench^d behind
the Council of ^nt: So, now, when your Affairs are in a lo^ Condition, you d^re
not pretend that to be a legal Combination, (...) whens^ever you are afloat. I
doubt not but it will be maintained a^ justified to purpose For indeed there is
nothing to defend it but t^ Sword: it is the proper time to say any thing, when
Men have all thing in their power.

In the mean time you would fain be nibling at a Parallel betwixt t^^
Association, and that in the time of Queen Elizabeth. But there th^s small
difference betwixt them, that the ends of one are directly opposite to the
other: one with the Queen's Approbation, and Conjuncti^^ as Head of it; the
other without either the Consent, or Knowledge the King, against whose
Authority it is manifestly designed. There^ you do well to have recourse to
your last Evasion, that it was contri^ by your Enemies, and shuffled into the
Papers that were seized: wh^ yet you s^e the Nation is not so easy to believe
as your own Jury: (...) the Matter is not difficult, to find 12 Men in Newgate,
who would (...) quit a Malefactor.

I have one only Favor to desire of you at parting, that when (...) think of
answering this Poem* you would employ the same Pens aga^ it, who have combated
with so much Success against Absalom and A^^ tophel: for then you may assure
your selves of a clear Victory, w^ the least Reply. Rail at me abundantly; and,
not to break a Custo^ do it without Wi^: By this Method you will gain a
considerable Pe^ which is wholly to wave the Answer of my Arguments. Never own
(...) bottom of your Principles, for fear they should be Treason. Fall seve^ly
on the Miscarriages of Government; for if ^candal be not al^ow you are no free
born Subjects. If God ha^ not blessed you with the (...) l^nt of R^iming, make
u^e of my poor Stock and welcome: let (...) Verses run upon my Feet: and for
the utmost Refuge of notorious B^ heads, reduc^d to the last extremity of
Sense, turn my own Lines (...) me, and in utter Despair of your own Satyr, make
me Satyrize my (...) Some of you have been driven to this Bay already; but
above all ^ rest commend me to the Nonconformist Parson, who writ the Whip
(...) Key. I am afraid it is not read so much as the Piece deserves, bec^ the
Bookseller is every Week crying help at the end of his Guzette, g^t it off. You
see I am charitable enough to do him a Kindness, (...) it may be published as
well as printed; and that so much Skill in Hebrew Derivations, may not lie for
Waste-Paper in the Shop. Yet I half suspect he went no farther for his
Learning, than the Index of Hebrew Names and Etymologies, which are printed at
the end of some English Bibles. If Achitophel signify the Brother of a Fool,
the Author of that Poem will pass with his Readers for the next of Kin. And
perhaps it is the Relation that makes the Kindness. Whatever the Verses are; buy
'em up I beseech you out of pity; for I hear the Conventicle is shut up, and
the Brother of Achitophel out of Service.

Now Footmen, you know, have the Generosity to make a Purse, for a Member of
their Society, who has had his Livery pulled over his Ears: and even Protestant
Socks are bought up among you, out of Veneration to the Name. A Dissenter in
Poetry from Sense and English, will make as good a Protestant Rhimer, as a
Dissenter from the Church of Engl^nd a Protestant Parson. Besides, if you
encourage a young Beginner, who knows but he may elevate his Style a little,
above the vulgar Epithe^s of profane and saucy Jack and Atheistick Scribler,
with which he treats me, when the Fit of Enthusiam is strong upon him: by which
well-manner'd and charitable Expressions, I was certain of his Sect before I
knew his Name. What would you have more of a Man? he has damned me in your
Cause from Genesis to the Revelations: And has half the Texts of ^both the
Testaments against me, if you will be so civil to your selves as to take him
for your Interpreter; and not to take them for Irish Witnesses. After all
perhaps you will tell me, that you retained him only for the opening of your
Cause, and that your main Lawyer is yet behind. Now if it so happen he meet
with no more Reply than his Predecessors, you may either conclude, that I trust
to the Goodness of my Cause, or fear my Adversary, or disdain him, or what you
please, for the short on it is, it is indifferent to your humble Servant,
whatever your Party says or thinks of him.

The Medal: A SATYR AGAINST SEDITION
OF all our Antic Sights, and Pageantry,
Which English Idiots run in Crowds to see,
The Polish Medal bears the Prize alone:
A Monster more the Favorite of the Town
Than either Fairs or Theaters have shown.
Never did Art so well with Nature strive;
Nor ever Idol seemed so much alive?
So like the Man; so golden to the sight,
So base within, so counterfeit and light.
One side is filled with Title and with Face;
And, lest the King should want a regal Place,
On the reverse, a Tower the Town surveys;
Over which our mounting Sun hi^ Beams displays.
The Word pronounced aloud by Shrieval Voice,
Laetamur, which, in Polish, is rejoice.
The Day, Month, Year, to the great Act are joined,
And a new Canting Holiday designed.
Five Days he sat, for every Cast and Look;
Four more than God to finish Adam took.
But who can tell what Essence Angels are,
Or how long Heaven was making Lucifer!
Oh, could the Style that copied every Grace,
And plough'd such Furrows for an Eunuch Face,
Could it have formed his ever-changing Will,
The various Piece had tired the Graver's Skill!
A Martial Hero first, with early Care,
Blown, like a Pigmy by the Winds, to War.
A Beardless Chief, a Rebel, ever a Man:
So young his Hatred to his Prince began.)
Next this, (How wildly will Ambition steer!)
A Vermin, wriggling in the Usurper's Ear.
B^tt'ring his venal Wit for Sums of Gold
He cast himself into the Saint-like Mould;
Groaned, sighed and prayed, while Godliness was Gain;
The ^udest Bag-pip^ of the Sqeaking Train.
^ut, as it is hard to cheat a Juggler's Eyes,
His open Lewdness he could never disguise.
There split the Saint: for Hypocritick Zeal
^llows no Sins but those it can conceal.
Whoring to Scandal gives too large a scope:
^aints must not trade; but they may interlope.
^h' ungodly Principle was all the same;
^ut a gross Cheat betrays his Partner's Game.
^esides, their pace was formal, grave and slack:
^is nimble Wit out-ran the heavy Pack.
^et still he found his Fortune at a stay;
Whole Droves of Blockheads choking up his way:
They took, but not rewarded, his Advice;
^illain and Wit exact a double Price.
^w'r was his aim: But, thrown from that pretense,
^he Wretch turned Loyal in his own Defense;
and Malice reconciled him to his Prince.
^m, in the Anguish of his Soul he served;
^warded faster still than he deserved.
^hold him now exalted into Trust;
^s Counsel's often convenient, seldom just.
^'n in the most sincere Advice he gave,
^e had a grudging still to be a Knave.
The Frauds he learnt in his Fanatic Years
Made him uneasy in his Lawful Gears.
At best as little honest as he could:
And, like white Witches, mischievously good.
To his first Bias, longingly he leans;
And rather would be great by wicked means.
Thus, framed from Ill, he loosed our Triple hold;
(Advice unsafe, precipitous, and bold.)
From hence those Tears! that Ilium of our Woe!
Who helps a powerful Friend, fore-arms a Foe.
What Wonder if the Waves prevail so far,
When He cut down the Banks that made the Bar?
Seas follow but their Nature to invade;
But he by Art our Native Strength betrayed.
So Sampson to his Foe his force confessed;
And, to be shorn, lay slumbering on her Breast.
But, when this fatal Counsel, found too late,
Exposed its Author to the public Hate;
When his just Sovereign, by no impious way;
Could be seduced to Arbitrary sway;
Forsaken of that Hope, he shifts the sail;
Dri^es down the Current with a pop'lar Gale;
And shows the F^end confessed without a Veil.
He preaches to the Crowd, that Power is lent,
But not conveyed to Kingly Government;
That claims successive bear no binding force;
That Coronation Oaths are things of course;
Maitains the Multitude can never err;
And sets the People in the Papal Chair.
The Reason's obvious; Interest never lies;
The most have still their Interest in their Eyes;
The Power is always theirs, and Power is ever wise.
Almighty Crowd, thou shorten'st all dispute;
Power is thy Essence; Wit thy Attribute!
Nor Faith nor Reason make thee at a stay,
Thou leap'st over all Eternal Truths, in thy Pindarique wa^
Athens, no doubt, did righteously decide,
When Phocion and when Socrates were tried:
As righteously they did those dooms repent,
Still they were wise, whatever way they went.
Crowds err not, though to both Extremes they run;
To kill the Father, and recall the Son.
Some think the Fools were most, as times went then;
But now the World's o'er-stock'd with prudent Men.
The common Cry is even Religion's Test;
The Turks is, at Constantinople, best;
^dols in India, Popery at Rome;
And our own Worship only true at home.
And true, but for the time, it is hard to know
How long we please it shall continues so.
This side to day, and that to morrow burns;
So all are God a mighties in their turns.
A Tempting Doctrine, plausible and new:
What Fools our Fathers were, if this be true?
Who, to destroy the seeds of Civil War,
^nherent Right in Monarchs did declare:
And, that a lawful Power might never cease,
Secu^'d Succession, to secure our Peace,
Thus Property and Sovereign Sway, at last
^n equal Balances were justly cast:
But this new Jehu spurs the hot-mouth'd Horse;
^nstructs the Beast to know his Native Force:
To take the Bit between his Teeth and fly
To the next headlong Steep of Anarchy.
Too happy England, if our good we knew;
Would we possess the Freedom we pursue!
The lavish Government can give no more:
^et we repine; and plenty makes us poor.
God tried us once; our Rebe-fathers fought:
^e glutted 'em with all the Power they sought:
^^ll, mastered by their own usurping Brave,
^he freeborn Subject sunk into a Slave.
We loath our Manna, and we long for Quails;
^h, what is Man, when his own Wish prevails!
^ow rash, bow swift to plunge himself in Ill^;
^roud of his Power, and boundless in his Will
That Kings can do no wrong we must believe:
None can they do, and must they all receive?
Help Heaven! or sa^ly we shall see an Hour,
When neither wrong nor right are ni their Power!
Already they have lost their best Defense,
The Benefit of Laws, which they dispense.
No Justice to their righteous Cause allowed;
But baffled by an Arbitrary Crowd.
And Medals engraved, their Conquest to record,
The Stamp and Coin of their adopted Lord.
The Man who laughed but once, to see an Ass
Mambling to make the cross-grained Thistles pass:
Might laugh again, to see a Jury chaw
The Prickles of unpalatable Law.
The Witnesses, that, Leech-like, lived on Blood,
Sucking for them were med'cinally good;
But, when they fastened on their fester'd Sore,
Then, Justice and Religion they forswore;
Their Maiden Oaths debauched into a Whore.
Thus Men are raised by Faction, and decry'd;
And Rogue and Saint distinguished by their Side.
They rack even Scripture to confess their Cause;
And plead a Call to preach, in spite of Laws.
But that is no News to the poor injured Page,
It has been used as ill in every Age;
And is constrained, with Patience, all to take;
For what Defense can Greek and Hebrew make?
Happy who can this Talking Trumpet seize;
They make it speak whatever Sense they please!
'Twas framed, at first, our Oracle to enquire;
But, since our Sects in Prophecy grow higher,
The Text inspires not them; but they the Text inspire.
London, thou great Emporium of our Isle,
O, thou too bounteous, thou too fruitful Nile,
How shall I praise or curse to thy Desert!
Or separate thy Sound, from thy corrupted part!
I called thee Nile; the parallel will stand:
Thy Tides of Wealth overflow the fatten'd Land;
^et Monsters from thy large Increase we find.
^ngender'd on the Slyme thou leave behind.
^edition has not wholly seized on thee;
Thy nobler Parts are from Infection free.
^r Israel's Tribes thou have a numerous Band;
^ut still the Canaanite is in the Land.
Thy Military Chiefs are brave and true;
^or are thy disinchanted Burghers few.
The Head is Loyal which thy Heart commands;
^ut what is a Head with two such gouty Hands?
The wise and wealthy love the surest way;
and are content to thrive and to obey.
^^t Wisdom is to Sloth too great a Slave;
^one are so busy as the Fool and Knave.
Those let me curse; what Vengeance will they urge,
Whose Ordures neither Plague nor Fire can purge;
^or sharp Experience can to Duty bring,
^or angry Heaven, nor a forgiving King!
(...) Gospel-phrase their Chapmen they betray:
Their Shops are Dens, the Buyer is their Prey.
The Knack of Trades is living on the Spoil;
They boast even when each other they beguile.
Customs to steal is such a trivial thing,
That it is their Charter to defraud their King.
^ll hands unite of every jarring Sect;
They cheat the Country first, and then infect.
They, for God's Cause their Monarchs dare dethrone;
and they will be sure to make his Cause their own.
^hether the plotting Jesuit laid the Plan
Of murdering Kings, or the French Puritan,
^our Sacrilegious Sects their Guides out-go;
and Kings and Kingly Power would murder too.
What means their Traitorous Combination less,
Too plain to evade, too shameful to confess.
^ut Treason is not owned when it is descried;
^uccessful Crimes alone are justified.
The Men, who no Conspiracy would find,
Who doubts, but had it taken, they had joined.
Joined, in a mutual Covenant of Defense;
At first without, at last against their Prince.
If Sovereign Right by S^vereign Power they scan,
The same bold Maxim holds in God and Man^:
God were not safe, his Thunder could they shun
He should be forced to crown another Son.
Thus, when the Heir was from the Vineyard thrown,
The rich Possession was the Murth'rers own.
In vain to Sophistry they have recourse:
By proving theirs no Plot, they prove it is worse;
Unmasked Rebellion, and audacicus Force.
Which, though not Actual, yet all Eyes may see
It Is working, in the immediate Power to be;
For, from pretended Grievances they rise,
First to dislike, and after to despise.
Then, Cyclop-like in humane Flesh to deal,
Chop up a Minister, at every Meal;
Perhaps no^ wholly to melt down the King;
But clip his Reg^l Rights within the Ring.
From thence to assume the power of Peace and War;
And ease him by degrees of public Care.
Yet, to consult his Dignity and Fame,
He should have leave to exercise the Name;
And hold the Cards, while Commons played the Game.
For what can Power give more than Food and Drink,
To live at Ease, and not be bound to think?
These are the cooler Methods of the Crime;
But their hot Zealots think it is loss of time:
On utmost Bounds of Loyalty they stand,
And grin and whet like a Croatian Band;
That waits impatient for the last Command.
Thus Outlaws open Villainy maintain;
They steal not, but in Squadrons scour the Plain:
And, if their power the Passengers subdue;
The most have right, the wrong is in the Few.
Such impious Axioms foolishly they show;
For, in some Soils Republics will not grow:
Our Temp' rate Isle will no Extremes sustain,
Of pop'lar Sway, or Arbitrary Reign^
But slides between them both into the best;
Secure in Freedom, in a Monarch blessed.
And though the Climate, vexed with various Winds,
Works through our yielding Bodies on our Minds,
The wholesome Tempest purges what it breeds;
To recommend the Calmness that succeeds.
But thou, the Pander of the Peoples Hearts,
^O Crooked Soul, and Serpentine in Arts,)
Whose Blandishments a Loyal Land^ have whor'd,
And broke the Bonds she plighted to her Lord;
What Curses on thy blasted Name will fall!
Which age to Age their Legacy shall call;
^or all must curse the Woes that must descend on all.
Religion thou have none: thy Mercury
Has passed through every Sect. or theirs through Thee.
^ut what thou giv'st, that Venom still remains;
and the pox'd Nation feels Thee in their Brains.
What else inspires the Tongues, and swells the Breasts
Of all thy bellowing Renegado Priest^,
that preach up thee for God; dispense thy Laws;
and with thy Stumm ferment their fainting Cause?
^sh Fumes of Madness raise; and toil and sweat
To make the formidable Cripple great.
^^t, should thy Crimes succeed, should lawless Power
Compass those Ends thy greedy Hopes devour,
Thy Canting Friends thy Mortal Foes would be;
Thy God and Theirs will never long agree.
^or thine, (if thou have any,) must be one
That lets the World and Humane Kind alone;
^ jolly God, that passes hours too well
^o promise Heaven, or threaten us with Hell.
that unconcerned can at Rebellion sit;
and wink at Crimes he did himself commit.
Tyrant theirs; the Heaven their Priesthood paints;
Conventicle of gloomy sullen Saints;
Heaven, like Bedlam, slovingly and sad;
^ore-doom'd for Souls, with false Religion mad.
Without a Vision Poets can fore-shew
that all but Fools, by common Sense my know:
If true Succession from our Isle should fail,
And Crowds profane, with impious Arms prevail,
Not thou, nor those thy Factious Arts engage
Shall reap that Harvest of Rebellious Rage,
With which thou flatter'st thy decrepit Age.
The swelling Poison of the several Sects,
Which wanting vent, the Nation's Health infects,
Shall burst its Bag; and fighting out their way
The various Venoms on each other prey.
The Presbyter, pufft up with spiritual Pride,
Shall on the Necks of the lewd Nobles ride:
His Brethren damn, the Civil Power defy;
And parcel out Republic Prelacy.
But short shall be his Reign: his rigid Yoke
And Tyrant Power will puny Sects provoke;
And Frogs and Toads, and all the Tadpole Train
Will croak to Heaven for help, from this devouring Cran^
The Cutthroat Sword and clamorous Gown shall jar,
In sharing their ill-gotten Spoils of War:
Chiefs shall be grudged the part which they pretend,
Lords envy Lords, and Friends with every Friend
About their impious Merit shall contend.
The surly Commons shall Respect deny;
And justle Peerage out with Property.
Their General either shall his Trust betray,
And force the Crowd to Arbitrary Sway;
Or they suspecting his ambitious Aim,
In hate of Kings shall cast a new the Frame;
And thrust out Collatine that bore the Name.
Thus in-born Broils the Factions would engage;
Or Wars of Exiled Heirs, or Foreign Rage,
Till halting Vengeance overtook our Age:
And our wild labors, wearied into Rest,
Reclined us on a rightful Monarch's Breast.
-- Pudet haec opprobria, vobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
FINIS.
Love given over: OR, A SATYR AGAINST THE Pride, Lust, and Inconstancy, etc. OF
WOMAN. WITH SYLVIA'S REVENGE, OR, A SATYR AGAINST MAN, In Answer to the Satyr
against Woman. Amended by the AUTHOR.

LONDON ^^inted and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-fryars near the Waterside. 1710.

To the Reader.
THE Pious Endeavors of the Gown, have not prov^ more ineffectual toward
reclaiming the Errors of a v^tious Age, than Satyr (the better way, though less
practiced) t^ Amendment of Honesty, and good Manners among us. Nor (...) it a
wonder, when we consider that Women, (as if they ha^ the ingredient of
Fallen-Angels in their Composition) the mo^ they are lashed, are but the more
hardened in Impenitence: A^ as Children in some violent Distemper, commonly spit
out the cherishing Cordials, which, if taken, might chase away t^ Malady: So
they (inspired as 'twere with a natural aversness to Virtue) despise that
wholesome Counsel, which is Religously designed for their future good, and
happiness. Judge the^ if Satyr ever had more need of a sharper sting than now:
wh^ hen can look out of his Cell on no side but sees so many obje^ beyond the
reach of indignation. Nor is it altogether unresonable for me (while others are
lashing the Rebellious Tim^ into Obedience) to have one fling at Woman, the
Origi^ of Mischief. I Am sensible I might as well expect to see Tr^ and Honesty
uppermost in the World, as think to be free fr^ the bitterness of their
Resentments: But I have no reason to concerned at that; since I Am certain my
Design's as far fr^ offending the good, (if there are any amongst 'em that can
said to be so) as those few that are good, would be offended their Reception
into the Eternal Inhabitations of Peace, to Crowned there with the Sacred
Reward of their Labors. for those that are ill, if it Gall them, it succeeds
according my wish; for I have no other design but the Amendmen^ Vice, which if
I could but in the least accomplish, I should well pleased; and not without
reason too; for it must need some satisfaction to a young unskilful Archer, to
hit the (...) Mark he ever aimed at.

Love given over: OR, A SATYR against WOMAN.
AT length from Love's vile Slavery I am free,
And have regained my ancient Liberty:
^e shook those Chains off which my Bondage wrought,
^n free as Air, and unconfined as Thought;
^or Faithless Sylvia I no more adore,
^neel at her Feet, and pray in vain no more:
^o more my Verse shall her fled Worth proclaim,
and with soft Praises celebrate her Name:
^er Frowns do now no awful Terrors bear;
^er Smiles no more can cure or cause Despair.
^ve banished her for ever from my Breast,
^anish'd the proud Invader of my Rest,
^anish'd the Tyrant-Author of my Woes,
That robbed my Soul of all its sweet repose:
^ot all her treacherous Arts bewitching Wiles,
^der Sighs, her Tears, nor her deluding Smiles,
shall my eternal Resolution move,
Or make me talk, or think, or dream of Love:
The whining Curse I Have banished from my Mind,
and with it, all the Thoughts of Womankind.
Come then my Muse, and since the Occasion's fair;
against that Sex proclaim an endless War;
Which may renew as still my Verse is read,
and live, when I am mingled with the dead.
Woman! by Hev'ns the very Name's a Crime,
enough to blast, and to debauch my Rhyme.
^ure Heaven it self (intranc't) like Adam lay,
Or else some banished Fiend usurped the ^way
When Eve was formed; and with her ushered in
^lagues, Woes, and Death, and a new World of Sin.
The fatal Rib was crooked and unev'n,
From whence they have their Crab-like Nature given;
Averse to all the Laws of Man and Heaven.
O Lucifer, thy Regions had been thin,
Were not for Woman's propagating Sin:
It Is they alone that all true Vices know;
And send such Throngs down to thy Courts below:
Nay there is hardly one among 'em all,
But envics Eve the Glory of the Fall:
Be cautious then, and guard your Empire well;
For should they once get Power to rebel,
They Would surely raise a Civil-War in Hell,
Add to the Pains you feel, and make you know,
We Are here above, as Cursed as you below.
But we may thank our selves; is there a Dog,
Who when he may have Freedom, wears the Clog?
But Man, vain Man, the more imprudent Beast,
Drags the dull weight when he may be releas't:
May such, (and, ah! too many such we see)
While they live here, just only live, to be
The Mark of Scorn, Contempt and Infamy.
But if the Tide of Nature boistrous grow,
And would Rebelliously its Banks overflow,
Then choose a Wench, who (full of lewd Desires)
Can meet your Floods of Love with equal Fires;
She only damns the Soul: but an ill Wife
Damns that, and with it all the Joys of Life:
And what vain Blockhead is so dull, but knows,
That of two Ills the least is to be chose?
But now, since Woman's Lust I chance to name,
Woman's unbounded Lust I Will first proclaim:
And show that our lewd Age has brought to view,
What Sodom, when at worst, has blushed to do.
True, I confess, that Rome's Emperial Whore,
(More Famed for Vice than for the Crown she wore)
Into the public Stews (disguised) would ^hrust,
To quench the raging Fury of her Lust;
And by such Actions bravely got her Name,
Born up for ever on the Wings of Fame:
^et this is poor, to what our Modern Age
^as hatched, brought forth, and acted on the Stage:
Which for the Sex's Glory I Will rehearse;
and make that deathless, as that makes my Verse.
Who knew not (for to whom was she unknown)
^or late prodigious Bewley? (true, she is gone
^o answer for the numerous Ills she is done;
^o^ if there is no Hell for such as she,
^eav'n is unjust, and that it cannot be.)
(...) Albion's Isle fast rooted in the Main,
^^es the rough Billows raging force Disdain,
which though they foam, and with loud Terror roar,
^^t they can never reach beyond the Shore.
^o she with Lust's Enthusiastic Rage,
^ustain'd all the salt Stallions of the Age.
Whole Legions she encountered, Legions tired;
^satiate yet, still fresh Supplies desired.
^ustrious Bawd! may thy Name live, and be
^bhorr'd by all, as it is abhorred by me;
^hou foremost in the Race of Infamy!
^^t Bodies must decay; for it is too sure,
There Is nothing from the Jaws of Time secure,
^et when she found that she could do no more,
^hen all her Body was one putrid Sore,
^^dded with Pox, and Ulcers quite all over;
^en then, by her delusive treacherous Wiles,
^or that is most specious still, which most beguiles)
^'enroll'd more Females in the List of Whore,
^^an all the Arts of Man ever did before.
^est with the ponderous Guilt, at length she fell,
^d through the solid Center sunk to Hell^
^e murmuring Fiends all hovered round about,
(...) in hoarse Howls did the great Bawd salute;
^az'd to see a sordid lump of Clay,
^n'd with more various bolder Crimes than they:
^or were her Torments less; for the dire Train,
^on sent her howling through the rolling Flame,
(...) the sad Seat of everlasting Pain.
Creswel, and Stratford, the same Path do tread,
In Sin's black Volume so profoundly read,
That whensoe'er they die, we well may fear,
The very Tincture of the Crimes they bear,
With strange Infusion may inspire the Dust,
And in the Grave commit true Acts of Lust.
And now, i^ so much to the World's revealed,
Reflect on the vast stores that lie concealed,
How often into their Closets they retire,
Where flaming Dil -- does inflame Desire,
And Gentle Lap-d -- s feed the amorous fire.
How cursed is Man! when Brutes his Rivals prove,
Ev' in the Sacred Business of his Love!
Unless Religion pious Thoughts instill,
Show me the Woman that would not be ill,
If she conveniently could have her will.
And when the Mind's corrupt, we all well know,
The Actions that proceed from't must be so.
Their Guilt's as great who any ill would do,
As their's who actually that ill pursue,
That they would have it so their Crime assures;
Thus, if they durst, most Women would be Whores.
That is, (and it is what all Men will allow)
There Is many would be so, that yet seems virtuous now
Forgive me, Modesty, if I have been,
In any thing I have mentioned here, obscene;
Yet stay -- Why should I ask that Boon of thee,
When it is a doubt if such a thing there be?
For Woman, in whose Breasts you are said to reign,
And show the glorious Conquests thou do gain,
Despises thee, and only courts the Name:
(Sounds, though we cannot see, yet we may hear,
And wonder at their echoing through the Air)
Thus, l^d by what delusive Fame imparts,
We think thy Throne's erected in their Hearts;
But we are deceived, as faith we ever were,
For if thou art, I Am sure thou art not there:
Nothing in those vile Mansions does reside,
But rank Ambition, Luxury and Pride.
Pride is the Deity they most adore,
Hardly their own dear selves they cherish more:
Survey their very Looks, you will find it there;
How can you miss it when it is every where?
Some through all hunted Natures Secrets trace.
To fill the Furrows of a wrinkl'd Face;
And after all their toil (pray mark the Curse)
They Have only made that which was bad much worse,
As some in striving to make ill Coin pass,
Have but the more discovered that 'twas Brass.
Nay, those that are reputed to be fair,
And know how courted, how admired they are,
Who one would think God had formed so complete,
They had no need to make his Gifts a Cheat;
Yet they too in Adulteration share,
And would in spite of Nature, be more fair.
Deluded Woman! tell me, where is the Gain,
In spending Time upon a thing so vain?
Your precious Time, (O to your selves unkind!
When it is uncertain you have an hour behind
Which you can call your own: For though you are Fair.
And beautiful as Guardian Angels are?
Adorned by Nature, fitted out by Art,
In all the Glories that delude the Heart:
Yet tell me, tell; have they the power to save?
Or can they privilege you from the Grave;
The Grave, which favors not the Rich or Fair;
Beauty with Beast lies undistinguished there.
But hold -- methinks I Am interrupted here,
By some vain Fop I neither Love nor Fear:
Who in these words his weakness does reveal,
And hurts that Wound which he should strive to heal.
'Soft, Sir, methinks you too inveterate grow;
'And more your Envy than Discretion show.
'Who'd blame the Sun because he shines so bright,
'That we cannot gaze upon his dazzling Light,
'When at the same time he chears the Earth,
'And gives the various Plant and Blossoms Birth?
'How does the Winter look, that naked thing,
'Compar'd to the fresh Glories of the Spring?
'Rivers adorn the Earth; the Fish, the Seas;
'Flowers and Grass, the Meadows; Fruit, the Trees;
'The Stars, the Fields of Air through which they ride;
'And Woman all the Works of God beside:
'Yet base detracting Envy will not allow
'They should adorn themselves; then pray, Sir, now
'Produce some Reasons why you're so severe;
'For, envious as you are, you know they are fair.
And so were Sodom's Apples heretofore,
But they were still found rotten at the Core.
Nature without dispute made all things fair;
And dressed 'em in an unaffected Air:
The Earth, the Meadows, Rivers, every Flower.
Proclaim the Skill of their great Maker's Power;
But they, as they were made at first, remain,
And all their ancient Luster still retain.
Nothing but vain fantastic Woman's changed;
And through all Mischiefs various Mazes ranged*
Yet that they are beautiful is not denied;
But tell me are the Unhandsome free from Pride?
No, no; the Strait, the Crooked, Ugly, Fair,
Have all, promiscuously, an equal share.
Thus, Sir, you see how they are estranged and strayed.
From what by Nature they at first were made.
Already many of their Crimes I Have named,
Yet that is untold for which they most are Famed:
A Sin (tall as the Pyramids of old)
From whose aspiring top we may behold
Enough to damn a World! -- what should it be,
But (Curse upon the Name!) Inconstancy?
O tell me, does the World those Men contain,
(For I have looked for such, but looked in vain)
Who never were drawn into that fatal Snare:
Fatal I call it, for he is cursed that is there.
Inspired then by my Fellow Sufferers wrongs,
And glad I am, the Task to me belongs;
I Will bring the Fiend unmasked to humane sight,
Though hid in the black Womb of deepest Night.
No more the Wind, the faithless Wind, shall be
A Simile for their Inconstancy,
For that sometimes is fixed; but Woman's Mind
Is never fixed, or to one Point inclined:
Less fixed than in a Storm the Billows are,
Or trembling Leaf the Aspen-Tree does bear,
Which never stand still, but (every way inclined)
Turn twenty times with the least breath of wind.
Less fixed than wanton Swallows while they play
In the Sunbeams, to welcome in the Day:
Now yonder, now they are here, as soon as there,
In no Place long, and yet are every where.
Lake a tossed Ship their passions fall and rise
One while you would think it touched the very Skies,
When straight upon the S^n^ it grovelling lies.
Even she her self, Sylvia, the loved and Fair,
Whose one kind Look could save me from Despair;
She, she whose Smiles I valued at that rate,
To enjoy them I scorned the Frowns of Fate;
Even she her self, (but Ah! I Am loath to tell,
Or blame the Crimes of one I loved so well;
But it must out) even she, swift as the Wind,
Swift as the airy Motions of the Mind,
At once proved false, and perjured, and unkind.
Here they to Day invoke the Powers above,
As Witnesses to their Immortal Love;
When (lo!) away the airy Fantom flies,
And ever it can be said to live, it dies:
Thus all Religious Vows they break,
With the same Ease and Freedom as they speak.
Nor is that sacred Idol, Marriage, free,
Marriage! which musty Drones affirm to be
The tie of Souls, as well as Bodies! nay,
The Spring that does through unseen Pipes convey
Fresh Sweets to Life, and drives the bitter Dregs away!
The Sacred Flame, the Guardian Pile of Fire,
That guides our Steps to Peace! nor does expire,
Till it has left us nothing to desire!
Even thus adorned, the Idol is not free
From the sw^ft turns of their Inconstancy.
Witness the Ephesian Matron --
Who to the Grave with her dead Husband went,
And closed her self up in his Monument;
Where on Marble she lamenting lay,
^n sighs, she spent the Night; in Tears, the Day,
And seemed to have no use of Life, but mourn it all away,
The wondering World extolled her faithful Mind,
Extolled her as the best of Womankind:
But see the World's Mistake; and with it, see
The strange effect of wild Inconstancy?
^or she her self, even in that Sacred Room,
With one brisk, vigorous Onset was overcome,
and made a Brothel of her Husband's Tomb:
Whose pale Ghost trembled in his Sacred Shroud,
Wondering that Heaven t^' Impious Act allowed:
^orror in Robes of Darkness stalkt around;
and through the frighted Tomb did Groans resound,
^he very Marbles wept, the Furies howled,
and in hoarse Murmurs their Amazement told.
^ll this shook no^ the Dictates of her Mind,
^t with a Boldness, suited to her kind,
She made her Husband's Ghost, (in Death, a Slave!)
Her necessary Pimp even in his Grave!
What need I fetch these Instances from old?
There now live those that are as bad, and bold,
Of Quality too, Young, Vigorous, Lustful, Fair;
But for their Husbands sakes their Names I spare.
Are these (ye Gods) the Virtues of a Wife?
The Peace that crowns a Matrimonial Life?
Is this the Sacred Prize for which we fight,
And hazard Life and Honor with delight?
Bliss of the Day, and Rapture of the Night?
The Reins, that guide us in our wild Careers,
And the Supporter of our feeble Years?
No, no, it is Contradiction; rather far
They are the cause of all our Bosom War:
The very Source, and Fountain of our Woe,
From whence Despair, and Doubt for ever flow:
The Gall, that mingles with our best delight;
Rank to the Taste, and nauseous to the Sight:
A Days, the weight of Care that clogs the Breast,
At Night the Hags that does disturb our Rest,
Our mortal Sickness in the midst of Health;
Chains in our Freedom; Poverty in Wealth:
The Eternal Pestilence, and Plague of Life;
The Original, and Spring of all our Strife;
These rather are the Virtues of a clamorous Wife!
O why, ye awful Powers, why was it your Will?
To mix our solid Good with so much Ill?
But you foresaw our Crimes would soar too high,
And so made them your Vengeance to supply:
For not the wild destructive waste of War,
Nor all the endless Lab'rinths of the Bar,
Famine, Revenge, perpetual loss of Health,
No, nor that grinning Fiend, Despair it self,
When it insults with most tyrannick sway,
Can plague or torture Man so much as they.
But hold -- don't let me blame the Powers Divine;
Or at the wondrous Works they made, repine.
All at first was good, formed by the unerring Will,
Though much has since degen'rated to ill.
Even Woman was (say they) made chaste and good;
But Ah! not long in that blessed State she stood;
Swift as a Meteor glides through Air she fell,
And showed, to love that Sex too much, is one sure way to Hell
But stop my Pen; for who can comprehend,
Or trace those Crimes, which n^'er can have an end?
The Sun, the Moon, the Stars that gild the Sky,
The World, and all its Glories too must dye,
And in one universal Ruin lie:
But they even Immortality will gain,
And live -- but must for ever live in pain;
For ever live, damned to eternal Night,
And never more review the Sacred Light.
Beware then, dull, deluded Man, beware;
And let not vicious Women be the Snare,
To make you the Companions with 'em there:
Scorn their vain Smiles, their little Arts despise,
And your Content at that just value prize,
As not to let those ravenous Thieves of Prey
Rifle, and bear the sacred Guest away;
It Is they, it is they that rob us of that Gem;
How could we lose it were it not for them?
Avoid 'em then, with all the gaudy Arts,
They daily practice to amuse our Hearts;
Avoid 'em, as you would avoid their Crimes,
Or the mad Follies that infest the Times.
But now should some (for doubtless we may find
Many a stupid Ass among Mankind,)
Should such contemn the wholesome Rules I give,
And in contempt of what I Have spoke, still live
Like base soul'd Slaves, and Fetters choose to wear,
When they may be as unconfined as Air,
Or the winged Race that do inhabit there;
May all the Plagues an ill Wife can invent,
Pursue 'em with eternal Punishment:
May they -- but stay, may Curses I forestall;
For in that Curse I Have comprehended all --
But say, Sir, if some Pilot on the Main
Should be so mad, so resolutely vain,
To steer his Bark upon that fatal Shore,
Where he has seen ten thousand wrack't before,
Though he should perish there; say, would you not
Bestow a Curse on the Notorious Sot;
Trust me, the Man's as much to blame as he,
Who ventures his frail Bark out wilfully,
On the Wild, Rocky, Matrimonial See;
When round about, and just before his Eyes,
Such a destructive waste of fatal Ruin lies.
FINIS.
The Epistle Dedicatory to the Snarling Curs the CRITICS.
AND why all this Noise and Splutter against the Women, Harmless Creatures*
What have they done to deserve so many Lampoons, Libels, Satyrs? But methinks
Gentlemen, it is not fair Dealing to commit A^ts of open Hostility before you
proclaim a War. And we know what Feats you brag have been done, by our little
Fire-ship called the Satyr against Woman: This Preface therefore is only to let
you know, that we have rig'd our a Female Man of War (if that been't Nonsense)
with 30 G^^s of a side, which I'gad Gentlemen, (as Mr. Bays has it) we hope
will maul you: and so much for that Point.

But Now -- what now? why, it seems 'twas Nero, and not Caligula, that made
such a Wish, mentioned in Page 2d. Why Gentlemen, I hope you will excuse the want
of Learning in a Woman; since upon my word, I never read Suetonius nor
Tranquills, for you all know, That a Box of Marmalade, Culpepper's Midwifery, a
Prayer Book, and two or three Plays, is all the Furniture of a Woman's Study,

If any of the Characters suit with some Persons to me unknown, I solemnly
profess, there is not one of them levelled against any Person whatsoever, but a
Skilful Painter may by the strength of Fancy, draw a Face representing some
Body, though no Body s^ for the Picture.

Madam,
THE Invasion first with fierce Assaults began,
And scattered wild Disorder as it ran,
It was a War betwixt our Sex and Man.
With haughty Pride the bold Triumphers boast,
And cry the weaker Vessel's sunk and lost;
Trophies along the gaudy Strand display^d,
And never such Insulting Poeans made.
Yet true it is, without a Blush we own,
Our Force in part was scattered and overthrown*
With Fright surpised we knew not then the Foe,
With Noise they hurried on, and flush't with show;
Yet still unmoved our Body did remain,
They only took some Straglers on the Plain.
To you the News with winged haste we bore,
You smiled, and bid us stand, and said no more.
Long you delayed indeed to aid us there,
And they mistook your Scorn of them, for fear.
You sent one Muse to view their Strength, she came
And told you 'twas but Noise and babbling Fame.
Unguarded, and how loose the Forces lay,
And would you then advance you would with the Day.
With this alarmed your God-like Genius rose,
Lord! how aghast appeared your frighted Foes?
At your approach, foiled and disarmed they yield,
And scatter strange Confusion over the Field.
With Numbers sweetly rank't you brought us Aid,
and show you can defend us and invade:
^^bmissive at your Feet their General craves,
And you a^ Pleasure wound the baff^d ^laves.
M P.


A SATYR against MAN.
THen must it thus, Ye Heavens for ever be,
Will no kind Fate our Sex from Censure free?
Must ill-bred Satyrs chase us through the World,
And shall no Thunder at the Slaves be hurled?
Ye Gods! how long shall injured Virtue groan?
How long shall Innocence be trampled on?
Shall a bold Scribbling Fop whose Head contains,
A Thousand Maggots for One Dram of Brains,
In Doggrel Rhyme, and much more Doggrel Sense,
Vomit six Pen'worth of Impertinence;
Thrust it abroad, and in a Style not common,
Call it forsooth -- A Satyr against Woman?
A pretty Title -- sure the Book must sell,
Cries a Clapt-Spark, and likes it wondrous well,
Another Laughs, and Snuffling in the Nose,
E'gad (says he) the Subjects rarely chose;
A third, -- but hold, the Slaves I must engage,
Inspire me Juno with a Woman's Rage,
A Rage like that, when you by Spies were told,
How finely Jupiter intreagu'd with Gold;
Or when the Shape of Bull and Swan put on,
To get some Mortal Maidenhead was gone:
Assist dear Goddess, teach me how to write,
Inform my Satyr when, and where to bite,
That all the Race of lewd inconstant Men,
May curse the time they roused a Woman's Pen*
It Is done, -- a glowing heat my Breast inspires,
Revenge inflames me with its eager Fires;
Oh were the Races of Mankind in my Power,
By all my Hopes, they should not live an hour,
By Heaven, Caligula, 'twas bravely done,
To wish all Necks in Rome were shrunk to one,
That at one blow they might receive their Fate,
Yet Caesar, you were moderate in your hate,
A part of Mankind, at your Rage would fall,
But mine, ( would Heaven would grant it) flies at all.
Fear not my Muse the Monster to engage,
But slight the passes of a Scribler's Rage;
What though he struts in big affected Notes,
You know the Muses still wear Petticoats,
Those Darling Shes, their Sexes Cause will own,
Shall Angel-Woman be by Man overthrown?
-- Man, the ignoble word of Tell-tale Fame,
My Paper blisters as I write the Name,
Man, must I then the hated Name rehearse,
Lord! how it stains my Ink and spoils my Verse,
Man, by some angry God in passion hurled
Down, as a Plague to vex the Female World.
A Spirit of Air and Flame may be withstood,
But who can shun a Devil of Flesh and Blood?
Man! hold my Muse, thy Epithets give over,
A Nobler Task will soon employ thy Store,
Expose the Wretch in all his vicious Shapes,
Trace him through all Disguises, all Escapes,
For though his Vices are become his Trade,
Yet Vice will sometimes Act in Masquerade.
Let no fond pity thy Resentments spare,
Let naught of Woman make the Lash forbear;
Let him be Fop, Pimp, Cully, Fool, or Knave,
Lash till he fly for shelter to the Grave:
That undeluded Females may be shown,
What a choice Creature it is they dote upon.
Nature has scarce wrote Man upon his Chin;
But strait to Love the Stripling does begin.
Though what it is he understands no more,
Than Sailors did the Compass heretofore.
Whether the Playhouse, Church, or Boarding-School,
Did with a Mistress furnish the young Fool,
We cannot tell -- but one at last is found,
Whose Charms the Heart of young Philander Wound
The Trifle humbly at her Feet he lays,
and has the Way of Courtship now a days:
^ome Present -- for a Bribe does slily use,
^o by a Gift -- his want of Gifts excuse;
and that his Plot be more securely laid,
^e gets an Interest in the Chambermaid:
^ut if from's Vows she turns her Scornful Eyes,
and with disdain his formal Courtship flies;
(...) Lunatic transformed he then despairs,
^ooks wild, storms, rages, and devoutly swears,
That if his Sylvia sends another Frown,
himself, himself, the Wretch himself will drown
before the arrival of the next days Sun,
and the next Tavern sees the Business done.
^ollow my Muse, you may if not too Clamorous,
^n a Red Sea of Claret find Sir Amorous.
Where powerful Love, yields to more powerful Wine,
And prompts his Fancy to some new Design:
His former Mistress like a Cast off Suit,
Thrown by -- another does his Heart recruit,
^o whom obliging Nature has been kind,
^n all the Gifts of Body and of Mind,
Nor must her Fortune be forgot behind;
^'ith her he uses all the little Arts,
^nvented to surprise unguarded Hearts.
No T^eats are wanting that may bribe her Sense,
And to her Heart convey soft Love from thence.
^o Balls and Plays she is daily ushered in,
Tell me St. Jaeme's- Park how often you have seen
The perjured Wretch conduct her through the Grove,
And whisper Tales of his pretended Love.
How often he kissed her hand, and softly ^re,
That she, and none but she he could adore,
When the same time he Ogl'd at a Whore.
His vigorous Courtship overcomes the Fair,
She can no longer such brisk Sallyes bear.
With blushes which too well the Heart discover,
The cred'lous Phillis owns her self a Lover,
Which mighty Secret when the Wretch has known
Retires, and all his Passion does disown*
Disown't said I? -- Ah certainly he would none;
And 'its a part of his Diversion made,
To tell the World how the Fair One was betrayed,
Your Thunder Gods! to strike the Villain dead.
O could my Pen dart Lightning at the Slave,
A Fate deserved his Perjuries should have:
But a Cursed Impotence attends me still,
And Men must for the Deed accept the Will;
But yet to show how far a Woman's Passion
Exceeds that Modish Raillery now in fashion.
For once let cheated Ariadne speak,
And if you any sense of Shame partake:
Know perjured Men, 'twill make your Hearts to ache.
And will oblige our injured Sex to know it,
The Story's true, no matter who is the Poet.
When Thesius false by unexpected Theft,
Had Ariadne on black Naxos left,
By him and this kind Sex exposed a Prey
To Wolves and Tigers milder Beasts than they,
Long her low Love and Nature's servile Chain,
Her just, her pious Curses did restrain:
But when far off his Perjured Gally flies,
And rising Billows screen her following Eyes,
All Woman in here is banished by despair,
Leaving a brave a dreadful Angel there;
Thus did She all his treacherous Sex engage,
And thus cursed on, inspired with Heavenly Rage.
Fly Villain, Monster, Traitor, if I can,
I Will call thee more than all, I Will call thee Man.
Man -- Nature's Blush, Medly of Lust and Blood,
All Man -- degenerate from thy Native Mud,
Pure Sedement of Chaos, Devil all over,
Thy self thy self, what need I call the more;
Perjured, and Treacherous, Monstrous, and Ingrate,
Deadly's your Love, more deadly than your Hate.
Your charming Eyes are those which have betrayed,
A tame, an easy, fond believing Maid.
Find me one Wretch in all your Hellish Bands,
Whose Tongue han't done more Murders than his Hands.
Crocadile are your Tears, sly silent Lies,
Hyena's Voice, and Cockatrices Eyes.
Angels before you have cheated us, and then,
The Cloven-foot peeps out, and you are all Devils again.
When I my own weak Soul and Sex review,
I hate my self and them as much as you.
Why has black Destiny obliged us thus,
To dote upon a Mortal- Incubus?
Oh that I could on the tame Fools prevail,
W^'d die to make their vip'rous Offspring fail^'
'Twould be but one cursed Age before they fell,
And moulder'd back into their native Hell.
By Heaven, 'twas nobly wished and bravely thought,
Were all our Sex with such Intentions fraught,
Hell would not long the treacherous Vermin spare,
For slighted Love who can with Patience bear?
And though our Spark was Perjured once before,
He Will tick with Hell for one false Promise more,
And a whole Race of feigned Vows run over.
No Woman shall monopolize his Heart,
But every Female shall pretend a part.
Inconstancy the Practiced Vice of the Age,
Makes him all Women that he sees engage.
One Woman takes him with her charming Air,
This 'cause she is Black, the other 'cause she is Fair.
Now now he dies for Sylvia's Charming Eyes,
Till Caelia's Singing did his Soul surprise;
His trifling Heart she for a while possessed,
Till 'twas removed to Rosalinda's Breast:
She could not long of her new Treasure boast,
The Skittish thing soon took another Post.
Octavia next would the Gay Bubble claim,
But still for Daphne he would a greater Flame;
For her he languisht in soft fond Desire,
^ill Florimena set his Heart on fire.
A while indeed he revel'd in her Arms,
But soon was captived with Almeria's Charms*
^or full six hours she held her Aerie Lover,
T^ll Arabella did new Charms discover:
Her welcome Guest she did not long enjoy,
But Lydia was presented with the Toy;
And though she would Magic that might cause its stay,
Yet Claristilla beckoned it away:
^n two hours time the inclination fled,
and Belvedira reigned in her stead;
^s Mistress long she had not bore Command,
^ut the Scepter was resigned to Flora's Hand,
^alse as the Wind, inconstant as the Weather,
(...) ran away from her the Lord knows whither.
His Love being thus in various Channels cut,
^old Lust flows in, as fast as Love ebbs out.
^ust, like a Fiend his Soul does haunt and vex,
^ust, the Familiar Devil of the Sex;
^ll sense of Reputation once abhorring,
^e lists himself a Proselyte for Whoring.
Whoring -- what pleasure does the sound afford?
^horing, that lovely fine delicious Word,
A Virtuous Woman's troubled with Ill Nature,
But yet a Whore's a most obliging Creature,
With her all his broken Vows repeats,
With her he values no Expense in Treats.
Whatever her fond Appetite can crave,
It Is but to ask, and she as soon shall have.
The Park and Playhouse see 'em still together,
And he is her Cully for all sorts of Weather;
And though some Years before the Nothing fled,
Yet he will be thought to have her Maidenhead.
A vicious Constancy he now will own,
And is not weary of her Service grown;
While in her Lap the enchanted Coxcomb rocks,
She lovingly requites him with a P --
But hold awhile m'unwary headstrong Muse,
In taxing Men I my own Sex Accuse,
The Dart which at the other Sex was thrown,
Recoils with all its Force upon our own:
And while the Cully I would fain explore,
In lively Colors display the Whore.
Like Sampson's Foxes tail to tail they are tied,
And who, the Loving Couple would divide?
Yet this for Jilts must in excuse be said,
'Twas false, base treacherous Man that them betrayed,
And if some Hellish Arts and Tricks they know,
To you kind Men, they all their Knowledge owe,
They were not Devils till you made 'em so.
From Fluxing or from private Hot House come,
For our last mentioned Cully make some Room.
Who though severely chastened for his Sins,
His much loved Trade of Whoring soon begins,
So Floodgates which have long stopped Watercourse,
When opened make it fly with greater force.
Not virtuous Ladies in his Lust he would spare,
Did not their Frowns make the bold Wretch forbear.
His Lust all manner of distinction Damns,
'Twixt Country nut-brown, or fine Court Madams.
Ugly or handsome, fair, black, brown, or yellow,
Tall, short, fat, lean, he swears she is not her fellow.
Abroad he fastens upon all he meets,
The Sexes common Scare crow in the Streets.
Where Widows, Wives, and Maids, he boldly seizes,
Ones Breast, and to others Hand he rudely squeezes.
But if he finds 'em civil or not right,
Damn 'em, says he, they are, Virtuous out of spite.
He roves not long till some kind Jenny pass,
And she with him takes one refreshing Glass.
Some paultry Chink to tempt her he will expose,
And she on him a swinging Clap bestows.
Who in few days finding his old Guest come;
At some Quack Doctors takes a private Room,
The Quacks those lewd Impostors of the times,
Famed for their Pills, their Spirits, and their Rhimes.
With promised hopes, expecting ^ops betray,
And send them more Distempered thence away,
Called of their Health, and cheated of their Pay.
Death through the Town is scattered in their Bills,
And Execution swallowed with their Pills.
'Twould blast a modest Muse t'approach too near,
A Dire Infection stains the neighboring Air.
Here draw the Veil and let the Wretches lie,
Cursing the effects of their base Leachery.
What Gaudy thing from China or Japan,
Is this appears? -- it cannot sure be Man.
And yet it talks, and looks, and walks like one,
Of those we call the modish Sparks of the Town.
Man's the least part about him that appears,
Sure he was got between some Tailors Shears.
Oh^ what a breadth, what mighty Port he bears;
A dozen Farms upon his back he wears.
Point de Venee must now adorn his Knees;
Whose Ancestors wore naught but homely Frieze.
^n a long Wig must our Sir Taudry strut^;
Whose Father wore the old Geneva-cut.
Dressing himself till noon the Fop must be,
The Royal Sovereign's sooner rig'd than he.
Each day he spends some hours before the Glass,
To make himself a most accomplished Ass.
Studies new Smiles and Cringes when alone,
And practices abroad what there was done;
Pride is the Mistress he does hourly serve,
His Ear is bored and he must never swerve:
Price, which to learn the Women but begin,
^n Men is grown a most habitual Sin.
Along the Park methinks I see him pass,
With formal steps he traverses the Grass;
^f any Ladies Eyes but toward him move,
He thinks, ( Vain Fool,) that they are with him in Love.
But if to advance, and to him come but nigh,
He gives 'em the kind squint and passes by;
Indeed he does it most Judiciously.
Then Spanish Snush, to Modish Nose is put,
At which Perfumed Handkerchief's drawn out;
T'adjust some bold disorder in the Face,
And put the Chin-patch in it proper place.
Then hums a Tune passing through the Streets
With his dear Friend, the brisk Sir Fopling meets;
With open Arms they embrace -- Dear Jack how is it?
Welcome from France, and then I think they kissed.
What News from Paris? Are the Ladies fine?
Shall we at Locket's Ordinary Dine?
What Novels, Songs, or Fashion have brought over,
Are the Ladies kind, I prithee Jack discover?
And thus does more Impertinence run through
Than ever Gossips at a Christning knew.
Nay -- it is not all his Huffing shall excuse,
The Bully from the Lash of angry Muse;
Bully, how great in the Mouth the Accent sounds;
Bully who nothing breaths but Bl -- -- -- d and W -- d^;
Some Devil did sure on Nature act a Rape,
And his own Likeness get in humane shape;
More Oaths and Curses not the Damned Vent,
Than from the Bully's Brimstone-Lungs are sent.
The Devil himself is all amazed to see,
A Wretch more impiously bold than he;
He for one daring Act was sent to Hell,
But the others loud G -- -- -- -- -- d D -- -- -- -- m's who can tell?
Like Tom a Bedlam he invades the Streets,
And Quarrels, Huffs, and Fights with all he meets.
But if that one whose Valor seems to stoop,
To Noise and Nonsense, take the Villain up;
And satisfaction for the Affront demand,
Sir Fright-All lowers his Top-sail to your hand.
Your Pardon Sir, says he, I must request,
By G -- -- -- I thought you would understood a Jest,
His Bilboe sh^ath'd he decently retires,
Tutor to young raw Fops and Country Squires,
Would you my Muse of Hell the Picture view,
And what distracted Looks the Damned show;
Go to some Gaming-Ordinary where,
Shamwell and Cheatly and such Rooks repair,
To sharp the City Prigg or Country- Heir.
Oaths loud as Thunder, shake the trembling Room,
And pointed Curses sign each others Doom.
The Pox, the Plague, and all the Ills that fall,
On wretched Mort^ls on themselves they call;
While they by the uncertain chance of Dice,
Lose Manors, Lands, and Lordships in a trice.
And what Old Gripe well, Scores of Years was getting,
I^ often at (...) in an (...) sitting*
The loss of Guineas proves the loss of sense.
^r against Chance how can there be Defense?
^nger, Despair and Fury fill the Face;
and Passion justles Reason out of Place.
^t last a Wretch with whom the Furies dwell,
(...) by a fatal thrust dismissed to Hell.
(...) inform old Nick, that all the rest agree,
^ortly to come and bear him Company.
The keeping Spark should next have been exposed,
^t that is a Text has one great Poet posed,
Satyr cannot fright him into shame,
those Presence damned the well-wrote Limber ham.
^ought have told what Arts and Tricks are laid,
^snare the virtuous young unthinking Maid.
What sly decoys are used t'intrap the Fair?
What trusty Pimp did in the Office share?
that Reverend Bands made use of to entice.
The Fair One's liking of that modish Vice?
^o^ she at last is guided to his Arms;
Where Victor like he triumphs in her Charms.
^o^ long she does the Airy Title hold,
and how her Joys are scarce a twelve Month old,
before kind Keeper takes another Miss;
^t sad experience knows too much of this.
My Task were endless, I should never stop;
^ere I obliged t'expose each sort of Fop.
^he rambling Fop from France but newly come,
that went out sound and brought Diseases home.
^he squeamish Fop so nice in all things grown,
(...) Courtly has his fellow Fools in Town.
The Lazy Fop that lies a Bed till Noon,
and wonders how he chanced to rise so soon:
The Fop which does to business make pretense,
^et never guilty known of too much Sense;
The City Fop that modish would appear,
and puts on Sword and Wig at Temple Bar.
The Cringing Fop that does to all Men bow;
The Sharping Fop that lives the Lord knows how*
The Noisy Fop would talk a Man to Death,
The Swearing Fop that lives on perjured Breath:
^ut hold -- I might as well attempt to show
that various Weeds on Banks of Nilus grow:
that sorts of Monsters Africks Deserts bear,
(...) tell how many sorts of Fops there are;
^e need not long be puzzled how to call Men,
(...) Fop is grown a common Name for all Men.
Forgetful Muse that amongst the Slaves that vex,
And daily torture our too harmless Sex,
You should forget that hateful Plague of Life,
Husband, the Constant Jailer of a Wife;
Husband -- the cursed Alotment of our Fate,
Husband, the thing which of all things we hate;
Fops plague us but by turns, and then they have done,
But Husbands Plagues are ever but begun;
And though each Day, we wish the Slavery done,
We find our Chains as constant as the Sun.
If Jealousy, That Maggot of the Pate,
Possess the Sot, how violent is his Hate?
What cursed Suspicions haunt his tortured Mind,
And make him look, for what he would not find?
To the Looking-glass he dare not cast an Eye,
For fear he should his fine Brow-Antlers Spy,
Nothing but Females must in the House appear,
And not a Dog or Cat that is Male be there:
Nay lest the unhappy Wife should have her Longings,
He cu^s out all the Men in the Tapstry-Hangings.
If but a harmless Letter to here is sent,
He Will make it own worse than ever it meant,
And ever the Letter from his hands be cast,
He Will make it speak some deadly Crime at last.
In a cursed Garret cloistered up for Life,
Lives Female-Innocence miscalled a Wife.
Denied those Pleasures are to Virtue granted,
Yet by the Devil of a Husband haunted:
For a Release, she cannot hope nor pray,
Till milder, Death take him, or her away:
If her she is happy -- and if him she is blessed;
Till to her Arms she take a second Guest:
But where is a Woman of all Sense so void,
Will Not shun --
That Gulf wherein she would like t've been destroyed
If Beauty, Wit, or Complaisance could do,
Here Is Woman that can all these Wonders show;
Beauty that might new Fire to Hermits lend,
And Wit which serves that Beauty to defend.
When courted, she did Wonders with her Charms,
Till Parson conjured her to Husbands Arms.
And though the same Perfections still remain,
Yet nothing now can the Dull Creature gain;
No Looks can win him, nor no Smiles invite;
The Wretch does her and her Endearments ^^ight;
And leaves those Graces which he should adore,
To dote upon some ugly Suburo Whore*
Whilst poor neglected Spouse remains at home,
With discontent and sorrow overcome.
No Prayers nor Tears, nor all the Virtuous Arts,
Which Women use to tame Rebellious Hearts
Can the Incorrigible Husband move,
And make him own his once so promised Love.
Consider, Lord! 'twould make his Head grow giddy,
He says he is not yet for Bedlam ready:
But the next time that you through Ludgate pass,
Through Grates you will see the loving Spend-All's Face*
And 'twill some Pleasure be the Wretch to view,
Angling for single Money in a Shoe.
Tell me you grave Disputers of the Schools,
You Learned Cox Combs, and you well-read Fools:
You that have told us Man must be our Head:
And made Dame Nature Pimp to what you have said,
Tell me when Husband drencht in Claret reels,
and slips by the Motion of his treacherous Heels.
That Head he has we all confess and own,
But what is the Head, when once the Sense is gone?
Oh! she is a happy, too too happy Bride,
That has a Husband snoring by her side:
^elching out Fumes of undigested Wine,
and lies all Night like a good-natured Swine:
Whose snoring serves for Music to her Ears;
and keeps true Consort with her silent Tears:
That can himself no more than Chaos move,
and still neglects the great Affair of Love.
^he may indeed assume the Name of Wife,
^ut others know she is but a Nurse for Life.
A Drunken Husband may pretend good Nature^
^ut here is a Sullen Matrimonial-Creature;
^ill, and will not, will ask, and will deny;
(...) Peevish, Cross, and cannot tell for why.
^ot one kind Look he will to Spouse afford,
^ot one kind Smile, perhaps not one good Word.
^ll the obliging Arts that she can use,
^o reconcile this angry peevish Spouse;
^vail no more, than if she took delight
(...) washing Bricks, or swarthy Negroes white,
^^ns and Tigers Men have learnt to tame,
^etaining nothing frightful but their Name:
^ith low Submission have their Keepers owned,
and trembled when their Masters have but frowned*
^t Man, unruly Man, that Beast of Reason,
^ainst Woman still continues in his Treason:
No Charms his damned ill nature can release,
Satan, must only Satan Dispossess.
Are these ye Gods, the Sov'reigns we must own?
Must we before these golden Galves bow down?
Forgive us Heaven if we renounce the Elves,
We'll make a Commonwealth among our selves:
Where, by the Laws that we shall then Ordain,
We'll make it Capital to mention Man.
Man, we'll for ever banish from our sight,
Not talk by day, nor think of them by night:
We'll shun their Courtship, as we'd do the Plague,
And loath 'em more, than they a toothless-Hag:
It Is not their Sighs, their Cringing nor their Prayers,
Their supple Whinings, nor their treacherous Tears.
That shall one kind Return for ever gain:
But when to oblige us they have done all they can,
We'll laugh, deride, and scorn the Foppish Sex;
And wrack Invention for new ways to vex.
Till they to shun us, prompted by Despair;
Or drown themselves, or hang in cleanly Air.
Thus when to Hell by Shoals the Men are hurled*
Women will Reign as Monarchs of the World.
But if amongst us there should chance to be,
On s^^ly fond regardless foolish She:
That spite of all our Edicts will maintain,
A League with that detested Creature Man:
Good Counsel first shall strive to bring her off;
But if the Fool with that good Method scoff;
We'll try what next our heavy Threa^'nings do;
But her cursed Treasons, if she still pursue.
If she the freedom of her Sex will leave,
And love a Wretch she knows that will deceive?
From Pity we'll exempt the Female Sot;
That wretched thing, a Husband be her Lot.
Jealous by Day, and Impotent by Night;
Have neither shape nor mein to please the Sight.
Diseased in Body and deformed in Soul,
Conceited, Proud, yet all the while a Fool.
Poor to a Proverb, Lazy, yet as Poor,
And still want Credit for to run on Score.
May she with him spin out a tedious Life;
Blessed with that much admired Title Wife.
And may no Female better Fate partake,
That dares profane the whols^m Laws we make.
FINIS.
THE Long Vacation: A SATYR. Addressed to all Disconsolate Traders.

LONDON: ^^inted and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-fryars, near the Waterside.
1709.

THE PREFACE.
TO all you Gentlemen (if so I may style you, since you are hardly well-bred,
and tell so many Lies every Day behind the Counter) who are born Cookneys, and
^ive within the Sound of Bow-Bell, I make these following Papers as a Present,
well knowing, that you now sit biting ^our Fingers in your Shops, or toying
with your Wives, and ^ave little or nothing to do. All the fine Birds are
flown, be Beau Monde have forsaken you, and what you get now, (...) believe, in
a whole Summer's Day, you may put in your Eyes, and 'twill no ways hinder you
from seeing your Horns, unless ^ou are fond of those Vipers which you hug in
your Bosoms; and ^re so wonderfully complaisant to your Wives that you will
give ^m no manner of Occasion to think you any ways troublesome and
impertinent, by having jealous Pates, or encroaching upon that Liberty and
Freedom, which your Wives, as Citizens ^hink, they have a Charter for.

Perhaps the following Lines may give you some Entertain^ent, or serve to amuse
you a While, 'till Fame's loud Trum^t shall echo a Victory to our Shore, which
will be more a^^eable to you, than those stolen Delights, which your Help^^^es
are now enjoying your absence, are to them. But, alas! ^^t most of you are
hornify'd, is no more News, (though you mentedly enough put the Disgrace in your
Pockets) than if ^y one should say, there is Bribery used in Elections; that
some the Parliament House are wiser than others; or that a young ^idow, who has
had the Pleasure of the shaking of the She^ts, ^^ls to be married again. Come,
come, take Heart of Grace, my Lads; don't be disconsolate; I make no Doubt, but
that you will shortly hear of a Battle, that will find you Yalk enough for all
the Vacation, and set your Tongues a moving as nimbly in every Coffee-house you
come at, as that of (...) Court-Lady somewhat overtaken with drinking
Harts-hor^ and Brandy.

As I said before, seeing you have little or nothing to do though you had rather
be accounted Cuckolds, than jealous Hu^ bands, yet it would not be amiss to
visit your Wives once ^ Week, that so by the Beating of their Pulse, you may
discove^ whether their Blood be in a Ferment or no, or when last their Bodies
had some unlawful Agitations. Besides, since Natu^ is very craving, and her
Wants must one Way or other be su^ply'd, it would be better for you to enjoy
the lawful Embrace of your own Spouses, than engender with that fulsome Crap^
which at this dead Time of the Year is left in Town.

I protest I almost pity you, and am sorry, that your Wiv^ should so impose
upon you. Some roaring Bully, or recruiti^ Officer in the Country, makes his
own Game with them; an^ Women are in one Respect the Reverse of the Turkey-Coc^
they are wonderful affected with a Red Coat. Since the your Shops are so empty
of Customers, and your Trade is so dea^ I would advise you to repent of all the
Lies that you told b^hind your Counters last Term, to make your Accounts up bo^
between God and Man; go to Church with a safe Conscience read the News
cheerfully; and since your Circumstances (...) present will not allow you to
drink Wine, fancy Tea and Coffe^ B^^rgundy and Campaign.

THE Long Vacation.
BLESS us! how silent is the noisy Gown?
How quiet are the Temples, Park, and Town?
As if Astraea (Great in Anna's Reign)
Had banished Law to some deserted Plain.
No Gouty J -- ce sits upon the Bench,
^ndulgent to a Bottle and a Wench;
Although his Reverend Garb, and Brow severe,
Promise his Morals, and his Sold austere.
Now sacred Peace, finds a secure Retreat
Where Laws and Justice held their awful Seat:
Not on Demurrers now the Sergeants drudge,
Nor crabbed Pleas detain the hungry Judge.
Each S -- now may rest in Elbow-Chair
His veterane Limbs, broke with nocturnal Care,
^n turning over Volumes, and the Fair.
No knotty Doubts his solid Ease beguile,
His Reverend Coke the dusty Cobwebs spoil:
Grave Littleton, and Leveing too, lie idle,
He reads them now no oftener than the Bible.
The jangling Laws, though insolently rude,
Dare not upon his peaceful Hours intrude.
Wine chears his Soul, and his obliging Eyes
show he is not dead to charming Mistresses;
Though at the Bar, in Term you would hardly think,
That he had Power enough to whore or drink;
But that the charming Beauties of the Fair,
Were far above his Notice, or his Care,
^uch Furrows in his aged Cheeks appear:
Yet ho's his Looks, an Air most solemn show,
His powdered Wig discovers he is a Beau;
And that when serious Business don't intrude,
His Worship can be both gallant and lewd.
THe C -- t's Kitchen, as his Brains is cold,
No longer now litigious Crowds make bold
To knock him up, and buy their Peace with Gold.
No more he sees his Chambers like a Fair,
Of Clients full, and never a Pauper there.
No longer now he props with noblest Wines
His Age, and at the Devil sups and dines.
Nor does the Porter light him to his Bed
'Twixt Twelve and One, by trusty Drawers led.
The Petty-fogger, who keeps such a House
Would starve a Church, or ancient College Mouse,
Hangs down his Ears, and now begins to miss
His sumptuous Meals, and Term-time Luxuries:
Just as his Looks, so does his Purse grow thin,
Paleness without, and Emptiness within.
Quickly he thinks it prudent to repair
To some convenient Seat for Country Air;
Carrying himself with Paultry present down,
His Board he spunges on some Rural Clown,
'Till the kind Term returns him to the Town.
Trusting in Impudence, which seldom fails,
Some silvane Nymph, perchance, the Fop assails.
The ruddy Maid at first receives his Flame,
And vows her Spark's a pretty Gentleman;
Though whatsoever he to his Mistress says,
Is stoll'n from D'Urfey's, or from Settle's Plays:
In vain he shows the abundance of his Sense,
And charms the Fair with borrowed Eloquence*
For soon malicious Fortune makes it clear,
That he is some paultry tricking Wappineer:
Good Gods! how dull his Courtship is! How lame^
How soon he quits his bold presumptuous Flame!
Winged with Disgrace, he flies the Hills and Groves,
And Valleys, conscious of his slighted Loves;
He hastes to Town, there meets what he deserves,
And twice two Months the Scoundrel Scribler starves;
^Till the returning Winter chears the Laws,
And the glad Term, a Scene of Business draws.
Thus, when the Woods, by some Autumnal Blast,
Their verdant Leaves, and shady Honors cast,
The sickening Trees, their ravished Beauties mourn,
^Till circling Hours the joyful Spring return;
^Till the warm Sun, with his resplendent Beams,
Thaws Nature's Bolts, and soon unlocks the Streams:
His vital Heat, the flowing Rills enlarge,
And the glad Fish from Icy Nets discharge.
So at the Appearance of the blooming Spring,
The Feathered Quoiristers rejoice and sing:
While they in Fields, their tuneful Notes prepare,
And with soft Music, bless the harmonious Air.
The weary Press, at Ease in Safety sleeps,
No supple Oil the Polished Iron keeps,
The Hawkers now we very rarely meet,
Faction and Treason venting in the Street.
From Will's and Tom's, the well-dress'd Youths are fled,
And Silence there with Poppies binds her Head.
To Country Seats the Men of Sense go down,
And for their rural Joys neglect the Town.
Some few sham Battles bellowed out at Night,
And Apparitions now the Mob affright.
Commets and Armies, fighting in the Air,
Seen by the Lord knows whom, the Lord knows where.
Our tuneful Bards, and Pamphleteers are fled,
Morphew and Brag protest their Trade is dead.
Upon the Stage no newborn Scenes arise,
No Lightnings flash from Imoinda Eyes.
The Bastard's Blood not injured Edgar spills,
^o save a Father, not a Brother kills:
Nor yet blind Gloucester's sad Intent defeats,
And his rash Sire with pious Falsehood cheats;
Near Elsenore, nor Hamlet's regal Ghost,
Speaks to his Son on young Horatio's Post;
Themselves, not Aetius, or Lucina kill,
The passive Subjects to a Tyrant's Will.
With lawless Fires, nor does not Barry burn,
And lewdly act the Daughter of the Sun.
No captive Bajazet, or Heroes storm;
No Desdamona, with Angelick Form,
Is doomed (most lovely as she is) to die,
For her Othello's hot-brained Jealousy.
No lost Statira, with her blooming Charms,
Ensnares Great Phillip's from Wars and Arms:
No different passions now the Hero move,
And wreck his Soul 'twixt Empire and Love.
Here no Sir Fopling, with his modish Dress,
Laughs at the Age's monst'rous Fopperies,
No merry Beggars here their Revels keep;
The Poets starve, and the nine Sisters sleep.
Far from the Town the fair Camilla fled,
To Tunbridge, there the rural Grass to tread.
Arsinoe, the Theater forsakes,
And from Augusta far her Lodging takes.
The Actors too, must take the pleasant Air,
To Oxford some, to Sturbridge some repair,
And quite debauch the hopeful Students there.
There in some Country Shed, --
The Tinfel Kings contentedly lie down,
And quite forget the Business of a Crown.
No costly Wines, their wondering Gust surprise,
Brandy and Ale their Royal Thirst suffice;
And when their Hearts by nappy Bowls made light,
Some ruddy Blouze sprawl in their Arms at Night;
Whose vigorous Race are well by Fate decreed,
To help our Peers, and mend St. -- 's Breed.
The British Beauties, now in Crowds resort
Within Vinsoria's Walls, or Hampton Court,
Where Royal Anna keeps her stately Seat,
And free from Crowds, enjoys a soft Retreat.
Some to the Bath most cautiously repair,
To keep their Beauties from polluted Air;
And blooming Nature Fence from fatal Shocks,
Both of the lesser and the greater Pox:
There they a thousand Pangs and Joys impart,
And with sure Arrows wound the boldest Heart:
There they display the Glories of their Eyes,
And make unguarded Man a Sacrifice;
Between their Bed, the Toylet and their Glass,
And giving Visits, all their Moments pass:
The admire the Beaus and are by them admired,
With equal Charms the wanton Crowd is fired:
They laugh, they sport, they dance, they toy and sing,
No days nor Hours the Fops to Reason bring.
Here Cloe once most insolently coy,
Who hated Love, and Love's surprising Joy;
She, who in Town, the fiercest Storms withstood,
Plainly discovers now she is Flesh and Blood,
And gives her Virgin-Treasure, which before
She valued higher than the glittering Store
Of Tagus Golden Sands. --
Athiests and Parsons here, alike repair,
To drink the Waters, and imbibe the Air:
Bawds, Matrons, Punks, commend the pregnant Steel;
But something else the fertile Ladies feel.
Sharpers, at Dice, consume the wasting Day;
The Fair for something else than Money play:
And when vast Sums these lovely Losers set,
They, with their Persons, pay the desperate Debt.
They Cit to Epsom brings that Chain of Life,
That saucy, scolding Termagant, his Wife;
Where, for two Months, that she may gay appear,
He spends the future Gains of half a Year.
Whatever the Hills or richer Vales produce,
The Swains prepare for her luxurious Use.
Mutton the Downs, Case-Hanton Trouts afford,
And every Park finds Ven'son for her Board.
But little thinks the wild expensive Fair,
What fertile Ills her Vanities prepare.
Twice ever the fiery Coursers of the Sun,
Have viewed each Pole, (their annual Labor done)
In the Queen's-B^nch we shall her Husband meet,
In Ludgate locked, or Prisoner in the Fleet.
Commissioned Harpies his Effects shall claim,
And the Gazette shall publish thrice his Name.
But fearless now of Dangers unforeseen,
He haunts the Walks, the Coffee-house, and Green.
Waters and Wine do all his Hours divide,
Heated and cooled by their alternate Tide.
With Mirth and Wine the uxorious Coxcomb drunk,
Little Regards his dear dissembling Punk,
Who, to the crowded Playhouse, amongst the Beaus,
Resorts, or else to New Spring-Garden goes:
For here the famous Powell.
Roscius of the Age,
In tragic Buskins treads the rural Stage.
The ancient Bards in long lost Plays revive,
And by their Wit, the industrious Actors thrive.
Each conscious Scene the amorous Jilt admires,
And in her Bosom, feels extinguished Fires.
For some loose Actor's brawny Back she burns,
Is lewd again, and her hot Fit returns.
Gods! how she praises Valentinian's Shape,
And sighing, wishes chaste Lucina's Rape!
With that fierce Joys could she One of the Libertines Companions.
Antonio meet,
Was he not quite so lewd, and more discreet!
For bold Almanzor's Strength the Wanton dies,
And views his Action with desiring Eyes.
When the gay Scenes are over, the Fair retreat
To silent Shades, where they their Lovers meet;
And in fresh Raptures, all their Joys repeat.
The Country 'Squire makes his Acquaintance drunk,
And falls enamored on some London Punk,
Who sets the rustic Coxcomb all on Fire,
And Warms his Breast with impudent Desire.
Hither the Covent Garden Crack repairs,
With bought Complexion, and with borrowed Hairs*
And while her Spark whole Towns to Ashes turns,
His Dam'sel here intriguing Coxcombs burns.
At first, my Lord, with a reluctant Frown,
Pulls up her Clothes and throws the Wanton down*
But when Necessity and Want assail,
Interest and Gain above her Pride prevail:
On easy Terms she will on the Grass be still,
And let his Lordship's Butler kiss his Fill.
The smiling Semptress now her Shop forsakes,
Here vents her Ware, and better Bargains makes.
Here in unlawful Joys, and stoll'n Delight,
Both Rich and Poor spend the polluted Night.
The Bankrupt Vintners starve for want of Trade,
Few Payments now are to the Merchants made.
Score in the Bar, the Master seldom bawls,
Nor little Bell, the tardy Drawer calls.
Rarely the Cook now Cutlets broils of Veal,
But unemploy'd, into the Cellar steals:
There she and Tom, to broach a Cask combine,
And against a Butt she spills her Master's Wine.
Few drunken Catches now at Night we hear,
Sad pensive Looks in every Post appear:
Their Dragon, Horns, and Fish neglected lie,
And all the Rubies in their Faces die.
No dirty Feet pollute their cleanly Floors,
Nor three for two the sleepy Mistress scores:
Whilst new-come Guests, past one, disturb her Nap,
And to get in, at the closed wicket rap.
Their Brewings, Mixtures, all are at a Stand,
And their Pricked Cider, frets upon their Hand.
The Merchant now to rural Village runs,
Enjoys the Country Air, and scapes his Duns;
Who only now can teaze him by the Post,
For Goods exported in the Tygar, lost.
The buzzing Change, and Gresham's Walks grow thin,
Catch-poles without, and Brokers sweat within.
Few others to the stately Dome repair,
Now unfrequented as a House of Prayer.
Guy's Infantry unarmed, and idle stands,
No Quarts or Glasses tire their trembling Hands.
To Jonathan's but few Stock-Jobbers go,
They only meet to forge good News, or so.
The Quack forbears to swell the Weekly Bills,
And avaritious Death but slowly kills.
Fevers can scarce the Doctor's Room supply,
And cheap and honestly the Vulgar die.
The Sexton groans to view his rusty Spade,
And greedy Curates moan their Want of Trade*
The Bearers sigh, and the sad Passing Bell
Bur rarely now the Deads Departure tell.
Late to the Park no whining Beaus repair,
And tell their Passion to the amorous Fair:
No burning Flambeaux light the dolesome Shade,
Nor Waxen Beams strike through the verdant Glade.
The fierce Patroul, which march the Rounds by Night,
Wild Ducks and Geese their sole Spectators fright.
Round the Canal no new-made Prints appear;
No cooing Lovers in the Grove we hear;
The waking Soldiers only guard the Deer.
On the Parade no haughty Col'nels meet,
In Order to consult where they may eat;
Or to advise who sells the noblest Wine,
And where from Duns they may securely dine.
Young Ensigns now at Man's no longer swear,
Nor cully'd Gamesters fret and wrangle there.
Trick-track and Basset now no longer please,
And Cards are banished, but from Refugees.
The Parson in a melancholy Tone
Harrangues at Church, now half his Flock is gone.
Each Reverend Accent now neglected falls,
C -- prays, and P -- d to little purpose bawls.
His numerous Parish various Journeys take,
These for the Bath, and those for Tunbridge make;
And the lost Sheep their past'ral Lord forsake.
The B -- s to their proper Sees repair,
For Conscience some, and some for Country Air,
And grace with Lawn, their rich Cathedral-Chair.
B --, whose Tongue is merry and divine,
Cannot to the Town, his wandering Lambs confine.
His pretty Audience crowd to Hudsons-Lane,
And the Saint-Player, yields to the Profane.
The godly, conscientious Holder-forth,
For rural Pleasure, leaves the Bull and Mouth,
And lodges at some Country Quaker's Inn,
Moved by the Spirit, and the Light within,
Where holy Sister, with religious Seed
Is fructify'd, and bears a pious Breed.
Others to Bristol's noted Fair retreat,
And with a pious Fraud, the Ungodly cheat.
But nobler Youth, a lovelier Game pursue,
And at St. Edmund's Virgin-Beauties view,
Whose natural Blushes raise ungoverned Fires,
And warm the Wildest with sincere Desires.
From Hills and Vales a Tide of Beauty flows,
And a new Spring the glittering Meadow shows.
Their lovely Bloom takes the most guarded Heart,
And Nature framed 'em in Despite of Art.
The lovesick Beaus with real Passion burn,
Unhurt they came, but wounded Home return*
Wisdom nor Power the Great or Wise secure,
Where Beauty wounds, and Fame denies a Cure*
No wanton Art their firm Affections win,
Scorn rules without, and Honor guards within;
Their equal Minds no troubled Passions try,
But all is serene as the superior Sky.
Here Love does all his keenest Darts prepare,
And keeps a Magazine in every Fair.
At lovelier Breasts never Cupid bent his Bow,
Nor stronger Charms Arabian Virgins know;
Though when their Joys Great Mecca's Priest did prove,
He found a Heaven, and fixed its Bliss in Love.
With Eyes like theirs, Venus did once persuade
The Trojan Youth, when he for Love betrayed
High Ilium's Towers, and low his City laid;
On Venus only he conferred the Prize,
For matchless Beauty, and bewitching Eyes.
But should once more that amorous Swain revive,
And over the Seas at Bury Fair arrive,
Not one alone would claim the Prize, but all,
And each he would judge deserved the Golden Ball.
To Granta's Str^ams the studious Youths retreat,
Where Arts profane, and sacred Knowledge meet;
And where the Muses chu^e their Halcyon Seat.
Learning, by Chance, to other Climes resorts,
But here she keeps her sage eternal Courts.
To her Apartments, all Admittance find,
Whose pleasing Fetters circumscribe the Mind:
Her Labor, Nature's dark Recesses shows,
And the coy Maid, by Time, familliar grows.
Through every Maze, Art sees the Virgin clear,
And her bright Charms without a Vail appear.
There Galen's Sons learn Paan's balmy Skill,
Use wholesome Medicines, and forget to kill:
The various Force of Trees and Plants they know,
From the tall Cedar, to the Shrubs below.
The Seeds of Things these Reverend Sages tell,
Why Roses sweet as Indian Spices smell;
Whence lofty Elms by Ivy are entwined.
Why in deep Slumbers drossy Poppies bind;
Why potent Opiats stop the haughty Pride
Of raging Pests, and cool Life's purple Tide;
Whence lazy Colds heat the fermenting Blood;
And why the Bark stagnates the boiling Flood;
What Accidents give Plagues and Fevers Birth;
Which scorch these mouldring Tenements of Earth;
The Scurvy, what malignant Atoms breed;
What swelling Springs the tumid Dropsy feed.
^^lomon, the Royal Simpler by the Almighty taught,
Who first prescribed, and Cures predestined wrought,
With readier Art could scarce the Sick relieve,
Or sooner Health to wounded Patients give,
^han skilful Leaches, who, near Cambridge.
Granta's Shore,
nature inspect, and all her Powers explore.
Others to bolder Themes their Thoughts direct,
and all the Wonders of the Sky detect;
their Art explains --
How angry Winds the Heavens with Horror shake,
And laboring Clouds with dreadful Thunder break;
Why Lightning flashes from the Realms above,
And Streams of Fire in rapid Torrents move;
Whence bearded Meteors threaten in the Sky,
And shed their baleful Influence as they fly;
What powerful Force the Alps asunder breaks,
And why the Earth with dire Convulsions quakes.
From Realms above they view the hoary Deep,
Where mighty Stores the Mother Waters keep;
Where murmuring Thetis lulls her infant Waves,
Beneath Earth's Bottom, and her farthest Caves;
Where Night and Horror bear eternal Sway,
Secure from Light, and radiant Beams of Day.
There these dark Powers their dusky Godheads hide.
And wrapped in Mists, their sooty Empire guide.
There sacred Bards in humble Cells confined,
Sore through the Heavens with their aspiring Mind.
Homer, the Brave, to War and Battles warns,
Urges the slothful, and the timorous Arms.
A^acreon there, does the Recluses move
To soft Delight, and Sapho bids them love.
Hesiod, the Birth does of the Gods rehearse,
And fictious Powers immortal, prove by Verse.
It Is he to Jove, that does his Thunder give,
The Poet makes the Cloud-Compeller live.
Pindar, in bold unimitable Strains,
Soars high, and towering wings the Aetherial Plains*
A thousand Joys the safe Collegiates please,
And bless their Hours with Happiness and Ease.
Did but the Crowd, which in Augusta dwells,
Taste the soft Bliss of these retired Cells,
The Term's Approach, the instructed Youth would fear*
And a Vacation wish throughout the Year.
FINIS.
THE Yorkshire-Racers, A POEM. ^n a LETTER from H -- -- -- -- S -- -- -- -- --
-- -- ton, to his Friend T -- -- -- -- -- P -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- n.

LONDON. ^nted for the Use of all Sorts of Iockeys, whether North, South, East,
or West.

THE Yorkshire-Racers.
FRet not, dear TOM, that thou have lost the Race;
You showed good Skill, and rid it with a Grace.
But some must lose; and since it was your Fate,
Envy not those, whose Luck has won the Plate:
Your Friends and ours their utmost Skill did show;
And as you jockey'd us, we jockey'd you.
Lord D.
PROBUS came first, and rid it like the Wind;
The slower Racers whipped and spurred behind.
A well-bred Horse, his Fore-hand is but course,
With a slack he Rein distanc'd every Horse.
His Feeding's good, his Airing's clear and pure;
He moves with Order, and his Steps are sure.
He Is tender-mouth'd, managed with easy Bit;
Runs true to the last, and has no reisty Fit;
Keeps the right Track, and scorns to glent aside;
None can a truer English Horse bestride.
Sir W. S.
EUCUS came next, a battered fiery Steed,
Descended from the old Cromwellian Breed.
He yells and neighs, and in Horse-language swears,
Snorts, paws, and champs, rouses his Ass's Ears:
But what is worse, he is maukeen, and half mad,
Has tasted Blood, and must by Blood be fed.
This foundered Stallion, gentle as a Bear,
May serve to horse some course East riding Mare;
Or being spavin'd, wind-gall'd, full of Flaws,
May make a Pack-Horse for the good old Cause:
H's run his last, his racing Days are done,
And leaves his Virtues to an hopeful Son.
Mr. D.
AULUS came next, a right New Market Crimp,
He runs off fast, but has a plaguey Limp;
A Hinch in's Gate, (as in the North we cry)
Sometimes he stumbles, often he treads awry.
Backed by old ROKUS, and his Pagan Crew,
Went off so fast, he did not run, but flew;
But soon his Sinews failed, his Pastorns feeble grew;
L -- d W*
ROKUS did manage well on AULUS Side,
Gawster'd and bawled, and often swore and ly'd;
Vowed him an Horse of noble Stud and Breed;
But none who ROKUS knew, will ROKUS heed;
An errant Jockey, born to lie and cheat;
He never rid true, nor carried Horse-man's Weight;
By Fraud he thrives, by Villainy grows great.
Sir A. K.
CAIUS run well, and bravely rid his Course,
He started last, but proved a true-bred Horse;
Runs light and fine; for the next Plate he will show
A Pair of Heels to distance EUC. and AU.
His Training's good, his Limbs are fine and clear,
No knavish Wind-galls do in him appear.
The modern Spavins have not made him limp,
Nor the Court-Jokeys matched him for a Crimp*
Runs true to the last, his Wind no Taint has got,
Amongst Racers now an epidemick Fau't.
His Sire was staunch, of honest English Breed,
Sure then the Colt will have both Truth and Speed!
Mr. W.
LENTO came lagging on, a formal Steed,
Of Spanish Gravity, and Spanish Speed;
His Steps he counts, and numbers every Stroke,
As if he were in Cavalcade to walk;
Or measuring out the Course with sober Stride,
Whilst whipped and spurred the Racers by him ride*
In pompous City-Triumph he may do,
Wear the great Saddle at a Lord-May'r's Show;
But for a Northern Race he is much too slow.
Courage he wants, with active Speed and Fire,
The noble Virtues of his martyred Sire:
Honest, but slow; a true Festina Lent,
If matched again, the Odds to one, are twenty.
The tawny Mr. L*
OSMAN, sprung from Turkish Sire,
A Beast unruly, full of Flame and Fire;
Never well-broke, impatient of his Rein,
Champs on the Bit, bounces, and fumes amain;
Scorns to be rid, or trained, an headstrong Horse,
By Chance has won a little paultry Course.
The Race he would lost, had not JOCUNDO lent
His winning Whip, and lashed him as he went:
For though he cracks of Native Speed and Heels,
He Is only swift in Wickedness and Ills.
For the next Plate he will spare no Pains or Cost,
Though often he runs of the wrong Side of the Post.
Mr. W.
SANCTO run strong, and strained him till he stard
Fear and Disorder in his Looks appeared.
Grim OSMAN swore, and zealous SANCTO prayed;
Yet at the Bottom SANCTO's but a Jade:
The Rascal Principles lurk in his Blood,
And Nature Education has withstood;
Not worth a Button, should he OSMAN beat,
He Will prove a Crimp, that is ( Anglice) a Cheat.
A merry Greek we may Sir J. B. of P.
JOCUNDO call,
Fearless of Danger, Sprightly, Runs at all;
Treads safe, and at the Bottom's true and good,
Though late he wore the Liv'ry Cloths and Hood;
With Curb some thought to have rid this bonny Steed,
Taught him to pace and amble, as They did;
Made him a Stalking-Horse, a Pad of State,
To Neigh, or as they please, Vociferate.
JOCUNDO scorned to Bray, or be their Ass,
So lost his Liv'ry, and was turned to grass.
^n Time to come, kind Fate the Wheel may move,
That he a Charging-Horse against some may prove.
Oh! that my silly Pencil could depaint
This Course betwixt JOCUNDO, TURK, and SAINT.
Here Palmestry and mystic Arts were tried,
With Buttocking, or else they are belied;
Here Scarves, silk Stockings, Stays, and silver Ladles,
Were Stirrops helpful to get into the Saddles.
Mr. A. and Mr. S.
QUAERE and CALCAR both at Rippon.
Noppir run,
The interloping Sir R. B.
TIT was quite undone;
At double Distance poorly did he move,
Yet did his best to please his L -- d W.
Lord above.
Spur-gall'd and cut, from Neck to Buttock flee'd,
This poor pretending Colt is almost dead;
Besides his Stable-Room and Keeping are unpaid.
Thus aspiring Tools are whipped and spurred,
To gratify some proud insulting L -- d,
Who to their Sores and Galls no Bal^am will afford.
CALCAR's a well-bred Colt, and true may ride,
If glittering Baubles turn him not aside.
His Sire runs well, and keeps a steady Course;
Then CALCAR, sure, may prove an useful Horse.
Old A. B. -- p of Y.
ORTHODOX, the Gray, was CALCAR's Sire,
A noted Steed for Vigor, brisk as Fire;
An early Courage did his Fame advance
Against the Bulls of Rome, and Wolves of France.
Though now he is bent by Years, and Cares oppressed,
And sometimes kicked by an unruly Beast:
The old English Course he keeps, gads not astray,
Jumps over each little Saw-pit in the Way,
Contemns each Ass, though loudly he may Bray.
In highest Stall his Merits do him place,
And spite of Malice, is an Horse of Grace.
Where the old Knaresborough.
Chaos sits in awful State
Mr. B. and Mr. S.
QUADRATO and ROTUNDO won the Plate.
Here Rocks from lapidescent Juices grow,
From healing Fountains, Life and Vigor flow,
And barren Females pregnant Secrets show.
Prancing QUADRATO here is Loved and known;
His Courage gives him Praise, his Speed Renown.
This Seahorse once Leviathan attacked,
Had hooked his Nose, had he been fairly backed;
But the Great Monster broke the harping Line;
For in his Aid, the Gramps and Sea-Calves join,
And Terrene Knav'ry, pleads for Villainy Marine.
Thus fared it with QUADRATE. Thrice happy we,
Would every Courser Courage show like thee!
Or would ROTUNDO's Arts like thine appear,
But Problem hard the Circle is to square,
Or make a Roundhead turn a Cavalier.
Mr. J. of K. Mr. M. of A.
RAW-HEAD and BLOODY-BONES, two frightful Steeds,
Of equal Parts, of equal Heels and Heads;
Both by Dame Nature blended in a Bowl,
A double Body, but a single Soul.
This, like a solid Dumplin, boiled in Pot,
That, like a Fritter, best when piping hot.
For sober Parts, this does Advancement find;
That for the illustrious Glories of his Mind.
This casts the Water of a sickly State;
That Judgment gives, all Oracle of Fate,
And yet but one identical Clod-pate.
Thus have I seen the Head of COLLY's Son,
By skilful Cook, split, and made two from one;
The pale Side boiled, the other grill'd with Bread,
This taught to judge, and this to talk and plead,
Yet both were one Original Calve's-head.
The Isurian Plate this noble Pair has won,
By Duke D. of N.
HOLDF ASTO trained and taught to run.
The Ebraukian Race the two York, Sir W. R. and Mr. B.
VOLANTO'S gain;
They neither whipped, nor spurred, nor made one Strain,
But half-bred Horses, gallop as they please,
And both infected with the same Disease.
Their Wind's not good, they seldom gallop true;
They trot, and pace, canter, and amble too.
They will not gallop fine; and what is more,
They Are apt to put the wrong Foot often before.
Were they well managed by a Man of Skill,
Way'd to the Course, and galloped true and well,
They Would win the Plate, and bear away the Bell.
For the small Brasian Plate Malton, Mr. S.
LEPULLUS run;
A Course which often his headstrong Sire had won.
A promising Colt, of hopeful Heels and Speed,
But Faults often lurk in the paternal Seed;
From vicious Stallions, ill-bred Colts proceed.
With him old Mr. P.
SACCAR as a Colleague joins,
Weak in the Gaskins, feeble in the Loins,
All patched and paultry, a New Market Cheat,
Battered and foundered both in Head and Feet.
He never runs true, at every Turn gets Ground,
In others Losses still his Gain he found;
But Good ill-got, prove rotten and unfound.
Mr. S. and Mr. P's Antagonists.
TANDEM and SLY against them both contend;
And TANDEM stakes both for himself and Friend.
Their utmost Skill these noted Jockeys show,
As far as Yorkshire Horsemanship can go:
From different Posts the various Racers start;
The dubious Plate is claimed on either Part;
And different Judges, chose on either Side,
All shout, they have won, and Victory is cried.
Mr. J. a Coalgetter.
CARBONO the sole Arbiter is made,
For Fosse Sapientiae guards his Head;
Yet Courage fails, and his poor Heart's afraid.
Thus private Interest makes Men Dastards grow;
Some own a God above, some Lords below,
To the Great HIPPODROME all is now referred,
Where Causes for Affection often are heard;
Where biased Judges rule; and what is worse,
Determine Races as they like the Horse;
Where he who wins, a Loser often is made,
And a good Horse is voted but a Jade,
And selling Wind, is grown a thriving Trade.
Cunning CARBONO now the Cause transfers
From's own Tribunal, to the Senator's.
CARBONO is a spick and span new 'Squire,
The Cent'ral Son of subterranean Sire,
And, Salamander like, subsists by Fire;
True Heir to PLUTO, VULCAN's eldest Son,
Who through the Abyss, long Voyages have run
Without the Guidance of the Stars or Moon;
Seen Mother Chaos in her native Bed.
Before she would washed her Hands, or combed her Head;
Beheld the Elements in Rubbish lie,
Ever this was taught to sink, and that to fly.
Here he his Option made; the Choice was Fire,
The Patient granted, as he did require.
Hence he the Force of Winter-Rage does tame,
And chilling BOREAS dreads his powerful Name;
He masters all the Strength of Ice and Snow,
Can, with his Breath, the frozen Mountains thaw;
He Greenland into Italy can turn;
And, CAESAR like, he will conquer, or he will burn.
The fiery Element he does supply,
And at his Pleasure, Man must starve or fry.
No smoaky Idol ever was adored
Like this infernal Necromantick L -- d.
Vast Caravans attend his Court each Hour,
And darling Wealth into his Bosom pour;
From every Part his humble Vot'ries come,
Empty their Purses, yet go loaded Home.
His Power is great, Armies he can command,
And from the Stygian Lake calls his Train-band.
Grim PLUTO trembles, if he do but srown,
And the black Regions scarce dare call his own.
Fear's an Invasion from his dreadful Power,
And finds his Scepter sinking every Hour.
Thus does CARBONO keep both Worlds in Awe,
Above he domineers, and rules below.
The sulfurous Damps stifle my tender Muse,
Some nobler Subject gladly would she choose;
Her Wings grow heavy, and her Flight is low,
And want of Strength her feeble Pinions show;
Fain would she breathe a while, and try her Skill,
To plume herself, and prune each weary Quill;
That the heroic TACKERS she may praise,
And crown their Mem'ries with immortal Bays.
The Subject's great, requires a towering Flight,
And calls for all that is excellent and bright.
To draw their Acts, requires a Master's Hand,
And DOLL's or KNELLER's Pencil may command.
My feeble Colors never can express
Their sterling Courage, Truth, and Steadiness;
Immortal Heroes of the darling Tribe.
Since CAESAR'S only CAESAR'S can describe,
Let me the Sketches of their Virtue draw,
Those Out-Lines with true English Courage show.
The unfinished Piece I Will leave to some great Hand,
Whose Pencil livelier Colors can command.
When Virtue was a Crime, you durst be good,
Firm to the Church, and steady to your God,
And true, when Truth was neither seen, felt, heard, nor understood.
You scorned the Frowns of C -- t, despised the Great,
Opposed the rampant Villainy of Fate;
God and his Church's Cause you never sold,
^or bartered off your Consciences for Gold;
You shared not in the Gains of public Chink,
Nor at exorbitant Accounts would wink;
^or damned the Bill to make us just and true,
^ypocrisy to quash, and Sin undo.
^ou strove to make us honest, if you could;
^ut we rebelled, and all your B -- withstood;
^ttl'd Hypocrisy, our Folly chose,
^id Gospel-Decency with Zeal oppose,
and made Men Atheists by new A -- -- -- -- s and L -- -- -- -- s.
^ur Freeborn Right to Sin we did maintain,
^llow'd dissembling both with God and Man;
As our Forefathers for BARABBAS cried,
The saving JESUS we have crucified;
Old MVGGLETON we have made a Babe of Grace,
LAELIUS SOCINUS claims a nobler Place;
GEORGE FOX's Gospel with St. JOHN's may vie,
And TOLAND's Faith exclude all Mystery.
On a safe Level every Sect does stand,
And S -- e^ Protection justly may command.
Hail, Master, crucify, are now the same,
And Christian is an odd and motely Name.
The woven Coat is patched with Shreds and Rags,
And Jockey now of Grace and Saint-ship brags.
To Unity and Peace we have bid good Night,
And learnt to praise the Deeds of forty eight.
We shape Religion as we shape our Clothes,
And daily strive to advance the good old Cause.
Here GOG and MAGOG their sly Interests join
With buckram Quaker, and soft Libertine.
Old LOYOLA the saving Jump puts on,
And LESSIUS calls the independent Son.
SUAREZ and CALVIN Hand in Hand do walk,
Covering their Knav'ry with the self same Cloak.
Impunity and Safety are the Word,
We value not our Enemies a T -- d.
Briars and Thorns no longer are a Curse,
By spick and span new Laws these Shrubs we nurse.
The harmless Nettle now has lost its Sting,
JACK Presbyter can cry, God save the King.
Thus by the Rules of modern Policy,
Scaffold and Ax are Signs of Loyalty.
But you these growing Villainies foresaw;
Aimed to secure us by a wholesome Law,
Did all that noble Patriots could invent,
To serve the Queen, the Church, and Government.
We loathed our Manna, did your Acts despise,
And scorned, by former sufferings, to grow wise.
Fostered they lie like Serpents in our Breasts,
'Till Warmth shall both erect their Stings and Crests.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of Poems, etc. Printed and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-Fryars, near
the Waterside; where several more may be had that are not here Inserted.
A Congratulatory Poem on Prince George of Denmark, etc. on the Success at Sea.
Marlborough Still Conquers. The Flight of the Pretender. Honesty in Distress, a
Tragedy. The Kit-Cats a Poem, etc. Wine, a Poem, etc. Cider, with the Splendid
Shilling. The Pleasures of a Single Life, etc. Faction Displayed. Moderation
Displayed. The Duel of the Stags. etc. Coopers-Hill, by Sir J. Denham. An Essay
on Poetry, by the Earl of Murlgrave. Absalom and Achitophel. The Plague of
Athens. A Satyr against Man and Woman. The Forgiving Husband. Instructions to
Vanderbank. The Temple of Death. An Essay on Translated Verse, by the Earl of
Roscomon. Horace: Or the Art of Poetry. The History of Insipids. The
Swan-Trip-Club. Lucretius on Death, etc. The Medal against Sedition.
Bellizarius a great Commander. Daphnis, or a Pastoral Elegy, etc. A Poem on the
Countess of Abingdon. Nundinae Sturbrigiences. Tunbrigialia. An Ode on the
Incarnation, etc. Hoglandiae Descriptio. Milton's Sublimity on Cider.
Bosworth-feild, by Sir John Beaumount, Bar. Canary Birds Naturalized. Art of
Poetry, by Boileau. Poems on the Death of the late Queen Mary. Baucis and
Philemon, etc. Circus, a Satyr: Or the Ring in Hide Park. St. James's Park, a
Satyr. The Spleen, a Pindarique Ode, etc. Philips's Pastorals. A Letter from
Italy, to my Lord Halifax, with other Poems. Blenheim, a Poem, by Phillips.
Mac-Flecknoe, by J. Dryden; etc. The Female Reign, an Ode, A Poem on the Taking
St. Mary's. Windsor Castle, a Poem. The Servitor, a Poem. The Campaign, by Mr.
Addison. The Counter-Scuffle, a Poem. Don Francisco Sutorioso. Consolation to
Mira mourning, A Panegyric on Oliver Cromwell, with three Poems on his Death. A
Poem in Defense of the Church of England. The Apparition, a Poem. The Hind and
Panther Transvers'd to the Story of the Country Mouse and City Mouse. Dr.
Gath's Dispensary. Memoirs on John Hall, the Famous Robber, etc. Mr Shaftoe's
Narrative giving an Account of the Birth of the Pretended Prince of Wales, etc.
The True-Born Englishman. The Husband, a Poem. The Commoner, a Poem. A Hymn to
the Pillory. The Rambling Fudle-Caps. D'Foe, on the Storm. The Wife, a Poem.
The Long Vacation.
LUCRETIUS: A POEM AGAINST THE Fear of Death.

WITH AN ODE In MEMORY of The Accomplished Young Lady Mrs. ANN KILLIGREW,
Excellent in the ^wo Sister Arts of Poetry and Painting.

LONDON: ^^inted and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-Fryars, near the Waterside,
1709. Price One Penny.

LUCRETIUS A POEM AGAINST The Fear of Death
WHat has this Bugbear Death to frighten Man,
If Souls can die, as well as Bodies can?
For, as before our Birth we felt no Pain
When punick Arms infested Land and Main,
When Heaven and Earth were in Confusion hurled
For the debated Empire of the World,
Which awed with dreadful Expectation lay,
Sure to be Slaves, uncertain who should sway:
So, when our mortal Frame shall be disjoined,
The lifeless Lump, uncoupled from the Mind,
From Sense of Grief and Pain we shall be free;
We shall not feel, because we shall not Be.
Though Earth in Seas, and Seas in Heaven were lost,
We should not move, we only should be tossed.
Nay, even suppose when we have suffered Fate,
The Soul could feel in her divided state,
What Is that to us, for we are only we
While Souls and Bodies in one Frame agree?
Nay, though our Atoms should revolve by chance,
and Matter leap into the former Dance;
Though time our Life and Motion could restore,
and make our Bodies what they were before.
What Gain to us would all this bustle bring,
The new made Man would be another thing;
Then once an interrupting pause is made,
That Individual Being is decayed.
^e, who are dead and gone, shall ^ear no part
(...) all the Pleasures, nor shall feel the smart,
Which to that other Mortal shall accrue,
Whom of our Matter Time shall mould anew.
^or backward if you look, on that long space
^f Ages past, and view the changing Face
^f Matter, tossed and variously combined
(...) sundry Shapes, it is easy for the mind
from thence to infer, that Seeds of things have been
(...) the same Order as they now are seen:
Which yet our dark Remembrance cannot trace,
because a pause of Life, a gaping space
^as come betwixt, where Memory lies dead,
and all the wandering Motions from the Sense are fled.
^or whosoe'er shall in Misfortunes live
Must Be, when those Misfortunes shall arrive;
and since the Man who Is not, seels not Woe,
For Death exempts him, and wards off the Blow,
Which we, the living, only feel and bear)
What is there left for us in Death to fear?
When ocne that pause of Life has come between,
^is just the same as we had never been.
and therefore if a Man bemoan his Lot,
that after Death his mouldring Limbs shall rot,
(...) Flames, or Jaws of Beasts devour his Mass,
^now he is an unsincere, unthinking Ass.
^ secret Sting remains within his mind,
The Fool is to his own cast Offals kind;
^e boasts no sense can after Death remain,
^et makes himself a part of Life again,
^s if some other He could feel the pain.
If, while he live, this Thought molest his Head,
What Wolf or Vulture shall devour me dead.
He wastes his Days in idle Grief, nor can
Distinguish 'twixt the Body and the Man:
But thinks himself can still himself survive;
And what when dead he feels not, feels alive.
Then he repines that he was born to die,
Nor knows in Death there is no other He,
No living He remains his Grief to vent,
And over his senseless Carcass to lament.
If after Death it is painful to be torn
By Birds and Beasts, then why not so to burn,
Or drenched in Floods of Honey to be soaked,
Imbalm'd to be at once preserved and choked;
Or on an airy Mountain's Top to lie
Exposed to Cold and Heavens Inclemency,
Or crowded in a Tomb to be oppressed
With Monumental Marble on thy Breast?
But to be snatched from all thy Household Joys,
From thy Chaste Wife, and thy dear prattling Boys,
Whose little Arms about thy Legs are cast,
And climbing for a Kiss prevent their Mother's have,
Inspiring secret Pleasure through thy Breast,
All these shall be no more: thy Friends oppressed,
Thy Care and Courage now no more shall free:
Ah Wretch, thou cry'st, ah! miserable me.
One woeful Day sweeps Children, Friends, and Wife,
And all the brittle Blessings of my Life!
Add one thing more, and all thou say is true;
Thy want and wish of them is vanished too,
Which well considered were a quick Relief,
To all thy vain imaginary Grief.
For thou shall sleep and never wake again,
And quitting Life, shall quit thy living Pain.
But we thy Friends shall all those Sorrows find,
Which in forgetful Death thou leave behind,
No time shall dry our tears, nor drive thee from our mind.
The worst that can befall thee, measured right,
^s a sound Slumber, and a long good Night.
Yet thus the Fools, that would be thought the Wits,
Disturb their Mirth with melancholy Fits,
When Healths go round, and kindly Brimmers flow,
Till the fresh Garlands on their Foreheads glow;
They whine, and cry, let us make haste to live,
^hort are the Joys that human Life can give.
Eternal Preachers, that corrupt the Draught,
and pall the God that never thinks, with Thought;
deots with all that Thought, to whom the worst
Of Death, is want of Drink, and enless Thirst,
Or any fond Desire as vain as these,
^or even in Sleep, the Body wrapped in Ease,
^upinely lies, as in the peaceful Grave,
and wanting nothing, nothing can it crave.
Were that sound Sleep Eternal it were Death,
^et the first Atoms then, the Seeds of Breath
^re moving near to Sense, we do but shake
and rouse that Sense, and straight we are awake.
Then Death to us, and Death's Anxiety
^ less than nothing, if a less could be.
^or then our Atoms, which in order lay,
^re scattered from their heap, and puffed away,
and never can return into their place,
When once the pause of Life has left an empty space.
and last, suppose Great Nature's Voice should call
^o thee, or me, or any of us all,
What do thou mean, ungrateful Wretch, thou vain,
^hou mortal thing, thus idly to complain,
and sigh and sob, that thou shall be no more?
^or if thy Life were pleasant heretofore,
^ all the bounteous Blessings I could give
^hou have enjoyed, if thou have known to live,
and Pleasure not leak through thee like a Sieve,
Why do thou not give thanks as at a plenteous Feast
^am'd to the Throat with Life, and rise and take thy Rest?
But if my Blessings thou have thrown away,
If indigested Joys passed through and would not stay,
Why do thou wish for more to squander still?
If Life we grown a Load, a real Ill,
And I would all thy Cares and Labors end,
Lay down thy Burden Fool, and know thy Friend.
To please thee I have empti'd all my Store,
I can invent, and can supply no more;
But run the round again, the round I ran before.
Suppose thou art not broken yet with Years,
Yet still the self-same Scene of things appears,
And would be ever, could thou ever live;
For Life is still but Life, there is nothing new to give.
What can we plead against so just a Bill?
We stand convicted, and our Cause goes ill.
But if a Wretch, a Man oppressed by Fate,
Should beg of Nature to prolong his Date,
She speaks aloud to him with more Disdain,
Be still thou Martyr Fool, thou covetous of Pain.
But if an old decrepit Sot lament;
What thou (She cries) who have outlived content!
Do thou complain, who have enjoyed my Store?
But this is still the effect of wishing more!
Unsatisfied with all that Nature brings;
Loathing the present, liking absent things;
From hence it comes thy vain Desires at strife
Within themselves, have tantaliz'd thy Life,
And ghastly Death appeared before thy sight
Ever thou had gorged thy Soul, and Senses with delight
Now leave those Joys unsuiting to thy Age,
To a fresh Comer, and resign the Stage.
Is Nature to be blamed if thus she chide?
No sure; for it is her Business to provide,
Against this ever changing Frame's decay,
New things to come, and old to pass away.
One being worn, another Being makes;
Changed but not lost; for Nature gives and takes:
New Matter must be found for things to come,
And these must waste like those, and follow Nature's Doom.
All things, like thee, have time to rise and rot;
And from each other's Ruin are begot;
For Life is not confined to him or thee;
^Tis given to all for Use; to none for Property.
Consider former Ages past and gone,
Whose Circles ended long ever thine begun,
Then tell the Fool, what part in them thou have?
Thus may thou judge the future by the past.
What Horror see thou in that quiet State,
What Bugbear Dreams to fright thee after Fate?
No Ghost, no Goblins, that still passage keep,
But all is there serene, in that eternal Sleep.
For all the dismal Tales that Poets tell,
Are verified on Earth, and not in Hell.
No Tantalus looks up with fearful eye,
Or dreads the impending Rock to crush him from on high:
But Fear of Chance on Earth disturbs our easy Hours:
Or vain imagined Wrath, of vain imagined Powers.
No Tityus torn by Vultures lies in Hell;
Nor could the Lobes of his rank Liver swell
To that prodigious Mass for their eternal Meal.
Not though this monstrous Bulk had covered over
Nine spreading Acres, or nine thousand more;
Not though the Globe of Earth had been the Giants Floor.
Nor in eternal Torments could he lie;
Nor could his Corpse sufficient Food supply.
But he is the Tityus, who by Love oppressed,
Or Tyrant Passion preying on his Breast,
And ever anxious Thoughts is robbed of Rest.
The Sisiphus is he, whom Noise and Strife
^educe from all the soft retreats of Life,
To vex the Government, disturb the Laws,
Drunk with the Fumes of popular Applause,
He courts the giddy Crowd to make him great,
And sweats and toils in vain, to mount the sovereign Seat.
For still to aim at Power, and still to fail,
Ever to strive and never to prevail,
What is it, but in Reason's true Account
To heave the Stone against the rising Mount?
Which urged, and labored and forced up with Pain,
Recoild and rowls impetuous down, and smokes along t^ Pla^
Then still to treat thy ever craving mind
With every Blessing, and of every kind,
Ye never fill thy rav'ning Appetite,
Though Years and Season vary thy Delight,
Yet nothing to be seen of all thy store,
But still the Wolf within thee barks for more.
This is the Fable's Moral, which they tell
Of fifty foolish Virgins damned in Hell
To leaky Vessels, which the Liquor spill;
To Vessels of their Sex, which none could ever fill.
As for the Dog, the Furies, and their Snakes,
The gloomy Caverns, and the burning Lakes,
And all the vain infernal Trumpery,
They neither are, nor were, nor ever can be.
But here on Earth the guilty have in view
The mighty Pains to m^ghty Mischiefs due:
Racks, Prisons, Poisons, Tarpeian Rock,
Stripes, Hangmen, Pitch, and suffocating Smoke,
And last, and most, if these were cast behind,
The avenging horror of a Conscious mind;
Whose dealy Fear anticipates the Blow,
And sees no end of Punishment and Woe:
But looks for more, at the last Gasp of Breath:
This makes an Hell on Earth, and Life a Death.
Mean time when Thoughts of Death disturb thy Head;
Consider, Ancus great and good is dead;
Ancus thy better far, was born to die,
And thou, do thou bewail Mortality?
So many Monarchs with their mighty State,
Who ruled the World, were overruled by Fate.
That haughty King, who Lorded over the Main*
And whose stupendo^s Bridge did the wild Waves restrain,
(In vain they foamed, in vain thy threatened Wreck,
While his pro^d Le^ions marched upon their Back:)
Him Death, a greter Monarch, overcame;
Nor spared his Guards the more, for their Immortal Name.
The Roman Chief, the Carthaginians dread,
Scipio the Thunderbolt of War is dead,
And like a common Slave, by Fate in Triumph led.
The Founders of invented Arts are lost;
And Wits who made Eternity their Boast.
Where now is Homer who possessed the Throne?
The immortal Work remains, the mortal Author's gone.
Democritus perceiving Age invade,
His Body weakened and his Mind decayed,
Obeyed the Summons with a cheerful Face;
Made haste to welcome Death, and met him half the Race.
That Stroke, even Epicurus could not bar,
Though he in Wit surpassed Mankind as far
As does the Midday Sun, the Midnight Star.
And thou, do thou disdain to yield thy Breath,
Whose very Life is little more than Death?
More than one half by lazy Sleep possessed;
And then a wake, thy Soul but nods at best,
Day-dreams and sickly Thoughts revolving in thy Breast.
Eternal Troubles haunt thy anxious Mind,
Whose Cause and Cure thou never hop'st to find;
But still uncertain, with thy self at strife,
Thou wander'st in the Labyrinth of Life.
O, if the foolish Race of Man, who find
A weight of Cares still pressing on their Mind,
Could find as well the Cause of this unrest,
And all this Burden lodged within the Breast,
Sure they would change their Course; nor live as now,
Uncertain what to wish or what to vow.
Uneasy both, in Country and in Town,
They search a place to lay their Burden down.
One restless in his Palace, walks abroad,
And vainly thinks to leave behind the Load.
But straight returns; for he is as restless there;
And finds there is no Relief in open Air.
Another to his Villa would retire,
And spurs as hard as if it were on Fire;
No sooner entered at his Country Door,
But he begins to stretch, and yawn and snore;
Or seeks the City which he left before.
Thus every Man o'er-works his weary Will,
To shun himself, and to shake off his ill;
The shaking Fit returns and hangs upon him still.
No prospect of Repose, nor hope of Ease;
The Wretch is ignorant of his Disease;
Which known would all his fruitless Trouble spare;
For he would know the World not worth his Care:
Then would he search more deeply for the Cause;
And study Nature well, and Nature's Laws:
For in this moment lies not the Debate;
But on our future, fixed, Eternal State;
That never-changing State which all must keep
Who Death has doomed to everlasting Sleep.
Why are we then so fond of mortal Life,
Beset with Dangers and maintained with Strife?
A Life which all our Care can never save;
Our Fate attends us; and one common Grave.
Besides we tread but a perpetual round,
We never strike out; but beat the former Ground,
And the same maukish Joys in the same Track are found.
For still we think an absent Blessing best;
Which cloys, and is no Blessing when possessed;
A new arising Wish expels it from the Breast*
The feav'rish Thirst of Life increases still;
We call for more, and more, and never have our Fill*
Yet know what to Morrow we shall try,
What Dregs of Life in the last Draught may lie.
Nor, by the longest Life we can attain;
One moment from the length of Death we gain;
For all behind belongs to his Eternal Reign.
When once the Fates have cut the mortal Thread,
The Man as much to all Intents is dead,
Who dies to day, and will as long be so,
As he who died a thousand Years ago.
To the Pious Memory of the Accomplished Young Lady Mrs. ANN KILLIGREW.
Excellent in the two Sister Arts of Poesy and Painting. An ODE.
I.
THou youngest Virgin-Daughter of the Skier,
Made in the last Promotion of the Blessed;
Whose Palms, new plucked from Paradise,
In spreading Branches more sublimely rise,
Rich with Immortal Green above the rest:
whether, adopted to some Neighboring Star,
Thou roll'st above us, in thy wandering Race,
Or, in Procession fixed and regular,
Moved with the Heavens Majestic Peace;
Or, called to more Superior Bliss,
Thou tread'st, with Seraphims, the vast Abyss.
What ever happy Region is thy place,
Cease thy Celestial Song a little space;
(Thou will have time enough for Hymns Divine,
Since Heavens Eternal Year is thine.)
Here then a Mortal Muse thy Praise rehearse,
In no ignorable Verse;
But such as thy own Voice did practice here,
When thy First^fruits of Poesy were givn'd;
To make thy self a welcome Inmate there:
While yet a young Probationer,
And Candidate of Heaven.
II.
If by Traduction came thy Mind,
Our Wonder is the less to find
A Soul so charming from a Stock so good;
Thy Father was transfused into thy Blood:
So were thou born into a tuneful strain,
(An early, rich, and inexhausted Vein.)
But if thy Prae-existing Soul
Was formed, at first, with Myriads more,
It did through all the Mighty Poets roll,
Who Greek or Latin Laurels wore.
And was that Sappho last, which once it was before*
If so, then cease thy flight, O Heaven-born Mind!
Thou have no Dross to purge from thy Rich Ore:
Nor can thy Soul a fairer Mansion find,
Than was the Beauteous Frame she left behind:
Return, to fill or mend the Quire, of thy Celestial kind.
III.
May we presume to say, that at thy Birth,
New Joy was sprung in Heaven, as well as here on Earth.
For sure the milder Planets did combine
On thy Auspicious Horoscope to shine,
And even the most malicious were in Trine.
Thy Brother-Angels at thy Birth
Strung each his Lyre, and tuned it high,
That all the People of the Sky
Might know a Poetess was born on Earth.
And then if ever, mortal Ears
Had heard the Music of the Spheres!
And if no clust'ring Swarn of Bees
On thy sweet Mouth distilled their Golden Dew,
'Twas that, such vulgar Miracles,
Heaven had not leisure to renew:
For all the Blessed Fraternity of Love
Solemnized there thy Birth, and kept thy Holy day above.
IV.
O Gracious God! How far have we
Profaned thy Heavenly Gift of Poesy?
Made prostitute and profligate the Muse,
Debased to each obscene and impious Use,
Who Harmony was first ordained Above
For Tongues of Angels, and for Hymns of Love?
O wretched We! why were we hurried down
This lubrique and adult'rate Age,
(Nay added fat Pollutions of our own)
TO increase the steaming Ordures of the Stage?
What can we say to excuse our Second Fall?
Let this thy Vestal, Heaven, atone for all?
Her Arethusian Stream remains unsoil'd,
Unmixt with Foreign Filth, and undefiled,
Her Wit was more than Man, her Innocence a Child!
V.
Art she had none, yet wanted none:
For Nature did that Want supply,
So rich in Treasures of her Own,
She might our boasted Stores defy:
Such Noble Vigor did her Verse adorn,
That it seemed borrowed, where 'twas only born.
Her Morals too were in her Bosom bred,
By great Examples daily fed,
What in the best of Books, her Father's Life, she read.
And to be read her self she need not fear,
Each Test, and every Light, her Muse will bear,
Though Epictetus with his Lamp was there.
Even Love (for Love sometimes her Muse expressed)
Was but a Lambent-flame which played about her Breast:
Light as the Vapors of a Morning Dream,
So cold her self, whilst she such Warmth expressed,
'Twas Cupid bathing in Diana's Stream.
VI.
Born to the spacious Empire of the Nine,
One would have thought, she should have been content
To manage well that mighty Government;
But what can young ambitious Souls confine?
To the next Realm she stretched her Sway
For Painture near adjoining lay,
A plenteous Province, and alluring Prey.
A Chamber of Dependencies was framed,
(As Conquerors will never want pretense,
When armed, to justify the Offense)
And the whole Fief, in right of Poetry she claimed.
The Country open lay without Defense:
For Poets frequent In-rodes there had made,
And perfectly could represent
The Shape, the Face, with every Lineament;
And all the large Demains which the Dumb-sister swayed,
All bowed beneath her Government,
Received in Triumph wheresoe'er she went.
Her Pencil drew, what ever her Sold designed,
And of the happy Draught surpassed the Image in her Mind.
The Sylvan Scenes of Herds and Flocks,
And fruitful Plains and barren Rocks,
Of shallow Brooks that flowed so clear,
The bottom did the top appear;
Of deeper too and ampler Floods,
Which as in Mirrors, showed the Woods;
Of lofty Trees, with sacred Shades,
And Perspectives of pleasant Glades,
Where Nymphs of brightest Form appear,
And shaggy Satyrs standing near,
Which them at once admire and fear.
The Ruins too of some Majestic Piece,
Boasting the Power of ancient Rome or Greece.
Whose Statues, Freezes, Columns broken lie,
And though defaced, the Wonder of the Eye,
What Nature, Art, bold Fiction ever durst frame,
Her forming Hand gave Feature to the Name.
So strange a Concourse never was seen before,
But when the Peopled Ark the whole Creation bore.
VII.
The Scene then changed, with bold Erected Look
Our Martial King the sight with Reverence struck:
For not content to express his Outward Part,
Her Hand called out the Image of his Heart,
His Warlike Mind, his Soul devoid of Fear,
His High-designing Thoughts, were figured there,
As when, by Magic, Ghosts are made appear.
Our Phoenix Queen was portray'd too so bright,
Beauty alone could Beauty take so right:
Her Dress, her Shape, her matchless Grace,
Were all observed, as well as Heavenly Face.
With such a Peerless Majesty she stands,
As in that Day she took the Crown from sacred Hands:
Before a Train of Heroins was seen,
In Beauty foremost, as in Rank, the Queen!
Thus nothing to her Genius was denied,
But like a Ball of Fire the further thrown,
Still with a greater Blaze she shone,
And her bright Soul broke out on every side.
What next she had designed, Heaven only knows,
To such Immod'rate Growth her Conquest rose,
That Fate alone its Progress could oppose.
VIII.
Now all those Charms, that blooming Grace,
The well-proportion'd Shape, and beauteous Face,
Shall never more be seen by mortal Eyes;
In Earth the much lamented Virgin lies!
Not Wit, nor Piety could Fate prevent;
Nor was the cruel Destiny content
To finish all the Murder at a Blow,
To sweep at once her Life, and Beauty to;
But, like a hardened Felon, took a Pride
To work more mischievously slow,
And plundered first, and then destroyed.
O double Sacrilege on things Divine,
To rob the Relic, and deface the Shrine!
But thus Orinda died:
Heaven, by the same Disease, did both translate,
As equal were their Souls, so equal was their Fate.
IX.
Mean time her Warlike Brother on the Seas
His waving Streams to the Winds displays,
And vows for his Return, with vain Devotion, pays,
Ah, Generous Youth, that Wish forbear,
The Winds too soon will wast thee here!
Slack all thy Sails, and fear to come,
Alas, thou know not, thou art wrecked at home!
No more shall thou behold thy Sister's Face,
Thou have already had her last Embrace.
But look aloft, and if thou ken'st from far,
Among the Pleiad's a New-kindled Star,
If any Sparkles, than the rest, more bright,
It Is she that shines in that propitious Light.
X.
When in mid-Air, the Golden Trump shall sound,
To raise the Nations under Ground;
When in the Valley of Jehosaphat,
The Judging God shall close the Book of Fate;
And there the last Assizes keep,
For those who Wake, and those who Sleep;
When rattling Bones together fly,
From the four Corners of the Sky,
When Sinews over the Skeletons are spread,
Those clothed with Flesh, and Life inspires the Dead;
The Sacred Poets first shall hear the Sound,
And foremost from the Tomb shall bound:
For they are covered with the lightest Ground,
And straight, with in-born Vigor, on the Wing
Like mounting Larks, to the New Morning sing.
There Thou, sweet Saint, before the Quire shall go,
As Harbinger of Heaven, the Way to show,
The way which thou so well have learnt below.
FINIS.
ELEONORA: A PANEGYRICAL POEM, Dedicated the MEMORY Of the Late COUNTESS OF
ABINGDON.

LONDON: ^^inted and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-Fryars, near the Waterside,
1709. Price One Penny.

To the Right Honorable the EARL of ABINGDON, etc.
MY LORD,
THE Commands, with which You honored me some Months ago, are now performed:
They had been sooner; but betwixt ill Health, some Business, and many Troubles,
I was forced to deferr them till this time. Ovid, going to this Banishment, and
Writing from on Shipboard to his Friends, excused the Faults of his Poetry by
his Misfortunes; and told them, that good Verses never flow, but from a serene
and composed Spirit. Wit, which is a kind of Mercury, with Wings fastened to
his Head and Heels, can fly but slowly, in a damp Air. I therefore chose rather
to Obey You late, than ill: if at least I am capable of writing any thing* at
any time, which is worthy Your Perusal and Your Patronage. I cannot say that I
have escaped from a Shipwreck; but have only gained a Rock by hard swimming;
where I may pan^ a while and gather Breath: For the Doctors give me a sad
Assurance that my Disease never took its leave of any Man, but with a purpose
to return. However, my Lord, I have laid hold on the Interval, and manag^d the
small Stock which Age has left me, to the best Advantage, in performing this
inconsiderable Service to my Lady's Memory. We, who are Priests of Apollo, have
not the Inspiration when we please; but must wait till the God comes rushing on
us, and invades us with a Fury, which we are not able to resist: which gives us
double Strength while the Fit continues, and leaves us languishing and spent,
at its Departure. Let me not seem to b^ast, my Lord; for I have really felt it
on this Occasion; and prophesied beyond my natural Power. Let me add, and hope
to be believed, that the Excellency of the Subject contributed much to the
Happiness of the Execution: And that the weight of thirty Years was taken off
me, while I was writing. I swom with the Tide, and the Water under ^e was
buoyant. The Reader will easily observe that I was transported, by the
Multitude and Variety of my Similitudes; which are generally the Product of a
luxuriant Fancy; and the Wantonness of Wit. Had I called in my Judgment to my
Assistance, I had certainly retrenched many of them. But I defend them not; let
them pass for beautiful Faults amongst the better sort of Critics. For the
whole Poem, though written in that which they call Heroic Verse, ^s of the
Pind^rick Nature, as well in the Thought as the Expression; and as such,
requires the same Grains of Allowance for it. It was intended, as your Lordship
sees in the Title, not for an Elegy, but a Panegyric. A kind of Apotheosis,
indeed; if a Heathen Word may be applied to a Christian Use. And on all
Occasions of Praise, if we take the Ancients for our Patterns, we are bound by
Prescription to employ the Magnificence of Words, and the force of Figures, to
adorn the Sublimity of Thoughts. Isocrates amongst the Grecian Orators, and
Cicero, and the younger Pliny, amongst the Romans, have left us their
Precedents for our security: For I think I need not mention the inimitable
^indar, who stretches on these Pinnions out of sight, and is carried upward, as
it were, into another World.

This at least, my Lord, I may justly plead, that if I have not performed so
well as I think I have, yet I have used my best Endeavors to excel my self.
One Disadvantage I have had, which is, never to have known, or seen my Lady:
And to draw the Lineaments of her Mind, from the Description which I have
received from others, is for a Painter to set himself at work without the
living Original before him. Which the more beautiful it is, will be so much the
more difficult for him to conceive; when he has only a relation give him, of
such and such Features by an Acquaintance or a Friend; without the Nice Touches
which give the best Resemblance* and make the Graces of the Picture. Every
Artist is apt enough to flatter himself, (and I amongst the rest) that that
their own ocular Observations, would have discovered more Perfections, at least
others, than have been delivered to them: Though I have receiv^d mine from the
best hands, that is, from Persons who neither want a just Understanding of my
Lady's Worth, nor a due Veneration for her Memory.

Doctor Donn the greatest Wit, though not the greatest Poet of our Nation,
acknowledges, that he had never seen Mrs. Drury, whom he has made immortal in
his admirable Anniversaries; I have had the same fortune; though I have no
succeeded to the same Genius. However, I have follow^d his Footsteps in the
Design of his Panegyric, which was to raise an Emul^tion in the living, to
Copy out the Example of the dead. And therefore it was, that I once intended to
have called this Poem, the Pattern: And though on a second Consideration, I
changed the Title into the Name of that Illustrious Person, yet the Design
continues, and Eleonora is still the Pattern of Charity, Devotion, and
Humility; of the best Wife, the best Mother, and the best of Friends.

And now, my Lord, though I have endeavored to answer Your Commands, yet I
could not ^nswer it to the World, nor to my Conscience, if I gave not Your
Lordship my Testimony of being the best Husband now living: I say my Testimony
only: For the Praise of it, is given You by Your self. They who despise the
Rules of Virtue both in their Practice and their Morals, will think this a very
trivial Commendation. But I think i^ the p^culiar Happiness of the Countess of
Abingdon, to have been so truly loved by you, while she was living, and so
gratef^lly honored, after she was dead. Few there are who have either had, or
co^'d have such a Loss; and yet fewer who carried their Love and Constancy
beyond the Grave. The exteriours of Mourning* a decent Funeral, and black
Habits, are the usual sti^s of Common Husbands: and perhaps their (...) deserve
no better than to be mou^^d with Hypocrisy* and forgot with ease. But you have
distinguished your self from ordinary Lovers, by a real, and lasting Grief for
the Deceased. And by endeavoring to raise for her, the most durable Monument,
which is that of Verse. And so it would have proved, if the Workman had been
equal to the Work; and your Choice of the Artificer, as happy as your Design.
Yet* as Phidias when he had made the Statue of Minerva, could not forbear to
ingrave his own Name, as Author of the Piece: so give me leave to hope, that by
subscribing mine to this Poem, I may live by the Goddess, and transmit my Name
to Posterity by the Memory of Hers. It Is no Flattery to assure Your Lorship,
that she is remembered in the present Age, by all who have had the Honor of
her Conversation and Acquaintance. And that I have never been in any Company
since the News of her Death was first brought me, where they have not ex^ol'^
her Virtues; and even spoken the same things of her in Prose, which I have done
in Verse.

I therefore think my self obliged to thank Your Lordship for the Commission
which You have given me: How I have acquitted my self of it, must be left to
the Opinion of the World, in spite of any Protestation, which I can enter
against the present Age, as Incompetent or Corrupt Judges. For my Comfort they
are but Englishmen, and as such, If they Think ill of me to Day, they are
inconstant enough, to Think well of me to Morrow. And after all, I have not
much to thank my Fortune that I was born amongst them. The Good of both Sexes
are so few* in ^ngland, that they stand like Exceptions against General Rules:
And though one of them has deserved a greater Commendation, than I could give
her, they have taken care, that I should not tire my Pen, with frequent
Exercise on the like Subjects* that Praises, like Taxes, shou'^ be
appropri^ted; and left almost as Individual as the Person. They say my Talent
is Satyr; if it be so, it is a fruitful Age; and there is an extraordinary Crop
to gather. But a single Hand is insufficient for such a Harvest: They have sown
the Dragons Teeth themselves; and it is but just they should reap each other in
Lampoons. You, my Lord, who have the Character of Honor, though it is not my
Happiness to know You, may stand ^side, with the small Remainders of the
English Nobility, truly such, and unhurt your selves, behold the mad Combat. If
I have pleased you, and some few others, I have obtained my end. You see, I
have disabled my self, like an Elected Speaker of the House; yet like him I
have undertaken the Charge; and find the Burden sufficiently recompensed by the
Honor. Be pleased to accept of these my unworthy Labors, this Paper Monument;
and let her Pious Memory, which I am sure is Sacred to You, not only Plead the
Pardon of my many Faults, but gain me your Protection, which is ambitiously
sought by,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's most Obedient Servant, JOHN DRYDEN.

ELEONORA: A Panegyrical Poem, Dedicated to the Memory of the Late Countess of
ABINGDON.
The Introduction.
AS, when some Great and Gracious Monarch dies,
Soft Whispers, first, and mournful Murmurs rise
Among the sad Attendants; then, the Sound
Soon gathers Voice, and spreads the News around,
Through Town and Country, till the dreadful Blast
Is blown to distant Colonies at last;
Who, then perhaps, were off 'ring Vows in vain,
For his long Life, and for his happy Reign:
So slowly, by degrees, unwilling Fame
Did Matchless Eleonora's Fate proclaim,
Till public, as the Loss, the News became.
The Nation felt it, in the extremest parts;
With Eyes overflowing, and with bleeding Hearts:
Of her Charity.
But most the Poor, whom daily she supplied;
Beginning to be such, but when she died.
For, whilst she lived, they slept in Peace, by Night;
Secure of Bread, as of returning Light;
And, with such firm dependence on the Day,
That need grew pampered; and forgot to pray:
So sure the Dole, so ready at their Call,
They stood prepared to see the Manna fall.
Such Multitudes she fed, she clothed, she nursed,
That she, her self, might fear her wanting first.
Of her five Talents, other five she made;
Heaven, that had largely given, was largely paid:
And, in few Lives, in wondrous few, we find
A Fortune better fitted to the Mind.
Nor did her Alms from Ostentation fall,
Or proud desire of Praise; the Soul gave all:
Unbrib'd it gave; or, if a Bribe appear,
No less than Heaven; to heap huge Treasures, there*
Want passed for Merit, at her open Door,
Heaven saw, he safely might increase his Poor.
And trust their Sustenance with her so well,
As not to be at Charge of Miracle.
None could be needy, whom she saw, or knew;
All, in the Compass of her Sphere, she drew:
He who could touch her Garment, was as sure,
As the first Christians of the Apostle's Cure.
The distant heard, by Fame, her pious Deeds*
And laid her up, for their extremest needs;
A future Cordial, for a fainting Mind;
For, what was never refused, all hoped to find;
Each in his turn: The Rich might freely come,
As to a Friend; but to the Poor, 'twas Home.
As to some Holy House the Afflicted came;
The Hunger-starved, the Naked, and the Lam^:
Want and Diseases fled before her Name.
For Zeal like hers, her Servants were too slow;
She was the first where need required, to go;
Her self the Foundress, and Attendant too.
Sure she had Guests sometimes to entertain,
Guests in Disguise, of her Great Master's Train:
Her Lord himself might come, for ought we know;
Since in a Servant's Form he lived below*
Beneath her Roof, he might be pleased to stay:
Or some benighted Angel, in his way
Might ease his Wings; and seeing Heaven appear
In its best Work of Mercy, think it there,
Where all the Deeds of Charity and Love
Were in as constant Method, as above:
All carried on; all of a piece with theirs,
As free her Alms, as diligent her Cares;
As loud her Praises, and as warm her Prayers.
Of her prudent Management.
Yet was she not profuse; but feared to wast,
And wisely managed, that the stock might last;
That all might be supplied; and she not grieve
When Crowds appeared, she had not to relieve.
Which to prevent, she still increased her store;
Laid up, and spared, that she might give the more:
So Pharaoh, or some Greater King than he,
Provided for the seventh Necessity:
Taught from above, his Magazines to frame;
That Famine was prevented e're it came.
Thus Heaven, though All-sufficient, shows a thrift
In his Economy, and bounds his Gift:
Creating for our Day, one single Light;
And his Reflection too supplies the Night:
Perhaps a thousand other Worlds, that lie
Remote from us, and latent in the Sky,
Are lightened by his Beams, and kindly nursed;
Of which our Earthly Dunghill is the worst,
Now, as all Virtues keep the middle Line,
Yet somewhat more to one Extreme incline,
Such was her Soul; abhorring Avarice,
Bounteous, but, almost bounteous to a Vice
Had she given more, it had Profusion been,
And turned the Excess of Goodness, into Sin.
Of her Humility.
These Virtues raised her Fabric to the Sky*
For that which is next Heaven, is Charity.
But, as high Turrets, for their Airy steep
Require Foundations, in proportion deep:
And lofty Cedars, as far upward shoot,
As to the nether Heavens they drive the Root*
So low did her secure Foundation lie,
She was not Humble, but Humility.
Scarcely she knew that she was great, or fair,
Or wise, beyond what other Women are,
Or, which is better, knew; but never durst compare.
For to be conscious of what all admire,
And not be vain, advances Virtue high'r:
But still she found, or rather thought she found,
Her own worth wanting, others to abound:
Ascribed above their due to every one,
Unjust and scanty to her self alone.
Of her Piety.
Such her Devotion was, as might give Rules
Of Speculation, to disputing Schools;
And teach us equally the Scales to hold
Betwixt the two Extremes of hot and cold;
That pious heat may mod'rately prevail,
And we be warned, but not be scorched with Zeal.
Business might shorten, not disturb her Prayer;
Heaven had the best, if not the greater share.
An active Life, long Oraison^ forbids;
Yet still she prayed, for still she prayed by Deeds*
Her every day was Sabbath: Only free
From hours of Prayer, for hours of Charity.
Such as the Jews from servile Toil releast;
Where Works of Mercy were a part of Rest:
^uch as blessed Angels exercise above,
^ary'd with Sacred Hymns, and Acts of Love;
^uch Sabbaths as that one she now enjoys,
^v'n that perpetual one, which she employs,
For such Vicissitudes in Heaven there are)
(...) Praise alternate, and alternate Prayer.
^ll this she practiced here; that when she sprung
^midst the Quires, at the first sight she sung.
^ung, and was sung her self, in Angels Lays;
^or praising her, they did her Maker praise.
All Offices of Heaven so well she knew,
Before she came, that nothing there was new.
And she was so familiarly received,
As one returning, not as one arrived.
Of her various Virtues.
Muse, down again precipitate thy Flight;
For how can Mortal Eyes sustain Immortal Light*
But as the Sun in Water we can bear,
Yet not the Sun, but his Reflection there,
So let us view her here, in what she was;
And take her Image, in this watery Glass:
Yet look not every Lineament to see;
Some will be cast in Shades; and some will be
So lamely drawn, you scarcely know, it is she.
For where such various Virtues we recite,
It Is like the Milky-Way, all over bright,
But sown so thick with Stars, it is undistinguished Light.
Her Virtue, not her Virtues let us call,
For one Heroic comprehends 'em all:
One, as a Constellation is but one;
Though it is a Train of Stars, that, rolling on,
Rise in their turn, and int he Zodiac run.
Evern in Motion; now it is Faith ascends,
Now Hope, now Charity, that upward tends,
And downwards with diffusive Good, descends.
As in Perfumes composed with Art and Cost,
It Is hard to say what Scent is uppermost;
Nor this part Musk or Civet can we call,
Or Amber, but a rich Result of all;
So, she was all a sweet; whose every part,
In due proportion mixed, proclaimed the Maker's Art.
No single Virtue we could most commend;
Whether the Wife, the Mother, or the Friend;
For she was all, in that supreme degree,
That, as no one prevailed, so all was she.
The several parts lay hidden in the Piece;
The Occasion but exerted that, or this.
Of her Conjugal Virtues*
A Wife as tender, and as true withal,
^s the first Woman was, before her Fall:
^ade for the Man, of whom she was a part;
^ade, to attract his Eyes, and keep his Heart.
second Eve, but by no Crime accursed;
^s beauteous, not as brittle as the first.
^ad she been first, still Paradise had bin,
and Death had found no entrance by her sin.
(...) she not only had preserved from ill
^r Sex and ours, but lived their Pattern still.
Love and Obedience to her Lord she bore,
^e much obeyed him, but she loved him more.
^ot awed to Duty by superior sway;
^t taught by his Indulgence to obey.
^hus we love God as Author of our good;
(...) Subjects love just Kings, or so they should.
^or was it with Ingratitude returned;
(...) equal Fires the blissful Couple burned:
^ne joy possessed 'em both, and in one Grief they mourned.
^is Passion still improved: he loved so fast
^s if he feared each Day would be her last.
^oo true a Prophet to foresee the Fate
that should so soon divide their happy State:
^hen he to Heaven entirely must restore
that Love, that Heart, where he went halves before.
^et as the Soul is all in every part,
(...) God and He, might each have all her Heart.
Of her Love to her Children.
So had her Children too; for Charity
^as not more fruitful, or more kind than she:
^ch under other by degrees they grew;
^ goodly Perspective of distant view:
^nchises looked not with so pleased a Face,
^ numb'^ing over his future Roman Race,
and Marshalling the Heroes of his Name
(...), in their Order, next to light they came;
^or Cybele with half so kind an Eye,
^rvey'd her Sons and Daughters of the Sky.
Proud, shall I say, of her immortal Fruit.
As far as Pride with Heavn'nly Minds may suit.
Her Care of their Education.
Her pious Love excelled to all the bore;
New Objects only multiplied it more.
And as the Chosen found the pearly Grain
As much as every Vessel could contain;
As in the Blissful Vision each shall share,
AS much of Glory, as his Soul can bear;
So did she love, and so dispense her Care.
Her eldest thus, by consequence, was best;
As longer cultivated than the rest:
The Babe had all that Infant Care beguiles,
And early knew his Mother in her Smiles:
But when dilated Organs let in Day
To the young Soul, and gave it room to play,
At his first aptness, the Maternal Love
Those Rudiments of Reason did improve:
The tender Age was pliant to command;
Like Wax it yielded to the forming hand:
True to the Artificer, the labored Mind
With ease was pious, generous, just and kind;
Soft for Impression, from the first, prepared,
Till Virtue, with long Exercise, grew hard;
With every Act confirmed; and made, at last
So durable, as not to be effaced,
It turned to Habit; and, from Vices free,
Goodness resolved into Necessity.
Thus fixed she Virtue's Image, that is her own,
Till the whole Mother in the Children shone;
For that was their Perfection: she was such,
They never could express her Mind too much.
So unexhausted her Perfections were,
That, for more Children, she had more to spare*
For Souls unborn, whom her untimely Death
Deprived of Bodies, and of mortal Breath;
And (could they take the Impressions of her Mind)
Enough still left to sanctify her Kind.
Of her Friendship.
Then wonder not to see this Soul extend
^he Bounds, and seek some other self, a Friend:
^ swelling Seas to gentle Rivers glide,
^o seek repose, and empty out the Tide;
(...) this full Soul, in narrow Limi^s pent,
^nable to contain her, sought a vent,
so issue out, and in some friendly Breast
^charge her Treasures, and securely rest.
^ unbosom all the secrets of her Heart,
^ake good Advice, but better to impart.
or it is the Bliss of Friendship's Holy State
^o mix their Minds, and to communicate;
though Bodies cannot, Souls can penetrate.
^x^ to her Choice; inviolably true;
and wisely choosing, for she chose but few.
^me she must have; but in no one could find
Tally fitted for so large a Mind.
^he Souls of Friends, like Kings in progress are;
^ll in their own, though from the Palace far:
^hus her Friend's Heart her Country Dwelling was,
^ sweet Retirement to a coarser place:
^here Pomp and Ceremonies entered not;
^here Greatness was shut out, and Business well forgot.
This is the imperfect Draught; but short as far
^ the true height and bigness of a Star
^ceeds the Measures of the Astronomer.
^e shines above we know, but in what place,
^w near the Throne, and Heavens Imperial Face,
^ our weak Optics is but vainly ghest;
^tance and Altitude conceal the rest.
Reflections on the Shortness of her Life.
Though all these rare Endowments of the Mind
^e^e in a narrow space of Life confined,
^e Figure was with full Perfection crowned;
^ough not so large an O^b, as truly round.
As when in Glory, through the public place,
^e Spoils of conquered Nations were to pass,
And but one day for Triumph was allowed,
The Consul was constrained his Pomp to crowd;
And so the swift Procession hurried on,
That all, though not distinctly, might be shown*
So, in the straightened Bounds of Life confined,
She gave but Glimpses of her glorious Mind:
And Multitudes of Virtues passed along;
Each pressing foremost in the mighty Throng;
Ambitious to be seen, and then make room,
For greater Multitudes that were to come.
Yet unemploy'd no Minute slipped away;
Moment were precious in so short a stay.
The haste of Heaven to have her was so great,
That some were single Acts, though each complete;
But every Act stood ready to repeat.
Her Fellow Saints with busy Care, will look
For her blessed Name, in Fate's Eternal Book;
And, pleased to be outdone, with Joy will see
Numberless Virtues, endless Charity;
But more will wonder at so short an Age;
To find a Blank beyond the thirti'th Page;
And with a pious Fear begin to doubt
The Piece imperfect, and the rest torn out.
She died in her Thirty third Year.
But 'twas her Savior's time; and, could there be
A Copy near the Original, 'twas she.
As precious Gums are not for lasting Fire,
They but perfume the Temple, and expire.
So soon was she exhaled, and vanished hence*
A short sweet Odor, of a vast Expense
She vanished, we can scarcely say she died;
For but a Now, did Heaven and Earth divide:
She passed serenely with a single B^eath,
This Moment perfect Health, the next was Death*
The manner of her D^
One Sigh, did her Eternal Bliss assure;
So little Penance needs, when Souls are almost pure.
As gentle Dreams our waking Thoughts pursue;
Or, one Dream passed, we slide into a new;
(So close they follow, such wild Order keep,
We think our selves awake, and are asleep:)
So softly Death, succeeded Life, in her;
She did but dream of Heaven, and was there.
No Pains she suffered, nor expired with Noise;
Her Soul was whispered out, with God's still Voice.
As an old Friend is beckoned to a Feast,
And treated like a long familiar Guest;
He took her as he found; but found her so,
Her Preparedness to dye.
As one in hourly Readiness to go.
Even on that Day, in all her Trim prepared;
As early notice she from Heaven had heard,
And some descending Courtier, from above
Have given her timely warning to remove:
Or counseled her to dress the Nuptial Room;
For on that Night the Bridegroom was to come.
She dy^d on Whitsunday Night.
He kept his Hour, and found her where she lay
Clothed all in white, the Liv'ry of the Day*
Scarce had she sinned, in Thought, or Word, or act;
Unless Omissions were to pass for Fact:
That hardly Death a Consequence could draw,
To make her liable to Nature's Law.
And that she died, we only have to show,
The mortal part of her she left below:
The rest (so smooth, so sudenly she went)
Looked like Translation, through the Firmament;
O^ like the fiery Carr, on the third Errand sent.
Apostrophe her Soul.
O happy Soul! if thou can view from high*
Where thou art all Intelligence, all Eye,
If looking up to God, or down to us,
Thou find'st, that any way be pervious,
Survey the Ruins of thy House, and see
Thy widowed, and thy Orphan Family;
Look on thy tender Pledges left behind:
And, if thou can a vacant Minute find
From Heavenly Joys, that Interval afford
To thy sad Children, and thy mourning Lord.
See how thy grieve, mistaken in their Love,
And shed a Beam of Comfort from above;
Give 'em as much as mortal Eyes can bear,
A transieth View of thy full Glories there;
That they with moderate Sorrow may sustain
And mollify their Losses, in thy Gain.
Or else divide the Grief, for such thou were,
That should not all Relations bear a part,
It were enough to break a single Heart.
Epiphonema* Or Close of the Poem.
Let this suffice: Nor thou, great Saint, refuse
This humble Tribute of no vulgar Muse:
Who, not by Cares, or Wants, or Age deprest,
Stems a wild Deluge with a dauntless Breast:
And dares to sing thy Praises, in a Clime.
Where Vice Triumphs, and Virtue is a Crime:
Where even to draw the Picture of thy Mind,
Is Satyr on the most of Humane Kind:
Take it, while yet it is Praise; before my Rage
Unsafely just, break loose on this bad Age;
So bad, that thou thy self had no Defense,
From Vice, but barely by departing hence.
Be what, and where thou art: To wish thy place,
Were in the best, Presumption, more than Grace.
Thy Relics (such thy Works of Mercy are)
Have, in this Poem, been my holy Care.
As Earth thy Body keeps, thy Soul the Sky,
So shall this Verse preserve thy Memory;
For thou shall make it live, because it sings of thee.
FINIS.
The Rambling Fuddle-Caps: OR, A Tavern-Struggle FOR A KISS. By the Author of
HUDIBRASS REDIVIVUS.

LONDON: Printed and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-fryars near the Waterside.
1709.

The Rambling Fuddle-Caps: OR, A Tavern-Struggle FOR A KISS.
Though Fuddl'd over Night, the next Morning we found,
That Sleep had recovered what Claret had drowned;
And all our numbed Members, so feeble and weak,
That we scarcely were able to walk, or to speak,
Were now by kind Morpheus with Strength reimpower'd,
And all to their primitive Vigor restored.
Our Thoughts were so sprightly, our Humors so gay,
That we both were as brisk as a Milk-maid in May.
And as for the Rudders that steer our Affections,
As Fancy, that Pilot, shall give 'em Directions;
Which were made over Night so incapably tender,
Were now grown as stiff as a Bullock's Defender:
That wanting Discretion I Would like to 've miscarried,
And thoughtless of Cuckldom wish my self married:
Well knowing desire of unchaste Copulation,
Had been an Affront to our new Reformation;
And therefore resolved to forbear the sweet Evil,
Though hugely inclined to the Flesh and the Devil.
But yet notwithstanding our over-Night's Fuddle,
That made us so brisk in the Tail and the Noddle,
We both were as dry, I may justly maintain,
As a Rat that is poisoned by eating his Bane.
In order to quench our immod'rate Droughts,
That burnt in our Stomachs, and scorched up our Mouths*
We leaped out of Bed with a strong Appetitus,
To swallow a Hair of the Dog that had bit us.
We shifted our Linen, and whipped on our Clothes,
And powdered our Wigs like a couple of Beaus,
Then quitted our Lodging till Night, with design,
To quench with that Engine, a Flask full of Wine,
The Fire which God Bacchus, as well as Fair Venus,
By the help of brisk Claret, had kindled within us.
So frensical Wretches their Senses restore,
By clawing the Hag who bewitched 'em before.
And skilful Physicians their Patients recover,
Of one Dose of Poison, by the power of another.
With this Resolution we crossed to S -- Lane,
'Twixt which and B -- Y -- hangs a Bush and a Sign,
Which some call the Tuns, by whose size one would guess,
They were three Brandy Runlets of Gallons a piece,
Well, well, says my Friend, you may descant upon 'em,
And for their diminutive sizes untun 'em:
But when within Doors you may think 'em much wider,
And Judge by the Wine they are Hogsheads of Cider.
However, said I, let us once venture in,
If it be for no cause, but to see and be seen:
For though it proves Cider 'twill quench us and clean us,
And wash down those sooty remains that are in us,
Condensed from the Poison of Necotianus.
With that we went into a pretty long Entry,
At the end of which Passage a Female stood Centry,
As stiff in her Box, and as starched in her Dress,
As an old Abby-Figure of Wax in a Press,
Where any for Threepence may behold,
What stiff body'd Queens lived in Ages of old.
To say that she Paints it might justly provoke her,
I Am sure that she does not, except it is with Oker:
Nor did she look warmed with Canary or Brandy,
But just of the Color of brown Sugar Candy.
From whence we may say, without any Reflection,
She Is blessed with a sweet and a melting Complexion.
Her Bubb^es, which just peeped above to invite ye,
By the help of her S^ays looked so round and so pretty,
That had but her Skin been a little more fair,
Like a Stone Horse enraged I Would leaped over the Bar;
But the Ginger-bread Color she wore in her Cheeks,
Was to me as offensive as Garlic or Leeks:
For Yellow I hate, and I Will tell you for what,
It Is the Mutton Complexion that dies of the Rot.
And who'd be so fond of a Kiss or a Touch,
With a Lady that looks not as sound as a Roach?
Her Hips, I confess, were so charmingly plump,
And between them a Hillock adorning her Rump,
That when she turned round, by a glimpse I could find
All the best of her Beauty was seated behind.
Though perhaps upon search it would have proved but a Cushion,
That raised up her A -- se to the height of the Fashion.
After Ogling, and Talking, and taking a view,
As she stood in the Bar, like a Jilt in a Pew.
The Drawer, according to our desire,
Showed us into the Kitchen, for sake of the Fire:
For cold was the Wind, and impleasant the Weather,
Which made us both willing to follow him thither.
No sooner we'd entered the Cook's Territories,
Where commonly either a Slut or a Whore is)
^ut a swinging Bellona we saw at the Dresser,
and a drunken young Rake-hell just going to Kiss her.
The masculine Jade had the Fork in her Hand,
And bid him stand off at the Word of Command:
And being a Lass both of Virtue and Value,
She cried* Keep your Gound, or, by Heavens, I Will maul ye.
The Spark in his Cups, full of Courage and Vigor,
In spite of her Threats, rallied on like a Tiger,
With his Arm, like a Fencer, he parry'd her Poker,
And running within her did further provoke her,
By falling most roughly and rudely upon her,
And bobbing his Hand at the Seat of her Honor;
But still with such Art she defended her Lips,
And now and then gave him such Pinches and Nips,
That I would not have born, to have purchased a Kiss,
From the Lips of Queen Dido, or Helen of Greece.
He swore that he would, but she vowed that he should not:
He strove, but she rustled so hard that he could not.
But as they contended thus, who should be Master,
In The the Scuffle there happened a scurvy Disaster:
A Pudding, with Plumbs, standing by on a Stool,
Ready mixed for the Bag, tempered up in a Bowl,
Unhappily met with a Fall in the Jostle,
And between 'em was thrown on the Ground in the bustle;
The Cook at this sorrowful sight grew inflamed,
And wished her Antagonist rotted and damned.
The Spark in return to the Queen of the Kitchen,
In wonderful Rage went to Cursing and Bitching:
But still in a Passion pursuing his Matter,
They scuffled about Ankle deep in the Batter:
As Soldiers hard set in a Battle do use,
To fight 'till the Blood washes over their Shoes.
The sturdy Defendant her Pudding beholding,
Fell now in good earnest to scratching and scolding.
And fought like a Cat when her Passion was stirred,
To see the good Food trod about like a T -- d,
Her Greasiness now all Venom and Gall,
Who swore she would admit of no Kissing at all;
And with that she exerted her Masculine Force,
Who was almost as strong a Mare or a Horse,
And pushed down the Spark, who most decently lay,
In the midst of the Pudding that fell in the Fray.
With that he arose full of Malice and Spite,
To see his black Clothes painted over with white:
And looked in this pickle, without any Lying,
Like a piece of fat Tripe dried in Batter for Frying.
The Curls of his Wig were so pasted and ma^ted,
All over so daubed, so beplumb'd and befatted;
So Eggy withal, that a Man would have sworn,
He had just in the Pill'ry been taking a Tu^n:
And being Lent-time, that some ill-natured Creatures,
Had pelted the Rogue with their Pancakes and Fritters.
Pray Sir, says my Friend, to the unfortunate Lover,
D^d ever you read the Famed History over,
Of a dapper, diminutive, comical Fellow,
Much less than a Barthol'mew-Fair Punchanello.
Methinks (though I speak not by way of Derision)
As now you appear in that dripping Condition;
You look like that little Tom Thumb, by my Soul,
^ust waded from out of the great Pudding-Bowl;
and have brought away Batter enough on your Back,
Which if savingly scraped from your Clothes that are black,
and improb'd into Dumplins, would make such a Feast,
That would tempt you with Patience to swallow the Jest.
Pray Sir, cries the Spark, in his Puddingy Robes,
^eep your Flirts to your self, and your merry dry Bobs;
^or I value not you or your Jests of a Clout,
^m good Flesh within, though I Am Pudding without;
and if you, like the Bitchington, think you can beat me,
^s drunk as I am, when you have done you shall eat me.
^ut if you will not Fight, let my Follies alone,
^r I Will Pudding your Jacket as bad as my own.
Dear Sir, says my Friend, in a bantering manner,
^ope, like the Cook, you will not turn Painter-stainer;
If you do, notwithstanding your huffing and prating,
The Proof of the Pudding shall be in the eating.
But, Sir, says our Pye-colour'd Sot of a Beau,
Why so much upon Pudding, I desire to know.
What though I Am bitterly daubed with the Batter,
Must every Fool take a lick at the Matter.
Ca^'t a Man tumble down in a Pudding, Ads fish,
But another must fling it so often in his Dish.
The Cook in a Corner stood fleering and laughing*
The Spark she had tamed staggered fretting and chaffing,
So near to the Fire, in a mighty disgust,
Till the Pudding was baked on his B^ck to a Crust.
Beholding the Rattle-brains, marry thought I,
I have heard of a Puppy put into a Pie,
But never yet met with a Story alluding,
To such a great Whelp that was baked in a Pudding.
By this time the Mistress, that sat in the Bar,
Being told the Misfortune by Fennick the Draw'r,
Stepped in to enquire out the truth of the Matter,
And view, with sad Eyes, the poor down-fallen Batter,
Says Madam to Nell, in a wonderful Passion,
You impudent Baggage, pray what is the occasion,
The Pudding designed for your Master's own Table,
Is thus trod about like a T -- d in a Stable?
O Heavens! pray what has this Termagant Blowze
Been a doing to the Gentleman's Wig and Clothes?
Zounds, Madam, cries Nell, I have done him no Hurt,
It was all his own Fault, he may thank himself for it.
For though I Am a poor Kitchin-Wench, let me tell ye,
I will not be tumbled and touz'd by the Belly;
Nor sl^bber'd or Kissed, as a Slut that was ready
To pleasure each Sot, like a Night-walking Lady.
I Would have you to know, I am Honest, though Poor,
And disd^in to be used like a Water-Lane Whore.
With that Madam Coming-Sir, cocking her Head,
Cried, Marry-come-up, you're a Beautiful Jade,
You had need brag so much of your Hypocrites Virtue,
A Gentleman's Kiss would have mightily hurt you!
You shall be so proud, you're so handsome a Piece,
So perfumed with your Sweat, and adorned with your Grease,
That a Gentleman for your Charms must approve you,
And if he once smel^s you, must certainly love you.
Go, go, you're a Slu^, I would have you to know;
Nay, a S^u^pet, to serve any Gentl^man so:
As for one silly Kiss to beget so much Strife,
And to spoil the best Pudding you have mixed in your Life.
Says Nell to her Mistres^, I scorn to be tumbled,
Let those play ^he Fool that delight to be Fumbl'd:
But you that are married may do as you list,
For a Cut of a Cut Loaf can never be mist.
Though you say I Am a Strumpet, remember, good Madam,
As bad as I am, I was never at Had'em:
Nor ever did I from my Modesty vary,
So far as to jumble a Pipe of Canary;
Or ever commit so notorious a Fault,
As be caught with a Drawer below in the Vault,
In marking that Pipe which was best for your turns
On the Head, with the scandalous Sign of Horns.
Horns! Hussy, says Madam, you impudent Queen,
Who is it you reflect on, what is it you mean?
Did ever you hear, through the course of you^ Life,
That I ever proved worse than a good Wise?
It Is amazing to me! I Am astonished to think
What your Impudence aims at, why sure you're in Drink;
Or else to your Mistress you never would prate,
(...) so base a provoking and saucy a rate.
Z^nes, Madam, says Nell, in a damnable Fury,
Will Not be th^s s^ub'd and abused, I assure ye,
Although I Am a Scrub that is doomed to a Kitchen,
I never was yet caught a Whoring or Bitching;
Nor am I got drunk, as your Ladyship says,
Though I know she that was, to her ugly Disgrace,
And was found with a Spark hovering over her Chair,
With a Hand on her Breasts, and the other elsewhere.
With that, says the Mistress, You ill-natured Devil,
For shame hold your Tongue, that implacable Evil.
Come, mop up the Batter you have trampled and stood in,
And let me, I say, have no more of the Pudding.
Whose Fault is it, cries Nell, get you into the Bar,
Pray, what business have you to come prying in here?
For the longer you stay, or the more that you talk,
You shall fare but the worse, so it is better to walk.
Well, Hussy, says Madam, for once you shall win me,
To use the Goodnature and Patience that is in me.
Now I see you're enraged, I will show a Concession,
But rattle you off when you're out of your Passion.
Thus Madam returned to her Station the Bar,
With a Nettle t'her Breech, and a Flea in her Ear;
Being glad to withdraw from the Rubs and the Railings
Of Nell, that was privy to some of her Failings.
Said I, honest Nell, you have an excellent Tongue,
That, according to Phrase, is most notably hung,
For it sounds like a Bell, and goes off with a Twang.
But I hope you will excuse me, invincible Nelly,
If I, like a Friend, take the Freedom to tell ye,
You banter too hard on the Brows of your Master,
And open those Sores that have need of a Plaster.
With that the huge termagant Devil turned back;
I believe (says the Jade) you come in for a snack:
They are Sparks like your self, and not I (cries the Blowze)
That with Antlers and Buds injure honest Men's Brows;
And when they are absent, by kissing their Spouses,
Make Bridges of many poor Cuckoldly Noses.
Thought I, it is more Prudence my Tongue to withold,
Or much better to talk to a Post than a Scold;
Cause they both to all Reason are deaf as a Drum,
Which the S^old will out-rattle, when the Post will be dumb.
Mr. Prim, who with shame to Elegant Beaus,
Had, for sake of a Kiss, so bespattered his Clothes,
And made the whole House so confounded uneasy,
By slabb'ring a Slut, but so ugly and greasy;
O'erpower'd with Wine, and Nocturnal Upsitting,
Fell asleep in a Nook, for a Sot very fitting,
With a Coat so besmeared in his amorous Fight,
That he looked like a Magpy, half black and half white;
And might justly be styled, for the Badges he wore,
The compleatest Jack-pudding that we ever saw before.
As thus the young Drunkard was sleeping and snoring,
And dreamnig, no doubt on it, of Drinking or Whoring,
(...) chanced that his Father, with Carbuncle Face,
Those glorious effects of the Bottle and Glass,
Came in with a Friend for a whet of good Red,
Lest his Rubies and Rosy Pimginets should fade:
For Flowers we know soon their Colors would lose,
^f they were not refreshed with the Rains and the Dews*
So the Nose of a Sot, which with pleasure we stare at,
Would fade, if not daily replenished with Claret.
The hearty Old Dad had no sooner came in,
And gave order to Fennick to draw him his Wine,
Turned his Nose to the Door, and his Arse to the Fire,
A Habit true Englishmen always acquire;
But the sharp fighted Fox round the Kitchen did look,
And saw Daddy's n'own Son drunk a sleep in a Nook.
With that he advances up close to the place,
Turns his Wig a one side, stares his Son in the Face;
Catches hold of his Nose in a damnable Passion,
And pulling on it, breaks into this Exclamation:
A Beau to the Life! a fine Spark, by my Soul,
You drunken young Rake-hell, come out of your hole:
Let us see in the Light what a Figure you make;
A most exquisite Sot, a true Orthodox Rake,
A hopeful young Student, a rare Inns of Courtier:
Nouns, what has the Dog been a treading of Mortar?
Adsheart, now I look on his Wig and his Back,
He Is all covered with Plumbs like an Islington Cake.
I Will be hanged if the Whelp had not Pudding for Supper,
And eat till he spewed from his Head to his Crupper.
The Son very drunk, also equally drowsy,
First shrug'd up his Shoulders as if he were Lousy;
Then stagg'ring about, betwixt sleeping and waking,
B'ing ready to spew, I suppose, by his kecking;
Not knowing his Father, he damned him and swore,
He that took him by the Nose was a Son of a Whore.
Then Cursing and Raving, like one in Distraction,
He vowed for the Affront he would have Satisfaction.
You Dog, says his Daddy at every word,
D' you offer to lay your vile Hand on your Sword!
Thou villainous Rebel, you undutiful Sot you,
D' you lift up your Arm against him that begot you?
Sure never poor Mortal ever fathered before,
Such a Rakebelly Rogue of a Son of a Whore.
With that the young Prodigal (hearing the Name
Of a Father) began to be little more tame:
And looking about him, at last had the Grace,
To know 'twas his Dad by his Carbuncle Face:
Then after a Keck, and a Hick-cough or two,
Like a Sot over-charg'd that was going to spew,
He cries to his Father, (provoking our Smiles)
You're the old Turky^c^ck, by your fiery Gills:
^ut what need you Cobble so loud at a Body,
(...) Tavern sometimes is as good as a Study:
^ve heard you often say, That Conversing and Drinking,
Must quicken our Brains more than Reading and Thinking,
And that Lawyers Littleton, Bracton, and Cook,
Did agree it was good for a Student to look
^n the brisk merry Bottle, as well as the Book.
It Is true, the said the Father, I always allowed ye,
To cheer up your Heart with a Glass after Study;
But not stretch your Guts like a Porter or Carman,
And turn a worse Sot than those guzling Vermin.
Pray Gentlemen see but his Coat and his Wig here,
Did ever a Beau make so beastly a Figure!
He looks, by my Soul, from the Head to the Rump,
^^ke a Pick-pocket just run away from the Pump.
You Rogue had I thought you would have proved such an Idle
Young Dog, I Would have choked you with Pap in the Cradle.
And never have been at the chargeable keeping
Of such a rude Rascal that daily is heaping
Such Cares and Vexations upon my Gray Hairs,
That in sight of you all makes me burst into Tears.
For shame, says his Friend, do not show your self such
^n old Tony to cry, you unman your self much:
It Is time to be shedding of Tears when you find him
Tied fast in a Cart with the Horses behind him.
Have I, says the Father, sat early and late,
^ike a Drudge at my Desk, to acquire an Estate,
And all for the sake of a profligate So^,
That will spend it much faster then ever 'twas got:
But, Nouns, if the Rake-hell continues thus loose,
(...) Revenge, I Will not leave the young Rebel a Sous:
^y my Generous Living I Will give him the Go-by,
and spend what I meant for the Prodigal Booby.
Here Drawer, says Rake, bring my Father a Quart,
I Will be hanged if 'twill do the old Toast any hurt.
Be nimble, you Dog, draw it brisk, neat and fine,
For a Glass of true Claret, or any good Wine,
He loves in a Morning, I Have often heard him say;
Nay, at Night, or indeed any time of the Day;
My Grandsire I Have heard, always drank like a Fish,
And his Children all loved to about with the Dish;
So what is bred in the Bone, will never out of the Flesh:
Therefore why should not I love a Cup of the Creature,
As well as my Father, by Instinct of Nature.
Pray judge, cries the Dad, do ye think I Am not blessed,
With a hopeful young Bird, but just flown from the Nest,
Who is ready to see, ever he is well knit together,
To pick out the Eyes of his tender old Father.
However, you Drawer, here bring us a Quart,
Since my dutiful Son's so importunate for it,
I Am resolved for this once will I humor the Brat,
'Cause I Will see what the Reprobate Rogue would be at.
With that the Old Gentleman sat himself down,
And requested the like of his Friend and his Son.
The Quart was brought in, and the Glass filled around,
As the Wine went about Daddy's Passion was drowned,
'Till his Fatherly Love prevailed above Anger,
It made him unable to vex any longer,
His Rubies now looked of so noble a Red,
Like the Bunches of Grapes round a Bacchus's Head,
That by squeezing his Nose one would easily have thought
The good Juice must have flown again into the Pot.
Ah Dick, says the Dad to his Prodigal Son,
If it was not for me, what a Race would thou run;
Yet for all my Reproof, my Advice, and my Care,
You're a wicked young Rascal, you know that you are*
However, in time thou will surely recant,
will once more forgive thee whatever comes on it.
So Dick here is a Bumper of Pacification,
Most heartily wish^ng thy new Reformation;
For Drinking, thou know, is a very sad Evil,
And Whoring and Gaming, the Flesh and the Devil.
Abandon, my Boy, all such things that have hurt in,
Or else for these Sins thou wilt be damned of a certain.
Says Dick to his Father how could you suppose,
When you got your poor Son with that Clarety Nose,
But that he must love, by the dint of each Ruby,
The Bottle, when weaned from its Likeness the Bubby.
My Father and Mother have always loved Claret,
And hew do you think that the Son should forbear it,
Whose Blood I might venture to swear, without sinning,
Was but Claret refined at the very beginning?
Says Daddy, did ever Man hear such a Dog,
^uch a witty young Cub, such a bantering Rogue,
^uch a pleasant and merry Companion, who rather
Than stifle a Jest, will make one of his Father?
Ah, Dick, if thy Wit was but balanced with Grace,
Thou for certain would never let it fly in my Face.
But however, since the Bottle has got the ascendant,
^or once I Will forgive thee, and so there is an end on it,
^n hopes, when you're sober, you Manners will mend on it.
O Father, says Dick, could you taste the delights
That my self and Companions enjoy a Nights,
Were you once but to hear the Cunnundrums and Quibbles,
The Retorts and the Puns, the Lampoons and the Libels,
The Rhimes, Repetitions, the Songs and the Catches;
The Whims and the Flirts, and the smart witty Touches,
That over the Flask we most lovingly vent,
^ou would think a whole Night most gloriously spent;
and would guess by our Wit, and the course that we follow,
We could all be no less than the Sons of Apollo.
Ah, Dick, says the Father, take care, I entreat ye,
Thou Would better be hanged, of the two than be witty;
For if you are once thought, by the Studies and Labors,
To Have acquired more Wit than the rest of thy Neighbors,
Thou Wilt be pissed on by Fools, and be feared by thy Betters,
And hunted about by Whores, Bailiffs and Setters.
Thy Lodging must be in some Nine-penny Garret,
Thy Drink Porters Guzzle much oftener than Claret:
Thy Coat must through all the four Seasons be worn,
Till it is robbed of its Nap like a Sheep newly shorn:
You must always seem pleasant, that is, if you can,
Keep your Wits ready prim'd for a flash in the Pan:
When your Pockets are empty, your Brains must project
Puns, Quibbles, and Tales to supply the Defect;
That whenever you meet with a generous Chub,
You may sneak out a Jest in the room of your Club:
For a Wit is no more than a merry Tom Fool,
A satirical Scourger or flattering Tool;
The Son of Nine Whores, that is compelled by his Mothers,
To starve, or to please (like the rest of his Brothers)
The Pride of some Men, or the Malice of others.
FINIS.
THE Libertine's Choice: OR, The Mistaken Happiness OF THE FOOL in FASHION.

LONDON: ^^inted and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-fryars near the Waterside.
1709.

THE Libertine's Choice: OR, The Mistaken Happiness OF THE FOOL in FASHION.
LET Holy Guides prevail on Timorous Fools,
TO abridge their Pleasure, and conform to Rulees,
^pos'd on Youth, by hoary Heads long since,
^hen dwind^d into Age and Impotence;
^ating their Vigorous Progeny should taste
those Lushious Joys their own weak Loins were past,
^ho in their Strength did Nature's Will obey,
and never grew Temperate till their Hairs grew Gray;
^hen with a Pious Rage, and Anxious Mind,
^ewing their Youthful Pleasures far behind:
^iev'd and Perplexed would all those Joys despise,
^o which their Gouty Dotage could not rise;
(...) when the Hare does her loud Foes defeat,
^he Huntsman damns the Bitch for sorry Meat;
^ngry to see his Hopes and Pleasures crossed,
^^temns the Game he valued till 'twas lost.
Grave, Toothless Grandsires, tell me but the Caus^
Why you prescribe to Youth such Rigig Laws?
Why you thus fright us with Infernal Pains,
To chill Love's gentle Fire that warms our Veins?
When you, like us, once found the pleasing Heat,
As Nat^ral as your Appetites to eat;
Pur^u'd those Blessings which you held so dear,
And could not shun what you would have us forbear.
Look back, when you were Juvenile and Strong;
Remember what you were, when Brisk and Young.
How did you then regard the Sage Advice,
Given by the Old, who call themselves the Wise?
Could your Fond Parents fright you from the Arms
Of the Fair Sex, and their alluring Charms?
Could all the sober Counsels they could give,
Make you without your Friend and Bottle live?
Could the grave Guide, with his Authentic Tale
Of Flames and Furies on your Youth prevail?
Could all his mild Reproofs, or Holy Threats,
Repel the warm Desires that Love begets?
No, the Rebellious Fever proved too hot
To be subdued; but that is, alas! forgot.
Old Men are subtle, and their Judgments strong,
They will not remember what they were when Young^
But as in us their Youthful Lives are seen,
So by our selves we know what you have been.
Why then so Envious, to debar our Taste
From Pleasures, which your wrinkled Brows are past,
Such as your wiser selves could not forbear,
When Gay and Vigorous as your Sons now are?
What though the Gout your crazy Limbs torment,
Or if the Stone perplex you, be content;
Why should our Joys increase your Punishment?
It Is Devil-like, to with an Envious Eye,
Behold past Blessings which you cannot enjoy;
and give us, by false Tales, an ill Conceit
Of Pleasures which your selves once found so sweet.
^uch Usage seemed as if you aimed to gain
That Power over Youth, as Satan did over Man:
and by the subtle Force of your Advice,
^love us to lose our present Paradise,
Through hopes of future Joys beyond the Skies.
The Infernal Tempter cunningly began
With Stratagems like these to ruin Man.
To this effect the Treacherous Serpent said,
^ke, Eat this Fruit; do but as I persuade,
and from that happy Moment you shall prove,
^ise and Immortal as the Gods above:
^t when the cunning Fiend had made them cat,
They found the Lushious Promise but a Cheat.
Thus did the Devil their Happiness molest,
because himself was cursed, and Man was Blessed.
Who knows but Age, when doomed to Pain and Care,
^o Joyful Youth may the like Envy bear:
^ating, beneath their own Decay, to see
^he Young so blessed, from a^l Afflictions free,
and their own frozen Limbs by Age declined,
(...) Crutches, Beds, and Elbow-Chairs confined;
^st so the Barren Woman does with Hate,
^hold the Fruitful in a Pregnant State.
With what Assurance can we then obey
^he Rules your Aged Heads before us lay;
^ho strive to incline us by your Sage Advice,
(...) quit known Pleasures for uncertain Bliss?
^we those Blessings you report, pursue;
(...) loose the present Joys within our View,
^en those you promise may not perhaps accrue.
(...) Humane Soul can no clear Prospect have
Torments, or of Joys beyond the Grave.
^pose we had, and future Worlds could see,
^r Doom to us would still uncertain be.
Though Hell be filled with Discord, Heaven with Peace,
The Gods reward poor Mortals as they please:
For Man, th^' ever so devoutly given,
Can plead no Merit to the Gifts of Heaven;
But must as Bounty, und^serv'd, receive
Those Blessings, which the Gods think fit to give.
Some Guides of Old instruct us to despise,
And look with Scorn upon Terrestrial Joys,
Extol the Crystal Stream above the Vine,
Prefer dull Element to Noble Wine.
Tell us soft Beauty's but a Charming Evil,
That all Delights are Off springs of the Devil.
Ill Manners sure to such Aspersions cast
On Blessings which we find oblige our Taste:
And highly Impious to condemn as vain,
What the kind Gods for Humane Use ordain.
If it is Ill-breeding, proudly to withstand
The meanest Gift, from a superior Hand:
Surely, without Offense, we cannot slight
What Bounteous Heaven has given for our Delight.
Shall I, if I Have an Appetite to eat,
For Roo^s and Herbs forsake much better Meat*
Or if my Heart to Hymen does incline,
Must I drink Water, when I lust for Wine?
No, let d^ll Bigots with the Stream agree,
Bacchus shall be the Jolly God for me.
What if Celinda's Graces I admire,
And her soft Charms should set my Breast on Fire;
Why should not we, if the kind Dame agrees,
Our loving selves, instead of others, please?
In doing which, we mutually approve
The Works of Heaven in the Delights of Love:
Love! which sublimes the Blessings we pursue,
And makes the Gods well pleased with what we do.
Let the Old Cinick (from the World retired)
Rail in his Age, at what his Youth admired:
To's Hut confined, drink Water and repent,
Feed on raw Roots, and boast of his Content;
Hug his own Follies, and those Joys despise,
Which not his Virtues, but his Age denies;
Snarl at our Pleasures, and our Pomp abuse,
Which he wants Wealth t'uphold, or Strength to use.
Thus like Town Bullies his Ill Nature show,
Who damn those Beauties which they cannot subdue.
Our wiser Guides may tell us if they please,
True Happiness consists in Whims like these;
And that the Old Morose Athenian Grub,
Who snarling lived in's Penitential Tub;
Possessed more Comforts, and enjoyed more Ease,
Than Princes in their Gaudy Palaces.
Such Frantic Doctrine may sometimes persuade,
Beggars and Slaves, when melancholy mad,
That Wealth is Dirt, and Honor but a Toy,
And none except the Poor true Peace enjoy;
Who else can fancy true Felicity,
Consists in stinking Rags and Poverty;
And that a scanty Meal is better far,
Than all the costly Dainties we prepare;
That nothing truly can afford Content,
But cold Retirement, and a self Restraint.
If Peace and her Companion Virtue dwells
^n Caves, and Tubs, and Subterranean Cells;
And starving Cinicks in their Lonely Huts,
Who pride themselves in punishing their Guts;
Can happy be who Happiness despise,
Then to be mad, is surely to be wise.
O Great Lucretius, thou shall be my Guide,
Like thee I Will live, and by thy Rules abide:
Measure my Pleasures by my Appetites,
And unconfined, pursue the World's Delights.
For Liberty makes every Action sweet,
And relishes our Joys, as Salt our Meat:
Without, we no true Happiness could boast,
The Taste of every Blessing would be lost;
The sweetest Bliss, would but a Slavery prove,
And we should then but hate what now we love.
My Native Freedom, therefore I'l^ employ,
Choose what I like, and what I like, enjoy.
Suppose bright Beauty should invade my Breast,
And with her pleasing Darts, disturb my Rest;
So that I sigh all Day, and wish all Night
For her, my only Object of Delight:
What must I marry? No, I Will not be cloyed,
The B^it I Will nibble, but the Hook avoid;
For cold Restraint makes every thing seem worse,
And often turns our Blessings to a Curse.
I love my Bed, when I my Rest would take;
Must it be therefore corded to my Back?
If I delight my Gelding to bestride,
Must I be always to the Saddle tied?
What the I chiefly love one sort of Meat,
It Is Punishment to have nothing else to eat:
The Charming Sex I'cknowledge, I adore,
And value Beauty much, but Freedom more;
If the kind Nymph will yield to my Desires
And with her Fa^ours quench Loves pleasing Fires;
I Will not with Oaths and Vows her Faith deceive,
But prove as kind as Nature givers me leave;
Be constant too, as long as ever I can,
But will not promise to be more than Man:
And when I Am tired, that she the Truth may know,
I Will frankly, without Flattery, tell her so.
Thus would I deal with Love's Rebellious Flame,
When cloyed with one, I Would still pursue fresh Game;
And not enslave my self, or yet deceive the Dame.
When one Delight by Use Insipid grew,
I Would change the stale Enjoyment for a New;
From Amorous Sports to the Bottle I Would repair,
To fill those Veins I Would emptied with the Fair;
Drink till my W^ts were ripe, and Brains were full,
For to be sober, is but to be dull,
Songsters and Wits I Would for Companions choose,
One for their Music, the other for their Muse,
That some kind Voice might readily supply
Our Thoughtful Intervals with Harmony;
Thus would we chase Old Father Time all Night,
Shorten our Days to lengthen our Delight:
Drink Healths, sing Catches, talk of past Intrigues,
And strengthen Bottle Friendship with new Leagues;
Swallow down Bumpers to each Left hand Friend,
And Vow a Thousand things we never intend.
When thus well fraighted with the cheerful Juice,
We'd sally forth and give our selves a loose,
Break Broth^l Windows, scour the crazy Watch,
And with fresh Mischiefs crown the Night's Debauch;
But soon as bright Aurora should draw nigh,
And with her Blushes gild the Eastern Sky,
Drowsy and drunk we'd stagger to our Beds,
And in Sot's Hev'n compose our aching Heads;
There drown in Sleep the Memory of our Sins,
And rise refreshed, as Drury Lane begins:
For new Diversions to the Playhouse fly,
Seek out new Faces, and their Humors try,
Flatter the Coy, and ridicule the Free,
Tattle with Punks, and ogle Quality;
Who in their upper Region awful sit,
And cull their brawny Stallions from the Pit:
Sometimes I Would be attentive to the Stage,
The Poet's Princess should my Eyes engage;
If she performed her Part with Excellence,
And trod the Stage with Graceful Impudence,
I Would clap the Dowdy till my Arms were sore,
As she perhaps had many a Spark before;
With Pleasure hear the O'er-grown Poppet whine,
And prostrate mourn over some dead Lover's Shrine;
Laugh in my Sleeve to know the cunning Jade
Kneels down a W -- re, yet rises for a Maid.
Next Scene perhaps some Hero might appear,
That lived long since, the Lord knows when or where;
Who in a Raving Fit of Jealous Love,
Would curse his angry Stars, and threaten Jove;
That the Fair Sex might with Concern behold,
How Hen-peck'd Monarchs raved, and loved of old;
And learn from thence to over Kings prevail,
And make the Head subservient to the Tail.
Thus on each Scene would I my Judgment spend,
Clap when they pleased, and hiss should they offend;
Applaud the Poet, when his Lines were full,
Commend his Wit, but damn his Muse when dull;
Keck when I heard the Barnet Mimick raise,
His croaking Voice in Famed Ben Johnson's Plays.
Blush that full Boxes, and a crowded Pit,
Should delight more in Apish Whims than Wit.
For what dull Miscreant, could with Patience see
A Noble Play quite spoiled with Foolery?
And French Jack-Puddings, in a thankless Age
Affront Immortal Shakespeare on the Stage;
So Nice Fop Epicures disdain to eat,
Without some Foreign Sauce, true English Meat;
And think through a Mistake the wholesome Food,
Cannot without such pault'ry Stuff be good;
When all their ill-mix'd Rareties at last
Spoil the Regale, and but confound the Taste.
When for three Hours I Would thus with Pleasure viewed
The strutting Mimicks, and their listening Crowd,
Till a dull Epilogue, perhaps new writ,
B^ some young Upstart Rhimer in the Pit;
Should gain a Clap to dignifie his Verse,
Fit only to adorn a Smithfield Farce.
Then to some Brothel would I steer my Course,
Where Beauty needs no Flattery or Force:
But where a Golden Bribe will purchase Bliss,
And open all the Gates of Paradise.
Gold, whose prevailing Touch we daily see,
Will charm the Soul of the most Charming she,
Who when the powerful Indian God's in view,
Will sacrifice their All to Gold and you:
Thus would I conquer who I most admired;
Triumph over Beauty till my Loins were tired;
Wal^ow in Love, and by exerting much,
Work out the Dregs of the last Night's Debauch.
Re^resh my Limbs by a kind pleasing Sweat,
Better than with a Bagnio's painful Heat.
Thus should my Chloe double Kindness show,
And be both Doxy and my Doctress too.
Supple my Joints at once, and cool my Flame,
And when I Would gratified the obliging Dame,
I Would leave her to the next Lewd Rake that came.
Then I Would repair to Queen Fortuna's Court,
Where Hawk-ey'd Bullies, and Rich Fools resort,
Where Wolves with Lambs, and Kites with Chickens play,
And Eagles do on Gaudy Peacocks prey.
Where many seek, but very few can find,
The fickle Dame they co^rt continue Kind;
Who, like a subtle Jilt, seems often vexed;
And if she smile^ one Minute, fro^^s the next,
There with the fatal Instruments of Chance,
Hazard my Store in hopes to more advance.
Draw in Rich Bubbles, Cog, Lie, Flatter, Cheat,
And push at all to be Profusely Great.
With eager Hopes Blind Fortune thus pursue;
And win from Nobles what is their Tradesmen's Due.
But should the fickle Dame her Smiles refuse,
I Would damn the sullen Jilt that made me lose;
Confound the Tongue that taught me first to Game;
And curse the uncertain Dice that crossed my Aim.
For each at play this Privilege may take;
Winners may smile, and Losing Gamesters speak.
No sneaking Sum should my Ambition bound,
I Would be a B -- ch'r, or my All con^ound;
Insinuate with my wealthy Lady's Son,
Cringe to the Fop, and cheat him when I Would done:
Drink with young Heirs, then draw them in to play,
Praise them for Wits, and on their Weakness prey;
For unexperienced Fools we dialy see,
Though never so stubborn, bend to Flattery.
Should Hood-winked Chance, to gratify my Pride,
Thus kindly place me on the winning side,
And guide the Dice with her prevailing Hand,
Till my extensive Wishes I had obtained;
Fortune would I adore, and only she,
For her past Favors should my Goddess be;
A Coach and Six I Would to her Glory raise,
And over the Stones would rattle forth her Praise;
Proud of my ill-got Wealth, with Scorn look ou^,
And laugh at Honest Fools that walk on Foot.
Contented to be poor for Conscience sake,
Whilst Libertines by Fraud their Fortunes make.
To thee, kind Chance that does allot the Prize,
Thou partial Goddess of the Cards and Dice;
I Would sacrifice from out the Numerous Swarm,
Some poor Levantine Bully every Term,
Till none should dare thy Altars to abuse,
And push at all who nothing have to lose;
But creep behind and with a Courtly Mein,
Turn humble Supplicants to those that win.
Then to advance my own immortal Fame,
And make distressed Punks adore my Name;
I Would build an Almshouse for each cast-off Whore,
And as I Would gulled the Rich, I Would feed the Poor:
Bribe Irish Stallions with my English Gold,
To please the Lame, Blind, Ugly and the Old;
That those course Objects we despise, might share,
What Is now engrossed by the Youthful and the Fair;
Thus every Hump and Squinny should enjoy,
As much of Love as they could well employ,
With new found Acts of Charity, like these,
Never yet performed, the Sinful World I Would please,
Till every ill-shap'd Dowdy should confess,
To me alone she owned her Happiness;
And say there goes the Man, G -- d speed him well,
That saved our Souls from leading Apes in Hell;
Nay, Toothless Beldams wrinkl'd and defaced,
Should mumble out their Blessings as I passed:
And cry all Honor be my Master's due,
Who feeds those Mouths that have no Teeth to chew,
This would I do, though by the Saints reviled,
Where I as Rich as D -- b or as C -- d.
Like Quality the Sunday would I spend,
And duly Covent Garden Church attend;
Religion would I modishly profess,
By Seven rise, and take three Hours to dress;
Then in my Chariot rattle through the Street,
To Church, where Hypocrites in Clusters meet.
Amongst the listening Crowd I Would squeeze for Room,
And with my Snush the Sweaty Air perfume;
Till the Pew-Keeper, more for Gain than Grace,
Should wedge me into some Commodious Place;
Where I the Gaudy Christian Herd might view;
And to the Fair my own Deportment show:
I Would pierce the Ladies with an amorous Eye,
But all their pious Looks and Cheats defy.
Take notice who was Fairest, or most Fine,
Who had the Blackest Hair, or Whitest Skin;
What Charming Phubsy had the Loveli'st Breast,
Who was the most Devout, and prayed the best,
Who had the bri^kest Eye, and fullest Brow,
Denoting a good Furbulo below,
Who had an Awful Look, and Modest Grace,
And who a Lustful Air, and Tempting Face:
Thus as an Observator would I sit;
Inspect the Galleries first, and then the Pit:
And from the different Saints in sundry Pews;
At once learn how to Judge, and how to Choose.
Perhaps behold some Lewd Notorious Punk,
That never prays but when she is Maudlin Drunk;
Pluck down her Hoods, kneel low amongst the rest,
And seem as quaint a Christian as the best;
Hold up her sinful Hands, respond as loud
As the upright'st Saint in all the Holy Crowd.
And when she is done, resume her matted place,
With Sin and Sorrow blushing in her Face,
Yet all pure Art, without one spark of Grace.
When Prayer was over, with Patience would I sit,
And hear Old Sternhold Rhyme to David's Wit.
But smile to see the Clark his Looks compose,
And saddle, with his Spectacles, his Nose;
Then coughing spit, and when his Lungs were calm,
Turn to his Book, and snuffle out a Psalm;
Wherein each Zealot fond of singing Praise,
Might squeak their Ekes, and grumble out their Ayes:
Over the doleful Song I Would yawn and gape,
What Christian could resolve against a Nap,
Or who forbear to dose at every Line,
That did not in the drowsy Chorus join?
My Head, I Am sure, their grave slow Time would keep,
For whilst they chanted, I should nod and sleep;
Like Gammer Friskit in her Wicker Chair,
Lulled by, Now ponder well you Parents dear.
Thus during Prayers the painful Hour I Would spend,
And small Attention to the Sermon lend;
But ever 'twas well begun, still wish it at an End.
With Patience I would hear the Preacher throw
His Darts upon the sinful Crowd below;
Observe his Knack, when prettily he talked,
How well he hemmed, how gracefully he haulk'd;
How mannerly he did his Nostrils blow,
And how he lugg'd the Cushion to and fro;
How earnestly sometimes his Words came out,
And how he thrash'd the Pope and Devilish about.
When the last Sand of the long Hour had run,
And told old Spintext when 'twas time to have done,
I Would rise among the rest, and gaze around,
Till I some famed Intriguing Lady found.
Invited by her Eyes and some kind Smile,
As she walked out, I Would meet her in the Isle;
With Amorous Whispers I Would her Ears approach,
Squeeze her soft Hand, conduct her to her Coach,
And lay the Groundwork of a new Debauch.
Then to some Rakish Friends my course I Would steer,
Strangers to Faith, and Enemies to Fear;
There Ridicule with them the Canting Priest,
And make Religion but our common Jest;
Raise up dead Hobs to justify our Cause,
And overthrow Divine, by Nature's Laws;
Burlesque the Scriptures, and asperse the Creed,
Awed by no musty Rules; Love, Drink and Feed:
This is the happy Life we Modish Rakes would lead.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of Poems, etc. Printed and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-Fryars, near
the Waterside; where several more may be had that are not here Inserted.
A Congratulatory Poem on Prince George of Denmark, etc. on the Success at Sea.
Marlborough Still Conquers. The Flight of the Pretender. Honesty in Distress, a
Tragedy. The Kit-Cats a Poem, etc. Wine, a Poem, etc. Cider, with the Splendid
Shilling. The Pleasures of a Single Life, etc. Faction Displayed. Moderation
Displayed. The Duel of the Stags. etc. Coopers-Hill, by Sir J. Denham. An Essay
on Poetry, by the Earl of Murlgrave. Absalom and Achitophel. The Plague of
Athens. A Satyr against Man and Woman. The Forgiving Husband. Instructions to
Vanderbank. The Temple of Death. An Essay on Translated Verse, by the Earl of
Roscomon. Horace: Or the Art of Poetry. The History of Insipids. The
Swan-Trip-Club. Lucretius on Death, etc. The Medal against Sedition.
Bellizarius a great Commander. Daphnis, or a Pastoral Elegy, etc. A Poem on the
Countess of Abingdan. Nundinae Sturbrigiences. Tunbrigialia. An Ode on the
Incarnation, etc. Hoglandiae Descriptio. Milton's Sublimity on Cider.
Bosworth-feild, by Sir John Beaumount, Bar. Canary Birds Naturalized. Art of
Poetry, by Boilean. Poems on the Death of the late Queen Mary. Baucis and
Philemon, etc. Circus, a Satyr: Or the Ring in Hide Park. St. James's Park, a
Satyr. The Spleen, a Pindarique Ode, etc. Philips's Pastorals. A Letter from
Italy, to my Lord Halifax, with other Poems. Blenheim, a Poem, by Phillips. Mac
Flecknoe, by J. Dryden; etc. The Female Reign, an Ode, A Poem on the Taking St.
Mary's. Windsor Castle, a Poem. The Servitor, a Poem. The Campaign, by Mr.
Addison. The Counter-Scuffle, a Poem. Don Francisco Sutorioso. Consolation to
Mira mourning, A Panegyric on Oliver Cromwell, with three Poems on his Death. A
Poem in Defense of the Church of England. The Apparition, a Poem. The Hind and
Panther Transvers'd to the Story of the Country Mouse and City Mouse. Dr.
Gath's Dispensary. Memoirs on John Hall, the Famous Robber, etc. Mr Shaftoe's
Narrative giving an Account of the Birth of the Pretended Prince of Wales, etc.
The True-Born Englishman. The Husband, a Poem. The Commoner, a Poem. A Hymn to
the Pillory. The Rambling Fudle-Caps. DFoe, on the Storm. The Wife, a Poem. The
Long Vacation.
COOPERS-HILL. A POEM, Written by the Honorable Sir JOHN DENHAM, Knight of the
Bath.

LONDON: ^rinted and Sold by H. Hills, in Blackfriars, near the Waterside,
1709.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
AFter the delivery of Your Royal Father's Person into the hands of the Army, I
undertaking to the Queen Mother, that I would find some means to get access to
him she was pleased to send me, and by the help of Hugh Peter's I got my
admittance, and coming well instructed from the Queen (his Majesty having been
long kept in the dark) he was pleased to discourse very freely with me of the
whole state of his Affairs: But, Sir, I will not launch into a History, instead
of an Epistle. One morning waiting on him at Causham, smiling upon me, he said
he could tell me some News of my self, which was, that he had seen some Verses
of mine the Evening before (being those to Sir Richard Fanshaw) and asking me
when I made them, I told him two or three years since; he was pleased to say,
that having never seen them before, He was afraid I had written them since my
return into England, and though he liked them well, He would advise me to write
no more, alleging, that when men are young, and have little else to do, they
might vent the overflowings of their Fancy that way; but when they were thought
fit for more serious Employments, if they still persisted in that course, it
would look as if they minded not the way to any better.

Whereupon I stood corrected as long as I had the honor to wait upon him, and
at his departure from Hampton Court, he was pleased to command me to stay
privately at London, to send to him and receive from him all his Letters from
and to all his Correspondents at home and abroad, and I was furnished with nine
several Ciphers in order to it: Which trust I performed with great safety, to
the persons with whom we corresponded; but about nine months after being
discovered by their knowledge of Mr. Cowley's Hand I happily escaped both for
my self, and those that held correspondence with me; that time war too hot and
busy for such idle speculations, but after I had the good fortune to wait upon
Your Majesty in Holland and France, You were pleased sometimes to give me
Arguments to divert and put off the evil hours of our Banishment, which now and
then fell not short of Your Majesty's expectation.

After, when Your Majesty departing from St. Germans to Jersy, was pleased
freely (without my asking) to confer upon me that place wherein I have now the
honor to serve You, I then gave over Poetical Line, and made it my business to
draw such others as might be more serviceable to Your Majesty, and I hope more
la^^ing Since that time I never disobeyed my old ^aster's Commands till this
^ummer at the We^s my Retirement the^ te^pting me to divert those melancholy
Thoughts, which the new Apperit^^n^ of Foreign Invasion, and Domestic
Di^content gave us: But the^e Clouds being now happily blown over, and our Sun
clearly shining out again, I have recovered the Relapse, i^ being suspected
that it would have proved the Epidemical Disease of Age, which is apt to fall
back into the Fo^^es in You^h; yet Socrates, Aristotle and Ca^o did the same,
and Scaliger says that ^ragment of Aristotle was bey^nd any thing that Pindar
or Homer ever wrote I will not call this a Dedication, for those Epistles are
commonly greater Absurdities than any that come after* For what Author c^n
reasonably believe, that fixing the great Name of some eminent Patron in the
Forehead of his Book can charm away Censure, and that the first Leaf should be
a Curtain to draw over and hide all the deformities that stand behind it?
Neither have I any need ^f such sh^f^s, for most of the Parts of thy Body have
already had your Majesty's View* and having past the Test of ^^cle (...) sharp
sighted a Judgment, which has as good a Title to give Law in Matters of this
Nature as in any other, they wh^ shall presume to dissent from Your Majesty,
will do more wrong to their own Judgment, than their Judgment can do to me. And
for those latter Parts which have not yet received your Majesty's favorable
Aspect, if they who have se^n them do not fl^tter me, (for I dare not trust my
own Judgment) they will make it appear, that it is not with me as with most of
Mankind, who never forsake their Darling Vices, till their Vices forsake them;
and that this Divorce was not Frigiditatis causa, but an Act of Choice, and not
of Necessity. Therefore, Sir, I shall only call it an humbl^ Petition, That
Your Majesty will p^ease to pardon this new Amor to my old Mistress and my
Disobedience to his Commands* to whose Memory I look upon with great Reverence
and Devotion, and making a seriouus Reflection upon that wise Advice, it
carries much greater weight with it now than when it was given; f^r when Age
and Experience has so ripened Man's Discre^ion as to make it fit for use,
either in private or publick^ Affairs, nothing blasts and cor^upts the Fruit of
it so much as the empty, airy Reputation of being nimis Poeta; and therefore I
shall take my leave of the Muses, as two of my Predecessors did, saying,

Splendidis longum vale dico nugis,
Hic versus and caesera ludiera pono.
Your Majesty's most faithful and loyal Subject, and most dutiful and devoted
Servant, JO. DENHAM.

COOPERS-HILL.
SURE there are Poets which did never dream
Upon Parnassus, nor did taste the Stream
Of Helicon; we therefore may suppose
Those made not Poets, but the Poet those.
And as Courts make not Kings, but Kings the Court,
So where the Muses and their Train resort,
Parnassus stands; if I can be to thee
A Poet, thou Parnassus art to me.
Nor wonder, if (advantaged in my Flight,
By taking Wing from thy Auspicious Height)
Through untrac'd Ways, and airy Paths I fly,
More boundless in my Fancy than my Eye:
My Eye, which swift as Thought contracts the Space
That lies between, and first salutes the Place
Crowned with that sacred Pile, so vast, so high,
That whether 'ts part of Earth, or Sky,
Uncertain seems, and may be thought a proud
Aspiring Mountain, or descending Cloud:
Paul's the late Theme of such a Muse whose Flight M. W.

His bravely reached and soared above thy Height;
Now shall thou stand, though Sword, or Time, or Fire,
Or Zeal more fierce than they, thy Fall conspire,
Secure, whilst thee the best of Poets sings,
Preserved from Ruin by the best of Kings.
Under his proud survey the City lies,
And like a mist beneath a Hill does rise;
Whose state and wealth the business and the Crowd,
Seems at this distance but a darker Cloud:
And is to him who rightly things esteems,
No other in effect than what it seems;
Where, with like haste, though several ways, they run,
Some to undo, and some to be undone;
While Luxury and Wealth, like War and Peace,
Are each the others ruin, and increase;
As Rivers Lost in Seas some secret Vein
Thence re-conveys there to be lost again.
O happiness of sweet retired content!
To be at once secure, and innocent.
Windsor the next (where Mars with Venus dwells, Windsor

Beauty with strength) above the Valley swells.
Into my eye, and does it self present
With such an easy and unforc't ascent,
That no stupendous precipice denies
Access, no horror turns away our eyes:
But such a Rise as does at once invite
A pleasure and a reverence from the sight.
Thy mighty Master's Emblem, in whose Face
State Meekness, heightened with Majestic Grace;
Such seems the gentle Height, made only proud
To he the Basis of that pompous load,
Than which, a nobler weight no Mountain bears,
But Atlas only that supports the Spears.
When Nature's hand this ground did thus advance,
'Twas guided by a wiser power than Chance;
Marked out for such a use. as if 'twere meant
TO invite the Builder, and his choice prevent.
Nor can we call it choice, when what we choose,
Folly, or Blindness only could refuse.
A Crown of such Majestic Towers does grace
The God's great Mother, when her heavenly race
Do homage to her, yet she cannot boast
Amongst that numerous, and Celestial Host;
More Hero's than can Windsor, nor does Fame's
Immortal Book record more noble Names.
Not to look back so far, to whom this Isle
Owes the first Glory of so brave a Pile,
Whether to Caesar, Albanact, or Brute,
The British Arthur, or the Danish Knute,
(Though this of old no less contest did move,
Than when for Homer's Birth seven Cities strove)
Like him in Birth, thou shoul'dst be like in Fame,
(As thine his Fate, if mine had been his Flame)
But whosoe'er it was, Nature designed
First a brave place, and then as brave a mind.
Not to recount those several Kings, to whom
It gave a Cradle, or to whom a Tomb,
But the (great Edward Third, and the Black Prince.
Edward) and thy greater Son,
(The Lillies which his Father wore, he won)
And thy Queen Philipa.
Bellona, who the Consert came
Not only to thy Bed, but to thy Fame,
The Kings of France and Scotland.
She to the Triumph led one Captive King,
And brought that Son, which did the second bring
Then did thou found that Order (whether Love
Or Victory thy Royal Thoughts did move)
Each was a Noble Cause, and nothing less
Than the Design, has been the great Success:
Which Foreign Kings and Emperors esteem
The second Honor to their Diadem.
Had thy great Destiny but given the Skill,
To know, as well as Power to act her Will,
That from those Kings, who then thy Captives were,
In After-time should spring a Royal Pair,
Who should possess all that thy mighty Power,
Or thy Desires more mighty, did devour;
To whom their better Fate reserves whatever
The Victor hopes for* or the Vanquished fear;
That Blood, which thou and thy Great Gransire shed,
And all that since these Sister Nations bled,
Had been unspilt, had happy Edward known
That all the Blood he spilt, had been his own.
When he that Patron chose, in whom are enjoyed
Soldier and Martyr, and his Arm's confined
Within the Azure Circle, he did seem
But to foretell and prophecy of him,
Who to his Realms that Azure Roun has joined,
Which Nature for their Bound at first designed.
That Boun^, which to the World's extremest ends,
End^ it self, ^s Liquid Arms extends;
Nor does he need those Emblems which we Paint,
But is himself the Soldier and the Saint.
Here should my Wonder dwell, and here my Praise,
But my fixed Thoughts my wandering Eye betrays;
Viewing a Neighboring Hill, whose Top of late
A Chapel crowned, till in the common Fate,
The adjoyding Abbey fell: (May no such Storm
Fall on our Times, where Ruin must reform.)
Tell me (my Muse) what monstrous dire Offense,
What Crime could any Christian King incense
To such a Rage? Was It Luxury, or Lust?
Was he so Temperate, so Chaste, so Just?
Were these their Crimes? They were his own much more:
But Wealth is Crime enough to him that is poor;
Who having spent the Treasures of his Crown,
Condemns their Luxury to feed his own.
And yet this Act, to varnish over the Shame
Of Sacrilege, must bear Devotion's Name.
No Crime so bold, but would be understood
A real, or at least a seeming good;
Who fears not to do ill, yet fears the Name,
And free from Conscience is a Slave to Fame.
Thus he the Church at once protects, and spoils:
But Princes Swords are sharper than their styles.
And thus to th'Ages past he makes amends,
Their Charity destroys, their Faith defends.
Then did Religion in a lazy Cell,
In empty, airy Contemplations dwell;
And like the Block, unmoved lay: but ours,
As much to active, like the Stork devours.
Is there no temperate Region can be known,
Betwixt their Frigid, and our Torrid Zone?
Could we not wake from that Lethargick Dream,
But to be restless in a worse Extreme?
And for that Lethargy was there no Cure,
But to be cast into a Calenture?
Can knowledge have no bound, but must advance
So far, to make us wish for ignorance?
And rather in the dark to grope our way,
Than led by a false Guide to err by day?
Who sees these dismal Heaps, but would demand
What barbarous Invader sacked the Land?
But when he hears, no Goth, no Turk did bring.
This desolation, but a Christian King;
When nothing, but the Name of Zeal, appears
'Twixt our best actions, and the worst of theirs,
What does he think our Sacrilege would spare,
When such the effects of our Devotion are?
Parting from thence 'twixt anger shame and fear,
Those for what is past, and this for what is too near:
My eye descending from the Hill, surveys
Where Thames amongst the wanton Valleys strays.
Thames, the most loved of all the Ocean Sons, Thames.

By his old Sire to his embraces runs,
Hasting to pay his tribute to the Sea,
Like mortal life to meet Eternity.
Though with those streams he no resemblance hold,
Whose foam is Amber, and their Gravel Gold;
His genuine, and less guilty wealth to explore,
Search not his bottom, but survey his shore;
Over which he kindly spreads his spacious wing:
And hatches plenty for the ensuing Spring.
Nor then destroys it with too fond a stay,
Like Mothers which their Infants overlay:
Nor with a sudden and impetuous wave,
Like profuse Kings, resums the wealth he gave
No unexpected inundations spoil
The Mowers hopes, nor mock the Plowmans toil:
But Godlike his unwearied Bounty flows;
First loves to do, than loves the Good he does:
Nor are his Blessings to his banks confined,
But free, and common, as the Sea or Wind;
When he to boast or to disperse his stores
Full of the tributes of his grateful shores,
Visits the World, and in his flying towers
Brings home to us, and makes both Indies ours;
Finds wealth where it is, bestows it where it wants,
Cities in deserts, Woods in Cities plants.
So that to us no thing, no place is strange,
While his fair bosom is the World's exchange.
O could I flow like thee, and make thy stream
My great example, as it is my theme!
Though deep, yet clear, though gentle, yet not dull,
Strong without rage, without o're-flowing full.
Heaven her Eridanus no more shall boast,
Whose Fame in thine, like lesser Currents lost;
Thy nobler Streams shall visit Jove's Aboads,
To shine among the Stars, and bathe the Gods:
Here Nature, The Forrest^
whether more intent to please
Us, or her self with strange Varieties;
(For Things of Wonder give no less Delight
To the wise Makers, than Beholder's Sight.
Though these Delights from several Causes wove,
For so our Children, thus our Friends we love)
Wisely she knew the Harmony of Things,
As well as that of Sounds, from Discords springs.
Such was the Discord, which did first disperse
Form, Order, Beauty, through the Universe;
While Dryness, Moisture, Coldness, Heat resists,
All that we have, and that we have subsists.
While the steep horrid Roughness of the Wood
Strive with the gentle Calmness of the Flood.
Such huge Extremes when Nature does unite,
Wonder from thence results, from thence Delight;
The Stream is so transparent, pure and clear, Narcissus.

That had the self-enamour'd Youth gazed here,
So fatally deceived he had not been,
While he the Bottom, not his Face had seen.
But his proud Head the airy Mountain hides
Among the Clouds; his Shoulders, and his Sides
A shady Mantle clothes; his curled Brows
Frown on the gentle Stream, which calmly flows,
While Winds and Storms his lofty Forehead beat
The common Fate of all that is High or Great.
Low at his Foot a spacious Plain is placed,
Between the Mountain and the Stream embraced:
Which Shade and Shelter from the Hill derives,
While the kind River, Wealth and Beauty gives;
And in the mixture of all these appears
Variety, which all the rest indears.
This Scene, had some bold Greek, or British Bard
^eheld of old, what Stories had we heard
Of Fairies, Satyrs, and the Nymphs, their Dames,
Their Feasts, their Revels, and their Amorous Flames?
It Is still the same, although their airy Shape,
All but a quick Poetic Sight escape.
There Faunus and Silvanus keep their Courts,
and thither all the horned Host resorts,
To graze the ranker Mead, that noble Heard
On whose sublime and shady Fronts is reared
Nature's great Masterpiece; to show how soon
Great things are made, but sooner are undone.
Here have I seen the King, when great Affairs
^ave leave to slacken, and unbend his Cares,
^ttended to the Chase by all the Flower
Of Youth, whose Hopes a nobler Prey devour:
^leasure with Praise, and Danger, they would buy,
and wish a Foe that would not only fly.
The Stag now conscious of his fatal Growth,
^t once indulgent to his Fear and Sloth,
To some dark Covert his Retreat had made,
Where no Man's Eye, nor Heaven's should invade
^'s soft Repose; when the unexpected Sound
^f Dogs and Men, his wakeful Ear does wound:
^ouz'd with the Noise, he scarce believes his Ear;
^illing to think the Illusions of his Fear
(...) given this false Alarm, but strait his View
^onfirms, that more than all he fears is true:
Betrayed in all his Strengths, the Wood beset,
All Instruments, all Arts of Ruin met
He calls to mind his Strength, and then his Speed,
His winged Heels, and then his Armed Head;
With these to avoid, with that his Fate to meet:
But fear prevails, and bids him trust his Feet.
So fast he flies, that his reviewing eye
Has lost the Chasers, and his ear the Cry:
Exulting, till he finds, their Nobler Sense
Their disproportioned Speed does recompense.
Then curses his conspiring Feet, who scent
Betrays that safety, which their swiftness lent.
Then tries his Friends, among the baser heard,
Where he so lately was obeyed, and feared,
His safety seeks: the Herd, unkindly wise,
Or Chases him from thence, or from him flies.
Like a declining Statesman, left forlorn
To his Friends pity, and Pursuers scorn;
With shame remembers, while himself was one
Of the same Herd, himself the same had done.
Thence to the Coverts, and the conscious Groves,
The Scenes of his past Triumphs, and his Loves;
Sadly surveying where he ranged alone
Prince of the Soil, and all the Herd his own;
And like a bold Knight Errant did proclaim
Combat to all, and bore away the Dame;
And taught the Woods to Echo to the Stream
His dreadful Challenge, and his clashing Beam:
Yet fairly now declines the fatal strife;
So much his Love was dearer than his Life.
Now every Leaf, and every moving Breath
Presents a Foe, and every Foe a Death.
Wearied, forsaken, and pursued, at last
All safety in despair of safety placed,
Courage he thence resumes, resolved to bear
All their Assaults, since it is in vain to fear.
And now too late he wishes for the fight,
That strength he wasted in ignoble flight:
But when he sees the eager Chase renewed
Himself by Dogs, the Dogs by Men pursued:
He strait revokes his bold resolve, and more
Repents his courage, than his fear before;
Finds that uncertain ways unsafest are,
And Doubt a greater mischief than Despair.
Then to the Stream, when neither Friends, nor Force,
Nor speed, nor Art avail, he shaps his course;
Thinks not their rage so desperate to assay
An Element more merciless than they.
But fearless they pursue, nor can the Flood
Quench their dire Thirst; alas, they thirst for Blood.
So toward a Ship the oarefin'd Galleys ply,
Which wanting Sea to ride, or Wind to fly,
Stands but to fall revenged on those that dare
Tempt the last fury of extreme Despair.
So fares the Stag among the enraged Hounds,
Repels their force, and wounds returns for wounds
And as a Hero, whom his baser Foes
In Troops surrounds, now these assails, now those,
Though Prodigal of Life, disdains to dye
By common hands; but if he can descry
Some nobler Foes approach, to him he calls,
And begs his Fate, and then contented falls.
So when the King a mortal Shaft lets fly
From his unerring hand, then glad to dye,
Proud of the wound, to it resigns his Blood,
And stains the Crystal with a purple Flood.
This a more innocent and happy Chase,
Than when of old, but in the self-same place,
Runny Mead, where that Great Charter was first sealed.
Fair Liberty pursued, and meant a Prey
To lawless power, here turned, and stood at Bay.
When in that Remedy all hope was placed,
Which was, or should have been at least, the last.
Here was that Charter sealed, wherein the Magna Charta.
Crown
All marks of Arbitrary Power lays down:
Tyrant and Slave, those Names of hate and fear,
The happier Style of King and Subject bear:
Happy when both to the same Center move,
When Kings give Liberty, and Subjects Love.
Therefore not long in Force this Charter stood;
Wanting that Seal, it must be sealed in Blood.
The Subjects armed, the more their Princes gave,
The advantage only took the more to crave.
Till King's by giving, gave themselves away,
And even that Power that should deny, betray.
"Who gives constrained, but his own Fear reviles,
"Not thanked, but scorned; nor are thy Gifts, but Spoils.
Thus Kings, by grasping more than they could hold,
First made their Subjects by Oppression bold:
And popular Sway, by forcing Kings to give
More than was fit for Subjects to receive,
Ran to the same Extremes; and one Excess
Made both, by striving to be greater, less.
When a calm River raised with sudden Rains,
Or Snows dissolved* overflows the adjoining Plains,
The Husbandmen with high-rais'd Banks secure
Their greedy Hopes, and this he can endure;
But if with Bays and Dams, they strive to force
His Chanel to a new or narrow Course;
No longer then within his Banks he dwells,
First to a Torrent, then a Deluge swells:
Stronger and Fiercer! by Restraint he roars,
And knows no Bound, but makes his Powers his Shores.
FINIS.
THE DUEL OF THE STAGS, A POEM, Written by the Honorable Sir ROBERT HOWARD.
Together with An EPISTLE TO THE AUTHOR, By Mr. John Dryden.

LONDON: Printed and Sold by H. Hills, in Blackfryars, near the Waterside.
1709.

THE DUEL of the STAGS.
IN Windsor Forest, before War destroyed
The harmless Pleasures which soft Peace enjoyed;
^ mighty Stag grew Monarch of the Herd,
^y all his Savage Slaves obeyed, and feared:
and while the Troops about their Sovereign fed,
^hey watched the awful nodding of his Head.
^till as he passes by, they all remove,
^roud in Dominion, Prouder in his Love:
And while with Pride and Appetite he swells;)
^e courts no chosen Object, but compels:
^o Subject his loved Mistress dares deny,
^ut yields his hopes up to his Tyranny.
Long had this Prince imperiously thus swayed,
^y no set Laws, but by his Will obeyed,
^is fearful Slaves, to full Obedience grown,
^dmire his strength, and dare not use their own.
One Subject most did his suspicion move,
that showed least Fear and counterfeited Love:
(...) the best Pastures by his side he fed,
^rm'd with two large Militia's on his head:
As if he practiced Majesty he walked,
And at his Nod, he made not have, but stalked.
By his large shade, he saw how great he was,
And his vast Layers on the bended Grass.
His thought as large as his proportion grew,
And judged himself as fit for Empire too.
Thus to Rebellious hopes he swelled at length,
Love and Ambition growing with his strength.
This hid Ambition his bold Passion shows,
And from a Subject to a Rival grows.
Sollicites all his Princes fearful Dames,
And in his fight Courts with rebellious flames.
The Prince sees this with an inflamed Eye,
But looks are only signs of Majesty:
When once a Prince's Will meets a restraint,
His Power is then esteemed but his Complaint.
His Head then shakes, at which the affrighted Herd
Start to each side; his Rival not afear'd,
Stands by his Mistress side, and stirs not thence,
But bids her own his Love, and his Defense,
The Quarrel now to a vast height is grown,
Both urged to fight by Passion and a Throne;
But Love has most excuse; for all, we find,
Have Passions, though not Thrones alike assigned.
The Sovereign Stag shaking his loaded head,
On which his Scepters with his Arms were spread,
Wisely by Nature, there together fixed,
Where with the Tittle, the Defense was mixed.
The pace which he advanced with to engage,
Became at once his Majesty, and Rage:
'Tother stands still with as much confidence,
To make his part seem only his defense.
Their heads now meet, and at one blow each strikes
As many strokes, as if a Rank of Pikes
Grew on his brows, as thick their Antlets stand,
Which every Year kind Nature does disband.
Wild Beasts sometimes in peace and quiet are,
But Man no season frees from Love or War.
With equal strength they met, as if two Oaks
Had fell, and mingled with a thousand strokes.
One by ambition urged, the other disdain,
One to preserve, the other fought to Gain:
The Subjects and the Mistresses stood by,
With Love and Duty to crown Victory:
For all Affections wait on prosperous Fame,
Not he that climbs, but he that falls, meet shame.
While thus with equal Courages they meet,
The wounded Earth yields to their struggling Feet;
And while one slides, the other pursues the Fight,
And thinks that forced Retreat looks like a Flight:
But then ashamed of his Retreat, at length
Drives his Foe back, his Rage renews his strength.
As even weights into a motion thrown,
By equal turns, drive themselves up and down;
So sometimes one, then 'tother Stag prevails,
And Victory yet doubtful, holds the Scales.
The Prince ashamed to be opposed so long,
With all his strength united rushes on;
The Rebel weaker, than at first appears,
And from his Courage sinks unto his Fears.
Not able longer to withstand his might,
From a Retreat, at last steals to a Flight.
The mighty Stag pursues his flying Foe,
Till his own Pride of Conquest made him slow;
Thought it enough to scorn a thing that flies,
And only now pursued him with his Eyes.
The vanquished as he fled turned back his fight,
Ashamed to fly, and yet afraid to fight:
Sometimes his wounds, as his excuse surveyed,
Then fled again, and then looked back and stayed:
Blush't that his wounds so slight should not deny
Strength for a fight, that left him strength to fly.
Calls thoughts of Love and Empire to his Aid,
But fears more powerful than all those persuade,
And yet in spite of them retains his shame,
His cooled ambition, and his half-quench'd flame,
There Is none from their own sense of shame can fly,
And dregs of Passions dwell with misery.
Now to the shades he bends his feeble course,
Despised by those that once admired his force:
The Wretch that to a scorned Condition's thrown,
With the World's Favor, loses too his own.
While fawning Troops their Conquering Prince enclosed,
Now rendered absolute by being oppo^'d;
Princes by Disobedience get Command,
And by new quenched Rebellions firmer stand
Till by the boundless offers of success,
They meet their Fate in ill-us'd happiness.
The vanquished Stag to thickest shades repairs,
Where he finds safety punished with his Cares;
Thorough the VVoods he rushes not, but glides,
And from all searches but his own he hides;
Ashamed to live, unwilling yet to lose
That wretched life he knew not how to use.
In this Retirement thus he lived concealed,
Till with his wounds his fears were almost healed;
His ancient Passions now began to move,
He thought again of Empire and of Love:
Then roused himself and stretched at his full length,
Took the large measure of his mighty strength;
Then shook his loaded Head; the shadow too,
Shook like a tree, where leaveless Branches grew:
Stooping to drink, he sees it in the Streams,
And in the Woods hears clashing of his Beams;
No Accident but does alike proclaim
His growing strength, and his increasing shame.
Now once again, resolves to try his Fate,
^ for Envy always is importunate;)
And in the mind perpetually does move,
A fit Companion for unquiet Love.
He thinks upon his mighty Enemy,
Circl'd about with Power and Luxury.
And hoped his strength might sink in his desires,
Remembering he had wasted in such Fires.
Yet while he hoped by them to overcome,
He wished the others fatal joys his own.
Thus the unquiet Beast in fasety lay,
Where nothing was to fear, nor to obey;
Where he alone commanded, and was Lord
Of every Bounty Nature did afford,
Chose Feasts for every Arbitrary Sense,
An Empire in the state of Innocence.
But all the Feasts Nature before him placed,
Had but faint relishes to his lost taste,
Sick Minds, like Bodies in a Fever spent,
Turn Food to the Disease, not nourishment.
Sometimes he stole abroad, and shrinking stood,
Under the shelter of the friendly Wood;
Casting his envious Eyes toward those Plains
Where with crowned joys, his mighty Rival Reigns.
He saw the obeying Herd marching along,
And weighed his Rival's Greatness by the Throng.
Want takes false Measures, both of Power and Joys,
And envied Greatness is but Crowd, and Noise.
Not able to endure this hated sight,
Back to the Shades he flies to seek out Nigt.
Like exiles from their native Soils, though sent
To better Countries, think it Banishment.
Here he enjoyed what the other could have there,
The woods are shady, and the streams as clear,
The Pastures more untainted where he fed,
And every Night chose out an unprest Bed.
But then his laboring Soul with Dreams was pressed,
And found the greatest weariness in rest;
His dreadful Rival in his sleep appears,
And in his Dreams again, he fights and fears:
Shrinks at the strokes of to others mighty Head,
Feels every wound, and dreams how fast he fled.
At this he wakes, and with his fearful Eyes,
Salutes the light that fleet the Eastern Skies,
Still half amazed, looks round, and held by fear,
Scarce can believe no Enemy was near.
But when he saw his heedless fears were brought
Not by a Substance, but a drowsy Thought.
His ample sides he shakes, from whence the dew
In scattered Showers like driven Tempests flew,
At which, through all his breast new boldness spread,
And with his Courage raised his mighty head.
Then by his Love inspired, resolves to try
The Combat now, and overcome, or die.
Every weak Passion sometimes is above
The fear of death, much more the noblest love.
By hope it is scorned, and by despair it is sought,
Pursued by Honor, and by Sorrow brought.
Resolved the paths of danger now to tread,
From his scorned shelter, and his fears he fled.
With a brave have now seeks a second Fight,
Redeems the base one by a Noble Flight.
In the mean time, the Conqueror enjoyed
That Power by which he was to be destroyed.
How hard it is for the Prosperous to see,
That fate which waits on Power, and Victory.
Thus he secuerly Reigned, when in a Rout
He saw the affrighted Herd flying about;
As if some Huntsmen did their Chase pursue,
About themselves in scattered Rings they flew,
He like a careful Monarch raised his Head,
To see what cause that strange disturbance bread.
But when the searcht-out Cause appeared no more,
Than from a Slave, he had overcome before,
A bold disdain did in his looks appear,
And shook his aweful Head to chide their Fear.
The Herd afraid of Friend and Enemy,
Shrink from the one, and from the other fly;
They scarce know which they should Obey, or Trust,
Since Fortune only makes it Safe and Just.
Yet in despite of all his Pride, he staid,
And this unlook't for Chance with trouble weighed,
His Rage, and his Contempt alike, swelled high,
And only feared his Enemy should fly;
He thought of former Conquest, and from thence
Cozened himself into a Confidence.
The Other that saw his Conqueror so near,
Stood still and list'ned to a whispering fear;
From whence she heard his Conquest and his Shame.
But newborn Hopes his ancient Fears o'recame.
The mighty Enemies now meet at length,
With equal Fury, though not equal Strength
For now, too late the Conqueror did find,
That all was wasted in him but his Mind.
His Courage in his Weakness yet prevails.
As a bold Pilot steers with tattered Sails,
And Cordage cracked, directs no steady Course,
Carried by Resolution, more than Force.
Before his once scorned Enemy he reels,
His wounds increasing with his shame, he feels
The others strength more from his weakness grows,
And with one furious push, his Rival throws.
So a tall Oak, the Pride of all the VVood,
That long the assault of several storms has stood,
Till by a mighty blast more pow'rfully push't,
His Roots torn up, and to the Earth he rusht.
Yet then he raised his Head, on which there grew,
Once, all his Power and all his Title too;
Unable now to rise, and less to fight,
He raised those Scepters to demand his Right.
But such weak Arguments prevail with none,
To plead their Titles, when their Power is gone.
His Head now sinks, and with it all defense,
Not only robbed of Power but Pretense.
Wounds upon wounds, the Conqueror still gives.
And thinks himself unsafe, while the other lives:
Unhappy State of such as wear a Crown,
Fortune does seldom lay'em gently down.
Now to the most scorned Remedy he flies,
And for some Pity seems to move his Eyes,
Pity, by which the best of Vertu's tried,
To wretched Princes ever is denied,
There is a Debt to Fortune, which they pay
For all their Greatness, by no common way.
The flattering Troops unto the Victor fly,
And own his Title to his Victory;
The Faith of most, with Fortune does decline,
Duty's but Fear, and Conscience but Design.
The Victor now, proud in his great success,
Hastes to enjoy his fatal happiness;
Forgot his mighty Rival was destroyed
But that, which he so fondly now enjoyed.
In Passions, thus Nature her self enjoys,
Sometimes preserves, and then again destroys;
Yet all Destruction which Revenge can move,
Time or Ambition, is supplied by Love.
To my Honored Friend Sir ROBERT HOWARD, On his Excellent Poem.
By Mr. John Dryden.
AS there is Music uniform'd by Art
In those wild Notes, which with a Merry heart
The Birds in unfrequented Shades express,
Who better taught at home, yet please us less:
So in your Verse, a Native sweetness dwells,
Which shames Composure, and its Art excels.
Singing no more can your soft numbers grace,
Than Paint adds Charms unto a beauteous face.
Yet as when mighty Rivers gently creep,
Their even Calmness does suppose them deep;
Such is your Muse: No Metaphor swelled high
With dangerous boldness lifts her to the Sky;
Those mounting Fancies, when they fall again,
Show Sand and Dirt at bottom do remain.
So firm a Strength, and yet withal so sweet,
Did never but in Sampson's Riddle meet.
It Is strange each Line so great a weight should bear,
And yet no sign of Toil, no Sweat appear.
Either your Art hides Art, as Stoics feign
Then least to feel, when most they suffer pain;
And we, dull Souls admire, but cannot see
What hidden Springs within the Engine be:
Or, it is some happiness that still pursues
Each Act and Motion of your graceful Muse.
Or is it Fortune's Work, that in your Head
The Curious Rete mirabile.
Net that is for Fancies spread,
Lets through its Meshes every meaner thought,
While rich Idea's there are only caught.
Sure that is not all; this is a piece too fair,
To be the Child of Chance, and not of Care.
No Atums casually together hurled
Could ever produce so beautiful a World.
Nor dare I such a Doctrine here admit,
As would destroy the Providence of wit,
It Is your strong Genius then which does not feel
Those weights would make a weaker Spirit reel.
To carry weight, and run so lightly too,
Is what alone you Pegasus can do.
Great Hercules himself could never do more,
Than not to feel those Heavens and Gods he bore.
Your easier Odes, which for delight were penned,
Yet our Instruction make their second End:
Were both enriched and pleased like them that woo,
At once a Beauty, and a Fortune too.
Of Moral Knowledge Poesy was Queen,
And still she might, had wanton wits not been;
VVo like ill Guardians lived themselves at large,
And not content with that, debauched their Charge:
Like some brave Captain, your successful Pen
Restores the Exiled to her Crown again;
And gives us hope that having seen the Days
When nothing flourished but Phanatick Bays,
All will at length in this Opinion rest,
A Sober Prince's Government is best.
This is not all, your Art the way has found
To make Improvement of the richest Ground,
That Soil which those Immortal Laurels bore,
That once the sacred Maro's Temples wore.
Elisa's Griefs are so expressed by you,
They are too Eloquent to have been true.
Had she so spoke, Aeneas had obeyed
What Dido, rather than what Jove had said.
If Funeral Rites can give a Ghost repose,
Your Muse so justly has discharged those,
Elisa's Shade, may now its wandering cease,
And claim a Title to the Fields of Peace.
But if Aeneas be obliged no less
Youd Kindness great Achilles does confess;
Who dressed by Statius in so bold a look,
Did ill become those Virgin Robes he took.
To understand how much we owe to you,
We must your Numbers with your Author's view;
Then we shall see his work was lamely rough,
Each Figure stiff, as if designed in Buff;
His Colors laid so thick on every place,
As only showed the Paint, but hid the Face.
But as in Perspective we beauties see,
Which in the Glass, not in the Picture be;
So here our Sight obligingly mistakes
That wealth which his your bounty only makes.
Thus vulgar Dishes are by Cooks disguised,
More for their dressing than their substance prized.
Your curious Annotations on Statius.
Notes to search into that Age,
When all was Fable but the sacred Page,
That since in that dark Night we needs must stray,
We are at least Misled in pleasant way.
But what we must admire your Verse no less
The Prophet than the Poet does confess.
E're our weak Eyes discerned the doubtful streak
Of Light, you saw Great Charles his Morning break^
So skilful Seamen ken the Land from far,
Which shows like Mists to the dull Passenger.
To Charles your Muse first pays her Dutious Love,
As still the Ancients did begin from Jove.
With Monck you end whose Name preserved shall be
As Rome Recorded Hic situs est Rufus, qui pulso vindice quendam
Imperium asseruit non sibi sed Patriae.

Rufus Memory.
Who thought it greater Honor to obey
His Countries Interest, than the world to sway.
But to write worthy things of worthy Men,
Is the peculiar talent of your Pen:
Yet let me take your Mantle up, and I
Will venture in your Right to Prophecy.
"This work by Merit first of Fame secure,
"Is likewise happy in its Geniture:
"For since it is born, when Charles ascends the Throne,
"It shares at once, his Fortune and his own.
FROM THE Greek of MEN AGE.
WHen through the Streets the Paphian Goddess run,
And cried the Fugitive her darling Son;
A Kiss was the Reward to be bestowed,
More sweet than Nector, or Ambrosial Food.
Your Son, the Fugitive you seek is here,
Within my Breast is hid the Wanderer:
Give me kind Goddess, give the charming kiss,
Or bid fair Celia, and improve the Bliss.
FINIS.
CIDER. A POEM. In TWO BOOKS. -- Honos erit huic quoque Pomo?

Virg. WITH THE SPLENDID SHILLING; PARADISE LOST, And Two SONGS, etc.

LONDON: ^^inted and Sold by H. Hills, in Black-Fryars, near the Waterside.
1709.

CIDER. BOOK I.
WHAT Soil the Apple loves, what Care is due
To Orchats, timeliest when to press the Fruit^
Thy Gift, Pomona, in Miltonian Verse
Adventrous I presume to sing; of Verse
Nor skilled, nor studious: But my Native Soil
Invites me, and the Theme as yet unsung.
Ye Ariconian Knights, and fairest Dames,
To whom propitious Heaven these Blessings grants,
Attend my Lays; nor hence disdain to learn,
How Nature's Gifts may be improved by Art.
And thou, O Mostyn, whose Benevolence,
And Candor often experienced, Me vouchsafed
To knit in Friendship, growing still with Years,
Accept this Pledge of Gratitude and Love.
May it a lasting Monument remain
Of dear Respect; that, when this Body frail
Is moulder'd into Dust, and I become
As I had never been, late Times may know
I once was blessed in such a matchless Friend.
Who-e'er expects his laboring Trees should bend
With Fruitage, and a kindly Harvest yield,
Be this his first Concern; to find a Tract
Impervious to the Winds, begirt with Hills,
That intercept the Hyperborean Blasts
Tempestuous, and cold Eurus nipping-Force,
Noxious to feeble Buds: But to the West
Lest him free Entrance grant, let Zephyrs bland
Administer their tepid genial Airs;
Naught fear he from the West, whose gentle Warmth
Discloses well the Earth's all-teeming Womb,
Invigorating tender Seeds; whose Breath
Nurtures the Orange, and the Citron Groves,
Hesperian Fruits, and wafts their Odours sweet
Wide through the Air, and distant Shores perfumes.
Nor only do the Hills exclude the Winds:
But, when the blackning Clouds in sprinkling Showers
Distill, from the high Summits down the Rain
Runs trickling; with the fertile Moisture cheered,
The Orchats smile; joyous the Farmers see
Their thriving Plants, and bless the heavenly Dew.
Next, let the Planter, with Discretion meet,
The Force and Genius of each Soil explore;
To what adapted, what it shuns averse:
Without this necessary Care, in vain
He hopes an Apple-Vintage, and Invokes
Pomona's Aid in vain. The miry Fields,
Rejoicing in rich Mold, most ample Fruit
Of beauteous Form produce; pleasing to Sight,
But to the Tongue inelegant and flat.
So Nature has decreed; so, often we see
Men passing fair, in outward Lineaments
Elaborate; less, inwardly, exact.
Nor from the sable Ground expect Success,
Nor from cretaceous, stubborn and jejune:
The Must, of pallid Hue, declares the Soil
Devoid of Spirit; wretched He, that quaffs
Such wheyish Liquors; often with Colic Pangs,
With pungent Colic Pangs distressed, he will roar,
And toss, and turn, and curse the unwholesome Draught*
But, Farmer, look, where full-ear'd Sheaves of Rye
Grow wavy on the Tilth, that Soil select
For Apples; thence thy Industry shall gain
Ten-fold Reward; thy Garners, thence with Store
Surcharged, shall burst; thy Press with purest Juice
Shall flow, which, in revolving Years, may try
Thy feeble Feet, and bind thy fault'ring Tongue.
Such is the Kent-church, such Dantzeyan Ground,
Such Thine, O learned Brom, and Capel such,
Willisian Burlton, much-loved Geers his Marsh,
And Sutton Acres, drenched with Regal Blood
Of Ethelbert, when to th'unhallow'd Feast
Of Mercian Offa he invited came,
To treat of Spousals: Long connubial Joys
He promised to himself, allured by Fair
Elfrida's Beauty, but deluded died
In height of Hopes -- Oh! hardest Fate, to fall
By Show of Friendship, and pretended Love!
I nor advise, nor reprehend the Choice
Of Marcley-Hill; the Apple no where finds
A kinder Mold: Yet it is unsafe to trust
Deceitful Ground: Who knows but that, once more,
This Mount may journey, and his present Site
Forsaking, to thy Neighbors Bounds transfer
The goodly Plants affording Matter strange
For Law-Debates? If therefore, thou incline
To deck this Rise with Fruits of various Tastes,
Fail not by frequent Vows t'implore Success;
Thus piteous Heaven may fix the wandering Glebe.
But if (for Nature does not share alike
Her Gifts) an happy Soil should be withheld;
If a penurious Clay should be thy Lot,
Or rough unweildy Earth, nor to the Plough,
Nor to the Cattle kind, with sandy Stones
And Gravel o'er-abounding, think it not
Beneath thy Toil; the sturdy Pear Tree here
Will rise luxuriant, and with toughest Root
Fierce the obstructing Grit, and restive Marle.
Thus naught is useless made; nor is there Land,
But what, or of it self, or else compelled,
Affords Advantage. On the barren Heath
The Shepherd tends his Flock, that daily crop
Their verdant Dinner from the mossie Turf,
Sufficient; after them the Cackling Goose,
Close-grazer, ^inds wherewith to ease her Want.
What should I more? Even on the cliffy Height
Of Penmenmaur, and that Cloud-piercing Hill,
Plinlimmon, from afar the Traveller kens
Astonished, how the Goats their shrubby Brouze
Gnaw pendent; nor untrembling can thou see,
How from a scraggy Rock, whose Prominence
Half overshades the Ocean, hardy Men,
Fearless of rending Winds, and dashing Waves,
Cut Sampire, to excite the squeamish Gust
Of pampered Luxury. Then, let thy Ground
Not lie unlabored; if the richest Stem
Refuse to thrive, yet who would doubt to plant
Somewhat, that may to Human Use redound,
And Penury, the worst of Ills, remove?
There are, who, fond studious of Increase,
Rich Foreign Mold on their ill-natured Land
Induce laborious, and with fatning Muck
Besmear the Roots; in vain! the nursling Grove
Seems fair a while, cherished with foster Earth:
But, when the alien Compost is exhaust,
It Is native Poverty again prevails.
Though this Art fails, despond not; little Pains,
In a due Hour employed, great Profit yield.
The industrious, when the Sun in Leo rides,
And darts his sultriest Beams, portending Drought,
Forgets not at the Foot of every Plant
To sink a circling Trench, and daily pour
A just Supply of alimental Streams,
Exhausted Sap recruiting; else, false Hopes
He cherishes, nor will his Fruit expect
Th'autumnal Season, but, in Summer's Pride,
When other Orchats smile, abortive fail.
Thus the great Light of Heaven, that in his Course
Surveys and quickens all things, often proves
Noxious to planted Fields, and often Men
Perceive his Influence dire; sweltring they run
To Grots, and Caves, and the cool Umbrage seek
Of woven Arborets, and often the Rills.
Still streaming fresh revisit, to allay
Thirst inextinguishable: But if the Spring
Preceding should be destitute of Rain,
Or Blast Septentrional with brushing Wings
Sweep up the smoaky Mists, and Vapors damp,
Then woe to Mortals! Titan then exerts
His Heat intense, and on our Vitals preys;
Then Mala dies of various Kinds, and Names
Unknown, malignant Fevers, and that Foe
To blooming Beauty, which imprints the Face
Of fairest Nymph, and checks our growing Love,
Reign far and near; grim Death, in different Shapes,
Depopulates the Nations, thousands fall
His Victims, Youths, and Virgins, in their Flower,
Reluctant die, and sighing leave their Loves
Unfinished, by infectious Heaven destroyed.
Such Heats prevailed, when fair Eliza, last
Of Winchcomb's Name (next Thee in Blood and Worth.
O fairest St. John!) left this toilsome World
In Beauty's Prime, and sadden'd all the Year:
Nor could her Virtues, nor repeated Vows
Of thousand Lovers, the relentless Hand
Of Death arrest; She with the Vulgar fell,
Only distinguished by this humble Verse.
But if it please the Sun's intemp'rate Force
To know, attend; whilst I of ancient Fame
The Annals trace, and Image to thy Mind,
How our Forefathers, (luckless Men!) ingulf,
By the wide yawning Earth, to Stygian Shades
Went quick, in one sad Sepulcher enclosed.
In elder Days, ever yet the Roman Bands
Victorious, this our other World subdued,
A spacious City stood, with firmest Walls
Sure mounded, and with numerous Turrets crowned,
Aerial Spires, and Citadels, the Seat
Of Kings and Heroes resolute in War,
Famed Ariconium; uncontrolled, and free,
'Till all subduing Latian Arms prevailed.
Then also, though to foreign Yoke submits,
She undemolish'd stood, and even 'till now
Perhaps had stood, of ancient British Art
A pleasing Monument, not less admired
Than what from Attic, or Etruscan Hands
Arose; had not the Heavenly Powers averse
Decreed her final Doom: For now the Fields
Labored with Thirst, Aquarius had not shed
His wonted Showers, and Sirius parched with Heat
Solstitial the green Herb: Hence 'gan relax
The Ground's Contexture, hence Tartarean Dregs,
Sulphur, and nitrous Spume, enkindling fierce,
Bellowed within their darksom Caves, by far
More dismal then the loud disploded Roar
Of Brazen Enginry, that ceaseless storm
The Bastion of a well built City, deemed
Impregnable: The infernal Winds, 'till now
Closely imprisoned, by Titanian Warmth,
Dilating, and with unctuous Vapors fed,
Disdained their narrow Cells; and their full Strength
Collecting, from beneath the solid Mass
Upheav'd, and all her Castles rooted deep
Shook from their lowest Seat; old Vaga's Stream,
Forced by the sudden Shock, her wonted Track
Forsook, and drew her humid Train aslope,
Crankling her Banks: And now the lowering Sky,
And baleful Lightning, and the Thunder, Voice
Of angry Gods, that rattled solemn, dismayed
The sinking Hearts of Men. Where should they turn
Distressed? Whence seek for Aid? when from below
Hell threatens, and even Fate supreme gives Signs
Of Wrath and Desolation? Vain were Vows,
And Plaints, and suppliant Hands, to Heaven erect!
Yet some to Fanes repaired, and humble Rites
Performed to Thor, and Woden, fabled Gods,
Who with their Vot'ries in one Ruin shared,
Crushed, and overwhelmed. Others, in frantic Mood
Run howling through the Streets, their hideous Yells
Rend the dark Welkin; Horror stalks around,
Wild-staring, and, his sad Concomitant,
Despair, of their abject Look: At every Gate
The thronging Populace with hasty Strides
Press furious, and too eager of Escape,
Obstruct the easy Way; the rocking Town
Supplants their Footsteps; to and fro, they reel
Astonished, as over charged with Wine; when lo!
The Ground adust her riven Mouth disparts,
Horrible Casm, profound! with swift Descent
Old Ariconium sinks, and all her Tribes,
Heroes, and Senators, down to the Realms
Of endless Night. Mean while, the loosened Winds
Infuriate, molten Rocks and flaming Globes
Hurled high above the Clouds; 'till, all their Force
Consumed, her ravenous Jaws the Earth satiate closed.
Thus this fair City fell, of which the Name
Survives alone; nor is there found a Mark,
Whereby the curious Passenger may learn
Her ample Site, save Coins, and mouldering Urns,
And huge unwieldy Bones, lasting Remains
Of that Gigantic Race, which as he breaks
The clotted Glebe, the Plowman happily finds,
Appalled. Upon that treacherous Tract of Land,
She whilomestood; now Ceres, in her Prime,
Smiles fertile, and, with ruddiest Freight bedeckt,
The Apple Tree, by our Forefathers Blood
Improved, that now recalls the devious Muse,
Urging her destined Labors to pursue.
The Prudent will observe, what Passions reign
In various Plants (for not to Man alone,
But all the wide Creation, Nature gave
Love, and aversion:) Everlasting Hate
The Vine to Ivy bears, nor less abhors
The Coleworts Rankness; but with amorous Twine,
Clasps the tall Elm: The Paes^an Rose unfolds
Her Bud, more lovely, near the fetid Leek,
(Crest of stout Britons,) an inhances thence
The Price of her celestial Scent: The Gourd,
And thirsty Cucumer, when they perceive
The approaching Olive, with Resentment fly
Her fatty Fibers, and with Tendrils creep
Diverse, detesting Contract; whilst the Fig
Contemns not Rue, nor Sage's humble Leaf,
Close Neighboring; the Herefordian Plant
Caresses freely the contiguous Peach,
Hazel, and weight-resisting Palm, and likes
TO approach the Quince, and the Elder's pithy Stem;
Uneasy, seated by funeral Yeugh,
Or Walnut, (whose malignant Touch impairs
All generous Fruits,) or near the bitter Dews
Of Cherries. Therefore, weigh the Habits well
Of Plants, how they associate best, nor let
Ill Neighborhood corrupt thy hopeful Graffs.
Would thou, thy Vats with generous Juice should froth?
Respect thy Orchats; think not, that the Trees
Spontaneous will produce an wholesome Draught.
Let art correct thy Breed: from Parent Bough
A Coin meetly sever; after, force
A way into the Crabstock's close-wrought Grain
By Wedges, and within the living Wound
Enclose the Foster Twig; nor over-nice
Refuse with thy own Hands around to spread
The binding Clay e're-long their differing Veins
Unite, and kindly Nourishment convey
To the new Pupil; now shoots his Arms
With quickest Growth; now shake the teeming Trunk,
Down rain the impurpl'd Balls, ambrosial Fruit.
Whether the Wildings Fibers are contrived
To draw the Earth's purest Spirit, and resist
It Is Feculence, which in more porous Stocks
Of Cydar Plants finds Passage free, or else
The native Verjuice of the Crab, derived
Through the infix'd Graff, a grateful Mixture forms
Of tart and sweet; whatever be the Cause,
This doubtful Progeny by nicest Tastes
Expected best Acceptance finds, and pays
Largest Revenues to the Orchat-Lord,
Some think, the Quince and Apple would combine
In happy Union; Others fitter deem
The Sloe-Stem bearing Sylvan Plums austere.
Who knows but Both may thrive? However, what loss
To try the Powers of Both, and search how far
Two different Natures may concur to mix
In close Embraces, and strange Offspring bear?
Thou Wilt find that Plants will frequent Changes try,
Undamag'd, and their marriageable Arms
Conjoin with others. So Silurean Plants
Admit the Peache's odoriferous Globe,
And Pears of sundry Forms; at different times
Adopted Plums will aliene Branches grace;
And Men have gathered from the Hawthorn's Branch
Large Medlars, imitating regal Crowns.
Nor is it hard to beautify each Month
With Files of parti-colour'd Fruits, that please
The Tongue, and View, at once. So Maro's Muse,
Thrice sacred Muse! commodious Precepts gives
Instructive to the Swains, not wholly bent
On what is gainful: Sometimes she diverts
From solid Counsels, shows the Force of Love
In savage Beasts; how Virgin Face divine
Attracts the hapless Youth through Storms, and Waves,
Alone, in deep of Night: Then she describes
The Scythian Winter, nor disdains to sing,
How under Ground the rude Riphaean Race
Mimic brisk Cider with the Brakes Product wild;
Sloes pounded, Hips, and Servis harshest Juice.
Let sage Experience teach thee all the Arts
Of Grafting, and In-Eyeing; when to lop
The flowing Branches; what Trees answer best
From Root, or Kernel: She will best the Hours
Of Harvest, and Seed time declare; by Her
The different Qualities of things were found,
And secret Motions; how with heavy Bulk
Volatile Hermes, fluid and unmoist,
Mounts on the Wings of Air; to her we owe
The Indian Weed, unknown to ancient Times
Nature's choice Gift, whose acrimonious Fume
Extracts superfluous Juices, and refines
The Blood distempered from its noxious Salts;
Friend to the Spirits, which with Vapors bland
It gently mitigates, Companion fit
Of Pleasantry, and Wine; nor to the Bards
Unfriendly, when they to the vocal Shell
Warble melodious their well-labour'd Songs.
She found the polished Glass, whose small Unequal
Enlarges to Ten Millions of Degrees
The Mite, invisible else, of Nature's Hand
Least Animal; and shows, what Laws of Life
The Cheese-Inhabitants observe, and how
Fabric their Mansions in the hardened Milk,
Wonderful Artists! But the hidden Ways
Of Nature would thou know? how first she frames
All things in Miniature? thy Specular Orb
Apply to well-dissected Kernels; lo!
Strange Forms arise, in each a little Plant
Unfolds its Boughs: observe the slender Threads
Of first-beginning Trees, their Roots, their Leaves,
In narrow Seeds described; Thou Wilt wondering say,
An inmate Orchat every Apple boasts.
Thus All things by Experience are displayed,
And most improved. Then sedulously think
To meliorate thy Stock; no Way, or Rule
Be unassay'd; prevent the Morning Star
Assiduous, nor with the Western Sun
Surcease to work; lo! thoughtful of Thy Gain,
Not of my Own, I all the live-long Day
Consume in Meditation deep, recluse
From human Converse, nor, at shut of Eve,
Enjoy Repose; but often at Midnight Lamp
Ply my brain racking Studies, if by chance
Thee I may counsel right; and often this Care
Disturbs me slumbring. Will thou then repine
To labor for thy Self? and rather choose
To lie supinely, hoping, Heaven will bless
Thy slighted Fruits, and give thee Bread unearn'd?
'Twill profit, when the Stork, sworn-Foe of Snakes,
Returns, to show Compassion to thy Plants,
Fatigued with Breeding. Let the arched Knife
Well sharpened now assail the spreading Shades
Of Vegetables, and their thirsty Limbs
Dissever: for the genial Moisture, due
To Apples, otherwise mispends it self
In barren Twigs, and for the expected Crop,
Naught but vain Shoots, and empty Leaves abound.
When swelling Buds their odorous Foliage shed,
And gently harden into Fruit the Wise
Spare not the little Offsprings, if they grow
Redundant: but the thronging Clusters thin
By kind Avulsion: else, the starv'ling Brood,
Void of sufficient Sustenance, wil] yield
A slender Autum; which the niggard Soul
Too late shall weep, and curse his thrifty Hand,
That would not timely ease the ponderous Boughs.
It much conduces, all the Cares to know
Of Gard'ning, how to scare nocturnal Thieves,
And how the little Race of Birds, that hop
From Spray to Spray, scooping the costliest Fruit
Insatiate, undisturbed. Priapus's Form
Avails but little; rather guard each Row
With the false Terrors of a breathless Kite.
This done, the timorous Flock with swiftest Wing
Scud through the Air; their Fancy represents
His mortal Talons, and his ravenous Beak
Destructive; glad to shun his hostile Gripe,
They quit their Thefts and unfrequent the Fields.
Besides, the filthy Swine will often invade
Thy firm enclosure, and with delving Snout
The rooted Forest undermine forthwith
Alloo thy furious Mastiff, bid him vex
The noxious Herd, and print upon their Ears
A sad Memorial of their past Offense.
The flagrant Procyon will not fail to bring
Large Shoals of slow House-bearing Snails, that creep
Over the ripe Fruitage, paring sliming Tracts
In the sleek Rinds, and unprest Cider drink.
No Art averts this Pest; on Thee it lies,
With Morning and with Evening Hand to rid
The preying Reptiles; nor, if wise, will thou
Decline this Labor, which it self rewards
With pleasing Gain, whilst the warm Limbec draws
Salubrious Waters from the nocent Brood.
Myriads of Wasps now also clustring hang,
And drain a spurious Honey from thy Groves,
Their Winter Food; though often repulst, again
They rally, undismayed: but Fraud with ease
Ensnares the noisome Swarms; let every Bough
Bear frequent Vials, pregnant with the Dregs
Of Moyle, or Mum, or Treacle's viscous Juice;
They, by the alluring Odor drawn, in haste
Fly to the dulcet Cates, and crouding sip
Their palatable Bane; joyful thou wilt see
The clammy Surface all o'er-strown with Tribes
Of greedy Insects that with fruitless Toil
Flap filmy Pennons often, to extricate
Their Feet in liquid Shackles bound, 'till Death
Bereave them of their worthless Souls: Such doom
Waits Luxury, and lawless Love of Gain!
However thou may forbid external Force,
^ntestine Evils will prevail; damp Airs,
And rainy Winters, to the Center pierce
Of firmest Fruits, and by unseen Decay
The proper Relish vitiate: then the Grub
Often unobserved invades the vital Core,
^ernicious Tenant, and her secret Cave
^nlarges hourly, preying on the Pulp
^easeless; mean while the Apple's outward Form
^electable the witless Swain beguiles,
'Till, with a writhen Mouth, and spattering Noise,
He tastes the bitter Morsel, and rejects
Disrelisht; not with less Surprise, then when
Embattled Troops with flowing Banners pass
Through flowery Mead delighted, nor distrust
The smiling Surface; whilst the cavern'd Ground,
With Grain incentive stored, by sudden Blaze
Bursts fatal, and involves the Hopes of War
In fiery Whirles; full of victorious Thoughts,
Torn and dismembered, they aloft expire.
Now turn thine Eye to view Alcinous' Groves,
The Pride of the Phaeacian Isle, from whence,
Sailing the Spaces of the boundless Deep,
To Ariconium precious Fruits arrived:
The Pippin burnisht over with Gold, the Moile
Of sweetest hony'd Taste, the fair Permain,
Tempered, like comliest Nymph, with red and white.
Salopian Acres flourish with a Growth
Peculiar, styled the Ottley: Be thou first
This Apple to transplant; If to the Name
It Is Merit answers, no where shall thou find
A Wine more prized, or laudable of Taste.
Nor does ths Eliot least deserve thy Care,
Nor John-Apple, whose withered Rind, entrencht
With many a Furrow, aptly represents
Decrepid Age; nor that from Harvey named
Quick-relishing: Why should we sing the Thrift,
Codling, or Pomroy, or of pimpled Coat
The Russet, or the Cats-Head's weighty Orb,
Enormous in its Growth; for various Use
Though these are meet, though after full repast
Are often required, and crown the rich Desert?
What, though the Pear Tree rival not the Worth,
Of Ariconian Products? yet her Freight
Is not contemned, yet her wide-branching Arms
Best screen thy Mansion from the fervent Dog
Adverse to Life; the wintry Hurricanes
In vain employ their Roar, her Trunc unmoved
Breaks the strong Onset, and controls their Rage,
Chiefly the Bosbury, whose large Increase,
Annual, in sumptuous Banquets claims Applause.
Thrice acceptable Bev'rage! could but Art
Subdue the floating Lee, Pomona's self
Would dread thy Praise, and shun the dubious Strife.
Be it thy Choice, when Summer-Heats annoy,
To sit Beneath her leafy Canopy,
Quaffing rich Liquids: Oh! how sweet to enjoy,
At once her Fruits and hospitable Shade!
But how with equal Number shall we match
The Musk's surpassing Worth? that earliest gives
Sure hopes of racy Wine, and in its Youth,
Its tender Nonage, loads the spreading Boughs
With large and juicy Offsspring, that defies
The Vernal Nippings, and cold Syderal Blasts!
Yet let her to the Red-streak yield, that once
Was of the Sylvan Kind, unciviliz'd,
Of no Regard, 'till Scudamore's skilful Hand
Improved her, and by courtly Discipline
Taught her the savage Nature to forget:
Hence styled the Scudamorean Plant; whose Wine
Who-ever tastes, let him with grateful Heart
Respect that ancient loyal House, and wish
The Noble Peer, that now transcends our Hopes
In early Worth, his Country's justest Pride,
Uninterrupted Joy, and Health entire.
Let every Tree in every Garden own
The Red-streak as supreme; whose pulpous Fruit
With Gold irradiate, and Vermilian shines
Tempting, not fatal, as the Birth of that
Primaeval interdicted Plant, that won
Fond Eve in hapless Hour to taste, and die*
This, of more bounteous Influence, inspires
Poetic Raptures, and the lowly Muse
Kindles to loftier Strains; even I perceive
Her sacred Virtue. See! the Numbers flow
Easy, whilst, cheered with her nectareous Juice,
Hers, and my Country's Praises I exalt.
Hail Herefordian Plant, that do disdain
All other Fields! Heavens sweetest Blessing, hail!
Be thou the copious Matter of my Song,
And Thy choice Nectar; on which always waits
Laughter, and Sport, and Care beguiling Wit,
And Friendship, chief Delight of Human Life.
What should we wish for more? or why, in quest
Of Foreign Vintage, insincere, and mixed,
Traverse the extremest World? Why tempt the Rage
Of the rough Ocean? when our native Glebe
Imparts, from bounteous Womb, annual Recruits
Of Wine delectable, that far surmounts
Gallic, or Latin Grapes, or those that see
The setting Sun near Calpe's towering Height.
Nor let the Rhodian, nor the Lesbion Vines
Vaunt their rich Must, nor let Tokay contend
For Sov'ranty; Phanaeus self must bow
To the Ariconian Vales: And shall we doubt
TO improve our vegetable Wealth, or let
The Soil lie idle, which, with fit Manure,
Will largest Usury repay, alone
Impow'red to supply what Nature asks
Frugal, or what nice Appetite requires?
The Meadows here, with bat'ning Ooze enriched,
Give Spirit to the Grass; three Cubits high
The jointed Herbage shoots; the unfallow'd Glebe
Yearly o'ercomes the Granaries with Store
Of Golden Wheat, the Strength of Human Life.
Lo, on auxiliary Poles, the Hops
Ascending spiral, ranged in meet Array!
Lo, how the Arable with Barley-Grain
Stands thick, o'er-shadow'd, to the thirsty Hind
Transporting Prospect! These, as modern Use
Ordains, infused, an Auburn Drink compose,
Wholesome, of deathless Fame. Here, to the Sight,
Apples of Price, and Plenteous Sheaves of Corn,
Often interlac'd occurr, and both imbibe
Fitting congenial Juice; so rich the Soil,
So much does fructuous Moisture o'er-abound!
Nor are the Hills unamiable, whose Tops
To Heaven aspire, affording Prospect sweet
To Human Ken; nor at their Feet the Vales
Descending gently, where the lowing Herd
Chews verdious Pasture; nor the yellow Fields
Gaily enterchang'd, with rich Variety
Pleasing as when an Emerald green, enchas'd
In Flamy Gold, from the bright Mass acquires
A nobler Hue, more delicate to Slight.
Next add the Sylvan Shades, and silent Groves,
(Haunt of the Druids) whence the Hearth is fed
With copious Fuel; whence the sturdy Oak,
A Prince's Refuge once, the Eternal Guard
Of England's Throne, by sweating Peasants felled.
Stems the vast Main, and bears tremendous War
To distant Nations, or with Sov'ran Sway
Aws the divided World to Peace and Love.
Why should the Chalybes, or Bilboa boast
Their hardened Iron; when our Mines produce
As perfect Martial Ore? Can Tmolus' Head
^ie with our Safron Odours? Or the Fleece
Baetic, or finest Tarentine, compare
With Lemster's silken Wool? Where shall we find
Men more addaunted, for their Country's Weal
More prodigal of Life? In ancient Days,
The Roman Legions, and great Caesar found
Our Fathers no mean Foes: And Cressy Plains,
And Agincourt, deep tinged with Blood, confess
What the Silures Vigor unwithstood
^ou'd do in rigid Fight; and chiefly what
Brydges' wide wasting Hand, first Garter'd Knight,
^uissunt Author of great Chandois' Stemm,
High Chandois that transmits Paternal Worth,
^rudence, and ancient Prowess, and Renown,
^his Noble Offspring. O thrice happy Peer!
that, blessed with hoary Vigor, view'st Thy self
Fresh blooming in thy Generous Son; whose Lips,
Flowing with nervous Eloquence exact,
Charm the wise Senate, and Attention win
In deepest Councils: Ariconium pleased,
Him, as her chosen Worthy, first salutes.
Him on the Iberean, on the Gallick Shore,
Him hardy Britons bless; His faithful Hand
Conveys new Courage from afar, nor more
The General's Conduct, than His Care avails.
Thee also, Glorious Branch of Cecil's Line,
This Country claims; with Pride and Joy to Thee
Thy Alterennis calls: yet she endures
Patient Thy Absence, since Thy Prudent Choice
Has fixed Thee in the Muse's fairest Seat,
Where Aldrich reigns, and from his endless Store
Of universal Knowledge still supplies
His noble Care; He generous Thoughts instills
Of true Nobility, their, Countries Love,
(Chief End of Life) and forms their ductile Minds
To Human Virtues: By his Genius led,
Thou soon in every Art preeminent
Shall grace this Isle, and rise to Burleigh's Fame.
Hail Highborn Peer! And Thou, great Nurse of Ar^
And Men, from whence conspicuous Patriots spring,
Hanmer, and Bromley; Thou, to whom with due
Respect Wintonia bows, and joyful owns
Thy mitred Offspring; be for ever blessed
With like Examples, and to future Times
Proficuous, such a Race of Men produce,
As, in the Cause of Virtue firm, may fix
Her Throne inviolate. Hear, ye Gods, this Vow
From One, the meanest in her numerous Train;
Though meanest, not least studious of her Praise.
Muse, raise thy Voice to Beaufort's spotless Fame,
To Beaufort, in a long Descent derived
From Royal Ancestry, of Kingly Rights
Faithful Asserters: In Him centring meet
Their glorious Virtues, high Desert from Pride
Disjoined, unshaken Honor, and Contempt
Of strong Allurements. O Illustrious Prince!
O Thou of ancient Faith! Exulting, Thee
^n her fair List this happy Land inrolls.
Who can refuse a Tributary Verse
To Weymouth, firmest Friend of slighted Worth
^n evil Days? whose hospitable Gate,
Unbarr'd to All, invites a numerous Train
Of daily Guests; whose Boar'd, with Plenty crowned,
Revives the Feast-rites old: Mean while His Care
Forgets not the Afflicted, but content
^n Acts of secret Goodness, shuns the Praise,
That sure attends. Permit me, bounteous Lord,
To blazon what though hid will beauteous shine;
And with Thy Name to dignifie my Song.
But who is He, that on the winding Stream
Of Vaga first drew vital Breath, and now
Approved in Anna's secret Council sits,
Weighing the Sum of things, with wise Forecast
^ollicitous of Public Good? How large
His Mind, that comprehends what ever was known
To Old, or Present Time; yet not elate,
Not conscious of its Skill? What Praise deserves
His liberal Hand, that gathers but to give,
^reventing Suit? O not unthankful Muse,
Him lowly reverence, that first designed to hear
Thy Pipe, and skreen'd thee from opprobrious Tongues
Acknowledge thy Own Harley, and his Name
^^scribe on every Bark; the wounded Plants
Will fast Increase, faster thy just Respect.
Such are our Heroes, by their Virtues known,
Or* Skill in Peace, and War: Of softer Mold
The Female Sex, with sweet attractive Airs
^ubdue obdurate Hearts. The Travelers often,
That view their matchless Forms with transient Glance,
^atch sudden Love, and sigh for Nymphs unknown,
^mit with the Magic of their Eyes: nor has
^he Daedal Hand of Nature only poured
Her Gifts of outward Grace; their Innocence
Unfeigned, and Virtue most engaging, free
From Pride, or Artifice, long Joys afford
To the honest Nuptial Bed, and in the Wane
Of Life, rebate the Miseries of Age.
And is there found a Wretch, so base of Mind,
That Woman's powerful Beauty dares condemn,
Exactest Work of Heaven? He ill deserves
Or Love, or Pity; Friendless let him see
Uneasy, tedious Days, despised, forlorn,
As Stain of Human Race: But may the Man,
That cheerfully recounts the Females Praise
Find equal Love, and Love's untainted Sweets
Enjoy with Honor. O, ye Gods! might I
Elect my Fate, my happiest Choice should be
A fair and modest Virgin, that invites
With Aspect chaste, forbidding Loose Desire,
Tenderly smiling; in whose Heavenly Eye.
Sits purest Love enthroned: But if the Stars
Malignant, these my better Hopes oppose,
May I, at least, the sacred Pleasures know
Of strictest Amity; nor ever want
A Friend, with whom I mutually may share
Gladness, and Anguish, by kind Intercourse
Of Speech, and Offices. May in my Mind,
Indelible a grateful Sense remain
Of Favors undeserved! -- O Thou! from whom
Gladly both Rich, and Low seek Aid; most Wise
Interpreter of Right, whose gracious Voice
Breaths Equity, and curbs too rigid Law
With mild, impartial Reason; what Returns
Of Thanks are due to Thy Beneficence
Freely vouchsafe, when to the Gates of Death
I tended prone? If Thy indulgent Care
Had not preven'd, among unbody'd Shades
I now had wandered; and these empty Thoughts
Of Apples perished: But, uprais'd by Thee,
I ^une my Pipe afresh, each Night, and Day
Thy unexampled Goodness to extol
Desirous; but nor Night, nor Day suffice
For that great Task; the highly Honored Name
Of Trevor must employ my willing Thoughts
^ncessant, dwell for ever on my Tongue.
Let me be grateful, but let far from me
Be fawning Cringe, and false dissembling Look,
And servile Flattery, that harbors often
^n Courts, and gilded Roofs. Some loose the Bands
Of ancient Friendship, cancel Nature's Laws
^or Pageantry, and tawdry Gugaws. Some
^enounce their Sires, oppose paternal Right
^or Rule, and Power; and other's Realms invade,
With specious Shows of Love. This traitorous Wretch
^etrays his Sov'ran. Others, destitute
Of real Zeal, to every Altar bend,
^y Lucre swayed, and act the basest Things
To be styled Honorable: The Honest Man,
^imple of Heart, prefers inglorious Want
^o ill-got Wealth; rather from Door to Door
^jocund Pilgrim, though distressed, he will rove,
^han break his plighted Faith; nor Fear, nor Hope,
Will shock his steadfast Soul; rather debarred
^ach common Privilege, cut off from Hopes
^f meanest Gain, of present Goods despoiled,
^e'll bear the Marks of Infamy, contemned,
^npity'd; yet his Mind, of Evil pure,
^^pports him, and Intention free from Fraud.
^no Retinue with observant Eyes
^ttend him, if he cannot with purple stain
^f cumbrous Vestments, labored over with Gold,
^^zle the Crowd, and set them all agape;
(...) clad in homely Weeds, from Envy's Darts
^emote he lives, nor knows the nightly Pangs
(...) Conscience, nor with Spectre's grisly Forms,
^emors, and injured Souls, at Close of Day
^^noy'd, sad interrupted Slumbers finds.
^t as a Child, whose inexperienc'd Age
Nor evil Purpose fears nor knows,) enjoys
Night's sweet Refreshment, humid Sleep, sincere,
When Chaunticleer, with Clarion shrill, recalls
The tardy Day he to his Labors hies
Gladsome, intent on somewhat that may ease
Unhealthy Mortals, and with curious Search
Examines all the Properties of Herbs,
Fossils, and Minerals, that embowell'd Earth
Displays, if by his Industry he can
Benefit Human Race: Or else his Thoughts
Are exercised with Speculations deep
Of Good, and Just, and Meet, and the wholesome Rule
Of Temperance, and aught that may improve
The moral Life; not sedulous to rail,
Nor with envenomed Tongue to blast the Fame
Of harmless Men, or secret Whispers spread,
Among faithful Friends to breed Distrust, and Hate
Studious of Virtue, he no Life observes
Except his own, his own employs his Cares,
Large Subject! that he labor to refine
Daily, nor of his little Stock denies
Fit Alms to Lazars, merciful, and meek.
Thus sacred Virgil lived, from courtly Vice,
And Baits of pompous Rome secure; at Court
Still thoughtful of the rural honest Life,
And how t'improve his Grounds, and how himself:
Best Poet! fit Exempler for the Tribe
Of Phoebus, nor less fit Maeonides.
Poor eyless Pilgrim! and if after these,
If after these another I may name,
Thus tender Spencer lived with mean Repast
Content, depressed by Penury, and Pine
In Foreign Realm: Yet not debased his Verse
By Fortunes Frown. And had that Other Bard,
Oh, had but He that first enobled Song
With holy Raptures, like his Abdiel been,
Among many faithless strictly faithful found;
Unpitied, he should nor have wail'd his Orbs,
That rolled in vain to find the piercing Ray,
And found no Dawn, by dim Suffusion veild!
But He -- However, let the Muse abstain,
Nor blast his Fame, from whom she learnt to sing
In much inferior Strains, groveling beneath
The Olympian Hill, on Plains, and Vales intent,
Mean Follower. There let her rest a while,
Pleased with the fragrant Walks, and cool Retreat.
CIDER. Book II.
O Hartcourt, Whom the ingenious Love of Arts
Has carried from thy native Soil, beyond
The eternal Alpine Snows, and now detains
In Italy's waste Realms, how long must we
Lament Thy Absence? Whilst in sweet Sojourn
Thou view'st the Relics of old Rome; or what,
Unrivaled Authors by their Presence; made
For ever venerable, rural Seats,
Tibur, and Tusculum, or Virgil's Urn
Green with immortal Bays, which happily Thou,
Respecting his great Name, do now approach
With bended Knee, and strew with purple Flowers;
Unmindful of Thy Friends, that ill can brook
This long Delay. At length, Dear Youth, return,
Of Wit, and Judgment ripe in blooming Years,
And Britain's Isle with Latian Knowledge grace.
Return, and let Thy Father's VVorth excite
Thirst of Preeminence; see! how the Cause
Of Widows, and of Orphans He asserts
With winning Rhetoric, and well argued Law!
Mark well His Footsteps, and, like Him, deserve
Thy Prince's Favor, and thy Country's Love.
Mean while (although the Massy Grape delights
Pregnant of racy Juice, and Formian Hills
Temper Thy Cups, yet) wilt not Thou reject
Thy native Liquors: Lo! for Thee my Mill
How grinds choice Apples, and the British Vats
Overflow with generous Cider; far remote
Accept this Labor, nor despise the Muse,
That, passing Lands, and Seas, on Thee attends.
Thus far of Trees: The pleasing Task remains,
To sing of VVines, and Autumn's blessed Increase.
The Effects of Art are shown, yet what avails
Against Heaven? Often, notwithstanding all thy Care
To help thy Plants, when the small Fruit'ry seems
Exempt from Ills, an oriential Blast
Disastrous flies, soon as the Hind, fatigued,
Unyokes his Team; the tender Freight, unskilled
To bear the hot Disease, distempered pines
In the Year's Prime, the deadly Plague annoys
The wide Enclosure; think not vainly now
To treat thy Neighbors with mellifluous Cups,
Thus disappointed: If the former Years
Exhibit no Supplies, alas! thou must,
With tastless Water wash thy Droughty Throat.
A thousand Accidents the Farmer's Hopes
Subvert, or checque; uncertain all his Toil,
'Till lusty Autumn's lukewarm Days, allayed
With gentle Colds, insensibly confirm
His ripening Labors: Autumn to the Fruits
Earth's various Lap produces, Vigor gives
Equal, intenerating milky Grain,
Berries, and Sky-dy'd Plums, and what in Coat
Rough, or soft Rind, or bearded Husk, or Shell;
Fat Olives, and Pistacio's fragrant Nut,
And the Pine's tastful Apple: Autumn paints
Ausonian Hills with Grapes, whilst English Plains
Blush with pomaceous Harvests, breathing Sweets.
O let me now, when the kind early Dew
Unlocks the embosom'd Odors, walk among
The well ranged Files of Trees, whose full-ag'd Sto^
Diffuse Ambrosial Streams, than Myrrh, or Nard
More grateful, or perfuming flowery Bean:
Soft whispering Airs, and the Larks mattin Song
Then woo to musing, and becalm the Mind
Perplexed with irksome Thoughts. Thrice happy time,
Best Portion of the various Year, in which
Nature rejoices, smiling on her Works
Lovely, to full Perfection wrought! but ah,
Short are our Joys, and neighboring Grief disturb
Our pleasant Hours. Inclement VVinter dwells
Contiguous; forthwith frosty Blasts deface
The blithsome Year: Trees of their shrivel'd Fruits
Are widowed, dreery Storms over all prevail.
Now, now is the time; ever hasty Suns forbid
To work, disburthen thou thy sapless Wood
Of its rich Progeny; the turgid Fruit
Abounds with mellow Liquor; now exhort
Thy Hinds to exercise the pointed Steel
On the hard Rock, and give a wheely Form
To the expected Grinder: Now prepare
Materials for thy Mill, a sturdy Post
Cylindric, to support the Grinder's Weight
Excessive, and a flexile Sallow entrenched,
Rounding, capacious of the juicy Hord.
Nor must thou not be mindful of thy Press
Long ever the Vintage; but with timely Care
Shave the Goats shaggy Beard, least thou too late,
In vain shoud'st seek a Strainer, to dispart
The husky, terrene Dregs, from purer Must.
Be cautious next a proper Steed to find,
Whose Prime is past; the vigorous Horse disdains
Such servile Labors, or if forced, forgets
His past Achievements, and victorious Palms.
Blind Bayard rather, worn with Work, and Years,
Shall roll the unwieldy Stone; with sober Pace
He Will tread the cirkcling Path 'till dewy Eve,
From early Dayspring, pleased to find his Ag^
Declining, unuseful to his Lord.
Some, when the Press, by utmost Vigor ^w'd
Has drained the pulpous Mass, regale their Swine
With the dry Refuse; thou more wise shall steep
Thy Husks in Water, and again employ
The pondrous Engine. Water will imbibe
The small Remains of Spirit, and acquire
A vinous Flavor; this the Peasants blish
Will quaff, and whistle, as thy tinkling Team
They drive and sing of Fuscae's radiant Eyes,
Pleased with the medly Draught. Nor shall thou now
Reject the Apple-Cheese, though quite exhaust;
Even now 'twill cherish, and improve the Roots
Of sickly Plants; new Vigor hence conveyed
Will yield an Harvest of unusual Growth.
Such Profit spring from Musk discreetly used!
The tender Apples, from their Parents rent
By stormy Shocks, must not neglected lie,
The Prey of Worms: A frugal Man I knew
Rich in one barren Acre, which, subdued
By endless Culture, with sufficient Must
His Casks replenisht yearly: He no more
Desired, nor wanted, diligent to learn
The various Seasons, and by Skill repel
Invading Pests, successful in his Cares,
'Till the damp Lybion VVind, with Tempests armed
Outrageous, bluster'd horrible amidst
His Cyder-Grove: O'er-turn'd by furious blasts,
The sightly Ranks fall prostrate, and around
Their Fruitage scattered, from the genial Boughs
Stripped immature: Yet did he not repine,
Nor curse his Stars; but prudent, his fallen Heaps
Collecting, cherished with the tepid Wreaths
Of teddid Grafts, and the Sun's mellowing Beams
Rivaled with artful Heats, and thence procured
A costly Liquor, by improving Time
Equaled with what, the happiest Vintage ^ears
But this I warn Thee, and shall always warn
No heterogeneous Mixtures use, as some
With watery Turnips have debased their Wines,
Too frugal; nor let the crude Humors dance
In heated Brass, steaming with Fire intense;
Although Devonia much commends the Use
Of strengthening Vulcan; with their native Strength
Thy Wines sufficient, other Aid refuse;
And, when the allotted Orb of Time's complete,
Are more commended than the labored Drinks.
Nor let thy Avarice tempt thee to withdraw
The Priest's appointed Share; with cheerful Heart
The tenth of thy Increase bestow and own
Hea'v'ns bounteous Goodness, that will sure repay
Thy grateful Duty: This neglected fear
Signal Avengeance, such as over-took
A Miser, that unjustly once withheld
The Clergy's Due; relying on himself,
His Fields he tended with successless Care,
Early, and late, when, or unwish't for Rain
Descended or unseasonable Frosts
Curbed his increasing Hopes, or when around
The Clouds dropped Fatness, in the middle Sky
The Dew suspended staid, and left unmoist
His execrable Glebe; recording this,
Be Just, and Wise, and tremble to transgress.
Learn now, the Promise of the coming Year
To know, that by no flattering Signs abused,
Thou wisely may provide: The various Moon
Prophetic, and attendant Stars explain
Each rising Dawn; ever Icy Crusts surmount
The current Stream, the heavenly Orbs serene
Twinkle with trembling Rays, and Cynthia glows
With Light unsullied: Now the Fowler, warned
By these good Omens, with swift early Steps
Treads the crimp Earth, ranging through Fields and Glades
Offensive to the Birds, sulphurous Death
Checques their mid Flight and heedless while they strain
Their tuneful Throats, the towering, heavy Lead
O'er-takes their Speed; they leave their little Lives
Above the Clouds, praecipitant to Earth.
The VVoodcocks early Visit, and Abode
Of long Continuance in our temperate Clime,
Foretell a liberal Harvest: He of Times
Intelligent, the harsh Hyperborean Ice
Shuns for our equal Winters; when our Suns
Cleave the chilled Soil, he backward wings his Way
To Scandinavian frozen Summers, meet
For his num'd Blood. But nothing profits more
Than frequent Snows: O, may Thou often see
Thy Furrows whitened by the woolly Rain,
Nutricious / Secret Nitre lurks within
The porous Wet, quickening the languid Glebe.
Sometimes thou shall with fervent Vows implore
A moderate Wind; the Orchat loves to wave
With Winter-Winds, before the Gems exert
Their feeble Heads; the loosened Roots then drink
Large Increment, Earnest of happy Years.
Nor will it nothing profit to observe
The monthly Stars, their powerful Influence
Over planted Fields, what Vegetables reign
Under each Sign. On our Account has Jove
Indulgent, to all Moons some succulent Plant
Allotted, that poor, helpless Man might slack
His present Thirst, and Matter find for Toil:
Now will the Corinths, now the Rasps supply
Delicious Draughts; the Quinces now, or Plums,
Or Cherries, or the fair Thisbein Fruit
Are pressed to Wines; the Britons squeeze the Works
Of sedulous Bees, and mixing odorous Herbs
Prepare balsamic Cups, to wheezing Lungs
Medicinal, and short breathed, ancient Sires.
But, if You Are indefatigably bent
To toil, and omnifarious Drinks would brew;
Besides the Orchat, every Hedge, and Bush
Affords Assistance; even afflictive Bi^ch,
Cursed by unlettered, idle Youth, distills
A limpid Current from her wounded Bark,
Profuse of nursing Sap. When Solar Beams
Parch thirsty human Veins, the damask't Meads,
Unforced display ten thousand painted Flowers
Useful in Potables. Thy little Sons
Permit to range the Pastures; gladly they
Will mow the Cowslip-Posies, faintly sweet,
From whence thou artificial Wines shall drain
Of icy Taste, that, in mid Fervors, best
Slack craving Thirst, and mitigate the Day.
Happy Irene, whose most wholesome Air
Poisons envenomed Spiders, and forbids
The baleful Toad and Viper from her Shore!
More happy in her Balmy Draughts, (enriched
With Miscellaneous Spices, and the Root
For Thirst-abating Sweetness praised,) which wide
Extend her Fame, and to each drooping Heart
Present Redress, and lively Health convey.
See how the Belgae, Sedulous, and Stout,
With Bowls of fat'ning Mum, or blissful Cups
Of Kernell-relish'd Fluids, the fair Star
Of early Phosphorus salute, at Noon
Jocund with frequent-rising Fumes! by Use
Instructed, thus to quell their Native Phlegm
Prevailing, and engender wayward Mirth.
What need to treat of distant Climes, removed
Far from the slopeing Journey of the Year,
Beyond Petsora, and Islandic Coasts?
Where ever-during Snows perpetual Shades
Of Darkness, would congeal their livid Blood,
Did not the Arctic Tract, spontaneous yield
A cheering purple Berry, big with Wine,
Intensely fervent, which each Hour they crave,
Spread round a flaming Pile of Pines, and often
They interlard their native Drinks with choice
Of strongest Brandy, yet scarce with these Aids
Enabled to prevent the sudden Rot
Of freezing Nose, and quick-decaying Feet.
Nor less the Sable Borderers of Nile,
Nor who Taprobane manure, nor They,
Whom sunny Borneo bears, are stored with Streams
Egregious, Rum, and Rice's, Spirit extract.
For here, exposed to perpendicular Rays,
In vain they covet Shades, and Thrascia's Gales,
Pining with Aequinoctial Heat unless
The Cordial Glass perpetual Motion keep,
Quick circuiting; nor dare they close their Eyes,
Void of a bulky Charger near their Lips,
With which, in often interrupted Sleep,
Their frying Blood compells to irrigate
Their dry-furr'd Tongues, else minutely to Death
Obnoxious, dismal Death, the Effect of Drought!
More happy they, born in Columbus' World,
Carybbes, and they, whom the Cotton Plant
With downy-sprouting Vests arrays! Their Woods
Bow with prodigious Nuts, that give at once
Celestial Food, and Nectar; than, at hand,
The Lemmon, incorrupt with Voyage long
To vinous Spirits added (heavenly Drink!)
They with Peneumatic Engine, ceaseless draw,
Intent on Laughter; a continual Tide
Flows from the exhilerating Fount. As, when
Against a secret Cliff, with sudden Shock
A Ship is dashed, and leaking drinks the Sea,
The astonished Mariners all ply the Pump,
No Stay, nor Rest, 'till the wide Breach is closed,
So they (but cheerful) unfatigu'd, still move
The draining Sucker, then alone concerned,
When the dry Bowl forbids their pleasing Work.
But if to hording Thou art bent, thy Hopes
Are frustrate, should Thou think thy Pipes will flow
With early-limpid Wine. The horded Store,
And the harsh Draught, must twice endure the Sun's
Kind strengthening Heat, twice Winter's purging Cold.
There are, that a compounded Fluid drain
From different Mixtures, Woodcock, Pippin, Moyle,
Rough Eliot, sweet Permain, the blended Streams
(Each mutually correcting each) create
A pleasurable Medly, of what Taste
Hardly distinguished; as the showry Arch,
With listed Colors gay, Or, Azure, Gules,
Delights, and puzles the Beholder's Eye,
That views the watery Bread, with thousand Shows
Of Painture varied, yet's unskilled to tell
Or where one Color rises, or one faints.
Some Cyders have by Art, or Age unlearned
Their genuine Relish, and of sundry Vines
Assumed the Flavor; one sort counterfeits
The Spanish Product, this, to Gauls has seemed
The sparkling Nectar of Champaigne; with that,
A German often has swill'd his Throat, and sworn,
Deluded, that Imperial Rhine bestowed
The Generous Rummer, whilst the Owner pleased,
Laughs inly at his Guests, thus entertained
With Foreign Vintage from his Cyder-Cask.
Soon as thy Liquor from the narroct Cells
Of close-prest Husks is freed, thou must refrain
Thy thirsty Soul; let none persuade to broach
Thy thick unwholesome, undigested Cades:
The hoary Frosts, and Northern Blasts take care
Thy muddy Beu'rage to serene, and drive
Praecipitant the baser, ropy Lees.
And now thy Wine's transpicuous, purged from all
It Is earthy Gross, yet led it feed a while
On the sat Refuse, least too soon disjoined
From spritely, it, to sharp, or vappid change.
When to convenient Vigor it attains,
Suffice it to provide a brazen Tube
Inflext; self-taught, and voluntary flies
The desecated Liquor, through the Vent
Ascending, then by downward Tract conveyed,
Spouts into subject Vessels, lovely clear.
As when a Noontide Sun, with Summer Beams,
Darts through a Cloud, her watery Skirts are edged
With lucid Amber, or undrosly Gold:
So, and so richly, the purged Liquid shines.
Now also, when the Colds abate, nor yet
Full Summer shines, a dubious Season, close
In Glass thy purer Streams, and let them gain,
From due Confinement, Spirit, and Flavor new
For this Intent, the subtle Chemist feeds
Perpetual Flames, whose unresisted Force
Over Sand, and Ashes, and the stubborn Flint
Prevailing, turns into a fusil Sea,
That in his Furnace bubbles sunny-red:
From hence a glowing Drop with hollowed Steel
He takes, and by one efficadious Breath
Dilates to a surprising Cube, or Sphaere,
Or Oval, and fit Receptacles forms
For every liquid, with his plastic Lungs,
To human Life subservient; by his Means
Cyders in Metal frail improve; the Moyle,
And tastful Pippin, in a Moon's short Year,
Acquire complete Perfection: Now they smoke
Transparent, sparkling in each Drop Delight
Of curious Palate, by fair Virgins craved.
But harsher Fluids different lengths of time
Expect: Thy Flask will slowly mitigate
The Eliot's Roughness. Stirom, firmest Fruit,
Embottled (long as Priameian Troy
Withstood the Greeks) endures, ever justly mild.
Softened by Age, it youthful Vigor gains,
Fallacious Drink! Ye honest Men beware,
Nor trust its Smoothless; The third circling Glass
Suffices Virtue: But may Hypocrites,
(That slyly speak one thing, another think,
Hateful as Hell) pleased with the Relish weak,
Drink on unwarn'd, 'till by enchanting Cups
Infatuate, they their wily Thoughts disclose,
And through Intemperance grow a while sincere.
The Farmer's Toil is done; his Cades mature,
Now call for Vent, his Lands exhaust permit
T'indulge a while. Now solemn Rites he pays
To Bacchus, Author of Heart-cheering Mirth.
His honest Friends, at thirsty hour of Dusk,
Come uninvited; he with bounteous Hand
Imparts his smoking Vintage, sweet Reward
Of his own Industry; the well-fraught Bowl
Circles incessant, whilst the humble Cell
With quavering Laugh, and rural Jests resounds,
Ease, and Content, and undissembled Love
Shine in each Face; the Thoughts of Labor past
Increase their Joy. As, from retentive Cage
When sullen Philomel escapes; her Notes
She varies, and often past Imprisonment
Sweetly complains; her Liberty retrieved
Cheers her sad Soul, improves her pleasing Song.
Gladsome they quaff, yet not exceeding the Bounds
Of healthy Temperance, nor incroach on Night,
Season of Rest, but well bedewed repair
Each to his Home, with unsupplanted Feet.
Ever Heaven's emblazon'd by the rosy Dawn
Domestic Cares awake them; brisk they rise,
Refreshed, and lively with the Joys that flow
From amicable Talk, and moderate Cups
Sweetly interchang'd. The pining Lover finds
Present Redress, and long Oblivion drinks
Of Coy Lucinda. Give the Debtor Wine;
His Joys are short, and few; yet when he drinks
His Dread retires, the flowing Glasses add
Courage, and Mirth; Magnificent in Thought,
Imaginary Riches he enjoys,
And in the Goal expatiates unconfined.
Nor can the Poet Bacchus' Praise indite,
Debarred his Grape: The Muses still require
Humid Regalement, nor will ought avail
Imploring Phoebus, with unmoisten'd Lips.
Thus to the generous Bottle all incline,
By parching Thirst allured: With vehement Suns
When dusty Summer bakes the crumbling Clods,
How pleasant is it, beneath the twisted Arch
Of a retreating Bower, in Mid-day's Reign
To ply the sweet Carouse, remote from Noise,
Secured of fev'rish Heats! When the aged Year
Inclines, and Borea's Spirit blusters frore,
Beware the inclement Heavens; now let thy Hearth
Crackle with juiceless Boughs; thy lingering Blood
Now instigate with the Apples powerful Streams
Perpetual Showers, and stormy Gusts confine
The willing Ploughman, and December warns
To Annual Jollities; now sportive Youth
Carol incondite Rhythms, with suiting Notes,
And quaver unharmonious; sturdy Swains
In clear Array, for rustic Dance prepare,
Mixed with the Buxom Damsels; hand in hand
They frisk, and bound, and various Mazes weave,
Shaking their brawny Limbs, with uncouth Mein,
Transported, and sometimes, an oblique Leer
Dart on their Loves, sometimes, an hasty Kiss
Steal from unwary Lasses; they with Scorn,
And Neck reclind, resent the ravished Bliss.
Mean while, blind British Bards with volant Touch
Traverse loquacious Strings, whose solemn Notes
Provoke to harmless Revels; these among,
A subtle Artist stands, in wondrous Bag
That bears imprisoned Winds, (of gentler sort
Than those, which erst Laertes Son enclosed.)
Peaceful they sleep, but let the tuneful Squeeze
Of laboring Elbow rouse them, out they fly
Melodious, and with spritely Accents charm.
'Midst these Disports, forget they not to drench
Themselves with bellying Goblets, nor when Spring
Returns, can they refuse to usher in
The fresh-born Year with loud Acclaim, and store
Of jovial Draughts, now, when the sappy Boughs
Attire themselves with Blooms, sweet Rudiments
Of future Harvest: When the Gnossian Crown
Leads on expected Autumn, and the Trees
Discharge their mellow Burdens, let them thank
Boon Nature, that thus annually supplies
Their Vaults, and with her former Liquid Gifts
Exhilerate their lanquid Minds, within
The Golden Mean confined: Beyond, there is naught
Of Health, or Pleasure. Therefore, when thy Heart
Dilates with fervent Joys, and eager Soul
Prompts to pursue the sparkling Glass, be sure
It Is time to shun it; if thou will prolong
Dire Compotation, forthwith Reason quits
Her Empire to Confusion, and Misrule,
And vain Debates; then twenty Tongues at once
Conspire in senseless Jargon, naught is heard
But Din, and various Clamor, and mad Rant:
Distrust, and Jealousy to these succeed,
And anger-kindling Taunt, the certain Bane
Of well-knit Fellowship. Now horrid Frays
Commence, the brimming Glasses now are hurled
With dire Intent; Bottles with Bottles clash
In rude Encounter, round their Temples fly
The sharp-edg'd Fragments, down their battered Cheeks
Mixed Gore, and Cider flow: What shall we say
Of rash Elpenor, who in evil Hour
Dried an immeasurable Bowl, and thought
T'exhale his Surfeit by irriguous Sleep,
Imprudent? Him, Death's Iron-Sleep oppressed,
Descending careless from his Couch; the Fall
Luxt his Neck-joint, and spinal Marrow bruised.
Nor need we tell what anxious Cares attend
The turbulent Mirth of Wine; nor all the kinds
Of Maladies, that lead to Death's grim Cave,
Wrought by Intemperance, joint racking Gout,
Intestine Stone, and pining Atrophy,
Chill, even when the Sun with July-Heats
Frys the scorched Soil, and Dropsy all a-float,
Yet craving Liquid: Nor the Centaurs Tale
Be here repeated; how with Lust, and Wine
Inflamed, they fought, and spilt their drunken Souls
At feasting Hour. Ye Heavenly Powers, that guard
The British Isles, such dire Events remove
Far from fair Albion, nor let Civil Broils
Ferment from Social Cups: May we, remote
From the hoarce, brazen Sound of War, enjoy
Our humid Products, and with seemly Draughts
Enkindle Mirth, and Hospitable Love.
Too often alas! has mutual Hatred drenched
Our Swords in Native Blood, too often has Pride,
And hellish Discord, and insatiate Thirst
Of other's Rights, our Quiet discomposed.
Have we forgot, how fell Destruction raged
Wide-spreading, when by Eris' Torch incensed
Our Fathers warred? What Hero's, signalized
For Loyalty, and Prowess, met their Fate
Untimely, undeserved! How Bertie fell,
Compton, and Gravill, dauntless Sons of Mars,
Fit Themes of endless Grief, but that we view
Their Virtues yet surviving in their Race!
Can we forget, how the mad, headstrong Rout
Defied their Prince to Arms, nor made account
Of Faith, or Duty, or Allegiance sworn?
Apostate, Atheist Rebels! bent to Ill,
With seeming Sanctity, and covered Fraud,
Instilled by him, who first presumed to oppose
Omnipotence; alike their Crime, the Event
Was not alike; these triumphed, and in height
Of barbarous Malice, and insulting Pride,
Abstained not from Imperial Blood. O Fact
Unparalled! O Charles! O best of Kings!
What Stars their black, disastrous Influence shed
On Thy Nativity, that Thou shoud'st fall
Thus, by inglorious Hands, in this Thy Realm,
Supreme, and Innocent, adjudg'd to Death
By those, Thy Mercy only would hay saved!
Yet was the Cyder-Land unstained with Guilt;
The Cyder-Land, obsequious still to Thrones,
Abhorred such base, disloyal Deeds, and all
Her Pruning Hooks extended into Swords,
Undaunted, to assert the trampled Rights
Of Monarchy; but, ah! successless She
However faithful! then was no regard
Of Right, or Wrong. And this, once happy Land,
By homebred Fury rent, long groaned beneath
Tyrannic Sway, 'till fair revolving Years
Our exiled Kings, and Liberty restored.
Now we exult, by mighty ANNA's Care
Secure at home, while She to foreign Realms
Sends forth her dreadful Legions, and restrains
The Rage of Kings: Here, nobly She supports
Justice oppressed; here Her victorious Arms
Quell the Ambitions: From Her Hand alone
All Europe fears Revenge, or hopes Redress.
Rejoice, O Albion! severed from the World
By Nature's wise indulgence, indigent
Of nothing from without; in One Supreme
Entirely blessed; and from beginning time
Designed thus happy; but the fond Desire
Of Rule, and Grandeur, multiplied a Race
Of Kings, and numerous Sceptres introduced,
Destructive of the public Weal: For now
Each Potentate, as wary Fear, or Strength,
Or Emulation urged, his Neighbor's Bounds
Invades, and ampler Territory seeks
With ruinous Assault; on every Plain
Host cop'd with Host, dire was the Din of War,
And ceaseless, or short Truce happily procured
By Havoc, and Dismay, 'till Jealousy
Raised new Combustion: Thus was Peace in vain
Sought for by Martial Deeds, and Conflict stern:
'Till Edgar grateful (as to those who pine
A dismal half-Year Night, the orient Beam
Of Phoebus Lamp) arose, and into one
Cemented all the long-contending Powers,
Pacific Monarch; then Her lovely Head
Concord reared high, and all around distas'd
The Spirit of Love; at Ease, the Bards new strung
Their silent Harps, and taught the Woods, and Vales,
In uncouth Rhythms, to echo Edgar's Name.
Then Gladness smiled in every Eye; the Years
Ran smoothly on, productive of a Line
Of wise, Heroic Kings, that by just Laws
Established Happiness at home, or crushed
Insulting Enemies in farthest Climes.
See Lyon-Hearted Richard, with his Force
Drawn from the North, to Jury's hallowed Plains!
Piously valiant, (like a Torrent swelled
With wintry Tempests, that disdains all Mounds,
Breaking a Way impetuous, and involves
Within its Sweep, Trees, Houses, Men) he pressed
Amidst the thickest Battle; and o'er-threw
Whatever withstood his zealous Rage; no Pause,
No Stay of Slaughter, found his vigorous Arm,
But the unbelieving Squadrons turned to Flight
Smote in the Rear, and with dishonest Wounds
Mangled behind: The Sultan, as he fled,
Often called on Alla, gnashing with Despite,
And Shame, and murmured many an Empty Curse.
Behold Third Edward's Streamers blazing high
On Gallia's hostile Ground! his Right withheld,
Awakens Vengeance; O imprudent Gauls,
Relying on false Hopes, thus to incense
The warlike English! one important Day
Shall teach you meaner Thoughts: Eager of Fight,
Fierce Brutus Offspring to the adverse Front
Advance resistless, and their deep Array
With furious Inroad pierce; the mighty Force
Of Edward, twice o'erturn'd their desperate King,
Twice he arose, and joined the horrid Shock:
The third time, with his wide extended Wings,
He fugitive declined superior Strength,
Discomfited; pursued, in the sad Chase
Ten Thousands ignominious fall; with Blood
The Valleys float: Great Edward thus avenged,
With golden Iris his broad Shield embossed.
Thrice glorious Prince! whom, Fame with all her Tongues
For ever shall resound. Yet from his Loins
New Authors of Dissension spring; from him
Two Branches, that in hosting long contend
For Sov'rain Sway; (and can such Anger dwell
In noblest Minds?) but little now availed
The Ties of Friendship; every Man, as lead
By Inclination, or vain Hope, repaired
To either Camp, and breathed immortal Hate,
And dire Revenge: Now horrid Slaughter reigns;
Sons against Father tilt the fatal Lance,
Careless of Duty, and their native Grounds
Distain with Kindred Blood, the twanging Bows
Send Showers of Shafts, that on their barbed Points
Alternate Ruin bear. Here might you see
Barons, and Peasants on the embottled Field
Slain, or half dead, in one huge, ghastly Heap
Promiscuously amast: with dismal Groans,
And Ejulation, in the Pangs of Death
Some call for Aid, neglected; some o'erturn'd
In the fierce Shock, lie gasping, and expire,
Trampled by fiery Coursers; Horror thus,
And wild Uproar, and Desolation reigned
Unrespited: Ah! who at length will end
This long, pernicious Fray? What Man has Fate
Reserved for this great Work? -- Hail, happy Prince
Of Tuder's Race, whom in the Womb of Time
Cadwallador foresaw! Thou, Thou art He,
Great Richmond Henry, that by nuptial Rites
Must close the Gates of Janus, and remove
Destructive Discord: Now no more the Drum
Provokes to Arms, or Trumpet's Clangor shrill
Affrights the Wives, or chills the Virgin's Blood;
But Joy, and Pleasure open to the View
Uninterrupted! With presaging Skill
Thou to Thy own unitest Fergus' Line
By wise Alliance; from thee James descends,
Heavens chosen Favorite, first Britannic King.
To him alone, Hereditary Right
Gave Power supreme; yet still some Seeds remained
Of Discontent; Two Nations under One,
In Laws and Interest diverse, still pursued
Peculiar Ends, on each Side resolute
To fly Conjunction; neither Fear, nor Hope,
Nor the sweet Prospect of a mutual Gain,
Could ought avail, 'till prudent ANNA said
Let there be UNION; strait with Reverence due
To Her Command, they willingly unite,
One in Affection, Laws, and Government,
Indissolubly firm; from Dubris South,
To Northern Orcades, Her long Domain.
And now thus leagued by an eternal Bond,
What shall retard the Britons' bold Designs,
Or who sustain their Force; in Union knit,
Sufficient to withstand the Powers combined
Of all this Globe? At this important Act
The Mauritanian and Cathaian Kings
Already tremble, and the unbaptiz'd Turk
Dreads War from utmost Thule; uncontrol'd
The British Navy through the Ocean vast
Shall wave her double Cross, to extremest Climes
Terrify, and return with odorous Spoils
Of Araby well fraught, or Indus' Wealth,
Pearl, and Barbaric Gold; mean while the Swains
Shall unmolested reap, what Plenty strows
From well stored Horn, rich Grain, and timely Fruits
The elder Year, Pomona, pleased, shall deck
With ruby-tinctur'd Births, whose liquid Store
Abundant, flowing in well blended Streams,
The Natives shall applaud; while glad the talk
Of baleful Ills, caused by Bellona's Wrath
In other Realms; where ever the British spread
Triumphant Banners, or their Fame has reached
Diffusive to the utmost Bounds of this
Wise Universe, Silurian Cider borne
Shall please all Tastes, and triumph over the Vine.
THE END.
THE SPLENDID SHILLING: IN Imitation of MILTON.
-- Sing Heavenly Muse,
Things unattempted yet in Prose or Rhyme,
A Shilling, Breeches, and Chimera 's dire.

HAppy the Man, who void of Cares and Strife,
In Silken or in Leathern Purse retains
A Splendid Shilling: he not hears with pain
New Oysters cried, nor sighs for cheerful Ale;
But with his Friends, when nightly Mists arise,
To Juniper's, or Magpye, or Town Hall repairs,
Where mindful of the Nymph, whose wanton Eye,
Transfixed his Soul, and kindled Amorous Flames.
Chloe or Phillis; he each Circling Glass
Wishes her Health, and Joy, and equal Love.
Mean while he Smoaks, and Laughs at merry Tale,
Or Pun ambiguous, or Conundrum quaint.
But I whom griping Penury surrounds,
And Hunger, sure Attendant upon Want,
With scanty Offals, and small acid Tiff
(Wretched Repast) my meagre Corpse sustain;
Then Solitary walk, or doze at home
In Garret vile, and with a warming puff
Regale chilled Fingers, or from Tube as blac^
As Winter's Chimney, or well-polish'd Jett,
Exhale Mundungus, ill-perfuming Smoke.
Not blacker Tube, nor of a shorter Size
Smoaks Cambro-Britain (versed in Pedigree,
Sprung from Cadwalader and Arthur, ancient Kings,
Full famous in Romantic tale) when he
O'r^ many a craggy Hill, and fruitless Cliff.
Upon a Cargo of famed Cestrian Cheese,
High over-shadowing rides, with a design
Te vend his Wares, or at the Arvonian Mart,
Or Maridunum, or the ancient Town
Hight Morgannumia, or where Vaga's Stream
Encircles Ariconium, fruitful Soil,
Whence flow Nectareous Wines, that well may vye
With Massic, Setian, or Renowned Falern.
Thus while my joyless Hours I lingering spend,
With Looks demure, and silent pace a Dund,
Horrible Monster! hated by Gods and Men,
To my aerial Citadel ascends;
With Vocal Heel thrice Thundering at my Gates,
With hideous Accent thrice he calls; I know
The Voice ill boding, and the solemn Sound;
What should I do, or whether turn? amazed,
Confounded, to the dark Recess I fly
Of Woodhole; straight my bristling Hairs erect,
My Tongue forgets her Faculty of Speech,
So horrible he seems; his faded Brow
Entrenched with many a Frown, and conic Beard,
And spreading Band admired by Modern Saint
Disastrous Acts forbode; in his Right hand
Long Scrolls of Paper solemnly he waves,
With Characters and Figures dire inscribed
Grievous to mortal Eye, (ye Gods avert
Such Plagues from Righteous Men) behind him stalks
Another Monster, not unlike himself,
Of Aspect sullen, by the Vulgar called
A Catchpole, whose polluted hands the Gods
With Force incredible, and Magic Charms
Erst have indu'd, if he his ample Palm
Should happily on ill-fated Shoulder lay
Of Debtor, straight his Body to the touch
Obsequious (as Whilom Knights were wont)
To some enchanted Castle is conveyed,
Where Gates impregnable, and coercive Charm
In durance vile detain him, till in form
Of Money, Pallas set the Captive free.
Beware, ye Debtors, when ye walk, beware,
Be circumspect; often which insiduous Ken,
This Caitiff eyes your steps alooff, and often
Lies perdue in a Creek or gloomy Cave,
Prompt to enchant some inadvertent wretch
With his unhallowed Touch. So (Poets sing)
Grimalkin to Domestic Vermin sworn
An everlasting Foe, with watchful eye,
Lies nightly brooding ore a chinky gap,
Protending her fell claws, to thoughtless Mice
Sure ruin. So her disembowell'd Web
The Spider in a Hall or Kitchen spreads,
Obvious to vagrant Flies: she secret stands
Within her woven Cell; the Humming Prey
Regardless of their Fate, rush on the toils
Inextricable, nor will ought avail
Their Arts nor Arms, nor shapes of lovely Hue,
The Wasp insidious, and the buzzing Drone,
And Butterfly proud of expanded Wings
Distinct with Gold, entangled in her Snares,
Useless resistance make: with eager strides
She towering flies to her expected Spoils;
Then with envenomed Jaws the vatal Blood
Drinks of reluctant Foes, and to her Cave
Their bulky Carcasses triumphant drags.
So pass my days. But when Nocturnal Shades
This World invelop, and the inclement Air
Persuades Men to repel benumming Frosts,
With pleasant Wines, and crackling blaze of Wood;
Me lonely sitting, nor the glimmering Light
Of make-weight Candle, nor the joyous talk
Of lovely friends delights; distressed, forlorn,
Amidst the Horrors of the tedious Night,
Darkling I sigh, and feed with dismal Thoughts
My anxious Mind; or sometimes mournful Verse
Indite, and sing of Groves and Myrtle Shades,
Or desperate Lady near a purling stream,
Or Lover pendant on a Willow-tree:
Mean while I labor with eternal drought,
And restless wish, in vain, my parched Throat
Finds no relief, nor heavy Eyes repose:
But if a Slumber happily does invade
My weary Limbs, my Fancy still awake,
Longing for Drink, and eager in my Dream,
Tipples Imaginary Pots of Ale.
Awake, I find the settled Thirst --
Still gnawing, and the pleasant Phantom curse.
Thus do I live from Pleasure quite debarred,
Nor taste the Fruits that the Sun's genial Rays
Mature, John-apple, nor the Downy Peach,
Nor Walnut in rough-furrow'd Coat secure,
Nor Medlar Fruit delicious in decay;
Afflictions great, yet greater still remain,
My Galligaskins that have long withstood
The Winter's Fury, and encroaching Frosts,
By Time subdued, (what will not Time subdue!
A horrid Chasm disclose, with Orifice
Wide discontinuous; at which the Winds
Eurus, and Auster, and the dreadful force
Of Boreas, that congeals the Cronian Waves,
Tumultuous enter with dire chilling Blasts,
Portending Agues. Thus a well-fraught Ship
Long sailed secure, or through the Egean Deep,
Or the Ionian, 'till Cruising near
The Lilybean Shore; with hideous Crush
On Scylla or Charybdis dangerous Rocks
She strikes rebounding, whence the shattered Oak,
So fierce a Shock unable to withstand,
Admits the Sea, in at the gaping Side,
The crouding Waves gush with impetuous Rage,
Resistless overwhelming; Horrors seize
The Mariners Death in their Eyes appears,
They stare, they lave, they plump, they swear, they pray:
Vain Efforts, still the battering Waves rush in
Implacable, 'till deluged by the foam,
The Ship sinks found'ring in the vast Abyss.
TO A LADY: WITH Milton's Paradise Lost.
SEE here how bright the Firstborn Virgin shone!
And how the first Fond Lover was undone:
Such powerful Words our Charming Mother spoke,
As Milton's are, and such as Yours her Look.
Yours the best Copy of the Original Face,
Whose Beauty was to furnish all her Race.
Your Charms no Author can escape but he;
There Is no way to be safe, but not to see.
A SONG.
I.
WHat! put off with One Denial?
And not make a Second Trial?
You might see my Eyes consenting,
All about me was relenting:
Women obliged to dwell in Forms,
Forgive the Youth who boldly storms.
II.
Lovers, when you Sigh and Languish;
When you tell us of your Anguish;
To the Nymph you will be more pleasing,
When those Sorrows you are reasing:
We love to try how far Men dare,
And never wish the Foe should spare.
A SONG.
By Mr. Cheek.
BRight Cythia's Power, divinely Great;
What Heart is not Obeying?
A Thousand Cupids on her wait,
And in her Eyes are playing.
She seems the Quee^ of Love to reign,
For she alone dispences
Such Sweets as best can entertain
The Gust of all the Senses.
Her Face a Charming Prospect brings;
Her Breath gives balmy Blisses:
I hear an Angel when she Sings,
And taste of Heaven in Kisses.
Four Senses thus she Feasts with Joy,
From Nature's chiefest Treasure:
Let me the other Sense employ,
And I shall dye with Pleasure.
A Catalogue of Poems, Printed and Sold by H. Hills in Black-Fryars, near the
Water side.
A Congratulatory POEM to his Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark, Lord
High Admiral of Great Britain, upon the Glorious Successes at Sea. By N. Tate
Esquire Poet-Laureat to Her Majesty. To which is added a Happy Memorable Song, on
the Fight near Audenarde, between the Duke of Marlborough and Vendome, etc.

Windsor Castle: A POEM. Inscribed to the Immortal Honor of our most Gracious
Sovereign, Anne, Queen of Great Britain, France, and Ireland. To which is
added, Britain's Jubilee; a new Congratulatory SONG, etc.

Marlborough Still Conquers: Or, UNION has got the Day. A POEM, upon the late
Victory obtained by the Prince and Duke of Marlborough; And UNION of the Two
Kingdoms. By J. Gaynam,

The Battle of Audenarde. A POEM, occasioned by the Glorious Victory obtained
over the French near that Place, the 11th of July, 1708. N. S. by the
Confederate Army under the Command of his Grace the Duke of Marlborough,
Monsieur D' Auverguerque, and Prince Eugene of Savoy. With the Characters of
the General Officers, who were present in the Engagement. Also a New Copy of
Verses of Jack French-man's Lamentation.

The Flight of the Pretender, with Advice to the POETS. A POEM, in the
Arthurical, -- Jobical. -- Elizabethical Style and Phrase of the sublime POET
MAVRVS.

Honesty in Distress; But relieved by no Party. A Tragedy, As it is Acted on
the Stage, etc.

St. James' Park: A SATYR.

The Kit-Cats. A POEM. To which is added the PICTURE, in Imitation of
Annacreon's Bathillus. As also the Coquet Beauty, by the Right Honorable the
Marquis of Normanby.

WINE, A POEM. To which is added Old England's New Triumph^* Or, the Battle of
Audenard. A SONG.

A POEM, occasioned by the much lamented Death of Mrs Hester Buckworth, only
Daughter of Sir John Buckworth, Knight. and Bar.

The LONG VACATION. A SATYR Addressed to all Disconsolate TRADERS.

FINIS

