AN EPISTLE TO C. CHURCHILL, AUTHOR of the ROSCIAD.

Telumque imbelle sine ictu Conjecit. VIRG. By R. LLOYD, M. A.

LONDON: Printed for WILLIAM FLEXNEY, near Gray's Inn Gate, Holborn. MDCCLXI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
AS in Parts of the following Poem there is an Allusion to a late delicate
Production, it may not be improper to let the Reader into some Secrets
concerning its Origin, that He may know the Progress of Wit, and how dangerous
it is for young Adventurers to attack Veterans in the Service, and teach them
to pay a due Deference to all distinguished Writers. An Author possessed of
those happy Qualities which appear so notoriously in that Publication, viz.
MODESTY, DECENCY, and GOOD NATURE, has an indisputable Right to be believed
upon his own Assertion; and therefore it would be illiberal to doubt, but that
he is, as he ought to be, DISTINGUISHED. This Ode then was performed by the
Maker, as a Coffin to hold the dead Bodies of those unfortunate Heroes slain by
his redoubtable Pen. A Gentleman it seems unhappily differed in Opinion with
our Champion, and expressed his Sentiments in a Paper called the Craftsman.
Out-sallies the vindictive Knight (I should say Squire) to use his own
Language, does him, slaps him into the Coffin, where he laid quietly for some
Months, till a second Paroxysm of Indignation, produced a second Murder, and
the former Body was obliged to give Place to the latter. The Coffin is nailed
down, the Plate altered, and the brazen Inscription informs us C. CHURCHILL
died the 12th of June 1761.

HAPPY is the Man that is always prepared for his Enemy, and has "his NAIADS by
him ready made." It must be allowed that this Gentleman has made huge Strides
toward Parnassus, and has strangely walked over all our Heads. I wish him Joy
of having exalted himself to the Pinnacle of this aerie Mountain, but beg Leave
to remind him, that People sometimes tolluntur in altum
Ut lapsu graviore cadant.


An EPISTLE to C. CHURCHILL.
IF at a Tavern, where you would wish to dine,
They cheat your Palate with adulterate Wine,
Would you, resolve me Critics, for you can,
Send for the Master up, or chide the Man.
The Man no doubt a knavish Business drives,
But tell me what is the Master who connives?
Hence you will infer, and sure the Doctrine's true,
Which says, no Quarter to a foul Review.
It matters not who vends the nauseous slop,
Master or Prentice; we detest the Shop.
CRITICS of old, a manly liberal Race,
Approved or censured with an open Face:
Boldly persu'd the free decisive Task,
Nor stabbed, concealed beneath a Ruffian's Mask.
To Works not Men, with honest Warmth severe,
Th'impartial Judges laughed at Hope or Fear:
Theirs was the noble Skill, with generous Aim,
To fan true Genius to an active Flame;
To bring forth Merit in its strongest Light,
Or damn the Blockhead to his native Night.
BUT, as all States are subject to Decay,
The State of Letters too will melt away.
Smit with the Harlot Charms of trilling Sound,
Softness now wantons even on Roman Ground;
Where Thebans, Spartans, sought their honored Graves,
Behold a weak enervate Race of Slaves.
In Classic Lore, deep Science, Language dead,
Though modern Witlings are but scantly read,
Professors The Author takes this Opportunity, notwithstanding all Insinuations
to the contrary, to declare, that he has no particular Aim at a Gentleman,
whose Abilities he sufficiently acknowledges.
fail not, who will loudly bawl
In Praise of either, with the Want of all.
Hailed mighty Critics to this present Hour.
-- The Tribune's Name survived the Tribune's Power.
Now Quack and Critic differ but in Name,
Empirics frontless both, they mean the same;
This raw in Physic, that in Letters fresh,
Both spring like Warts, Excrescence from the Flesh.
Half formed, half bred in Printers' hireling Schools,
For all Professions have their Rogues and Fools,
Though the pert Witling, or the coward Knave,
Casts no Reflection on the Wise or Brave.
YET in these leaden Times, this idle Age,
When blind with Dullness, or as blind with Rage,
Author against Author rails with Venom cursed,
And happy He who calls out Blockhead first,
From the low Earth aspiring Genius springs,
And sails triumphant, born on Eagle Wings.
No toothless Spleen, no venomed Critic's aim,
Shall rob thee, CHURCHILL, of thy proper Fame;
While hitch'd for ever in thy nervous Rhyme,
Fool lives, and shines out Fool to latest Time.
PITY perhaps might with a harmless Fool,
To escape the Observance of the Critic School;
But if low Malice leagued with Folly rise,
Armed with Invectives, and hedged round with Lies;
Should wakeful Dullness, if she ever wake,
Write sleepy Nonsense but for Writing Sake,
And stung with Rage, and piously severe,
Wish bitter Comforts to your dying Ear;
If some small Wit, some six-lin'd Verseman, rakes
For quaint Reflections in the putrid Jakes,
Talents usurped, demand a Censor's Rage,
A Dunce is Dunce proscribed in every Age.
COURTIER, Physician, Lawyer, Parson, Cit,
All, all are Objects of Theatric Wit.
Are ye then, Actors, priviledg'd alone
To make that Weapon Ridicule your own?
Professions bleed not from his just Attack,
Who laughs at Pedant, Coxcomb, Knave, or Quack;
Fools on and off the Stage are Fools the same,
And every Dunce is Satire's lawful Game.
Freely you thought, where Thought has free'st Room,
Why then apologize? for what? to whom?
THOUGH Gray's Inn Wits with Author Squire's unite,
And self-made Giants club their labored Mite,
Though pointless Satire make its weak Escape
In the dull Babble of a mimic Ape,
Boldly pursue where Genius points the Way,
Nor heed what monthly puny Critics say.
Firm in thyself with calm Indifference smile,
When the wise Vet'ran knows you by your Style,
With critic Scales weighs out the partial Wit,
What I, or You, or He, or no one writ;
Denying thee thy just and proper Worth,
But to give Falshood's spurious Issue Birth;
And all self-willed with lawless Hand to raise
Malicious Slander on the Base of Praise.
DISGRACE eternal wait the Wretch's Name
Who lives on Credit of a borrowed Fame;
Who wears the Trappings of another's Wit,
Or fathers Bantlings which he could not get.
But shrewd Suspicion with her squinting Eye
To Truth declared, prefers a whispered Lie.
With greedy Mind the proffered Tale believes,
Relates her Wishes, and with Joy deceives.
THE World, a pompous Name, by Custom due
To the small Circle of a talking few,
With heartfelt Glee th'injurious Tale repeats,
And sends the Whisper buzzing through the Streets.
The Prude demure with sober saint-like Air,
Pities her Neighbor for she is wondrous fair.
And, when Temptations lie before our Feet,
Beauty is frail, and Females indiscreet.
She hopes the Nymph will every Danger shun,
Yet prays devoutly -- that the Deed were done.
Mean Time sits watching for the daily Lie,
As Spiders lurk to catch a simple Fly.
YET is not Scandal to one Sex confined,
Though Men would fix it on the weaker Kind.
Yes, this great Lord, Creation's Master Man,
Will vent his Malice where the Blockhead can,
Imputing Crimes, of which even Thought is free,
For Instance now, your ROSCIAD all to me.
IF partial Friendship in thy sterling Lays
Grows all too wanton in another's Praise,
Critics who judge by Ways themselves have known,
Shall swear the Praise, the Poem is my own;
For it is the Method in these learned Days
For Wits to scribble first, and after praise.
Critics and Co. thus vend their wretched Stuff,
And help out Nonsense by a monthly Puff,
Exalt to Giant's Forms weak puny Elves,
And descant sweetly on their own dear selves;
For Works per Month by Learning's Midwives paid,
Demand a Puffing in the Way of Trade.
RESERVED and cautious with no partial Aim,
My Muse ever sought to blast another's Fame.
With willing Hand could twine a Rival's Bays,
From Candor silent where she could not praise.
But if vile Rancour, from (no Matter who)
Actor, or Mimic, Printer, or Review,
Lies often overthrown with ceaseless Venom spread,
Still hiss out Scandal from their Hydra Head,
If the dull Malice boldly walk the Town,
Patience herself would wrinkle to a Frown.
Come then with Justice draw the ready Pen,
Give me the Works, I would not know the Men.
All in their Turns might make Reprisals too,
Had all the Patience but to read them through.
Come, to the utmost, probe the desperate Wound,
Nor spare the Knife wherever Infection's found.
BUT Prudence, CHURCHILL, or her Sister Fear,
Whispers Forbearance to my fright'ned Ear.
Oh! then with me forsake the thorny Road,
Lest we should flounder in some Fleet-Ditch Ode,
And sunk for ever in the lazy Flood,
Weep with the NAIADS heavy Drops of Mud.
HAIL mighty Ode! which like a Picture Frame,
Hold any Portrait, and with any Name;
Or like your Nitches planted thick and thin,
Will serve to cram the Random Hero in.
HAIL mighty Bard too -- whatsoever thy Name,
-- or DURFY, for it is all the same.
To Brother Bards shall equal Praise belong,
For Wit, for Genius, Comedy and Song.
No costive Muse is thine, which freely rakes
With ease familiar in the well known Jakes,
Happy in Skill to souse through foul and fair,
And toss the Dung out with a lordly Air.
So have I seen amidst the grinning Throng
The Sledge Procession slowly dragged along,
Where the mock Female Shrew and hen-peck'd Male
Scoop'd rich Contents from either copious Pail,
Called Bursts of Laughter from the roaring Rout,
And dashed and splash'd the filthy Grains about.
QUIT then, my Friend, the Muses loved Abode,
Alas! they lead not to Preferment's Road,
Be solemn, sad, put on the priestly Frown,
Be dull, it is sacred, and becomes the Gown.
Leave Wit to others, do a Christian Deed,
Your Foes shall thank you, for they know their Need.
BROAD is the Path by Learning's Sons possessed
A thousand modern Wits might walk abreast,
Did not each Poet mourn his luckless Doom
Jostled by Pedants out of Elbow Room.
I, who nor court their Love, nor fear their Hate,
Must mourn in Silence over the Muses Fate.
No Right of Common now on Pindus' Hill,
While all our Tenures are by Critics Will.
Where, watchful Guardians of the Lady Muse,
Dwell monstrous Giants, dreadful tall REVIEWS,
Who, as we read in famed Romance of Yore,
Sound but a Horn press forward to the Door.
But let some Chief, some bold adventurous Knight,
Provoke these Champions to an equal Fight,
Strait into Air to spaceless nothing fall
The Castle, Lions, Giants, Dwarf and all.
ILL it befits with undiscerning Rage
To censure Giants in this polished Age.
No lack of Genius stains these happy Times,
No Want of Learning, and no Dearth of Rimes.
The see-saw Muse that flows by measured Laws,
In tuneful Numbers, and affected Pause,
With Sound alone, Sound's happy Virtue fraught,
Which hates the Trouble, and Expense of Thought,
Once, every Moon, throughout the circling Year
With Even Cadence charms the critic Ear.
While, dire Promoter of Poetic Sin,
A Magazine must hand the Lady in.
HOW Moderns write, how nervous, strong and well,
The ANTI-ROSCIAD'S decent Muse does tell.
Which, while she strives to cleanse each Actor hurt,
Daubs with her Praise, and rubs him into Dirt.
SURE never yet was happy Era known
So gay, so wise, so tasteful as our own.
Our curious Histories rise at once COMPLETE,
Yet still continued, as they are paid, per Sheet.
SEE every Science which the World would know,
Your Magazines shall every Month bestow,
Whose very Titles fill the Mind with Awe,
Imperial, Christian, Royal, British, Law;
Their rich Contents will every Reader fit,
Statesman, Divine, Philosopher and Wit;
Compendious Schemes! which teach all Things at once,
And make a pedant Coxcomb of a Dunce.
BUT let not Anger to such Frenzy grow,
Drawcansir like, to strike down Friend and Foe.
To real Worth be Homage duly paid,
But no Allowance to the paltry Trade.
My Friends I name not (though I boast a few,
To Me an Honor and to Letters too)
Fain would I praise, but when such Things oppose
My Praise of Course must make them -- 's Foes.
IF manly JOHNSON, with satyric Rage,
Lash the dull Follies of a trifling Age,
If his strong Muse with genuine Strength aspire,
Glows not the Reader with the Poet's Fire?
HIS the true Fire, where creep the witling Fry
To warm themselves, and light their Rushlights by.
WHAT Muse like GRAY'S shall pleasing pensive flow
Attemper'd sweetly to the rustic Woe?
Or who like him shall sweep the Theban Lyre,
And, as his Master, pour forth Thoughts of Fire?
EVEN now to guard afflicted Learning's Cause,
To judge by Reason's Rules, and Nature's Laws,
Boast we true Critics in their proper Right,
While LOWTH and Learning, HURD and Taste unite.
HAIL sacred Names -- Oh armed with honest Rage,
Save your loved Mistress from a Ruffian's Rage;
See how she gasps and struggles hard for Life,
Her Wounds all bleeding from the Butcher's Knife:
Critics, like Surgeons, blessed with curious Art,
Should mark each Passage to the human Heart,
But not unskilful, yet with lordly Air
Read Surgeon's Lectures while they scalp and tear.
To Names like these, I pay the hearty Vow,
Proud of their Worth, and not ashamed to bow.
To these inscribe my rude, but honest Lays,
And feel the Pleasures of my conscious Praise.
Not that I mean to court each lettered Name,
And poorly glimmer from reflected Fame,
But that the Muse which owns no servile Fear,
Is proud to pay her willing Tribute here.
FINIS.

