She Stoops to Conquer: OR, The Mistakes of a Night.

(Price One Shilling and Sixpence.)

She Stoops to Conquer: OR, The Mistakes of a Night. A COMEDY. AS IT IS ACTED
AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN COVENT GARDEN. WRITTEN BY Doctor GOLDSMITH.

LONDON: Printed for F. NEWBERY, in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCCLXXIII.

To SAMUEL JOHNSON, L. L. D.
Dear Sir,
BY inscribing this slight performance to you, I do not mean so much to
compliment you as myself. It may do me some honor to inform the public, that I
have lived many years in intimacy with you. It may serve the interests of
mankind also to inform them, that the greatest wit may be found in a character,
without impairing the most unaffected piety.

I have, particularly, reason to thank you for your partiality to this
performance. The undertaking a comedy, not merely sentimental, was very
dangerous; and Mr. Colman, who saw this piece in its various stages, always
thought it so. However I ventured to trust it to the public; and though it was
necessarily delayed till late in the season, I have every reason to be grateful.

I am, Dear Sir, Your most sincere friend, And admirer, OLIVER GOLDSMITH.

PROLOGUE
By DAVID GARRICK, Esquire.
Enter Mr. WOODWARD, Dressed in Black, and holding a Handkerchief to his Eyes.
EXCUSE me, Sirs, I pray -- I cannot yet speak --
I Am crying now -- and have been all the week!
It Is not alone this mourning suit, good masters;
I Have that within -- for which there are no plasters!
Pray would you know the reason why I Am crying?
The Comic muse, long sick, is now a dying!
And if she goes, my tears will never stop;
For as a play'r, I cannot squeeze out one drop:
I am undone, that is all -- shall lose my bread --
I Would rather, but that is nothing -- lose my head.
When the sweet maid is laid upon the bier,
Shuter and I shall be chief mourners here.
To her a mawkish (...) of spurious breed,
Who deals in s^^t^^^^tals will succeed!
Poor Ned and I are dead to all intents,
We can as soon speak Greek as sentiments!
Both nervous grown, to keep our spirits up,
We now and then take down a hearty cup.
What shall we do? -- If Comedy forsake us!
They Will turn us out, and no one else will take us,
But why cannot I be moral? -- Let me try --
My heart thus pressing -- fixed my face and eye --
With a sententious look, that nothing means,
(Faces are blocks, in sentimental scenes)
Thus I begin -- All is not gold that glitters,
Pleasure seems sweet, but proves a glass of bitters.
When ignorance enters, folly is at hand;
Learning is better far than house and land:
Let not your virtue trip, who trips may stumble,
And virtue is not virtue, if she tumble.
I give it up -- morals will not do for me;
To make you laugh I must play tragedy.
One hope remains -- hearing the maid was ill,
A doctor comes this night to show his skill.
To cheer her heart, and give your muscles motion,
He in five draughts prepared, presents a potion:
A kind of magic charm -- for be assured,
If y^^ (...) swallow it, the maid is cured:
But d^^p^^^te the Doctor, and her case is,
If you reject the d^se, and make wry faces!
This truth he boasts, will beast it while he lives,
No poisonous drugs are mixed in what he gives;
Should he succeed, you will give him his degree;
If not, within he will receive no fee!
The college you, must his pretensions back,
Pronounce him regular, or dub him quack.
EPILOGUE
By Dr. GOLDSMITH.
WELL, having stooped to conquer with success,
And gained a husband without aid from dress,
Still as a Bar-maid, I could wish it too,
As I have conquered him to conquer you:
And let me say, for all your resolution,
That pretty Bar-maids have done execution.
Our life is all a play, composed to please,
"We have our exits and our entrances."
The first act shows the simple country maid,
Harmless and young, of every thing asraid;
Blushes when hired, and with unmeaning action,
I hopes as how to give you satisfaction.
Her second act displays a livelier scene, --
The unblushing Bar-maid of a country inn.
Who whisks about the house, at market caters,
Talks loud, coquets the guests, and scolds the waiters.
Next the scene shifts to town, and there she soars,
The chop house toast of ogling connoissieurs.
On 'Squires and Cits she there displays her arts,
And on the gridiron broils her lover's hearts --
And as she smiles, her triumphs to complete,
Even Common Councilmen forget to eat.
The fourth act shows her wedded to the 'Squire,
And Madam now begins to hold it higher;
Pretends to taste, at Operas cries caro,
And quits her Nancy Dawson, for Che Faro.
Doats upon dancing, and in all her pride,
Swims round the room, the Heinel of Cheapside:
Ogles and leers with artificial skill,
Till having lost in age the power to kill,
She sits all night at cards, and ogles at spadille.
Such, through our lives, the eventful history --
The fifth and last act still remains for me.
The Bar-maid now for your protection prays,
Turns Female Barrister, and leads for Bays.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Sir CHARLES MARLOW, Mr. GARDNER. Young MARLOW (his Son) Mr. JEWS. HARDCASTLE,
Mr. SHUTER. HASTINGS, Mr. DUBELLAMY. TONY LUMPKIN, Mr. QUICK. DIGGORY, Mr.
SAUNDERS,
WOMEN.
Mrs. HARDCASTLE, Mrs. GREEN. Miss HARDCASTLE, Mrs. BULKELY. Miss Neville, Mrs.
KNIVETON. Maid, Miss WILLEMS.


Landlord, Servants, etc. etc.

She Stoops to Conquer: OR, The Mistakes of a Night.
ACT I.
SCENE, A CHAMBER in an old fashioned HOUSE. Enter Mrs. HARDCASTLE and Mr.
HARDCASTLE. Mrs. HARDCASTLE. I Vow, Mr. Hardcastle, you're very particular. Is
there a creature in the whole country, but ourselves, that does not take a trip
to town now and then, to rub off the rust a little? There Is the two Miss Hoggs,
and our neighbor, Mrs. Grigsby, go to take a month's polishing every winter.


HARDCASTLE. Ay, and bring back vanity and affectation to last them the whole
year. I wonder why London cannot keep its own fools at home. In my time, the
follies of the town crept slowly among us, but now they travel faster than a
stage-coach. Its fopperies come down, not only as inside passengers, but in the
very basket.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Ay, your times were fine times, indeed; you have been telling
us of them for many a long year. Here we live in an old rumbling mansion, that
looks for all the world like an inn, but that we never see company. Our best
visitors are old Mrs. Oddfish, the curate's wife, and little Cripplegate, the
lame dancing master: And all our entertainment your old stories of Prince
Eugene and the Duke of Marlborough. I hate such old-fashioned trumpery.


HARDCASTLE. And I love it. I love every thing that is old: old friends, old
times, old manners, old books, old wine; and, I believe, Dorothy, (taking her
hand) you will own I have been pretty fond of an old wife.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Lord, Mr. Hardcastle, you're for ever at your Dorothy's and
your old wife's. You may be a Darby, but I Will be no Joan, I promise you. I Am
not so old as you would make me, by more than one good year. Add twenty to twenty,
and make money of that.


HARDCASTLE. Let me see; twenty added to twenty, makes just fifty and seven.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. It Is false, Mr. Hardcastle: I was but twenty when I was
brought to bed of Tony, that I had by Mr. Lumpkin, my first husband; and he is
not come to years of discretion yet.


HARDCASTLE. Nor ever will, I dare answer for him. Ay, you have taught him
finely.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. No matter, Tony Lumpkin has a good fortune. My son is not to
live by his learning. I don't think a boy wants much learning to spend fifteen
hundred a year.


HARDCASTLE. Learning, quotha! A mere composition of tricks and mischief.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Humor, my dear: nothing but humor. Come, Mr. Hardcastle,
you must allow the boy a little humor.


HARDCASTLE. I Would sooner allow him an horse-pond. If burning the footmens shoes,
frighting the maids, and worrying the kittens, be humor, he has it. It was but
yesterday he fastened my wig to the back of my chair, and when I went to make a
bow, I popt my bald head in Mrs. Frizzle's face.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. And am I to blame? The poor boy was always too sickly to do
any good. A school would be his death. When he comes to be a little stronger,
who knows what a year or two's Latin may do for him?


HARDCASTLE. Latin for him! A cat and fiddle. No, no, the alehouse and the
stable are the only schools he will ever go to.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Well, we must not snub the poor boy now, for I believe we
shall not have him long among us. Any body that looks in his face may see he is
consumptive.


HARDCASTLE. Ay, if growing too fat be one of the symptoms.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. He coughs sometimes.


HARDCASTLE. Yes, when his liquor goes the wrong way.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. I Am actually afraid of his lungs.


HARDCASTLE. And truly so am I; for he sometimes whoops like a speaking trumpet
-- (Tony hallooing behind the Scenes) -- O there he goes -- A very consumptive
figure, truly.


Enter TONY, crossing the Stage. Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Tony, where are you going, my
charmer? Will Not you give papa and I a little of your company, lovee?


TONY. I Am in haste, mother, I cannot stay.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. You shall not venture out this raw evening, my dear: You look
most shockingly.


TONY. I cannot stay, I tell you. The Three Pigeons expects me down every
moment. There Is some fun going forward.


HARDCASTLE. Ay; the alehouse, the old place: I thought so.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. A low, paltry set of fellows.


TONY. Not so low neither. There Is Dick Muggins the exciseman, Jack Slang the
horse doctor, Little Aminadab that grinds the music box, and Tom Twist that
spins the pewter platter.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Pray, my dear, disappoint them for one night at least.


TONY. As for disappointing them, I should not so much mind; but I cannot abide
to disappoint myself.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. (Detaining him) You shall not go.


TONY. I will, I tell you.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. I say you shall not.


TONY. We'll see which is strongest, you or I.


[Exit. hawling her out. HARDCASTLE. Solus. HARDCASTLE. Ay, there goes a pair
that only spoil each other, But is not the whole age in a combination to drive
sense and discretion out of doors? There Is my pretty darling Kate; the fashions
of the times have almost infected her too. By living a year or two in town, she
is as fond of gauze, and French frippery, as the best of them.


Enter MISS HARDCASTLE. HARDCASTLE. Blessings on my pretty innocence! Dressed out
as usual my Kate. Goodness! What a quantity of superfluous silk has thou got
about thee, girl! I could never teach the fools of this age, that the indigent
world could be clothed out of the trimmings of the vain.


Miss HARDCASTLE. You know our agreement, Sir. You allow me the morning to
receive and pay visits, and to dress in my own manner; and in the evening, I
put on my housewife's dress to please you.


HARDCASTLE. Well, remember I insist on the terms of our agreement; and, by the
bye, I believe I shall have occasion to try your obedience this very evening.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I protest, Sir, I don't comprehend your meaning.


HARDCASTLE. Then, to be plain with you, Kate, I expect the young gentleman I
have chosen to be your husband from town this very day. I have his father's
letter, in which he informs me his son is set out, and that he intends to
follow himself shortly after.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Indeed! I wish I had known something of this before. Bless
me, how shall I behave? It Is a thousand to one I shall not like him; our meeting
will be so formal, and so like a thing of business, that I shall find no room
for friendship or esteem.


HARDCASTLE. Depend upon it, child, I Will never control your choice; but Mr.
Marlow, whom I have pitched upon, is the son of my old friend, Sir Charles
Marlow, of whom you have heard me talk so often. The young gentleman has been
bred a scholar, and is designed for an employment in the service of his
country. I am told he is a man of an excellent understanding.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Is he?


HARDCASTLE. Very generous.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I believe I shall like him.


HARDCASTLE. Young and brave.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I Am sure I shall like him.


HARDCASTLE. And very handsome.


Miss HARDCASTLE. My dear Papa, say no more (kissing his hand) he is mine, I Will
have him.


HARDCASTLE. And to crown all, Kate, he is one of the most bashful and reserved
young fellows in all the world.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Eh! you have frozen me to death again. That word reserved,
has undone all the rest of his accomplishments. A reserved lover, it is said,
always makes a suspicious husband.


HARDCASTLE. On the contrary, modesty seldom resides in a breast that is not
enriched with nobler virtues. It was the very feature in his character that
first struck me.


Miss HARDCASTLE. He must have more striking features to catch me, I promise
you. However, if he be so young, so handsome, and so every thing, as you
mention, I believe he will do still. I think I Will have him.


HARDCASTLE. Ay, Kate, but there is still an obstacle. Its more than an even
wager, he may not have you.


Miss HARDCASTLE. My dear Papa, why will you mortify one so? -- Well, if he
refuses, instead of breaking my heart at his indifference, I Will only break my
glass for its flattery. Set my cap to some newer fashion, and look out for some
less difficult admirer.


HARDCASTLE. Bravely resolved! In the mean time I Will go prepare the servants
for his reception; as we seldom see company they want as much training as a
company of recruits, the first day's muster.


[Exit Miss HARDCASTLE, Sola. Miss HARDCASTLE. Lud, this news of Papa's, puts
me all in a slutter. Young, handsome; these he put last; but I put them
foremost. Sensible, good-natured; I like all that. But then reserved, and
sheepish, that is much against him. Yet cannot he be cured of his timidity, by
being taught to be proud of his wife? Yes, and cannot I -- But I vow I Am
disposing of the husband, before I have secured the lover.


Enter Miss NEVILLE. Miss HARDCASTLE. I Am glad you're come, Neville, my dear.
Tell me, Constance, how do I look this evening? Is there any thing whimsical
about me? Is it one of my well looking days, child? Am I in face to day?


Miss NEVILLE. Perfectly, my dear. Yet now I look again -- bless me! -- sure no
accident has happened among the canary birds or the gold fishes. Has your
brother or the cat been meddling? Or has the last novel been too moving?


Miss HARDCASTLE. No; nothing of all this. I have been threatened -- I can
scarce get it out -- I have been threatened with a lover.


Miss NEVILLE. And his name --


Miss HARDCASTLE. Is Marlow.


Miss NEVILLE. Indeed!


Miss HARDCASTLE. The son of Sir Charles Marlow.


Miss NEVILLE. As I live, the most intimate friend of Mr. Hastings, my admirer.
They are never asunder. I believe you must have seen him when we lived in town.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Never.


Miss NEVILLE. He Is a very singular character, I assure you. Among women of
reputation and virtue, he is the modestest man alive; but his acquaintance give
him a very different character among creatures of another stamp: you understand
me.


Miss HARDCASTLE. An odd character, indeed. I shall never be able to manage
him. What shall I do? Pshaw, think no more of him, but trust to occurrences for
success. But how goes on your own affair my dear, has my mother been courting
you for my brother Tony, as usual?


Miss NEVILLE. I have just come from one of our agreeable tete a-tetes. She has
been saying a hundred tender things, and setting off her pretty monster as the
very pink of perfection.


Miss HARDCASTLE. And her partiality is such, that she actually thinks him so.
A fortune like yours is no small temptation. Besides, as she has the sole
management of it, I Am not surprised to see her unwilling to let it go out of
the family.


Miss NEVILLE. A fortune like mine, which chiefly consists in jewels, is no
such mighty temptation. But at any rate if my dear Hastings be but constant, I
make no doubt to be too hard for her at last. However, I let her suppose that I
am in love with her son, and she never once dreams that my affections are fixed
upon another.


Miss HARDCASTLE. My good brother holds out stoutly. I could almost love him
for hating you so.


Miss NEVILLE. It is a good natured creature at bottom, and I Am sure would wish
to see me married to any body but himself. But my aunt's bell rings for our
afternoon's walk round the improvements. Allons. Courage is necessary as our
affairs are critical.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Would it were bed time and all were well.


[Exeunt. SCENE, An Alehouse Room. Several shabby fellows, with Punch and
Tobacco. TONY at the head of the Table, a little higher than the rest: A mallet
in his hand. OMNES. Hurrea, hurrea, hurrea, bravo.


First FELLOW. Now, gentlemen, silence for a song. The 'Squire is going to
knock himself down for a song.


OMNES. Ay, a song, a song.


TONY. Then I Will sing you, gentlemen, a song I made upon this alehouse, the
Three Pigeons.

SONG.
Let schoolmasters puzzle their brain,
With grammar, and nonsense, and learning;
Good liquor, I stoutly maintain,
Gives genus a better discerning.
Let them brag of their Heathenish Gods,
Their Lethes, their Styxes, and Stygians;
Their Quis, and their Quaes, and their Quods,
They Are all but a parcel of Pigeons.
Toroddle, toroddle, toroll.
When Methodist preachers come down,
A preaching that drinking is sinful,
I Will wager the rascals a crown,
They always preach best with a skinful.
But when you come down with your pence,
For a slice of their scurvy religion,
I Will leave it to all men of sense,
But you my good friend are the pigeon.
Toroddle, toroddle, toroll.
Then come, put the jorum about,
And let us be merry and dever,
Our hearts and our liquors are stout,
Here Is the Three Jolly Pigeons for ever.
Let some cry up woodcock or hare,
Your bustards, your ducks, and your widgeons;
But of all the birds in the air,
Here Is a health to the Three Jolly Pigeons.
Toroddle, toroddle, toroll.

OMNES. Bravo, bravo.


First FELLOW. The 'Squire has got spunk in him.


Second FELLOW: I loves to hear him sing, bekeays he never gives us nothing
that is low.


Third FELLOW. O damn any thing that is low, I cannot bear it.


Fourth FELLOW. The genteel thing is the genteel thing at any time. If so be
that a gentleman bees in a concatenation accordingly.


Third FELLOW. I like the maxum of it, Master Muggins. What, though I am
obligated to dance a bear, a man may be a gentleman for all that. May this be
my poison if my bear ever dances but to the very genteelest of tunes. Water
Parted, or the minuet in Ariadne.


Second FELLOW. What a pity it is the 'Squire is not come to his own. It would
be well for all the publicans within ten miles round of him.


TONY. Ecod and so it would Master Slang. I Would then show what it was to keep
choice of company.


Second FELLOW. O he takes after his own father for that. To be sure old
'Squire Lumpkin was the finest gentleman I ever set my eyes on. For winding the
straight horn, or beating a thicket for a hare, or a wench he never had his
fellow. It was a saying in the place, that he kept the best horses, dogs and
girls in the whole county.


TONY. Ecod, and when I Am of age I Will be no bastard I promise you. I have been
thinking of Bett Bouncer and the miller's gray mare to begin with. But come, my
boys, drink about and be merry, for you pay no reckoning. Well Stingo, what is
the matter?


Enter LANDLORD. LANDLORD. There be two gentlemen in a post-chaise at the door.
They have lost their way upo' the forest; and they are talking something about
Mr. Hardcastle.


TONY. As sure as can be one of them must be the gentleman that is coming down
to court my sister. Do they seem to be Londoners?


LANDLORD. I believe they may. They look woundily like Frenchmen.


TONY. Then desire them to step this way, and I Will set them right in a
twinkling. (Exit Landlord.) Gentlemen, as they may not be good enough company
for you, step down for a moment, and I Will be with you in the squeezing of a
lemon.


[Exeunt Mob. TONY solus. TONY. Father-in-law has been calling me whelp, and
hound, this half year. Now if I pleased, I could be so revenged upon the old
grumbletonian. But then I Am afraid -- afraid of what! I shall soon be worth
fifteen hundred a year, and let him frighten me out of that if he can.


Enter LANDLORD, conducting Marlow and Hastings. MARLOW. What a tedious
uncomfortable day have we had of it! We were told it was but forty miles across
the country, and we have come above threescore.


HASTINGS. And all Marlow, from that unaccountable reserve of yours, that would
not let us enquire more frequently on the way.


MARLOW. I own, Hastings, I am unwilling to lay myself under an obligation to
every one I meet; and often, stand the chance of an unmannerly answer.


HASTINGS. At present, however, we are not likely to receive any answer.


TONY. No offense, gentlemen. But I Am told you have been enquiring for one Mr.
Hardcastle, in those parts. Do you know what part of the country you are in?


HASTINGS. Not in the least Sir, but should thank you for information.


TONY. Nor the way you came?


HASTINGS. No, Sir; but if you can inform us --


TONY. Why, gentlemen, if you know neither the road you are going, nor where
you are, nor the road you came, the first thing I have to inform you is, that
-- You have lost your way.


MARLOW. We wanted no ghost to tell us that.


TONY. Pray, gentlemen, may I be so bold as to ask the place from whence you
came?


MARLOW. That Is not necessary toward directing us where we are to go.


TONY. No offense; but question for question is all fair, you know. Pray,
gentlemen, is not this same Hardcastle a cross-grained, old-fashioned,
whimsical fellow, with an ugly face; a daughter, and a pretty son?


HASTINGS. We have not seen the gentleman, but he has the family you mention.


TONY. The daughter, a tall trapesing, trolloping, talkative maypole -- The
son, a pretty, well-bred, agreeable youth, that every body is fond of.


MARLOW. Our information differs in this. The daughter is said to be well-bred
and beautiful; the son, an awkward booby, reared up, and spoiled at his
mother's apron-string.


TONY. He-he-hem -- Then, gentlemen, all I have to tell you is, that you will not
reach Mr. Hardcastle's house this night, I believe.


HASTINGS. Unfortunate!


TONY. It Is a damned long, dark, boggy, dirty, dangerous way. Stingo, tell the
gentlemen the way to Mr. Hardcastle's; (winking upon the Landlord) Mr.
Hardcastle's, of Quagmire Marsh, you understand me.


LANDLORD. Master Hardcastle's! Lock-a-daisy, my masters, you're come a deadly
deal wrong! When you came to the bottom of the hill, you should have crossed
down Squash-lane.


MARLOW. Cross down Squash-lane!


LANDLORD. Then you were to keep straight forward, 'till you came to four roads.


MARLOW. Come to where four roads meet!


TONY. Ay; but you must be sure to take only one of them.


MARLOW. O Sir, you're facetious.


TONY. Then keeping to the right, you are to go side-ways till you come upon
Crack-skull common: there you must look sharp for the track of the wheel, and
go forward, 'till you come to farmer Murrain's barn. Coming to the farmer's
barn, you are to turn to the right, and then to the left, and then to the right
about again, till you find out the old mill --


MARLOW. Zounds, man! we could as soon find out the longitude!


HASTINGS. What Is to be done, Marlow?


MARLOW. This house promises but a poor reception; though perhaps the Landlord
can accommodate us.


LANDLORD. Alack, master, we have but one spare bed in the whole house.


TONY. And to my knowledge, that is taken up by three lodgers already. (after a
pause, in which the rest seem disconcerted) I have hit it. Don't you think,
Stingo, our landlady could accommodate the gentlemen by the fireside, with --
three chairs and a bolster?


HASTINGS. I hate sleeping by the fireside.


MARLOW. And I detest your three chairs and a bolster.


TONY. You do, do you? -- then let me see -- what -- if you go on a mile
further, to the Buck's Head; the old Buck's Head on the hill, one of the best
inns in the whole county?


HASTINGS. O ho! so we have escaped an adventure for this night, however.


LANDLORD. (Apart to Tony) Sure, you ben't sending them to your father's as an
inn, be you?


TONY. Mum, you fool you. Let them find that out. (to them) You have only to
keep on straight forward, till you come to a large old house by the road side.
You Will see a pair of large horns over the door. That Is the sign. Drive up the
yard, and call stoutly about you.


HASTINGS. Sir, we are obliged to you. The servants cannot miss the way?


TONY. No, no: But I tell you though, the landlord is rich, and going to leave
off business; so he wants to be thought a Gentleman, saving your presence, he!
he! he! He Will be for giving you his company, and ecod if you mind him, he will
persuade you that his mother was an alderman, and his aunt a justice of peace.


LANDLORD. A troublesome old blade to be sure; but a keeps as good wines and
beds as any in the whole country.


MARLOW. Well, if he supplies us with these, we shall want no further
connection. We are to turn to the right, did you say?


TONY. No, no; straight forward. I Will just step myself, and show you a piece of
the way. (to the landlord) Mum.


LANDLORD. Ah, bless your heart, for a sweet, pleasant -- damned mischievous
son of a whore.


[Exeunt. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, An old-fashioned HOUSE. Enter HARDCASTLE, followed by three or four
awkward Servants. HARDCASTLE. WELL, I hope you're perfect in the table exercise
I have been teaching you these three days. You all know your posts and your
places, and can show that you have been used to good company, without ever
stirring from home.


OMNES. Ay, ay,


HARDCASTLE. When company comes, you are not to pop out and stare, and then run
in again, like frighted rabbits in a warren.


OMNES. No, no.


HARDCASTLE. You, Diggory, whom I have taken from the barn, are to make a show
at the side-table; and you, Roger, whom I have advanced from the plough, are to
place yourself behind my chair. But you're not to stand so, with your hands in
your pockets. Take your hands from your pockets, Roger; and from your head, you
blockhead you. See how Diggory carries his hands. They Are a little too stiff,
indeed, but that is no great matter.


DIGGORY. Ay, mind how I hold them. I learned to hold my hands this way, when I
was upon drill for the militia. And so being upon drill --


HARDCASTLE. You must not be so talkative, Diggory. You must be all attention
to the guests. You must hear us talk, and not think of talking; you must see us
drink, and not think of drinking; you must see us eat, and not think of eating.


DIGGORY. By the laws, your worship, that is parfectly unpossible. Whenever
Diggory sees yeating going forward, ecod he is always wishing for a mouthful
himself.


HARDCASTLE. Blockhead! Is not a belly-full in the kitchen as good as a
belly-full in the parlour? Stay your stomach with that reflection.


DIGGORY. Ecod I thank your worship, I Will make a shift to stay my stomach with
a slice of cold beef in the pantry.


HARDCASTLE. Diggory, you are too talkative. Then if I happen to say a good
thing, or tell a good story at table, you must not all burst out a-laughing, as
if you made part of the company.


DIGGORY. Then ecod your worship must not tell the story of Old Grouse in the
gun-room: I cannot help laughing at that -- he! he! he! -- for the soul of me.
We have laughed at that these twenty years -- ha! ha! ha!


HARDCASTLE. Ha! ha! ha! The story is a good one. Well, honest Diggory, you may
laugh at that -- but still remember to be attentive. Suppose one of the company
should call for a glass of wine, how will you behave? A glass of wine, Sir, if
you please (to Diggory) -- Eh, why don't you move?


DIGGORY. Ecod, your worship, I never have courage till I see the eatables and
drinkables brought upo' the table, and then I Am as bauld as a lion.


HARDCASTLE. What, will no body move?


FIRST SERVANT. I Am not to leave this pleace.


SECOND SERVANT. I Am sure it is no pleace of mine.


THIRD SERVANT. Nor mine, for sartain.


DIGGORY. Wauns, and I Am sure it canna be mine.


HARDCASTLE. You numbskulls! and so while, like your betters, you are
quarrelling for places, the guests must be starved. O you dunces! I find I must
begin all over again. -- But don't I hear a coach drive into the yard? To your
posts, you blockheads. I Will go in the mean time and give my old friend's son a
hearty reception at the gate.


[Exit Hardcastle. DIGGORY. By the elevens, my pleace is gone quite out of my
head.


ROGER. I know that my pleace is to be every where.


FIRST SERVANT. Where the devil is mine?


SECOND SERVANT. My pleace is to be no where at all; and so Ize go about my
business.


[Exeunt Servants, running about as if frighted, different ways. Enter SERVANT
with Candles, showing in MARLOW and HASTINGS. SERVANT. Welcome, gentlemen, very
welcome. This way.


HASTINGS. After the disappointments of the day, welcome once more, Charles, to
the comforts of a clean room and a good fire. Upon my word, a very well-looking
house; antique, but creditable.


MARLOW. The usual fate of a large mansion. Having first ruined the master by
good housekeeping, it at last comes to levy contributions as an inn.


HASTINGS. As you say, we passengers are to be taxed to pay all these fineries.
I have often seen a good sideboard, or a marble chimney-piece, though not
actually put in the bill, inflame a reckoning confoundedly.


MARLOW. Travelers, George, must pay in all places. The only difference is,
that in good inns, you pay dearly for luxuries; in bad inns, you are fleeced
and starved.


HASTINGS. You have lived pretty much among them. In truth, I have been often
surprised, that you who have seen so much of the world, with your natural good
sense, and your many opportunities, could never yet acquire a requisite share
of assurance.


MARLOW. The Englishman's malady. But tell me, George, where could I have
learned that assurance you talk of? My life has been chiefly spent in a
college, or an inn, in seclusion from that lovely part of the creation that
chiefly teach men confidence. I don't know that I was ever familiarly
acquainted with a single modest woman -- except my mother -- But among females
of another class you know --


HASTINGS. Ay, among them you are impudent enough of all conscience.


MARLOW. They are of us you know.


HASTINGS. But in the company of women of reputation I never saw such an idiot,
such a trembler; you look for all the world as if you wanted an opportunity of
stealing out of the room.


MARLOW. Why man that is because I do want to steal out of the room. Faith, I
have often formed a resolution to break the ice, and rattle away at any rate.
But I don't know how, a single glance from a pair of fine eyes has totally
overset my resolution. An impudent fellow may counterfeit modesty, but I Will be
hanged if a modest man can ever counterfeit impudence.


HASTINGS. If you could but say half the fine things to them that I have heard
you lavish upon the bar-maid of an inn, or even a college bed maker --


MARLOW. Why, George, I cannot say fine things to them, They freeze, they
petrify me. They may talk of a comet, or a burning mountain, or some such
bagatelle. But to me, a modest woman, dressed out in all her finery, is the most
tremendous object of the whole creation.


HASTINGS. Ha! ha! ha! At this rate, man, how can you ever expect to marry!


MARLOW. Never, unless as among kings and princes, my bride were to be courted
by proxy. If, indeed, like an Eastern bridegroom, one were to be introduced to
a wife he never saw before, it might be endured. But to go through all the
terrors of a formal courtship, together with the episode of aunts, grandmothers
and cousins, and at last to blurt out the broad staring question, of, madam
will you marry me? No, no, that is strain much above me I assure you.


HASTINGS. I pity you. But how do you intend behaving to the lady you are come
down to visit at the request of your father?


MARLOW. As I behave to all other ladies. Bow very low. Answer yes, or no, to
all her demands -- But for the rest, I don't think I shall venture to look in
her face, till I see my father's again.


HASTINGS. I Am surprised that one who is so warm a friend can be so cool a
lover.


MARLOW. To be explicit, my dear Hastings, my chief inducement down was to be
instrumental in forwarding your happiness, not my own. Miss Neville loves you,
the family don't know you, as my friend you are sure of a reception, and let
honor do the rest.


HASTINGS. My dear Marlow! But I Will suppress the emotion. Were I a wretch,
meanly seeking to carry off a fortune, you should be the last man in the world
I would apply to for assistance. But Miss Neville's person is all I ask, and
that is mine, both from her deceased father's consent, and her own inclination.


MARLOW. Happy man! You have talents and art to captivate any woman. I Am doomed
to adore the sex, and yet to converse with the only part of it I despise. This
stammer in my address, and this awkward prepossessing visage of mine, can never
permit me to soar above the reach of a milliner's 'prentice, or one of the
dutchesses of Drury Lane. Pshaw! this fellow here to interrupt us.


Enter HARDCASTLE. HARDCASTLE. Gentlemen, once more you are heartily welcome.
Which is Mr. Marlow? Sir, you're heartily welcome. It Is not my way, you see, to
receive my friends with my back to the fire. I like to give them a hearty
reception in the old style at my gate. I like to see their horses and trunks
taken care of.


MARLOW. (aside) He has got our names from the servants already. (To Him) We
approve your caution and hospitality, Sir. (To Hastings) I have been thinking,
George, of changing our traveling dresses in the morning. I am grown
confoundedly ashamed of mine.


HARDCASTLE. I beg, Mr. Marlow, you will use no ceremony in this house.


HASTINGS. I fancy, George, you're right: the first blow is half the battle. I
intend opening the campaign with the white and gold.


Mr. HARDCASTLE. Mr. Marlow -- Mr. Hastings -- gentlemen -- pray be under no
constraint in this house. This is Liberty-hall, gentlemen. You may do just as
you please here.


MARLOW. Yet, George, if we open the campaign too fiercely at first, we may
want ammunition before it is over. I think to reserve the embroidery to secure
a retreat.


HARDCASTLE. Your talking of a retreat, Mr. Marlow, puts me in mind of the Duke
of Marlborough, when we went to besiege Denain. He first summoned the garrison.


MARLOW. Don't you think the ventre dor waistcoat will do with the plain brown?


HARDCASTLE. He first summoned the garrison, which might consist of about five
thousand men --


HASTINGS. I think not: Brown and yellow mix but very poorly.


HARDCASTLE. I say, gentlemen, as I was telling you, he summoned the garrison,
which might consist of about five thousand men --


MARLOW. The girls like finery.


HARDCASTLE. Which might consist of about five thousand men, well appointed
with stores, ammunition, and other implements of war. Now, says the Duke of
Marlborough, to George Brooks, that stood next to him -- You must have heard of
George Brooks; I Will pawn my Dukedom, says he, but I take that garrison without
spilling a drop of blood. So --


MARLOW. What, my good friend, if you gave us a glass of punch in the mean
time, it would help us to carry on the siege with vigor.


HARDCASTLE. Punch, Sir! (aside) This is the most unaccountable kind of modesty
I ever met with.


MARLOW. Yes, Sir, Punch. A glass of warm punch, after our journey, will be
comfortable. This is Liberty-Hall, you know.


HARDCASTLE. Here Is Cup, Sir.


MARLOW. (Aside) So this fellow, in his Liberty-hall, will only let us have
just what he pleases.


HARDCASTLE. (Taking the Cup) I hope you will find it to your mind. I have
prepared it with my own hands, and I believe you will own the ingredients are
tolerable. Will you, be so good as to pledge me, Sir? Here, Mr. Marlow, here is
to our better acquaintance.

[drinks.
MARLOW. (Aside) A very impudent fellow this! but he is a character, and I Will
humor him a little. Sir, my service to you.

(drinks)
HASTINGS. (Aside) I see this fellow wants to give us his company, and forgets
that he is an innkeeper, before he has learned to be a gentleman.


MARLOW. From the excellence of your cup, my old friend, I suppose you have a
good deal of business in this part of the country. Warm work, now and then, at
elections, I suppose.


HARDCASTLE. No, Sir, I have long given that work over. Since our betters have
hit upon the expedient of electing each other, there is no business for us that
sell ale.


HASTINGS. So, then you have no turn for politics I find.


HARDCASTLE. Not in the least. There was a time, indeed, I fretted myself about
the mistakes of government, like other people; but finding myself every day
grow more angry, and the government growing no better, I left it to mend
itself. Since that, I no more trouble my head about Heyder Ally, or Ally Cawn,
than about Ally Croaker. Sir, my service to you.


HASTINGS. So that with eating above stairs, and drinking below, with receiving
your friends within, and amusing them without, you lead a good pleasant
bustling life of it.


HARDCASTLE. I do stir about a great deal, that is certain. Half the differences
of the parish are adjusted in this very parlour.


MARLOW. (After drinking) And you have an argument in your cup, old gentleman,
better than any in Westminster Hall.


HARDCASTE. Ay, young gentleman, that, and a little philosophy.


MARLOW. (Aside) Well, this is the first time I ever heard of an innkeeper's
philosophy.


HASTINGS. So then, like an experienced general, you attack them on every
quarter. If you find their reason manageable, you attack it with your
philosophy; if you find they have no reason, you attack them with this. Here Is
your health, my philosopher.

(drinks)
HARDCASTLE. Good, very good, thank you; ha, ha. Your Generalship puts me in
mind of Prince Eugene, when he fought the Turks at the battle of Belgrade. You
shall hear.


MARLOW. Instead of the battle of Belgrade. I believe it is almost time to talk
about supper. What has your philosophy got in the house for fupper?


HARDCASTLE. For Supper, Sir! (aside) Was ever such a request to a man in his
own house!


MARLOW. Yes, Sir, supper Sir; I begin to feel an appetite. I shall make
devilish work tonight in the larder, I promise you.


HARDCASTLE. (Aside) Such a brazen dog sure never my eyes beheld. (to him) Why
really, Sir, as for supper I cannot well tell. My Dorothy, and the cook maid,
settle these things between them. I leave these kind of things entirely to them.


MARLOW. You do, do you?


HARDCASTLE. Entirely. By-the-bye, I believe they are in actual consultation
upon what is for supper this moment in the kitchen.


MARLOW. Then I beg they will admit me as one of their privy council. It Is a way
I have got. When I travel, I always choose to regulate my own supper. Let the
cook be called. No offense I hope, Sir.


HARDCASTLE. O no, Sir, none in the least; yet I don't know how: our Bridget,
the cook maid, is not very communicative upon these occasions. Should we send
for her, she might scold us all out of the house.


HASTINGS. Let Us see your list of the larder then. I ask it as a favor. I
always match my appetite to my bill of fare.


MARLOW. (To Hardcastle, who looks at them with surprise) Sir, he is very right,
and it is my way too.


HARDCASTLE. Sir, you have a right to command here. Here, Roger, bring us the
bill of fare for to night's supper. I believe it is drawn out. Your manner, Mr.
Hastings, puts me in mind of my uncle, Colonel Wallop. It was a saying of his,
that no man was sure of his supper till he had eaten it.


HASTINGS. (Aside) All upon the high ropes! His uncle a Colonel! We shall soon
hear of his mother being a justice of peace. But let us hear the bill of fare.


MARLOW. (Perusing) What Is here? For the first course; for the second course;
for the desert. The devil, Sir, do you think we have brought down the whole
Joiners Company, or the Corporation of Bedford, to eat up such a supper? Two or
three little things, clean and comfortable, will do.


HASTINGS. But, let us hear it.


MARLOW. (Reading) For the first course at the top, a pig, and pruin sauce.


HASTINGS. Damn your pig, I say.


MARLOW. And damn your pruin sauce, say I.


HARDCASTLE. And yet, gentlemen, to men that are hungry, pig, with pruin sauce,
is very good eating.


MARLOW. At the bottom, a calve's tongue and brains.


HASTINGS. Let your brains be knocked out, my good Sir; I don't like them.


MARLOW. Or you may clap them on a plate by themselves. I do.


HARDCASTLE. (Aside) Their impudence confounds me. (to them) Gentlemen, you are
my guests, make what alterations you please. Is there any thing else you wish
to retrench or alter, gentlemen?


MARLOW. Item. A pork pie, a boiled rabbet and saufages, a florentine, a
shaking pudding, and a dish of tiff -- taff -- taffety cream!


HASTINGS. Confound your made dishes, I shall be as much at a loss in this
house as at a green and yellow dinner at the French ambassador's table. I Am for
plain eating.


HARDCASTLE. I Am sorry, gentlemen, that I have nothing you like, but if there
be any thing you have a particular fancy to --


MARLOW. Why, really, Sir, your bill of fare is so exquisite, that any one part
of it is full as good as another. Send us what you please. So much for supper.
And now to see that our beds are air'd, and properly taken care of.


HARDCASTLE. I entreat you will leave all that to me. You shall not stir a step.


MARLOW. Leave that to you! I protest, Sir, you must excuse me, I always look
to these things myself.


HARDCASTLE. I must insist, Sir, you will make yourself easy on that head.


MARLOW. You see I Am resolved on it. (aside) A very troublesome fellow this, as
ever I met with.


HARDCASTLE. Well, Sir, I Am resolved at least to attend you. (aside) This may
be modern modesty, but I never saw any thing look so like old-fashioned
impudence.


[Exeunt Marlow and Hardcastle. HASTINGS solus. HASTINGS. So I find this
fellow's civilities begin to grow troublesome. But who can be angry at those
assiduities which are meant to please him? Ha! what do I see? Miss Neville, by
all that is happy!


Enter Miss NEVILLE. Miss NEVILLE. My dear Hastings! To what unexpected good
fortune? to what accident am I to ascribe this happy meeting?


HASTINGS. Rather let me ask the same question, as I could never have hoped to
meet my dearest Constance at an inn.


Miss NEVILLE. An inn! sure you mistake! my aunt, my guardian, lives here. What
could induce you to think this house an inn?


HASTINGS. My friend Mr. Marlow, with whom I came down, and I, have been sent
here as to an inn, I assure you. A young fellow whom we accidentally met at a
house hard by directed us hither.


Miss NEVILLE. Certainly it must be one of my hopeful cousin's tricks, of whom
you have heard me talk so often, ha! ha! ha! ha!


HASTINGS. He whom your aunt intends for you? He of whom I have such just
apprehensions?


Miss NEVILLE. You have nothing to fear from him, I assure you. You Would adore him
if you knew how heartily he despises me. My aunt knows it too, and has
undertaken to court me for him, and actually begins to think she has made a
conquest.


HASTINGS. Thou dear dissembler! You must know, my Constance, I have just
seized this happy opportunity of my friend's visit here to get admittance into
the family. The horses that carried us down are now fatigued with their
journey, but they will soon be refreshed; and then if my dearest girl will trust
in her faithful Hastings, we shall soon be landed in France, where even among
slaves the laws of marriage are respected.


Miss NEVILLE. I have often told you, that though ready to obey you, I yet
should leave my little fortune behind with reluctance. The greatest part of it
was left me by my uncle, the India Director, and chiefly consists in jewels. I
have been for some time persuading my aunt to let me wear them. I fancy I Am
very near succeeding. The instant they are put into my possession you shall
find me ready to make them and myself yours.


HASTINGS. Perish the baubles! Your person is all I desire. In the meantime, my
friend Marlow must not be let into his mistake. I know the strange reserve of
his temper is such, that if abruptly informed of it, he would instantly quit
the house before our plan was ripe for execution.


Miss NEVILLE. But how shall we keep him in the deception? Miss Hardcastle is
just returned from walking; what if we still continue to deceive him? -- This,
this way --

[They confer.]
Enter MARLOW. MARLOW. The assiduities of these good people teize me beyond
bearing. My host seems to think it ill manners to leave me alone, and so he
claps not only himself but his old-fashioned wife on my back. They talk of
coming to sup with us too; and then, I suppose, we are to run the gauntlet
through all the rest of the family. -- What have we got here! --


HASTINGS. My dear Charles! Let me congratulate you! -- The most fortunate
accident! -- Who do you think is just alighted?


MARLOW. Cannot guess.


HASTINGS. Our mistresses boy, Miss Hardcastle and Miss Neville. Give me leave
to introduce Miss Constance Neville to your acquaintance. Happening to dine in
the neighborhood, they called, on their return to take fresh horses, here.
Miss Hardcastle has just stepped into the next room, and will be back in an
instant. Was Not it lucky? eh!


MARLOW. (Aside) I have just been mortified enough of all conscience, and here
comes something to complete my embarrassment.


HASTINGS. Well! but was not it the most fortunate thing in the world?


MARLOW. Oh! yes. Very fortunate -- a most joyful encounter -- But our dresses,
George, you know, are in disorder -- What if we should postpone the happiness
'till tomorrow? -- Tomorrow at her own house -- It will be every bit as
convenient -- And rather more respectful -- Tomorrow let it be.

[offering to go.
Miss NEVILLE. By no means, Sir. Your ceremony will displease her. The disorder
of your dress will show the ardour of your impatience. Besides, she knows you
are in the house, and will permit you to see her.


MARLOW. O! the devil! how shall I support it? Hem! hem! Hastings, you must not
go. You are to assist me, you know. I shall be confoundedly ridiculous. Yet,
hang it! I Will take courage. Hem!


HASTINGS. Pshaw man! it is but the first plunge, and all is over. She Is but a
woman, you know.


MARLOW. And of all women, she that I dread most to encounter!

Enter Miss HARDCASTLE as returned from walking, a Bonnet, etc.


HASTINGS, (introducing them.) Miss Hardcastle, Mr. Marlow, I Am proud of
bringing two persons of such merit together, that only want to know, to esteem
each other.


Miss HARDCASTLE aside. Now, for meeting my modest gentleman with a demure
face, and quite in his own manner. (After a pause, in which he appears very
uneasy and disconcerted.) I Am glad of your safe arrival, Sir -- I Am told you
had some accidents by the way.


MARLOW. Only a few madam. Yes, we had some. Yes, Madam, a good many accidents,
but should be sorry -- Madam -- or rather glad of any accidents -- that are so
agreeably concluded. Hem!


HASTINGS. (To him.) You never spoke better in your whole life. Keep it up, and
I Will insure you the victory.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I Am afraid you flatter, Sir. You that have seen so much of
the finest company can find little entertainment in an obscure corner of the
country.


MARLOW. (Gathering courage.) I have lived, indeed, in the world, Madam; but I
have kept very little company. I have been but an observer upon life, Madam,
while others were enjoying it.


Miss NEVILLE. But that, I am told, is the way to enjoy it at last.


HASTINGS. (To him.) Cicero never spoke better. Once more, and you are
confirmed in assurance for ever.


MARLOW. (To him.) Hem! Stand by me then, and when I Am down, throw in a word or
two to set me up again.


Miss HARDCASTLE. An observer, like you, upon life, were, I fear, disagreeably
employed, since you must have had much more to censure than to approve.


MARLOW. Pardon me, Madam. I was always willing to be amused. The folly of most
people is rather an object of mirth than uneasiness.


HASTINGS. (To him.) Bravo, Bravo. Never spoke so well in your whole life.
Well! Miss Hardcastle, I see that you and Mr. Marlow are going to be very good
company. I believe our being here will but embarrass the interview.


MARLOW. Not in the least, Mr. Hastings. We like your company of all things.
(To him.) Zounds! George, sure you will not go? How can you leave us?


HASTINGS. Our presence will but spoil conversation, so we'll retire to the
next room. (To him) You don't consider, man, that we are to manage a little
tete-a-tete of our own.


Exeunt. Miss HARDCASTLE. (After a pause) But you have not been wholly an
observer, I presume, Sir: The ladies I should hope have employed some part of
your addresses.


MARLOW. (Relapsing into timidity) Pardon me, Madam, I -- I -- I -- as yet have
studied -- only -- to -- deserve them.


Miss HARDCASTLE. And that some say is the very worst way to obtain them.


MARLOW. Perhaps so, madam. But I love to converse only with the more grave and
sensible part of the sex. -- But I Am afraid I grow tiresome.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Not at all, Sir; there is nothing I like so much as grave
conversation myself; I could hear it for ever. Indeed I have often been
surprised how a man of sentiment could ever admire those light airy pleasures,
where nothing reaches the heart.


MARLOW. It Is -- a disease -- of the mind, madam. In the variety of tastes
there must be some who wanting a relish -- for -- um -- a -- um.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I understand you, Sir. There must be some, who wanting a
relish for refined pleasures, pretend to despise what they are incapable of
tasting.


MARLOW. My meaning, madam, but infinitely better expressed. And I cannot help
observing -- a --


Miss HARDCASTLE. (Aside) Who could ever suppose this fellow impudent upon some
occasions. (To him) You were going to observe, Sir --


MARLOW. I was observing, madam -- I protest, madam, I forget what I was going
to observe.


Miss HARDCASTLE. (Aside) I vow and so do I. (To him) You were observing, Sir,
that in this age of hypocrisy something about hypocrisy, Sir.


MARLOW. Yes, madam. In this age of hypocrisy there are few who upon strict
enquiry do not -- a -- a -- a --


Miss HARDCASTLE. I understand you perfectly, Sir.


MARLOW. (Aside) Egad! and that is more than I do myself.


Miss HARDCASTLE. You mean that in this hypocritical age there are few that do
not condemn in public what they practice in private, and think they pay every
debt to virtue when they praise it.


MARLOW. True, madam; those who have most virtue in their mouths, have least of
it in their bosoms. But I Am sure I tire you, madam.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Not in the least, Sir; there is something so agreeable and
spirited in your manner, such life and force -- pray, Sir, go on.


MARLOW. Yes, madam. I was saying -- that there are some occasions -- when a
total want of courage, madam, destroys all the -- and puts us -- upon a -- a --
a --


Miss HARDCASTLE. I agree with you entirely, a want of courage upon some
occasions assumes the appearance of ignorance, and betrays us when we most want
to excel. I beg you will proceed.


MARLOW. Yes, madam. Morally speaking, madam -- But I see Miss Neville
expecting us in the next room. I would not intrude for the world.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I protest, Sir, I never was more agreeably entertained in all
my life. Pray go on.


MARLOW. Yes, madam. I was -- But she beckons us to join her. Madam, shall I do
myself the honor to attend you?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Well then, I Will follow.


MARLOW aside. This pretty smooth dialogue has done for me.


[Exit. Miss HARDCASTLE sola. Miss HARDCASTLE. Ha! ha! ha! Was there ever such
a sober sentimental interview? I Am certain he scarce looked in my face the
whole time. Yet the fellow, but for his unaccountable bashfulness, is pretty
well too. He has good sense, but then so buried in his fears, that it fatigues
one more than ignorance. If I could teach him a little confidence, it would be
doing somebody that I know of a piece of service. But who is that somebody? --
that, faith, is a question I can scarce answer.


[Exit. Enter TONY and Miss NEVILLE, followed by Mrs. HARDCASTLE and HASTINGS.
TONY. What do you follow me for, cousin Con? I wonder you're not ashamed to be
so very engaging.


Miss NEVILLE. I hope, cousin, one may speak to one's own relations, and not be
to blame.


TONY. Ay, but I know what sort of a relation you want to make me though; but
it will not do. I tell you, cousin Con, it will not do, so I beg you will keep your
distance, I want no nearer relationship.


[She follows coqueting him to the back scene. Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Well! I vow,
Mr. Hastings, you are very entertaining. There Is nothing in the world I love to
talk of so much as London, and the fashions, though I was never there myself.


HASTINGS. Never there! You amaze me! From your air and manner, I concluded you
had been bred all your life either at Ranelagh, St. James's, or Tower Wharf.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. O! Sir, you're only pleased to say so. We Country persons can
have no manner at all. I Am in love with the town, and that serves to raise me
above some of our neighboring rustics; but who can have a manner, that has
never seen the Pantheon, the Grotto Gardens, the Borough, and such places where
the Nobility chiefly resort? All I can do, is to enjoy London at second-hand. I
take care to know every tete-a-tete from the Scandalous Magazine, and have all
the fashions, as they come out, in a letter from the two Miss Rickets of
Crookedlane. Pray how do you like this head, Mr. Hastings?


HASTINGS. Extremely elegant and degagee, upon my word, Madam. Your Friseur is
a Frenchman, I suppose?


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. I protest I dressed it myself from a print in the Ladies
Memorandum-book for the last year.


HASTINGS. Indeed. Such a head in a side-box, at the Playhouse, would draw as
many gazers as my Lady May'ress at a City Ball.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. I vow, since inoculation began, there is no such thing to be
seen as a plain woman; so one must dress a little particular or one may escape
in the crowd.


HASTINGS. But that can never be your case, Madam, in any dress.

(bowing)
Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Yet, what signifies my dressing when I have such a piece of
antiquity by my side as Mr. Hardcastle: all I can say will never argue down a
single button from his clothes. I have often wanted him to throw off his great
flaxen wig, and where he was bald, to plaster it over like my Lord Pately,
with powder.


HASTINGS. You are right, Madam; for, as among the ladies, there are none ugly,
so among the men there are none old.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. But what do you think his answer was? Why, with his usual
Gothic vivacity, he said I only wanted him to throw off his wig to convert it
into a tete for my own wearing.


HASTINGS. Intolerable! At your age you may wear what you please, and it must
become you.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Pray, Mr. Hastings, what do you take to be the most
fashionable age about town?


HASTINGS. Some time ago, forty was all the mode; but I Am told the ladies
intend to bring up fifty for the ensuing winter.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Seriously. Then I shall be too young for the fashion.


HASTINGS. No lady begins now to put on jewels 'till she is past forty. For
instance, Miss there, in a polite circle, would be considered as a child, as a
mere maker of samplers.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. And yet Mrs. Niece thinks herself as much a woman, and is as
fond of jewels as the oldest of us all.


HASTINGS. Your niece, is she? And that young gentleman, a brother of yours, I
should presume?


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. My son, Sir. They are contracted to each other. Observe their
little sports. They fall in and out ten times a day, as if they were man and
wife already. (To them.) Well Tony, child, what soft things are you saying to
your cousin Constance this evening?


TONY. I have been saying no soft things; but that it is very hard to be
followed about so. Ecod! I Have not a place in the house now that is left to
myself but the stable.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Never mind him, Con. my dear. He Is in another story behind
your back.


Miss NEVILLE. There Is something generous in my cousin's manner. He falls out
before faces to be forgiven in private.


TONY. That Is a damned confounded -- crack.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Ah! he is a sly one. Don't you think they are like each other
about the mouth, Mr. Hastings? The Blenkinsop mouth to a T. They Are of a size
too. Back to back, my pretties, that Mr. Hastings may see you. Come Tony.


TONY. You had as good not make me, I tell you.

(measuring.)
Miss NEVILLE. O lud! he has almost cracked my head.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. O the monster! For shame, Tony. You a man, and behave so!


TONY. If I Am a man, let me have my fortin. Ecod! I Will not be made a fool of no
longer.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Is this, ungrateful boy, all that I Am to get for the pains I
have taken in your education? I that have rocked you in your cradle, and fed
that pretty mouth with a spoon! Did not I work that waistcoat to make you
genteel? Did not I prescribe for you every day, and weep while the receipt was
operating?


TONY. Ecod! you had reason to weep, for you have been dosing me ever since I
was born. I have gone through every receipt in the complete huswife ten times
over; and you have thoughts of coursing me through Quincy next spring. But,
Ecod! I tell you, I Will not be made a fool of no longer.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Was Not it all for your good, viper? Was Not it all for your
good?


TONY. I wish you would let me and my good alone then. Snubbing this way when I Am
in spirits. If I Am to have any good, let it come of itself; not to keep dinging
it, dinging it into one so.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. That Is false; I never see you when you're in spirits. No,
Tony, you then go to the alehouse or kennel. I Am never to be delighted with
your agreeable, wild notes, unfeeling monster!


TONY. Ecod! Mamma, your own notes are the wildest of the two.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Was ever the like? But I see he wants to break my heart, I
see he does.


HASTINGS. Dear Madam, permit me to lecture the young gentleman a little. I Am
certain I can persuade him to his duty.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Well! I must retire. Come, Constance, my love. You see Mr.
Hastings, the wretchedness of my situation: Was ever poor woman so plagued with
a dear, sweet, pretty, provoking, undutiful boy.


[Exeunt Mrs. Hardcastle and Miss Neville. HASTINGS. TONY. TONY, singing. There
was a young man riding by, and fain would have his will. Rang do didlo dee.
Don't mind her. Let her cry. It Is the comfort of her heart. I have seen her and
sister cry over a book for an hour together, and they said, they liked the book
the better the more it made them cry.


HASTINGS. Then you're no friend to the ladies, I find, my pretty young
gentleman?


TONY. That Is as I find 'um.


HASTINGS. Not to her of your mother's choosing, I dare answer? And yet she
appears to me a pretty well-tempered girl.


TONY. That Is because you don't know her as well as I. Ecod! I know every inch
about her; and there is not a more bitter cantanckerous toad in all Christendom.


HASTINGS. (Aside) Pretty encouragement this for a lover!


TONY. I have seen her since the height of that. She has as many tricks as a
hare in a thicket, or a colt the first day's breaking.


HASTINGS. To me she appears sensible and silent!


TONY. Ay, before company. But when she is with her play-mates she is as loud as
a hog in a gate.


HASTINGS. But there is a meek modesty about her that charms me.


TONY. Yes, but curb her never so little, she kicks up, and you're flung in a
ditch.


HASTINGS. Well, but you must allow her a little beauty. -- Yes, you must allow
her some beauty.


TONY. Bandbox! She Is all a made up thing, mun. Ah! could you but see Bet
Bouncer of these parts, you might then talk of beauty. Ecod, she has two eyes
as black as sloes, and cheeks as broad and red as a pulpit cushion. She Would make
two of she.


HASTINGS. Well, what say you to a friend that would take this bitter bargain
off your hands?


TONY. Anon.


HASTINGS. Would you thank him that would take Miss Neville and leave you to
happiness and your dear Betsy?


TONY. Ay; but where is there such a friend, for who would take her?


HASTINGS. I am he. If you but assist me, I Will engage to whip her off to
France, and you shall never hear more of her.


TONY. Assist you! Ecod I will, to the last drop of my blood. I Will clap a pair
of horses to your chaise that shall trundle you off in a twinkling, and may be
get you a part of her fortin beside, in jewels, that you little dream of.


HASTINGS. My dear squire, this looks like a lad of spirit.


TONY. Come along then, and you shall see more of my spirit before you have
done with me (singing). We are the boys that fears no noise where the
thundering cannons roar.


[Exeunt. END OF SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
Enter HARDCASTLE solus. HARDCASTLE. WHAT could my old friend Sir Charles mean
by recommending his son as the modestest young man in town? To me he appears
the most impudent piece of brass that ever spoke with a tongue. He has taken
possession of the easy chair by the fireside already. He took off his boots in
the parlour, and desired me to see them taken care of. I Am desirous to know how
his impudence affects my daughter. -- She will certainly be shocked at it.


Enter Miss HARDCASTLE, plainly dressed. HARDCASTLE. Well, my Kate, I see you
have changed your dress as I bid you; and yet, I believe, there was no great
occasion.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I find such a pleasure, Sir, in obeying your commands, that I
take care to observe them without ever debating their propriety.


HARDCASTLE. And yet, Kate, I sometimes give you some cause, particularly when
I recommended my modest gentleman to you as a lover today.


Miss HARDCASTLE. You taught me to expect something extraordinary, and I find
the original exceeds the description.


HARDCASTLE. I was never so surprised in my life! He has quite confounded all
my faculties!


Miss HARDCASTLE. I never saw any thing like it: And a man of the world too!


HARDCASTLE. Ay, he learned it all abroad, -- what a fool was I, to think a
young man could learn modesty by traveling. He might as soon learn wit at a
masquerade.


Miss HARDCASTLE. It seems all natural to him.


HARDCASTLE. A good deal assisted by bad company and a French dancing master.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Sure you mistake, papa! a French dancing master could never
have taught him that timid look, -- that awkward address, -- that bashful
manner --


HARDCASTLE. Whose look? whose manner? child!


Miss HARDCASTLE. Mr. Marlow's: his meanvaise Loute, his timidity struck me at
the first sight.


HARDCASTLE. Then your first sight deceived you; for I think him one of the
most brazen first sights that ever astonished my senses.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Sure, Sir, you rally! I never saw any one so modest.


HARDCASTLE. And can you be serious! I never saw such a bouncing swaggering
puppy since I was born. Bully Dawson was but a fool to him.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Surprising! He met me with a respectful bow, a stammering
voice, and a look fixed on the ground.


HARDCASTLE. He met me with a loud voice, a lordly air, and a familiarity that
made my blood freeze again.


Miss HARDCASTLE. He treated me with diffidence and respect; censured the
manners of the age; admired the prudence of girls that never laughed; tired me
with apologies for being tiresome; then left the room with a bow, and, madam, I
would not for the world detain you.


HARDCASTLE. He spoke to me as if he knew me all his life before. Asked twenty
questions, and never waited for an answer. Interrupted my best remarks with
some silly pun, and when I was in my best story of the Duke of Marlborough and
Prince Eugene, he asked if I had not a good hand at making punch. Yes, Kate, he
asked your father if he was a maker of punch!


Miss HARDCASTLE. One of us must certainly be mistaken.


HARDCASTLE. If he be what he has shown himself, I Am determined he shall never
have my consent.


Miss HARDCASTLE. And if he be the sullen thing I take him, he shall never have
mine.


HARDCASTLE. In one thing then we are agreed -- to reject him.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Yes. But upon conditions. For if you should find him less
impudent, and I more presuming; if you find him more respectful, and I more
importunate -- I don't know -- the fellow is well enough for a man -- Certainly
we don't meet many such at a horse race in the country.


HARDCASTLE. If we should find him so -- But that is impossible. The first
appearance has done my business. I Am seldom deceived in that.


Miss HARDCASTLE. And yet there may be many good qualities under that first
appearance.


HARDCASTLE. Ay, when a girl finds a fellow's outside to her taste, she then
sets about guessing the rest of his furniture. With her, a smooth face stands
for good sense, and a genteel figure for every virtue.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I hope, Sir, a conversation begun with a compliment to my
good sense will not end with a sneer at my understanding?


HARDCASTLE. Pardon me, Kate. But if young Mr. Brazen can find the art of
reconciling contradictions, he may please us both, perhaps.


Miss HARDCASTLE. And as one of us must be mistaken, what if we go to make
further discoveries?


HARDCASTLE. Agreed. But depend on it I Am in the right.


Miss HARDCASTLE. And depend on it I Am not much in the wrong.


[Exeunt. Enter TONY running in with a Casket. TONY. Ecod! I have got them.
Here they are. My Cousin Con's necklaces, bobs and all. My mother shall not cheat
the poor souls out of their fortune neither. O! my genus, is that you?


Enter HASTINGS. HASTINGS. My dear friend, how have you managed wit your
mother? I hope you have amused her with pretending love for your cousin, and
that you are willing to be reconciled at last? Our horses will be refreshed in
a short time, and we shall soon be ready to set off.


TONY. And here is something to bear your charges by the way, (giving the
casket.) Your sweetheart's jewels. Keep them, and hang those, I say, that would
rob you of one of them.


HASTINGS. But how have you procured them from your mother?


TONY. Ask me no questions, and I Will tell you no fibs. I procured them by the
rule of thumb. If I had not a key to every drawer in mother's bureau, how could
I go to the alehouse so often as I do? An honest man may rob himself of his own
at any time.


HASTINGS. Thousands do it every day. But to be plain with you; Miss Neville is
endeavoring to procure them from her aunt this very instant. If she succeeds,
it will be the most delicate way at least of obtaining them.


TONY. Well, keep them, till you know how it will be. But I know how it will be
well enough, she would as soon part with the only sound tooth in her head.


HASTINGS. But I dread the effects of her resentment, when she finds she has
lost them.


TONY. Never you mind her resentment, leave me to manage that. I don't value
her resentment the bounce of a cracker. Zounds! here they are. Morris. Prance.


[Exit Hastings. TONY, Mrs. HARDCASTLE, Miss NEVILLE. Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Indeed,
Constance, you amaze me. Such a girl as you want jewels? It will be time enough
for jewels, my dear, twenty years hence, when your beauty begins to want
repairs.


Miss NEVILLE. But what will repair beauty at forty, will certainly improve it
at twenty, Madam.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Yours, my dear, can admit of none. That natural blush is
beyond a thousand ornaments. Besides, child, jewels are quite out at present.
Don't you see half the ladies of our acquaintance, my lady, Kill day light, and
Mrs. Crump, and the rest of them, carry their jewels to town, and bring nothing
but Paste and Marcasites back.


Miss NEVILLE. But who knows, Madam, but somebody that shall be nameless would
like me best with all my little finery about me?


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Consult your glass, my dear, and then see, if with such a
pair of eyes, you want any better sparklers. What do you think, Tony, my dear,
does your cousin Con. want any jewels, in your eyes, to set off her beauty.


TONY. That Is as thereafter may be.


Miss NEVILLE. My dear aunt, if you knew how it would oblige me.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. A parcel of old-fashioned rose and table-cut things. They
would make you look like the court of king Solomon at a puppet-shew. Besides, I
believe I cannot readily come at them. They may be missing for aught I know to
the contrary.


TONY. (Apart to Mrs. Hardcastle.) Then why don't you tell her so at once, as
she is so longing for them. Tell her they are lost. It Is the only way to quiet
her. Say they are lost, and call me to bear witness.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. (Apart to Tony.) You know, my dear, I Am only keeping them for
you. So if I say they are gone, you will bear me witness, will you? He! he! he!


TONY. Never fear me. Ecod! I Will say I saw them taken out with my own eyes.


Miss NEVILLE. I desire them but for a day, Madam. Just to be permitted to show
them as relics, and then they may be locked up again.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. To be plain with you, my dear Constance; if I could find
them, you should have them. They Are missing, I assure you. Lost, for aught I
know; but we must have patience wherever they are.


Miss NEVILLE. I Will not believe it; this is but a shallow pretense to deny me.
I know they are too valuable to be so slightly kept, and as you are to answer
for the loss.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Don't be alarmed, Constance. If they be lost, I must restore
an equivalent. But my son knows they are missing, and not to be found.


TONY. That I can bear witness to. They are missing, and not to be found, I Will
take my oath on it.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. You must learn resignation, my dear; for though we lose our
fortune, yet we should not lose our patience. See me, how calm I am.


Miss NEVILLE. Ay, people are generally calm at the misfortunes of others.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Now, I wonder a girl of your good sense should waste a
thought upon such trumpery. We shall soon find them; and, in the mean time, you
shall make use of my garnets till your jewels be found.


Miss NEVILLE. I detest garnets.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. The most becoming things in the world to set off a clear
complexion. You have often seen how well they look upon me. You shall have them.


[Exit. Miss NEVILLE. I dislike them of all things. You shall not stir. -- Was
ever any thing so provoking to mislay my own jewels, and force me to wear her
trumpery.


TONY. Don't be a fool. If she gives you the garnets, take what you can get.
The jewels are your own already. I have stolen them out of her bureau, and she
does not know it. Fly to your spark, he will tell you more of the matter. Leave
me to manage her.


Miss NEVILLE. My dear cousin.


TONY. Vanish. She Is here, and has missed them already. Zounds! how she fidgets
and spits about like a Catharine wheel.


Enter Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Confusion! thieves! robbers! We are
cheated, plundered, broke open, undone.


TONY. What Is the matter, what is the matter, mamma? I hope nothing has happened
to any of the good family!


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. We are robbed. My bureau has been broke open, the jewels
taken out, and I Am undone.


TONY. Oh! is that all? Ha, ha, ha. By the laws, I never saw it better acted in
my life. Ecod, I thought you was ruined in earnest, ha, ha, ha.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Why boy, I am ruined in earnest. My bureau has been broke
open, and all taken away.


TONY. Stick to that; ha, ha, ha; stick to that. I Will bear witness, you know,
call me to bear witness.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. I tell you, Tony, by all that is precious, the jewels are
gone, and I shall be ruined for ever.


TONY. Sure I know they are gone, and I am to say so.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. My dearest Tony, but hear me. They Are gone, I say.


TONY. By the laws, mamma, you make me for to laugh, ha, ha. I know who took
them well enough, ha, ha, ha.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Was there ever such a blockhead, that cannot tell the
difference between jest and earnest. I tell you I Am not in jest, booby.


TONY. That Is right, that is right: You must be in a bitter passion, and then
nobody will suspect either of us. I Will bear witness that they are gone.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Was there ever such a cross-grained brute, that will not hear
me! Can you bear witness that you're no better than a fool? Was ever poor woman
so beset with fools on one hand, and thieves on the other.


TONY. I can bear witness to that.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Bear witness again, you blockhead you, and I Will turn you out
of the room directly. My poor niece, what will become of her! Do you laugh, you
unfeeling brute, as if you enjoyed my distress?


TONY. I can bear witness to that.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Do you insult me, monster? I Will teach you to vex your mother,
I will.


TONY. I can bear witness to that.

(He runs off, she follows him. Enter Miss HARDCASTLE and Maid.


Miss HARDCASTLE. What an unaccountable creature is that brother of mine, to
send them to the house as an inn, ha, ha. I don't wonder at his impudence.


MAID. But what is more, madam, the young gentleman as you passed by in your
present dress, asked me if you were the bar maid? He mistook you for the bar
maid, madam.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Did he? Then as I live I Am resolved to keep up the delusion.
Tell me, Pimple, how do you like my present dress. Don't you think I look
something like Cherry in the Beaux Stratagem?


MAID. It Is the dress, madam, that every lady wears in the country, but when
she visits or receives company.


Miss HARDCASTLE. And are you sure he does not remember my face or person?


MAID. Certain of it.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I vow I thought so; for though we spoke for some time
together, yet his fears were such, that he never once looked up during the
interview. Indeed, if he had, my bonnet would have kept him from seeing me.


MAID. But what do you hope from keeping him in his mistake?


Miss HARDCASTLE. In the first place, I shall be seen, and that is no small
advantage to a girl who brings her face to market. Then I shall perhaps make an
acquaintance and that is no small victory gained over one who never addresses
any but the wildest of her sex. But my chief aim is to take my gentleman off
his guard, and like an invisible champion of romance examine the giant's force
before I offer to combat.


MAID. But are you sure you can act your part, and disguise your voice, so that
he may mistake that, as he has already mistaken your person?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Never fear me. I think I have got the true bar cant. -- Did
your honor call? -- Attend the Lion there. -- Pipes and tobacco for the Angel.
-- The Lamb has been outrageous this half hour.


MAID. It will do, madam. But he is here.


[Exit Maid. Enter MARLOW. MARLOW. What a bawling in every part of the house; I
have scarce a moment's repose. If I go to the best room, there I find my host
and his story. If I fly to the gallery, there we have my hostess with her
curtesy down to the ground. I have at last got a moment to myself, and now for
recollection.

[Walks and muses.
Miss HARDCASTLE. Did you call, Sir? did your honor call?


MARLOW. (Musing.) As for Miss Hardcastle, she is too grave and sentimental for
me.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Did your honor call?


(She still places herself before him, he turning away. MARLOW. No, child
(musing). Besides from the glimpse I had of her, I think she squints.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I Am sure, Sir, I heard the bell ring.


MARLOW. No, No. (musing) I have pleased my father, however, by coming down,
and I Will tomorrow please myself by returning.

(Taking out his tablets, and perusing.
Miss HARDCASTLE. Perhaps the other gentleman called, Sir.


MARLOW. I tell you, no.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I should be glad to know, Sir. We have such a parcel of
servants.


MARLOW. No, no, I tell you. (Looks full in her face.) Yes, child, I think I
did call. I wanted -- I wanted -- I vow, child, you are vastly handsome.


Miss HARDCASTLE. O la, Sir, you will make one ashamed.


MARLOW. Never saw a more sprightly malicious eye. Yes, yes, my dear, I did
call. Have you got any of your -- a -- what do you call it in the house?


Miss HARDCASTLE. No, Sir, we have been out of that these ten days.


MARLOW. One may call in this house, I find, to very little purpose. Suppose I
should call for a taste, just by way of trial, of the nectar of your lips;
perhaps I might be disappointed in that too.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Nectar! nectar! that is liquor there is no call for in these
parts. French, I suppose. We keep no French wines here, Sir.


MARLOW. Of true English growth, I assure you.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Then it is odd I should not know it. We brew all sorts of
wines in this house, and I have lived here these eighteen years.


MARLOW. Eighteen years! Why one would think, child, you kept the bar before
you were born. How old are you?


Miss HARDCASTLE. O! Sir, I must not tell my age. They say women and music
should never be dated.


MARLOW. To guess at this distance, you cannot be much above forty
(approaching.) Yet nearer I don't think so much (approaching.) By coming close
to some women they look younger still; but when we come very close indeed
(attempting to kiss her.)


Miss HARDCASTLE. Pray, Sir, keep your distance. One would think you wanted to
know one's age as they do horses, by mark of mouth.


MARLOW. I protest, child, you use me extremely ill. If you keep me at this
distance, how is it possible you and I can be ever acquainted?


Miss HARDCASTLE. And who wants to be acquainted with you? I want no such
acquaintance, not I. I Am sure you did not treat Miss Hardcastle that was here
awhile ago in this obstropalous manner. I Will warrant me, before her you looked
dashed, and kept bowing to the ground, and talked, for all the world, as if you
was before a justice of peace.


MARLOW. (Aside.) Egad! she has hit it, sure enough. (To her.) In awe of her,
child? Ha! ha! ha! A mere, awkward, squinting thing, no, no. I find you don't
know me. I laughed, and rallied her a little; but I was unwilling to be too
severe. No, I could not be too severe, curse me!


Miss HARDCASTLE. O! then, Sir, you are a favorite, I find, among the ladies?


MARLOW. Yes, my dear, a great favorite. And yet, hang me, I don't see what
they find in me to follow. At the Ladies Club in town, I Am called their
agreeable Rattle. Rattle, child, is not my real name, but one I Am known by. My
name is Solomon's. Mr. Solomon's, my dear, at your service.

(Offering to salute her.)
Miss HARDCASTLE. Hold, Sir; you were introducing me to your club, not to
yourself. And you're so great a favorite there you say?


MARLOW. Yes, my dear. There Is Mrs. Mantrap, Lady Betty Blackleg, the Countess
of Sligo, Mrs. Langhorns, old Miss Biddy Buckskin, and your humble servant,
keep up the spirit of the place.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Then it is a very merry place, I suppose.


MARLOW. Yes, as merry as cards, suppers, wine, and old women can make us.


Miss HARDCASTLE. And their agreeable Rattle, ha! ha! ha!


MARLOW. (Aside) Egad! I don't quite like this chit. She looks knowing,
methinks. You laugh, child!


Miss HARDCASTLE. I cannot but laugh to think what time they all have for
minding their work or their family.


MARLOW. (Aside) All Is well, she don't laugh at me. (To her) Do you ever work,
child?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Ay, sure. There Is not a screen or a quilt in the whole house
but what can bear witness to that.


MARLOW. Odso! Then you must show me your embroidery. I embroider and draw
patterns myself a little. If you want a judge of your work you must apply to me.

[Seizing her hand.
Miss HARDCASTLE. Ay, but the colors don't look well by candle light. You
shall see all in the morning.

[Struggling.
MARLOW. And why not now, my angel? Such beauty fires beyond the power of
resistance. -- Pshaw! the father here! My old luck: I never nicked seven that I
did not throw ames ace three times following.


[Exit Marlow. Enter HARDCASTLE, who stands in surprise. HARDCASTLE. So, madam!
So I find this is your modest lover. This is your humble admirer that kept his
eyes fixed on the ground, and only adored at humble distance. Kate, Kate, art
thou not ashamed to deceive your father so?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Never trust me, dear papa, but he is still the modest man I
first took him for, you will be convinced of it as well as I.


HARDCASTLE. By the hand of my body I believe his impudence is infectious!
Didn't I see him seize your hand? Didn't I see him hawl you about like a milk
maid? and now you talk of his respect and his modesty, forsooth!


Miss HARDCASTLE. But if I shortly convince you of his modesty, that he has
only the faults that will pass off with time, and the virtues that will improve
with age, I hope you will forgive him.


HARDCASTLE. The girl would actually make one run mad! I tell you I Will not be
convinced. I am convinced. He has scarcely been three hours in the house, and
he has already encroached on all my prerogatives. You may like his impudence,
and call it modesty. But my son-in-law, madam, must have very different
qualifications.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Sir, I ask but this night to convince you.


HARDCASTLE. You shall not have half the time, for I have thoughts of turning
him out this very hour.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Give me that hour then, and I hope to satisfy you.


HARDCASTLE. Well, an hour let it be then. But I Will have no trifling with your
father. All fair and open do you mind me.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I hope, Sir, you have ever found that I considered your
commands as my pride; for your kindness is such, that my duty as yet has been
inclination.


[Exeunt. END OF THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
Enter HASTINGS and Miss NEVILLE. HASTINGS. YOU surprise me! Sir Charles Marlow
expected here this night? Where have you had your information?


Miss NEVILLE. You may depend upon it. I just saw his letter to Mr. Hardcastle,
in which he tells him he intends setting out a few hours after his son.


HASTINGS. Then, my Constance, all must be completed before he arrives. He
knows me; and should he find me here, would discover my name, and perhaps my
designs, to the rest of the family.


Miss NEVILLE. The jewels, I hope, are safe.


HASTINGS. Yes, yes. I have sent them to Marlow, who keeps the keys of our
baggage. In the meantime, I Will go to prepare matters for our elopement. I have
had the Squire's promise of a fresh pair of horses; and, if I should not see
him again, will write him further directions.


[Exit. Miss NEVILLE. Well! success attend you. In the meantime, I Will go amuse
my aunt with the old pretense of a violent passion for my cousin.


[Exit. Enter MARLOW, followed by a Servant. MARLOW. I wonder what Hastings
could mean by sending me so valuable a thing as a casket to keep for him, when
he knows the only place I have is the seat of a post-coach at an Inn-door. Have
you deposited the casket with the landlady, as I ordered you? Have you put it
into her own hands?


SERVANT. Yes, your honor.


MARLOW. She said she would keep it safe, did she?


SERVANT. Yes, she said she would keep it safe enough; she asked me how I came by
it? and she said she had a great mind to make me give an account of myself.


[Exit Servant. MARLOW. Ha! ha! ha! They Are safe however. What an unaccountable
set of beings have we got amongst! This little bar-maid though runs in my head
most strangely, and drives out the absurdities of all the rest of the family.
She Is mine, she must be mine, or I Am greatly mistaken.


Enter HASTINGS. HASTINGS. Bless me! I quite forgot to tell her that I intended
to prepare at the bottom of the garden. Marlow here, and in spirits too!


MARLOW. Give me joy, George! Crown me, shadow me with laurels! Well, George,
after all, we modest fellows don't want for success among the women.


HASTINGS. Some women you mean. But what success has your honor's modesty been
crowned with now, that it grows so insolent upon us?


MARLOW. Didn't you see the tempting, brisk, lovely, little thing that runs
about the house with a bunch of keys to its girdle?


HASTINGS. Well! and what then?


MARLOW. She Is mine, you rogue you. Such fire, such motion, such eyes, such
lips -- but, egad! she would not let me kiss them though.


HASTINGS. But are you so sure, so very sure of her?


MARLOW. Why man, she talked of showing me her work above-stairs, and I am to
improve the pattern.


HASTINGS. But how can you, Charles, go about to rob a woman of her honor?


MARLOW. Pshaw! pshaw! we all know the honor of the bar-maid of an inn. I
don't intend to rob her, take my word for it, there is nothing in this house, I
shall not honestly pay for.


HASTINGS. I believe the girl has virtue.


MARLOW. And if she has, I should be the last man in the world that would
attempt to corrupt it.


HASTINGS. You have taken care, I hope, of the casket I sent you to lock up?
It Is in safety?


MARLOW. Yes, yes. It Is safe enough. I have taken care of it. But how could you
think the seat of a post-coach at an Inn-door a place of safety? Ah! numbskull!
I have taken better precautions for you than you did for yourself. -- I have --


HASTINGS. What!


MARLOW. I have sent it to the landlady to keep for you.


HASTINGS. To the landlady!


MARLOW. The landlady.


HASTINGS. You did.


MARLOW. I did. She Is to be answerable for its forthcoming, you know,


HASTINGS. Yes, she will bring it forth, with a witness.


MARLOW. Was Not I right? I believe you will allow that I acted prudently upon
this occasion?


HASTINGS. (Aside.) He must not see my uneasiness.


MARLOW. You seem a little disconcerted though, methinks. Sure nothing has
happened?


HASTINGS. No, nothing. Never was in better spirits in all my life. And so you
left it with the landlady, who, no doubt, very readily undertook the charge?


MARLOW. Rather too readily. For she not only kept the casket; but, through her
great precaution, was going to keep the messenger too. Ha! ha! ha!


HASTINGS. He! he! he! They Are safe however.


MARLOW. As a guinea in a miser's purse.


HASTINGS. (Aside.) So now all hopes of fortune are at an end, and we must set
off without it. (To him.) Well, Charles, I Will leave you to your meditations on
the pretty bar-maid, and, he! he! he! may you be as successful for yourself as
you have been for me.


[Exit. MARLOW. Thank ye, George! I ask no more. Ha! ha! ha!


Enter HARDCASTLE. HARDCASTLE. I no longer know my own house. It Is turned all
topsey-turvey. His servants have got drunk already. I Will bear it no longer, and
yet, from my respect for his father, I Will be calm. (To him.) Mr. Marlow, your
servant. I Am your very humble servant.

(bowing low.
MARLOW. Sir, your humble servant. (Aside.) What Is to be the wonder now?


HARDCASTLE. I believe, Sir, you must be sensible, Sir, that no man alive ought
to be more welcome than your father's son, Sir. I hope you think so?


MARLOW. I do from my soul, Sir. I don't want much entreaty. I generally make
my father's son welcome wherever he goes.


HARDCASTLE. I believe you do, from my soul, Sir. But though I say nothing to
your own conduct, that of your Servants is insufferable. Their manner of
drinking is setting a very bad example in this house, I assure you.


MARLOW. I protest, my very good Sir, that is no fault of mine. If they don't
drink as they ought they are to blame. I ordered them not to spare the cellar.
I did, I assure you. (To the side scene.) Here, let one of my servants come up.
(To him.) My positive directions were, that as I did not drink myself, they
should make up for my deficiencies below.


HARDCASTLE. Then they had your orders for what they do! I Am satisfied!


MARLOW. They had, I assure. You shall hear from one of themselves.


Enter SERVANT drunk. MARLOW. You, Jeremy! Come forward, sirrah! What were my
orders? Were you not told to drink freely, and call for what you thought fit,
for the good of the house?


HARDCASTLE. (Aside.) I begin to lose my patience.


JEREMY. Please your honor, liberty and Fleet Street for ever! Though I Am but a
servant, I Am as good as another man. I Will drink for no man before supper, Sir,
dammy! Good liquor will sit upon a good supper, but a good supper will not sit
upon -- hiccup -- upon my conscience, Sir.


MARLOW. You see, my old friend, the fellow is as drunk as he can possibly be.
I don't know what you would have more, unless you would have the poor devil soused in a
beer-barrel.


HARDCASTLE. Zounds! He Will drive me distracted if I contain myself any longer.
Mr. Marlow. Sir; I have submitted to your insolence for more than four hours,
and I see no likelihood of its coming to an end. I Am now resolved to be master
here, Sir, and I desire that you and your drunken pack may leave my house
directly.


MARLOW. Leave your house! -- Sure you jest, my good friend? What, when I Am
doing what I can to please you.


HARDCASTLE. I tell you, Sir, you don't please me; so I desire you will leave my
house.


MARLOW. Sure you cannot be serious? At this time o'night, and such a night.
You only mean to banter me?


HARDCASTLE. I tell you, Sir, I Am serious; and, now that my passions are
rouzed, I say this house is mine, Sir; this house is mine, and I command you to
leave it directly.


MARLOW. Ha! ha! ha! A puddle in a storm. I shall not stir a step, I assure you.
(In a serious tone.) This, your house, fellow! It Is my house. This is my house.
Mine, while I choose to stay. What right have you to bid me leave this house,
Sir? I never met with such impudence, curse me, never in my whole life before.


HARDCASTLE. Nor I, confound me if ever I did. To come to my house, to call for
what he likes, to turn me out of my own chair, to insult the family, to order
his servants to get drunk, and then to tell me This house is mine, Sir. By all
that is impudent it makes me laugh. Ha! ha! ha! Pray, Sir, (bantering.) as you
take the house, what think you of taking the rest of the furniture? There Is a
pair of silver candlesticks, and there is a fire-screen, and here is a pair of
brazen nosed bellows, perhaps you may take a fancy to them?


MARLOW. Bring me your bill, Sir, bring me your bill, and let us make no more
words about it.


HARDCASTLE. There are a set of prints too. What think you of the rake's
progress for your own apartment?


MARLOW. Bring me your bill, I say; and I Will leave you and your infernal house
directly.


HARDCASTLE. Then there is a mahogony table, that you may see your own face in.


MARLOW. My bill, I say.


HARDCASTLE. I had forgot the great chair, for your own particular slumbers,
after a hearty meal.


MARLOW. Zounds! bring me my bill, I say, and let us hear no more on it.


HARDCASTLE. Young man, young man, from your father's letter to me, I was
taught to expect a well-bred modest man, as a visitor here, but now I find him
no better than a coxcomb and a bully; but he will be down here presently, and
shall hear more of it.


[Exit. MARLOW. How Is this! Sure I have not mistaken the house! Every thing
looks like an inn. The servants cry, coming. The attendance is awkward; the
bar-maid too to attend us. But she is here, and will further inform me. Whither
so fast, child. A word with you.


Enter Miss HARDCASTLE. Miss HARDCASTLE. Let it be short then. I Am in a hurry.
(Aside.) (I believe he begins to find out his mistake, but its too soon quite
to undeceive him.)


MARLOW. Pray, child, answer me one question. What are you, and what may your
business in this house be?


Miss HARDCASTLE. A relation of the family, Sir.


MARLOW. What. A poor relation?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Yes, Sir. A poor relation appointed to keep the keys, and to
see that the guests want nothing in my power to give them.


MARLOW. That is, you act as the bar-maid of this inn.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Inn. O law -- What brought that in your head. One of the best
families in the county keep an inn. Ha, ha, ha, old Mr. Hardcastle's house an
inn.


MARLOW. Mr. Hardcastle's house! Is this house Mr. Hardcastle's house, child!


Miss HARDCASTLE. Ay, sure. Whose else should it be.


MARLOW. So then all is out, and I have been damnably imposed on. O, confound my
stupid head, I shall be laughed at over the whole town. I shall be stuck up in
caricatura in all the print-shops. The Dullissimo Maccaroni. To mistake this
house of all others for an inn, and my father's old friend for an innkeeper.
What a swaggering puppy must he take me for. What a silly puppy do I find
myself. There again, may I be hanged, my dear, but I mistook you for the
bar-maid.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Dear me! dear me! I Am sure there is nothing in my behavour to
put me upon a level with one of that stamp.


MARLOW. Nothing, my dear, nothing. But I was in for a list of blunders, and
could not help making you a subscriber. My stupidity saw every thing the wrong
way. I mistook your assiduity for assurance, and your simplicity for
allurement. But its over -- This house I no more show my face in.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I hope, Sir, I have done nothing to disoblige you. I Am sure I
should be sorry to affront any gentleman who has been so polite, and said so
many civil things to me. I Am sure I should be sorry (pretending to cry) if he
left the family upon my account. I Am sure I should be sorry, people said any
thing amiss, since I have no fortune but my character.


MARLOW. [Aside.] By heaven, she weeps. This is the first mark of tenderness I
ever had from a modest woman, and it touches me; (to her) Excuse me, my lovely
girl, you are the only part of the family I leave with reluctance. But to be
plain with you, the difference of our birth, fortune and education, make an
honorable connection impossible; and I can never harbor a thought of seducing
simplicity that trusted in my honor, or bringing ruin upon one, whose only
fault was being too lovely.


Miss HARDCASTLE. [Aside]. Generous man! I now begin to admire him. (to him.)
But I Am sure my family is as good as miss Hardcastle's, and though I Am poor,
that is no great misfortune to a contented mind, and, until this moment, I never
thought that it was bad to want fortune.


MARLOW. And why now, my pretty simplicity?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Because it puts me at a distance from one, that if I had a
thousand pound I would give it all to.


MARLOW. [Aside.] This simplicity bewitches me, so that if I stay I Am undone. I
must make one bold effort, and leave her. (to her) Your partiality in my
favor, my dear, touches me most sensibly, and were I to live for myself alone,
I could easily fix my choice. But I owe too much to the opinion of the world,
too much to the authority of a father, so that -- I can scarcely speak it -- it
affects me. Farewell.


[Exit. Miss HARDCASTLE. I never knew half his merit till now. He shall not go,
if I have power or art to detain him. I Will still preserve the character in
which I stooped to conquer, but will undeceive my papa, who, perhaps, may laugh
him out of his resolution.


[Exit. Enter TONY, Miss NEVILLE. TONY. Ay, you may steal for yourselves the
next time. I have done my duty. She has got the jewels again, that is a sure
thing; but she believes it was all a mistake of the servants.


Miss NEVILLE. But, my dear cousin, sure you will not forsake us in this distress.
If she in the least suspects that I am going off, I shall certainly be locked
up, or sent to my aunt Pedigree's, which is ten times worse.


TONY. To be sure, aunts of all kinds are damned bad things. But what can I do?
I have got you a pair of horses that will fly like Whistlejacket, and I Am sure
you cannot say but I have courted you nicely before her face. Here she comes, we
must court a bit or two more, for fear she should suspect us.


[They retire, and seem to fondle. Enter Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Mrs. HARDCASTLE.
Well, I was greatly fluttered, to be sure. But my son tells me it was all a
mistake of the servants. I shall not be easy, however, till they are fairly
married, and then let her keep her own fortune. But what do I see! Fondling
together, as I Am alive. I never saw Tony so sprightly before. Ah! have I caught
you, my pretty doves! What, billing, exchanging stolen glances, and broken
murmurs. Ah!


TONY. As for murmurs, mother, we grumble a little now and then, to be sure.
But there is no love lost between us.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. A mere sprinkling, Tony, upon the flame, only to make it burn
brighter.


Miss NEVILLE. Cousin Tony promises to give us more of his company at home.
Indeed, he shall not leave us any more. It will not leave us cousin Tony, will it?


TONY. O! it is a pretty creature. No, I Would sooner leave my horse in a pound,
than leave you when you smile upon one so. Your laugh makes you so becoming.


Miss NEVILLE. Agreeable cousin! Who can help admiring that natural humor,
that pleasant, broad, red, thoughtless, (patting his cheek) ah! it is a bold
face.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Pretty innocence.


TONY. I Am sure I always loved cousin Con's hazle eyes, and her pretty long
fingers, that she twists this way and that, over the haspicholls, like a parcel
of bobbins.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Ah, he would charm the bird from the tree. I was never so
happy before. My boy takes after his father, poor Mr. Lumpkin, exactly. The
jewels, my dear Con, shall be yours incontinently. You shall have them. Is Not
he a sweet boy, my dear? You shall be married tomorrow, and we'll put off the
rest of his education, like Dr. Drowsy's sermons, to a fitter opportunity.


Enter DIGGORY. DIGGORY. Where Is the 'Squire? I have got a letter for your
worship.


TONY. Give it to my mamma. She reads all my letters first.


DIGGORY. I had o^ders to deliver it into your own hands.


TONY. Who does it come from?


DIGGORY. Your worship mun ask that of the letter itself.


TONY. I could wish to know, though

[turning the letter, and gazing on it.]
Miss NEVILLE. [Aside.] Undone, undone. A letter to him from Hastings. I know
the hand. If my aunt sees it, we are ruined for ever. I Will keep her employed a
little if I can. [To Mrs. Hardcastle.] But I have not told you, Madam, of my
cousin's smart answer just now to Mr. Marlow. We so laughed -- You must know,
Madam -- this way a little, for he must not hear us.

[They confer.
TONY. [Still gazing.] A damned cramp piece of penmanship, as ever I saw in my
life. I can read your print-hand very well. But here there are such handles,
and shanks, and dashes, that one can scarce tell the head from the tail. To
Anthony Lumpkin, Esquire. It Is very odd, I can read the outside of my letters,
where my own name is, well enough. But when I come to open it, it is all --
buzz. That Is hard, very hard; for the inside of the letter is always the cream
of the correspondence.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Ha, ha, ha. Very well, very well. And so my son was too hard
for the philosopher.


Miss NEVILLE. Yes, Madam; but you must hear the rest, Madam. A little more
this way, or he may hear us. You Will hear how he puzzled him again.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. He seems strangely puzzled now himself, methinks.


TONY. [Still gazing.] A damned up and down hand, as if it was disguised in
liquor. [Reading.] Dear Sir. Ay, that is that. Then there is an M, and a T, and
an S, but whether the next be an izzard or an R, confound me, I cannot tell.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. What Is that, my dear. Can I give you any assistance?


Miss NEVILLE. Pray, aunt, let me read it. No body reads a cramp hand better
than I. (twitching the letter from her.) Do you know who it is from?


TONY. Cannot tell, except from Dick Ginger the feeder.


Miss NEVILLE. Ay, so it is, (pretending to read) Dear 'Squire, Hoping that
you're in health, as I am at this present. The gentlemen of the Shake bag club
has cut the gentlemen of goose-green quite out of feather. The odds -- um --
odd battle -- um -- long fighting -- um here, here, it is all about cocks, and
fighting; it is of no consequence, here, put it up, put it up,

[thrusting the crumpled letter upon him.
TONY. But I tell you, Miss, it is of all the consequence in the world. I would
not lose the rest of it for a guinea. Here, mother, do you make it out. Of no
consequence!

[giving Mrs. Hardcastle the letter.
Mrs. HARDCASTLE. How Is this! (reads) Dear 'Squire, I Am now waiting for Miss
Neville, with a post-chaise and pair, at the bottom of the garden, but I find
my horses yet unable to perform the journey. I expect you will assist us with a
pair of fresh horses, as you promised. Dispatch is necessary, as the hag (ay
the hag) your mother, will otherwise suspect us. Yours, Hastings. Grant me
patience. I shall run distracted. My rage choaks me.


Miss NEVILLE. I hope, Madam, you will suspend your resentment for a few moments,
and not impute to me any impertinence, or sinister design that belongs to
another.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. (Curtesying very low.) Fine spoken, Madam, you are most
miraculously polite and engaging, and quite the very pink of curtesy and
circumspection, Madam. (Changing her tone.) And you, you great ill-fashioned
oaf, with scarce sense enough to keep your mouth shut. Were you too joined
against me? But I Will defeat all your plots in a moment. As for you, Madam,
since you have got a pair of fresh horses ready, it would be cruel to
disappoint them. So, if you please, instead of running away with your spark,
prepare, this very moment, to run off with me. Your old aunt Pedigree will keep
you secure, I Will warrant me. You too, Sir, may mount your horse, and guard us
upon the way. Here, Thomas, Roger, Diggory, I Will show you, that I wish you
better than you do yourselves.


[Exit. Miss NEVILLE. So now I Am completely ruined.


TONY. Ay, that is a sure thing.


Miss NEVILLE. What better could be expected from being connected with such a
stupid fool, and after all the nods and signs I made him.


TONY. By the laws, Miss, it was your own cleverness, and not my stupidity,
that did your business. You were so nice and so busy with your Shake-bags and
Goose-greens, that I thought you could never be making believe.


Enter HASTINGS. HASTINGS. So. Sir, I find by my servant, that you have shown
my letter, and betrayed us. Was this well done, young gentleman.


TONY. Here Is another. Ask Miss there who betrayed you. Ecod, it was her doing,
not mine.


Enter MARLOW. MARLOW. So I have been finely used here among you. Rendered
contemptible, driven into ill manners, despised, insulted, laughed at.


TONY. Here Is another. We shall have old Bedlam broke loose presently.


Miss NEVILLE. And there, Sir, is the gentleman to whom we all owe every
obligation.


MARLOW. What can I say to him, a mere boy, an idiot, whose ignorance and age
are a protection.


HASTINGS. A poor contemptible booby, that would but disgrace correction.


Miss NEVILLE. Yet with cunning and malice enough to make himself merry with
all our embarrassments.


HASTINGS. An insensible cub.


MARLOW. Replete with tricks and mischief.


TONY. Baw! damme, but I Will fight you both one after the other, -- with baskets.


MARLOW. As for him, he is below resentment. But your conduct, Mr. Hastings,
requires an explanation. You knew of my mistakes, yet would not undeceive me.


HASTINGS. Tortured as I am with my own disappointments, is this a time for
explanations. It is not friendly, Mr. Marlow.


MARLOW. But, Sir --


Miss NEVILLE. Mr. Marlow, we never kept on your mistake, till it was too late
to undeceive you. Be pacified.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. My mistress desires you will get ready immediately,
Madam. The horses are putting to Your hat and things are in the next room. We
are to go thirty miles before morning.


[Exit servant. Miss NEVILLE. Well, well; I Will come presently.


MARLOW. [To Hastings.] Was it well done, Sir, to assist in rendering me
ridiculous. To hang me out for the scorn of all my acquaintance. Depend upon
it, Sir, I shall expect an explanation.


HASTINGS. Was it well done, Sir, if you're upon that subject, to deliver what
I entrusted to yourself, to the care of another, Sir.


Miss NEVILLE. Mr. Hastings. Mr. Marlow. Why will you increase my distress by
this groundless dispute. I implore, I entreat you --


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Your cloak, Madam. My mistress is impatient.


Miss NEVILLE. I come. Pray be pacified. If I leave you thus, I shall die with
apprehension.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Your fan, muff, and gloves, Madam. The horses are
waiting.


Miss NEVILLE. O, Mr. Marlow! if you knew what a scene of constraint and
ill nature lies before me, I Am sure it would convert your resentment into pity.


MARLOW. I Am so distracted with a variety of passions, that I don't know what I
do. Forgive me, Madam. George, forgive me. You know my hasty temper, and should
not exasperate it.


HASTINGS. The torture of my situation is my only excuse.


Miss NEVILLE. Well, my dear Hastings, if you have that esteem for me that I
think, that I am sure you have, your constancy for three years will but
increase the happiness of our future connection. If --


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. [Within.] Miss Neville. Constance, why Constance, I say.


Miss NEVILLE. I Am coming. Well, constancy. Remember, constancy is the word.


[Exit. HASTINGS. My heart! How can I support this. To be so near happiness,
and such happiness.


MARLOW. [To Tony.] You see now, young gentleman, the effects of your folly.
What might be amusement to you, is here disappointment, and even distress.


TONY. [From a reverie.] Ecod, I have hit it. Its here. Your hands. Yours and
yours, my poor Sulky. My boots there, ho. Meet me two hours hence at the bottom
of the garden; and if you don't find Tony Lumpkin a more good-natured fellow
than you thought for, I Will give you leave to take my best horse, and Bet
Bouncer into the bargain. Come along. My boots, ho.


[Exeunt. END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE Continues. Enter HASTINGS and SERVANT. HASTINGS. YOU saw the Old Lady
and Miss Neville drive off, you say.


SERVANT. Yes, your honor. They went off in a post coach, and the young
'Squire went on horseback. They Are thirty miles off by this time.


HASTINGS. Then all my hopes are over.


SERVANT. Yes, Sir. Old Sir Charles is arrived. He and the Old Gentleman of the
house have been laughing at Mr. Marlow's mistake this half hour. They are
coming this way.


HASTINGS. Then I must not be seen. So now to my fruitless appointment at the
bottom of the garden. This is about the time.


[Exit. Enter SIR CHARLES and HARDCASTLE HARDCASTLE. Ha, ha, ha. The peremptory
tone in which he sent forth his sublime commands.


Sir CHARLES. And the reserve with which I suppose he treated all your advances.


HARDCASTLE. And yet he might have seen something in me above a common
innkeeper, too.


Sir CHARLES. Yes, Dick, but he mistook you for an uncommon innkeeper, ha, ha,
ha.


HARDCASTLE. Well, I Am in too good spirits to think of any thing but joy. Yes,
my dear friend, this union of our families will make our personal friendships
hereditary; and though my daughter's fortune is but small --


Sir CHARLES. Why, Dick, will you talk of fortune to me. My son is possessed of
more than a competence already, and can want nothing but a good and virtuous
girl to share his happiness and increase it. If they like each other, as you
say they do --


HARDCASTLE. If, man. I tell you they do like each other. My daughter as good
as told me so.


Sir CHARLES. But girls are apt to flatter themselves, you know.


HARDCASTLE. I saw him grasp her hand in the warmest manner myself; and here he
comes to put you out of your iffs, I warrant him.


Enter MARLOW. MARLOW. I come, Sir, once more, to ask pardon for my strange
conduct. I can scarce reflect on my insolence without confusion.


HARDCASTLE. Tut, boy, a trifle. You take it too gravely. An hour or two's
laughing with my daughter will set all to rights again. She Will never like you
the worse for it.


MARLOW. Sir, I shall be always proud of her approbation.


HARDCASTLE. Approbation is but a cold word, Mr. Marlow; if I am not deceived,
you have something more than approbation thereabouts. You take me.


MARLOW. Really, Sir, I have not that happiness.


HARDCASTLE. Come, boy, I Am an old fellow, and know what is what, as well as you
that are younger. I know what has past between you; but mum.


MARLOW. Sure, Sir, nothing has past between us but the most profound respect
on my side, and the most distant reserve on here is. You don't think, Sir, that
my impudence has been past upon all the rest of the family.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Impudence! No, I don't say that -- Not quite impudence --
Though girls like to be played with, and rumpled a little too sometimes. But
she has told no tales, I assure you.


MARLOW. I never gave her the slightest cause.


HARDCASTLE. Well, well, I like modesty in its place well enough. But this is
over-acting, young gentleman. You may be open. Your father and I will like you
the better for it.


MARLOW. May I die. Sir, if I ever --


HARDCASTLE. I tell you, she don't dislike you; and as I Am sure you like her --


MARLOW. Dear Sir -- I protest, Sir --


HARDCASTLE. I see no reason why you should not be joined as fast as the parson
can tie you.


MARLOW. But hear me, Sir --


HARDCASTLE. Your father approves the match, I admire it, every moment's delay
will be doing mischief, so --


MARLOW. But why will not you hear me? By all that is just and true, I never gave
miss Hardcastle the slightest mark of my attachment, or even the most distant
hint to suspect me of affection. We had but one interview, and that was formal,
modest and uninteresting.


HARDCASTLE. (Aside.) This fellow's formal modest impudence is beyond bearing.


Sir CHARLES. And you never grasped her hand, or made any protestations!


MARLOW. As heaven is my witness, I came down in obedience to your commands. I
saw the lady without emotion, and parted without reluctance. I hope you will
exact no further proofs of my duty, nor prevent me from leaving a house in
which I suffer so many mortifications.


[Exit. Sir CHARLES. I Am astonished at the air of sincerity with which he
parted.


HARDCASTLE. And I Am astonished at the deliberate intrepidity of his assurance.


Sir CHARLES. I dare pledge my life and honor upon his truth.


HARDCASTLE. Here comes my daughter, and I would stake my happiness upon her
veracity.


Enter Miss HARDCASTLE. HARDCASTLE. Kate, come hither, child. Answer us
sincerely, and without reserve; has Mr. Marlow made you any professions of love
and affection?


Miss HARDCASTLE. The question is very abrupt, Sir! But since you require
unreserved sincerity, I think he has.


HARDCASTLE. (To Sir Charles) You see.


Sir CHARLES. And pray, madam, have you and my son had more than one interview?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Yes, Sir, several.


HARDCASTLE. (To Sir Charles) You see.


Sir CHARLES. But did he profess any attachment?


Miss HARDCASTLE. A lasting one.


Sir CHARLES. Did he talk of love?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Much, Sir.


Sir CHARLES. Amazing! And all this formally?


Miss HARDCASTLE. Formally.


HARDCASTLE. Now, my friend, I hope you are satisfied.


Sir CHARLES. And how did he behave, madam?


Miss HARDCASTLE. As most professed admirers do. Said some civil things of my
face, talked much of his want of merit, and the greatness of mine; mentioned
his heart, gave a short tragedy speech, and ended with pretended rapture.


Sir CHARLES. Now I Am perfectly convinced, indeed. I know his conversation
among women to be modest and submissive. This forward canting ranting manner by
no means describes him, and I am confident, he never sat for the picture.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Then what, Sir, if I should convince you to your face of my
sincerity? If you and my papa, in about half an hour, will place yourselves
behind that screen, you shall hear him declare his passion to me in person.


Sir CHARLES. Agreed. And if I find him what you describe, all my happiness in
him must have an end.


[Exit. Miss HARDCASTLE. And if you don't find him what I describe -- I fear my
happiness must never have a beginning.


[Exeunt. SCENE changes to the Back of the Garden. Enter HASTINGS. HASTINGS.
What an idiot am I, to wait here for a fellow, who probably takes a delight in
mortifying me. He never intended to be punctual, and I Will wait no longer. What
do I see. It is he, and perhaps with news of my Constance.


Enter TONY, bocted and spattered. HASTINGS. My honest 'Squire! I now find you
a man of your word. This looks like friendship.


TONY. Ay, I Am your friend, and the best friend you have in the world, if you
knew but all. This riding by night, by the bye, is cursedly tiresome. It has
shook me worse than the basket of a stage-coach.


HASTINGS. But how? Where did you leave your fellow travelers? Are they in
safety? Are they housed?


TONY. Five and twenty miles in two hours and a half is no such bad driving.
The poor beasts have smoaked for it: Rabbet me, but I Would rather ride forty miles
after a fox, than ten with such varment.


HASTINGS. Well, but where have you left the ladies? I die with impatience.


TONY. Left them. Why where should I leave them, but where I found them.


HASTINGS. This is a riddle.


TONY. Riddle me this then. What Is that goes round the house, and round the
house, and never touches the house?


HASTINGS. I Am still astray.


TONY. Why that is it, mon. I have led them astray. By jingo, there is not a pond
or slough within five miles of the place but they can tell the taste of.


HASTINGS. Ha, ha, ha, I understand; you took them in a round, while they
supposed themselves going forward. And so you have at last brought them home
again.


TONY. You shall hear. I first took them down Feather-bed-lane, where we stuck
fast in the mud. I then rattled them crack over the stones of Up-and-down Hill
-- I then introduced them to the gibbet on Heavy-tree Heath, and from that,
with a circumbendibus, I fairly lodged them in the horsepond at the bottom of
the garden.


HASTINGS. But no accident, I hope.


TONY. No, no. Only mother is confoundedly frightened. She thinks herself forty
miles off. She Is sick of the journey, and the cattle can scarce crawl. So if
your own horses be ready, you may whip off with cousin, and I Will be bound that
no soul here can budge a foot to follow you.


HASTINGS. My dear friend, how can I be grateful?


TONY. Ay, now its dear friend, noble 'Squire. Just now, it was all idiot, cub,
and run me through the guts. Damn your way of fighting, I say. After we take a
knock in this part of the country, we kiss and be friends. But if you had run
me through the guts, then I should be dead, and you might go kiss the hangman.


HASTINGS. The rebuke is just. But I must hasten to relieve miss Neville; if
you keep the old lady employed, I promise to take care of the young one.


[Exit Hastings. TONY. Never fear me. Here she comes. Vanish. She Is got from
the pond, and draggled up to the waist like a mermaid.


Enter Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Oh, Tony, I Am killed. Shook. Battered
to death. I shall never survive it. That last jolt that laid us against the
quickset hedge has done my business.


TONY. Alack, mama, it was all your own fault. You would be for running away by
night, without knowing one inch of the way.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. I wish we were at home again. I never met so many accidents
in so short a journey. Drenched in the mud, overturned in a ditch, stuck fast
in a slough, jolted to a jelly, and at last to lose our way. Whereabouts do you
think we are, Tony?


TONY. By my guess we should be upon Crackskull common, about forty miles from
home.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. O lud! O lud! the most notorious spot in all the country. We
only want a robbery to make a complete night on it.


TONY. Don't be afraid, mama, don't be afraid. Two of the five that kept here
are hanged, and the other three may not find us. Don't be afraid. Is that a man
that is galloping behind us? No; its only a tree. Don't be afraid.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. The fright will certainly kill me.


TONY. Do you see any thing like a black hat moving behind the thicket?


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. O death!


TONY. No, it is only a cow. Don't be afraid, mama; don't be afraid.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. As I Am alive, Tony, I see a man coming toward us. Ah! I Am
sure on it. If he perceives us we are undone.


TONY. [Aside.] Father-in-law, by all that is unlucky, come to take one of his
night walks. [To her.] Ah, it is a highwayman, with pistils as long as my arm. A
damned ill-looking fellow.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Good heaven defend us! He approaches.


TONY. Do you hide yourself in that thicket, and leave me to manage him. If
there be any danger I Will cough and cry hem. When I cough be sure to keep close.


[Mrs. Hardcastle hides behind a tree in the back scene. Enter HARDCASTLE.
HARDCASTLE. I Am mistaken, or I heard voices of people in want of help. Oh,
Tony, is that you. I did not expect you so soon back. Are your mother and her
charge in safety?


TONY. Very safe, Sir, at my aunt Pedigree's. Hem.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. [From behind.] Ah death! I find there is danger.


HARDCASTLE. Forty miles in three hours; sure, that is too much, my youngster.


TONY. Stout horses and willing minds make short journies, as they say. Hem.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. [From behind.] Sure he will do the dear boy no harm.


HARDCASTLE. But I heard a voice here; I should be glad to know from whence it
came?


TONY. It was I, Sir, talking to myself, Sir. I was saying that forty miles in
four hours was very good going. Hem. As to be sure it was. Hem. I have got a
sort of cold by being out in the air. We'll go in, if you please. Hem.


HARDCASTLE. But if you talked to yourself, you did not answer yourself. I am
certain I heard two voices, and am resolved (raising his voice) to find the
other out.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. (From behind.) Oh! he is coming to find me out. Oh!


TONY. What need you go, Sir, if I tell you. Hem. I Will lay down my life for the
truth -- hem -- I Will tell you all, Sir.

[detaining him.
HARDCASTLE. I tell you, I will not be detained. I insist on seeing. It Is in
vain to expect I Will believe you.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. (Running forward from behind.) O lud, he will murder my poor
boy, my darling. Here, good gentleman, whet your rage upon me. Take my money,
my life, but spare that young gentleman, spare my child, if you have any mercy.


HARDCASTLE. My wife! as I Am a Christian. From whence can she come, or what
does she mean!


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. (Kneeling.) Take compassion on us, good Mr. Highwayman. Take
our money, our watches, all we have, but spare our lives. We will never bring
you to justice, indeed we will not, good Mr. Highwayman.


HARDCASTLE. I believe the woman's out of her senses. What, Dorothy, don't you
know me?


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Mr. Hardcastle, as I Am alive! My fears blinded me. But who,
my dear, could have expected to meet you here, in this frightful place, so far
from home. What has brought you to follow us?


HARDCASTLE. Sure, Dorothy, you have not lost your wits. So far from home, when
you are within forty yards of your own door. (To him.) This is one of your old
tricks, you graceless rogue you. (To her.) Don't you know the gate, and the
mulberry-tree; and don't you remember the horsepond, my dear?


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Yes, I shall remember the horsepond as long as I live; I have
caught my death in it. (To Tony.) And is it to you, you graceless varlet, I owe
all this. I Will teach you to abuse your mother, I will.


TONY. Ecod, mother, all the parish says you have spoiled me, and so you may
take the fruits on it.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. I Will spoil you, I will.


[Follows him off the stage. Exit. HARDCASTLE. There Is morality, however, in
his reply.


[Exit. Enter HASTINGS and Miss NEVILLE. HASTINGS. My dear Constance, why will
you deliberate thus? If we delay a moment, all is lost for ever. Pluck up a
little resolution, and we shall soon be out of the reach of her malignity.


Miss NEVILLE. I find it impossible. My spirits are so sunk with the agitations
I have suffered, that I am unable to face any new danger. Two or three years
patience will at last crown us with happiness.


HASTINGS. Such a tedious delay is worse than inconstancy. Let us fly, my
charmer. Let us date our happiness from this very moment. Perish fortune. Love
and content will increase what we possess beyond a monarch's revenue. Let me
prevail.


Miss NEVILLE. No, Mr. Hastings; no. Prudence once more comes to my relief, and
I will obey its dictates. In the moment of passion, fortune may be despised,
but it ever produces a lasting repentance. I Am resolved to apply to Mr.
Hardcastle's compassion and justice for redress.


HASTINGS. But though he had the will, he has not the power to relieve you.


Miss NEVILLE. But he has influence, and upon that I am resolved to rely.


HASTINGS. I have no hopes. But since you persist, I must reluctantly obey you.


[Exeunt. SCENE Changes. Enter Sir CHARLES and Miss HARDCASTLE. Sir CHARLES.
What a situation am I in. If what you say appears, I shall then find a guilty
son. If what he says be true, I shall then lose one that, of all others, I most
wished for a daughter.


Miss HARDCASTLE. I am proud of your approbation, and to show I merit it, if
you place yourselves as I directed, you shall hear his explicit declaration.
But he comes.


Sir CHARLES. I Will to your father, and keep him to the appointment.


[Exit Sir Charles. Enter MARLOW. MARLOW. Though prepared for setting out, I come
once more to take leave, nor did I, till this moment, know the pain I feel in
the separation.


Miss HARDCASTLE. (In her own natural manner.) I believe these sufferings
cannot be very great, Sir, which you can so easily remove. A day or two longer,
perhaps, might lessen your uneasiness, by showing the little value of what you
now think proper to regret.


MARLOW. [Aside.] This girl every moment improves upon me. (To her.) It must
not be, Madam. I have already trifled too long with my heart. My very pride
begins to submit to my passion. The disparity of education and fortune, the
anger of a parent, and the contempt of my equals, begin to lose their weight;
and nothing can restore me to myself, but this painful effort of resolution.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Then go, Sir. I Will urge nothing more to detain you. Though my
family be as good as here is you came down to visit, and my education, I hope,
not inferior, what are these advantages without equal affluence? I must remain
contented with the slight approbation of imputed merit; I must have only the
mockery of your addresses, while all your serious aims are fixed on fortune.


Enter HARDCASTLE and Sir CHARLES from behind. Sir CHARLES. Here, behind this
screen.


HARDCASTLE. Ay, Ay, make no noise. I Will engage my Kate covers him with
confusion at last.


MARLOW. By heavens, Madam, fortune was ever my smallest consideration. Your
beauty at first caught my eye; for who could see that without emotion. But
every moment that I converse with you, steals in some new grace, heightens the
picture, and gives it stronger expression. What at first seemed rustic
plainness, now appears refined simplicity. What seemed forward assurance, now
strikes me as the result of courageous innocence, and conscious virtue.


Sir CHARLES. What can it mean! He amazes me!


HARDCASTLE. I told you how it would be. Hush!


MARLOW. I am now determined to stay, Madam, and I have too good an opinion of
my father's discernment, when he sees you, to doubt his approbation.


Miss HARDCASTLE. No, Mr. Marlow, I will not, cannot detain you. Do you think I
could suffer a connection, in which there is the smallest room for repentance?
Do you think I would take the mean advantage of a transient passion, to load
you with confusion? Do you think I could ever relish that happiness, which was
acquired by lessening yours?


MARLOW. By all that is good, I can have no happiness but what is in your power
to grant me. Nor shall I ever feel repentance, but in not having seen your
merits before. I will stay, even contrary to your wishes; and though you should
persist to shun me, I will make my respectful assiduities atone for the levity
of my past conduct.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Sir, I must entreat you will desist. As our acquaintance began,
so let it end, in indifference. I might have given an hour or two to levity;
but feriously, Mr. Marlow, do you think I could ever submit to a connection,
where I must appear mercenary, and you imprudent? Do you think I could ever
catch at the confident addresses of a secure admirer?


MARLOW. (Kneeling.) Does this look like security. Does this look like
confidence. No, Madam, every moment that shows me your merit only serves to
increase my diffidence and confusion. Here let me continue --


Sir CHARLES. I can hold it no longer. Charles, Charles, how have thou deceived
me! Is this your indifference, your uninteresting conversation!


HARDCASTLE. Your cold contempt; your formal interview. What have you to say
now?


MARLOW. That I Am all amazement! What can it mean!


HARDCASTLE. It means that you can say and unsay things at pleasure. That you
can address a lady in private, and deny it in public; that you have one story
for us, and another for my daughter.


MARLOW. Daughter! -- this lady your daughter!


HARDCASTLE. Yes, Sir, my only daughter. My Kate, whose else should she be.


MARLOW. Oh, the devil.


Miss HARDCASTLE. Yes, Sir, that very identical tall squinting lady you were
pleased to take me for, (curtesying.) She that you addressed as the mild,
modest, sentimental man of gravity, and the bold forward agreeable rattle of
the ladies club; ha, ha, ha.


MARLOW. Zounds, there is no bearing this; it is worse than death.


Miss HARDCASTLE. In which of your characters, Sir, will you give us leave to
address you. As the faultering gentleman, with looks on the ground, that speaks
just to be heard, and hates hypocrisy; or the loud confident creature, that
keeps it up with Mrs. Mantrap, and old Miss Biddy Buckskin, till three in the
morning; ha, ha, ha.


MARLOW. O, curse on my noisy head. I never attempted to be impudent yet, that
I was not taken down. I must be gone.


HARDCASTLE. By the hand of my body, but you shall not. I see it was all a
mistake, and I am rejoiced to find it. You shall not, Sir, I tell you. I know
she will forgive you. Will Not you forgive him, Kate. We'll all forgive you. Take
courage, man.


[They retire, she tormenting him to the back Scene. Enter Mrs. HARDCASTLE.
TONY. Mrs. HARDCASTLE. So, so, they are gone off. Let them go, I care not.


HARDCASTLE. Who gone?


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. My dutiful niece and her gentleman, Mr. Hastings, from Town.
He who came down with our modest visitor here.


Sir CHARLES. Who, my honest George Hastings. As worthy a fellow as lives, and
the girl could not have made a more prudent choice.


HARDCASTLE. Then, by the hand of my body, I Am proud of the connection.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Well, if he has taken away the lady, he has not taken her
fortune, that remains in this family to console us for her loss.


HARDCASTLE. Sure Dorothy you would not be so mercenary?


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Ay, that is my affair, not yours. But you know if your son,
when of age, refuses to marry his cousin, her whole fortune is then at her own
disposal.


HARDCASTLE. Ay, but he is not of age, and she has not thought proper to wait
for his refusal.


Enter HASTINGS and Miss NEVILLE. Mrs. HARDCASTLE. (Aside.) What returned so
soon, I begin not to like it.


HASTINGS. (To Hardcastle.) For my late attempt to fly off with your niece, let
my present confusion be my punishment. We are now come back, to appeal from
your justice to your humanity. By her father's consent, I first paid her my
addresses, and our passions were first founded in duty.


Miss NEVILLE. Since his death, I have been obliged to stoop to dissimulation
to avoid oppression. In an hour of levity, I was ready even to give up my
fortune to secure my choice. But I Am now recovered from the delusion, and hope
from your tenderness what is denied me from a nearer connection.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. Pshaw, pshaw, this is all but the whining end of a modern
novel.


HARDCASTLE. Be it what it will, I Am glad they are come back to reclaim their
due. Come hither, Tony boy. Do you refuse this lady's hand whom I now offer you?


TONY. What signifies my refusing. You know I cannot refuse her till I Am of age,
father.


HARDCASTLE. While I thought concealing your age boy was likely to conduce to
your improvement, I concurred with your mother's desire to keep it secret. But
since I find she turns it to a wrong use, I must now declare, you have been of
age these three months.


TONY. Of age! Am I of age, father?


HARDCASTLE. Above three months.


TONY. Then you will see the first use I Will make of my liberty. (taking miss
Neville's hand.) Witness all men by these presents, that I, Anthony Lumpkin,
Esquire, of BLANK place, refuse you, Constantia Neville, spinster, of no place
at all, for my true and lawful wife. So Constance Neville may marry whom she
pleases, and Tony Lumpkin is his own man again.


Sir CHARLES. O brave 'Squire.


HASTINGS. My worthy friend.


Mrs. HARDCASTLE. My undutiful offspring.


MARLOW. Joy, my dear George, I give you joy sincerely. And could I prevail
upon my little tyrant here to be less arbitrary, I should be the happiest man
alive, if you would return me the favor.


HASTINGS. (To miss Hardcastle.) Come, madam, you are now driven to the very
last scene of all your contrivances. I know you like him, I Am sure he loves
you, and you must and shall have him.


HARDCASTLE. (Joining their hands.) And I say so too. And Mr. Marlow, if she
makes as good a wife as she has a daughter, I don't believe you will ever repent
your bargain. So now to supper, tomorrow we shall gather all the poor of the
parish about us, and the Mistakes of the Night shall be crowned with a merry
morning; so boy take her; and as you have been mistakenn in the mistress, my
wish is, that you may never be mistaken in the wife.


FINIS.
EPILOGUE To be Spoken in the Character of TONY LUMPKIN.
BY J. CRADDOCK, Esquire.
WELL -- now all is ended -- and my comrades gone,
Pray what becomes of mother's nonly son?
A hopeful blade! -- in town I Will fix my station,
And try to make a bluster in the nation.
As for my cousin Neville, I renounce her,
Off -- in a crack -- I Will carry big Bett Bouncer.
Why should not I in the great world appear?
I soon shall have a thousand pounds a year;
No matter what a man may here inherit,
In London -- 'gad, they have some regard to spirit.
I see the horses prancing up the streets,
And big Bet Bouncer, bobs to all she meets;
Then hoikes to jiggs and pastimes every night --
Not to the plays -- they say it a'n't polite,
To Sadler's-Wells perhaps, or Operas go,
And once by chance, to the roratorio.
Thus here and there, for ever up and down,
We'll set the fashions too, to half the town;
And then at auctions -- money never regard,
Buy pictures like the great, ten pounds a yard;
Zounds, we shall make these London gentry say,
We know what is damned genteel, as well as they. * This came too late to be
Spoken.


