THE DRAMATIC PUFFERS, A PRELUDE; AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN
COVENT GARDEN.

LONDON: Printed for G. KEARSLEY, FLEET STREET; and E. MACKLEW, in the
HAYMARKET. M.DCC.LXXXII.

CHARACTERS.
ZEPHYR, Mr. EDWIN, BREEZE, Mr. ROBSON, AUTHOR, Mr. LEE JEWS.
THE DRAMATIC PUFFERS,
SCENE. The Stage. Enter ZEPHYR and BREEZE, meeting. ZEPHYR. BY this light but
it is -- What! Bill Breeze!


BREEZE. Ah! my gentle Zephyr! (shaking hands) Why, where have you hid
yourself? -- But I beg pardon --


ZEPHYR. Oh, I make no secret of my situations; I Have been obliged to lodge for
a few weeks on the other side of the water; it was forcibly recommended to me
by a doctor well skilled in consumptive cases. (quaintly.)


BREEZE. And you find yourself the better for it?


ZEPHYR. Amazingly; for I Have now got rid of all those lurking symptoms which
are the too frequent attendants on genius, and letters. -- So, I find they have
had some flogging work over both courses in my absence: the different studs
have been run hard, eh!


BREEZE. Hard? -- puffed all round; -- scarce a leg to stand on!


ZEPHYR. As the knowing ones have been taken in, you touched a little, Breeze,
I hope!


BREEZE. Not a ducat! -- No, Zephyr, all my prospects fell with the coalition;
-- at the beginning of the season, indeed, I offered my services here; -- but I
was delicately told -- that authors nowadays took upon themselves the
disagreeable task of criticizing their own pieces; and at as to the ordinary
business of the theater, a gentleman of established reputation had undertaken
to do the whole upon a standing contract!


ZEPHYR. Ay; I suppose I should have met with similar neglect on the other side
of the way, if it had not been for my new invented playhouse machine.


BREEZE. Playhouse machine! a kind of theatrical Buzaglo, I suppose,
occasionally to keep the house warm?


ZEPHYR. (Conceitedly,) Oh, no! you will never guess it; -- will you promise me
the most profound secrecy?


BREEZE. 'Pon my honor --


ZEPHYR. (Half whispering) Why, then, you must know I call it (and I think
rather aptly) -- I call it -- an Applauder!


BREEZE. An Applauder?


ZEPHYR. Yes, an Applauder; a mechanical improvement on the vulgar art of
manucussion; by which one man, with the simple winch of a barrel-organ, shall
give a more marked and judicious applause, than can possibly be derived from
any stationary band of hireling clappers!


BREEZE. Egad that is a happy invention! -- but pray, Zephyr, wont it tend in
some measure to counteract the real plaudits of an impartial audience?


ZEPHYR. Oh, quite the contrary; for as clapping, like gaping, is nothing more
than an involuntary accordance of muscular motion, I will engage, my dear
Breeze, -- barring rheumatic and gouty cases, -- to carry every hand on any
particular occasion, in unison with my Applauder.


BREEZE. A very capital idea upon my soul!


ZEPHYR. Besides, I don't see why the benefit of it may not be extended to the
performers; then you know the actors and actresses of a certain natural
diffidence, need not so often be laid up, by the chilling damps of silent
admiration!


BREEZE. Certainly my dear friend. -- But when will it come out Zephyr?


ZEPHYR. Almost immediately; the first essay was to have been made on a late
musical occasion; but the author and composer, not being able to settle which
of the parts deserved the " most decisive bursts of universal applause," the
machine was laid by, and the matter left as usual to the decision of hands.


BREEZE. And so you are come here, I suppose to offer it also to this House?


ZEPHYR. Oh, no, I have conveyed away the copy-right; and the managers of both
Theaters are now contending for an exclusive patent.


BREEZE. Ha! ha! ha! Do you do any thing in the parliatary way now, Zephyr?


ZEPHYR. Not a metaphor! that branch fell to nothing when gentlemen first
submitted to the fatigue of carrying their own FLOWERS to market! -- No, having
a little leisure upon my hands, the prompter said he would recommend me as
diurnal colourist to the young author of this night's piece.


BREEZE. That Is droll enough! why, I am waiting here myself in hopes of
procuring a similar employ.


ZEPHYR. Indeed! why, then, if that is the case, suppose we conduct the matter
jointly, and share the profits?


BREEZE. With all my heart: -- so, if you will undertake to waft him through the
pacific ocean of the mininisterial prints, I Will engage -- but soft; here, I
fancy, comes the young author; -- and a martial one I see by his appearance.


Enter AUTHOR, in an officer's uniform, (looking round.) AUTHOR. It Is strange I
should never be able to catch those scene-painting gentry! -- Wild said they
would meet me here at half past five; (looking at his watch) I fear we shall
not arrange the scene for the last act before the piece begins -- (they
advance) Oh, gentlemen, I Am glad we have met at last.


ZEPHYR. Mr. Wild, Sir, I take it for granted --


AUTHOR. Yes; but he says we have not a moment to lose!


BREEZE. True, Sir, I thought you would be in a hurry, so we took care to be
prepared.


AUTHOR. I Am glad of it; and how do you intend --


ZEPHYR. Why, Sir, as it is a first attempt, and times are ticklish, I don't
think it advisable to give any thing too highly colored at present, and
therefore I have sketch'd something in the oblique way, which I conceive
however will have a fine effect.


AUTHOR. I understand you; in the side wing way; but in that case how shall we
display the performers to advantage?


ZEPHYR. Oh, dear Sir, never fear them; they are able, and willing enough to
take care of themselves!


BREEZE. Well, for my part, I think there is nothing like a good bold outline
at once, to take in the flats.


AUTHOR. Well gentlemen, I Am indifferent whether the scene be a flat, or an
oblique one, provided its effect be strikingly conveyed to the galleries.


BREEZE. Oh, lud Sir, make yourself perfectly easy on that score; -- my designs
(pulling out his papers) are calculated for all classes; (gives him one) there
Sir, just run your eye over that; I think that will reach the Gods, or the
Devil's in it!


AUTHOR. (Reads) "A new constellation of resplendent brilliancy, illumined the
theatrical hemisphere last night; the dramatic magi" -- (in amazement) What am
I to understand by this?


ZEPHYR. (Giving one of his papers) Probably, Sir, you will like that better,
from the delicacy of the keeping.


AUTHOR. (Reads) "The genius of comedy perhaps never was so illustriously
displayed" -- Why, what the devil is all this, gentlemen?


BREEZE. Lud, Sir, don't you know? why, puffs to be sure; -- puffs, and as good
as any home made ones -- that you will find in the circle of your dramatic
friends, depend on it.


AUTHOR. Puffs? --


ZEPHYR. Yes, puffs, Sir: an airy insinuating kind of system, which, though
generally despised, is more generally practiced; that has the address to baffle
the whole five senses, and carry all its points in spite of conviction!


AUTHOR. Indeed! is that the case?


BREEZE. To be sure, Sir!


ZEPHYR. No doubt, Sir: -- it is what may be emphatically termed the foil-stone
of fame; which, like the mock jewel of the stage, never fails to out-glare the
modest sparkling diamond! --


AUTHOR. And pray, gentlemen, to whom am I indebted for these singular
obligations? -- Your name, if you please?


BREEZE. My name! Breeze, Sir; I Am not ashamed of my name. (pertly) -- Billy
Breeze, No. 300, at the brass knocker, Air-street, Piccadilly.


AUTHOR. And yours, worthy Sir?


ZEPHYR. Zephyr, Sir, at your service.


AUTHOR. And are not you, Messrs. Zephyr and Breeze, a cogenial couple of
pitiful parasites?


BREEZE. Lud, Sir!


AUTHOR. Fly hence, ye rascally retailers of ill founded reputation! and by
that means save your bones: -- howhowever humble my genius may prove, know,
that it scorns to soar upon the wretched pinion of Grubstreet Prostitution!


ZEPHYR. Sir, This is no place, Sir -- no place -- but we'll find one, depend
on it --


BREEZE. Yes, Sir, -- we'll tickle --

(He drives them out.
Enter PROMPTER's BOY. BOY. The scene for the last act is settled; so, if you
please, Sir, we'll ring in.


AUTHOR. By all means.

(Exit Boy.)
(The author steps forward to speak the Prologue.) THE PROLOGUE.
THE PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. LEE JEWS. CALLED forth Thalia's standard to display,
And here maintain her sovereign comic sway;
As Chief -- I Will reconnoitre well the ground,
To learn what hostile lines are drawn around!
[Surveys the House with a Glass. That Is not a dark defile in yonder glade? --
For should it prove a treacherous ambuscade,
No puffing miners have I here in pay,
To sap their works, or turn their covert-way;
No mercenary band who have been wont,
To hack and hew, like pioneers in front!
With flying shells our engineers shall try,
That well manned battlement which towers so high!
[Pointing to the Upper Gallery. Beneath, our point-blank-shot will surely
reach,
And in yon half moon batt'ry make a breach!
[To the Second Gallery. Those lovely breast-works that adorn the field,
To nature's gentle summons soon must yield!
[Side Boxes, etc. This post advanced the piquet guard to keep,
And that reserve, who are entrenched chin-deep,
We hope to carry by a bold exertion,
At least amuse, with some well planned diversion!
[To the Pit. My troops are vet'rans: -- it has been their lot,
To form in front of service hissing hot;
Who, when their ranks are galled, or put to flight,
Are sure to rally, and renew the fight,
Unless -- and then no light dragoons scour fleeter --
Their powder fails for want of true saltpeter!
Our plan's avowed; it is from this firm station,
To gain the heights of public approbation!
THE END.

