THE RELIEF, OR, DAY THOUGHTS: A POEM.

OCCASIONED BY THE ^OMPLAINT, OR NIGHT THOUGHTS.

Humbly Inscribed to The RIGHT HONORABLE The EARL of HOLDERNESS.

-- Assert Eternal Providence,
And justify the Ways of God to Men.
MILTON. LONDON: Printed in the Year M.DCC.LIVE.

THE RELIEF: A POEM.
WHY all this solemn apparatus? why?
Why all this din about a worm's concerns?
The child of dust, of misery, of scorn;
The prey of flattery, the food of pride;
^ain expectation's bubble, reason's dupe;
(...) frantic hope misled; and lost in whirls
(...) visionary scenes, enchanted piles,
^he fancied fabrics built by vanity
upon the vapors of a heated brain;
(...) craft kept up in injured reason's spite,
(...) custom held in reverential awe;
^^e sacred bugbears of a frighted world;
To serve the purpose of designing knaves,
And yoke the neck of fools? --
The awful temples, tombs, and rolling clocks;
The midnight damps that drop from weeping yews,
Beneath the eclipsed moon, (the scriech-owl's haunt)
Drenching the locks of some night-watching pilgrim
Who sits, in dismal meditation wrapped,
And brainsick horror, over yon mouldering grave,
By time defaced, and frequent footsteps worn:
No mark remaining, but the erected stone
Inscribed with narratives uncouth of birth,
Of death, (a mute unmeaning blank between)
The chissel's story to the pensive hind,
Who painful pores upon the wasted words,
And puzzling scans the imperfect characters
Half hid in nettles, and perplexed with thorn.
Here, moping superstition nightly broods;
Here counts the clarion of the bird of dawn,
Whose dreary note proclaims the ebbing night,
And drives the frighted goblin to his haunt,
The time-recording cock: or to the winds
Repeats her unavailing vespers over;
The winds, that mournful yell, from (...) vaults,
And broken sepulchers, their groaning access;
As if they wail'd the long-departing dead,
Who slumber, deep in everlasting night,
Within these dreary mansions; where no dawn
Returns. Thus, hideous melancholy dips
Her pencil, still in dark delusive tincts,
And paints the face of things; detested growpe!
A landscape fit for hell: the work of fiends!
Let rescued fancy turn aloft her eye,
And view yon wide extended arch; behold
Yon crystal concave, studded with the gems,
The radiant gems of heaven, that nightly burn
In golden lamps, and gild the aetherial space;
That smiling vault, that canopy of stars,
Those clustered constellations! mark yon moon
Serenely shine; (her borrowed luster full;)
The mountain tops, the rocks, the vales, the lawns,
By her set off, adorned, and made delightful:
The boundless main, a polished mirror now,
Reflecting, from its bosom, back, the vast,
The wonderful, the glorious, glad appearance!
Bright visions echo to the enchanted eye;
As, on the ear, harmonious sounds return
In mimic notes, responsive made to fill,
To charm the fancy, with repeated transport.
All these, in their eternal round, rejoice;
All these, with universal praise, proclaim
Their great creator; bountiful, benign,
Immensely good, rejoicing in his creatures!
Behold, yon blazing sun! but, Oh, to what;
To what shall we compare; (away with such
A thought) to what resemble him! this globe;
Ten thousand thousand worlds, beyond where space
Exists, where matter lives; beyond the grasp
Of human thought, imagination's ken,
Nay reason's reach, the intellect of angels? --
But, silence best becomes the boundless theme;
In wonder swallowed up, and deep astonishment!
What should we fear? this glorious prospect brings
No dreadful phantom to the frighted eye,
No terror to the soul; it is transport all!
Here fancy roves, in sweet variety
For ever lost; her native bliss. For her,
The blue ethereal arch expands; her table
Spread out with all the dainties of the sky,
Imagination's rich regale. For her
The clouds absorb the evening ray; and drink
The liquid gold, which stains their fleecy sides
With all the tincts of heaven, transmitted through
A thousand different strainers to the eye,
And thence upon the ravished soul diffused.
The blushing beauties of the infant morn,
Aurora's saffron beam; the splendid bow,
Whose copious arch was bent by hands divine,
An emblem formed of half eternity,
By angels robe'd in all the aggregate,
The unblended aggregate, of various day,
Of heaven's own day; and from its sunbeams drawn,
In all its tinges dipped, its glories dressed.
For her, the smiling earth puts on her mantle;
Her mantle green, with purple mixed, with gold,
With all the liv'ries of the youthful spring,
To wake new raptures in the heart of man;
And fill his soul with gratitude immense.
All these are reason's treasures, stores of thought;
Reflection's unexhausted funds, replete
With matter for her own delightful task.
Here wisdom works at large; here smiling builds,
For sweet content, a homely shed; where joy,
Where gladness, visit often her temperate guests,
And make their willing stay: here, undisturbed,
They reign, they revel, take their fill of all
That nature (ever bounteous mother) yields,
For use or pleasure: but excess avoid;
That fiend accursed, whose bloated visage wan,
And troubled eye, betray her inward pang,
Which shakes severe her paralytic nerve,
Her tottering frame; ever death, by nature taught,
And time, in season due, with gentle hand
Can cut the wasted thread: excess usurps
With force the abortive task, and vindicates
Her prey -- Come all, ye family of joy;
Ye children of the cheerful hour, begot
By wisdom on the virtuous mind; O, come!
Come innocence, in conscious strength secure;
Come courage, foremost in the manly train;
Come all; and in the honest heart abide,
Your native residence, your fortress still,
From real or from fancied evils free:
O, come; indignant, drive out, far beyond
The utmost precincts of the human breast,
Beyond the springs of hope, the cells of joy,
And every mansion where a virtue lives;
O drive far off, for ever drive that bane,
That hideous pest, engendered deep in hell,
Where Stygian glooms condensed dimension'd darkness,
Contains, within its dire embrace, that monster
Horrid to sight, and by the frighted furies
In their dread pannic SUPERSTITION named!
The close contracted span of human life
Is dearly purchased by the sons of care;
Since sickness, disappointment, pain, and death,
A thousand varied unavoided evils,
Prey hourly on the vexing heart of man,
Like officers of wrath, let loose by pride,
To raise the rigid tax on wretched being;
A dreadful interest, for a sum so small!
Enough are these, alas, to gall and sting!
What need we then for fancied evils seek,
To scare the soul, and harrow up the heart,
Already tossed, and torn, and broken down
By evils of its own contrivance? evils
Still adverse found, to nature's wholesome ways;
The bane of every bliss, and social joy:
Ambition, with her train; and luxury,
With custom linked, with fell corruption joined,
Led up by fashion in her frantic dance,
Followed by misery, despair, and death.
For pity's sake, forbear to haunt the world
With hideous specter, and fantastic forms;
With harpy footed furies, fearful phantoms,
Everlasting torments, and unquenched fire.
O say, what horrid scenes are these you draw!
What portraits of the Almighty! hence, away;
See reason turns the face aside, see nature
Start at the monstrous form! and cry aloud
Through all her works, It is not like. Forbear,
Ye croaking ministers of midnight dreams,
Ye madding trumpeters of false report,
Forbear to pour your ghastly images
On truth, nor give just providence the lie.
What Is a churchyard, what I pray? this horri^ goblin
Arrayed in midnight weeds by frantic fancy
IN the solemn moon-struck hour? a bed prepared
For silent unperceiving dust that once
To human thought was wedded, vital clay,
Divorced by death to join the general mother,
Divided far from its companion dear,
The immortal soul, that now above the stars
Forgets this trampled clod, and joins the choirs
Of bliss, it is gloomy all and solemn. Hark,
Was it the clock that told the passing; hour,
And told it too at midnight? when deep silence
And hideous darkness reign over half the world
It was. -- What then? it tells it too at noon,
Amidst the noise and sunshine of that hour,
The clock that calls to business or to pleasure
The sons of avarice and sensual joy.
What tragic bustle when an engine strikes!
Shall mere negations, unsubstantial shades,
Such monsters form, to fright the unthinking crowd
To fancy tangible, to terror real?
Let monks, let nurses put these vizors on,
To startle bigots, and astonish babes;
Reason scorns, and common sense defies 'em;
And who so weak to shudder at the sound
Of yon departed moment fled for ever!
Or with his sad foreboding sighs keep time
To each elapsing sand that silent flows
From his exhausting glass with breaking heart:
"O wretched avarice of breath, to draw
"Fresh air, or gaze upon the wearied sun;
To tread the same unvary'd round with pain,
To eat, to drink, to sleep, to satisfy
Each sensual sordid appetite, alas!
How often have distant prospects, verdant views,
With all that fortune's faithless flattering mirror
To sanguine pride presents and vain self-love,
How often has cheated hope complained, and sought
^or refuge in despair? the sense itself
Grows weary of the toil, the beastly toil,
And reason often repeats this lesson learned
From pain, it is time to die; and what is time
^^elf! this awful sire of births prodigious;
The creature of the mind, no more: the vassal
Of thought, whose very being is the soul
Made short or long, as that is more or less
Employed. -- Good heaven and earth, what horrid noise!
What stir about a reptile's poor concerns!
And when a worm expires, shall nature, say
Shall suffering nature sympathize with me?
Re-eccho groan for groan? so pride asserts;
O, monstrous pride! made drunk by fancy at
Ambition's feast. Shall yonder sun be hid,
Fierce Aetna flame, and thunder shake the poles,
Because, forsooth, some spring eccentric moves
Within this frail machine? and passion sways
The soul, for this the universal flood
Broke loose beyond its stated bounds; for this!
The mountains melt, the comets glare; for this!
Shall famine, pestilence, and war devour?
But, hark! the infernal forge begins to roar,
The sounds of sorrow, and the yells of pain,
Now tear the shop of death, and reach my sense:
The flames ascend, the furies howl, and all
The Stygian eccho's ring a peal; a peal so loud,
That shakes the north of hell, and makes the throne
Of terror start. O whence this fierce uproar!
This strong convulsion in the realms of woe!
Behold yon reptile gasping in the arms,
The inexorable arms of death; how pale!
How ghastly are its looks! Ah! see, how fear,
How dread distort the face, and fix the eye,
The pallid eye, that window of the soul,
The parting soul, that spark of entity,
Which now stands shivering on the verge of life,
And views the imaginary gulf beneath!
What horrors! O, what anguish, must she taste,
Whilst yet her faculties are left entire;
Whilst yet, she views the gaping fiends and flames!
O say, can human thought, can words express,
What nature feels in that tremenduous hour?
What pangs, what spasms, twisting too and fro
With irritated force, convulsive, tug
The rooted fibers, and the springs of life!
By horrors heightened, and distempered fumes,
That rack the mind, and tear the tortured frame;
Till the cracked heart, subdued at length, forgets
To pant; and death, in mercy, ends the fray:
Nor only then, when near the expiring gasp,
(Though then, each moment counterweighs an age)
Not only then, but through the goaded length
Of harrass'd life, we drag the burdened weight
Of slavish fear, imposed on childhood's thought,
By ignorance, made gray in gainful error,
And credulous design; who sit enthroned,
Like tyrants of an ancient race, to plead
Prescription's right, and rule the passive soul.
Can then a gracious GOD be said to call
From forth the vacant unexisting blank,
A race of creatures capable of joy.
Enriched with thought, and warm with fierce desire;
With delicate sensations covered over,
And nice perception, prompt to gratify
The implanted impulse, and the vigorous call?
When nature makes her strong, her just demand;
When passion rises at the loud alarm;
Led up by reason to the genial task;
By reason guided to the wise retreat.
Can justice punish what herself decrees,
And make obedience to her laws a crime?
Justice is nature in her social dress;
And social virtue is the voice of heaven.
Shall arbitrary cobwebs skreen this truth,
With positive dogmatical behests;
And give yon blazing sun the lie? Awake,
Unhood-wink'd man, and cast abroad thy eyes;
Behold all nature in one generous strife,
The war of amity, and discord sweet;
The strife of strong benevolence, behold,
The universal agents all at work,
From different quarters, with contending powers;
In hostile harmony, to propagate
One glorious and eternal good to man:
To beasts, to fish, to fowl; to plants, perhaps;
To all that feel the informing touch of good,
With grateful energy their texture strike,
And send the gladsome tiding to the soul.
See nature, in her various style, express
The thankful tribute of incessant praise,
From lifeless matter, to the sprouting blade
Of humble grass, upon the liv'ry'd lawn;
From trodden daisies, to the plant of JOVE.
Behold the genial ether swarm with life;
With quickening millions float. Behold the ant,
That citizen severe, with all her tribes
Incorporate, or different colored train;
Denisons of dust, and privileged to think,
Employ their parsimonious intellect,
And in their turn rejoice. It Is life's great charter,
Given from eternity to all that breathe.
Shall those, to whom our jealous pride denies
Superior talents, and immortal thought;
Shall they, in self-felicity, flow over,
And mental transport; since, no joy, alas,
But in the mind, can live; shall they, whom we
Mere animates, miscall; shall they rejoice,
With fearless hearts, of shadows fearless made,
And fancied terrors all? Imaginary
Phantoms! From these exempt, they live at ease;
Regale each sense: enjoy existence still,
Without excess. The sons of pride may here
Be taught, what instinct and what reason mean:
Reason, thou title to superior rank,
Thou dear bought purchase of the sons of EVE,
What ravens, vultures, and what harpies cry,
What clang incessant, over thy destined head!
And scare thy timid soul, thou lord of nature!
Beast and angel joined! eccentric wretch!
The property of custom, fraud, and cunning!
The dupe of arrogance, the fool of forms!
With envious eyes, from thy exalted stand,
Look down upon thy subject world, and ask
Thy own experienced heart, what living thing,
Amidst the meanest reptiles, in thy reign,
Can suffer such extremes of woe as thee?
Rise up, thou glorious attribute! assert
Thy native dignity; rise up once more,
In injured man's defense; rise, reason, rise;
And with thy ray, invincible, drive far
These fancy-form'd, these monster-stalking shades,
These giant shapes, by melancholy seen,
With horrid strides, to glance athwart the sick
Imagination, curtain'd in already
By superstition's hand, and terrified
By her magnific glass, reflecting still
The midnight goblin, and the ghastly shade.
In justice to thy great creator, rise,
To human nature, and to injured truth:
Thou attribute divine! thou ray of GOD!
Immortal reason! come, and with thee bring
In thy exulting train, invincible,
The honest purpose, and the cheerful heart;
The joyful fancy, filled with images
Of truth, of science, and of social love.
Let friendship too be there; O, closer to
Thy sacred breast embrace her; closer yet:
She comes, she comes, from heaven, her native place,
And with her see whatever deserves thy wish,
Whatever is cordial, comely, and humane,
Whatever is rational, whatever is pure;
The handmaid of the Almighty, sent to bless
The suffering sons of men; to soften sorrow;
To sweeten care: Seraphic guest! all hail!
Thou, dearer than relations dear; than son,
Than father, brother, wife, or tender tie;
Thou child of sweet benevolence, begot
By reason on the virtuous heart; arise,
Thou best beloved of heaven! thou joy, thou crown
Of man, arise; and from thy sacred presence
Drive far each hideous apparition, formed
By midnight hags, beneath the abortive gloom,
The bane of every social bliss; thy bane.
What magic sounds are these, that powerful shed
Their thrilling transport through the raptured soul,
And captivate each thought? it is music's charms
Hark! again, again, they strike; again possess
The heart: O! sweeter, louder yet proclaim
Thy large dominion over the kindred soul,
Extatic harmony, triumphant bliss,
To the, glad heart! where virtue tunes the strings.
Awake, awake, each cheerful thought; arise
At that seraphic call; it is friendship's voice.
Good nature, now, arise, in smiles arrayed;
Thou welcome guest, with aspect open still,
And with unguarded lip, because thy heart
With social fervor glows, and sends its message
To the rich tongue, by sense directed still;
By prudence taught: behold yon smiling bowl,
By temperance mixed, with cheerful hand, invite^
Thy lip: see blushing beauty there adorned
With modesty sublime, with meekness robe'd,
With grace invincible attract the soul,
And heighten every joy: thou fugitive,
Fly far, intruding care; from hence fly far;
And in some Gothic cell, with superstition,
With slavish horror, make thy drear abode.
Let in the mimic arts, the muse shall lead
Them in; herself their chief, their crown, their pride,
Immortal pride, that hands them safe through all
The havoc and the wrecks of time; by her
Preserved, recorded, and immortal made.
Behold the magic pencil's mock creation;
The peopled canvass, and the story'd wall;
How life, how passion, blend together there!
To ravish, and to warm the wondering soul,
And lift its faculties to heaven. O, there
Let fancy feast, and take her fill of all,
That genius, or that learning yield; of all
That dignity or grace bestow, to banquet
Reason, and cheer the heart, susceptible,
Whom genius, taste, and science, formed to feel,
To foster, cherish, and enjoy the guests
Divine; the soul congenial, copious, warm,
Exalted and humane, with opening arms
Will rush to meet embrace, and welcome in
The angelic visitants in meek disguise,
In Britain yet, (alas, how few the friends,
The hospitable friends they find) yet there,
Yet even there, a CHESTERFIELD and HOLDERNESS,
Anxious for their country's fading glory,
Inspired by genius and immortal fame,
Throw wide their gates, and hail the mimic arts.
Abroad, abroad, there health invites thee forth;
There, pleasure courts thee in her russet robe
Magnificent: the morning gales arise,
With freighted pinions wafting all the east
In odorous incense to thy ravished mind;
Thy mind, dilated now with all the wide
Extended various prospect, stretched beneath
The cope of heaven sublime; delicious feast!
The ecchoing hills the chearing horn delight,
The soul exerting clangor, ripening CERES,
And the rich swelling grape; in these exult,
In these rejoice, thy lot bestowed, O man!
Whilst youth and vigor in thy heart remain,
And nature bids thee to her banquet come,
Thy portion given beneath the sun. Once more,
Collect thy powers divine, once more drive off
That evil thing called fear, that slavish fiend!
Let hope, let joy, thy bosom inmates be,
Through life still cherished, and in death held fast,
A gracious GOD, loud speaking to thy heart,
Through all his works, this truth inculcates still,
Nature's thy nurse, and providence thy friend.
Integrity, with fearless heart, ride on,
Undaunted, tread the various path, through life,
Which leads to death, that hospitable stage:
Where weary nature takes her last repose,
And lays her down from toil, and pain, to rest
In sweet oblivion wrapped; remote from grief,
And all the ingrafted ills which life has fostered.
Why should approaching death affright the soul?
Why reason start, and turn away from him,
Who comes to bring us home from misery,
Mistake and fear? the messenger of heaven!
No grisly terror to the honest heart:
If GOD be just. O blasphemy, to doubt
His justice or his mercy! -- Mercy all
But not unjust) is God. O sacred source
Of bounty, life, and truth eternal; rise,
Look down, and vindicate thy injured name,
From those, who dress thee out in terror, thunder,
Revenge, with flaming bolts and hissing wheels;
With all the dreadful equipage of wrath,
Infernal malice, and tyrannic pride,
O bigot blasphemy! begot on fear,
By pride made drunk! by melancholy nursed!
By ignorance, by cruelty, brought up!
By craft accomplished, and by custom fixed!
Detested monster! -- Tell, ye stars that rule
The ambrosial night, thou circling moon proclaim,
^^azon abroad thy great original,
Thou glorious sun! of unperceiving things,
Thy maker's brightest image! O declare,
Was it thy great, thy good creator's view,
(O horrid plan,) to cheat me into being,
To gratify revenge and rage eternal,
In tortures beyond thought, and endless woe.
Can he enjoy a wretch's dolors? He exult
At agony? can he, like Nero, view
His noblest work consumed, and triumph in
The blaze? O justice, lift thy righteous arm:
Yet hold! Compassion, patience, and redress,
Still best become thee, it is but frenzy all,
And brainsick rant, which physic should remove,
And reason cool. Thou homicide forbear!
And from thy throat thy desperate hand withdraw;
Lay down the murderous knife, the loaded gun,
And fling the baneful volume by; nay, burn it
Tear, scatter it abroad; O, quick deface
The pestilential lie that taints the whole,
And breathes through every page. A way with fuel
Contagion from the eyes of man; with tombs,
With churchyards, tolling midnight clocks; away
With funeral pomp, with gloomy mock parade,
With sable hearses, scutcheons, nodding plumes,
And all the dismal pegeantry of death.
Let fancy drive these goblins from her sight;
Let mirth, let joy, let transport fill their place;
Philosophy and faith shall hand them in,
And nature bid them welcome. O rejoice,
Distinguished man! rejoice, how blessed thy lot,
Whilst reason is thy guide! look up, look up,
O see where hope stands pointing to the sky,
On sunbeams raised, by angels beckoned on;
See her celestial flight, where thou shall follow.
Turn thy eyes thither; thither lift thy heart.
Thy gracious GOD awaits thee there; to him
Thou shall return in season due, to taste
Immortal transports! thy beginning, end,
Thy center, father, savior, and thy friend.
FINIS.

