THE CANDIDATE. [Price Half a Crown.]

THE CANDIDATE. A POEM. BY C. CHURCHILL.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR; And Sold by W. FLEXNEY, near Gray's-Inn Gate,
Holborn; G. KEARSLY, opposite St. Martin's Church, Ludgate Street; C.
HENDERSON, at the Royal Exchange; J. COOTE, in Paternoster Row; J. GARDENER,
in Charles-Street, Westminster; J. ALMON, in Piccadilly; and A. MORAN, under
the Piazzas, Covent Garden. MDCCLXIV.

THE CANDIDATE.
ENOUGH of Actors -- let them play the play'r,
And, free from censure, fret, sweat, strut, and stare.
GARRICK abroad, what motives can engage
To waste one couplet on a barren stage?
Ungrateful GARRICK! when these tasty days,
In justice to themselves, allowed thee praise,
When, at thy bidding, Sense, for twenty years,
Indulged in laughter, or dissolved in tears,
When, in return for labor, time, and health,
The Town had given some little share of wealth,
Could Thou repine at being still a slave?
Dare Thou presume to enjoy that wealth She gave?
Could Thou repine at laws ordained by Those,
Whom nothing but thy merit made thy foes,
Whom, too refined for honesty and trade,
By need made tradesmen, Pride had Bankrupts made,
Whom Fear made Drunkards, and, by modern rules,
Whom Drink made Wits, though Nature made them Fools?
With Such, beyond all pardon is thy crime,
In such a manner, and at such a time,
To quit the stage, but Men of real Sense
Who neither lightly give, nor take offense,
Shall own Thee clear, or pass an act of grace
Since Thou have left a POWELL in thy place.
Enough of Authors -- why, when Scribblers fail,
Must other Scribblers spread the hateful tale,
Why must they pity, why contempt express,
And why insult a Brother in distress?
Let Those, who boast the uncommon gift of brains,
The Laurel pluck, and wear it for their pains,
Fresh on their brows for ages let It bloom,
And, ages past, still flourish round their tomb.
Let Those, who without Genius write, and write,
Versemen or Prosemen, all in Nature's spite,
The Pen laid down, their course of Folly run,
In peace, unread, unmention'd, be undone.
Why should I tell to cross the will of fate,
That FRANCIS once endeavored to translate?
Why, sweet Oblivion winding round his head,
Should I recall poor MURPHY from the dead?
Why may not LANGHORNE, simple in his lay,
Effusion on Effusion pour away,
With Friendship, and with Fancy trifle here,
Or sleep in Pastoral at BELVIDERE?
Sleep let them all, with DULLNESS on her throne,
Secure from any malice, but their own.
Enough of Critics -- let them, if they please,
Fond of new pomp, each month pass new decrees;
Wide and extensive be their infant State,
Their Subjects many, and those Subjects great,
Whilst all their mandates as sound Law succeed,
With Fools who write, and greater fools who read.
What, though they lay the realms of Genius waste,
Fetter the Fancy, and debauch the Taste;
Though They, like Doctors, to approve their skill,
Consult not how to cure, but how to kill;
Though by whim, envy, or resentment led,
They damn those authors whom they never read,
Though, other rules unknown, one rule they hold,
To deal out so much praise for to much gold;
Though Scot with Scot, in damned close intrigues,
Against the Commonwealth of Letters leagues;
Uncensur'd let them Pilot at the helm,
And, rule in Letters, as they ruled the realm.
Ours be the curse, the mean, tame Coward's curse,
(Nor could Ingenious Malice make a worse,
To do our Sense, and Honor deep despite)
To credit what They say, read what They write.
Enough of Scotland -- let her rest in peace,
The cause removed, effects of course should cease.
Why should I tell, how Tweed, too mighty grown,
And proudly swelled with waters not his own,
Burst over his banks, and, by destruction led,
Over our fair ENGLAND desolation spread,
Whilst riding on his waves, Ambition plumed
In tenfold pride the port of BUTE assumed,
Now that the River God, convinced, though late,
And yielding, though reluctantly, to fate,
Holds his fair course, and with more humble tides,
In tribute to the sea, as usual, glides.
Enough of States, and such like trifling things;
Enough of Kinglings, and enough of Kings;
Henceforth, secure, let ambush'd Statesmen lie,
Spread the Court web, and catch the Patriot fly;
Henceforth, unwhipt of Justice, uncontrolled
By fear or shame, let Vice, secure and bold,
Lord it with all her sons, whilst Virtue's groan
Meets with compassion only from the Throne.
Enough of Patriots -- all I ask of man
Is only to be honest as he can.
Some have deceived, and some may still deceive;
It Is the Fool's curse at random to believe.
Would those, who, by Opinion placed on high,
Stand fair and perfect in their Country's eye,
Maintain that honor, let me in their ear
Hint this essential doctrine -- Persevere.
Should They (which Heaven forbid) to win the grace
Of some proud Courtier, or to gain a place,
Their King and Country Sell, with endless shame
The avenging Muse shall mark each traitorous name;
But if, to Honor true, they scorn to bend,
And, proudly honest, hold out to the end,
Their grateful Country shall their fame record,
And I Myself descend to praise a Lord.
Enough of Wilkes -- with good and honest men
His actions speak much stronger than my pen,
And future ages shall his name adore,
When he can act, and I can write no more.
ENGLAND may prove ungrateful, and unjust,
But fost'ring FRANCE shall never betray her trust;
It Is a brave debt which Gods on men impose,
To pay with praise the merit even of foes.
When the great Warrior of Amilcar's race
Made ROME's wide Empire tremble to her base,
To prove her Virtue, though it galled her pride,
ROME gave that fame which CARTHAGE had denied.
Enough of Self -- that darling, luscious theme,
Over which Philosophers in raptures dream;
On which with seeming disregard they write,
Then prizing most, when most they seem to slight;
Vain proof of Folly tinctured strong with pride!
What Man can from himself himself divide?
For Me (nor dare I lie) my leading aim,
(Conscience first satisfied) is love of Fame,
Some little Fame derived from some brave few,
Who, prizing Honor, prize her Vot'ries too.
Let All (nor shall resentment flush my cheek)
Who know me well, what they know, freely speak,
So Those (the greatest curse I meet below)
Who know me not, may not pretend to know.
Let none of Those, whom blessed with parts above
My feeble Genius, still I dare to love,
Doing more mischief than a thousand foes,
Posthumous nonsense to the world expose,
And call it mine, for mine though never known,
Or which, if mine, I living blushed to own.
Know all the World, no greedy heir shall find,
Die when I will, one couplet left behind.
Let none of Those, whom I despise though great,
Pretending Friendship to give malice weight,
Publish my life; let no false, sneaking peer
(Some such there are) to win the public ear,
Hand me to shame with some vile anecdote,
Nor soul-gall'd Bishop damn me with a note.
Let one poor sprig of Bay around my head
Bloom whilst I live, and point me out when dead;
Let It (may Heaven indulgent grant that prayer)
Be planted on my grave, nor wither there;
And when, on travel bound, some riming guest
Roams through the Churchyard, whilst his Dinner's dressed,
Let It hold up this Comment to his eyes;
Life to the last enjoyed, here Churchill lies;
Whilst (O, what joy that pleasing flattery gives)
Reading my Works, he cries -- here Churchill lives.
Enough of Satire -- in less hardened times
Great was her force, and mighty were her rimes.
I Have read of Men, beyond Man's daring brave,
Who yet have trembled at the strokes she gave,
Whose souls have felt more terrible alarms
From her one line, than from a world in arms.
When, in her faithful and immortal page,
They saw transmitted down from age to age
Recorded Villains, and each spotted name
Branded with marks of everlasting shame,
Succeeding Villains sought her as a friend,
And, if not really mended, feigned to mend.
But in an age, when actions are allowed
Which strike all Honor dead, and crimes avowed,
Too terrible to suffer the report,
Avowed and praised by men who stain a Court;
Propp'd by the arm of Power, when Vice, highborn,
High-bred, high-station'd, holds rebuke in scorn,
When She is lost to every thought of fame,
And, to all Virtue dead, is dead to shame,
When Prudence a much easier task must hold
To make a new World, than reform the old,
SATIRE throws by her arrows on the ground,
And, if She cannot cure, She will not wound.
Come, PANEGYRIC -- though the MUSE disdains,
Founded on Truth, to prostitute her strains
At the base instance of those men, who hold
No argument but power, no God but Gold,
Yet, mindful that from heaven She drew her birth,
She scorns the narrow maxims of this earth,
Virtuous herself, brings Virtue forth to view,
And loves to praise, where praise is justly due.
Come PANEGYRIC -- in a former hour,
My soul with pleasure yielding to thy power,
Thy shrine I sought, I prayed -- but wanton air,
Before it reached thy ears, dispersed my prayer;
Even at thy altars whilst I took my stand,
The pen of Truth and Honor in my hand,
Fate, meditating wrath against me and mine,
Chid my fond zeal, and thwarted my design,
Whilst, HAYTER brought too quickly to his end,
I lost a Subject, and Mankind a friend.
Come PANEGYRIC -- bending at thy throne,
Thee and thy Power my soul is proud to own,
Be Thou my kind Protector, Thou my Guide,
And lead me safe through passes yet untried.
Broad is the road, nor difficult to find,
Which to the house of Satire leads mankind;
Narrow, and unfrequented are the ways,
Scarce found out in an age, which lead to Praise.
What though no theme I choose of vulgar note,
Nor wish to write, as Brother Bards have wrote,
So mild, so meek in praising, that they seem
Afraid to wake their Patrons from a dream,
What though a theme I choose, which might demand
The nicest touches of a Master's hand,
Yet, if the inward workings of my soul
Deceive me not, I shall attain the goal,
And Envy shall behold, in triumph raised,
The Poet praising, and the Patron praised.
What Patron shall I choose? shall public voice,
Or private knowledge influence my choice?
Shall I prefer the grand retreat of STOWE,
Or, seeking Patriots, to friend WILDMAN's go?
To WILDMAN's, cried DISCRETION (who had heard
Close-standing at my elbow, every word)
To WILDMAN's! art Thou mad? can Thou be sure
One moment there to have thy head secure?
Are they not All (let observation tell)
All marked in Characters as black as Hell,
In Doomsday book by Ministers set down,
Who style their pride the honor of the crown?
Make no reply -- let Reason stand aloof --
Presumptions here must pass as solemn proof.
That settled Faith, that Love which ever springs
In the best Subjects, for the best of Kings,
Must not be measured now, by what Men think,
Or say, or do -- by what They eat, and drink,
Where, and with whom, that Question's to be tried,
And Statesmen are the Judges to decide;
No Juries called, or, if called, kept in awe,
They, facts confessed, in themselves vest the law.
Each dish at WILDMAN's of sedition smacks;
Blasphemy may be Gospel at ALMACK's.
Peace, good DISCRETION, peace -- thy fears are vain;
Never will I herd with WILDMAN's factious train,
Never the vengeance of the great incur,
Nor, without might, against the mighty stir.
If, from long proof, my temper you distrust,
Weigh my profession, to my gown be just;
Do Thou one Parson know, so void of grace
To pay his court to Patrons out of place.
If still you doubt (though scarce a doubt remains)
Search through my altered heart, and try my reins;
There, searching, find, nor deem me now in sport,
A Convert made by SANDWICH to the Court:
Let Madmen follow error to the end,
I, of mistakes convinced, and proud to mend,
Strive to act better, being better taught,
Nor blush to own that change, which Reason wrought*
For such a change as this, must Justice speak;
My heart was honest, but my head was weak.
Bigot to no one Man, or set of Men,
Without one selfish view, I drew my pen;
My Country asked, or seemed to ask my aid,
Obedient to that call, I left off trade;
A side I chose, and on that side was strong,
'Till time has fairly proved me in the wrong;
Convinced, I change (can any Man do more,
And have not greater Patriots changed before)
Changed, I at once (can any man do less)
Without a single blush, that change confess,
Confess it with a manly kind of Pride,
And quit the losing for the winning side,
Granting, whilst virtuous SANDWICH holds the rein,
What BUTE for ages might have sought in vain.
Hail SANDWICH, -- nor shall WILKES resentment show
Hearing the praises of so brave a foe --
Hail, SANDWICH, -- nor, through pride, shall Thou refuse
The grateful tribute of so mean a Muse --
SANDWICH, All Hail -- when BUTE with foreign hand,
Grown wanton with ambition, scourged the land,
When Scots, or slaves to Scotsmen steered the helm,
When Peace, inglorious Peace, disgraced the realm,
Distrust, and general discontent prevailed;
But when (he best knows why) his spirits failed,
When, with a sudden panic struck, he fled,
Sneaked out of power, and hid his recreant head;
When, like a MARS (fear ordered to retreat)
We saw Thee nimbly vault into his seat,
Into the seat of power, atone bold leap,
A perfect Connoisseur in Statemanship;
When, like another MACHIAVEL, we saw
Thy fingers twisting, and untwisting law,
Straining, where godlike Reason bade, and where
She warranted thy Mercy, pleased to spare,
Saw Thee resolved, and fixed (come what, come might)
To do thy God, thy King, thy Country right;
All things were changed, suspense remained no more,
Certainty reigned where doubt had reigned before.
All felt thy virtues, and all knew their use,
What Virtues such as thine must needs produce.
Thy Foes (for Honor ever meets with foes)
Too mean to praise, too fearful to oppose,
In sullen silence sit; thy Friends (some Few,
Who, friends to Thee, are Friends to Honor too)
Plaud thy brave bearing, and the Commonweal
Expects her safety from thy stubborn zeal.
A place amongst the rest the Muses claim,
And bring this free will offering to thy fame,
To prove their virtue, make thy virtues known,
And, holding up thy fame, secure their own.
From his youth upwards to the present day,
When Vices more than years have marked him gray,
When riotous excess with wasteful hand
Shakes life's frail glass, and hastes each ebbing sand,
Unmindful from what stock he drew his birth,
Untainted with one deed of real worth,
LOTHARIO, holding Honor at no price,
Folly to Folly added, Vice to Vice,
Wrought sin with greediness, and sought for shame
With greater zeal than good men seek for fame.
Where (Reason left without the least defense)
Laughter was Mirth, Obscenity was Sense,
Where Impudence made Decency submit,
Where Noise was Humor, and where Whim was Wit,
Where rude, untemper'd License had the merit
Of Liberty, and Lunacy was Spirit,
Where the best things were ever held the worst,
LOTHARIO was, with justice, always first.
To whip a Top, to knuckle down at Taw,
To swing upon a gate, to ride a straw,
To play at Push-Pin with dull brother Peers,
To belch out Catches in a Porter's ears,
To reign the monarch of a midnight cell,
To be the gaping Chairman's Oracle,
Whilst, in most blessed union, rogue and whore
Clap hands, huzza, and hiccup out, Encore,
Whilst gray Authority, who slumbers there
In robes of Watchman's fur, gives up his chair,
With midnight howl to bay the affrighted Moon,
To walk with torches through the streets at noon,
To force plain nature from her usual way,
Each night a vigil, and a blank each day,
To match for speed one Feather against another,
To make one leg run races with his brother,
Against all the rest to take the northern wind,
BUTE to ride first, and He to ride behind,
To coin newfangled wagers, and to lay 'em,
Laying to lose, and losing not to pay 'em;
LOTHARIO, on that stock which Nature gives,
Without a rival stands, though MARCH yet lives.
When FOLLY, (at that name, in duty bound,
Let subject Myriads kneel, and kiss the ground,
Whilst They who, in the presence, upright stand,
Are held as rebels through the loyal land)
Queen every where, but most a Queen in Courts,
Sent forth her heralds, and proclaimed her sports,
Bade fool with fool on her behalf engage,
And prove her right to reign from age to age,
LOTHARIO, great above the common size,
With all engaged, and won from all the prize;
Her Cap he wears, which from his Youth he wore,
And every day deserves it more and more.
Nor in such limits rests his soul confined;
Folly may share, but cannot engross his mind;
Vice, bold, substantial Vice, puts in her claim,
And stamps him perfect in the books of shame.
Observe his Follies well, and You would swear
Folly had been his first, his only care;
Observe his Vices, You Will that oath disown,
And swear that he was born for Vice alone.
Is the soft Nature of some easy Maid
Fond, easy, full of faith, to be betrayed,
Must She, to Virtue lost, be lost to fame,
And He, who wrought her guilt, declare her shame?
Is some brave Friend, who, men but little known,
Deems every heart as honest as his own,
And, free himself, in others fears no guile,
To be ensnared, and ruined with a smile?
Is Law to be perverted from her course?
Is abject fraud to league with brutal force?
Is Freedom to be crushed, and every son,
Who dares maintain her cause, to be undone?
Is base Corruption, creeping through the land,
To plan, and work her ruin, underhand,
With regular approaches, sure though slow,
Or must she perish by a single blow?
Are Kings (who trust to servants, and depend
In servants (fond, vain thought) to find a friend)
To be abused, and made to draw their breath
In darkness thicker than the shades of death?
Is God's most holy name to be profaned,
His word rejected, and his laws arraigned,
His servants scorned, as men who idly dreamed,
His service laughed at, and his Son blasphemed?
Are Debauchees in Morals to preside,
Is Faith to take an Atheist for her guide?
Is Science by a Blockhead to be led?
Are States to totter on a Drunkard's head?
To answer all these purposes, and more,
More black than ever Villain planned before,
Search Earth, search Hell, the Devil cannot find
An Agent, like LOTHARIO, to his mind.
Is this Nobility, which, sprung from Kings,
Was meant to swell the power from whence it springs?
Is this the glorious produce, this the fruit,
Which Nature hoped for from so rich a root?
Were there but two (search all the world around)
Were there but two such Nobles to be found,
The very name would sink into a term
Of scorn, and Man would rather be a worm,
Than be a Lord; but Nature, full of grace,
Nor meaning birth, and titles to debase,
Made only One, and, having made him, swore,
In mercy to mankind, to make no more.
Nor stopped She there, but, like a generous friend,
The ills which Error caused, She strove to mend,
And, having brought LOTHARIO forth to view,
To save her credit, brought forth SANDWICH too.
Gods! with what joy, what honest joy of heart,
Blunt as I am, and void of every art,
Of every art which great Ones in the state
Practice on knaves they fear, and fools they hate,
To Titles with reluctance taught to bend,
Nor prone to think that Virtues can descend,
Do I behold (a sight alas! more rare
Than honesty could wish) the Noble wear
His Father's honors, when his life makes known,
They Are his by Virtue, not by birth alone,
When he recalls his Father from the grave,
And pays with interest back that fame he gave.
Cured of her splenetic and sullen fits,
To such a Peer my willing soul submits,
And to such virtue is more proud to yield
Than against ten titled rogues to keep the field.
Such (for that Truth even Envy shall allow)
Such WYNDHAM was, and such is SANDWICH now.
O gentle MONTAGUE, in blessed hour
Did thou start up, and climb the stairs of power;
ENGLAND of all her fears at once was eased,
Nor, amongst her many foes, was One displeased.
FRANCE heard the news, and told it Cousin SPAIN;
SPAIN heard, and told it Cousin FRANCE again;
The HOLLANDER relinquished his design
Of adding spice to spice, and mine to mine,
Of Indian villainies he thought no more,
Content to rob us on our native shore;
Awed by thy fame, (which winds with open mouth,
Shall blow from East to West, from North to South)
The western world shall yield us her increase,
And her wild Sons be softened into peace;
Rich Eastern Monarchs shall exhaust their stores,
And pour unbounded wealth on Albion's shores,
Unbounded wealth, which from those golden scenes,
And all acquired by honorable means,
Some honorable Chief shall hither steer,
To pay our debts, and set the nation clear.
NABOBS themselves, allured by thy renown,
Shall pay due homage to the English crown,
Shall freely as their King our King receive --
PROVIDED, the Directors give them leave.
Union at home shall mark each rising year
Nor taxes be complained of, though severe,
Envy her own destroyer shall become,
And Faction with her thousand mouths be dumb,
With the meek man thy Meekness shall prevail,
Nor with the spirited thy spirit fail,
Some to thy force of reason shall submit,
And some be converts to thy princely Wit,
Reverence for Thee shall still a Nation's cries,
A grand concurrence crown a grand excise,
And Unbelievers of the first degree
Who have no faith in God, have faith in Thee.
When a strange jumble, whimsical and vain,
Possessed the region of each heated brain,
When some were fools to censure, some to praise,
And all were mad, but mad in different ways;
When Commonwealth's-men, starting at the shade
Which in their own wild fancy had been made,
Of Tyrants dreamed, who wore a thorny crown,
And with State-Bloodhounds hunted Freedom down;
When Others, struck with Fancies not less vain,
Saw mighty Kings by their own subjects slain,
And, in each friend of Liberty and Law,
With horror big, a future CROMWELL saw;
Thy manly zeal stepped forth, bade discord cease,
And sung each jarring atom into peace.
LIBERTY, cheered by thy all-chearing eye,
Shall, waking from her trance, live and not die,
And, patronized by Thee, PREROGATIVE,
Shall, striding forth at large, not die, but live,
Whilst PRIVILEGE, hung betwixt earth and sky,
Shall not well know, whether to live, or die.
When on a rock which overhung the flood,
And seemed to totter, COMMERCE shivering stood;
When CREDIT, building on a sandy shore,
Saw the sea swell, and heard the Tempest roar,
Heard death in every blast, and in each wave
Or saw, or fancied that She saw her grave;
When PROPERTY, transferred from hand to hand,
Weak'ned by change, crawled sickly through the land;
When mutual Confidence was at an end,
And Man no longer could on Man depend;
Oppressed with debts of more than common weight,
When all men feared a bankruptcy of state;
When, certain death to honor, and to trade,
A Sponge was talked of as our only aid,
That to be saved we must be more undone,
And pay off all our debts, by paying none;
Like England's better Genius, born to bless,
And snatch his sinking country from distress,
Did Thou step forth, and without sail or oar,
Pilot the shattered vessel safe to shore,
Nor shall Thou quit, till anchored firm, and fast,
She rides secure, and mocks the threatening blast!
Born in thy house, and in thy service bred,
Nursed in thy arms, and at thy table fed,
By thy sage counsels to reflection brought,
Yet more by pattern, than by precept taught,
ECONOMY her needful aid shall join
To forward, and complete thy grand design,
And, warm to save, but yet with Spirit warm,
Shall her own conduct from thy conduct form.
Let Friends of Prodigals say what they will,
Spendthrifts at home, abroad are Spendthrifts still.
In vain have sly and subtle Sophists tried
Private from public Justice to divide,
For Credit on each other they rely,
They live together, and together die.
Against all experience it is a rank offense,
High Treason in the eye of Common Sense,
To think a Statesman ever can be known
To pay our debts, who will not pay his own.
But now, though late, now may we hope to see
Our debts discharged, our Credit fair and free,
Since rigid Honesty, fair fall that hour,
Sits at the helm, and SANDWICH is in power.
With what delight I view the wondrous Man,
With what delight survey thy sterling plan,
That plan which All with wonder must behold,
And stamp thy age the only age of gold.
Nor rest thy triumphs here -- That Discord fled,
And sought with grief the hell where She was bred;
That Faction, against her Nature forced to yield,
Saw her rude rabble scattered over the field,
Saw her best friends a standing jest become,
Her Fools turned speakers, and her Wits struck dumb;
That our most bitter Foes (so much depends
On Men of name) are turned to cordial friends;
That our offended Friends (such terror flows
From Men of name) dare not appear our foes;
That Credit, gasping in the jaws of death,
And ready to expire with every breath,
Grows stronger from disease; that Thou have saved
Thy drooping Country; that thy name engraved
On plates of brass defies the rage of time;
Than plates of brass more firm, that sacred Rhyme
Embalms thy memory, bids thy glories live,
And gives Thee what the Muse alone can give;
These heights of virtue, these rewards of Fame,
With Thee in common other Patriots claim.
But that poor, sickly SCIENCE, who had laid,
And drooped for years beneath neglect's cold shade,
By those who knew her purposely forgot,
And made the jest of those who knew her not,
Whilst Ignorance in power, and Pampered Pride,
Clad like a Priest, passed by on the other side,
Recovered from her wretched state, at length
Puts on new health, and clothes herself with strength,
To Thee we owe, and to thy friendly hand
Which raised, and gave her to possess the land.
This praise, though in a court, and near a throne,
This praise is thine, and thine, alas! alone.
With what fond rapture did the Goddess smile,
What blessings did she promise to this Isle,
What honor to herself, and length of reign!
Soon as She heard, that Thou did not disdain
To be her Steward; but what grief, what shame,
What rage, what disappointment shook her frame,
When her proud children dared her will dispute,
When Youth was insolent, and Age was mute.
That Young Men should be fools, and some wild few,
To Wisdom deaf, be deaf to interest too,
Moved not her wonder, but that Men, grown gray
In search of Wisdom, Men who owned the sway
Of Reason, Men who stubbornly kept down
Each rising passion, Men who wore the gown,
That They should cross her will, That They should dare
Against the cause of interest to declare,
That They should be so abject and unwise,
Having no fear of loss before their eyes,
Nor hopes of gain, scorning the ready means
Of being Vicars, Rectors, Canons, Deans,
With all those honors which on Mitres wait,
And mark the virtuous favorites of state,
That They should dare a HARDWICK to support,
And talk, within the hearing of a Court,
Of that vile beggar Conscience, who undone,
And starved herself, starves every wretched son;
This turned her blood to gall, This made her swear
No more to throw away her time and care
On wayward Sons who scorned her love, no more
To hold her courts on CAM's ungrateful shore.
Rather than bear such insults, which disgrace
Her royalty of Nature, birth, and place,
Though DULLNESS there unrivaled State does keep,
Would She at WINCHESTER with BURTON sleep;
Or, to exchange the mortifying scene
For something still more dull, and still more mean,
Rather than bear such insults, She would fly
Far, far beyond the search of English eye,
And reign amongst the SCOTS; to be a Queen
Is worth ambition, though in ABERDEEN.
O, stay thy flight, fair SCIENCE; what though some,
Some base-born children Rebels are become,
All are not Rebels; some are duteous still,
Attend thy precepts, and obey thy will;
Thy interest is opposed by those alone
Who either know not, or oppose their own.
Of Stubborn Virtue, marching to thy aid,
Behold in black, the liv'ry of their trade,
Marshalled by form, and by Discretion led,
A grave, grave troop, and SMITH is at their head,
Black SMITH of TRINITY; on Christian ground
For Faith in Mysteries none more renowned.
Next (for the best of causes now and then
Must beg assistance from the worst of men)
Next, (if old Story lies not) sprung from Greece,
Comes PANDARUS, but comes without his Niece.
Her, wretched Maid! committed to his trust,
To a rank Letcher's coarse and bloated lust,
The Arch, old, hoary Hypocrite had sold,
And thought himself and her well damned for gold.
But (to wipe off such traces from the mind,
And make us in good humor with mankind)
Leading on Men, who, in a College bred,
No Women knew, but those which made their bed,
Who, planted Virgins on Cam's virtuous shore,
Continued still Male Virgins at threescore,
Comes SUMPNER, wise, and chaste as chaste can be,
With LONG as wise, and not less chaste than He.
Are there not Friends too, entered in thy cause,
Who, for thy sake, defying penal Laws,
Were, to support thy honorable plan,
Smuggled from JERSEY, and the ISLE of MAN?
Are there not PHILOMATHS of high degree
Who, always dumb before, shall speak for thee?
Are there not PROCTORS, faithful to thy will,
One of full growth, others in Embryo still,
Who may perhaps in some ten years, or more,
Be ascertained that Two and Two make four,
Or may a still more happy method find,
And, taking One from too, leave none behind.
With such a mighty power on foot, to yield
Were death to Manhood; better in the field
To leave our Carcases, and die with fame,
Than fly, and purchase life on terms of shame*
SACKVILLES alone anticipate defeat,
And, e're they dare the battle, sound retreat.
But if Persuasions ineffectual prove,
If Arguments are vain, nor Prayers can move,
Yet, in thy bitterness of frantic woe,
Why talk of BURTON? why to SCOTLAND go?
Is there not OXFORD? She with open arms
Shall meet thy wish, and yield up all her charms,
Shall for thy love her former loves resign,
And jilt the banished STUARTS to be thine.
Bowed to the yoke, and, soon as she could read,
Tutored to get by heart the Despot's Creed,
She, of subjection proud, shall knee thy throne,
And have no principles but thine alone,
She shall thy will implicitly receive,
Nor act, or speak, or think, without thy leave.
Where is the glory of imperial sway
If subjects none but just commands obey?
Then, and then only is obedience seen,
When, by command, they dare do all that is mean.
Hither then wing thy flight, here fix thy stand,
Nor fail to bring thy SANDWICH in thy hand.
Gods, with what joy (for Fancy now supplies,
And lays the future open to my eyes)
Gods, with what joy I see the Worthies meet,
And Brother LITCHFIELD Brother SANDWICH greet!
Blessed be your greetings, blessed each dear embrace,
Blessed to yourselves, and to the human race.
Sickening at Virtues, which She cannot reach,
Which seem her baser nature to impeach,
Let ENVY, in a whirlwind's bosom hurled,
Outrageous, search the corners of the world,
Ransack the present times, look back to past,
Rip up the future, and confess at last,
No times, past, present, or to come, could ever
Produce, and bless the world with such a pair.
PHILLIPS, the good old PHILLIPS, out of breath,
Escaped from MONMOUTH, and escaped from death,
Shall hail his SANDWICH, with that virtuous zeal,
That glorious ardour for the Commonweal,
Which warmed his loyal heart, and blessed his tongue,
When on his lips the cause of Rebels hung.
Whilst Womanhood, in habit of a Nun,
At M -- -- lies, by backward Monks undone;
A nation's reckoning, like an alehouse score,
Whilst PAUL the aged chalks behind a door,
Compelled to hire a foe to cast it up;
-- --, shall pour, from a Communion Cup,
Libations to the Goddess without eyes,
And Hob or Nob in Cider and excise.
From those deep shades, where VANITY, unknown,
Does Penance for her pride, and pines alone,
Cursed in herself, by her own thoughts undone,
Where She sees all, but can be seen by none,
Where She no longer, Mistress of the schools,
Hears Praise loud pealing from the mouth of fools,
Or hears it at a distance, in despair
To join the crowd, and put in for a share,
Twisting each thought a thousand different ways,
For his new friends new-modelling old praise,
Where frugal Sense so very fine is spun,
It serves twelve hours though not enough for one,
KING shall arise, and, bursting from the dead,
Shall hurl his piebald Latin at thy head*
BURTON (whilst awkward Affectation's hung
In quaint and labored accents on his tongue,
Who against their will makes Junior Blockheads speak,
Ign'rant of both, new Latin, and new Greek,
Not such as was in Greece and Latium known,
But of a modern cut, and all his own;
Who threads, like beads, loose thoughts on such a string,
They Are Praise, and Censure; Nothing, Ev'ry-thing;
Pantomime thoughts, and Style so full of trick
They even make a MERRY ANDREW sick,
Thoughts all so dull, so pliant in their growth,
They Are Verse, They Are Prose, They Are Neither, and They Are Both)
Shall (though by Nature ever loath to praise)
Thy curious worth set sorth in curious phrase,
Obscurely stiff, shall press poor Sense to death,
Or in long periods run her out of breath,
Shall make a babe, for which, with all his fame,
ADAM could not have found a proper name,
Whilst, beating out his features to a smile,
He hugs the bastard brat, and calls it STYLE.
Hushed be all Nature as the land of Death;
Let each Stream sleep, and each wind hold his breath,
Be the Bells muffled, nor one sound of care,
Pressing for Audience, wake the slumbering air;
BROWN comes -- behold how cautiously he creeps --
How slow he walks, and yet how fast he sleeps --
But to thy praise in sleep he shall agree;
He cannot wake, but he shall dream of Thee.
PHYSIC, her head with opiate Poppies crowned,
Her loins by the chaste matron Camphire bound,
PHYSIC, obtaining succor from the pen,
Of her soft son, her gentle HEBERDEN,
If there are Men who can thy virtue know,
Yet spite of Virtue treat Thee as a foe,
Shall, like a Scholar, stop their rebel breath,
And in each RECIPE send Classic death.
So deep in knowledge that few lines can sound,
And plumb the bottom of that vast profound,
Few grave ones with such gravity can think,
Or follow half so fast as he can sink,
With nice distinctions glossing over the text,
Obscure with meaning, and in words perplexed,
With subtleties on subtleties refined,
Meant to divide, and subdivide the mind,
Keeping the forwardness of Youth in awe,
The Scowling BLACKISTON bears the train of LAW.
DIVINITY, enrob'd in College fur,
In her right hand a New Court Calendar,
Bound like a Book of Prayer, thy coming waits
With all her pack, to hymn Thee in the gates.
LOYALTY, fixed on ISIS' altered shore,
A stranger long, but stranger now no more,
Shall pitch her tabernacle, and with eyes,
Brim-full of rapture, view her new allies,
Shall with much pleasure, and more wonder view
Men great at Court, and great at Oxford too.
O Sacred LOYALTY! accursed be those
Who seeming friends turn out thy deadliest foes,
Who prostitute to Kings thy honored name,
And soothe their passions to betray their fame;
Nor praised be those, to whose proud Nature clings
Contempt of government, and hate of Kings,
Who, willing to be free, not knowing how,
A strange intemperance of zeal avow,
And start at LOYALTY, as at a word
Which without danger FREEDOM never heard.
Vain errors of vain men -- wild both extremes,
And to the State not wholesome, like the dreams,
Children of night, of indigestion bred,
Which, Reason clouded, seize and turn the head,
LOYALTY without FREEDOM is a chain
Which Men of liberal notice cannot sustain,
And FREEDOM without LOYALTY, a name
Which nothing means, or means licentious shame.
Thine be the art, my SANDWICH, thine the toil,
In OXFORD's stubborn, and untoward style,
To rear this plant of Union, till at length,
Rooted by time, and fostered into strength,
Shooting aloft, all danger It defies,
And proudly lifts its branches to the skies,
Whilst, Wisdom's happy son, but not her slave,
Gay with the gay, and with the grave ones grave,
Free from the dull impertinence of thought,
Beneath that shade, which thy own labors Wrought,
And fashioned into strength, shall Thou repose,
Secure of liberal praise, since ISIS flows,
True to her TAME, as duty has decreed,
Nor longer, like a harlot, lust for TWEED,
And those old wreaths, which OXFORD once dared twine,
To grace a STUART brow, she plants on thine.
THE END.

