AN ESSAY ON EPIC POETRY.

[Price 10 s. 6 d.]

AN ESSAY ON EPIC POETRY; IN FIVE EPISTLES TO THE REVD. MR. MASON. WITH NOTES.

-- Vatibus addere calcar
Ut studio majore petant Helicona virentem.
HOR. BY WILLIAM HAYLEY, ESQUIRE.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. DODSLEY, IN PALL MALL. M.DCC.LXXXII.

EPISTLE THE FIRST.
ARGUMENT OF THE FIRST EPISTLE.
Introduction. -- Design of the Poem to remove prejudices which obstruct the
cultivation of Epic writing. -- Origin of Poetry. -- Honors paid to its
infancy. -- Homer the first Poet remaining. -- Difficulty of the question why
he had no Successor in Greece. -- Remark of a celebrated Writer, that as
Criticism flourishes Poetry declines. -- Defense of Critics. -- Danger of a
bigoted acquiescence in critical Systems -- and of a Poet's criticizing his own
works. -- Advantages of Friendship and study of the higher Poets.

EPISTLE I.
PERISH that critic pride, which often has hurled
Its empty thunders over the Epic world;
Which, eager to extend its mimic reign,
Would bind free Fancy in a servile chain;
With papal rage the eye of Genius blind,
And bar the gates of Glory on the mind!
-Such dark decrees have lettered Bigots penned Ver. 7. See NOTE I.
,
Yet seized that honored name, the Poet's Friend.
But Learning from her page their laws will blot;
Scorned be their arrogance! their name forgot!
The indignant Bard, abhorring base control,
Seeks the just Critic of congenial soul.
Say! MASON, Judge and Master of the Lyre!
Harmonious Chief of Britain's living Choir,
Say! will Thou listen to his weaker strains,
Who pants to range round Fancy's rich domains;
To vindicate her empire, and disown
Proud System, seated on her injured throne?
Come! while thy Muse, contented with applause,
Gives to her graceful song a little pause,
Enjoying triumphs past; at leisure laid
In thy sweet Garden's variegated shade,
Or fondly hanging on some favorite Oak
That Harp, whose notes the fate of Mona spoke,
Strung by the sacred Druid's social band,
And wisely trusted to thy kindred hand!
Come! for thy liberal and ingenuous heart
Can aid a Brother in this magic art;
Let us, and Freedom be our guide, explore
The highest province of poetic lore,
Free the young Bard from that oppressive awe,
Which feels Opinion's rule as Reason's law,
And from his spirit bid vain fears depart,
Of weakened Nature and exhausted Art!
Phantoms! that literary spleen conceives!
Dullness adopts, and Indolence believes!
While with adventurous step we wind along
The expansive regions of Heroic song,
From different sources let our search explain
Why few the Chieftains of this wide domain.
Happily, inspiriting poetic youth,
Our verse may prove this animating truth,
That Poesy's sublime, neglected field
May still new laurels to Ambition yield;
Her Epic trumpet, in a modern hand,
Still make the spirit glow, the heart expand.
Be such our doctrine! our enlivening aim
The Muse's honor, and our Country's fame!
Thou first and fairest of the social Arts!
Sovereign of liberal souls, and feeling hearts,
If, in devotion to thy heavenly charms,
I clasped thy altar with my infant arms,
For thee neglected the wide field of wealth,
The toils of interest, and the sports of health,
Enchanting Poesy! that zeal repay
With powers to sing thy universal sway!
To trace thy progress from thy distant birth,
Heaven's pure descendant! dear delight of Earth!
Charm of all regions! to no age confined!
The prime ennobler of the aspiring mind!
Nor will thy dignity, sweet Power! disdain
What Fiction utters in her idle strain,
Thy sportive Friend! who, mocking solemn Truth,
Tells her fond tales of thy untutored youth.
As wronged Latona (so her tale begins)
To Delphos traveled with her youthful twins;
The envenomed Python, with terrific sway,
Crossed the fair Goddess in her destined way:
The heavenly parent, in the wild alarm,
Her little Dian in her anxious arm,
High on a stone, which she in terror trod,
Cried to her filial guard, the Archer God,
Bidding with force, that spoke the Mother's heart,
Her young Apollo launch his ready dart;
In measured sounds her rapid mandate flowed,
The first foundation of the future Ode!
Thus, at their banquets, fabling Greeks rehearse Ver. 77. See NOTE II.

The fancied origin of sacred Verse:
And though cold Reason may with scorn assail,
Or turn contemptuous from their simple tale,
Yet, Poesy! thy sister Art may stoop
From this weak sketch to paint the impassioned group.
Though taste refined to modern Verse deny
The hacknied pageants of the Pagan sky,
Their sinking radiance still the Canvass warms,
Painting still glories in their graceful forms;
Nor can thou envy, if the world agree
To grant thy Sister claims denied to thee;
For thee, the happier Art! the elder-born!
Superior rights and dearer charms adorn:
Confined she catches, with observance keen,
Her single moment of the changeful scene;
But thou, endu'd with energy sublime,
Unquestioned arbiter of space and time!
Can join the distant, the unknown create,
And, while Existence yields thee all her state,
On the astonished mind profusely pour
Myriads of forms, that Fancy must adore.
Yet of thy boundless power the dearest part
Is firm possession of the feeling Heart:
No progeny of Chance, by Labor taught,
No slow-form'd creature, of scholastic thought,
The child of Passion thou! thy lyre she strung,
To her parental notes she tuned thy tongue;
Gave thee her boldest swell, her softest tone,
And made the compass of her voice thy own.
To Admiration, source of joy refined!
Chaste, lovely mover of the simple mind!
To her, though skeptics, in their pride, declaim,
With many an insult, on her injured name;
To her, sweet Poesy! we owe thy birth,
Thou first encomiast of the fruitful Earth!
By her inspired, the earliest mortal found
The ear-delighting charm of measured sound;
He hailed the Maker of a world so fair,
And the first accent of his song was prayer.
O, most attractive of those airy Powers,
Who most illuminate Man's checkered hours!
Is there an Art, in all the group, divine,
Whose dawn of Being must not yield to thine?
Religion's self, whose provident control
Takes from fierce Man his anarchy of soul,
She over thy youth with fond affection hung,
And borrowed music from thy infant tongue.
Law, sterner Law, whose potent voice impressed
Severest terror on the human breast,
With thy fresh flowers her aweful figure crowned,
And spoke her mandate in thy foster found.
Even cold Philosophy, whom later days
Saw thy mean rival, envious of thy praise;
Who closed against thee her ungrateful arms,
And urged her Plato to defame thy charms;
She from thy childhood gained no fruitless aid,
From thee she learnt her talent to persuade.
Gay Nature viewed thee with a smiling glance,
The Graces round thee framed the frolic dance:
And well might festive Joy thy favor court;
Thy song turned strife to peace, and toil to sport.
Exhausted Vigor at thy voice revived,
And Mirth from thee her dearest charm derived.
Triumphant Love, in thy alliance blessed,
Enlarged his empire over the gentle breast;
His torch assumed new luster from thy breath,
And his clear flame defied the clouds of death.
But of the splendid train, who felt thy, sway,
Or drew existence from thy vital ray,
Glory, with fondest zeal, proclaimed thy might,
And hailed thee victor of oblivious Night.
Her martial trumpet to thy hand she gave,
At once to quicken, and reward the Brave:
It sounds -- his blood the kindling Hero pays,
A cheap and ready price for thy eternal praise!
Though selfish Fear the immortal strain deride,
And mock the Warrior's wish as frantic pride!
Ye gallant, hapless Dead of distant time,
Whose fame has perished unembalm'd in rhyme,
As through the desert air your ashes fly,
In Fancy's ear the nameless atoms cry,
"To us, unhappy! cruel Fates refuse
"The well-earn'd record of the applauding Muse."
Blessed are those Chiefs, who, blazoned on her roll,
Still waken virtue in each kindred soul;
Their bright existence still on earth prolong,
And shine for ever in the deathless song.
Yet often Oblivion, in a treacherous shade,
Has sunk the tuneful rites to Valor paid;
Her palsied lips refusing to rehearse
The sacred, old, traditionary verse.
As well the curious eye, with keen desire,
Might hope to catch that spark of vital fire,
Which first through Chaos shot a sudden light,
And quickened Nature in its transient flight;
As the fond ear to catch the fleeting note,
Which on the ravished air was heard to float,
When first the Muse her Epic strain began,
And every listening Chief grew more than Man.
But, as the Ruler of the newborn day
From Chaos rose, in glory's rich array;
So from deep shades, impenetrably strong,
That shroud the darkened world of ancient song,
Bright HOMER bursts, magnificently clear,
The solar Lord of that poetic sphere;
Before whose blaze, in wide luxuriance spread,
Each Grecian star hides his diminished head;
Whose beams departed yet enchant the sight,
In Latium's softer, chaste, reflected light.
Say ye! whose curious philosophic eye
Searches the depth where Nature's secrets lie;
Ye, who can tell, how her capricious fit
Directs the flow and ebb of human wit,
And why, obedient to her quick command,
Spring-tides of Genius now enrich her favorite land,
Now sink, by her to different climes assigned,
And only leave some worthless weeds behind!
Say! why in Greece, unrivaled and alone,
The Sovereign Poet graced his Epic throne?
Why did the realm that echoed his renown,
Produce no kindred heir to claim his crown?
If, as the liberal mind delights to think,
Fancy's rich flowers their vital essence drink
From Liberty's pure streams, that largely roll
Their quickening virtue through the Poet's soul;
Why, in the period when this Friend of Earth
Made Greece the model of heroic worth,
And saw her votaries act, beneath her sway,
Scenes more sublime than Fiction can display,
Why did the Epic Muse's silent lyre Ver. 207. See NOTE III.

Shrink from those feats that summoned all her fire?
Or if, as courtly Theorists maintain,
The Muses revel in a Monarch's reign;
Why, when young Ammon's soul, athirst for fame,
Called every Art to celebrate his name;
When ready Painting, at his sovereign nod,
With aweful thunder armed this mimic God;
Why did coy Poesy, though fondly wooed,
Refuse that dearer smile for which he sued,
And see him shed, in martial Honor's bloom,
The tear of envy on Achilles' tomb?
In vain would Reason those nice questions solve,
Which the fine play of mental powers involve:
In Bards of ancient time, with genius fraught,
What mind can trace how thought engendered thought,
How little hints awaked the large design,
And subtle Fancy spun her variegated line?
Yet sober Critics, of no vulgar note,
But such as Learning's sons are proud to quote,
The progress of Homeric verse explain,
As if their souls had lodged in Homer's brain.
Laughs not the spirit of poetic frame,
However slightly warmed by Fancy's flame,
When grave Bossu by System's studied laws Ver. 231. See NOTE IV.

The Grecian Bard's ideal picture draws,
And wisely tells us, that his Song arose
As the good Parson's quiet Sermon grows;
Who, while his easy thoughts no pressure find
From hosts of images that crowd the mind,
First calmly settles on some moral text,
Then creeps -- from one division -- to the next?
Nor, if poetic minds more slowly drudge
Through the cold comments of this Gallic judge,
Will their indignant spirit less deride
That subtle Pedant's more presumptive pride,
Whose bloated page, with arrogance replete,
Imputes to VIRGIL his own dark conceit: Ver. 244. See NOTE V.

And from the tortured Poet dares to draw
That latent sense, which HORACE never saw;
Which, if on solid proof more strongly built,
Must brand the injured Bard with impious guilt.
While such Dictators their vain efforts waste
In the dark visions of distempered Taste,
Let us that pleasing, happier light pursue,
Which beams benignant from the milder few;
Who, justly conscious of the doubts that start
In all nice questions on each finer Art,
With modest doubt assign each likely cause,
But dare to dictate no decisive laws!
It Is said by one, who, with this candid claim, Ver. 257. See NOTE VI.

Has gained no fading wreath of Critic fame,
Who, fondly listening to her various rhyme,
Has marked the Muse's step through many a clime;
That, where the settled Rules of Writing spread,
Where Learning's code of Critic Law is read,
Though other treasures deck the enlightened shore,
The germs of Fancy ripen there no more.
Are Critics then, that bold, imperious tribe!
The Guards of Genius, who his path prescribe;
Are they like Visirs in an Eastern court,
Who sap the very power they should support?
Whose specious wiles the royal mind unnerve,
And sink the monarch they pretend to serve.
No! of their value higher far I deem;
And prize their useful toil with fond esteem.
When LOWTH's firm spirit leads him to explore
The hallowed confines of Hebraic lore,
When his free pages, luminous and bold,
The glorious end of Poesy unfold,
Assert her powers, her dignity defend,
And speak her, as she is, fair Freedom's friend;
When thus he shines his mitred Peers above,
I view his warmth with reverential love;
Proud, if my verse may catch reflected light
From the rich splendour of a mind so bright.
Blessed be the names, to no vain system tied,
Who render Learning's blaze an useful guide,
A friendly beacon, raised on high to teach
The wandering bark to shun the shallow beach.
But O! ye noble, and aspiring few,
Whose ardent souls poetic fame pursue,
Ye, on whom smiling Heaven, perfection's source,
Seems to bestow unlimitable force,
The inborn vigor of your souls defend,
Nor lean too fondly on the firmest friend!
Genius may sink on Criticism's breast,
By weak dependence on her truth oppressed,
Sleep on her lap, and stretch his lifeless length,
Shorn by her soothing hand of all his strength.
Thou will not, MASON! thou, whose generous heart
Must feel that Freedom is the soul of Art,
Thou will not hold me arrogant or vain,
If I advise the young poetic train
To deem infallible no Critic's word;
Not even the dictates of thy Attic HURD:
No! not the Stagyrite's unquestioned page,
The Sire of Critics, sanctified by age!
The noblest minds, with solid reason blessed,
Who feel that faculty above the rest,
Who argue on those arts they never try,
Exalt that Reason they so often apply,
Till in its pride, with tyrannous control,
It crush the kindred talents of the soul;
And hence, in every Art, will systems rise,
Which Fancy must survey with angry eyes;
And at the lightning of her scornful smile,
In frequent ruin sinks the labored pile.
How often, my ROMNEY! have I known thy vein
Swell with indignant heat and generous pain,
To hear, in terms both arrogant and tame,
Some reasoning Pedant on thy Art declaim:
Its laws and limits when his sovereign taste
With firm precision has minutely traced,
And in the close of a decisive speech
Pronounced some point beyond the Pencil's reach,
How has thy Genius, by one rapid stroke,
Refuted all the sapient things he spoke!
Thy Canvass placing, in the clearest light,
His own Impossible before his sight!
O might the Bard who loves thy mental fire,
Who to thy fame attun'd his early lyre,
Learn from thy Genius, when dull Fops decide,
So to refute their systematic pride!
Let him, at least, succeeding Poets warn
To view the Pedant's lore with doubt, or scorn,
And even to question, with a spirit free,
Established Critics of the first degree!
Among the names that Judgment loves to praise,
The pride of ancient, or of modern days;
What Laws of Poesy can Learning show
Above the Critic song of sage DESPREAUX?
His fancy elegant, his judgment nice,
His method easy, and his style concise;
The Bard of Reason, with her vigor fraught,
Her purest doctrine he divinely taught;
Nor taught in vain! His precept clear and chaste
Reformed the errors of corrupted Taste;
And French Imagination, who was bit
By that Tarantula, distorted Wit,
Ceasing her antic gambols to rehearse,
Blessed the pure magic of his healing verse:
With his loud fame applauding Europe rung,
And his just praise a rival Poet sung.
Yet, had this Friend of Verse-devoted Youth,
This tuneful Teacher of Poetic truth,
Had he but chanced his doctrine to diffuse
Ere Milton commun'd with his sacred Muse;
And could that English, self-dependant soul,
Born with such energy as mocks control,
Could his high spirit, with submissive awe,
Have stooped to listen to a Gallic Law;
His hallowed subject, by that Law forbid Ver. 359. See NOTE VII.
,
Might still have laid in silent darkness hid,
And, this bright Sun not rising in our sphere,
HOMER had wanted still his true compeer.
From hence let Genius to himself be just,
Hence learn, ye Bards, a liberal distrust;
Whenever it is said, by System's haughty Son,
That what He cannot do, can never be done,
It Is Fancy's right the exalted throne to press,
Whose height proud System can but blindly guess,
Springs, whose existence she denies, unlock,
And call rich torrents from the flinty rock.
Let the true Poet, who would build a name
In noble rivalship of ancient fame,
When he would plan, to triumph over Time,
The splendid fabric of his lofty rhyme,
Let him the pride of Constantine assume,
The imperial Founder of the second Rome,
Who scorned all limits to his work assigned, Ver. 377. See NOTE VIII.

Save by the inspiring God who ruled his mind;
Or, like the fabled Jupiter, ut perhibent, spatium quum discere vellet
Naturae, regni nescius ipse sui,
Armigeros utrimque duos aequalibus alis
Misit ab Eois Occiduisque plagis.
Parnassus geminos fertur junxisse volatus;
Contulit alternas Pythius axis aves.
CLAUDIAN.
Jove, to ascertain
The doubtful confines of his wide domain,
Two Eagles let him send of equal wing,
Whose different flight may form a perfect ring,
And, at the point where Sense and Fancy meet,
There safely bold, and though sublime discreet,
His fame's foundation let him firmly lay,
Nor dread the danger of disputed sway!
Yet, if the Bard to glory must aspire
By free exertion of unborrow'd fire,
Nor, like the Classic Bigot, vainly deem
No modern Muse can challenge just esteem,
Unless her robe in every fold be pressed
To fall precisely like the Grecian vest;
If the blind notion he must boldly shun,
That Beauty's countless forms are only one,
And not, when Fancy, from her magic hoard,
Would blindly bring him treasures unexplor'd,
Snap her light wand, and force her hand to bear
The heavier Compass, and the formal Square;
Let him no less their dangerous pride decline,
Who singly criticize their own design.
In that nice toil what various perils lurk!
Not Pride alone may mar the needful work;
But foes more common to the feeling nerve,
Where Taste and Genius dwell with coy Reserve,
The sickly Doubt, with modest weakness fraught,
The languid Tedium of o'erlabour'd thought,
The Pain to feel the growing work behind
The finished model in the forming mind;
These foes, that often the Poet's bosom pierce,
These! that condemned to fire Virgilian Verse,
Prove that the Bard, a bold, yet trembling elf,
Should find a Critic firmer than himself.
But what fine Spirit will assume the Judge,
Patient through all this irksome toil to drudge?
It Is here, O Friendship! here thy glories shine;
The hard, the important task is only thine;
For thou alone can all the powers unite,
That justly make it thy peculiar right:
Thine the fixed eye, which at no foible winks;
Thine the warm zeal, which utters all it thinks,
In those sweet tones, that hasty Spleen disarm,
That give to painful Truth a winning charm,
And the quick hand of listening Genius teach,
To grasp that excellence he burns to reach:
Thou sweet Subduer of all mental strife!
Thou Source of vigor! thou Support of life!
Nor Art nor Science could delight or live,
Without that energy thy counsels give:
Genius himself must sink in dumb despair,
Unblest, uncherish'd by thy cheering care.
Nor let the Bard, elate with youthful fire,
When Fancy to his hand presents the lyre,
When her strong plumes his soaring spirit lift,
When Friendship, Heaven's more high and holy gift,
With zeal angelic prompts his daring flight,
And round him darts her doubt-dispelling light,
Let him not then, by Vanity betrayed,
Look with unjust contempt on Learning's aid!
But, as the adventurous Seaman, to attain
That bright renown which great Discoverers gain,
Consults the conduct of each gallant name,
Who sailed before him in that chase of Fame,
Reviews, with frequent glance, their useful chart,
Marks all their aims, and fathoms all their art,
So let the Poet trace their happy course,
So bravely emulate their mental force,
Whose daring souls, from many a different clime,
Have nobly ventured on the sea of Rhyme!
Led by no fear, his swelling sail to slack,
Let him, with eager eyes, pursue the track;
Not like a Pirate, with insidious views
To plunder every vessel he pursues,
But with just hope to find yet farther shores,
And pass each rival he almost adores!
END OF THE FIRST EPISTLE.
EPISTLE THE SECOND
ARGUMENT OF THE SECOND EPISTLE.
Character of Ancient Poets -- Homer -- Apollonius Rhodius -- Virgil -- Lucan.

EPISTLE II.
HAIL, mighty Father of the Epic line,
Thou vast, prolific, intellectual Mine,
Where veins of ancient and of modern gold,
The wealth of each poetic world, have rolled!
Great Bard of Greece, whose ever-during Verse
All ages venerate, all tongues rehearse;
Could blind idolatry be justly paid,
To aught of mental power by man displayed,
To thee, thou Sire of soul-exalting Song,
That boundless worship might to thee belong;
For, as thy Jove, on his Olympian throne,
In his unrivaled sway exults alone,
Commanding Nature by his aweful nod,
In high seclusion from each humbler God;
So shines thy Genius through the cloud of years,
Exalted far above thy Pagan peers
By the rich splendour of creative fire,
And the deep thunder of thy martial lyre;
The conscious world confesses thy control,
And hails thee Sovereign of the kindling soul.
Yet, could thy mortal shape revisit earth,
How would it move, great Bard! thy scornful mirth,
To hear vain Pedants to thy Verse assign
Scholastic thoughts that never could be thine;
To hear the quaint conceits of modern Pride
Blaspheme thy Fancy and thy Taste deride?
When thus in Vanity's capricious fit,
We see thy fame traduced by Gallic wit, Ver. 28. See NOTE I.

We see a Dwarf, who dares his foot to rest
On a recumbent Giant's ample chest,
And, lifting his pert form to public sight,
Boasts, like a child, his own superior height.
But neither envious Wit's malignant craft,
Though armed with Ridicule's envenomed shaft,
Nor fickle Fashion's more tyrannic sway,
Whose varying voice the sons of Earth obey,
Can shake the solid base of thy renown,
Or blast the verdure of thy Laurel crown.
Though Time, who from his many-colour'd wings,
Scatters ten thousand shades over human things,
Has wrought unnumber'd changes since thy birth,
And given new features to the face of earth;
Though all thy Gods who shook the starry pole,
Unquestioned Rulers of the Pagan soul,
Are fallen with their fanes, in ruin hurled,
Their worship vanished from the enlightened world;
Still its immortal force thy Song retains,
Still rules obedient man and fires his glowing veins;
For Nature's self, that great and constant power,
One and the same through every changing hour,
Gave thee each secret of her reign to pierce,
And stamped her signet on thy sacred Verse;
That aweful signet, whose imperial sway
No age disputes, no regions disobey;
For at its sight the subject passions start,
And open all the passes of the heart.
'Twas Nature taught thy Genius to display
That host of Characters who grace thy lay;
So richly varied and so vast the store,
Her plastic hand can hardly model more:
'Twas Nature, noblest of poetic Guides,
Gave thee thy flowing Verse, whose copious tides
Gushing luxuriant from high Fancy's source,
By no vain art diverted in their course,
With splendid ease, with simple grandeur roll,
Spread their free wealth, and fertilize the soul.
There are, whom blind and erring zeal betrays
To wound thy Genius with ill-judging praise;
Who rashly deem thee of all Arts the sire,
Who draw dull smoke from thy resplendent fire,
Pretend thy fancied Miracles to pierce,
And form quaint riddles of thy clearest Verse;
Blind to those brighter charms and purer worth,
Which make thy Lays the lasting joy of earth.
For why has every age with fond acclaim
Swelled the loud note of thy increasing fame?
Not that cold Study may from thee deduce
Vain codes of mystic lore and laws abstruse;
But that thy Song presents, like solar light,
A world in action to the enraptured sight;
That, with a force beyond the enervate rules
Of tame Philosophy's pedantic Schools,
Thy living Images instruct mankind,
Mould the just heart, and fire the heroic mind.
Even SOCRATES himself, that purest Sage, Ver. 85. See NOTE II.

Imbibed his Wisdom from thy moral page;
And happily Greece, the Wonder of the Earth
For feats of martial fire and civic worth,
That glorious Land, of noblest minds the nurse,
Owes her unrivaled race to thy inspiring Verse;
For O, what Greek, who in his youthful vein
Had felt thy soul-invigorating strain,
Who that had caught, amid the festive throng,
The public lesson of thy patriot Song,
Could ever cease to feel his bosom swell
With zeal to dare, and passion to excel.
In thee thy grateful country justly praised
The noblest Teacher of the tribes she raised;
Thy voice, which doubly gave her fame to last,
Formed future Heroes, while it sung the past.
What deep regret thy fond admirers feel,
That mythologic clouds thy life conceal;
That, like a distant God, you are darkly shown,
Felt in thy Works, but in Thyself unknown!
Perchance the shades that hide thy mortal days
From keen Affection's disappointed gaze,
And that Idolatry, so fondly proud,
With which thy Country to thy genius bowed,
Might form the cause why, kindling with thy fire,
No Grecian rival struck thy Epic lyre;
Perchance, not seeing how thy steps were trained,
How they the summit of Parnassus gained,
On thy oppressive Glory's flaming pride
Young Emulation gazed, and gazing died.
The Muses of the Attic Stage impart
To many a Votary their kindred art;
And she who bids the Theban Eagle bear
Her lyric thunder through the stormy air,
How high soever she leads his daring flight, Ver. 119. See NOTE III.

Guides his bold rivals to an equal height.
Of all the Grecian Bards in Glory's race,
It Is thine alone, by thy unequalled pace,
To reach the goal with loud applause, and hear
No step approaching thine, no rival near.
Yet may not Judgment, with severe disdain,
Slight the young RHODIAN's variegated strain; Ver. 126. See NOTE IV.

Though with less force he strike an humbler shell,
Beneath his hand the notes of Passion swell.
His tender Genius, with alluring art,
Displays the tumult of the Virgin's heart,
When Love, like quivering rays that never rest,
Darts through each vein, and vibrates in her breast.
Though Nature feel his Verse, though she declare
Medea's magic is still potent there,
Yet Fancy sees the slighted Poet rove
In pensive anger through the Elysian Grove.
From Critic shades, whose supercilious pride
His Song neglected, or his Powers decried,
He turns indignant -- unopprest by fears,
Behold, he seeks the sentence of his Peers.
See their just band his honest claim allow,
See pleasure lighten on his laurell'd brow;
He soars the Critic's cold contempt above,
For VIRGIL greets him with fraternal love!
Hail, thou rich Column, on whose high-wrought frame
The Roman Muse supports her Epic fame!
Hail, great Magician, whose illusive charms
Gave pleasing luster to a Tyrant's arms,
To Jove's pure scepter turned his iron rod,
And made the Homicide a Guardian God!
Hail, wondrous Bard, to Glory's temple led
Through paths that Genius rarely deigns to tread;
For Imitation, she whose siren song
Betrays the skillful and unnerves the strong,
Preserving thee on her perfidious shore,
Where many a Poet had been wrecked before,
Led thee to heights that charm the astonished eye,
And with Invention's heaven in splendour vie.
As Rome herself, by long unwearied toil,
Gleaned the fair produce of each foreign soil;
From all her wide Dominion's various parts
Borrowed their laws, their usages, their arts;
Imported knowledge from each adverse zone,
And made the wisdom of the world her own:
Thy patient spirit thus, from every Bard
Whose mental riches won thy just regard,
Drew various treasure; which thy skill refined,
And in the fabric of thy Verse combined.
It was thy glory, as thy fond desire,
To echo the sweet notes of HOMER's lyre;
But with an art thy hand alone can reach,
An art that has endeared the strain of each.
So the young Nymph, whose tender arms embrace
An elder Sister of enchanting grace,
Though formed herself with every power to please,
By genuine character and native ease,
Yet fondly copies from her favorite Fair
Her mien, her motion, her attractive air,
Her robe's nice shape, her riband's pleasing hue,
And every ornament that strikes the view;
But she displays, by imitative art,
So quick a spirit, and so soft a heart,
The graceful mimic while our eyes adore,
We think the model cannot charm us more:
Though seen together, each more lovely shows,
And by comparison their beauty grows.
Some Critics, to decide which Bard prevails,
Weigh them like Jove, but not in golden scales;
In their false balance the injured GREEK they raise,
VIRGIL sinks loaded with their heavy praise. Ver. 190. See NOTE V.

Ingenuous Bard, whose mental rays divine
Shaded by modest doubts more sweetly shine;
Thou whose last breath, unconscious of the wrong,
Doomed to destruction thy sublimest Song;
How dull their incense in thy sight must burn,
How must thy spirit with abhorrence turn
From their disgusting rites, who at thy shrine
Blaspheme thy Master's name, to honor thine!
More equal tribute, in their simpler flowers,
The Poets offer to your separate powers;
For all poetic eyes delight to view
Your different forms, and with devotion due
In each the radiant Delphic God they own,
By beauteous majesty distinctly shown:
But they behold the lofty HOMER stand
The bright Colossus of the Rhodian land,
Beneath whose feet the waves submissive roll,
Whose towering head appears to prop the pole;
Stupendous Image! grand in every part,
And seeming far above the reach of mortal art.
In thee, thou lovely Mantuan Bard, appear
The softer features of the Belvidere;
That finished grace which fascinates all eyes;
Yet from the copying hand elusive flies:
Charms so complete, by such pure spirit warmed,
They make less perfect beauty seem deformed.
O had thy Muse, whose decorating skill
Could spread rich foliage over the leafless hill;
Had she, who knew with nicest hand to frame
The sweet unperishable wreaths of Fame;
Had she, exalted by a happier fate,
Virtue's free Herald, and no Slave of State,
Decked worthier shrines with her unfading flower,
And given to Freedom what she gave to Power;
Then with more keen delight and warmer praise
The world had listened to thy bolder lays;
Perchance had owed to thee (a mighty debt)
Verse where Perfection her bright seal had set,
Where Art could nothing blame and Nature naught regret.
Of coarser form, with less pathetic charms,
Hating with Stoic pride a Tyrant's arms,
In the keen fervor of that florid time
When youthful Fancy pours her hasty rhyme,
When all the mind's luxuriant shoots appear,
Untrimm'd by Art, by Interest, or Fear,
See daring LUCAN for that wreath contend,
Which Freedom twines for her poetic friend.
It Is thine, thou bold but injured Bard, it is thine!
Though Critic spleen insult thy rougher line;
Though wronged thy Genius, and thy Name misplaced
By vain distinctions of fastidious Taste;
Indignant Freedom, with just anger fired,
Shall guard the Poet whom herself inspired.
What though thy early, uncorrected page
Betrays some marks of a degenerate age;
Though many a tumid point thy verse contains,
Like warts projecting from Herculean veins;
Though like thy CATO thy stern Muse appear,
Her manners rigid, and her frown austere;
Like him, still breathing Freedom's genuine flame,
Justice her idol, Public Good her aim,
Well she supplies her want of softer art
By all the sterling treasures of the heart;
By Energy, from Independance caught,
And the free Vigor of unborrow'd Thought.
Thou Bard most injured by malicious fate,
Could not thy Blood appease a Tyrant's hate?
Must He, still galled by thy poetic claim,
With falsehood persecute thy moral fame?
Shall History's pen, to aid his vengeance won, Ver. 260. See NOTE VI.

Brand thee, brave Spirit, as an impious Son,
Who meanly feared to yield his vital flood,
And sought his safety by a Parent's blood?
Base calumny, at which Belief must halt,
And blind Credulity herself revolt.
Could that firm Youth become so vile a slave,
Whose voice new energy to virtue gave;
Whose Stoic soul all abject thoughts abhorred,
And owned no sordid passion as its lord;
Who in the trying hour of mortal pain,
While life was ebbing from his open vein,
Alike unconscious of Remorse and Fear,
His heart unshaken, and his senses clear,
Smiled on his doom, and, like the fabled bird
Whose music on Meander's bank was heard,
Formed into tuneful notes his parting breath,
And sung the approaches of undreaded death?
Rise, thou wronged Bard, above Detraction's reach,
Whose arts in vain thy various worth impeach;
Enjoy that fame thy spirit knew to prize,
And viewed so fondly with prophetic eyes.
Though the nice Critic of fastidious France
Survey thy Song with many a scornful glance,
And as a Goth the kinder judge accuse,
Who with their great CORNEILLE commends thy Muse,
Let Britain, eager as the Lesbian state
To shield thy Pompey from the wrongs of Fate,
To thee with pride a fond attachment show,
Thou Bard of Freedom, though the world's thy foe.
As keenly sensible of Beauty's sway,
Let our just isle such generous honor pay
To the fair partner of thy hapless life,
As Lesbos paid to Pompey's lovely Wife. Ver. 293. See NOTE VII.

Ye feeling Painters, who with genius warm
Delineate Virtue in her softest form,
Let ARGENTARIA on your canvass shine, Ver. 296. See NOTE VIII.

A graceful mourner at her Poet's shrine;
For, nobly fearless of the Tyrant's hate,
She mourns her murdered Bard in solemn state;
With pious, care she decks his splendid tomb,
Where the dark Cypress sheds its soothing gloom,
There frequent takes her solitary stand,
His dear Pharsalia in her faithful hand;
That hand, whose toil the Muses still rehearse,
Which fondly copied his unfinished Verse.
See, as she bends before his recent urn,
See tender Grief to Adoration turn.
O lovely Mourner, could my Song bestow
Unfading glory on thy generous woe,
Age after age thy virtue should record,
And thou should live immortal as thy Lord.
Him Liberty shall crown with endless praise,
True to her cause in Rome's degenerate days;
Him, like his Brutus, her fond eye regards,
And hails him as the last of Roman Bards.
END OF THE SECOND EPISTLE.
EPISTLE THE THIRD.
ARGUMENT OF THE THIRD EPISTLE.
Sketch of the Northern and the Provencal Poetry. -- The most distinguished
Epic Poets of Italy, Spain, Portugal, France, and England.

EPISTLE III.
BLESSED be the hand that with a generous care,
To the bright Crown which Learning loves to wear,
Restores the Gem, whose luster, faint and pale,
Died in the fold of dark Oblivion's veil.
Such praise, O MASON! to the Bard is due,
In whose fraternal guard thy Genius grew;
Over whose untimely grave thy Lyre has paid
Its just devotion to a Brother's shade:
And thus hereafter shall the British Muse,
In Memory's fane the fairest tablet choose,
To bid her sons your blended names admire,
The pride of Friendship's as of Fancy's choir.
Thy modest GRAY, solicitous to pierce
The dark and distant source of modern Verse,
By strings untried first taught his English Lyre
To reach the Gothic Harp's terrific fire:
The North's wild specter own his potent hand,
And Hell's nine portals at his voice expand;
With new existence by his Verse endued,
See Gothic Fable wakes her shadowy brood,
Which, in the Runic rhymes of many a Scald,
With pleasing dread our Northern sires appalled.
Ye brave Progenitors, ye vigorous Source
Of modern Freedom and of Europe's force,
While your rude minds, athirst for martial strife,
Mocked all the meaner arts of polished life,
The Muse still led you by her magic clue,
And from your savage strength new vigor drew.
In War's dire field your dauntless Bards appeared,
Alost their animating harps they reared,
Poured through the charging host their potent strain,
And swelled the fiery flood in Valor's vein.
Souls thus inspired, in every scene elate,
Defied the utmost rage of adverse fate;
In torturing death the Royal Captive sang,
And smiles of triumph hid his mortal pang. Ver. 36. See NOTE I.

Thus to brave ODIN's Songs, our Northern sire,
Rude, early framer of the modern Lyre,
Fierce Freedom gave an energy sublime,
Parent and Guardian of the Gothic Rhyme.
While nurtured in the North's protecting arms,
The modern Muse displayed her infant charms,
Like Jove's undaunted Child her spirit glowed,
And force Herculean in her cradle showed;
Her native scene in roughness she surpast,
Her breath tempestuous as the Northern blast:
But, when to softer climes the vagrant flew,
And bask'd beneath a sky of azure hue;
When for her throne the flowery South she chose,
And formed her crown of the Provencal Rose;
Warmed by a brighter Sun's relaxing beams,
She tuned her altered voice to tender themes:
Here her gay form a gaudier dress assumes,
And shines in Chivalry's imperial plumes;
Her votaries wear proud Honor's mystic glove,
And every lyre resounds Romantic Love;
Save when, to burst Oppression's mental chain,
Keen Satire mingles with this gallant train,
Strikes Priestly pride with Wit's vindictive flash,
And galls the ghostly Tyrant with her lash. Ver. 60 See NOTE II.

Afraid of Poesy's expansive flood,
These early Bards along the shallows feud
In some light skiff; for on the depths untried
No full-trimm'd vessel floats in Epic pride.
As infants, eager for regard, abound
In sportive efforts of uncertain sound,
Before their little artless lips can reach
The harder elements of perfect speech;
So the young language of each modern clime
Rose by prelusive lays to lofty rhyme.
Through many an age, while, in the Convent bred,
Over the chilled mind scholastic darkness spread,
Those keener Spirits, who from Nature caught
The warmth that kindles to Poetic thought,
Betrayed, Ambition! by thy blind desire,
Struck with ill-fated zeal the Latian lyre, Ver. 76. See NOTE III.

Though Discord's hand the jarring strings had crossed,
And all the sweetness of their tone was lost.
At length, fair Italy, luxuriant land,
Where Art's rich flowers in earliest bloom expand,
Thy daring DANTE his wild Vision sung, Ver. 81. See NOTE IV.

And raised to Epic pomp his native Tongue.
Down Arno's stream his new-form'd music floats,
The proud vale echoing with his Tuscan notes.
See the bold Bard now sink and now ascend,
Wherever Thought can pierce or Life extend;
In his wide circuit from Hell's drear abyss,
Through purifying scenes to realms of perfect bliss,
He seems begirt with all that airy throng,
Who brighten or debase the Poet's song.
Sublimest Fancy now directs his march
To opening worlds, through that infernal arch
Over whose rough summit aweful words are read,
That freeze each entering soul with hopeless dread.
Now at her bidding his strong numbers flow,
And rend the heart at Ugolino's woe;
While Nature's glory-giving tear bedews
A tale unrivaled by the Grecian Muse.
Now to those notes that milder grief inspire,
Pathetic Tenderness attunes his lyre,
Which, soft as murmurs of the plaintive dove,
Tells the sad issue of illicit love.
But all the worse companions of his way
Soon into different sounds his ductile voice betray:
Satiric Fury now appears his guide,
Through thorny paths of Enmity and Pride;
Now quaint Conceit his wandering steps misleads
Through all the hideous forms that Folly breeds;
Now Priestly Dullness the lost Bard enshrouds
In cold confusion and scholastic clouds.
Unequal Spirit! in thy various strain,
With all their influence Light and Darkness reign;
In thy strange Verse and wayward Theme alike
New forms of Beauty and Disorder strike;
Extremes of Harmony and Discord dwell,
The Seraph's music and the Demon's yell!
The patient Reader, to thy merit just,
With transport glows, and shudders with disgust.
Thy Failings sprung from thy disastrous time;
Thy stronger Beauties from a soul sublime,
Whose vigor burst, like the volcano's flame,
From central darkness to the sphere of fame.
Of gentler mind, and with a heart to feel
The fondest warmth of emulative zeal,
Thy festive Scholar, who adored thy Lays,
And graced thy Genius with no scanty praise,
The gay BOCCACIO, tempts the Italian Muse Ver. 127. See NOTE V.

More varied notes and different themes to choose;
Themes which her voice had dared not yet to sound,
Valor's heroic feats by Beauty crowned.
Sweet was the glowing Song; but, strange to tell,
On his bold lyre Oblivion's shadows fell;
His richer Tales engrossed the World's regard,
And the bright Novelist eclipsed the Bard.
In following ages, when Italia's shore
Blazed with the rising light of Classic lore,
Stern System led, from her new-founded school,
A Poet fashioned by her rigid rule:
Behold my Son! (his sapient Tut'ress cried)
Who throws the bonds of Gothic rhyme aside;
For whom these hands the Grecian Lyre new strung:
She spoke exulting, and TRISSINO sung. Ver. 142. See NOTE VI.

In his cold Verse he kept her Critic laws,
While Pedants owned their power, and yawn'd applause.
Indignant Fancy, who with scorn surveyed
The sleepy honors to proud System paid,
Smiling to see that on her rival's brow
The Poppy lurked beneath the Laurel bough,
Resolved in sportive triumph to display
The rich extent of her superior sway:
From Necromancy's hand, in happiest hour,
She caught the rod of visionary power;
And as aloft the magic wand she raised,
A peerless Bard with new effulgence blazed,
Born every law of System to disown,
And rule by Fancy's boundless power alone.
High in mid air, between the Moon and Earth,
The Bard of Pathos now, and now of Mirth,
Poised with his lyre between a Griffin's wings,
Her sportive darling, ARIOSTO, sings.
As the light cloud, whose varying vapors fly,
Driven by the zephyr of the evening sky,
Fixes and charms the never-wearied view,
By taking every shape and every hue;
So, by Variety's supreme control,
His changeful numbers seize the willing soul.
Enchanted by his Song, Attention sits,
With features catching every cast by fits,
Like the fond infant, in whose tender brain
Young Sensibility delights to reign;
While rapid Joy and Pain each other chase
Through the soft muscles of its April face.
In vain the slaves of System would discard
From Glory's classic train this airy Bard;
Delighted Nature her gay favorite crowned,
And Envy's clamor in her plaudit drowned.
Severe Morality, to censure moved,
His wanton Lyre with juster blame reproved;
But his sweet Song her anger so beguiled,
That, ere she finished her reproof, she smiled.
Of chaster fire, a rival name succeeds,
Whose bold and glowing hand Religion leads:
In solemn accent, and in sacred state,
With classic lore and Christian zeal elate,
Sweetly pathetic, and sublimely strong,
TASSO begins his more majestic song;
The Muse of Sion, not implored in vain,
Guides to the impassioned soul his heavenly strain.
Blush, BOILEAU, blush, and for that pride atone,
Which slandered Genius far above thy own;
And thou, great injured Bard, thy station claim
Amid the Demigods of Epic name;
Heir to a mantle by the Muses spun,
Of a poetic Sire the more poetic Son. Ver. 194. See NOTE VII.

Nor, though just Fame her richer palm devote
To the high-sounding lyre of serious note,
Shall gay TASSONI want his festive crown, Ver. 197. See NOTE VIII.

Who banished from the Muse her aweful frown,
And, tuning to light themes her lofty style,
Over her grave features spread a comic smile.
Such various Sons, of Epic fire possessed,
Italia fostered on her feeling breast.
Spain, whose bold genius with misjudging pride
O'ersteps true glory by too large a stride,
Claims higher merit from one Poet's birth,
Who rivals all the different Bards of earth:
With more than Niobe's parental boast,
She calls her single Son himself an Host,
And rashly judges that her VEGA's lyre Ver. 209. See NOTE IX.

Is equal to the whole Aonian quire.
Impetuous Poet! whose full brain supplied
Such floods of Verse, and in so quick a tide,
Their rapid swell, by its unrivaled height,
Pleased, yet produced more wonder than delight:
Though thy free rhyme from Fancy's fountain gush,
And with the grandeur of the torrent rush,
Its troubled streams in dark disorder roam,
With all the torrent's noise and all its foam.
To Emulation fired by TASSO's strain,
Thy spirit quitted the dramatic plain
To seek those Epic heights, sublimely calm,
Whence he had plucked his Idumean palm;
But, vainly struggling in a task too hard,
Sunk at the feet of that superior Bard.
Brave Spaniard! still thy wounded pride console;
Time shall not strike thy name from Glory's roll,
On which thy generous and fraternal hand
Emblaz'd each brother of thy tuneful band;
Thy Muse shall share the praise she joy'd to give,
And while thy language lasts thy fame shall live.
Perchance, though strange the paradox may seem,
That fame had risen with a brighter beam,
Had radiant Fancy less enriched thy mind:
Her lavish wealth, for wiser use designed,
Ruined the Poet by its splendid lure,
As India's mines have made his country poor.
With warmth more temperate, and in notes more clear,
That with Homeric richness fill the ear,
The brave ERCILLA sounds, with potent breath, Ver. 239. See NOTE X.

His Epic trumpet in the fields of death.
In scenes of savage war when Spain unfurled
Her bloody banners over the western world,
With all his Country's virtues in his frame,
Without the base alloy that stained her name,
In Danger's camp this military Bard,
Whom Cynthia saw on his nocturnal guard,
Recorded, in his bold descriptive lay,
The various fortune of the finished day;
Seizing the pen while Night's calm hours afford
A transient slumber to his satiate sword,
With noble justice his warm hand bestows
The meed of Honor on his valiant foes.
However precluded, by his generous aim,
From high pretensions to inventive fame,
His strongly-colour'd scenes of sanguine strife,
His softer pictures caught from Indian life,
Above the visionary forms of art,
Fire the awakened mind and melt the heart.
Though fiercest tribes her galling fetters drag,
Proud Spain must strike to Lusitania's flag,
Whose ampler folds, in conscious triumph spread,
Wave over her NAVAL POET's laureate head.
Ye Nymphs of Tagus, from your golden cell,
That caught the echo of his tuneful shell,
Rise, and to deck your darling's shrine provide
The richest treasures that the deep may hide:
From every land let grateful Commerce shower
Her tribute to the Bard who sung her power;
As those rich gales, from whence his GAMA caught
A pleasing earnest of the prize he sought,
The balmy fragrance of the East dispense,
So steals his Song on the delighted sense,
Astonishing, with sweets unknown before,
Those who never tasted but of classic lore.
Immortal Bard, thy name with GAMA vies,
Thou, like thy Hero, with propitious skies
The sail of bold adventure have unfurled,
And in the Epic ocean found a world.
'Twas thine to blend the Eagle and the Dove,
At once the Bard of Glory and of Love: Ver. 280. See NOTE XI.

Thy thankless Country heard thy varying lyre
To PETRARCH's Softness melt, and swell to HOMER's Fire!
Boast and lament, ungrateful land, a Name,
In life, in death, thy honor and thy shame.
Thou nobler realm, whom vanity betrays
To load thy lettered sons with lavish praise;
Where Eulogy, with one eternal smile, Ver. 287. See NOTE XII.

Heaps her faint roses in a withering pile:
A City milk-maid, on the first of May,
Who, pertly civil, and absurdly gay,
Forms her dull garland in fantastic state,
With ill-adjusted flowers and borrowed plate.
Can thou, self-flattering France, with justice vaunt
One Epic laurel as thy native plant?
How often a Gallic hand, with childish fire,
Has rattled Discord on the heroic lyre,
While their dull aid associate Critics bring,
And vainly teach the use of every string!
In Morals, as, with many an empty boast,
They practice virtue least who preach it most;
So, haughty Gallia, in thy Epic school,
No great Examples rise, but many a Rule. Ver. 302. See NOTE XIII.

Yet, though unjust to TASSO's nobler lays,
Keen BOILEAU shall not want his proper praise; Ver. 304. See NOTE XIV.

He, archly waving his satiric rod
Through the new path which first TASSONI trod,
Pursued his sportive march in happy hour,
And plucked from Satire's thorn a festive flower.
His sacerdotal War shall wake delight,
And smiles in Gravity herself excite,
While Canons live to quarrel or to feast,
And gall can tinge the spirit of a Priest.
Nor, gentle GRESSET, shall thy sprightly rhyme Ver. 313. See NOTE XV.

Cease to enchant the listening ear of Time:
In thee the Graces all their powers instill,
To touch the Epic chords with playful skill.
The hapless Parrot whom thy lays endear,
In piety and woe the Trojan's peer;
His heart as tender, and his love more pure,
Shall, like Aeneas, live of fame secure;
While female hands, with many a tender word,
Stroke the soft feathers of their favorite bird.
Yet not in childish sport, or trifling joy,
Do Gallic Fair-ones all their hours employ:
See lovely BOCCAGE, in ambition strong, Ver. 325. See NOTE XVI.

Build, with aspiring aim, her Epic Song!
By Glory fired, her rosy lips rehearse
Thy feats, Columbus, in unborrow'd Verse.
If this new Muse in War's dire field displays
No Grecian splendour, no Homeric blaze,
Attractive still, though not in pomp arrayed,
She charms like Zama, in her Verse portray'd;
Whose form from dress no gorgeous pride assumes,
Clad in a simple zone of azure plumes.
England's dear guest! this Muse of Gallia caught
From our inspiring Isle her ardent thought;
Here first she strove to reach, with venurous hope,
MILTON's chaste grandeur, and the grace of POPE;
And sweetly taught, in her mimetic strain,
The Songs of Britain to the Banks of Seine.
But see! with wounded Pride's indignant glance,
The angry Genius of presuming France
From ancient shrines their Epic wreaths would tear,
To swell the glory of her great VOLTAIRE. Ver. 344. See NOTE XVII.

O, formed in Learning's various paths to shine,
Encircled from thy birth by all the Nine,
On thee, blessed Bard, these rivals seemed to shower
Their various attributes and blended power!
But, when their lofty leader bade thee frame
The rich Heroic song on Henry's fame,
Sarcastic Humor, trifling with her lyre,
Took from the inspiring Muse her solemn fire.
No more her spirit like the Eagle springs,
Or rides the buoyant air with balanced wings:
Though rapid still, to narrow circuits bound,
She, like the darting Swallow, skims the ground.
Thy Verse displays, beneath an Epic name,
Wit's flinty Spark, for Fancy's solar Flame.
While yet thy hand the Epic chords embraced,
With playful spirit, and with frolic haste,
Such lively sounds thy rapid fingers drew,
And through the festive notes so lightly flew,
Nature and Fancy joined their charms to swell,
And laughing Humor crowned thy new Pucelle:
But the chaste Muses, startled at the sound,
Amid thy sprightly numbers blushed and frowned;
With decent anger, and becoming pride,
Severer Virtue threw the Song aside;
While Justice owned it, with a kinder glance,
The wittiest Levity of wanton France.
Now, graver Britain, amiably severe,
To thee, with native zeal, to thee I steer;
My venurous bark, its foreign circuit over,
Exulting springs to thy parental shore.
Thou gorgeous Queen, who on thy silvery coast,
Sit encircled by a filial host,
And see thy sons, the jewels of thy crown,
Blaze with each varying ray of rich renown;
If with just love I hold their Genius dear,
Lament their hardships, and their fame revere,
O bid thy Epic Muse, with honor due,
Range her departed Champions in my view!
See, on a party-colored steed of fire,
With Humor at his side, his trusty Squire,
Gay CHAUCER leads -- in form a Knight of old,
And his strong armor is of steel and gold;
But over it age a cruel rust has spread,
And made the brilliant metals dark as lead.
Now gentle SPENSER, Fancy's favorite Bard,
Awakes my wonder and my fond regard;
Encircling Fairies bear, in sportive dance,
His adamantine shield and magic lance;
While Allegory, dressed with mystic art,
Appears his Guide; but, promising to dart
A lambent glory round her listening Son,
She hides him in the web herself has spun.
Ingenuous COWLEY, the fond dupe of Wit,
Seems like a vapor over the field to flit;
In David's praise he strikes some Epic notes,
But soon down Lethe's stream their dying murmur floats.
While COWLEY vanished in an amorous riddle,
Up rose the frolic Bard of Bear and Fiddle:
His smile exhilarates the sullen earth,
Adorning Satire in the mask of Mirth:
Taught by his Song, Fanatics cease their jars,
And wise Astrologers renounce the Stars.
Unrivaled BUTLER! blessed with happy skill
To heal by comic verse each serious ill,
By Wit's strong flashes Reason's light dispense,
And laugh a frantic nation into sense!
Apart, and on a sacred hill retired,
Beyond all mortal inspiration fired,
The mighty MILTON sits -- an host around
Of listening Angels guard the holy ground;
Amazed they see a human form aspire
To grasp with daring hand a Seraph's lyre,
Inly irradiate with celestial beams,
Attempt those high, those soul-subduing themes,
(Which humbler Denizens of Heaven decline)
And celebrate, with sanctity divine,
The starry field from warring Angels won,
And GOD triumphant in his Victor Son.
Nor less the wonder, and the sweet delight,
His milder scenes and softer notes excite,
When at his bidding Eden's blooming grove
Breathes the rich sweets of Innocence and Love.
With such pure joy as our Forefather knew
When Raphael, heavenly guest, first met his view,
And our glad Sire, within his blissful bower,
Drank the pure converse of the aetherial Power,
Round the blessed Bard his raptured audience throng,
And feel their souls imparadis'd in song.
Of humbler mien, but not of mortal race,
Ill-fated DRYDEN, with Imperial grace,
Gives to the obedient lyre his rapid laws;
Tones yet unheard, with touch divine, he draws,
The melting fall, the rising swell sublime,
And all the magic of melodious rhyme.
See with proud joy Imagination spread
A wreath of honor round his aged head!
But two base Specter, though of different hue,
The Bard unhappy in his march pursue;
Two vile disgraceful Fiends, of race accursed,
Conceived by Spleen, by meagre Famine nursed,
Malignant Satire, mercenary Praise,
Shed their dark spots on his immortal bays.
Poor DAVENANT marched before, with nobler aim,
His keen eye fixed upon the palm of Fame,
But cruel Fortune doomed him to rehearse
A Theme ill-chosen, in ill-chosen Verse.
Next came Sir RICHARD, but in woeful plight,
DRYDEN's Led-horse first threw the luckless Knight.
He rose adventurous still -- O who may count
How often he tried a different Steed to mount!
Each angry steed his awkward rider flung;
Undaunted still he fell, and falling sung.
But Aesculapius, who, with grief distressed,
Beheld his offspring made a public jest,
Soon bade a livelier Son with mirth efface
The shame he suffered from Sir RICHARD's case.
Swift at the word his sprightly GARTH began
To make an And his high helmet was a Close-stool Pan. DISPENSARY.
helmet of a Close-stool Pan;
An Urinal he for his trumpet takes,
And at each blast he blows see Laughter shakes.
Yet peace -- new music floats on Aether's wings;
Say, is it Harmony herself who sings?
No! while enraptured Sylphs the Song inspire,
It Is POPE who sweetly wakes the silver lyre
To melting notes, more musically clear
Than Ariel whispered in Belinda's ear.
Too soon he quits them for a sharper tone;
See him, though formed to fill the Epic throne,
Decline the scepter of that wide domain,
To bear a Lictor's rod in Satire's train;
And, shrouded in a mist of moral spleen, Ver. 475. See NOTE XVIII.

Behold him close the visionary scene!
END OF THE THIRD EPISTLE.
EPISTLE THE FOURTH.
ARGUMENT OF THE FOURTH EPISTLE.
Remarks on the supposed Parsimony of Nature in bestowing Poetic Genius. -- The
Evils and the Advantages of Poetry exemplified in the Fate of different Poets.

EPISTLE IV.
SAY, generous Power, benignant Nature say,
Who temp'rest with thy touch our human clay,
Warming the fields of Thought with genial care,
The various fruits of mental growth to bear;
Shall not thy vot'ries glow with just disdain,
When Sloth or Spleen thy bounteous hand arraign?
Art thou the Niggard they pretend thou art,
A grudging Parent with a stepdame's heart;
And do thou shed, with rare, reluctant toil,
Bright Fancy's germins in the mental soil?
Is Genius, thy sweet Plant of richest power,
Whose dearly prized and long-expected flower
More tardy than the Aloe's bloom appears,
Ordained to blow but in a thousand years?
Perish the sickly thought -- let those who hold
Thy quickening influence so coy, so cold,
Calmly the habitable earth survey,
From time's first era to the passing day;
In what rude clime, beneath what angry skies,
Have plants Poetic never dared to rise?
In torrid regions, where it is toil to think,
Where souls in stupid ease supinely sink;
And where the native of the desert drear
Yields to blank darkness half his icy year;
In these unfriendly scenes, where each extreme
Of heat and cold forbids the mind to teem,
Poetic blossoms into Being start,
Spontaneous produce of the feeling heart.
Can we then deem that in those happier lands,
Where every vital energy expands;
Where Thought, the golden harvest of the mind,
Springs into rich luxuriance, unconfined;
That in such soils, with mental weeds o'ergrown,
The Seeds of Poesy were thinly sown?
Shall we deny the labor of the swain,
Who to the cultured earth confides the grain,
If all the vagrant harpies of the air
From its new bed the pregnant treasure tear;
If, when scarce rising, with a stem infirm,
It dies the victim of the mining worm;
If mildew, riding in the eastern gust,
Turns all its ripening gold to sable dust?
These foes combined (and with them who may cope?)
Are not more hostile to the Farmer's hope,
Than Life's keen passions to that lighter grain
Of Fancy, scattered over the infant brain.
Pleasure, the rambling Bird! the painted Jay!
May snatch the richest seeds of Verse away;
Or Indolence, the worm that winds with art
Through the close texture of the cleanest heart,
May, if they happily have begun to shoot,
With partial mischief wound the sickening root;
Or Avarice, the mildew of the soul,
May sweep the mental field and blight the whole;
Nay, the meek errors of the modest mind,
To its own vigor diffidently blind,
And that cold spleen, which falsely has declared
The powers of Nature and of Art impaired,
The gate that Genius has unclos'd may guard,
And rivet to the earth the rising Bard:
For who will quit, though from mean aims exempt,
The cares that summon, and the joys that tempt,
In many a lonely studious hour to try
Where latent springs of Poesy may lie;
Who will from social ease his mind divorce,
To prove in Art's wide field its secret force,
If, blind to Nature's frank parental love,
He deems that Verse, descended from above,
Like Heaven's more sacred signs, whose time is over,
A gift miraculous, conferred no more?
O Prejudice! thou bane of Arts, thou pest,
Whose russian powers the freeborn soul arrest;
Thou who, dethroning Reason, dare to frame
And issue thy proud laws beneath her name;
Thou Coaster on the intellectual deep,
Ordering each timid bark thy course to keep;
Who, lest some daring mind beyond thee steer,
Have raised, to vouch thy vanity and fear,
Herculean pillars where thy sail was furled,
And named thy bounds the Limits of the World.
Thou braggart, Prejudice, how often thy breath
Has doomed young Genius to the shades of death!
How often has thy voice, with brutal fire
Forbidding Female hands to touch the lyre,
Denied to Woman, Nature's favorite child,
The right to enter Fancy's opening wild!
Blessed be this smiling hour, when Britain sees
Her Fair-ones cancel such absurd decrees,
In one harmonious group, with graceful scorn,
Spring over the Pedant's fence of withered thorn,
And reach Parnassian heights, where, laurel-crown'd,
This softer Quire the notes of triumph sound;
Where SEWARD, leader of the lovely train,
Pours over heroic tombs her potent strain;
Potent to sooth the honored dead, and dart
Congenial virtue through each panting heart;
Potent through spirits masculine to spread
Poetic jealousy and envious dread;
If Love and Envy could in union rest,
And rule with blended sway a Poet's breast;
The Bards of Britain, with unjaundic'd eyes,
Will glory to behold such rivals rise.
Proceed, ye Sisters of the tuneful Shell, Ver. 103. See NOTE I.

Without a scruple, in that Art excel,
Which reigns, by virtuous Pleasurers soft control,
In sweet accordance with the Female soul;
Pure as yourselves, and like your charms designed
To bless the earth, and humanize mankind.
Wherever that Parent of engaging thought,
Warm Sensibility, like light, has taught
The bright'ning mirror of the mind to show
Nature's reflected forms in all their glow;
Where in full tides the fine affections roll,
And the warm heart invigorates the soul;
In that rich spot, where winds propitious blow,
Culture may teach poetic Fame to grow.
Refined Invention and harmonious Rhyme,
Are the slow gifts of Study and of Time;
But to the Bard whom all the Muses court,
His Sports are study, and his Studies sport.
Even at this period, when all tongues declare
Poetic talents are a gift most rare,
Unnumber'd Spirits, in our generous isle,
Are ripening now beneath kind Nature's smile,
Whom happy care might lead to lasting fame,
And art ennoble with a Poet's name.
Not that it is granted this high prize to gain.
By light effusions of a sportive vein,
The idle Ballad of a summer's morn,
The child of Frolic, in a moment born:
Who views such trifles with a vain regard,
But ill deserves the mighty name of Bard;
In different tints see virtuous GRESSET trace
The genuine spirit of Poetic race:
Je veux qu'epris d'un nom plus legitime,
Que non content de se voir estime,
Par son Genie un Amant de la rhyme
Emporte encor le plaisir d'etre aim
Qu'aux regions a lui meme inconnues
Ou voleront ses gracieux ecrits,
A ce tableau de ses moeurs ingenues,
Tous ses Lecteurs deviennent ses Amiss:
Que dissipant le prejuge vulgaire,
Il montre enfin que sans crime on peut plaire,
Et reunir, par un heureux lien,
L' Auteur charmant et le vrai Citoyen.

Let the true Bard (this pleasing Poet sings)
Bid his fair fame on strong foundations rest;
His be each honor that from Genius springs,
Esteemed by Judgment, and by Love carest;
His the Ambition, that in climes unknown,
Wherever his wandering volume may extend,
Wherever that Picture of his mind is shown,
In every Reader he may find a Friend.
Be it his aim to dart the living ray
Of purest pleasure over the enlightened earth;
And in sweet union let his works display
The Poet's fancy and the Patriot's worth.
Thus far, O GRESSET, on these points agreed,
My soul professes thy Poetic Creed;
Though the soft languor of thy song I blame,
Which present ease prefers to future fame,
Thy nobler maxims I with pride embrace,
That Verse should ever rise on Virtue's base,
And every master of this matchless art
Exalt the Spirit, and improve the Heart;
And many a Youth, now rising into Man,
Might build his glory on this noble plan,
With latent powers to make the structure last
Till Nature dies, and Time itself be past:
But O, how intricate the chances lurk,
Whose power may drive him from the doubtful work!
Of the strong minds by chaste Ambition nursed,
Who burn to rank in Honor's line the first,
One leaves the Lyre to seize the martial crown,
And one may drop it at a Parent's frown;
For still with scorn, which anxious fear inflames,
Parental care against Poesy declaims!
"Fly, fly, my son, (the fond adviser cries)
"That thorny path, where every peril lies;
"Oh! be not thou by that vain Art betrayed,
"Whose pains are Substance, and whose joys are Shade!
"Mark, in the Muses' miserable throng,
"What air-built visions cheat the Sons of Song!
"This is a lesson taught in every street,
"And Bards may read it at each Stall they meet:
"Take the first book, behold in many a page
"What promises of life from age to age;
"The Poet swears himself he never shall die,
"A troop of rhyming friends support the lie:
"Yet see how soon in Lethe's stream expire
"This leading Bard and his attendant Quire,
"And round these boards, their unexpected bier,
"Their ghosts breathe wisdom in the passing ear:
"For Stalls, like Churchyards, moral truth supply,
"And teach the visionary Bard to die.
"If present fame, thy airy hope, be gained,
"By vigils purchased, and by toil maintained,
"What base alloy must sink the doubtful prize,
"Which Envy poisons, and which Spleen denies!
"Observe what ills the living Bard attend,
"Neglect his lot, and Penury his end!
"Behold the world unequally requite.
"Two Arts that minister to chaste delight,
"Twin-sisters, who with kindred beauty strike
"In fortune different, as in charms alike:
"PAINTING, fair Danae! has her Golden shower,
"But Want is POESY's proverbial dower.
"See, while with brilliant genius, ill applied,
"The noble RUBENS flatters Royal pride,
"Makes all the Virtues, who abjured him, wait
"On abject JAMES, in allegoric state;
"Over the base Pedant his rich radiance flings,
"And deifies the meanest of our Kings;
"His Son rewards, and Honor owns the deed,
"The splendid Artist with a princely meed.
"Now turn to MILTON's latter days, and see
"How Bards and Painters in their fate agree;
"Behold him sell his heaven-illumin'd page,
"Mirac'lous child of his deserted age,
"For such a pittance, so ignobly slight,
"As wounded Learning blushes to recite! Ver. 210. See NOTE II.

"If changing times suggest the pleasing hope,
"That Bards no more with adverse fortune cope;
"That in this altered clime, where Arts increase,
"And make our polished Isle a second Greece;
"That now, if Poesy proclaims her Son,
"And challenges the wreath by Fancy won;
"Both Fame and Wealth adopt him as their heir,
"And liberal Grandeur makes his life her care;
"From such vain thoughts thy erring mind defend,
"And look on CHATTERTON's disastrous end.
"Oh, ill-starr'd Youth, whom Nature formed, in vain,
"With powers on Pindus' splendid height to reign!
"O dread example of what pangs await
"Young Genius struggling with malignant fate!
"What could the Muse, who fired thy infant frame
"With the rich promise of Poetic fame;
"Who taught thy hand its magic art to hide,
"And mock the insolence of Critic pride;
"What could her unavailing cares oppose,
"To save her darling from his desperate foes;
"From pressing Want's calamitous control,
"And Pride, the fever of the ardent soul?
"Ah, see, too conscious of her failing power,
"She quits her Nursling in his deathful hour!
"In a chill room, within whose wretched wall
"No cheering voice replies to Misery's call;
"Near a vile bed, too crazy to sustain
"Misfortune's wasted limbs, convulsed with pain,
"On the bare floor, with heaven-directed eyes,
"The hapless Youth in speechless horror lies!
"The poisonous vial, by distraction drained,
"Rolls from his hand, in wild contortion strained:
"Pale with life-wasting pangs, it is dire effect,
"And stung to madness by the world's neglect,
"He, in abhorrence of the dangerous Art,
"Once the dear idol of his glowing heart,
"Tears from his Harp the vain detested wires,
"And in the frenzy of Despair expires!
"Pernicious Poesy! thy baleful sway
"Exalts to weaken, flatters to betray;
"When thy sond Votary has to thee resigned
"The captive powers of his deluded mind,
"Fantastic hopes his swelling breast inflame,
"Tempestous passions tear his shattered frame,
"Which sinks; for round it seas of trouble roar,
"Admitting agony at every pore;
"While Dullness, whom no tender feelings check,
"Grins at his ruin, and enjoys the wreck;
"Seen through the mist which clouds her heavy eyes,
"The faults of Genius swell to double size,
"His generous faults, which her base pride makes known,
"Insulting errors so unlike her own.
"Far then, my Son, far from this Siren steer;
"Or, if her dulcet song must charm thy ear,
"Let Reason bind thee, like the Greek of yore,
"To catch her music, but escape her shore;
"For never shall the wretch her power can seize,
"Regain the port of Fortune, or of Ease."
Parental Fear thus warns the filial heart,
From this alluring, this insidious Art;
But, wounded thus by keen Invective's edge,
Say, can the Muse no just defense allege?
In striking contrast has she not to paint
Her prosperous Hero, as her murdered Saint?
It Is true, she often has fruitless vigils kept,
And often, with unavailing sorrow, wept
Her injured Vot'ries, doomed to quit the earth
In the sharp pangs of ill-requited worth.
Ye noble Martyrs of poetic name,
"Bliss to your Spirits, to your Mem'ries Fame!"
By generous Honor be your toils revered,
To grateful Nature be your names endeared!
To all who Pity's feeling nerve possess,
Doubly endeared by undeserved distress.
But, to relieve the pain your wrongs awake,
O let the Muse her brighter records take,
Review the crown by living Merit won,
And share the triumph of each happier Son.
If the young Bard who starts for Glory's goal,
Can sat with present fame his ardent soul,
Poetic story can with truth attest
This rarest, richest prize in life possessed.
See the GAY POET of Italia's shore,
Whom with fond zeal her feeling sons adore,
Pass, while his heart with exultation beats,
Poetic Mantua's applauding streets!
See him, while Justice smiles, and Envy snarls,
Receive the Laurel from Imperial Charles! Ver. 298. See NOTE III.

And lo, the unfading Gift still shines above
Each perishable mark of Royal Love.
If humbler views the tuneful mind inflame,
If to be rich can be a Poet's aim,
The Muse may show, but in a different clime,
Wealth, the fair produce of applauded Rhyme.
Behold the favorite Bard of liberal Spain,
Her wondrous VEGA, of exhaustless vein;
From honest Poverty, his early lot,
With honor sullied by no vicious blot,
Behold him rise on Fortune's glittering wings,
And almost reach the opulence of Kings;
The high-soul'd Nobles of his native land,
Enrich their Poet with so frank a hand!
For him Pieria's rock with treasure teems,
For him her fountains gush with golden streams; Ver. 314. See NOTE IV.

And never did Fortune, with a love more just,
Her splendid stores to worthier hands entrust;
For with the purest current, wide and strong,
His Charity surpast his copious Song.
If the Enthusiast higher hope pursues,
If from his commerce with the inspiring Muse
He seeks to gain, by no mean aims confined,
Freedom of thought and energy of mind;
To raise his spirit, with aetherial fire,
Above each little want and low desire;
O turn where MILTON flames with Epic rage,
Unhurt by poverty, unchill'd by age:
Though danger threaten his declining day,
Though clouds of darkness quench his visual ray,
The heavenly Muse his hallowed spirit fills
With raptures that surmount his matchless ills;
From earth she bears him to bright Fancy's goal,
And distant fame illuminates his soul!
Too often the wealthy, to proud follies born,
Have turned from lettered Poverty with scorn.
Dull Opulence! thy narrow joys enlarge;
To shield weak Merit is thy noblest charge:
Search the dark scenes where drooping Genius lies,
And keep from sorriest sights a nation's eyes,
That, from expiring Want's reproaches free,
Our generous country may never weep to see
A future CHATTERTON by poison dead,
An OTWAY fainting for a little bread.
If deaths like these deformed our native isle,
Some English Bards have bask'd in Fortune's smile.
Alike in Station and in Genius blessed,
By Knowledge praised, by Dignity carest,
POPE's happy Freedom, all base wants above,
Flowed from the golden stream of Public Love;
That richest antidote the Bard can seize,
To save his spirit from its worst disease,
From mean Dependence, bright Ambition's bane,
Which blushing Fancy strives to hide in vain.
To POPE the titled Patron joy'd to bend,
Still more ennobled when proclaimed his friend;
For him the hands of jarring Faction join
To keep their tribute on his HOMER's shrine,
Proud of the frank reward his talents find,
And nobly conscious of no venal mind,
With the just world his fair account he clears,
And owns no debt to Princes or to Peers.
Yet, while our nation feels new thirst arise
For that pure joy which Poesy supplies,
Bards, whom the tempting Muse enlists by stealth,
Perceive their path is not the road to wealth,
To honorable wealth, young Labor's spoil,
The due reward of no inglorious toil;
Whose well-earn'd comforts noblest minds engage,
The just asylum of declining age;
Else had we seen a warm Poetic Youth
Change Fiction's roses for the thorns of Truth,
From Fancy's realm, his native field, withdraw,
To pay hard homage to severer Law.
O thou bright Spirit, whom the Asian Muse
Had fondly steeped in all her fragrant dews,
And over whose early Song, that mental feast,
She breathed the sweetness of the rifled East;
Since independent Honor's high control
Detached from Poesy thy ardent soul,
To seek with better hopes Persuasion's seat,
Blessed be those hopes, and happy that retreat!
Which with regret all British Bards must see,
And mourn a Brother lost in losing thee.
Nor leads the Poet's path to that thronged gate
Where crouching Priests on proud Preferment wait;
Where, while in vain a thousand vot'ries fawn,
She robes her favorite few in hallowed Lawn:
Else, liberal MASON, had thy spotless name,
The Ward of Virtue as the Heir of Fame,
In lists of mitred Lords been still unread,
While Mitres drop on many a Critic's head?
Peace to all such, whose decent brows may bear
Those sacred honors placed by Learning there;
May just respect from brutal insult guard
Their Crown, unenvied by the genuine Bard!
Let Poesy, embellished by thy care,
Pathetic MASON! with just pride declare,
Thy breast must feel a more exulting fire,
Than Pomp can give, or Dignity inspire,
When Nature tells thee that thy Verse imparts
The thrill of pleasure to ten thousand hearts;
And often has she heard ingenuous Youth,
Accomplished Beauty, and unbiased Truth,
Those faithful harbingers of future fame,
With tender interest pronounce thy name
With lively gratitude for joy refined,
Gift of thy Genius to the feeling mind.
These are the honors which the Muse confers,
The radiant Crown of living light is here is;
And on thy brow she gave those gems to blaze,
That far outshine the Mitre's transient rays;
Gems that shall mock malignant Envy's breath,
And shine still brighter through the shades of death.
For me, who feel, whenever I touch the lyre,
My talents sink below my proud desire;
Who often doubt, and sometimes, credit give,
When Friends assure me that my Verse will live;
Whom health too tender for the bustling throng
Led into pensive shade and soothing song;
Whatever fortune my unpolished rhymes
May meet, in present or in future times,
Let the blessed Art my grateful thoughts employ,
Which sooths my sorrow and augments my joy;
Whence lonely Peace and social Pleasure springs,
And Friendship, dearer than the smile of Kings!
While keener Poets, querulously proud,
Lament the Ills of Poesy aloud,
And magnify, with Irritation's zeal,
Those common evils we too strongly feel,
The envious Comment and the subtle Style
Of specious Slander, stabbing with a smile;
Frankly I wish to make her Blessings known,
And think those Blessings for her Ills atone:
Nor would my honest pride that praise forego,
Which makes Malignity yet more my foe.
If heartfelt pain ever led me to accuse
The dangerous gift of the alluring Muse,
'Twas in the moment when my Verse impressed
Some anxious feelings on a Mother's breast.
O thou fond Spirit, who with pride have smiled,
And frowned with fear, on thy poetic child,
Pleased, yet alarmed, when in his boyish time
He sighed in numbers, or he laughed in rhyme;
While thy kind cautions warned him to beware
Of Penury, the Bard's perpetual snare;
Marking the early temper of his soul,
Careless of wealth, nor fit for base control:
Thou tender Saint, to whom he owes much more
Than ever Child to Parent owed before,
In life's first season, when the fever's flame
Shrunk to deformity his shrivelled frame,
And turned each fairer image in his brain
To blank confusion and her crazy train,
'Twas thine, with constant love, through lingering years,
To bathe thy Idiot Orphan in thy tears;
Day after day, and night succeeding night,
To turn incessant to the hideous sight,
And frequent watch, if happily at thy view
Departed Reason might not dawn anew.
Though medicinal art, with pitying care,
Could lend no aid to save thee from despair,
Thy fond maternal heart adhered to Hope and Prayer:
Nor prayed in vain; thy child from Powers above
Received the sense to feel and bless thy love;
O might he thence receive the happy skill,
And force proportioned to his ardent will,
With Truth's unfading radiance to emblaze
Thy virtues, worthy of immortal praise!
Nature, who decked thy form, with Beauty's flowers,
Exhausted on thy soul her finer powers;
Taught it with all her energy to feel
Love's melting softness, Friendship's fervid zeal,
The generous purpose, and the active thought,
With Charity's diffusive spirit fraught;
There all the best of mental gifts she placed,
Vigor of Judgment, purity of Taste,
Superior parts, without their spleenful leaven,
Kindness to Earth, and confidence in Heaven.
While my fond thoughts over all thy merits roll,
Thy praise thus gushes from my filial soul;
Nor will the Public with harsh rigor blame
This my just homage to thy honored name;
To please that Public, if to please be mine,
Thy Virtues trained me -- let the praise be thine.
Since thou have reached that world where Love alone,
Where Love Parental can exceed thy own;
If in celestial realms the blessed may know
And aid the objects of their care below,
While in this sublunary scene of strife
Thy Son possesses frail and feverish life,
If Heaven allot him many an added hour,
Gild it with virtuous thought and mental power,
Power to exalt, with every aim refined,
The loveliest of the Arts that bless mankind!
END OF THE FOURTH EPISTLE.
EPISTLE THE FIFTH.
ARGUMENT OF THE FIFTH EPISTLE.
Examination of the received opinion, that supernatural Agency is essential to
the Epic Poem. -- The folly and injustice of all arbitrary systems in Poetry.
-- The Epic province not yet exhausted. -- Subjects from English History the
most interesting. -- A national Epic Poem the great desideratum in English
literature. -- The Author's wish of seeing it supplied by the genius of Mr.
MASON.

EPISTLE V.
ILL-FATED Poesy! as human worth,
Praised, yet unaided, often sinks to earth;
So sink thy powers; not doomed alone to know
Scorn, or neglect, from an unfeeling Foe,
But destined more oppressive wrong to feel
From the misguided Friend's perplexing zeal.
Such Friends are those, who in their proud display
Of thy young beauty, and thy early sway,
Pretend you are robbed of all thy warmth sublime,
By the benumbing touch of modern Time.
What! is the Epic Muse, that lofty Fair,
Who makes the discipline of Earth her care!
That mighty Minister, whom Virtue leads
To train the noblest minds to noblest deeds!
Is she, in office great, in glory rich,
Degraded to a poor, pretended Witch,
Who raised her spells, and all her magic power,
But on the folly of the favoring hour?
Whose dark, despised illusions melt away
At the clear dawn of Philosophic day?
To such they sink her, who lament her fall
From the high Synod of the Olympian Hall;
Who worship System, hid in Fancy's veil,
And think that all her Epic force must fail,
If she no more can borrow or create
Celestial Agents to uphold her state.
To prove if this famed doctrine may be found.
To rest on solid; or on sandy ground,
Let Critic Reason all her light diffuse
Over the wide empire of this injured Muse,
To guide our search to every varied source
And separate sinew of her vital force. --
To three prime powers within the human frame,
With equal energy she points her aim:
By pure exalted Sentiment she draws
From Judgment's steady voice no light applause;
By Nature's simple and pathetic strains,
The willing homage of the Heart she gains;
The precious tribute she receives from these,
Shines undebas'd by changing Time's decrees;
The noble thought, that fired a Grecian soul,
Keeps over a British mind its firm control;
The scenes, where Nature seems herself to speak,
Still touch a Briton, as they touched a Greek:
To captivate admiring Fancy's eyes,
She bids celestial decorations rise;
But, as a playful and capricious child
Frowns at the splendid toy on which it smiled;
So wayward Fancy now with scorn surveys
Those specious Miracles she loved to praise;
Still fond of change, and fickle Fashion's dupe,
Now keen to soar, and eager now to stoop,
Her Gods, Dev'ls, Saints, Magicians, rise and fall,
And now she worships each, now laughs at all.
If then within the rich and wide domain
Over which the Epic Muse delights to reign,
One province weaker than the rest be found,
It Is her Celestial, Sphere, or Fairy Ground:
Her realm of Marvels is the distant land,
Over which she holds a perilous command;
For, placed beyond the reach of Nature's aid,
Here her worst foes her tottering force invade:
Over the wide precinct proud Opinion towers,
And withers with a look its altered powers;
While lavish Ridicule, pert Child of Taste!
Turns the rich confine to so poor a waste,
That some, who deem it but a cumbrous weight,
Would lop this Province from its Parent State.
What mighty voice first spoke this wondrous law,
Which ductile Critics still repeat with awe --
That man's unkindling spirit must refuse
A generous plaudit to the Heroic Muse,
However she paint her scenes of manly life,
If no superior Agents aid the strife?
In days of courtly wit, and wanton mirth,
The loose PETRONIUS gave the maxim birth; Ver. 76. See NOTE I.

Perchance to sooth the envious Nero's ear,
And sink the Bard whose fame he sighed to hear;
To injure LUCAN, whose adventurous mind,
Inflamed by Freedom, with just scorn resigned.
The exhausted fables of the starry pole,
And found a nobler theme in CATO's soul:
To wound him, in the mask of Critic art,
The subtle Courtier launched this venomed dart,
And following Critics, fond of Classic lore,
Still echo the vain law from shore to shore;
On Poets still for Deities they call,
And deem mere earthly Bards no Bards at all.
Yet, if by fits the mighty HOMER nods,
Where sinks he more than with his sleepy Gods?
Even LUCAN proves, by his immortal name,
How weak the dagger levelled at his fame;
For in his Song, which Time will never forget,
If Taste, who much may praise, will much regret,
It Is not the absence of the Olympian state,
Embroiled by jarring Gods in coarse debate:
It Is nice arrangement, Nature's easy air,
In scenes unfolded with superior care;
It Is softer diction, elegantly terse,
And the fine polish of Virgilian Verse.
O blind to Nature! who assert the Muse
Must over the human frame her empire lose,
Failing to fly, in Fancy's wild career,
Above this visible diurnal sphere!
Behold yon pensive Fair! who turns with grief
The tender Novel's soul-possessing leaf!
Why with moist eyes to those soft pages glu'd,
Forgetting her fixed hours of sleep and food;
Why does she keenly grasp its precious woes,
Nor quit the volume till the story close?
It Is not that Fancy plays her revels there,
Cheating the mind with lucid forms of air;
It Is not that Passion, in a style impure,
Holds the warm spirit by a wanton lure:
It Is suffering Virtue's sympathetic sway,
That all the fibers of her breast obey;
It Is Action, where Immortals claim no part;
It Is Nature, grappled to the human heart.
If this firm Sovereign of the feeling breast
Can thus the fascinated thought arrest,
And through the bosom's deep recesses pierce,
Ungrac'd, unaided by enchanting Verse,
Say! shall we think, with limited control,
She wants sufficient force to seize the soul,
When Harmony's congenial tones convey
Charms to her voice, that aid its magic sway?
If Admiration's hand, with eager grasp,
Her darling HOMER's deathless volume clasp,
Say to what scenes her partial eyes revert!
Say what they first explore, and last desert!
The scenes that glitter with no heavenly blaze,
Where human agents human feelings raise,
While Truth, enamored of the lovely line,
Cries to their parent Nature, "These are thine."
When Neptune rises in Homeric state,
And on their Lord the Powers of Ocean wait;
Though pliant Fancy trace the steps he trod,
And with a transient worship own the God,
Yet colder readers with indifference view,
The Sovereign of the deep, and all his vassal crew,
Nor feel his watery pomp their mind enlarge,
More than the pageant of my Lord May'r's barge.
But when Achilles' wrongs our eyes engage,
All bosoms burn with sympathetic rage:
And when thy love parental, Chief of Troy!
Hastes to relieve the terrors of thy boy,
Our senses in thy fond emotion join,
And every heart's in unison with thine.
Still in the Muse's ear shall Echo ring,
That heavenly Agents are her vital spring?
Those who conclude her winning charms arise
From Beings darting from the distant skies,
Appear to cherish a conceit as vain,
As once was harbored in Neanthus' brain,
When he believed that harmony must dwell
In the cold concave of the Orphic shell:
The ancient Lyre, to which the Thracian sung,
Whose hallowed chords were in a temple hung,
The shallow Youth with weak ambition sought,
And of the pilfering Priest the relic bought;
Viewing his treasure with deluded gaze,
He deemed himself the heir of Orphic praise;
But when his awkward fingers tried to bring
Expected music from the silent string,
Not even the milder brutes his discord bore,
But howling dogs the fancied Orpheus tore. Ver. 166. See NOTE II.

When the true Poet, in whose frame are joined
Softness of Heart and Energy of Mind,
His Epic scene's expansive limit draws,
Faithful to Nature's universal laws;
If through her various walks he boldly range,
Marking how often her pliant features change;
If, as she teaches, his quick powers supply
Successive pictures to the astonished eye,
Where noblest passions noblest deeds inspire,
And radiant souls exhibit all their fire;
Where softer forms their sweet attractions blend,
And suffering Beauty makes the world her friend;
If thus he build his Rhyme, with varied art,
On each dear interest of the human heart,
His genius, by no vain conceits betrayed,
May spurn faint Allegory's feeble aid.
The Heroic Muse, in earthly virtue strong,
May drive the host of Angels from her Song,
As her fair Sister Muse, the Tragic Queen,
Has banished Ghosts from her pathetic scene,
Though her high soul, by SHAKESPEARE's magic swayed,
Still bends to buried Denmark's aweful Shade.
If we esteem this Epic Queen so great,
To spare her heavenly train, yet keep her state,
It Is not our aim, with systematic pride,
To sink their glory, or their powers to hide,
Who add, when folded in the Muse's arms,
Celestial beauty to her earthly charms.
Sublimely fashioned, by no mortal hands,
The dome of mental Pleasure wide expands:
Formed to preside over its allotted parts,
At different portals stand the separate Arts;
But every portal different paths may gain,
Alike uniting in the mystic Fane.
Contentious mortals on these paths debate;
Some, wrangling on the road, never reach the gate,
While others, armed with a despotic rod,
Allow no pass but what themselves have trod.
The noblest spirits, to this foible prone,
Have slandered powers congenial with their own:
Hence, on a Brother's genius MILTON frowned,
Scorning the graceful chains of final sound,
And to one form confined the free sublime,
Insulting DRYDEN as the Man of Rhyme.
Caprice still gives this lasting struggle life;
Rhyme and Blank Verse maintain their idle strife:
The friends of one are still the other's foes,
For stubborn Prejudice no mercy knows.
As in Religion, Zealots, blindly warm,
Neglect the Essence, while they grasp the Form;
Poetic Bigots, thus perversely wrong,
Think Modes of Verse comprize the Soul of Song.
If the fine statuary fill his part
With all the powers of energetic Art;
If to the figures, that, with skill exact,
His genius blends in one impassioned act,
If to this Group such speaking force he give,
That startled Nature almost cries "They live;"
All tongues with zeal the enchanting work applaud,
Nor the great Artist of due praise defraud,
Whether he formed the rich expressive mass
Of Parian marble, or Corinthian brass;
For each his powers might fashion to fulfill
The noblest purpose of mimetic skill;
Each from his soul might catch Promethean fire,
And speak his talents, till the world expire.
It Is thus that MILTON's Verse, and DRYDEN's Rhyme,
Are proof alike against the rage of Time;
Each Master modeled, with a touch so bold,
The rude materials which he chose to mould,
That each his portion to perfection brought,
Accomplishing the glorious end he sought.
False to themselves, and to their interest blind,
Are those cold judges, of fastidious mind,
Who with vain rules the suffering Arts would load,
Who, ere they smile, consult the Critic's code;
Where, puzzled by the different doubts they see,
(For who so often as Critics disagree?)
They lose that pleasure by free spirits seized,
In vainly settling how they should be pleased.
Far wiser those, who, with a generous joy,
Nor blindly fond, nor petulantly coy,
Follow each movement of the varying Muse,
Whatever step her airy form may choose,
Nor to one march her rapid feet confine,
While ease and spirit in her gesture join;
Those who facilitate her free desire,
To melt the heart, or set the soul on fire;
Who, if her voice to simple Nature lean,
And fill with Human forms her Epic scene;
Pleased with her aim, assist her moral plan,
And feel with manly sympathy for Man:
Or if she draw, by Fancy's magic tones,
Aetherial Spirits from their sapphire thrones,
Her Heavenly shapes with willing homage greet,
And aid, with ductile thought, her bright deceit;
For, if the Epic Muse still wish to tower
Above plain Nature's firm and graceful power,
Though Critics think her vital powers are lost
In cold Philosophy's petrific frost;
That Magic cannot her sunk charms restore,
That Heaven and Hell can yield her nothing more;
Yet may she dive to many a secret source
And copious spring of visionary force:
India yet holds a Mythologic mine,
Her strength may open, and her art refine:
Though Asian spoils the realms of Europe fill,
Those Eastern riches are unrifled still;
Genius may there his course of honor run,
And spotless Laurels in that field be won. Ver. 276. See NOTE III.

Yet nobler aims the Bards of Britain court,
Who steer by Freedom's star to Glory's port;
Our generous Isle, with far superior claim,
Asks for her Chiefs the palm of Epic fame.
In every realm wherever the Heroic Muse
Has deigned her glowing spirit to infuse,
Her tuneful Sons with civic splendour blaze,
The honored Heralds of their country's praise,
Save in our land, the nation of the earth
Ordained to give the brightest Heroes birth! --
By some strange fate, which ruled each Poet's tongue,
Her dearest Worthies yet remain unsung.
Critics there are, who, with a scornful smile,
Reject the annals of our martial Isle,
And, dead to patriot Passion, coldly deem
They yield for lofty Song no touching theme.
What! can the British heart, humanely brave,
Feel for the Greek who lost his female slave?
Can it, devoted to a savage Chief,
Swell with his rage, and soften with his grief?
And shall it not with keener zeal embrace
Their brighter cause, who, born of British race,
With the strong cement of the blood they spilt,
The splendid fane of British Freedom built?
Blessed Spirits, who, with kindred fire endued,
Through different ages this bright work pursued,
May Art and Genius crown your sainted band
With that poetic wreath your Deeds demand!
While, led by Fancy through her wide domain,
Our steps advance around her Epic plain;
While we survey each laurel that it bore,
And every confine of the realm explore,
See Liberty, arrayed in light serene,
Pours her rich luster over the expanding scene!
Thee, MASON, thee she views with fond regard,
And calls to nobler heights her favorite Bard.
Tracing a circle with her blazing spear,
"Here," cries the Goddess, "raise thy fabric here,
Build on these rocks, that to my reign belong,
The noblest basis of Heroic Song!
Fix here! and, while thy growing works ascend,
My voice shall guide thee, and my arm defend."
As thus she speaks, methinks her high behest
Imparts pure rapture to thy conscious breast,
Pure as the joy immortal NEWTON found,
When Nature led him to her utmost bound,
And clearly showed, where unborn ages lie,
The distant Comet to his daring eye;
Pure as the joy the Sire of mortals knew,
When blissful Eden opened on his view,
When first he listened to the voice Divine,
And wondering heard, "This Paradise is thine."
With such delight may thou her gift receive!
May thy warm heart with bright ambition heave
To raise a Temple to her hallowed name,
Above what Grecian artists knew to frame!
Of English form the sacred fabric rear,
And bid our Country with just rites revere
The Power, who sheds, in her benignant smile,
The brightest Glory on our boasted Isle!
Justly on thee the inspiring Goddess calls;
Her mighty task each weaker Bard appalls:
It Is thine, O MASON! with unbaffled skill,
Each harder duty of our Art to fill;
It Is thine, in robes of beauty to array,
And in bright Order's lucid blaze display,
The forms that Fancy, to thy wishes kind,
Stamps on the tablet of thy clearer mind.
How softly sweet thy notes of pathos swell,
The tender accents of Elfrida tell;
Caractacus proclaims, with Freedom's fire,
How rich the tone of thy sublimer Lyre;
Even in this hour, propitious to thy fame,
The rural Deities repeat thy name:
With festive joy I hear the sylvan throng
Hail the completion of their favorite Song,
Thy graceful Song! in honor of whose power,
Delighted Flora, in her sweetest bower,
Weaves thy unfading wreath; -- with fondest care,
Proudly she weaves it, emulously fair,
To match that crown, which in the Mantuan grove
The richer Ceres for her VIRGIL wove!
See! his Euridice herself once more
Revisits earth from the Elysian shore!
Behold! she hovers over thy echoing glade!
Envy, not love, conducts the pensive Shade,
Who, trembling at thy Lyre's pathetic tone,
Fears lest Nerina's fame surpass her own.
Thou happy Bard! whose sweet and potent voice
Can reach all notes within the Poet's choice;
Whose vivid soul has led thee to infuse
Dramatic life in the preceptive Muse;
Since, blessed alike with Beauty and with Force,
Thou rivall'st VIRGIL in his Sylvan course,
O be it thine the higher palm to gain,
And pass him in the wide Heroic plain!
To sing, with equal fire, of nobler themes,
To gild Historic Truth with Fancy's beam!
To Patriot Chiefs unsung thy Lyre devote,
And swell to Liberty the lofty note!
With humbler aim, but no ungenerous view,
My steps, less firm, their lower path pursue;
Of different Arts I search the ample field,
Mark its past fruits, and what it yet may yield;
With willing voice the praise of Merit sound,
And bow to Genius wheresoever found;
Over my free Verse bid noblest names preside,
Though Party's hostile lines those names divide;
Party! whose murdering spirit I abhor,
More subtly cruel, and less brave than War.
Party! insidious Fiend! whose vapors blind
The light of Justice in the brightest mind;
Whose feverish tongue, whence deadly venom flows,
Basely belies the merit of her foes!
O that my Verse with magic power were blessed,
To drive from Learning's field this baleful pest!
Fond, fruitless wish! the mighty task would foil
The firmest sons of Literary Toil;
In vain a lettered Hercules might rise
To cleanse the stable where this Monster lies:
Yet, if the Imps of her malignant brood,
With all their Parent's acrid gall endu'd;
If Spleen pours forth, to Mockery's apish tune,
Her gibing Ballad, and her base Lampoon,
On fairest names, from every blemish free,
Save what the jaundic'd eyes of Party see;
My glowing scorn will execrate the rhyme,
Though laughing Humor strike its tuneful chime;
Though keenest Wit the glittering lines invest
With all the splendour of the Adder's crest.
Sublimer MASON! not to thee belong
The reptile beauties of envenomed Song.
Thou chief of living Bards! O be it ours,
In fame though different, as of different powers,
Party's dark clouds alike to rise above,
And reach the firmament of Public Love!
May thou ascend Parnassus' highest mound,
In triumph there the Epic Trumpet sound;
While, with no envious zeal, I thus aspire
By just applause to fan thy purer fire;
And of the Work which Freedom pants to see,
Which thy firm Genius claims reserved for thee,
In this frank style my honest thoughts impart,
If not an Artist yet a friend to Art.
NOTES.
NOTES TO THE FIRST EPISTLE.
NOTE I. Ver. 7.
SUCH dark decrees have lettered Bigots penned,
Yet seized that honored name, the Poet's Friend.]
Of the several authors who have written on Epic Poetry, many of the most
celebrated are more likely to confound and depress, than to enlighten and exalt
the young Poetical Student. The Poetics of Scaliger, which are little more than
a labored panegyric of Virgil, would lead him to regard the Aeneid as the only
standard of perfection; and the more elegant and accomplished Vida inculcates
the same pusillanimous lesson, though in spirited and harmonious verse.

Unus hic ingenio praestanti gentis Achivae
Divinos vates long superavit, et art,
Aureus immortale sonans. stupet ipsa pavetque,
Quamvis ingentem miretur Graecia Homerum.
Ergo ipsum ante alios animo venerare Maronem,
Atque unum sequere, utque potes, vestigia serva!
VIDA. See how the Grecian Bards, at distance thrown,
With reverence bow to this distinguished son;
Immortal sounds his golden lines impart,
And naught can match his Genius but his Art;
Even Greece turns pale and trembles at his fame,
Which shades the luster of her Homer's name.
Hence, sacred Virgil from thy soul adore
Above the rest, and to thy utmost power
Pursue the glorious paths he struck before.
PITT's Translation. A Critic, who lately rose to great eminence in our own
country, has endeavored by a more singular method to damp the ardour of
inventive Genius, and to annihilate the hopes of all who would aspire to the
praise of originality in this higher species of poetical composition. He has
attempted to establish a Triumvirate in the Epic world, with a perpetuity of
dominion. Every reader who is conversant with modern criticism will perceive
that I allude to the following passage in the famous Dissertation on the sixth
Book of Virgil: -- "Just as Virgil rivalled Homer, so Milton emulated both of
them. He found Homer possessed of the province of Morality; Virgil of Politics;
and nothing left for him but that of Religion. This he seized, as aspiring to
share with them in the government of the Poetic world: and, by means of the
superior dignity of his subject, has gotten to the head of that Triumvirate,
which took so many ages in forming. these are the three species of the Epic
Poem; for its largest sphere is human action, which can be considered but in a
moral, political, or religious view: and these the three Makers; for each of
their Poems was struck out at a heat, and came to perfection from its first
essay. Here then the grand scene was closed, and all farther improvements of
the Epic at an end."

I apprehend that few critical remarks contain more absurdity (to use the
favorite expression of the author I have quoted) than the preceding lines.
Surely Milton is himself a proof that human action is not the largest sphere of
the Epic Poem; and as to Virgil, his most passionate admirers must allow, that
in subject and design he is much less of an original than Camoens or Lucan. But
such a critical statute of limitation, if I may call it so, is not less
pernicious than absurd. To disfigure the sphere of Imagination with these
capricious and arbitrary zones is an injury to science. Such Criticism, instead
of giving spirit and energy to the laudable ambition of a youthful Poet, can
only lead him to start like Macbeth at unreal mockery, and to exclaim, when he
is invited by Genius to the banquet, "The Table's full."

NOTE II. Ver. 77.
Thus, at their banquets, fabling Greeks rehearse
The fancied origin of sacred Verse.]
For this fable, such as it is, I am indebted to a passage in Athenaeus, which
the curious reader may find in the close of that fanciful and entertaining
compiler, page 701 of Casaubon's edition.

NOTE III. Ver. 207.
Why did the Epic Muse's silent lyre
Shrink from those feats that summoned all her fire?]
I have ventured to suppose that Greece produced no worthy successor of Homer,
and that her exploits against the Persians were not celebrated by any Poet in a
manner suitable to so sublime a subject; -- yet an author named Chaerilus is
said to have recorded those triumphs of his country in verse, and to have
pleased the Athenians so highly as to obtain from them a public and pecuniary
reward. He is supposed to have been a cotemporary of the historian Herodotus.
But from the general silence of the more early Greek writers concerning the
merit of this Poet, we may, I think, very fairly conjecture that his
compositions were not many degrees superior to those of his unfortunate
namesake, who frequented the court of Alexander the Great, and is said to have
sung the exploits of his Sovereign, on the curious conditions of receiving a
piece of gold for every good verse, and a box on the ear for every bad one. The
old Scholiast on Horace, who has preserved this idle story, concludes it by
saying, that the miserable Bard was beat to death in consequence of his
contract. Some eminent modern Critics have indeed attempted to vindicate the
reputation of the more early Chaerilus, who is supposed to be confounded, both
by Horace himself, and afterward by Scaliger, with the Chaerilus rewarded by
Alexander. Vossius De Historicis Graecis.
, in particular, appears a warm advocate in his behalf, and appeals to various
fragments of the ancient Bard preserved by Aristotle, Strabo, and others, and
to the testimony of Plutarch in his favor. But on consulting the fragments he
has referred to, they rather fortify than remove my conjecture. The scrap
preserved by Aristotle in his Rhetoric is only half a verse, and quoted without
any commendation of its author. The two citations in Strabo amount to little
more. The curious reader may also find in Athenaeus an Epitaph on Sardanapalus,
attributed to this Poet; who is mentioned by the same author as peculiarly
addicted to the grosser excesses of the table. -- Let us now return to that
Chaerilus whom Horace has "damned to everlasting fame." The judicious and
elegant Roman Satirist seems remarkably unjust, in paying a compliment to the
poetical judgment of his patron Augustus, at the expense of the Macedonian
hero. Alexander appears to have possessed much more poetical spirit, and a
higher relish for poetry, than the cold-blooded Octavius. It is peculiarly
unfair, to urge his liberality to a poor Poet as a proof that he wanted
critical discernment, when he had himself so thoroughly vindicated the delicacy
of his taste, by the enthusiastic Bon-mot, that he had rather be the Thersites
of Homer than the Achilles of Chaerilus.

NOTE IV. VERSE 231.
When grave Bossu by System's studied laws
The Grecian Bard's ideal picture draws.]
Though Bossu is called "the best explainer of Aristotle, and one of the most
learned and judicious of modern critics," by a writer for whose opinions I have
much esteem, I cannot help thinking that his celebrated Essay on Epic Poetry is
very ill calculated either to guide or to inspirit a young Poet. The absurdity
of his advice concerning the mode of forming the fable, by choosing a moral,
inventing the incidents, and then searching history for names to suit them, has
been sufficiently exposed: and as to his leading idea, concerning the design of
Homer in the composition of the Iliad and Odyssey, I apprehend most poetical
readers must feel that he is probably mistaken; for it is a conjectural point,
and placed beyond the possibility of decision. Perhaps few individuals differ
more from each other in their modes of thinking, by the force of education and
of national manners, than a modern French Critic and an early Poet of Greece;
yet the former will often pretend, with the most decisive air, to lay open the
sensorium of an ancient Bard, and to count every link in the chain of his
ideas. Those who are most acquainted with the movements of imagination, will
acknowledge the steps of this airy power to be so light and evanescent in their
nature, that perhaps a Poet himself, in a few years after finishing his work,
might be utterly unable to recollect the exact train of thought, or the various
minute occurrences which led him to the general design, or directed him in the
particular parts of his poem. But, in spite of the interval of many hundred
centuries, the decisive magic of criticism can call up all the shadows of
departed thought that ever existed in his brain, and display, with a most
astonishing clearness, the precise state of his mind in the moment of
composition.

"Homere," says Bossu, " Livre i. chap. 8.
voyoit les Grecs pour qui il ecrivoit, divisez en autant d'etats qu'ils avoient
de villes considerables: chacune faisoit un corpse a part and avoit sa form de
gouvernement independamment de toutes les autres. Et toute-fois ces etats
differens etoient souvent obligez de se reunir comme en un seul corpse contre
leurs ennemis communs. Voila sans doubt deux sorts de gouvernemens bien
differens, pour etre commodement reunis en un corpse de morale, and en un seul
poem.

"Le poet en a donc fait deux fables separees. L'une est pour toute la Greece
reunie en un seul corpse, mais composee de parties independantes les unes des
autres, comme else etoient en effect; and l'autre est pour chaque etat
particulier, tells qu'ils etoient pendant la paix, sans ce premier rapport and
sans la necessete de se reunir.

"Homere a donc pris pour le fond de sa fable, cette grande verite, que la
Mesintelligence des princes ruin leurs propres etats."

On the Odyssey Bossu remarks, "Que la verite qui sert de fond a cette fiction,
and qui avec elle compose la fable, est, que l'absence d'une person horse de
chez soi, ou qui n'a point l'oeil a ce qui s'y fait, y cause de grands
desordres Livre i. chap. 10.
."

On the mature consideration of these two moral axioms, the Critic supposes the
sublime Bard to have begun his respective Poems; for Homer, continues he, "
Livre i. chap. 13.
n'avoit point d'autre dessein que de former agreablement les moeurs de ses
Citoiens, en leur proposant, comme dit Horace, ce qui est utile ou pernicieux,
ce qui est honnete ou ce qui ne l'est pas: -- il n'a entrepris de raconter
aucune action particuliere d'Achille ou d'Ulysse. Il a fait la fable et le
dessein de ses poemes, sans penser a ces princes; and ensuite il leur a fait
l'honneur de donner leurs noms aux heroes qu'il avoit feints."

The preceding remarks of this celebrated Critic have been frequently admired
as an ingenious conjecture, which most happily illustrates the real purpose of
Homer. To me they appear so much the reverse, that if I ventured to adopt any
decided opinion on a point so much darkened by the clouds of antiquity, I
should rather incline to the idea which Bossu affects to explode, and suppose
the Poems of Homer intended panegyrics on the very princes whom the Critic
affirms he never thought of while he was designing the works which have made
them immortal.

There is a striking passage on this subject in a dialogue of Plato, which I
shall enlarge upon, for two reasons: 1st, As it proves that the latter
persuasion concerning the purpose of Homer was entertained at Athens; and 2dly,
Because it gives me a pleasing opportunity of supporting the learned Madame
Dacier against an ill-grounded censure of a late English critic. In her Preface
to the Odyssey, she asserts that the judgment of antiquity decided in favor of
the Iliad; and she appeals to part of the sentence in Plato to which I have
alluded, as a proof of her assertion. Mr. Wood, in a note to the Introduction
of his Essay on Homer, endeavors to show the insufficiency of this proof; and
still farther, to convince us that Madame Dacier was utterly mistaken in her
sense of the passage to which she appealed. If he ventures to contradict this
learned lady, he does not however insult her with that insolent pertness with
which she is frequently treated in the notes to Pope's Homer; and which, for
the honor of our English Poet, I will not suppose to be his. But though Mr.
Wood endeavors to support his opinion by argument, I apprehend that he is
himself mistaken, and that Madame Dacier is perfectly right in understanding
the words of Socrates in their literal sense, without the least mixture of
irony. It is true, indeed, that the aim of Socrates, in the course of the
dialogue, is to ridicule the presumption and ignorance of the sophist Hippias,
in the most ironical manner; but the particular speech on Which Madame Dacier
founds her opinion, is a plain and simple address to Eudicus, before he enters
on his debate with the Sophist. It turns on the most simple circumstance, the
truth of which Eudicus could hardly be ignorant of, namely, the sentiments of
his own father concerning the Poems of Homer. As these sentiments are such as I
believe most admirers of the ancient Bard have entertained on the point in
question, I perfectly agree with Madame Dacier in thinking that Socrates means
to be literal and serious, when he says to Eudicus, (...). Plat. Hip. min.
edit. Serrani, tom. i. page 363. " I have heard your father Apemantus say, that
the Iliad of Homer was a finer poem than his Odyssey, and as far surpassed it
in excellence as the virtue of Achilles surpassed the virtue of Ulysses; for
those two poems, he said, were purposely composed in honor of those two
heroes: the Odyssey, to show the virtues of Ulysses; the Iliad, those of
Achilles." Plato's Lesser Hippias, translated by Sydenham, page 13.

Let us now return to Bossu; whose opinion concerning the purpose of Homer we
may venture to oppose, supported as it is by an ingenious interpretation of
some ambiguous passages in the Poetics of Aristotle; and this opposition may be
grounded, not so much on the sentence which I have quoted from Plato, as on the
probable conduct of Epic composition in the early ages of poetry. In such
periods as produced the talents of Virgil and of Dryden, when all the arts of
refined flattery were perfectly understood, we can easily conceive that they
might both be tempted to compliment the reigning monarch under the mask of such
heroic names as history could supply, and their genius accommodate to their
purpose. We find accordingly, that the Roman Bard is supposed to have drawn a
flattering portrait of his Emperor in the character of Aeneas, and that the
English Poet has, with equal ingenuity, enwrapt the dissolute Charles the
Second in the Jewish robes of King David. But in so rude an age as we must
admit that of Homer to have been; when the Poet was certainly more the child of
Nature than of Art; when he had no history to consult, perhaps no patron to
flatter, and no critics to elude or obey; in such an age, may we not more
naturally conjecture, that poetical composition was neither labored in its
form, nor deep in its design? that, instead of being the slow and systematic
product of political reasoning, it was the quick and artless offspring of a
strong and vivifying fancy, which, brooding over the tales of tradition, soon
raised them into such life and beauty, as must satisfy and enchant a warlike
and popular audience, ever ready to listen with delight to the heroic feats of
their ancestors.

If the learned Bossu appears unfortunate in his system concerning the purpose
of Homer, he may be thought still more so in his attempt to analyze the
Divinities of Virgil; for, to throw new light on the convention of the Gods, in
the opening of the tenth Aeneid, he very seriously informs us, that " Book v.
chap. I.
Venus is divine mercy, or the love of God toward virtuous men; and Juno his
justice."

I cannot conclude these very free strictures on a celebrated author, without
bearing a pleasing testimony to the virtues of the man. -- Bossu is allowed by
the biographers of his country to have been remarkable for the mildest manners
and most amiable disposition; totally free from that imperious and bigoted
attachment to speculative opinions, which the science he cultivated is so apt
to produce. He endeared himself to Boileau by a generous act of friendship,
that led to an intimacy between them, which was dissolved only by the death of
the former, in 1680.

NOTE V. VERSE 244.
Imputes to Virgil his own dark conceit.] As it requires much leisure to
examine, and more skill to unravel an intricate hypothesis, twisted into a long
and labored chain of quotation and argument, the Dissertation on the sixth
Book of Virgil remained for some time unrefuted. The public very quietly
acquiesced in the strange position of its author, "That Aeneas's adventure to
the infernal shades, is no other than a figurative description of his
initiation into the Mysteries; and particularly a very exact one of the
spectacles of the Eleusinian." At length a superior but anonymous Critic arose,
who, in one of the most judicious and spirited essays that our nation has
produced on a point of classical literature, completely overturned this
ill-founded edifice, and exposed the arrogance and futility of its assuming
architect. The Essay I allude to is entitled "Critical Observations on the
Sixth Book of the Aeneid;" printed for Elmsly, 1770: and as this little
publication is, I believe, no longer to be purchased, the curious reader may
thank me for transcribing a few of its most striking passages.

Having ridiculed, with great spirit and propriety, Warburton's general idea of
the Aeneid as a political institute, and his ill-supported assertion, that both
the ancient and modern poets afforded Virgil a pattern for introducing the
Mysteries into this famous episode, the author proceeds to examine how far the
Critic's hypothesis of initiation may be supported or overthrown by the text of
the Poet. "It is," says he, "from extrinsical circumstances that we may expect
the discovery of Virgil's allegory. Every one of these circumstances persuades
me, that Virgil described a real, not a mimic world, and that the scene lay in
the Infernal Shades, and not in the Temple of Ceres.

"The singularity of the Cumaean shores must be present to every traveller who
has once seen them. To a superstitious mind, the thin crust, vast cavities,
sulphurous steams, poisonous exhalations, and fiery torrents, may seem to
trace out the narrow confine of the two worlds. The lake Avernus was the chief
object of religious horror; the black woods which surrounded it, when Virgil
first came to Naples, were perfectly suited to feed the superstition of the
people Strabo, I. v. p. 168.
. It was generally believed, that this deadly flood was the entrance of Hell
Sil. Ital. l. xii.
; and an oracle was once established on its banks, which pretended, by magic
rites, to call up the departed spirits Diod. Siculus, l. iv. p. 267. edit.
Wesseling.
. Aeneas, who revolved a more daring enterprise, addresses himself to the
priestess of those dark regions. Their conversation may perhaps inform us
whether an initiation, or a descent to the Shades, was the object of this
enterprise. She endeavors to deter the hero, by setting before him all the
dangers of his rash undertaking.

-- Facilis descensus Averni;
Noctes atque dies patet atri janua Ditis:
Sed revocare gradum, superasque evadere ad auras,
Hoc opus, hic labor est Aeneid vi. 126.
.
These particulars are absolutely irreconcilable with the idea of initiation,
but perfectly agreeable to that of a real descent. That every step and every
instant may lead us to the grave, is a melancholy truth. The Mysteries were
only open at stated times, a few days at most in the course of a year. The
mimic descent of the Mysteries was laborious and dangerous, the return to light
easy and certain. In real death this order is inverted. -- Pauci quos aequus
amavit
Jupiter, aut ardens evexit ad aethera virtus,
Diis geniti, potuere Ibid. vi. 129.
.
These heroes, as we learn from the Speech of Aeneas, were Hercules, Orpheus,
Castor and Pollux, Theseus, and Pirithous. Of all these antiquity believed,
that, before their death, they had seen the habitations of the dead; nor indeed
will any of the circumstances tally with a supposed initiation. The adventure
of Eurydice, the alternate life of the Brothers, and the forcible intrusion of
Alcides, Theseus, and Pirithous, would mock the endeavors of the most subtle
critic, who should try to melt them down into his favorite Mysteries. The
exploits of Hercules, who triumphed over the King of Terrors, Tartareum ille
manu custodem in vincla petivit
Ipsius a solio regis, traxitque trementem Ibid. vi. 395.
.
was a wild imagination of the Greeks Homer Odyss. l. xi. ver. 623. Apoll. Bib.
l. ii. c. 5.
; but it was the duty of ancient Poets to adopt and embellish these popular
traditions; and it is the interest of every man of taste to acquiesce in their
poetical fictions.

Virgil has borrowed, as usual, from Homer his episode of the Infernal Shades,
and, as usual, has infinitely improved what the Grecian had invented. If among
a profusion of beauties I durst venture to point out the most striking beauties
of the sixth Book, I should perhaps observe, 1. That after accompanying the
hero through. the silent realms of Night and Chaos, we see, with astonishment
and pleasure, a new creation bursting upon us. 2. That we examine, with a
delight which springs from the love of virtue, the just empire of Minos, in
which the apparent irregularities of the present system are corrected; where
the patriot who died for his country is happy, and the tyrant who oppressed it
is miserable. 3. As we interest ourselves in the hero's fortunes, we share his
feelings: -- the melancholy Palinurus, the wretched Deiphobus, the indignant
Dido, the Grecian kings, who tremble at his presence, and the venerable
Anchises, who embraces his pious son, and displays to his sight the future
glories of his race: all these objects affect us with a variety of pleasing
sensations.

Let us for a moment obey the mandate of our great Critic, and consider these
aweful scenes as a mimic show, exhibited in the Temple of Ceres, by the
contrivance of the priest, or, if he pleases, of the legislator. Whatever was
animated (I appeal to every reader of taste) whatever was terrible, or whatever
was pathetic, evaporates into lifeless allegory. -- Tenuem sine viribus umbram.
-- Dat inania verba,
Dat sine mente sonum, gressusque effingit euntis.
The end of philosophy is truth; the end of poetry is pleasure. I willingly
adopt any interpretation which adds new beauties to the original; I assist in
persuading myself that it is just, and could almost show the same indulgence to
the Critic's as to the Poet's fiction. But should a grave Doctor lay out
fourscore pages in explaining away the sense and spirit of Virgil, I should
have every inducement to believe that Virgil's soul was very different from the
Doctor's.

Having shown, in this spirited manner, how far the hypothesis of the Critic is
inconsistent with particular passages, and with the general character of the
Poet, the Essayist proceeds to allege "two simple reasons, which persuade him
that Virgil has not revealed the secret of the Eleusinian mysteries: the first
is his ignorance, and the second his discretion." The author then proves, by
very ingenious historical arguments, 1st, That it is probable the Poet was
never initiated himself; and, 2dly, That if he were so, it is more probable
that he would not have violated the laws both of religion and of honor, in
betraying the secret of the Mysteries; particularly, as that species of
profanation is mentioned with abhorrence by a cotemporary Poet. -- Vetabo, qui
Cereris sacrum
Vulgarit arcanae, sub iisdem
Sit trabibus, fragilemque mecum
Solvat phaselum.
HOR. l.iii. od. 2. When Horace composed the Ode which contains the preceding
passage, "the Aeneid (continues my author) and particularly the sixth Book,
were already known to the public Donat. in Virgil. Propert. l.ii. el. xxv. v.
66.
. The detestation of the wretch who reveals the Mysteries of Ceres, though
expressed in general terms, must be applied by all Rome to the author of the
sixth Book of the Aeneid. Can we seriously suppose that Horace would have
branded with such wanton infamy one of the men in the world, whom he loved and
honored the most Hor. l.i. od. 3. l.i. sermon. v. ver. 39, etc.
?

"Nothing remains to say, except that Horace was himself ignorant of his
friend's allegorical meaning; which the Bishop of Gloucester has since revealed
to the world. It may be so; yet, for my own part, I should be very well
satisfied with understanding Virgil no better than Horace did."

Such is the forcible reasoning of this ingenious and spirited writer. I have
been tempted to transcribe these considerable portions of his Work, by an idea
(perhaps an ill-founded one) that the circulation of his little Pamphlet has
not been equal to its merit. But if it has been in any degree neglected by our
country, it has not escaped the researches, or wanted the applause, of a
learned and judicious foreigner. Professor Heyne, the late accurate and
accomplished Editor of Virgil, has mentioned it, in his Comments to the sixth
Book of the Aeneid, with the honor it deserves. He remarks, indeed, that the
Author has censured the learned Prelate with some little acrimony; "Paullo
acrius quam velis." But what lover of poetry, unbiassed by personal connection,
can speak of Warburton without some marks of indignation? If I have also
alluded to this famous Commentator with a contemptuous asperity, it arises from
the persuasion that he has sullied the page of every Poet whom he pretended to
illustrate; and that he frequently degraded the useful and generous profession
of Criticism into a mean instrument of personal malignity: or (to use the more
forcible language of his greatest antagonist) that he "invested himself in the
high office of Inquisitor General and Supreme Judge of the Opinions of the
Learned; which he assumed and exercised with a ferocity and despotism without
example in the Republic of Letters, and hardly to be paralleled among the
disciples of Dominic Letter to Warburton by a late Professor, etc. page 9. 2d
edition.
." It is the just lot of tyrants to be detested; and of all usurpers, the
literary despot is the least excusable, as he has not the common tyrannical
plea of necessity or interest to allege in his behalf; for the prevalence of
his edicts will be found to sink in proportion to the arbitrary tone with which
they are pronounced. The fate of Warburton is a striking instance of this
important truth. What havoc has the course of very few years produced in that
pile of imperious criticism which he had heaped together! Many of his notes on
Shakespeare have already resigned their place to the superior comments of more
accomplished Critics; and perhaps the day is not far distant, when the volumes
of Pope himself will cease to be a repository for the lumber of his friend. The
severest enemies of Warburton must indeed allow, that several of his remarks on
his Poetical Patron are entitled to preservation, by their use or beauty; but
the greater part, I apprehend, are equally destitute of both: and how far the
Critic was capable of disgracing the Poet, must be evident to every reader who
recollects that the nonsense in the Essay on Criticism, where Pegasus is made
to snatch a grace, which is justly censured by Dr. Warton, was first introduced
into the poem by an arbitrary transposition of the editor.

Though arrogance is perhaps the most striking and characteristical defect in
the composition of this assuming Commentator, he had certainly other critical
failings of considerable importance; and it may possibly be rendering some
little service to the art which he professed, to investigate the peculiarities
in this singular writer, which conspire to plunge him in the crowd of those
evanescent critics (if I may use such an expression) whom his friend Pope
beheld in so clear a vision, that he seems to have given us a prophetical
portrait of his own Commentator. Critics I saw, that others' names efface,
And fix their own, with labor, in the place;
Their own, like others', soon their place resigned,
Or disappeared, and left the first behind.
I shall therefore hazard a few farther observations, not only on this famous
Critic of our age and country, but on the two greater names of antiquity, to
each of whom he has been declared superior by the partial voice of enthusiastic
friendship. I wish not to offend his most zealous adherents; and, though I
cannot but consider him as a literary usurper, I speak of him as a great
Historian said of more exalted tyrants, sine ira et studio, quorum causas
procul habeo. -- There seem to be three natural endowments requisite in the
formation of an accomplished critic; -- strong understanding, lively
imagination, and refined sensibility. The first was the characteristic of
Aristotle, and by the consent of all ages he is allowed to have possessed it in
a superlative degree. May I be pardoned for the opinion, that he enjoyed but a
very moderate portion of the other two? I would not absolutely say that he had
neither Fancy nor Feeling; but that his imagination was not brilliant, and that
his sensibility was not exquisite, may I think be fairly presumed from the
general tenor of his prose; nor does the little relic of his poetry
contradict the idea. The two qualities in which Aristotle may be supposed
defective, were the very two which peculiarly distinguish Longinus; who
certainly wanted not understanding, though he might not possess the
philosophical sagacity of the Stagyrite. When considered in every point of
view, he appears the most consummate character among the Critics of antiquity.
If Warburton wore any resemblance to either of these mighty names, I apprehend
it must be to the former, and perhaps in imagination he was superior to
Aristotle; but, of the three qualities which I have ventured to consider as
requisite in the perfect Critic, I conceive him to have been miserably
deficient in the last, and certainly the most essential of the three; for, as
the great Commentator of Horace has philosophically and truly remarked, in a
note to that Poet, "Feeling, or Sentiment, is not only the surest, but the sole
ultimate arbiter of works of genius Notes on the Epistle to Augustus, ver. 210.
." A man may possess an acute understanding and a lively imagination, without
being a sound Critic; and this truth perhaps cannot be more clearly shown than
in the writings of Warburton. His understanding was undoubtedly acute, his
imagination was lively; but Imagination and Sentiment are by no means
synonymous; and he certainly wanted those finer feelings which constitute
accuracy of discernment, and a perfect perception of literary excellence. In
consequence of this defect, instead of seizing the real sense and intended
beauties of an author, he frequently followed the caprices of his own active
fancy, which led him in quest of secret meanings and mysterious allusions;
these he readily found, and his powers of understanding enabled him to dress
them up in a plausible and specious form, and to persuade many readers that he
was (what he believed himself to be) the restorer of genuine Criticism. As a
farther proof that he was destitute of refined sensibility, I might allege the
peculiarity of his diction, which, as Dr. Johnson has very justly remarked, is
coarse and impure. Perhaps it may be found, that in proportion as authors have
enjoyed the quality which I suppose him to have wanted, they have been more or
less distinguished by the ease, the elegance, and the beauty of their language:
were I required to fortify this conjecture by examples, I should produce the
names of Virgil and Racine, of Fenelon and Addison -- that Addison, who, though
insulted by the Commentator of Pope with the names of an indifferent Poet and a
worse Critic, was, I think, as much superior to his insulter in critical taste,
and in solidity of judgment, as he confessedly was in the harmony of his style,
and in all the finer graces of beautiful composition.

NOTE VI. VERSE 257.
It Is said by one, who, with this candid claim,
Has gained no fading wreath of critic fame.]
These, and the six subsequent lines, allude to the following passage in Dr.
Warton's Essay on Pope. "I conclude these reflections with a remarkable fact.
In no polished nation, after Criticism has been much studied, and the rules of
writing established, has any very extraordinary work ever appeared. This has
visibly been the case in Greece, in Rome, and in France, after Aristotle,
Horace, and Boileau had written their Arts of Poetry. In our own country, the
rules of the Drama, for instance, were never more completely understood than at
present; yet what uninteresting, though faultless, Tragedies have we lately
seen? so much better is our judgment than our execution. How to account for the
fact here mentioned, adequately and justly, would be attended with all those
difficulties that await discussions relative to the productions of the human
mind, and to the delicate and secret causes that influence them; whether or no
the natural powers be not confined and debilitated by that timidity and caution
which is occasioned by a rigid regard to the dictates of art; or whether that
philosophical, that geometrical, and systematical spirit so much in vogue,
which has spread itself from the sciences even into polite literature, by
consulting only reason, has not diminished and destroyed sentiment, and made
our poets write from and to the head, rather than the heart; or whether,
lastly, when just models, from which the rules have necessarily been drawn,
have once appeared, succeeding writers, by vainly and ambitiously striving to
surpass those just models, and to shine and surprise, do not become stiff and
forced, and affected in their thoughts and diction." Warton's Essay, page 209,
3d edition. -- I admire this ingenious and modest reasoning; but, for the
honor of that severer art, which this pleasing writer has the happy talent to
enliven and embellish, I will venture to start some doubts concerning the fact
itself for which he endeavors to account. Perhaps our acquaintance with those
writings of Greece and Rome, which were subsequent to Aristotle and Horace, is
not sufficiently perfect to decide the point either way in respect to those
countries. But with regard to France, may we not assert, that her poetical
productions, which arose after the publication of Boileau's Didactic Essay, are
at least equal, if not superior, to those which preceded that period? If the
Henriade of Voltaire is not a fine Epic poem, it is allowed to be the best
which the French have to boast; not to mention the dramatic works of that
extraordinary and universal author. If this remarkable fact may indeed be found
true, I should rather suppose it to arise from the irritable nature of the
poetic spirit, so peculiarly averse to restraint and control. The Bard who
could gallop his Pegasus over a free and open plain, might be eager to engage
in so pleasing an exercise; but he who observed the direction-posts so thickly
and so perversely planted, that, instead of assisting his career, they must
probably occasion his fall, would easily be tempted to descend from his steed,
and to decline the course. Let me illustrate this conjecture by a striking
fact, in the very words of the Poet just mentioned, who was by no means
deficient in poetical confidence, and who has left us the following anecdote of
himself, in that pleasing little anonymous work entitled, Commentaire
Historique sur les Oeuvres de l' Auteur de la Henriade. "Il lut un jour
plusieurs chants de ce poem chez le jeune President de Maisons, son intime
ami. On l'impatienta par des objections; il jetta son manuscrit dans le feu. Le
President Henaut l'en retira avec peine. "Souvenez vous (lui dit Mr. Henaut)
dans une de ses lettres, que c'est moi qui ai sauve la Henriade, et qu'il m'en
a coute une belle pair de manchettes."

To return to the Essay on Pope. -- I rejoice that the amiable Critic has at
length obliged the public with the conclusion of his most engaging and
ingenious work: he has the singular talent to instruct and to please even those
readers who are most ready to revolt from the opinion which he endeavors to
establish; and he has in some degree atoned for that excess of severity which
his first volume discovered, and which sunk the reputation of Pope in the eyes
of many, who judge not for themselves, even far below that mortifying level to
which he meant to reduce it. Had Pope been alive, to add this spirited essay to
the bundle of writings against himself which he is said to have collected, he
must have felt, that, like the dagger of Brutus, it gave the most painful blow,
from the character of the assailant: All the conspirators, save only he,
Did that they did in envy of great Caesar;
He, only, in a general honest thought,
And common good to all, made one of them.
Yet Pope ascended not the throne of Poetry by usurpation, but was seated there
by a legal title; of which I shall speak farther in a subsequent note.

NOTE VII. VERSE 359.
His hallowed subject, by that Law forbid,
Might still have laid in silent darkness hid.]
Boileau's Art of Poetry made its first appearance in 1673, six years after the
publication of Paradise Lost. The verses of the French Poet to which I have
particularly alluded are these: C'est donc bien vainement que nos auteurs decus,
Bannissant de leurs verse ces ornemens recus,
Pensent fair agir Dieu, ses saints, et ses prophets,
Comme ces dieux eclos du cerveau des Poets;
Mettent a chaque pas le lecteur en enfer;
N'offrent rien qu' Astaroth, Belzebuth, Lucifer.
De la foi d'un Chretien les mysteres terribles
D'ornemens egayes, ne sont point susceptibles.
L'Evangile a l'esprit n' offer de tons cotes
Que penitence a fair, et tourmens merits:
Et de vos fictions le melange coupable,
Meme a ses verites done l' air de la fable.
Et quel objet enfin a presenter aux yeux
Que le Diable toujours hurlant contre les cieux,
Qui de votre heroes veut rabaisser la gloire,
Et souvent avec Dieu balance la victoire.
Poetique de DESPREAUX, chant iii. ver. 193, etc.

The preceding lines, which are said to have been levelled at the Clovis of
Desmaretz, appear so pointed against the subject of Milton, that we might
almost believe them intended as a satire on our divine Bard. There is nothing
in Boileau's admirable Didactic Essay so liable to objection as the whole
passage concerning Epic poetry. His patronage of the old Pagan divinities, and
his oblique recommendation of Classical heroes, are alike exceptionable. Even a
higher name than Boileau has failed in framing precepts for the Epic Muse. The
maxims delivered by Tasso himself, in his Discourse on Epic poetry, are so far
from perfect, that an agreeable and judicious French critic has very justly
said of him, "S'il eut mis sa theorie en pratique, son poem n'auroit pas tant
de charms Marmontel Poetique Francoise.
." I am not so vain as to think of succeeding in the point where these immortal
authors have failed; and I must beg my reader to remember, that the present
work is by no means intended as a code of laws for the Epic poet; it is not my
design To write receipts how poems may be made. For I think the writer who
would condescend to frame this higher species of composition according to the
exact letter of any directions whatever, may be most properly referred to that
admirable receipt for an Epic poem with which Martinus Scriblerus will happily
supply him. My serious desire is to examine and refute the prejudices which
have produced, as I apprehend, the neglect of the Heroic Muse: I wish to kindle
in our Poets a warmer sense of national honor, with ambition to excel in the
noblest province of poesy. If my essay should excite that generous enthusiasm
in the breast of any young poetic genius, so far from wishing to confine him by
any arbitrary dictates of my own imagination, I should rather say to him, in
the words of Dante's Virgil, Non aspettar mio dir piu, ne mio cenno
Libero, dritto, sano e tuo arbitrio,
E fallo fora non fare a suo senno.


NOTE VIII. VERSE 377.
Who scorned all limits to his work assigned,
Save by the inspiring God who ruled his mind.]
On foot, with a lance in his hand, the Emperor himself led the solemn
procession, and directed the line, which was traced as the boundary of the
destined capital; till the growing circumference was observed with astonishment
by the assistants, who at length ventured to observe, that he had already
exceeded the most ample measure of a great city. "I shall still advance,"
replied Constantine, "till he, the invisible guide who marches before me,
thinks proper to stop. GIBBON, Vol. II. page 11. END OF THE NOTES TO THE FIRST
EPISTLE.
NOTES TO THE SECOND EPISTLE.
NOTE I. VERSE 28.
WE see thy fame traduced by Gallic wit.] Homer, like most transcendent
characters, has found detractors in every age. We learn from a passage in the
life of Socrates by Diogenes Laertius, that the great Poet had, in his
lifetime, an adversary named Sagaris, or Syagrus; and his calumniator Zoilus
is proverbially distinguished. In the Greek Anthologia, there is a sepulchral
inscription on a slanderer of the sovereign Bard, which, for its enthusiastic
singularity, I shall present to the reader.

(...).
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
Anthologia, p. 70. Edit. Oxon. 1766. On Parthenius the Phocensian, who
calumniated Homer.
Here, though deep buried he can rail no more,
Pour burning pitch, on base Parthenius pour;
Who on the sacred Muses dared to spirt
His frothy venom and poetic dirt:
Who said of Homer, in his frantic scorn,
The Odyssey was mud, the Iliad thorn:
For this, dark Furies, in your snakes enroll,
And through Cocytus drag the sland'rous soul.
Parthenius, say the Commentators, was a disciple of Dionysius of Alexandria,
who flourished under Nero and Trajan. Erycius, the author of the inscription,
is supposed to have lived in the same age. Among the modern adversaries of
Homer, the French are most remarkable for their severity and injustice: nor is
it surprising, that the nation which has displayed the faintest sparks of Epic
fire, should be the most solicitous to reduce the oppressive splendour of this
exalted luminary. The most depreciating remarks on genius, in every walk, are
generally made by those who are the least able to prove its rivals; and often,
perhaps, not so much from the prevalence of envious malignity, as from the want
of vivid and delicate perception. The merits and the failings of Homer were
agitated in France with all the heat and acrimony of a theological dispute.
Madame Dacier distinguished herself in the contest by her uncommon talents and
erudition: she combated for the Grecian Bard with the spirit of Minerva
defending the Father of the Gods. It must however be confessed, that she
sometimes overstepped the modesty of wisdom, and caught, unwarily, the scolding
tone of Juno. It is indeed amusing, to observe a people, who pique themselves
on their extreme politeness, and censure Homer for the gross behavior of his
Gods, engaging among themselves in a squabble concerning this very Poet, with
all the unrefined animosity of his Olympian Synod. In the whole controversy
there is nothing more worthy of remembrance and of praise, than the lively
elegance and the pleasing good humor of Mr. de la Motte, who, though not one
of the most exalted, was certainly one of the most amiable, characters in the
literary world; and made a generous return to the severity of his female
antagonist, by writing an ode in her praise. Voltaire has pointed out, with his
usual spirit, the failings of La Motte in his Abridgement of the Iliad; but he
has frequently fallen himself into similar defects, and is equally unjust to
Homer, against whom he has levelled the most bitter sarcasms, both in prose and
verse. Voltaire attacking Homer, is like Paris shooting his arrow at the heel
of Achilles: the two Poets are as unequal as the two ancient Warriors; yet
Homer, like Achilles, may have his vulnerable spot; but with this happy
difference, that although the shaft of ridicule, which is pointed against him,
may be tinged with venom, its wound cannot be mortal. Perhaps no better answer
can be made to all those who amuse themselves with writing against Homer, than
the following reply of Madame Dacier to the Abbe Terrasson, who had attacked
her favorite Bard in two abusive volumes: -- "Que Monsieur l'Abbe Terrasson
trouve Homere sot, ridicule, extravagant, ennuyeux, c'est son affair, le
public jugera si c'est un defaut a Homere de deplaire a M. l'Abbe Terrasson, ou
a M. l'Abbe Terrasson de ne pas gouter Homere."

NOTE II. VERSE 85.
Even Socrates himself, that purest Sage,
Imbibed his Wisdom from thy moral page.]
Dio Chrysostom, in one of his orations, has called Socrates the disciple of
Homer, and drawn a short parallel of their respective merits; observing in
honor of both, (...). DION. CHRYSOSTOM. p. 559.

NOTE III. VERSE 119.
How high soever she leads his daring flight, etc.] I mean not to injure the
dignity of Pindar by this assertion. Though Quinctilian, in drawing the
character of the Grecian Lyric Poets, has given him high pre-eminence in that
choir, we may, I think, very fairly conjecture that some odes of Alcaeus and
Stesichorus were not inferior to those of the Theban Bard, who is said to have
been repeatedly vanquished in a poetical contest by his female antagonist
Corinna. The absurd jealousy of our sex concerning literary talents, has led
some eminent writers to question the merits of Corinna, as Olearius has
observed, in his Dissertation on the female Poets of Greece. But her glory
seems to have been fully established by the public memorial of her picture,
exhibited in her native city, and adorned with a symbol of her victory.
Pausanias, who saw it, supposes her to have been one of the handsomest women of
her time; and the ingenuity of some Critics imputes her success in the poetical
contest to the influence of her beauty. They have taken some liberties less
pardonable with her literary reputation, and, by their curious comments on a
single Greek syllable, made the sublime Pindar call his fair rival a Sow,
though the unfortunate word (...), which may be twisted into that meaning,
signifies, in its more obvious construction, that the Poet challenged his
successful antagonist to a new trial of skill. -- For a more minute account of
this singular piece of criticism, I must refer the reader to the notes on
Corinna, in the Fragmenta Poetriarum, by Wolfius. Time has left us only a few
diminutive scraps of Corinna's Poetry; but Plutarch, in his Treatise on the
Glory of the Athenians, has preserved one of her critical Bon-mots, which may
deserve to be repeated. That author asserts, that Corinna instructed Pindar in
his youth, and advised him to adorn his composition with the embellishments of
fable. The obedient Poet soon brought her some verses, in which he had followed
her advice rather too freely; when his Tutress, smiling at his profusion, (...).

NOTE IV. VERSE 126.
Yet may not Judgment, with severe disdain,
Slight the young Rhodian's variegated strain.]
Apollonius, surnamed the Rhodian from the place of his residence, is supposed
to have been a native of Alexandria; where he is said to have recited some
portion of his Poem, while he was yet a youth. Finding it ill received by his
countrymen, he retired to Rhodes, where he is conjectured to have polished and
completed his Work, supporting himself by the profession of Rhetoric, and
receiving from the Rhodians the freedom of their city. He at length returned,
with considerable honor, to the place of his birth, succeeding Eratosthenes in
the care of the Alexandrian Library, in the reign of Ptolemy Euergetes, who
ascended the throne of Egypt in the year before Christ 246. That prince had
been educated by the famous Aristarchus, and rivalled the preceding sovereigns
of his liberal family in the munificent encouragement of learning. Apollonius
was a disciple of the poet Callimachus; but their connection ended in the most
violent enmity, which was probably owing to some degree of contempt expressed
by Apollonius for the light compositions of his master. The learned have vainly
endeavored to discover the particulars of their quarrel. -- The only Work of
Apollonius which has descended to modern times, is his Poem, in four Books, on
the Argonautic expedition. Both Longinus and Quintilian have assigned to this
Work the mortifying character of Mediocrity; but there lies an appeal from the
sentence of the most candid and enlightened Critics to the voice of Nature; and
the merit of Apollonius has little to apprehend from the decision of this
ultimate judge. His Poem abounds in animated description, and in passages of
the most tender and pathetic beauty. How finely painted is the first setting
forth of the Argo! and how beautifully is the wife of Chiron introduced,
holding up the little Achilles in her arms, and showing him to his father
Peleus as he sailed along the shore! But the chief excellence in our Poet, is
the spirit and delicacy with which he has delineated the passion of love in his
Medea. That Virgil thought very highly of his merit in this particular is
sufficiently evident from the minute exactness with which he has copied many
tender touches of the Grecian Poet. Those who compare the third Book of
Apollonius with the fourth of Virgil, may, I think, perceive not only that Dido
has some features of Medea, but that the two Bards, however different in their
reputation, resembled each other in their genius; and that they both excel in
delicacy and pathos.

NOTE V. VERSE 190.
Virgil sinks loaded with their heavy praise.] Scaliger appears to be the most
extravagant of all the Critics who have lavished their undistinguishing
encomiums on Virgil, by asserting that he alone is entitled to the name of
Poet. Poetices, lib. iii. c. 2. -- Though the opinion of Spence, and other
modern Critics, concerning the character of Aeneas, considered as an
allegorical portrait of Augustus, seems to gain ground, yet it might perhaps be
easy to overturn the ingenious conjectures and the fanciful reasoning by which
that idea has been supported. This attempt would have the sanction of one of
the most judicious Commentators of Virgil; for the learned Heyne expressly
rejects all allegorical interpretation, and thinks it improbable that a Poet of
so correct a judgment could have adopted a plan which must necessarily contract
and cramp his powers. He even ventures to assert, that if the character of
Aeneas was delineated as an allegorical portrait of Augustus, the execution of
it is unhappy. The strongest argument which has been adduced to support this
conjecture, is founded on the ingenious interpretation of the following passage
in the opening of the third Georgic: Primus ego in patriam mecum, modo vita
supersit,
Aonio rediens deducam vertice Musas:
Primus Idumaeas referam tibi, Mantua, palmas;
Et viridi in campo templum de marmore ponam
Propter aquam, tardis ingens ubi flexibus errat
Mincius, et tenera praetexit arundine ripas.
In medio mihi Caesar erit, templumque tenebit, etc.


These lines, in which Virgil expresses his intention of dedicating a temple to
Augustus, have been considered as the noblest allegory of ancient Poetry Hurd's
Horace, vol.ii. page 44.
; and the great Critic who first started the idea, has expatiated, in the
triumph of his discovery, on the mysterious beauties they contain: but the
whole of this hypothesis is unfortunately built upon the rejection of three
verses, which are pronounced unworthy of the Poet, and which, though found in
every MS. the Critic claims a right of removing. A license so extraordinary
cannot even be justified by the talents of this accomplished writer; for if the
less elegant passages of the ancient Poets might be removed at pleasure, their
compositions would be exposed to the caprice of every fantastic commentator.
The obvious and literal interpretation not only renders this violence
unnecessary, but is more agreeable to the judgment of the Poet and the manners
of his age. The custom of erecting real temples was so familiar to antiquity,
that a Roman would never have suspected the edifice was to be raised only with
poetical materials. We may even conjecture, from a line of Statius, that the
Poet himself had a temple erected to his memory; and, without any breach of
probability, we may admit his intention of giving his living Emperor such a
testimony of his gratitude. This adulation, though shocking to us, was too
generally justified by example to oblige the Poet to palliate it by a fiction.
He had before acquiesced in the divinity of his Imperial Patron, and had
expressed the idea in its full sense.

Namque erit ille mihi semper Deus, illius aram
Saepe tener nostris ab ovilibus imbuet agnus.
Eclog. I. Ingredere et votis jam nunc assuesce vocari.
Georg. I. Having made such an invocation in the beginning of his Work, was his
delicacy afterward to be shocked, and oblige him to pay a compliment under the
disguise of an obscure conceit? for that allegory must be allowed to be
obscure, which had remained through so many ages unexplained. The unfortunate
rejected lines, for whose elegance we do not contend, may at least be rescued
from impropriety by a literal interpretation of the preceding passage; for,
dismiss the conjectured allegory, and the chief objections against them remain
no longer. If the phraseology be peculiar, it is at least supported by
concurring MSS. The adjective ardens is sometimes undoubtedly joined to a word
that does not denote a substance of heat or flame, as the Critic himself admits
in the case of ardentes hosts, to which we may add the verbum ardens of
Cicero. As to the line which is said to contain the most glaring note of
illegitimacy, Tithoni prima quot abest ab origin Caesar, many reasons might
induce the Poet to use the name of Tithonus, which at this distance of time it
is not easy for us to conjecture. Perhaps he chose it to vary the expression of
Assaraci Proles, which he had adopted in the preceding lines. The absurdity of
the subject matter, and the place in which it is introduced, that are insisted
on as the principal objections, arise solely from the allegorical hypothesis:
without it the construction will be plain and natural. The Poet expresses his
intention of erecting a temple to Augustus, and expatiates on the magnificence
with which it was to be adorned: he then returns to his present poetical
subject; Interea Dryadum sylvas saltusque sequamur: and, having dwelt a little
on that, to avoid too long a digression, very naturally resumes the praises of
the Emperor, by alluding to the sublimer song which he intended to devote to
him hereafter. Mox tamen ardentes accingar dicere pugnas
Caesaris. --
Perhaps the important position that gave rise to this conjecture, and to
others of a similar complexion, "that the propriety of allegorical composition
made the distinguished pride of ancient poetry," is as questionable as the
conjecture itself; and a diligent and judicious perusal of the ancient Poets
might convince us, that simplicity was their genuine character, and that many
of their allegorical beauties have originated in the fertile imagination of
their commentators. Aristarchus, indeed, the celebrated model of ancient
criticism, rejected with great spirit the allegorical interpretations of Homer,
as we are informed by Eusthathius; but the good Archbishop of Thessalonica,
who, like some modern prelates, had a passion for allegory, censures the great
Critic of Alexandria for his more simple mode of construction, and supposes it
an injury to the refined beauties and profound wisdom of the Poet. (...).
EUSTH. vol. iii. page 1300.

NOTE VI. VERSE 260.
Shall History's pen, to aid his vengeance won.] There is hardly any eminent
personage of antiquity who has suffered more from detraction, both in his
literary and moral character, than the poet Lucan. His fate, indeed, seems in
all points to have been peculiarly severe. His early death, at an age when few
Poets have even laid the foundation of their capital work, is itself sufficient
to excite our compassion and regret; but to perish by the envious tyranny of
Nero, may be considered as a blessing, when compared with the more cruel
misfortune of being branded with infamy in the immortal pages of Tacitus. As I
am persuaded that the great Historian has inadvertently adopted the grossest
calumny against our Poet, I shall most readily assign my reasons for thinking
so. It may first be proper to give a short sketch of Lucan's life. -- He was
the son of Anneus Mela, the youngest brother of Seneca; and though born at
Corduba, was conveyed to Rome at the age of eight months: a circumstance, as
his more indulgent critics observe, which sufficiently refutes the censure of
those who consider his language as provincial. At Rome he was educated under
the Stoic Cornutus, so warmly celebrated by his disciple Persius the Satirist,
who was the intimate friend of our Poet. In the close of his education Lucan is
said to have passed some time at Athens. On his return to Rome he rose to the
office of Quaestor, before he had attained the legal age. He was afterward
enrolled among the Augurs; and married a lady of noble birth, of whose amiable
character I shall speak more at large in a subsequent note. Lucan had for some
time been admitted to familiarity with Nero, when the Emperor chose to contend
for poetical honors by the public recital of a poem he had composed on Niobe;
and some verses of this imperial production are supposed to be preserved in the
first Satire of Persius. Lucan had the hardiness to repeat a poem on Orpheus,
in competition with that of Nero; and, what is more remarkable, the judges of
the contest were just and bold enough to decide against the Emperor. From hence
Nero became the persecutor of his successful rival, and forbade him to produce
any poetry in public. The well-known conspiracy of Piso against the tyrant soon
followed; and Tacitus, with his usual sarcastic severity, concludes that Lucan
engaged in the enterprise from the poetical injuries he had received: a remark
which does little credit to the candor of the Historian; who might have found
a much nobler, and, I will add, a more probable motive for his conduct, in the
generous ardor of his character, and his passionate adoration of freedom. In
the sequel of his narration, Tacitus alleges a charge against our Poet, which,
if it were true, must lead us to detest him as the most abject of mankind. The
Historian asserts, that Lucan, when accused of the conspiracy, for some time
denied the charge; but; corrupted at last by a promise of impunity, and
desirous to atone for the tardiness of his confession, accused his mother
Atilla as his accomplice. This circumstance is so improbable in itself, and so
little consonant to the general character of Lucan, that some writers have
treated it with contempt, as a calumny invented by Nero to vilify the object of
his envious abhorrence. But the name of Tacitus has given such an air of
authority to the story, that it may seem to deserve a more serious discussion,
particularly as there are two subsequent events related by the same Historian,
which have a tendency to invalidate the accusation so injurious to our Poet.
The events I mean are, the fate of Annaeus, and the escape of Atilla, the two
parents of Lucan. The former died in consequence of art accusation brought
against him, after the death of his son, by Fabius Romanus, who had been
intimate with Lucan and forged some letters in his name, with the design of
proving his father concerned in the conspiracy. These letters were produced to
Nero, who sent them to Annaeus, from an eager desire, says Tacitus, to get
possession of his wealth. From this fact two inferences may be drawn, according
to the different lights in which it may be considered: -- If the accusation
against Annaeus was just, it is clear that Lucan had not betrayed his father,
and he appears the less likely to have endangered by his confession the life of
a parent, to whom he owed a still tenderer regard: -- If Annaeus was not
involved in the conspiracy, and merely put to death by Nero for the sake of his
treasure, we may the more readily believe, that the tyrant who murdered the
father from avarice, might calumniate the son from envy. But the escape of
Atilla affords us the strongest reason to conclude that Lucan was perfectly
innocent of the abject and unnatural treachery, of which Tacitus has supposed
him guilty. Had the Poet really named his mother as his accomplice, would the
vindictive and sanguinary Nero have spared the life of a woman, whose family he
detested, particularly when other females were put to death for their share in
the conspiracy? That Atilla was not in that number, the Historian himself
informs us in the following remarkable sentence, Atilla matter Annaei Lucani,
sine absolutione, sine supplicio, dissimulata; thus translated by Gordon: "The
information against Atilla, the mother of Lucan, was dissembled; and, without
being cleared, she escaped unpunished."

The preceding remarks will, I hope, vindicate to every candid mind the honor
of our Poet; whose firmness and intrepidity of character are indeed very
forcibly displayed in that picture of his death which Tacitus himself has given
us. I shall present it to the English reader in the words of Gordon: -- Lucan,
"while his blood issued in streams, perceiving his feet and hands to grow cold
and stiffen, and life to retire by little and little to the extremities, while
his heart was still beating with vital warmth, and his faculties no wise
impaired, recollected some lines of his own, which described a wounded soldier
expiring in a manner that resembled this. The lines themselves he rehearsed;
and they were the last words he ever uttered." The Annals of Tacitus, Book xv.
-- The critics differ concerning the verses of the Pharsalia which the author
quoted in so memorable a manner. I shall transcribe the two passages he is
supposed to have repeated, and only add that Lipsius contends for the latter.

Sanguis erant lacrymae: quaecunque foramina novit
Humor, ab his largus manat cruor: ora redundant,
Et patulae nares: sudor rubet: omnia plenis
Membra fluunt venis: totum est pro vulnere corpus.
Lib. ix. 814. Now the warm blood at once, from every part,
Ran purple poison down, and drained the fainting heart.
Blood falls for tears; and over his mournful face
The ruddy drops their tainted passage trace.
Wherever the liquid juices find a way,
There streams of blood, there crimson rivers stray.
His mouth and gushing nostrils pour a flood,
And even the pores ouze out the trickling blood;
In the red deluge all the parts lie drowned,
And the whole body seems one bleeding wound.
ROW. Scinditur avulsus; nec sicut vulnere sanguis
Emicuit lentus; ruptis cadit undique venis,
Discursusque animae, diversa in membra meantis,
Interceptus aquis.
Lib. iii. v. 638. No single wound the gaping rupture seems,
Where trickling crimson wells in slender streams;
But, from an opening horrible and wide,
A thousand vessels pour the bursting tide:
At once the winding channel's course was broke,
Where wandering life her mazy journey took;
At once the currents all forgot their way,
And lost their purple in the azure sea.
ROW. Such was the death of Lucan, before he had completed his twentyseventh
year. If his character as a man has been injured by the Historian, his poetical
reputation has been treated not less injuriously by the Critics. Quintilian, by
a frivolous distinction, disputes his title to be classed among the Poets; and
Scaliger says, with a brutality of language disgraceful only to himself, that
he seems rather to bark than to sing. But these insults may appear amply
compensated, when we remember, that in the most polished nations of modern
Europe the most elevated and poetic spirits have been his warmest admirers;
that in France he was idolized by Corneille, and in England translated by Row.
-- The severest censures on Lucan have proceeded from those who have unfairly
compared his language to that of Virgil: but how unjust and absurd is such a
comparison! it is comparing an uneven block of porphyry, taken rough from the
quarry, to the most beautiful supersicies of polished marble. How differently
should we think of Virgil as a poet, if we possessed only the verses which he
wrote at that period of life when Lucan composed his Pharsalia! In the
disposition of his subject, in the propriety and elegance of diction, he is
undoubtedly far inferior to Virgil: but if we attend to the bold originality of
his design, and to the vigor of his sentiments; if we consider the Pharsalia
as the rapid and uncorrected sketch of a young poet, executed in an age when
the spirit of his countrymen was broken, and their taste in literature
corrupted, it may justly be esteemed as one of the most noble and most
wonderful productions of the human mind.

NOTE VII. VERSE 293.
As Lesbos paid to Pompey's lovely Wife.] Pompey, after his defeat at
Pharsalia, proceeded to Lesbos, as he had left his wife Cornelia to the
protection of that island; which received the unfortunate hero with a sublime
generosity. The Lesbians entreated him to remain amongst them, and promised to
defend him. Pompey expressed his gratitude for their fidelity, but declined the
offer, and embarked with Cornelia. The concern of this gallant people on the
departure of their amiable guest is thus described by Lucan: -- dixit;
moestamque carinae
Imposuit comitem. Cunctos mutare putares
Tellurem patriaeque solum: sie litore toto
Plangitur, infestae tenduntur in aethera dextrae;
Pompeiumque minus, cujus fortuna dolorem
Moverat, ast illam, quam toto tempore belli
Ut civem videre suam, discedere cernens
Ingemuit populus; quam vix, si castra mariti
Victoris peteret, siccis dimittere matres
Jam poterant oculis: tanto devinxit amore
Hos pudor, hos probitas, castique modestia vultus.
Lib. viii. v. 146. He ceased; and to the ship his partner bore,
While loud complainings fill the sounding shore;
It seemed as if the nation with her passed,
And banishment had laid their island waste.
Their second sorrows they to Pompey give;
For her as for their citizen they grieve;
Even though glad victory had called her thence,
And her Lord's bidding been the just pretense,
The Lesbian matrons had in tears been drowned,
And brought her weeping to their watery bound:
So was she loved, so winning was her grace,
Such lowly sweetness dwelt upon her face.
ROW.

NOTE VIII. VERSE 296.
Let Argentaria on your canvass shine.] Polla Argentaria was the daughter of a
Roman Senator, and the wife of Lucan. She is said to have transcribed and
corrected the three first books of the Pharsalia, after the death of her
husband. It is much to be regretted that we possess not the poem which he wrote
on the merits of this amiable and accomplished woman; but her name is
immortalized by two surviving Poets of that age. The veneration which she paid
to the memory of her husband, is recorded by Martial; and more poetically
described in that pleasing and elegant little production of Statius,
Genethliacon Lucani, a poem which I the more readily commend, as I may be
thought by some readers unjust toward its author, in omitting to celebrate his
Thebaid. I confess, indeed, the miscellaneous poems of Statius appear to me his
most valuable work: in most of these there is much imagination and sentiment,
in harmonious and spirited verse. The little poem which I have mentioned, on
the anniversary of Lucan's birth, is said to have been written at the request
of Argentaria. The Author, after invoking the poetical deities to attend the
ceremony, touches with great delicacy and spirit on the compositions of Lucan's
childhood, which are lost, and the Pharsalia, the production of his early
youth; he then pays a short compliment to the beauty and talents of Argentaria,
laments the cruel fate which deprived her so immaturely of domestic happiness;
and concludes with the following address to the shade of Lucan: At tu, seu
rapidum poli per axem
Famae curribus arduis levatus,
Qua surgunt animae potentiores,
Terras despicis, et sepulchra rides:
Seu pacis meritum nemus reclusae
Felix Elysiis tenes in oris,
Quo Pharsalica turba congregatur;
Et te nobile carmen insonantem
Pompeii comitantur et Catones:
Tu magna sacer et superbus umbra
Nescis Tartaron, et procul nocentum
Audis verbera, pallidumque visa
Matris lampade respicis Neronem.
Adsis lucidus; et vocante Polla
Unum, quaeso, diem deos silentum
Exores; solet hoc patere limen
Ad nuptas redeuntibus maritis.
Haec te non thiasis procax dolosi^
Falsi numinis induit figuras;
Ipsum sed colit, et frequentat ipsum
Imis altius insitum medullis;
Ac solatia vana subministrat
Vultus, qui simili notatus auro
Stratis praenitet, excubatque somno
Securae. Procul hinc abite mortes;
Haec vitae genitalis est origo;
Cedat luctus atrox, genisque manent
Jam dulces lacrymae dolorque festus
Quicquid fleverat ante nunc adoret.
But you, O! whether to the skies
On Fame's triumphant car you rise,
(Where mightier souls new life assume)
And mock the confines of the tomb;
Or whether in Elysium blessed
You grace the groves of sacred rest,
Where she Pharsalian heroes dwell;
And, as you strike your Epic shell,
The Pompeys and the Catos throng
To catch the animating song;
Of Tartarus the dread control
Binds not your high and hallowed soul*
Distant you hear that wailing coast,
And see the guilty Nero's ghost
Grow pale with anguish and affright,
His mother flashing on his sight.
Be present to your Polla's vows,
While to your honored name she bows!
One day let your entreaties gain
From those who rule the shadowy train!
Their gates have opened to bless a wife,
And given a husband back to life.
In you the tender Fair invites
No fancied god with frantic rites;
You are the object of her prayers,
You in her inmost heart she bears:
And, stamped on mimic gold, your head
Adorns the faithful mourner's bed,
And sooths her eyes before they close,
The guardian of her chaste repose.
Away with all funereal state!
From hence his nobler life we date:
Let Mourning change the pang severe
To fond Devotion's grateful tear!
And festal grief, its anguish over,
What it lamented, now adore!


I cannot close this note without observing, that the preceding verses have a
strong tendency to prove, that Lucan was perfectly innocent in regard to the
accusation which I have examined before. Had he been really guilty of basely
endangering the life of his mother, it is not probable that his wife would have
honored his memory with such enthusiastic veneration, or that Statius, in
verses designed to do him honor, would have alluded to the mother of Nero. The
Reader will pardon my recurring to this subject, as it is pleasing to make use
of every argument which may remove so odious and unjust a stain from a manly
and exalted character.

NOTES TO THE THIRD EPISTLE.
NOTE I. VERSE 36.
AND smiles of triumph hid his mortal pang.] An allusion to ridens moriar, the
close of the celebrated Northern Ode, by the Danish king Regner Lodbrog; a
translation of which is inserted in the curious little volume of Runic poetry,
printed for Dodsley, 1763.

Bartholin, in his admirable Essay on the Causes which inspired the Danes with
a Contempt of Death, affirms, that it was customary with the Northern warriors
to sing their own exploits in the close of life. He mentions the example of a
hero named Hallmundus, who being mortally wounded, commanded his daughter to
attend while he composed a poem, and to inscribe it on a tablet of wood.
BARTHOLIN. Lib. i. cap. 10.

NOTE II. VERSE 60.
And galls the ghostly Tyrant with her lash.] The poetry of Provence contains
many spirited satires against the enormities of the Clergy. The most
remarkable, is the bold invective of the Troubadour Guillaume Figueira, in
which he execrates the avarice and the cruelty of Rome. The Papal cause found a
female Poet to defend it: Germonda of Montpellier composed a poetical reply to
the satire of Figueira. See MILLOT's Hist. des Troubadours, vol. ii. p. 455.

NOTE III. VERSE 76.
Struck with ill-fated zeal the Latian lyre.] There never was a century utterly
destitute of ingenious and elegant Poets, says the learned Polycarp Leyser,
after having patiently traced the obscure progress of Latin poetry through all
the dark ages. Indeed the merit of some Latin Poets, in a period that we
commonly suppose involved in the grossest barbarism, is singularly striking;
many of these are of the Epic kind, and, as they describe the manners and
customs of their respective times, a complete review of them might form a
curious and entertaining work. I shall briefly mention such as appear most
worthy of notice.

Abbo, a Parisian monk, of the Benedictine order, wrote a poem on the siege of
Paris by the Normans and the Danes, at which he was present, in the year 886:
it is printed in the second volume of Duchesne's Script.Francorum; and, though
it has little or no poetical merit, may be regarded as an historical curiosity.
The following lines, addressed to the city of Paris, in the beginning of the
work, may serve as a specimen of its language: Dic igitur praepulchra polis,
quod Danea munus
Libavit tibimet, soboles Plutonis amica,
Tempore quo praesul domini et dulcissimus heroes
Gozlinus temet pastorque benignus alebat!
Haec inquit, miror, narrare potest aliquisne?
Nonne tuis idem vidisti oculis? refer ergo:
Vidi equidem, jussisque tuis parebo libenter.


Leyser has confounded this Poet with another of this name; but Fabricius has
corrected the mistake, in his Bibliotheca Latina mediae et infimae Aetatis.

Guido, Bishop of Amiens from the year 1058 to 1076, wrote an Heroic poem on
the exploits of William the Conqueror, in which, according to Ordericus
Vitalis, he imitated both Virgil and Statius. William of Apulia composed, at
the request of Pope Urban the IId, a poem, in five books, on the actions of the
Normans in Sicily, Apulia, and Calabria, to the death of Robert Guiscard their
prince; addressing his work to the son of that hero. It was written between the
years 1080 and 1099; first printed in 1582, 4to; and again in Muratori's
Script. Ital. Du Cange, in his Notes to the Alexiad of the Princess Anna
Comnena, has illustrated that history by frequent and long quotations from
William of Apulia; but though the learned Critic gives him the title of
Scriptor Egregius, his poetry appears to me but a few degrees superior to that
of the Monk Abbo, whom I have just mentioned. The Reader may judge from the
following passage, which I select not only as a specimen of the Author's style,
but as it shows that the wives of these martial Princes shared with them in all
the perils of war.

Uxor in hoc bello Roberti forte sagitta
Quadam laesa fuit, quae vulnere territa, nullam
Dum sperabat opem, se pene subegerat hosti,
Navigio cujus se commendare volebat,
Instantis metuens vicina pericula lethi:
Hanc deus eripuit, fieri ludibria nolens
Matronae tantae tam nobilis et venerandae.
The Princess Comnena has also celebrated the fortitude which this Heroine,
whose name was Gaita, displayed in the battle; and it is remarkable, that the
royal female Historian describes the noble Amazon. more poetically than the
Latin Poet.

Gualfredo, an Italian, who succeeded to the bishopric of Siena in the year
1080, and died in 1127, wrote an Heroic poem on the expedition of Godfrey of
Boulogne, which is said to be still preserved in MS. at Siena. I believe
Gualfredo is the first Poet, in point of time, who treated of the happy subject
of the Crusades; which was afterward embellished by two very elegant writers
of Latin verse, Iscanus and Gunther, of whom I shall presently speak, and at
length received its highest honor from the genius of Tasso. There is also an
early Latin poem on this subject, the joint production of two writers, named
Fulco and Aegidius, whom the accurate Fabricius places in the beginning of the
13th. century; the title of the work is Historia. Gestorum Viae: nostri
Temporis Hierosolymitanae. It is printed in the fourth volume of Duchesne's
Script. Franc. and with considerable additions in the third volume of Anecdota
Edmundi Martene. I transcribe part of the opening of this poem, as the curious
reader may have a pleasure in comparing it with that of Tasso. Ardor inest,
inquam, sententia fixaque menti
Versibus et numeris transmittere posteritati
Qualiter instinctu deitatis, et auspice cultu
Est aggressa via memorando nobilis actu,
Qua sacrosancti violantes jura sepulchri
Digna receperunt meriti commercia pravi.
Inque suis Francis antiqua resurgere Troja
Coepit, et edomuit Christo contraria regna.
I will only add the portrait of Godfrey: Inclytus ille ducum Godefridus culmen
honosque,
Omnibus exemplum bonitatis militiaeque,
Sive hasta jaculans aequaret Parthica tela,
Cominus aut feriens terebraret ferrea scuta,
Seu gladio pugnans carnes resecaret et ossa,
Sive eques atque pedes propelleret agmina densa,
Hic inimicitiis cunctis sibi conciliatis
Cunctis possessis pro Christi pace relictis
Arripuit callem Christum sectando vocantem.
The poem closes with the capture of Jerusalem.

Laurentius of Verona, who flourished about the year 1120, wrote an Heroic
poem, in seven books, entitled, Rerum in Majorica Pisanorum. Edidit Ughellus,
tom. 3. Italiae sacrae.

But in merit and reputation, these early Latin Poets of modern time are very
far inferior to Philip Gualtier de Chatillon, who seems to have been the first
that caught any portion of true poetic spirit in Latin verse. He was Provost of
the Canons of Tournay Fabricius calls him Episcopus Magalonensis. Bib. Lat.
tom. ii. p. 255.
about the year 1200, according to Mr. Warton, who has given some specimens of
his style in the second Dissertation prefixed to his admirable History of
English Poetry. I shall therefore only add, that the best edition of his
Alexandreid, an Heroic poem in ten books on Alexander the Great, was printed at
Leyden, 4to, 1558.

The superior merit of Josephus Iscanus, or Joseph of Exeter, has been also
displayed by the same judicious Encomiast, in the Dissertation I have
mentioned; nor has he failed to commemorate two Latin Epic Poets of the same
period, and of considerable merit for the time in which they lived -- Gunther,
and William of Bretagny; the first was a German monk, who wrote after the year
1108, and has left various historical and poetical works; particularly two of
the Epic kind -- Solymarium, a poem on the taking of Jerusalem by Godfrey of
Bulloign; and another, entitled Ligurinus, on the exploits of the Emperor
Frederick Barbarossa, which he completed during the life of that Prince. The
first was never printed; of the latter there have been several editions, and
one by the celebrated Melancthon, in 1569. That his poetical merit was
considerable in many respects, will appear from the following verses, in which
he speaks of himself.

Hoc quoque me famae, si desint caetera, solum
Conciliare potest, quod jam per multa latentes
Saecula, nec clausis prodire penatibus ausas
Pierides vulgar paro, priscumque nitorem
Reddere carminibus, tardosque citare poetas.
William of Bretagny was preceptor to Pierre Charlot, natural son of Philip
Augustus, King of France, and addressed a poem to his pupil, entitled Karlotis,
which is yet unpublished; but his greater work, called Philippis, an Heroic
poem in twelve books, is printed in the collections of Duchesne and Pithaeus;
and in a separate 4to volume, with a copious commentary by Barthius.
Notwithstanding the praises bestowed on this Author by his learned Commentator,
who prefers him to all his contemporaries, he appears to me inferior in poetic
spirit to his three rivals, Gualtier de Chatillon, Iscanus, and Gunther. Yet
his work is by no means despicable in its style, and may be considered as a
valuable picture of the times in which he lived; for he was himself engaged in
many of the scenes which he describes. His professed design is to celebrate the
exploits, of Philip Augustus; and he closes his poem with the death of that
Monarch, which happened in 1223. He addresses his work, in two separate
poetical dedications, to Lewis, the successor of Philip, and to Pierre Charlot
his natural son, who was Bishop of Noyon in 1240, and died 1249, He seems to
have been excited to this composition by the reputation of Gualtier's
Alexandreid; to which he thus alludes, in the verses addressed to Lewis: Gesta
ducis Macedum celebri describere versu
Si licuit Gualtere tibi, quae sola relatu
Multivago docuit te vociferatio famae.
Cur ego quae novi, proprio quae lumine vidi,
Non ausim magni magnalia scribere regis,
Qui nec Alexandro minor est virtute, nec illo
Urbi Rumuleae totum qui subdidit orbem?


He takes occasion also, in two other parts of his poem, to pay a liberal
compliment to Gualtier, to whom, in poetical ability, he confesses himself
inferior; but this inferiority his admirer Barthius will not allow. Of their
respective talents the reader may judge, who will compare the passage which Mr.
Warton has cited from the Alexandreid, with the following lines, in which
William of Bretagny uses the very simile of his predecessor, comparing his hero
Philip to a young lion.

Rex dolet ereptum comitem sibi, frendit, et irae
Occultare nequit tectos sub pectore motus,
Nam rubor in vultu duplicatus prodit aperte
Quam gravis illustrem trahit indignatio mentem.
Qualiter in Lybicis spumante leunculo rictu
Saltibus ungue ferox, et dentibus asper aduncis
Fortis et horrisoris anno jam pene secundo,
Cui venatoris venabula forte per armos
Descendere levi stringentia vulnere corpus,
Colla rigens hirsuta jubis desaevit in hostem
Jam retrocedentem, nec eum tetigisse volentem,
Cum nihil ex facto referat nisi dedecus illo.
Nec mora nec requies, quin jam deglutiat ipsum,
Ni prudens hostis praetenta cuspide scuto
Unguibus objecto, dum dat vestigia retro,
In loca se retrahat non irrumpenda leoni.
Sic puer in comitem rex debacchatur et ipsum
Subsequitur presso relegens vestigia gressu.
I will add the following passage from the eleventh Book, as it contains an
animated portrait, and a simile more original than the preceding.

At laevo in cornu, qui nulli mart secundus,
Bolonides pugnae insistit, cui fraxinus ingens
Nunc implet dextram, vix ulli bajula, qualem
In Bacchi legimus portasse Capanea cunas,
Quam vix fulmineo dejecit Jupiter ictu:
Nunc culter vitae impatiens, nunc sanguine pugni
Mucro rubens; gemina e sublimi vertice fulgens
Cornua conus agit, superasque eduxit in auras
E costis assumpta nigris, quas faucis in antro
Brachia balenae Britici colit incola ponti;
Ut qui magnus erat magnae superaddita moli
Majorem faceret phantastica pompa videri.
Ac velut in faltus scopulosa Bieria saltu
Praecipiti mittit ingenti corpore cervum,
Cujus multifidos numerant a cornibus annos,
Mense sub Octobri nondum Septembre peracto,
Annua quando novis Venus incitat ignibus illum,
Cursitat in cervos ramosa front minores,
Omnibus ut pulsis victor sub tegmine fagi
Connubio cervam solus sibi subdat amatam.
Haud secus e peditum medio, quibus ipse rotundo
Ut castro cauta se circumsepserat art,
Prosiliens volat in Thomam, Robertigenasque
Drocarum Comitem, Belvacenumque Philippum
Bolonides. --
William of Bretagny had an immediate successor in Latin poetry, who appears to
have at least an equal portion of poetical spirit; the name of this Author is
Nicholas de Brai, who wrote an Heroic poem on the actions of Louis the VIIIth,
after the death of that Monarch, and addressed it to William of Auvergne, who
was Bishop of Paris from the year 1228 to 1248. As a specimen of his
descriptive power, I select the following lines, which form part of a long
description of a Goblet presented to the King on his accession: -- Parant
intrare palatia regis
Magnifici cives, gratissima dona ferentes,
Tegmina quos ornant variis insculpta figuris;
Et patrem patriae jucunda voce salutant,
Et genibus flexis praesentant ditia dona.
Offertur crater, quem si sit credere dignum
Perditus ingenio fabricavit Mulciber auro;
Margin crateris totus depingitur orbis,
Et series rerum brevibus distincta figuris:
Illic pontus erat, tellus et pendulus aer,
Ignis ad alta volans coeli supereminet illis:
Quatuor in parts orbis distinguitur, ingens
Circuit oceanus immensis fluctibus orbem.
Ingenio natura suo duo lumina fecit
Fixa tenore poli, mundi famulantia rebus.
The Author proceeds to describe Thebes and Troy, as they are figured on this
superb Goblet; and concludes his account of the workmanship with the four
following lines, of peculiar beauty for the age in which they appeared: Martis
adulterium resupino margin pinxit
Mulciber, et Venerem laqueis cum Mart ligavit;
Pluraque caelasset sub margin, sed pudor illi
Obstat, et ingentis renovatur causa doloris.


This Poem, Which the author seems to have left imperfect, is printed in the
fifth volume of Duchesne's Script. Francorum. -- England is said to have
produced another Heroic Poet of considerable merit, who celebrated in Latin
verse the exploits of Richard the First, and who was called Gulielmus
Peregrinus, from his having attended that Prince to the Holy Land. Leland
mentions him by the name of Gulielmus de Canno, and Pits calls him Poetarum sui
temporis apud nostrates facile Princeps; but I do not find that his Work was
ever printed; nor do the several biographical writers who speak of him, inform
us where it exists in MS.

In Italy the Latin language is supposed to have been cultivated with still
greater success, and the restoration of its purity is in great measure ascribed
to Albertino Mussato, whose merits were first displayed to our country by the
learned author of the Essay on Pope. -- Mussato was a Paduan, of high rank and
great talents, but unfortunate. He died in exile, 1329, and left, besides many
smaller Latin pieces, an Heroic Poem, De Gestis Italorum post Henricum VII.
Caesarem, seu de Obsidione Domini Canis Grandis de Verona circa maenia Paduanae
civitatis et Conflictu ejus. -- Quadrio, from whom I transcribe this title,
says it is printed in the tenth volume of Muratori. Vossius, who speaks of him
as an Historian, asserts that he commanded in the war which is the subject of
his Poem.

In a few years after the death of Mussato, Petrarch received the laurel at
Rome, for his Latin Epic poem, entitled Africa; a performance which has sunk so
remarkably from the high reputation it once obtained, that the great admirer
and encomiast of Petrarch, who has published three entertaining quarto volumes
on his life, calls it "Un ouvrage sans chaleur, sans invention, sans interet,
qui n'a pas meme le merit de la versification and du style, and don't il est
impossible de soutenir la lecture. -- I must observe, however, that Tasso, in
his Essay on Epic Poetry, bestows a very high encomium on that part of
Petrarch's Latin poem in which he celebrates the loves of Sophonisba and
Masinissa; and indeed the censure of this amiable French writer, who in other
points has done ample justice to the merits of Petrarch, appears to me
infinitely too severe. There are many passages in this neglected Poem conceived
with great force and imagination, and expressed with equal elegance of
language. I shall select some verses from that part of it which has been
honored by the applause of Tasso. The following lines describe the anguish of
the young Numidian Prince, when he is constrained to abandon his lovely bride:
Volvitur inde thoro (quoniam sub pectore pernox
Saevit amor, lacerantque truces praecordia curae)
Uritur, invigilant moeror, metus, ira, furorque,
Saepe and absentem lacrymans dum stringit amicam
Saepe thoro dedit amplexus, et dulcia verba.
Postquam nulla valent violento fraena dolori,
Incipit, et longis solatur damna querelis.
Cura mihi nimium, vita mihi dulcior omni
Sophonisba vale: non te mea cura videbo
Leniter aethereos posthac componere vultus,
Effusosque auro religantem ex more capillos.
Dulcia, non caelum mulcentia verba, Deosque,
Oris odorati, secretaque murmura carpam.
Solus ero gelidoque insternam membra cubili,
Atque utinam socio componat amica sepulchro,
Et simul hic vetitos, illic concorditer annos
Contingat duxisse mihi sors optima busti.
Si cinis amborum commixtis morte medullis
Unus erit, Scipio nostros non scindet amores.
O utinam infernis etiam nunc una latebris
Umbra simus, liceat pariter per claustra vagari
Myrtea, nec nostros Scipio disjungat amores.
Ibimus una ambo flentes, et passibus iisdem
Ibimus, aeterno connexi foedere, nec nos
Ferreus aut aequos Scipio interrumpet amores.


The well-known catastrophe of the unfortunate Sophonisba is related with much
poetical spirit. The close of her life, and her first appearance in the regions
of the dead, are peculiarly striking.

Illa manu pateramque tenens, and lumina coelo
Attollens, Sol alme, inquit, superique valete!
Masinissa vale, nostri memor: inde malignum
Ceu sitiens haurit non mota front venenum,
Tartareasque petit violentus spiritus umbras.
Nulla magis Stygios mirantum obsessa corona
Umbra lacus subiit, postquam divisa triformis
Partibus haud aequis stetit ingens machina mundi.
Obtuitu attonito stabant horrentia circum
Agmina Poenarum, sparsoque rigentia villo
Eumenidum tacitis inhiabant rictibus ora.
Regia vis oculis inerat, pallorque verendus
Et vetus egregia majestas front manebat.
Indignata tamen superis, irataque morti
Ibat et exiguo defigens lumina flexu.
With Petrarch I may close this cursory review of the neglected authors who
wrote Heroic poems in Latin, during the course of the dark ages. -- A peculiar
circumstance induces me to add another name to the preceding list. John, Abbot
of Peterborough, in the reign of Edward the Third, wrote an Heroic poem,
entitled Bellum Navarrense, 1366, de Petro rege Aragoniae, and Edwardo
Principe. This performance, containing five hundred and sixty verses, is said
to be preserved in MS. in the Bodleian Library; and I have thought it worthy of
notice, because it treats of the very subject on which Dryden informs us he had
once projected an Epic poem.

Of the many Latin compositions of the Epic kind, which later times have
produced, the Christiad of Vida, the Sarcotis of Massenius, and the Constantine
of Mambrun, appear to me the most worthy of regard; but even these are seldom
perused: and indeed the Poet, who in a polished age prefers the use of a dead
language to that of a living one, can only expect, and perhaps only deserves,
the attention of a few curious sequestered students.

NOTE IV. VERSE 81.
Thy daring Dante his wild Vision sung.] Dante Allighieri was born at Florence,
in May 1265, of an ancient and honorable family. Boccacio, who lived in the
same period, has left a very curious and entertaining Treatise, on the Life,
the Studies, and Manners of this extraordinary Poet; whom he regarded as his
master, and for whose memory he professed the highest veneration. This
interesting biographer relates, that Dante, before he was nine years old,
conceived a passion for the lady whom he has immortalized in his singular Poem.
Her age was near his own; and her name was Beatrice, the daughter of Folco
Portinari, a noble citizen of Florence. Of this fair one the best accounts are
obscure. Some refining commentators have even denied her corporeal existence;
affirming her to be nothing more or less than Theology. But we may question if
Theology was ever the mistress of so young a lover. The passion of Dante,
however, like that of his successor Petrarch, seems to have been of the chaste
and Platonic kind, according to the account he has himself given of it, in one
of his early productions, entitled Vita Nuova; a mixture of mysterious poetry
and prose, in which he mentions both the origin of his affection and the death
of his mistress, who, according to Boccacio, died at the age of twenty-four.
The same author asserts, that Dante fell into a deep melancholy in consequence
of this event, from which his friends endeavored to raise him; by persuading
him to marriage. After some time he followed their advice, and repented it; for
he unfortunately made choice of a lady who bore some resemblance to the
celebrated Xantippe. The Poet, not possessing the patience of Socrates,
separated himself from her with such vehement expressions of dislike, that he
never afterward admitted her to his presence, though she had borne him several
children. -- In the early part of his life he gained some credit in a military
character; distinguishing himself by his bravery in an action where the
Florentines obtained a signal victory over the citizens of Arezzo. He became
still more eminent by the acquisition of civil honors; and at the age of
thirty-five he rose to be one of the chief magistrates of Florence, when that
dignity was conferred by the suffrages of the people. From this exaltation the
Poet himself dated his principal misfortunes, as appears from the fragment of a
letter quoted by Lionardo Bruni; one of his early biographers, where Dante
speaks of his political failure with that liberal frankness which integrity
inspires. -- Italy was at that time distracted by the contending factions of
the Ghibellins and the Guelphs: the latter, among whom Dante took an active
part, were again divided into the Blacks and the Whites. Dante, says Gravina,
exerted all his influence to unite these inferior parties; but his efforts were
ineffectual, and he had the misfortune to be unjustly persecuted by those of
his own faction. A powerful citizen of Florence, named Corso Donati, had taken
measures to terminate these intestine broils, by introducing Charles of Valois,
brother to Philip the Fair, King of France. Dante, with great vehemence,
opposed this disgraceful project, and obtained the banishment of Donati and his
partisans. The exiles applied to the Pope (Boniface the VIIIth) and by his
assistance succeeded in their design. Charles of Valois entered Florence in
triumph, and those who had opposed his admission were banished in their turn.
Dante had been dispatched to Rome as the ambassador of his party, and was
returning, when he received intelligence of the revolution in his native city.
His enemies, availing themselves of his absence, had procured an iniquitous
sentence against him, by which he was condemned to banishment, and his
possessions were confiscated. His two enthusiastic biographers, Boccacio acid
Manetti, express the warmest indignation against this injustice of his country.
Dante, on receiving the intelligence, took refuge in Siena, and afterward in
Arezzo, where many of his party were assembled. An attempt was made to surprise
the city of Florence, by a small army which Dante is supposed to have attended:
the design miscarried, and our Poet is conjectured to have wandered to various
parts of Italy, till he found a patron in the great Can della Scala, Prince of
Verona, whom he has celebrated in his Poem. The high spirit of Dante was ill
suited to courtly dependence; and he is said to have lost the favor of his
Veroneze patron by the rough frankness of his behavior. From Verona he retired
to France, according to Manetti; and Boccacio affirms that he disputed in the
Theological Schools of Paris with great reputation. Bail questions his
visiting Paris at this period of his life, and thinks it improbable, that a
man, who had been one of the chief magistrates of Florence, should condescend
to engage in the public squabbles of the Parisian Theologists; but the spirit
both of Dante, and the times in which he lived, sufficiently account for this
exercise of his talents; and his residence in France at this season is
confirmed by Boccacio, in his life of our Poet, which Bail seems to have had
no opportunity of consulting.

The election of Henry Count of Luxemburgh to the empire, in November 1308,
afforded Dante a prospect of being restored to his native city, as he attached
himself to the interest of the new Emperor, in whose service he is supposed to
have written his Latin treatise De Monarchia, in which he asserted the rights
of the Empire against the encroachments of the Papacy. In the year 1311, he
instigated Henry to lay siege to Florence; in which enterprise, says one of his
Biographers, he did not appear in person, from motives of respect toward his
native city. The Emperor was repulsed by the Florentines; and his death, which
happened in the succeeding year, deprived Dante of all hopes concerning his
re-establishment in Florence.

After this disappointment, he is supposed to have passed some years in roving
about Italy in a state of poverty and distress, till he found an honorable
establishment at Ravenna, under the protection of Guido Novello da Polenta, the
lord of that city, who received this illustrious exile with the most endearing
liberality, continued to protect him through the few remaining years of his
life, and extended his munificence to the ashes of the Poet.

Eloquence was one of the many talents which Dante possessed in an eminent
degree. On this account he is said to have been employed on fourteen different
embassies in the course of his life, and to have succeeded in most of them. His
patron Guido had occasion to try his abilities in a service of this nature, and
dispatched him as his ambassador to negociate a peace with the Venetians, who
were preparing for hostilities against Ravenna. Manetti asserts that he was
unable to procure a public audience at Venice, and returned to Ravenna by land,
from his apprehensions of the Venetian fleet; when the fatigue of his journey,
and the mortification of failing in his attempt to preserve his generous patron
from the impending danger, threw him into a fever, which terminated in death on
the 14th of September 1321. He died, however, in the palace of his friend, and
the affectionate Guido paid the most tender regard to his memory. This
magnificent patron, says Boccacio, commanded the body to be adorned with
poetical ornaments, and, after being carried on a bier through the streets of
Ravenna by the most illustrious citizens, to be deposited in a marble coffin.
He pronounced himself the funeral oration, and expressed his design of erecting
a splendid monument in honor of the deceased: a design which his subsequent
misfortunes rendered him unable to accomplish. At his request, many epitaphs
Were written on the Poet: the best of them, says Boccacio, by Giovanni del
Virgilio of Bologna, a famous author of that time, and the intimate friend of
Dante. Boccacio then cites a few Latin verses, not worth transcribing, six of
which are quoted by Bail as the composition of Dante himself, on the authority
of Paul Jovius. In 1483 Bernardo Bembo, the father of the celebrated Cardinal,
raised a handsome monument over the neglected ashes of the Poet, with the
following inscription:

Exigua tumuli Danthes hic sort jacebas
Squallenti nulli cognita paene situ;
At nunc marmoreo subnixus conderis arcu,
Omnibus et cultu splendidiore nites:
Nimirum Bembus, Musis incensus Etruscis,
Hoc tibi, quem in primis hae coluere, dedit.
Before this period the Florentines had vainly endeavored to obtain the bones
of their great Poet from the city of Ravenna. In the age of Leo the Xth they
made a second attempt, by a solemn application to the Pope, for that purpose;
and the great Michael Angelo, an enthusiastic admirer of Dante, very liberally
offered to execute a magnificent monument to the Poet. The hopes of the
Florentines were again unsuccessful. The particulars of their singular petition
may be found in the notes to Condivi's Life of Michael Angelo.

The person and manners of Dante are thus represented by the descriptive pen of
Boccacia: -- "Fu adunque questo nostro Pceta di Mezzana statura; e poiche alla
matura eta fu pervenuto, ando alquanto gravetto, ed era il suo andar grave, e
mansueto, di onestissimi panni sempre vestito, in quello abito, che era alla
sua matura eta convenevole; il suo volto (...) lungo, il naso aquilino, gli
occhi anzi grossi, che piccioli, le mascelle grandi, e dal labbro di sotto, era
quel di sopra avanzato; il color era bruno, i capelli, e la barba spessi neri
e crespi, e sempre nella faccia malinconico e pensoso -- Ne costumi publici e
domestici mirabilmente fu composto e ordinato; piu che niuno altro cortese e
civil; nel cibo e nel poto fu modestissimo. -- Though Dante is described as
much inclined to melancholy, and his genius particularly delighted in the
gloomy and sublime, yet in his early period of life he seems to have possessed
all the lighter graces of sprightly composition, as appears from the following
airy and sportive sonnet:

IMITATION.
Henry! I wish that you, and Charles, and I,
By some sweet spell within a bark were placed,
A gallant bark with magic virtue graced,
Swift at our will with every wind to fly:
So that no changes of the shifting sky,
No stormy terrors of the watery waste,
Might bar our course, but heighten still our taste
Of sprightly joy, and of our social tie:
Then, that my Lucy, Lucy fair and free,
With those soft nymphs on whom your souls are bent,
The kind magician might to us convey,
To talk of love throughout the live-long day;
And that each fair might be as well content
As I in truth believe our hearts would be.
A GUIDO CAVALCANTI.
Guido, vorrei, che tu, e Lappo, ed io,
Fossimo presi per incantamento,
E messi ad un vassel, ch'ad ogni vento
Per mare andasse a voler vostro e mio;
Sicche fortuna, od altro tempo rio,
Non ci potesse dare impedimento:
Anzi vivendo sempre in noi talento
Di stare insieme crescesse 'l disio.
E monna Vanna, e monna Bice poi,
Con quella su il numer delle trenta,
Con noi ponesse il buono incantatore:
E quivi ragionar sempre d' amore:
E ciascuna di lor fosse contenta,
Siccome io credo che sariamo noi.
These lively verses were evidently written before the Poet lost the object of
his earliest attachment, as she is mentioned by the name of Bice. At what time,
and in what place, he executed the great and singular work which has rendered
him immortal, his numerous Commentators seem unable to determine. Boccacio
asserts, that he began it in his thirty-fifth year, and had finished seven
Cantos of his Inferno before his exile; that in the plunder of his house, on
that event, the beginning of his poem was fortunately preserved, but remained
for some time neglected, till its merit being accidentally discovered by an
intelligent Poet named Dino, it was sent to the Marquis Maroello Malespina, an
Italian nobleman, by whom Dante was then protected. The Marquis restored these
lost papers to the Poet, and entreated him to proceed in a work which opened in
so promising a manner. To this incident we are probably indebted for the poem
of Dante, which he must have continued under all the disadvantages of an
unfortunate and agitated life. It does not appear at what time he completed it
perhaps before he quitted Verona, as he dedicated the Paradise to his Veronese
patron. -- The Critics have variously accounted for his having called his poem
Comedia. He gave it that title, said one of his sons, because it opens with
distress, and closes with felicity. The very high estimation in which this
production was held by his country, appears from a singular institution. The
republic of Florence, in the year 1373, assigned a public stipend to a person
appointed to read lectures on the poem of Dante: Boccacio was the first person
engaged in this office; but his death happening in two years after his
appointment, his Comment extended only to the seventeen first Cantos of the
inferno. The critical dissertations that have been written on Dante are almost
as numerous as those to which Homer has given birth: the Italian, like the
Grecian Bard, has been the subject of the highest panegyric, and of the
grossest invective. Voltaire has spoken of him with that precipitate vivacity,
which so frequently led that lively Frenchman to insult the reputation of the
noblest writers. In one of his entertaining letters, he says to an Italian
Abbe, "Je fais grand cas du courage, avec lequel vous avez ose dire que Dante
etoit un fou, et son ouvrage un monstre -- Le Dante pourra entrer dans les
bibliotheques des curieux, mais il ne sera jamais lu." But more temperate and
candid Critics have not been wanting to display the merits of this original
Poet. Mr. Warton has introduced into his last volume on English Poetry, a
judicious and spirited summary of Dante's performance. We have several versions
of the celebrated story of Ugolino; but I believe no entire Canto of Dante has
hitherto appeared in our language, though his whole work has been translated
into French, Spanish, and Latin verse. The three Cantos which follow, were
translated a few years ago, to oblige a particular friend. The Author has since
been solicited to execute an entire translation of Dante; but the extreme
inequality of this Poet would render such a work a very laborious undertaking,
and it appears very doubtful how far such a version would interest our country.
Perhaps the reception of these Cantos may discover to the Translator the
sentiments of the public. At all events, he flatters himself that the ensuing
portion of a celebrated poem may afford some pleasure from its novelty, as he
has endeavored to give the English reader an idea of Dante's peculiar manner,
by adopting his triple rhyme; and he does not recollect that this mode of
versification has ever appeared before in our language; it has obliged him of
course to make the number of translated lines correspond exactly with those of
the original. The difficulties attending this meter will sufficiently show
themselves, and obtain some degree of indulgence from the intelligent and
candid reader.

DELL' INFERNO.
CANTO I.
NEL mezzo del cammin di nostra vita
Mi ritrovai per una selva oscura,
Che la diritta via era smarrita:
E quanto a dir qual era, e cosa dura,
Questa selva selvaggia ed aspra e forte,
Che nel pensier rinnuova la paura.
Tanto e amara, che poco e piu morte:
Ma per trattar del ben, ch'i vi trovai,
Diro dell' altre cose, ch'i v'ho scorte.
I non so ben ridir, com'i v'entrai;
Tant'era pien di sonno in su quel punto,
Che la verace via abbandonai.
Ma po' ch'i fui al pie d'un colle giunto,
La ove terminava quella valle,
Che m'avea di paura il cor compunto;
Guarda'in alto, e vidi le sue spalle
Vestite gia de' raggi del pianeta,
Che mena dritto altrui per ogni call.
Allor fu la paura un poco queta,
Che nel lago del cor m'era durata,
La notte, ch'i passai con tanta pieta.
E come quei, che con lena affannata
Uscito fuor del pelago alla riva,
Si volge all'aqua perigliosa, e guata;
Cosi l'animo mio, ch'ancor fuggiva,
Si vols' a retro a rimirar lo passo,
Che non lascio giammai persona viva.
Poi ch'ebbi riposato il corpo lasso,
Ripresi via per la piaggia deserta,
Si che'l pie fermo sempre era'l piu basso.
Ed ecco, quasi al cominciar dell' erta,
Una lonza leggiera e presta molto,
Che di pel maculato era coperta.
E non mi si partia dinanzi al volto;
Anz' impediva tanto 'l mio cammino,
Ch'i fu per ritornar piu volte volto.
Temp' era dal principio del mattino,
E'l sol montava in su con quelle stelle,
Ch'eran con lui, quando l'amor divino
Moss da prima quelle cose belle
Si ch'a been sperar m'era cagione
Di quella fera la gaietta pelle,
L'ora del tempo, e la dolce stagione:
Ma non si, che paura non mi desse
La vista, che m'apparve d'un leone.
Questi parea, che contra me venesse
Con la test'alta, e con rabbiosa fame,
Si che parea, che l'aer ne temesse:
Ed una lupa, che di tutte brame
Sembiava carca con la sua magrezza,
E molte genti fe' gia viver grame.
Questa mi porse tanto di gravezza
Con la paura, ch'uscia di sua vista,
Ch'i perde' la speranza dell' altezza.
E quale e quei, che volentieri acquista,
E gingne 'l tempo, che perder lo face,
Che 'n tutt' i suoi pensier piange, e s'attrista;
Tal me fece la bestia senza pace,
Che venendomi 'ncontro, a poco a poco
Mi ripingeva la, dove 'l sol tace.
Mentre ch'i rovinava in basso loco,
Dinanzi gli occhi mi si fu offerto
Chi per lungo silenzio parea fioco.
Quando in vidi costui nel gran diserto;
Miserere di me gridai a lui,
Qual che tu sii, od ombra, od uomo certo.
Risposemi: non uomo, uomo gia fui,
E li parenti miei furon Lombardi,
E Mantovani, per patria amendui.
Nacqui sub Julio, ancorche fosse tardi,
E vissi a Roma, sotto 'l buono Agusto,
Al tempo degli Dei falsi e bugiardi.
Poeta fui, e cantai di quel giusto
Figlioul d'Anchise, che venne da Troja,
Poiche 'l superbo Ilion fu combusto.
Ma tu, perch ritorni a tanta noja?
Perch non sali il dilettoso monte,
Ch'e principio e cagion di tutta gioja?
Or se' tu quel Virgilio, e quella font,
Che spande di parlar si largo fiume?
Risposi lui, con vergognosa front.
Oh degli altri poeti onore e lume,
Vagliami 'l lungo studio, e'l grande amore,
Che m'han fatto cercar lo tuo volume.
Tu se' lo mio maestro, e'l mio autore:
Tu se' solo colui, da cu'io tolsi
Lo bello style, che m'ha fatto onore.
Vedi la bestia, per cu'io mi volsi:
Ajutami da lei, famoso saggio,
Ch'ella mi fa tremar le vene e i polsi.
A te convien tenere altro viaggio,
Rispose, poiche lagrimar mi vide,
Se vuoi campar d'esto luogo selvaggio:
Che questa bestia, per la qual tu gride,
Non lascia altrui passar per la sua via,
Ma tanto lo 'mpedisce, che l'uccide:
Ed ha natura si malvagia e ria,
Che may non empie la bramosa voglia,
E, dopo 'l pasto, ha piu fame, che pria.
Molti son gli animali, a cui s'ammoglia;
E piu saranno ancora, infin che 'l veltro
Verra, che la fara morir di doglia.
Questi non cibera terra, ne peltro,
Ma sapienza, e amore, e virtute,
E sua nazion sara tra Feltro e Feltro:
Di quell' umile Italia fia salute,
Per cui morio la Vergine Cammilla,
Eurialo, e Turno, e Niso di ferute:
Questi la caccera per ogni villa,
Fin che l'avra rimessa nello 'nferno,
La onde 'nvidia prima dipartilla.
Ond'io, per lo tuo me', penso e discerno,
Che tu mi segui, ed io saro tua guida,
E trarrotti di qui, per luogo eterno,
Ov' udirai le disperate strida,
Vedrai gli antiche spiriti dolenti,
Che la seconda morte ciascun grida:
E poi vedrai color, che son contenti
Nel fuoco; perch speran di venire,
Quando che sia, all beat genti:
All qua' poi se tu vorrai salire,
Anima fia, a cio di me piu degna:
Con lei ti lascero nel mio partire:
Che quello 'mperador, che lassu regna,
Perch' in fu'ribellante alla sua leg,
Non vuol che'n sua citta per me si vegna.
In tutte parti impera, e quivi regge:
Quivi e la sua cittade, e l'alto seggio:
O felice colui, cu' ivi elegge!
Ed io a lui: Poeta, in ti rechieggio,
Per quello Iddio, che tu non conoscesti,
Acciocch' in fugga questo male e peggio,
Che tu mi meni, la dov'or dicesti,
Si ch' in vegga la porta di san Pietro,
E color che tu fai cotanto mesti.
Allor si moss, ed io li tenni dietro.
CANTO II.
LO giorno se n'andava, e l'aer bruno
Toglieva gli animai, che sono 'n terra,
Dalle fatiche loro: ed io sol' uno
M'apparecchiava a softener la guerra,
Si del cammino, e si della pietate,
Che ritrarra la mente, che non erra.
O Muse, o alto 'ngegno, or m'ajutate:
O mente, che scrivesti cio ch'i' vidi,
Qui si parra la tua nobilitate.
Io cominciai: Poeta, che mi guidi,
Guarda la mia virtu, s'ell' e possente,
Prima ch' all' alto passo tu mi fidi.
Tu dici, che di Silvio lo parente,
Corrutibile ancora, ad immortale
Secolo ando, e fu sensibilmente.
Pero se l'avversario d'ogni male
Cortese fu, pensando l'alto effetto,
Ch' uscir dovea di lui, e'l chi, e'l quale,
Non pare indegno ad uomo d'intelletto:
Ch' ei fu dell'alma Roma, e di suo 'mpero,
Nell' empireo ciel, per padre, eletto:
La quale, e'l quale (a voler dir lo vero)
Fur stabiliti, per lo loco santo,
U' siede it successor del maggior Piero.
Per questa andata, onde li dai tu vanto,
Intese cose, che furon cagione
Di sua vittoria, e del papale ammanto.
Andovvi poi lo vas d'elezione,
Per recarne conforto, a quella feed,
Ch' e principio alla via di salvazione.
Ma io, perch venirvi? o chi 'l concede?
Io non Enea, io non Paolo sono:
Me degno a cio, ne io, ne altri il creed.
Perch se del venire in m'abbandono,
Temo che la venuta non sia folle:
Se' savio, e 'ntendi me', ch'i' non ragiono.
E quale e quei, che disvuol cio ch'e' volle,
E per nuovi pensier cangia proposta,
Si che del cominciar tutto si toll;
Tal mi fec' io' in quella oscura costa:
Perch, pensando, consumai la 'mpresa,
Che fu, nel cominciar, cotanto tosta.
Se io ho ben la tua parola intesa,
Rispose del magnanimo quell' ombra,
L'anima tua e da viltate offesa:
La qual molte fiate l'uomo ingombra,
Si che d'onrata impresa lo rivolve,
Come falso veder bestia, quand' ombra.
Da questa tema acciocche tu ti solve,
Dirotti, perch' in venni, e quel, ch'io'ntesi,
Nel primo punto, che di te mi dolve.
Io era tra color, che son sospesi,
E donna mi chiamo beata e bella,
Tal che di comandare in la richiesi.
Lucevan gli occhi suoi piu, che la stella:
E cominciommi a dir soave e piana,
Con angelica voce, in sua favella:
O anima cortese Mantovana,
Di cui la fama ancor nel mondo dura,
E durera, quanto'l moto lontana:
L'amico mio, e non della ventura,
Nella deserta piaggia e impedito
Si nel cammin, che volto e per paura:
E temo, che non sia gia si smarrito,
Ch'io mi sia tardi al soccorso levata,
P^r qu l, ch' io ho di lui, nel Cielo, udito.
Or muovi, e con la tua parola ornata,
E con cio, che ha mestieri al suo campare,
L'ajuta si, ch'i' ne sia consolata.
IN son Beatrice, che ti faccio andare:
Vegno di loco, ove tornar disio:
Amor mi moss, che mi fa parlare.
Quando saro dinanzi al signor mio,
Di te mi lodero sovente a lui:
Tacette allora, e poi comincia' io:
O donna di virtu, sola, per cui,
L'umana spezie eccede ogni contento
Da quel ciel, ch' ha minor li cerchi suoi:
Tanto m'aggrada 'l tuo comandamento,
Che l'ubbidir, se gia fosse, m'e tardi:
Piu non t'e uopo aprirmi'l tuo talento.
Ma dimmi la cagion, che non ti guardi
Dello scender quaggiuso, in questo centro,
Dall' ampio loco, ove tornar tu ardi.
Da che tu vuoi saper cotanto addentro,
Dirotti brevemente, mi rispose,
Perch'i' non temo di venir qua entro.
Temer si dee di sole quelle cose,
Ch' haano potenza di fare altrui male:
Dell' altre no, che non son paurose.
Io son fatta da Dio, sua merce, tale,
Che la vostra miseria non mi tange,
Ne fiamma d'esto 'ncendio non m'assale.
Donna e gentil nel ciel, che si compiange
Di questo 'mpedimento, ov' in ti mando,
Si che duro giudicio lassu frange.
Questa chiese Lucia in suo dimando,
E disse: Ora abbisogna il tuo fedele
Di te, ed io a te lo raccomando.
Lucia nimica di ciascun crudele
Si moss, e venne al loco, dov'i' era,
Che mi sedea con l'antica Rachele:
Disse, Beatrice, loda di Dio vera,
Che non soccorri quei, che t'amo tanto;
Ch' uscio per te della volgare schiera?
Non odi tu la pieta del suo pianto,
Non vedi tu la monte, che 'l combatte
Su la fiumana, ove'l mar non ha vanto?
Al mondo non fur may person ratte
A far lor pro, ed a fuggir lor danno,
Com' io, dopo cotai parole fat,
Venni quaggiu dal mio beato scanno,
Fidandomi nel tuo parlare onesto,
Ch' onora te, e quei, ch'udito l'hanno.
Poscia che m'ebbe ragionato questo,
Gli occhi lucenti, lagrimando, volse:
Perch mi fece del venir piu presto:
E venni a te cosi, com' ella volse:
Dinanzi a quella fiera ti levai,
Che del bell monte it corto andar ti tolse:
Dunque che e? perch, perch ristai?
Perch tanta vilta nel cuore allette?
Perch ardire e franchezza non hai?
Poscia the tai tree done benedette
Curan di te, nella corte del Cielo,
E'l mio parlar tanto ben t'impromette?
Quale i fioretti, dal notturno gielo,
Chinati e chiusi, poi che'l sol gl'imbianca,
Si drizzan tutti aperti in loro stelo,
Tal mi fec'io, di mia virtute stanca:
E tanto buono ardire al cuor mi corse,
Ch'i' cominciai, come persona franca:
O pietosa colei, che mi soccorse,
E tu cortese, ch'ubbidisti tosto
All vere parole, che ti porse!
Tu m'hai con desiderio il cuor disposto
Si al venir, con le parole tue,
Ch'i' son tornato nel primo proposto.
Or va, ch'un sol volere e d'amendue:
Tu duca, tu signore, e tu maestro:
Cosi li dissi: e poiche mosso fue,
Entrai per lo cammino alto e silvestro.
CANTO III.
"PER me si va nella citta dolente:
Per me si va nell' eterno dolor:
Per me si va tra la perduta gente.
Giustizia mosse'l mio alto fattore:
Fecemi la divina potestate,
La somma sapienzia, e'l primo amore.
Dinanzi a me non fur cose create,
Se non eterne, ed io eterno duro:
Lasciate ogni speranza, voi che 'ntrate."
Queste parole di color oscuro
Vid' io scritte al sommo d'una porta:
Perch'io, Maestro, il senso lor m'e duro.
Ed egli a me, come persona accorta,
Qui si convien lasciare ogni sospetto:
Ogni vilta convien, che qui sia morta.
Noi sem venuti al luogo, ov' in t'ho detto,
Che tu vedrai le genti dolorose,
Ch'hanno perduto 'l ben dello 'ntelletto.
E poiche la sua mano alla mia pose,
Con lieto volto, ond'i' mi confortai,
Mi mise dentro all segrete cose.
Quivi sospiri, pianti, e alti guai
Risonavan, per l'aer senza stelle,
Perch'io al cominciar, ne lagrimai.
Diverse lingue, orribili favelle,
Parole di dolor, accenti d'ira,
Voci alte e fioche, e suon di man con elle
Facevano un tumulto, il qual s'aggira
Sempre 'n quell' aria, senza tempo, tinta,
Come la rena quando'l turbo spira.
Ed io, ch' avea d'error la testa cinta,
Dissi, Maestro, che e quel, ch'i' odo?
E che gent' e, che par nel duol s^ vinta?
Ed egli a me: Questo misero mod^
Tengon l' anime triste di ^oloro,
Che visser sanza infamia, e sanza lodo.
Mischiate sono a quel cattivo coro
Degli angeli, che non furon ribelli,
Ne fur fedeli a Dio, ma per se foro.
Cacciarli i ciel, per non esser men belli:
Ne lo profondo inferno gli riceve,
Ch'alcuna gloria i rei avrebber d'elli.
Ed io: Maestro, che e tanto greve
A lor, che lamentar gli fa si forte?
Rispose: Dicerolti molto breve.
Questi non hanno speranza di morte:
E la lor cieca vita e tanto bassa,
Che 'nvidiosi son d'ogni altra sort.
Fama di loro il mondo esser non lassa:
Misericordia e giustizia gli sdegna.
Non ragioniam di lor, ma guarda, e passa.
Ed io, che riguardai, vidi una insegna,
Che, girando, correva tanto ratta,
Che d'ogni posa mi pareva indegna:
E dietro le venia si lunga tratta
Di gente, ch'i' non avrei may creduto,
Che morte tanta n' avesse disfatta.
Poscia ch' io v'ebbi alcun riconosciuto,
Guardai, e vidi l'ombra di colui,
Che fece, per viltate, il gran rifiuto.
Incontanente intese, e certo fui,
Che quest' era la setta de' cattivi
A Dio spiacenti, ed a' nemici sui.
Questi sciaurati, che may non fur vivi,
Erano ignudi, e stimolati molto
Da mosconi, e da vespe, ch'erano ivi.
Elle rigavan lor di sangue it volto,
Che mischiato di lagrime, a' lor piedi,
Da fastidiosi vermi era ricolto.
E poi, ch'a riguardare oltre mi diedi,
Vidi gente alla riva d'un gran fiume;
Perch' in dissi: Maestro, or mi concedi,
Ch'io sappia, quali sono, e qual costume
Le fa parer di trapassar si pronte,
Com'io discerno per lo fioco lume.
Ed egli a me: Le cose ti fien conte,
Quando noi fermerem li nostri passi
Su la trista riviera d'Acheronte.
Allor con gli occhi vergognosi e bassi
Temendo, no 'l mio dir gli fusse grave,
Infino al fiume di parlar mi trassi.
Ed ecco verso noi venir, per nave,
Un vecchio bianco, per antico pelo,
Gridando, Guai a voi anime prave:
Non isperate may veder lo cielo:
IN vegno, per menarvi all' altra riva
Nelle tenebre eterne, in caldo e'n gielo:
E tu, che se' costi, anima viva,
Partiti da cotesti, che son morti:
Ma poi ch' e' vide, ch' in non mi partiva,
Disse: Per altre vie, per altri porti
Verrai a piaggia, non qui, per passare:
Piu lieve legno convien, che ti porti.
E'l duca a lui: Caron, non ti crucciare:
Vuolsi cosi cola, dove si puote
Cio che si vuole, e piu non dimandare.
Quinci fur quete le lanose got
Al nocchier della livida palude,
Che 'ntorno agli occhi ave' di siamme ruote.
Ma quell' anime, ch'eran less e nude,
Cangiar color, e dibattero i denti,
Ratto che 'nteser le parole crude.
Bestemmiavano Iddio, e i lor parenti,
L'umana spezie, il luogo, il tempo, e'l seem,
Di lor semenza, e di lor nascimenti.
Poi si ritrasser tutte quante insieme
Forte piangendo, alla riva malvagia,
Ch'attende ciascun'uom, che Dio non teme.
Caron dimonio, con occhi di bragia,
Loro accennando, tutte le raccoglie:
Batte col remo, qualunque s'adagia.
Come d' Autunno si levan le foglie,
L' una appresso dell' altra, infin che 'l ramo
Rende alla terra tutte le sue spoglie;
Similemente il mal seem d' Adamo:
Gittansi di quel lito ad una ad una,
Per cenni, com' augel, per suo richiamo.
Cosi sen vanno su per l'onda bruna,
E avanti che sien di la discese,
Anche di qua nova schiera s'aduna.
Figliuol mio, disse il maestro cortese,
Quelli, che muojon nell' ira di Dio,
Tutti convegnon qui d' ogni paese:
E pronti sono al trapassar del rio,
Che la divina giustizia gli sprona,
Si che la tema si volge in disio.
Quinci non passa may anima buona:
E pero se Caron di te si lagna,
Ben puoi saper omai, che'l suo dir suona.
Finito questo la buja campagna
Tremo si forte, che dello spavento
La mente di sudore ancor mi bagna.
La terra lagrimosa diede vento,
Che baleno una luce vermiglia,
La qual mi vinse ciascun sentimento:
E caddi, come l' uom, cui sonno piglia.
THE INFERNO OF DANTE.
CANTO I.
IN the mid season of this mortal strife,
I found myself within a gloomy grove,
Far wandering from the ways of perfect life:
The place I know not, where I chanced to rove,
It was a wood so wild, it wounds me sore
But to remember with what ills I strove:
Such still my dread, that death is little more.
But I will tell the good which there I found.
High things 'twas there my fortune to explore:
Yet how I entered on that secret ground
I know not to explain; so much in sleep
My mortal senses at that hour were drowned.
But when I reached the bottom of a steep,
That rose to terminate the dreary vale,
Which made cold terrors through my bosom creep,
I looked on high, where breathed a purer gale,
And saw the summit glisten with that ray
Which leads the wanderer safe over hill and dale.
This soon began to chase those fears away,
Which held my struggling spirit bound so fast
During that night of darkness and dismay:
And, as the exhausted wretch, by fortune cast
Safe from the stormy deep upon the shore,
Turns to survey the perils he has past,
So turned my soul, ere yet its dread was over,
Back to contemplate that mysterious strait
Where living mortal never past before.
Arising soon from this repose elate,
Up the rough steep my journey I begin,
My lower foot sustaining all my weight.
Here, while my toilsome way I slowly win,
Behold a nimble Panther springs to sight!
And beauteous spots adorn his motley skin:
He at my presence showed no signs of fright,
But rather strove to bar my doubtful way;
I often turned, and often resolved on flight.
'Twas now the cheerful hour of rising day;
The sun advanced in that propitious sign
Which first beheld his radiant beams display
Creation's charms, the work of love divine!
So that I now was raised to hope sublime,
By these bright omens of a fate benign,
The beauteous Beast and the sweet hour of prime.
But soon I lost that hope; and shook yet more
To see a Lion in this lonely clime:
With open jaws, athirst for human gore,
He rushed toward me in his hungry ire;
Air seemed to tremble at his savage roar.
With him, enflamed with every fierce desire,
A famished She-wolf, like a spectre, came;
Beneath whose gripe shall many a wretch expire.
Such sad oppression seized my sinking frame,
Such horror at these strange tremendous sights,
My hopes to climb the hill no longer aim;
But, as the wretch whom lucre's lust incites,
In the cursed hour which scatters all his wealth,
Sinks in deep sorrow, dead to all delights,
So was I robbed of all my spirit's health,
And to the quarter where the sun grows mute,
Driven by this Beast, who crept on me by stealth.
While I retreated from her dread pursuit,
A manly figure my glad eyes surveyed,
Whose voice was like the whisper of a lute.
Soon as I saw him in this dreary glade,
Take pity on me, to this form I cried,
Be thou substantial man, or fleeting shade! --
A man I was (the gracious form replied)
And both my parents were of Lombard race;
They in their native Mantua lived and died:
I lived at Rome, rich in a monarch's grace,
Beneath the good Augustus' lettered reign,
While fabled Gods were served with worship base.
A Bard I was: the subject of my strain
That just and pious Chief who sailed from Troy,
Sinking in ashes on the sanguine plain.
But thou, whom these portentous sights annoy,
Why do thou turn? why not ascend the mount,
Source of all good, and summit of all joy! --
Art thou that Virgil? thou! that copious fount
Of richest eloquence, so clear, so bright?
I answered, blushing at his kind account;
O thou! of Poets the pure guide and light!
Now let me profit by that fond esteem
Which kept thy song for ever in my sight!
Thou art my Master! thou my Bard supreme,
From whom alone my fond ambition drew
That purer style which I my glory deem!
O! from this Beast, so hideous to the view,
Save me! O save me! thou much-honour'd Sage!
For growing terrors all my power subdue. --
A different road must lead thee from her rage,
(He said, observant of my starting tears)
And from this wild thy spirit disengage;
For that terrific Beast, which caused thy fears,
Worries each wretch that in her road she spies,
Till death at length, his sole relief, appears.
So keen her nature, sleep never seals her eyes;
Her ravenous hunger no repast can sat;
Food only serves to make its fury rise.
She calls from different animals her mate;
And long shall she produce an offspring base,
Then from a mighty victor meet her fate.
Nor pomp nor riches shall that victor grace,
But truth, and love, and all excelling worth;
He from his rescued land all ill shall chase,
The savior of the realm that gives him birth,
Of Italy, for whom Camilla fell,
And Turnus, fighting for his native earth,
And Ninus, with the friend he loved so well.
The Beast this victor to that den shall drive
Whence Envy let her loose, her native hell!
Now for thy good, well-pleased, I will contrive.
That by my aid, while I thy steps control,
Thou shall in safety at those realms arrive
Where thou shall see the tortured spirits roll,
And hear each mourn his miserable fate,
Calling for death on his immortal soul.
Then shall thou visit those, who in a state
Of purifying fire are still content,
And for their promised heaven submissive wait:
If to that heaven thy happy course is bent,
A worthier guard will soon my place supply;
A purer spirit, for thy guidance sent!
For that Immortal Power, who rules on high,
Because I never his perfect laws have known,
His sacred presence will to me deny.
There in the realms of light he fixed his throne;
There over the world Almighty Lord he reigns:
O blessed the servant whom he deigns to own! --
Poet (I answered) by thy living strains,
And by that God, though not revealed to thee,
That I may 'scape from these, and heavier pains,
Be thou my leader, where thy way is free!
So that my eyes St. Peter's gate may find,
And all the wonders of the deep may see!
He led, and I attentive marched behind.
CANTO II.
THE day was sinking, and the dusky air
On all the animals of earth bestowed
Rest from their labors. I alone prepare
To meet new toil, both from my dreary road,
And pious wish to paint in worthy phrase
The Unerring Mind, and his divine abode.
O sacred Muses! now my genius raise!
O Memory, who writest what I saw,
From hence shall spring thy ever-during praise!
Kind Poet (I began, with trembling awe)
Mark if my soul be equal to this aim!
Nor into scenes too hard my weakness draw!
Thy Song declares, the Chief of pious fame
Appeared among the blessed, retaining still
His mortal senses and material frame;
Yet, if the great Opposer of all ill
Showed grace to him, as knowing what and who
Should from him rise, and mighty things fulfill,
Most worthy he appeared, in Reason's view,
That Heaven should choose him as the Roman Sire,
Source of that empire which so widely grew,
Marked in its growth by the angelic choir
To be the seat where Sanctity should rest,
And Peter's heirs yet raise dominion higher.
From his dark journey, in thy Song expressed,
He learned mysterious things; from whence arose
Rome's early grandeur and the Papal vest.
To Paul, while living, heaven's high powers disclose
Their secret bliss, that he may thence receive
strength in that faith from which salvation flows.
But how may I this high exploit atchieve?
I Am not Aeneas, nor the holy Paul:
Of this unworthy I myself believe:
If then I follow at thy friendly call,
Midway perchance my trembling soul may sink:
Wise as thou art, thou may foresee my fall.
Now as a man who, shudd'ring on the brink
Of some great venture, sudden shifts his mind,
And feels his spirit from the peril shrink;
So, in this scene of doubt and darkness joined,
Wavering I wasted thought in wild affright,
And the first ardour of my soul resigned.
If thy faint words I understand aright,
(Replied the mighty and magnanimous shade)
Those mists of fear have dimmed thy mental sight,
Which often the seat of human sense invade,
And make blind mortals from high deeds recoil,
By Terror's airy fantasies betrayed:
But, that such fears thy soul no more may soil,
I Will tell thee whence I came; at whose request;
When first I pitied thy uncertain toil.
From the suspended host in which I rest,
A lovely Spirit called me, fair as light;
Eager I waited on her high behest;
While eyes beyond the solar radiance bright,
And with the sweetness of an angel's tongue,
Thus her soft words my willing aid invite:
O ever gentle shade, from Mantua sprung!
Whose fame unfading on the earth shall last
As long as earth in ambient air is hung;
My friend, whose love all base desire surpast,
In yon drear desert finds his passage barred,
And compassed round with terrors stands aghast;
And much I fear, beset with dangers hard,
He may be lost beyond all friendly reach,
And I from heaven descend too late a guard.
But go! and with thy soft soul-soothing speech,
And all the aid thy wisdom may inspire,
The ways of safety to this wanderer teach!
My name is Beatrice: the heavenly quire
For this I left, though ever left with pain;
But love suggested what I now desire,
When I the presence of my lord regain,
On thee my praises with delight shall dwell.
So spoke this angel, in her heavenly strain.
Bright Fair, (I cried) who did on earth excel
All that ever shone beneath the lunar sphere,
And every mind to virtuous love impel!
Had I even now performed the task I hear,
That swift performance I should think too slow:
Nor needs there more; your gracious will is clear:
Yet how you venture, I would gladly know,
From those pure realms, to which again you fly,
So near the center of eternal woe.
What you require (she said, in kind reply)
I briefly will explain: how thus I dare,
Unconscious of alarm, these depths to try.
From these things only springs our fearful care,
By which our hapless friends may suffer ill;
But not from other; for no fear is there.
Such am I formed, by Heaven's most gracious will,
That torture cannot touch my purer frame,
Even where fierce fires his flaming region fill.
A gentle spirit (Lucia is her name)
In heaven laments the hardships of my friend,
For whom I ask your aid: to me she came,
And kindly bade me to his woes attend:
Behold (she said) thy servant in distress!
And I his safety to thy care commend.
Lucia, the friend of all whom ills oppress,
Me, where I sat with pensive Rachel, sought,
In heavenly contemplation's deep recess:
In mercy's name (she cried) thus lost in thought,
See thou not him who held thy charms so dear,
Whom Love to rise above the vulgar taught?
And do thou not his lamentation hear,
Nor see the horror, which his strength impairs,
On yon wide torrent, with no haven near?
Never was mind, intent on worldly cares,
So eager wealth to gain, or loss to shun,
As, when acquainted with these deadly snares,
I flew from the blessed confines of the sun,
Trusting that eloquence, which to thy name
And to thy followers such praise has won.
She having thus explained her gracious aim,
Turned her bright eyes, which tears of pity fill:
And hence more swift to thy relief I came;
And, pleased to execute her heavenly will,
I saved thee from the fury of that Beast,
Which barred thy journey up the brighter hill.
Why then, O why has all thy ardour ceased?
And whence this faintness in thy feeble mind?
Why has its noble energy decreased,
When these pure Spirits, for thy good combined,
Watch over thy safety in their heavenly seat,
And I reveal the favor thou shall find? --
As tender flowers, revived by solar heat,
That through the chilling night have sunk deprest,
Rise and unfold, the welcome ray to meet;
So rose my spirit, of new life possessed;
And, my warm heart on high achievements bent,
I thus my animating guide addressed:
Gracious that Spirit who thy succor sent!
And friendly thou, who freely have displayed
Thy zeal to execute her kind intent!
Thy soothing words have to my soul conveyed
Such keen desire to those bright realms to soar,
I scorn the terror that my step delayed.
Now lead! -- thy pleasure I dispute no more.
My lord, my master thou! and thou my guard! --
I ended here; and, while he marched before,
The gloomy road I entered, deep and hard.
CANTO III.
"THROUGH me you pass to Mourning's dark domain;
Through me to scenes where Grief must ever pine;
Through me, to Misery's devoted train.
Justice and power in my Great Founder join,
And love and wisdom all his fabrics rear;
Wisdom above control, and love divine!
Before me, Nature saw no works appear;
Save works eternal: such was I ordained.
Quit every hope, all ye who enter here!"
These characters, where misty darkness reigned,
High over a lofty gate I saw engraved.
Ah Sire! (said I) hard things are here contained.
He, sapient Guide! my farther question saved,
With spirit answering, "Here all doubt resign,
All weak distrust, and every thought depraved;
At length we have reached that gloomy drear confine,
Where, as I said, thou wilt see the mournful race
For ever robbed of Reason's light benign."
Then, stretching forth his hand with gentle grace,
From whence new comfort through my bosom flows,
He led me in to that mysterious place.
There sighs, and wailings, and severest woes;
Deeply resounded through the starless air;
And as I first advanced, my fears arose.
Each different cry, the murmuring notes of care,
Accents of misery, and words of ire,
With all the sounds of discord and despair,
To form such tumult in this scene conspire,
As flies for ever round the gloomy waste,
Like sand when quickened by the whirlwind's fire.
I then (my mind with error still disgraced)
Exclaimed -- O Sire! what may this trouble mean?
What forms are these, by sorrow so debased? --
He soon replied -- Behold, these bounds between,
All who without or infamy or fame
Closed the blank business of their mortal scene!
They join those angels, of ignoble name,
Who not rebelled, yet were not faithful found;
Without attachment! self alone their aim!
Heaven shuts them out from its unsullied bound;
And Hell refuses to admit this train,
Lest even the damned over these their triumph sound. --
O Sire! (said I) whence then this grievous pain,
That on our ears their lamentations grate? --
This (he replied) I will in brief explain:
These have no hope that death may mend their fate;
And their blind days form so confused a mass,
They pine with envy of each other's state:
From earth their name has perished, like the grass;
Even Mercy views them with a scornful eye.
We'll speak of them no more: Behold! and pass! --
I looked, and saw a banner raised on high,
That whirled, unconscious of a moment's stand,
With rapid circles in the troubled sky:
Behind it, driven by Fate's supreme command,
Came such a host! I never could have believed
Death had collected so complete a band.
When now I had the forms of all perceived,
I saw the shade of that ignoble priest,
Of sovereign power by indolence bereaved.
Instant I knew, from every doubt released,
These were the base, the miscreated crew
To whom the hate of God had never ceased.
Vile forms! never honored with existence true!
Naked they marched, and sorely were they stung
By wasps and hornets, that around them flew;
These the black blood from their galled faces wrung;
Blood mixed with tears, that, trickling to their feet,
Fed the fastidious worms which round them clung.
When now I farther pierced the dark retreat,
Numbers I saw beside a mighty stream:
Sudden I cried -- Now, Sire, let me entreat
To know what forms in distant prospect seem
To pass so swiftly over a flood so wide,
As I discern by this imperfect gleam? --
That shall thou know (returned my gracious Guide)
When the near respite from our toil we reach,
On sullen Acheron's infernal tide. --
With downcast eyes, that pardon now beseech,
And hoping silence may that pardon win,
Even to the river I abstained from speech.
And lo! toward us, with a shrivelled skin,
A hoary boatman steers his crazy bark,
Exclaiming, "Woe to all ye sons of sin!
Hope not for heaven, nor light's celestial spark!
I come to wast you to a different lot;
To Torture's realm, with endless horror dark:
And thou, who living view'st this sacred spot,
Haste to depart from these, for these are dead!"
But when he saw that I departed not,
In wrath he cried, "Through other passes led,
Not here, shall thou attempt the farther shore;
But in a bark to bear thy firmer tread." --
O Charon, said my Guide, thy strife give over;
For thus it is willed in that superior scene
Where will is power. Seek thou to know no more! --
Now grew the bearded visage more serene
Of the stern boatman on the livid lake,
Whose eyes so lately glar'd with anger keen:
But all the naked shades began to quake;
Their shuddering figures grew more pale than earth,
Soon as they heard the cruel words he spoke:
God they blasphemed, their parents' injured worth,
And all mankind; the place, the hour, that saw
Their first formation, and their future birth.
Then were they driven, by Fate's resistless law,
Weeping, to that sad scene prepared for all
Who fear not God with pure devotion's awe.
Charon, with eyes of fire and words of gall,
Collects his crew, and high his oar he wields,
To strike the tardy wretch who slights his call.
As leaves in autumn through the woody fields
Fly in succession, when each trembling tree
Its lingering honors to the whirlwind yields;
So this bad race, condemned by Heaven's decree,
Successive hasten from that river's side:
As birds, which at a call to bondage flee,
So are they wafted over the gloomy tide;
And ere from thence their journey is begun,
A second crew awaits their hoary guide. --
My gracious Master kindly said -- My son!
All those who in the wrath of God expire,
From every clime haste hither, one by one;
Nor would their terrors from this stream retire,
Since heavenly justice so impels their mind,
That fear is quickened into keen desire.
Here may no spirit pass, to good inclined;
And hence, if Charon seemed to thwart thy will,
Hence will thou deem his purpose not unkind. --
He paused; and horrors of approaching ill
Now made the mournful troop so stand aghast,
Their fears yet strike me with a deadly chill!
The groaning earth sent forth a hollow blast,
And flashed a fiery glare of gloomy red!
The horrid scene my fainting power surpast:
I fell, and, as in sleep, my senses fled.
NOTE V. VERSE 127.
The gay Boccacio, tempts the Italian Muse. Boccacio was almost utterly unknown
to our country as a Poet, when two of our most accomplished Critics restored
his poetical reputation.

Mr. Tyrwhitt, to whom Chaucer is as deeply indebted as a Poet can be to the
judgment and erudition of his commentator, has given a sketch of Boccacio's
Theseida, in his introductory discourse to the Canterbury Tales; and Mr. Warton
has enriched the first volume of his History of English Poetry with a
considerable specimen of this very rare Italian Epic poem, of which our country
is said to possess but a single copy. -- The father of Boccacio was an Italian
merchant, a native of Certaldo, near Florence, who in his travels attached
himself to a young woman of Paris; and our Poet is supposed to have been the
illegitimate offspring of that connection. He was born in 1313, and educated as
a student of the canon law; but a sight of Virgil's tomb, according to Filippo
Villani, his most ancient Biographer, made him resolve to relinquish his more
irksome pursuits, and devote himself entirely to the Muses. His life seems to
have been divided between literature and love, as he was equally remarkable for
an amorous disposition, and a passionate attachment to study. His most
celebrated mistress was Mary of Arragon, the natural daughter of Robert, King
of Naples, the generous and enthusiastic patron of Petrarch. To this lady,
distinguished by the name of The Fiammetta, Boccacio addressed his capital
poem, the Theseida; telling her, in an introductory letter, that it contained
many allusions to the particular circumstances of their own secret attachment.
In his latter days he retired to Certaldo, and died there in the year 1475, of
a disorder supposed to have arisen from excessive application. Few authors have
rendered more essential service to the republic of letters than Boccacio, as he
not only contributed very much to the improvement of his native language, but
was particularly instrumental in promoting the revival of ancient learning: a
merit which he shared with Petrarch. The tender and generous friendship which
subsisted between these two engaging authors, reflects the highest honor on
both; and their letters to each other may be ranked among the most interesting
productions of that period. Boccacio composed, according to Quadrio, no less
than thirty-four volumes. His Novels are universally known: his Poetical Works
are as follow: 1. La Theseida in Ottava Rima. 2. L'Amorosa Visione in Terza
Rima. 3. Il Filostrato in Ottava Rima. 4. Il Ninfale Fiesolano in Ottava Rima.
-- He piqued himself on being the first Poet who sung of martial subjects in
Italian verse; and he has been generally supposed the inventor of the Ottava
Rima, the common Heroic measure of the Italian Muse; but Quadrio has shown that
it was used by preceding writers; and Pasquier, in his Recherches, has quoted
two stanzas of Thibaud king of Navarre, written in the same measure, on Blanch
queen of France, who died in 1252. The neglect into which the Poems of Boccacio
had fallen appears the more striking, as he peculiarly prided himself on his
poetical character; informing the world, by an inscription on his tomb, that
Poetry was his favorite pursuit -- Studium fuit alma Poesis, are the last
words of the epitaph which he composed for himself.

NOTE VI. VERSE 142.
She spoke exulting, and Trissino sung. Giovanni Giorgio Trissino was born of a
noble family in Vicenza, 1478: he was particularly distinguished by a passion
for Poetry and Architecture; and one of the very few Poets who have been rich
enough to build a palace. This he is said to have done from a design of his
own, under the direction of the celebrated Palladio. He had the merit of
writing the first regular tragedy in the Italian language, entitled Sophonisba;
but in his Epic poem he is generally allowed to have failed, though some
learned Critics (and Gravina amongst them) have endeavored to support the
credit of that performance. His subject was the expulsion of the Goths from
Italy by Belisarius; and his poem consists of twenty-seven books, in blank
verse. He addressed it to the Emperor Charles the Vth; and professes in his
Dedication to have taken Aristotle for his preceptor, and Homer for his guide.

The reader will excuse a trifling anachronism, in my naming Trissino before
Ariosto, for poetical reasons. The Italia Liberata of the former was first
published in 1548; the Orlando Furioso, in 1515. Trissino died at Rome, 1550;
Ariosto at Ferrara, 1533.

NOTE VII. VERSE 194.
Of a poetic Sire the more poetic Son. The reputation of Torquato Tasso has
almost eclipsed that of his father Bernardo, who was himself a considerable
Poet, and left two productions of the Epic kind, L'Amadigi, and Il Floridante:
the latter remained unfinished at his death, but was afterward published in
its imperfect state by his son; who has spoken of his father's poetry with
filial regard, in his different critical works. The Amadigi was written at the
request of several Spanish Grandees, in the court of Charles the Vth, and first
printed in Venice by Giolito, 1560. The curious reader may find an entertaining
account of the Author's ideas in composing this work, among his Letters, volume
the first, page 198. I cannot help remarking, that the letter referred to
contains a simile which Torquato has introduced in the opening of his Jerusalem
Delivered.

The Italians have formed a very pleasing and valuable work, by collecting the
letters of their eminent Painters; which contain much information on points
relating to their art. The letters of their Poets, if properly selected, might
also form a few interesting volumes: as a proof of this, I shall insert a short
letter of the younger Tasso, because it seems to have escaped the notice of his
Biographers, and relates the remarkable circumstance of his having deliberated
on five different subjects before he decided in favor of Goffredo: Al M.
Illustre Sig. Conte Ferrante Estense Tassone.

Io ho scritto questa mattina a V. S. che io desidero di far due Poemi a mio
gusto; e sebben per elezione non cambierei il soggetto che una volta presi;
nondimeno per soddisfar il signor principe gli do l' elezione di tutti questi
soggetti, i quali mi paijono sovra gli altri atti a ricever la forma eroica.

Espedizion di Goffredo, e degli altri principi contra gl' Infedeli, e ritorno.
Dove avro occasion di lodar le famiglie d' Europa, che io vorro.

Espedizion di Belisario contra i Goti.

Di Narsete contra i Goti, e discorro d' un principe. E in questi vrei
grandissima occasion di lodar le cose di Spagna e d' Italia e di Grecia e l'
origin di casa d' Austria.

Espedizion di Carlo il magno contra Lansoni.

Espedizion di Carlo contra i Longobardi. In questi troverei l' origin di
tutte le famiglie grandi di Germania, di Francia, e d' Italia, e 'l ritorno d'
un principe.

E sebben alcuni di questi soggetti sono stati presi, non importa; perch io
cercherei di trattargli neglio, e a gindicio d' Aristotele.

Opere di Torquato Tasso, tom. ix. p. 240. This letter is the more worthy of
notice, as the subject on which Tasso fixed has been called by Voltaire, and
perhaps very justly, Le plus grand qu'on ait jamais choisi. Le Tasse l'a^traite
dignement, adds the lively Critic, with unusual candor; yet in his subsequent
remarks he is peculiarly severe on the magic of the Italian Poet. The merits of
Tasso are very ably defended against the injustice of French criticism, and
particularly that of Boileau and Voltaire, in the well-known Letters on
Chivalry and Romance. Indeed the genius of this injured Poet seems at length to
triumph in the country where he was most insulted, as the French have lately
attempted a poetical version of his Jerusalem.

I enter not into the history of Tasso, or that of his rival Ariosto, because
the public has lately received from Mr. Hoole a judicious account of their
lives, prefixed to his elegant versions of their respective Poems.

NOTE VIII. VERSE 197.
Shall gay Tassoni want his festive crown. Alessandro Tassoni, the supposed
inventor of the modern Heroi-comic Poetry, was born at Modena, 1565. His family
was noble; but his parents dying during his infancy, left him exposed to
vexatious lawsuits, which absorbed a great part of his patrimony, and rendered
him dependant. In 1599 he was engaged as Secretary to Cardinal Ascanio Colonna,
whom he attended on an embassy into Spain. He was occasionally dispatched into
Italy on the service of that Prelate, and in the course of one of these
expeditions wrote his Observations on Petrarch. In 1605 he is supposed to have
quitted the service of the Cardinal, and to have lived in a state of freedom at
Rome, where, in 1607, he became the chief of a literary society, entitled
Academia degli Umoristi. He was afterward employed in the service of Charles
Emanuel, Duke of Savoy; which, after suffering many vexations in it, he quitted
with a design of devoting himself to study and retirement. But this design he
was induced to relinquish, and to serve the Cardinal Lodovisio, nephew of Pope
Gregory XV. from whom he received a considerable stipend. On the death of this
patron, in 1632, he was recalled to his native city by Francis the First, Duke
of Modena, and obtained an honorable establishment in the court of that
Prince. Age had now rendered him unable to enjoy his good fortune: his health
declined in the year of his return, and he expired in April 1635. His genius
was particularly disposed to lively satire; and the incidents of his life had a
tendency to increase that disposition. After having passed many vexatious and
unprofitable years in the service of the Great, he had his portrait painted,
with a fig in his hand; and Muratori supposes him to have written these two
lines on the occasion:

Dextera cur ficum, quaeris, mea gestet inanem:
Longi operis merces haec fuit; aula dedit.
His celebrated Poem, La Secchia rapita, was written, as he has himself
declared, in 1611; begun in April, and finished in October. It was circulated
in MS. received with the utmost avidity, and first printed at Paris 1622. In a
catalogue of the numerous editions of the Secchia, which Muratori has prefixed
to his Life of Tassoni, he includes an English translation of it, printed 1715.

NOTE IX. VERSE 209.
And rashly judges that her Vega's lyre.] The famous Lope de Vega, frequently
called the Shakespeare of Spain, is perhaps the most fertile Poet in the annals
of Parnassus; and it would be difficult to name any author, ancient or modern,
so universally idolized while living by all ranks of people, and so
magnificently rewarded by the liberality of the Great. He was the son of Felix
de Vega and Francisca Fernandez, who were both descended from honorable
families, and lived in the neighborhood of Madrid. Our Poet was born in that
city, on the 25th of November 1562. He was, according to his own expression, a
Poet from his cradle; and, beginning to make verses before he had learned to
write, he used to bribe his elder scholl-fellows with a part of his breakfast,
to commit to paper the lines he had composed. Having lost his father while he
was still a child, he engaged in a frolic, very natural to a lively boy, and
wandered with another lad to various parts of Spain, till, having spent their
money, and being conducted before a magistrate at Segovia, for offering to sell
a few trinkets, they were sent home again to Madrid. Soon after this adventure,
our young Poet was taken under the protection of Geronimo Manrique, Bishop of
Avila, and began to distinguish himself by his dramatic compositions, which
were received with great applause by the public, though their author had not
yet completed his education; for, after this period, he became a member of the
university of Alcala, where he devoted himself for four years to the study of
philosophy. He was then engaged as Secretary to the Duke of Alva, and wrote his
Arcadia in compliment to that patron; who is frequently mentioned in his
Occasional Poems. He quitted that employment on his marriage with Isabel de
Urbina, a lady (says his friend and biographer Perez de Montalvan) beautiful
without artifice, and virtuous without affectation. His domestic happiness was
soon interrupted by a painful incident: -- Having written some lively verses in
ridicule of a person who had taken some injurious freedom with his character,
he received a challenge in consequence of his wit; and happening, in the duel
which ensued, to give his adversary a dangerous wound, he was obliged to fly
from his family, and shelter himself in Valencia. He resided there a
considerable time; but connubial affection recalled him to Madrid. His wife
died in the year of his return. His affliction on this event led him to
relinquish his favorite studies, and embark on board the Armada which was then
preparing for the invasion of England. He had a brother who served in that
fleet as a lieutenant; and being shot in an engagement with some Dutch vessels,
his virtues were celebrated by our afflicted Poet, whose heart was peculiarly
alive to every generous affection. After the ill success of the Armada, the
disconsolate Lope de Vega returned to Madrid, and became Secretary to the
Marquis of Malpica, to whom he has addressed a grateful Sonnet. From the
service of this Patron he passed into the household of the Count of Lemos, whom
he celebrates as an inimitable Poet. He was once more induced to quit his
attendance on the Great, for the more inviting comforts of a married life. His
second choice was Juana de Guardio, of noble birth and singular beauty. By this
lady he had two children; a son, who died in his infancy, and a daughter, named
Feliciana, who survived her father. The death of his little boy is said to have
hastened that of his wife, whom he had the misfortune to lose in about seven
years after his marriage. Having now experienced the precariousness of all
human enjoyments, he devoted himself to a religious life, and fulfilled all the
duties of it with the most exemplary piety; still continuing to produce an
astonishing variety of poetical compositions. His talents and his virtues
procured him many unsolicited honors. Pope Urban the VIIIth sent him the Cross
of Malta, with the title of Doctor in Divinity, and appointed him to a place of
profit in the Apostolic Chamber; favors for which he expressed his gratitude
by dedicating his Corona Tragica (a long poem on the fate of Mary Queen of
Scots) to that liberal Pontiff. In his seventy-third year he felt the
approaches of death, and prepared himself for it with the utmost composure and
devotion. His last hours were attended by many of his intimate friends, and
particularly his chief patron the Duke of Sessa, whom he made his executor;
leaving him the care of his daughter Feliciana, and of his various manuscripts.
The manner in which he took leave of those he loved was most tender and
affecting. He said to his Disciple and Biographer, Montalvan, That true fame
consisted in being good; and that he would willingly exchange all the applauses
he had received, to add a single deed of virtue to the actions of his life.
Having given his dying benediction to his daughter, and performed the last
ceremonies of his religion, he expired on the 25th of August 1635.

The splendour of his funeral was equal to the respect paid to him while living.
-- His magnificent patron, the Duke of Sessa, invited the chief nobility of the
kingdom to attend it. The ceremony was prolonged through the course of several
days; and three sermons in honor of the deceased were delivered by three of
the most celebrated preachers. These are printed with the works of the Poet,
and may be considered as curious specimens of the false eloquence which
prevailed at that time. A volume of encomiastic verses, chiefly Spanish, and
written by more than a hundred and fifty of the most distinguished characters
in Spain, was published soon after the death of this lamented Bard. To this
collection his friend and disciple Perez de Montalvan prefixed a circumstantial
account of his life and death, which I have chiefly followed in the preceding
narrative. An ingenious Traveller, who has lately published a pleasing volume
of Letters on the Poetry of Spain, has imputed the duel in which Lope de Vega
was engaged to the gallantries of his first wife; but Montalvan's relation of
that adventure clears the honor of the lady, whose innocence is still farther
supported by a poem written in her praise by Pedro de Medina Medinilla: it is
printed in the works of our Poet, who is introduced in it, under the name of
Belardo, celebrating the excellencies and lamenting the loss of his departed
Isabel.

Of the person and manners of Lope de Vega, his friend Montalvan has only given
this general account: -- that his frame of body was particularly strong, and
preserved by temperance in continued health; -- that in conversation he was
mild and unassuming; courteous to all, and to women peculiarly gallant; -- very
eager when engaged in the business of his friends, and somewhat careless in the
management of his own. Of his wealth and charity I shall have occasion to speak
in a subsequent note. The chief expenses in which he indulged himself were
books and pictures; of the latter, he distributed a few as legacies to his
intimate friends: to the Duke of Sessa, a fine portrait of himself; and to me,
says Montalvan, another, painted when he was young, surrounded by dogs,
monkies, and other monsters, and writing in the midst of them, without
attending to their noise. -- Of the honors paid to this extraordinary Poet,
his Biographer asserts that no person of eminence visited Spain without seeking
his personal acquaintance; that men yielded him precedence when they met him in
the streets, and women saluted him with benedictions when he passed under their
windows. If such homage can be deserved by the most unwearied application to
poetry, Lope de Vega was certainly entitled to it. He declared that he
constantly wrote five sheets a day; and his biographers, who have formed a
calculation from this account, conclude the number of his verses to be no less
than 21,316,000. His country has very lately published an elegant edition of
his poems in 19 quarto volumes; his dramatic works are to be added to this
collection, and will probably be still more voluminous. I shall speak only of
the former. -- Among his poems there are several of the Epic kind; the three
following appear to me the most remarkable. 1. La Dragontea. 2. La Hermosura de
Angelica. 3. La Jerusalem Conquistada. The Dragontea consists of ten cantos, on
the last expedition and death of our great naval hero Sir Francis Drake, whom
the Poet, from his excessive partiality to his country, considers as an
avaricious pirate, or rather, as he chooses to call him, a marine Dragon: and it
may be sufficient to observe that he has treated him accordingly. The poem on
Angelica seems to have been written in emulation of Ariosto, and it is founded
on a hint in that Poet: it was composed in the early part of our Author's life,
and contains many compliments to his sovereign Philip the IId: it consists of
20 cantos, and closes with Angelica's being restored to her beloved Medoro. In
his Jerusalem Conquistada he enters the lists with Tasso, whom he mentions in
his preface as having sung the first part of the history which he had chosen
for his subject. From the great name of Lope de Vega, I had some thoughts of
presenting to the reader a sketch of this his most remarkable poem; but as an
Epic Poet he appears to me so much inferior to Tasso, and to his countryman and
cotemporary Ercilla, that I am unwilling to swell these extensive notes by an
enlarged description of so unsuccessful a work: the Author has prophesied in
the close of it, that, although neglected by his own age, it would be esteemed
by futurity: -- a singular proof that even the most favored writers are
frequently disposed to declaim against the period in which they live. If Lope
de Vega could think himself neglected, what Poet may ever expect to be
satisfied with popular applause? -- But to return to his Jerusalem Conquistada.
Richard the Second of England, and Alphonso the Eighth of Castile, are the
chief heroes of the poem; which contains twenty cantos; and closes with the
unfortunate return of these confederate Kings, and the death of Saladin. It was
first printed 1609, more than twenty years after the first appearance of
Tasso's Jerusalem. -- One of the most amiable peculiarities in the character of
Lope de Vega, is the extreme liberality with which he commends the merit of his
rivals. In his Laurel de Apollo, he celebrates all the eminent Spanish and
Portugueze Poets; he speaks both of Camoens and Ercilla with the warmest
applause. Among the most pleasing passages in this poem is a compliment which
he pays to his father, who was, like the father of Tasso, a Poet of
considerable talents.

Among the smaller pieces of Lope de Vega, there are two particularly curious;
a descriptive poem on the garden of his patron the Duke of Alva, and a sonnet
in honor of the Invincible Armada: the latter may be considered as a complete
model of Spanish bombast: "Go forth and burn the world," says the Poet,
addressing himself to that mighty fleet; "my sighs will furnish your fails with
a never-failing wind; and my breast will supply your cannon with inexhaustible
fire." -- Perhaps this may be equalled by a Spanish character of our Poet, with
which I shall close my imperfect account of him. It is his friend and
biographer Montalvan, who, in the opening of his life, bestows on him the
following titles: El Doctor Frey Lope Felix de Vega Carpio, Portento del Orb,
Gloria de la Nation, Luster de la Patria, Oracula de la Lengua, Centro de la
Fama, Assumpio de la Invidia, Cuydado de la Fortuna, Fenix de los Siglos,
Principe de los Versos, Orfeo de las Ciencias, Apolo de las Musas, Horacio de
los Poetas, Virgilio de los Epicos, Homero de los Heroycos, Pindaro de los
Lyricos, Sofocles de los Tragicos, y Terencio de los Comicos, Unico enter los
Mayores, Mayor enter los Grandes, y Grande a todas Luzes, y en todas Materias.

NOTE X. VERSE 239.
The brave Ercilla sounds, with potent breath,
His Epic trumpet in the fields of death.]
Don Alonzo de Ercilla y Zuniga was equally distinguished as a Hero and a Poet;
but this exalted character, notwithstanding his double claim to our regard, is
almost totally unknown in our country, and I shall therefore endeavor to give
the English reader the best idea that I can, both of his gallant life, and of
his singular poem. -- He was born in Madrid, on the 7th of August 1533, the
third son of Fortun Garcia de Ercilla, who, though descended from a noble
family, pursued the profession of the law, and was so remarkable for his
talents, that he acquired the appellation of "The subtle Spaniard." The mother
of our Poet was also noble, and from her he inherited his second title, Zuniga:
Ercilla was the name of an ancient castle in Biscay, which had been long in the
possession of his paternal ancestors. He lost his father while he was yet an
infant, a circumstance which had, great influence on his future life; for his
mother was received, after the decease of her husband, into the household of
the Empress, Isabella, the wife of Charles the Vth, and had thus an early
opportunity of introducing our young Alonzo into the palace. He soon obtained
an appointment there, in the character of page to the Infant Don Philip, to
whose service he devoted himself with the most heroic enthusiasm, though Philip
was a master who little deserved so generous an attachment. At the age of
fourteen, he attended that Prince in the splendid progress which he made, at
the desire of his Imperial father, through the principal cities of the
Netherlands, and through parts of Italy and Germany. This singular expedition
is very circumstantially recorded in a folio volume, by a Spanish historian
named Juan Christoval Calvete de Estrella, whose work affords a very curious
and striking picture of the manners and ceremonies of that martial and romantic
age. All the cities which were visited by the Prince contended with each other
in magnificent festivity: the brilliant series of literary and warlike pageants
which they exhibited, though they answered not their design of conciliating the
affection of the sullen Philip, might probably awaken the genius of our
youthful Poet, and excite his ambition to acquire both poetical and military
fame. In 1551, he returned with the Prince into Spain, and continued there for
three years; at the end of which he attended his royal master to England on his
marriage with Queen Mary, which was celebrated at Winchester in the summer of
1554. At this period Ercilla first assumed the military character; for his
sovereign received advice, during his residence at London, that the martial
natives of Aranco, a district on the coast of Chile, had revolted from the
Spanish government, and dispatched an experienced officer, named Alderete, who
attended him in England, to subdue the insurrection, investing him with the
command of the rebellious province. Ercilla embarked with Alderete; but that
officer dying in his passage, our Poet proceeded to Lima. Don Hurtado de
Mendoza, who commanded there as Viceroy of Peru, appointed his son Don Garcia
to supply the place of Alderete, and sent him with a considerable force to
oppose the Arancanians. Ercilla was engaged in this enterprise, and greatly
distinguished himself in the obstinate contest which ensued. The noble
character of the Barbarians who maintained this unequal struggle, and the many
splendid feats of valor which this scene afforded, led our author to the
singular design of making the war, in which he was himself engaged, the subject
of an Heroic poem; which he entitled "La Araucana," from the name of the
country. As many of his own particular adventures may be found in the following
summary of his work, I shall not here enlarge on his military exploits; but
proceed to one of the most mortifying events of his life; which he briefly
mentions in the conclusion of his poem. After passing with great honor through
many and various perils, he was on the point of suffering a disgraceful death,
from the rash orders of his young and inconsiderate Commander. On his return
from an expedition of adventure and discovery, to the Spanish city of Imperial,
he was present at a scene of public festivity displayed there, to celebrate the
accession of Philip the IId to the crown of Spain; at a kind of tournament,
there arose an idle dispute between Ercilla and Don Juan de Pineda, in the heat
of which the two disputants drew their swords; many of the spectators joined in
the broil; and, a report arising that the quarrel was a mere pretense, to
conceal some mutinous design, the hasty Don Garcia, their General, committed
the two antagonists to prison, and sentenced them both to be publicly beheaded.
Ercilla himself declares, he was conducted to the scaffold before his
precipitate judge discovered the iniquity of the sentence; but his innocence
appeared just time enough to save him; and he seems to have been fully
reinstated in the good opinion of Don Garcia, as, among the complimentary
sonnets addressed to Ercilla, there is one which bears the name of his General,
in which he styles him the Divine Alonzo, and celebrates both his military and
poetical genius. But Ercilla seems to have been deeply wounded by this affront;
for, quitting Chile, he went to Callao, the port of Lima, and there embarked on
an expedition against a Spanish rebel, named Lope de Aguirre, who, having
murdered his captain, and usurped the chief power, was perpetrating the most
cruel enormities in the settlement of Venezuela. But Ercilla learned, on his
arrival at Panama, that this barbarous usurper was destroyed; he therefore
resolved, as his health was much impaired by the hardships he had passed, to
return to Spain. He arrived there in the twenty-ninth ninth year of his age;
but soon left it, and traveled, as he himself informs us, through France,
Italy, Germany, Silesia, Moravia, and Pannonia; but the particulars of this
expedition are unknown. In the year 1570 he appeared again at Madrid, and was
married to Maria Bazan, a lady whom he contrives to celebrate in the course of
his military poem. He is said to have been afterward gentleman of the
bedchamber to the Emperor Rodolph the IId, a prince who had been educated at
Madrid; but the connection of our Poet with this Monarch is very indistinctly
recorded; and indeed all the latter part of his life is little known. In the
year 1580 he resided at Madrid, in a state of retirement and poverty. The time
and circumstances of his death are uncertain: it is proved that he was living
in the year 1596, by the evidence of a Spanish writer named Mosquera, who, in a
treatise of military discipline, speaks of Ercilla as engaged at that time in
celebrating the victories of Don Alvaro Bazan, Marquis de Santa Cruz, in a poem
which has never appeared, and is supposed to have been left imperfect at his
death. Some anecdotes related of our Poet afford us ground to hope that his
various merits ware not entirely unrewarded. It is said, that in speaking to
his sovereign Philip, he was so overwhelmed by diffidence that language failed
him: "Don Alonzo! (replied the King) speak to me in writing." -- He did so, and
obtained his request. The Spanish Historian Ovalle, who has written an account
of Chile, in which he frequently supports his narration by the authority of
Ercilla, affirms that our Poet presented his work to Philip with his own hand,
and received a recompense from the King. But in this circumstance I fear the
Historian was mistaken, as he supposes it to have happened on the return of
Ercilla from Chile; and our Poet, in a distinct portion of his work, which was
not published till many years after that period, expressly declares, in
addressing himself to Philip, that all his attempts to serve him had been
utterly unrequited. Ercilla left no legitimate family; but had some natural
children, the most eminent of which was a daughter, who was advantageously
married to a nobleman of Portugal.

In that elegant collection of Spanish Poets, " Parnaso Espan^ol," there is a
pleasing little amorous poem, written by Ercilla in his youth, which is
peculiarly commended by Lope de Vega; who has bestowed a very generous encomium
on our Poet, in his " Laurel de Apolo." But the great and singular work which
has justly rendered Ercilla immortal, is his Poem entitled Araucana, which was
published in three separate parts: the first appeared in 1577; he added the
second in the succeeding year; and in 1590 he printed a complete edition of the
whole. It was applauded by the most eminent writers of Spain; and Cervantes, in
speaking of Don Quixote's Library, has ranked it among the choicest treasures
of the Castilian Muse. Voltaire, who speaks of Ercilla with his usual spirit
and inaccuracy, has the merit of having made our Poet more generally known,
though his own acquaintance with him appears to have been extremely slight; for
he affirms that Ercilla was in the battle of Saint Quintin: a mistake into
which he never could have fallen, had he read the Araucana. Indeed the
undistinguishing censure which he passes on the poem in general, after
commending one particular passage, sufficiently proves him a perfect stranger
to many subsequent parts of the work; yet his remark on the inequality of the
Poet is just. Ercilla is certainly unequal; but, with all his defects, he
appears to me one of the most extraordinary and engaging characters in the
poetical world. Perhaps I am a little partial to him, from the accidental
circumstance of having first read his poem with a departed friend, whose
opinions are very dear to me, and who was particularly fond of this military
Bard. However this may be, my idea of Ercilla's merit has led me to hazard the
following extensive sketch of his Work: -- it has swelled to a much larger size
than I at first intended; for I was continually tempted to extend it, by the
desire of not injuring the peculiar excellencies of this wonderful Poet. If I
have not utterly failed in that desire, the English reader will be enabled to
judge, and to enjoy an author, who, considering his subject and its execution,
may be said to stand single and unparalleled in the host of Poets. His beauties
and his defects are of so obvious a nature, that I shall not enlarge upon them;
but let it be remembered, that his poem was composed amidst the toils and
perils of the most fatiguing and hazardous service, and that his verses were
sometimes written on scraps of leather, from the want of better materials. His
style is remarkably pure and perspicuous, and, notwithstanding the restraint of
rhyme, it has frequently all the ease, the spirit, and the volubility of Homer.
I wish not, however, to conceal his defects; and I have therefore given a very
fair account of the strange episode he introduces concerning the history of
Dido, which has justly fallen under the ridicule of Voltaire. I must however
observe, as an apology for Ercilla, that many Bards of his country have
considered it as a point of honor to defend the reputation of this injured
lady, and to attack Virgil with a kind of poetical Quixotism for having
slandered the chastity of so spotless a heroine. If my memory does not deceive
me, both Lope de Vega and Quevedo have employed their pens as the champions of
Dido. We may indeed very readily join the laugh of the lively Frenchman against
our Poet on this occasion; but let us recollect that Ercilla has infinitely
more Homeric spirit, and that his poem contains more genuine Epic beauties,
than can be found in Voltaire.

Ercilla has been honored with many poetical encomiums by the writers of his
own country; and, as I believe the most elegant compliment which has been paid
to his genius is the production of a Spanish lady, I shall close this account
of him with a translation of the Sonnet, in which she celebrates both the Hero
and the Poet.

SONETO DE LA SEN^ORA DON^A LEONOR DE ICIZ, SEN^ORA DE LA BARONIA DE RAFALES A
DON ALONSO DE ERCILLA.
Mil bronces para estatuas ya forxados,
Mil lauros de tus obras premio honroso
Te ofrece Espan^a, Ercilla generoso,
Por tu pluma y tu lanza tan ganados.
Hourese tu valor enter soldados,
Invidie tu nobleza el valeroso,
Y busque en ti el poeta mas famoso
Lima para sus versos ma^-limados.
Derrame por el mundo tus loores
La fama, y eternice tu memoria,
Porque jamas el tiempo la consuma.
Gocen ya, sin temor de que hay mayores
Tus hechos, y tus libros de igual gloria,
Pues la han ganado igual la espada y pluma.
SONNET FROM THE LADY LEONORA DE ICIZ, BARONESS OF RAFALES, TO DON ALONZO DE
ERCILLA.
Marble, that forms the Hero's mimic frame,
And laurels, that reward the Poet's strain,
Accept, Ercilla, from thy grateful Spain!
Thy sword and pen alike this tribute claim.
Our Warriors honor thy heroic name;
Thy birth is envied by Ambition's train;
Thy verses teach the Bard of happiest vein
A finer polish, and a nobler aim.
May glory round the world thy merit spread!
In Memory's volume may thy praises stand
In characters that time shall never destroy!
Thy songs, and thy exploits, without the dread
To be surpassed by a superior hand,
With equal right their equal fame enjoy!
A SKETCH OF THE ARAUCANA.
THE Poem of Ercilla opens with the following exposition of his subject: I Sing
not love of ladies, nor of sights
Devised for gentle dames by courteous knights,
Nor feasts, nor tourneys, nor that tender care
Which prompts the Gallant to regale the Fair;
But the bold deeds of Valor's favorite train,
Those undegenerate sons of warlike Spain,
Who made Arauco their stern laws embrace,
And bent beneath their yoke her untamed race.
Of tribes distinguished in the field I sing;
Of nations who disdain the name of King;
Courage, that danger only taught to grow,
And challenge honor from a generous foe;
And persevering toils of purest fame,
And feats that aggrandize the Spanish name:
For the brave actions of the vanquished spread
The brightest glory round the victor's head.


He then addresses his work to his sovereign, Philip the Second, and devotes
his first Canto to the description of that part of the new world which forms
the scene of his action, and is called Arauco; a district in the province of
Chile. He paints the singular character and various customs of its warlike
inhabitants with great clearness and spirit. In many points they bear a
striking resemblance to the ancient Germans, as they are drawn with a kind of
poetical energy by the strong pencil of Tacitus. The first Canto closes with a
brief account how this martial province was subdued by a Spanish officer named
Valdivia; with an intimation that his negligence in his new dominion gave birth
to those important exploits which the Poet proposes to celebrate.

CANTO II.
ERCILLA begins his Cantos much in the manner of Ariosto, with a moral
reflection; sometimes rather too much dilated, but generally expressed in easy,
elegant, and spirited verse. -- The following lines faintly imitate the two
first stanzas of his second Canto: Many there are who, in this mortal strife,
Have reached the slippery heights of splendid life:
For Fortune's ready hand its succor lent;
Smiling she raised them up the steep ascent,
To hurl them headlong from that lofty seat
To which she led their unsuspecting feet;
Even at the moment when all fears disperse,
And their proud fancy sees no sad reverse.
Little they think, beguiled by fair success,
That Joy is but the herald of Distress:
The hasty wing of time escapes their sight,
And those dark evils that attend his flight:
Vainly they dream, with gay presumption warm,
Fortune for them will take a steadier form;
She, unconcerned at what her victims feel,
Turns with her wonted haste her fatal wheel.


After blaming his countrymen for abusing their good fortune, the Poet
celebrates, in the following spirited manner, the eagerness and indignation
with which the Indians prepared to wreak their vengeance on their Spanish
oppressors: The Indians first, by novelty dismayed,
As Gods revered us, and as Gods obeyed;
But when they found we were of woman born,
Their homage turned to enmity and scorn:
Their childish error, when our weakness showed,
They blushed at what their ignorance bestowed;
Fiercely they burnt, with anger and with shame,
To see their masters but of mortal frame.
Disdaining cold and cowardly delay,
They seek atonement, on no distant day:
Prompt and resolved, in quick debate they join,
To form of deep revenge their dire design.
Impatient that their bold decree should spread,
And shake the world around with sudden dread,
The assembling Chieftains led so large a train,
Their ready host overspread the extensive plain.
No summons now the soldier's heart requires;
The thirst of battle every breast inspires;
No pay, no promise of reward, they ask,
Keen to accomplish their spontaneous task;
And, by the force of one avenging blow,
Crush and annihilate their foreign foe.
Of some brave Chiefs, who to this council came,
Well may thou, Memory, preserve the name;
Though rude and savage, yet of noble soul,
Justly they claim their place on Glory's roll,
Who robbing Spain of many a gallant son,
In so confined a space such victories won;
Whose fame some living Spaniards yet may spread,
Too well attested by our warlike dead.


The Poet proceeds to mention, in the manner of Homer, but in a much shorter
catalogue, the principal chieftains, and the number of their respective vassals.

Uncouthly as their names must sound to an English ear, it seems necessary to
run through the list, as these free and noble-minded savages act so
distinguished a part in the course of the poem. -- Tucapel stands first;
renowned for the most inveterate enmity to the Christians, and leader of three
thousand vassals: Angol, a valiant youth, attended by four thousand: Cayocupil,
with three; and Millarapue, an elder chief, with five thousand: Paycabi, with
three thousand; and Lemolemo, with six: Maregnano, Gualemo, and Lebopia, with
three thousand each: Elicura, distinguished by strength of body and detestation
of servitude, with six thousand; and the ancient Colocolo with a superior
number: Ongolmo, with four thousand; and Puren, with six; the fierce and
gigantic Lincoza with a still larger train. Peteguelen, lord of the valley of
Arauco, prevented from personal attendance by the Christians, dispatches six
thousand of his retainers to the assembly: the most distinguished of his party
are Thome and Andalican. The Lord of the maritime province of Pilmayquen, the
bold Caupolican, is also unable to appear at the opening of the council. Many
other Chieftains attended, whose names the Poet suppresses, lest his prolixity
should offend. As they begin their business in the style of the ancient
Germans, with a plentiful banquet, they soon grow exasperated with liquor, and
a violent quarrel ensues concerning the command of the forces for the projected
war: an honor which almost every chieftain was arrogant enough to challenge
for himself. In the midst of this turbulent debate, the ancient Colocolo
delivers the following harangue, which Voltaire prefers (and I think with great
justice) to the speech of Nestor, on a similar occasion, in the first Iliad.

Assembled Chiefs! ye guardians of the land!
Think not I mourn from thirst of lost command,
To find your rival spirits thus pursue
A post of honor which I deem my due.
These marks of age, you see, such thoughts disown
In me, departing for the world unknown;
But my warm love, which ye have long possessed,
Now prompts that counsel which you will find the best.
Why should we now for marks of glory jar?
Why wish to spread our martial name afar?
Crushed as we are by Fortune's cruel stroke,
And bent beneath an ignominious yoke,
Ill can our minds such noble pride maintain,
While the fierce Spaniard holds our galling chain.
Your generous fury here ye vainly show;
Ah! rather pour it on the embattled foe!
What frenzy has your souls of sense bereaved?
Ye rush to self-perdition, unperceived.
Against your own vitals would ye lift those hands,
Whose vigor ought to burst oppression's bands?
If a desire of death this rage create,
O die not yet in this disgraceful state!
Turn your keen arms, and this indignant flame,
Against the breast of those who sink your fame,
Who made the world a witness of your shame.
Haste ye to cast these hated bonds away,
In this the vigor of your souls display;
Nor blindly lavish, from your country's veins,
Blood that may yet redeem her from her chains.
Even while I thus lament, I still admire
The fervor of your souls; they give me fire:
But, justly trembling at their fatal bent,
I dread some dire calamitous event;
Lest in your rage Dissention's frantic hand
Should cut the sinews of our native land.
If such its doom, my thread of being burst,
And let your old compeer expire the first!
Shall this shrunk frame, thus bowed by age's weight,
Live the weak witness of a nation's fate?
No: let some friendly sword, with kind relief,
Forbid its sinking in that scene of grief.
Happy whose eyes in timely darkness close,
Saved from that worst of sights, his country's woes!
Yet, while I can, I make your weal my care,
And for the public good my thoughts declare.
Equal ye are in courage and in worth;
Heaven has assigned to all an equal birth:
In wealth, in power, and majesty of soul,
Each Chief seems worthy of the world's control.
These gracious gifts, not gratefully beheld,
To this dire strife your daring minds impelled.
But on your generous valor I depend,
That all our country's woes will swiftly end.
A Leader still our present state demands,
To guide to vengeance our impatient bands;
Fit for this hardy task that Chief I deem,
Who longest may sustain a massive beam:
Your rank is equal, let your force be tried,
And for the strongest let his strength decide.
The Chieftains acquiesce in this proposal; which, as Voltaire justly observes,
is very natural in a nation of savages. The beam is produced, and of a size so
enormous, that the Poet declares himself afraid to specify its weight. The
first Chieftains who engage in the trial support it on their shoulders five and
six hours each; Tucapel fourteen; and Lincoza more than double that number;
when the assembly, considering his strength as almost supernatural, is eager to
bestow on him the title of General; but in the moment he is exulting in this
new honor, Caupolican arrives without attendants. His person and character are
thus described by the Poet: Though from his birth one darkened eye he drew
(The viewless orb was of the granate's hue)
Nature, who partly robbed him of his sight,
Repaid this failure by redoubled might.
This noble youth was of the highest state;
His actions honored, and his words of weight:
Prompt and resolved in every generous cause,
A friend to Justice and her sternest laws:
Fashioned for sudden feats, or toils of length,
His limbs possessed both suppleness and strength:
Dauntless his mind, determined and adroit
In every quick and hazardous exploit.


This accomplished Chieftain is received with great joy by the assembly; and,
having surpassed Lincoza by many degrees in the trial, is invested with the
supreme command. He dispatches a small party to attack a neighboring Spanish
fort: they execute his orders, and make a vigorous assault. After a sharp
conflict they are repulsed; but in the moment of their retreat Caupolican
arrives with his army to their support. The Spaniards in despair evacuate the
fort, and make their escape in the night: the news is brought to Valdivia, the
Spanish Commander in the city of Conception; -- and with his resolution to
punish the Barbarians the canto concludes.

CANTO III.
O CURELESS malady! Oh fatal pest!
Embraced with ardor and with pride carest;
Thou common vice, thou most contagious ill,
Bane of the mind, and frenzy of the will!
Thou foe to private and to public health;
Thou dropsy of the soul, that thirsts for wealth,
Insatiate Avarice! -- it is from thee we trace
The various misery of our mortal race.
With this spirited and generous invective against that prevailing vice of his
countrymen, which sullied the luster of their most brilliant exploits, Ercilla
opens his 3d canto. He does not scruple to assert, that the enmity of the
Indians arose from the avaricious severity of their Spanish oppressors; and he
accuses Valdivia on this head, though he gives him the praise of a brave and
gallant officer. -- This Spaniard, on the first intelligence of the Indian
insurrection, dispatched his scouts from the city where he commanded. They do
not return. Pressed by the impatient gallantry of his troops, Valdivia marches
out: -- they soon discover the mangled heads of his messengers fixed up as a
spectacle of terror on the road. Valdivia deliberates what measures to pursue.
His army entreat him to continue his march. He consents, being piqued by their
insinuations of his disgracing the Spanish arms. An Indian ally brings him an
account that twenty thousand of the confederated Indians are waiting to destroy
him in the valley of Tucapel. He still presses forward; arrives in sight of the
fort which the Indians had destroyed, and engages them in a most obstinate
battle; in the description of which, the Poet introduces an original and
striking simile, in the following manner: The steady pikemen of the savage band,
Waiting our hasty charge, in order stand;
But when the advancing Spaniard aimed his stroke,
Their ranks, to form a hollow square, they broke;
An easy passage to our troop they leave,
And deep within their lines their foes receive;
Their files resuming then the ground they gave,
Bury the Christians in that closing grave.
As the keen Crocodile, who loves to lay
His silent ambush for his finny prey,
Hearing the scaly tribe with sportive sound
Advance, and call a muddy darkness round;
Opens his mighty mouth, with caution, wide,
And, when the unwary fish within it glide,
Closing with eager haste his hollow jaw,
Thus satiates with their lives his ravenous maw:
So, in their toils, without one warning thought,
The murderous foe our little squadron caught
With quick destruction, in a fatal strife,
From whence no Christian soldier 'scap'd with life.


Such was the fate of the advanced guard of the Spaniards. The Poet then
describes the conflict of the main army with great spirit: -- ten Spaniards
distinguish themselves by signal acts of courage, but are all cut in pieces.
The battle proceeds thus: The hostile sword, now deeply died in blood,
Drenched the wide field with many a sanguine flood;
Courage still grows to form the fierce attack,
But wasted vigor makes the combat slack:
No pause they seek, to gain exhausted breath,
No rest, except the final rest of death:
The wariest combatants now only try
To snatch the sweets of vengeance ere they die.
The fierce disdain of death, and scorn of flight,
Give to our scanty troop such wondrous might,
The Araucanian host begin to yield;
They quit with loss and shame the long-fought field:
They fly; and their pursuers shake the plain
With joyous shouts of Victory and Spain.
But dire mischance, and Fate's resistless sway,
Gave a strange issue to the dreadful day.
An Indian Youth, a noble Chieftain's son,
Who as our friend his martial feats begun,
Our Leader's Page, by him to battle trained,
Who now beside him the hard fight sustained,
As he beheld his kindred Chiefs retire,
Felt an indignant flash of patriot fire;
And thus incited to a glorious stand
The flying champions of his native land:
Misguided Country, by vain fear possessed,
Ah whither do thou turn thy timid breast?
Ye brave compatriots, shall your ancient fame
Be vilely buried in this field of shame?
Those laws, those rights, ye gloried to defend,
All perish, all by this ignoble end?
From Chiefs of dreaded power, and honored worth,
Ye sink to abject slaves, the scorn of earth!
To the pure founders of your boasted race
Ye give the cureless wound of deep disgrace!
Behold the wasted vigor of your foe!
See, bathed in sweat and blood, their coursers blow!
Lose not your mental force, your martial fires,
Our best inheritance from generous sires;
Sink not the noble Araucanian name,
From glory's summit to the depths of shame;
Fly, fly the servitude your souls detest!
To the keen sword oppose the dauntless breast.
Why show ye frames endued with manly power,
Yet shrink from danger in the trying hour?
Fix in your minds the friendly truth I speak;
Vain are your fears, your terror blind and weak:
Now make your names immortal; now restore
Freedom's lost blessings to your native shore:
Now turn, while Fame and Victory invite,
While prosperous Fortune calls you to the fight;
Or yet a moment cease, O cease to fly,
And for our country learn of me to die!
As thus he speaks, his eager steps advance,
And against the Spanish Chief he points his lance;
To lead his kindred fugitives from flight,
Singly he dares to tempt the unequal fight:
Against our circling arms, that round him shine,
Eager he darts amidst the thickest line,
Keen as, when chafed by summer's fiery beam,
The young stag plunges in the cooling stream.


The Poet proceeds to relate the great agility and valor displayed by Lantaro,
for such is the name of this gallant and patriotic Youth: and, as Ercilla has a
soul sufficiently heroic to do full justice to the virtues of an enemy, he
gives him the highest praise. Having mentioned on the occasion many heroes of
ancient history, he exclaims: Say, of these famous Chiefs can one exceed
Or match this young Barbarian's noble deed?
Victory for them, her purpose unexplor'd,
Tempted by equal chance their happy sword:
What risk, what peril did they boldly meet,
Save where Ambition urged the splendid feat;
Or mightier Interest fired the daring mind,
Which makes a Hero of the fearful Hind?
Many there are who with a brave disdain
Face all the perils of the deathful plain,
Who, fired by hopes of glory, nobly dare,
Yet fail the stroke of adverse chance to bear;
With animated fire their spirit shines,
Till the short splendour of their day declines;
But all their valor, all their strength expires,
When fickle Fortune from their side retires.
This youthful Hero, when the die was cast,
War's dire decree against his country past,
Made the stern Power the finished cause resume,
And finally reverse the cruel doom:
He, by his efforts in the dread debate,
Forced the determined will of adverse Fate,
From shouting Triumph rushed the palm to tear,
And fixed it on the brow of faint Despair.


Caupolican, leading his army back to the charge, in consequence of Lantaro's
efforts in their favor, obtains a complete victory. The Spaniards are all
slain in the field, except their Commander Valdivia, who flies, attended only
by a priest; but he is soon taken prisoner, and conducted before the Indian
Chief, who is inclined to spare his life; when an elder savage, called Leocato,
in a sudden burst of indignation, kills him with his club.

All the people of Arauco assemble in a great plain to celebrate their victory:
old and young, women and children, unite in the festival; and the trees that
surround the scene of their assembly are decorated with the heads and spoils of
their slaughtered enemies.

They meditate the total extermination of the Spaniards from their country, and
even a descent on Spain. The General makes a prudent speech to restrain their
impetuosity; and afterward, bestowing just applause on the brave exploit of
the young Lantaro, appoints him his lieutenant. In the midst of the festivity,
Caupolican receives advice that a party of fourteen Spanish horsemen had
attacked some of his forces with great havoc. He dispatches Lantaro to oppose
them.

CANTO IV.
A PARTY of fourteen gallant Spaniards, who had set forth from the city of
Imperial to join Valdivia, not being apprized of his unhappy fate, are
surprised by the enemy where they expected to meet their Commander; -- they
defend themselves with great valor. They are informed by a friendly Indian of
the fate of Valdivia. They attempt to retreat; but are surrounded by numbers of
the Araucanians: -- when the Poet introduces the following instance of Spanish
heroism, which I insert as a curious stroke of their military character: Here,
cried a Spaniard, far unlike his race,
Nor shall his abject name my verse debase,
Marking his few associates march along,
O that our band were but a hundred strong!
The brave Gonsalo with disdain replied:
Rather let two be severed from our side,
Kind Heaven! that Memory may our feats proclaim
And call our little troop The Twelve of Fame!


They continue to fight with great bravery against superior numbers, when
Lantaro arrives with a fresh army against them. Still undaunted, they only
resolve to sell their lives as dear as possible. Seven of them are cut to
pieces. -- In the midst of the slaughter a furious thunder and hail storm
arises, by which incident the surviving seven escape. The tempest is described
with the following original simile: Now in the turbid air a stormy cloud
Spreads its terrific shadow over the crowd;
The gathering darkness hides the solar ray,
And to the affrighted earth denies the day;
The rushing winds, to which the forests yield,
Rive the tall tree, and desolate the field:
In drops distinct and rare now falls the rain;
And now with thickening fury beats the plain.
As the bold master of the martial drum,
Ere to the shock the advancing armies come,
In awful notes, that shake the heaven's high arch,
Intrepid strikes the slow and solemn march;
But, when the charging heroes yield their breath,
Doubles the horrid harmony of death:
So the dark tempest, with increasing sound,
Pours the loud deluge on the echoing ground.


The few Spaniards that escape take refuge in a neighboring fort; which they
abandon the following day on hearing the fate of Valdivia. Lantaro returns, and
receives new honors and new forces from his General, to march against a Spanish
army, which departs from the city of Penco under the command of Villagran, an
experienced officer, to revenge the death of Valdivia. The departure of the
troops from Penco is described, and the distress of the women. -- Villagran
marches with expedition toward the frontiers of Arauco. He arrives at a
dangerous pass, and finds Lantaro, with his army of 10,100 Indians,
advantageously posted on the heights, and waiting with great steadiness and
discipline to give him battle.

CANTO V.
LANTARO with great difficulty restrains the eager Indians in their post on the
rock. He suffers a few to descend and skirmish on the lower ground, where
several distinguish themselves in single combat. The Spaniards attempt in vain
to dislodge the army of Lantaro by an attack of their cavalry: -- they
afterward fire on them from six pieces of cannon.

The vexed air feels the thunder of the fight,
And smoke and flame involve the mountain's height;
Earth seems to open as the flames aspire,
And new volcano's spout destructive fire.
Lantaro saw no hopes of life allowed,
Save by dispersing this terrific cloud,
That pours its lightning with so dire a shock,
Smiting his lessened host, who strew the rock;
And to the troop of Leucoton the brave
His quick command the skilful Leader gave:
He bids them fiercely to the charge descend,
And thus exhorts aloud each ardent friend:
My faithful partners in bright victory's meed,
Whom fortune summons to this noble deed,
Behold the hour when your prevailing might
Shall prove that Justice guards us in the fight!
Now firmly fix your lances in the rest,
And rush to honor over each hostile breast;
Through every bar your bloody passage force,
Nor let a brother's fall impede your course;
Be yon dread instruments of death your aim;
Possessed of these you gain eternal fame:
The camp shall follow your triumphant trace,
And own you leaders in the glorious chase.
While these bold words their ardent zeal exalt,
They rush impetuous to the rash assault.
The Indians, undismayed by a dreadful slaughter, gain possession of the
cannon. -- Villagran makes a short but spirited harangue to his flying
soldiers. He is unable to rally them: and, choosing rather to die than to
survive so ignominious a defeat, rushes into the thickest of the enemy: -- when
the Poet, leaving his fate uncertain, concludes the canto.

CANTO VI.
THE valiant mind is privileged to feel
Superior to each turn of Fortune's wheel;
Chance has no power its value to debase,
Or brand it with the mark of deep disgrace:
So thought the noble Villagran, our Chief,
Who chose that death should end his present grief,
And smooth the horrid path, with thorns overspread,
Which Destiny condemned his feet to tread.
With the preceding encomium on the spirit of this unfortunate officer the Poet
opens his 6th Canto. Thirteen of the most faithful soldiers of Villagran,
perceiving their Leader fallen motionless under the fury of his enemies, make a
desperate effort to preserve him. -- Being placed again on his horse by these
generous deliverers, he recovers from the blow which had stunned him; and by
singular exertion, with the assistance of his spirited little troop, effects
his escape, and rejoins his main army; whom he endeavors in vain to lead back
against the triumphant Araucanians. The pursuit becomes general, and the Poet
describes the horrid massacre committed by the Indians on all the unhappy
fugitives that fell into their hands. -- The Spaniards in their flight are
stopped by a narrow pass fortified and guarded by a party of Indians. Villagran
forces the rude entrenchment in person, and conducts part of his army safe
through the pass; but many attempting other roads over the mountainous country,
are either lost among the precipices of the rocks, or pursued and killed by the
Indians.

CANTO VII.
THE remains of the Spanish army, after infinite loss and fatigue, at last
reach the city of Concepcion.

Their entrance in these walls let fancy paint,
Overwhelmed with anguish, and with labor faint:
These gash'd with ghastly wounds, those writhed with pain,
And some their human semblance scarce retain;
They seem unhappy spirits 'scap'd from hell,
Yet wanting voice their misery to tell.
Their pangs to all their rolling eyes express,
And silence most declares their deep distress.
When weariness and shame at length allowed
Their tongues to satisfy the enquiring crowd,
From the pale citizens, amazed to hear
A tale surpassing even their wildest fear,
One general sound of lamentation rose,
That deeply solemnized a nation's woes;
The neighboring mansions to their grief reply,
And every wall returned the mournful cry.
The inhabitants of Concepcion, expecting every instant the triumphant Lantaro
at their gates, resolve to abandon their city. A gallant veteran upbraids their
cowardly design. They disregard his reproaches, and evacuate the place: -- when
the Poet introduces the following instance of female heroism: It Is just that
Fame a noble deed display,
Which claims remembrance, even to the day
When Memory's hand no more the pen shall use,
But sink in darkness and her being lose:
The lovely Mencia, an accomplished Dame,
A valiant spirit in a tender frame,
Here firmly showed, as this dread scene began,
Courage now found not in the heart of man.
The bed of sickness 'twas her chance to press
But when she heard the city's loud distress,
Snatching such weapons as the time allowed,
She rushed indignant midst the flying crowd.
Now up the neighboring hill they slowly wind,
And, bending often their mournful eyes behind,
Cast a sad look, of every hope berest,
On those rich plains, the precious home they left.
More poignant grief see generous Mencia feel,
More noble proof she gives of patriot zeal:
Waving a sword in her heroic hand,
In their tame march she stopped the timid band;
Crossed the ascending road before their van,
And, turning to the city, thus began:
Thou valiant nation, whose unequalled toils
Have dearly purchased fame and golden spoils,
Where is the courage ye so often displayed
Against this foe, from whom ye shrink dismayed?
Where those high hopes, and that aspiring flame,
Which made immortal praise your constant aim?
Where your firm souls, that every chance defied,
And native strength, that formed your noble pride?
Ah whither would you fly, in selfish fear,
In frantic haste, with no pursuer near?
How often has censure to your hearts assigned
Ardor too keenly brave and rashly blind;
Eager to dart amid the doubtful fray,
Scorning the useful aid of wise delay?
Have we not seen you with contempt oppose,
And bend beneath your yoke unnumber'd foes;
Attempt and execute designs so bold,
Ye grew immortal as ye heard them told?
Turn! to your people turn a pitying eye,
To whom your fears these happy seats deny!
Turn! and survey this fair, this fertile land,
Whose ready tribute waits your lordly hand;
Survey its pregnant mines, its sands of gold;
Survey the flock now wandering from its fold,
Mark how it vainly seeks, in wild despair,
The faithless shepherd, who forsakes his care.
Even the dumb creatures, of domestic kind,
Though not endowed with man's discerning mind,
Now show the semblance of a reasoning soul,
And in their masters misery condole:
The stronger animals, of sterner heart,
Take it this public woe a feeling part;
Their plaintive roar, that speaks their sense aright,
Justly upbraids your, ignominious flight.
Ye fly from quiet, opulence, and fame,
Purchased by valor, your acknowledged claim;
From these ye fly, to seek a foreign seat,
Where dastard fugitives no welcome meet.
How deep the shame, an abject life to spend
In poor dependence on a pitying friend!
Turn! let the brave their only choice await,
Or honorable life, or instant fate.
Return! return! O quit this path of shame!
stain not by fear your yet unsullied name;
Myself I offer, if our foes advance,
To rush the foremost on the hostile lance;
My actions then shall with my words agree,
And what a woman dares your eyes shall see.
Return! return! she cried; but cried in vain;
Her fire seemed frenzy to the coward train.


The dastardly inhabitants of the city, unmoved by this remonstrance of the
noble Donna Mencia de Nidos, continue their precipitate flight, and, after
twelve days of confusion and fatigue, reach the city of Santiago, in the valley
of Mapocho. Lantaro arrives in the mean time before the walls they had
deserted: -- and the Poet concludes his canto with a spirited description of
the barbaric fury with which the Indians entered the abandoned city, and
destroyed by fire the rich and magnificent mansions of their Spanish oppressors.

CANTO VIII.
LANTARO is recalled from his victorious exploits, to assist at a general
assembly of the Indians, in the valley of Arauco. The different Chieftains
deliver their various sentiments concerning the war, after their Leader
Caupolican has declared his design to pursue the Spaniards with unceasing
vengeance. The veteran Colocolo proposes a plan for their military operations.
An ancient Augur, named Puchecalco, denounces ruin on all the projects of his
countrymen, in the name of the Indian Demon Eponamon. He recites the omens of
their destruction. The fierce Tucapel, provoked to frenzy by this gloomy
prophet, strikes him dead in the midst of his harangue, by a sudden blow of his
mace. Caupolican orders the murderous Chieftain to be led to instant death. He
defends himself with success against numbers who attempt to seize him. Lantaro,
pleased by this exertion of his wonderful force and valor, entreats the
General to forgive what had passed; and, at his intercession, Tucapel is
received into favor. Lantaro then closes the business of the assembly, by
recommending the plan proposed by Colocolo, and entreating that he may himself
be entrusted with a detached party of five hundred Indians, with which he
engages to reduce the city of Santiago. His proposal is accepted. The
Chieftains, having finished their debate, declare their resolutions to their
people; and, after their usual festivity, Caupolican, with the main army,
proceeds to attack the city of Imperial.

CANTO IX.
THE Poet opens this Canto with an apology for a miracle, which he thinks it
necessary to relate, as it was attested by the whole Indian army; and, though
it does not afford him any very uncommon or sublime imagery, he embellishes the
wonder he describes, by his easy and spirited versification, of which the
following lines are an imperfect copy: When to the city's weak defenseless wall
Its foes were rushing, at their trumpet's call,
The air grew troubled with portentous sound,
And mournful omens multiplied around;
With furious shock the elements engage,
And all the winds contend in all their rage.
From clashing clouds their mingled torrents gush,
And rain and hail with rival fury rush.
Bolts of loud thunder, floods of lightning rend
The opening skies, and into earth descend.
Over the vast army equal terrors spread;
No mind escapes the universal dread;
No breast, though armed with adamantine power,
Holds its firm vigor in this horrid hour;
For now the fierce Eponamon appears,
And in a Dragon's form augments their fears;
Involving flames around the Demon swell,
Who speaks his mandate in a hideous yell:
He bids his votaries with haste invest
The trembling city, by despair deprest.
Wherever the invading squadrons force their way,
He promises their arms an easy prey.
Spare not (he cried) in the relentless strife,
One Spanish battlement, one Christian life!
He spoke, and, while the host his will adore,
Melts into vapor, and is seen no more.
Quick as he vanished Nature's struggles cease;
The troubled elements are soothed to peace:
The winds no longer rage with boundless ire,
But, hushed insilence, to their caves retire:
The clouds disperse, restoring as they fly
The unobstructed sun and azure sky:
Fear only held its place, and still possessed
Usurped dominion over the boldest breast.
The tempest ceased, and heaven, serenely bright,
Arrayed the moistened earth in joyous light:
When, poised upon a cloud that swiftly flew,
A Female form descended to their view,
Clad in the radiance of so rich a veil,
As made the sun's meridian luster pale;
For it outshone his golden orb as far
As his full blaze outshines the twinkling star.
Her sacred features banish all their dread,
And over the host reviving comfort shed.
An hoary Elder by her side appeared,
For age and sanctity of life revered;
And thus she spoke, with soft persuasive grace:
Ah! whither rush ye, blind devoted race?
Turn, while you can, toward your native plain,
Nor against yon city point your arms in vain;
For God will guard his faithful Christian band,
And give them empire over your bleeding land,
Since, thankless, false, and obstinate in ill,
You scorn submission to his sacred will.
Yet shun those walls; the Almighty, there adored,
There arms his people with Destruction's sword.
So spoke the Vision, with an angel's tongue,
And through the spacious air to heaven she sprung.


The Indians, confounded by this miraculous interposition, disperse in disorder
to their several homes; and the Poet proceeds very gravely to affirm, that,
having obtained the best information, from, many individuals, concerning this
miracle, that he might be very exact in his account of it, he finds it happened
on the twenty-third of April, four years before he wrote the verses that
describe it, and in the year of our Lord 1554. The Vision was followed by
pestilence and famine among the Indians. They remain inactive during the
winter, but assemble again the ensuing spring in the plains of Arauco, to renew
the war. They receive intelligence that the Spaniards are attempting to rebuild
the city of Concepcion, and are requested by the neighboring tribes to march
to their assistance, and prevent that design. Lantaro leads a chosen band on
that expedition, hoping to surprise the fort the Spaniards had erected on the
ruins of their city; but the Spanish commander, Alvarado, being apprized of
their motion, sallies forth to meet the Indian party: a skirmish ensues; the
Spaniards retire to their fort; Lantaro attempts to storm it; a most bloody
encounter ensues; Tucapel signalizes himself in the attack; the Indians
persevere with the most obstinate valor, and, after a long conflict (described
with a considerable portion of Homeric spirit) gain possession of the fort;
Alvarado and a few of his followers escape; they are pursued, and much galled
in their flight: a single Indian, named Rengo, harrasses Alvarado and two of
his attendants; the Spanish officer, provoked by the insult, turns with his two
companions to punish their pursuer; but the wily Indian secures himself on some
rocky heights, and annoys them with his sling, till, despairing of revenge,
they continue their flight.

CANTO X.
THE Indians celebrate their victory with public games; and prizes are
appointed for such as excel in their various martial exercises. Leucoton is
declared victor in the contest of throwing the lance, and receives a scimitar
as his reward. Rengo subdues his two rivals, Cayeguan and Talco, in the
exercise of wrestling, and proceeds to contend with Leucoton. After a long and
severe struggle, Rengo has the misfortune to fall by an accidental failure of
the ground, but, springing lightly up, engages his adversary with increasing
fury; and the canto ends without deciding the contest.

CANTO XI.
LANTARO separates the two enraged antagonists, to prevent the ill effects of
their wrath. The youth Orompello, whom Leucoton had before surpassed in the
contest of the lance, challenges his successful rival to wrestle: they engage,
and fall together: the victory is disputed. Tucapel demands the prize for his
young friend Orompello, and insults the General Caupolican. The latter is
restrained from avenging the insult, by the sage advice of the veteran
Colocolo, at whose request he distributes prizes of equal value to each of the
claimants. To prevent farther animosities, they relinquish the rest of the
appointed games, and enter into debate on the war. Lantaro is again appointed
to the command of a chosen troop, and marches toward the city of St. Jago. The
Spaniards, alarmed at the report of his approach, send out some forces to
reconnoitre his party: a skirmish ensues: they are driven back to the city, and
relate that Lantaro is fortifying a strong, post at some distance, intending
soon to attack the city. Villagran, the Spaniard who commanded there, being
confined by illness, appoints an officer of his own name to sally forth, with
all the forces he can raise, in quest of the enemy. The Spaniards fix their
camp, on the approach of night, near the fort of Lantaro: they are suddenly
alarmed, and summoned to arms; but the alarm is occasioned only by a single
horse without a rider, which Lantaro, aware of their approach, had turned loose
toward their camp, as an insulting mode of proclaiming his late victory, in
which he had taken ten of the Spanish horses.

The Spaniards pass the night under arms, resolving to attack the Indians at
break of day. Lantaro had issued orders that no Indian should sally from the
fort under pain of death, to prevent the advantage which the Spanish cavalry
must have over his small forces in the open plain. He also commanded his
soldiers to retreat with an appearance of dismay, at the first attack on the
fort, and suffer a considerable number of the enemy to enter the place. This
stratagem succeeds: the Spaniards rush forward with great fury: the Indians
give ground, but, soon turning with redoubled violence on those who had passed
their lines, destroy many, and oblige the rest to save themselves by a
precipitate flight. The Indians, forgetting the orders of their Leader, in the
ardour of vengeance sally forth in pursuit of their flying enemy. Lantaro
recalls them by the sound of a military horn, which he blows with the utmost
violence. They return, but dare not appear in the presence of their offended
Commander. He issues new restrictions; and then, summoning his soldiers
together, addresses them, in a spirited, yet calm and affectionate harangue, on
the necessity of martial obedience. While he is yet speaking, the Spaniards
return to the attack, but are again repulsed with great loss. They retreat, and
encamp at the foot of a mountain, unmolested by any pursuers.

CANTO XII.
THE Spaniards remain in their camp, while two of their adventurous soldiers
engage to return once more to the fort, and examine the state of it. On their
approach, one of them, called Marcos Vaez, is saluted by his name, and promised
security, by a voice from within the walls. Lantaro had formerly lived with him
on terms of friendship, and now invites him into the fort. The Indian Chief
harangues on the resolution and the power of his countrymen to exterminate the
Spaniards, unless they submit. He proposes, however, terms of accommodation to
his old friend Marcos, and specifies the tribute he should expect. The Spaniard
answers with disdain, that the only tribute the Indians would receive from his
countrymen would be torture and death. Lantaro replies, with great temper, that
arms, and the valor of the respective nations, must determine this point; and
proceeds to entertain his guest with a display of six Indians, whom he had
mounted and trained to exercise on Spanish horses. The Spaniard challenges the
whole party: Lantaro will not allow him to engage in any conflict, but
dismisses him in peace. He recalls him, before he had proceeded far from the
fort, and, telling him that his soldiers were much distressed by the want of
provision, entreats him to send a supply, affirming it to be true heroism to
relieve an enemy from the necessities of famine. The Spaniard subscribes to the
sentiment, and engages, if possible, to comply with the request. Returning to
his camp, he acquaints his Commander Villagran with all that had passed; who,
suspecting some dangerous design from Lantaro, decamps hastily in the night to
regain the city. The Indian Chief is severely mortified by their departure, as
he had formed a project for cutting off their retreat, by letting large
currents of water into the marshy ground on which the Spaniards were encamped.
Despairing of being able to succeed against their city, now prepared to resist
him, he returns toward Arauco, most sorely galled by his disappointment, and
thus venting his anguish: What can redeem Lantaro's wounded name?
What plea preserve his failing arms from shame?
Did not my ardent soul this task demand,
Which now upbraids my unperforming hand?
On me, on me alone can censure fall;
Myself the adviser and the guide of all.
Am I the Chief who, in Fame's bright career,
Asked to subdue the globe a single year?
While, at the head of this my glittering train,
I weakly threaten Spanish walls in vain,
Thrice has pale Cynthia, with replenished ray,
Seen my ill-order'd troop in loose array;
And the rich chariot of the blazing sun
Has from the Scorpion to Aquarius run.
At last, as fugitives these paths we tread,
And mourn twice fifty brave companions dead.
Could Fate's kind hand this hateful stain efface,
Could death redeem me from this worse disgrace,
My useless spear should pierce this abject heart,
Which has so ill sustained a soldier's part.
Unworthy thought! the mean ignoble blow
Would only tempt my proud and vaunting foe
To boast that I preferred, in fear's alarm,
My own weak weapon to his stronger arm.
By Hell I swear, who rules the sanguine strife,
If Chance allow me yet a year of life,
I Will chase these foreign lords from Chile's strand,
And Spanish blood shall saturate our land.
No changing season, neither cold nor heat,
Shall make the firmer step of War retreat;
Nor Shall the earth, nor hell's expanding cave,
From this avenging arm one Spaniard save.
Now the brave Chief, with solemn ardor, swore
To his dear native home to turn no more;
From no fierce sun, no stormy winds to fly,
But patiently abide the varying sky,
And spurn all thoughts of pleasure and of ease,
Till rescued fame his tortured soul appease;
Till earth confess the brave Lantaro's hand
Has closed the glorious work his spirit planned.
In these resolves the Hero found relief,
And thus relaxed the o'erstrain'd cord of grief;
Whose pressure galled him with such mental pain,
That frenzy almost seized his burning brain.


Lantaro continues his march into an Indian district, from which he collects a
small increase of force; and, after addressing his soldiers concerning the
expediency of strict military discipline, and the cause of their late ill
success, he turns again toward the city of St. Jago; but, receiving
intelligence on his road of its preparations for defense, he again suspends his
design, and fortifies a post, which he chooses with the hope of collecting still
greater numbers to assist him in his projected enterprise. The Spaniards at St.
Jago are eager to sally in quest of Lantaro, but their Commander Villagran was
absent on an expedition to the city of Imperial. In returning from thence he
passes near the post. of Lantaro. An Indian ally acquaints him with its
situation, and, at the earnest request of the Spanish officer, agrees to
conduct him, by a short though difficult road, over a mountain, to attack the
fort by surprise. The Poet suspends his narration of this interesting event, to
relate the arrival of new forces from Spain in America; and he now begins to
appear himself on the field of action. "Hitherto," says he, "I have described
the scenes in which I was not present; yet I have collected my information from
no partial witnesses, and I have recorded only those events in which both
parties agree. Since it is known that I have shed so much blood in support of
what I affirm, my future narration will be more authentic; for I now speak as
an ocular witness of every action, unblinded by partiality; which I disdain,
and resolved to rob no one of the praise which he deserves."

After pleading his youth as an apology for the defects of his style, and after
declaring that his only motive for writing was the ardent desire to preserve so
many valiant actions from perishing in oblivion, the Poet proceeds to relate
the arrival of the Marquis de Canete as Viceroy in Peru, and the spirited
manner in which he corrected the abuses of that country. The canto concludes
with reflections on the advantages of loyalty, and the miseries of rebellion.

CANTO XIII.
SPANISH deputies from the province of Chile implore assistance from the new
Viceroy of Peru: he sends them a considerable succor, under the conduct of Don
Garcia, his son. The Poet is himself of this band, and relates the splendid
preparations for the enterprise, and the embarkation of the troops in ten
vessels, which sail from Lima toward the coast of Chile. Having described part
of this voyage, he returns to the bold exploit of Villagran, and the adventures
of Lantaro, the most interesting of all the Araucanian Heroes, whom he left
securing himself in his sequestered fort.

A path where watchful sentinels were spread,
A single path, to this lone station led:
No other signs of human step were traced;
For the vexed land was desolate and waste.
It chanced that night the noble Chieftain pressed
His anxious mistress to his gallant breast,
The fair Guacolda, for whose charms he burned,
And whose warm heart his faithful love returned.
That night beheld the warlike savage rest,
Free from the encumbrance of his martial vest;
That night alone allowed his eyes to close
In the deceitful calm of short repose:
Sleep pressed upon him like the weight of death;
But soon he starts, alarmed, and gasps for breath.
The fair Guacolda, with a trembling tongue,
Anxious enquires from whence his anguish sprung.
My lovely Fair! the brave Lantaro cries,
An hideous vision struck my scornful eyes:
Methought that instant a fierce Chief of Spain
Mocked my vain spear with insolent disdain;
His forceful arm my failing powers o'ercame,
And strength and motion seemed to quit my frame.
But still the vigor of my soul I keep,
And its keen anger burst the bonds of sleep.
With quick despair, the troubled Fair one said,
Alas! thy dreams confirm the ills I dread.
It Is come -- the object of my boding fears!
Thy end, the source of my unceasing tears.
Yet not so wretched is this mournful hour,
Nor over me, Fortune, can thou boast such power,
But that kind death may shorten all my woes,
And give the agonizing scene to close.
Let my stern fate its cruel rage employ,
And hurl me from the throne of love and joy;
Whatever pangs its malice may devise,
It cannot rend affection's stronger ties.
Though horrible the blow my fears foresee,
A second blow will set my spirit free;
For cold on earth thy frame shall never be found,
While mine with useless being loads the ground.
The Chief, transported with her tender charms,
Closely around her neck entwined his arms;
And, while fond tears her snowy breast bedewed,
Thus with redoubled love his speech pursued:
My generous Fair, thy gloomy thoughts dismiss;
Nor let dark omens interrupt our bliss,
And cloud these moments that with transport shine,
While my exulting heart thus feels thee mine.
Thy troubled fancy prompts my mutual sigh;
Not that I think the hour of danger nigh:
But Love so melts me with his soft control,
Impossibilities alarm my soul.
If thy kind wishes bid Lantaro live,
Who to this frame the wound of death can give?
Though against me all the powers of earth combine,
My life is subject to no hand but thine.
Who has restored the Araucanian name,
And raised it, sinking in the depths of shame,
When alien lords our nation's spirit broke,
And bent its neck beneath a servile yoke?
I am the Chief who burst our galling chain,
And freed my country from oppressive Spain;
My name alone, without my sword's display,
Humbles our foes, and fills them with dismay.
These happy arms while thy dear beauties fill,
I feel no terror, I foresee no ill.
Be not by false and empty dreams deprest,
Since truth has nothing to afflict thy breast.
Often have I 'scap'd, inured to every state,
From many a darker precipice of fate;
Often in far mightier perils risk'd my life,
And issued glorious from the doubtful strife.
With lessening confidence, and deeper grief,
Trembling she hung upon the soothing Chief,
His lip with supplicating softness pressed,
And urged with many a tear this fond request:
If the pure love, which, prodigal and free,
When freedom most was mine, I gave to thee;
If truth, which Heaven will witness and defend,
Weigh with my sovereign lord and gentle friend;
By these let me adjure thee; by the pain
Which at our parting pierced my every vein,
And all the vows, if undispers'd in air,
Which then with many a tear I heard thee swear;
To this my only wish at least agree,
If all thy wishes have been laws to me:
Haste, I entreat thee, arm thyself with care,
And bid thy soldiers for defense prepare.
The brave Barbarian quick replied -- It Is clear
How low my powers are rated by thy fear.
Can thou so poorly of Lantaro deem?
And is this arm so sunk in thy esteem?
This arm, which, rescuing thy native earth,
So prodigally proved its valiant worth!
In my tried courage how complete thy trust,
Whose terror weeps thy living lord as dust!
In thee, she cries, with confidence most pure,
My soul is satisfied, yet not secure.
What will thy arm avail in danger's course,
If my malignant fate has mightier force?
But let the misery I forebode arise;
On this firm thought My constant love relies:
The sword whose stroke our union may disjoin,
Will teach my faithful soul to follow thine.
Since my hard destiny, with rage severe,
Thus threatens me with all that love can fear;
Since I am doomed the worst of ills to see,
And lose all earthly good in losing thee;
O! suffer me to pass, ere death appears,
The little remnant of my life in tears!
The heart that sinks not in distress like this,
Could never feel, could never merit bliss.
Here from her eyes such floods of sorrow flow,
Compassion weeps in gazing on her woe!
The fond Lantaro, though of firmest power,
Sheds, as she speaks, a sympathetic shower.
But, to the tender scenes of love unused,
My artless pen, embarrass'd and confused,
From its sad talk with diffidence withdraws,
And in its labor asks a little pause.
CANTO XIV.
WHAT erring wretch, to Truth and Beauty blind,
Shall dare to satirize the Female kind,
Since pure affection prompts their anxious care,
Their lovely weakness, and their fond despair?
This fair Barbarian, free from Christian ties,
A noble proof of perfect love supplies,
By kindest words, and floods of tears that roll
From the clear source of her impassioned soul.
The chearing ardor of the dauntless Chief
Fails to afford her troubled mind relief;
Nor can the ample trench and guarded wall
Preserve her doubtful heart from fear's enthrall:
Her terrors, rushing with love's mighty force,
Level whatever would impede their course.
She finds no shelter from her cruel doom,
Save the dear refuge of Lantaro's tomb.
Thus their two hearts, where equal passion reigned.
A fond debate with tender strife maintained;
Their differing words alike their love display,
Feed the sweet poison, and augment its sway.
The sleepy soldiers now their stories close,
And stretched around their sinking fires repose.
The path in front with sentinels was lined,
And the high mountain was their guard behind;
But over that mountain, with adventurous tread,
Bold Villagran his silent forces led.
His hasty march with painful toil he made;
Toil is the price that must for fame be paid.
Now near the fort, and halting in its sight,
He waits the coming aid of clearer light.
The stars yet shining, but their fires decay,
And now the reddening east proclaims the day.
The advancing troop no Indian eye alarms,
For friendly darkness hovered over their arms;
And on the quarter where the Mountain rose,
The careless guard despised the thought of foes.
No panting horse their still approach betrayed;
Propitious Fortune lent the Spaniards aid;
Fortune, who often bids drowsy Sloth beware,
And lulls to sleep the watchful eye of Care.
When Night's obscure dominion first declines,
And glimmering light the dusky air refines,
The weary guards, who round the wall were placed,
Hail the new day, and from their station haste;
Secure of ill, no longer watch they keep,
Quick to forget their nightly toils in sleep:
Through all the fort there reigned a calm profound;
In wine and slumber all its force was drowned.
The Spanish Chief, who saw the favoring hour,
Led on by slow degrees his silent power.
No Indian eyes perceived his near advance;
Fate seemed to bind them in a cruel trance;
Each in sound slumber draws his easy breath,
Nor feels his slumber will be closed by Death.
So blind are mortals to that tyrant's sway,
They deem him distant, while they sink his prey.
Our eager soldiers now no longer halt,
While kind occasion prompts the keen assault;
A shout they raise, terrific, loud, and long,
Swelled by the voice of all the ardent throng;
Whose ranks, obedient to their Leader's call,
Rush with light ardor'o er the unguarded wall,
And gain the fort, where Sleep's oppressive weight
Exposed his wretched victims, blind to fate.
As villains, conscious of their life impure,
Find in their guilty course no spot secure;
For vice is ever doomed new fears to feel,
And tremble at each turn of Fortune's wheel;
At every noise, at each alarm that stirs,
Death's penal horror to their mind occurs;
Quick to their arms they fly with wild dismay,
And rush where hasty terror points the way:
So quick the Indians to the tumult came,
With sleep and valor struggling in their frame.
Unawed by danger's unexpected sight,
They rouse their fellows, and they rush to fight.
Though their brave bosoms are of armor bare,
Their manly hearts their martial rage declare.
No furious odds their gallant souls appall,
But resolute they fly to guard the wall.
It was the season when, with tender care,
Lantaro reasoned with his anxious Fair;
Carest, consol'd, and, in his anger kind,
Mildly reproved her weak mistrusting mind.
Spite of his chearing voice she trembles still;
Severer terrors now her bosom fill:
For sterner sounds their soft debate overcome,
Drowned in the rattle of the alarming drum.
But not so quick, on Apprehension's wings,
The wretched miser from his pillow springs,
Whose hoarded gold forbids his mind to rest,
If doubtful noise the nightly thief suggest:
Nor yet so hasty, though with terror wild,
Flies the fond mother to her wounded child,
Whose painful cry her shuddering soul alarms,
As flew Lantaro at the sound of arms.
His mantle rapidly around him rolled,
And, grasping a light sword with hasty hold,
Too eager for his heavier arms to wait,
The fierce Barbarian hurried to the gate.
O faithless Fortune! thou deceitful friend!
Of thy false favors how severe the end!
How quick thou cancell'st, when thy frown appears,
The accumulated gifts of long triumphant years!
To aid the Spaniards in their bold emprize,
Four hundred Indians marched, their firm allies,
Who on the left their line of battle close,
And haste to combat with their painted bows;
Launching adroitly, in their rapid course,
Unnumber'd arrows with unerring force.
As brave Lantaro issued from his tent,
A shaft to meet the sallying Chief was sent;
Through his left side (ye valiant, mourn his lot!)
Flew the keen arrow, with such fury shot
It pierced his heart, the bravest and the best
That ever was lodged within a human breast.
Proud of the stroke that laid such valor low,
Death seemed to glory in the important blow;
And, that no Mortal might his triumph claim,
In darkness hid the doubtful Archer's name.
Such force the keen resistless weapon found,
It stretched the mighty Chieftain on the ground,
And gave large outlet to his ardent blood,
That gushed apace in a tumultuous flood.
From his sunk cheek its native color fled;
His sightless eyes rolled in his ghastly head;
His soul, that felt its glorious hopes overthrown,
Retired, indignant, to the world unknown.
The noble savages, not dismayed by the death of their Leader, continue to
defend the fort with great fury.

CANTO XV.
THE Poet opens this canto with a lively panegyric on Love: he affirms that the
greatest Poets have derived their glory from their vivid descriptions of this
enchanting passion; and he laments that he is precluded by his subject from
indulging his imagination in such scenes as are more likely to captivate a
reader.

He seems to intend this as an apology (but I must own it is an unsatisfactory
one) for deserting the fair Guacolda, whom he mentions no more. He proceeds to
describe the sharp contest which the undaunted Indians still maintained in
their fort: -- they refuse quarter, which is offered them by the Spanish
Leader, and all resolutely perish with the brave and beloved Lantaro. The Poet
then resumes his account of the naval expedition from Peru to Chile; and
concludes the canto with a spirited description of a storm, which attacked the
vessels as they arrived in sight of the province to which they were steering.

CANTO XVI.
THE storm abates. The Spaniards land, and fortify themselves on an island near
the country of the Araucanians. The latter hold a council of war in the valley
of Ongolmo. Caupolican, their General, proposes to attack the Spaniards in
their new post. The elder Chieftains dissuade him from the design. A quarrel
ensues between Tucapel and the aged Peteguelen: -- they are appeased by a
speech of the venerable Colocolo; by whose advice a spirited and adroit young
Indian, named Millalanco, is dispatched, as a peaceful ambassador, to learn the
situation and designs of the Spaniards. He embarks in a large galley with oars,
and soon arrives at the island. He surveys the Spanish implements of war with
astonishment, and is conducted to the tent of the General, Don Garcia.

CANTO XVII.
THE Indian addresses the Spanish officers with a proposal of peace and amity.
He is dismissed with presents. The Chieftains, on his return, pretend to
relinquish hostilities; but prepare secretly for war. The Spaniards remain
unmolested on the island during the stormy season. They send a select party of
a hundred and thirty, including our Poet, to raise a fort on the continent:
these execute their commission with infinite dispatch, and all the Spanish
troops remove to this new post. The Araucanians are alarmed. An intrepid Youth,
named Gracolano, proposes to the Indian General, Caupolican, to storm the fort.
The Indians advance near it, under shelter of the night. The Poet describes
himself, at this juncture, as oppressed by the excessive labors of the day,
and unable to pursue his poetical studies according to his nightly custom: the
pen falls from his hand: he is seized with violent pains and tremblings: his
strength and senses forsake him: but soon recovering from this infirmity, he
enjoys a refreshing sleep. Bellona appears to him in a vision, and encourages
him both as a soldier and a poet. She conducts him, through a delicious
country, to the summit of a most lofty mountain; when, pointing to a spot
below, she informs him it is St. Quintin, and that his countrymen, under the
command of their sovereign Philip, are just marching to attack it: she adds,
that her presence is necessary in the midst of that important scene; and leaves
the Poet on the eminence to survey and record the battle.

CANTO XVIII.
AFTER the Poet has described the success of his royal master at St. Quintin, a
female figure of a most venerable appearance, but without a name, relates to
him prophetically many future events of great importance to his country. She
touches on the disturbances in the Netherlands, the enterprises of the Turks,
and the exploits of Don John of Austria, at that time unknown to fame. These
she hints very imperfectly, telling the Poet, that if he wishes for farther
information, he must follow the steps of a tame deer, which he will find in a
particular spot; this animal will lead him to the cell of an ancient hermit,
formerly a soldier, who will conduct him to the secret cave of the unsocial
Fiton, a mighty magician, who will display to him the most miraculous visions.
His female Instructor then advises him to mix softer subjects with the horrors
of war, and to turn his eyes and his thoughts to the charms of the many
Beauties who then flourished in Spain. He beholds all these lovely fair ones
assembled in a delicious paradise; and he is particularly attracted by a young
lady, whose name he discovers to be Donna Maria Bazan (his future wife): in the
moment that he begins to question his Guide concerning this engaging Beauty, he
is roused from his vision by the sound of an alarm. He snatches up his arms,
and hurries to his post: -- while the morning dawns, and the Indians begin to
attack the fort.

CANTO XIX.
THE Indians advance in three squadrons. The Youth Gracolano o'erleaps the
trench, supported on a lofty pike, by which he also passes the wall. He defends
himself in the midst of the Spaniards with great spirit; but, finding himself
unsupported, he wrenches a lance from a Spanish soldier, and tries to leap once
more over the trench; but he is struck by a stone while vaulting through the
air, and falls, covered, as the Poet expressly declares, with two-and-thirty
wounds. Some of his friends are shot near him; but the Indians get possession
of the Spanish lance with which he had sprung over the wall, and brandish it in
triumph. The Spaniard, named Elvira, who had lost his weapon, piqued by the
adventure, sallies from the fort, and returns, amid the shouts of his
countrymen, with an Indian spear which he won in single combat from a
Barbarian, whom he had perceived detached from his party. The Indians attempt
to storm the fort on every side: many are destroyed by the Spanish firearms.
The head of the ancient Peteguelen is shot off; but Tucapel passes the wall,
and rushes with great slaughter into the midst of the enemy. The Spaniards who
were in the ships that anchored near the coast hasten on shore, and march to
assist their countrymen in the fort, but are attacked by a party of Indians in
their march. The conflict continues furious on the walls; but the Indians at
length retreat, leaving Tucapel still fighting within the fort.

CANTO XX.
TUCAPEL, though severely wounded, escapes with life, and rejoins the Indian
army, which continues to retreat. The Spaniards sally from the fort, but soon
return to it, from the apprehension of an ambuscade. They clear their trench,
and strengthen the weaker parts of their fortification. Night comes on. The
Poet describes himself stationed on a little eminence in the plain below the
fort, which was seated on high and rocky ground: -- fatigued with the toils of
the day, and oppressed by the weight of his armor, which he continues to wear,
he is troubled with a lethargic heaviness; which he counteracts by exercise,
declaring that his disposition to slumber in his post arose not from any
intemperance either in diet or in wine, as moldy biscuit and rainwater had
been for some time his chief sustenance; and that he was accustomed to make the
moist earth his bed, and to divide his time between his poetical and his
military labors. He then relates the following nocturnal adventure, which may
perhaps be considered as the most striking and pathetic incident in this
singular poem: While thus I strove my nightly watch to keep,
And struggled with the oppressive weight of sleep,
As my quick feet, with many a silent stride,
Traversed the allotted ground from side to side,
My eye perceived one quarter of the plain
White with the mingled bodies of the slain;
For our incessant fire, that bloody day,
Had slaughtered numbers in the stubborn fray.
As often I paused each distant noise to hear,
Gazing around me with attentive ear,
I heard from time to time a feeble sound
Toward the breathless Indians on the ground,
Still closing with a sigh of mournful length;
At every interval it gathered strength;
And now it ceased, and now again begun,
And still from corse to corse it seemed to run.
As night's increasing shade my hope destroys,
To view the source of this uncertain noise,
Eager my mind's unquiet doubts to still,
And more the duties of my post fulfill,
With crouching steps I haste, and earnest eyes,
To the low spot from whence the murmurs rise;
And see a dusky Form, that seems to tread
Slow, on four feet, among the gory dead.
With terror, that my heart will not deny,
When this strange vision struck my doubtful eye,
Toward it, with a prayer to Heaven, I pressed,
Arms in my hand, my corselet on my breast;
But now the dusky Form, on which I sprung,
Upright arose, and spoke with plaintive tongue:
Mercy! to mercy hear my just pretense;
I am a woman, guiltless of offense!
If my distress, and unexampled plight,
No generous pity in thy breast excite;
If thy blood-thirsty rage, by tears uncheck'd,
Would pass those limits which the brave respect;
Will such a deed increase thy martial fame,
When Heaven's just voice shall to the world proclaim,
That by thy ruthless sword a woman died,
A widow, sunk in sorrow's deepest tide?
Yet I implore thee, if 'twas happily thine,
Or for thy curse, as now I feel it mine;
If ever thy lot, in any state, to prove
How firm the faithful ties of tender love,
O let me bury one brave warrior slain,
Whose corse lies blended with this breathless train!
Remember, he who thwarts the duteous will
Becomes the approver and the cause of ill.
Thou will not hinder these my pious vows;
War, fiercest war, this just demand allows:
The basest tyranny alone is driven
To use the utmost power that chance has given.
Let but my soul its dear companion find,
Then sat thy fury, if to blood inclined;
For in such grief I draw my lingering breath,
Life is my dread, beyond the pangs of death.
There is no ill that now can wound my breast,
No good, but what I in my Love possessed:
Fly then, ye hours! that keep me from the dead;
For he, the spirit of my life, is fled.
If adverse Heaven my latest wish deny,
On his dear corse to fix my closing eye,
My tortured soul, in cruel Fate's despite,
Will soar, the faithful partner of his flight.
And now her agony of heart implored
An end of all her sorrows from my sword.
Doubt and distrust my troubled mind assail,
That fears deceit in her affecting tale;
Nor was I fully of her faith secure,
Till often her words the mournful truth insure;
Suspicion whispered, that an artful spy
By this illusion might our state descry.
However inclined to doubt, yet soon I knew,
Though night concealed her features from my view,
That truth was stamped on every word she said;
So full of grief, so free from guilty dread:
And that bold love, to every danger blind,
Had sent her forth her slaughtered Lord to find,
Who, in the onset of our bloody strife,
For brave distinction sacrificed his life.
Filled with compassion, when I saw her bent
To execute her chaste and fond intent,
I led her weeping to the higher spot,
To guard whose precincts was that night my lot;
Securely there I begged her to relate
The perfect story of her various fate;
From first to last her touching woes impart,
And by the tale relieve her loaded heart.
Ah! she replied, relief I never can know,
Till Death's kind aid shall terminate my woe!
Earth for my ills no remedy supplies,
Beyond all suff'rance my afflictions rise:
Yet, though the talk will agonize my soul,
Of my sad story I will tell the whole;
Grief, thus enforced, my life's weak thread may rend,
And in the killing tale my pangs may end.


The fair Indian then relates to Ercilla the particulars of her life, in speech
of considerable length: -- she informs him, that her name is Tegualda; -- that
she is the daughter of the Chieftain Brancol; -- that her father had often
pressed her to marry, which she had for some time declined, though solicited by
many of the noblest Youths in her country; till, being appointed, in compliment
to her beauty, to distribute the prizes. in a scene of public festivity, to
those who excelled in the manly exercises, she was struck by the
accomplishments of a gallant Youth, named Crepino, as she bestowed on him the
reward of his victories; -- that she declared her choice to her father, after
perceiving the Youth inspired with a mutual affection for her; -- that the old
Chieftain was delighted by her choosing so noble a character, and their marriage
had been publicly solemnized but a month from that day. On this conclusion of
her story she bursts into new agonies of grief, and entreats Ercilla to let her
pay her last duties to her husband; or rather, to unite them again in a common
grave. Ercilla endeavors to console her, by repeated promises of all the
assistance in his power. In the most passionate excess of sorrow, she still
entreats him to end her miserable life. -- In this distressing scene, our
Author is relieved by the arrival of a brother officer, who had been also
stationed on the plain, and now informs Ercilla that the time of their
appointed watch is expired. They join in comforting the unhappy Mourner, and
conduct her into the fort; where they consign her, for the remainder of the
night, to the decent care of married women, to use the chaste expression of the
generous and compassionate Ercilla.

CANTO XXI.
IN pure affection who has soared above
The tender pious proof of faithful love,
Which thus awaked our sympathetic care
For this unhappy, fond, barbarian Fair?
O that just Fame my humble voice would raise
To swell in loudest notes her lasting praise!
To spread her merits, in immortal rhyme,
Through every language, and through every clime!
With pitying females she the night remained,
Where no rude step their privacy profaned;
Though wretched, thankful for their soothing aid,
With hopes her duty would at length be paid.
Soon as the welcome light of morning came,
Though soundest sleep had seized my jaded frame,
Though my tired limbs were still to rest inclined,
Solicitude awaked my anxious mind.
Quick to my Indian Mourner I repair,
And still in tears I find the restless Fair;
The varying hours afford her no relief,
No transient momentary pause of grief.
With truest pity I her pangs assuage;
To find her slaughtered Lord my word engage;
Restore his corse, and, with a martial band,
Escort her safely to her native land.
With blended doubt and sorrow, weeping still,
My promised word she prayed me to fulfill.
Assembling now a menial Indian train,
I led her to explore the bloody plain:
Where heaps of mingled dead deformed the ground,
Near to the fort the breathless Chief we found;
Clay-cold and stiff, the gory earth he pressed,
A fatal ball had passed his manly breast.
Wretched Tegualda, who before her viewed
The pale disfigured form, in blood imbrued,
Sprung forward, and with instantaneous force
Frantic she darted on the precious corse,
And pressed his lips, where livid death appears,
And bathed his wounded bosom in her tears,
And kissed the wound, and the wild hope pursues
That her fond breath may yet new life infuse.
Wretch that I am! at length she madly cried,
Why does my soul these agonies abide?
Why do I linger in this mortal strife,
Nor pay to Love his just demand, my life?
Why, poor of spirit! at a single blow
Do I not close this bitter scene of woe?
Whence this delay? will Heaven to me deny
The wretch's choice and privilege, to die?
While, bent on death, in this despair she gasp'd,
Her furious hands her snowy neck inclasp'd;
Failing her frantic wish, they do not spare
Her mournful visage nor her flowing hair.
Much as I strove to stop her mad intent,
Her fatal purpose I could scarce prevent:
So loathed she life, and with such fierce control
The raging thirst of death inflamed her soul.
When by my prayers, and soft persuasion's balm,
Her pangs of sorrow grew a little calm,
And her mild speech confirmed my hope, at last,
That her delirious agony was past,
My ready Indian train, with duteous haste,
On a firm bier the clay-cold body placed,
And bore the Warrior, in whose fate we grieved,
To where her vassals the dear charge received.
But, lest from ruthless War's outrageous sway
The mourning Fair might suffer on her way,
Over the near mountains, to a safer land,
I marched to guard her with my warlike band;
And there secure, for the remaining road
Was clear and open to her own abode,
She gratefully declined my farther care,
And thanked and blessed me in a parting prayer.
As I have been tempted to dwell much longer than I intended on some of the
most pathetic incidents of this extraordinary poem, I shall give a more concise
summary of the remaining cantos. -- On Ercilla's return, the Spaniards continue
to strengthen their fort. They receive intelligence from an Indian ally, that
the Barbarian army intend a fresh assault in the night. They are relieved from
this alarm by the arrival of a large reinforcement from the Spanish cities in
Chile: -- on which event Colocolo prevails on the Indians to suspend the
attack. Caupolican, the Indian General, reviews all his forces; and the various
Chieftains are well described. The Spanish Commander, Don Garcia, being now
determined to march into the hostile district of Amuco, addresses soldiers in a
spirited harangue, requesting them to remember the pious, cause for which they
fight, and to spare the life of every Indian who is disposed to submission.
They remove from their post, and pass in boats over the broad river Biobio.

CANTO XXII.
THE Spaniards are attacked in their new quarters -- a surious battle enfues.
The Spaniards are forced to give ground, but at last prevail. The Indian Chief,
Rengo, signalizes himself in the action; defends himself in a marsh, and
retreats in good order with his forces. The Spaniards, after the conflict,
seize an unhappy straggling Youth, named Galvarino, whom they punish as a rebel
in the most barbarous manner, by cutting off both his hands. The valiant Youth
defies their cruelty in the midst of this horrid scene; and, brandishing his
bloody stumps, departs from his oppressors with the most insulting menaces of
revenge.

CANTO XXIII.
GALVARINO appears in the Assembly of the Indian Chieftains, and excites them,
in a very animated speech, to revenge the barbarity with which he has been
treated. He faints from loss of blood, in the close of his harangue, but is
recovered by the care of his friends, and restored to health. The Indians,
exasperated by the sight of his wounds, unanimously determine to prosecute the
war. The Spaniards, advancing in Arauco, send forth scouts to discover the
disposition of the neighboring tribes. Ercilla, engaging in this service,
perceives an old Indian in a sequestered spot, apparently sinking under the
infirmities of age; but, on his approach, the ancient figure flies from him
with astonishing rapidity. He endeavors in vain, though on horseback, to
overtake this aged fugitive, who soon escapes from his sight. He now discovers
the tame Deer foretold in his vision; and, pursuing it, is conducted through
intricate paths to a retired cottage, where a courteous old man receives him in
a friendly manner. Ercilla enquires after the Magician Fiton: the old man
undertakes to guide him to the secret mansion of that wonderful Necromancer, to
whom he declares himself related. He adds, that he himself was once a
distinguished warrior; but, having the misfortune to sully his past glory,
without losing his life, in a conflict with another Chieftain, he had withdrawn
himself from society, and lived twenty years as a hermit. He now leads Ercilla
through a gloomy grove to the cell of the Magician, whose residence and magical
apparatus are described with great force of imagination. Fiton appears from a
secret portal, and proves to be the aged figure who had escaped so swiftly from
the sight of Ercilla. At the request of his relation, the old Warrior, he
condescends to show Ercilla the wonders of his art. He leads him to a large
lucid globe, self-suspended in the middle of an immense apartment. He tells him
it is the work of forty years study, and contains an exact representation of
the world, with this singular power, that it exhibits, at his command, any
scene of futurity which he wishes to behold: -- that, knowing the heroic
composition of Ercilla, he will give him an opportunity to vary and embellish
his poem by the description of a most important sea fight, which he will
display to him most distinctly on that sphere. He then invokes all the powers
of the infernal world. Ercilla fixes his eye on the globe, and perceives the
naval forces of Spain, with those of the Pope and the Venetians, prepared to
engage the great armament of the Turks.

CANTO XXIV.
DESCRIBES circumstantially the naval battle of Lepanto, and celebrates the
Spanish admiral, Don John of Austria. Ercilla gazes with great delight on this
glorious action, and beholds the complete triumph of his countrymen; when the
Magician strikes the globe with his wand, and turns the scene into darkness.
Ercilla, after being entertained with other mavelous sights, which he omits
from his dread of prolixity, takes leave of his two aged friends, and regains
his quarters. The Spaniards continue to advance: on their pitching their camp
in a new spot, toward evening, an Araucanian, fantastically dressed in armor,
enquires for the tent of Don Garcia, and is conducted to his presence.

CANTO XXV.
THE Araucanian delivers a defiance to Don Garcia, in the name of Caupolican,
who challenges the Spanish General to end the war by a single combat. The
messenger adds, that the whole Indian army will descend into the plain, on the
next morning, to be spectators of the duel. Don Garcia dismisses him with an
acceptance of the challenge. At the dawn of day the Indian forces appear in
three divisions. A party of Spanish horse precipitately attack their left wing,
before which Caupolican was advancing. They are repulsed. A general and
obstinate engagement ensues. The mangled Galvarino appears at the head of one
Indian squadron, and excites his countrymen to revenge his wrongs. Many
Spaniards are named who distinguish themselves in the battle. Among the Indian
Chiefs Tucapel and Rengo display the most splendid acts of valor; and, though
personal enemies, they mutually defend each other. Caupolican also, at the head
of the left squadron, obliges the Spaniards to retreat; and the Araucanians are
on the point of gaining a decisive victory, when the fortune of the day begins
to turn.

CANTO XXVI.
THE reserved guard of the Spaniards, in which Ercilla was stationed, advancing
to the charge, recover the field, and oblige the main body of the Indians to
fly. Caupolican, though victorious in his quarter, sounds a retreat when he
perceives this event. The Indians fly in great disorder. Rengo for some time
sustains an unequal conflict, and at last retreats sullenly into a wood, where
he collects several of the scattered fugitives. As Ercilla happened to advance
toward this spot, a Spaniard, called Remon, exhorts him by name to attempt the
dangerous but important exploit of forcing this Indian party from the wood. His
honor being thus piqued, he rushes forward with a few followers, and, after an
obstinate engagement, in which many of the Indians are cut to pieces, the
Spaniards obtain the victory, and return to their camp with several prisoners.
After this great defeat of the Indian army, the Spaniards, to deter their
enemies from all future resistance, barbarously resolve to execute twelve
Chieftains of distinction, whom they find among their captives, and to leave
their bodies exposed on the trees that surrounded the field of battle. The
generous Ercilla, lamenting this inhuman sentence, intercedes particularly for
the life of one, alleging that he had seen him united with the Spaniards. This
person proves to be Galvarino; who, on hearing the intercession for his life,
produces his mangled arms, which he had concealed in his bosom, and, giving
vent to his detestation of the Spaniards, insists on dying with his countrymen.
Ercilla persists in vain in his endeavor to save him. As, no executioner could
be found among the Spanish soldiers, a new mode of destruction, says our Poet,
was invented; and every Indian was ordered to terminate his own life by a cord
which was given him. These brave men hastened to accomplish their fate with as
much alacrity, continues Ercilla, as the most spirited warrior marches to an
attack. One alone of the twelve begins to hesitate, and pray for mercy;
declaring himself the lineal descendant of the most ancient race and sovereign
of the country. He is interrupted by the reproaches of the impetuous Galvarino,
and, repenting his timidity, atones for it by instant death.

The Spaniards advance still farther in the country and raise a fort where
Valdivia had perished. Ercilla finds his old friend the Magician once more, who
tells him that Heaven thought proper to punish the pride of the Araucanians by
their late defeat; but that the Spaniards would soon pay dearly for their
present triumph. The Wizard retires after this prophecy, and, with much
entreaty, allows Ercilla to follow him. Coming to a gloomy rock, he strikes it
with his wand; a secret door opens, and they enter into a delicious garden,
which the Poet commends for its symmetry, expressly declaring that every hedge
has its brother. The Magician leads him into a vault of alabaster; and,
perceiving his wish, though he does not express it, of seeing the miraculous
globe again, the courteous Fiton conducts him to it.

CANTO XXVII.
THE Magician displays to our Poet the various countries of the globe;
particularly pointing out to him the ancient castle of Ercilla, the seat of his
ancestors in Biscay, and the spot where his sovereign Philip the Second was
soon to build his magnificent palace, the Escurial. Having shown him the
various nations of the earth on his mavelous sphere, Fiton conducts his guest
to the road leading to the Spanish camp, where the soldiers of Ercilla were
seeking their officer. The Spaniards in vain attempt to sooth and to terrify
the Araucanians into peace; and, finding the importance of their present post,
they determine to strengthen it. Ercilla proceeds with a party to the city of
Imperial, to provide necessaries for this purpose. On his return, as he is
marching through the country of some pacific Indians, he discovers, at the
close of day, a distressed female, who attempts to fly, but is overtaken by
Ercilla.

CANTO XXVIII.
THE fair fugitive, whom our Poet describes as singularly beautiful, relates
her story. She tells him her name is Glaura, the daughter of an opulent
Chieftain, with whom she lived most happily, till a brother of her father's,
who frequently resided with him, persecuted her with an unwarrantable passion;
-- that she in vain represented to him the impious nature of his love; -- he
persisted in his frantic attachment, and, on the appearance of a hostile party
of Spaniards, rushed forth to die in her defense, entreating her to receive his
departing spirit. He fell in the action; her father shared the same fate: she
herself escaped at a postern gate into the woods. Two negroes, laden with
spoil, discovered, and seized her. Her cries brought a young Indian, named
Cariolano, to her rescue: he shot an arrow into the heart of the first russian,
and stabbed the second. Glaura expressed her gratitude by receiving her young
deliverer as her husband. Before they could regain a place of safety, they were
alarmed by the approach of Spaniards. The generous Youth entreated Glaura to
conceal herself in a tree, while he ventured to meet the enemy. In her terror
she submitted to this expedient, which, on recovery from her panic, she
bitterly repented; for when she issued from her retreat, she sought in vain for
Cariolano, and supposed, from the clamor she had heard, that he must have
perished. She continued to wander in this wretched state of mind, still unable
to hear any tidings of her protector. While the fair Indian thus closes her
narrative, Ercilla is alarmed by the approach of a large party of Barbarians.
One of his faithful Indian attendants, whom he had lately attached to him,
entreats him to escape with the utmost haste; adding, that he can save him from
pursuit by his knowledge of the country; and that he will risque his own life
most willingly, to preserve that of Ercilla. Glaura bursts into an agony of
joy, in discovering her lost Cariolano in this faithful attendant. Ercilla
exclaims, Adieu, my friends; I give you both your liberty, which is all I have
at present to bestow, and rejoins his little troop. Before he enters on the
account of what followed, he relates the circumstance by which he attached
Cariolano to his service; whom he had found alone, as he himself was marching
with a small party, and a few prisoners that he had taken. The Youth at first
defended himself, and shot two Spaniards with his arrows, and continued to
resist the numbers that pressed upon him, with his mantle and his dagger
evading their blows by his extreme agility, and wounding several. Ercilla
generously rushed in to his rescue, and declared he. deserved a reward for his
uncommon bravery, instead of being destroyed so unfairly. The Youth, in
consequence of this treatment, flung down his dagger, and became the
affectionate attendant of Ercilla. Our Poet, after relating this incident,
returns to the scene where his party was surprised in a hollow road, and
severely galled by the enemy, who attacked them with showers of stones from the
higher ground. Ercilla forces his way up the precipice, and, after dispersing
part of the Indian force, effects his escape with a few followers; but all are
wounded, and obliged to leave their baggage in the possession of their numerous
enemies.

CANTO XXIX.
OPENS with an encomium on the love of our country, and the signal proofs of
this virtue which the Araucanians displayed; who, notwithstanding their loss of
four great battles in the space of three months, still continue firm in their
resolution of defending their liberty. Caupolican proposes, in a public
assembly, to set fire to their own habitations, and leave themselves no
alternative, but that of killing or being killed: The Chieftains all agree in
this desperate determination. Tucapel, before they proceed to action against
the Spaniards, insists on terminating his difference with Rengo, a rival
Chieftain, by a single combat. A plain is appointed for this purpose: all the
people of Arauco assemble as spectators: the Chiefs appear in complete armor,
and engage in a most obstinate and bloody conflict.

CANTO XXX.
AFTER many dreadful wounds on each side, the two Chiestains, closing with each
other, fall together, and, after a fruitless struggle for victory, remain
speechless on the ground. Caupolican, who presided as judge of the combat,
descends from his seat, and, finding some signs of life in each, orders them to
be carried to their respective tents. They recover, and are reconciled. The
Spaniards, leaving a garrison in their new fort, under a captain named Reynoso,
had proceeded to the city of Imperial. Caupolican endeavors to take advantage
of this event. He employs an artful Indian, named Pran, to examine the state of
the fort. Pran insinuates himself among the Indian servants belonging to the
Spaniards. He views the fort, and endeavors to persuade a servile Indian,
named Andresillo, to admit Caupolican and his forces while the. Spaniards are
sleeping. Andresillo promises to meet Caupolican in secret, and converse with
him on this project.

CANTO XXXI.
OPENS with a spirited invective against treachery in war, and particularly
those traitors who betray their country. Andresillo reveals all that had passed
to his Spanish captain; who promises him a great reward if he will assist in
making the stratagem of the Indians an instrument of destruction to those who
contrived it. They concert a plan for this purpose. Andresillo meets Caupolican
in secret, and promises to introduce the Indian forces into the fort when the
Spaniards are sleeping, in the heat of the day. Pran is sent forward, to learn
from Andresillo if all things are quiet, just before the hour appointed for the
assault. He examines the state of the fort, and, finding the Spaniards
apparently unprepared for defense, hastens back to the Indian General, who
advances by a quick and silent march. The Spaniards in the interim point all
their guns, and prepare for the most bloody resistance.

CANTO XXXII.
AFTER a panegyric on clemency, and a noble censure of those enormous
cruelties, by which his countrymen sullied their military fame, the P^^^ (...)
the dreadful earnage which ensued as the Indians approached the fort. The
Spaniards, after destroying numbers by their artillery, s^nd f^rth a party of
horse, who cut the fugitives to pieces. They inhumanly murder thirteen of their
most distinguished prisoners, by blowing them from the mouths of cannon: but
none of the considerate Chieftains, whom the Poet has particularly celebrated,
were included in this number; for those high-spirited Barbarians had refused to
attend Caupolican in this assault, as they considered it as disgraceful to
attack their enemies by surprise. The unfortunate Indian Leader, ^eeing his
forces thus unexpectedly massacred, escapes with ten faithful followers, and
wanders through the country in the most calamitous condition. The Spaniards
endeavor, by all the means they can devise, to discover his retreat: the
faithful inhabitants of Arauco refuse to betray him.

Ercilla, in s^arching the country with a small party, finds a young wounded
(...)* (...), that marching with her husband, she had the misfortune of seeing
him perish in the late slaughter; -- that a friendly soldier, in pity to her
extreme distress, had tried to end her miserable life in the midst of the
confusion, but had failed in his generous design, by giving her an ineffectual
wound; -- that she had been removed from the field of battle to that
sequestered spot, where she languished in the hourly hope of death, which she
now implores from the hand of Ercilla. Our Poet consoles her; dresses her
wound, and leaves one of his attendants to protect her. On his return to the
fort, he discourses to his soldiers in praise of the fidelity and spirit
displayed by the Indian females, comparing them to the chaste and constant
Dido. A young soldier of his train expresses his surprise on hearing Ercilla
commend the Carthaginian Queen for a virtue to which, he conceived, she had no
pretense. From hence our Poet takes occasion to vindicate the injured Eliza
from the slanderous misrepresentation of Virgil; and flatters himself that the
love of justice, so natural to man, will induce every reader to listen with
pleasure to his defense of the calumniated Queen. He then enters on her real
history, and relates circumstantially her lamentation over the murdered
Sichaeus, and the artifice by which she escaped with her treasures from her
inhuman brother Pygmalion: -- she engages many of his attendants to share the
chances of her voyage; and, having collected a supply of females from the
island of Cyprus, she directs her course to the coast of Africa.

CANTO XXXIII.
DIDO, as our Poet continues her more authentic story, purchases her dominion
and raises her flourishing city. The ambassadors of Iarbas arrive at Carthage,
to offer this celebrated Queen the alternative of marriage or war. The Senate,
who are first informed of the proposal, being fearful that the chaste
resolutions of their fair Sovereign may ruin their country, attempt to engage
her, by a singular device, to accept the hand of Iarbas. They tell her, that
this haughty Monarch has sent to demand twenty of her privy counselors to
regulate his kingdom; and that, in consideration of their age and infirmities,
they must decline so unpleasant a service. The Queen represents to them the
danger of their refusal, and the duty which they owe to their country;
declaring, that she would most readily sacrifice her own life for the safety or
advantage of her subjects. The Senators then reveal to her the real demand of
Iarbas, and urge the necessity of her marriage for the preservation of the
state. The faithful Dido knows not what to resolve, and demands three months to
consider of this delicate and important point: -- at the close of that period,
she assembles her subjects; and, taking leave of them in a very affectionate
harangue, declares her resolution to die, as the only means by which she can at
once satisfy both Heaven and earth, by discharging her duty to her people, and
at the same time preserving her faith inviolate to her departed Sichaeus.
Invoking his name, she plunges a poniard in her breast; and throws herself on a
flaming pile, which had been kindled for a different sacrifice. Her grateful
subjects lament her death, and pay divine honors to her memory. "This Este es
el cierto y verdadero cuento,
De la famosa Dido disfamada
Que Virgilio Maron sin miramiento
Falseo su historia y castidad preciada
Por dar a sus ficciones ornamento
Pues vemos que esta Reyna importunada
Pudiendose casar y no quemarse
Antes quemarse quiso, que casarse.

(says our Poet) is the true and genuine story of the famous defamed Dido,
whose most honored chastity has been belied by the inconsiderate Virgil, to
embellish his poetical fictions."

Our Poet returns from this digression on Dido, to the fate of the Indian
Leader Caupolican. -- One of the prisoners, whom the Spaniards had taken in
their search after this unfortunate Chief, is at last tempted by bribes to
betray his General. He conducts the Spaniards to a spot near the sequestered
retreat of Caupolican, and directs them how to discover it; but refuses to
advance with them, overcome by his dread of the Hero whom he is tempted to
betray. The Spaniards surround the house in which the Chieftain had taken
refuge with his ten faithful associates. Alarmed by a sentinel, he prepares for
defense; but being soon wounded in the arm, surrenders, endeavoring to conceal
his high character, and to make the Spaniards believe him an ordinary soldier.

With their accustomed shouts, and greedy toil,
Our furious troops now riot in their spoil;
Through the lone village their quick rapine spread,
Nor leave unpillag'd even a single shed:
When, from a tent, that, placed on safer ground,
The neighboring hill's uncultur'd summit crowned,
A woman rushed, who, in her hasty flight,
Ran through the roughest paths along the rocky height.
A Negro of our train, who marked her way,
Soon made the hapless fugitive his prey;
For thwarting crags her doubtful steps impede,
And the fair form was ill prepared for speed;
For at her breast she bore her huddled son;
To fifteen months the infant's life had run:
From our brave captive sprung the blooming boy,
Of both his parents the chief pride and joy.
The Negro carelessly his victim brought,
Nor knew the important prize his haste had caught.
Our soldiers now, to catch the cooling tide,
Had sallied to the murmuring river's side:
When the unhappy Wife beheld her Lord,
His strong arms bound with a disgraceful cord,
Stripped of each ensign of his past command,
And led the prisoner of our shouting band;
Her anguish burst not into vain complaint,
No female terrors her firm soul attaint;
But, breathing fierce disdain, and anger wild,
Thus she exclaimed, advancing with her child:
The stronger arm that in this shameful band.
Has tied thy weak effeminated hand,
Had nobler pity to thy state expressed
If it had bravely pierced that coward breath.
Were thou the warrior whose heroic worth
So swiftly flew around the spacious earth,
Whose name alone, unaided by thy arm,
Shook the remotest clime with fear's alarm?
Were thou the victor whose triumphant strain
Promised with rapid sword to vanquish Spain;
To make new realms Arauco's power revere,
And spread her empire over the Arctic sphere?
Wretch that I am! how was my heart deceived,
In all the noble pride with which it heaved,
When through the world my boasted title ran,
Tresia, the wife of great Caupolican!
Now, plunged in misery from the heights of fame,
My glories end in this detested shame,
To see thee captive in a lonely spot,
When death and honor might have been thy lot!
What now avail thy scenes of happier strife,
So dearly bought by many a nobler life;
The wondrous feats, that valor scarce believed,
By thee with hazard and with toil achieved?
Where are the vaunted fruits of thy command,
The laurels gathered by this fettered hand?
All sunk! all turned to this abhorred disgrace,
To live the slave of this ignoble race!
Say, had thy soul no strength, thy hand no lance,
To triumph over the fickle power of chance?
Do thou not know, that, to the Warrior's name,
A gallant exit gives immortal fame?
Behold the burden which my breast contains,
Since of thy love no other pledge remains!
Had thou in glory's arms resigned thy breath,
We both had followed thee in joyous death:
Take, take thy son! he was a tie most dear,
Which spotless love once made my heart revere;
Take him! -- by generous pain, and wounded pride,
The currents of this fruitful breast are dried:
Rear him thyself, for thy gigantic frame,
To woman turned, a woman's charge may claim:
A mother's title I no more desire,
Or shameful children from a shameful fire!
As thus she spoke, with growing madness stung,
The tender nursling from her arms she flung
With savage fury, hastening from our sight,
While anguish seemed to aid her rapid flight.
Vain were our efforts; our indignant cries,
Nor gentle prayers, nor angry threats, suffice
To make her breast, where cruel frenzy burned,
Receive the little innocent the spurned.
The Spaniards, after providing a nurse for this unfortunate child, return with
their prisoner Caupolican to their fort, which they enter in triumph.

The Indian General, perceiving that all attempts to conceal his quality are
ineffectual, desires a conference with the Spanish Captain Reynoso.

CANTO XXXIV.
CAUPOLICAN entreats Reynoso to grant his life, but without any signs of
terror. He affirms it will be the only method of appeasing the sanguinary
hatred by which the contending nations are inflamed; and he offers, from his
great influence over his country, to introduce the Christian worship, and to
bring the Araucanians to consider themselves as the subjects of the Spanish
Monarch. His proposals are rejected, and he is sentenced to be impaled, and
shot to death with arrows. He is unappall'd by this decree; but first desires
to be publicly baptized: after which ceremony, he is inhumanly led in chains to
a scaffold. He displays a calm contempt of death; but, on seeing a wretched
Negro appointed his executioner, his indignation bursts forth, and he hurls the
Negro from the scaffold, entreating to die by a more honorable hand. His
horrid sentence is however executed. He supports the agonies of the stake with
patient intrepidity, till a chosen band of archers put a period to his life.

Our brave Ercilla expresses his abhorrence of this atrocious scene; and adds,
that if he had been present, this cruel execution should not have taken place.

The consequence of it was such as Caupolican foretold: -- the Araucanians
determine to revenge his death, and assemble to elect a new General. The Poet
makes an abrupt transition from their debate, to relate the adventures of Don
Garcia, with whom he was himself marching to explore new regions. The
inhabitants of the districts they invade, alarmed at the approach of the
Spaniards, consult on the occasion. An Indian, named Tunconabala, who had
served under the Araucanians, addresses the assembly, and recommends to them a
mode of eluding the supposed avaricious designs of the Spaniards, by sending
messengers to them, who should assume an appearance of extreme poverty, and
represent their country as barren, and thus induce the invaders to turn their
arms toward a different quarter. He offers to engage in this service himself.
The Indians adopt the project he recommends, and remove their valuable effects
to the interior parts of their country.

CANTO XXXV.
DON GARCIA being arrived at the boundaries of Chile, which no Spaniard had
passed, encourages his soldiers, in a spirited harangue, to the acquisition of
the new provinces which lay before them. They enter a rude and rocky country,
in which they are exposed to many hazards by their deceitful guides.
Tunconabala meets them, as he had projected, with the appearance of extreme
poverty; and, after many assurances of the sterility of that region, advises
them to return, or to advance by a different path, which he represents to them
as dangerous, but the only practicable road. On finding them resolved to press
forward, he supplies them with a guide. They advance, with great toil and
danger. Their guide escapes from them. They continue their march, through
various hardships, in a desolate region. They at length discover a fertile
plain, and a large lake with many little inhabited islands. As they approach
the lake, a large gondola, with twelve oars, advances to meet them: the party
it contained leap ashore, and salute the Spaniards with expressions of amity.

CANTO XXXVI.
THE young Chieftain of the gondola supplies the Spaniards with provisions,
refusing to accept any reward: and our Poet celebrates all the inhabitants of
this region, for their amiable simplicity of manners. He visits one of the
principal islands, where he is kindly entertained. He discovers that the lake
had a communication with the sea, by a very rough and dangerous channel: this
circumstance obliges the Spaniards, though reluctant, to return. They lament
the necessity of passing again through the hardships of their former road. A
young Indian undertakes to conduct them by an easier way. But our adventurous
Ercilla, before the little army set forth on their return, engages ten chosen
associates to embark with him in a small vessel, and pass the dangerous
channel. He lands on a wild and sandy spot, and, advancing half a mile up the
country, engraves a stanza, to record this adventure, on the bark of a tree. He
repasses the channel, and rejoins the Spanish troops; who, after much
difficulty, reach the city of Imperial. Our Poet then touches on some
particulars of his personal history, which I mention in the slight sketch of
his life. He afterward promises his reader to relate the issue of the debate
among the Araucanian Chieftains, on the election of their new General; but,
recollecting in the instant that Spain herself is in arms, he entreats the
favor of his Sovereign to inspire him with new spirit, that he may devote
himself to that higher and more interesting subject.

CANTO XXXVII.
OUR Poet, in this his last canto, seems to begin a new work. He enters into a
discussion of Philip's right to the dominion of Portugal, and his acquisition
of that kingdom; when, sinking under the weight of this new subject, he
declares his resolution of leaving it to some happier Poet. He recapitulates
the various perils and hardships of his own life, and, remarking that he has
ever been unfortunate, and that all his labors are unrewarded, he consoles
himself with the reflection, that honor consists not in the possession of
rewards, but in the consciousness of having deserved them. He concludes with a
pious resolution to withdraw himself from the vain pursuits of the world, and
to devote himself to God.

NOTE XI. VERSE 280.
At once the Bard of Glory and of Love. The Epic powers of Camoens have
received their due honor in our language, by the elegant and spirited
translation of Mr. Mickle; but our country is still a stranger to the lighter
graces and pathetic sweetness of his shorter compositions. These, as they are
illustrated by the Spanish notes of his indefatigable Commentator, Manuel de
Faria, amount to two volumes in folio. I shall present the reader with a
specimen of his Sonnets, for which he is celebrated as the rival of Petrarch.
Of the three translations which follow, I am indebted for the two first to an
ingenious friend, from whom the public may wish me to have received more
extensive obligations of a similar nature. It may be proper to add, that the
first Sonnet of Camoens, like that of Petrarch, is a kind of preface to the
amorous poetry of its author.

SONETO I.
EM quanto quis Fortuna que tivesse
Esperanca de algum contentamento,
O gosto de hum suave pensamento
Me fez que seus effeytos escrevesse.
Porem temendo Amor que aviso desse
Minha escritura a algum juizo isento,
Escureccome o engenho co' o tormento,
Para que seus enganos nao dissesse
O vos, que amor obriga a ser sogeytos
A diversas vontades! quando lerdes
Number breve livro casos tao diversos;
Verdades puras sao, and nao defeytos.
Entendey que segundo o amor tiverdes,
Tircis o entendimento de meus versos.
SONETO XIX.
ALMA minha gentil, que te partiste
Tao cedo desta vida descontente,
Repousa la no ceo eternamente,
E viva eu ca na terra sempre triste.
Se la no assento etereo, onde subiste,
Memoria desta vida se consent,
Nao te esquecas de aquelle amor ardente
Que ja nos olhos meus tao puro viste.
Ese vires que pode merecerte
Algua cousa a dor queme sicou
Da magoa, sem remedio, de perderte,
Roga a Deos que teus annos encurtou,
Que tao cedo de ca me leve a verte,
Quao cedo de meur olhos te levou.
SONNET I.
WHILE on my head kind Fortune deigned to pour
Her lavish boons, and through my willing soul
Made tides of ecstasy and pleasure roll,
I sung the raptures of each passing hour.
But Love, who heard me praise the golden shower,
Resolved my fond presumption to control;
And painful darkness over my spirit stole,
Lest I should dare to tell his treacherous power.
O ye, whom his hard yoke compels to bend
To others' will, if in my various lay
Sad plaints ye find, and fears, and cruel wrong,
To suffering nature and to truth attend;
For in the measure ye have felt his sway,
Your sympathizing hearts will feel my song.
SONNET XIX. ON THE DEATH OF THE POET'S MISTRESS, DONNA CATALINA DE ATAIDE, WHO
DIED AT THE AGE OF TWENTY.
GO, gentle spirit! now supremely blessed,
From scenes of pain and struggling virtue go:
From thy immortal seat of heavenly rest
Behold us lingering in a world of woe!
And if beyond the grave, to saints above,
Fond memory still the transient past pourtrays,
Blame not the ardor of my constant love,
Which in these longing eyes was wont to blaze.
But if from virtue's source my sorrows rise,
For the sad loss I never can repair,
Be thine to justify my endless sighs,
And to the Throne of Grace prefer thy prayer,
That Heaven, who made thy span of life so brief,
May shorten mine, and give my soul relief.
SONETO LXXII.
QUANDO de minhas magoas a comprida
Maginacao os olhos me adormece,
Em sonhos aquella alma me aparece
Que para mi foy sonho nesta vida.
La numa soidade, onde estendida
A vista por o campo desfallece,
Corro apos ella; and ella entao parece
Que maes de mi se alonga, compelida,
Brado: Nao me fujays, sombra benina.
Ella (os olhos em mi c'hum brado pejo,
Como quem diz, que ja nao pode ser)
Torna a fugirme: torno a bradar; dina:
E antes q' acabe em mean, acordo, and vejo
Que nem hum breve engano posso ter.
SONNET LXXII.
WHILE pressed with woes from which it cannot flee,
My fancy sinks, and number seals my eyes,
Her spirit hastens in my dreams to rise,
Who was in life but as a dream to me.
Over a drear waste, so wide no eye can see
How far its sense-evading limit lies,
I follow her quick step; but ah! she flies!
Our distance widening by stern Fate's decree.
Fly not from me, kind shadow! I exclaim:
She, with fixed eyes, that her soft thoughts reveal,
And seem to say, "Forbear thy fond design!"
Still flies: -- I call her; but her half-form'd name
Dies on my falt'ring tongue. -- I wake, and feel
Not even one short delusion may be mine.
The Spanish Commentator of Camoens considers this vision as the most exquisite
Sonnet of his author, and affirms that it is superior to the much longer poem
of Petrarch's, on a similar idea. It may amuse a curious reader to compare both
Camoens and Petrarch, on this occasion, with Milton, who has also written a
Sonnet on the same subject. The Commentator Faria has a very pleasant remark on
this species of composition. He vindicates the dignity of the amorous Sonnet,
by producing an alphabetical list of two hundred great Poets, who have thus
complimented the object of their affection; and he very gravely introduces
Achilles as the leader of this choir, for having celebrated Briseis. If the
Sonnets of the Portugueze Poet are worthy of attention, his Elegies are perhaps
still more so, as they illustrate many particulars of his interesting life,
which ended in 1579, under the most cruel circumstances of neglect and poverty.

Portugal has produced no less than fourteen Epic poems; twelve in her own
language, and two in that of Spain. At the head of these stands the Lusiad of
Camoens. The Malaca Conquistada of Francisco de Sa' de Menesis -- and the
Ulyssea, or Lisboa Edificada, of Gabriel Pereira de Castro, are two of the most
eminent among its successors. -- For a list of the Portugueze Epic Poets, and
for an elegant copy of the Malaca Conquistada, I am indebted to the very
liberal politeness of the Chevalier de Pinto, the Ambassador of Portugal.

NOTE XII. VERSE 287.
Where Eulogy, with one eternal smile. Though a vain insipidity may be
considered as the general characteristic of the French Eloges, it is but just
to remark, that several of these performances are an honor to the country
which produced them; and particularly the little volume of Eloges lately
published by Mr. D'Alembert. This agreeable Encomiast has varied and enlivened
the tone of panegyric by the most happy mixture of amusing anecdote, judicious
criticism, and philosophical precept: we may justly say of him, what he himself
has said of his predecessor Fontenelle: Il a solidement assure sa gloire....
par ces Eloges si interessans, pleins d'une raison si fine et si profonde, qui
font aimer et respecter les lettres, qui inspirent aux genies naissans la plus
noble emulation, et qui feront passer le nom de l'auteur a la posterite, avec
celui de la compagnie celebre don't il a ete le digne organe, et des grands
hommes don't il s'est rendu l'egal en devenant leur panegyriste.

D'Alembert, Eloge de la Motte, p. 279. NOTE XIII. VERSE 302.
No great Examples rise, but many a Rule. Before the appearance of Bossu's
celebrated treatise on Epic poetry, the French had a similar work written in
Latin. The learned Jesuit Mambrun published, in 1652, a quarto volume,
entitled, Dissertatio Peripatetica de Epico Carmine. His Dissertation is
founded on the principles of Aristotle, whom he considers as infallible
authority; and he introduces the Greek Philosopher to decide the following very
curious question, which he argues with becoming gravity, Whether the action of
a woman can be sufficiently splendid to prove a proper subject for an Epic
poem. -- Having reasoned on this delicate point, with more learning than
gallantry, he thus concludes the debate: Congruenter magis finem huic
quaestioni ponere non licet, quam verbis Aristotelis capite 15 Poeticae, ubi de
moribus disputat, (...); -- id est, secunda proprietas morum est, ut sint
congruentes, ut esse fortem mos est aliquis; at non congruit mulieri fortem
esse aut terribilem ut vertit Riccobonus, vel prudentem ut Pacius. The latter
interpretation of the word (...) would render the decision of these
Philosophers very severe indeed on the Female character, by supposing it
incapable of displaying both fortitude and prudence. -- The Fair Sex have found
an advocate, on this occasion, in a French Epic Poet. The famous Chapelain, in
the preface to his unfortunate Pucelle, has very warmly attacked these
ungallant maxims of Mambrun and Aristotle. In speaking of certain critics, who
had censured the choice of his subject, before the publication of his poem, he
says, Ceux-cy, jurant sur le text d'Aristote, maintiennent que la femme est
une erreur de la nature, qui ayant toujours intention de fair un homme,
s'arreste souvent en chemin, et se voit contrainte, par la resistance de la
matiere, de laisser son dessein imparfait. Ils tienne^^t la force corporelle
tellement necessaire, dans la composition d'un heroes, que quand il n'y auroit
autre defaut a reprocher a la femme, ils luy en refuseroient le nom, pour cela
seulement, qu'elle n'a pas la vigueur d'un Athlete, et que la mollesse de sa
complexion l'empesche de pouvoir durer au travail. Ils n'estiment ce Sex
capable d'aucune pensee heroique, dans la creance que l'esprit suit le
temperament du corpse, et que, dans le corpse de la femme, l'esprit ne peut rien
concevoir, qui ne se sent de sa foiblesse. -- Ces Messieurs me pardonneront,
toutefois, si je leur dis qu'ils ne considerent pas trop bien quelle est la
nature de la virtue heroique, qu'ils en definissent l'essence, par un de ses
moindres accidens, et qu'ils en font plutost une virtue brutale, qu'une virtue
divine. -- Ils se devroient souvenir que cette virtue n'a presque rien a fair
avec le corpse, et qu'elle consiste, non dans les efforts d'un Milon de Crotone,
ou l'esprit n'a aucune part, mais en ceux des ames nees pour les grandes
chooses; quand par une ardeur plusqu' human, else s'elevent audessus
d'elles-mesmes; qu'elles forment quelque dessein, don't l'utilite est aussi
grande que la difficulte, et qu'elles choisissent les moyens de l'executer avec
constance et hauteur de courage. Pour prevenus qu'ils soient en faveurs des
hommes, je ne pense pas qu'ils voulussent attribuer a leur ame un seul
avantage, auquel l'ame de la femme ne pust aspirer, ni fair deux especes des
deux sexes, desquels la raison de tous les sages n'a fait qu'une jusqu'icy --
je ne croy pas non plus qu'ils imaginent que les vertus morales ayent leur
siege ailleurs, que dans la volonte, ou dans l'entendement. Mais si else y ont
leur siege, et si l'on ne peut dire que ces deux facultes soient autres, dans
l'ame de la femme que dans l'ame de l'homme, ils ne peuvent, sans absurdite,
accorder une de ces vertus a l' homme, et ne l' accorder pas a la femme. En
effet, cette belle pensee d'Aristote qui a done occasion a leur erreur, est si
peu physique, qu'elle fait plus de tort a la philosophy du Lycee, qu'elle
n'appuye l'opinion de ceux que nous combattons." Chapelain then enters into an
historical defense of Female dignity, and opposes the authority of Plato to
that of Aristotle, concerning the propriety of woman's ever appearing on the
great theater of active life. Happy had he supported the Female cause as
forcibly, in the execution of his poem, as in the arguments of his preface: but
Chapelain was unfortunately one of the many examples, which every country
affords, that the most perfect union of virtue and erudition is utterly
insufficient to form a Poet; and, as he had the ill fate to be persecuted by
the pitiless rigor of Boileau, his inharmonious poem can never sink into a
desirable oblivion. The treatise of Mambrun seems to have excited, among the
French, an eagerness to distinguish themselves in the field of Epic poetry; for
several Epic poems were published in France in a few years after that work
appeared; but most of them, and particularly those on scriptural subjects, were
hardly ever known to exist.

Le Jonas inconnu seche dans la poussiere,
Le David imprime n'a point vu la lumiere,
Le Moise commence a moisir par les bords.
BOILEAU, Sat. ix. The Alaric of Scudery, and the Clovis of Desmarests, can
scarce be reckoned more fortunate; but in this band of unsuccessful Epic
writers, there was one Poet, of whom even the severe Boileau could not allow
himself to speak ill; this was Le Moine, the author of St. Louis. The Satirist
being asked, why he had never mentioned the poetry of Le Moine? replied with
the two following verses, parodied from Corneille, Il s'est trop eleve pour en
dire du mal,
Il s'est trop egare pour en dire du bien.


The judicious and candid Heyne has bestowed considerable applause on Le Moine,
in one of his notes to the 6th book of Virgil, where he examines the different
methods by which the Epic Poets have introduced their various pictures of
futurity. From his account, Le Moine excels in this article. I can speak only
from the opinion of this learned Critic, for the neglected French Poet is
become so rare, that I have sought in vain for a copy of his work. -- The
number of obscure Epic writers in France is very trifling, compared to those
which Italy has produced; the Italians have been indefatigable in this species
of composition, and, as if they had resolved to leave no Hero unsung, their
celebrated Novelist, Giraldi Cinthio has written an Epic poem, in twenty-six
cantos, on the exploits of Hercules.

NOTE XIV. VERSE 304.
Keen Boileau shall not want his proper praise. Nicolas Boileau Despreaux was
born in or near Paris, for it is a contested point, on the first of November
1636, and died in March 1711 of a dropsy, the very disease which terminated the
life of his English rival. The Lutrin of Boileau, still considered by some
French Critics of the present time as the best poem to which France has given
birth, was first published in 1674. It is with great reason and justice that
Voltaire confesses the Lutrin inferior to the Rape of the Lock. Few Poets can
be so properly compared as Pope and Boileau; and, wherever their writings will
admit of comparison, we may, without any national partiality, adjudge the
superiority to the English Bard. These two great authors resembled each other
as much in the integrity of their lives, as in the subjects and execution of
their several compositions. There are two actions recorded of Boileau, which
sufficiently prove that the inexorable Satirist had a most generous and
friendly heart; when Patru, the celebrated Advocate, who was ruined by his
passion for literature, found himself under the painful necessity of selling
his expensive library, and had almost agreed to part with it for a moderate
sum, Boileau gave him a much superior price; and, after paying the money, added
this condition to the purchase, that Patru should retain, during his life, the
possession of the books. The succeeding instance of the Poet's generosity is
yet nobler: -- when it was rumoured at court that the King intended to retrench
the pension of Corneille, Boileau hastened to Madame de Montespan, and said,
that his Sovereign, equitable as he was, could not, without injustice, grant a
pension to an author like himself, just ascending Parnassus, and take it from
Corneille, who had so long been seated on the summit; that he entreated her,
for the honor of the King, to prevail on his Majesty rather to strike off his
pension, than to withdraw that reward from a man whose title to it was
incomparably greater; and that he should more easily console himself under the
loss of that distinction, than under the affliction of seeing it taken away
from such a Poet as Corneille. This magnanimous application had the success
which it deserved, and it appears the more noble, when we recollect that the
rival of Corneille was the intimate friend of Boileau.

The long and unreserved intercourse which subsisted between our Poet and
Racine was highly beneficial and honorable to both. The dying farewell of the
latter is the most expressive eulogy on the private character of Boileau: Je
regard comme un bonheur pour moi de mourir avaunt vous, said the tender Racine,
in taking a final leave of his faithful and generous friend.

NOTE XV. VERSE 313.
Nor, gentle Gresset, shall thy sprightly rhyme.] This elegant and amiable
writer was born at Amiens, and educated in the society of the Jesuits, to whom
he has paid a grateful compliment in bidding them adieu. At the age of
twenty-six he published his Ver-vert, a poem in four cantos, which commemorates

La cause infortunee
D'un Perroquet non moins brillant qu' Enee:
Non moins devot, plus malheureux que lui.
Voltaire has spoken invidiously of this delightful performance; but a spirited
French Critic has very justly vindicated the merits of Gresset in the following
remark: -- Le Ver-vert sera toujours un poem charmant et inimitable, sans
souiller sa plume par l'impiete et la license qui deshonorent celle de l'auteur
de La Pucelle, le Poet a su y repandre un agreement, une fraicheur et une
vivacite de coloris, qui le rendent aussi piquant dans les details, qu'il est
rich et ingenieux dans la fiction. On placera toujours cet agreeable badinage
parmi les productions originales, propres a fair aimer des etrangers la gaiete
Francoise en ecartant toute mauvaise idee de nos moeurs.

NOTE XVI. VERSE 325.
See lovely Boccage, in ambition strong.] Madame du Boccage is known to the
English reader as the correspondent of Lord Chesterfield. This ingenious and
spirited Lady has written three poems of the Epic kind -- Le Paradis Terrestre,
in six cantos, from Milton; La Mort d'Abel, in five cantos, from Gesner; and a
more original composition, in ten cantos, on the exploits of Columbus. I have
alluded to a passage in the last poem, where Zama, the daughter of an Indian
Chief, is thus described: Comme Eve, elle etoit nue; une egale innocence
L'offre aux regards sans honte, et voile ses appas;
Les Graces qu'elle ignore accompagnent ses pas,
Et pour tout vetement, en formant sa parure,
D'un plumage azure couvrirent sa ceinture.


The works of this elegant female Poet contain an animated version of Pope's
Temple of Fame. And she has added to her poetry an account of her travels
through England, Holland, and Italy, in a series of entertaining letters,
addressed to Madame du Perron, her sister.

NOTE XVII. VERSE 344.
To swell the glory of her great Voltaire.] Though the Henriade has been
frequently reprinted, and the partisans of Voltaire have endeavored to make it
a national point of honor to support its reputation, it seems at length to be
sinking under that neglect and oblivion, which never fail to overtake every
feeble offspring of the Epic Muse. Several of our most eminent Critics have
attacked this performance with peculiar severity, and some have condemned it on
the most opposite principles, merely because it does not coincide with their
respective systems. Their sentence has been passed only in short and incidental
remarks; but a French writer, inflamed by personal animosity against Voltaire,
has raised three octavo volumes on the defects of this single poem. Mr.
Clement, in his "Entretiens sur le Poem Epique relativement a la Henriade,"
has endeavored to prove it utterly deficient in all the essential points of
Epic poetry; -- in the structure of its general plan, in the conduct of its
various parts, in sentiment, in character, in style. His work indeed displays
an acrimonious detestation of the Poet whom he examines; and perhaps there is
hardly any human composition which could support the scrutiny of so rigid an
inquisitor: the Henriade is utterly unequal to it; for in many articles we are
obliged to confess, that the justice of the Critic is not inferior to his
severity. He discovers, in his dissection of the Poem, the skill of an
anatomist, with the malignity of an assassin. If any thing can deserve such
rigorous treatment, it is certainly the artifice of Voltaire, who, in his Essay
on Epic Poetry, has attempted, with much ingenuity, to sink the reputation of
all the great Epic Writers, that he might raise himself to their level; an
attempt in which no author can ultimately succeed; for, as D'Alembert has
admirably remarked on a different occasion, Le public laissera l'amour propre
de chaque ecrivain fair son plaidoyer, rira de leurs efforts, non de genie,
mais de raisonnement, pour hausser leur place, et finira par mettre chacun a la
sienne.

NOTE XVIII. VERSE 475.
And, shrouded in a mist of moral spleen.] It seems to be the peculiar
infelicity of Pope, that his moral virtues have had a tendency to diminish his
poetical reputation. Possessing a benevolent spirit, and wishing to make the
art, to which he devoted his life, as serviceable as he could to the great
interests of mankind, he soon quitted the higher regions of poetry, for the
more level, and more frequented field of Ethics and of Satire. He declares,
with a noble pride arising from the probity of his intention, That not in
Fancy's maze he wandered long,
But stooped to truth, and moraliz'd his song.
The severity of Criticism has from hence inferred, that his imagination was
inferior to the other faculties of his mind, and that he possessed not that
vigor of genius which might enable him to rank with our more sublime and
pathetic Bards. This inference appears to me extremely defective both in
candor and in reason; it would surely be more generous, and I will venture to
add, more just, to assign very different causes for his having latterly applied
himself to moral and satyric composition. If his preceding poems displayed only
a moderate portion of fancy and of tenderness, we might indeed very fairly
conjecture, that he quitted the kind of poetry, where these qualities are
particularly required, because Nature directed him to shine only as the Poet of
reason. -- But his earlier productions will authorize an opposite conclusion.
At an age when few authors have produced any capital work, Pope gave the world
two poems; one the offspring of imagination, and the other of sensibility,
which will ever stand at the head of the two poetical classes to which they
belong: his Rape of the Lock, and his Eloise, have nothing to fear from any
rivals, either of past or of future time. When a writer has displayed such
early proofs of exquisite fancy, and of tender enthusiasm, those great
constituents of the real Poet, ought we not to regret that he did not give a
greater scope and freer exercise to these qualities, rather than to assert that
he did not possess them in a superlative degree? Why then, it may be asked, did
he confine himself to compositions in which these have little share? The life
and character of Pope will perfectly explain the reasons, why he did not always
follow the higher suggestions of his own natural genius. He had entertained an
opinion, that by stooping to truth, and employing his talents on the vices and
follies of the passing time, he should be most able to benefit mankind. The
idea was perhaps ill-founded, but his conduct in consequence of it was
certainly noble. Its effects however were most unhappy; for it took from him
all his enjoyment of life, and may injure, in some degree, his immortal
reputation: by suffering his thoughts to dwell too much on knaves and fools, he
fell into the splenetic delusion, that the world is nothing but a compound of
vice and folly; and from hence he has been reproached for supposing that all
human merit was confined to himself, and to a few of his most intimate
correspondents.

There was an amiable peculiarity in the character of Pope, which had great
influence both on his conduct and composition -- he embraced the sentiments of
those he loved with a kind of superstitious regard; his imagination and his
judgment were perpetually the dupes of an affectionate heart: it was this which
led him, at the request of his idol Bolingbroke, to write a sublime poem on
metaphysical ideas which he did not perfectly comprehend; it was this which
urged him almost to quarrel with Mr. Allen, in compliance with the caprices of
a female friend; it was this which induced him, in the warmth of gratitude, to
follow the absurd hints of Warburton with all the blindness of infatuated
affection. Whoever examines the life and writings of Pope with a minute and
unprejudiced attention, will find that his excellencies, both as a Poet and a
Man, were peculiarly his own; and that his failings were chiefly owing to the
ill judgment, or the artifice, of his real and pretended friends. The lavish
applause and the advice of his favorite Atterbury, was perhaps the cause of
his preserving the famous character of Addison, which, finely written as it is,
all the lovers of Pope must wish him to have suppressed. Few of his friends had
integrity or frankness sufficient to persuade him, that his satires would,
destroy the tranquillity of his life, and cloud the luster of his fame: yet, to
the honor of Lyttelton, be it remembered, that he suggested such ideas to the
Poet, in the verses which he wrote to him from Rome, with all the becoming zeal
of enlightened friendship: No more let meaner Satire dim the rays
That flow majestic from thy nobler bays!
In all the flowery paths of Pindus stray,
But shun that thorny, that unpleasing way!
Nor, when each soft, engaging Muse is thine,
Address the least attractive of the Nine!


This generous admonition did not indeed produce its intended effect, for other
counselors had given a different bias to the mind of the Poet, and the
malignity of his enemies had exasperated his temper; yet he afterward turned
his thoughts toward the composition of a national Epic poem, and possibly in
consequence of the hint which this Epistle of Lyttelton contains. The intention
was formed too late, for it arose in his decline of life. Had he possessed
health and leisure to execute such a work, I am persuaded it would have proved
a glorious acquisition to the literature of our country: the subject indeed
which he had chosen must be allowed to have an unpromising appearance; but the
opinion of Addison concerning his Sylphs, which was surely honest, and not
invidious, may teach us hardly ever to decide against the intended works of a
superior genius. Yet in all the Arts, we are perpetually tempted to pronounce
such decisions. I have frequently condemned subjects which my friend Romney had
selected for the pencil; but in the sequel, my opinion only proved that I was
near-sighted in those regions of imagination, where his keener eyes commanded
all the prospect.

NOTES TO THE FOURTH EPISTLE.
NOTE I. VERSE 103.
PROCEED, ye Sisters of the tuneful Shell.] For the advice which I have thus
ventured to give such of my fair readers as have a talent for poetry, I shall
produce them a much higher poetical authority. In the age of Petrarch, an
Italian Lady, named Giustina Perrot, was desirous of distinguishing herself by
this pleasing accomplishment; but the remarks of the world, which represented
it as improper for her sex, discouraged her so far, that she was almost tempted
to relinquish her favorite pursuit. In her doubts on this point, she consulted
the celebrated Poet of her country in an elegant Sonnet; and received his
answer on the interesting subject in the same poetical form. I shall add the
two Sonnets, with an imitation of each.

IO vorrei pur drizzar queste mie piume
Cola, Signor, dove il desio n'invita,
E dopo morte rimaner' in vita
Col chiaro di virtute inclyto lume
Ma' volgo inerte, che dal rio costume
Vinto, ha d' ogni suo ben la via smarrita,
Come degna di biasmo ogn' hor m' addita
Ch' ir tenti d' Elicona al sacro fiume.
All ago, al fuso, piu ch' al lauro, o al mirto,
Come che qui non sia la gloria mia,
Vuol ch' habbia sempre questa mente intesa.
Dimmi tu hormai, che per piu dritta via
A Parnasso to en vai, nobile spirto,
Dovro dunque lasciar si degna impresa?
LA gola; e'l sonno, e l' oziose piume
Hanno del mondo ogni virtu sbandita,
Ond' e dal corso suo quasi smarrita
Nostra natura vinta dal costume:
Ed e si spento ogni benigno lume
Del ciel, per cui s' informa umana vita,
Che per cosa mirabile s' addita
Chi vuol far d' Elicona nascer fiume.
Qual vaghezza di lauro, qual di mirto?
Povera e nuda vai filosofia,
Dice la turba al vil guadagno intesa.
Pochi compagni avrai per l'altra via
Tanto ti prego piu, gentile spirto,
Non lasciar la magnanima tua impresa!
THE SONNET OF GIUSTINA TO PETRARCH.
GLADLY would I exchange inglorious ease
For future fame, the Poet's fond desire!
And still to live, in spite of death, aspire
By Virtue's light, that darkness cannot seize*
But, stupefied by Custom's blank decrees,
The idle vulgar, void of liberal fire,
Bid me, with scorn, from Helicon retire,
And rudely blame my generous hope to please.
Distaffs, not laurels, to your sex belong,
They cry -- as honor were beyond our view:
To such low cares they with my spirit bent.
Say thou! who marchest, 'mid the favored few,
To high Parnassus, with triumphant song,
Should I abandon such a fair intent?
THE ANSWER OF PETRARCH.
LUXURIOUS pleasure, and lethargic ease
Have deaden'd in the world each bright desire:
Our thoughts no more with Nature's force aspire;
Custom's cold powers the drooping fancy seize:
So lost each light that taught the soul to please,
Each heavenly spark of life-directing fire,
That all, who join the Heliconian choir,
Are frantic deemed by Folly's dull decrees.
What charms, what worth to Laurel-wreaths belong?
Naked and poor Philosophy we view,
Exclaims the crowd, on sordid gain intent. --
Associates in thy path thou wilt find but few;
The more, I pray thee, Nymph of graceful song,
Indulge thy spirit in its noble bent!
NOTE II. VERSE 210.
As wounded Learning blushes to recite!] Milton sold the copy of Paradise Lost
for the sum of five pounds, on the condition of receiving fifteen pounds more
at three subsequent periods, to be regulated by the sale of the Poem. -- For
the ceiling at Whitehall, Rubens received, three thousand pounds.

NOTE III. VERSE 298.
Receive the Laurel from imperial Charles!] Ariosto is said to have been
publicly crowned with laurel at Mantua, by the Emperor Charles the Vth, toward
the end of the year 1532. This fact has been disputed by various writers, but
it seems to be sufficiently established by the researches of Mazzuchelli.

The custom of crowning Poets with laurel is almost as ancient as poetry
itself, says the Abbe du Resnel, in his Recherches sur les Poets couronnez, a
work which contains but scanty information on this curious topic. Petrarch is
generally supposed to have revived this ancient solemnity, which had been
abolished as a pagan institution in the reign of the Emperor Theodosius. It
appears however, from two passages in the writings of Boccacio, that Dante had
entertained serious thoughts of this honorable distinction, which his exile
precluded him from receiving, as he chose, says his Biographer, to be crowned
only in his native city.

An amusing volume might be written on the honors which have been paid to
Poets in different ages, and in various parts of the world. It is remarkable,
that the most unpolished nations have been the most lavish in rewarding their
Bards. There are two instances on record, in which poetical talents have raised
their possessors even to sovereign dominion. The Scythians chose the Poet
Thamyris for their king, though he was not a native of their country, (...).
Hist. Poet. Script. Edit. Gale, p. 250. Saxo Grammaticus begins the sixth book
of his History by relating, that the Danes bestowed their vacant diadem on the
Poet Hiarnus, as a reward for his having composed the best epitaph on their
deceased sovereign Frotho. From the four Latin verses which the Historian has
given us, as a translation of this extraordinary epitaph, we may venture to
affirm, that the poetical monarch obtained his crown on very easy conditions.

NOTE IV. VERSE 314.
For him her fountains gush with golden streams.] Of the great wealth which
flowed into the hands of this extraordinary Poet, his friend and biographer
Montalvan has given a particular account. This author concludes that Lope de
Vega gained by his dramatic works alone a sum nearly equal to 20,000 pounds
sterling; the revenue arising from the posts he held, and from his pension, was
very considerable. His opulence was much increased by the most splendid
instances of private liberality. He received many costly presents from various
characters to whom he was personally unknown; and he was himself heard to say,
in speaking of his generous patron, that the Duke of Sessa alone had given him,
at different periods of his life, sums almost amounting to six thousand pounds.

It must be confessed, that the noble patrons of English poetry have not
equalled this example of Spanish munificence, even if we admit, the truth of
our traditionary anecdotes concerning the generosity of Lord Southampton to
Shakespeare, and of Sir Philip Sidney to Spenser. Considering the liberality
for which our nation is so justly celebrated, it is remarkable, that not a
single English Poet appears to have been enriched by our monarchs: yet Spenser
had every claim to the bounty of Elizabeth; he sung her praises in a strain
which might gratify her pride; and of all who have flattered the great, he may
justly be considered as the most worthy of reward. His song was the tribute of
his heart as well as of his fancy, and the sex of his idol may be said to
purify his incense from all the offensive particles of servile adulation. The
neglect which he experienced from the vain, imperious, and ungrateful
Elizabeth, appears the more striking, when we recollect, that her lovely rival,
the beautiful and unfortunate Queen of Scots, signalized her superior
generosity by a magnificent present of plate to the French Poet Ronsard. This
neglected Bard was once the darling of France, and perhaps equalled Lope de
Vega in the honors which he received: his sovereign, Charles the Ninth,
composed some elegant verses in his praise, and the city of Toulouse presented
him with a Minerva of massive silver.

If our princes and nobles have not equalled those of other kingdoms in
liberality to the great Poets of their country, England may yet boast the name
of a private gentleman, who discovered in this respect a most princely spirit;
no nation, either ancient or modern, can produce an example of munificence more
truly noble than the annual gratuity which Akenside received from Mr. Dyson; a
tribute of generous and affectionate admiration, endeared to its worthy
possessor by every consideration which could make it honorable both to himself
and to his patron!

It has been lately lamented by an elegant and accomplished writer, who had too
much reason for the complaint, that the profession of Literature, by far the
most laborious of any, leads to no real benefit. Experience undoubtedly proves,
that it has a general tendency to impoverish its votaries; and the legislators
of every country would act perhaps a wise, at all events an honorable part, if
they corrected this tendency, by establishing public emoluments for such as
eminently distinguish themselves in the various branches of science. It is
surely possible to form such an establishment, which, without proving a
national burden, might aggrandize the literary glory of the nation, by
preserving her men of letters from the evils so frequently connected with their
pursuits, by securing, to those who deserve it, the possession of ease and
honor, without damping their emulation, or destroying their independence.

NOTES TO THE FIFTH EPISTLE.
NOTE I. VERSE 76.
THE loose Petronius gave the maxim birth.] Aristotle has said but little, in
his Poetics, concerning that weighty point, which has so much employed and
embarrassed the modern Critics -- the machinery of the Epic poem; and the
little which he has said might rather furnish an argument for its exclusion,
than justify its use. But Rome, in her most degenerate days, produced a writer,
to whose authority, contemptible as it is, most frequent appeals have been made
in this curious literary question. In almost every modern author who has
touched, however slightly, on Epic poetry, we may find at least some part of
the following sentence from Petronius Arbiter: -- Ecce, Belli civilis ingens
opus quisquis attigerit, nisi plenus litteris, sub onere labetur. Non enim res
gestae versibus comprehendendae sunt, quod long melius historici faciunt; sed
per ambages, deorumque ministeria, and fabulosum sententiarum tormentum
praecipitandus est liber spiritus; ut potius furentis animi vaticinatio
appareat, quam religiosae orationis sub testibus fides.

These remarks on the necessity of celestial agents, were evidently, made to
depreciate the Pharsalia of Lucan; and Petronius may be called a fair Critic,
as Pope said of Milbourne, on his opposition to Dryden, because he produces his
own poetry in contrast to that which he condemns. His specimen of the manner in
which he thought an Epic poem should be conducted, sufficiently proves the
absurdity of his criticism; for how insipid is the fable in those verses which
he has opposed to the Pharsalia, when compared to the first book of Lucan! Yet
the Epic composition of Petronius has not wanted admirers: a Dutch Commentator
is bold enough to say, that he prefers this single rhapsody to three hundred
volumes of such poetry as Lucan's: an opinion which can only lead us to exclaim
with Boileau, Un sot trouve toujours un plus sot qui l'admire.

If men of letters, in the age of Lucan, differed in their sentiments
concerning machinery, the great changes that have since happened in the world,
and the disquisitions which have appeared on the subject, are very far from
having reconciled the judgment of modern writers on this important article. Two
eminent Critics of the present time have delivered opinions on this topic so
singularly opposite to each other, that I shall transcribe them both.

In a theatrical entertainment, which employs both the eye and the ear, it
would be a gross absurdity to introduce upon the stage superior Beings in a
visible shape. There is not place for such objection in an Epic poem; and
Boileau, with many other Critics, declares strongly for that fort of machinery
in an Epic poem. But waving authority, which is apt to impose upon the
judgment, let us draw what light we can from reason. I begin with a preliminary
remark, that this matter is but indistinctly handled by Critics, The poetical
privilege of animating insensible objects for enlivening a description, is very
different from what is termed machinery, where deities, angels, devils, or
other supernatural powers, are introduced as real personages, mixing in the
action, and contributing to the catastrophe; and yet these two things are
constantly jumbled together in the reasoning. The former is founded on a
natural principle; but can the latter claim the same authority? So far from it,
that nothing is more unnatural. Its effects at the same time are deplorable.
First, it gives an air of fiction to the whole, and prevents that impression of
reality which is requisite to interest our affections, and to move our
passions; which of itself is sufficient to explode machinery, whatever
entertainment it may afford to readers of a fantastic taste or irregular
imagination. And next, were it possible, by disguising the fiction, to delude
us into a notion of reality, which I think can hardly be, an insuperable
objection would still remain, which is, that the aim or end of an Epic poem can
never be attained in any perfection where machinery is introduced; for an
evident reason, that virtuous emotions cannot be raised successfully, but by
the actions of those who are endued with passions and affections like our own,
that is, by human actions: and as for moral instruction, it is clear that none
can be drawn from Beings who act not upon the same principles with us. Homer,
it is true, introduces the Gods into his fable; but the religion of his country
authorized that liberty; it being an article in the Grecian creed, that the
Gods often interpose visibly and bodily in human affairs. I must, however,
observe, that Homer's Deities do no honor to his poems. Fictions that
transgress the bounds of nature seldom have a good effect; they may inflame the
imagination for a moment, but will not be relished by any person of a correct
taste. They may be of some use to the lower rank of writers; but an author of
genius has much finer materials of nature's production for elevating his
subject, and making it interesting. -- Voltaire, in his Essay upon Epic Poetry,
talking of the Pharsalia, observes judiciously, that the proximity of time, the
notoriety of events, the character of the age, enlightened and Political,
joined with the solidity of Lucan's subject, deprived him of all liberty of
poetical fiction. Is it not amazing, that a Critic who reasons so justly with
respect to others, can be so blind with respect to himself? Voltaire, not
satisfied to enrich his language with images drawn from invisible and superior
Beings, introduces them into the action. In the sixth canto of the Henriade,
St. Louis appears in person, and terrifies the soldiers; in the seventh canto,
St. Louis sends the God of Sleep to Henry; and in the tenth, the demons of
Discord, Fanaticism, War, etc. assist Aumale in a single combat with Turenne,
and are driven away by a good angel brandishing the sword of God. To blend such
fictitious personages in the same action with. mortals, makes a bad figure at
any rate, and is intolerable in a history so recent as that of Henry IV. This
singly is sufficient to make the Henriade a short-lived poem, were it otherwise
possessed of every beauty. Elements of Criticism, vol. ii. p. 389, 4th.
edition. The Pagan Gods and Gothic Fairies were equally out of credit when
Milton wrote. He did well therefore to supply their room with Angels and
Devils. If these too should wear out of the popular creed (and they seem in a
hopeful way, from the liberty some late Critics have taken with them) I know
not what other expedients the Epic Poet might have recourse to; but this I know
-- the pomp of verse, the energy of description, and even the finest moral
paintings, would stand him in no stead. Without admiration (which cannot be
effected but by the mavelous of celestial intervention, I mean the agency of
superior natures really existing, or by the illusion of the fancy taken to be
so) no Epic poem can be long-lived. I am not afraid to instance in the Henriade
itself, which, notwithstanding the elegance of the composition, will in a short
time be no more read than the Gondibert of Sir W. Davenant, and for the same
reason. Letters on Chivalry and Romance, Letter X. I have thus ventured to
confront these eminent critical antagonists, that, while they engage and
overthrow each other, we may observe the injustice produced by the spirit of
systematical criticism, even in authors most respectable for their talents and
erudition. -- Here is the unfortunate Voltaire placed between two critical
fires, which equally destroy him. The first Critic asserts that the Henriade
must be short-lived, because the Poet has introduced invisible and superior
agents; -- the second denounces the same fate against it, because it wants the
agency of superior natures: yet surely every reader of poetry, who is not
influenced by any particular system, will readily allow, that if Voltaire had
treated his subject with true Epic spirit in all other points, neither the
introduction nor the absence of St. Louis could be singly sufficient to plunge
the Henriade in oblivion. Indeed the learned author, who has spoken in so
peremptory a manner concerning the necessity of supernatural agents to preserve
the existence of an Epic poem, appears rather unfortunate in the two examples
by which he endeavors to support his doctrine; for the Epic poems both of
Davenant and Voltaire have sufficient defects to account for any neglect which
may be their lot, without considering the article of Machinery.

If I have warmly opposed any decisions of this exalted Critic, it is from a
persuasion (in which I may perhaps be mistaken) that some of his maxims have a
strong tendency to injure an art highly dear to us both; an art on which his
genius and learning have cast many rays of pleasing and of useful light.

NOTE II. VERSE 166.
But howling dogs the fancied Orpheus tore.] This anecdote of Neanthus, the son
of King Pittacus, is related by Lucian. The curious reader may find it in the
second volume of Dr. Francklin's spirited translation of that lively author,
page 355 of the quarto edition.

NOTE III. VERSE 276.
And spotless Laurels in that field be won.] The Indian mythology, as it has
lately been illustrated in the writings of Mr. Holwell, is finely calculated to
answer the purpose of any poetical genius who may wish to introduce new
machinery into the serious Epic Poem. Besides the powerful charm of novelty, it
would have the advantage of not clashing with our national religion; for the
endeavors of Mr. Holwell to reconcile the ancient and pure doctrine of Bramah
with the dispensation of Christ, have so far succeeded, that if his system does
not satisfy a theologist, it certainly affords a sufficient basis for the
structure of a Poet. In perusing his account of the Indian scripture, every
reader of imagination may, I think, perceive, that the Shastah might supply a
poetical spirit with as rich a mass of ideal treasure as fancy could with to
work upon. -- An Epic Poet, desirous of laying the scene of his action in
India, would be more embarrassed to find interesting Heroes than proper
Divinities. -- Had justice and generosity inspired and guided that English
valor, which has signalized itself on the plains of Indostan; had the arms of
our country been employed to deliver the native Indians from the oppressive
usurpation of the Mohammedan powers; such exploits would present to the Epic
Muse a subject truly noble, and the mythology of the East might enrich it with
the most splendid decorations. Whether it be possible or not to find such a
subject in the records of our Indian history, I leave the reader to determine.
-- Our great Historian of the Roman empire has intimated, in a note to the
first volume of his immortal work, that the wonderful expedition of Odin, which
deduces the enmity of the Goths and Romans from so memorable a cause, might
supply the noble groundwork of an Epic poem. The idea is certainly both just
and splendid. Had Gray been ever tempted to engage in such a work, he would
probably have convinced us, that the Northern mythology has still sufficient
power to seize and enchant the imagination, as much in Epic as in Lyric
composition.

It may amuse our speculative Critics, to consider how far the religious Gothic
fables should be introduced or rejected, to render such a performance most
interesting to a modern reader. Few judges would agree in their sentiments on
the question; and perhaps the great dispute concerning Machinery cannot be
fairly adjusted, till some happy genius shall possess ambition and perseverance
enough to execute two Epic poems, in the one adopting, and in the other
rejecting, supernatural agents; for Reason alone is by no means an infallible
conductor in the province of Fancy; and in the poetical as well as the
philosophical world, experiment is the surest guide to truth.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
EPISTLE II.
Ver. 3, for where read whence -- 282, for Critic read Critics
EPISTLE IV.
Ver. 356, for keep read heap. Ver. 372, at the end of the line insert a mark
of Interrogation.
ERRATA IN THE NOTES.
Page 133, line 3, for wore read bore -- 181, -- 10, for Ninus read Nisus --
201, -- 8, for neglio read meglio -- for gindicio read giudicio -- 208, -- 28,
for Aranco read Arauco; and line ult. for Arancanians read Araucanians -- 217,
etc. for Lincoza read Lincoya -- 223, line 20, for Lantaro read Lautaro. -- The
Reader is desired to correct this name in different pages, as it is repeatedly
misprinted. -- 286, line 2, for was read were

