AN ADDRESS TO THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND: BEING THE PROTEST OF A PRIVATE PERSON
Against every SUSPENSION OF LAW that is liable to injure or endanger PERSONAL
SECURITY.

WHEREIN IS SHOWN That the Claim of personal Protection and Relief from unjust
Imprisonment, BY DUE PROCESS OF THE LAW, (and that "WITHOUT DELAY,") is a
"COMMON RIGHT," so indispensably due to all innocent Persons, that it cannot be
set aside, or withdrawn from any that are so, (who demand it,) without
fundamentally subverting the political Constitution, or legal Establishment of
these Kingdoms, and thereby rendering the Advisers and Promoters of such a
Measure guilty of HIGH TREASON!

"It is the Duty of every Individual whatsoever to aid PEACE and PUBLIC
JUSTICE," -- agreeable to a MAXIM of the Law -- "UNUSQUISQUE PACI ET JUSTITIAE
PUBLICAE TENETUR SUCCURRERE." "Those Men, who set aside" (or suspend) "the Law
of the Land, do thereby incur a perpetual Stain of Infamy!" -- For it is a
fundamental MAXIM of the Constitution -- " LEGEM TERRAE amittentes perpetuam
infamiae notam inde merito incurrunt." LONDON: PRINTED IN THE YEAR
M.DCC.LXXVIII.

TO THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND.
COMMON CHARITY will induce us to believe that the advocates for an occasional
suspension of the Habeas Corpus laws are not really aware of the dangerous
tendency of such a measure; and therefore when the author of this Protest (in
the following pages) charges the advisers and promoters of the suspension with
high treason against the king and state, he professes to aim the severity of
his censure chiefly against the measure itself, (in order to express the real
danger and malignity of its effect,) rather than against the persons of those
men who, inadvertently, or through inattention to the fundamental or
indispensable principles of law, have promoted it: and therefore to those
persons, jointly with all the other People of England, (as being equally
interested with the rest in the effects of such a measure) the author of this
Protest now addresses himself, not to promote a spirit of vengeance and
personal resentment, but merely for the purposes of warning and instruction to
all parties, that they may cordially unite in restoring the due limitations of
government, on which depends the common safety both of king and people.

The Advocates for an occasional suspension of the law, perhaps, will allege,
that the new temporary powers (whatever they may happen to be) which would
thereby be thrown into the hands of the persons entrusted with the
administration of government, are by no means intended to take effect against
the People of England, that are resient in this island, but only against such
persons as have been guilty of treason in foreign parts (in America, let us
suppose, for instance) or on the high seas, or for piracy; and therefore they
conceive, that the free inhabitants of this island could not be injured by so
limited a suspension of the laws, especially if they should admit in their bill
an additional clause of limitation, proposed even by an opposite party, by way
of security; which we will suppose to be couched in the following terms, viz.
That nothing herein is intended, or shall be construed, to extend to the case
of any other prisoner or prisoners than such as shall have BEEN OUT OF THE
REALM AT THE TIME OR TIMES OF THE OFFENSE OR OFFENSES wherewith he or they
shall be charged, or of which they shall be suspected. Such a clause as this
seems, on a slight examination, to secure the inhabitants of this island from
the danger of an unlimited power, against which all true Englishmen ought to be
ever upon their guard: but, alas! so dangerous is it to stop the ordinary
course of justice and common right, or to alter the "due process of the law,"
in any cases whatsoever wherein personal liberty (the highest and most valuable
temporal object of Englishmen) is concerned, that, if we should suppose the
case of such a suspension of the laws as courtiers in general would endeavor
to obtain, were they to be entrusted with the compiling of a bill for that
purpose, and then carefully compare the said supposed bill with the
abovementioned clause of limitation, we should soon have reason to be convinced
that the security of the latter is only imaginary; and that multitudes of his
majesty's innocent and peaceable subjects would be still liable to be
oppressed, and be denied the benefits of public justice and common right, by
such a suspension of law, if they should happen to incur the displeasure of
persons in power, or be misrepresented to them by any secret enemy.

The proposed clause leaves unprotected all the nobility, gentry, and other
persons whatsoever, that have made any excursions into France, Italy, Germany,
Flanders, etc. or even to Ireland, ever since the commencement of the troubles
(whatever they might be) which occasioned an imaginary necessity, or plea, for
SUSPENDING THE LAWS. And this, perhaps, might be extended three or four years
back, and might thereby exclude from the protection of the limiting clause a
great multitude of the most respectable people of the kingdom, who might happen
to have traveled abroad during such a period. Neither does the clause protect
the merchants, traders, and other persons, that have arrived from the
West Indies, Ireland, or any other country, within such a supposed period. And
they are, surely, too numerous and respectable a body to be thus outlawed!

Add to this, that all seafaring Persons without exception (though they are the
most valuable subjects of this maritime state) would be left unprotected by
such a clause, and of course would be rendered subject to the unlimited WILL of
man, (ARBITRIUM hominis, which is the true definition of ARBITRARY POWER,)
instead of LAW! And, lastly, all other persons whatsoever are liable to suffer
the same inconveniences, if they have not kept a diary, or have not memory or
memorandums, to enable them to produce sufficient evidence of their being
actually WITHIN THIS REALM at any period of time that might be fixed upon
within the last three or four years; so that not only persons seized and taken
OUT OF THE REALM would be made liable to the effects of such a suspending act,
but all the other persons abovementioned, though they are actually RESIENT
WITHIN THE REALM.

In order to state the case for my argument as clearly as I am able, I have
here supposed the adoption of such a suspending bill as we might naturally
conceive to be proposed by any set of men in power, who are warmed by the
sunshine of court-favour till they forget that their own real interest is
inseparably connected with that of the public, and that the increase of power,
which they promote, may possibly fall into some other hands than their own. But
the hands of government must be strengthened, they would probably say; and, for
this purpose, they would be very apt to insert in their bill some discretionary
powers to enable the king and his ministers to imprison not only persons seized
and taken out of the realm, but also persons who shall be committed in any part
of his majesty's dominions for the said crimes, I mean, any crimes which I have
before supposed in stating this case, viz. High Treason in any of his majesty's
colonies or plantations in America, or ON THE HIGH SEAS, (which will include
our own coasts any where beyond low water mark,) or the crime of piracy,
without any description or limitation of place whatsoever! So that if any
innocent man (who happens not to be able to prove an alibi for every day, and
even every hour, since these troubles began) should be maliciously "charged
with" the crime of treason or piracy committed within half a mile of the
British coasts, he may be seized and imprisoned, without bail or mainprize, at
the will and pleasure of the king and council, for many months; and, at the
expiration of the limited time, (without any farther examination or opportunity
of being heard at all by his country,) his term of confinement is prolonged by
another such act, and perhaps another after that, (as evil examples beget
others,) till the time of his relief by due process of the law becomes totally
uncertain and indefinite! -- A deplorable condition this! which, in our common
law, is deemed "wretched slavery;" -- for, Misera est servitus (says the maxim)
ubi JUS est vagum aut incertum. ( Principia leg. and Aeq. p. 61.)

But the condition of the deluded subjects will be rendered still more
completely uncertain and wretched, if the compilers of the supposed suspending
act should endeavor to avail themselves of vague terms and expressions: -- for
instance, -- (in the body of the bill,) -- "Such crimes" (referring to the
crimes particularly named in the former part) instead of "the said crimes:" --
for, as "Nullum simile est idem," -- ( LIKE is not THE SAME,) -- the
expression, "such crimes," signifies only similar crimes, and not the same
crimes before expressed, whereby the power of the act would be liable to an
arbitrary extension at the will of the magistrate!

Whenever persons in power cease to be duly limited by a free parliament, they
will pay but very little regard to the grossness of the propositions which they
tender to that, once, august assembly; and therefore, if such an illegal power
should ever be usurped by any set of men, we may then expect to find many more
vague expressions in our public acts! -- We may in that case, without
improbability, suppose the penning of a suspending act to be -- not only for
such crimes, OR ANY of them, -- but also for SUSPICION of SUCH CRIMES, or any
of them, by any magistrate, etc. viz. any trading magistrate, pensioned
Middlesex justice, or other wretched time-server, that may happen to be
entrusted with a power of committing to prison. -- And in such times it will
afford a sufficient handle against any person whatsoever, if they are but
"charged with" such crimes, whether they be guilty of them or not; or even if
they be but CHARGED WITH the SUSPICION of SUCH crimes, or any of them, by ANY
magistrate, etc. -- Nothing more arbitrary or capricious can easily be
described; and yet, alas! my supposed bill by no means exceeds the bounds of
probability; for, when the baneful practice of bribery becomes triumphant, and
the very foundations of government are thoroughly corrupted, we may expect that
probability will still go farther, and that the above supposed extraordinary
powers will be farther augmented by a "non obstante," to trample down at once,
not only the Habeas Corpus Act, but all the other fences of British liberty,
national justice, and common right, on which the safety of Englishmen depends!
viz. any law, statute, or usage, to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.

The clause is indeed a common one, for the repeal of useless or indifferent
matters; but, when the effect extends to annul all the laws of personal
protection, and the common right of Englishmen to "the due process of the law,"
(which is, to be tried without delay by their country, [per legem terrae,] and,
if innocent, to be restored to freedom,) -- such a suspension, I say, of common
justice and common right is so fundamentally subversive of the British
constitution of state, that no authority of parliament can make it legal;
because it it is high treason against the king and people! and all the abettors
and promoters of such an act would thereby render themselves "eternally
infamous" in the eye of the law! -- which is declared by a constitutional
maxim: -- LEGEM TERRAE amittentes PERPETUAM INFAMIAE NOTAM inde merito
incurrunt. (3. inst. p. 221.) -- Those men, who set aside THE LAW OF THE LAND,
(which is certainly the case of those who vote for suspending it,) do thereby
incur a PERPETUAL STAIN of INFAMY!

If ever such an act, therefore, should subsist, and the promoters of it remain
in power, British subjects may amuse themselves with the name of freedom if
they please, but they will have no more real and just right to boast of their
liberty than the subjects of France or Prussia! For they would then be involved
exactly in the same uncertain and precarious condition! And, though they might
not, perhaps, for some considerable time afterward, begin to feel the
pernicious effects of a government unlimited by law, yet that would not render
their condition less base or slavish, for our common law has already stated the
condition of such as an outlawed people: -- Res est misera, ubi JUS est vagum.
Grounds and Rudiments of Law and Equity, p. 304.
-- WRETCHED is the state of affairs wherever COMMON RIGHT is vague and
uncertain! -- Nay it is downright slavery, as declared by another maxim,
already cited, in p. 11.

The learned Sir Robert Atkins (formerly one of the judges of the Common Pleas)
has remarked, (concerning the pope's exercise of his power of dispensing, or
rather of suspending laws, by virtue of such a "non obstante,") that it was
used with some moderation AT FIRST, in cases that seemed to be of GREAT
NECESSITY only; but at last, by degrees, it grew to be intolerable and
unlimited. (See his parliamentary and political Tracts, p. 247.) And surely we
ought to be equally jealous of every claim or pretension to omnipotence, or
unlimited power, whenever and by whomsoever it is made, though we do not
immediately feel the baneful effects of it. -- There are but too many advocates
for the imaginary omnipotence, or unlimited power, of parliament!

True it is, that the same persons, who are entrusted with authority to make
laws, are entrusted likewise with authority to suspend or repeal them; but in
this (without the least detriment to their just liberty and free privileges)
they are not without limitation. Even liberty itself is limited, and submits to
the same sort of definition; for liberty (says an old and eminent law-writer)
is not a power to act, quidquid libet, what we list, (for this may be
licentious, and a lust or passion may enslave a man [or men] as much as any
chain or fetter,) but, quod licet, what is just and rational. (Rights of the
Kingdom, p. 136.) And, in the preceding page, speaking expressly of the house
of commons, or parliaments, he says: -- When they are FREEST they have LIMITS,
for they be NOT INFINITE. Nay, when they are MOST FREE, they are MOST BOUND to
GOOD ORDERS and TO RIGHT REASON. The truth of this doctrine is unquestionable:
for, if a parliament, or legislative power of any kind, (regal or popular,)
presume to enact ordinances which oppose, or in any respect set aside, natural
justice, or the common right of innocent persons, and shall claim an authority
or privilege to do so, (which is ignorantly and vainly called omnipotence of
parliament,) the said power ceases to be a legal power, because it casts off
the restraint and government of God's indispensable laws, and thereby becomes
excommunicated from God! -- Shall the throne of INIQUITY have fellowship with
thee, which FRAMES MISCHIEF BY A LAW? (Psalm xciv. 20.)

A due consideration of this ought to restrain the modern rage of act-making!
for it is laid down, in that ancient and respectable law-book, called FLETA,
that the power of RIGHT ( or justice) is of God alone, but the power of WRONG
(or injury) is of the DEVIL; and the works of whichsoever of these two, (viz.
of God or of the devil,) he shall do, ( speaking of the agency of a king, and
the same may surely be said also of a parliament,) of him he is the servant.
Potestas enim JURIS solius est DEI, INJURIAE vero DIABOLI, et, cujus OPERA
fecerit, ejus et minister erit. (Fleta, c. xvii. p. 17.)
And to this doctrine, as an unquestionable truth, that illustrious lawyer,
Henry de Bracton, (who was a judge in this realm above 530 years ago,) has made
the following addition: -- Therefore, ( says he, still speaking of a king,)
while he DOES JUSTICE he is the vicar of the ETERNAL KING; but he is the
SERVANT OF THE DEVIL while he declines to INJUSTICE or WRONG. Quia illa
potestas (potestas JURIS) solius DEI est; potestas autem injuriae DIABOLI, et
non DEI; et, cujus horum opera fecerit rex, ejus minister erit cujus opera
fecerit. (And then follows the addition quoted above.) Igitur, dum FACIT
JUSTITIAM, vicarius est REGIS AETERNI; minister autem DIABOLI, dum declinet ad
injuriam. Bract. lib. iii. c. 9, p. 107.
And, in like manner, a parliament, or the persons entrusted with the power of
legislation, are to be esteemed as the servants of the devil, and as enemies to
God, while they promote or establish any notorious injustice: for, Know ye not,
that, to whom ye yield yourselves servants, to obey, his servants ye are to
whom ye obey; whether of sin, unto death, or of obedience, unto righteousness?
(Romans vi. 16.)

Many laws there are which belong to God as well as man, and which are
therefore to be esteemed as parts of the ETERNAL LAW: i.e. the WILL of GOD that
all things be moved and directed to a good and proper end; a perpetual and
constant WILL to give to every one his RIGHT; LEX AETERNA nihil aliud est quam
ipsa summa ratio gubernationis rerum in DEO, sive illa summa ratio DIVINAE
SAPIENTIAE, qua vult DEUS omnia a se condita, moveri, et dirigi, ad bonum et
debitum finem, -- etc. And again: LEX AETERNA, sub alia descriptione, dicitur
PERPETUA et CONSTANS VOLUNTAS JUS SUUM unicuique tribuens, etc. Doct. et Stud.
c. i. p. 2.
and no right can be more sacred than the right of an innocent man to obtain
FREEDOM, by "due process of the law," from duress and unjust imprisonment: for,
LIBERTY is inestimable; ( libertas est res inestimabilis, Jenk. cent. 52.) and
is planted BY GOD in the very nature of man. ( Libertas a Deo hominis est
indita naturae. Fortescu de laud. Leg. Ang. 41.) So that human nature entreats
(or implores) favor in the CAUSE OF LIBERTY more than in any other cause; --
Humana natura in libertatis causa favorem semper, MAGIS QUAM IN ALIIS CAUSIS,
deprecetur, etc. Ib. c. xlvii. p. 109.
and consequently the man, who does not favor the cause of LIBERTY, is already
condemned, in our common law, as impious and cruel. Impius et crudelis
judicandus est qui libertati non favet. Co. Lit. 124.
And, in like manner, every act of parliament, or statute, which is
unfavourable thereto, (by reducing freedom and augmenting slavery,) must
necessarily be esteemed equally obnoxious and inimical to GOD and MAN: -- for,
CRUDELIS etiam NECESSARIO judicabitur LEX, quae servitutem augmentat et minuit
libertatem. (Fortescu, c. 41.) And, as this "will of God," respecting the right
of men, is, in the above quotation, declared to be perpetual and constant, it
necessarily follows, that no human authority upon earth can suspend or annul
any part of the eternal law, without grievous sin! for our first allegiance is
made in baptism to God and his laws: and the latter consist not merely in the
written injunctions of divine revelation, (which we call the scriptures,) but
also in reason and natural justice; the knowledge of which (though it is a
divine attribute) is inherited by mankind in general, and written in their
hearts; Scribiturque haec lex (lex rationis) in cord cujuslibet hominis,
docens eum quid agendum, et quid fugiendum, unde dicit apostolus ad Romanos
secundo. Omnes gentes, qui legem S. scriptam non habent NATURALITER, ea quae
legis suni faciunt, hujusmodi legem non habentes ipsi sibi sunt lex, qui
ostendunt opus legis SCRIPTUM IN CORDIBUS SUIS, testimonium reddente illis
CONSCIENTIA IPSORUM. Et, quod lex rationis in cord scribitur, ideo deleri non
potest, nec etiam recepit mutationem, ex loco nec tempore; sed ubique, et inter
omnes homines, servari debet. NAM JURA NATURALIA IMMUTABILIA SUNT, etc. Doct.
et Stud. c. ii. p. 5.
or else there could be no such thing as the imputation of sin! THE LAW OF
REASON is therefore justly esteemed the first foundation of the laws of
England: -- Primum fundamentum legis Angliae est lex rationis. (Doct. et Stud.
c. v. p. 14.) And the law of reason includes the laws of nature, which cannot
lawfully be suspended or changed by parliament; for our common law declares
that they are immutable: -- "Jura naturae sunt IMMUTABILIA." (Prin. Leg. et
Aequit. p. 46.) The laws of nature are unchangeable: they cannot therefore be
lawfully suspended or changed by parliament; neither can any manifest injustice
be made lawful: for, by the same authority, we know, that LEX INJUSTA non est
LEX. "An unjust ordinance" (or act of parliament) "is not law." -- No plea of
necessity could render such a parliamentary exertion even excuseable; for,
though there are many maxims on this head, as Necessitas non habet legem; and
Salus populi (which even bad legislators will pretend to regard) suprema est
lex; -- Necessitas facit licitum quod alias non est licitum; -- Necessitas
vincet legem. Yet these can relate only to such laws as are made to remedy
inconveniences, not in themselves evil, mere mala prohibita; but cannot
authorize any thing that is malum in se; for that would be REBELLION AGAINST
GOD, which no case can justify. For, of those who say Let us do evil that good
may come; the Scripture has added, Whose damnation is just. (Romans iii. 8.) Fiat
justitia, ruat coelum, is, therefore, a sound maxim both of law and politics;
so that no necessity whatever can justify the establishment of any injustice,
without a remedy: and no injustice, evil, tort, wrong, or iniquity, can be more
flagrant or more dangerous to the state than an unnecessary delay of common
right and justice to an innocent man, whose personal liberty is unjustly
invaded; for, if "personal liberty" is not secured and protected BY EQUAL LAW,
no property, or other rights whatsoever, can have any real value; and from
thence it arises that the common right of every innocent person to the laws of
protection, is esteemed our highest and most valuable inheritance; for, Major
haereditas venit unicuique nostrum a JURE et LEGIBUS quam a parentibus; A
greater inheritance descends to every one of us from (the constitutional
establishment of) right It is called RIGHT," (says the lord Coke, 2nd inst. p.
56,) "because it is THE BEST BIRTHRIGHT the subject has; for thereby his
goods, lands, wife, children, HIS BODY," (for it is the birthright and best
PROTECTION of every honest SEAMAN, as well as of all other men,) "life, honor,
and estimation, are PROTECTED from injury and wrong:" (and then he cites THE
MAXIM:) -- "Major haereditas, etc.
and the laws than from our parents. -- A "non obstante;" therefore, which
boldly suspends at once all the ancient constitutional laws of personal
protection, and leaves an innocent man without a remedy, cannot be LAW, being
contrary to all that ought to be esteemed law; for, Lex nemini operatur
iniquum, nemini facit injuriam; Law works no iniquity to any man, does INJURY
to no man: and, Quicquid est contra norman RECTI est injuria; whatever is
contrary to the rule of RIGHT, is INJURY: -- and Tort a la ley est CONTRARY.
Co. Lit. 158. Wrong is CONTRARY to law, and therefore whatever is done CONTRARY
TO LAW (or makes against law) ought to be esteemed as UNDONE. -- Pro infecto
habetur, (says the maxim;) Quod contra legem fit pro infecto habetur; so that
the examples, that have been cited as precedents for suspending the laws of
liberty and protection, are no precedents of justification; for the legislative
power of dispensing with laws, extends only to those laws which relate to mala
prohibita, as I have before remarked, (Dispensatio est MALI PROHIBITI provida
relaxatio utilitate communi pensata,) and cannot effect the laws of natural
justice and common constitutional right; because an act of parliament for any
such purpose must be a malum in se, and consequently is null and void in itself.

The king has no power, nor can be allowed any power, to defer, postpone, or
suspend, that equal and right justice which is due, by inheritance, to all
British subjects, (to common sailors as well as others,) without respect of
persons; because the king subscribed Magna Charta when he received the Holy
Sacrament at his coronation, (of which the author of this protest is an
eyewitness, being very near the king's person at that time,) whereby he has
promised before God and the people, that he will delay or deny to none right or
justice; -- Nulli negabimus aut differemus justitiam vel rectum; (cap. xxix.)
so that this excludes all power of suspending any of the laws on which justice
or right depend! The king, therefore, must neither delay justice himself, nor
be, in any way, instrumental in preventing his judges from proceeding to do
justice according to Magna Charta and the other ancient and fundamental laws of
the land; for the judges are also sworn to deny to no man common right, by the
king's letters, nor none other man's, nor for none other cause. (See the oath
made 18 Edward III. Keble's Statutes, p. 110.) This wary expression in the
oath, (viz. for none other cause,) excludes all possibility of admitting any
exception whatsoever; so that the sworn judges are so bound to GOD, the king,
and the people, (for they are sworn to "serve the people" Ye shall swear, and
well and lawfully ye shall SERVE our lord the king, AND HIS PEOPLE, in the
office of justice, etc.
as well as the king,) that they must not obey even an act of parliament which
sets aside this matter of "common right," I mean the common right of PERSONAL
LIBERTY to all ranks of men that are innocent from crimes and free from debt.

Some worthy men, zealous for the privileges of parliament, are, indeed,
unwilling to admit this seeming independence of the judges, in the
administration of justice or common right; which, by their oaths, they are to
"deny to no man:" but the just privileges of parliament never can be injured by
the independence of the judges in this single point; because, if a judge is so
scrupulous, or conscientious, that he refuses to enforce or obey an unjust
statute, it is still in the power of parliament to impeach or discharge him
from his office for disobedience, so that the loss would fall only upon the
honest and worthy judge, though the dishonor of the injustice would rest where
it began! Nevertheless, while JUDGES remain in office, they must not
acknowledge any obligation superior to that which they owe to natural justice
and the laws of God; for they are bound to GOD (as I have already remarked) by
the nature of their office, as well as to the king and the people; though this
first and most binding obligation is not expressed in their oath; yet the
Scripture says, The judgment is God's; (Deuteronomy. i. 17.) and again, Ye judge not
for man, but for THE LORD, who is with you in the JUDGMENT: (2 Chronicles. ix. 6.)
and, therefore, neither the judges nor the king himself are to be accounted
laymen, but "ministers of God," for righteousness, justice, and judgment. --
By the two latter, in the present case, I do not mean penal justice or
judgment, but the duties of maintaining the "common right" of innocent
persons, and of relieving the oppressed. These are, in a peculiar manner,
sacred to God, and, therefore, unalienable from the people, and not to be
suspended by the authority of parliament; because the commands of God, in these
matters, are peremptory, and can admit of no exceptions. -- Thus says the
Lord, (Jehovah,) KEEP YE judgment and do justice, (Isaiah lvi. 1.) which is
diametrically opposite to the measure of suspending or postponing them. And
again, -- KEEP mercy and JUDGMENT, and wait on thy God CONTINUALLY or ALWAYS:
(Hos. xii. 6.) so that there never can be any time of danger, or difficulty, so
pressing and urgent as to justify the plea of a NECESSITY for the suspension of
justice and judgment, when demanded by innocent persons under illegal
restraint or duress! For, prisoners, that are really guilty, will not demand
judgment, (by writs of Habeas Corpus,) for fear of the penal statutes; and
even if such prisoners (trusting, at any time, to the want of sufficient
evidence against them) should demand judgment, and thereby escape; yet it is
better that TEN offenders should escape penal justice, than that ONE innocent
man should suffer by the denial or suspension of "COMMON RIGHT." -- Melius est
ut DECEMBER NOXII evadant, quam ut UNUS INNOCENS pereat. -- For herein the
difference between the sort of justice and judgment, for which I contend, and
penal justice, (which may be suspended by competent authority,) is manifested,
viz. that THE RIGHTEOUS "JUDGE OF ALL THE WORLD" declared himself willing to
suspend his penal judgment against A WHOLE NATION of notorious convicted
offenders, rather than he would involve TEN innocent persons in their
destruction, if so many could have been found among them! This sentiment of
divine justice was revealed, for our instruction, to a man, who was honored
with the testimony of being inclined to KEEP the way of the Lord; -- and the
way of the Lord, (as the following words declare,) is -- to DO justice and
judgment, (Genesis xviii. 19-33.) -- The suspension, therefore, of justice and
judgment from innocent persons, is plainly the reverse of KEEPING the way of
the Lord! Wherefore, -- Let it suffice you, O princes of Israel; remove
violence and spoil, and EXECUTE JUDGMENT AND JUSTICE; (which is the very
reverse of suspending them!) take away your exactions from my people, says the
Lord. (Ezekiel. xlv. 9.) -- Cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek judgment;
RIGHTEN the OPPRESSED; (for this is plainly the kind of judgment, which, in
the former texts, God has commanded men to KEEP, and which, therefore, ought
never to be SUSPENDED;) judge the fatherless; plead for the widow. (Isaiah i.
16, 17.)

It is also necessary to remark the divine testimony against those who
suspended or did not "KEEP justice and judgment;" but, on the contrary,
devised wicked ordinances: -- They conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity.
They hatch cockatrice eggs, and weave the spider's web, etc. All which may well
be said of those who enact wicked statutes to ensnare and oppress the people!
And again, The act of violence is in their hands. Their feet run to evil, and
they make haste to SHED INNOCENT BLOOD: their thoughts are thoughts of
iniquity; WASTING AND DESTRUCTION are in their paths. THE WAY OF PEACE THEY
KNOW NOT; and (there is) NO JUDGMENT in their goings; (meaning no legal
judgment, or due process of the law; for the Hebrew word is (...) properly
signifying a legal decision, as (...) also signifies a JUDGE;) they have made
them crooked paths; (which may surely be said of wicked or unjust laws, but
more especially of any law to suspend or annul the law itself!) whosoever goes
therein shall not know PEACE. Therefore is JUDGMENT far from us, ( meaning
that the due process of the law, or proper LEGAL decision, is far from us; for
it is the same Hebrew word as before;) neither does RIGHTEOUSNESS In the common
version it is rendered, -- neither does JUSTICE overtake us: which is liable to
be understood in a contrary sense from the original as if it referred to penal
justice, whereas the Hebrew word is (...) (properly righteousness); which (as
it is due to all men) may justly be understood to signify that which in our
English law is called "common right."
( or "common right") reach us, etc. (Isaiah lix. 4 -- 9.) And again, the 14th
and 15th verses of the same chapter, demonstrate, that what I have already
cited from it relates to the failure of justice and judgment, or the
suspension of due legal process! And judgment (said the prophet) is turned
away backward; and justice (or rather COMMON RIGHT as I have before remarked;
for the Hebrew word is (...) "RIGHTEOUSNESS") STANDS AFAR OFF: for TRUTH is
fallen in the street, ( i. e. the TRUTH of conviction or acquittal, by legal
process, "is fallen,") and EQUITY cannot enter; (which must generally be the
case when WILL is set up above law! but hear the prophet,) Yes; TRUTH (says he)
fails; and he that departs from evil makes himself a prey: (or, as we read
in the margin, "is accounted mad:" i.e. in the opinion of those detestable
politicians who do evil that good may come:) and the Lord (Jehovah) saw! and it
displeased him that there was NO JUDGMENT! ((...) -- so that it can never be
either lawful or expedient to remove the "due process of the law" from the
reach of innocent persons, by suspension, or in any other manner,). And he saw
that (there was) no man: that is, -- no man to stand in the gap for the defense
of his ETERNAL LAW, which is explained by the 4th verse, -- None calls for
justice, ((...) more properly for RIGHTEOUSNESS, or "THE COMMON RIGHT" of the
people,) nor any pleads for truth, etc. [Neither prince, prelate, nor judge,
it seems, were inclined to enter a protest in favor of immutable justice and
right! -- Horrible depravity!] And he (the almighty) wondered that there was no
intercessor! therefore his arm brought salvation unto him; and his
RIGHTEOUSNESS, it sustained him. For he put on RIGHTEOUSNESS as a breast plate:
and an helmet of salvation (i. e. in behalf of the poor, and those that were
unjustly oppressed) upon his head; and he put on the garments of VENGEANCE
(for) clothing; and was clad with ZEAL as a cloak. (And then follows, THE LAW
OF RETRIBUTION;). "According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay, -- FURY
to his adversaries, RECOMPENSE" (or retribution) "to his enemies, to THE
ISLANDS he will REPAY RETRIBUTION!" Where then (if we have any belief in God's
eternal law) is the boasted "omnipotence of parliament!" Or, who can be truly
"loyal," in the proper sense of that epithet, but those who acknowledge that
the former is unchangeable, and that common right, and the justice due to
innocent persons, can never be SUSPENDED without rebellion against GOD! For
there is no salvation for man without CHARITY; and our common law teaches us,
-- that "the highest" ( and therefore the most indispensable) CHARITY is to do
JUSTICE to all and every single soul at ALL TIMES: -- so that A TIME of
NECESSITY (I mean SUCH A TIME as is generally called so) will afford but a poor
excuse for so notorious a breach of this FIRST principle of CHARITY; Summa
CARITAS est facere JUSTITIAM singulis et omnibus OMNI TEMPORE. -- My
countrymen, in general, I fear are too depraved to bear all the truths of my
remonstrance; but I cannot now be silent without guilt!

Many are the limitations of the law of reason, (too numerous to be here
recited,) which necessarily annul all acts of legislature that unhappily exceed
them, Against this law, (i. e. the law of reason,) prescription, STATUTE, nor
custom, may not prevail; and, if any be brought in against it, they be not
prescriptions, STATUTES, nor CUSTOMS, but ( CORRUPTELAE, CORRUPTIONS Et contra
eam (viz. legem rationis) non est praescriptio vel ad appositum STATUTUM, sive
consuetudo: et, si aliqua fiant, NON SUNT STATUTA, sive consuetudines, sed
CORRUPTELAE. (Doct. et Stud. c. ii. p. 5. ed. ^at.)
) things void and against justice. (Doct. et Stud. Eng. ed. 1668, p. 5.)
if the first foundation of the English law (already mentioned in p. 24.) be
duly regarded. And the second foundation of our excellent legal establishment
acknowledges no fewer limitations of legislature than there are divine precepts
of morality and justice in the Holy Scriptures. For THE SECOND FOUNDATION of
the law of England is the LAW OF GOD: against which the haughty omnipotence of
parliament (the pope of England) has not the least authority to ordain any
thing! insomuch, that if ANY STATUTE is set forth AGAINST them, it ought to be
esteemed of NO FORCE in the law of England. -- Etiam, si aliquod statutum esse
editum contra eos; [probably mis-written for eas, (leges divinas,) or eam
(legem divinam)]; nullius vigoris in legibus Angliae censeri debet: etc. Doct.
et Stud. c. vi. p. 18. b.
For, if FOUNDATIONS are removed, the whole fabric of our law and political
constitution must precipitate into destruction!

I appeal to the JUDGES THEMSELVES for the truths which I here assert. They
know the foundations of our law: they know that there are many maxims of a
superior order By maxims of a superior order, I mean, those inevitable and
necessary conclusions of reason, which belong to the first foundation of
English law: for, though these may be justly included also in the fourth
foundation of our law, under the general head of Maxims, yet they ought to be
duly distinguished from those less obvious maxims which relate only to the
general customs of the kingdom, and have no claim to be ranked higher than the
fourth foundation.
which bear ample testimony to my doctrine; that justice or common right can
never be suspended, without subverting the legal constitution of this kingdom!
-- Si a JURE discedas VAGUS eris, et erunt omnia omnibus INCERTA; If you depart
from COMMON RIGHT, you will become vague, (or unsettled,) and all things will
be uncertain to all men.
(Co. Lit. 227.) and Res est misera; -- Misera est servitus ubi JUS est VAGUM
aut INCERTUM; Affairs are in a wretched state, -- nay, it is deplorable
slavery, wherever justice (or common right) is vague or uncertain.
(4 Inst. 246.) wherefore, -- Justitia nemini neganda est. "Justice must be
denied to no man."
Justitia est cuilibet facienda. "Justice must be done to every man whatsoever."
Injusticia non est alicui facienda. "Injustice must not be done to any man
whatsoever."
Justitia non est neganda, non DIFFERENDA. "Justice must neither be denied nor
delayed," i. e. nor SUSPENDED.
(Jenk. Cent. 93.) -- And, therefore, no plea of necessity whatever can excuse
so great an evil as a SUSPENSION of justice or common right! This is confirmed
also by another maxim, -- Melius est OMNIA MALA pati quam malo consentire. It
is better to endure ALL adversities than to assert to ONE evil measure!
(3 Inst. 23.) How much soever any particular man, in authority, may be either
inclined, or think himself obliged to accommodate his opinion to the present
times of violence and injustice, yet, I flatter myself, that there is not a
single judge in the kingdom, who will venture to set his face against these
indispensable conclusions of reason; and, therefore, to the judges I have
appealed for the truth of my assertion; that every act of parliament which
contains any thing in it contrary to these first principles of reason and
honesty, is null and void; -- is a corruption, and not law! For statutes, --
Nec contra RATIONEM, nec contra LEGEM DIVINAM existunt. Statutes "cannot exist
either against REASON, or the LAW DIVINE."
(Doct. et Stud. c. 10. de Diversis Statutis.) because Hae duae leges declinari
non possunt: Because "these two laws" (the law of reason and the law of God)
"cannot abate or turn aside."
(ib. c. 17.) and because the holy Scriptures denounce WOE against the makers of
unjust laws. -- Woe unto them that decree UNRIGHTEOUS DECREES, (or laws,) and
write grievousness (which) they have prescribed: to turn aside the needy from
JUDGMENT; (which, in Israel, was a judgment of peers; the judgment of the
congregation) and to take away the right ( or rather "the judgment" or
"process of the law;" for the Hebrew word is (...)) from the poor of my people,
that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless. (And then
follows the retribution, which proves that there never can be any NECESSITY for
INJUSTICE.) And what will you do in the day of visitation, and in the
desolation (which) shall come from far? To whom will you flee for help? and
where will ye leave your glory? [or, (in the plural,) your honors?] (Isai. x.
1 -- 3.).

No necessity, therefore, whatever, can justify the adoption of an unrighteous
or unjust measure, by any legislature upon earth; because no danger or evil
whatsoever is so much to be dreaded as God's vengeance for the failure of
justice, judgment, and righteousness; and, therefore, "common right" and equal
justice, which belong to God, for the good of his people, are so interwoven and
united with the legal constitution of these kingdoms, that to set them aside,
by public authority, amounts to a total subversion of the common law, and, of
course, to the legal constitution of these kingdoms, which no act of parliament
can effect; for that (with respect to the legislature) would be a sort of felo
de se, Whatever is destructive of the law cannot itself be law; for then the
law would be felo de se: Lex quae leges avertit, ipsa lex esse non potest; a
thing divided against itself, and therefore will not stand. Uhi non est pudor,
nec cura juris, instabile regnum est. Judge Atkins, p. 221.
a crime of the highest treason in all who voted for it! for which they are
liable to be impeached by the great body of the nation, in case a political
reformation should take place; and precedents are not wanting for inflicting
capital punishment on JUDGES, for enforcing unjust laws, though the same had
obtained the sanction of parliament. To submit the operation of law to the WILL
of the king and council, (which is done by this supposed act, That no judge or
justice of peace shall bail or try any such person or persons, without order
from his majesty's most honorable privy council, etc. any law, statute, usage,
etc. notwithstanding; boldly subverting at once the whole legal constitution.
) would tend to annul even THE KING'S AUTHORITY; for, it is laid down as an
established principle of the British constitution, by one of the best
authorities in our common law, that there is NO KING where WILL rules, and not
law: Non est enim rex, ubi dominatur voluntas et non lex; so that a king of
England ceases to be king, when he ceases to be limited by the LAW; as another
old constitutional maxim also informs us, The law is the most high inheritance
that the king has; for, if the LAW was not, there would be NO KING nor
inheritance; Le ley est le plus haute inheritance que le roi ad: car par la ley
il-meme et tous ses sujets sont rules; et, si le ley ne fuit, null roi et null
inheritance sera. Year Book, 19 Hen. VI. 63.
and another maxim says, Cessa regnare, si non vis judicare. Cease to reign, if
you will not do justice. -- The king, therefore, must not deny or delay common
right; and the insertion of a "non obstante," to set aside at once all the
laws, statutes, and usages, of the kingdom, respecting THE PERSONAL PROTECTION
of the subject, is a manifest subversion of our legal constitution, and
consequently is HIGH TREASON against the king, as well as against the state,
and the latter is declared to be no less a crime than the former; -- Non minor
est proditio LEGIS, quam REGEM velle perdere. -- So that such an attempt
against the law is not only a most dangerous undermining of the king's crown
and dignity, but the highest act of treason and DISLOYALTY in the strictest
sense of the word: as no man can be LOYAL who votes for a general suspension of
all the LAWS and fences of that most valuable right of the subject, the right
to personal liberty!

Such a suspension of law is too similar to that non obstante of pope Innocent
IV. "whereby" (as the proctors of king Henry III. declared) common right was
annulled, and authentic records rendered void. -- Per quam jus pro nihilo
habetur et authentica scripta enervantur. (Judge Atkins Parl. Tracts, p. 212.)
And the same learned judge remarks, that it is part of the description given of
antichrist, by the prophet Daniel, c. 7. He shall think that he may change
times and laws, and they shall be given into his hands. (P. 218.) In the
following paragraph he also cites bp. Jewel's Exposition upon the Epistle to
the Thessalonians, (fol. 131.) viz. Antichrist (says the bishop) is there
called (...), a man without order or LAW, that man of sin; which is one of the
peculiar notes of antichrist. He shall seek to be free, and go at liberty; he
shall be tied to NO LAW, neither of God nor man. Hence it is said of the pope,
that he is Solutus OMNI LEGE HUMANA. In iis quae VULT, est ei pro ratione
VOLUNTAS, nec est qui dicat illi, Domine, cur ita facis? Ille potest SUPRA JUS
DISPENSARE, et de injustitia facere justitiam, corrigendo jura et mutando.

To set up the WILL and PLEASURE of man, therefore, above LAW, or to pretend to
give a power to the king, or his privy council, to SUSPEND the fundamental LAWS
of the kingdom, is to render them (...), lawless and unlimited, like the
princes and powers of ANTICHRIST, foretold in the second Psalm, who say, -- Let
us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us; viz. the bonds
of reason, law, and natural justice, and the cords of allegiance to divine
authority; for, to this effect, I have seen a remark upon the text, by judge
Atkins, though I cannot at present find the passage. An act of parliament for
so base a purpose, as the establishment of an unlimited power, is so far from
deserving the name of law, that it must necessarily be deemed a subversion of
law; as it sets up the will and pleasure of man (king and council) above the
operation of law, contrary to a fundamental principle of the constitution. More
SECURE, as well as MORE POWERFUL, is the effect (or operation) of LAW, than the
WILL and PLEASURE of man; Firmior et potentior est operatio LEGIS quam
DISPOSITIO hominis; (Co. Lit. 102.) because, the man who is allowed more power
than is just and equal, will affect still more than is allowed: Cui plus licet
quam par est, plus vult quam licet. (2 Inst. 464.).

From the unhappy experience of all nations, in all ages, this established
doctrine of our common law may be amply proved; and, with respect to the
supposed act in question, it is certainly liable to afford such opportunity and
temptation to promote unjust charges against innocent persons; (arming a
particular party with unconstitutional powers of oppression and iniquity, to
intimidate all honest and independent people;) that it is manifestly a malum in
se, (as I have said,) which can never be made lawful; nay, the whole business
is so disloyal that it seems to be nothing less than "framing mischief by a
law," which is the most dangerous as well as most iniquitous mode of
oppression; because it amounts to an apostasy from God! as the Scriptures
declare, Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which forms
mischief by a law? (Ps. 94.20.) And again, Woe be to them that decree
unrighteous decrees, and that write grievousness which they have prescribed, to
turn aside the needy from JUDGMENT, etc. The very case in point! Isaiah x. 12.
See pages 19, 33, 41, 44, and 45. -- We are bound, by our baptismal vow, to
"renounce the devil and all his works," and of course it is our duty to resist
and oppose evil to the utmost of our power; otherwise we deserve not to be
ranked with the servants and soldiers of the "prince of peace," because he is,
also, the king of RIGHTEOUSNESS; and, therefore, in a Christian community,
every private person, every individual, has an undoubted right to detect and
protest against every iniquity and injustice, even though it shall have
obtained the sanction of the public legislature; and it is a maxim of the
common law, that Unusquisque paci et justitiae publicae tenetur succurrere; but
the judges are still more particularly bound (both on account of their learning
and office) to point out and reject every ordinance of man that is contrary to
natural justice and the laws of God. And so far is it from being their duty to
obey, or enforce, any such laws, that the common law has provided them a ready
answer for refusing the functions of their office in such cases; -- Contra
justitiam nihil possumus: for, though they are officers of the king and people,
and sit in the king's judgment seat, judging in his name; yet their duty
respecting common right and natural justice does not depend on the king, nor
any other, but on GOD alone, as I have already remarked; for they judge not for
man, but for the Lord, etc. (2d Chron. xix. 6, 7.) -- And again, -- Ye shall
not be afraid of the face of man, (which excludes all partial influence of
kings or any other human powers,) for the judgment is God's. (Deuteronomy. i. 16,
17.). -- And all judges ought to be deeply impressed with that indispensable
doctrine of our common law, that it is infinitely more heinous to offend
ETERNAL than TEMPORAL majesty! for it is a maxim, -- Gravius est ETERNAM quam
TEMPORALEM laedere MAJESTATEM. -- Thus stands THE LAW OF GOD respecting judges;
and THE LAW OF GOD is always to be esteemed an unalienable and unchangeable
part of THE LAW OF ENGLAND! (See p. 42, 45.)

Both the king and his judges are sworn (as I have already observed, p. 29,
30.) not to delay or deny common right; and, therefore, no danger, or other
evil whatsoever, (against which men have ever pleaded a NECESSITY of suspending
the laws of protection from innocent persons,) can be so great an evil, or be
so imminently dangerous in itself, as that very measure of suspension! No
NECESSITY whatsoever can be so deplorable, or so disgracefully injurious to the
state, as the measure itself! and, therefore, there never can be a necessity
for such a MEASURE; and the same may be said, with unquestionable truth,
concerning every other MEASURE of oppression and injustice; but more
particularly may it be said of that other most notorious and iniquitous mode of
suspending, or rather annulling, all the laws of British freedom, in the case
of seamen; I mean the IMPRESSING The form of press-warrants, and the
expressions used therein, may, perhaps, be very ancient; and those expressions,
(viz. impress and press-money,) perhaps, according to the ancient meaning of
them, may be innocent and legal: but no RIGHT or prerogative, either by usage
or prescription, is thereby to be presumed in favor of the modern sense in
which they are now usually interpreted: viz. as a warrant to take a man by
force, to drag him away, like a thief, to a floating prison (the most dangerous
and detestable of all others); that, by imprisonment and duress, he may be
compelled to enter into an involuntary servitude! What is this but a true
definition of the most absolute slavery! -- And yet it is equally true when
applied to the case of pressed seamen on-board the tenders and hulks. But let
us examine by what authority this is done, and then judge whether the supposed
prerogative is legal. The warrant is signed by the lords commissioners of the
admiralty and their secretary, who claim no other authority in their
justification than what is expressed in the beginning of the warrant: -- viz.
-- "In pursuance of his majesty's order in council, dated," -- etc. etc.

Now, unhappily for the lords of the admiralty and their secretary, (if they
should be duly prosecuted for their misdemeanor,) neither his majesty nor the
privy council (neither any of them separately, nor all of them together have
any legal power to commit, or distrain an innocent man of his liberty; because
all power for any such purposes was taken from them by authority of parliament,
and the act is still in full force. See 16 Cha. I. c. x. The purpose of this
act is expressly "for the regulating the privy council," as well as for taking
away the court commonly called the star chamber.

In the preamble of this act the Great Charter is cited, -- that -- No freeman
shall be TAKEN, or IMPRISONED, or disseized of his freehold, or LIBERTIES, etc.
but by lawful judgment of his peers, or by the law of the land, and also
(besides several others) that inestimable statute of 28 Edw. III. cap. iii.
that No man, of what estate or condition soever he be, shall be put out of his
lands or tenements, nor TAKEN, nor IMPRISONED, etc. without being brought in to
answer BY DUE PROCESS OF LAW: -- so that the whole statute of 16 Cha. I. c. x.
must be construed according to the true spirit of these golden laws of liberty;
and more especially the 8th section of it, where we read -- That, if ANY PERSON
(here can be no exception to the prejudice of seamen) shall hereafter be
COMMITTED, RESTRAINED OF HIS LIBERTY, or SUFFER IMPRISONMENT, by the order or
decree of any such court of star chamber, etc. (mentioning several other
courts, and then adds,) OR by the command OR WARRANT of THE KING'S MAJESTY, his
heirs or successors, in their own person, or by the command or WARRANT of the
COUNCEL-BOARD, or of any of the lords, or others of HIS MAJESTY'S
PRIVY COUNCIL, that, in EVERY such case, EVERY PERSON, so committed, restrained
of his liberty, or suffering imprisonment, [ which necessarily includes the
case of "every person" -- " restrained of his liberty," or taken, or imprisoned
by a press-warrant; especially as his majesty's order in council (which is
expressly limited by this act) is the only authority cited by the admiralty for
issuing such warrants, since the clause of non obstante statuto has been
declared VOID in law.] upon demand, or motion made, (says the act,) by his
counsel, or other employed by him for that purpose, unto the JUDGES of the
court of KING'S BENCH, or COMMON PLEAS, in open court, SHALL, WITHOUT DELAY
UPON ANY PRETENSE WHATSOEVER, for the ordinary dues usually paid for the same,
have forthwith granted unto him a writ of HABEAS CORPUS, to be directed
generally unto all and every sheriff, jailer, minister, OFFICER, or other
person, in whose custody the party so committed or restrained shall be, etc.
(And, after describing the mode of making the return to the writ, the statute
directs the court that they) -- shall thereupon do what to JUSTICE shall
appertain; either by delivering, bailing, or REMANDING, the prisoner: and, if
any thing shall be otherwise wilfully done, or omitted to be done, BY ANY
JUDGE, JUSTICE, OFFICER, or other person aforementioned, contrary to the
direction and TRUE MEANING hereof, (necessarily including the "TRUE MEANING,"
likewise, of all the acts recited in the preamble: so that, if A JUDGE should
presume to remand into confinement any man, of what estate or condition soever
he be, that has been TAKEN, or IMPRISONED, etc. WITHOUT DUE PROCESS OF LAW,)
that then (says the act) such person, so offending, shall forfeit to the party
grieved his TREBLE DAMAGES, to be recovered by such means and in such manner as
is formerly in this act limited and appointed for the like penalty to be sued
for and recovered, etc.

In the preamble of the Petition of Rights, (3 Cha. I.) the same noble
declarations of British liberty, drawn from the ancient statutes against taking
and imprisoning a man without due process of the law, are expressly recited and
confirmed, (see 3d and 4th.) as well as in the last-mentioned act. And the
judges are likewise expressly directed, BY BOTH ACTS, to grant "WRITS OF HABEAS
CORPUS," for immediate relief from all such illegal imprisonments; whether
committed by authority of the king or of the privy council: so that there are
two habeas corpus acts, previous to, and of equal authority with, that which
commonly engrosses the title of the Habeas Corpus Act, though it is, in
reality, only a supplement to the two former acts, being clearly intended to
supply all that could be thought insufficient for the security of the subject's
liberty in the former acts above recited: being entitled, -- " An Act for the
BETTER SECURING the Liberty of the Subject, etc." See stat. 31 Cha. II. c. ii.
And therefore whatever may seem doubtful, or not sufficiently expletive
therein, must necessarily be construed in favor of liberty, according to the
established rules and maxims of the common law. " Impius et crudelis judicandus
est qui LIBERTATI non favet." Co. Lit. 29, from Fortescu. Impious and cruel is
that man to be esteemed who does not favor liberty. -- Angliae jura in omni
casu LIBERTATI dant savorem. (See Prin. Leg. et Aequit. p. 5, from Fortescu.)
The laws of England FAVOR liberty IN EVERY CASE. And the learned chancellor
Fortescu himself expresses this noble principle still more fully in c. xlvii.
p. 109, ^e laud. Leg. Ang. -- Humana natura in LIBERTATIS causa FAVOREM semper,
MAGIS QUAM IN ALIIS CAUSIS, deprecetur, etc. In the cause of LIBERTY human
nature ALWAYS implores FAVOR more than in any other cause.


If a judge, therefore, should remand a man into any such illegal imprisonment,
he immediately (by the inevitable construction of these laws This truth is also
farther testified by the arguments and authorities collected in Bushel's case,
reported by Ld C. J. Vaughan, p. 156: -- viz. When a man is brought by HABEAS
CORPUS to the court, and, upon return of it, it appears to the court that he
was against law IMPRISONED and DETAINED, though there be no cause of privilege
for him in this court, he shall never be by the act of the court REMANDED to
his unlawful imprisonment, for then THE COURT should do an act of INJUSTICE, in
imprisoning him, DE NOVO, AGAINST LAW; whereas the the great charter is, Quod
nullus liber homo IMPRISONETUR, NISI PER LEGEM TERRAE, etc.
) becomes a party in the injury: for the illegality of remanding a man, brought
up by HABEAS CORPUS, where no cause is certified, (that is, no legal cause,) is
severely condemned in the 5th sect. of the Bill of Rights: and the subsequent
act, of 16 Cha. I. c. x. gives a penalty of treble damages, as I have already
remarked. And, what is worse, if any judge should be guilty of such injustice,
in the case of a pressed man, he would be liable to still greater penalties,
because the case of pressing necessarily includes, not only the circumstances
of taking and imprisoning a man without due process of the law, but also the
intention of carrying him a prisoner "out of the realm;" whereby the judges (so
offending) become liable to all the penalties of the last supplemental habeas
corpus act; which is treble costs, and 500 l. damages at the least; a
disability to bear any office of trust or profit under the crown; besides all
the other penalties of a praemunire, which the king cannot pardon! -- the
person, or persons, who shall knowingly frame, contrive, write, seal, or
counter-sign, ANY WARRANT or writing for such commitment, detainer,
imprisonment, or TRANSPORTATION; or shall so commit, detain, imprison, or
TRANSPORT, any person, or persons, contrary to this act; or be ANY WAYS
ADVISING, AIDING, OR ASSISTING, THEREIN; (which must inevitably include the act
of REMANDING;) being lawfully convicted thereof, shall (besides the penalties
of treble costs and L. 500 damages, mentioned in the former part of the
section) be disabled from thenceforth to bear any office of trust or profit
within the said realm of England, etc. and shall incur and sustain the pains,
penalties, etc. in and by the statute of provision and praemunire, etc. -- and
be INCAPABLE OF ANY PARDON FROM THE KING, his heirs, etc. -- Stat. 31 Car. II..
xii. And, by the x.. a forfeit of 500 l. is awarded against any judge for
refusing the writ of HABEAS CORPUS, even though demanded in time of vacation.


The plea of necessity for the service will not excuse them; because that very
plea in the very same case, the necessity for the sea service, viz. for the
good and safety of the kingdom in general, etc. and the whole kingdom in danger
(and a stronger or more urgent necessity cannot be expressed); yet it was
deemed INSUFFICIENT to justify the opinion of all the judges in favor of
extorting SHIP MONEY (16 Cha. I. c. 14); and much more insufficient will it be
to excuse the violent and forcible "taking and imprisoning" of SHIP-MEN,
because the persons of men are infinitely more sacred in law than their
pecuniary property: for it is an unquestionable maxim, that LAW regards THE
PERSON above his possessions. LIFE AND LIBERTY MOST, etc. (Prin. Leg. et Aeq.
p. 56.) And, as the inheritance of the law, by an established maxim already
quoted, is said to descend unicuique nostrum, -- to EVERY ONE of us, (without
exception,) the SEAMEN are surely as much entitled to claim their inheritance
and RIGHT to the whole benefit of the law as any other part of the community;
for they cannot be excluded, because another excellent maxim says, Turpis est
PARS quae non convenit cum suo TOTO. (Plowden, 161.) Shameful is* that part (of
a community) which is not suited with its whole (body). So that, if SEAMEN are
denied the benefit and protection of the laws, on the part of government, such
a denial unavoidably tends to slacken and untie the bands of allegiance on the
part of the seamen, who are thereby compelled to undertake their own protection
and defense whenever the law is denied them; for the ties of allegiance must
necessarily be reciprocal, according to the first principles of social
government, because the protection of natural right is the first foundation of
English law, which no act of parliament has any authority to subvert; and the
useful order of seamen, in particular, cannot be denied the protection of the
law, without the most stimulalating provocation to resistance in their own
defense: because it is agreeable to a fundamental maxim of the British
constitution of state, that Nothing is more intolerable in law, than that any
one part of the community should be esteemed under a different law from the
rest, Nihil in lege intolerabilius est, candem rem diverso jure censeri: and
another maxim says, -- Turpis est pars quae non convenit cum suo toto.
for there can be no such thing as common right wherever this is the case. --
Thus I have endeavored to express the right of seamen in as plain and
intelligible terms as I could; that every common seaman of common sense may be
able to discern the inestimable value of his best inheritance, THE LAW; and I
shall always esteem it my duty to God to maintain and defend their rights to
the utmost of my power.


them into service by force and violence, which the most dissolute of public
ministers never presumed to palliate, or excuse, by any other plea than this
mere bugbear, NECESSITY!

It is a practice so notoriously repugnant to common right and equity, so
fundamentally subversive of the most essential and indispensable principles of
our happy legal establishment; and, at the same time, so impious a violation of
that natural equality, with respect to law, justice, and personal protection,
which the Almighty himself has commanded to be maintained "without respect of
persons;" that even an act of parliament cannot make it lawful; for God is no
respecter of persons. (Acts x. 34) He accepts not the persons of princes, nor
regards the rich MORE THAN POOR; for they are all the work of his hands.
(Job. xxxiv. 19.) He has made the small and the great, AND CARES FOR ALL
ALIKE. (Wisdom, vi. 7.) And, with respect to equal justice, God's direction to
judges is part of the moral law, which is still binding, -- they shall judge
the people with JUST JUDGMENT. Thou shall not wrest judgment. Thou SHALL NOT
RESPECT PERSONS; neither take a gift, According to the common law of England
also, BRIBERY, or the taking of gifts, is esteemed a most heinous crime in
JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS; yet it is much more heinous (because more dangerous) in
LEGISLATION: insomuch that a JUST SUSPICION of undue influence (by private
pensions, places held during pleasure, etc.) is sufficient also to vitiate and
annul the proceedings even of a LEGISLATURE! and therefore, when wicked and
corrupt men, in the administration of any government, presume to varnish over
their illegal proceedings with the specious pretense of vindicating and
establishing legislative authority, and yet, at the same time, (by sapping its
honor and dignity with the baneful influence of pensions, and such other
BRIBERY,) do notoriously practice the most effectual means to undermine and
destroy it! -- such men, I say, must be deemed traitors and unpardonable
hypocrites, whom NATIONAL JUSTICE will mark for the future vengeance of a much
injured, and, hitherto, DELUDED PEOPLE, if they do not repent, before the
measure of their iniquity be fulfilled, and heartily adopt some prudent plan of
political reformation!
etc. (Deuteronomy. xvi. 18.) The fashionable sneer, therefore, of some modern
lawyers, against the just doctrine concerning "the equality of mankind,"
savours of a lamentable ignorance in the first principles of their profession,
relating to "common right" or justice!

All that I have said against the supposed act for suspending the law, would be
equally applicable to an act of parliament for impressing either seamen, or any
other rank or denomination of British subjects: because it would be a real
suspension (with respect to one part of the community) of all the most valuable
acts of parliament which are deemed the pillars of the constitution, though the
learned judge Foster has prostituted his pen by asserting that it is not
inconsistent with any statute. That learned man, surely, did not consider that
the practice of impressing (as now carried on) necessarily includes the
circumstances of taking and imprisoning without due process of the law; which
is expressly prohibited not only by one statute, but by many statutes. The very
first statute in our book ordains, that No freeman shall be TAKEN or
IMPRISONED, etc. but by the lawful judgment of his peers, or by the LAW OF THE
LAND: which, in another recital, by parliamentary authority, is explained to
signify process of the law. -- And another venerable statute (which, like Magna
Charta, has been so frequently confirmed by other acts of parliament, in
different periods, that no single parliament can have sufficient authority to
repeal it) expressly ordains, that No man, of what estate or condition that he
be, (so that there can be no exception of SEAMEN,) shall be put out of land or
tenements, nor TAKEN, nor IMPRISONED, nor disinherited, (and the protection of
THE LAW is already shown to be our most valuable inheritance,) nor put to
death, without being brought to answer by DUE PROCESS OF LAW. Stat. 28 Ed. III.
c. 3. This excellent statute, and the clause above quoted from the
Great-Charter, are both expressly recited and confirmed in the Bill of Rights,
(3 Cha. I. c. 1.) and also in the act for regulating the privy council, (16
Cha. I. c. 10.) -- So that judge Foster's assertion in favor of pressing, viz.
that it is not inconsistent with any statute, is an unpardonable instance of
disingenuity! For what "due process of law" can be pointed out to justify or
warrant the taking, imprisoning, and disinheriting, (of his most valuable
inheritance, THE LAW) an innocent sailor? -- An admiralty-warrant cannot be
considered as a due process of the law, to justify any such taking,
imprisoning, etc. because it is founded on no other authority than that of the
king and council, whose warrant, for any such purposes, is rendered totally
illegal by authority of an act of parliament, still in force; (16 Cha. I. c.
10.) so that if a judge should presume to remand a man to confinement, that has
been taken and imprisoned by any such warrant, (which is illegal, and of course
no process of law,) he would be liable to an impeachment of high treason to the
state: for promoting an illegal power and pretension of the crown, in direct
opposition to a solemn act of the whole legislature!

For the same reasons, every magistrate who presumes to back a press-warrant is
also highly criminal, and makes himself an adviser and party, in a most
notorious breach of the king's peace! because the effect of promoting an
illegal warrant, to suspend (as much as in him lies) the laws of the king's
peace, common right, and personal protection, from any of the king's subjects,
(and this even in the king's name,) must necessarily suspend also, at the same
time, the allegiance of the persons injured, for so a long time as they are in
any actual danger; and they are permitted, even by the FIRST foundation of the
English law, Primum fundamentum legis Angliae est lex RATIONIS. -- Doct. et
Stud. c. 5. -- Insuper lex rationis permittit plurima fieri, ut scilicet quod
LICITUM EST vim vi repellere, et quod fas est UNICUIQUE (seamen not excepted)
se tueri, et rem suam defendere contra vim injustam. Doct. et Stud. c. ii.
to repel force with force, and to defend themselves and their own property
against UNJUST violence. And they are not deemed guilty of murder, even if they
kill the assailants, provided the killing be inevitable in their defense; and
that they cannot otherwise maintain their rights. -- Nay, men are not only
justified in defending themselves with force and arms, but may also legally
defend and rescue any other person whatever, that is attacked or oppressed by
an unlawful violence, though he be totally unknown to the rescuers! -- For this
was literally the case of Hopkins, Hugget, and three others, (an adjudged case
in B. R. 18 Car. 2.) who, in attempting to rescue a stranger from the custody
of some press-masters, in Smithfield, happened to kill one of them. -- This was
but manslaughter, (says Ld. C. J. Holt, See his Report of "Regina versus
Mawgridge," published at the end of Ld C. J. Kelyng's Reports, of which judge
Holt was the editor. Some stress has been laid on the circumstance in the above
case, that "the piece of paper," which the press-masters showed to Hugget, etc.
"was not a sufficient warrant." This is, indeed, readily allowed; and we may
safely add, that, if the lord admiral himself had attended to assist his
press-masters, his authority in this case would have been as insignificant as
that of any other man; since the baneful clause of "Non obstante statuto" in
the lord admiral's patent is declared null and void: and, even if the king, at
that time, and the lords of the privy council had also attended in person, with
the BEST WARRANT they could make, it would still have been "an insufficient
warrant" to justify any such violent attacks upon the liberty of innocent
subjects! and the same judgment in law must inevitably have been given
(supposing the LAW to be DULY MAINTAINED) as in the recited case: because the
meanest subjects are as much entitled to the protection of the law as a king is
to his crown, and consequently are equally justified in defending it, and in
resisting unlawful force with force, according to the first foundation of the
English law as already recited. For it is a maxim in law, that "the king can
order nothing" (i. e. nothing of legal process) except by a court legally
appointed. Rex nil potest jubere nisi per curiam legitime constitutam. Now, as
all pretense of legal power (in the capacity of a court of law) is taken from
the king and council by express act of parliament, it would be absurd to
attribute to their warrants and orders, or the admiralty press-warrants, (which
are founded on no other authority,) the least legal authority as "a sufficient
warrant" to justify the taking and imprisoning any man whatsoever; because they
are not, nor cannot be considered as, any part of "THE DUE PROCESS OF THE LAW,"
which alone can justify the taking and imprisoning British subjects! And,
therefore, as press-gangs (officers as well as men) are manifestly employed in
an unlawful business, acting WITHOUT LAW, there is no crime in beating, or even
in killing, them, if they cannot otherwise be repelled, which must necessarily
be deemed a justifiable manslaughter, "SE DEFENDENDO;" because it is a maxim,
that -- where there is NO LAW there is no TRANSGRESSION. Ubi non est LEX ibi
non est TRANSGRESSIO. And another maxim says: -- In vain does that man implore
the aid (or protection) of LAW, who strives to subvert even the LAW itself. --
Frustra LEGIS auxilium implorat, qui LEGES IPSAS subvertere conatur: which must
inevitably be deemed the case of press-gangs; insomuch that judge Foster
himself (if he meant to act according TO LAW) must have directed the jury to
find the same verdict, in his famous reported case of Alexander Broadfoot, even
if, instead of a common sailor belonging to the press-gang, Broadfoot had shot
the lieutenant of the gang, or even the captain himself with the admiralty
warrant in his hand; because the same just objection would still have held good
against the press-gang, viz. -- "that they acted without legal warrant;" for an
admiralty warrant, to impress seamen, is no legal warrant, or "process of the
law," to take or imprison any man whatsoever: -- and, therefore all the pains
that have been taken, by that learned man, to disguise and confound the true
legal state of the case, are frivolous, and unworthy his rank and character!
) for, when the liberty of one subject is invaded, it affects all the rest: it
is a provocation to all people, as being of ill example and pernicious
consequence.

In short, that excellent adage for all the ordinary circumstances of life,
viz. " Honesty the best POLICY," will be found to hold equally good in real
politics, or affairs of government, even throughout the most dangerous and
alarming difficulties and emergencies of state; because (if we entertain any
real belief in divine Providence) examples may be produced, from the histories
of all nations, to demonstrate, that the crafty refinements of mere worldly
policy do frequently hasten or produce the very evils they were intended to
avert! An administration of government, therefore, which cannot subsist with
law, justice, and common honesty, is unfit to subsist at all! because law is
the only basis of good and lawful government; so that no man can be esteemed
truly loyal who thinks otherwise; and though several precedents for suspending
THE LAW (both in pressing and other cases) may easily be produced; yet they can
afford no justification or excuse for such measures; because the iniquity of
them still remains, and Malum quo communius eo pejus; so that the citing bad
presidents is a manifest aggravation of the treason! And it is a maxim, -- that
PEACE IS THE LIFE OF THE COMMONWEALTH, LIBERTY THE SOUL OF IT, AND THE LAWS
IT IS BODY. -- VITA REIPUBLICAE PAX, ET ANIMUS LIBERTAS, ET CORPUS LEGES. --
And, therefore, the hateful measure of SUSPENDING THE LAWS, under a pretended
necessity of carrying on a cruel WAR against the advocates for LIBERTY, ought
to be deemed an attempt to destroy the LIFE, SOUL, and BODY, of the republic!

-- Great is the TRUTH, and stronger than all things; -- it lives and
conquereth for evermore. With her there is no ACCEPTING OF PERSONS, or REWARDS;
she does the things that are JUST, and refraineth from ALL UNJUST and WICKED
THINGS. -- Neither in her JUDGMENT (or decree) is any UNRIGHTEOUSNESS; and she
is the STRENGTH, KINGDOM, POWER, and MAJESTY, of all ages! BLESSED BE THE GOD
OF TRUTH!

