TOM JONES.

[Price One Shilling and Six Pence.]

TOM JONES, A COMIC OPERA: As it is Performed at the THEATER ROYAL IN
COVENT GARDEN.

By JOSEPH REED.

THE SECOND EDITION.

LONDON, Printed for BECKET and DE HONDT, in the Strand; and RICHARDSON and
URQUHART, at the Royal Exchange.

MDCCLXIX.

PREFACE.
IT is needless to say the following Opera is taken from FIELDING'S celebrated
novel of Tom Jones; a production so replete with wit, humor, and character,
that it can never want admirers while the English language remains. My extreme
veneration for the memory of the truly-witty and ingenious novelist, naturally
led me to preserve as much of FIELDING throughout my Opera, as the nature of my
plan would allow. Nay, when it was thought necessary to shorten the piece, lest
it should be too long in representation, I readily parted with my own, to
retain as much as possible of the invaluable Original.

I have made many material deviations from the novel, both in point of fable,
and character. I have stripped its hero of his libertinism, to render him, as I
imagined, more amiable and interesting; and have metamorphos'd Parson Supple
into a country 'squire, to avoid giving offense to the cloth. The characters of
Western and Honor I have divested of their provinciality; lest the attention
of the performers, to the pronunciation of an uncouth and difficult dialect,
should produce an Inattention to the more material business of the drama. I
have also endeavored to purge Western's character of its coarseness and
indelicacy, in conformity to the refined taste of the present age; and of its
Jacobitism, from an opinion that such political sect no longer exists, as well
as from a conviction that nothing of party should ever appear within the walls
of a theater.

While I was writing the last act of this Opera (which was in June, 1765), the
French Tom Jones fell into my hands. I found its plan so very confined, and so
materially different from mine, that I could reap little or no benefit from it.
The only particulars, of which I have availed myself from Mons. POINSINET, are
the hint of legitimating Jones, and the thought, which gave rise to my second
air. I have quoted the lines, from which I received advantage in the latter
instance:

Que les devoirs que tu m'imposes,
Triste raison, ont de rigueur!
Tu gemis, Sophie, and tu n'oses
T'interroger sur ta douleur.
Quand sous tes doigts naissent les roses,
Les epines sont dans ton coeur.
ADVERTISEMENT.
N. B. This Opera is entered in the Hall-book of the Company of Stationers; and
whoever pirates any part of it will be prosecuted.

Dramatis Personae.
ALLWORTHY, Mr. GIBSON. WESTERN, Mr. SHUTER. JONES, Mr. MATTOCKS. SUPPLE, Mr.
BARNSHAW. NIGHTINGALE, Mr. DU-BELLAMY. OLD NIGHTINGALE, Mr. MORRIS. BLIFIL, Mr.
GARDNER.
Mrs. WESTERN, Mrs. GREEN. SOPHIA, Mrs. PINTO. NANCY, Mrs. BAKER. HONOR, Mrs.
MATTOCKS. LANDLADY, Mrs. WHITE.
Four Country Gentlemen, Servants, Huntsman, etc.

SCENE, during the First and Second Acts, in SOMERSETSHIRE; in the Last, at
UPTON.

TOM JONES.
ACT I.
SCENE, A Hall in an old Mansion House.
WESTERN, JONES, SUPPLE, and four Country Gentlemen, just returned from a
Fox-Chace; two French Horns, a Huntsman bearing a Fox's Head, and a Servant
with a large Tankard, which he hands round during the Song. AIR.
Set by Mr. ARNOLD.
Jon. NO sport to the chase can compare,
So manly the pleasures it yields;
How sweet, how refreshing that air
Inhal'd in the woods and the fields!
As we rush in pursuit, new scenes still appear,
New landscapes encounter the eye;
Not Handel's sweet music more pleases the ear,
Than that of the hounds in full cry.
New strength from the chase we derive;
Its exercise purges the blood:
How happy that mortal must live,
Whose sport yields both physic and food!
So new and so varied its charms, they never cloy
Like those of the bottle and face;
The oftener, the harder, the more we enjoy,
The more we are in love with the chase.

Was. Gentlemen, though none of you will stay dinner, I must insist on your
pushing it about. We Have had a hard ride, and a refreshing draught will not be
amiss -- come, brother sportsman, to our next merry meeting in the field.
drinks.


1st. Genesis Thank you, my old soul -- [taking the tankard.] And here is wishing
the next fox may give us as much sport, as that ginger-colour'd gentleman.
drinks.


All. Illo ho! illo ho! hark to him! to him!


2d. Genesis Excellent stuff in faith! This will make a man live for ever -- I
cannot part with the tankard without the other draught -- [drinks.] If I were a
king, I would make the fellow, that brewed this stingo, my prime minister.


Was. Rot thee, Ned, you are a jolly dog, and a true sportsman!


Sup. Come, here is confusion to all poachers.


3d. Genesis With three chears, gentlemen; with three chears.


All. Huzza! huzza! huzza!


4th Genesis Good b'ye, gentlemen.


Sup. Gentlemen all, your most obedient. Exeunt the four Gentlemen.


Was. So my sister and Sophy have dined?


Ser. Yes, sir; madam did not expect you so soon, and as it was Gazette-day,
they dined at one.


Was. Then let us have dinner immediately. [Exit Ser.] I Will just take a peep
into the stable, to see how Chevalier does after his hard chase -- didn't he
behaved gallantly today, Tom?


Jon. Amazingly, sir!


Sup. It Is one of the best pieces of horseflesh that ever was crossed. Exeunt
-- Western singing.


SCENE, a genteel Apartment.
SOPHIA working a Chair-bottom, and HONOR sewing. AIR.
Mr. HOLCOMBE.
So. When tyrant love, that foe to rest,
Despotic rules a virgin's breast,
The needle she employs in vain
To banish thought, to banish pain:
For while beneath her fingers grows
In mimic bloom the silken rose,
The fair, by real anguish torn,
Feels in her heart the growing thorn.

Hon. I Am sorry, ma'am, to see you look so grave this afternoon. I Am afraid Mr.
Jones runs in your head.


So. Mr. Jones runs in my head! What is Mr. Jones to me?


Hon. Nothing, ma'am. He Is not a proper match for you to be sure: with your
fortune you may command one of the greatest lords of the land; therefore you
will not certainly stoop to marry a beggar and a foundling.


So. I don't know what you mean by taking these liberties with Mr. Jones! The
misfortune of his birth is not his crime.


Hon. Ma'am, if it was a disgrace, Mr. Jones has a great many people, that
carry their heads very high, to keep him in countenance -- well, he is one of
the sweetest gentlemen that ever trod on shoe-leather! Every body likes him:
all the neighborhood, for five miles round, would run through fire and water
for him -- if I were in your clothes, and he loved me, as much as I believe he
loves you --


So. Loves me, Honor! I don't understand you.


Hon. Ma'am, I may be mistaken, it is true; because, as the man says, we can be
sure of nothing in this world but death and taxes: however I could tell you
something, that looks very like it.


So. Ay! pray what is that, Honor?


Hon. He came into the room, as I was sitting at work, and what should be upon
the table but the muff you gave me, and my gentleman whips his hands into it.
"La, Mr. Jones, you will spoil it," says I; but he still kept his hands in it,
and kissed it, and mumbled it, and kissed it -- for my part I never saw such
kisses in my life as he gave it.


So. When was this?


Hon. Let me see -- it was the day after I dreamt that I was married to Sir
Timothy Tipple -- last Thursday -- ay it was on Thursday. -- But that is not
all neither -- yesterday, as you were playing on the harpsichord, he was in the
next room, and looked melancholy -- says I, "What Is the matter, Mr. Jones? A
penny for your thoughts" -- "Hussy," says he, starting up as from a dream,
"what can I be thinking of, when that angel your mistress is playing?" -- But
I Am afraid you're offended, ma'am?


So. No, no -- proceed.


Hon. Then squeezing my hand -- he squeezed so hard, that I thought he would
have forced the blood out of my finger-ends -- "Oh! Mrs. Honor, says he, how
happy will that man be" -- and then he sighed -- Upon my faith his breath is as
sweet as a nosegay -- but for heaven's sake, ma'am, don't speak of this; for he
gave me a guinea never to mention it. However, as I did not swear it, it is only
a promise, and what signifies a promise?

AIR.
Set by Mr. ARNOLD.
At court, where true breeding abounds,
They never let promises bind 'em:
In country, in cities, in towns,
It Is likewise the mode not to mind 'em.
To promises never give trust,
Of truth they are seldom the token;
The old proverb says, a pye-crust
And a promise were made to be broken.

So. Honor, if you will never mention this affair again, I Will not be angry
with you: It may come to my father's ears, and he would be displeased at Mr.
Jones; though I really believe he meant no harm.


Hon. Harm, ma'am? I Am positive sure he meant no harm -- "Yes, Honor, says he,
I Am neither such a coxcomb, nor such a villian, as to look upon her in any
other light, but as my goddess; and as such I will always worship and adore her
while I have breath" -- this was all, ma'am; so you plainly see he meant no
harm.


So. Well, well, let me hear no more of this -- I Will take a walk in the garden
-- [takes up a muff] Lord! what an odious muff is this! I cannot bear it -- pray
fetch me my old one, Honor.


Hon. What, that your ladyship gave me?


So. Ay, that; fetch it this minute.


Hon. I will, ma'am -- the old muff again! Oh ho! aside, exit.


So. Love will not be concealed. We try to deceive ourselves, we try to deceive
others; but alas! it is all in vain. The more we attempt to conceal our
affections, the more we expose ourselves; and our very servants are witnesses
of our weakness.

AIR.
Set by Mr. ARNOLD.
That passion, which harrows the soul,
By reason we strive to remove;
But reason's too weak to control
A passion, so powerful as love.
Then why this vain war with desire?
Resistance but doubles the smart:
The more I oppose the fierce fire,
It rages the more in my heart.

Enter HONOR, with a Muff. Hon. Here it is, ma'am. gives it to Sophia.


So. Thank you, dear Honor -- I Will wear it again. Instead of it, you may take
the lutestring night town.


Hon. Ma'am, I Am very much obliged to you -- [Exit. Soph. sighing and kissing
the muff.] A lutestring nightgown for an old muff! -- to be sure she does not
love Mr. Jones! No, not she, dear creature! -- Well if I had twice her fortune,
I shouldn't think myself a crumb too good for him -- here he comes! Heavens
bless him! He Is a sweet man, that is the truth on it!


Enter JONES. Jon. Mrs. Honor, your servant. How does your young lady today?


Hon. Very well, Mr. Jones -- we have just been talking of you.


Jon. Of me, Mrs. Honor?


Hon. Yes, Sir -- I Have been telling her that -- that --


Jon. What?


Hon. Why what you said, when she was playing on the harpsichord.


Jon. Bless me, Mrs. Honor! How could you, when I so earnestly desired your
secrecy?


Hon. Sir, I had really no design to mention it, but Old Scratch pushed me on,
a purpose to make me break my word.


Jon. [Walking about] I shall never be able to look her in the face again.


Hon. Nay for that matter, you need not be in such a fluster neither. I don't
believe she is angry at you, because she begged the muff again, though I told her
of your kissing it.


Jon. Again! Why had she given it you?


Hon. Yes, sir; and she has just now bid me take a silk gown for it. Now you
know if she was angry, she would scarce take to wearing it again.


Jon. Why that is true -- yet she must be displeased at my presumption, in
entertaining even the most distant thoughts of her -- I pray thee, dear Honor,
unsay it all to Sophia: Tell her it was only an invention of thy own. Takes
hold of her hand.


Enter WESTERN and SUPPLE. West. Ah! you liquorish rogue! what are you about?
Honor, go and tell Sophy to come hither.


Hon. Yes, sir. Exit.


AIR.
Mr. GRANOM.
Was. Come leave off these tricks, or
I Will lend you a flick, sir;
I guess you, young dog, what you drive at.
For shame! Keep aloof, sir;
While under my roof, sir,
Pray none of your wenches in private.
You Will give the world handle
My mansion to scandal;
Remember few damsels are barren:
Then beat up elsewhere, sir,
The game, and forbear, sir,
To poach any more in my warren.

Enter SOPHIA. Was. Kiss me, Sophy; I have not had a buss of thee these two
days. -- I want a little of the motion of thy fingers. [Shakes his fingers.]
"Old sir Simon the king." sings.


So. [Sitting down to the harpsichord.] Papa, you have it so often, that I
wonder you don't tire of it. I have this morning been practicing an air, which
I yesterday overheard Mr. Jones sing to sir Timothy, when you retired to take
your afternoon's nap -- let me give it you: Mr. Jones will perhaps favor you
with the words.


Was. Come, Tom, let us have it.


Jon. With all my heart, sir.

AIR.
Dr. ARNE.
Swains, tell me no more of the transports divine
You reap with the women, exclusive of wine.
Wine heightens our pleasures, each joy will improve,
Adds smartness to converse, and fuel to love.
Nor tell me, ye topers, that wine ever made
You perfectly happy without woman's aid.
This maxim attend, if true bliss you would have,
Of both be a lover, to neither a slave.

Was. Thank you, Tom. -- [As Sophia plays the symphony, the muff drops on the
harpsichord.] I wonder what business your damned muff has there to spoil your
playing? -- [throws it away] I wish one of my beagles would come, and tear it
in pieces!


So. [Runs and snatches the muff] I would not have it torn in pieces for a
thousand pounds.


Jon. O the enchanting angel!


Was. A thousand pounds! It was hardly ever worth a thousand farthings -- but I
know you say this by way of contradiction; you're like your mother for that.


So. Would I could be like her in every thing! for she was one of the worthiest
women upon earth.


Was. Why there was not a worse wife in all christendom than she made. She would
sit you sulk, sulk, sulking from day's end to day's end, and all only because
her father forced her to marry me. She had no more affection for me to the hour
of her death, than if I had been an Egyptian mummy, or a Russian bear --
[Sophia bursts into tears and exit.] Ay, this is always madam's way, when I
talk about her mother -- but we must crack a bottle together: I didn't drink
much above a pint at dinner, and I generally make it up a bottle, by way of
concoction, as they call it.


Sup. You know, 'squire, I seldom object to a proposal of this kind.


Was. No, nor to any other proposal, I Will say that for thee. -- But what say
you, Tom?


Jon. No more wine for me I thank you, sir: I must go and change my dress.


Was. Dress? What signifies dress, you monkey, when you're among friends?


Sup. I Will be hanged, Jones, if you have not some wench or other in your eye,
or you would hardly take so much pains in adorning your person.


Was. So I think, cuz; for what signifies dress, if one does not want to make
the women fond of one?


Jon. Very true, sir; and where is the man that does not wish to make the women
fond of him? -- and so your servant, gentlemen. Exit.


Was. I must keep a sharp look-out, or this young rogue will be getting hold of
some of the hussies in my family as sure as a gun.

AIR. O my kitten.
And should a young bantling appear,
Dame scandal at me will let fly;
Each neighbor will snigger and fleer,
"I guess who'as a hand in the pie."
The jokers a fine game will go,
And hourly have me on the hip,
With "'squire, an old coachman you know
Loves always the smack of the whip."
Cracks his whip.
Enter Mrs. WESTERN and her MAID. Mrs. Was. I think this post will never come!
-- Betty, take that pamphlet, and lay it on my toilette: I must finish it
before I sleep. [Exit Maid.] This author elucidates the affair of continental
connexions in a most masterly manner, and his reasoning upon the national debt,
and internal and external taxation is unanswerable -- brother, your servant. I
want to have a little talk with you -- nay you need not go, Mr. Supple; it is
nothing but what may be mentioned in your presence.


Was. Well, what is it about, sister?


Mrs. Was. Pray have not you observed something very extraordinary in your
daughter of late?


Was. Not I.


Mrs. Was. Nor you, Mr. Supple?


Sup. Not I, madam.


Mrs. Was. Gentlemen, I am absolutely astonished at your blindness.


Was. Why, is there any thing the matter with the girl?


Mrs. Was. Yes, I think there is; and of much consequence too.


Was. If any thing be the matter, acquaint me with it at once, for you know I
love her more than my own soul.


Mrs. Was. Nay, nay, the disorder is not so very dangerous -- I believe,
gentlemen, you are both pretty well convinced -- you more especially, Mr.
Supple -- that I know the world.


Sup. Not one person on the whole globe knows it so well as yourself.


Was. That Is a damned -- I know what. aside.


Mrs. Was. Nay now, cousin, that is going rather too far. The globe you know is
of very extraordinary circumference, and there are undoubtedly persons on it,
some few persons, who perhaps may exceed -- at least equal me in that
particular -- well, I promise you I was never more deceived in my life, if my
niece be not --


Was. What? what?


Mrs. Was. Most desperately in love.


Was. How? in love? Fall in love without asking me leave? I Will disinherit her;
I Will turn her out of doors.


Mrs. Was. This is so like you! Always in a passion before you know why.


Was. Zounds! Don't I know --


Mrs. Was. You know nothing; nothing in the world: there is scarce a less
intellectual being in the creation -- suppose now she should have fixed upon
the very person, whom you yourself would wish? I hope you would not be angry
then?


Was. No, no, no; that makes a wide difference! if she only marries the man I
would have her, she may love any body she pleases.


Mrs. Was. Brother, I must compliment you on the increase of your
understanding; for this is positively the most sensible expression that ever
escaped you -- I will disclaim all knowledge of the world, if the person, my
niece, has chosen, be not the very person you would choose for her.


Was. But who is he?


Mrs. Was. Nay, even find that out your self. You who are so profound a
politician -- in your own opinion -- can be at no great loss. That judgment,
which can penetrate into the cabinets of princes, and discern the secret
springs, which move the state-wheels in all the political machines in Europe,
can surely very easily find out what passes in the rude, uninform'd mind of a
girl.


Was. Sister, don't talk your court-gibberish to me: I don't understand the
lingo; and moreover, and besides, you know, I hate every thing that belongs to
the court. It Is well for thee that you are a woman, or I Would have lent thee many
a flick, for talking to me so much court-nonsense. I Would have thrash'd thy jacket
for thee, I promise thee.


Mrs. Was. Ay, ay, in that flicking and thrashing lies all your fancied
superiority: Your bodies, not your brains, are stronger than ours. It Is with
you as with the brute creation in general; the greater your bulk and strength,
the smaller your intellects.


Was. But prithee tell me what you mean about my daughter?


Mrs. Was. Hold a moment, while I digest that sovereign contempt I have for
your sex -- there -- now, good politic sir, with all your prodigious share of
supposed sagacity, what think you of -- Mr. Blisil?


Was. Blifil! speaking together.


Sup. Blifil! speaking together.


Mrs. Was. Ay, Blifil -- don't you remember, gentlemen, she fainted away in the
field about a month ago, on seeing him lie breathless on the ground, in
consequence of some hostilities offered him by Jones, on account of a sarcastic
sneer on his illegitimate birth? When we came up to the scene of action, did
not you observe her look pale?


Sup. Yes, as pale as a playhouse-ghost, I perfectly remember.


Was. Before George, now you mind me on it, I remember it all. I knew Sophy was a
good girl, and wouldn't fall in love to make me angry -- I was never more
rejoiced in my life, for nothing can lie so handy as the two estates: they are,
as one may say, joined in matrimony already, and it would be a thousand pities
to part them.


Sup. So it would, cousin.


Was. And yet I cannot tell what to think on it; for Allworthy is such a queer
chap, that money has no effect on him.


Sup. No effect on him? Then he must be made of different materials from the
rest of mankind.

AIR. Peggy's Mill.
That gold is an idol all people adore,
Their practice evinces most clearly:
Even patriots themselves often grasp at this ore,
Their country scarce loving so dearly.
Let the prelate against riches employ tongue and pen,
Be his eloquence ever so charming,
Only think of his lordship's full coffers, and then --
You Will sneer at both preacher and sermon.

Was. But what would you have me do, sister?


Mrs. Was. Since you condescend to ask my advice, you may propose the match to
Allworthy yourself. There is no indecorum in the proposal's coming from a
parent. King Alcinous offers, in Pope's Odyssey, his daughter to Ulysses.


Was. King Alcinous offers Pope Odyssey his daughter Ulysses!


Mrs. Was. Brother, your ignorance provokes me to smile.


Was. Allworthy is gone to visit a sick tenant, and will call in his return --
suppose I mention the matter.


Mrs. Was. Do so, do so; and desire him to bring Blifil to dine with us
tomorrow.


Was. Odd rabbit it! If Allworthy should refuse the match, I shall be for
lending him a flick, as sure as the devil's in London; for I cannot bear to have
my girl slighted.


Sup. Don't be afraid of that; the match is too advantageous to be refused.


Mrs. Was. Brother, do you suppose Mr. Allworthy has more contempt for money,
because he professes more? You would make a fine plenipo at a general congress!
You would negotiate with these Machiavels, the French, with great dexterity!


Was. I Am sure I could make as good a negotiator as you, or any political old
woman in the nation; though we have a great many of them.


Mrs. Was. You negotiate? Yes, for a few acres of land, or a stack of hay.


Sup. Here Is a quarrel a-brewing! I had best march. Exit.


Was. Before you women set up for managing state affairs, you should learn the
needful art of keeping a secret.


Mrs. Was. I insist on it that we keep secrets better than you he-creatures.


Was. In your intrigues, I grant you; there you have the advantage of us -- No,
no, sister; though the folks at the head of affairs are no great conjurers, yet
they are rather wiser than to trust an old woman with their secrets, ha! ha! ha!


Mrs. Was. Sir, you're both a brute and a blockhead, and if you had the least
spice of intellects or good-manners, you would scorn to use a gentlewoman of my
acknowledged abilities in this preposterous manner. -- Notwithstanding your
horse-laugh, it is my happiness to be universally regarded as a phenomenon in
the political hemisphere, and as a nonpareil in the knowledge of the world --
Wiser than trust a woman with their secrets! -- Sir, I beg leave to tell you,
there are persons of the first distinction -- yes, of the very first
distinction in the political world, who have not thought it beneath their
dignity to trust me, ay, me, sir, with the most important secrets. -- And let
me tell you further, sir, I have had the honor of being closetted with a
prime-minister, and consulted on an expedition, before it has been communicated
to either king or council.


Was. Closetted with a prime-minister! I Am afraid, sister, there has been
something more than politics in the case.


Mrs. Was. How dare you have the effrontery to make so scurrilous and
indelicate an innuendo, to a woman of my irreproachable character? A woman,
who, instead of studying personal embellishments, has taken so much pains in
adorning her head?


Was. Yes, yes, you do take pains enough to adorn your head! you build it up to
a monstrous height indeed! Ecod, I cannot help laughing, whenever I look at it.

AIR.
The women attempted some few years ago
Their lovers to charm with a small head;
But now in their noddles as bumpy they show,
As if the whole carcass was all head.
This fashion the sex of admirers will rob;
Their conquests they certainly push ill,
In striving to charm with a bolster'd-out nob,
As large as a Winchester-bushel.
Exit.
Mrs. Was. Was there ever so affronting a savage! -- Wiser than trust a woman
with their secrets! -- He has no more breeding -- Were it not for his daughter,
I would depart, like an offended ambassador, without taking leave.


Enter SOPHIA, reading. Come hither, Sophy -- what book is that? Let me see it,
child -- Heloisa to Abelard! -- I thought it was something on love -- you
blush, child! -- ah! Sophy, Sophy, I know what passes in that little heart of
yours, more than you imagine -- do you think I don't know the reason of your
overacting all that friendship for Mr. Blifil the other day?

So. Heavens! Am I discovered? (aside.)


Mrs. Was. Nay, you need not blush; it is a passion, which both I and your
father approve -- come, constitute and appoint me of your privy council, and I
will guaranty to you the peaceable possession of your Adonis -- don't sigh, my
dear, but out with it all -- no reserve, I conjure you -- the affair is already
on the carpet, and your father is going to have a private audience with Mr.
Allworthy, in order to propose the match, and will invite the heir-presumptive
of your affections to dine with us tomorrow.


So. Tomorrow, my dear aunt? -- [fetching her breath] You frighten me out of
my senses!


Mrs. Was. Oh! my dear, you will soon come to yourself, for he is a most charming
young fellow.


So. I must own I don't know another man, that seems to have so many good
qualities.


Mrs. Was. Yes, yes, he has a great many indeed! I don't wonder at your loving
him.


So. So brave.


Mrs. Was. And yet so gentle.


So. So witty.


Mrs. Was. Yet so inoffensive.


So. So humane, so sprightly -- speaking both together.


Mrs. Was. So civil, so -- speaking both together. My dear, there is no getting
in a word with you.


So. What signifies the circumstance of his birth, when compared with such
qualifications!


Mrs. Was. His birth? Pray what circumstance is there in the least derogatory
to the birth of Mr. Blifil?


So. Mr. Blifil!


Mrs. Was. Mr. Blifil? Ay, of whom else have we had this conference?


So. Good heaven! Of Mr. Jones I thought.


Mrs. Was. Jones? And is it possible you can think of allying yourself to
illegitimacy? The blood of the Westerns could never submit to such
contamination -- you are the first; yes, Miss Western, you are the very first
of your name, since the landing of Julius Caesar, that ever entertained so
grovelling a thought. The female Westerns have been proverbially called the
Dianas of the age, since the Conquest -- and you to defile a stream of blood,
which has flowed with such purity for so many hundred -- centuries!


So. My dear aunt, don't put yourself in so violent a rage.


Mrs. Was. Fall in love with one of spurious origin! I thought, miss, the pride
of your family would have restrained such monstrous inclinations. -- Love
indeed is well enough in trades-people's daughters, chambermaids, and such
low-bred reptiles; but in a woman of family it is the most ridiculous thing
upon earth. To the praise of the present nobility be it spoken, there is hardly
any such thing as love to be met with in our right honorable matches.


So. But, madam --


Mrs. Was. And you to think of disgracing yourself and family by so vulgar, so
preposterous a passion! -- I Will to your father this instant, and inform him of
the grossness, the depravity, of your affection.


So. [kneeling] Alas! my dear madam --


Mrs. Was. It is in vain to importune me; the match is resolved upon, and
nothing can, nor shall prevent it.


AIR.
Van MALDERE.
So. Dearest aunt, attend my prayer!
Let your indignation cease:
These stern looks my bosom tear:
Have some pity on a niece!
From this hard, this cruel stroke,
Your loved darling kindly save!
The sad sentence, O revoke!
Or you doom me to the grave.

Mrs. Was. It Is all to no purpose -- your solicitation is totally inadmissible.


So. [rising] But, madam, you will surely give me time to get the better of my
disinclination to Mr. Blifil?


Mrs. Was. It would be fine politics indeed to protract a siege, when the
enemy's army is at hand, and in danger of relieving the town. As your heart is
in so critical a situation, I will do all I can to hasten the match, and put
your honor out of the care of your family -- I shall not acquaint your father
with your hopeful passion; but if you ever speak to this spurious swain any
more, he shall know the whole. I would therefore advise you to evacuate your
heart of its attachment to so inadequate a pretender as Jones, and turn your
thoughts wholly on the intended alliance between you and Mr. Allworthy's
heir-apparent. Exit.


Enter HONOR. Hon. Bless me, ma'am! what makes you look so sad?


So. Alas! Honor, my father and aunt have resolved on a match between me and
Mr. Blifil.


Hon. Lord forbid! Even poor as I am, I would scarce have him myself, for I
cannot abide him -- however, one comfort is, that they cannot force you whether
you will or no to marry him. -- Dear ma'am, do not sigh so.


So. Yes, I must be sacrificed to family-views -- tormenting thought!


AIR.
Mr. BACH.
Thirst of wealth too often bewitches
The deluded parent's heart;
But can worldly pomp or riches
Real happiness impart?
Love's the sweetest, dearest pleasure
To the human heart conveyed:
Those, who give up love for treasure,
Quit the substance for the shade.
Exit. Hon. I would not tell her that Mr. Jones was in the garden, for fear of
offending her -- poor soul! he is walking by the canal step by step with his
arms across, and so thoughtful! [walks as describ'd] I Am in a peck of fears and
troubles, lest he should be throwing himself in -- and yet I think I need not
be afraid on it; for hanging and drowning for love is almost out of fashion. --
This match with Blifil will be a terrible affair to my poor mistress; for if
love has not already got hold of her little heart, I am hugely mistaken -- for
my part I cannot blame her for liking so charming a man as Mr. Jones.

AIR.
Had I quite clear in land a year
Full twenty thousand pound,
And did surpass the fairest lass
That ever trod the ground;
Though dukes and lords, with stars and swords,
Should court while courting's good,
For him alone I Would slight each don:
I wish I may die but I would!
He is in truth a well-made youth,
And of the sweetest mein:
Whoever his wife, she will lead a life
As happy as a queen.
No courtly dame need think it shame
To wed, if he should woo.
No swain I know could charm me so,
I wish I may die if I do!

Runs off singing. SCENE, A Garden.
JONES. Jon. There can be no hopes of her father's consent; and Mr. Allworthy
would never pardon an attempt to marry her without it -- nay I could scarce
pardon myself. Conscience teaches me, that to repay the friendships of
hospitality by this worst kind of robbery, is to be the meanest, the basest of
all robbers. -- Yet is there not a great difference between clandestinely
marrying a friend's daughter from a motive of love, and doing it from a sordid
motive of interest? -- Certainly -- but then her father would disclaim her; and
shall I, whose sole support flows from Mr. Allworthy's unmerited bounty,
involve her in my distress? Her, who has been brought up with such tenderness,
elegance, and delicacy? -- That, that has determined me -- No, no, no; let me
not make her unhappy, however miserable I may be myself -- I must think no more
of her.

AIR.
Dr. ARNE.
What pity that nature has cast
Between us this distance in life,
When nearness in temper and taste
Has formed us for husband and wife!
Sold Hymen my passion befriend,
How sweet were each conjugal kiss!
Such raptures our loves would attend,
That angels might envy my bliss.
Enter SOPHIA. Miss Western, your most obedient -- this is an unexpected
pleasure indeed!


So. The fineness of the weather has tempted me out -- here is a heavenly
afternoon, and the reflection of the sun upon the water makes the canal appear
remarkably beautiful -- I fancy, Mr. Jones, you have some little shuddering
when you see that water?


Jon. Shuddering, my dear madam! why?


So. You cannot have forgot, though it is so long ago, your plunge into the canal,
when the bough broke, as you were climbing the tree to recover your little
namesake.


Jon. I assure you, madam, the concern, which you felt for the loss of your
bird, will always appear to me the highest circumstance of that boyish
adventure.


So. Upon my word, Mr. Jones, your gallantry had very nearly cost you your life!


Jon. Madam, if I have any reason to reflect with sorrow, it is that the water
was not a little deeper.


So. Sure you cannot be in earnest! This affected contempt of life is only an
excess of your complaisance. You would endeavor to lessen the obligation of
having ventured it twice on my account -- you know it was last year in danger,
when you broke your arm by leaping off your horse, to prevent mine from
throwing me -- you have escaped twice, but beware the third time. Looks at him
very languishingly.


Jon. Oh! Miss Western, can you desire me to live? Can you wish me so ill?


So. Indeed, Mr. Jones I -- I -- I don't wish you ill: I don't indeed.


Jon. Madam, you wish me ill, if you wish me to live, for life begins to be
insupportable -- your caution comes too late; the mischief is already done.


So. Nay now I don't understand you.


Jon. My dear Miss Western, I would not be understood -- I know not what I say
-- meeting you here so unexpectedly, I have been unguarded. I have uttered
that, which I had resolved everlastingly to bury in this bosom -- pardon me,
most angelic creature, if I have said any thing to offend you.


So. Mr. Jones, I will not affect to misunderstand you; but if you have any
regard for me, let me make the best of my way into the house -- I wish I may be
able to support myself thither.


Jon. I must first entreat your forgiveness of that, which love has forced
from me entirely against my will.


So. You have my forgiveness, Mr. Jones. Fortune, not Sophia, is your enemy.


AIR.
Set by Mr. ARNOLD.
Jon. And must I, cruel powers! resign
This idol of my heart?

So. Alas! it is fate's decree, not mine;
We must forever part.
Farewell.

Jon. Not yet -- holding her.

So. I must away;
This freedom gives offense.

Jon. O frown not!

So. It Is a crime to stay,
When duty calls me hence.

Both. Oh! how it tears my bleeding heart,
To think we must forever part!

Jon. Yet, loveliest virgin, ever you go,
Permit me to declare
To what excess I love.

So. No, no:
Such tender tale forbear.
Adieu!

Jon. Adieu!

Both. How I repine
At fate's severe decree!
If India's utmost wealth were mine,
I Would give it all for thee.

Exeunt severally. The END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE, A Garden.
Enter JONES, and NIGHTINGALE. Jon. DEAR Nightingale, you should have
considered her want of fortune sooner. On promise of marriage, you have won her
to elope from a tender mother. You have made use of every effort to seduce her,
and because you cannot succeed, you want to shuffle her off. The girl is
absolutely ruined; for should she even return home immediately, it would be
impossible to convince the world of her innocence.


Night. That Is true! But it is the very devil to marry a woman without any
fortune!

AIR.
Dr. ARNE.
'Till luxury came into play,
And swelled the expenses of life,
Even dowerless beauty could sway
Each youth in the choice of a wife.
But now such a chargeable train
Of wants has the conjugal state,
That women should only be taken
Like money not current -- by weight.

Jon. Well, if you don't marry her, Mrs. Miller will assuredly die of a broken
heart; and I wish poor Nancy may not make her exit by more hasty means; so you
will not only have the reputation of ruining the daughter, but the glory of
killing the mother.


Night. Upon my word, Tom, thou would have made a most admirable parson!


Jon. Nay, my dear Jack, I know you have not a bad heart, so prithee don't
trifle on so serious a business.


Night. Well, if thou wilt accompany me to Upton, I Will marry her tomorrow.


Jon. With the greatest pleasure.


Night. I Will to the poor girl, and comfort her: she has scarce had a dry eye
since morning -- but pray in what situation are your affairs?


Jon. My affairs are desperate indeed! I had fostered some distant hopes of the
lovely Sophia; but I must renounce her: the peace of a worthy family requires
it -- she never can be mine, and my only relief must be to forget her -- to
shake off the slavery of an enfeebling passion, I will embrace the noblest of
all passions, the love of my country, and enter a volunteer in its service.

AIR.
Dr. ARNE.
Sound, sound aloud Britannia's name!
Her great and glorious deeds proclaim
To every foreign land:
Fame, sing her conquests on the main;
All her brave sons will join the strain,
And swell the choral band.
Exeunt.
SCENE, A Chamber.
Enter WESTERN and a SERVANT. Was. So, because she is expounding the Gazette, as
Jones calls it, to my cuz Supple, I must be obliged to wait the lord knows how
long? Tell her -- Oh! here she comes! -- Get thee gone. Exit Servant.


Mrs. Was. [Within] Mr. Supple, I Will be with you again, as soon as possible.


Enter Mrs. WESTERN, with a Gazette in her Hand. Things look so well in the
North, that I was never in a better humor -- Brother, I am now at your service
for a few minutes -- your pleasure?

Was. I have opened the matter to Allworthy, who is now in the dining room,
acquainting his nephew with it.


Mrs. Was. Excessively well! You have acted like a wise and prudent father. --
Brother, the Gazette brings good news. Things look very well in the North, and
here is a pretty good article from Vienna. [reads.] The grand duke of Tuscany
was elected king of the Romans on the thirteenth, and --


Was. But, dear sister, let us mind our own affairs, and leave those of the
grand duke to some other time.


Mrs. Was. Then prithee make haste, for we have yet above a column and a half
to go through -- what do say, brother? I Am as impatient to be gone, as a
vigilant general is to steal a march of the enemy -- come, dispatch, dispatch.


Was. As Blifil is in the house, suppose he and Sophy should have a meeting
immediately?


Mrs. Was. That requires some consideration -- [looking on the Gazette] why --
a -- yes -- no -- certainly -- by no means.


Was. [Mimicking her] Yes -- no -- certainly -- by no means! -- The devil's in
the woman to be sure! It Is confounded hard that you will not give a body a direct
answer -- nay, what signifies my talking? -- You cannot hear a syllable, while
you have have that damned Gazette in your hand, unless I speak as loud as a
thunderclap. Speaking very loud.


Mrs. Was. [With surprise.] Brother!


Was. I ask if they may not as well have a meeting immediately?


Mrs. Was. Who have a meeting?


Was. Zounds! Sophy and Blifil.


Mrs. Was. Bless me! How you swear!


Was. Swear! You Would make a parson swear.


Mrs. Was. Well, let them have a meeting to open their amorous conferences.
Reads.


Was. But should'nt I acquaint Sophy with it before hand? -- Nay, now you're at
it again! -- I must have recourse to other means I find. Snatches the Gazette.


Mrs. Was. Brother, you are absolutely a perfect Croat -- but things look so
well in the North, that I cannot be angry with you.


Was. I say should'nt I --


Mrs. Was. [stopping her ears] I Will not hear a word; not one word I assure you.
I will by no means vouchsafe you a parley, till you make restitution of that
literary acquisition, which you have so piratically snatched from me.


Was. There it is for you -- shouldn't Sophy be acquainted before hand?


Mrs. Was. Acquainted with what?


Was. With what? Why that she and Blifil are to have a meeting. Loud.


Mrs. Was. I protest, brother, you are enough to frighten one -- but pray what
were you asking me?


Was. If Sophy should not be acquainted with the intended meeting between her
and Blifil?


Mrs. Was. Oh! by all means, brother! Pray go and inform her of it. You are the
fittest person in the universe to be employed in such an embassy -- but poor
Mr. Supple will be as anxious for my return, as a harrass'd army, after a long
campaign, is to go into winter quarters -- [reads] Letters from the Ottoman
Port bring advice that the infidels are forming an army of observation -- Exit.


Was. The duce Ottoman Port thee! I Am as tired as a dog of her damned
nonsensical politics -- but here comes Sophy!


Enter SOPHIA. Well, Sophy, I Have resolved to marry thee to Blifil -- what a
plague do thou sigh for? -- Come, come, none of these maidenish airs -- your
mother, I remember, whimper'd and whin'd at our marriage, but it was all over
in eight and forty hours -- cheer up, cheer up, child -- I Will go and bring thy
lover. Exit.

So. How terrible is my situation! I can never marry this man -- shall I then
turn rebel against a father's authority, and violate one of the strongest
obligations that nature has imposed on us? I shudder at the thought!


AIR.
Set by Mr. ARNOLD.
Duty is nature's strongest law;
A tie, that all should have in view;
A debt of gratitude, love, awe,
To every tender parent due.
By heaven it is stamped upon our frames;
In polished minds it shines the most:
The wretch that duty's bond disclaims,
Must be to every virtue lost.
Sits down in a musing posture. And yet methinks duty cannot demand the
sacrifice of my own happiness! Surely neither heaven nor nature require me, in
obedience to a parent, to marry a man, with whom I must be for ever miserable.
Rises.

Enter WESTERN and BLIFIL. Was. There she is! To her, to her, coo her -- that is
it, you jolly dog -- follow her, boy -- run in, run in -- that is it, Honeys --
dead, dead, dead -- don't stand shill I, shall I, but push matters home. Exit.


Bli. Miss Western, your most obedient humble servant -- Mr. Western, madam,
has been telling me of the honor intended me, and it is hardly in the power of
words to express my joy on such a happy occasion.


So. Fathers, Mr. Blifil, are frequently too hasty in the disposal of their
children; and often involve them in real misery, by endeavoring to promote
their imaginary happiness.


Bli. I hope Mr. Western is not in that class of parents: I am so much a friend
to his daughter, that I should be extremely sorry he should do any thing to
occasion her disquiet.


So. Then, Mr. Blifil, the only way to show your friendship, will be to decline
your pretensions; for such is my present situation, that I cannot give you the
least encouragement.


Bli. But, madam, may I be allowed to ask your reasons?


So. It is needless: I think I have already explained my self sufficiently.
Exit.


Bli. Leave me so abruptly? Then it is pretty evident she does not like me --
no matter: As she will be the key to the two estates, she is still an object
worthy my pursuit -- by marrying her, I shall not only succeed to the fortunes
of both families, but compass a most desirable point, the expulsion of Jones --
the marriage must be hurried on as fast as possible: I begin to have some ugly
fears about Dowling! It is very lucky that he is now in London -- I must
conceal Sophia's coldness, and tell her father she has given me a most
favorable reception, as that will be the only means to hasten the match --
here he comes!


Enter WESTERN. Was. My daughter, gone! -- Well, how did she receive you?


Bli. Beyond my hopes! Oh! she is the most charming creature!


Was. Tol lol de roll. Sings and capers about.


Bli. So affable, so obliging!


Was. Tol lol de roll.


Bli. So easy! So winning in her deportment!


Was. Tol lol de roll.


Bli. So engaging in her manner! and so very favorable to my hopes!


Was. hugging and kissing him My dear boy, I shall be happier than either of
you -- run to your uncle, and bless him with the news -- Exit Blifil.


HONOR crosses the Stage.

Honor, tell Sophy I want her.

Hon. Yes sir. Exit.


AIR. Sir Simon the king.
Was. How happy a father am I!
How blessed the condition I Am in!
My heart is so light, that for joy
I could almost jump out of my skin.
Search England around and around,
Search all nations under the sky,
And in 'em there will not be found
A father so happy as I,

Capers about. Enter SOPHIA. He embraces her. My dear Sophy, I Am the happiest
dog in the world! Choose what clothes thou will, what jewels thou will; eat what
thou will, drink what thou will, do what thou will; for I have no other use for
money, but to make thee happy -- my dear, dear Sophy! you are my only joy upon
earth.

So. And can my dear papa be so good, as to place all his joy in my happiness?


Was. Yes, burn me if I don't! Kisses her.


So. Then pray do not make me the most miserable creature upon earth. Kneels.


Was. How? What? Staring wildly.


So. Alas! sir, I cannot possibly marry Mr. Blifil.


Was. Not marry Blifil?


So. No indeed, sir, I cannot -- and will the best of fathers break my heart?


Was. Pho! pho! pho! all stuff and nonsense! -- break your heart indeed! As if
marriage could break any woman's heart? -- No, no; women's hearts are not so
easily broken: I know that by experience; I could never break your mother's.


So. A marriage with Mr. Blifil is even worse than death.


Was. You shall have him; you shall by my soul! This is my fixed resolution,
and so consider on it. She catches hold of the shirt of his coat.


AIR.
HANDEL.
So. O do not look so wild!
Have pity on a child!
Such indignation my poor heart will break.

Was. Wretch! I will not hear you;
Hence! I cannot bear you:
In such cause how dare you Speak?

So. Words of such angry strain
Rend my sad heart in twain:
Can a fond father's resolve be to kill?

Was. I shall swear and bluster,
I Am in such a fluster.
Cease this whining racket,
Or, I tell you roundly,
I shall thrash your jacket Soundly
For thwarting my will.

So. Will nothing move you?
Think now I love you,
And with soft pity attend my sad moan.

Was. It Is in vain to snivel.

So. Hear me --

Was. Fly a thousand mile hence.

So. O hear me!

Was. Disobedient devil!
Silence!
Go, go: get thee gone.

He breaks from her; she falls on the ground. Enter JONES. Jon. Dear sir,
what is the matter?


Was. I have not breath to tell thee, Tom -- that undutiful hussy has put me
in such a passion, that I could fight with my own shadow -- prithee take her in
thy arms, and set her in a chair. -- I have been telling her my resolution of
marrying her to Blifil, and --


Jon. [starting] Blifil!


Was. Ay Blifil: what a pox did thou start at?


Jon. N -- nothing, sir; nothing at all -- Mr. Blifil, sir -- to be sure, sir,
is -- a very un -- equal -- I mean unexceptionable match -- confusion! Aside.


Was. Tom, you answer very queerly! What Is the matter? Ar'n't you well?


Jon. Never worse in my life, sir. I Have so violent a pain in my head, that I
would thank any body for blowing out my brains this instant.


Was. Blowing out one's brains is a ready way to be sure to get quit of the
headache -- but, as I was telling thee, Tom, though I have resolved to marry her
to Blifil, the disobedient young hussy will not agree to the match. -- You
undutiful jade, I Have a good mind to -- but I will not put my self in a passion;
for passion is like -- is like -- is like dram-drinking; it sets a man all in a
blaze, all in a blaze, all in a blaze -- [walks about fanning himself with his
hat.] No, I Am resolved I will not be in the least passion imaginable -- talk to
her, Jones; I know she has an opinion of thee -- talk her into her duty -- do you
hear, Tom?


Jon. If it is your pleasure, sir, I Will do it with all my heart.


Was. Will thou? -- Give me thy hand -- I Will leave thee with her, and I
heartily wish thou may prevail on her to do, as thou would have her.


Jon. And so do I most sincerely


Was. Give me thy hand again -- you are the best friend I have in the world --
my dear Tom, leave nothing undone to gain thy point.


Jon. Nothing in my power, I assure you, sir.


Was. Thank thee kindly: you are a prince of a man -- but may I be hanged,
drawn, and quartered, if I don't turn her out of doors, unless she have him!
May I be gibbetted if I don't! Exit.


So. Mr. Jones, for heaven's sake how came you here? Leave me instantly I
entreat you.


Jon. Do not impose on me so harsh a command -- Turn not thus inhumanly from me
-- O speak to me, Sophia! comfort my bleeding heart.


So. Alas! Mr. Jones, what comfort have I to bestow? You know my father's
intentions.


Jon. But, at the same time, I know your compliance with them cannot be
compelled.

AIR.
Dr. ARNE.
Your beauteous looks inspire my mind
With passion of the purest kind:
No selfish views my bosom sway,
But all is love without allay.
Of such a darling gem possessed,
My lot would be supremely blessed;
Possession would increase my joy,
For charms like yours can never cloy.
With every charm, with every grace
Has nature decked that form, and face;
At your creation heaven designed
To show a goddess to mankind.

Was. [within] Where Is this rascal, this Jones? I Will have his heart's blood!


So. O heavens! My father! Faints in Jones's arms.


Enter WESTERN. Was. Ha! my daughter fainting! Here, sister! Honor! Jenny!
Help! Water! Water! Richard! Thomas! William! Water! Water! Water! Runs first
to one door, then to another, then to Sophia.


Enter Mrs. WESTERN, SUPPLE, HONOR, and several Servants. Mrs. Was. Stand off!
leave her to me: I have some Assa foetida in my smelling-bottle -- this will
bring her to herself -- [rubs her temples.] Brother, you will never leave off
these boisterous ways: you're enough to frighten half the sex into fits -- you
will not strive to get the better of that natural rage and brutality,
notwithstanding all the pains I take to lecture, and polish you into a
civilized being -- Oh! she revives! -- Honor, help me to lead her off. Exeunt
Mrs. Western, Sophia, Honor, and Servants.


Was. Now I Will be revenged on the rascal -- [Supple holds him] cuz, let me go,
for I will have satisfaction -- off with thy clothes, if you are a man -- off
with thy clothes I say, and I Will lick thee, as thou was it never licked in thy
days -- A damned beggarly bastard! To come here a-poaching after my daughter!
-- Let me come at the dog; let me come at him I say: I can bear it no longer!

AIR Sir Roger de Coverly.
I Will humble my gentleman's pride, sir:
Hands off -- let me go I entreat you,
I long to be currying his hide, sir --
To mummy, you dog, I could beat you!
My fingers now itch to be at you,
But cuz holds me faster and faster,
Or soon I would teach you, odd rat you!
To meddle with meat for your master.

Jon. Sir, this usage is hardly to be born; but no abuse, however virulent, can
provoke me to retaliate on the father of Sophia. Exit.


Was. You rascal, I Will fight you for fifty guineas, if you dare: nay I Will do it
for pure love.


Enter ALLWORTHY. Sup. Here comes Mr. Allworthy!


All. Dear sir, what is the matter with you?


Was. You Have brought up your by-blow, if he be yours, to a fine purpose. My
daughter has fallen in love with him over head and ears, that is all -- It Is
well for him that cuz would not let me get at him, or I Would have trimmed him, I Would
have spoiled his catterwawling.


All. But pray, sir. --


Was. Yes, if she will have him, the clothes on her back shall be all her
portion: I Would sooner give my estate to the devil than to her.


All. I am extremely sorry that I consented to his staying with you, during the
sporting season.


Was. Pfha! Pox o'your sorrow! It will do me abundance of good truly, when I
have lost my only child, that was all the joy, hope, and comfort of my age --
(weeps) but she shall beg, and starve, and rot in the streets for me. Not a
farthing, no not a brass farthing, shall she have of mine -- the rascal was
always a dab at finding a hare, but I little thought what puss he was looking
after -- if I should lose my poor girl, it will break my heart; for I love her
more than all the dogs, and horses in the world. Weeps.


All. This affair has really amazed me!


Sup. And me too, I assure you.


All. Pray, neighbor, when did you find it out?


Was. Sister told me just now.


All. But did you never discover any symptoms of love between them?


Was. What the plague do you think I Am a conjurer? -- No, no, no; you may be sure
they took care to keep the matter from me -- I have indeed, now and then, seen
him cast a sheep's eye at her, but that you know young fellows will do, without
being in love: but, as I hope to be saved, I never saw him kiss her but once;
and that was at my bidding, to punish her for blushing, when I told her, by way
of banter, Jones was so handsome a fellow, that I was afraid she would be
falling in love with him.


All. A wise punishment indeed! Aside.


Was. But I must away and look after the wench, for fear she give me the flip.


All. Well, what would you have me do?


Was. Do? Warn the rascal to keep away from this house; for if I catch him
here, curse me if I am not the death of him! Exit.


Sup. I had best follow, to prevent mischief. Exit.


All. This youngster's ingratitude touches me nearly -- I cannot easily pardon
his design on Miss Western -- Blifil!


Enter BLIFIL. Bli. Dear sir, you seem disturbed.


All. Disturbed? Yes, I am disturbed, and distressed to the last degree upon
your account -- I am sorry to inform you that Miss Western is in love with
Jones.


Bli. In love with Jones? -- Confusion! -- However, I Am but rightly served --
it is no wonder the man should rival me, who has attempted to make me a beggar.


All. To make you a beggar? Explain yourself -- What has he done?


Bli. No matter, sir -- let it rest.


All. Your reserve will displease me. I desire to know the affair.


Bli. I beg to be excused -- to tell it at this time would have the appearance
of malice.


All. Nephew, I insist upon knowing it.


Bli. An uncle's command must be obeyed -- during your late sickness -- but
pray excuse me.


All. I will admit of no excuse -- proceed.


Bli. When you were given over by the physicians, he made a bold attempt to
inherit your whole estate.


All. To inherit my whole estate? By what means?


Bli. By such as will hardly seem credible -- he tampered with farmer Flail and
his wife, to witness a will under your signature; offering them five thousand
pounds, and promising to marry their daughter.


All. Is it possible?


Bli. Dear sir, if you have the least doubt, let the farmer be instantly sent for.


All. Nephew, I know you're incapable of telling me a lie, therefore I want no
farther proof. -- A villain! I Will make him an example. Exit.


Bli. The farmer is prepared: 'twas lucky that I planned the business with him
this afternoon -- The promise of a thousand pounds, and the renewal of his
lease, have secured him -- if I can but accomplish the removal of Jones from my
uncle, I shall be very easy about Sophia; she may dispose of her hand to whom
she pleases. Exit.


SCENE, A Chamber; a Table, on which are a Globe, several Maps, Pamphlets, and
Newspapers.
Enter Mrs. WESTERN, and SUPPLE. Mrs. Was. Here is the map, cousin; now I Will
show you Franckfort -- Ay, here is Franckfort! It must be a very large city,
for the geographer has laid it down, in this small map, full as big as a
horse-bean -- well, I should have liked to see the new emperor make his public
entry into Franckfort. The procession must be prodigiously superb and
magnificent!


Sup. No doubt on it -- the election of the grand duke must be a very favorable
circumstance to the queen of Hungary.


Mrs. Was. Oh! the most auspicious event in the world! He will certainly put
all the belligerent powers, now in hostility with his royal consort, under the
ban of the empire, if not actually declare war with them -- yes, yes, as you
observe, the queen's affairs will receive great benefit from the strength of
the emperor.


Sup. I hope you will now indulge me with an audience on our own affairs?


Mrs. Was. Then make it your audience of leave, for it is really too late to
think of engaging in an offensive and defensive alliance for life.


Sup. Madam, it is never too late to be happy.


Mrs. Was. But, cousin, will your hereditary dominions be able to furnish
adequate supplies for a combined army? The junction of our forces, though we
should have no infantry, must inevitably cause a great effusion of money; and
your revenues are not of the largest.


Sup. If they fall short, I presume my dear ally will have no objection to
furnish her quota, as her finances are in so flourishing a state.


Mrs. Was. You might perhaps be entitled to a subsidy from me as an ally. I
don't mean as a British ally; for the allies of this island, instead of
contributing to the expenses of a war, are often well paid for doing nothing --
except defending their own territories -- but do you really think we could live
happily together?


Sup. Certainly: with the most cordial affection; not with the fashionable
indifference, I might call it aversion, of modern couples.

AIR.
Dr. ARNE.
Each noble of yore was so fond of his wife,
That marriage was held the chief blessing in life:
Each lady so loving, so cheerful, and gay,
That all her delight was to please and obey.
But modern fine ladies and lords are above
So vulgar a passion, as conjugal love:
Such quarrels and partings have happened of late,
As if their chief passion were conjugal hate.
Madam, I have such a plan for spending the winter!


Mrs. Was. A plan! Pray let me hear it.


Sup. Last week you were wishing for a new translation of your favorite
Puffendorf. I will undertake it, and my amiable auxiliary shall enrich the work
with her learned notes and annotations.


Mrs. Was. This gives me as much joy, as the news of a complete victory over
the French! -- But -- but -- I say suppose you should let me have the credit of
the translation? -- Only oblige me in that, and I may surrender at discretion
-- come, you must, cousin: you positively must.


Sup. I will if you will give me one kiss by way of earnest.


Mrs. Was. I think it quite sufficient, if I suffer you to take one -- there is
my cheek; I never give more than the cheek; lips should only be given to a
husband.


Sup. In which sense you ought now to regard me.


Mrs. Was. No, no, cousin; not till you have ratified the definitive treaty, and
sworn to it at the altar.


Sup. Psha! I don't like such cold kisses. Catches her in his arms and kisses
her.


Mrs. Was. Good heaven! yonder is my niece! I Am in the utmost consternation --
pray, Mr. Supple, retreat with all possible precipitation -- [Exit Supple.] I
hope she has not reconnoitred us! If she has been lying in ambush to watch our
motions, I am in a fine dilemma.


Enter SOPHIA. Well, niece, are you yet reconciled to the intended match?

So. Madam, it is impossible to be reconciled to the match, while I dislike the
man.


Mrs. Was. Dislike the man? If I were not fifty times a greater philosopher
than Plato, and five hundred times more placid than Socrates himself, you would
positively put me in a rage -- did ever any body hear so ridiculous an
objection? -- The liking of husbands is nowadays as much out of fashion, as
real patriotism.


So. But, madam, where one's inclinations --


Mrs. Was. Inclinations! Inclinations quotha! I am absolutely astonished at
your assurance! One of your years talk of inclinations! -- a girl! a child! a
baby! an infant! a suckling! -- Inclinations! Inclinations! Walks about in
great state.


So. Dear madam, I alone am concerned, and my happiness is at stake, wherefore
--


Mrs. Was. You alone concerned? So far from it, madam, that you are not
concerned at all -- do you conceive, mistress, when a daughter of France is
married into Spain, the princess alone is considered in the match? No: the
family alliance is the sole object of consideration; the princess is only
thrown into the scale as a mere make-weight -- It Is the very same with great
houses, such as ours. Walks about in great state.


So. Madam, I should be sorry to do any thing to disoblige my family; but as
for Mr. Blifil, no force on earth shall compel me to marry him.

AIR.
GALLUPPI.
The match, however commodious,
Must meet my utmost scorn:
His passion would be odious,
Were he to empire born.
Such hate my soul possesses,
Each hardship I Would sustain,
Ever listen to the addresses
Of such detested swain.

Enter WESTERN. Was. Thou shall have him, as sure as ever thou wast born.


Mrs. Was. Why, sir, will you dare to interfere, when I have undertaken to
manage her?


Was. I Will manage her myself for the future.


Mrs. Was. You manage her? Ha! ha! ha! She will be most gloriously managed
indeed! -- Such a boor as you talk of managing a young lady?


Was. Boor? I Am no more a boor than yourself, madam.


Mrs. Was. Sir, I shall endure your insolence and brutality no longer -- this
is the last night I will sleep in your house, I assure you


Was. A good riddance! -- Blood! it is enough to make my daughter undervalue my
sense, when she hears you every hour calling me a fool.


Mrs. Was. It is impossible that any one should undervalue such a blockhead.


Was. Blockhead, madam? I Have more sense than you and your whole generation put
together, though you're always preaching up your skill in politics, and great
knowledge of the world -- would any body but you have put me upon a wrong
scent, about my daughter's being in love with Blifil? There was politics! there
was knowledge of the world! -- Ah! you old fool you!


Mrs. Was. Tell James to get my coach -- [Calls at the door.] An ill-bred
provoking blockhead! I Will not stay another minute in his house.


So. Pray, my dear aunt --


Mrs. Was. Not another minute, I assure you, child.

AIR.
Dr. ARNE.
My coach! -- I Will begone; and from this very hour
Ends all my alliance with such a rude boor.
My sex, my political knowledge despise?
By heaven! I could tear out the Hottentot's eyes --
An illiterate clown! give his tongue such a loose!
For the future I never set foot in your house --
Adieu, my dear child -- this is usage so trying,
In spite of my pride it will set me -- a crying.
Exit weeping.
Was. Loo! loo! loo! loo! loo! -- Ay, let her go and be hanged -- I Am certainly
the most unfortunate dog in the world! It is always my fate to be whipped in by
the humors of some damned jade or other. -- But curse my jacket, if I will be
run down in this manner by any of them!


So. Dear sir, entreat my aunt to stay.


Was. Stay? What to indict me for a plot, and have me hanged, that the
government may get my estate?


So. My aunt, sir, is so far from injuring you, that she has left you her
whole fortune.


Was. Ay, but she is such an odd-temper'd devil, I shall never be sure of what
she has, till she is at her last gasp.


So. Then pray, sir, entreat her to stay: a little submission will satisfy her.


Was. So, I must ask pardon for your fault? You Have lost the hare, and I must
draw every way to find her? -- Well, for this once I Will take your advice, for
fear of the worst. -- A damned old hag! -- But I must humor her. Exit.


Enter HONOR. Hon. O lud, ma'am! poor Mr. Jones! poor Mr. Jones!


So. What of him?


Hon. Is turned adrift by Mr. Allworthy, for making love to you. Poor creature!
how he begged and prayed to take his last farewell of you; but Mr. Allworthy
would not allow it -- the door stood a little a-jar, and I heard all that
passed.


So. You astonish me, Honor!


Hon. When I found they were parting, I ran down the back-stairs, and met Mr.
Jones in the hall. He looked me full in the face, but was not able to speak a
word; pressed my hand, kissed it, sighed, beat his breast, burst into tears,
and then marched off for the alehouse, where Black George, the game-keeper, is
going to carry his clothes to -- I Am sure my poor heart was ready to bre -- bre
-- break, to see him in such a pi -- pi -- piteous taking. Weeps.


So. And have I been the cause of his ruin?


Hon. Nay, ma'am, there is something besides you in the case. Mr. Allworthy
charged him with a design of forging a will; which he solemnly denied, and even
offered to face his accusers: But Mr. Allworthy would not give up his author.


So. Forge a will? Impossible!


Hon. Ay, ma'am, full as impossible, as for me to fly over the moon.


So. Here; take my purse -- these rings -- this watch --


Hon. Ma'am, my master may miss the watch and rings, and you may want the money.


So. Then thou shall supply me -- away! find Black George, and carry this to
Mr. Jones -- go, go, go. [Exit Honor.] Yes, I must lose him for ever! What a
pity it is, that the casual difference of our situation should make us both
unhappy!

AIR.
Dr. ARNE.
Such beauty, manliness, and air
His form and face adorn,
Not half so lovely, half so fair
Appears the blushing morn:
His grace, his dignity, his ease
My fond affections stole;
He was by fate designed to please,
And captivate the soul.

Exit. SCENE, A Dinning-Room.
Enter ALLWORTHY, WESTERN, Mrs. WESTERN, and BLIFIL. Mrs. Was. As Mr. Allworthy
is guarantee for your future behavior, I will grant you a peace; but take care
how you renew hostilities with me.


Was. Dear sister, I Will never offend you again, while breath's in my body.


Mrs. Was. Away then, and bring your daughter to her swain. [Exit Western.] Mr.
Allworthy, our plan of operations must be concerted for a surprise, not a storm.


All. Madam, I am utterly against all violent measures.


Bli. But I hope, sir, you will indulge me with another interview?


All. I have no objection to that: use every fair method to gain her, but no
compulsion.


Enter WESTERN and SOPHIA. Was. Here she is, Blifil -- come, let us leave 'em
together -- She Is more complying than I expected.


Mrs. Was. Ay, ay, she will capitulate at last. The strongest citadel must
yield to a vigorous siege. Exeunt Allworthy, Western, and Mrs. Western.


Bli. Miss Western, I am once more so happy, as to be with you alone; and now
let me hope for a more favorable hearing.


So. Mr. Blifil, shall I be ingenuous with you?


Bli. Undoubtedly, madam.


So. Then let me once more declare to you, it is impossible that I can be yours.


Bli. Why impossible, Miss Sophy? Time perhaps --


So. Don't flatter yourself; I shall never consent, and it will be in vain to
give yourself any further trouble about me.


Bli. And is this your serious resolution?


So. It is: I therefore hope you will immediately desist.


Bli. If this be the case, I must apply to Mr. Western, and your aunt.


So. Apply to whom you please, I never can suffer it.


Bli. Excuse me, madam, if I don't take this answer from you -- I shall
acquaint Mr. Western with what has passed, and leave you to declare your
sentiments and resolutions to him. Exit.


So. Insufferable assurance! -- Though I tremble at the thoughts of disobeying a
father, yet all his authority cannot compel me to marry this detested insolent.


Enter HONOR. Hon. O dear Ma'am! I Am frightened out of my wits! -- My master
has been ordering the steward to take horse for a license. He swore with a
great oath, that you should be married to Mr. Blifil tomorrow.


So. Tomorrow! (leans on Honor.] Support me -- pray, dear Honor, give me thy
advice -- What would thou do in my case?


Hon. Do? Why any thing to be sure before I would marry a man I could not abide.


So. But what would thou do in my situation?


Hon. Go off directly to London, ma'am.


So. Fly from my father? No, no, no; I can never think of this desperate remedy
-- good heaven! What will become of me? -- I shall run distracted -- let us to
my chamber; perhaps we may hit on some expedient.


Hon. Only be ruled by me, ma'am, and all will be well, I warant you.

AIR.
Dr. ARNE.
To be tied to a fellow one hates were a curse,
A curse I could never survive;
Nay sooner than take him for better, for worse,
By Jove! I Would be buried alive.
Should pappy insist on my wedding a man,
Whose sight would occasion the hip;
Ever into such marriage he should me trapan,
By Jingo! I Would give him the slip.
Exeunt.
SCENE, An Alehouse.
Enter NIGHTINGALE and NANCY. Night. And you thought I intended to leave you?


Nancy. I confess I was not without my fears; but you have effectually removed
them, by the assurance you have given me of our marriage tomorrow -- I am now
really happy!

AIR.
Mr. BACH.
Blessed with thee, my soul's dear treasure,
Sweetly will each hour be passed;
Every day will bring new pleasure,
And be happier than the last.
With so loved a partner talking,
Time will quickly glide away:
With so dear a husband walking,
Nature all her bloom display.
Such a darling swain possessing,
All my sorrows will be over;
Thou art fortune's utmost blessing,
Fortune cannot give me more.
And shall we set off for Upton tonight?


Night. As soon as ever poor Jones has finished his letter to Mr. Allworthy.


Nancy. I pity the unfortunate gentleman, and shall always love him for those
noble principles, which you tell me he displayed in your late interview.


Night. Yes, my dear Nancy, his generous advice has greatly contributed to our
happiness. I must own that the fear of a father's resentment operated on me
very strongly.


Nancy. How sorry my mamma will be for this breach between Mr. Jones, and his
benefactor!


Enter JONES. Jon. I Have dispatched my letter, and now am ready to attend you.


Nan. And pray, sir, how do you find yourself?


Jon. Abundantly easier -- I have taken my everlasting leave of the most
adorable Sophia.


Night. Leave of Sophia! You have not seen her? Have you?


Jon. No: I Have eternally renounced her in my letter. I have given up love to
glory and patriotism. My country is now my mistress, whom I will serve with the
most inviolable fidelity.


AIR.
Dr. ARNE.
Jon. My youthful bosom glory fires,
I feel its all-enlivening breath;
This arm Britannia's cause requires;
Then welcome fame, or welcome death.

All three. Crown, propitious fortune, crown
The brave with conquest, and renown!

Night. Arise, dread genius of this isle!
This isle, which foreign wonder draws;
With fame's first honors crown their toil,
Who bleed, or conquer in her cause.

All three. Crown, propitious fortune, crown
The brave with conquest, and renown!

All three. Bright beauty's tribute shall be paid
To the surviving sons of fame;
And each fond matron, each fond maid,
With love reward her hero's flame.
Crown, propitious fortune, crown
The brave with conquest, love, renown!

Exeunt. The END of the SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE, An Inn at Upton.
Enter SOPHIA and HONOR. So. WITH a woman say thou? Can it be?


Hon. As sure as my name's Honor, ma'am. I got a full view of him, as the maid
carried in the tea-kettle.


So. Then there is no truth in man -- order the horses: instead of flying to my
cousin at London, I will return home.


Hon. But, ma'am --


So. False, false man! -- I Am ashamed of this weakness -- away!


Hon. Well, were it my case, I would mortify my gentleman; I would bounce into
the room, and surprise them.


So. Thou have inspired me with a thought -- yes, he shall know I have been
here -- [writes with a pencil on a piece of paper] there is my name; pin it to
the muff, and bribe the maid to convey it into the room. Bid her lay it where
he cannot miss seeing it.


Hon. I shall, ma'am. Exit.


So. Base, inconstant, and ungrateful man! How had inclination tempted me to
deviate from duty! -- but from this moment, I will abandon the thoughts of him,
and his perfidious sex for ever.

AIR.
Mr. BAILDON.
To changeful man's delusive arts
Let maids beware how they give way;
Nor yield too hastily their hearts,
Lest each with me repenting say,
"Deserted by my saithless swain,
"Poor I, alas! must love in vain."

Enter HONOR. Hon. Betty has carried it in -- she says there is a crack in the
wainscot, through which one may see them -- Oh! here it is! -- I Will have a peep
-- they sit very lovingly together -- Ah! the duce take you, for a
false-hearted creature! -- She sits with her back this way: I wish she would
turn about, that one might see her face! -- Take a peep, ma'am; do.


So. No, no, no; I will not trouble myself about him.


Hon. With what pleasure he looks on her! -- Now he rests his elbow on the
table, and seems grave -- now he is all life and gaiety -- Ah! you're a pretty
gentleman!


So. A base man! I blush at the recollection of my past folly.


Hon. Ha! he starts! his eyes are fixed on the muff -- He takes it up, and
seems quite astonished -- Ay, ay, his conscience begins to fly in his face! --
he leaves the room!


So. He is coming here then -- lock the door -- Good heaven! what shall I do?


Hon. Do? Even see him, ma'am.


So. See him! No, no, no: I Will never see him more.


Hon. [Peeping through the key-hold] I vow he is talking to Betty -- He comes
this way -- that is he! A knocking at the door.


So. How shall I avoid him?


Hon. Get into this closet. Sophia goes into the closet.


Jon. [Within and knocking at the door] Miss Western! -- Madam! -- Sophia!


Hon. Who Is there? [very loud.]


Jon. It Is I, dear Honor -- pray open the door, She unlocks the door.


Enter JONES, with a muff. Hon. Bless me, sir! who thought of seeing you here?


Jon. Dear Honor, where is your lady?


Hon. At home, I suppose: I Have left her service. Very coldly.


Jon. No, no; the maid tells me she is in the house.


Hon. Well, if she is in the house, she will not see you, sir.


Jon. Not see me? how have I offended her? -- I must speak to her -- I must
indeed, Honor.


Hon. [Whispering] She Is in that closet -- [very loud] I tell you, sir, you may
as well be gone, for she will have nothing to say to you.


Jon. She Is in this closet; I hear her stir -- it is she! -- she comes! Sophia
comes from the closet.

AIR.
Dr. BOYCE.
Tell me, lovely charmer, why
You thus a fond adorer fly?
You cannot surely harbor strife
Against him, that loves you more than life!
No longer, then no longer shun
The swain, by love and thee undone.
Why thus a fond adorer fly?
Lovely charmer, tell me why?

So. I beg, sir, you will leave me instantly.


Jon. But why, my dear angel, so cruel a request?


So. No matter: I know too much, ever to think of you more.


Jon. If to love and adore you more than ever man did woman; if to prefer your
happiness to my own; if to dread your displeasure more than death itself be
criminal, I plead guilty: but --


So. Be at no trouble to justify yourself, sir -- What! not pass one day after
you had left me, without devoting yourself to another!


Jon. To another? -- To whom? -- May heaven --


So. Hold, Sir! do not add perjury to inconstancy.


Hon. I saw you with her, Mr. Jones, I Will take my Bible-oath on it.


Jon. With whom?


Hon. With a madam, if I must speak plain English.


Jon Me? when? where?


Hon. Yes, you; just this minute; in next room, sir.


Jon. That young lady --


Hon. Lady! A very fine lady! Of the right sort I warrant her.


Jon. Miss Western, if there be any faith in man --


So. No excuses; they are quite needless. -- I am almost distracted. Aside, and
walking about.


Jon. [Following her] Sophia! -- my most adorable Sophia! -- Nay, this is so
perverse -- Miss Western! -- my dear angel! -- Honor! -- Mrs. Honor! -- Then
there is but one way to convince them. Exit.


Hon. What does he mean? He seems to face us down; but seeing's believing all
the world over.


Enter JONES and NANCY. Nancy. How does my dear school-fellow?


So. Miss Miller! [they salute] What brings you here?


Nancy. A runaway scheme -- I suppose somewhat like your own, my dear. Mr.
Nightingale has prevailed on me to take a matrimonial trip. -- We were in your
neighborhood yesterday, and came hither last night, accompanied by Mr. Jones
-- The rector, it seems, is on a visit at a friend's, about five miles hence;
and Mr. Nightingale went to him, near three hours ago, to procure a license;
leaving me in the care of this gentleman till his return.


Jon. I hope the matter is now explained, madam?


Nancy. And so I find it has been jealous of me? Has it?


So. My dear Nancy, how could you be so rash?


Nancy. Ah! my dear, what is it that a woman will not do for the man she loves?

AIR.
Mr. ARNE.
To lure me from mammy the swain did employ,
On every occasion, the strongest persuasion:
At length I consented, and told the dear boy,
That through the world with him I Would wander with joy.
Though prudes and old maids, by despair ever teiz'd,
My conduct should handle with malice and scandal,
So vast an affection my bosom has seized,
That through the world with him I Would wander well-pleased.
As I live there is Mr. Nightingale, and a gentleman! -- Excuse me, Miss Sophy;
I must attend my lord and master. Exit singing, And through the world with him.


Hon. So! Now miss is gone, the best thing I can do is to leave them together:
leastwise I should like to be served so myself. Exit.


Jon. O Sophia! did you but know the torments I have suffered, since we parted,
you would not thus have added to my affliction, by supposing me capable of
inconstancy.


So. I confess I was too hasty; but appearances partly justified my suspicions
-- And yet, alas! why should I interest myself in your conduct?


Jon. Why not, my angel? Give me but the least hope, and I will wait till time,
and some favorable event shall reconcile your father.


So. Alas! Mr. Jones, you know I am not mistress of myself. -- Yet I will
confess, that did not duty forbid, even ruin with you would be preferable to
the most affluent fortune with another.


Jon. [Starting.] Ruin! Oh! Sophia, can I be the villain to ruin thee? No; by
heavens! no: I will give you up; yes, I will give you up for ever; though it must
render me completely miserable.


Enter HONOR. AIR.
Mr. ABEL.
Hon. Where can we run? Where can we fly,
To hide us from your father's eye?
This place in troth will not hold us both --
Was ever such a luckless elf?
What shall we do? -- Here Is room for you --
In, in -- I Will scamper for it myself.

So. Stay, Honor -- My father! heaven and earth! is he come?


Hon. He, Mr. Allworthy, Supple, and that odious pragmatical Blifil are just
lighted.


So. Ruined past redemption!


Jon. Away to miss Miller, and leave me to stand the brunt. Exeunt Sophia and
Honor.


Was. [within] Show me her chamber -- I Will unkennel her -- I Will have her, if
she be above ground.


Enter ALLWORTHY, WESTERN, SUPPLE, and BLIFIL. Illo ho! illo ho! we have got the
dog-fox; I Will warrant madam is not far off -- [ seizes Jones] Where Is Sophy,
you rascal? -- [Jones shakes him off.] Sirrah, you have stole my daughter, and
I Will have you hanged. -- I have not been in the commission of the peace so
long, not to know it is a hanging matter to steal an heiress. -- You shall
swing for it, you dog; you shall be tucked up; you shall dangle. I expect to be
pricked for high sheriff, and I Will see you executed.

Jon. Sir, I can assure you I was not in the least privy to miss Western's
flight.


Sup. Don't say so, Mr. Jones: this proves you guilty. Taking up the muff.


Bli. It is miss Sophy's; I Have seen her wear it.


Was. My daughter's? So it is I Will be sworn! -- Bear witness, gentlemen; the
goods are found in his custody; in suo custodium -- this will do his business
-- tol lol de roll -- he shall be hanged for it, an it cost me ten thousand
pound.


All. It is in vain, Mr. Jones, to persist in this falsehood. If you did not
decoy the young lady away, how comes she to be here with you?


Bli. Ay, pray how comes she to be here with you?


Was. Right! how comes she to be here with you?


Jon. By mere accident I assure you, gentlemen. Miss Miller, who is in the next
room, will convince you of it.


Was. Pho! pho! pho! All a pack of damned lies!


All. However, neighbor, if he did not decoy her away, he will, in my eye,
appear a good deal less criminal.


Was. But where is Sophy, you villain?


Jon. In the next room with Miss Miller. [ Exeunt Allworthy, Western, Supple,
and Blisil. My dear Sophy! I fear the violence of her father's temper will be
too much for her.


Enter NIGHTINGALE. Night. My dear Tom, I Have got the license. -- Pray do you
know my cousin Dowling, the attorney?


Jon. Very well: what of him?


Night. I overtook him about a mile from hence; and happening to speak of Mr.
Allworthy's displeasure, he said he must communicate to him an affair, which
would reinstate you in his favor.


Enter NANCY. Jon. Where is Miss Western, madam?


Nancy. In the next room with her papa and the gentlemen -- Poor creature! she
will have a sad time on it.


Jon. Excuse me: I must know the issue of this business. Exit.


Night. Nancy, let me have a dish of coffee, and then we'll to church. -- I am
now truly happy! So sincere is my love, that I would not exchange thee for a
diadem.

AIR.
Mr. BACH.
When I Am in nuptial union joined
With my enchanting fair,
What raptures will possess my mind!
What transports shall I share!
From such a sweet engaging wife
New joys must hourly spring,
I would not change so blessed a life
To be the greatest king.

Exeunt. SCENE, A large Room. A tankard on the table.
WESTERN, SOPHIA, and HONOR. Was. Your obstinacy is not to be endured -- What
does the girl snivel and cry for?


So. Alas! my dear father, I cannot help it.


Hon. Ah! it is an old cross-grained patch! Aside.


Was. What can I do more to make you happy? You know I love you so well, that I
would see all the world hanged, before I would even have your little finger
hurt.


Hon. The world is very much obliged to you truly! Aside.


Was. And yet all this will not do. -- But I must secure you, till I have
breakfasted. -- In -- in to that room. -- In with you both -- [ Exeunt Sophia
and Honor.] There! -- [locks the door] I have her as secure now, as a fox in a
bag. -- Whew! [whistles] Here, house! -- Whew! --


Enter LANDLADY. Landlady, I want something for breakfast.

Land. Coffee or tea, your honor's worship?


Was. Pox on such rot-gut stuff! Some ham, cold buttock of beef, venison pasty,
or any thing on the substantial order.


Land. We Have nothing cold; the soldier fellows have eat up all.


Was. Ah! the devil take them! A swarm of red-coat locusts! They Will eat up the
whole nation by and by.


Land. Would your honor's worship choose some new-laid eggs and bacon?


Was. Nothing better: it is a breakfast for an emperor! Get them ready as fast
as possible -- And hark you -- send me a pipe; I Have tobacco of my own.


Land. Yes, an't please your honor's worship. Exit.


Was. [drinking] This is excellent beer in faith! I Am one of your true
Englishmen; I hate all slipslops.

AIR. Roast Beef.
When good queen Elizabeth, history's boast,
From Spaniards and Frenchmen defended our coast,
The noblemen feasted on baked, boiled, and roast.
O the roast beef of Old England!
And O the English roast beef!
Enter landlady, with pipes, etc. and exit. The ladies delighted in good hearty
cheer,
All kickshaws, and slipslops they left to Mounse^r;
Their breakfast in common was beef and strong beer.
O the strong beer of Old England!
And O the English strong beer!

Enter Mrs. WESTERN and SUPPLE. Mrs. Was. [flinging herself into a chair] Sure
no one ever had so intolerable a journey! -- I Am fatigued to death I -- I
shall not be able to rise out of my chair these three hours -- I Am jolted to
pieces -- Well, where is my niece?


Was. Locked up.


Mrs. Was. [rising hastily] Locked up! I thought you would be taking such
headstrong measures! -- Why will you pretend to meddle with matters, so
infinitely beyond your knowledge?


Was. [dashing his pipe on the floor] Zounds and blood! did ever any body hear
the like! To be fallen upon in this manner, when I expected you would commend
me for what I Have done!


Mrs. Was. Commend you? Your operations are diametrically opposite to my free
principles, and totally inconsistent with Magna Charta -- Let my niece be set
at liberty this instant, and given up to my management -- Will you agree to
this stipulation? -- I expect a categorical answer -- Either cede her entirely
to me, or take her wholly to your own surprising discretion; and then I here,
before Mr. Supple, evacuate the garrison, and renounce all family-compact with
you for ever.


Sup. Mr. Western, let me be a mediator.


Was. [throwing a key on the table] There Is the key: she may take it up if she
will.


Mrs. Was. No, sir; I insist on the formality of its being delivered.


Was. There then -- I wish old scratch had her! Aside.


Mrs. Was. If your daughter had always lived with me, you would have had no
occasion for locks, bolts, nor bars.


Was. Zounds and the devil! What would you have me do? -- You're enough to make
me raving mad.


Mrs. Was. There now! Look you there! Just according to his old custom! Flying
out upon every occasion, right or wrong -- Absolutely, brother, there is no
speaking to you! If I were not a woman of the meekest disposition upon earth, I
could not possibly live under the same roof with you -- I will appeal to Mr.
Supple, whom every body allows to be a man of great sense, if I have said even
one individual thing, to put any human being, except such an irascible animal
as yourself, into the least passion imaginable.


Sup. Let me beg you, dear madam, not to irritate him any further.


Mrs. Was. Irritate him! You are ten times a greater blockhead than himself. It
is my misfortune to be hemmed round by such fools and dunces! -- Mercy on all
affairs under the guidance and direction of you men! -- you are such a parcel
of purblind creatures! -- The head of one woman is worth fifty thousand of
yours. Unlocks the door, and exit.


Was. A fractious, cross-grained, contradictious, self-opiniated, Presbyterian,
Oliverian hag! when she takes to a thing, one can no more turn her from it,
than a young beagle can turn an old hare: -- I was a damned fool ever for
thinking of her estate; but as I Have been a slave so long, it would be a pity to
lose it at last, for want of holding out.


Sup. Cousin, I highly commend your prudence.


Enter Mrs. WESTERN, SOPHIA, and HONOR. Mrs. Was. The world is come to a fine
pass indeed, if we must be locked up when every whimsical husband, or father
takes in into his self-sufficient noddle to confine us!


Hon. Very true, ma'am! locking, and bolting, and barring will not do for an
Englishwoman.

AIR.
PERGOLESI.
The swarthy Italian the privilege claims
To lock up, in family-durance, the dames
Of every condition, of every degree:
But here we defy such tyrannical knaves;
The females of England will never be slaves:
Fate, custom, and charter, to favor the fair,
Against locking, and bolting, and barring declare,
And wisely ordain that our sex shall be free.

Exit. Mrs. Was. Well, you remember the stipulation?


Was. Yes, yes; I Will neither meddle nor make. The girl can never be in better
hands. My cuz here will do me the justice to own, that I Have been praising you
up to the skies, and saying you was the best-temper'dest woman in the world,
and fit to have the care of a princess-royal -- have not I, cuz? Winks at
Supple.


Sup. Yes indeed, and a great deal more, sir. I never heard you speak more
handsomely of Mrs. Western in my life.


Mrs. Was. Brother, I Am satisfied -- you are naturally too rash and
precipitate; but when you give yourself time to reflect, I don't know a man
more reasonable.


Sup. Nor I neither.


Was. I am indeed a little passionate, but, like all true Englishmen, I scorn
to bear malice -- But come, cuz, let us go to breakfast; I Have ordered some eggs
and bacon -- B'ye, my dear sister -- [kisses her] we'll never have another
quarrel, as long as we live -- I wish she were once dead with all my heart!
[aside] Exeunt Western and Supple.


Mrs. Was. Eggs and bacon for breakfast! What a Hottentot! -- who would say he
is any thing akin to me! [looks in a pocket glass.] Bless me! what a fright am
I! This journey has made me look ten years older.


So. In my opinion you never looked better, madam.


Mrs. Was. O fie, child! no, no, Sophy: faces will grow worse for wear -- but
for all that, I Have had my conquests, and a coronet among them; but he was
remarkably ugly, and very poor -- Sophy, I was never so handsome as you, and
yet I had a great deal of you formerly.


Enter HONOR. Hon. Ma'am, Mr. Blifil desires to speak with you.


Mrs. Was. Well, child, what would you have me do?


So. Pray, my dear aunt, don't suffer him to come in.


Mrs. Was. Well, well, he shall not -- I Will go to him -- yes, yes, I have had my
conquests. Exit.


Hon. Ma'am, you seem to have got the old lady into a very good humor; but a
little flattery always does it, for she loves it as well as a girl of nineteen.


Enter ALLWORTHY. All. Miss Western, if you're at leisure, I could wish to have
a little conversation with you.


Hon. That Is as much as to say, "March, Honor." Exit.


All. I Am extremely sorry, madam, for the uneasiness I have occasioned; but it
was not my fault:


So. I hope, sir, you are not offended at my behavior to your nephew?


All. No apology, dear madam. Such a discovery has been made, that I must
always blush at the reflection of his being my nephew -- yet I could still wish
to have so accomplished a young lady in my family; wherefore I beg leave to
make you a tender of --


So. [Looking on the ground] I hope Mr. Allworthy's good sense will prevent him
from making any offers of that kind?


All. Madam, I am justly reprehensible for not explaining myself sooner: the
tender I mean is not on my own, but my nephew's account.


So. Your nephew's? I thought you had said --


All. I don't mean that wretch Blifil, but one whom I am pretty sure you will
like -- the very man, whom I am confident you would wish.


So. Heaven and earth! Mr. Jones!


All. It is, it is -- [embraces her, and weeps.] I have used him very hardly,
in so hastily and cruelly dismissing him. I feel more on the occasion than I am
able to express.


Enter BLIFIL. Bli. I ask pardon, sir: I thought you were alone. Going.


All. Stay -- hark you, sir -- see that you find me the letter, which your
mother sent me on her deathbed.


Bli. Letter, sir?


All. Ay, letter -- your mother sent me one by Mr. Dowling. Did not he deliver
it to you?


Bli. No, sir.


All. Villain, how can you have the effrontery to deny it?


Bli. Sir, I can deny it very safely -- This must be some collusion between
Jones and Dowling. It is of a piece with my rival's behavior, relative to the
forged will.


All. That too I look upon as an infamous falsehood -- You have offered Dowling
a large sum, to conceal the circumstance of your brother's birth: he will swear
it.


Bli. Sir, if Mr. Dowling has a mind to swear away my life, I cannot help it.


All. Provoking villain! See here, to your utter confusion, a duplicate of the
letter, signed by your mother, and attested by the clergyman, that attended her
in her last illness.


Bli. Then I Am undone! Dowling never mentioned the duplicate -- [aside] Alas!
my dear uncle, I confess my crime, and -- Kneeling.


All. I want no reply -- see my face no more -- go, and the reproaches of a
guilty mind, the bitterest of all punishments, attend you -- Yet stay -- I am
sorry that I should thus upbraid you -- To insult a person in affliction is a
species of revenge, which base and illiberal minds can only entertain -- I
shall order my steward to pay you a thousand pounds, which is the last favor
you must ever expect from an injured uncle -- retire -- [exit Blifil.] I ask
pardon for this behavior; but his villainous suppression of the letter so
affected me, that I could not command my temper.


So. Rage is so ungovernable a passion, and you had so just an occasion for it,
that an apology was unnecessary -- but pray, dear sir, forgive him.


All. Forgive him! impossible!


AIR.
Set by Mr. ARNOLD.
So. Sweet mercy is the loveliest flower,
That Heaven ever planted in the mind;
The queen of virtues, whose soft power
Can even to godhead raise mankind.
Let patriots, kings, and heroes boast
A name, that will in history live;
Yet he resembles Heaven the most,
Whose godlike bosom can forgive.

Enter WESTERN. Was. Neighbor, this rascal Jones has not left the inn yet. I
wish you would grant me a warrant, and I Will have him committed for a vagrant.


All. I think the young man has suffered enough already.


Was. Suffered enough! why he deserves hanging.


All. I Am of a contrary opinion; and know he has been greatly injured: I am
therefore resolved to make him amends, by making him my heir.


Was. Your heir! What! make Tom your heir?


All. It is my firm resolution.


Was. Curse me! if I Am not glad on it, for he is a jolly dog. I always thought he
wanted nothing but a fortune, to be the cleverest fellow in all England -- but
pray how comes this about?


All. He is a very near relation of mine.


Was. Oh, ho! I smoke you! So then you have had a colt's tooth in your head when
you were young, as well as other folks, old sly-boots? -- But it is only what I
thought; for I always supposed him to be your son, by your bringing him up like
a gentleman.


All. He is not my son, but the son of my sister, who, two years before her
marriage with Capt. Blifil, was privately married to Mr. Sumner.


Was. Sumner! What! the handsome clergyman, that you brought up? Parson
Gillyflower, as I used to call him?


All. The same.


Was. Gad, I have often thought that Tom had a great look of him -- Well, if
you're in the mind, we'll clap up a match between Jones and Sophy?


All. Nothing can be more agreeable to me.


Was. [Chucking Sophia under the chin] And to thee too, my little gipsy, I Will
answer for it -- you see she is all scarlet at the very mention of it.


All. She Is a most beautiful creature indeed!


Was. So much the better for Tom, for egad he shall have the towsling of her.


Enter HONOR. Hon. Dear ma'am, for goodness' sake come away: poor miss Miller
is in a fit. Exeunt Sophia and Honor.


Was. [Shouting after them] Give her a hearty tweak by the nose: the best thing
in the world -- I saw a recruiting sergeant recover the squeaking landlady at
Gloucester by it.


All. What can be the matter? Oh! here is an explanation of the affair.


Enter Old NIGHTINGALE, dragging in his son; SUPPLE interposing. Old Night.
Come along, you dog: I will not let you stay another minute -- you're a fine
gentleman indeed, to run away with a hussy that has not a penny! -- You rascal,
I Have a good mind to horsewhip you, as long as I can stand over you.


Night. I beg, sir, you will be pacified.


Was. Lord! I wonder how any man can put himself in such a passion!


Old Night. If I had not come just in the nick -- for I have not been here
since I went to live in Berkshire -- If I had'nt seen cuz Dowling, by the
merest chance in the world, it had been all over as clean as a whistle -- The
provoking 'scape-grace has the impudence to tell me he will marry her, though I
should disinherit him -- Yes, sirrah, I will disinherit you; cuz Dowling shall
make my will immediately; and as soon as I have executed it, I Will hang myself
for fear I should change my mind -- I Will be revenged on you.


Night. Miss Miller, sir, is more to me than all the wealth in the world.


All. Come, don't be so angry, Mr. Nightingale. I Will engage to make miss Miller
a fortune of ten thousand pounds, if you will consent to the match.


Night. Excuse me, sir; I cannot accept a fortune from you.


Old Night. Why not, Jack? If he has a mind to give it, what business have thou
to oppose it?


Night. Sir, my conscience will not suffer me to take it.


All. I will satisfy your scruples, young gentleman. A chancery-suit, which I
have carried on for Mrs. Miller against the son of her guardian, was the other
day determined in her favor; and she is now worth upwards of fifteen thousand
pounds.


Old Night. And pray what childer has she?


Night. None but my dear Nancy.


Old Night. Jack, give me thy fist -- thou art not altogether so great a puppy
as I thought thee -- get ready for church, and I Will stand father.


Night. I Will go and bless my Nancy with the news.


Enter Mrs. WESTERN. Mrs. Was. The poor creature is better. -- Mr. Nightingale,
how could you be so boisterous? -- I am come to negotiate a general
pacification. You surely cannot deny it to your old flame? Thirty years ago you
would have acceded to any demand from me.


Old Night. Madam, all is made up, and I Will go and see my daughter. Exit.


Sup. Will Mr. Allworthy be so kind as to lend me his mediation?


All. In what can I serve you, Mr. Supple?


Sup. In bringing Mr. Western to consent to my marriage with this lady.


Was. How! What a plague is this! Marry at fifty-three! Why, sister, did not
you promise me, when my wife died, if I would live single, that you would never
marry?


Mrs. Was. You a politician and depend on the promises of a woman in
love-affairs? You might as well depend on the promises of the French.


Sup. Your family, Mr. Western, will be no loser by the match. Sophy is my
nearest relation, and shall inherit all I have.


Was. As this is the case, if sister's inclinable --


Mrs. Was. Brother, I must own I esteem Mr. Supple, as he is a man of sense,
and a great admirer of female understandings. He has already made some amorous
advances; and should he besiege me in form, after I have held out a few months,
I may possibly be inclined to listen to terms of capitulation.


Sup. A few months? dear madam, that will be too long a blockade. If you're
resolved to defend the garrison to the last extremity, I find I must begin the
attack by storm.


Was. Ay, ay, cuz; begin with storming, and I warrant you will carry her. --
Come, sister, you may as well consent, and we'll have both marriages together.


Mrs. Was. Well, brother, if this besieger will agree to certain articles --


Sup. Dear madam, I will grant you a carte blanch.


Enter OLD NIGHTINGALE, NIGHTINGALE, SOPHIA, and NANCY. Old Night. I thought my
daughter before a mere painted doll; but, now I Have seen her again, she looks
like an angel.


Was. That Is because she will be a fifteen thousand pounder. Lord! how fond of
money are some people! [Aside.] But what has become of my friend Jones all this
while?


Mrs. Was. He is gone to wait upon his brother with compliments of condolance.
-- This is an unexpected revolution indeed!


Enter JONES. Was. [ embracing Jones] My old friend Tom, I am glad to see thee
with all my heart. -- I must have a buss of thee, dear dog. -- All past must be
forgotten. -- Christians must forget and forgive one another.


Jon. I hope, sir, I shall never forget the many obligations I am under to Mr.
Western. -- My brother, Sir, is extremely sorry for his offense, and humbly
begs leave to speak with you.


All. Tell him I don't know him.


So. Pray, sir, let me intercede in his behalf.


All. You are both too good: for your sakes I will keep him above want.


Mrs. Was. Ay, ay, let him retire with a pension.


Jon. And now, dear sir, if I could hope you would countenance my addresses to
this young lady --


Was. It Is all done: the match is agreed on.


Jon. Then I Am the happiest man in the world.


Night. You Will except me, Mr. Jones?


Sup. And me too? this lady and I will convince you, that matrimonial happiness
is not solely confined to yourselves.


Was. Well said, cuz.


All. My happiness, I am persuaded, will hardly be inferior to any of yours.
He, who rewards merit, and promotes the bliss of others, must always feel the
greatest happiness himself.


AIR.
HASSE.
Jon. Each desire is now complete;
Here all female graces meet;
Each fond wish at last is crowned;
Bliss and happiness abound.

So. Queens, enjoy your pomp and state;
Be, as pride can make you, great;
At your lot I Will never repine;
State be yours, but love be mine.

Set by Mr. ARNOLD.
Night. Love's a spark of heavenly flame,
Lent to warm the human frame:

Nancy. Love sincere can never cloy;
Love's the source of every joy.

Old King Cole.
Old Night. Dear Miss, I ask your pardon there,
With you I cannot agree;
For drinking claims the greatest share
In man's felicity.
Then drink about, see it out, jolly jolly topers;
Drink about, see it out, jolly jolly topers:
Love's milksop joys can never compare
With Bacchanalian glee.

Was. If I must chant a stave at all,
I Will sing in Nighty's tune:
I hate Italian shake and squall,
Though they are in such renown:
I love a song, short or long, jolly jolly songsters;
I love a song, short or long, jolly jolly songsters;
Which goes to a fall, lal, lal, lal, lal,
Or a down, down, hey derry down.

CORRELLI.
Chorus. Long may love and marriage reign!
Sound, to marriage sound the strain!
The supremest bliss in life
Is the kind, the virtuous wife.
Love's a spark of heavenly flame,
Lent to warm the human frame:
Love sincere can never cloy;
Love's the source of every joy.
Long may love and marriage reign!
Sound, to marriage sound the strain!
The supremest bliss in life
Is the kind, the virtuous wife.

Exeunt. THE END.

