ACHILLES. AN OPERA.

By the late Mr. GAY.

Price One Shilling and Six Pence.

ACHILLES. AN OPERA. As it is Performed at the Theater Royal in Covent Garden.

-- deceperat omnes
(In quibus Ajacem) sumptae fallacia vestis.
Ovid. Metam. Lib. 13. Naturam expellas furca licet, usque recurret. Hor.
Written by the late Mr. GAY.

With the MUSIC prefixed to each SONG.

LONDON: Printed for J. WATTS at the Printing-Office in Wild-Court, near
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields. MDCCXXXIII.

Price One Shilling and Six Pence.

A TABLE of the SONGS.
ACT I.
AIR 1. What Is Life? No Curse is more severe. Page 2 AIR 2. Why thus am I held
at Defiance? p. 3 AIR 3. The Woman always in Temptation. p. 4 AIR 4. When a
Woman sullen sits. p. 6 AIR 5. Man's so touchy, a Word that is injurious. p. 7
AIR 6. Must then, alas, the fondest Mother. p. 8 AIR 7. How your Patience had
been tried. p. 10 AIR 8. Whenever my Looks have spoke Desire. p. 11 AIR 9.
Observe the wanton Kitten's Play. p. 12 AIR 10. When a Woman's censorious. p.
14 AIR 11. As you, Sir, are my Husband, no doubt you're prone. p. 15 AIR 12.
Then must I bear eternal Strife. p. 16 AIR 13. O Love, plead my Pardon, nor
plead it in vain. p. 17 AIR 14. To what a Pitch is Man profuse. p. 18 AIR 15.
Reputations hacked and hewed. ibid. AIR 16. Though Woman's glib Tongue, when
her Passions are fired. p. 20 AIR 17. O guard your Hours from Care. p. 22 AIR
18. All Hearts are a little frail. p. 23 AIR 19. Let Jealousy no longer. p. 24
ACT II.
AIR 20. Such Homage to her Beauty. p. 25 AIR 21. Should the Beast of the
noblest Race. p. 26 AIR 22. What, must I remain in Anguish? p. 28 AIR 23. If my
Passion want explaining. p. 30 AIR 24. How unhappy are the Great. p. 31 AIR 25.
When the Fort on no Condition. ibid. AIR 26. Why such Affectation? p. 32 AIR
27. What Heart has not Courage by Force assailed. p. 33 AIR 28. No more be
coy. p. 34 AIR 29. What give over! p. 36 AIR 30. The Slips of a Husband, you
Wives p. 37 AIR 31. Ah! should you ever find her. p. 38 AIR 32. First let him
for Honor roam. p. 40 AIR 33. Think what Anguish tears my Quiet. p. 41 AIR 34.
Know that Importunity's in vain. p. 42 AIR 35. How happy my Days, and how sweet
was my Rest. p. 43 AIR 36. Your Dress, your Conversations. p. 44 AIR 37. Ah,
why is my Heart so tender! p. 45
ACT III.
AIR 38. What are the Jests that on Marriage you quote? p. 47 AIR 39. Soldier,
think before you marry. p. 48 AIR 40. What is all this idle Chat? p. 50 AIR 41.
Oh, then it seems you want a Wife! p. 51 AIR 42. What means all this Ranting?
p. 52 AIR 43. In War we have naught but Death to fear. p. 54 AIR 44. We may
resolve to resist Temptation. p. 56 AIR 45. Think of Dress in every Light. p.
57 AIR 46. In Dress and Love by like Desires p. 59 AIR 47. Thy Fate then, O
Troy, is decreed. p. 61 AIR 48. Beauty weeps. -- Ah, why that Languish? p. 62
AIR 49. Why this Pain? p. 63 AIR 50. O, what a Conflict's in my Breast! p. 64
AIR 51. Was ever a Lover so happily freed! p. 66 AIR 52. How short was my Calm!
in a Moment it is past. p. 67 AIR 53. Nature breaks forth at the Moment
unguarded. p. 68 AIR 54. Thus when the Cat had once all Woman's Graces. ibid.
PROLOGUE.
Written by Mr. GAY.
Spoken by Mr. QVIN.
I Wonder not our Author doubts Success,
One in his Circumstance can do no less.
The Dancer on the Rope that tries at all,
In each unpracticed Caper risques a Fall:
I own I dread his ticklish Situation,
Critics detest Poetic Innovation.
Had Ic'rus been content with solid Ground,
The giddy venurous Youth had never been drowned.
The Pegasus of old had Fire and Force,
But your true Modern is a Carrier's Horse,
Drawn by the foremost Bell, afraid to stray,
Bard following Bard jogs on the beaten Way.
Why is this Man so obstinate an Elf?
Wall he, alone, not imitate himself?
His Scene now shows the Heroes of old Greece;
But how? it is monstrous! In a Comic Piece.
To Buskins, Plumes and Helmets what Pretense,
If mighty Chiefs must speak but common Sense?
Shall no bold Diction, no Poetic Rage,
Foam at our Mouths and thunder on the Stage?
No it is Achilles, as he came from Chiron,
Just taught to sing as well as wield cold Iron;
And whatsoever Critics may suppose,
Our Author holds, that what He spoke was Prose.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Lycomedes, MR. Quin. Diphilus, Mr. Aston. Achilles, Mr. Salway. Ulysses, Mr.
Chapman. Diomedes, Mr. Laguerre. Ajax, Mr. Hall. Periphas, Mr. Walker. Agyrtes,
Mr. Leveridge.
WOMEN.
Thetis, Mrs. Buchanan. Theaspe, Mrs. Cantrel. Deidamia, Miss Norsa. Lesbia,
Miss Binks. Philoe, Miss Oats. Artemona, Mrs. Egleton.
Courtiers, Guards, etc.
SCENE, SCYROS. ACHILLES.
ACT I. SCENE I.
SCENE, The Palace.
THETIS, ACHILLES. THETIS. BEFORE I leave you, Child, I must insist upon your
Promise, that you will never discover yourself without my Leave. Don't look
upon it as capricious Fondness, nor think (because it is a Mother's Advice) that
in Duty to yourself you are obliged not to follow it.


Ach. But my Character! my Honor! -- Would you have your Son live with Infamy?
-- On the first Step of a young Fellow depends his Character for Life. -- I beg
you, Goddess, to dispense with your Commands.


Thet. Have you then no Regard to my Presentiment? I cannot bear the Thoughts of
your going, for I know that odious Siege of Troy would be the Death of thee.


Ach. Because you have the natural Fears of a Mother, would you have me
insensible that I have the Heart of a Man? The World, Madam, must look upon my
absconding in this Manner, and at this particular Juncture, as infamous
Cowardice.

AIR I. A Clown in Flanders once there was.
^ What Is Life? No Curse is more severe,
Than bearing Life with Shame.
Is this your Fondness? this your Care?
O give me Death with Fame.



Thet. Keep your Temper, Achilles: -- It Is both impious and undutiful to call
my Prescience in question.


Ach. Pardon me, Goddess, for had you, like other Mothers, been a mere Woman
only, I should have taken the Liberty of other Sons, and should (as it is my
Duty) have heard your Advice, and followed my own.


Thet. I positively shall not be easy, Child, unless you give me your Word and
Honor. -- You know my Commands.


Ach. My Word, Madam, I can give you; but my Honor is already sacrificed to my
Duty. That I gave you when I submitted to put on this Woman's Habit.


Thet. Believe me, Achilles, I have a tender Regard for your Honor, as well as
Life. -- By preventing your running headlong to your Destiny, I preserve you
for future Glory. Therefore, Child, I once more insist upon your solemn Promise.


Ach. Was I a Woman (as I appear to be) I could without Difficulty give you a
Promise to have the Pleasure of breaking it; but when I promise, my Life is
pledged for the Performance. -- Your Commands, Madam, are sacred. -- Yet I
entreat you, Goddess, to consider the ignominious Part you make me act. -- In
obeying you, I prove my self unworthy of you.


Thet. My Will, Achilles, is not to be controverted. Your Life depends upon
your Duty; and positively, Child, you shall not go to this Siege.

AIR II. Gudgeon's Song.
^ Why thus am I held at Defiance?
A Mother, a Goddess obey!
Will Men never practice Compliance,
Till Marriage has taught 'em the Way?



Ach. But why must I lead the Life of a Woman? Why was I stolen away from my
Preceptor? Was I not as safe under the Care of Chiron? -- I know the Love he
had for me; I feel his Concern; and I dare swear that good Creature is now so
distressed for the Loss of me, that he will quite founder himself with
galloping from Place to Place to look after me.


Thet. I Will hear no more. Obey, and seek to know no further. -- Can you imagine
that I would have taken all this Trouble to have lodged you under the
Protection of Lycomedes; if I had not seen the absolute Necessity of it?


Ach. Were I allowed to follow my Inclinations, what would you have to fear? --
I should do my Duty, and die with Honor. -- Was I to live an Age, I could do
no more.


Thet. You are so very obstinate, that really, Child, there is no enduring you.
-- Your Impatience seems to forget that I am a Goddess: Have I not degraded my
self into the Character of a distressed Grecian Princess? It Is owing to my
Artifice and Insinuation that we have the Protection of the King of Scyros.
Have I not won Lycomedes his Friendship and Hospitality to that degree as to
place you, without the least Suspicion, among his Daughters? -- And for what,
dear Achilles? -- Your Safety and future Fame required it.


Ach. It Is impossible, Madam, to bear it much longer. -- My Words, my Actions,
my awkward Behavior, must one Day inevitably discover me. -- I had been safer
under the Tuition of Chiron.


Thet. Has not the Prophet Calchas persuaded the Confederates that the Success
of their Expedition against Troy depends upon your being among 'em? Have they
not Emissaries and Spies almost every where in search of you? It Is here only,
and in this Disguise, that I can believe you out of the Reach of Suspicion. --
You have so much Youth, and such a Bloom, that there is no Man alive but must
take you for a Woman. What I am most afraid of is, that when you are among the
Ladies you should be so little Master of your Passions as to find your self a
Man.


AIR III. Did you ever hear of a galant Sailor.
^ Ach. The Woman always in Temptation,
Must do what Nature bids her do;
Our Hearts feel equal Palpitation,
For we have unguarded Minutes too.
By Nature greedy,
When lank and needy,
Within your Fold the Wolf confine;
Then bid the Glutton
Not think of Mutton;
Can you persuade him not to dine?



Thet. Now, dear Child, let me beg you to be discreet. -- I have some
Sea-Affairs that require my Attendance, which (much against my Will) oblige me
for a time to leave you to your own Conduct.


SCENE II.
Thetis, Achilles, Artemona. Art. The Princesses, Lady Pyrrha, have been
sitting at their Embroidery above a Quarter of an Hour, and are perfectly
miserable for want of you.


Thet. Pyrrha is so very unhandy, and so monstrously awkward at her Needle,
that I know she must be diverting. Her Passion for Romances (as you must have
observed in other Girls) took her off from every Part of useful Education.


Ach. For the many Obligations I have to the Princesses, I should (no doubt)
upon all Occasions show my self ready to be the But of their Ridicule. -- It Is
a Duty that all great People expect from (what they call) their Dependants.


Art. How can you, Lady Pyrrha, misinterpret a Civility? I know they have a
Friendship, an Esteem for you; and have a Pleasure in instructing you.


Thet. For Heaven's sake, Pyrrha, let not your captious Temper run away with
your Good-manners. You cannot but be sensible of the King's and their
Civilities, both to you and me. -- How can you be so horridly out of Humor?


Ach. All I mean, Madam, is; that when People are sensible of their own
Defects, they are not the proper Objects of Ridicule.


Thet. You are so very touchy, Pyrrha, that there is no enduring you. -- How
can you be so unsociable a Creature as to deny a Friend the Liberty of laughing
at your little Follies and Indiscretions? For what do you think Women keep
Company with one another?


Ach. Because they hate one another, despise one another, and seek to have the
Pleasure of seeing and exposing one another's Faults and Follies.


Thet. Now, dear Pyrrha, tell me, is Work a thing you pique yourself upon?
Suppose too they should smile at an Absurdity in your Dress, it could not be
such a Mortification as if (like most Women) you had made it the chief Business
of your Life?


Art. Don't they treat one another with equal Familiarity?


Ach. But a Reply from me (whatever was the Provocation) might be looked upon
as impertinent. I hate to be under the Restraint of Civility when I am ill-us'd.


Art. Will you allow me, Madam, to make your Excuses to the Princesses? -- The
Occasion of your Highness's leaving her, I see, troubles her. -- Perhaps I may
interrupt Conversation.


Thet. It Is astonishing, Child, how you can have so little Complaisance. This
sullen Behavior of yours must be disagreeable. I hope, Madam, she is not
always in this way?


Art. Never was any Creature more entertaining! Such Spirits, and so much
Vivacity! The Princesses are really fond of her to Distraction. -- The most
cheerful Tempers are liable to the Spleen, and it is an Indulgence that one
Woman owes to another.


Ach. The Spleen, Madam, is a Female Frailty that I have no Pretensions to, nor
any of its Affections.

AIR IV. Si vous vous moquez de nous.
^ When a Woman sullen sits,
And wants Breath to conquer Reason.
Always these affected Fits
Are in Season:
Since it is in her Disposition,
Make her be her own Physician.


Nay, dear Madam, you shall not go without me. -- Though I have my particular
Reasons to be out of Humor, I cannot be deficient in Good-manners.


Art. I know they would take it mortally ill if they thought your Complaisance
had put yourself under the least Restraint.


Ach. I cannot forgive myself for my Behavior. -- You must excuse me, Madam;
for Absence in Conversation is an Incivility that I am but too liable to.


Art. You know we all rally you upon your being in Love, as that is one of its
most infallible Symptoms.


Thet. I charge you, upon my Blessing; -- as you expect Fame, Glory,
Immortality, obey me.


[To Achilles. Thetis kisses him. Exeunt Achilles and Artemona. SCENE III.
Thetis. As for his Face, his Air, his Figure, I am not under the least
Apprehension; all my Concern is from the Impetuosity of his Temper. -- Yet,
after all, why should I fear a Discovery? for Women have the same Passions,
though they employ 'em upon different Objects.

AIR V. A Minuet.
^ Man's so touchy, a Word that is injurious
Wakes his Honor; he is sudden as Fire.
Woman kindles, and is no less furious
For her Trifles, or any Desire.
Man is ^^sty,
Or sour, or resty,
If balk'd of Honors, or Power, or Pelf.
Woman's Passions can no less molest ye,
And all for Reasons she keeps to her self.


He is sudden, he is impatient. What then? Are Women less so? Ask almost all
Servants what they know of their Mistresses. -- He is wilful, testy, and
untractable. Cannot Thousands of Husbands say as much of their Wives? Then as
for his Obstinacy -- that can never show him less a Woman. But he has not that
Command of his Tongue I could wish him: He is too vehement, too severe in his
Expressions. In this Particular, indeed, few Women take equal Liberties to one
another's Faces, but they make ample Amends for it behind each other's Backs;
so that, with all these Infirmities of Man, he may with the least Conduct very
well pass for a fine-spirited Woman. -- This Reflection has cured my Anxiety,
and will make me believe him secure.


SCENE IV.
Thetis, Lycomedes. Thet. It Is with the utmost Gratitude that I return your
Majesty Thanks for the Honors and hospitable Favors shown to me and my
Daughter.


Lycom. You would oblige me more, Madam, if your Affairs would allow you to
accept 'em longer.


Thet. I have presumed, Sir, to trespass further on your Generosity, in leaving
my Daughter under your Protection. -- I hope Pyrrha's Behavior will deserve it.


AIR VI. To you, my Dear, and to no other.
^ Must then, alas, the fondest Mother
Desert her Child?

Lycom. -- Ah, why this Tear?
She Will in Theaspe find another;
In me paternal Love and Care.



Had you taken her with you, my Daughters would have been miserable beyond
Expression. Theirs and her Education shall be the same.


Thet. I beg you, Sir, not to regard my Gratitude like the common Obligations
of Princes; for neither Time nor Interest can ever cancel it.


Lycom. Affairs of Consequence may require your Presence. Importunity upon
these Occasions is troublesome and unhospitable. -- I ask no Questions, Madam,
because I choose not to pry into Secrets.


Thet. I can only thank, and rely upon your Majesty's Goodness. -- My Duty to
the Queen, Sir, calls me hence to own my Obligations, and receive her Commands.


SCENE V.
Lycomedes, Diphilus. Lyc. The Princess Calista has taken her Leave; she is
but just gone out of the Room.


Diph. That Pyrrha, Sir, was a most delicious Piece.


Lycom. With all her little vixen Humors, to my Taste she is infinitely
agreeable.


Diph. Your parting with her, Sir, in this easy manner, is astonishing. One too
so excessively fond of you?


Lycom. Parting with her, Diphilus!


Diph. But no Prince alive has so great a Command of his Passions.


Lycom. Dear Diphilus, let me understand you.


Diph. To my Knowledge you might have had her.


Lycom. Can I believe thee?


Diph. I really thought the Queen began to be a little uneasy, and, for the
Quiet of the Family (since she is gone) I must own I am heartily glad of it.

AIR VII. John went suiting unto Joan.
^ How your Patience had been tried,
Had this haughty Dame complied!
What Is a Mistress and a Wife?
Joy for Moments; Plague for Life.



Lycom. I am not so unhappy, Diphilus. -- Her Mother has left her to my Care.


Diph. Just as I wished.


Lycom. Would she had taken her with her!


Diph. It might have been better. For beyond dispute, Sir, both you and the
Queen would have been easier.


Lycom. Why did she trust her to me?


Diph. There could be but one Reason.


Lycom. I cannot answer for myself.


Diph. 'Twas upon that very Presumption you was trusted.


Lycom. Would I could believe thee!


Diph. It Is an apparent manifest Scheme, Sir, and you would disappoint both
Mother and Daughter if your Majesty did not betray your Trust. -- You love her,
Sir, you say.


Lycom. To Distraction, Diphilus.


Diph. And was the betraying a Trust ever as yet an Obstacle to that Passion?
What would you have a Mother do more upon such an Occasion? Ladies of her Rank
cannot transact an Affair of this kind, but with some Decorum.


Lycom. But you can never suppose Pyrrha knows any thing of the Matter.


Diph. Why not, Sir?


Lycom. From me she cannot; for I have never as yet made any downright
Professions.


Diph. There lies the true Cause of her Thoughtfulness; it is nothing but
Anxiety, for fear her Scheme should not take place; for, no doubt, her Mother
has instructed her not to be too forward, to make you more so. -- Believe me,
Sir, you will have no Difficulties in this Affair, but those little ones that
every Woman knows how to practice to quicken a Lover.


Lycom. Be it as it will, Diphilus, I must have her.


Diph. Had I been acquainted with your Pleasure sooner, your Majesty by this
time had been tired of her. -- How happy shall I make her, if I may have the
Honor of your Majesty's Commands to hint your Passion to her!


Lycom. Never did Eyes receive a Passion with such Coldness, such Indifference!

AIR VIII. Groom's Complaint.
^ Whenever my Looks have spoke Desire,
I sighed, I gazed in vain;
No Glance confessed her secret Fire;
And Eyes the Heart explain.



Diph. Though it is what she wishes, what she longs for, what she sighs for,
Respect and Awe are a Restraint upon her Eyes as well as Tongue. I have often
told you, Sir, she dares not understand you; she dares not believe herself so
happy.


Lycom. This Ring, Diphilus. -- I must leave the rest to your Discretion.


Diph. There may be a manner in giving it her, a little Hint or so -- but the
Present will speak for itself; it is the most successful Advocate of Love, and
never wants an Interpreter.


Lycom. Say every thing for me, Diphilus; for I feel I cannot speak for myself.


Diph. Could I be as successful in all my other Negotiations! Yet there may be
Difficulties, for, if I mistake not, the Lady has something of the Coquette
about her; and what Self-Denial will not those Creatures suffer to give a Lover
Anxiety!

AIR IX. Over Bogie.
^ Observe the wanton Kitten's Play,
Whenever a Mouse appears;
You there the true Coquette survey
In all her flirting Airs:
Now pawing,
Now clawing,
Now in fond Embrace,
Till 'midst her Freaks,
He from her breaks,
Steals off, and bilks the Chase.



Lycom. Dear Diphilus, what do you mean? I never saw a Woman so little of that
Character.


Diph. Pardon me, Sir; your Situation is such that you can never see what
Mankind really are. In your Presence every one is acting a Part; no one is
himself, and was it not for the Eyes and Tongues of your faithful Servants how
little would your Subjects be known to you! Though she is so prim and reserved
before you, she is never at a Loss for Airs to draw all the young flirting
Lords of the Court about her.


Lycom. Beauty must always have its Followers.


Diph. If I mistake not, General Ajax too (who is sent to solicit your Quota
for the Trojan War) has another Solicitation more at heart. -- But suppose she
had ten thousand Lovers; a Woman's prevalent Passion is Ambition, which must
answer your Ends. -- The Queen is coming this way, and her Commands may detain
me. -- I go, Sir, to make Pyrrha the happiest Creature upon Earth.


SCENE VI.
Lycomedes, Theaspe. Theas. I think the Princess Calista might as well have
taken her Daughter with her. -- That Girl is so intolerably forward, that I
cannot imagine such Conversation can possibly be of any great Advantage to your
Daughter's Education.


Lycom. You seem of late to have taken an Aversion to the Girl. She has Spirit
and Vivacity, but not more than is becoming the Sex; and I never saw any thing
in her Behavior but what was extremely modest.


Theas. For Heaven's sake, Sir, allow me to believe my own Eyes. Her
Forwardness must give the Fellows some Encouragement, or there would not be
that intolerable Flutter about her. -- But perhaps she has some Reasons to be
more upon her Guard before you.


Lycom. How can you be so unreasonably censorious?


Theas. I can see her Faults, Sir. I see her as a Woman sees a Woman. The Men,
it seems, think the awkward Creature handsome.


AIR X. Dutch Skipper. First Part.
^ Lycom. When a Woman's censorious,
And attacks the meritorious;
In the Scandal she shows her own malicious Thought.
If real Guilt she blames,
Then Pride her Heart inflames;
And she fancies she is better for another's Fault.
Thus seeking to disclose
The Slips of Friends and Foes,
By her Envy she does herself alone expose.



Nay, dear Child, your attacking her in this peevish way can be nothing but
downright Antipathy.


Theas. Nay, dear Sir, your defending her in this feeling manner can be nothing
but downright Partiality.


Lycom. I own my self partial to Distress, and I see her in that Circumstance.


Theas. But there are other Reasons that may make a Man partial.

AIR XI. Dutch Skipper. Second Part.
^ As you, Sir, are my Husband, no doubt you're prone
To turn each new Face
To a Wife's Disgrace;
And for no other Cause but that she is your own;
Nay, Sir, it is an evident Case.
It Is strange that all Husbands should prove so blind,
That a Wife's real Merits they never can find,
Though they strike all the rest of Mankind.



Lycom. How can you be so ridiculous? By these Airs, Madam, you would have me
believe you are jealous.


These. Whence had you this contemptible Opinion of me? Jealous! If I was so I
have a Spirit above owning it. I would never heighten your Pleasure by letting
you have the Satisfaction of knowing I was uneasy.


Lycom. Let me beg you, my Dear, to keep your Temper.


Theas. Since I have been so unguarded as to own it; give me leave to tell you,
Sir, that was I of a lower Rank it would keep you in some Awe, because you
would then know I could take my Revenge.


Lycom. You forget your Duty, Child.


Theas. There is a Duty too due from a Husband.


Lycom. How can you give way to these Passions?


Theas. Because you give way to yours.


Lycom. But to be so unreasonably jealous!


Theas. Unreasonably! Would it were so!


AIR XII. Black Joke.
^ Lycom. Then must I bear eternal Strife,
Both Night and Day put in mind of a Wife,
By her Pouts, Spleen, and passionate Airs!

Theas. Do You think I Will bear eternal Slight,
And not complain when I Am robbed of my Right?
Call you this, Sir, but whimsical Fears?

Lycom. Can naught then still this raging Storm?

Theas. Yes. What you promised if you would perform.

Lycom. Pr'ythee teaze me no more.

Theas. I can never give over,
Till I find you as fond and as kind as before.

Lycom. Will you never ask
A possible Task?



Would you have me so unhospitable as to deny her my Protection?


Theas. It Is not, Sir, that I presume to control you in your Pleasures. -- Yet
you might, methinks, have showed that Tenderness for me to have acted with a
little more Reserve. Women are not so blind as Husbands imagine. -- Were there
no other Circumstances, -- your Coolness to me, your Indifference. -- How I
despise my self for this Confession! -- Pardon me, Sir, Love made me thus
indiscreet.

AIR XIII. Ye Shepherds and Nymphs.
^ Theaspe weeping.
O Love, plead my Pardon, nor plead it in vain;
'Twas you that was jealous, 'twas you was in Pain;
Yet why should you speak? To what Purpose or End?
I must be unhappy if Love can offend.


Yet was ever a Design of this kind so manifest, so barefaced!

AIR XIV. The Goddesses.
^ Theaspe angry.
To what a Pitch is Man profuse,
And all for ostentatious Pride!
Even Misses are not kept for Use,
But for mere Show, and naught beside.
For might a Wife speak out,
She could prove beyond all doubt,
With more than enough he was supplied.


The Princess Calista has shown an uncommon Confidence in your Majesty. The
Woman, no doubt, depends upon it, that her Daughter's Charms are not to be
resisted.


Lycom. Nay, dear Child, don't be scandalous.

AIR XV. Joan's Placket.
^ Reputations backed and hewed,
Can never be mended again;
Yet nothing stints the tattling Prude,
Who joys in another's Pain.
Thus while she rends
Both Foes and Friends,
By both she is torn in twain.
Reputations hacked and hewed,
Can never be mended again.



Theas. You are in so particular a manner obliged to her, that I am not
surprised at your taking her Part.


Lycom. But, dear Madam, why at present is all this violent Fluster?


Theas. Ask your own Heart, ask your own Conduct. Those can best inform you. --
'Twou'd have been more obliging if Pyrrha and you had kept me out of this
impudent Secret. -- You know, Sir, I have Reason.


Lycom. If one Woman's Virtue depended upon another's Suspicions, where should
we find a Woman of common Modesty! Indeed, Child, I think you injure her; I
believe her virtuous.


Theas. When a Man has ruined a Woman, he thinks himself obliged in Honor to
stand up for her Reputation.


Lycom. If you will believe only your own unaccountable Suspicions, and are
determined not to hear Reason, I must leave you to your perverse Humors. --
What would you have me say? What would you have me do?


Theas. Show your Hospitality (as you call it) to me, and put that Creature out
of the Palace.


Lycom. I have a greater Regard to yours and my own Quiet, than ever to comply
with the extravagant Passions of a jealous Woman.


Theas. You have taken then your Resolutions, I find; and I am sentenced to
Neglect. -- Did ever a Woman marry but with the Probability of having at least
one Man in her Power? -- What a wretched Wife am I!


[Weeps. Lycom. Jealousy from a Wife, even to a Man of Quality, is now looked
upon as Ill-manners, though the Affair be never so public. -- But without a
Cause! -- I beg you, Madam, to say no more upon this Subject.


Theas. Though you, Sir, may think her fit Company for you; methinks the very
same Reasons might tell you that she is not so very reputable a Companion for
your Daughters.


Lycom. Since a passionate Woman will only believe herself, I must leave you,
Madam, to enjoy your Obstinacy. I know but that way of putting an end to the
Dispute.

AIR XVI. We Have cheated the Parson, etc.
^ Though Woman's glib Tongue, when her Passions are fired,
Eternally go, a Man's Ear can be tired.
Since Woman will have both her Word and her Way,
I yield to your Tongue; but my Reason obey.
I obey,
Nothing say,
Since Woman will have both her Word and her Way.



SCENE VII.
Theaspe. Theas. Would I had been more upon the Reserve! But Husbands are
horridly provoking; they know the Frailty of the Sex, and never fail to take
the Advantage of our Passions to make us expose our selves by Contradiction. --
Artemona.


SCENE VIII.
Theaspe, Artemona. Art. Madam.


Theas. Is that Creature, that (what do you call her) that Princess gone?


Art. Yes, Madam.


Theas. Why did not she take that awkward Thing, her Daughter, with her?


Art. The Advantages she mighr receive in her Education, might be an Inducement
to leave her.


Theas. Might that be an Inducement?


Art. Besides, in her present Circumstance, it might be inconvenient to take
her Daughter with her.


Theas. Cannot you find out any other Reason for leaving her?


Art. Your Courtesy, Madam; your Hospitality.


Theas. No other Reason!


Art. No other Reason? --


Theas. Would I could believe there was no other!


Art. It Is not for me to pry into your Majesty's Secrets.


Theas. I hate a Girl that is so intolerably forward.


Art. I never observed any thing but those little Liberties that Girls of her
Age will take, when they are among themselves. -- Perhaps those particular
Distinctions the Princesses show her, may have made her too familiar. -- I am
not, Madam, an Advocate for her Behavior.


Theas. A Look so very audacious! Now the filthy Men, who love every thing that
is impudent, call that Spirit. -- But there are, Artemona, some particular
Distinctions from a certain Person, who of late has been very particular to
me, that might indeed make her too familiar.


Art. Heaven forbid!


Theas. How precarious is the Happiness of a Wife, when it is in the Power of
every new Face to destroy it! -- Now, dear Artemona, tell me sincerely, don't
you, from what you yourself have observed, think I have Reason to be uneasy?


Art. That I have observed!


Theas. Dear Artemona, don't frighten thyself. -- I am not accusing you but
talking to you as a Friend.

AIR XVII. Fairy Elves.
^ Art. O guard your Hours from Care,
Of Jealousy beware;
For she with fancied Sprites,
Herself torments and frights.
Thus she frets, and pines, and grieves,
Raising Fears that she believes.




Theas. I hate myself too for having so much Condescension and Humility as to
be jealous. It Is flattering the Man that uses one ill; and it is wanting the
natural Pride that belongs to the Sex. What a wretched, mean, contemptible
Figure is a jealous Woman! How have I exposed myself!


Art. Your Majesty is safe in the Confidence reposed in me.


Theas. That is not the Case, Artemona. Lycomedes knows I am unhappy. I have
owned it, and was so unguarded as to accuse him.


Art. Upon mere Suspicion only?


Theas. Beyond Dispute he loves her. I know it, Artemona; and can one imagine
that Girl has Virtue enough to withstand such a Proposal?

AIR XVIII. Moll Peatly.
^ All Hearts are a little frail
When Temptation is rightly applied.
What can Shame or Fear avail
When we sooth both Ambition and Pride?
All Women have Power in view;
Then there is Pleasure to tempt her too.
Such a sure Attack there is no defying,
No denying;
Since complying
Gives her another's Due.


-- I cannot indeed (if you mean that) positively affirm that he has yet had
her.


Art. Then it may be still only Suspicion.


Theas. I have trusted too my Daughter Deidamia with my Weakness; that she, by
her Intimacies and Friendship with Pyrrha, may get into her Secrets. In short,
I have placed her as my Spy about her. -- That Girl (out of Goodnature, and to
prevent Family-disputes) may deceive me. She insists upon it that I have
nothing to fear from Pyrrha; and is so positive in this Opinion, that she
offers to be answerable for her Conduct.


Art. Why then, Madam, will you still believe your own Jealousies?


Theas. All I say is, that Deidamia may deceive me; for whatever is in the
Affair, it is impossible but she must know it; I have ordered it so that she is
scarce ever from her; they have one and the same Bedchamber; yet such is my
Distemper, that I suspect every Body, and can only believe my own Imaginations.
-- There must be some Reason that Deidamia has not been with me this Morning.
-- I am impatient to see her.


AIR XIX. John Anderson my Jo.
^ Art. Let Jealousy no longer
A fruitless Search pursue;
You make his Flame the Stronger,
And wake Resentment too.
This self-tormenting Care give over;
For all you can obtain
Is, what was only Doubt before,
To change for real Pain.



The End of the First Act.
ACT II. SCENE I.
Diphilus, Achilles. Ach. I Am very sensible, my Lord, of the particular
Honors that are shown me.


Diph. Honors, Madam! Lycomedes is still more particular. How happy must that
Woman be whom he respects!


Ach. What do you mean, my Lord?


Diph. Let this speak both for him and me: The Present is worthy him to give,
and you to receive.


Ach. I have too many Obligations already.


Diph. It Is in your Power, Madam, to return 'em all.


Ach. Thus I return 'em. And, if you dare be honest, tell him this Ring had
been a more honorable Present to Theaspe.


AIR XX. Abroad as I was walking.
^ [Offering the Ring a second time.]
Diph. Such Homage to her Beauty,
What Coyness can reject?
Accept, as it is your Duty,
The Tribute with Respect.
What more can Beauty gain thee?
With Love I offer Power.
What Shame can ever stain thee,
Restrain thee,
Or pain thee,
When blessed with such a Dower?



Diph. It Is but an Earnest, Madam, of future Favors. -- When Lycomedes his
Power is yours, I entreat your Highness not to forget your Servant.


Ach. I shall remember thee with Contempt and Abhorrence.


Diph. I beg you, Madam, to consider your present Situation. -- This uncommon
Distinction requires a softer Answer.


Ach. I shall give no other, my Lord. -- I dare say, Diphilus, you think
yourself highly honored by your present Negotiation. -- Is there no Office too
mean for Ambition? -- Was you not a Man of Quality, was you not a Favorite,
the World, my Lord, would call you a Pimp, a Pandar, a Bawd, for this very
honorable Proposal of yours.


Diph. What an unmerciful Weapon is a Woman's Tongue! -- I beg your Highness to
confine yourself within the Bounds of common Civility, and to consider who I am.


Ach. I do consider it, Diphilus, and that makes thee a thousand times the more
contemptible.

AIR XXI. Buttered Pease.
^ Should the Beast of the noblest Race
Act the Brute of the lowest Class;
Tell me, which do you think more base,
Or the Lion or the Ass?
Boast not then of thy Rank or State;
That but shows thee the meaner Slave.
Take thy due then of Scorn and Hate,
As you are but the greater Knave.



Diph. Though the Sex have the Privilege of unlimited Expression, and that a
Woman's Words are not to be resented; yet a Lady, Madam, may be ill-bred.
Ladies too are generally passionate enough without a Provocation, so that a
Reply at present would be unnecessary.


Ach. Are such the Friends of Power? -- How unhappy are Princes to have their
Passions so very readily put in Execution, that they seldom know the Benefit of
Reflection! Go, and for once make your Report faithfully and without Flattery.


SCENE II.
Diphilus. Diph. This Girl is so excessively ill-bred, and such an arrant
Termagant, that I could as soon fall in love with a Tigress. She has a handsome
Face, it is true, but in her Temper she is a very Fury. -- But Lycomedes likes
her; and it is not for me to dispute either his Taste or Pleasure. --
Notwithstanding she is such a Spit-fire, it is my Opinion the thing may still
do: Things of this Nature should be always transacted in Person, for there are
Women so ridiculously half-modest, that they are ashamed in Words to consent to
what (when a Man comes to the Point) they will make no Difficulties to comply
with.


SCENE III.
Lycomedes, Diphilus. Lycom. Well, Diphilus, in what manner did she receive my
Present?


Diph. It Is my Opinion, Sir, that she will accept it only from your Hands. From
me she absolutely refuses it.


AIR XXII. Come open the Door sweet Betty.
^ Lycom. What, must I remain in Anguish?
And did not her Eyes consent?
No Sigh, not a Blush, nor Languish
That promised a kind Event!
It must be all Affectation,
The Tongue has her Heart belied;
That often has withstood Temptation,
When every thing else complied.



Lycom. How did she receive you? Did you watch her Eyes? What was her Behavior
when you first told her I loved her?


Diph. She seemed to be desperately disappointed that you had not told her so
your self.


Lycom. But when you pressed it to her --


Diph. She had all the Resentment and Fury of the most complying Prude.


Lycom. But did not she soften upon Consideration?


Diph. She seemed to take it mortally ill of me, that my meddling in the Affair
had delayed your Majesty's Application.


Lycom. What no favorable Circumstance!


Diph. Nay, I was not in the least surprised at her Behavior. Love at
second-hand to a Lady of her warm Constitution! It was a Disappointment, Sir;
and she could not but treat it accordingly. -- Whatever was my Opinion, 'twas
my Duty, Sir, to obey you, but I found just the Reception I expected. Apply to
her your self, Sir; answer her Wishes, and (if I know any thing of Woman) she
will then answer yours, and behave herself as she ought.


Lycom. But, dear Diphilus, I grow more and more impatient.


Diph. That too by this time is her Case -- To save the Appearances of Virtue,
the most easy Woman expects a little gentle Compulsion, and to be allowed the
Decency of a little feeble Resistance. For the Quiet of her own Conscience a
Woman may insist upon acting the Part of Modesty, and you must comply with her
Scruples. -- You will have no more trouble but what will heighten the Pleasure.


Lycom. Pyrrha! -- This is beyond my Hopes. -- Diphilus, lay your Hand upon my
Breast. Feel how my Heart flutters.


Diph. Did Pyrrha feel these Assurances of Love she would not appear so
thoughtful.


Lycom. Deidamia too not with her!


Diph. She is with the Queen, Sir.


Lycom. My other Daughters, who seem less fond of her, are in the Garden; so
all is safe. -- Leave me, Diphilus, and let none, upon Pain of my Displeasure,
presume to intrude.


SCENE IV.
Lycomedes, Achilles. Lycom. Lady Pyrrha, my dear Child, why so thoughtful?


Ach. Thoughts may not be so respectful; they may be too familiar, too
friendly, too true: And who about you presumes to communicate 'em? Words and
Forms only are for your Ear, Sir.


Lycom. You know, Pyrrha, you was never received upon the Foot of Ceremony, but
Friendship; so that it would be more respectful if you was less shy and less
reserved. -- It Is your Behavior, Pyrrha, that keeps me at a Distance.


Ach. If I was wanting, Sir, either in Duty to you or my self, my own Heart
would be the first to reproach me. -- Your Majesty's Generosity is too
solicitous upon my Account; and your Courtesy and Affability may even now
detain you from Affairs of Importance. -- If you have no Commands, Sir, the
Princesses expect me in the Garden.


Lycom. Nay, positively, my dear Pyrrha, you shall not go.


Ach. But why, Sir? -- For Heaven's Sake, what has set you a trembling? -- I
fear, Sir, you are out of Order. -- Who waits there?


Lycom. I did not call, Pyrrha.


Ach. Let me then, Sir, know your Commands. --


AIR XXIII. Altro Giorno in compagnia.
^ Lycom. If my Passion want explaining,
This way turn and read my Eyes;
These will tell thee, without feigning,
What in Words I must disguise.



Ach. Why do you fix your Eyes so intensely upon me? -- Speak your Pleasure,
speak to me then. -- Why am I seized? -- Spare me, Sir, for I have a Temper
that cannot bear Provocation.


Lycom. I know there are a thousand necessary Affectations of Modesty, which
Women, in Decency to themselves, practice with common Lovers before Compliance.
-- But my Passion, Pyrrha, deserves some Distinction.


Ach. I beg you then, Sir, don't lay violent Hands upon me.


Lycom. The Present you refused from Diphilus accept from me.


Ach. Why will you persist? -- Nay, dear Sir, I cannot answer for my Passions.


Lycom. It Is not Diphilus, but I give it you.


Ach. That Diphilus, Sir, is your Enemy.


Lycom. It Is I that offer it.


Ach. Your very worst Enemy, your Flatterer.


Lycom. You should strive, Child, to conquer these extravagant Passions.


Ach. How I despise that Fellow! that Pimp, that Pandar!

AIR XXIV. Trip to the Landry.
^ How unhappy are the Great,
Thus begirt with servile Slaves!
Such with Praise your Reason cheat.
Flatt'rers are the meanest Knaves.
They, in Friendship's Guise accost you;
False in all they say or do.
When these Wretches have engrossed you,
Who Is the Slave, Sir, they or you?



Lycom. Is this reproachful Language, Pyrrha, befitting my Presence?


Ach. Nay, dear Sir, don't worry me. By Jove, you will provoke me.


Lycom. Your Affectation, Pyrrha, is intolerable. There Is enough of it. --
Those Looks of Aversion are insupportable. -- I will have no struggling.


Ach. Then, Sir, I must have no Violence.


AIR XXV. As I walked along Fleetstreet.
^ Lycom. When the Fort on no Condition
Will admit the generous Foe,
Parley but delays Submission;
We by Storm should lay it low.



Lycom. I am in earnest, Lady. -- I will have no trifling, no coquetting; you
may spare those little Arts of Women, for my Passion is warm and vehement
enough without 'em. -- Do you know, Pyrrha, that Obedience is your Duty?


Ach. I know my Duty, Sir; and, had it not been for that Sycophant Diphilus,
perhaps you had known yours.


Lycom. I am not, Lady, to be awed and frightened by stern Looks and Frowns. --
Since your obstinate Behavior then makes Violence necessary --


Ach. You make Self-preservation, Sir, as necessary.


Lycom. I will not be refused.


AIR XXVI. The Lady's New Year's Gift.
^ Lycom. Why such Affectation?

Ach. Why this Provocation?

Lycom. Must I bear Resistance still!

Ach. Check your Inclination.

Lycom. Dare you then deny me?

Ach. You too far may try me.

Lycom. Must I then against your Will!

Ach. Force shall never ply me.



Lycom. Never was such a Termagant!


Ach. By Jove, never was such an Insult!


Lycom. Will you? -- Dare you? -- Never was such Strength! --


[ Achilles pushes him from him with great Violence, and throws him down. Ach.
Desist then.


Lycom. Audacious Fury, know you what you have done? --


AIR XXVII. Puppet-Show Trumpet Tune.
^ [ Achilles holding Lycomedes down.] Ach. What Heart has not Courage, by
Force assailed,
To brave the most desperate Fight?
It Is Justice and Virtue that has prevailed;
Power must yield to Right.



Lycom. Am I so ignominiously to be got the better of!


Ach. You are.


Lycom. By a Woman!


Ach. You now, Sir, find you had acted a greater Part, if (in Spite of your
Flatterers) you had got the better of your own Passions.


SCENE V.
Lycomedes, Achilles, Diphilus, Courtiers. 1 Court. An Attempt upon the King's
Life! -- The Guards! where are the Guards?


2 Court. Such an open, barefaced Assassination!


[They seize Achilles, and raise Lycomedes. 3 Court. And by a Woman too!


1 Court. Where are your Wounds, Sir.


2 Court. Take the Dagger from her, that she do no farther Mischief.


3 Court. The Dagger! Where? What Dagger?


1 Court. You will find it some where or other concealed; examine her, search
her.


Ach. Save your Zeal, Sirs, for times of real Danger. Let Lycomedes accuse me.
-- He knows my Offense.


Lycom. How have I exposed my self! -- Diphilus, bid these over-officious
Friends leave me, and, as they value my Favor, that they say nothing of what
they have seen. -- [ Diphilus talks apart with the Courtiers, who go out.]
Though the Insult from any other Person had been unpardonable; there are ways
that you, Madam, might still take to reconcile me.


Ach. Self-defence, Sir, is the Privilege of Mankind. I know your Power, but as
I have offended no Law I rely upon your Justice.


Lycom. 'Twou'd be safer, Madam, to rely on your own future Behavior.


Ach. Who was the Aggressor, Sir?


Lycom. Beauty, Inclination, Love. If you will merit Favor you know the
Conditions.

AIR XXVIII. Old King Cole.
^ No more be coy;
Give a Loose to Joy,
And let Love for thy Pardon sue.
A Glance could all my Rage destroy,
And light up my Flame anew.
For though a Man can stand at Bay
Against a Woman's Will;
And keep, amid the loudest Fray,
His Resolution still:
Yet when consenting Smiles accost,
The Man in her Arms is lost.



SCENE VI.
Lycomedes, Achilles, Diphilus. Ach. If your Resentment wants only the Show of
Justice; let this honorable Man here be my Accuser; it may be necessary for
him to trump up a horrid Conspiracy to skreen his own infamous Practices.


Diph. Your Majesty has had too much Confidence in this Woman. The Lives of
Kings are sacred, and the Matter (trivial as it seems) deserves further
Inquiry. -- There must be some secret villainous Design in this Affair.


Ach. And are not you, Diphilus, conscious of that secret villainous Design?


Diph. It Is an Offense, Sir, that is not to be pardoned. Your Dignity, Sir,
calls upon you (notwithstanding your Partiality to her) to make her an Example.
There must be Things of Consequence that we are still ignorant of; and she
ought to undergo the severest Examination. -- My Zeal for your Service, Sir,
was never as yet at a loss for Witnesses upon these Occasions.


[To Lycomedes. Lycom. Don't you see the Queen coming this Way? Have done with
this Discourse, dear Diphilus, and leave me. -- Would I could forget this
ridiculous Affair! For the present; Pyrrha, I trust you to return to the
Ladies; though (considering your passionate Temper) I have little Reason to
rely on your Discretion.


SCENE VII.
Lycomedes, Theaspe, Deidamia. Theas. I thought I had heard Pyrrha's Voice.


Lycom. A jealous Woman's Thoughts are her own and her Husband's eternal
Plague; so I beg you, my Dear, say no more of her.


Theas. And have I no reason but my own Thoughts, my Liege?


AIR XXIX. Dicky's Walk in Dr. Faustus.
^ Theas. What give over!
I must and will complain.

Lycom. You plague us both in vain.

Theas. You wont then hear a Wife!

Lycom. I must, it seems, for Life.
Teaze no more.

Theas. Nay, Sir, you know it is true,
That it is to her I owe my Due.
No Thanks to you!



It behooves Kings, Sir, to have the severest Guard upon their Actions; for as
their great ones are trumpeted by Fame, their little ones are as certainly and
as widely conveyed from Ear to Ear by a Whisper.


Lycom. These chimerical Jealousies, Madam, may provoke my Patience.


Theas. Chimerical Jealousies! -- And do you really, Sir, think your
ignominious Affair is still a Secret? -- Am I to be ignorant of a Thing that is
already whispered every where?


AIR XXX. Puddings and Pyes.
^ Lycom. The Slips of a Husband you Wives
Will never forget:
Your Tongue for the Course of our Lives
Is never in debt.
It Is now funning,
And then dunning;
Intent on our Follies alone,
It Is so fully employed that you never can think of your own.



Theas. My Suspicions have, indeed, wronged Pyrrha. -- How I respect and honor
that Girl! -- Deidamia, that honorable, that virtuous Creature Pyrrha, well
deserves both your Friendship and mine. -- As soon as you have found her bring
her to me, that I may acknowledge the Merits she has to me.


SCENE VIII.
Lycomedes, Theaspe. Theas. After the Repulse and Disgrace you have very justly
met with, you might with Reason censure me for want of Duty and Respect should
I upbraid you. -- It Is past; and if you will never again put me in mind, I
choose to forget it. -- Yet, would you reward Virtue, and had you any Regard
for my Quiet. --

AIR XXXI. My Dilding, my Dalding.
^ Ah! should you ever find her
Complying and kinder;
Though now you have resigned her;
What then must ensue!
Your Flame, though now it is over,
Again will recover;
You Will prove as fond a Lover,
As I Am now of you.



Lycom. What would you have me do?


Theas. I would have you distrust your self and remove the Temptation. -- I
have long had it at Heart to find a Match for my Nephew Periphas, and I really
think we can never meet with a more deserving Woman.


Lycom. Whatever Scheme you have for her, I shall not interfere with you. -- I
have had enough of her termagant Humors; she has not the common Softness of
the Sex. -- It Is my Opinion, that Periphas will not find himself much obliged
to you; for the Man that marties her must either conquer his own Passions, or
hers, and one of 'em (according to my Observation) is not to be conquered.


Theas. Marriage, Sir, has broke many a Woman's Spirit; and that will be only
his Affair. -- When he takes her with him, your own Family at least will be
easy.


Lycom. Her Presence just now would be shocking. -- I could not stand the Shame
and Confusion. -- I see her, and Deidamia with her. -- Do with her as you
please; you have my Consent.


SCENE IX.
Theaspe, Deidamia, Achilles. Theas. The Character Deidamia has given of you,
and your own Behavior, Child, have so charmed me, that I think I never can
sufficiently reward your Merits.


Ach. Deidamia's Friendship may make her partial. -- My only Merit, Madam, is
Gratitude.


Theas. To convince you of the Opinion I have of you -- But I must first ask
you a Question -- Don't you think, Lady Pyrrha, that my Nephew Periphas is very
agreeable?


Ach. That Impatience of his, to serve as a Volunteer with the Troops of
Lycomedes at the Siege of Troy, is becoming his Birth. -- So much Fire, and so
much Spirit! -- I don't wonder your Majesty is fond of him.


Theas. But I am sure, Pyrrha, you must think his Person agreeable.


Ach. No Woman alive can dispute it.


Theas. I don't know, every way, so deserving a young Man; and I have that
Influence upon him, and at the same time that Regard for him, that I would have
him happy. -- Don't think, Child, that I would make him happy at your Expense;
for, knowing him, I know you will be so. -- Was the Princess Calista here, it is
a Match she could not disapprove of; therefore let that be no Obstacle, for
every thing, in regard to her, I take upon my self.


Ach. Would you make me the Obstacle to his Glory? Pardon me, Madam, I know my
self undeserving.

AIR XXXII. How happy are you and I.
^ First let him for Honor roam,
And martial Fame obtain:
Then (if he should come Home)
Perhaps I may explain.
Since then alone the Hero's Deeds
Can make my Heart give way;
'Till Ilion falls and Hector bleeds,
I must my Choice delay.



Theas. Nay, Pyrrha, I will not take these romantic Notions of yours for an
Answer. -- Deidamia is so much your Friend, that, I am sure, she must be happy
with this Alliance; so, while I make the Proposal to my Nephew, I leave you two
to talk over the Affair together.


SCENE X.
Deidamia, Achilles. Ach. Was there ever a Man in so whimsical a Circumstance!


Deid. Was there ever a Woman in so happy and so unhappy a one as mine!


Ach. Why did I submit? why did I plight my Faith thus infamously to conceal my
self? -- What is become of my Honor?


Deid. Ah Pyrrha, Pyrrha, what is become of mine!


Ach. When shall I behave my self as a Man!


Deid. Would you had never behaved yourself as one!


AIR XXXIII. Fie gar rub her over with Straw.
^ Deid. Think what Anguish tears my Quiet,
Since I suffered Shame for thee:
Man at large may rove and riot,
We are bound but you are free.
Are thy Vows and Oaths mistaken?
See the Birds that wing the Sky;
These their Mates have never for saken,
'Till their Young at least can fly.



Ach. Pestered and worried thus from every Quarter it is impossible much longer
to prevent discovery!


Deid. Dear, dear Pyrrha, confide in me. Any other Discovery but to me only
would be inevitable Perdition to us both. -- Am I treated like a common
Prostitute? Can your Gratitude (would I might say Love!) refuse to let me know
the Man to whom I owe my Ruin?


Ach. You must rely, my dear Princess, upon my Honor; for I am not, like a
fond weak Husband, to be teased into the breaking my Resolution.


AIR XXXIV. Beggar's Opera. Hornpipe.
^ Ach. Know that Importunity's in vain.

Deid. Can then nothing move thee?

Ach. Ask not since Denial gives me Pain.

Deid. Think how much I love thee.

Ach. What Is a Secret in a Woman's Breast?

Deid. Can thou thus upbraid me!

Ach. Let me leave thy Heart and Tongue at rest.

Deid. Love then has betrayed me.



Ach. For Heaven's sake, Deidamia, if you regard my Love, give me Quiet. --
Entreaties, Fondness, Tears, Rage and the whole matrimonial Rhetoric of Woman
to gain her Ends are all thrown away upon me; for, by the Gods, my dear
Deidamia, I am inexorable.


Deid. But, my dear Pyrrha, (for you oblige me still to call you by that Name)
only imagine what must be the Consequence of a Month or two. -- Think of my
unhappy Condition. -- To save my Shame (if you are a Man of Honor) you must
then come to some Resolution.


Ach. 'Till I deserve these Suspicions, Deidamia, methinks it would be more
becoming your Professions of Love to spare 'em. -- I have taken my Resolutions;
and when the time comes, you shall know 'em: till then be easy, and press me no
farther.


AIR XXXV. My time, O ye Muses.
^ Deid. How happy my Days and how sweet was my Rest,
Ere Love with his Passions my Bosom distressed!
Now I languish with Sorrow, I doubt and I fear:
But Love has me all when my Pyrrha is near.
Yet why have I grieved? -- Ye vain Passions adieu!
I know my own Heart and I Will think thee as true;
And as you know my Heart, 'twou'd be folly to range;
For who'd be inconstant to lose by the Change?



Deid. My Life, my Honor, then I implicitly entrust with you.


Ach. Who would have the trouble of putting on a Character that does not
naturally belong to him! the Life of a Hypocrite must be one continual Scene of
Anxiety. When shall I appear as I am, and extricate my self out of this Chain
of Perplexities! -- I have no sooner escaped being ravished but I am
immediately to be made a Wife.


Deid. But, dear Pyrrha, for my sake, for your own, have a particular Regard to
your Behavior till your Resolution is ripe for Execution. -- You now and then
take such intolerable Strides, that I vow you have set me a blushing.


Ach. Considering my continual Restraint, and how much the Part I act differs
from my Inclinations, I am surpised at my own Behavior.


AIR XXXVI. I am come to your House.
^ Ach. Your Dress, your Conversations,
Your Airs of Joy and Pain,
All these are Affectations
We never can attain.
The Sex so often varies,
It Is Nature more than Art:
To play their whole Vagaries
We must have Woman's Heart.



Deid. Your Swearing too, upon certain Occasions, sounds so very masculine --
an Oath startles me. -- Would I could cure my self of these violent
Apprehensions!


Ach. As for that matter, there are Ladies who, in their Passions, can take all
the Liberties of Speech.


Deid. Then too, you very often look so agreeably impudent upon me, that, let
me die, if I have not been mortally afraid my Sisters would find you out.


Ach. Impudent! are Women so censorious that Looks cannot escape 'em? -- May
not one Woman look kindly upon another without Scandal?


Deid. But such Looks! -- Nay, perhaps I may be particular, and it may be only
my own Fears; for (notwithstanding your Dress) whenever I look upon you, I have
always the Image of a Man before my Eyes.


Ach. Do what we will, Love at some Moments will be unguarded. -- But what
shall I do about this Periphas?


Deid. His Heart is so set upon the Siege, that I know you can have but very
little Persecution upon his Account.


Ach. Would I could go with him!


Deid. And could you leave me thus?


Ach. Have you only a womanish Fondness? I thought, Deidamia, you loved me. And
you cannot truly love and esteem, if in every Circumstance of Life you have not
a just Regard for my Honor.


Deid. Dear Pyrrha, don't mention it; the very Thought of it kills me. You have
set my Heart in a most violent Palpitation. -- Let us talk no more upon this
disagreeable Subject. -- My Sisters will grow very impatient. -- Should we stay
longer together I might again be importunate and ask to know you, and I had
rather bear the eternal Plague of unsatisfied Curiosity, than give you a
Moment's Disquiet. -- They are now expecting us in the Garden, and, considering
my present Circumstances, I would not give 'em occasion to be impertinent, for
of late they have been horridly prying and inquisitive. -- Let us go to 'em.


Ach. I envy that Periphas. His Honor, his Fame, his Glory is not shackled by
a Woman.


AIR XXXVII. The Clarinette.
^ Ach. Ah, why is my Heart so tender!
My Honor incites me to Arms:
To Love shall I Fame surrender?
By Laurels I Will merit thy Charms.

Deid. How can I bear the Reflection

Ach. I balance; and Honor gives way.

Deid. Reward my Love by Affection;
I ask thee no more than I pay.



The End of the Second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Theaspe, Periphas, Artemona. Theasp. PEriphas, I have a Favor to ask of you,
and positively I will not be refused.


Per. Your Majesty may command.


Theas. Nay, Nephew, it is for your own good.


Per. To obey your Commands, Madam, must be so.


Theas. I am not, Periphas, talking to you as a Queen, but as a Relation, a
Friend. -- I must have no Difficulties; therefore I insist upon your absolute
Promise.


Per. I am not in my own Power, Madam. -- Lycomedes, you know has acceded to
the Treaty of Alliance; that to furnish his Quota, his Troops are already
embarked, and that I have engaged my self in his Service.


Theas. Why will you raise Obstacles before you know the Conditions? It Is a
thing I have set my heart upon, and I tell you it is what in Honor you can
comply with.


Per. My Duty, my Obligations put me entirely in your Disposal.


Theas. You promise then solemnly, faithfully --


Per. I do.


Theas. I have remarked, Periphas, that you are prodigiously fond of the
Princess Calista's Daughter.


Per. I fond of her, Madam!


Theas. Nay, Periphas, are not you eternally at her Ear?


Art. How I have seen that formidable Hero General Ajax suffer upon your
Account! -- Of all his Rivals you are his eternal Torment. -- He reddens,
sighs, and (as much as is consistent with such a blustering Soldier's Valor)
languishes whenever you are near her.


Theas. You may safely own your Passion, Periphas, for I know you think her
agreeable.


Art. Besides her being the fashionable Beauty of the Court (which is
sufficient Vanity to make all the young Fellows follow her) you, of all
Mankind, in Gratitude ought to like her. -- I know all of 'em envy the
particular Distinctions she shows you.


Theas. I am convinced, of her Merits; and your marrying her I know would make
you both happy.


Per. Let me perish, Madam, if I ever once thought of it!


Theas. Your Happiness you see has been in my Thoughts. -- I take the settling
this Affair upon my self.


Per. How could you, Madam, imagine I had any Views of this kind! -- What, be a
Woman's Follower with Intention to marry her! Why, the very Women themselves
would laugh at a Man who had so vulgar a Notion of Galantry, and knew so little
of their Inclinations. -- The Man never means it, and the Woman never expects
it; and for the most part they have every other View but Marriage.


Theas. But I am serious, Nephew, and insist upon your Promise.

AIR XXXVIII. No sooner had Jonathan leaped from the Boat.
^ What are the Jests that on Marriage you quote?
All ignorant Batchelors censure by Rote;
Like Critics you view it with Envy or Spleen.
You pry out its Faults, but the Good is o'erseen.



Per. It Is not in my Power, Madam; it is not in my Inclinations. -- A Soldier
can have but one Inducement to marry, (and the Woman may have the same Reason
too) which is, the Opportunities of Absence.


Theas. You know, Nephew, you have promised.


Per. But suppose I am already engaged.


Theas. That will be another Merit to her.


Per. It Is impossible, Madam. -- In a Day or two you know I am to set out for
the Campaign.


Theas. A Lady of her romantic Spirit can have no Objections to following the
Camp.


AIR XXXIX. Love's a Dream of mighty Pleasure.
^ Soldier, think before you marry;
If your Wife the Camp attends,
You but a Convenience carry,
For (perhaps) a hundred Friends.
If at home she is left in Sorrow,
Absence is convenient too;
Neighbors now and then may borrow
What is of no Use to you.


Theas. I indeed feared Pyrrha might have started some Difficulties, but if you
rightly consider the Proposal you can have none.


Per. What is the Cause of the War we are now engaged in? Does not the Fate of
Menelaus stare me in the Face?


Theas. I will have no more of your trifling Objections, Periphas; and as to
your Part, from this time I will look upon the Affair as happily concluded. --
All that now remains to be done is with Pyrrha. I have left her to Deidamia's
Management; and without doubt her good Offices must prevail, for you can never
have a better Advocate. -- But should the Girl be perverse and obstinate! --
It Is impossible. For however her Heart is already engaged, no Woman alive can
resist the Ambition of such an Alliance.


SCENE II.
Periphas. Per. Had I so little Taste of Liberty as to be inclined to marry;
that Girl is of so termagant a Spirit! -- The bravest Man must have the dread
of an eternal Domestic War. -- In a Tongue-combat Woman is invincible, and the
Husband must come off with Shame and Infamy; for though he lives in perpetual
Noise and Tumult, the poor Man is only ridiculous to his Neighbors. -- How can
we ever get rid of her? -- Hercules conquered the seven-headed Hydra, but his
Wife was a venomed Shirt that stuck to him to the last.


SCENE III.
Periphas, Ajax. Ajax. This Rencounter, Periphas, is as I wished. -- The
Liberties you have taken -- you know what I mean -- when my Honor is concerned
-- an Indignity and all that! -- It Is not to be put up; and I must insist upon
an Explanation. -- There is a particular Affair, my Lord. --


Per. Your accosting me in this particular manner, Lord Ajax, requires
Explanation. -- For let me die, if I comprehend you!


Ajax. Death, my Lord, I explain! I am not come here to be asked Questions. --
It Is sufficient that I know the Affront, and that you know I will have
Satisfaction. -- So, now you are answered --


Per. I cannot say much to my Satisfaction, my Lord; for I cannot so much as
guess at your meaning.


Ajax. A Man of Honor, Periphas, is not to be trifled withal.


Per. But a Man of Honor, Ajax, is not obliged in Courage to be unintelligible.


Ajax. I hate talking. -- The Tongue is a Woman's Weapon. Whenever I am
affronted; by the Gods, this Sword is my only Answer.


Per. It Is not, Ajax, that I decline the Dispute, or would upon any Account
deny you the Pleasure of fighting; yet (if it is not too much Condescension in
a Man of Honor) before I fight I would willingly know the Provocation.


AIR XL. Maggy Lawther.
^ Ajax. What is all this idle Chat?
Words are out of Season.
Whether it is or this or that,
The Sword shall do me reason.
Honor called me to the Task;
No matter for explaining:
It Is a fresh Affront to ask
A Man of Honor's meaning.



Ajax. Be it as it will, Periphas; we have gone too far already to retract. --
You know, I suppose, of my Pretensions to a certain Lady. -- Now are you
satisfied?


Per. If you had her, my Lord, it had been much more to my Satisfaction. -- I
admire your Courage.

AIR XLI. Lord Frog and Lady Mouse.
^ Oh, then it seems you want a Wife!
Should I consent,
You may repent,
And all her daily Jars and Strife
You may on me resent.
Thus every Day and every Night,
If things at home should not go right,
We three must live in constant Fight.
Take her at all Event.



Ajax. Hell, and Furies! I am not to be rallied out of my Resentment.


Per. Now in my Opinion it is flinging away your Courage to fight without a
Cause; though indeed the Men of uncommon Prowess, by their loving to make the
most of every Quarrel, seem to think the contrary.


Ajax. You are not so sure of the Lady, Periphas, as you flatter yourself; for
whenever I am a Rival, by Jove, it is not her Consent, but my Sword, that must
decide the Question.


Per. Sure never a Rival (as you will call me) had a better Reason for fighting
than I have at present; for if I am killed, I shall be out of danger of having
the Woman.


Ajax. You might spare your Jokes, Periphas, for my Courage wants no
Provocation. -- If I fall, Pyrrha may be yours: You will then deserve her. --
'Till then --


Per. So he that conquers, as a Reward, I find is to be married. -- Now dear
Ajax, is that worth fighting for?


Ajax. Your Passion for that Lady, Periphas, is too public to bear Dispute. --
Have not I seen you whisper her, laugh with her? And by some particular Looks
at the same time 'twas too evident that I was the Subject of your Mirth.


Per. Looks, Ajax!


Ajax. Yes Looks, my Lord; and I never did or will take an impertinent one from
any Man.


Per. Impertinent one!


Ajax. Furies! This calm Mockery is not to be born. -- I will not have my Words
repeated.


Per. Such Language, Ajax, may provoke me.


AIR XLII. Richmond Ball.
^ Per. What means all this Ranting?

Ajax. Cease your joking;
It Is provoking.

Per. I to my Honor will never be wanting.

Ajax. Will you do me right?

Per. What means all this Ranting?

Ajax. Cease your joking;
It Is provoking.

Per. I to my Honor will never be wanting.

Ajax. Talk not then but fight.
Give then by Action
Satisfaction.

Per. I Am not in awe, Sir.

Ajax. Death! will you draw, Sir?
Tittle-tattle
Is a Battle
You may safer try.

Per. Yet, first, I Would fain know why.



Ajax. By Jupiter, Periphas, 'till now I never thought you a Coward.


Per. Nay then -- since my own Honor calls upon me. -- Take notice, Ajax, that
I don't fight for the Woman.


[They fight. SCENE IV.
Periphas, Ajax, Theaspe, Artemona, Guards. 1 Guard. Part 'em. -- Beat down
their Swords.


[They are parted. 2 Guard. How dared you presume to fight in the Royal Gardens?


1 Guard. Nay, in the very Presence! -- For see, the Queen.


Ajax. It Is very hard, Sirs, that a Man should be denied the Satisfaction of a
Gentleman.


Theas. Lord Ajax, for this unparalled Presumption we forbid you the Palace.


Ajax. I shall take some other Opportunity, my Lord.


SCENE V.
Theaspe, Artemona, Periphas. Theas. And as for you, Periphas --


Per. Your Majesty's Rigor can do no less than forbid me the Woman.


Theas. The Woman, Periphas, is the only thing that can reconcile me to your
Behavior.


Per. That blundering Hero Ajax will have it that I am his Rival. The Man will
be almost as miserable without her, as it is probable he might be with her. --
Oblige us both then, Madam, and let the General be miserable in his own way.


Theas. I could not have imagined that obstinate Girl could have had any
Scruples to the Match; but Deidamia tells me she finds her as difficult as you.


Per. Since you know, Madam, that Pyrrha will have her own way; for both our
sakes, and to save yourself unnecessary Trouble, your Majesty had better give
up this Impossibility.


SCENE VI.
Theaspe, Artemona, Periphas, Diphilus, Guards. Diph. To prevent future
Mischief, my Lord, his Majesty puts you under Arrest, and commands you to
attend him. General Ajax is already in Custody. -- It Is his Pleasure too, that
(after you have paid your Duty to him) you embark with the Troops immediately;
and you are not to come ashore again upon pain of his Majesty's Displeasure.


AIR XLIII.
^ In War we have naught but Death to fear,
How gracious is the Sentence!
For that is easier far to bear,
Than Marriage with Repentance.
Begirt with Foes, by Numbers braved,
I Would bless the happy Crisis;
The Man from greater Danger saved
The lesser ones despises.


Per. Your Majesty then, you find, must dispense with my Promise 'till after
the Expedition. -- If the General should be so happy, to bring Pyrrha with him
to the Camp, perhaps we may like one another better.


Diph. The King, Madam, wants to talk to your Majesty upon Affairs of
Consequence. -- You will find him in the Royal Apartment.


Theas My Daughters with Pyrrha have just turned the Walk, and are coming this
way. -- You may stay with 'em, Artemona, till I send for you.


SCENE VII.
Artemona, Philoe, Lesbia. Phil. It Is horridly mortifying that these
Trades-People will never get any thing New against a Birthday. They are all so
abominably stupid, that a Woman of Fancy cannot possibly have the Opportunity
of showing her Genius.


Lesb. The Fatigue one has of talking to those Creatures for at least a Month
before a Birthday is insupportable; for you know, Sister, when the time draws
so very near, a Woman can think of nothing else.


Phil. After all, Sister, though their things are detestable, one must make
choice of something or other. I have sent to the Fellows to be with me this
Morning.


Lesb. You are so eternally sending for 'em, one would imagine you was
delighted with their Conversation. For those hideous Stuffs they will show us
from Year to Year are frightful, are shocking. How can a Woman have so ill a
Taste as to expose herself in a last Year's Pattern!


Phil. Dear Madam, I beg your Pardon. Let me die, if I saw you!


Lesb. Our meeting her was lucky beyond Expression, for I never felt so uneasy
a thing as a Secret.


Phil. You know, Sister, we had agreed to trust her with our Suspicions.


Lesb. Yet after all when a Sister's Reputation is concerned.


Phil. But is not the Honor of a Family of greater Consequence?


Lesb. Tho she is a Woman and a Favorite, I dare say, if Artemona promises,
whatever the suffers she will inviolably keep it to herself.


Art. If I had not this Quality I had little deserved Theaspe's Friendship. --
By all that is Sacred, Ladies, you may safely trust me.


Phil. It Is impossible, Sister, but she herself must have observed it.


Lesb. Whatever People have observed, it is a thing you know, that no Creature
alive can presume to talk upon.


Phil. Deal fairly and openly with us, Artemona. -- Have you remarked nothing
particular of Deidamia yonder of late?


Art. Of Deidamia!


Lesb. Only look upon her, Madam.


Phil. Well -- what do you think of her?


Lesb. Are you blind, Artemona, or dare not you believe your Eyes?


Art. Her particular Intimacy with Pyrrha do you mean?


Phil. Dear Madam! -- Then I find we must speak first.


Lesb. Now, dear Artemona, can any Woman alive imagine that Shape of hers
within the compass of common Modesty?


Art. But how can one possibly have those Suspicions?


Phil. She is a Woman, Madam; she has Inclinations and may have had her
Opportunities that we know nothing of.


AIR XLIV. Minuet of Corelli in the Ninth Concerto.
^ Phil. We may resolve to resist Temptation;
And that is all we can do:
For in the Hour of Inclination
What could -- I or you?



Lesb. Though the thing is improbable, it is so monstrously evident that it
cannot bear a Dispute.


Phil. Then her Bosom too is so preposterously impudent! -- One would think a
Woman in her Condition was not conscious of her own Shame.


Lesb. Or imagined other People could overlook it as well as herself.


Phil. Then she is so squeamish and so frequently out of order. --


Lesb. That she has all the outward Marks of Female Frailty must be visible to
all Womankind.


Phil. But how she came by 'em, there, Artemona, is still the Secret.


Lesb. I must own that, by her particular Intimacies with that forward Creature
Pyrrha, I suspect her to be her Confident in this Accident.


Art. I beg you, Ladies, to turn this Discourse; for Deidamia and Pyrrha are
just coming upon us to join the Conversation.


SCENE VIII.
Philoe, Lesbia, Artemona, Deidamia, Achilles. Lesb. Now I dare swear that
careless Creature Pyrrha has not once thought of her Clothes.


Art. Nay, dear Lady Pyrrha, the thing is not such a trifle, for it is the only
Mark of Respect that most People are capable of showing. And though that is not
your Case, I know your Gratitude can never omit this public Occasion.


AIR XLV. Tom and Will were Shepherds twain.
^ Art. Think of Dress in every Light;
It Is Woman's chiefest Duty;
Neglecting that, our selves we slight
And undervalue Beauty.
That allures the Lover's Eye,
And graces every Action;
Besides, when not a Creature's by,
It Is inward Satisfaction.



Ach. As I am yet a Stranger, Ladies, to the Fashions of the Country, it is your
Fancy that must determine me.


Phil. How can a Woman of common Sense be so unsolicitous about her Dress!


Lesb. And trust a Woman to choose for her! It Is a Temptation to be spiteful
that very few of us can resist; for we have not many Pleasures that can equal
that of seeing another Woman ridiculous.


Phil. But you have not, Pyrrha, misplaced your Confidence.


SCENE IX.
Philoe, Lesbia, Deidamia, Achilles, Artemona, Servant. Serve. Your Embroiderer,
Madam.


Phil. That Woman is everlastingly pestering me for Employment. Now can she
imagine that to promote her tawdry Trade I can be talked into making myself
ridiculous by appearing eternally in her odious Embroidery? -- I cannot see her
now. -- But perhaps I may want her for some trivial thing or other. -- Let her
call again to morrow.


Serve. The Antichamber, Madam, is crowded with Trades-People.


Phil. Did not I tell you that I would not be troubled with those impertinent
Creatures? -- But hold -- I had forgot I sent for 'em. -- Let 'em wait.


Lesb. But if those foreign Merchants who lately came into Port are among 'em
--


Phil. There, Sister, is all my Hope. I shall be horridly disappointed if they
don't show us something charming.


Lesb. Should any Woman alive get Sight of their things before us --


Phil. I could not bear it. -- To appear in what another Woman had refused
would make the Creature so intolerably vain!


Lesb. Are those Merchants I ask you among 'em?


Serve. They have been waiting, Madam, above this half Hour.


Lesb. And did not you know our Impatience? -- How could you be so stupid! --
Let us see them this Instant.


SCENE X.
Artemena, Philoe, Lesbia, Deidamia, Achilles. Ulysses, Diomedes, Agyrtes.
[Disguis'd as Merchants.] Art. Unless you have any thing that is absolutely new
and very uncommon, you will give us and your selves, Gentlemen, but unnecessary
Trouble.


Ulys. Our Experience, Madam, must have profited very little by the Honor of
dealing with Ladies, if we could imagine they could possibly be pleased twice
with the same thing.


Diom. You might as well offer 'em the same Lover.


Ulys. We have learnt the good Manners, Madam, to distinguish our Customers. --
To produce any thing that had ever been seen before would be a downright Insult
upon the Genius of a Lady of Quality.


Diom. Novelty is the very Spirit of Dress.


Lesb. Let me die, if the Fellows don't talk charmingly!


Phil. Sensibly, Sister.


Lesb. It Is evident they must have had Dealings with Ladies of Condition.


Diom. We only wait your Commands.


Ulys. We have things of all kinds, Ladies.


Phil. Of all kinds! -- Now that is just what I wanted to see.


Lesb. Are not these, Sister, most delightful Creatures?


Ulys. We know a Lady can never fix unless we first cloy her Curiosity.


Diom. And if Variety can please, we have every thing that Fancy can wish.

AIR XLVI. The Bob-tail Lass.
^ In Dress and Love by like Desires
Is Woman's Heart perplexed;
The Man and the Gown she one Day admires,
She wishes to change the next.
The more you are fickle, we are more employed,
And Love has more Customers too;
For Men are as fickle, and soon are cloyed,
Unless they have something New.



Lesb. But, dear Man, consider our Impatience.


Ulys. Would you command the things, Ladies, to be brought here, or would you
see 'em in your own Apartment?


Phil. How intolerably these Fellows love talking!


Lesb. How can thou, Man, ask such a Question!


Phil. Here -- immediately.


Ulys. Nay, it is not, Madam, that our Goods can be put out of Countenance by the
most glaring Light -- as for that matter --


Lesb. Nay, pry'thee, Fellow, have done.


[ Diomedes goes out and returns with Agyrtes. Ulys. I would not offer you
these Pearls, Ladies, if the World could produce such another Pair.


Phil. A Pair, Fellow -- Do thou think that Jewels pair like Men and Women
because they were never made to agree?


Diom. Now, Ladies, here is all that Art can show you. -- Open the Packet.


Lesb. This very individual Pattern, in a blue Pink, had been infinitely
charming.


Phil. Don't you think it pretty, Deidamia?


Lesb. For Heaven's sake, Lady Pyrrha. -- Nay, dear Child, how can any Creature
have so little Curiosity!


Ulys. Look upon it again, Madam. -- Never was so delightful a Mixture!


Diom. So soft! so mellow!


Ulys. So advantageous for the Complexion!


Lesb. I cannot bear it, Man; the Color is frightful.


Phil. I hate our own tame homebred Fancy. -- I own I like the Design -- but
take it away, Man.


Art. There must be something pretty in every thing that is foreign.


[ Ulysses shows another Piece. Deid. I am sure, Madam, this must convince you
to the contrary. -- Never was any thing so detestable!


Lesb. For Heavens sake, Sir, open that other Packet; and take away this
hideous Trumpery.


Ulys. How coud'st thou make this Mistake? -- Never was such an eternal
Blunderer.


[Opens the Armor. Phil. How ridiculous is this Accident!


Diom. Pardon the Mistake, Ladies.


Lesb. A Suit of Armor! -- You see, Philoe, they can at least equip us for the
Camp.


Phil. Nay, Lesbia, for that Matter it might serve many a stiff awkward
Creature that we see every Day in the Drawingroom; sor their Dress is every way
as absurd and preposterous.


[Another Packet opened. Ulys. If your Expectations, Ladies, are not now
answered, let Fancy own herself at a stand. It Is inimitable! It Is irresistible!


[As the Ladies are employed in examining the Stuffs, Achilles is handling and
poising the Armor, Ulysses observing him. Achil. The Workmanship is curious;
and so justly mounted! This very Sword seems fitted to my Hand. -- The Shield
too is so little cumbersome; so very easy! -- Was Hector here, the Fate of Troy
should this Instant be decided. -- How my Heart burns to meet him!


Ulys. [Aside to Diom. That intrepid Air! That Godlike Look! It must be He! His
Nature, his Disposition shows him* through the Disguise [To Achilles.] Son of
Thetis, I know thee, Greece demands thee, and now, Achilles, the House of Priam
shakes.


Ach. But what are you, Friend, who thus presume to know me?


Ulys. You cannot be a Stranger, Sir, to the Name of Ulysses.


Ach. As I have long honored, I shall now endeavor, Sir, to emulate your Fame.


Ulys. Know, Sir, Diomedes; He too is ambitious to attend you, and partake your
Glory.


Diom. Come Agyrtes; with him we carry Conquest to the Confederates.


[ Agyrtes takes a Trumpet which lay amongst the Armor, and sounds. AIR XLVII.
My Dame has a lame tame Crane.
^ Ulys. Thy Fate then, O Troy, is decreed.

Diom. How I pant!

Achil. How I burn for the Fight.

Diom. Hark, Glory calls.

Achil. Now great Hector shall bleed.

Agyr. Fame shall our Deeds requite.



[As Achilles is going off, he turns and looks on Deidamia. AIR XLVIII.
Geminiani's Minuet.
^ Ach. Beauty weeps. -- Ah, why that Languish?
See she calls and bids me stay.
How can I leave her? my Heart feels her Anguish.
Hence, Fame and Glory. Love wins the Day.
[He drops the Sword and Shield.


Trumpet sounds, and he takes 'em up again. AIR My Dame has a lame, etc.
as before, Sung in Four Parts as a Catch.



Ulys. Thy Fate then, O Troy, is decreed.


Ach. How I pant! How I burn for the Fight!


Diom. Hark, Glory calls. Now great Hector shall bleed.


Agyr. Fame shall our Deeds requite.


[As they are going; Achilles stops with his Eyes fixed on Deidamia. Art. For
Heaven's sake, Ladies, support Deidamia.


Phil. Never was any thing so astonishing!


Lesb. Run then, Artemona, and acquaint the King and Queen with what has
happened.


SCENE XI.
Philoe, Lesbia, Deidamia, Achilles, Diomedes, Ulysses, Agyrtes. Phil. Ah
Sister, Sister, the Mystery then of that particular Intimacy between you and
Pyrrha is at last unravelled.


Lesb. Now if it had not been a Man of this prodigious Consequence, it had been
the same thing. -- Sure never unguarded Woman was so unaccountably lucky!


Deid. Can you leave me, Achilles? -- Can you?


Ulys. Consider your own Glory, Sir.


AIR XLIX. Gavotte of Corelli.
^ Ach. Why this Pain?
Love adieu,
Break thy Chain,
Fame pursue.
Ah, false Heart,
Can thou part?
Oaths and Vows have bound me.
Fame cries, Go;
Love says, No.
Why do you thus confound me?



Deid. Think of my Condition. -- Save my Honor.


Ulys. Think of the Honor of Greece.


Deid. Think of your solemn Oaths and Promises.


Ulys. Nations depend upon you. -- Victory, Sir, calls you hence.


Deid. Can you, Achilles, be perfidious?


Ulys. Can you lose your Glory in the Arms of a Woman?


Deid. Can you sacrifice the Fame of your faithful Deidamia?


AIR L. The Scheme.
^ Ach. O, what a Conflict's in my Breast!

Ulys. What, still in suspense? bid Fame adieu.

Deid. See me with Shame oppressed:
I curse, yet I love thee too.

Ulys. Let not her Sighs unman your Heart.

Deid. Can you then go, and Faith resign?

Ach. Should I! -- How can I part?

Deid. Your Honor is linked with mine.



SCENE The Last.
Philoe, Lesbia, Deidamia, Achilles, Ulysses, Artemona, Diomedes, Agyrtes,
Lycomedes, Theaspe, Diphilus, Periphas, Ajax. Lycom. Hence, Diphilus; and
presume no more to come into my Presence. 'Twas your paltry Flattery that made
me ridiculous. -- Such a Genius can never be at a loss for Employment, for I
have found you qualified for the very meanest Offices.


[Exit Diphilus. Theas. My Daughter, Sir, I hope, has put Confidence in a Man
of Honor.


Ach. My Word, Madam, is as sacred as the most religious Ceremony. -- Yet
(though we are already solemnly betrothed to each other) it is my Request,
Madam, that before I leave the Court the Priest may confirm the Marriage.


[Theaspe whispers Artemona, who goes out. Theas. This might have proved a
scurvy Affair, Deidamia; for a Woman can never depend upon a Man's Honor after
she has lost her own to him.


[Achilles talks apart to Ulysses, Periphas, etc. Lycom. You must own, Madam,
that 'twas your own Jealousies that were the Occasion of Deidamia's Disgrace.


Theas. How can you have the Assurance to name it? Does it not put you in mind
of your own? -- Let her Marriage to Achilles make us forget every thing past.


Ach. As you was so furiously in Love, Lord Ajax, I hope I shall still retain
your Friendship.


Ajax. No joking I beg you, young Man. -- But pr'ythee, how came you here? and
in a Woman's Dress too! -- Your setting out, Stripling, did not seem to promise
much.


Ach. The Adventure would be too long to tell you. -- I shall reserve the Story
for the Camp.


[ Artemona returns with the Priest. Art. The Priest, Sir, is ready.


Lycom. The Ceremony waits you.


Ach. It shall be my Study, Lycomedes, to deserve this Alliance.


Lycom. May you be happy!


Theas. Let the Priest then join your Hands.


[ Achilles, Deidamia, Lycomedes, Theaspe, Lesbia, Philoe, Artemona, retire to
the back part of the Stage. The Priest performs the Ceremony. Per. Our Duel,
Ajax, had made a much better Figure if there had been a Woman in the Case. --
But you know, like Men of violent Honor, we were so very valiant that we did
not know what we were fighting for.


Ajax. If you are too free with your Wit, Periphas, perhaps we may know what we
quarrel about.


Ulys. What testy, Ajax! Petticoats have led many a Man into an Error. How
lucky was the Discovery! for had you found a real complying Woman you had
irretrievably been married. -- The Presence of Achilles shall now animate the
War.


AIR LI. The Man that is drunk, etc.
^ Per. Was ever a Lover so happily freed!

Ajax. Try me no more; and mention it never.

Ulys. Suppose you had found her a Woman indeed.

Ajax. Must I be teased and worried for ever!

Diom. By Conquest in Battle we finish the Strife;

Per. But Marriage had kept you in Quarrels for Life.

Ajax. Must you be fleering?
Truce with your jeering.
Know that you Wits often paid for your sneering.



Per. If you had been deceived by a Woman -- it is what we are all liable to.


Diom. But Ajax is a Man of warm Imagination.


Ajax. After this Day let me hear no more of this ridiculous Affair.


Per. Nay for that matter any Man might have been deceived; for Love, you know,
is blind.


Ajax. With my Sword I can answer any Man. -- I tell you, I hate joking.


[ Lycomedes, etc. come forwards. Lycom. I have the common Cause so much at
Heart that I would not, Son, detain you from the Siege.


AIR LII. There lived long ago in a Country Place.
^ Deid. How short was my Calm! in a Moment it is past;
Fresh Sorrows arise, and my Day is overcast.
But since it is decreed. -- Let me stifle this Tear.
Be bold, yet be cautious; my Life is thy Care;
On thine it depends; it is for thee that I fear.



Lycom. As both her Country and your Glory are concerned, Deidamia must learn
to bear your Absence. -- In the mean time, Achilles, she shall be our Care. --
As the Marriage is confirmed; let the Dancers, who were preparing for the
approaching Festival, celebrate the Wedding.


Ajax. But hearkee, young Fellow, -- This is the old Soldier's Play; for we
seldom leave Quarters but the Landlord's Daughter is the better for us. -- Hah!


[ To Achilles. DANCE. Ulys. We may for a while put on a feigned Character, but
Nature is so often unguarded that it will show itself. -- It Is to the Armor we
owe Achilles.


AIR LIII. Minuet of Corelli.
^ Single. Nature breaks forth at the Moment unguarded;

Chorus. Through all Disguise she her self must betray.

Single. Heaven with Success has our Labors rewarded.

Chorus. Let Us with Achilles over Genius obey.



AIR LIVE. Saraband of Corelli.
^ Ulys. Thus when the Cat had once all Woman's Graces;
Courtship, Marriage won her Embraces:
Forth lept a Mouse; she, forgetting Enjoyment,
Quits her fond Spouse for her former Employment.



CHORUS.
Minuet of Corelli.
Nature breaks forth at the Moment unguarded;
Through all Disguise she herself must betray.
Heaven with Success has our Labors rewarded;
Let Us with Achilles our Genius obey.


FINIS
February 28, 1733. Just Published, A SELECT COLLECTION of MOLIERE's CoMEDIES,
French and English, in EIGHT POCKET VOLUMES, neatly Printed on a Fine Paper,
with a curious Frontispiece to each Comedy. To which is prefixed a curious
PRINT of the AUTHOR, and his LIFE in French and English; Extracted from
Monsieur Bail, Rapin, etc.

N. B. That it may be seen how much the English Stage has been indebted to
Moliere, we have, in this Catalogue, placed such of Our Comedies as have been
founded upon His over against the Originals, from whence they were taken.

Vol. I. containing, A DEDICATION of the Whole WORK to HER MAJESTY. The LIFE of
the AUTHOR. A General PREFACE to the Whole WORK. 1 Miser, Shadwel. Miser,
Fielding.
1 L'AVARE. The MISER.

Dedicated to His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales.

Sganarelle ou le Cocu Imaginaire.

The Cuckold in Conceit.

Dedicated to Miss Wolstenholme.


Vol. II. containing, 2 Citizen turned Gentleman, Ravenscroft.
2 Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme.

The Cit turned Gentleman.

Dedicated to His Royal Highness the Duke.

3 Love's Contrivances, Centlivre.
3 Le Medicin malgre Lui.

A Doctor and No Doctor.

Dedicated to Dr. Mead.


Vol. III. containing, 4 Sir Martin Marral, Dryden.
4 L'Etourdi ou les Contre-Tems.

The Blunderer: Or the Counter-Plots.

Dedicated to the Right Honorable Philip Earl of Chesterfield.

Les Precieuses Ridicules.

The Conceited Ladies.

Dedicated to Miss Le Bas.


Vol. IV. containing, 5 Squire of Alsatia, Shadwell.
5 L'Ecole des Maris.

The School for Husbands.

Dedicated to the Right Honorable the Lady Harriot Campbell.

6 Country Wife, Wicherly.
6 L'Ecole des Femmes.

The School for Wives.

Dedicated to the Right Honorable Sir William Young, Knight of the Bath.


Vol. V. containing, 7 Nonjurer, Cibber.
7 Tartuffe, ou L'Imposteur.

The Impostor.

Dedicated to Mr. Wyndham of Clower-Wall, in Gloucestershire.

8 Wanton Wife, Betterton.
8 George Dandin, ou le Mari Confondu.

George Dandin, or the Husband Defeated.

Dedicated to the Right Honorable the Lady ^


Vol. VI. containing, 9 Plain-Dealer, Wicherly.
9 Le Misantrope.

The Man-Hater.

Dedicated to His Grace the Duke of Montagu.

10 M. De Pourceaugnac. 10 Trelooby, Vanbrugh.


Squire Lubberly.

Dedicated to the Right Honorable the Lady Mary Wortley Montagu.


Vol. VII. containing, 11 Amphitryon, Dryden.
11 Amphitrion. Amphitryon.

Dedicated to the Right Honorable George Dodington, Esquire

Le Marriage Force.

The Forced Marriage.

Dedicated to the Right Honorable the Lady Harvey.

12 Tender Husband, Steel.
12 Le Sicilien, ou L'Amour Pointre.

The Sicilian, or Love makes a Painter.

Dedicated to Her Grace the Duchess of Richmond.


Vol. VIII. containing, Le Malade Imaginaire.

The Hypochondriack.

Dedicated to His Grace the Duke of Argyle.

13 Impertinents, Shadwell.
13 Les Fascheux. The Impertinents.

Dedicated to the Right Honorable the Lord Carteret.



* Just Published, The TRAVELS and ADVENTURES of the Sieur JACQUES MASS: Being
a very entertaining Account of his Arrival in an unknown Country in Terra
Australis, after having suffered two Shipwrecks: Of the strange Manners and
Customs of the People: Of his curious Conversations with the Priests, Judges,
and with the KING himself, on the Subjects of Religion, Trade, and almost all
the Arts and Sciences: Of his Passage from the Southern Countries to Goa, where
he was imprisoned in the Inquisition: Of his being taken by Pirates in his
Voyage from thence to Lisbon; and of his Ransom from Slavery, and Arrival at
London: Besides many other most diverting Incidents, which are very agreeably
interspersed in the Narrative.

Just Published, The BOARDING SCHOOL; or, The SHAM CAPTAIN. An Opera. As it is
performed at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane, by His Majesty's Servants:
Written by Mr. COFFEE, Author of the Beggar's Wedding, and The Devil to Pay.
With the Music prefixed to each Song.

Also just Published the last New Play, called, CAELIA, or, The Perjured LOVER,
as it is Acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane, by His Majesty's Servants.

N. B. This Play is founded on a True Tragical Story in Common Life, and the
Incidents very Natural and Moving.

And the Second Edition of The MOCK DOCTOR: Or, The DUMB LADY Cured, a Comedy
done from Moliere, with additional SONGS and Alterations.

** Feb. 28, 1732. In a few Days will be Published, The MISER. A Comedy, taken
from Plautus and Moliere. By HENRY FIELDING, Esquire. As it is now Acting at the
Theater Royal in Drury Lane, by His Majesty's Servants.

Printed for John Watts at the Printing-Office in Wild-Court near Lincoln's End
Fields.

