COMMONPLACE ARGUMENTS, etc.

COMMONPLACE ARGUMENTS AGAINST ADMINISTRATION, WITH OBVIOUS ANSWERS, (INTENDED
FOR THE USE OF THE NEW PARLIAMENT.)

LONDON: PRINTED FOR R. FAULDER, NEW BOND STREET, M DCC LXXX.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IN most of the Arts and Sciences, Professors have formed general outlines of
the plan, method, and arrangement, to be followed by the pupils who study them.

Some sort of analysis might be of equal service to young proficients in
parliamentary eloquence -- A multitude of words, delivered with rapidity and
vehemence, puzzle and confuse those who are unacquainted with the technical
trick of debate -- It will be of use therefore to prepare for our juvenile
senators, a compendious outline of such arguments as may most probably be
employed at the opening of the approaching Session.

And, in order to detect the fallacy of much popular rhetoric, brief
observations will be annexed to each of the Commonplace topics; by which means,
when any of the old Opposition Orators begin to flourish away on these trite
arguments, the young members may, by recurring to the proper section in the
Analysis, immediately find most of the thoughts, and many of the words, that
will be used, for, or against the Question; with this main difference, that
each will be much shorter, and probably both more intelligible.

The Author is aware, that nothing can be simpler than this plan; it being much
of the same nature with an Exhibition Catalogue, which merely describes the
subjects of the several compositions presented to public criticism; and
possibly some readers may think it might have been well, to complete the
simile, by subjoining in this instance, as well as in the former, the names of
the several Artists; but, though something of that dramatic kind, was rather
successfully attempted in a pamphlet, called Anticipation, it seems more
advise-able to avoid the least appearance of personality, on the present
occasion: -- The ridicule that was then, with some propriety, directed against
the tediousness, or the pedantry, or the droll dotage, that characterized some
individual speakers; would now be wholly unnecessary: it never was a task of
difficulty to expose the folly of mock eloquence; once achieved, the
repetition would be as disgustful as the subject.

But sophistry assumes new shapes, and acts under various disguises; like the
malicious enchanter in romance, to be finally overcome, it must be attacked in
all its transformations; yet he who engages in this war of words, can be but
little exposed to any charge of presumption; it is a combat far more tiresome,
than perilous; and however severely his patience may be exercised, he will have
but few occasions to exert his strength; so that as his utmost triumph can be
only proportionable to so inferior a contest, he may be secure at least from
the imputation of vanity in undertaking it.

CONTENTS.
THE late, and the new Parliament 9 Answer 11 Complimentary Invitations to the
young Members 14 Answer 17 The Prophecies of Opposition 22 Answer 24 Annual
Parliaments 28 Answer 34 Best Officers driven from the Service 35 Answer 39
Conversation Politics 46 Answer 49 The Praise of Party 51 Answer 55 The last
Campaign, and State of the nation -- Comprizing -- The Captures -- Rhode Island
and Monsieur de Ternay -- Lord Cornwallis's Victory -- Danger of Jamaica and
Hallifax -- Portuguese Perfidy -- Army and Navy -- Petitions and Association 58
The Answer 66 Miscellaneous Eloquence for the Gallery 78 Answer 86 Change the
Ministry 90 Answer 93
COMMON PLACE ARGUMENTS.
THE LATE AND THE NEW PARLIAMENT.
THE late parliament was the most infamous, slavish, base, sordid, venal, mean,
inconsistant, despicable parliament, that ever existed. -- It betrayed the
rights of the people, trampled on their privileges; violated their majesty;
servilely crouched to prerogative; and wasted the blood and treasure of the
public, to satiate private ambition and avarice.

Hence national resentment was universally rouzed; the elective body, to a man,
despised the representative, and all ranks and orders of people anxiously
expected the happy moment of the dissolution. At the approach indeed of that
awful crisis, political frailty felt a sort of deathbed penitence; it was the
hectic virtue of a moment: the panic however soon subsided; and, flushed with
new hopes of a protracted existence: the old septennial methodist rose, like
Voltaire from sickness, impatient for deeper vices, and anxious for more
aggravated profligacy.

"Such was your parliament -- Look you now what follows" -- A young phoenix
rising from the ashes of the old! -- the best of all possible parliaments! -- a
pure, incorrupt, delegation from the true source of all real power, the people:
unfettered by connections; unclogged with errors; free to consult; to
deliberate; to determine; for the public safety! "Such is your parliament."

ANSWER.
IT is difficult to give a just idea, of the animated style of opposition
invectives; particularly on such a theme as the present, where the free
indulgence of them, is unchecked by any of those awkward restraints, which some
young men have of late, so unconstitutionally thrown on them. -- A deceased
parliament is one of those immaterial objects, that every one may attack with
perfect impunity; and indeed, under the present restrictions, it is no small
convenience to the component parts of such a corporate body, to have in the
very nature of their constitution, a safe resource for the exercise of their
wildest rancour, and most fanciful asperity. It is however uncommonly
whimsical, that almost the very same set of men, who actually composed the
subject of this invective, should be themselves the auditors of it; and at the
same moment that they are stigmatized in their late capacity, they should
receive so premature a panegyric in their new one; yet such is almost precisely
the case.

The last parliament and the present parliament being very nearly one, and the
same. -- It is true indeed, there have been some exchanges, and different
branches of particular families have taken their rotation in election honors;
but still both parliaments are essentially and effectually alike: so that, with
a few inconsiderable exceptions, the returns and re-elections incontrovertibly
prove, that all the imputations of national odium and contempt, so
industriously thrown on the last parliament, must at least have been grossly
exaggerated, if not entirely false.

As to the penitential vote, so often, and so vauntingly relied on, it will
always be remembered, that the House at large, refused to report the abstract
proposition so fearfully passed, by a committee of inferior numbers -- It was
indeed a florid weakness; the hectic effort of exhausted sedition; that "Like
the faint offer of a latter spring, served but to usher in the fall, and
withered in an affected bloom."

COMPLIMENTARY INVITATIONS TO BE SCATTERED AMONG THE YOUNG MEMBERS.
AS it is scarcely possible that any gentleman of spirit, or independence, can
support the ministry, without forfeiting all pretensions to virtue, justice,
honor, and common sense, there can be still less doubt, that those, who are
least hackneyed in the ways of public life, and consequently most accutely
sensible of the allurements of popularity, will instantly join the present
constitutional, upright, consistent, generous, just, opposition.

What can be so flattering to youthful ambition, as being immediately enrolled
in a band of genuine patriots, and registered among the only British worthies
of the age! what ampler field can the world afford for the display of genius,
learning and eloquence, than that glorious contest of America with England, of
freedom against tyranny!

In the most prosperous times, the support of ministers is an inglorious and
vulgar task, compared to the control of them. There is little, or no scope for
rhetoric, in plain statements, regular calculations, legal precision, and such
other trite and plain modes, as men in office must necessarily pursue. On the
contrary, opposition, has inexhaustible themes of eloquence -- suspicions,
alarms, menaces, and predictions, (not to mention impeachments, which cannot
well recur so regularly) are rich and constant sources of popular declamation.
Besides, one of the chief benefits that arise from new parliaments, is the
accession of fresh supplies of genius and cultivated abilities. And perhaps,
there never was a time, when such immense quantities of both were introduced
into the House of Commons as upon the present occasion -- young gentlemen, not
only endowed with prodigious abilities, but who have been for many years back,
in training for debate, abound on all sides. -- What an infinite pity would it
be then, were such improved talents obscured and shrouded from public
admiration, in the dull details of official politicians! -- In the moment of
peril and dismay, it is happy for this nation at large to have selected men,
formed, as it were, for the salvation of their country. -- It is no less
fortunate for those, who possess such talents, to have them called into action,
at so aweful a crisis. -- Indeed, it is one of the great benefits arising from
the present calamities, that gentlemen have now much finer opportunities and
more numerous subjects, for displaying their talents, than they could possibly
have enjoyed in more quiet times; and which too, if not immediately taken
advantage of, may irretrievably escape by some unlucky change, to prosperity
abroad, or humanity at home.

ANSWER.
WHAT antidote can reason provide against such potent incantations? -- The cold
suggestion of more temperate advice would feebly resist the Siren voice of
popular allurement; and vainly is judgment addressed, where the subtle appeal
is more fancifully made to vanity and inexperience. To examine and analize the
several properties of real debate, in distinction to those of wild declamation,
would appear too refined: to ridicule the prevailing passion for oratory, too
trite: still less would it be proper, under this division, either to enquire
into the merits of Minority, or to discuss the justice and sincerity of their
claims to public confidence.

To raise new levies for the service of Opposition, is so entirely the interest
of that set of men who command the old troops, that it cannot fail to create
some flight doubts of the perfect sincerity and pure zeal of their
complimentary invitations. But (without considering such an adventurous
junction in the more serious light of a desertion from every solid and
substantial interest of our country) it may not be wholly unuseful to suggest
how impossible it is for the Opposition, in its present state, to afford those
numerous and happy occasions for the display of genius and eloquence, which its
advocates so speciously hold out as the strongest incentives to youthful
ambition.

The Minority has long been directed, and controuled, by a few leading orators;
who, after years of fatiguing service, are most justly entitled to rank as
veterans in their profession; and are now too reasonably jealous of their
established precedence, to participate in fame with the raw recruits they are
so anxious to enlist -- One of their leaders has expressly published the
Articles of Party; with much fairness and candor, avowing the necessity of
obedience to a common leader, and of acting in due subordination to his
commands. With more zeal, indeed, than policy, this champion of party very
frankly decried and ridiculed all separate exertions and individual efforts, as
attempts of equal inefficacy and presumption; and rather rashly discovered so
much more of this degrading system than former politicians had thought it wise,
or decent to reveal, that many men of proper pride and spirit were disgusted
with the Rockingham service, and begged leave to resign their commissions --
Others of subtler talents, labored with more art and casuistry to explain away
these dangerous articles: but still, however speciously they argued, they
always had the precaution to maintain their rank in eloquence, by the exclusion
of every new competitor, and to secure the credit, by monopolizing the time, of
debate.

-- No young man of talents has, for years back, met with the patronage of
Opposition; every succeeding session was the echo of the former; the same
quantity of time has been annually devoted to the same tediousness and
protraction of debate; even stated hours seemed almost appointed for each
particular orator; nor was it ever a very difficult calculation to imagine who
was actually speaking, at any given time, by only looking what o'clock it was;
for the daily movements of their rhetoric were as mechanically exhibited, by a
periodical succession of figures, as those of the famous Strasburg clock;
except indeed, when some rough unmanageable country-gentlemen would start out,
like the savages of St. Dunstan's, to give a hasty stroke, or two, and then
retire again, to rest in peace on their unpolished clubs.

But above all, the particular style of abilities, which characterize the
present manager of Opposition, renders all inferior exertions in eloquence,
almost useless and ridiculous -- There is a magnitude in extraordinary talents,
that contrasts, and caricatures the comparative inequality of those who are
placed in competition with them. Qualities, which, carried to an extreme, are
striking from their enormity, (such as desperate vehemence and outrageous
acrimony) become ridiculous in imitation, and impotent by inferiority. They
resemble theatrical thunder compared with real; and serve only to burlesque an
original, that can never be successfully imitated. The minor malcontents, and
mimic republicans of the present day, would do well therefore to reflect, how
very contemptible the petty partisans of faction have been, in all ages and
countries. There were dozens of duodecimo Catilines, who buzzed conspiracy in
every corner of the Forum, though history has scarcely stooped to name them;
Ravaillac had his monk committees and holy associations, whose debates and
resolutions have been charitably consigned to oblivion: nor has there ever been
any desperate leader, from the rank of Catiline to Cade, who has not boasted a
gang of followers, officious, and obscure; busy, and forgot.

PROPHECIES OF OPPOSITION.
IN stating contingent events, and deducing the future consequences of any
measure now in agitation, Opposition should always be deemed infallible -- They
are entitled to this dependence on their present predictions, because all their
former prophecies are fully accomplished. -- Lest a point of such consequence
to their credit should have remained unrecorded, a copious list of these
divinations was published in a periodical paper devoted to their service; and,
to authenticate more indubitably the evidence of this political foresight, any
gentleman, who will be so obliging as to refer to the list, will find the date
of each prediction accurately subjoined, the place of utterance in a marginal
note, and the full accomplishment in the opposite column. It will be equally
apparent, that the ministry in several instances, received and treated these
prophecies with most irreverent skepticism: with great justice and propriety
therefore, no circumstance is more perpetually, and more successfully, urged,
than the Prophecies of Opposition; and hence it is most fairly inferred, that
their past sagacity, invests them with an indefeasible and perpetual
infallibility in future.

ANSWER.
THE gipsey Fortune Tellers "takes a bond of Fate." and to ensure her skill,
most generally perpetrates the mischiefs she predicts. -- To this judicious
policy it may be chiefly owing, that Egyptian divination has so long survived
all other oracles and supernatural inspirations of antiquity -- The Pythian
priestess became suspected, or unintelligible, from evasion, or ambiguity; and
was equally stigmatized by Philip's gold, or the chains of Craesus. -- Even our
homespun witches "palter'd in such double sense," that, by their own
equivocation more than any terrors of law, they forfeited the credulous
veneration they had so long usurped. -- In short, the gipsey pursues the best
system for all human prophecies. This ensuring Sybil, boldly corrects the
uncertainty of time, and chance, and with great prudence relies on her own
dexterity, for the securest voucher of her prescience.

-- A similar wisdom has guided the prophets of Opposition.

I pledge myself to this House (says one of them) that the confidence which
America may justly repose in the sympathetic ardor, that inspires a very great
part of this nation, will make her scorn your menaces, and fly to arms, to
vindicate her rights. -- Here is one instance among a thousand others of a
patriotic prediction, that, by the liberal encouragement it holds out, goes
great lengths to effect the event it foretells, and is, in fact, the leading
cause of its own accomplishment. -- Away with the idle notion (says another
prophet) of success in your Northern expedition! I am bold to say, (and I wish
my words to be taken down) that miscarriage and ruin, will attend that devoted
army. -- Not to comment too harshly on the very extraordinary precision and
accuracy of these terms, it is fair to observe thus much on all predictions of
this nature, That they act with a double influence: first, by dispiriting our
friends, and then by encouraging the enemy; consequently, if they are not
condemned as principals, they may at least be arraigned as active accomplices,
in producing the calamity they foretell.

But as many people have thought, that too large a portion of debate has been
employed of late years in recounting the utterance, and expounding the final
completion of these prophecies; it might tend to abbreviate this article of
oratory, if a committee of parliamentary prophets, invested with the ensigns of
augural authority, were ordered forth with to prepare and bring in a kind of
Political Almanac, or Patriots Calender, for the use of the current year;
wherein all minor victories and defeats, should be set down as feasts, and
fasts, and red-letter days set apart for more important losses.

It might enrich a work of this nature, to interleave each month with pages of
collateral philosophy, opposite to its subjects; such as refutations of several
vulgar errors too commonly enterained, relative to some military misdeeds in
the late campaigns; by comparing them, to the retrogade motion of the planets;
which every more enlightened observer can easily prove to be quite contrary to
appearances, and merely arising from our vast distance from the objects, and
the gross medium through which we view them; so too, any tediousness in
crossing the Delaware, or obscurity in the Saratoga business, might receive
great light from the philosophy of transits, and eclipses; while the doctrine
of Comets would furnish infinite analogy to all kinds of excentricity, civil,
military, or naval.

These, together with proper tables for calculating the influence of the moon
on the rise and fall of stocks, would form a very compendious and handy diary
in state affairs, and, in a short time, must become as infallible a guide in
politics, as Partridge's predictions formerly were in astrology.

ANNUAL PARLIAMENTS.
IN the moment of most general danger to the very existence of a state, from a
rebellion, and a foreign war, it becomes all wise, good, and prudent men, to
devote their whole time to the concerting measures, not to overcome the common
enemy, but to new model and patch up the constitution; just as, in a closely
besieged town, every clever fellow should leave it to his inferiors to repel
the assailants from the walls, and busy himself, and his neighbors, in drawing
plans to repair, and beautify the old town hall, the assembly-rooms, and other
buildings of the city. And this, not from any paradoxical confusion, or ideal
refinement, that the inside of the town is to all intents and purposes the
outside; or that the said edifices are virtually the fortifications; but for a
much simpler and more substantial reason; namely that the day of distress and
danger is the true time to frighten the magistrates into receiving their terms:
which, if the siege is raised, will set them up for ever in fame and fortune;
and if it be not, will serve at least to recommend them to the victorious enemy
as very shrewd and notable projectors.

Now, in a state like ours, it is clear that the constitution of parliament
must always form the grand subject of political theory. Hence various schemes
have been propounded, to purify, and refine it from all corruptions; and many
tedious preparations, in the nature of chemical processes, have been
occasionally invented, to exalt it to what it really should be, a kind of
compound elixir of popular spirit.

In the course of these experiments, some professors insisted, that its whole
efficacy must depend on the ingredients, that compose it, being brought from
their several native soils, free of all charges. -- Others held, that larger
quantities of its most wholesome simples, should be gathered out of the
richest, and best cultivated lands, and not picked up, like mushrooms, from old
wastes and barren commons. But, however composed, sifted, and refined, several
concurred in opinion, that it never could keep its spirit above three years,
because formerly they only made it up for that time.

But the last, and far most important discovery of all, is, that it never
possibly can be fit for use, or good for any thing at all, above a twelvemonth
after it is first put together. -- Or (to release the metaphor before it is
quite exhausted) that annual parliaments are the grand arcanum, and sovereign
panacea, for all the distempers of our decayed and perishing constitution. And,
in order to establish this important point; first, they affirm, that the virtue
of that restricted duration beyond a triennial one, is very clearly proved by a
converse ratio of the old homely adage, "There can never be too much of a good
thing," which, being inverted, very fairly carries the question by three to
one, against triennial in favor of annual parliaments -- And next, the
ingenious advocates of this improvement, as clearly prove the undoubted use and
pleasure, that would naturally result both to constituents and representatives,
from this annual revolution of intercourse; by showing how infallibly it must
promote the health and spirits of the former, to be under a sort of pleasing
necessity, to keep up a visiting acquaintance, with their constituents in the
purer air of the country; to whom, in their turn it would prove equally
beneficial and delightful, by encouraging the briskness of trade, and cheapness
of provisions, at such constant repetitions of election festivity, and
convivial fellowship. -- But these, and many secondary motives, are lost in the
beauty, depth, and curiosity of the main argument, that is the foundation of
this plan, which is briefly this; The mysterious excellence of the number
TWELVE, that limits the months in this constitutional period: a cabalistical
idea, which, though too subtle and complex to be dwelt on minutely in this place,
cannot fail to strike every impartial mind with sufficient force, on the mere
mention of a few instances, among the millions which exist, wherein this number
of TWELVE predominates: with which short enumeration the subject shall be
closed.

First then, all the world knows, that the earth revolves in twelve months,
round the twelve signs of the Zodiac; and this too, (as Monsieur Gebelin very
critically expounds,) was typically illustrated, in Pagan mythology, by the
twelve labors of Hercules; all which, like our corporate and parochial
offices, were performed exactly in the good, even, space of a twelvemonth.
Next, all petty juries are composed of twelve, and grand juries, of twice
twelve, good men and true; so too there are twelve judges; and, though the
bishops (exclusive of the two metropolitans) are just twice that number, yet
there is a relative proportion even in this difference, which was certainly
designed to signify the double glory of ecclesiastical, united with temporal
dignities; as well as the exact increase of piety in these latter, compared to
the primitive times; when, in truth, as every one knows, there were but twelve
apostles. -- Add to these therefore the twelve candlesticks in the revelations,
the twelve tribes of Israel, the twelve Caesar's, and dozens of other duodecimo
examples, and you will then have the very essence of all the arguments, in
favor of parliaments for twelve months.

ANSWER.
PREVIOUS QUESTION.

BEST OFFICERS DRIVEN FROM THE SERVICE.
MINISTERS have the art to connect contrarieties of baseness; they dismiss
without cause, or employ to no end, our best officers. -- Examples of the
former have appeared in the militia: the latter has been equally instanced both
in our army, and navy. -- There is something of Pagan craft in this crooked
policy -- The virtue and valor of Theseus were too formidable to a feeble and
suspicious tyrant to be overlooked with affected contempt, or openly degraded:
it was a safer, and subtler cruelty to exhaust this dangerous heroism, in
remote and perilous enterprises; which, if achieved, would give credit to the
wisdom of those who projected them, but, if attended with shame and
disappointment, might lower, if not entirely destroy, the reputation of their
conductors.

The hero of antiquity indeed, defeated this pernicious system, and returned in
triumph, to greet his insidious employers with unwelcome successes, and
offensive victory. But, however fatally imperfect the parallel of devoted
valor must appear in modern annals, every generous mind will equally abhor the
same base and mean policy, which, in both instances, veiled ruin beneath its
bounty, and exalted, only to destroy.

Such has been the odious system of government toward those, whose
professional eminence, joined to their popular attachments and connections,
pointed them out as the fittest objects for temporary banishment, at least, if
not shameful captivity abroad, or more degrading impotence at home.

Nor has the executive power been less busily oppressive in the domestic
arrangements of our great internal and constitutional defense, the militia. --
It is the extreme of tyranny to control the freedom of thought -- Sidney lost
his life for his written principles. -- With more cautious injustice, the
patriots of the present day, are deprived of their hereditary honors, for
daring to speak their independent opinions. -- To release the mind from the
oppressive awe of of authority, the patriotic parliament of Charles the First's
reign claimed, and exercised, their just right of appointing the Lord
Lieutenants, and other officers, that array and command, our militia. -- It was
too well foreseen that a right of so extensive a nature might, in the hands of
regal caprice, become a convenient instrument to check the spirit of liberty,
or to punish its generous exertions. -- Could it have been imagined that the
time would arrive, when the highest and most important ranks of that very
armament should be rashly invaded, and revengefully violated by prerogative,
if, on any occasion, their established possessors dared to exercise the right
of thinking for themselves, it might have damped the zeal of precipitate
loyalty in resigning so important a right to the discretion and virtue of a
monarch. Unfortunately however this very right was as rashly surrendered by the
parliament of Charles the Second, as it was manfully maintained in the reign of
his tyrannical predecessor.

What has been the consequence? -- We have lived to see the day when a ruinous
and wretched administration (that administration, which has invariably pursued
the wicked system of division; that administration, which has set friend
against friend, relation against relation, and connection against connection;
that administration, which has robbed us of thirteen colonies, and plunged us
in a shameful and calamitous war, with the whole world) has insolently
dismissed the accomplished descendants of two of the noblest, and most ancient
families, from those commands, to which their superior rank and property had
most justly elevated their ancestors and themselves; for -- only happening to
vote in opposition to the minister of the day.

ANSWER.
THERE is but little necessity to consider the fabulous allusions, and ideal
parallels, of declamation. The legendary tale of Demagogues, had its use in the
decline of Athenian freedom: but if its boasted hero had surrendered to his
worst and basest antagonist, without fighting, and, in a short time after, some
happier hero had fought, and conquered the very same combatant; probably, no
Grecian orator would afterward have much insisted on the visionary speculation
of an army's being devoted to sacrifice an individual.

It is necessary to treat the latter part of this argument with some degree of
seriousness and solidity. Least however too much time may appear to be wasted
on it, it may be prudent to premise, that objections, founded on popular
notions and prejudices, are easily conveyed in few words, and, so conveyed,
make strong impressions; but whoever answers those objections must encounter
all the notions to which they are allied, and to which they owe their strength;
and it is well if any words find admittance to remove the first impression.

The appointment of party men to places of trust, and power, was indeed a very
hazardous policy: it must however be remembered, that this policy was founded
on a very liberal and generous hope, that, however the forms of opposition
might be kept up, and even the technical licentiousness of debate persevered
in, yet that every man of honor, at so awful a period, would divest himself of
all the little prejudices and passions of party, and feel his mind actuated by
the noblest impulse, to suspend at least all private resentment, if not to form
a truly glorious coalition, founded on public principle, and national honor. --
Certainly the accomplishment of so noble a purpose, would have been crowned
with far different success, from that which has actually attended its attempt.

But, to avoid these painful, and vain reflections; in proceeding to answer the
charge of violent and unconstitutional dismission, it must first be remembered
that removals are not punishments. -- It would be absurd to imagine, that a
mere private prejudice in political measures, however vague and fancifull, or
even pernicious in its tendency to the general welfare of the state, can become
an object of penalty: But it is indeed a very different question, with what
propriety those persons, who not only avow such opinions with the fond
attachment of innovation, but also disseminate them with most active zeal,
should be continued in those very stations, which afford most frequent and most
extensive opportunities, to spread them with all the weight of influence and
authority. -- And next, as to the right of dismission, it is obvious that the
same power, which appoints to offices, must necessarily remove from them: both
are exercises of that plain discretionary trust necessarily reposed in all
governments, to the end that every delegation of their authority may be lodged
in such hands as shall seem best affected to those who employ them. -- Nor is
this preventive policy of guarding against dissaffecton less congenial with the
spirit of our constitution. -- The prerogative of appointment to offices was
originally unlimited; but, at the Restoration, the parliament most expressly
declared the necessity of guarding with jealous vigilance against the
introduction of those persons into places of power and trust, whose opinions
and prejudices rendered them dangerous servants for the state to employ.

Hence the corporation and test acts; which (though, at first, they may seem
rather formed to guard the mitre, than the crown) were in fact, more really
directed against the civil than the religious principles of the dissenters.

These disabling statutes very clearly prove two points, both of which are
material to this question.

First, that it is perfectly constitutional to exercise the prerogative of
appointment to offices, with a strict and cautious attention to the principles
of those who are to be employed in them: and next, that in every other
instance, except in these statutable disqualifications, this prerogative is
entirely unlimited, and absolutely discretionary; for it is plain, that the
very restriction in those excepted cases, virtually establishes its
independance in every other. But so anxious were the restoration parliament to
remove all possibility of any future encroachment on the discretionary
prerogative of militia appointments, that an act was unanimously passed,
expressive of the national abhorrence of that recent usurpation of them, which
had fatally given arms to innovation, and overturned the constitution, under
the specious pretense of amending it.

By the same act also, it was directly declared, that those very appointments
had ever been, and for ever should continue, the unalienable and uncontrouled
right of the crown.

Such then being both the letter and the spirit of the law on this point, it is
but mere matter of curiosity, to consider the plain principles, on which this
power is founded, both in natural and civil society.

In the former, though all men were originally on an equality, yet the
distinction of abilities set the first bounds. -- It required wisdom and
courage for council and arms -- and it was necessary of course to exclude from
each, such as were respectively deficient in either.

So far forth therefore there was a natural limitation. -- But in civil society
it is equally important, in all delegations of power, to connect affection to
the government, with the other leading qualifications; for (as has been too
often proved) a courageous man, who hates his employers, is at least as unfit
to be trusted, as a coward; and wisdom, connected with enmity, would only serve
to aggravate treachery in council. -- The plain consequence of which, is this;
that either, no government has a right to preserve itself against the
disaffection of a subject; or else that every government has a right to exclude
from offfices of power and trust, such as render themselves suspected of
disaffection.

OPINION OF THINGS IN GENERAL, OR, CONVERSATION POLITICS.
EVERY thing is as bad as bad can be! -- Indeed it is now my only comfort that
any change, must be for the better -- It cannot be for the worse! -- As to
America, the game is up -- It was always a mad, visionary, scheme; without an
object, or an end -- Poor Sir Robert Walpole (who, after all, was a very great
man) used always to say "He would never set that stone a rolling." -- France is
amazingly populous! -- It Is nonsense to talk of a rebellion in South America --
Spain has all that immense wealth under her thumb -- So, we are to fight them,
and all the world, for what I see!

And how? -- We have no men at home -- And how are we to get them? -- I Am sure,
we have no money.

Formerly we had friends abroad to apply to. -- The old king of Prussia for
one. -- But surely, we cannot go on, as we have, year after year, with loan upon
loan and tax upon tax! -- Why if a gentleman's going post now, he cannot sleep
in peace in his chaise -- He Is sure to be, woke by the turnpike man, hollowing
for the new tickets indeed! -- What will they tax next? -- Not air, I hope --
Then, there are these northern power -- I don't know what they mean -- I repeat
it, I haven't an idea, what they would be at -- Let me tell you, it is a very
black cloud, hovering over us; and bodes no good.

Why don't we employ new men? -- We want some great original genius like a
Chatham, to come forward, and act -- Then we should get on -- We don't get on
-- Such a monstrous fleet as ours, should have pushed into Breast water at once
-- or bombarded Cadiz -- Why did not they convoy all the ships we have lost? --
All I see that they are ever about, is victualling. -- They are taking in fresh
provisions, and water, from morning till night.

Yet they are always sick too. -- Lord Sandwich mistook his line -- I want to
see a seaman at the head of the navy. -- I doubt there is some mystery at the
bottom of those captures -- People shake their heads in the city -- Depend on
it, there has always been an overruling influence in the cabinet -- A'nt every
thing given to Scotch-men? -- We should set the axe to the root -- In short, I
fairly own, things are come to such a pass, that -- I really don't know what to
advise.

EQUIVOCAL ANSWER BY A TRIMMER.
COME, come, my dear sir; now, you go too far -- As long as you confined
yourself to wit and humor, it was all very fair -- but don't be too severe --
Not that I absolutely differ from you, in what you assert; for I have, by no
means made up my mind on any of these matters -- I own, I wish to see, a little
more, what turn things may take, before I declare myself -- This country has
certainly very great resources -- But, at the same time, we are in a mighty
hazardous way -- Yet America is a great game -- Heaven only knows though, what
should be done -- It is very true, I have mostly voted with ministry -- Indeed
I did live in habits with a good many of them -- But I never will commit myself
to any set of men -- I own, I always thought, the lessening the burdens of the
landed interest a very fine object -- And, to be sure, it was my opinion, that
our colonies should bear a part in redeeming the debts, we incurred for their
defense -- But I don't know, that every thing has been carried on right in
America -- Yet, I don't throw blame any where -- Though there may have been
faults -- on both sides -- However we shall see -- I must talk with ministers
about these things -- But thus much I will say -- I don't at all disapprove of
the conduct of the States General; nor indeed of any of the northern powers;
for they act only with proper precaution; and it is quite right for nations, as
well as individuals, to be on their guard, and take care of themselves.

THE PRAISE OF PARTY.
INdependance is a wild, unsocial idea -- even a monk confessed, that, to
absolutely enjoy this mental solitude, man must change his nature to that of
angels, or demons.

In the progress of civilization, every approach to perfection is founded, on
relinquishing this solitary pride of thinking, or acting, for ourselves alone
-- The rudest savages have their clans, and chiefs; the freest republics their
heads, and statholders.

From different degrees of strength, courage, or abilities, subordination
arises. -- To the boldest, or hardiest, or wisest, the supreme command in war,
or in peace, is confided -- and the natural equality of each is prudently
resigned for the benefit of all -- but chiefly on the spur of necessity, and
the pressure of complex operations, is the increase of dependence originally
grounded, and ultimately established -- The former createa Roman dictatorship;
by the latter, it was perpetuated.

Thus then, as it appears, that all natural independance has been exchanged as
the barter for social happiness, so it is equally evident, that, in the
perfection of a civil state, combinations and confederacies must be encouraged,
and perfected; and finally, that in the conflict of opposite contentions, the
decisive weight and efficient force of party must depend on its disciplined
submission to the control of one common leader.

Nor let it be objected that the avowed hostilities of party, may, in the
present times, provoke a closer union of ministerialists, than might otherwise
subsist among so divided a body -- It is true, indeed, there is a gloomy cloud
of discord and dissension, that overspreads those common foes of Opposition,
and of their country -- Auspicious may it prove; and happy be the presage of
their dispersion, and their ruin! -- But let it not inspire a sanguine and
premature confidence, which, by relaxing the ardour of pursuit, may in the end
defeat our hopes, and rob us of the glorious object of all our toils --
Besides, at this crisis, there are those, who are yet free to choose their
political line -- And, if properly incited, what doubt can long remain, in
favor of which they will decide? -- Is not the support of ministry but another
term for meanness and venality? Are not Opposition, and party, the very echoes
of virtue and genius? The former is indeed a phalanx of baseness -- the latter,
the sacred league of wisdom and of honor. -- If then the lists of
parliamentary fame must be martialed for the combat, who is there, can a moment
hesitate, what arms to wield, whence the champion should begin his bold career,
or what is the enterprise his courage should atchieve, to win the immortal
guerdon of renown?

Minions of power! yours be the inglorious task, in tinsel pomp, and flimsey
pride, to wave your silken banners in the sunshine of a courtly pageant!

Labor, and vigilance, and patience, are the badge of all the patriot tribe!
-- But reputation is the palm! -- and if they perish in the cause of liberty,
welcome be the stroke that consecrates their doom, with more than martyr's
glory, and transmits their fame, from age, to age, with undiminished honor.

ANSWER.
THOUGH nothing is more certain than that public spirit is equally abhorrent
from credulous adherence, or cowardly indecision, yet to define the precise
limits of either extreme would be to renew the commonest of all commonplace
theories. -- It may be more useful to state a few points admitted by the
disputants on both sides. -- It is allowed then, that fixed principles, and
general maxims, should be the established guides of all bodies of men, whose
office it is, to act together.

This conformity is restricted however to opinions; though it naturally inclines
to a consistence in public conduct. -- But leagues, and confederacies, founded
on private attachments only, lead to mean, and degrading subservience; for more
personal association is little better than conspiracy-Hence, to desire a body
of English gentlemen, (who are chosen by the nation to consult, deliberate, and
then determine) to herd at once, under any individual leader, and follow,
wherever he calls, is equally absurd, and insolent.

It must be repeated however, that established principles and unequivocal
maxims, are great, and proper guides. -- To act consistently with them, is
sense, and honor. -- How contradictory to this system are the language and the
conduct of Opposition? -- "I boast myself a party-man, and, therefore, will
oppose the minister," are the very words perpetually repeated in the House of
Commons by the greatest advocates of minority. -- Thus the badge and livery of
faction are ostentatiously displayed on one side of the house. -- On the
opposite, ask one of the equivocal politicians, how he means to act, and he
will answer you (and with perfect honor) that "he is no party-man, but will
freely tell you, his general principles, and avow his former line of conduct."
-- And so far forth, he acts up to the spirit of the constitution. -- But if
afterward his conduct is a desertion of those principles, and totally
inconsistent with what he himself declares it to have formerly been; if, in
short, it is evasive, shuffling, and mean; if he hangs aloof in the lobby;
takes an impartial dinner in the adjoining coffee-houses; or happens unluckily
to be called out, on very particular business, just before the division; and
then sails up, and down, the passages; cruises in the committee-rooms; bears
away for the court of requests; or steers directly home in his coach, with his
light out; then indeed, the previous acknowledgment of his former principles,
and conduct, is equally useless, and ridiculous; and he must be content to rank
in future, with those home-hollanders or domestic dutchmen, whose cold
ungrateful caution, and armed neutrality, is nearly as pernicious, and far more
despicable, than the bolder hostilities of open enmity.

THE LAST CAMPAIGN AND GENERAL STATE OF THE NATION.
AFTER the ruinous experience of a ten year's war, the moment is arrived, when
a New Parliament are to deliberate and determine on the expediency of
prosecuting, or relinquishing, of accomplishing, or abandoning, American
subjugation. -- Let the Last Campaign, and the present State of the Nation, be
the fair and substantial grounds of argument to decide upon this extensive and
important question.

First then, As to the Latte Campaign, it is apparent to the whole world, that
the daring spirit of enterprise, which once distinguished the councils, and
elevated the valor of this country above her ancient enemies, is now fatally
changed to cold and ignominious caution, to narrow and temporary prudence. --
It is no longer conquest or death -- It is lingering shame, and protracted
disgrace. -- That fleet, which once commanded the homage of nations, is become
now, the object of pity or contempt -- Those arms, that for ages snatched
uncertainty from Fortune, are at length the splendid pageant of defensive
pride, and wasteful inactivity. -- On the contrary, what is the situation of
our enemies in both these respects? -- To the accident of an epidemical disease
alone, it is owing that Count D'Estaign, at the head of the combined fleets,
did not drive us from the Channel -- Yet the moment he had steered from Spain,
by the ignorance and folly of our Admiralty, and the miserable meanness of the
convoys, two of the most valuable fleets, that ever sailed from this country,
were instantly captur'd; to the aggrandizement and glory of our enemies, to the
disgrace and ruin of ourselves -- In the West Indies, such is the decided
superiority of the French and Spaniards, that it may be boldly predicted,
Jamaica must immediately be the victim of Spanish avarice, and Halifax become
the support and resource of the ambition of France. Nor have their arms been
less successful by land. Monsieur de Ternay is in complete possession of Rhode
Island; an acquisition, in itself fatally accommodated to impede every
enterprise of England; but still more ruinous by facilitating and hastening the
entire loss of Canada. -- Unlike the slight and single advantage which has been
dearly acquired by our army; and which indeed will too probably become more
ruinous to this country, that its fatal surrender or captivity could possibly
have proved: by madly encouraging the further prosecution of destructive
temerity, and by deluding the giddy unthinking multitude to a longer endurance
of this accursed war.

Such being the comparative state of the last campaign, let us in the next
place consider the situation of continental politics.

Commodore Johnstone has been driven from Portugal -- That nation is crouching
to Spain -- There is an officer in the House of Commons, who may be appealed
to, to tell his experience of the duplicity and meanness of Portugal -- Indeed
the conduct of Portugal is now but a proper return for our additional
impositions on her trade, as well as the unparalled audacity of seizing
American vessels laden with her produce -- It is a similar perfidy that has
provoked the resentment of all the nothern nations; -- The Portuguese are not
more our enemies, than the Russians, the Swedes, the Danes, and the Dutch --
Turks, Jews, and Infidels conspire to drive us from the Mediteranean -- With
our trade, our possessions also in those seas, must inevitably perish. --
Minorca cannot long escape. Gibraltar was saved last year, by an experiment,
and preserved only by the indolence of Spain. -- A ridiculous embassy indeed
has been secretly undertaken, and the literary West Indian translated to the
Spanish Friar. -- But while political credulity consults its Delphic Oracle, or
weakly trusts the visionary hope of a congenial rebellion in South America, our
vigilant and determined enemies are somewhat more seriously employed. -- France
has sent troops to Holland, and the Dutch must be compelled to go to war with
us -- In short, the whole continent of Europe is united in one common and equal
league against this devoted country.

To oppose so powerful a confederacy, what are our resources? -- There are
none, that the ablest financier could invent, sufficient to contend with the
whole world. But the nation is already exhausted and ruined -- The spirit of
commerce is for ever annihilated by our recent, irreparable calamities: nor can
the most adventuring industry any longer confide in the despicable conductors
of our naval strength, to hazard any new enterprise. -- But supposing the
possibility, that added burdens of imposts and taxes could be explored, what
force have we to oppose the matchless superiority of our enemies? -- Young,
undisciplined regiments, must be sent to baneful climates; while our old
establishments are confined at home, and excellent officers are either
necessarily detained with them, or insolently superseded by adventurers,
without a claim, or pretension to so dangerous an innovation.

And this too, while the Commander in Chief in America calls for new supplies
of men, which it is impossible to provide, and yet without which, those already
there must be totally ineffectual -- Such is our miserable inability in arms,
resources, officers and men, to continue this ruinous, destructive, desolating
war, against America, against the world.

What is our situation at home? -- A settled gloom of discontent! -- The
petitions of the people for a while gave place to more immediate and pressing
objects -- But let not the authors of national ruin exult in secure
tranquillity -- The momentary calm may yet be succeeded by tempests that shall
overwhelm them in misery and destruction -- And if the most shameless
corruption, if an accumulation of injuries and insults can awaken us to a just
feeling of our wrongs, it will be easy to discover, and meritorious to employ,
the most effectual means of redressing them -- Every lenient and peaceable
method has long been pursued in vain -- Authority has been entreated with
submission, haughtiness has been soothed with humility, profligacy has been
tempted to reformation by allurement of pardon, and even by the prospect of
praise -- That weight and authority, which, from the chair of office, turned
the scale of debate, and with liberal and disinterested magnanimity, supported
the petitions, will now be exerted, though not with equal dignity, yet with
superior force, to give effect to those principles, which it so liberally
avowed.

Our only remaining hope is, in the union of disinterested and independent
spirits throughout the kingdom. Such an union directed to one view, and
pressing to one object, will not easily be resisted by the arms of power, or
frustrated by the arts of corruption.

ANSWER.
SUCH is the gloomy and exaggerated picture of our national distresses -- Such
are the pretenses for cowardly despondency, for weak contemptible desertion of
all our interests and of all our hopes; and for a rash and giddy subservience
to that fatal spirit of innovation, in the pursuit of improvements we never may
obtain, and to the risque of calamities which we may never remedy -- But it is
not now the question, whether a season of external danger and hostility is the
fittest for new arrangements of internal polity -- When it was seen with what
industry and activity the same set of men were busied in running from one
country to another, in private intrigue and public incitement, in dictating
where they had no property, and canvassing where they had no connexious;
impartial men were led to suspect, that the independent and respectable part of
the confederacy, far from being the real contrivers, were but the ostensible
authors of the farce of reformation -- To erect new assemblies, unknown to the
constitution which they purposed to reform, and paramount to the legislature,
which they professed to supplicate, was a system as suspicious in its motive,
as alarming in its tendency -- A Legislature insulted and menaced, became the
object of factious insolence from every desperate cabal -- Even Opposition
themselves, who had first instilled into the minds of men a contempt of order,
felt, in their turn, the miseries of lawless uproar, and lamented the mischiefs
they had produced -- It shall not therefore be the present enquiry, whether the
worst and most ruinous situation, that fancy can imagine, could justify a wild
licentious anarchy at home -- It is a far plainer and more limited enquiry;
whether the present is in any degree that ruinous crisis, which, by extirpating
every present hope, throws us at once on the unprincipled and profligate
violence of theoretic enterprise, and speculative despair: or rather, whether
we may not still preserve our expectations, still sustain our spirit, and
confide both in our national resources, and the courage of our people, to
re-establish our welfare, and regain that respect and consequence in Europe,
which the generous spirit of England has ever entitled her to maintain, as the
protectress of liberty, and the arbitress of continental freedom -- It is a
glaring proof of the inconsistency of Opposition, that at the same moment, when
the complicated concerns of so extensive a system are exaggerated with every
fanciful aggravation, the impolicy of a defensive war should be grafted on the
former proposition -- To have maintained an equality, at least, against
combined hostilities, does not appear to merit the imputation of ignorance, so
repeatedly thrown upon that department, to which the conduct of our navy is
entrusted -- It is stated as a providential escape, that Count D'Estaign, by
the epidemical sickness of his armament, was prevented from entering the
British Channel -- But on the contrary, that calamity was indeed in its effects
a national misfortune to Great Britain -- For nothing but sickness could have
checked the rash presumption and impetuosity of that Commander, from hazarding
an action, for which our fleet was perfectly prepared; and which too (as it was
impossible to be foreseen,) became the accidental cause of those very captures,
which are injuriously stated as the effects of rashness and ignorance in our
Admiralty -- It is clear, however, that convoys can only be protections against
resistance of an inferior kind: -- It is impossible to provide a convoy for
every inward, and outward-bound fleet, sufficient to defeat the combined fleets
of France and Spain -- nor indeed were grand fleets ever directed against
mercantile fleets, except in those cases, where, as in the present instance,
their greater operations, had been absolutely prevented by sickness, and other
accidents, equally unforeseen by both parties -- Whether an implicit reliance
must be paid to those ill-omened predictions, which menace ruin and desolation
to our foreign possessions, from the enemies fleets abroad, must remain a doubt
-- It will always be remembered, that two years have already elapsed, since
that period, when the same prophets of Opposition so peremptorily foretold the
absolute impossibility of continuing the war for one year longer -- With equal
solemnity however, the loss of Canada is predicted, from the terrors of a
French proclamation, joined to the evidence of Monsieur de Ternay's possession
of Rhode Island -- But, however mysterious the former may be, little stress can
be laid on the latter: for the weakness of the Americans in the desertion of an
island to their insidious protectors, is a very strange proof of English
cowardice in surrendering a whole continent which they have gained with glory,
preserved with humanity, and are resolute to defend to the last extremity. It
must be remembered, that Admiral Graves sailed after the French squadron, and
arrived at Rhode Island, much about the same time as Monsieur De Ternay had
been admitted there. But since that arrival of the English fleet, the French
have remained totaly inactive. We have the superiority, and they haven't dared
to fight. Indeed the French assistance is far more calculated to support the
spirit of party there, than to form an expectation of cooperating, where they
will always disagree -- But if, at length, the French should determine to make
North America the seat of war, we certainly may as well fight them there, as
any where else -- We can but lose America at last -- and they themselves gain
nothing but blows and losses.

Yet, in contrast to this pacific resignation to Monsieur De Ternay, is Lord
Cornwallis's victory compared, by those who consider surrenders, glorious, and
victories, ruinous.

Happy had it been for this country, if military wisdom had been exerted, in
this as in the last war, to justify and immortalize valor, not to depreciate
achievements, which indeed are the decisive condemnation of those who
disparage them. -- If such a principle is once admitted, that defeat and ruin
will be our real advantage, it would overturn every spirited exertion to obtain
a favorable peace, by demonstrating every new acquisition to be a motive for
submission, every gallant and honorable enterprise a ground of tame
acquiescence to degradation and disgrace. -- It would rob heroism of its best
reward, and convert victory and triumph to a mere quibbling paradox of
debasement and infamy.

But with the same policy, the misfortunes of our continental situation are
exaggerated and proclaimed. It is admitted to be too plain a truth, that far
less hopes can be entertained from a rebellion in the Spanish colonies, than
were confidently cherished in England, upon the first idea of American
resistance -- The Spanish colonists want indeed the main force and decisive
stress of insurgency and rebellion -- They want a South American party in
Spain, to countenance their disaffection, to exalt their profligacy, to
pronounce in a Senate the eulogiums of their leaders, to distract the National
Councils in their support, to menace the legislature in their defense, to
sympathize with their sufferings, and to triumph in their success. -- But as to
Portugal, it is a subject of double grief, that, to establish the perfidy of
that state, a military officer, once gloriously engaged in its defense, should
now be the tame witness, not the gallant avenger of ingratitude and falsehood
-- In fact, the the learned Commodore was very much courted by the Portuguese;
nor will that people ever actually quarrel with those, whom every commercial
interest has fixed their best and surest allies -- The extreme of danger that
political prediction can menace, is the loss of Minorca; which however has
always been retained, as a point of honor, rather than as a necessary
possession -- When we are at peace, Gibralter is sufficient for the
Mediterranean trade; and when at war, we have none at all -- As to Holland, the
Dutch have too great a property in our funds, to assist in destroying our
settlements abroad. -- Nor is it possible, that the northern powers of Europe
can consider it their interest to overturn a nation, to which some of them
almost owe their existence, others their preservation from the jealousy of the
house of Bourbon, and all have derived a generous, liberal, mediation and
protection -- Great Britain, that formerly established Holland, can now resist
any similar confederacy: and in this glorious struggle, if she does not
ultimately secure a more firm independance, she has already maintained at least
an equality of strength, every where; and has vanquished her enemies whenever
they have ventured to contend with her -- Her situation in point of defense is
better, and becoming still more so, every hour -- Both our army and navy are
greater in number, and better in discipline and order, than ever they were --
Wherever fleets and armies, have been sent, ours have pursued them. -- It has
always been the rule to fend the new-raised regiments abroad, in time of war,
because the few we retain at home, should lead and be an example to the
militia, in case of invasion. But to add new force to the national armaments,
there is no boundary to the spirit, readiness, and exertion of individuals at
home, to support the dignity and the rights of this country -- In one or two
instances, such singular zeal has called for uncommon honors; and, in those
extraordinary cases alone, for a limited time, and for a specific service,
those gentlemen, who have hazarded their property, and lives, for the public
safety, without any condition of rank or emolument for themselves, subsequent
to such service, have been raised to temporary rank.

The complaint of our resources has constantly been repeated, when we have
actually found them most efficient -- Ten millions were raised last year almost
in the course of a day. Nearly as much the year before: our revenues are
improved; the sinking-fund is certainly increasing -- War has hitherto produced
no immediate distress to the state; and creates a more general circulation than
peace -- The captures indeed are an exception -- But let opposition explain
these effects of their jealous dissatisfaction against the profits of
individual contractors, who formerly conducted the whole business, and periods
of sailing, for our mercantile fleets -- But the navy-board having undertaken
it of late, and in the midst of more complicated operations, the consequence
has been, that too many of the convoys of transports, with stores, men, and
provisions, have failed -- The former effected the business well, being well
paid for it -- The latter have done it ill, because they are not paid at all.

In such a situation, the sense, the spirit of this country will still
persevere, in a just and honorable cause -- The happy appearance of returning
loyalty in the southern colonies, with the certainty of their resources being
cut off, joined to the gallantry of Lord Cornwallis's expedition up the
Chesapeak Bay, give the fairest presage of connecting also the submission of
the northern colonies -- The former are most important to us, because they are
more productive, and the inhabitants more naturally inclined to us.

With such prospects therefore, the weak murmurs of domestic disaffection will
be despised -- The tyranny of that monster, Association, will only be a rule to
its own miserable vassals -- The independent country-gentlemen, who have seen
the baneful effects of this fatal spirit, in that county where it first arose,
will guard against the specious impostures of so dangerous an innovation --
They, who in return for a hasty and misplaced confidence, received every
contumelious and insulting reproach, will act with more caution, in avoiding
those plausible pretenses, which involve the most fatal consequences -- The
little ill that followed in that instance, will hence be productive of the
greatest good. Every independent character will now be no longer alarmed by
Association, or insulted by instructions; but persevere in that bold, decided,
manly firmness, that has ever been the surest guardian of the rights and
liberties of Great Britain.

MISCELLANEOUS ELOQUENCE, OR, COLLATERAL RHETORIC FOR THE GALLERY.
IN a mixed government like ours, public speaking has a sort of relative
analogy to the compound structure of our constitution, and to the different
orders of which it is composed. Thus the highest, and most exalted rank
possesses a proud pre-eminence of phraseology, evidently characteristic of its
sovereignty, and excellence: while the second degree, preserves a kind of
equipoise in style; which, by a due mixture of dignity with plainness, denotes
its intermediate balance, in the scale of legislative eloquence. -- But
chiefly, in the third estate, it is peculiarly necessary, that the stream of
rhetoric should have certain particles of popularity, perpetually floating on
its surface, as testimonies of the parent source, and fountain, from which it
springs.

Upon this system, analogous principles might be formed, for the respective
oratory of the several degrees -- At present, however, a few documents only
shall be suggested for the particular application of this principle, to the
rhetoric of the House of Commons; more especially to that truly constitutional
part of it, occasionally addressed to the strangers in the gallery; whose "good
report," as it is indeed "the brief and abstract chronicle" of parliamentary
fame, it becomes peculiarly prudent, as well as honorable, to obtain.

In general then, as to the mode of exercising this miscellaneous eloquence
with most ease and efficacy; it may be fairly laid down, that all eminent and
projecting sentences; all pointed, and epigrammatic quibbles; all metaphorical
menaces; violent tropes; forced figures; and glaring ornaments; are well
calculated to rouse the attention, and hitch upon the memory, of the gallery.

These, like the emphasis of Italics in printing, summon the too negligent and
careless mind, to pay a proper attention to many choice, and curious
researches, intimately connected with the other matter; but which might
otherwise perish from their refinement, or irretrievably slip bye, unnoticed.

But one of the more certain, and secure resources of miscellaneous rhetoric
(and which I prefer mentioning, from its double illustration of precept and
example,) is that conciliating respect, which some popular orators more
directly pay the gallery; in downright acknowledgment of the "respectable
appearance" of its company, on "important occasions."

This condescending recognition (as it well deserves indeed) generally meets
with a proper return; and it is pleasing to observe, how wonderfully attentive
the whole body of strangers become, at the first mention of this general
respectability -- On some late occasions, this idea has been carried somewhat
too far: for there have not been wanting certain popular orators, who politely
withheld their arguments, after each division, and avowedly stopped all business,
till the readmission of the audience.

This however, though uncommonly handsome, is dangerous; as it may give a handle
to some moody, malignant mutes, for the absolute exclusion of all interlopers
on debate. -- But it will always be good, to prepare, and scatter, as occasion
offers, some promiscuous panegyrics, of nearly the same, though not absolutely so
direct a tendency -- for example -- That In a constitution, like ours, every
thinking man, has a natural interest in public debate, which it is tyrannical
to abridge, or violate. -- Or, that It becomes all wise and cautious
constituents to hear, in order to judge of their representatives! -- Or again,
that It is no small consolation, in the present aweful crisis, to find a
general diffusion of public vigilance and anxiety disseminated among all ranks,
and orders of men; and more particularly in the present numerous and
respectable appearance!

These, and all others of the same kind, properly accompanied by submissive
tones, modulated breaks in the voice, and collateral attitudes of respectful
inclination toward the gallery, scarcely ever fail of awakening the grateful
attention, and sometimes, dormant curiosity of the strangers: especially at
such times, as they have painfully, and patriotically, persevered, to combat
both fatigue and appetite, in hourly expectation of collecting some scattered
scraps of mutilated eloquence, for their own private, or domestic, consumption
at the Lycaeum, or Belle Assemblee.

But, in this species of miscellaneous eloquence, the effect is comparatively
weak, and contemptible, considered with others that are founded upon the same
principle.

Those already mentioned, can only be scattered occasionally, in the exordiums,
and some episodical parts, of an oration. -- The latter, and more efficient
class, must take their station in the peroration, and declamatory close, of
prolix speeches; as a corpse dereserve, to support and reinforce the main body
of argument, after the harder service of the day. -- These ought chiefly to
consist of some very new, and deep theory; abstract, and metaphysical; and
calculated to give an idea of the originality, extent, and boldness of its
author's mind; which, by connecting so many ingredients of sublimity, tends to
inspire a sort of awe for such pre-eminence of genius, and to create a confused
notion that this inventive wildness, if it could but be applied to the more
serious business of politics, would, with equal brilliancy, strike out fresh
systems of calculation, explore new resources of finance, and produce unheard
of wonders and revolutions, in all the complicated concerns of political
enterprise.

As this description may serve to convey some idea of the last, and highest
style of miscellaneous rhetoric; it will be sufficient to elucidate the
principle, by a single example; on a subject too, not wholly untouched in the
last session -- UNIVERSAL WHIGGISM -- which is the better adapted for the
proposed illustration from its uniting wildness, sublimity, invention,
originality, and a proper degree of extravagance; together with various other
requisites, equally necessary for the perfection of this species of eloquence.

Well has it been imagined, that every human entity has universal, fixed, and
innate ideas from the first, infused in every created soul common to all, --
equal to all -- perfect to all -- as perfect to the savage in his cave, as to
an Englishman in the senate! -- Thus has universal nature endowed the whole
stock of human race, with equal and impartial powers, to receive and to enjoy
the perfect completion of universal rights; those rights which our first
thoughts inspire, and which are unalienably the pride, and passion of man, the
rights of UNIVERSAL WHIGGISM -- To dispense, and perfect, these vast, original
blessings to the whole world at large, was the great work reserved for our own
times, and for our own country. -- Now then, let every nation, and people of
the earth, confederate in one universal crusade, to rescue these sacred birth
rights from barbarous violation! -- The spirit of liberty is gone forth! -- Her
voice is the universal language of mankind -- Let it be heard in the echoed
thunder of the world -- till UNIVERSAL WHIGGISM incorporate, with human nature,
and blend its essence with the soul.

ANSWER.
IF the form of these essays did not call for some comments on each subject, no
answer would be attempted to such indisputable truths as are contained in the
foregoing documents. -- A very few words will be offered on this occasion,
rather as additions, than amendments -- It is apparent, that, in the several
precepts for miscellaneous eloquence, there is least novelty in those of the
first mentioned class, touching the direct or collateral appeals to the
judgment, and the taste of the gallery: most of which, every judicious critic
will immediately discover to be closely copied from the higher models of this
collateral rhetoric, exhibited by the professors of our modern drama; wherein
it is invariably the custom to overcharge particular passages, as attractive
appeals to their gallery also; which, when properly given (as the actors phrase
it) tell most surprizingly.

But, it must be remembered, that much of the success in both case, depends on
a curious interspersion of these brilliances, so as to relieve the heavier
masses, and sustain due proportions of light and shade -- For rhetorical
flowers must be disposed and mingled with a studious delicacy of arrangement,
and interweave their blended beauties in just contrast to the coarser texture
of more substantial argument.

Thus (to adapt our expressions to the subject) in some parts of the rhetorical
groundwork, small seedlings of little violet-tropes should seem to fearfully
revoke even the minuter elegance, they so faintly disclose -- while, in others,
more full-blown metaphors, may diffuse their roseat luxuriance, and prodigally
extend both stem and foliage among the thorny sweet-briars of irony; or
entwining knots of syllogistic woodbine -- with these also there should
occasionally be interspersed, some brighter ornaments of wit, like the spangles
of the pattern, to variegate the silken sentences of persuasion, and set them
off with more dazzling decoration.

As to the latter, and far more original division of miscellaneous eloquence,
though something (it must be owned) of its baser kind is equally observable in
the fustiantags and finales of our more ancient tragedies; and on the same plan
too of leaving a good impression on the gallery; yet it is certainly, in its
true nature and perfect state, most completely sublime: and in the exemplified
instance defective only, in its unaccountably narrow and restricted limitation
to this world alone; when, with equal ease and efficacy, it might, and ought to
be extended, not only to the inhabitants of our own moon, and other lunatic
countries, but also to every nation and people in the whole planetary system:
so that, in any great congress of astronomical worlds, universal whiggism
should as certainly be the ruling principle of the delegates of Jupiter's
satellites, as a whig-president must be deputed by the constituents of Saturn's
ring -- It is only necessary therefore to add, that the respect for this kind
of gigantic rhetoric will be greatly enhanced, by a proportionable elocution
and action, to justify and grace its magnificence. -- For here, though the
figures are intentionally dilated and monstrous, and the coloring
systematically overcharged, like those of cupola paintings, yet to the ignorant
auditor above, the rhetoric of the former will seem as natural and just; as the
symmetry of the latter appears exact, and proportionable, to the stupid gazer
below -- For the eye and the ear are equally delighted and deceived, in both
the one, and the other case.

In the delivery therefore of these rhetorical caricatures, all that can be
requisite to complete their effect, is to accompany them by congenial degrees
of violence and vehemence, in expression, and deportment; or, in short, that
the gestures and elocution of the orator, who pronounces them, may somewhat
resemble those of a furious feugleman, or a fanatic in a frenzy.

CHANGE THE MINISTRY.
AS most of the writers, who have treated of the English constitution,
(particularly those of foreign countries) very ingeniously prove, that a
revolution is necessary once a century to renovate its spirit; so, in order to
proportionably purify our interior government, the Ministry, by a fair and
equable calculation, should undergo a change once at least, if not much
oft'ner, in the course of every ten years.

More or less degrees of this principle of mutability are incident to all
bodies; natural, or politic; and universally tend to renew their genuine force
and purity.

But if this theory had never before been applied to the administrations of
this country, surely the present ministers, and the present times, would be
admitted as irrefragable arguments, in favor of that national supplication,
which now universally prevails, for the dismission of a ruinous Ministry, and
the substitution of a virtuous Opposition.

This national demand is grounded on principles as plain, as they ought to be
decisive: namely, that the present Ministry are the sole and original causes of
that fatal source of all our miseries, the American war; and, on the contrary,
that Opposition have from the first moment, unanimously reprobated the policy,
and, with uniform consistency, ever afterward condemned the principle of
colony-taxation.

Such is the plain broad basis of that national supplication to change the
present ruinous, and execrated Ministers -- A supplication, which every
district of this country has not only united to enforce, but more distinctly
promoted, with peculiar wisdom, in the late honorable delegation of its best
and greatest supporters, the members of Westminster and Surrey; unawed by the
menaces, uncorrupted by the odious influence of prerogative!

To this national supplication for the dismission of the present flagitious
Ministers, the substitution of their virtuous Opposers, is, by necessary
implication, inseparably connected. -- But, if the public virtues of that
patriot band have not sufficiently stamped the justice of their claims on every
English heart; let cooler, and more deliberate judgment trace their higher
title to pre-eminence of station, in unrivaled superiority of genius, in
unparallelled excellence of education; let their habits, studies, and private
virtues, (all exercised, with undissipated attention to advance the public
good; all directed to the enrichment of their fellow-citizens; the diminution
of national expense; and the promotion of justice, probity, and honor,) be at
once the plainest, and surest proofs of their disinterested views, as well as
the best pledges of their future upright, and honest conduct.

ANSWER.
TO this great, and most important of all questions; this cause, and end of all
logic, argument, and eloquence; this attractive power, to whose magnetic force,
all the lightest, or weightiest bodies of reasoning must irresistably
gravitate; with mixed sensations of regret, and satisfaction, we are at length
arrived. -- Here should every specious deduction, and every established proof,
be equally admitted both from the advocates who attack, and the witnesses who
defend, the cause of administration -- Here should each slightest particle of
evidence, each minute and shadowy distinction of opinion, be fairly and
impartially deposited in that golden balance, which even-handed justice should
suspend and poise, to weigh the doubtful conflict of political warfare -- But,
to assist at such a trial would be far too solemn, too laborious, for profaner
pens -- It is a task that may be consigned, with far greater security, to the
busy zeal, and persevering patience, of polemical politicians -- A hasty and
imperfect answer to the foregoing argument, shall conclude these slighter toils
-- It must be owned then, that the philosophy of ministerial changes, is worthy
the solidity of its foreign theorists -- It seems indeed very closely borrowed
from the Parisian vicissitudes of fashion, dress, and even furniture, for the
respective seasons -- On so accommodating a system, many fanciful varieties
might be practiced, to variegate successive administrations; which, with that
view, might be quarterly; and composed of more decided characters for the two
greater divisions of the year, and a kind of demi-saison statesmen for the
lesser.

This would give an impartial rotation to all sorts of parties, and, by a just
adaption of dispositions, and tempers, analogous to their successive periods,
might produce the happiest, and most extraordinary effects -- For, young
adventuring politicians might sow the principles of a scheme in the spring
administration, which, when cultivated, and matured, by coalitions of the
summer and autumnal ministries, would finally produce the richest fruits, to be
treasured, and dispensed, by the colder caution and wintry wisdom of more
experienced counselors. But after all, changes of ministry are neither as
sudden, nor as easy, as changes of weather, or changes of scenery at a play
house. -- And as the principle of mutability was not much insisted on, it will
be fairer to recur to the more serious and material substance of the argument.
-- The petitions -- and the two other great points -- the origin of our
troubles -- and the consistency of opposition.

To these it may be briefly answered, that if it can possibly be proved, that
one of the petitions was not invented, framed, and circulated, by those
gentlemen, whose appointment and elevation they severally dictate, the truth of
them all, shall be universally admitted. -- But, on the contrary, if the whole
pile of them was raised, fabricated, and supported, by one, and, the same set
of men, for one, and the same purpose; the force of their evidence will not be
much relied on. -- Next, as to the origin of the war, it is sufficient to
repeat that trite truth, " The STAMP ACT was, not the work of the present
ministry!" And, in respect to the uniform resistance to the principle of
American subordination, the equally self-evident proposition must always be
remembered "That to opposition alone are we indebted, for that absolute and
universal claim to it; THE DECLARATORY LAW." -- Two most trite refutations, of
the two tritest of all charges! which however as indisputably disprove the
imputed delinquency on the one side, as they absolutely overthrow the
ridiculous claim to consistency on the other.

But, with regard indeed to the great criterion of national opinion, the two
popular elections; certainly much stress is wisely and justly laid upon that
point -- nor would it prove an unpleasing task for some advocate of opposition,
to draw an exact parallel, in the manner of Plutarch, between the four
triumphant candidates; wherein it would as evidently appear, that the two
admirals, who severally share these domestic honors, are not more precisely
alike in principles and conduct; than the two statesmen also of the same
elections, resemble each other, in high birth, exalted genius, cultivated
taste, sound reasoning, strict honor, and undamped fortitude. -- Which close,
and mathematical, consideration of the several relative proportions of merit,
thus mutually compared, in their respective parallels, must, not only
demonstrate the exact correspondence of their reciprocal excellencies, and
therefore, by fair consequence, the truth, and justice of declaring these two
elections a common, and equal standard of national opinion, but also at once
overthrow every cavilling notion that may arise of their rediculous
dissimilitude, and establish them, for the whole succeeding session of
parliament, as the great political parallellogram of public spirit.

It may however be unnecessary to continue much longer the mysterious
insinuation of INFLUENCE, so industriously circulated, preparatory to these
boasted triumphs -- at the moment, it might have been judicious, nay, possibly,
necessary, to lean on this popular argument -- But to continue it, might now
appear unworthy the gallantry and spirit of its author, if not too like the
fretful resource of disappointed pride. -- When the tempest had dissevered the
good old vessel, despair might fly to any refuge. -- The gilded lion at the
head, was then no longer to be upheld, by romantic enthusiasm, as the
glittering sign and splendid presage of victory: distress and danger had
destroyed all fanciful respect; and exhausted, sinking, strength caught at that
majestic ruin, which, faithful even to its debaser, elevated and supported the
very hand that selfishly depressed it. -- It has had its use! -- performed its
service! -- Let it be no longer exposed, and dragged about, for low mockery and
insolent profanation; but generously and gratefully laid up, like a votive
tablet in the temple of Neptune, the consecrated record of unhoped-for refuge.

It remains only to say a few words on the last and powerful argument for the
Change of Ministry; namely, the decisive superiority of abilities, on the part
of Opposition -- this favorite common place, so perpetually, and so modestly
urged, might lead to personal parallels, of all others the most invidious, as
well as disputable. -- On this question, every man must judge for himself. --
All that shall be said here -- is this; that it must indeed be a much more
infinite superiority of talent, than frequently occurs in the scale of human
understanding, that can, at once, render the qualifications of any set of men
(who are comparatively unconversant with official business, or, at least, not
equally versed of late years in political negociations, foreign, or domestic;)
so supremely superexcellent to those of others, some of whom have been
literally educated in office, others passed the greatest part of their lives in
foreign embassies of complicated concern, with the ablest, and purest
reputation; and all are perfectly equal to their competitors in every advantage
of rank and situation. -- To this the thousand declamatory common place replies
of practiced fraud, veteran subtlety, and professional treachery, as they may
be easily imagined, shall be silently despised. -- Certainly there are
individuals in opposition, of most extensive, and possibly unequalled
understanding, the accession of whose abilities would give luster to public
council, and be indeed almost a national blessing. -- But if the miserable
appendages of party must for ever fix their ponderous and oppressive influence
on talents formed for free, and bold aspiring; then may their perverted
excellence be justly pronounced the ruin of their country; and while, to vulgar
observation, this luminous and malignant prodigy, this splendid, but baneful
portent, scatters terror and amazement; by every more thinking mind, it will at
once be wondered at, and lamented; admired, and deplored. -- For pre-eminence
of genius becomes doubly pernicious by the abuse of its own superiority, and
the contaminating degradation of the faculties of others; and is indeed, both
in effect, and by example, -- The decay of a whole age.

FINIS.

