MEDEA. A TRAGEDY.

-- Aestuat ingens
Imo in cord pudor, mixtoque insania luctu,
Et furiis agitatus amor, et conscia virtus.
AENEID. LONDON: Printed by H. WOODFALL: And Sold by J. MORGAN,
Paternoster Row. M.DCC.LXI.

[Price TWO SHILLINGS and SIXPENCE.]

TO THE KING THIS TRAGEDY OF MEDEA IS MOST HUMBLY INSCRIBED BY HIS MAJESTY's

MOST DUTIFUL, MOST FAITHFUL AND DEVOTED SUBJECT AND SERVANT, R. GLOVER.

PROLOGUE.
THOUGH wild our theme, the grave historian's page
Has sanctified the tale through every age.
Who has not heard of Argo sent from Greece,
Of Jason's labors for the golden fleece,
And fond Medea's ill-requited aid
To that false hero, who his vows betrayed?
In every clime, where learned Muses reign,
The stage has known Medea's mournful strain,
Has given the flying car, and magic rod
To her, the avowed descendant of a god.
The storms of trouble, which afflict the great,
Teach private life to prise its tranquil state.
That truth the moral of our fable shows
Too well in scenes of unexampled woes,
Which here will ravage an exalted breast
Of merit conscious, and with shame oppressed;
Where love and fury, grief and madness joined
O'erturn the structure of a godlike mind.
Power, wisdom, science, and her birth divine
In vain to shield her from distress combine;
Nor wisdom, power, nor science yield relief;
Her potent wand can vanquish all, but grief:
In vain her winged chariot sweeps the air
To shun that mightier sorceress, despair.
The characters and passions hence expressed
Are all submitted to the feeling breast;
Let ancient story justify the rest.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
JASON. AESON. CREON. LYCANDER. FIRST COLCHIAN. FIRST CORINTHIAN.
MEDEA. THEANO. HECATE. FIRST PHAEACIAN.
COLCHIANS, PHAEACIANS, THESSALIANS and CORINTHIANS.

The scene is in the citadel of Corinth between a grove sacred to Juno, and the
royal palace, with a distant prospect of the sea.

MEDEA. A TRAGEDY.
ACT THE FIRST.
SCENE THE FIRST.
LYCANDER seeing THEANO advance from the temple of JUNO. THAT form divine, by
all revered and loved,
Moves from the temple. On her pensive brow
Sits holy care with gentleness and grace,
Whose placid beams humanity reveal.
She stops contemplating the sea. Theano --
Why with that musing aspect towered the main
Stand'st thou regardless of thy brother's voice?

THEANO. Imperial Juno in an awful vision
This morn presented to my wondering sight
The shapes of strangers by distress pursued;
Whom to the refuge of this holy place
I must receive obedient to her charge:
And lo! a vessel turns her hastening prow
To Corinth's harbor.

LYCANDER. Ten well-measur'd strokes
Of her swift oars will reach the shore below:
But hear my errand. Creon knows, thy altar
Unclad with garlands still proclaims thy firmness
Against his daughter's marriage; then prepare
Thy hallowed eye to meet his threatening brow;
Fence thy chaste ear against his impious vaunts,
Which urge the example of Almighty Jove
For his own thirst of empire.

THEANO. Say to Creon, Kings should aspire to imitate the Gods
Not in their power, but goodness; human virtues
More nigh to Heaven's perfection may be raised,
Than human grandeur: Jove derides the toil
Of mortal power, but smiles on righteous deeds.

LYCANDER. Thus would I speak, Theano, could my words
And thoughts be tuned in harmony like thine;
But danger breaks that union in a palace,
And strains the tongue to discord with the heart:
Then pacify thy goddess, when the king
Exacts my service, if discretion wears
A mask of duty; kindly thou impute
Blame to my station, and absolve Lycander.
But look; yon vessel has discharged its train,
Who climb the hill with aged steps and slow.
Nay turn thy eyes; a second troop of strangers
March through the city. Sable is their garb,
Their mien dejected. This demands my care.
Farewell.

SCENE THE SECOND.
THEANO and COLCHIANS. THEANO. What forms are these? All-potent goddess!
I feel thee now; my vision is accomplished.

FIRST COLCHIAN. O thou, who seem the guardian of these shades,
Which from the isthmus show their towering growth,
The sailor's guide through Corinth's double main;
Permit an humble stranger to enquire,
What power is worshipped here.

THEANO aside. The very garb!
The figures painted in my recent vision!
Thy feet, O stranger, stand on sacred earth.
These shades enclose the venerable fane
Erected there to hymeneal Juno,
Whose presence guards the citadel of Corinth.

FIRST COLCHIAN. Then let us lift our suppliant voice unblam'd,
That in the refuge of this hallowed grove
Our exiled feet may rest.

THEANO. Your suit is granted.
So wills the power inhabiting that temple.
And say, ye favored of connubial Juno,
What are your names and country?

FIRST COLCHIAN. From the banks
Of distant Phasis, and the Euxin wave,
Lost to our native mansions, are we come
Ill-guided Colchians to the walls of Corinth.
On king Aeetes' daughter we attend,
That boast of Asia, to the Sun allied,
To Hecate and Circe, more illustrious
In her own virtues, for her wisdom known
Through every clime, the all-endow'd Medea.

THEANO. Where is your princess?

FIRST COLCHIAN. In that anchored bark,
Which to your haven from Iolcos sailed;
Where on his specious ambassy to Creon
Her husband left her on a lonely pillow:
At length impatient of his tedious absence
She and her sons have braved the unsparing deep.

THEANO. Yet more unsparing, than the deep, is man.
So will this daughter of affliction find,
When her sad feet are planted on this shore.

FIRST COLCHIAN. How swift are evil tidings! While our keel
But lightly touched that well-frequented strand,
We heard, the ungrateful Jason would divorce her
This day to wed the daughter of your monarch.

THEANO. If heaven prevent not. Through the solemn shade
Direct thy view. That high-rais'd altar note
Close by the fountain. Thither lead your princess.
This is a refuge, which no regal pride
High-swoln with power, nor multitude inflamed
By madding discord, nor invader's rapine
Have ever profaned. Return. Yon palace opens.
No friend of yours approaches. It is Creon.
Thou too be present, goddess, and illumine
The earth-born darkness of thy servant's mind.

SCENE THE THIRD.
THEANO and CREON. CREON entering. Why do they paint Medea's woes to me?
A king should lift his steady front on high,
And, while he gazes on the radiant throne,
Where bright ambition sits amid the stars,
The hopes, the fears, the miseries of others
Pass by unheeded in his contemplation.
Art thou come forth with those ill-omen'd looks
To blast the public festival?

THEANO. Howl, howl,
Deluded city; banish from thy dwellings
The genial banquet; fill thy streets with mourners
To celebrate in notes of lamentation
A nuptial day offensive to the gods.

CREON. Think thou, thy priestly office can avail
To counteract the high designs of kings?
Go and with bridal chaplets deck thy altar,
Left thou provoke me to confound thy pride
Elate with wreaths of sanctity in vain.

THEANO. Not, that the holy fillet binds my temples,
Not, that before the altar I present
The public victim, or a nation's vows
By me are ushered to the eternal thrones,
Misjudging monarch, is my heart elate;
It is, that virtue owns me for her servant.
Benevolence and pity guide my will,
Beneficence and charity my deeds.
Even now, though deemed importunate and proud,
My soul bows down in heaviness for Creon,
And at his danger sighs in mournful warnings.

CREON. Repeat thy warnings to the coward's ear.
My danger?

THEANO. From that goddess, who inspired
The Colchian princess to desert her father,
To aid the Grecian heroes, and restore
Our lost possession of the golden fleece.
The voice of loud complaint from yonder beach
Already strikes her ear. Medea --

CREON. Ha!
What of Medea?

THEANO. Is arrived in Corinth.

CREON. Arrived?

THEANO. She and her children to reclaim
A husband and a father in that prince,
Whom thou have destined to Creusa's bed.

CREON. Thou, who obtain'st infinity of power,
Lord of Olympus, king of gods and men,
Do thou regard thy sceptered sons below?
Say, shall a female hand o'erturn the basis,
Which I am founding to enlarge my sway?
If so, resume the diadem, I wear;
Its scanty circle I reject with scorn.

THEANO. Ye winds, disperse impieties like these;
Nor let their sound profane the heavenly threshold.

CREON. Hence to thy temple.

THEANO. Thou defy'st not me,
But her, whose awful presence fills that temple.
Imperfect victims, inauspicious offerings,
And sounds portentous have foreboded long
Her high displeasure. Her apparent form
Stood near my pillow at the opening dawn,
And strictly charged me to receive this stranger.
Think too, what lofty science arms Medea
With more, than nature's force.

CREON. I think it false,
And all the fabled wonders of her charms,
Thy legends too of inauspicious offerings,
Imperfect victims, and portentous sounds,
What priests may publish, and a king despise.

THEANO. Farewell, rash prince. My duty is discharged.

CREON. Stay. Do thou mean to give this Colchian refuge?

THEANO. Can I dispute a deity's injunction?

CREON. Go, dream again; procure some wiser vision,
Which may instruct thee to avoid my wrath.

SCENE THE FOURTH.
CREON and LYCANDER. CREON. Where have thou loiter'd to conceal the arrival
Of this accursed enchantress, and the purpose
Of thy rebellious sister to protect her?

LYCANDER. My lord, these tidings are to me unknown;
But further news of high import I bear.
Iolchian Aeson, Jason's royal sire,
Advancing now anticipates this notice.

SCENE THE FIFTH.
CREON, LYCANDER, and AESON with THESSALIANS in mourning garments. CREON.
Thrice hail! my double brother. Do I owe
Thy timely presence to our ancient friendship,
Or to the alarm, Medea's flight might raise,
Who scarce precedes thy fortunate appearance?
My sudden joy o'erlook'd that dusky robe.

AESON. It suits my fortune. Heavy with affliction
My weary feet are banished from Iolcos.
How my fell brother, Pelias, that usurper
Of my paternal sway was foiled and slain,
Thou know. His son retreated into Thrace;
Whence he has poured a savage host of ruffians
With unexpected inroad, and so rapid,
That instant flight alone preserved thy friend,
Thy suppliant now for aid.

CREON. Dismiss thy cares.
Soon shall thy warlike son display his banners,
Extend my frontier, and recover thine.
More of thy fortunes shall thou tell hereafter;
But give to gladness this selected day
Of Jason's nuptials.

AESON. Nobly thou reliev'st
A king's distress. Now satisfy the parent.
Lead me to Jason.

CREON. Follow to my palace.

LYCANDER. He is not there.

CREON. What say thou?

LYCANDER. On the sands
Alone with melancholy pace he treads,
As I but now descried him from this rock.

AESON. With melancholy pace?

CREON. His promise binds him
This very morning to espouse Creusa.

AESON. Perhaps with fresh calamity o'erworn,
I doubt too much; yet hear me.

CREON. Thy appearance
Removes all doubts. Lycander, find the prince.
Say, who is come to celebrate his nuptials.

AESON to LYCANDER. Is he a stranger to Medea's landing?

LYCANDER. I trust, he is.

AESON. They must not meet.

CREON. Lycander,
See, thou prevent it. Send Theano to us;
And let her bring obedience: else her fault
Shall on thy head be punished.

SCENE THE SIXTH.
CREON and AESON. AESON. Should my son
Once see Medea!

CREON. Can her looks annul
A league like ours?

AESON. Alas! thou little know her.
Her eye surpasses that refulgent star,
Which first adorns the evening; and her talents
Exceed her beauty. Like the forked thunder
She wields resistless arguments; her words
With more, than lightning's subtlety, are winged.

CREON. Why art thou startled?

AESON. She is there -- ascending;
My sight acquainted with her haughty steps
Shrinks, ere they touch the summit of this hill.

CREON. Which is the far-fam'd sorceress of Colchis?

AESON. Too well distinguished by her stately port,
And elevation over that weeping train,
She towers a genuin offspring of the gods.
Rage on her brow, and anguish in her eye
Denounce the growing tempest of her mind.

CREON. Now, god of waters, since thy partial hand
Thrusts this barbarian outcast on my shores,
Back to thy floods the fugitive I spurn.

AESON. What means my royal friend? Retire. Avoid
This formidable woman, who may wound
Our dignity. I know her soaring mind,
Which all enlightened with sublimest knowledge
Disdains the state and majesty of kings,
Nor ranks with less, than deity itself.

CREON. Curse on her beauty, and majestic mien!
But let the rumor of her power be true;
The Sun, her boasted ancestor, may arm
Her hand with fire; let Hecate and Circe,
The goddesses of spells, and black enchantments,
Attend her steps, and cloth her feet in terror:
We have our fiends; the sorceress shall find,
That grief, despair, distraction wait our nod,
To wring her heart through all her magic guards.

SCENE THE SEVENTH.
MEDEA, her two CHILDREN, COLCHIANS and PHAEACIANS. MEDEA. No more, I charge
you. Noble minds oppressed
By injuries disdain the sound of comfort.
Ye fiends and furies wont to leave your flames
At my command, and tremble at my charms,
Now, now ascend and aid Medea's rage.
Give me the voice of thunder to resound
My indignation over the earth and heavens;
That I, who draw my lineage from the Sun,
Am fallen below the basest lot of slaves:
That anguish, want, despair, contempt and shame
Are heaped together by the hands of fate,
Whelmed in one mass of ruin on my head,
And dash my struggling virtue to the ground.

FIRST COLCHIAN. Why to our faithful counsels art thou deaf?

MEDEA. Can thou by counsel wast my exiled feet
To my lost parents, my forsaken friends,
And native palace? -- Oh! I gave him all;
To him my virgin bosom I resigned,
For him the regal mansion of my father,
The loved companions of my youth deserted;
From foul defeat, from shame, from death I saved him:
What more could woman? -- Yet he weds another.
Me he abandons, and these helpless infants
Forlorn, unshelter'd in a foreign clime,
To every outrage, every want exposed.
Blast his perfidious head, vindictive lightnings!
Unhappy woman! can thou in the height
Of thy despair, thy rage and indignation,
Can thou pursue him with a heavier curse,
Than to be plunged in woes, which equal thine?

FIRST COLCHIAN. Though stung with just resentment, due regard
Pay to my age, fidelity and service.
A long and painful traverse from Iolcos
Have thou endured, nor since thy landing here
The needful succor known of rest, or food.

MEDEA. Talk not to me of nourishment and rest.
Food to these lips, and slumber to these eyes
Must ever now be strangers.

FIRST COLCHIAN. By the beams
Of thy forefather never will I see
Thy wisdom bound in vassalage to passion.
Once more I warn thee, princess, to thy refuge.
This is the consecrated bower of Juno.
Thou underneath the hospitable shade
Sit suppliant down.

MEDEA. Improvident Medea!
To raise another from destruction's depths,
To wealth, to glory raise him, yet thyself
Leave destitute and suppliant! Oh! what art thou,
Whom blinded men unerring wisdom call?
Thou could not pierce the thin, the airy veils,
Which from my eyes concealed the paths of danger;
Nor can thou now repel the increasing storm
Of rapid anguish, which o'erturns my peace:
Down to the endless gloom of dreary night;
Hence, let me drive thee from my inmost soul;
That nothing calm may hover nigh my heart
To cool its pain, and save me from distraction.

SCENE THE EIGHTH.
COLCHIANS and PHAEACIANS. A COLCHIAN. Come on, ye soft companions in
affliction,
Melodious daughters of Phaeacia's isle;
In strains alternate let us chaunt our grief:
Perhaps our mistress we may charm to rest.

A PHAEACIAN. O Music, sweet artificer of pleasure,
Why is thy science exercised alone
In festivals, on hymeneal days,
And in the full assemblies of the happy?
Ah! how much rather should we court thy skill
In sorrow's gloomy season, to diffuse
Thy smooth allurements through the languid ear
Of self-devour'd affliction, and delude
The wretched from their sadness.

A COLCHIAN. Let us melt
In tuneful accents flowing to our woes,
That so Medea may at least reflect,
She is not singly wretched. Let her hear
Our elegies, whose measured moan records
Our friends forsaken, and our country lost;
That she no longer to her sole distress,
Her deep-revolving spirit may confine,
But by our sorrows may relieve her own.

FIRST PART OF THE MUSIC.
A COLCHIAN. [IAMBICS.] Ye stately battlements and towers,
Imperial Corinth's proud defense;
Thou citadel, whose dewy top
The clouds in fleecy mantles fold,
Projecting over the briny foam
An awful shadow, where the might
Of Neptune urges either shore,
And this contracted isthmus forms:
Ah! why your glories to admire
Do we repining Colchians stand,
Ill-fated strangers! on the banks
Of silver-water'd Phasis born.

A PHAEACIAN. [TROCHAICS.] Pride of art, majestic columns,
Which beneath the sacred weight
Of that god's refulgent mansion
Lift your flow'r-insculptur'd heads;
Oh! ye marble-channell'd fountains,
Which the swarming city cool,
And, as art directs your murmurs,
Warble your obedient rills:
You our eyes obscured by sorrow
View unconscious of your grace,
Mourning still our lost Phaeacia,
Long-remember'd, native isle.

A PHAEACIAN. [IAMBICS.] O that on famed Peneus' banks
The nymphs of Pelion had bemoaned
Their shady haunts to ashes turned
By heaven's red anger! hateful pines,
Which formed thy well-compacted sides,
O Argo fatal to our peace.
Thou never then through Adria's wave
Had reached Phaeacia's blissful shore,
Nor good Alcinous the hand
Of Jason with Medea joined,
Nor sent us weeping from our homes,
Her luckless train, to share her grief.

SECOND PART.
A PHAEACIAN. [TROCHAICS.] Known recesses, where the echoes
Through the hollow-winding vale,
And the hill's retentive caverns
Tuned their voices from our songs;
Shade-encircled, verdant levels,
Where the downy turf might charm
Weary feet to joyous dances
Mixed with madrigals and pipes:
O ye unforgotten pleasures,
Pleasures of our tender youth,
You we never shall revisit,
Ill-exchang'd for scenes of woe.

A COLCHIAN. From the polished realms of Greece,
Where the arts and muses reign,
Truth and justice are expelled.
Here from palaces and towers
Snowy-vested faith is fled;
While beneath the shining roofs
Falsehood stalks in golden robes.
Dreary Caucasus! again
Take us to thy frozen breast;
Let us shiver on thy ridge,
Ever-during pile of ice
Gathered from the birth of time!

A PHAEACIAN. Cheering breeze with sportive pinion
Gliding over the crisped main,
With our tresses thou shall wanton
On our native sands no more.
Fountains, whose melodious waters,
Cooling our Phaeacian grots,
Often our eyes to sweetest slumber
With their lulling falls beguiled;
We have changed your soothing warble
For the doleful moan of woe,
And our peaceful moss deserting
Found a pillow thorn'd with care.

END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT THE SECOND.
SCENE THE FIRST.
JASON advancing from the end of the stage, THEANO on one side, MEDEA in the
grove. THEANO. THE princely steps of Jason are in sight.
He scarce conjectures, that the indignant breast
Of her, he injures, pours from yonder shades
Its high-ton'd anguish. Yet, illustrious false one,
What stinging thoughts distort thy manly frame!
How have thy gestures lost their wonted grace
In this keen struggle with upbraiding conscience!
Thou soon before that inward judge arraigned
Shall hear me plead thy wronged Medea's cause.
This is the crisis -- Too complacent hero,
By pride untutored, though misled by error,
Thou will be calm and gentle to rebuke.

JASON. Pressed by a father's absolute decree,
Solicited by Corinth's potent lord,
Awed with the specious sound of public good,
I have consented, and the hour is nigh.
Oh! in some future hour of sad reflection
May not my heart with self-reproach confess,
This plea of public welfare was ambition;
And filial duty was a feeble tie
To authorize the breach of sacred vows.

MEDEA in the grove. Ungrateful Jason!

JASON. Whence proceeds this voice?

MEDEA in the grove. O fire of light, thou see my wrongs.

JASON. Again?
Imagination pregnant with remorse
In sounds unreal yields its birth of terror.

MEDEA in the grove. Ye arbiters of oaths, and plighted faith,
O Jove and Themis, hear!

JASON. It is a voice!
Resembling hers, when she alas! is far,
No mockery of fancy.
Leans against the scene.
THEANO advancing. On his cheek
Health seems to wither. Over his shaded sight
The shivering eyelids close. A creeping tremor
O'erspreads his fading lips, and dewy limbs.
Blessed be these signals of returning virtue.
Hail! prince. Why stand'st thou listening? What alarms thee?

JASON. An awful murmur from offended heaven
Through yonder branches issued in a voice,
Which chilled my spirit, and unnerv'd my strength.

THEANO. What did thou hear?

JASON. Medea's well-known accents
Thrice did the vocal prodigy repeat,
Though seas divide her from these faithless arms.

THEANO. There is no need of prodigy. Mere nature
In thy own breast will startle, when thou know,
It was Medea's self, who called on Jason.

JASON. Herself?

THEANO. The injured daughter of Aeetes,
But newly-wafted from Thessalia's shore,
Thou may discover through those parting boughs;
Where she is seated near the fountain's brink
With her pale cheek reclining on the altar.

JASON looking on the grove. Stern deities of vengeance, and of justice!
Now pass your sentence, Nemesis and Themis!
My ill-wrought web of hated life unravel,
Which was not wove for happiness.

THEANO. Be patient.

JASON. Peculiar woes through every stage of being
Were Jason's portion. Early I beheld
My father's crown usurped. My youth subjected
To an insidious tyrant was devoted
A sacrifice in Colchis -- So he hoped,
And I wish now! -- I triumphed -- Glory followed,
The source of new calamity to me.
Where is that glory? Serving selfish kings,
Abetting falsehood, perjury and fraud.

THEANO. Turn thy attention from thy own distress
To feel, what others suffer by thy frailty,
Thy wife and offspring. Listen.

JASON. I obey.

THEANO. How could thou lead this all-excelling princess
From clime to clime, the associate in thy toils,
To fall the victim in a foreign land
Of those unrighteous statutes, which appoint
Imperious husbands masters of divorce;
How think, the established practice of the Greeks,
Or all, which varnished policy might plead,
Could ever absolve thee from a solemn tie
With such uncommon obligations bound
By those superior, those unwritten laws,
Which honor whispers to the conscious heart?

JASON. O venerable woman, lend thy aid.

THEANO. Atone thy fault. Repentance is heroic,
And holds its rank among the manly virtues.

JASON. Yes, I renounce Creusa, and her kingdom.
Yet see this breast with newborn terror beat.
Not all my trials through unnumber'd dangers
From monsters, famine, from the raging deep,
And dark-brow'd care have so confirmed my courage,
But that I tremble at the impending conflict.
I dread that scorn and fury, whose excess
May kill repentance, and provoke destruction.

SCENE THE SECOND.
THEANO, JASON and LYCANDER LYCANDER. The king, Theano, summons thee before him.

THEANO. What time?

LYCANDER. This instant.

THEANO. I obey his pleasure.

JASON. Thou will not leave me.

THEANO. Thou have heard this summons.
Heed my last words. Maintain thy just resolves.
Lycander, let thy conduct leave no room
For my reproaches, and the wrath of Juno.

LYCANDER. Fear not; thy counsels shall be treasured here.

SCENE THE THIRD.
JASON and LYCANDER. LYCANDER. I see a sudden change. My single charge
I will deliver, and forbear enquiry.
Long have I sought thee, prince. The royal Aeson
Is now in Corinth, and will soon accost thee.

JASON. My father here? Why, multiply distress,
Accumulate perplexity and shame
On my devoted head, ye righteous powers!

LYCANDER. Prince, he is near; and I return to Creon.

SCENE THE FOURTH.
JASON and AESON. JASON. Amazed, distracted, tortured, I retain
My veneration here. O sacred head,
What from thy peaceful habitation calls
Thy silver hairs to these abodes of woe?
Or come thou wrapped in sable to lament
Our mutual errors, and dishonored names?

AESON. Why I am here, why bearing this apparel,
Too soon will Jason know. But first reply;
Why on the sea's waste margin was my son
Observed to trace his solitary path;
When Corinth pauses in her general gladness,
Her choral songs and minstrelsy suspending
For Jason's absence?

JASON. Better she should wait,
Whole ages wait, than justice be suspended,
And the return of honor be unwelcom'd.

AESON. Can I interpret these mysterious words?

JASON. Have thou not heard, my father, that Medea
Weeps in that bower, invoking Jove and Themis
To witness what returns, she meets from Jason?

AESON. What most I dreaded. Then my aged limbs
Must wear these garments still unchanged, thy country,
Thy friends, thy father's house unceasing mourn.
The woes of exile more severe, than time,
Indent the surrows deeper on these brows*

JASON. The woes of exile?

AESON. Yes, the race of Pelias
Force me to Corinth. Young Acastus reigns.
The generous Creon promises his aid;
That aid will Jason cruelly prohibit?

JASON. Then we begin to reap the bitter harvest
From seeds, which selfish policy had sown.
When I was hurried to these fatal walls,
And, galled with jealous fear, Medea left thee;
Heaven in that period from the roll of fortune
Eras'd our titles, and the withering scepter
Shrunk from thy grasp.

AESON. Nay look not thus entranced.
What draws thy eye?

JASON. She rises from the grove,
A Sun disfigured by a mist of sorrow
Raised from our crime. Awake thee -- What remains,
But that we fall before our known protectress,
Confessing both in Jove's offended sight,
How much of weak inconstancy has stained
My name of hero, what ignoble guile
Disgraced thy regal head?

AESON. And who must save
Iolcos?

JASON. She. Medea's generous wisdom,
Which in itself contains the strength of armies,
And quelled old Pelias, can dethrone the son.

AESON. What frenzy guides thee? Follow me to Creon.

JASON. Rest thou with me.

AESON. Inhuman! do thou covet
To see my age and dignity reviled?
I charge thee, follow.

JASON. Riveted, I wait,
As if congenial with this rock I grew
From its foundations, till Medea come.

AESON. Revolter! she is coming -- But my eye
Shall not be far. Remember, thou do hazard
Thy country's love, perhaps thy father's too.

SCENE THE FIFTH.
JASON apart, MEDEA, COLCHIANS and PHAEACIANS. JASON. How shall I face her
injured worth, how choose
The most auspicious moment to accost her?

MEDEA. Why have I science to command the moon,
To draw the spirits from the realms of night,
And trace the hidden powers of baneful nature?
Why am I wise, unless to feel my sorrows
With sharper sensibility, and prove,
How weak is wisdom struggling with despair?

FIRST COLCHIAN. Its succor yet solicit. Wisdom smooths
Each thorny path, and Virtue is her sister.

MEDEA. Old man, be silent. Has Medea's grief
The leisure now to hear thy moral tale?
No, let me loath my being, curse the sun,
My bright forefather, and upbraid the heavens,
That I was ever born. I will exclaim;
I will demand, ye unrelenting powers,
Why your injustice terrifies the earth
With such an image of distress, as mine.

JASON. This interview I see in all its terrors;
But further pause will turn suspense to madness.
Medea -- I am come....

MEDEA. And dare thou come
With that unmatched ingratitude and falsehood
To face the constant worth, thou now betray'st?

JASON. I come to lay my errors in thy view.

MEDEA. No, to my view display Creusa's beauty;
Dwell on her merit, who excels Medea.

JASON. The deity presiding over that temple
I call to witness, that my father's pleasure....

MEDEA. And do thou urge thy father, thou perfidious?
Thy father! -- Oh! that I had been thus wise,
And never forgot the duty of a child.
Thy father gave thee a precarious being,
In its first flight of glory doomed to fall
Fresh in its prime a victim to oblivion,
Had not I saved and borne thee to renown.

JASON. Yes, Jason's life and glory are thy gifts.

MEDEA. I gave thee too my love, my virgin love,
My friends, my country, my unspotted fame,
My joy, my peace, all, all on thee bestowed;
What could a father more? Him too my power
Snatched from oppression, and his trech'rous brother,
Usurping Pelias slew, that cruel Pelias,
Who on thy youth imposed the dangerous toil,
Whence I preserved thee -- But, my wrath, be still.
Inconstant, base alike, both son and sire
Deserve my scorn.

JASON. Shall contumelious harshness
Blot those perfections from the sun derived,
And not one moment to thy wisdom yield,
That thou may hear me?

MEDEA. No, thou most ingrate
Of all, who ever forgot their benefactors.
When the famed Argo fraught with Grecian princes
Pierced with its beak the sandy verge of Phasis,
What daring hand, but mine, their trophies raised?
The golden fleece amid the enchanted grove
Had hung untouched beside its scaly guardian;
Wild dogs and vultures had devoured your limbs;
Your bones had whitened on the Colchian strand.
I fearless stepped between the narrow bounds,
Which parted your devoted lives from fate,
With mystic spells entranced the sleepless dragon,
Bent to the yoke the brazen-footed bulls,
And gave you safety, victory and fame.

JASON. I own thy merits; and the deep remembrance...

MEDEA. Forever be detested that remembrance.
Cursed be the skill, which framed your fatal bark,
Accursed the gale, which filled her spreading canvas,
But doubly cursed the hour, the hour of ruin,
When first I viewed that smiling, trech'rous form,
And fondly trusted to the fair delusion.
O that amid the terrors of enchantment,
When for thy sake profoundest hell was opened,
Some fiend had whirled me to the desert pole;
Or that the earth dividing with my charms
Low, as her central cavern, had entombed me.

JASON. I feel thy anguish, daughter of Aeetes,
Which would overwhelm me, had I less to offer,
Than my repentant heart.

MEDEA. Thy perjured heart
Foul with ingratitude and guilt. Avaunt,
And give it thy Creusa; I despise thee.

JASON. Think, who I am. Though criminal I stand
And mourn my fault, forget not, I am Jason
By fame in brightest characters recorded.
Deserving thy reproaches, I endured them;
But sure the luster of my name is proof
Against contempt.

MEDEA. The recompense of falsehood.

JASON. Hold, I conjure thee! -- Nay, I will be heard.
When first I sailed for Corinth, all my purpose
Was to establish by a league with Creon
The unstable throne of Thessaly, since crushed
By fierce Acastus. Aeson's strict injunction
To wed Creusa followed my arrival;
When thou were distant from my sight, and Creon
Would grant his friendship.....

MEDEA. But by thy disgrace.

JASON, Impatient woman!

MEDEA. Could a king's protection
Be ranked with mine, thou weakly-perjur'd man?

JASON. Thou shall not stop me by the immortal gods!
I will proceed -- Intemp'rate passion stifles
Her breathless voice -- Oh! majesty! Oh! wisdom!
Oh! features once divine! how long shall rage
Despoil your grace? No other form of beauty,
No qualities, or talents to thy own
Have I preferred. By empire's glaring bubble,
By policy's ensnaring voice misled,
Or by mistaken duty to a parent,
I swerved from sacred faith. At thy approach
Light flashes through my error; to thy feet
Contrition brings me no ignoble suppliant:
The scourge of tyrants, vanquisher of monsters,
Thy instrument of glory now most glorious,
That he subdues himself, implores thy pardon.
Oh! unadvised! -- Obdurate! -- While I sue,
Thy unforgiving brow returns disdain.
Think of thy children!

MEDEA. Traitor, dare thou name them?

JASON. Beware; destruction with a hunter's speed
Pursues us both. Inextricable snares
Are spreading round us -- Ha! be calm -- Provoke
Ill fate no further -- Weigh in wisdom's balance
The powerful obligations, which assailed me.

MEDEA. Can they be weighed with conquest, life and fame,
The vast profusion of my bounty on thee,
Thou weak, thou blind, insensible and base?
No, my superior soul shall stoop no more.
Though once from foul defeat and death I saved thee,
I will not raise thee from thy groveling falsehood.
Let fortune's whole malignity pursue me,
I and my children wretched, as we may be,
Outcast, derided by the barbarous herd,
Spurned by the unpitying proud, with grim despair,
With beggary and famine our companions
Will wander through the inhospitable world,
Nor even amidst our complicated woes
Ever think of thee, perfidious, but with scorn.

SCENE THE SIXTH.
JASON and AESON. JASON. Then let the tempest roar, tyrannic woman,
The billows rise in mountains over thy head.

AESON. Well, thou have seen her; while thy father's eye
Ak'd at the low submission of a hero,
Who with unmollify'd disdain was spurned.
Say, will my gentle son persist to court
The fellowship of fury, and abide
The acrimonious taunt, the settled frown,
The still-renew'd upbraiding? Will my Jason
For this to deathless obloquy abandon
His name of hero, while his arm rejects
A proffered aid to reinstate his father,
Redeem his country, and refresh his laurels
With want of action fading?

JASON. There, O Mars,
Thou do provide a banquet for despair.

AESON. No, for thy valor, son, a feast of glory.
Come, leave this melancholy spot. Return
With me to joy.

JASON. I go -- but never more
Speak to thy son of joy. My soul foregoes
All gentle thoughts. Its sad relief is horror
From the grim power of homicide and ravage.
O that this evening, lighted by the stars,
And glimpse of armor, I might turn my back
On Corinth's bulwarks; that the trumpet's clangor,
The shrill-mouth'd clarion, and the deep-ton'd horn,
The groans of slaughter, and the crash of spears
Might blend their discord for my nuptial song.

SCENE THE SEVENTH.
COLCHIANS and PHAEACIANS from the grove, and looking on JASON, as he quits the
stage. A COLCHIAN. [Solemn RECITATIVE.] Thou, who did yoke the brazen-footed
bulls,
And fearless guide the adamantine plough,
Which Vulcan labored, over the direful soil
Sown with the serpent's teeth, whence crested helms,
And spears high-brandish'd by the earth-born race
For thy encounter pierced the crumbling mold;
Thou conqueror, beware: more dangerous foes
Doomed to subdue thee in that palace wait.

A PHAEACIAN. [TROCHAICS.] Soft, alluring wiles are there
To seduce thee from the paths
Trod by godlike steps alone,
Paths of virtue, paths of praise.
Colchian monsters, Syren's songs
Might thy mortal frame destroy;
These will kill thy glorious name,
Matchless Jason, then beware.

A COLCHIAN. [Solemn RECITATIVE.] Thou yet untainted hero, Ah! reflect,
That keenest sorrow, poverty, or pain
Are light and gentle to the bitter darts
Thrice steeped in gall, which Nemesis directs
Against his bosom, who by merit passed
Once drew the enchanting melody of praise,
Then forfeiting the sweet report of fame
Over his irrevocable loss repines.

A PHAEACIAN. [TROCHAICS.] Shall the nymphs of Tempe's vale,
Who in rural lays record
Thy persuasive love, that won
Kind Medea to thy aid,
Shall they change the applauding strain?
Shall the discord of reproach
Wound thy ear accustomed long
To the music of renown?

END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT THE THIRD.
SCENE THE FIRST.
THEANO and the FIRST COLCHIAN. FIRST COLCHIAN. HOPE in its bud was blasted by
her anger.

THEANO. Unhappy anger! but her wrongs are great;
Nor is my pity less. Instruct me, Colchian,
Was she not famed for hospitable deeds?

FIRST COLCHIAN. Often has her known benignity preserved
The Grecian strangers on our barbarous coast.

THEANO. Yet now a Grecian prince denies her shelter.
Well, introduce me to her.

FIRST COLCHIAN. Restless anguish
Will soon transport her hither. Look, she comes.
Here let us watch some interval of calmness.

THEANO. Are those her children?

FIRST COLCHIAN. Yes, from Jason sprung.

THEANO. They too with intermingling tears enhance
The piteous scene. Thou fair and stately tree,
Who once so proudly did o'ertop the forest,
What cruel hand despoils thee of thy honors?
Now do thou show, as blasted by the lightning,
With all thy tender branches withering round.

SCENE THE SECOND.
THEANO and the FIRST COLCHIAN apart. MEDEA, her TWO CHILDREN, COLCHIANS and
PHAEACIANS. ELDEST CHILD. Why fly'st thou from us? Wherefore do thou frown,
Whenever we name, or ask to see our father?

MEDEA. You have no father.

ELDEST CHILD. When we left Iolcos,
Did thou not tell us, he was here in Corinth?
Now we have passed the frightful sea, what hinders,
But we may find him?

MEDEA. Never find him more
To you a parent, or to me a husband.

ELDEST CHILD. Alas! thou weep'st.

MEDEA. You too must learn to weep,
Ye destined wand'rers in the vale of mourning.
Why do you lift your infant eyes to me?
Your helpless mother cannot guard your childhood,
Nor bid neglect and sorrow stand aloof.
I once had parents -- Ye endearing names!
How my torn heart with recollection bleeds!
You too perhaps overflow your aged cheeks,
Rend from your heads the venerable snow
Often, as your lost Medea is recalled,
And for a hapless offspring mourn like me.

FIRST COLCHIAN. Heartbreaking sorrow now succeeds to rage.
Turn, royal mistress; see the holy priestess.

MEDEA. Hail! most humane.

THEANO. To Juno render praise.

MEDEA. She owes me refuge. Prompted first by Juno,
I left my native Phasis, and conveyed
Back to her favored clime the golden fleece.
Thy part was all humanity.

THEANO. Sage princess,
Hear me divulge the menaces of Creon
To drive thee hence. Expect his presence soon.
Fear not his anger. Warranted by Juno,
By my high function, by my nature more,
I gave thee, I continue my protection.

MEDEA. Turn to these infants thy benignant looks.
Them to secure from trouble and the terrors,
Which gather closely on the steps of time,
Is all their mother's care; at whose entreaty
Do thou receive their innocence in charge:
But leave Medea to her own protection.

ELDEST CHILD. Our father long has left us. By thy side,
And in thy bosom we had comfort still.
Will thou forsake us?

MEDEA. We will meet again.
Remove them from me. I can bear no longer
To view those mirrors, which reflect the image
Of my distress, and multiply my pains.

THEANO. Weep not, my children.

MEDEA. Hide their melting softness,
Lest they dissolve the vigor, which must save them.

MEDEA continues weeping. THEANO. Come, lovely mourners, rest awhile with me.
Come and be practiced to repeat your vows
For this most wronged of mothers. You shall lift
Your blameless hands, sweet supplicants, shall kneel
To nuptial Juno, and to reverend Themis,
The arbitress of oaths, and plighted faith.
The dove-like voice of your untainted age,
Thus visited by undeserved affliction,
May win their guardian mercy; when the prayers
Of man, false man grown reprobate by time
With all the pomp of hecatombs would fail.

SCENE THE THIRD.
MEDEA, COLCHIANS and PHAEACIANS. MEDEA. Are they withdrawn?

FIRST COLCHIAN. They are.

MEDEA. Then, mighty Spirit,
Once more at least thy majesty shall blaze
Such, as thou were amid th'enchanted wood;
When thou did summon hell's reluctant powers,
And hell obeyed: when dark'ning, from her car
The moon descended, and the knotted oak
Bent with thy charms, which tamed the wakeful dragon,
And safety gave to demigods and heroes.

FIRST COLCHIAN. Behold the king.

SCENE THE FOURTH.
MEDEA, COLCHIANS and PHAEACIANS, CREON, LYCANDER and attendants. MEDEA. Why
comes the king of Corinth
To break upon my sorrows, and to vaunt,
That his injustice is endu'd with power
To grieve Medea?

CREON. To debate, weak woman,
Is thy known province; to command is mine.
Be seen no longer in the bounds of Corinth.

MEDEA. And who art thou, do give Medea law,
And circumscribe the slend'rest spot on earth
Against her passage. Unconfined, as winds,
I range with nature to her utmost bounds;
While, as I tread, mankind reveres my steps,
Its hidden powers each element unfolds,
And mightiest heroes anxious for renown
Implore Medea's favor. What is Creon,
Who from the sun's descendant dares withold
The right to hospitality and justice?

CREON. Not of the number, who revere thy steps,
Or supplicate thy favor; one, whose scepter
Forbids thy residence in Greece. Away;
Range through the snows of Caucasus; return
To Pontic deserts, to thy native wilds:
Among barbarians magnify thy deeds.
This land admits no wanderer like Medea,
Who with a stranger from her father fled,
Fled from her country, and betrayed them both.

MEDEA. With him I fled, whom thou would foully draw
Through blackest treason to thy daughter's bed;
And for the rest, if equity, or wisdom
Were Creon's portion, I would plead before him:
But vindicate my actions to a robber,
Who basely watched my absence to purloin
My only wealth! my lofty soul disdains it.

CREON. Hence, while thou may, rash woman, ere thou prove,
How strong the awful image of the gods
Is stamped on monarchs, and thou feel my wrath
Swift in destruction like the bolt of Jove.

MEDEA. Do thou recount thy fables to Medea,
The idiot tale, which cheats the gaping vulgar,
To her, who knows the secret source of things?
Behold this comely image of the gods.
This violator of the holiest ties,
Whom the dull hand of undiscerning chance
Has decked in purple robes, and pageant gold,
Resembles much the majesty of heaven.

CREON. Thy bare expulsion shall not now atone.
I will stand forth the avenger of Aeetes
On his false daughter; for thy crimes in Colchis
Vindictive furies in this distant region,
Shame, chastisement and insult shall overtake thee,
Spoil that fair body, humble that fell heart;
Till, as with bitt'rest agony it breaks,
Thou curse its wild temerity, which braved
The ponderous hand of majesty incensed.

MEDEA. Ha! thou vain-boaster, have thou yet to learn,
That I can rock the iron throne of Pluto;
Can waft thee struggling to Rhiphaean crags,
Where thou shall rave and foam and gnash thy teeth;
Where frost shall parch thee, where the clouds shall scatter
Their storms around thee, whirl in sportive air
Thy gorgeous robe, thy diadem and scepter:
While I -- Oh! fruitless, unsubstantial power!
Must still continue wretched -- Oh! vain threat!
Has he not torn my Jason from these arms?
What then avails the knowledge of my mind?
Stretched on the rack of anguish is my heart.
What spark of wisdom in my breast remains?
All is extinguished there -- Oh! Jason! Jason!

Is supported by her women. CREON to LYCANDER. Thou see the haughty sorceress
abashed
Before a monarch's persevering frown.

LYCANDER aside. Most injured woman!

CREON. Go, transport her hence,
Ere she revive.

LYCANDER. The multitude already
Begins to murmur; were this holy place
Defiled by force, their zeal would swell to madness.
Perhaps this princess for her wisdom famed
May be persuaded to abandon Corinth.
And she revives with milder looks.

MEDEA aside. Pride, pride,
For once be wise; in lowliness disguise thee,
That thou may rise to vengeance. King of Corinth,
I only crave three hours to quit thy borders.

CREON to LYCANDER. If she exceed that slender space of time,
Force shall remove her from my loathing sight.

LYCANDER to MEDEA, while CREON is going. This contest, princess, thou have
wisely closed.
Three hours elapsed, expect me to return
Thy safe conductor to the kingdom's frontier.

SCENE THE FIFTH.
MEDEA, COLCHIANS and PHAEACIANS. FIRST COLCHIAN. Thou do not droop. This
tyrant's empty threats
Thy very breath could dissipate like clouds,
Which for awhile some hideous form assume,
Then pass away dissolved to fleeting vapor.
I too will aid thee. By thy father's sister
I was held dear, by Circe, powerful queen,
Who taught me various spells and incantations.

MEDEA. Go then, and bring my wand, that potent rod,
Which grew a branch of ebony o'ershading
The throne of Pluto; severed thence, and dipped
Thrice in the cold of Lethe's sleeping lake,
By Hecate on Circe was bestowed,
By her on me to still the winds and floods,
Night's drowsy curtains over the sky to draw,
And all its active fires entrance to rest.
Leave us apart. Retire, my faithful virgins,
Who share so kindly in Medea's woes.
I would not pierce your gentle hearts with terror.

SCENE THE SIXTH.
MEDEA and the FIRST COLCHIAN. MEDEA waving her wand. First rise, ye shades
impervious to the sight;
And you, ye sable-skirted clouds, descend:
Us and our mystic deeds with night surround.
The stage is darkened. [IAMBICS.] Thou, by whose power the magic song
Charms from its orb the unwilling moon,
Controlls the rapid planet's speed,
And dims the constellation's fires;
While sounding torrents stop and sleep,
While fountain-nymphs in dread withold
Their mazy tribute from the meads,
And stiff'ning serpents hear and die:
Terrific deity, whose name,
And altar stained with human blood
On Tauric cliffs the Scythian wild,
And fell Sarmatian tribes adore;
[TROCHAICS.] Wreathed in snakes, and twining boughs
Gathered from infernal oaks,
Which over Pluto's portal hung
Shed a second night on hell;
In thy raven-tinctur'd stole,
Grasping thy tremendous brand,
With thy howling train around,
Awful Hecate, ascend.

FIRST COLCHIAN. By the pitchy streams of Styx,
Lethe's mute and lazy flood,
By the deathful vapor sent
From Avernus' steaming pool;
By the eternal sigh, which heaves
With Cocytus' mournful wave,
By the Phlegethontic blaze,
Direful goddess, hear and rise.
[IAMBICS.] Or if, where discord late has heaped
Her bloody hecatombs to Mars,
Thou sweeping over the mangled slain
Do tinge thy feet in sanguin dew;
Ah! leave awhile the vultures shriek,
The raven croaking over the dead,
The midnight wolf's insatiate howl,
And hither turn thy solemn pace.
The winds in magic horror bound
Shall at thy presence cease to breathe,
No thunder-teeming cloud approach,
The hoarse and restless surge be dumb.

MEDEA. No more. The strong-constraining spell has tamed
The restif blast; the pliant leaves are fixed;
The fountains rest; the oblivious birds are hushed;
And dead the billows on the silent beach.
Begone -- She comes -- I feel the rocking ground.
Its entrails groan -- Its shivering surface parts.
Scarce can Aeetes' child the sight endure.

SCENE THE SEVENTH.
MEDEA, and HECATE rising in long, black garments, with a wreath of snakes, and
oaken boughs on her head, and a torch in her hand. MEDEA. O my propitious and
congenial goddess,
Who thy mysterious science have diffused
Of potent herbs, and necromantic songs
Through my capacious bosom, who so long
Have been assistant to Medea's triumphs,
Now thou behold'st me vanquished by despair.

HECATE. I know thy sufferings, daughter; but to close
The wounds of anguish, and assuage despair
Is not the task of hell.

MEDEA. Then give me vengeance.

HECATE. On whom?

MEDEA. Creusa? -- No? -- My high revenge
O'erleaps a trifling maid. Old Aeson -- No.
He is my hero's father. But for Creon.....

HECATE. The hour is nigh, when yonder flood will rage,
This rock be loosened, and its structures nod;
Then shall the fury, discord, and red zeal
Thrice steeped in Stygian fires avenge thy wrongs.
Farewell.

MEDEA. A moment stay -- My yielding heart
Must ask -- Will Jason ever more be kind.

HECATE. Search not thy fate.

MEDEA. Unfold it, I enjoin thee
By him, thou dread'st, by Demogorgon's name.

HECATE. Against thyself, unhappy, thou prevail'st.
Ere night's black wheels begin their gloomy course,
What, thou do love, shall perish by thy rage,
Nor thou be conscious, when the stroke is given;
Then a despairing wanderer must thou trace
The paths of sorrow in remotest climes.

SCENE THE EIGHTH.
MEDEA. Destroy my love! By me shall Jason die?
Oh! insupportable! O pitying Juno!
Assist me sinking to the ground with anguish.

SCENE THE NINTH.
MEDEA on the ground, COLCHIANS and PHAEACIANS. FIRST COLCHIAN entering. The
streaming purple of the western Sun
Glows on these towers and pinnacles again,
Prevailing over the darkness, which the wand
Of our sage mistress raised -- Dejecting sight!
Thy faithful servant can refrain no longer,
But tears must wash the furrows of his cheeks.

MEDEA. Ah! how much more my eyes should stream in torrents!
Ah! how much stronger should my bosom heave,
And sound its agonies in bitter groans
To the remorseless gods! Destroy my Jason!
Starting up. The dear, false hero! Perish first my art.

FIRST PHAEACIAN. How often have perjured lovers been recalled
By strong enchantment? Check these vain complaints.
Have thou not magic to constrain this wanderer
Back to thy arms?

MEDEA. I have, but scorn the arts,
Which may command his person, not his love.
No, fly to Jason. Let the only charm
Be soft persuasion to attract him hither.
O he is gentle, as the summer's breeze,
With looks and gestures fashioned by the graces.
The messenger be thou, discreet and good.
Medea's pride shall stoop.

FIRST COLCHIAN. I go -- though hopeless.
Aside.
MEDEA. Mean time will I to yonder wood return,
And some deep-shaded receptacle choose.
There, wrapped in darkness, shall my suffering soul
The sense of all its injuries disburthen
In secret murmurs, till its rage be spent.

SCENE THE TENTH.
COLCHIANS and PHAEACIANS. A COLCHIAN. [CRETICS.] Native floods rough with ice,
Rushing down mountain-sides,
Whirling thence broken rocks;
[TROCHAICS.] Your discordant waves, that sweep
Harshly over their flinty beds,
Yield a more alluring sound,
Than the gently-trilling notes
Of the tender Grecian lyre,
Or the swelling strain diffused
From the music-breathing flute.
[CRETICS.] Native groves hoar with frost,
Caverns deep filled with night,
Shagged clifts, horror's seat;
[TROCHAICS.] Oh! to these desiring eyes
Lovely is your gloom, which lives
In remembrance ever dear.
You are brighter, than my thoughts,
Which despondency o'erclouds,
And in these perfidious climes
Expectation cheats no more.

A PHAEACIAN. [CRETICS.] Torrents swel, tempests rage,
Danger frowns, pain devours,
Grief consumes, man betrays;
[TROCHAICS.] Such our doom in every clime:
Yet among the thorns of life
Hope attends to scatter flowers;
And Credulity, her child,
Still with kind imposture smooths
Heaving trouble, and imparts
Moments, which suspend despair.
[CRETICS.] Goddess bland, soothing hope,
In thy smile I confide,
And believe, Jason comes.
[TROCHAICS.] All, I see, delights my eye;
Every found enchants my ear;
Those rude-featur'd crags are gay;
Turning to the sea. Winds in notes harmonious blow;
Hoarsest billows murmur joy;
And my long-forsaken home
Wakes the plaintive muse no more.

END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT THE FOURTH.
SCENE THE FIRST.
JASON and the FIRST COLCHIAN. JASON. WHY am I summoned?

FIRST COLCHIAN. But once more to greet her.

JASON. And be the mark of scorn.

FIRST COLCHIAN. Remind thee, hero,
Of all thy generous labors never denied,
But often repeated to restore the wretched.
Shall thy distressed Medea be the first,
Thou do refuse to aid?

JASON. It is too late.
She cast me from her, and we now are strangers.

FIRST COLCHIAN. I have been long a traveller with time,
And through unnumber'd evils have I noted
Those born of anger to be most deplored.
Thou look no longer on that mutual care,
Your children's welfare. In the wrathful Jason
Benignity is lost, even nature dead
In the fond father.

JASON. When I named our children,
Her ear was deafen'd, and her scornful tongue
Was sharpened into outrage.

FIRST COLCHIAN. See them here,
The lively patterns of their mother's graces,
And sharers in misfortune.

SCENE THE SECOND.
JASON, the FIRST COLCHIAN and the CHILDREN. ELDEST CHILD. Art thou found
At last, my father? In thy search we passed
Through frightful waters, and in roaring winds.
Come to our mother, who of thee complains;
And with a promise never more to leave us
Speak comfort to her.

JASON. Comfort!

FIRST COLCHIAN. Do thou shrink
To see these pledges of a love like hers?
Oh! thou obdurate, who have thrown the beauties
Of virtue from thee in thy youthful season,
When every soft sensation is most warm,
To clasp the cold deformity of guilt!
I have no offspring -- Must an old man's eyes
Teach thine their tender lesson? Must a heart,
Which time and ills and care might well have feared,
Teach thee affection, and a parent's feeling?

JASON. Support me rather, than depress me, Colchian.
I sink -- My soul dissolving in affection
Has quite unmann'd me.

ELDEST CHILD. Do thou grieve to see us?

JASON. No, my poor boys. My spirit bows before you
In love and reverence. These indeed subsist
A common care exacting all regard.
What shall I say -- Not cruel would I seem,
Not even severe -- Yet, Colchian, let me ask?
Will she....

FIRST COLCHIAN. Command her; she is all submission.

JASON. Amid the woes of separating parents
Who like the father can protect the offspring?
Will she commit them to my charge, that comfort,
Prosperity and honor be their portion?

ELDEST CHILD. Ah! do not take us from our mother's arms.

YOUNGEST CHILD. From our kind mother. Leave us.

ELDEST CHILD. Leave us here
To weep with her.

JASON. How constant are these children!
But they were never harrass'd by her scorn.

SCENE THE THIRD.
JASON, the CHILDREN, MEDEA, COLCHIANS and PHAEACIANS. MEDEA stopping short.
The man, who knew, and yet despised my worth,
I see before me -- Still, thou restif heart,
Still do thou rise tumultuous in my bosom?
Oh! thou must bend.

JASON. Well, daughter of Aeetes;
Lo! I am here obedient to thy call.

MEDEA. Once was the time, when Jason would have come
Uncalled, unprompted, but by love alone.
Why do I bring the wasted glass of joy
Back to my view! -- Oh! torture of remembrance!
Oh! Jason! Jason!

JASON. Speak.

MEDEA. I cannot speak.

JASON aside. My spirit yields -- this mute distress o'erwhelms me.

MEDEA. Is it decreed to separate thy name
From mine for ever. -- First to all restore me,
Which I relinquished for thee, to my country,
The veneration, which that country paid me,
My injured parents, and their lost affection.
To my untainted, virgin fame restore me,
My once untroubled, unreproaching thoughts.
Impossible -- Then hear, and yet be just.

JASON aside. Oh! that this morning she had thus addressed me!

MEDEA. Not love alone, not Hymen's common ties,
But fame and conquest, mutual toils and hardships,
All, which is mavelous and great, conspired
To make us one. What stars in distant skies,
What seas, what shores unvisited before
Have we not seen together? And what perils
Could each inhospitable clime present,
From which Medea has not saved her Jason?
Our toils at length surmounted, must we part?
My lord -- My husband -- Father of these boys!
Shame, anguish, desperation rush upon me!
They bind my heart in adamantine woes!
They weigh me down -- They bear me to the earth.
Kneeling with the children. Thus low behold the issue of the sun
Imploring pity of the man, who scorned her.

JASON. Can thou, O Juno, from thy neighboring temple
View this illustrious suff'rer at my feet,
Nor swift destruction from thy altar shower
On my perfidious head? Why rather, goddess,
Who have thy thunder like thy husband, Jove,
Did thou not blast me, when, by furies guided,
I ratified but now the unhallowed contract.

MEDEA rising. What have thou said?

JASON. Creusa -- is my wife.
He starts at Medea's looks, then fixes his eyes steadfastly upon her, and after
some time proceeds. Medea -- Ha! Have sense and motion left her?
Her color dies, which once outshone the morn.
Those radiant eyes, whose majesty proclaimed
The sun's own progeny, withdraw their luster.
Oh! thou most injured, utter thy complaints;
Give words to anger, and to sorrow tears.

MEDEA. Astonishment! What prodigy is there?
Look yonder.

FIRST COLCHIAN. Go -- go, children, to the temple;
Avoid this sight.

The children are led off by a Phaeacian to the temple. MEDEA. What wonderful
appearance
Floats on the main, and stems the lofty surge?

JASON. O execrable perfidy! which fills
The loveliest eyes with tears, the noblest heart
With pangs, the most enlightened mind with madness.

MEDEA. See, where yon snowy concave in its bosom
Collecting all the motion of the winds
Drives the huge burden to the affrighted shore.

JASON. O had the flood, she sees in frantic thought,
Ingulph'd that bark!

MEDEA advancing toward him. What art thou, most presumptuous,
Who dare approach the limits of this region?
Have thou not heard, that bulls with brazen feet,
And sleepless dragons guard the fatal soil?
He hears unterrify'd -- I never beheld
Such majesty and grace.

JASON. Debased, deformed
By guilt's polluting hand!

MEDEA. He speaks -- What music!
He claims the golden fleece -- What means this warmth,
Which prompts my hand to give the radiant prize?
But will thou prove then constant -- ever kind?
I must, I will believe thee.

FIRST COLCHIAN. What remorse,
What consternation petrify his frame!
And she grows wilder.

MEDEA. Hark. With flaming throats
The bulls begin to roar. The forest trembles.
And see, the dragon hither points his course.
See, his huge pinions beat the tortured air.
His monstrous body rolls the blast before him,
And sails amidst a whirlwind. Do thou droop?
Be not dismayed, my hero. Stand behind.
Attend, ye demons, whose contagious breath
Defiles the sun, who chill the fiercest heart,
And lock in drowsy sloth the nerves of strength.

JASON. Assume thy terrors -- Moulder me to dust.
Now call thy demons, whose infernal grasp
May snatch and hurl me to my destined pains.
Let me be stretched on torn Ixion's wheel,
Or chained in burning adamant endure
The tooth of vipers, and the scorpion's sting;
Oh! rather, rather, than behold thy sufferings.

MEDEA. Why art thou pale and languid? Thou art safe.
The slumbering monster drops his scaly wings.
Thine is the fleece -- Medea too is thine.
Jason throws himself back, and is received by the Colchians. Confusion and
amazement! -- Is he vanished?
Where am I? -- On a rock, a desert cliff,
Which overhangs the unfrequented waves;
No plant, but moss, to hide its craggy sides;
No shelter nigh my tempest-beaten head:
And lo! two infants clinging to my knees,
Who join my grief, and call Medea mother.
O thou false hero, whither art thou fled?
Hark -- The wind only answers my complaint,
It is the sea, which murmurs to my groans.
Ha! what art thou, grim shape embru'd with gore?
Why do thou wave that Stygian torch around?
Art thou Revenge from Tartarus enlarged
To aid Medea? Come then, shake thy brand
Before my steps. To perpetrate thy mischief
The winds shall lend their swiftness, hell its fiends,
The sea its fury, and the Sun his flames.

SCENE THE FOURTH.
JASON and the FIRST COLCHIAN. FIRST COLCHIAN. Resume thy courage.

JASON. Yes, my soul emerges
From dark confusion, now she knows the worst.
My sight is cleared, my enterprise resolved,
And hope enlarges my adventurous spirit.

FIRST COLCHIAN. I hear in wonder, prince. At least prepare thee
To guard Medea in her new distress,
Whom Creon threatens to expel.

JASON. The priestess
Will be her safeguard, till.....

FIRST COLCHIAN. Restrain thy speech,
And look behind thee. He is sent from Creon
To drive her hence.

SCENE THE FIFTH.
JASON, the FIRST COLCHIAN and LYCANDER. JASON. Lycander!

LYCANDER. Prince, allow me
With this old Colchian to confer a moment.

FIRST COLCHIAN. Nay, speak aloud.

LYCANDER. Thou know my errand, Colchian.

FIRST COLCHIAN. Yes, if our princess willingly depart not,
Thou will by force remove her.

JASON. Base and impious!
Now should these hands, which yoked the brazen bulls,
Divide thy limbs, and hurl the mangled fragments
From yonder promontory's brow to feast
The scaly monsters in the flood below,
It were a righteous sacrifice to justice:
But thou art brother to the good Theano.

LYCANDER. Whom thou do wrong in me. By her consent,
And on Medea's promise to depart,
I came to guide her with respectful care
To Corinth's verge. Compassion for this princess,
Dread of the king, and reverence for the goddess,
With all thy changes, prince, perplex my course;
That through the maze of this eventful day
I never shall tread securely.

JASON. Nay, Lycander,
If thou art blameless....

LYCANDER. Stop. The king is here
To widen this confusion.

SCENE THE SIXTH.
JASON, the FIRST COLCHIAN, LYCANDER, CREON and attendants. CREON entering. I am
told,
That with a pensive mien he left the place,
And joined a Colchian of Medea's train.
Gods! he is here -- disordered -- with Lycander
And that old stranger -- all in sullen silence
At my appearance -- Jason -- He replies not.
What are your consultations? Speak, Lycander

LYCANDER. My liege, I cannot, uninform'd like thee.

CREON. Then, as a king and father, I demand
Of thee, Thessalian hero, why, confused
At my approach, thy countenance is fallen?

JASON. At thy approach? More formidable powers
Could never awe this heart, which naught has vanquished,
But its own frailties.

CREON. Visions.

JASON. Hear with patience.
The tutelary deity of Corinth
Sits here in awful judgment. Virtue pleads,
And pity weeps before her. Thou and I
At this tribunal show our guilty heads.
Long have we slumber'd on the couch of folly;
Let us awaken from the cheating dream,
Nor each rebuke the other for his weakness,
But acquiesce in Juno's just decree.
I must annul my contract with thy daughter,
And bid her now eternally farewell.

CREON. Eternally farewell? I dream -- Lycander,
Is not Medea gone?

LYCANDER. My lord, the time....

CREON. Inactive traitor! Go and seize that fiend.

JASON to CREON. Hold. Thou esteem'st me still the gentle Jason,
The pliant vassal of my father's will,
And thy ambition. I am changed -- My heart
Is full of tumult -- New-created rage,
Rage at myself, at Aeson too and thee
Now ravages my bosom -- Then be counseled,
Nor tempt the wild, ungovernable transports
Of one distempered with a foul assemblage
Of guilt, despair and shame.

CREON. Presumptuous boy!
Do thy exploits by sorcery achieved,
Do thy rude trophies from barbarians won
Exalt thy pride to brave a Grecian monarch?
When now, from all inheritance expelled,
A needy exile, thou have no support,
But from my throne, whose patronage is granted
To thy imploring father.

JASON. I reject it,
And own no patron, but my sword and name.
Can I want aid, the argonautic leader?
While Hercules, while Telamon and Peleus,
While sacred Orpheus, and the twins of Leda
Remain unconquered to assert my cause.
Why do I measure folly back to folly,
And here degrade my honors and renown
With boasts resembling thine? Farewell forever.

SCENE THE SEVENTH.
LYCANDER, CREON and attendants. CREON. Ha! I perceive his purpose. Haste,
collect
To one of his attendants. A faithful band; secure Medea's vessel.
Ye blackest demons of resentment, rise;
March by my side, and brandish you my scepter.
To another of his attendants. Thou shut the city-gates. Let none depart
Without my license. I will hold him still,
And cast him prostrate at Creusa's feet.

SCENE THE EIGHTH.
LYCANDER, CREON, attendants and THEANO. THEANO. I heard thy threatening voice,
O blindly fixed
In disobedience to the queen of gods.

CREON. Dare thou, sole authress of thy sov'reign's ills,
Confront his anger? First on thee, confed'rate
To Lycander. With this rebellious, shall my vengeance fall.
By thy designed misconduct Jason twice
Has seen Medea.

LYCANDER. Chance, or heaven's appointment,
Not my contrivance....

CREON. Seize and drag him hence;
Low in a dungeon hide him; chain him down
In damps and darkness.

LYCANDER. Citizens of Corinth,
This place is holy. In the name of Juno
I claim protection.

THEANO. Universal reverence
From your forefathers at the birth of Corinth
Has guarded still the inviolable grove.

CREON. Do ye recoil, ye cowards? Rebel, traitor,
I will assemble those, shall force this refuge,
The seat of priestly craft to aid sedition;
When thou in torture shall atone thy crime.

THEANO. Once more I warn thee to revere a goddess.

CREON. No, I revere a god, the god of thunders.
Jove, thou did toil for empire; so shall Creon,
And show the earth a pattern of thy sway.
For empire thou thy father did dethrone,
Thy Titan kindred plunge in deepest hell.
The giant lancing from his hundred hands
A hundred rocks to shake the Olympian towers
Thou did with labor vanquish. Shall these shades*
Which awe the vulgar, shall the ready prey
To every firebrand, or the woodman's ax
Obstruct a king? No, insolent revolters,
Soon shall you see me lift the bloody scourge
Of chastisement, unsheathe the sword of havoc,
And vindicate my glory.

THEANO. Impious man!

SCENE THE NINTH.
LYCANDER and THEANO. THEANO. Do thou consult thy safety.

LYCANDER. Be not anxious.
The king's own rashness shall secure Lycander.
Though years may roll on years, ere we again
Shall meet in peace.

SCENE THE TENTH.
LYCANDER, THEANO and JASON. JASON. Medea to thy temple
Is fled from all her virgins, who entreat
Thy kind permission to pursue her steps,
Wherever her frenzy leads.

THEANO. My help is ready.
And to thy guardian care I trust my brother,
Whom Creon threatens with immediate death.
Yet something whispers, something sure divine,
That other clouds of black events will break,
Ere a new morning rise on troubled Corinth,
And we surviving each portentous storm
Derive a sad security from horror.

SCENE THE ELEVENTH.
LYCANDER and JASON. LYCANDER. Whatever this mystic language may import,
Prince, give attention.

JASON. Speak.

LYCANDER. Thy only course
Is to embark from Corinth with Medea.

JASON. It was my secret and determined purpose.

LYCANDER. Nor yet a secret. Our suspicious tyrant,
If he could rule his discontented subjects,
Would stop thy passage. But thy just design
The public shall befriend by me alarmed
At Creon's threat to violate the grove.

JASON. Can I requite thee?

LYCANDER. Let me serve thee first;
Requite me after, as my wants may dictate.
Is not thy father yonder?

JASON. Let him come.
Go and expect me shortly on the beach.

SCENE THE TWELFTH.
JASON and AESON. AESON. What have I heard? The exasperated king....

JASON. Has told thee truth. His daughter I relinquish.

AESON. Off with this bridal pageantry, which mocks
With gay delusion my disastrous age.
Reach me again my sable; from thy hand
I will receive it: from thy barbarous hand
Let dust be sprinkled on my joyless head.
Nay, rather turn invincible against me;
Lock in that nervous gripe these snowy hairs;
And to the hovering eagles on the beach
Cast my disfigured relics. Do thou pause?
Think thou, that Jason's father will be seen
Decrepit, tottering with distress and years,
A vagabond, a suppliant for protection
Among the happier princes? No, my son,
Though not like thee the faulchion I can weild,
And mow my foes before me, I can die.

JASON. Come thou with threat'nings? That tremendous goddess,
Whose piercing eye from yonder fane discerns
Guile in its naked shape through every garb,
And marks ingratitude for signal vengeance,
Knows, that we merit both to die: yet, dying,
We could not expiate our unmatched offense.

AESON. What unaccustomed, terrifying sterness
Frowns on that aspect? Gentle have I known thee
From infancy to manhood, never before
Have felt thee dreadful.

JASON. Ever from thy fears
Will thou take counsel? Can the voice of pity,
Benevolence and equity convey
No admonition? O exalt thy thoughts
From this base earth, the mansion of deceit,
Of perjuries and crimes. Erect thy visage
To Themis heav'n-thron'd patroness of justice.
Invoke her aid, that, strengthened, thou may hear,
Nor be confounded at thy son's resolves.
By no persuasion, artifice, or menace
My now-reviving dignity of mind
From its own summit shall again descend.

AESON. What would my Jason?

JASON. Take the holy priestess;
Repair to Creon; with united counsels
Him first from impious violence dissuade:
And then....

AESON. To whose protection must I fly?

JASON. To mine. Abandon Corinth, and at Thebes
Not three day's march from these detested gates
Expect my presence. Hercules is there,
My friend, my soldier. He with every hero,
Who once obeyed my standard, will again
League their auxiliar swords and save Iolcos.
Let this suffice -- If not -- Persist no more.
Thy son is fixed immovable, as fate.

AESON. Thunder. Thy mightier genius awes me. I submit.
We all are guilty -- Juno so proclaims.
But Oh! amid these prodigies, my Jason,
Not one alarms me like the rude commotion,
Which shakes thy placid bosom. Be composed.
I will conduct Theano to the king.

SCENE THE THIRTEENTH.
JASON turning toward the temple. Look down, connubial goddess, and with hope
Let thy appeased divinity indulge
A hero offering at thy holy shrine
His spirit humbled with repentant sighs.
You too attend, ye favorable gales,
And swiftly waft us to the kind embrace
Of our companion, Orpheus; who shall breathe
His tuneful consolation in a strain
Of grief-composing energy to charm
Distraction's rage, till newborn reason smile.
Then with her children lovely, as the mother,
Shall blooming Tempe on its flowery lap
Again receive her; while Peneus' stream
Blends with the flitting warblers on his banks
His murmuring cadence to delight her ear:
And I once more along the accustomed vale
Shall by the luster of the silent moon
Walk by her side attentive, while her tongue
Unfolds the powers of heaven's resplendent train,
Of magic numbers, and mysterious spells,
And feasts with knowledge my enraptured soul.

SCENE THE FOURTEENTH.
COLCHIANS. [IAMBICS.] Sire of Aeetes, god revered
By our forefathers on their sands
Bleach'd by the Euxin's restless foam,
Effulgent origin of day;
Who with illimitable view,
As from the amber-portal'd east
Thy coursers fiery-man'd proceed,
See the deep-bosom'd woes of men;
[TROCHAICS.] Whether placed in mildest climes,
Or beneath thy sultry wheels,
Whether freezing near the pole,
All the various race of care.
[IAMBICS.] Yet to thy sad paternal eye
Can this diversity of grief
Not one present through all thy course
To match thy own Medea's pain.
Lo! every flower of wisdom fades
Within her large and fertile breast,
A desert now by tempests ranged,
The seat of wild discordant thoughts.
[TROCHAICS.] God of wisdom and of light,
O relume her darkened soul!
Let her, though begirt with ills,
Still thy progeny be known.

END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT THE FIFTH.
SCENE THE FIRST.
THEANO descending from the temple, AESON and COLCHIANS. AESON. WHERE is the
priestess, Colchian?

FIRST COLCHIAN. There descending.
Pale consternation overcasts her visage.

THEANO. O most portentous, execrable sight!
I led the virgins to rejoin your princess,
Who had escaped their care -- Mysterious heaven!
Where was thy power to check a mother's rage?
Where was thy mercy, when her savage hand
Unclos'd the jaws of slaughter on her children?

AESON. Oh! all-surpassing evil!

FIRST COLCHIAN. When and how?
Oh! speak.

THEANO. A knife of sacrifice she seized,
And in their tender bosoms plunged its point.
We found her planted near their welt'ring limbs;
Her fiery eye balls on their wounds were fixed;
A ghastly triumph swelled her wild revenge,
And madness mingled smiles with horror.

AESON. Horror
Is my companion now. The race of Jason
One common crime has swallowed in its gulf.

THEANO. The goddess bowed in pity from her shrine;
When straight a voice oracular in thunder,
Whose awful clamor must have reached your ears,
Peal'd over the rocking temple. "Impious Creon,"
The voice proclaimed, "thy guilt has filled its measure;
"Then fall, thou victim to the gods of hell."

AESON. Tremendous sentence!

THEANO. I with fearful steps
Haste to the palace.

AESON. Make me thy associate,
And I to calm his violence will join.

SCENE THE SECOND.
COLCHIANS, MEDEA rushing from the temple, PHAEACIANS following. FIRST
COLCHIAN. Behold, where, dropping with her children's blood,
The lost Medea comes.

MEDEA. It is begun.
Now to complete my vengeance will I mount
The burning chariot of my bright forefather;
The rapid steeds over Corinth will I drive,
And with the scattered lightnings from their manes
Consume its walls, its battlements and towers,
Its princes, people, palaces and temples:
Then, as the flames embrace the purple clouds,
And the proud city crumbles from its base,
The demon of my rage and indignation
All grim and wrapped in terror shall bestride
The mountainous embers, and denounce abroad
To gods and men my wrongs and my revenge.

FIRST COLCHIAN. How is thy wisdom exiled from thy breast,
Its native seat, nor leaves one trace behind
To show, it once was there.

MEDEA. Weep'st thou, old man?
Ha! speak; thou venerable mourner, speak
Thy cause of anguish. Had thou not a daughter
Wise like Minerva, like the morning fair,
And once thy dearest comfort? Has she left thee,
Left thy decrepit head for grief to seize
And dash against the tomb? Weep, weep, old man,
The slight remainder of thy days exhaust
In lamentation; she is lost for ever,
Lost to herself and thee: and never more
Shall thou the beauty of her face contemplate,
Nor hear again the wisdom of her tongue.

FIRST COLCHIAN. Thou do mistake me for the stern Aeetes.
I am but one among the unnumber'd Colchians,
Who mourn in thee their nation's glory fallen.

MEDEA. I well deserve this pity -- yours -- and yours,
Who kindly weep around me. As I pass,
I wade through seas of tears -- I hear no sound,
But sighs and groans from sorrow-beaten breasts.
Dishevelled fragments of uprooted hairs
From the wild head of anguish fly about me.
Is it not fitting? When Medea mourns,
Shall not the skies assume their blackest robes,
And scowl upon mankind? Medea sighs;
Shall not hell groan, and heaven reply in thunder?
It is the offspring of the Sun, who wrings
Her helpless hands, who rends her scattered locks.
My heart is cold -- The thread of life unwinds.
Now triumph, death -- Thy conquest is Medea.

She sinks into the lap of a Phaeacian. FIRST COLCHIAN. Repose her harrass'd
limbs with tenderest care.
If this delirious transport be no more,
Than some short tumult of the heated brain;
Refreshing sleep may cool that seat of thought,
And wandering reason sojourn there again.
Essay your vocal power, harmonious maids;
Some new and soothing modulation choose;
Dress in persuasive melody your numbers,
Whose artful cadence from the breaking heart
May steal its cares, and fold them in oblivion.

A PHAEACIAN turning toward the sea. [TROCHAICS.] Azure god, whose active
waters
Beat with endless toil below,
Calm the ruder blasts to slumber;
While to yonder grove, which bends
Stately over thy shaded bosom,
Softly-sighing gales aspire.
And, ye zephyrs, which ascending
Fan the plumy verdure there,
Lulling whispers, drowsy murmurs
Through the trembling foliage breathe
Over the wakeful brow of sorrow
Care-beguiling sleep to spread.
Or my gently-soothing measure
On your downy pinions bear
Through the grief-distemper'd spirit
With delusion sweet to steal,
Till, on music's lap dissolving,
Madness lull its wearied head.

FIRST COLCHIAN. Your queen recovers, and her look serene
Shows, the mild beam of reason shines anew.

MEDEA. Grief, as o'erlabour'd with its cruel office,
Awhile is pausing, till its strength returns.
I will at least possess the short relief
To see my infants. Sure, my faithful friends,
From my sad heart no evils can erase
Maternal gladness at my children's sight.
Go, lead them from the temple -- They will smile,
And lift my thoughts to momentary joy.
Not gone, my virgins? Wherefore this delay?
Why all aghast? Why tremble thus your limbs?
Ha! whence this blood? My hands are dipped in slaughter.
Speak, ye dumb oracles of terror, speak;
Rising. Where are my children? My distracted brain
A thousand dreadful images recals
Imperfectly remembered -- Speak, I charge you;
Where are my children? -- Silent still and pale.
Enough -- Fell powers, your purpose is accomplished;
Medea's sufferings are complete and full.

FIRST COLCHIAN. The swelling passions struggle in her breast,
And find no vent. My ever-honour'd mistress,
This is the time for tears and exclamations.

MEDEA. Can exclamations down the wind convey
From these retentive ears my children's groans?
Or can this murderous hand by tears be whitened?
Hear, Neptune! over this citadel emerge
To reach my crime; or send the power of whirlwinds
To sweep my footsteps from the stable earth,
In rapid flight to Caucasus transport
And fix me shivering on the pointed rock.
Let Nemesis revive the breathless clay
Of my slain infants, to the ravenous beak
Their lips disfigure, and their tender fingers
Arm with the vulture's talons; that their wounds
May be imprinted on their mother's breast
With Promethean torture, and her heart
In blood bewail the error of her hand.

FIRST COLCHIAN. It was the act of ignorance and madness.
Just Themis knows thy purity of mind,
And will with pity cleanse that erring hand.

MEDEA. Not the disburthen'd sluices of the skies,
The watery Nereids with the ocean's store,
Nor all the tears, which misery has shed,
Can from the mother wash her children's blood.
Where shall I hide me from the piercing day?
What man will grant protection to my guilt,
What god afford me safeguard at his altar?
Thou must alone receive me, thou, O earth.
Then, while I crush my bosom on thy surface,
And grasp the dust within my struggling hands,
Distain my limbs, and strike my head against thee,
At length in pity of my sufferings sue
The loit'ring gods to rear the friendly bolt,
And close my sorrows on thy peaceful breast.

FIRST COLCHIAN. See Jason too unconscious of his loss.

SCENE THE THIRD.
COLCHIANS, MEDEA, PHAEACIANS and JASON. JASON. Is she restored?

FIRST COLCHIAN. Restored to full sensation
Of her increased afflictions, there she lies.

JASON. They shall be soon diminished. Fate at last
Has folded up its inauspicious scroll,
And fairer volumes open to our eyes.
I see, you doubt me all. That pale dejection
Reveals distrust and fear. I tell you, Colchians,
Prophetic Themis from her spotless shrine,
When she unfolds the oracle of justice,
Fills not her priest with more enraptured fervor,
Than now her present deity supplies
To my stability of soul, which marks
Success in prospect, and will show me still
Not less, than Jason in the brightest hour,
Yourselves can witness, of his passed achievements.
Perhaps she sleeps.

Looking attentively on Medea. FIRST COLCHIAN. Ah! no.

JASON. Then, dearest woman,
Look on me, hear me, trust me once again.
I have resigned Creusa and her kingdom;
I have appeased my father; Creon's wrath
Is ineffectual now: then deign to cast
One glance on Jason, on thy suppliant husband
Returned in tears of penitence and shame,
But with redoubled tenderness and truth.

MEDEA. Oh! Jason -- Thou and I have once been happy.
What are we now?

JASON. Let thy forgiving breath
Revive my courage fettered yet and tame
With thy displeasure; and my active love
Shall soon transport thee from this seat of woe:
Then, as we bound before the favoring gale,
Shall fondly whisper, we may still be happy.

MEDEA starting up. Survey these hands.

JASON. What blood is this?

MEDEA. Thy children's.

JASON. Inhuman Creon! Could thy malice choose
No other victims, than my blameless boys?
I come, incensed Corinthians, to divulge
This profanation through your madding streets;
Myself will guide your torrent of revolt,
And whelm its billows on this royal savage.

MEDEA. If heaven had once meant kindly to Medea,
Some tyrant had been found, some other hand*
Than hers alone to spill her children's blood.
The season for upbraiding is no more;
But know, thou wretched like myself, that madness
Armed my blind rage against them, and the deed
Now weighs me down to everlasting night.

JASON falling on his knees. O thou, whose equal balance to mankind
Distributes justice, and restoring mercy,
If prayers from this polluted breast may reach
Thy pure abode, exert thy righteous power;
Drop thy asswaging pity on her heart;
On me exhaust the quiver of thy vengeance.

MEDEA. Was not my portion of distresses large,
Ye powers obdurate? Has this heart refused
To sigh, these eyes been sparing of their streams?
Impelled by indignation, still my spirit
Would challenge your injustice, which required
My children's blood to mingle with my tears.
Take back the mighty mind, you framed to break,
First rent by anguish, then by guilt deformed.

Draws a poniard. A VOICE from the temple. Hold, offspring of the Sun; arise;
repair
To Juno's shrine; reply not, but obey.

SCENE THE FOURTH.
JASON, COLCHIANS and PHAEACIANS. JASON. Celestial presence, I adore thy
greatness;
Yet thy tremendous voice, which rocks these bulwarks,
Appalls not me, who bid destruction welcome.
Hope, which cements the structure of the heart,
From mine is moulder'd, and despair is lodged
Within the ruins.

SCENE THE FIFTH.
JASON, COLCHIANS, PHAEACIANS and LYCANDER. LYCANDER. Gods! what new reverse
Has cast the first of heroes to the earth?
Thy mariners expect thee; haste away.
Too high the ferment rises. Oh! recall
Theano's last presage of black events.
The wild impatience of religious rage
Stings every bosom. Our Corinthian dames
Range through the streets with torches in their hands,
Invoking Juno, hymeneal Juno.
An impulse more, than natural, directs
Those armed numbers to some hideous act.
They breathe demoniac fury on the palace.
Should Creon meet them, he must fall. Rise, prince,
I must attend thy flight. Our timely absence
Will save our streets from homicide.

JASON. No, death
May reach me too.

LYCANDER. For pity -- Ha! the skies
Share in our tumult, and a bloody veil
Hangs over the sickening sun. The air wheels round us.
Grim Neptune yonder shakes his stormy trident.
Why heaves the loosened rock? Why drop these clouds
In threatening murmurs from their dusky folds
Streaked with sulphurous gleams?

Thunder, lightning and the stage darkened. JASON rising. This suits my soul
For its infernal journey all prepared,
A pale attendant on my children's ghosts
In Tartarus to dwell, while they repose
In blessed Elysium.

FIRST COLCHIAN. Look, the holy priestess
Breaks from the palace in disordered haste,
And to her temple flies. In consternation
Old Aeson too is nigh.

SCENE THE SIXTH.
JASON, COLCHIANS, PHAEACIANS, LYCANDER, AESON and THESSALIANS. AESON. My son!
my son!

JASON. If thou do bring fresh evils, thou art welcome.

AESON. We found the hardened king. My words were vain,
So were Theano's. With a desperate band,
Of life regardless, and contemning Juno,
Against her grove he sallies.

CREON behind the scenes. Since no longer
You dread my scepter, you shall feel my sword;
Which over your mangled carcasses shall hew
Its purple passage to chastise the author
Of this revolt, and chase barbarians hence.

LYCANDER. The king's rash voice. He charges.

A shout within. AESON. Hideous roar!
Thunder and lightning. O Jove, be merciful!

LYCANDER. He gives the signal,
And shows the tumult through those livid flames.

JASON. I hear the clang of arms. Unmoved and cold,
My heart rejects that once-enliv'ning sound,
And sighs for dissolution. Pause awhile,
Sad spirit, till Medea's fate is known,
Then prompt my sword to justice on myself.

AESON. That shout denounces triumph.

LYCANDER. Yes, and safety
To all, but Creon. Give the torrent way.

SCENE THE SEVENTH.
JASON, COLCHIANS, PHAEACIANS, LYCANDER, AESON, THESSALIANS and CORINTHIANS.
FIRST CORINTHIAN. Where is the honored priestess? We will bring,
If she so wills, the sacrilegious head
Of our slain tyrant to her sacred feet.

SCENE THE LAST.
JASON, COLCHIANS, PHAEACIANS, LYCANDER, AESON, THESSALIANS and CORINTHIANS
falling back on each side of the stage, as THEANO descends from the temple.
LYCANDER. Be silent, all. Theano from the goddess
To this assembly moves. Night flies before her;
Earth, seas and heavens are calmed.

THEANO. Ye sons of Corinth,
Old men of Colchis and Thessalians, hear.
At length the gods restrain their vengeful rod.
The dreadful scene is closed. Iolchian prince,
Thou from Aeetes' daughter art disjoined.
Look, where the goddess through the aerial champain
Sends in a chariot drawn by winged dragons
That all-transcending woman into climes
Remote, but whither is from thee concealed.

JASON. Heaven guide her fortunes. This shall govern mine.

Offers to fall on his sword and is prevented. THEANO. Unmanly desperation!
Will the grave
Hide thy disgrace, or ill-tongu'd rumor die,
When thou art ashes? No. Recall thy manhood.
Thou have a father's kingdom to redeem.
Go, save a nation. These afflicted maids,
These aged Colchians to their homes restore.
Thus shall the censure, which thy frailty merits,
Be changed to blessings on thy generous deeds,
And time's light finger loosen from thy breast
Its root of care, till peace of mind return.

END OF THE LAST ACT.
ERRATA.
In Page 9, Line 7, for Tidings read Tidings* 22, Line 9, for fire read sire.

