AN AUTHENTIC NARRATIVE OF THE Late Extraordinary Proceedings AT CAMBRIDGE,
AGAINST THE W -- R CLUB.

The Public in these Cases have a Right to demand that all Circumstances be
produced to Examination. If what we are doing be wrong, it his high Time Things
should be altered for the better. If we are acting right, the closer the
Scrutiny be made into our Conduct, the more will it redound to our Credit.

Dr. KEENE's Sermon preached before the Sons of the Clergy at Newcastle upon
Tyne. Page 4.

LONDON: Printed for M. COOPER, at the Globe in Paternoster Row. 1751.

(Prince one Shilling.)

AN AUTHENTIC NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT CAMBRIDGE.
Came. Dec. 16, 1750.
AS the Subject of the following Sheets has been Matter of public Discourse,
and the Circumstances attending it much mistaken by some, and grossly
misrepresented by others, it is thought proper to lay before the World a plain
and succinct Narrative of the whole Proceedings; and we can assure our Readers
that no material Circumstance is omitted.

Saturday Nov. 17th, being the Anniversary of Queen Elizabeth, Forty-six
Gentlemen of this University, who had been educated at W -- r School, met
together at the Tuns Tavern to commemorate their Foundress, as was customary on
that Day. Amongst them were several Fellow-Commoners and Fellows of Colleges,
and three Masters of Arts; one of whom, Mr. F -- n, G -- k P -- ss -- r of the
University, was President. The Company met between Eight and Nine o'Clock.
Every Thing was conducted with the utmost Decency and Sobriety, and they were
breaking up at Eleven; when, to the great Surprise of all the Gentlemen
present, Mr. B -- n, Senior P -- r of the University, entered the Room,
attended by Mr. F -- r, who followed him with the Staff. What ensued, the
Reader will find amply discussed in the Course of these Proceedings; and we
shall only observe that, after about twenty Minutes Stay in the Room, the
Company separated and retired to their respective Colleges.

On the Wednesday following it was reported, that there had been a Meeting of
the Heads on the Occasion, and that the V. C. had laid before them Mr. B -- 's
Accusation against the whole Club; and also particular Charges against three
Masters of Arts and two Fellow Commoners; and that, in consequence of this
Meeting, it had been determined to summons them to the V. C.'s Court on
Saturday.

It was with much Difficulty, that the Gentlemen concerned could persuade
themselves to give any Credit to so strange a Report; as it was absurd to
suppose a Matter so trifling and insignificant could so far merit the Attention
of the V. C. and H -- ds, and much less engage them in such violent
Proceedings. This Report however being confirmed, Mr. C --, Mr. A --, and Mr. F
-- n, judged it highly expedient to wait on the V. C. in order to enquire into
the Particulars, and at the same Time that they might have the Opportunity of
justifying their Conduct to him; which they accordingly did, on Thursday
Afternoon, when they acquainted him with the Report that had prevailed, and the
Surprise with which they had heard it. He assured them it was true, that there
had been a Meeting; and that they must appear at his Court on Saturday. They
then represented to him, in as modest Terms as they could make Use of, that it
gave them great Concern to find he had so far countenanced an Accusation, not
only against Under-Graduates, but against Persons of Standing and Character in
the University, as to lay it before the H -- ds; and that they could not but be
of Opinion, it had been more candid and humane, before he proceeded so far, to
have heard what they had to say in Defense of their Conduct; and did assure him
at the same Time, that, if the Affair was brought before the Court, if not
supported, it would appear as a malicious ill-grounded Prosecution, and could
therefore be attended with no other Consequences than to throw an Odium on the
Accuser, promote Animosities and Divisions in the University, and only lessen
that Authority which it was meant to support. They desired the V. C. even then,
as it was certainly in his Power, to make up the Matter amicably. The V. C.
replied, that he had acted as his Duty required; that he had received the
Accusation in Form from the P -- r, and had laid it before the H -- ds; that he
could not determine it any other Way than by hearing their public Defense in
Court, which they were at Liberty to make; that they were summoned to appear on
Saturday, and Citations were already given out for that Purpose. Upon which the
Gentlemen took their Leave, and next Morning received (as did also Mr. V -- e
and Mr. V -- n) their separate Citations in Form as follows:

To J -- s B -- gh, T -- s B -- s, or T -- s B -- t, Esqrs. Beadles of the U --
y of C -- ge, or their lawful Deputy.
SUmmon T -- s F -- n, Master of Arts, Fellow of T -- y-College in the U -- of
C -- m-b --, and G -- k P -- r in the said U -- and S -- l C -- w, Master of
Arts, Fellow of T -- y-College aforesaid; and T -- s A -- ll, Bachelor of
Laws, Fellow of T -- y-H -- ll in the said U -- y; each of them to appear
before me at my next Court to be held in the Law-Schools on Saturday the 24th
of this instant November, between the Hours of Two and Three of the Clock in
the Afternoon, then and there to answer in a certain Cause of Correction and
Discipline, for insulting and interrupting the Reverend J -- s B -- n, Master
of Arts, Fellow of P -- ke-H -- ll, Senior P -- r of the said U -- y, in the
Execution of his Office as P -- r: Hereof fail not at your Peril. Given under
my Hand this 23d Day of November, in the Year of our Lord 1750.

ED -- D K -- E, V -- C --.

All the Gentlemen, who were at the Club, were also ordered to appear in Court.

Nothing was now talked of in the University but the W -- r Club, the Meeting
of the H -- ds, the Summons, and above all the Citation of M -- rs of A -- ts
into the V. C.'s Court, being a Thing extremely unusual, induced the greater
part of them who were unacquainted with the Circumstances, and with the
Gentlemen accused, to imagine that some very gross Insults had been offered to
the P -- r, and some very flagrant Irregularities committed on that Night; but
Saturday came, and they were quickly undeceived.

At Three o'Clock the Court being met in the Law-Schools, Mr. P -- r was
desired by the V. C. to give in his Deposition, which was taken down, as he
spoke it, by the Register; with an exact Copy of which we here present the
Reader, and recommend it to him as a Tract which for Matter, Style and Method,
cannot perhaps be easily paralelled.

Saturday, Nev. 24, 1750.
"There went forth a Decree, etc. which being returned, J -- s B -- n, Senior P
-- r, alleged, that on Saturday Night last he was insulted and interrupted in
the Execution of his Office at the W -- r Club, at the Tuns Tavern; which they
contested negatively.

He also alleged, that he was insulted by the whole Club: That he received
particular Affronts from one, whom he since finds to be Mr. V -- n: That he,
the said V -- n, behaved also very insolently at his (the P -- 's) Chamber,
when he sent for him upon this Subject.

That Mr. V -- e also behaved very indecently, at his Chambers; but he has no
Complaint against him for any ill Behavior at the Club in particular.

That the Clock at P -- e-Hall had stricken Eleven before he left College, in
order to visit.

That, upon his going into the Room, the Gentlemen holla'd, to the best of his
Remembrance, before he spoke at all.

That upon being informed, there were Masters of Arts in Company, he applied
himself to Mr. F -- n, and said, he was come to desire, that all Persons under
the Degree of Master of Arts in that Company would retire, adding, that it was
past Eleven o'Clock.

That Mr. A -- ll said to him, with a kind of Sneer, "Mr. P -- r, I hope you
will observe, that all the Company are sober."

That after Mr. A -- ll had spoke, there followed a loud Holla, and a long one.

That Mr. A -- ll came up to him, and said, with an Air of Triumph, "Mr. P --
r, I hope you do not think that what I said was with a Design of getting
Applause;" or Words to that Purpose.

That there were about this Time more Claps and Hollas, to the best of his
Remembrance.

That about this Time some of the Company began to expostulate; Mr. A -- ll in
particular said, It was an annual, not monthly, Meeting; and one in particular
said, It was uncivil to visit on that Night, and some one said, It was a
rigorous Execution of the Orders; or Words to that Effect.

That he applied himself in particular at this Time to Mr. P -- r F -- n, and
said, he believed Mr. P -- r knew there were Orders against all Clubs in
general.

That Mr. P -- r F -- n laughed when he attempted to show, that this was not a
rigorous Execution of the Orders; and said, turning to some near him, "This he
calls a mild Execution of his Office;" or Words to that Purpose.

That Mr. A -- ll about this Time said "A mild Interpretation of Orders indeed!"

That at this Time there were many Claps and Hollas.

That Mr. C -- w about this Time insisted, that it was rude or uncivil, or
Words to this Purpose, to visit when there were Masters of Arts in Company, and
one of them a P -- r; and asked him, if he did not think them able to take Care
of the young Gentlemen in the Company.

That he told Mr. C -- w, that it did not appear they had done so; for it was
now past the Time that those young Gentlemen ought to have been at home.

That Mr. C -- w received particular Applause from the Company for what he had
said, and appeared to be much delighted with it.

That Mr. C -- w insisted farther, that it was strange (or Words to that
Purpose) that the Execution of these Orders should be begun at the W -- r Club.

That Mr. C -- w again received the Applause of the Company by Claps and Hollas.

That Mr. C -- w said farther, "We scarcely know what these Orders are; which
to be observed, and which not;" and complained, in general Words, that it
appeared, some were to be executed, and some not.

That upon this followed again the Acclamations of the Company.

That, during these Disputes, Mr. P -- ss -- r F -- n said two or three times,
"The P -- r is doing his Duty."

That he understood him to say so with a Sneer the first Time.

That afterward he thought that he did recollect himself, and seemed to be
serious; and that he should have continued to have thought so, if he had not
soon after turned into a Rage.

That Mr. P -- ss -- r talked some Time, and expressed a great deal of Anger
and Resentment upon being interrupted by the P -- r that Night.

That soon after he called out, "Here Is to our next merry Meeting;" which Words
were twice at least repeated. He added once -- "without Interruption from P --
rs."

The P -- r also alleged, that, during these Transactions, he did observe a
Gentleman in particular behave very rudely: That he heard next Morning Mr. V --
e had behaved very ill, and that he sent for him, to see if he were that
Gentleman; and upon seeing and talking with him, it appeared he was not.

That on Sunday in the Afternoon, he heard that Mr. V -- n had behaved very
ill, and from his appearing to this Time, he has no Doubt but that he is the
Person.

That he expressed his Rudeness at the Club, by laughing several Times in the P
-- r's Face, and behaving otherwise very insolently.

That he continued to show several Marks of Rudeness.

That he, Mr. V -- n, was going to make a Reply, and the P -- ss -- r stopped him.

That at his Chambers in P -- e-Hall, he, Mr. V -- n, talked much of his
Independency, upon being accused of his ill Behavior.

That he asked in particular, if it was the Custom of this Place to interrupt
Gentlemen at their Meetings.

That, upon telling him it was the Custom to interrupt them at those
unseasonable Hours, he said, with a Sneer, that then he was instructed in what
he did not know before, or Words to that Purpose, and said, he did not value
what the Un -- ty could do to him; or Words to that Purpose.

That upon being told, he had laughed often in his (the P -- r's) Face, he
said, in a very contemptuous Manner, that really he could not help those
natural Emotions.

That he said farther, that his Clappings and Hollaings were not meant as an
Affront to him (the P -- r) but an Approbation of what P -- ss -- r F -- n had
said.

That upon the whole, he did not show any Signs, whereby he might think himself
secured from the like Treatment again.

That, upon talking with Mr. V -- e, he found he was not the Person. That he
talked to him (the P -- r) that he had no Dependence upon the U -- y, and did
not value what might be done to him, or Words to that Purpose.

That he said his Laughings and Clappings and Hollaings were not designed as an
Affront to him (the P -- r) but an Approbation of Mr. P -- ss -- r F -- n.

That he thought that every Thing that Gentleman said was so perfectly right,
that he could not help applauding it, or Words to that Purpose.

That he said farther, he understood it was the Custom for several Gentlemen to
stay on that Night 'till Twelve o'Clock; and that for his Part he had
determined to stay 'till the last. About the middle of this Deposition it
growing dark, the Court was by the V. C. adjorned to the Senate House, when Mr.
P -- r proceeded, and finished it as above.


Mr. P -- r having finished his Deposition, the V. C. said, he believed the
Defenses of the Gentlemen accused must be deferred 'till another Day, it
growing very late. To this Mr. P -- ss -- r F -- n assented; but Mr. A -- ll,
having prepared his Defense, desired he might be permitted to make it
immediately: To which the V. C. agreeing, Mr. A -- ll spoke as follows:

Mr. V. C.
IN a very public and unprecedented Manner I appear before you, accused of
Irregularity and Insult to the P -- r in the Execution of his Office.

It is indeed a very general Accusation; and as it is of a criminal Nature, it
ought, according to the established and universal Practice of all Courts of
Justice, to be most literally and demonstrably proved. A few Facts have been
mentioned to support the Charge; of which some have been particularly alleged
against myself. In the Course of my Defense therefore I shall endeavor to
obviate the Facts: Notwithstanding it is my sincere Opinion I could evince to
the Audience, that even if they were true, yet nevertheless that they could by
no means (if heartily interpreted according to the concomitant Circumstances
and Occasion) be justly said to amount to an Insult on Authority. But as your
Judgment, I hope, will be impartially formed upon the Truth of Evidence, and a
due Regard to the Merits of our Cause; I cannot but greatly rejoice, that so
many of the W -- r Scholars were then present to attest what I shall assert;
and that so many Members of the U -- y are now present to bear Witness of our
Vindication.

To digest as well as I can and methodize my Defense, I shall submit it to your
Consideration in the following Order.

First, I shall state to you very faithfully, according to the best of my
Memory, the Behavior both of the P -- r and the Club upon our
Commemoration-Night; for upon this the whole of the Accusation is founded.

Secondly, I shall enlarge upon the Circumstances; and expressly account for my
own Conduct upon that Occasion.

Lastly, Mr. V. C. I shall entreat your Indulgence, that I may mention to this
Audience the Proceedings subsequent to, and consequent of, the P -- r's Visit.

It has been a constant Custom among the Scholars educated at W -- r to
celebrate the 17th of November, as the Anniversary of Queen Elizabeth, who was
Foundress of their School; for which Reason last Saturday Night a numerous
Meeting of 46 were assembled. There is no Necessity for me to take Notice of
any Thing which passed before the P -- r's Visit; except only, that before his
coming, we had called for our Bill, had collected our Reckoning, and should
have departed before his Entrance, if there had not been an accidental Omission
in the Bill, and a Miscomputation of what should be given to the Waiters and
Servants; and that it was on account of this Deficiency we were retarded 'till
the Waiter could collect Sixpence a-piece more from the Members. He was ordered
to do it with Dispatch; in the mean Time we were desired by the President to
drink a concluding Toast to Dr. N -- ls's Health.

It was at this Crisis that the P -- r came in, without Notice, and with so
little Ceremony that I knew not of his Presence, 'till I saw him near me at the
upper end of the Room. He came very abruptly to the Head of the Table, and told
us, it was an irregular Hour, and ordered us to depart: Upon this a Silence
ensued, and there seemed to be a general Amazement. It was then, Mr. V. C, I
addressed myself to him, to inform him of the Occasion of our Meeting, "That it
was to commemorate the Foundation-day of our School; and I observed to him that
we were just going to depart: If he would consider therefore the Occasion and
the Hour, he would not charge us with Irregularity: And I further told him,
that since he had taken the unusual Pains to visit us, I requested him to do us
the Justice to remark the Sobriety and good Order of our Members, and to report
it accordingly to their Reputation." These were, as near as I can now
recollect, my very Words. The Members applauded me by clapping of their Hands.
The P -- r thereupon said, he thought that was Insult to him. Upon which I
replied, I am persuaded, Sir, that you misinterpret the Applause of the
Company; for it is meant, I believe, to signify their Approbation of what I
said in Vindication of the Occasion of our Meeting and of the Regularity of it:
And I assured him, I did not mean by what I had said to encourage Disobedience
to his Authority. He seemed satisfied with my Answer, and told me, he was not
offended with it. Mr. P -- ss -- r F -- n next spoke to him, and told him, that
our Reckoning was just collected, Bill ready for Payment on the Table, and that
we were going to drink to Dr. N -- ls's Health before we departed: He
remonstrated too against the Incivility of visiting him without Notice, as he
was A. M.

Mr. C -- w next spoke upon the Point of not paying a customary Regard to their
Degree. At the End of each of their Speeches there ensued a general Applause.
It was then proposed to drink the Toast and go: Mr. F -- n, Mr. C -- w and
myself advising them to obey, the Company showed a very ready Obedience to the
Advice. We immediately left the Room, and withdrew to our respective Colleges.
Nor do I yet hear of any personal Affront or Injury which was then offered to
the P -- r.

Having thus as briefly as possible informed you of the Facts, I shall Secondly
enlarge upon the Circumstances which will explain those Facts: And by more
thoroughly acquainting you with the Motives, shall enable you to judge more
equitably upon their Merits.

The Motives to commemorate a Founder's Day are indisputably grounded upon a
generous and laudable Principle of Gratitude; and are authorized by many such
solemn Festivals observed in every College, and in all Societies where Piety to
Patrons is preserved. The Uses and Advantages of School-Anniversaries are
certainly commendable, as they tend to cultivate and improve those most
disinterested Friendships contracted in our Youth. And if I am not deceived (I
speak this with great Deference to your Office) even you, Mr. V. C. have
formerly expressed your Sense and Approbation of these greatful Commemorations,
by your Presence at the Anniversaries of the Charterhouse School. This I
mention with great Deference to you, Sir; but as it seems to be much in Point,
Self-defence obliges me to take Notice of it.

It being confessed therefore that our Meeting was originally at least not
culpable, it follows then, that some After-Act must be proved to make it so.
But no such After-Act does appear upon Evidence: For what has been pretended
(if culpable) has been very weakly objected, and not at all supported by the
Complainant. Was there any Intemperance? Was there any personal Injury or
Affront offered to Mr. B -- n? None is suggested: He only says in general, that
as P -- r he was insulted. Had it the Appearance of an irregular Meeting, where
a P-f-r was President, and so many Fellows of Colleges were his Associates? Can
it so properly be said to be a Club as a solemn Anniversary, which is allowed
even to our younger Brethren at the School? Can any Irregularity be justly
imputed to us? I am conscious there will be none. I am conscious, you will be
convinced, Mr. V. C. that none can be imputed, when you have given me leave to
explain at large the only Fact which seems to affect us, "That we had not left
the Room at Eleven;" although it is most certainly true, that we were about to
depart when the P -- r came in. Let it b^ remembered, that our Bill and
Reckoning were ready on the Table, so much in readiness to be paid; that it was
only delayed while the Deficiency of the Miscalculation and first Collection
was to be made good by a small Addition, and while the concluding Health of Dr.
N -- ls our Master was to be drank. Be it known to you, that some of the
Members were just gone, many were then going; and I think it is more than
probable, that the whole Company, at least the Under-Graduates, would at that
Time have been retired to their proper Colleges, if it had not been incumbent
upon the Seniors at the Table to desire them, with as much Dispatch as
possible, to make good the Defect of the Reckoning by contributing something
more. At this instant, without any Notice given, without so much as a Message
to Mr F -- n, Master of Arts, P-f-r and our President, the P -- r entered. But
so false is his Deposition of a general Shout and Confusion, that I most
solemnly declare, I did not know he was in the Room, 'till I saw him near me at
the upper End of the Table. Neither can I recollect any Confusion so remarkable
at that Time as his own; which I take Notice of here, because I think it in
some degree material, as it must invalidate the Credit of his Report; and as it
may in some measure account for the Inconsistency of his Accusation against us.
So insensible and ignorant was I of his Presence, that when I saw the whole
Company rise up from their Chairs, I thought it was either to drink the Toast
(for this Ceremony is observed among us in public Healths) or to depart.

So false is the Charge of a general Outcry or Hallooing before he spoke, or
afterward, that I solemnly declare an universal Silence ensued upon his
Speech: And that the Silence and the Consternation, which prevailed over the
whole Company, excited me to vindicate and exempt them from his Aspersion of
Irregularity.

When you reflect, Mr. V. C. upon this Situation of the Members, and the
manifest Suspense they were in, you will not be offended that I should inform
the P -- r of the extraordinary Occasion of our Meeting, and that we were about
to depart; or that I should desire him to observe, to the Reputation of the
Club, it is singular Sobriety and Decency. It must be a most rigid
Interpretation of my Words to extort an Expression of Insolence from them; and
it is a very unjust Insinuation, that they were spoke with Derision. The P -- r
did not so understand them, for, when I afterward attempted to satisfy him of
the Reason of the Applause which followed them, he confessed to me, he was not
offended with what I had said. A strange Confession, if it had been true, that
I had spoke to him with an Air of Triumph!

When I had thus, with much Submission, (and am conscious without a Sneer) made
this Representation to him, an Applause ensued; which he misconceived to be an
intended Insolence to him, as P -- r. I again therefore addressed myself to
him, to assure him, that he misinterpreted the Meaning of it, and that he
should find a ready Obedience to his Authority.

Yet before I conclude this Part of my Defense, I shall more directly obviate
the P -- r's Objection, That I spoke to him with a Sneer and an Air of Triumph.
These Words seem to be an Embellishment, and rhetorically thrown in to inflame
and to support an Accusation which wanted such Assistance: But I answer
plainly, That I was not guilty of such irreverent Behavior; and I think the P
-- r himself, on a better Recollection, acquits me of it; for he now confesses
in Court, that he then told me, "He was not offended with what I had said to
him." How repugnant to each other are the Charge and the Confession! Moreover,
Mr. V. C. I cannot but now think, I might safely have submitted my own Conduct
to your Judgment, even upon the very Words of the Accusation, if the P -- r had
not invented that supplemental Improvement upon the Manner in which I uttered
them. But as this Aggravation is insisted on, I positively deny the Truth of
it; and his After-Confession will give Credit to my Negation.

If this will not satisfy you, Sir, it must rest on our Credibility and
Characters, or the Testimony of the Company. Yet I shall add an Observation,
which may induce you to believe me: It is, That if you consider the Words laid
to my Charge, you will not find them to be indecent, or scurrilous, or of that
Nature that would require me to make use of a Sneer, or an Air of Triumph. [
"The P -- r too has told you, that I did not appear to be pleased with the
Applauses as Mr. C -- w seemed to be:" The Crotchet was not spoke in Court, but
delivered in to the V. C. afterward.
Does not this Acknowlegement imply a Contradiction to the Air of Triumph?
Remember therefore Mr. V. C. that, as this Accusation is of the Nature of a
Criminal Profecution it ought to be quashed and annulled, if it be either
uncertain, or too general; more especially, if the chief Matter in Charge is
not fully verified.

Thus far relates to myself; and I have the Confidence now to expect, that my
Conduct on the Occasion will appear rather commendable than culpable; for the P
-- r cannot but do me the Justice to confess, that I recommended an Obedience
to him.

Next as an Evidence ***** [ Here I was interrupted from giving my Attestation
to the Behavior of my Associates: But the V. C. indulged me to relate the
following Fact, as a Proof of the Respect always paid by the P -- rs to A. M.
so far as not to visit, where they are in Company.]

It is incumbent upon me to take Notice of the Remonstrance made by Mr. F -- n
against the P -- r's Incivility of not regarding him, as Gentlemen of his
Degree had ever been respected by the Magistrates of the U -- y. And what
especially induces me (though not honored with the same Degree) to speak upon
this Subject, is, that I can quote an Instance to confirm this customary
Deference, from a Visit at the Tuns where I was present. It was in the
Moderatorship of Mr. R -- ss; who one Night, in the Execution of his Office,
came into the Room, where a Master of Arts of K -- g's- College and myself were
at Supper. But Mr. R -- ss (although a noted Disciplinarian) was so sensible of
the Incivility which he had committed, that on the next Day he made an Apology
to me, and assured me, that his coming into the Room where a Master of Arts was
in Company, had been occasioned by the Waiter's Neglect of informing him who
were there.

Give me leave now, Mr. V. C. to mention in few Words the Procedings subsequent
to, and consequent of, the P -- r's Visit.

Common Report had informed me, that some of the Under-Graduates had been sent
for by the P -- r: I heard afterward, that he had sent for and demanded a List
of Names: And it was told me, that you, Sir, had consulted the H -- ds upon
this Subject of the Visit to the W -- rs. Yet 'till I waited upon you at your
Lodge on Thursday, I did not know that any Information had been offered against
Mr. F -- n, Mr. C -- w, or myself; neither did I know, that my Reputation had
been called in Question before an Assembly of the H -- ds. When therefore you
acquainted me with the Information, Consultation, and Citation for me to appear
in Court before you, I could not but be greatly astonished at the seeming
Impropriety of your receiving an Accusation, reporting it again to others, and
countenancing the Charge so much as to summon us to answer in Court, before you
had in the least enquired what might be shown as Cause, why the Information
should not be granted at all.

This Proceeding, Mr. V. C. however it may be authorized by the Power of your
Office, was nevertheless contrary to a fundamental Rule of the Civil Law, which
ought, I believe, in a great Measure, to direct this Court. The Rule is, Non
debet Actore licere, quod Reo non permittitur. Dig. lib. 50. Tit. 17. l. 41.
It is a Rule of Equity and Reason, and should especially be admitted here,
where the Power of the Judge seems to be so unlimited. You told us in Answer,
That you was obliged to receive the Information; and that for your own
Assistance, you had consulted the H -- ds. I do not question this; I only
contend, that it would have been more candid and humane, if you had allowed us
a Hearing before your Report to the H -- ds. For how faithfully soever you
might repeat the P -- r's Accusation; yet certainly you was liable to a wrong
Impression for want of regarding the well known and just Maxim, Audi alteram
partem. Much more were the H -- ds liable to receive a wrong Impression of the
Merits of our Cause, from it is being received by a V. C. and so far
countenanced as to be thought worthy of a Consultation upon it.

You told us indeed, Sir, that this should in no wise prejudice our Cause. I
must beg Leave to reply, that it has already been very prejudicial to us: And
although I have the Confidence to hope that none of our Judges will suffer such
an Impression to mislead them into a Praejudication of the Case before them;
yet the Citation itself is a Punishment much too severe for the Offense, (if in
Truth any Offense could be made to appear.) Strangers to the Facts will
conclude, from the very Nature of such an extraordinary Citation, that it
implies some Guilt: And it certainly subjects us, 'till the Hour of Trial, to
the Reflections of the U -- y, before they are enabled to judge truly on the
Facts and Merits. It is well known to this Audience, Facts of this kind gather
Falsehood in Report; and that Fame, especially an ill-natured Fame, increases
as she flies. Many of these false Rumors have come to my own Hearing; and
several of them relative to myself; nay, the Accusation itself is a false
Imputation: For which Cause I am glad of this Opportunity to contradict them
before so full an Assembly of the whole U -- y. Nevertheless, as this Citation
has hitherto given some Countenance to such Reports, I cannot but think it a
Hardship, that I was not indulged with a Hearing before Mr. V. C. had so far
given a kind of Sanction to the Calumny.

But if I esteem this as an Hardship upon myself, there is much more Reason to
consider it as an Injustice to Mr. F -- n, a Gentleman of an unblemished
Reputation, a Master of Arts, Fellow of a College, and of distinguished Honor
in the U -- y: Yet not the common Civilities due to his Degree have been shown
him by the P -- r; (and this is undoubtedly an Affront to the whole Body of A.
M.) no Respect has been paid him as a P -- f -- r; nor the common Practice
observed of hearing him before the Report, or so much as Notice given to him or
any of us, of the Proceedings against us. For I am well assured, that, 'till I
accompanied them to the V. C.'s on Thursday-noon, neither the P -- f -- r, nor
Mr. C -- w had been spoke to upon this Subject by any of the Magistrates,
notwithstanding natural Equity seemed to require that we should have been
invited to answer Mr. B -- n's Objections, or apprized of them at least before
they were referred to a Consultation of the H -- ds. These are known Rules in
Courts of Equity and Civil Law.

Favorabiliores Rei potius quam Actores habentur.
Dig. l. 50. Reg. 125. In paenalibus causis benignius interpretandum est.
Reg. 155. And certainly, Mr. V. C. if ever it was reasonable to regard this
Doctine Favores ampliandi, Odia vero restinguenda sunt, it now seems most
remarkably so, when the notorious Divisions among ourselves already furnish our
Enemies with so much Cause of Triumph against us. But to receive in such Manner
an ill-founded Accusation against the Members of so great a School as W -- r,
does not seem to be a probable Method of reconciling Dissentions, or
extinguishing the Flames which already prevail too much. Excuse me, Sir, for
this Observation; for the Nature of my Defense led me to it imperceptibly.

After all this singular and severe Proceeding against us, does it appear that
we have deserved any Severity or Censure at all? Quite the Reverse. And I am
persuaded, upon an unprejudiced Enquiry into the Truth of the Case, it will be
evident, we have merited other Usage: Our President especially, instead of this
criminal Citation, has deserved a better Treatment; and I cannot but think,
that, instead of such a Censure, the Thanks of the whole Assembly are justly
due to him.

Gratitude and your Regard to Discipline should exact them from you, Mr. V. C.
and the H -- ds of Colleges, for preserving so great a Sobriety and Temperance
among forty young Gentlemen met to celebrate a Festival, and revive their
Friendships: For it must be imputed to his Preeminence, and a Deference to his
Rank as well as his Example, that so much Order, Decency, and Regularity were
maintained in so numerous a Meeting. Thanks are due to him ****** [ Here I was
again interrupted, and desired to confine myself to the Defense of my own
Conduct; in Obedience to which Injunction, I was obliged to proceed as follows,
without a proper Connection.]

Before my Conclusion I shall recapitulate the Facts, and subjoin a succinct
Answer to the Charge against myself.

It is most materially worthy your Consideration, Mr. V. C. to remember, that
it struck Eleven while the P -- r was in the Yard, that when he came into the
Room (which he did without any previous Notice) he found the Reckoning just
collected, and the Bill lying on the Table for immediate Payment; that we were
drinking a concluding Toast to Dr. N -- s's Health; and that it was really
owing to an accidental Miscalculation, and to the Difficulty of collecting the
Money from so many Members that we were retarded so long: And I may venture to
assure you, that I believe the whole Company would immediately have dispersed
to their respective Colleges after drinking to the Doctor's Health, if they had
not been so unseasonably, I must call it, visited.

In regard to myself, Mr. V. C. I do not find any Thing else alleged against
me, but that I spoke to the P -- r with a kind of Sneer, when he so abruptly
charged us with Irregularity, and ordered us to depart: -- That expostulating
with him, I said it was an Annual and not a Monthly Meeting; and that I told
him, with an Air of Triumph, "Mr. P -- r, I hope you do not think that what I
said was with a Design of getting Applause."

My first Speech to him (as I have before repeated it) was intended only to
wipe away the Aspersion of Irregularity, and to vindicate the Reputation of the
Company, by representing to him, with Deference to his Authority, the solemn
Occasion of our Meeting; and requesting him to remark the general Sobriety of
all that were present, and to report it accordingly. My other Speech, for which
I am here reponsible, was intended to undeceive the P -- r in his misconceived
Opinion and Suspicion, that the Applause was meant as an Insolence to him; and
I endeavored to convince him, in very few Words, of his Misinterpretation of
it.

As to the Allegation, that I spoke with a Sneer or Air of Triumph, it seems to
be inserted only to induce you to believe he had some Foundation for an
Accusation against me; for without that Addition, I am sure there is none: But
I positively answer to this Part of the Charge, that it is not true.

Upon the whole therefore, Mr. V. C. and H -- ds, I hope this very faithful
Explanation of my Conduct, and the Motives of it, will sufficiently satisfy
you, that I never intended any Insult against the P -- r in the Execution of
his Office; and I most solemnly declare to you, that I am not yet conscious to
myself of having committed any Offense against his Authority: But on the
contrary, I am very conscious, that my Behavior has in no wise deserved these
Proceedings against me; for the whole Company will bear me Witness, that I
recommended it to them to obey the P -- r and depart.

Upon this I shall rest my Defense, and submit it to your Judgment; reminding
you of an equitable Maxim, that if there should be any Difference of Sentiments
among you, Inter dispares Sententias, Mitior vincat.


P. S. When I had ended speaking the above Defense; the P -- r made a severe
Observation, That there was no Reason to conclude the Company was like to
depart, because the Reckoning was collected. But such a Construction of our
Intentions with so improbable a Conjecture betrayed a malevolent Desire to
insinuate Irregularity where he could not prove any. -- I replied therefore to
the following Purpose, That such a Fact was at least a strong Presumption in
our Favor; and that it had ever been admitted, Probable Presumptions on the
favorable Side were always allowed as tantum non Proofs.



Mr. A -- ll, having finished his Speech (no Part of which did at that Time
seem to give any Offense to the V. C. or the H -- ds) the Court was adjourned
to Tuesday the 27th of November at 9 in the Morning.

Here it may not be amiss to inform the Reader, that the latter Part of the P
-- r's Deposition was given in, and Mr. A -- ll's Defense spoke, not in the
Law-Schools, from whence the Court had adjourned on Account of it is growing
dark, but in the Theater, where the younger Part of the U -- y took the
Advantage (as might indeed easily have been foreseen) of their Distance from
the Court below, they being in the Galleries, to express with Freedom their
Sense of the Proceedings; and they accordingly took the Liberty to laugh at the
Plaintiff, hiss the Judge, and applaud the Defendant; and that in so tumultuous
a Manner, that it was with the utmost Difficulty they were persuaded to Silence
and Attention. To prevent those Disorders from being repeated, Sixteen Pro-P --
rs were appointed for the Tuesday following, with full Power to punish with the
utmost Severity any who should disturb the Proceedings.

Things being thus settled, the Court met again on Tuesday at 9 in the Morning,
when Mr. P -- f -- r F -- n, before he entered on his Defense, desired the P --
r might be sworn; but this he was informed by the V. C. and H -- ds, was not
the Custom of that Court. It was said, that the P -- r had taken an Oath on
entering into his Office, which was sufficient; but he might nevertheless be
upon Oath if he thought proper. Whereupon Mr. F -- n asked him if he chose to
be sworn, which he modestly refused. In omnibus Licentia comedenda est ei cui
onus probationis incumbit, Adversario suo de rei veritate jusjurandum infer;
ipso prius pro calumnia jurante, ut Judex juramenti fidem secutus ita possit
sententiam formare jure religionis referendae ei servando Dig. 22. 3. 25.


Mr. P -- f -- r F -- n's Defense, Dr. G -- e, P -- t of K -- s-College,
formerly Master of E -- n School, endeavored before Mr. P -- f -- r F -- n
began his Defense to intimidate him by observing, that Mr. A -- ll's Defense
was a seditious Harangue, and very affrontive to the V. C. and he would not
advise Mr. F -- n to speak in the same Manner; and while Mr. F -- n spoke, he
frequently interrupted him, found Fault with the Position of his Body, and told
him to turn more to the V. C. and not talk to the U -- y; rebuked him for
treating the P -- r's Character with Contempt, and all this with that high
Degree of Politeness, Urbanity and Softness of Manners, for which he is so
eminently distinguished.
spoke in the Law Schools, Nov. 27. 1750.
Mr. V. C. and Gentlemen of the Court,
I Am summoned to appear before you in this Court to answer for insulting and
interrupting the P -- r in the Execution of his Office, on Saturday, November
the 17th, at the W -- r Club. Great Surprise I must confess to you, I feel on
this Occasion, and still greater Anxiety; for little indeed did I expect, after
so many Years Standing, after so long a Time passed with a Character blameless
and irreproachable, after having just received that Dignity from the U -- ty,
which (how unworthy soever I may be) I now stand possessed of, little did I
expect that, after all, I should be cited to appear in this public Manner, and
called upon to answer for my Ill-behaviour. Very unworthy, Mr. V. C. should I
account myself of that Dignity, and very ungrateful to those who conferred it
upon me, were I capable of doing that which is laid to my Charge, of flying in
the Face of Authority, of insulting and interrupting a superior Magistrate in
the Execution of his Office.

That Masters of Arts, Fellows of Colleges, Gentlemen of Character and
Reputation in this Body, should be thus cited, is I believe, Mr. V. C. you will
yourself acknowledge, a Thing pretty unusual: I cannot therefore but be of
Opinion, that in such a Case the Facts alleged ought to be of a very
extraordinary Nature, and the Proofs of them extremely well supported.

I shall be more sollicitous, Mr. V. C. in my Defense, and in Defense of those
Gentlemen who are accused with me, because I think the Honor of that School
and Foundation from whence we came, the Honor of that Senate to which we
belong, and of that U -- y of which we are Members, are all of them most nearly
and intimately concerned in the Event. The Dignity, Weight, and Authority of a
P -- r ought undoubtedly to be strenuously supported; but at the same Time I am
satisfied, that a due Deference and Regard is to be paid to those of an
inferior Rank. To put M. A. on the same Footing with Under-Graduates, to
subject them to the same Restraint in every Word and Action; this, Mr. V. C. is
to level all Degrees, throw down all Distinction, and introduce Disorder and
Confusion in the U -- y.

Mr. A -- ll has already made his Defense, and a very excellent one it was,
that has sufficiently refuted every Thing laid to his Charge, and withal stated
the general Facts in a true Light, explained the Cause of our Meeting, and
shown the great Order and Regularity with which every Thing was conducted.

Never indeed I believe did so large and numerous an Assembly meet, where more
Decency and Sobriety were maintained than at that where I had the Honor to
preside. To us, Mr. V. C. I will beg leave to observe, this Decency and
Sobriety might be in some Measure owing; and we therefore rather expected, from
the Officers of the U -- y, those Thanks we endeavored to merit, than that
Censure which we apparently meant to avoid.

It is but Justice to the young Gentlemen concerned in this Accusation to
acknowledge, that their Behavior on this Occasion was worthy the Place of their
Education, worthy of that School to which we have been indebted for so many
great and good Men, to which our noble and most worthy Ch -- lor did himself
belong, and which he has so long patronized and protected; a School, in short,
to which we owe such Men as always have been, now are, and I trust always will
be, an Honor and an Ornament to this U -- y.

And yet, Mr. V. C. these are the Gentlemen who have created all this
Disturbance; by these the P -- r was insulted and interrupted, and we are
represented as Abettors of an Action we were not capable of committing, as
Encouragers of a Design to which we were absolute Strangers. How ill-supported
that Part of the Accusation is, which relates to Mr. A -- ll, has already
appeared; that what is alleged also against myself, stands on no better
Foundation, I shall now endeavor, Mr. V. C. most fully to convince you.

But before I enter upon this, there is one Thing which I must beg Leave to
take Notice of, and that is, that in a Cause of so serious and important a
Nature (for such it is to us) against so many Gentlemen of Honor and
Reputation, the whole is supported by the single Testimony of a Person who has
all along acknowleged himself to have been, during his whole Stay in the Club
Room, in such Confusion and Perplexity as not to know what he said or did, as
will indeed be sufficiently evident when you hear the Articles of his
Deposition; the inconceivable Falsehood and Absurdity of which I shall be
obliged to expose in Vindication of my own Conduct.

Omitting therefore those Articles which regard particular Persons, I shall
consider only those which have Respect to the general Behavior and remain
unanswered, and those which concern myself. These I shall lay before you, and
confute in their Order distinctly and separately.

First then, Mr. V. C. for Mr. P -- r's first Article; Mr. P -- r asserts, that
"upon going into the Room the Gentlemen halloo'd, to the best of his
Remembrance, before he spoke at all."

The Gentlemen halloo'd, he says, before he spoke at all, this is his first A
-- Quale principium dedit! It has always been looked upon as an ill Omen to
stumble at the Threshold. The first Thing he sets out with is absolutely and
directly false; and to prove this, I beg that Mr. Wish, according to his own
Desire, may be brought into Court, and sworn, [which he accordingly was, and
being asked whether, on his going up with the P -- r, he remembered any
Hallooing at his Entrance, he said no, and that the first Noise he heard, which
was a Clapping, was about five Minutes afterward, below Stairs. Mr. F -- r
also, a Gentleman who attended the P -- r to carry his Staff, and was in the
Room all the Time, was sworn, and said he remembered no such Noise till after
Mr. A -- had spoke.]

Here, Mr. V. C. is as ample Testimony as can be produced against Mr. P -- r's
Evidence; upon which I shall beg Leave to make this Observation.

That in all Courts of Judicature, (as I have been informed by Mr. A --, and
several other Lawyers) where many Articles are alleged, if any one of those
Articles is fairly proved to be absolutely and incontestibly false, the whole
Prosecution drops to the Ground: But perhaps it may be still better to prove
every Article as false as the first, which may be done with the same Ease, for
he goes on just as he begins, Ab ovo usque ad mala; for Example:

Article the Second says, That upon being informed there were Masters of Arts
in Company, he applied himself to Mr. F -- n; and said he was come to desire,
that all Persons, under the Degree of Master of Arts, in that Company would
retire; adding, that it was past Eleven o'Clock.

This Mr. V. C. is just as true as the former; for Mr. P -- r made the Speech,
he here mentioned, without any Application to me. However, it is matter of no
Moment, whether he did or not; as I apprehend what he only said to me cannot
possibly be a Charge against me.

I proceed therefore to another Article, and a pretty remarkable one it is,
that, "about this Time, some of the Company began to expostulate; one in
particular said, it was uncivil to visit that Night; some one said, it was a
rigorous Execution of the Orders, or, Words to that Purpose.""

This, Mr. V. C. is a most astonishing, unprecedented Way of laying an
Allegation; such a vague and undeterminate Method, as not only proves but
asserts Nothing, and would be sufficient to quash any Charge in any Court
whatever. About this Time, Mr. P -- r says, but about what Time we must guess,
some of the Company began to expostulate; but in regard to who they were, we
are again left in the Dark; one in particular said it was uncivil; some one
said it was a rigorous Execution! Is not this the strangest, most perplexed
Affair, a Story of I don't know what, said by I don't know who? But the
Absurdity of it is sufficiently evident, and it would be only Loss of Time to
endeavor to contradict what it is impossible to understand.

The next Article therefore, which I shall take Notice of, is this, that "Mr. P
-- f -- r F -- n laughed when he (the P -- r) attempted to show, that this was
not a rigorous Execution of the Orders, and said, turning to some near him,
This he calls a mild Execution of his Office;" and concludes with his usual
Salvo, " or Words to this Purpose."

Now, Mr. V. C. as to the first Part of this Article: I shall not contest a
Smile with him, as it is very probable one might be raised by Mr. P -- 's
boasting his great Indulgence: Every Under-Graduate is enjoined to leave
Taverns at Eleven: Now it had just struck Eleven by some Clocks, by others it
had not, when the P -- r came. Had he come half an Hour after indeed he might
have expected less Company there; but, as it happened, he was but a Minute or
two on the right Side of Authority; and consequently could have no great Merit
to plead on that Hdea. But in regard to the latter Part of this Article, it is
absolutely false: I never did say, this he calls a mild Execution of his
Office. This perhaps might be said by some of the Company, but I solemnly
declare it was not said by me, nor any Words to that Purpose; and this I will
testify on Oath if required, and I believe all the Gentlemen then present are
ready to do the same.

Surely, Mr. V. C. to confound Personages, to put Speeches into one Man's Mouth
which came out of another's, to falsify and equivocate in this Manner, to
subject Gentlemen to all this Trouble and Uneasiness on such weak Foundations,
is unjust and ungenerous. You will please to observe he would exculpate himself
from absolute Falsehood by the Salvos thrown into most of the Articles, such as
Words to this Purpose, and to the best of his Remembrance. Whether what he
asserts is to the best of his Remembrance or not, it is impossible for me to
determine; but I am certain if so it be, his Memory is of a very peculiar and
extraordinary Nature; for he has hitherto been so unfortunate as to remember
nothing, but that which was never said.

But to proceed. In the Deposition, Mr. V. C. you will find the following very
curious Article; that "during these Disputes, Mr. P -- f -- r said two or three
Times, The P -- r is doing his Duty; that he understood him to say so with a
Sneer the first Time; that afterward he thought that he did recollect himself,
and seem to be serious; and lastly, that he should have continued to have
thought so, if he had not soon after turned into a Rage." Here Mr. V. C. is
another Instance of Mr. P -- r's amazing Exactness and Perspicuity in the
Delivery of his Charge. First you see it was said with a Sneer, then it was
said without a Sneer; and then it was said with a Sneer again. He should have
thought I had been serious, (he says) but that I turned into a Rage. Now for my
Part, I cannot help thinking, but that most People who are in a Rage are
serious; though it does indeed sometimes happen, that Men are very serious, and
very angry too, on very trifling and insignificant Occasions, as is evident
from the whole Course of this Prosecution. However, to cut short the Matter now
in Dispute, whether what I said was with a Sneer or without a Sneer, in a
Passion or out of a Passion, I declare I never said it at all. It was what
indeed by my Behavior I expressed, and that most seriously all the Time; and
the Gentlemen present will bear me Witness, that I desired them all several
Times, as did also Mr. C -- w and Mr. A -- ll, not to insult or interrupt the P
-- r.

Mr. P -- r goes on to assert, that "Mr. P -- f -- r talked some Time, and
expressed a great deal of Anger and Resentment upon being interrupted by the P
-- r that Night."

Mr. P -- f -- r, (he says) talked some Time: -- One would really imagine, by
the Number of the Things alleged, and the P -- r's Manner of relating them,
that he had spent at least two Hours in the Room; though the Truth is, he was
there but twenty Minutes in the whole, and in that Space it is impossible, half
the Things, with the Answers, Replies, etc. which he talks of, could be said.
But he goes on to assert, that I expressed a great deal of Anger and
Resentment, and he had told you before, that I was in a Rage.

Men in a Rage, Mr. V. C. inflamed with Anger and Resentment, are apt to throw
out very harsh and cutting Things, and which when they are cool they are very
sorry for; but, I don't hear that Mr. P -- r has any such to produce against
me; and I have no Reason to suppose, that if I had said them, they would have
escaped his Observation: I would therefore infer, Mr. V. C. that I could be in
no very great Passion: I am sure if I was, it was the most fortunate Passion I
ever was in in all my Life. That I expressed some Resentment at his coming I
shall not deny; but on the contrary do still assert, that I had Reason so to
do: I do not dispute, nor did I then, his Right to visit at any Time or Place;
but I remonstrated to him, that it was very unusual to visit on that Night; and
withal, that when Masters of Arts were in Company, more Respect was always paid
to them. This, Mr. V. C. is indisputable. Mr. P -- r should have sent up to us;
Mr. Wish desired him to do so; but he would not. Mr. A -- ll gave you a
remarkable Instance of the Respect paid to our Degree, and I could give you
several, were it necessary to our Defense. There were Masters of Arts, there
were Under-Graduates in the House at that Time; but nobody was visited, nobody
taken Notice of, but the W -- r Club.

Mr. V. C. I insist upon it, the Honor of the Senate ought to be supported;
but if the Members of it are to be brought into a Court in this Manner on every
trifling Occasion; if a Look, a Laugh, a Smile, shall subject them to Censure
and Punishment, how shall the younger Part of the U -- y be induced to pay them
that Deference and Regard which is due to their Station? I protest, for my own
Part, I shall for the future never expect it.

One Article more, and we have done. Mr. P -- r deposes, that "Mr. P-f-r
called out here is to our next merry Meeting, which Words were twice at least
repeated, he added once, without Interruption from P -- rs."

To our next merry Meeting, Mr. V. C. was certainly the Health, and a very
innocent Health it is. In what follows, Mr. P -- r has indulged himself in his
usual License of adding Words which were never spoke.

Here you will please to observe, every Thing is positively asserted: It is not
Words to this Purpose, or to the best of my Remembrance, but the whole is
confidently attested. Now we do as confidently attest, that the Health, as
related by the P -- r, was not drunk. Mr. F -- r, the Gentleman who attended
the P -- r, being asked, if he heard any Toast proposed, answered in the
Affirmative, viz. "To our next merry Meeting, and that he believed the Words
without Interruption, etc. were added, by somebody, but he could not say who."


In Matters, Mr. V. C. where every Thing must depend on Words as related by the
Plaintiff, the utmost Caution should be used; because the Addition of a single
Word, nay a single Syllable, may entirely change the State of the Case in
Question; and I have known a Cause of a criminal Nature laid aside, merely on
Account of the mis-spelling of a Name. Mr. V. C. you must allow, that if an
Accuser has the Liberty of adding or taking away Words at his Pleasure, there
is nothing which can be said, but may very easily be proved actually to have
been said, and consequently in such a Case no Justice can be expected.

And now, Mr. V. C. and Gentlemen of the Court, I have, as briefly as I could,
answered those Parts of the general Charge which might be thought to remain
unconfuted, and withal every Article separately which related to myself; and I
make no Doubt but that Things have now quite another Face than when partially
and imperfectly represented to you. Had I been apprehensive I was before Men
whose Minds were tainted by Prejudice, or who would have wrested any Thing to
my future Disadvantage, I should not have spoken with that Openness and Freedom
which I have ventured to make use of: But I hope I speak to Men unbiassed and
uninfluenced. You, Mr. V. C. have indulged us in a free Liberty of Defense, and
given us a fair and equitable Hearing. The same Candor, with which you have
hitherto acted in the Course of these Proceedings, we also expect in your
Determination of them. You have seen how little, after all, is alleged against
us; how very small a Part of that little has been at all supported; and that
not one single Article against myself proved; you see, that the whole
Deposition is perplexed and confused, and you will be pleased to remember, that
your Judgment must rest on the Proof of the Facts there alleged, and on that
only.

The Statutes, Mr. V. C. and Assessors, are the Laws by which we are to be
judged, but those Statutes you have yourselves the Power to interpret: A very
great and a very extensive Power it is, and which ought indeed to be lodged in
the Hands of none but Men of the strictest Honor and Integrity, Conscience,
Tenderness, and Humanity. On that Honor, that Integrity, and Humanity, we
firmly and willingly rest our Cause. You will consider, Mr. V. C. the
Characters of the Gentlemen concerned; how grievously they have already
suffered, and how unjustly, by this Accusation: You will consider, that the
Censure of an U -- y is no light or easy Punishment; and that it will not be
confined within these Walls: Reputation, Mr. V. C. is a tender Point, and by no
means to be blemished on every slight Occasion: It is on that, our good or ill
Success in future Life must depend; and if you take it from us, it will not be
in your Power to give it us again.

I know it has been said by many, that the Honor of the U -- y is concerned to
support a P -- r; and so it is also, Mr. V. C. to support it is P -- f -- rs,
it is Masters of Arts, it is Scholars, and every Member of it; but not to support
either of them, of what Rank or Degree soever, in Falsehood, in malicious
illgrounded Prosecutions; nor to support them against Truth, and against
Conviction.

I believe, Mr. V. C. every one here sees, (and none I hope with greater
Pleasure than yourself) that I am entirely innocent. If I have been obliged to
expose the Absurdities, Perplexity, and Confusion of Mr. B -- n's Evidence, it
was what I could by no Means avoid. It was an ill-founded, groundless
Accusation, and therefore he deserved it: He was dissuaded from the Prosecution
by many, but persisted; and if the Odium consequent on such Behavior be
general, I cannot help it.

To your Determination therefore, Mr. V. C. and Assessors, we submit our Cause;
and from you we hope all the Amends which can now be made us, to be honouraby
cleared; but this must be left to your own Breast.

In the mean Time, we shall all of us have the noblest Testimony of our
Innocence, we shall have what is infinitely preferable to the favorable
Decision of all the Courts in the Universe, we shall have the silent Applause
of our own Consciences to support, we shall have the unanimous Voice of all
good, honest and reasonable Men to acquit us.

Mr. F -- n having finished his Defense, Mr. C -- w addressed the V. C. as
follows.

Mr. V. C. and Gentlemen of the Court,
THE general Behavior of the W -- r Club on the 17th Instant, and particularly
that of the presiding Members, has now been so clearly explained, and the Facts
alleged against us by Mr. P -- r so fully answered, that I should greatly
infringe upon that Time which to every Member of this Place dedicated to
private Study must be so precious, should I detain the Court by attempting to
enlarge upon what has been already so well urged in behalf of our Conduct.

But I hope it will not be taken amiss, if, before I proceed to the Defense of
my own Behavior, and to answer that Part of the general Accusation which
affects myself, if I do join with Mr. P -- f -- r F -- n, and Mr. A -- ll in
this Observation, that, when Masters of Arts, one of them particularly
distinguished, several Fellows of Colleges, and many other Gentlemen of great
Reputation, whose Characters have from their Admission to this Time remained
unblemished, do receive such a Disgrace as to be publicly cited to this Court,
that the Facts might be expected to be of a more extraordinary Nature, or at
least much better supported, than I flatter myself they really appear to every
candid and impartial Hearer.

But this Consideration I submit to the Judgment of the Court: And I hope Mr. P
-- r will not take it ill, if I mention what I think it is my Duty to declare,
as my real and sincere Opinion, that either through Defect of Memory, or
perhaps through that Confusion which Mr. P -- r acknowleges he was in at the
Time, he has mistaken some of the Facts, misrepresented others, and I have
Reason to believe has in a great measure misconstrued the whole.

I need not mention Particulars, which have been already urged in Proof of
this: But I could not answer it to my Conscience, did I not beg leave to speak
only with regard to one Particular alleged against Mr. A -- ll, viz. That when
he desired Mr. P -- r to observe the Sobriety of the Club, he should seem to
express himself with a Sneer. I stood close to Mr. A -- ll at this Time, and
took particular Notice of him, and I do from my Heart declare, that as far as
it is possible to judge of the inward Thoughts from the outward Behavior; as
far as it is possible to distinguish the real Sentiments of the Heart from the
Expressions of the Tongue, (which I allow is extremely difficult;) yet, as far
as my Penetration reaches, I think the Look, the Gesture, the very Sound of Mr.
A -- ll's Voice, and the Manner of delivering himself, testified quite the
contrary: And as a further Proof of Mr. A -- ll's Zeal to show all proper
Respect to Mr. P -- r, on receiving Applause from the Company for what he had
said, he immediately, with as much tender Concern as any Man could express on
the Occasion, begged all the Gentlemen to offer no Insult to the P -- r; in
which Petition Mr. P -- f -- r F -- n and myself very strenuously joined. I
might mention other particulars alleged against the same Gentleman, as well as
against Mr. P -- f -- r F -- n, in which I am persuaded Mr. P -- r is very much
mistaken; but those Gentlemen have so well defended themselves, that I shall
only add one Observation or two more in general, and proceed to answer to my
own Charge.

And First, I cannot but believe, that every candid Hearer will allow that the
Behavior of the presiding Members, our Attendance at the Club purposely to
preserve Regularity and Sobriety, our previous Resolution to see the Gentlemen
depart by the statutable Hour, our zealous Endeavors to execute what we had
resolved, (which Endeavors had succeeded, but for that Deficiency in the
Reckoning, which, to my Knowledge, detained many, who were desired to stay 'till
it was made up;) that these Circumstances make us deserving of Applause rather
than Reproach, and ought to gain us the Thanks of the Officers of the U -- y,
rather than be the Means of bringing us to our public Trial. I must observe
further, as a Proof of the Regularity of my School-fellows, that I believe
there never was so large an Assembly, comprised chiefly of Youth, met together
upon so extraordinary an Occasion, in which any public Officer could expect to
find fewer Marks either of Riot or Intemperance.

But to hasten to what regards myself: -- Before I answer Particulars, give me
leave, Mr. V. C. to observe in general, that, as I have been upwards of seven
Years of this U -- y, have now the Honor to be a Member of the Senate, and
Fellow of one of the principal Colleges; that, as during all this Time I have
shown the greatest Regard to the Laws of the Place, have behaved with as much
Regularity myself as any other Member, and promoted the same as much in others,
I think, and I flatter myself the whole Court will think it highly improbable,
I should at this Time of Day begin to trample upon Authority, or insult any
public Officer in the Execution of his Duty.

The Credit therefore of the School I come from, the Honor of the U -- y, and
particularly of the College I belong to, but, what is more to me in my private
Capacity, my own Repute with those, who have honored me from my Admission to
this Time with their Friendship and Patronage, oblige me to endeavor to wipe
off that Stain which my Character may possibly receive, from this Accusation,
in the Eyes of them and many others, who have hitherto, I am persuaded,
entertained a very different Opinion of me.

The first Fact I stand particularly charged with is, in Mr. P -- r's Words,
That "I insisted it was rude and uncivil, or Words to this Purpose, in him to
visit, when there were Masters of Arts in Company, and one of them a P-f-r;"
and that I asked him, "if he did not think us able to take Care of the young
Gentlemen in Company:" To which he replied, "It did not appear we had done so,
for it was now past Eleven."

This Reply of Mr. P -- r's, I hope I may say without Offense, seems to
intimate, that he rather meant to vindicate himself than prove any Insult
offered to, or Interruption in, his Office from me; unless he calls the
remonstrating to him his unprecedented Behavior to Masters of Arts, and Want
of that Civility which the strictest Officers have always paid to that Degree,
an Insult; unless he calls that an Interruption in his Office, which was meant
to show him, how far we had been instrumental ourselves in promoting that
Regularity and Sobriety, which Mr. A -- ll desired him to take Notice of.

The next Article, if meant as an Accusation, is, with Submission to the Court,
of a very extraordinary Nature; since I never knew before, that it was criminal
to receive Applause; nor can I imagine, that any of the Court, or even Mr P --
r himself, will think it more so to be delighted with it; to be delighted with
the Approbation of my School-fellows for speaking in support of the Privileges
of a Master of Arts, and of the Deference, which I perhaps ignorantly thought
might be expected to be paid by any Officer of the U -- y to a P-f-r in the
same.

The two remaining Articles against me are, First, That "I insisted it was
strange, or Words to that Effect, that the Execution of these Orders should be
begun at the W -- r Club;" and Secondly, That I further said, "We scarcely know
what these Orders are; which to be observed, and which not; and complained, in
general Words, that it appeared some were executed and some not."

That the Words, which Mr. P -- r has put into my Mouth in the first Part of
this Charge, are such as I made Use of, I believe I may venture to deny; since
I was far from thinking, that it is being the W -- r Club, gave it a greater
Sanction, or exempted it from any legal Visitation more than another; but meant
to signify, that as an annual Meeting, at which Masters of Arts presided, it
might not unreasonably hope for a little more Indulgence than is usually
allowed to a private Company: And Mr. P -- r must have greatly mistaken my
Words in the other Part of the Charge, to accuse me of denying my Knowledge of
these Orders; since I protest, Mr. V. C. I said nothing to any such Purpose,
and I believe yourself and the rest of the Court will think it highly
improbable I should, when I had the new Regulations at that very Time in my
Pocket, and was present when they passed.

These, Mr. V. C. are all the Articles particularly alleged against me; to
which how far and how clearly I have answered, I willingly leave to your
Determination; which I hope will be such, as to clear me entirely from any
Aspersions which this Accusation may have thrown upon me; and that I may not
now begin to appear the Promoter of Irregularity, and the Encourager of
Disobedience, who have so long given Testimony of a far different Disposition.

Mr. V -- n then being asked by the V. C. if he had any Thing to say in Answer
to the P -- r's Accusation, spoke thus:

Mr. V. C. and Gentlemen of the Court,
I Am here called upon publicly to vindicate my Character which has been
stigmatized through the whole U -- y, upon Mr. P -- r's Accusation of having,
in a particular Manner, distinguished myself in the Affronts he pretends were
put upon his Office the Night he visited the W -- r Meeting; and having added
Insults to that Injury, when he called upon me to give an Account of my Conduct
at his Room.

So much has been already spoken, and so justly, in Vindication, as well of the
Conduct of the Masters of Arts, as of all the Members of the Society without
Exception; that (should it be thought incumbent on me to answer this Part of my
Charge at all, as I shall endeavor to show Reason why I should not) a few
Observations would be sufficient to quash and falsify such a frivolous and
ill-supported Accusation.

And here it is a Satisfaction to me, that I can, if necessary, support my
Confutation of this Part of my Charge, by the Evidence of This Gentleman, being
one of the Club, though by Mistake not cited into Court, was not permitted to
appear as an Evidence in Mr. V -- n's Favor.
a Gentleman, a Fellow of a College, and who not being summoned as an
Accomplice, will I hope appear a more unexceptionable Witness than a Person
whose Confusion had led him into the numberless Mistakes and Calumnies, which
have been amply set forth by the Gentlemen who have so fully answered their
Parts of the Charge already.

To begin with the first Objection, which I have already hinted, I must beg
leave to remind the Court of the surprising Incident by which Mr. P -- r had
the Happiness to discover that heinous Offender, whose rude and insolent
Behavior had struck him, in so particular a Manner, amidst the universal
Insult he so loudly complains of. He tells you, his first Suspicion light on
Mr. V -- e; who having cleared himself, our Accuser finds himself once more at
a Loss for his Culprit, and a whole Day passes before his good Fortune throws
in his Way a false and malicious Report, which having compared with his own
confused Recollection of what had passed, or rather Invention of what had not
passed, he fixes his Charge upon me; a Person whom he confessed, at his
Chambers, he had not the least previous Knowledge of, nor did he pretend, when I
appeared, to recollect me: And as he also chooses to conceal the Author of his
Intelligence, it is probable and will I hope incontestably appear, that his
Informer was as ignorant in that respect as himself.

From such Conjectures, and such hearsay Evidence, he makes not the least
Scruple to affirm, that I am the Person he pretends to have great Reason for
Complaint against; and as I have always heard, it is necessary that the Accuser
should be positive in his Proofs of the Person of the Accused, even before he
is permitted to give his Charge, I hope it will appear Time to call for some
more unexceptionable Evidence than the Repetition of a Calumny communicated by
a Person, whose Name is to remain a Secret. Mr. V. C. here asked, if Mr. V -- n
would rest his Defense there. He replied, he would readily proceed to examine
the Articles of the Charge, provided this Objection might have it is due Weight;
which was promised. It must here be observed, that the Person, who attended Mr.
P -- r, swore first, that he observed no such Behavior as is, in the Charge,
attributed to Mr. V -- n, from any Person. And secondly, that he did not know
Mr. V -- n at the Time they visited the Meeting.


The first Article of the Charge accuses me "of laughing in his, the P -- r's,
Face, and behaving otherwise very insolently."

If so laudable an Occasion of meeting my Friends, and renewing earliest
Acquaintances, had inclined me to a more joyous Disposition and Aspect, than
the solemn Appearance of such an Officer as Mr. P -- r required, I hope that
Consideration (and not the Insolence that Gentleman ascribes as the Motive)
will be thought to have occasioned the gay Appearance which seems so much to
have shocked him, and I cannot help applying on this Occasion that equitable
Maxim with which Mr. A -- ll concluded his Defense, Inter dispares Sententias,
mitior vincat.


The next Article says, that "I continued to show several Marks of Rudeness."
This vague, no-meaning Article (as Mr. P -- r seems not to recollect these
Marks) I may do well to pass in Silence.

Next follows, that I was going to reply to a Question, he has thought proper
to omit. I should not trouble you, Mr. V. C. with a Repetition of these Heads
of Accusation, if they were not alleged as Marks of so ungentlemanlike a
Behavior as Insolence, which is here endeavored to be proved by heartily
anticipating Words which he says I was prevented from speaking; Mr. P -- f -- r
F -- n, who he said was the Person that stopped me, assured the Court he
remembered no such Attempt from me, nor any such Prevention on his Part: And
this Part of my Accusation is concluded by affirming, they were to have been
insolent had they been uttered.

I come now to the second Part of Mr. P -- r's Charge, where he has selected
some Expressions which appeared to him injurious to the Discipline and Officers
of the U -- y. Had he been pleased to deliver the whole Sentences in which
those Expressions were contained, I should, I am persuaded, have stood absolved
from any such Aspersion; and here I apprehend it will again appear
extraordinary, that Words said to be dropped from an accused Person in a
private Examination, should serve to aggravate that Person's Charge in a Court
of Equity.

The first Article on this second Head accuses me of having talked much of my
Independency. The World I remember to have used, and to this Effect; that as I
was not intimidated by any Dependence on the U -- y, I was ready and willing to
answer Mr. P -- r's Accusation, at any Time and in any Place he should think
proper to call upon me. This I said in answer to his asking me, If I proposed
to deny his Accusation in the same Manner I had done there, wherever I should
be called to an Account.

I am next accused of questioning him as to the Customs of his Office; and what
is more strange, I am complained of in a Court of Justice for owning him
capable to instruct me. My Question was, whether his Office obliged him to
interrupt, in that rigorous Manner, so regular and solemn a Meeting as the
Celebration of the Anniversary of our Benefactress.

The following carry so dubious an Air, that I question, if Mr. P -- r's Memory
(though in no small Esteem with him) was not in this Case a little suspicious
to himself; as the Terms are so general and his assistant Expletives are so
frequently called in, (though very judiciously, I must confess;) as I
apprehend, if it had not been for those Licenses of Rhetoric, the Words Sneer
and Contemptuous being thrown in, these Articles could not bear the least
Color of Offense.

Next comes an amphibious Article; and whether to consider it as an Accusation
against, or an Excuse for, the Person he is accusing, I am at a Loss; as his
acquitting me of any Intention to affront him is a new Expedient for
corroborating a Charge of Insolence. He indeed seems to have answered one End,
which is endeavoring to make it appear, that Mr. P -- f -- r F -- n was the
Man who received all our Applause, and by that adding some Credibility to his
malicious Assertions against him: But I do declare, that I said I applauded, to
signify my Approbation of what was said by the Gentlemen, who took the Pains to
speak for the Company, without naming any particular Person. This I thought it
incumbent upon me to mention, as I observed the same Insinuation in Mr. V --
e's Charge.

His last Article seems calculated to prejudice the U -- y against me; if
indeed Men of Sense could be suspected to be biassed by a Declaration of Mr. B
-- n's Opinion of what will be my future Conduct.

Having briefly gone through every Article of a Charge grounded on Hearsay, and
resting on Mr. P -- r's Interpretations of Looks, Reflections on Words spoke
and about to be spoken, his Notions of Gestures, and Presagings of future
Events; nothing now remains, but that I return my particular Thanks to you, Mr.
V. C. and to the Gentlemen of the U -- y in general, for so candid and
attentive a Hearing, and for that Desire shown, so much to their Honor, of
hearing my Confutation of one of the severest of Charges had it been proved; I
mean the Contempt of superior Authority, mildly and impartially exerted: And
having had an Opportunity to clear myself in their Eyes, adds not a little to
the Satisfaction I shall receive in finding myself absolved by so equitable and
unexceptionable a Judge.

Mr. V -- n having finished, Mr. V -- e also made a short, modest and sensible
Speech, in Defense of his Conduct.

The Defenses being over, the V. C. desired Time to consider the Circumstances,
and adjourned the Court to Thursday, November 29.

And now it was hoped, that, after the Defendants had so fully proved the
Charge against them to be groundless, false and malicious; -- after Part of it
had been confuted by the Oaths of Witnesses produced; -- after they had shown
the P -- r's Evidence to be nothing but Malice, Confusion and Perplexity; --
that the Gentlemen accused would all of them have been justly and honorably
acquitted; but, upon what Foundation, or from what Motives we will not pretend
to say, they met with a very different Fate: For, on Thursday, Nov. 29, at
Three in the Afternoon, the Court, being once again met on this very important
Affair, the V. C. delivered his Sentence, which was to this Effect.

That it was the Opinion of the Court, that Mr. F -- n, Mr. A -- ll, Mr. C --
w, Mr. V -- n, and Mr. V -- e, were guilty of the Charge alleged against them
by the P -- r; and that they should be reprimanded for it, and he did therefore
reprimand them. But, in regard to Mr. A -- ll's Sentence in particular, the V.
C. delivered himself in the following Words;

It is a most disagreeable Circumstance to me, that I am obliged to add, in
support of the Dignity of the Office of V. C. that it is the unanimous Opinion
of this Court, that Mr. A -- ll, for his rude, contemptuous and disobedient
Behavior Nulla Juris ratio aut aequitatis benignitas patitur, ut qua
salubriter pro utilitate hominum introducontur, ea nes duriore interpretatione
contra ipsorum commodum ad severitatem producamus. Dig. 1. l. 3. 25.
to me, during his Mr. A -- ll remonstrating after Sentence passed, that he
could not recollect any Thing in his Defense deserving it, Dr. G -- e said,
"Sir, it was not what you said, but the Manner of it; Sir, you know you
elevated your Voice."
Defense of himself in Court, be suspended ab omni Gradu suscepto et
suscipiendo; and I do, by my Authority, accordingly suspend you, ab omni Gradu
suscepto et suscipiendo.

The rest of the Club were also reprimanded, and all under the Degrees of M. A.
or L. L. B. punished 6 s. 8 d. for being out of College after Eleven o'Clock.

All the Parties accused, condemned in the Expenses of the Court.

Mr. A -- ll, not conscious to himself of having, by any Part of his Mr. A --
ll remonstrating after Sentence passed, that he could not recollect any Thing
in his Defense deserving it, Dr. G -- e said, "Sir, it was not what you said,
but the Manner of it; Sir, you know you elevated your Voice."
Defense, deserved so severe a Sentence appealed against it to the Senate.

The Appeal was admitted in Court, and entered by the Register. But Mr. A -- ll
waiting on the V. C. next Day with the P -- r, who is appointed by the Statute,
in Cases of Appeal, to inhibit the Execution of the Sentence, the V. C. would
not suffer Mr. A -- ll to proceed; but desired Time to consider, whether he
should admit the Appeal or not, and, after about a Fortnight's Deliberation,
sent Mr. A -- ll the following Note:

SIR,
I Could not determine upon your Business before Yesterday, after the Post came
in; and then it was agreed, that no Appeal could be allowed from my Sentence of
Suspension.

I am, Sir, Your very humble Servant, E -- K --.


Mr. A -- ll, being of Opinion that the V. C. is not authorized by the Statutes
of the U -- y to refuse his Right of Appeal, is determined to support and
defend it.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE 6, l. 20, for separate read separate. P. 7, l. 17, a Period at Club. P.
24, in the Quotation, for Actore, read Actori. P. 32, in the Quotation, for
comedenda read concedenda. P. 46, l. 6, for nor read not.


