THE DOUBLE MISTAKE. A COMEDY. As it is PERFORMED at the THEATER ROYAL IN
COVENT GARDEN.

Depressa resurgam. LONDON: Printed for J. ALMON, opposite Burlington-House in
Piccadilly; T. LOWNDES in Fleet Street; S. BLADON in Paternoster Row; and J.
WILLIAMS, next the Mitre Tavern in Fleet Street. M.DCC.LXVI. [Price One
Shilling and Six Pence.]

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Lord Belmont, Mr. ROSS. Sir Charles Somerville, Mr. SMITH. Mr. Belmont, Mr.
SHUTTER. Mr. Southern, Mr. DUNSTALL. Elder Freeman, Mr. HULL. Younger Freeman,
Mr. DYER. Thomas, Servant to Mr. Belmont, Mr. HOLTOM. Ralph, Servant to Younger
Freeman, Mr. CUSHING, Two Men Servants.
WOMEN.
Lady Bridget Belmont, Mrs. WALKER. Lady Mary Belmont, Miss MACKLIN. Lady
Louisa Belmont, Miss WILFORD. Emily Southern, Mrs. MATTOCKS. A Maid Servant.
SCENE, LONDON.

TO HER GRACE THE Duchess of MARLBOROUGH,
THIS Comedy is most humbly inscribed, by one whose work and wishes,
inconsiderable as they are, should ever be dedicated to her noble family, and
who is also sensible of the highest respect for her Grace's merit, and truly
amiable character, and who has the honor to be,

Her GRACE's most humble, and most obedient Servant, The AUTHOR.

PROLOGUE.
By a FRIEND.
Spoken by Mr. SMITH. TO lead attention through five acts of prose,
Where to soft notes no tuneful couplet flows,
To please each heart, each judgment, eye and ear,
The attempt how bold! the labor how severe!
Thus I addressed our bard; who quick replied
With honest diffidence, and modest pride:
" If I should fail, I shall not think it shame
" To miss what few have gained, the wreath of fame.
" This spot I deem the public treasury,
" Where wits, rare coins, for general service lie;
" Where critics, strict examiners, are placed
" To try each piece by that nice standard, taste;
" And what to public use may be applied,
" Is justly saved, what faulty, thrown aside.
" Hence, it is the Poet's duty to dispense
" Each various vein of humor, wit, or sense;
" Not miser-like, to his own h^ard confine
" The smallest spark of nature's genuine mine;
" But to the muse his grateful tribute pay,
" And in the common mint his quota lay."
On this resolve, he to your sterling store
Presents a specimen of untried ore;
If any worth it bears, assayed by you,
His private talent is the public due;
And should it not disgrace your brilliant mass,
Give it your stamp, and let the metal pass.
THE DOUBLE MISTAKE. A COMEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
An apartment in Lord Belmont 's house. Enter Lord Belmont, reading a letter, a
servant following. Lord BELMONT. MY compliments to the lady, and I will
instantly attend her. Order James to bring the chariot to the door directly.

[ Exit Servant. The more I think of this extraordinary summons, the more I am
surprised at it. Emily Southern, my near relation, at an inn in London, and
desires to see me! -- I tremble for the cause; for though by no means infected
with Spanish jealousy, I look upon it that the honor of every woman in my
family, lessens or increases mine.


Enter Mr. Belmont. Bell. Good Morrow, nephew, I am glad to see you up so early;
I wonder how the folks, that lie a-bed, ever get through the business of the
day; for my part, though I rise ever so soon, I am in a perfect hurry, from
morning to night.


L. Bell. I should imagine, sir, that a little regularity might prevent your
being so much embarrass'd. -- Method makes all things easy.


Enter a Servant. Ser. Your lordship's chariot is ready.

[Exit.
Bell. That Is lucky. -- Will you be so kind, my lord, as to take me along with
you, as far as the Tower? There is a wharfinger there, who, I am told, is
possessed of an inestimable treasure: a Roman ring made of iron, which, for
ought we know, might have belonged to the mighty Julius himself.


Enter Thomas. Tho. Sir, [ to Mr. Belmont] the gentleman is below, whom you
desired to wait on you about the tulip roots: he says there is a cargo just
arrived from Holland, and if you don't make haste, the choice ones will be gone
immediately.


Bell. Was ever man so unfortunate! Well, my lord, you see I cannot wait on you,
at present; but I beg you will not go to the wharfinger's alone, nor buy the
ring till I see it.


L. Bell. You may depend upon me, sir: I shall not even go within a mile of the
place; my engagements lie another way.

[Exit.
Bell. That Is well, that is well; get me my cloak: no, get me a chair, I Will go
directly to the man that has the macaw birds, and the cocatoo's, and buy me
some of them immediately.


Tho. The gentleman waits about the tulips, sir.


Bell. Odso, odso, I forgot; was ever any poor man so hurried as I am!


Enter a Servant. Ser. Sir, there is a man below, that says you desired him to
call with some fine shells.


Bell. What shall I do? Well, I will see the man with the shells. [going,
returns] There again, I am undone, my spectacles are at Margass's. You must
step to my sister, Lady Bridget, and desire her to lend me hers [ To Thomas.


Tho. I don't believe, sir, her ladyship uses spectacles; at least I should be
afraid to offend her, by asking.


Bell. Not use spectacles, and near threescore! ha, ha, ha, very fine, indeed:
but come, Thomas, get my cloak; I Will take a turn in the Park, and then to the
Cocoa-tree, to hear the news of the day, and peruse the advertisements. -- I
have a world of business on my hands, that is certain.

[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
A chamber in an inn. Enter Emily. Emi. There lives not, surely, on this globe,
a wretch so lost, so totally forlorn, as I am. In one sad moment deprived of
friends and fame. But what are these to the sharp pangs that rend my tortured
heart, for his unkindness, who should heal my grief, assert my innocence, and
clear my fame? But he, alas! thinks meanly of me, and in that thought the
measure of my sorrow is accomplished. -- I am a wretch, indeed!


Enter a Servant. Ser. Madam, the gentleman you sent to is below, and desires
to see you.


Emi. Show him in -- [ Exit Servant.] How shall I tell my story, how make my
innocence appear?


Enter Lord Belmont. L. Bell. That I am glad to see you any where, my dear
Emily, this visit will evince; but, I confess, I am surpised at meeting you in
such a place as this, when I, who have the honor of being so nearly related to
you, am master of a house in London. I think your billet said you were alone. I
now expect you will explain this mystery, by other means than tears and
blushes. -- Pray speak, and clear my doubts.


Emi. Innocence should be bold, my lord; but maiden innocence is full of fear.
Pray pardon my hesitation; I know not how, or where I shall begin.


L. Bell. Recollect your spirits, and be assured you speak to one, who, to the
utmost of his power, will prove a brother to you. -- My sisters too, I Will
answer for them, when once acquainted with your person and merit, will be your
sisters also.


Emi. Your kindness has encouraged me. Your lordship knows my mother died while
I was yet an infant, and that my father married soon again. -- From that
unhappy hour, I became an alien to his heart and person; under pretense of
education, I was sent to school, where I received the honor of your lordship's
frequent and friendly visits, and remained there 'till about two years since.
-- Would I had never left it!


L. Bell. Pray proceed.


Emi. The taunts, the cruelties I met at home, are not to be described. 'Till
about six weeks since, there was a match proposed to me, with the most
detestable of men which I, prostrate at my father's feet, and bathing them with
tears, refused.


L. Bell. He could not sure attempt to force your hand?


Emi. Every argument was used to persuade, every threat to terrify me, into
compliance, but in vain. During this time of persecution, my father's ill
health obliged him to visit Bath; I was permitted to attend him, upon promising
to try to conquer my aversion to this hated marriage. -- I promised any thing,
to gain a respite.


L. Bell. As you describe your situation, I cannot blame you. -- But was it
aversion to the match proposed, or prepossession for some other object, that
ruled your will? I beg you will be sincere. Your blushes answer me. -- But go
on.


Emi. I do not mean, my lord, to hide a single thought; sincerity is the fair
garb of virtue, and they who know no guilt, need no disguise. At Bath, I met a
gentleman, whom I had known at school, his sister was my friend and favorite
there, and, in my childish days, he used to call himself my lover. -- Even then
I thought him, as sure he is this moment, the most amiable of his sex.


L. Bell. Poor Emily, I begin to tremble for you.


Emi. This gentleman renewed his former courtship, if I may be allowed the
term, while my first impressions recurr'd with added strength. He asked me of
my father, who absolutely refused, and forbad me ever to see him more -- cruel,
inhuman sentence!


L. Bell. This was indeed severe.


Emi. I received a billet from him, requesting me to see him when the family
were retired to rest. My father had ordered every thing to be got ready for
leaving Bath next day.


L Bell. And you, of course, consented to this last adieu?


Emi. He came, and while he uttered the tenderest vows of everlasting love, we
heard a noise in my closet, to which he flew, and, on forcing it open, to our
mutual astonishment, a gentleman rushed out. My dear, deceived, unhappy lover,
called on him to draw; and, casting a look of rage, mixed with contempt, at me,
said, "Life is no longer worth my care, thy perfidy has made it hateful to me."
I threw myself between their swords, and scream'd so loud, that it brought my
father, and all the family, into the room. At sight of him, my terror and
confusion redoubled. I ran down stairs into the street, without knowing whither
I went, or what to do. The night coach was setting off for London, at that
moment; I got into it, without determining on any thing, but that I would not
return; and hither it has brought me.


Enter a Servant. Ser. Sir Charles Somerville has this moment alighted at the
door, and seeing your lordship's chariot there, begs leave to pay his respects
to you.

[Exit.
Emi. Quick, let me fly, my lord.

[Runs to the door.
L. Bell. You Will meet him that way. Into this closet; I will not suffer him to
keep you long a prisoner.

[She goes into the closet.
Enter Sir Charles Somerville. L. Bell. Welcome to London, my dear Charles; but
to what happy chance are we indebted for your return? I understood that you
meant to pass a philosophical summer, at your seat in the west, in reading and
retirement. But it grew dull, I suppose; it would not do, Sir Charles; though you
have not made a very long trial of it, I think, neither.


Sir Cha. I have not indeed, my lord, made the smallest attempt toward the
rational scheme you hint at. Thoughts of a very different nature have, for some
time past, wholly occupied my mind, and left no room for any thing beside, but
friendship, and Lord Belmont.


L. Bell. Lord Belmont is much yours. But from this sententious speech, and that
grave countenance, I think I may, without being a conjuror, pronounce, that the
gay and lively Sir Charles Somerville is on the point of matrimony with some
well-jointur'd widow, or rich heiress; and that he is, at this very moment,
making an exact calculation of the fortune he shall allot to his seventh son,
by, and of that marriage lawfully begotten.


Sir Char. Your lordship was never more mistaken. -- So far from it, that I
have bid adieu to the whole sex, and am determined to quit England, in a few
days, with a firm purpose never to revisit it. [A loud sigh heard from the
closet.] Ha! whence could that sigh proceed?


L. Bell. Sir Charles, I beg a thousand pardons, but I must entreat you to
withdraw immediately, and request the pleasure of meeting you at my house, in
half an hour.


Sir Char. I shall obey your commands, but can scarce forgive your suffering my
present intrusion.

[Exit.
Lord Belmont opens the closet. L. Bell. Emily! She faints!


Emi. Be not alarmed, my lord, the closeness of the place overcame my spirits;
I shall recover soon: but is Sir Charles resolved then? does he leave England
immediately? what have I said! I mean, my lord, is the gentleman quite gone? is
there no fear of his returning? one is apt to rave after fainting, you know, my
lord.


L. Bell. There is method in your madness, Emily; but though I dare say you did
not mean to trust me with the name of your lover, be assured I am extremely
pleased at discovering him in the person of my friend Sir Charles Somerville.


Emi. He is, indeed, my lord, the object of my hopes, and my despair; but to
what purpose do I own my passion? he quits his native land, to fly from me!


L. Bell. Be patient, Emily -- from his known character of truth, and honor, I
am certain he will do you justice; dare you abide that test?


Emi. Most willingly, my lord.


L. Bell. The way to hope for candor from Somerville, the world, and me, is by
a frank confession. Who was that gentleman he found concealed?


Emi. By all my hopes of candor from the world, of esteem from you, and love
from Somerville, I know him not; nor why, or wherefore he came thither.


L. Bell. I must believe you, Emily; there is a charm in truth, that strikes
upon the mind, like light upon our eyes. -- It Is irresistible. Yet passion, I
will grant, may cast a veil on either; I therefore can excuse Sir Charles for
judging wrong.


Emi. Oh! blame him not, my lord, appearances were strong against me; but while
we talk, he flies.


L. Bell. Your fears are those of love, but let them rest; and be assured he
shall not break the double toil, that love and friendship spread to hold him
fast. But come, my Emily, I am impatient 'till I place you in a fitter
situation, and present you to my sisters.


Emi. By no means, my lord; think how improper it would be for me to appear in
your house, or any where in my own character, 'till time shall have unravelled
this cruel mystery. Scandal has as many wings as tongues, and in a few hours, I
may expect to be the general subject of discourse, and object of reproach.
Besides, you may suppose my father will pursue me, and, if under your roof, I
must be discovered.


L. Bell. Your objections are just, and yet you can be no where so safe, as
under my protection. Suppose then you were to be introduced to my aunt and
sisters, who have never seen you, under a feigned name and character, as the
daughter of a clergyman, a particular friend of mine; they have often heard me
speak of such a person, who has been some years dead, his name was Lawson.


Emi. I put myself under your lordships guidance, and shall assume whatever
form you please, 'till heaven thinks fit to let me wear my own with honor.


L. Bell. I hope you will not continue long in masquerade; but now, my dear,
your hand.

[Exeunt.
SCENE III.
A dressing room in Lord Belmont 's house, Lady Mary at work, and Lady Louisa
with a book in her hand. L. Mar. My dear sister, let me dissuade you from
carrying on this affair with Mr. Freeman any farther; if he really loves you,
and his family and fortune may pretend to such a match, why not consult my
brother? who has an undoubted right to be considered as a father, from having
acted on all occasions like one.


L. Loui. You have very vulgar notions, sister; I suppose if you should ever
have a lover, you will bid him ask your parents whether you shall like him or
not? -- poor soul! but is it aunt Bridget, or uncle Frank, he shall apply to?
ha, ha! Do you know, my dear, that as well as I love my Strephon, if he were to
say one syllable about me to my grave brother, it is an hundred to one, I
should detest him. Secrecy is the very essence of love, and like all other
essences, it will evaporate, the moment it gets air.


L. Mar. I am sorry to differ so much in opinion with you, Louisa, but I cannot
help thinking that the most innocent correspondence, which can possibly subsist
between men and women, becomes in some degree criminal, when it is carried on
clandestinely; at least, it must appear as if one party was ashamed of the
other, which you must allow to be a sentiment, by no means consistent with
heroic love.


L. Loui. Read, read, my dear, and improve yourself, for you are really very
ignorant; did you ever hear of a heroine, in tragedy, or romance, who consulted
any third person, in the disposal of her heart?


L. Mar. I cannot say I have read many of either; but to such overweening
confidence in ourselves, I believe we are indebted for many tragical subjects.


L. Loui. A truce! a truce! dear girl; and for this once, assist me. It is
impossible I can refuse to see him this evening, when he so ardently entreats
it; in your grave mathematical calculation, he has been absent three weeks, but
that, you know, is three thousand years, in a lover's calendar.


L. Mar. My dear Louisa, I will, though against my judgment, to the utmost of my
power, assist you; but if my lord should pass the evening at home, I cannot
guess how it is possible, without alarming him; or, what is much worse, making
confidants of the servants, to effect your purpose.


L. Loui. Give me your aid, and leave the rest to me.


Enter Lady Bridget. L. Brid. Your servant, ladies -- what, at work? you are a
most indefatigable creature, niece Mary, and sometimes remind me of those
industrious maidens, that worked beds and hangings, as I have heard my
grandmother say; for those mechanical amusements were entirely out of fashion,
before my youth was capable of instruction.


L. Mar. Your ladyship has given up your time to more abstruse and difficult
employments, the study of the learned languages; but as every person may not
have capacity, or inclination, to employ their minds in that way, I look upon
works of fancy as pleasing and innocent amusements.


L. Brid. They are perfectly simple, indeed, and, of course, may be innocent.


Enter Lord Belmont. L. Bell. Good morrow, ladies; have you enlivened the Park
with your presence this morning, Louisa? or staid at home on the rational plan
of reading and working, by turns, with Lady Mary? -- I hope I see you in good
health, madam? [ To Lady Bridget.


L. Brid. Tolerable, not exuberant, I thank your lordship.


L. Loui. We have been quite on the domestic plan, my lord, and, of course,
extremely dull.


L. Mar. We have felt the loss of your lordship's company, who are generally so
good to make yourself the master of our revels.


L. Brid. That Is a bad phrase, niece; revels imply revelling, which is a term
indecent for so young a lady to make use of. I declare, I was turned of twenty,
before I could be prevailed on to pronounce the word jollity; and then it was
at the earnest entreaty of poor dear Mr. Feeble, that I would give it
utterance. It was a dying request, for he expired of a galloping consumption,
in a few hours after I had granted his desire.


L. Bell. As I could wish to justify Lady Mary's expression, I will for this
once take upon me the character her politeness has assigned me, by making a
present to ye all, that will, I hope, both improve, and enlarge the circle of
your pleasures.


L. Loui. [aside] What can it be, sister? I die to know.


L. Brid. Some improvement, I suppose, nephew, in the Encyclopoedia; there are
many sciences yet left imperfect.


L. Bell. No, madam, it is a living volume I mean to offer to your inspection,
and I think a fair one. It Is the daughter of my old friend, Mr. Lawson, who is
come to town upon business, and I have entreated her to make this house her own.


L. Mar. We shall doubtless do every thing, in our power, to render it
agreeable to her.


L. Bell. I will present her to you instantly.

[Exit.
L. Brid. Her father was a very learned divine, and who can tell but she may
understand the rabbinical text? O! if she can but translate the Lexicon, I
shall be quite happy.


Enter Lord Belmont, presenting Emily. L. Bell. I hope, madam, you will now
consider yourself as in a brother's house, and as another sister to these two
ladies.


Emi. If they will condescend to accept my friendship and esteem, they shall be
truly theirs.


L. Mar. We thankfully receive, and shall endeavor to deserve them both, by
sending ours to meet them more than half way. -- Fie, sister, why are you so
cold? Pray speak. [ Aside to Louisa.


L. Loui. [ to L. Mary.] She is vastly handsome -- Every person who has the
pleasure or seeing you, madam, must necessarily feel such ^ prepossession in
your favor, as willingly to accept what you so kindly offer.


L. Brid. Very courtly and correctly spoken on all sides, my lord; but ladies,
the hour appropriated to the adornment of our persons draws near, and I shall
request the favor of this young lady to accompany me to the temple of the
graces, or, in other words, the toilet. [Aside.] I think that was elegantly
expressed, and must inspire her with a proper idea of my erudition.


Emi. I shall esteem it an honor to attend your ladyship.

[ Lord Belmont bows, as taking leave.
L. Brid. Is your lordship also on the wing? Come then, you shall conduct us.

[ Exeunt Lord Belmont, Lady Bridget, and Emily.
L. Loui. There are some very odd whims come into my head about this girl,
sister; she is quite a beauty, nay, seems accomplished too; a clergyman's
daughter! that is the old story. But in short, Maria, I begin to think this wise
brother of ours has his failings, like other men, and growing indolent, as they
all do, chooses to bring his favorites near home: did you observe with what an
enquiring eye he looked at you? He thought he might easily impose on poor aunt
Bridget and me, but he is mistaken. Was this his fine present?


L. Mar. For shame, Louisa, how can you think so badly of a man who has
deserved so well? Left to his care, even from our earliest years, what
tenderness, what delicacy has he not shown, both to our sex and age?


L. Loui. I grant the utmost; but still there is a somewhat that strikes upon
my mind, and tells me there is mystery in this affair; and I am determined to
find it out, if I can.


L. Mar. Indeed, sister, there is something very ungenerous in suspicion; if
the tenor of our lives cannot exempt us from censure, with respect to this
world, we act virtuously in vain.


L. Loui. O! for heaven's sake, my dear, let us have done with this wise
discourse; it actually gives me the vapors, and I would tune my spirits to
their highest key, for Freeman will be here tonight. "Winds, catch the sound."


L. Mar. Positively, sister, if you abridge my morality, I must insist on an
abatement of your transports.


L. Loui. Well then, " Formed by thy converse, happily I Will steer,
" From grave to gay, from lively to severe."
Is not that quite civil now?


L. Mar. Vastly polite, indeed.


L. Loui. But still this most important business remains unsettled -- Let me
consider -- Have you a pocket-almanack?


L. Mar. Not about me; but prithee why do you ask?


L. Loui. No matter, he shall come through the garden by moonlight.


L. Mar. What, whether the moon shines, or no?


L. Mar. I know it will; Cynthia's the lover's friend, and lends her silver
lamp to light them on their way.


L. Mar. Again in heroics, Louisa?


L. Loui. I have done -- His letter says, his servant will be here in an hour,
from my fair hand to receive his master's doom -- Is not that galant, sister?


L. Mar. Yes; but I dare say he does not apprehend your ladyship's sentence
should ordain the dagger, or the bowl.


L. Loui. No truly, I shall be a merciful judge; his doom will not be death.


L. Mar. You seem, at present, a very complete emblem of justice; for in my
humble opinion, you are acting blindfold, though you might see if you pleased.


L. Loui. Never let that bandage from my eyes remove, Which hides the faults of
him I fondly love.

[Exeunt.
END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
A drawing room in Lord Belmont 's house. Enter Lord Belmont and Sir Charles
Somerville. Sir Char. I Have now, my lord, frankly related to you all the
circumstances of this extraordinary novel, except the lady's name, which I
hope, for her sake, will ever remain a secret. What the denouement will be on
her part, I cannot guess, but am determined it shall not conclude in the usual
style with me; for, from this hour, I disclaim all future thoughts of a serious
connection with any of the sex.


L. Bell. Is it possible, Sir Charles, that passion can so far triumph over
reason, as in one moment to destroy the good opinion of a character, formed on
a long acquaintance? You say you knew the lady from her childhood?


Sir Char. My dear Belmont, you have stated this argument quite wrong, it was
not passion that triumphed over reason, but reason that subdued passion. I can
now see, nay feel, what an abject wretch he must be, who trusts his happiness
in a woman's power -- damned, smiling mischiefs, all! -- I will, henceforth,
see, and admire the pretty baubles, as I would a fine piece of china, but no
more attribute worth and honor to them, than maleability to that; for if my
Emily could deceive, there is no truth in woman.


L. Bell. This is mere commonplace, Sir Charles.


Sir Char. By calling it common, my lord, you allow it the general sense of
mankind, which is, no doubt, founded on experience. I am therefore determined
to profit by it, so far as to retain my freedom at least. I think I almost feel
the shackles I might have worn, but for the old gentleman's refusal. -- Oh! how
I thank him!


L. Bell. Perhaps you misplace your gratitude. I am not yet sure that you are
under any manner of obligation to him.


Sir Char. Certainly the greatest, though his refusal then was daggers to my
heart. -- Fool that I was, I thought her what she seemed, an angel; and, but
for him, Ixion like, I had embraced a cloud. But why do I still talk, or think
of her! she is not worth a thought, and I hope to get quite clear of her idea,
before I reach Harwich.


L. Bell. Believe me, you deceive yourself; her form will haunt you, fly
wherever you will, and for the same reason that murderers fancy ghosts -- for I
am persuaded you have injured her.


Sir Char. What shall I not believe my eyes! by heaven, the consciousness of
her guilt even conquered female fear; she threw herself upon a madman's sword,
such I then was; but 'twas to save her lover, and my rival; ungrateful woman!


L. Bell. You seem inclined to lay hold of the dark side of every circumstance;
but there is one you seem not yet to have attended to, or you could not think
of leaving England immediately. May not the gentleman, you encountered in your
mistress's chamber, possibly suppose you fled from him?


Sir Cha. That thought had quite escaped me. I left a servant behind, whom I
expect this night, in order to discover who my rival was; and also to find out
what her father had done, or meant to do, with his unworthy, yet too lovely
daughter: I fear he will use her cruelly, my lord.


L. Bell. And can you think of that, and talk of quitting England?


Sir Char. Why, faith, my lord, I have always looked upon chivalry as a very
ridiculous science, and yet I begin to think it has its foundation in nature,
for I never yet heard of a damsel in distress, that I did not wish to relieve
her.


L. Bell. Sir Charles, this affair is much too serious to jest with. You have
asked my opinion, and, as a man of honor, and your friend, I now declare, I
think your traveling scheme should be entirely laid aside, until this mystery
is properly explained. Notwithstanding your affected gaiety, I am certain you
still love this lady.


Sir Char. There again, your lordship is guilty of a small error, only
mistaking the past for the present tense; say I did love her, if you please.


L. Bell. Well, Sir Charles, grant you no longer love, you are certainly a man
of honor, and must therefore think it incumbent on you to clear a lady's
character, which may possibly have suffered as much on your account, in the
minds of others, as she has done in yours, from this unlucky accident.


Sir Char. Would to heaven that I could clear her to my own heart, from all
suspicion, with as much justice, as I can to the world, of what relates to me;
in her whole conduct and behavior toward me, she was purity herself, her soul
seemed even lovelier than her form, and cast a kind of glory round her beauty,
which, while it awed, transported, raised, and chastis'd desire -- yet she is
false!


L. Bell. I cannot think so.


Sir. Char. Be that as it may, your lordship has convinced me that I should not
leave London for a few days; within that term, or never, a clue will certainly
be found, to lead us through this maze; I therefore will abide the event; certain
it cannot be worse than what I fear.


L. Bell. I must insist on your acquainting me with every step you take. You
know you may command me on the most difficult occasions.


Sir Char. I certainly rely on your lordship's friendship.


L. Bell. The moment your servant arrives, pray let me know; I cannot tell you
how much I am interested in this affair. -- I shall be at home all day.


Sir Char. I shall call upon your lordship in the evening.


L. Bell. 'Till then adieu.

[Exeunt severally.
SCENE II.
A dressing room in Lord Belmont 's house, Lady Bridget at her toilet, Emily
sitting, and a maidservant attending. L. Brid. In what part of Albion was your
father beneficed, Miss Lawson? Had he livings in commendam, or did he only
serve a simple cure? -- You are abominably awkward. [To the maid.


Emi. [aside] What shall I say?


Enter Mr. Belmont. Bell. O Lady Bridget, sister, would you believe it, I am
cheated, imposed upon, to the last degree. The man that sold me the blue-bird,
with the scarlet head, has deceived me; it is only painted. He called it the
true blue-bird of paradise, but he is the true serpent of it, and has bit me.
Odso! I beg pardon, who is that pretty lady?


L. Brid. Upon my word, brother, you seem to be verging toward the state of
second childhood. You act directly like a baby, one moment purchasing toys, and
the next weary of them. But as the great Mr. Dryden observes, "Men are but
children of a larger growth." I hope you are an admirer of Mr. Dryden, Miss
Lawson?


Emi. All persons of sense and taste, madam, I believe, admire his writings;
and though I by no means pretend to either of those characters, I join my humble
suffrage.


Bell. Odso! she talks very handsomely, Lady Bridget; I have a great notion she
is very learned. Pray, madam, do you understand coins?


Emi. Not in the least, sir.


Bell. I am sorry for it, because if you did, I would have treated you with a
sight of my best Otho; it has the true green mold on it, and is so very
antique, that all traces of the figure are worn out, so that it looks for all
the world like a bit of plain copper.


L. Brid. And so, to be sure, it is. Pray, brother, don't expose yourself, and
interrupt our conversation.


Bell. Why, there it is now; you don't like to hear any one talk but yourself.
Lady Bridget; but I will not hold my tongue, for all that. I Will go this moment,
and fetch my Otho, and the lady shall be judge whether it is not a fine one;
and if she says it is, I Will make her a present of it, to vex you.


Emi. I must beg to be excused, sir; I can by no means think of depriving you
of a treasure, that would be totally useless to me.


Bell. [aside] I am afraid she is but filly. -- Useless, madam! an Otho useless!
I must beg pardon.


Emi. I only said it would be so to me, sir, who am not a virtuoso, and want
taste to know its value.


L. Brid. This absurd conversation is an outrage on my patience, which I can no
longer submit to. Pray, brother, give me leave; -- I should be glad to know,
Miss Lawson, if your father bequeathed you any ancient manuscripts, in the
Hebrew, or Greek languages?


Bell. O sister! dear Lady Bridget! let me enquire about them. Are they much
worm-eaten? O! if I had them to present to the Society of Antiquarians, I
should be enrolled among the literati, and be reckoned a great man! Dear Miss,
pray let me have them, I Will make you a present of all my birds, flowers, and
shells, since you don't like antiques.


Emi. I wish it was in my power to oblige either your ladyship, or Mr. Belmont,
but I really am not in possession of manuscripts in any of the learned
languages.


L. Brid. But you understand them, miss?


Emi. Madam!


L. Brid. Come, come, you are too modest, I am perfectly informed of your great
erudition.


Emi. Upon my word, madam, I cannot say I am mistress of any language, being
but a very poor proficient in French and Italian, which are the only ones that
I was ever taught.


L. Brid. [aside] I am vastly disgusted at her ignorance. -- How could your
parents so shamefully neglect your education! But I presume your mother gave up
her time to the making of conserves, and distilling of simples. Not understand
Greek! it is an exalted language, and all its ideas are refined.


Bell. Now hang me, if I believe she understands it herself. But she is like the
man in the play, "that loved and honored the sound." But, miss, if you will
give me the manuscripts, I will not tell Lady Bridget, upon honor.


Emi. I do assure you, sir --


Bell. You will for ever oblige me, miss. -- Egad, she has the true Cleopatran
neck, and the right Grecian Venus' nose. [Aside.


Enter a Servant. Ser. [ To Emily.] Madam, my lord desires to speak with you in
his library, and, sir, there is a gentleman to wait on you with some modern
antiques.


Bell. Models of antiques, he must have said, you blockhead!


Emi. I shall attend his lordship.


L. Brid. [aside] In his library! Poor illiterate!

[Exeunt.
SCENE III.
A library. Enter Lord Belmont. L. Bell. I know not how to act in this affair;
if her father should discover her being here, I have no right to detain her.
This unknown lover too puzzles me much. Somerville is positive he came to her,
and yet with what an air of truth and confidence she has disowned him! I Will
make her think that Somerville is gone; she may, from that belief, become more
candid.


Enter Emily. Emi. I have expected your lordship's summons with the utmost
impatience. -- Have you seen Sir Charles?


L. Bell. Yes, Emily, bur all my arguments were vain; he holds his purpose, and
is this very moment on his journey.


Emi. And does this wretched body still subsist, after the soul is fled!


L. Bell. This is the language of romance; you must forget him. I have matters
of more consequence to acquaint you with.


Emi. Why did you not suffer me to see Sir Charles? He must, he would have
credited the truth, and thought me what I am, injured, and innocent. But, at
this instant, he detests my name, he thinks me false, and strives to banish me
from his remembrance.


L. Bell. Then do the same by him; retaliation is held just.


Emi. Never, my lord; he is deceived, and my poor heart now bleeds for what his
generous soul must feel, when he shall be convinced that he has wronged me.


L. Bell. That may possibly never happen; or, if it should, the time must be far
off, and we have not a moment now to lose. I have received a letter from your
father, which informs me he will be here this night, and that he comes in
search of you.


Emi. My father here! and will you give me up?


L. Bell. You know I have no power to withold you from him.


Emi. I am satisfied -- all that can now befall me, is quite equal; since
Somerville is lost, no matter what becomes of me.


L. Bell. I shall be very unwilling to give you back into your father's power,
as I fear he will compel you to that marriage you seem so much to loath.


Emi. No, sir, that cannot be: even at the altar, should he drag me there, I
will assert the rights of human kind; -- not all the world combined, shall ever
make me the wife of any other man but Somerville.


L Bell. You never can be his; therefore, Emily, let me now advise you, if the
gentleman, who was found in your closet, and has for ever separated Somerville
and you, be a man of honor, and one whose family and fortune may pretend to
you, to turn your thoughts on him. I really know no other way to escape your
father's wrath, and rescue your own character.


Emi. Is cruelty so catching? Has Somerville infected your humanity, and caught
you to insult my wretchedness! Must I again repeat, I do not know him?


L. Bell. [aside] Her emotion affects me, it is strong and natural; she has again
convinced me. -- Excuse this little trial of your truth, which friendship, and
not cruelty, suggested.


Emi. A wounded heart, my lord, ill brooks suspicion.


L. Bell. Pray pardon mine, and be assured it is vanished now. Your father's
arrival may throw some new light on this affair; the moment it is clear, I will
send after Sir Charles, and possibly may bring him back. Endeavor to be
cheerful, and hope the best.


Emi. My hopes and cheerfulness have fled with him.


L. Bell. They may return, even sooner than you think. But let us join my
sisters; their conversation will, at least, amuse you.

[Exeunt.
SCENE IV.
Younger Freeman 's lodgings. Enter Younger Freeman. Y. Free. I am confoundedly
fatigued; I begin to think, that a man of galantry has but a bad time of it;
it is the life of a seaman, weathering storms and tempests, to gain a port,
which one quits without reluctance, in three days. Well, now for the delights
of matrimony! Egad, that is worse; for there, we are weather-bound for life. --
Aye, but a fine young woman of quality, with ten thousand pounds. -- Youth,
beauty, and money, are but sweetners, they will melt; however, I am resolved to
try how long they, and my love, will last; for any thing is better than
returning to post the books, with old square toes, that is certain.


Enter Elder Freeman. E. Free. I am agreeably disappointed at finding you in
town, brother, as I did not expect you for some time; but it is lucky you are
come, for my father's patience is almost worn out by your long absence.


Y. Free. And so, Jack, you think, because I am in London, that I shall quietly
return into the city, and occupy my old seat in the compting-house? but faith
you are mistaken; business to attorneys and mechanics, for me; I fly at higher
game; pleasure, my dear, pleasure is the business of my life, and the only
business worth following, believe me.


E. Free. These flights would be ridiculous, even in a man of fortune, brother,
but from you, they appear contemptible. You were bred to business, Harry, and a
man who acts properly, in the station of life he was born to, is a much more
estimable character, than a coxcomb, assuming the airs of a man of quality,
without breeding, or fortune to support them. You really make a very absurd
figure


Y. Free. I should upon 'Change, perhaps, as the mercantile world don't deal in
my way. But come, Jack, should I not, even there, be looked upon as a genius,
who, in less than six months, have acquired ten thousand pounds, having set out
in trade without one shilling of capital?


E. Free. As I cannot believe that you have either parts, or application,
sufficient to discover the longitude, I shall not reason on such a ridiculous
proposition.


Y. Free. Why truly, brother, as you observe, I have never studied mathematics,
or the art of navigation, much, since I left school; nor am I philosopher
enough, to have discovered the transmutation of metals; and yet this poor
contemptible, absurd brother of yours, may be master of the aforesaid sum, with
some other pretty movables thereunto belonging, in a few hours, if he thinks
them worth his acceptance [aside,] -- He must be devilish dull, if he does not
guess now.


E. Free. I should be extremely sorry that so near a relation of mine had
enrolled the name of Freeman among the knights of the post.


Y. Free. Have a care, Jack, though you are my brother, my honor, sir --


E. Free. Don't debase the term. -- Honor's the offspring of fair truth and
honesty; yet scoundrels, sharpers, worse than robbers, use it. Gambler is a
name more infamous than highwayman, has all his vice, but wants his single
virtue, courage. With such, I may presume, you are associated.


Y. Free. The violence of your temper, Mr. Freeman, has warped your
understanding; there are other means, besides play, to make a fortune, which,
since your plodding wisdom cannot discover, I shall inform you of. -- Suppose a
lady of quality were to think my figure not quite so contemptible as you seem
to do?


E. Free. Insufferable vanity!


Y. Free. You may think so, if you please; but it is a certain fact, that there
is a lady, of high birth and beauty, with the fortune I have named, that is
ready to take hands, and begin a dance for life, with your humble servant,
Harry Freeman.


E. Free. Then you have deceived, imposed on her, which is the lowest baseness.


Y. Free. Not I, as I hope to be saved; I had no occasion to tell her I was a
pretty fellow, "for she had eyes, and chose me." And I never pretended to be
any thing more; rot me, if I did.


E. Free. Am I from hence to suppose, that you have acquainted the lady with
your family, and no fortune?


Y. Free. Pardonnez moi; there was not the least necessity of informing her,
that my father Anthony, and my brother John Freeman and co. formerly sold rum
and hops in Bishopsgate-street, and were at present promoted to the more
profitable, and, of course, more honorable employment, of keeping a bank in
Lombard Street. Ha, ha, ha!


E. Free. Despicable coxcomb! I know not which you are the most proper object
of, contempt or rage; can you be such a wretch, to think of abusing the love
and confidence of a woman of virtue and honor, who perhaps has no other
weakness, but her attachment to such a worthless being; one who would cheat her
into beggary, and ruin her merely to save himself. By heaven, if I can discover
who she is, I will detect your fraud.


Y. Free. Why faith, Jack, though you have put the affair in a bad light, you
have come pretty near the truth, I own; though, upon my soul, I love the lady.


E. Free. Answer me one question. -- Would you marry her, were you in
affluence, and she a beggar?


Y. Free. Hum! that is staring the case quire an travers. Why I, I, I really
cannot tell. But I am so confoundedly dipped, Jack, I cannot pay at sight, as I
used to do, at the Bank; and then I am so hellishly afraid lest my tailor, my
milliner, and frizeur, should carry in their bills to my father, that, faith, I
cannot help it; I must marry to quit scores.


E. Free. The difficulty of your situation shall not be an excuse for such
villainy -- if you act with honesty, I Will serve you; inform the lady who you
really are; if she persists in her regard, I will acquaint my father, and have
no doubt but he will make a suitable settlement -- her fortune is by no means
beyond his power to give an equivalent to.


Y. Free. Ay, Jack, but if she should fly off?


E. Free. Then, sir, I Will pay your debts, provided you return to business, and
renounce the coxcomb. In three days I shall expect your final answer, and from
that date shall esteem you as a brother, or disclaim that tie. In the mean
time, here is a bill to serve your present use. -- No thanks, deserve my
friendship, and be sure of it.

[Exit.
Y. Free. Why, what a devilish deal of stuff has this formal elder brother of
mine canted out, about honor and honesty! Egad, I might as well have read a
sermon, as I used to do, on a Sunday evening, when I was apprentice. "Inform
the lady who I am, give her up, and return to business." -- Ha, ha, ha! poor
Jack! you know little of the world on this side Temple Bar. Though I felt myself
somewhat awkward, at some part of his discourse, I thought he looked like my
father in a passion, and I actually began to be almost afraid of him. -- I am
glad he is gone, I have now three days of grace, which I am resolved to make
the most of, and the worst that can happen, is, to close my books at the end of
them.


Enter Ralph; and gives a letter. Ralph. From Lady Louisa, sir.


Y. Free. [Reads and kisses it.] Corn, wine, and oil, Ceres, Flora, Bacchus,
and all the gods and goddesses! fly, Ralph, get my things to dress: dear
creature! at the garden door, at seven o'clock.


Ralph. Please your honor, the trunks are not yet arrived.


Y. Free. No matter, I Will visit my charmer en dishbille, en cavalier: love is
above all forms, let that plead my excuse.

[Exeunt.
SCENE V.
A drawing room. Lord Belmont, Lady Bridget, Lady Mary, Lady Louisa, Mr.
Belmont, and Emily are discovered. L. Bell. So then, Lady Mary, it is your
opinion that we can love but once?


L. Mar. I believe, my lord, the general experience of mankind will allow, that
true love visits us but once in our lives.


L. Loui. Lord, sister, how you must be laughed at, should you hint such an
old-fashioned notion among the Beau-monde. -- Why there is scarce a man of
quality, in England, who has not been violently in love with half a dozen fine
women, at least, before he thinks of marrying; and if every one of them were to
carry off but a corner of his heart, there could scarce be an atom left for the
poor lady, to whom he devotes his hand.


Bell. I am sure if that was true, I should have no more heart than a mummy; for
I have suffered love, many and many a time, and yet I think that I am
heart-whole still, and have as large a stock of love to dispose of as ever.


Emi. You, very possibly, may have preserved your whole fund entire, sir; for
it is my belief, "they never knew to love, who knew to change." Other passions,
sometimes, assume its form, and impose even on ourselves. But the true, the
real flame, subsists even 'till the lamp of life itself is quite extinguished.


L. Loui. [aside] She talks very feelingly upon this subject.


L. Brid. True, Miss Lawson; I will not blush to own that I am a fatal
illustration of this sentiment; the redundancy of my regards for Mr. Feeble,
even in the tomb, shall ever make me decline marriage. -- To his memory have I
consecrated my virgin bloom.


Bell. Lord, sister, I never heard that you were in love, 'till now, and have
often wondered mightily, that you did not marry some learned man.


L. Brid. The delicacy of my sentiments, brother, forbad a promulgation of my
passion; though some years are elapsed, since the dear object was no more.


Bell. Ay, that there has, I Will be sworn. -- It Is at least five-and-twenty
years, since poor Feeble departed, and he was dying for seven years before. --
There Is a fine antique, nephew; there is a true gem, my lord.


L. Bell. You will pardon me, sir, this is but a very poor copy.


Bell. Don't say so, my lord, you will break my heart; I gave fifty guineas for
it, and bespoke it three months ago.


L. Brid. Bespoke an antique, brother?


Bell. Yes, madam, bespoke it.


L. Bell. What then, he made it for you, sir?


Bell. No, no, no, he said it was the true original antinous, and it might be
two thousand years of age, for ought he knew.


L. Loui. And so it may, uncle, if you can preserve it so long; and though it may
not now, it will then certainly be an antique.


Bell. I Will go instantly, and find out the fellow that sold it to me, and if he
cannot prove my ring a thousand years old, at least, I Will give him a hundred
strokes with my ratan, and get my fifty guineas again.

[Exit.
L. Mar. My poor uncle has generally some violent distress of his own making.


L. Loui. O this is nothing to the grief I saw him in last year, upon the
blowing of a tulip, which he fancied would be black, and unfortunately proved
to be red and yellow.


L. Bell He, like many others, mistakes a passion for science, for the knowledge
of it, and is, therefore, for ever liable to imposition. But we have all our
failings, and let his pass. I think, Louisa, you gave up your opinion too
tamely, I was in hopes we should have a notable argument; but your withdrawing,
has left Miss Lawson, and your sister, in possession of the field.


L. Loui. I have not courage sufficient, my lord, to encounter such odds; even
Lady Bridget joined them, that was three to one: but if your lordship will
declare on my side, I am ready to renew the attack, and have no doubt of
victory.


L. Bell. Come on then, ladies, all brave men should engage on the weaker side.


L. Mar. If numbers can give strength, my lord, I fancy there will be ten ready
to list under Lady Louisa's banner, for one that will choose to be encumbered
with the heavy armor of constancy, which our champions must put on. Come,
General Lawson, rouse to the charge.


Emi. If our friends are fewer, madam, they will be more sincere, and of
course, like British soldiers, braver than those venal troops, that are ready
to fight under all colors.


L. Brid. Permit me, my lord, to bring this argument to a conclusion, by
observing, that young ladies cannot expatiate on the thesis of love, without
giving an intimation that they are adepts in the science; which would be rather
an oppribrium, than an honor to persons not yet adult. But if your lordship
pleases, you and I will support the argument, in a Socratic manner; and treat
the subject, as they would have done in the Athenian porch.


L. Bell. I must beg to be excused, madam. I am by no means master of the
subject, and proposed it merely to hear what might be said on both sides. Some
other time I shall be glad to hear your sentiments -- at present, business
calls me.

[Exit.
L. Brid. At your option, my lord.


L. Loui. [aside to L. Mary] What shall I do to get away? I must feign myself
ill.


L. Brid. Come, children, if you will attend me to my dressing room, I may
perhaps inform your understandings with a lecture on la belle passion, provided
you do not presume to reason, or interrupt me.


L. Loui. I am extremely ill on a sudden. -- Your ladyship will excuse me. --
Sister, pray help me to my chamber.


Emi. Will your ladyship permit me to attend you?


L. Loui. By no means, madam, I Will only trouble my sister.


L. Brid. Here, child, lean on me. -- This is a precipitate attack.

[Exeunt all but Emily.
Emi. Oh! what a heavy task? to wear a cheerful face, with a sad heart! -- It
will not long be so. -- When in my father's power, I shall have leave, as well
as cause, to weep. Yet let me snatch this precious interval, and give a loose
to those fond sighs, that rend my bursting bosom! cruel, unkind. -- Ah no!
deceived, unhappy Somerville.


Enter Mr. Belmont. Bell. O miss, I am glad I have met you; the man swears it is
a right cameo, a true antique. Lord, what is the matter, miss! what do you cry
for? has sister Bridget said any thing to vex you? I Will lay my life she has,
she is very spiteful at times, though good-natured in the main, I Will assure you.
But if I was you, I would not cry for her.


Emi. You do her wrong, sir; she never gave me cause to weep.


Bell. Well, miss, dry up your tears, I have something to tell you, that will
make you glad; at least, I hope so.


Emi. That would be news, indeed.


Bell. Ay, so you will say, when you hear it. But you must not mention it, miss.
(I don't know how to tell it to her neither.) [Aside.


Emi. If it be a secret, sir, you had better keep it still so.


Bell. No, miss, you must know it, and no body else; O yes, one more -- cannot
you guess, now?


Emi. No, really, sir, I never was expert at riddles, even when my thoughts
were free; now they are all employed. [Going.


Bell. Pray stay a little, miss, I Will tell it you just now.


Emi. I should be glad to be excused, at present, sir; I am not very well.


Bell. That happens very cross, now, and yet I am in a hurry too; I shall run
away the very minute I have told you. -- Did you ever see my birds? I have a
parrot that speaks as plain as I do.


Emi. [aside] And as much to the purpose, I dare say.


Bell. What do you say, miss?


Emi. Nothing that signifies. -- [aside] I shall be teized to death.


Bell. I Will reach that parrot, by tomorrow morning, to tell you that I love
you, and will marry you. -- I have done it.

[Runs off.
Emi. My poor ridiculous uncle! yet I cannot help smiling at his disappointment,
when he shall know his mistress for his niece.

[Exit.
Enter Mr. Belmont. Bell. Egad, she smiled though; that is a good sign; I did not
see her laugh before, since she came into the house. I have seen as pretty
women, that is certain, but never one that had such true antique beauty. When
she is Mrs. Belmont, I shall have all the virtuosi coming to admire her neck,
and the statuaries begging leave to take off her nose; but I will not suffer it.
No, sir, Mrs. Belmont is indisposed, she cannot be seen this morning; you must
come some other time, for I shall not expose her to the eye of curiosity, as I do
my coins. I Will keep one rarity to myself at least. But I must take care that
Lady Bridget don't come near her to infect her brain with dictionaries and
romances. -- I Will go directly, and take a house for her, near the Museum, and
if I can but inspire her with a true taste for antiques, I shall positively be
the happiest man alive.

[Exit.
END of the SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
A drawing room. Enter Lady Mary and Lady Louisa. L. Loui. I Begin to have a
thousand fears, sister, perhaps his servant has lost my letter; perhaps some
accident has happened to Mr. Freeman, or he certainly would not out-stay his
time.


L. Mar. My dear Louisa, your watch and your passions keep pace; it wants some
minutes of seven; but I could wish from my heart, that almost any accident
might prevent this meeting. I find myself sinking in my own esteem, for being
in the secret. I wish you had not told me.


L. Loui. How can you be so ill-natured! Don't you know it was impossible to
keep it from you?


L. Mar. That is, indeed, the best, though not the kindest excuse, you might have
made, for such a confidence. But prithee, Louisa, how is this affair to end?
You cannot surely be mad enough to think of marrying a person, that, for ought
you know, may be a highwayman?


L. Loui. It is a great pity, Lady Mary, that your sentiments are so vastly
confined. But you have never felt la belle passion, and I excuse you. You don't
know, that from the instant we fall in love, we have a power of endowing the
dear object of our affections, with truth, constancy, honor, in short, with
every amiable quality; nor do we ever suppose that he can be deficient, even in
the common acquisitions, either of wealth or rank.


L. Mar. I am surprised that the repeated disappointments, which such sanguine
expectations have met with, even in romance, have not a little abated your
ladyship's ardor. -- But here comes your hero, and I, for this once, will act
the part of a trusty confidante, by retiring, to prevent your being interrupted.


L. Loui. O! for heaven's sake, take care of Miss Lawson, and Aunt Bridget.


L. Mary. I shall prevent their coming near you, by staying in the next room.

[Exit.
Enter Younger Freeman. Y. Free. Your ladyship sees the happiest of mankind,
this moment, before you, since I am again permitted to behold that beauteous
form, and breathe my raptures forth on this fair hand.


L. Loui. You are vastly polite, sir; but may I not suppose, that among the
multiplicity of fine women you must have seen, during your absence, you may
have met with one, to whom that compliment might be more properly addressed?


Y. Free. [aside] Sure he cannot have heard any thing.


L. Loui. You seem to pause for a reply, sir.


Y. Free. Pause, madam -- I pause indeed, with astonishment, at such an
uncommon instance of humility -- But if your ladyship will cast a look upon
that mirror, it will fully answer your unjust suspicion.


L. Loui. I cannot avoid being pleased at my doubts, sir, since they have
afforded you an opportunity of clearing them so politely.


Y. Free. The tedious hours I have been compelled to pass in absence, have been
all employed in stupid business, looking over steward's accounts, and making
leases, which would have been quite insupportable, but that I hoped, at my
return, your ladyship would kindly condescend to abridge my tortures, and
suffer me to seize that beauteous hand.


L. Loui. O, Mr. Freeman!


Y. Free. By heaven, I cannot live a day, an hour, unless you promise to be
mine; lillies and roses bloom to wait your coming -- now, now, my charmer, name
the happy hour. O how delightful is a true love match! Say, at what time my
chariot shall attend.


L. Loui. I am frighted at your transports, I cannot now resolve.


Y. Free. Here let me wait then, on my bended knee, 'till you pronounce my doom.


L. Loui. Pray rise, I --


Enter Lady Mary. L. Mar. O Louisa, my brother hearing that you were not well,
has sent word he is coming up to see you; that gentleman had better make his
way down the back stairs: I will delay my lord, for a minute, in the next room,
but pray, sir, make haste.

[Exit.
Y. Free. And must I leave you undetermined? Will you not suffer me to see you
again this night? May I not return the same way, some hours hence, when the
family are retired to rest, and there can be no interruption? O speak, my angel!


L. Loui. I am so terrified, I know not what to say; but pray be gone, this
moment, even though you should return.


Y. Free. That permission has given me new life, and now I fly.

[Exit.
Enter Lord Belmont, and Lady Mary. L. Bell. I am glad to hear she is better. --
Louisa, what has been the matter? You tremble, and look pale.


L. Loui. My nerves are weak, my lord, you know that is a common complaint.


L. Bell. It is indeed become too general; but I flattered myself, that a good
constitution, and regularity, might have exempted you from it, as I believe it
usually has its foundation in late hours, and want of exercise. But we shall go
into the country, in a few days, to remedy these evils.


L. Mar. I rejoice to hear your lordship say so, for at this lovely season of
the year, I grow quite weary of London.


L. Loui. [aside] I have the comfort to think I shall not be of the party.


L. Bell. Come, ladies, let us adjourn to the drawing room, I left Lady Bridget
and Miss Lawson there; company is good for you, Louisa.


L. Mar. We attend your lordship.

[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
A street. Enter Sir Charles Somerville. Sir Char. Where can she have fled, my
dear, unhappy Emily? But wherefore do I call her mine? She surely must have
escaped with her unknown gallant -- I need not then defer my journey longer --
I have bid adieu to happiness, and her, and it is no matter where I wander now.
[ Young Freeman enters as from the garden, crosses the stage, and exit.] Have I
my sight? or is it fancy conjures up this fiend! By heaven, that is the man --
yet sure I must mistake. He came out of that door too, Lord Belmont's
garden-door! What! has he rivall'd me in friendship as in love! this is too
much; my honor is now at stake, Lord Belmont must account for this proceeding;
for though imposed upon by female artifice, I will not be man's dupe.

[Exit.
SCENE III.
A library, Lord Belmont discovered. Enter Sir Charles. L. Bell. Welcome, my
dear Charles: is your servant arrived? Have you discovered who this ignis
fatuus, this unknown spark is? You seem disordered.


Sir Char. My lord, I come to you for information, I Will be no longer trifled
with -- you must explain.


L. Bell. [aside] He has found out that Emily is here, who could reveal it? --
If then you know the secret, Charles, how can you blame me?


Sir Char. Not blame you, sir! but I will yet have patience -- such mean,
clandestine doings, are unworthy of your birth. You wrung my story from me, to
betray me -- think what a light I see you in, then let your crime upbraid you.


L. Bell. By heaven, I never did disclose your confidence, nor --


Sir Char. For shame, for shame, my lord, wound not the character of manhood
thus, nor sink below my rage.


L. Bell. Sir Charles, this is a language I am not used to hear; but lovers,
like lunatics, have leave to rail, when the mad fit is on them: I think her
innocent, and will defend her.


Sir Char. You think her innocent! you! the abettor of her guilt; her lover's
confidant!


L. Bell. I blush to own that I have been his friend; ill-temper'd, un-bred man.


Sir Char. I am not quite so placid as your lordship, I confess; you are the
true French courtier, my travels are to come. Born and bred up a Briton, I may
be rough, but am sincere -- no flatterer, no false friend.


L. Bell. I even disdain to answer your low sarcasm, but am most glad that Emily
has escaped you.


Sir Char. I doubt it not, but will not waste my time in fruitless altercation.


L. Bell. The sooner this is ended, sir, the better. At six tomorrow morning,
if you please, we will use men's, not women's weapons.


Sir Char. Name the place.


L. Bell. Hyde-Park.


Sir Char. You may depend on me. But as that time or place will not admit of
parley, I now conjure you to answer me one question.


L. Bell. Speak it, sir.


Sir Char. If I survive, it will be of some consequence, if not, it will be
buried with me. Who is the happy man, that both my mistress and my friend have
sacrificed me to?


L. Bell. Insolent man! how should I know the person?


Sir Char. In vain you strive to hide him from me -- were he ennobled with all
the honors majesty can give, he cannot be raised above resentment; and were he
sprung from the lowest of mankind, my Emily's love has dignified his meanness,
and made him, in point of happiness at least, far my superior. Therefore,
again, I do entreat you tell me.


L. Bell. There is something very extraordinary in your persisting in a request,
that is impossible for me to grant; for, by my honor, I do not know the man
whom you suppose your mistress has preferred, nor ever heard his name.


Sir Char. Not know the person, whom I this very hour saw come out of your
house, by the backdoor that leads into your garden?


L. Bell. You must mistake. Sir Charles, it cannot be.


Sir Char. Do I know you, am I awake, or in my senses? If these things are
true, I surely saw him issue from your garden-door; his image is too strongly
fixed upon my wounded memory, to think I can mistake; the moon shone bright
upon him.


L Bell. You have amazed me, yet still I think it is impossible.


Sir Char. My dear Lord Belmont, if I have injured you, by imagining you to be
this unknown person's friend, therefore no longer mine, what apology, what
atonement can I make?


L. Bell. Indeed, Sir Charles, you have wronged both truth and friendship; I
never had a friend I dared to injure, or disclaim; yet, if it was not a vision
that you saw, you are in some degree excuseable -- yet, why should he come here?


Sir Char. That is indeed a mystery -- but as I could not imagine he came to
any one within these walls, except your lordship, I hope you will pardon the
frenzy of a man who thought himself aggrieved in the most tender points, his
love and friendship.


L. Bell. Sir Charles, your seeming motives for resentment were so strong, that
I can readily forget the effects -- I hope we are friends again -- but let the
conviction of your present error lead you to doubt, at least, the certainty of
some former appearances.


Sir Char. O, my too generous friend! let me be happy still in your esteem, but
banish from my mind all thoughts of love. Her guilt is fully proved; she fled,
that fatal night, from Bath, with her seducer. Curses blast him!


L. Bell. What reason have you to think so? -- [aside] It Is plain he does not
know she is here, nor can I now inform him.


Sir Char. My servant is returned, and brings this sad account; he left her
poor unhappy father setting out in pursuit of -- I cannot name her, my once
lovely Emily.


L. Bell. In such a scene of complicated distress, may she not have fled for
refuge to some friend? Why will you think the worst?


Sir Char. O no, my lord, she had no friend to fly to; for sure he is the worst
of foes, as well as villains, that would destroy her innocence. I doubt not but
the wretch may abandon her to want and infamy.


L. Bell. I cannot think that she is in his power. It is improbable that a
well-educated maid should take so rash a step, but on a certainty of marriage
with the man she loved.


Sir Char. I should rejoice to think as you do; and were there but the
slightest foundation for hope, would gladly rest upon it. But all my doubts are
at an end; I am therefore determined to quit England. but not 'till I have
found the man, who has robbed me of my peace, and Emily. I Will go this moment in
pursuit of him.


L. Bell. I shall be glad if you will return and sup with me; we shall be quite
alone -- I shall be anxious to know what discoveries you make. I also will
endeavor to find out who this same incognito can visit here.


Sir Char. I shall with pleasure attend your lordship, provided I don't
trespass on you -- We sleepless wretches are sometimes tempted to break in upon
those hours the happy give to rest.


L. Bell. You will oblige, and not distress me: name your hour.


Sir Char. Eleven, if agreeable.


L. Bell. Quite so, 'till then adieu. [ Exit Sir Charles.] If Sir Charles
Somerville is to be credited, what must I think? Who could that villain come
to? For such, by all accounts, he must be. Emily continued in the drawing room
from dinner 'till I left it. She scarce yet knows the way to her own chamber,
much less that through the garden; and yet to her, and her alone, he must have
come.


Enter a Servant. Ser. A gentleman desires to see your lordship.


L. Bell. Show him in.

[ Exit Servant.
Enter Mr. Southern. South. It is so long since I have seen your lordship, I
am not surpised that you don't know me. -- My name is Southern.


L. Bell. I am very glad to see you, sir.


South. You were but a child, my lord, when I left London, on the death of my
first wife.


L. Bell. I am sorry, sir, not to have been better known to so near a relation.
Pray how does my cousin Emily? I used to visit her often, while she was at
school.


South. She is very well, my lord, and that is my greatest grief. If she had
died with her mother, she would have been happy, and so would I.


L. Bell. You will pardon me, sir, but that thought seems so very unnatural.


South. Not at all, not at all, my lord; she has been a plague to me, ever
since she was born; and my present lady, Mrs. Southern, always said she would
be so. And Mrs. Southern, let me tell your lordship, is a parlous wise woman,
and never was mistaken in her whole life; at least, I never thought her in the
wrong, and therefore never contradicted her.


L. Bell. I should be sorry to think Mrs. Southern never erred in judgment, for
then my cousin must have verified this infallible lady's prediction.


South. And so she has, my lord. I, like a careful father, as I was, and in
regard to her poor mother's memory, provided a proper and convenient match for
her; my neighbor Winterbottom, my lord, a man pretty near my own age, one that
was fit to conduct and manage such a raw, headstrong chit, as she; a discreet
person, let me tell you; and a great favorite of Mrs. Southerne's.


L. Bell. You could not surely think of marrying my cousin to a person as old as
her father, sir?


South. Why not, why not, my lord, she made no objection to his years, but
truly she disliked his family and person, because he was not a fine smock-fac'd
beau, and could not trace his pedigree up to Adam, forsooth; a conceited
undutiful minx as she was.


L. Bell. I cannot blame my cousin's spirit, sir; her birth, youth, and fortune,
entitle her to a very different match; but were she a beggar, sir, she had
better serve, to earn her bread, than wed the man she hates.


South. Very fine, my lord; but stay 'till you hear the end of that high spirit.


L. Bell. Whatever her conduct may have been, sir, I fear yours toward her, has
justified it.


South. No, no, I was too tender of her; when she got into the pouts, and cried
and roared, I promised not to force her to this marriage; but if she would be a
dutiful child, and consent to it, I would take her with me to Bath; she
promised she would try to obey me, and, in an ill hour, to Bath I brought her.


L. Bell. And there, I suppose, she married the first man that asked her.


South. Worse, much worse than that: she sent a fine spark, a baronet, I think
he was, to ask her for his wife, though she knew very well, that Mrs. Southern
had passed her word she should marry Winterbottom; and did she think I would
make my lady a liar? No, no, I sent him a packing, and ordered madam to prepare
for Southerne-hall directly.


L. Bell. May I not presume to say, sir, that this proceeding was too violent?


South. Pray don't interrupt me, my lord, and you shall hear how this gentle
lady behaved. -- About eleven that night, when I was smoking my pipe, I heard
her squall; I ran into her chamber, and there I found the knight, and another
of her lovers, I suppose, tilting at each other; I beat down their passes with
my crutch, the candle fell to the ground, and before the servants could bring
light, madam and all were fled.


L. Bell. Have you heard nothing of her since?


South. Not a syllable, nor would I ever have enquired about her, but that my
lady's honor is engaged to Winterbottom. Now, if you can assist me to discover
where she is, I Will bring a replevin for her, and carry her home directly. If
Winterbottom will marry her, so -- if not, I Will keep her close enough to
prevent her bringing any farther disgrace on me, while I live, I warrant you.


L. Bell. Have you found out who the gentleman was, who fought with the baronet?


South. Yes, her maid Sally, a forward young flirt, like her mistress, told the
servants that his name was Freeman.


L. Bell. [aside] Freeman! that is something gained -- a thought occurs.


South. Now I beg, my lord, that you will send out immediately to all the inns
and lodging-houses about town, to look for Emily; my servants shall go one way,
yours another, and I think we cannot well miss of her; though London is hugely
grown; since I was here, that is certain.


L. Bell. You may be sure, sir, that I shall take every proper method for the
service of my cousin; but it is not by a replevin, that her character is to be
recovered, though her person may. You, as her father, sir, are first bound to
do her justice; to call the man who has wronged her to a strict account, and
make him clear her fame by instant marriage.


South. What! I call any one to account! I fight for her! Not I, truly. I am a
civil magistrate, the law is my weapon, and if I can reclaim her by that, I
will.


L. Bell. But what are we to do, sir, with the fair fugitive, when we have
recovered her?


South. Even what your lordship pleases; you shall be heartily welcome to
dispose of her to whom you will for me. Try if you can make a match for her,
suited to her birth and youth, since you don't approve of that I had proposed.
But not a penny will I give to buy her a fop, or a coxcomb, or a title; yet if
either of those fellows she went off with, will marry her without money, why
I Will even give my consent, that I may he no longer plagued with her; though I am
very much afraid that Mrs. Southern will be angry.


L. Bell. You talk, sir, as if your daughter were already found.


South. Why, my lord, if she should never be found, I cannot help it: but as I
am come so far, I Will even stay in town 'till the horses are rested. -- Poor
things! they have not had such a journey this many a long year.


L. Bell. Sir, if you will leave the management of this affair to me, I Will act
as if my cousin were my sister; but remember, sir, you have promised your
consent to the baronet, if he should again solicit it.


South. Ay, ay, my lord, he shall have her, if he chooses to wait for her
fortune 'till my death. I must now go smoke my pipe. In the morning I will call
upon you, and pay my respects to Lady Bridget and my brother Belmont.


L. Bell. I wish you a good night, sir.


South. I believe I shall sleep pretty sound, for I am very weary.

[Exit.
L. Bell. And I no less of you; -- was there ever such a brute! -- But this
Freeman, now we have found his name, he must have more cunning than a fox, if
two such brisk hunters, as Sir Charles and I, cannot unearth him. I will first
try the ground at home, and that immediately.

[Exit.
SCENE IV.
A drawing room. Enter Lady Mary and Lady Louisa. L. Loui. Was there ever such
a lucky escape, Lady Mary?


L. Mary. I know not how to consider it in that light, Louisa, I am almost
sorry that I prevented my brother's meeting Mr. Freeman, it must have brought
on an eclaircissement, which I am of opinion is absolutely necessary.


L. Loui. You are not in earnest, sure! you could not be guilty of any thing so
inhuman!


L. Mary. I think it would have been rather kind than cruel.


L. Loui. O, absolutely barbarous! [aside] I fancy she is vexed at not having a
lover herself; I Will not trust her any farther.


L. Mary. Our sentiments are so different, upon many subjects, that I am not
surpised they do not accord on this. What objection can Mr. Freeman have to
Lord Belmont's being made acquainted with his passion? My brother's tenderness
demands our confidence, and it is robbing him of what he has fairly purchased,
to withold it.


L. Mary. How often must I tell you, Lady Mary, that it is I, and not Mr.
Freeman, that would have this affair kept secret. -- There is something so
indelicate in public courtship and weddings, that I cannot bear the thought.


L. Mar. You Will pardon me, Louisa, if I pronounce it much more indelicate for a
young lady to receive the addresses of a lover privately, than if authorized by
the approbation of her friends: in this case, her compliance might appear a
condescension to their desires; in the other, it looks too much like granting
an indulgence to her own.


L. Loui. Your ladyship has stated the case, as you call it, with all the
wisdom and gravity of a lawyer. I hope you will be married to a judge, sister;
you will be a vast help to him in his business, and may save him the expense of a
clerk. But pray, Madam Coke upon Littleton, in the aforesaid case, is not the
young lady to be considered as the principal party, and is it not quite as
necessary she should be pleased, as any of her kindred and parentage?


L. Mary. Doubtless, my dear; but will the approbation of her friends prevent
her liking?


L. Loui. Why, yes, I think it might. -- For example, were my uncle to
recommend a husband to me, he must be a virtuoso; if my aunt, he must be a
pedant; if my brother, he must be a philosopher; and if my dear Maria was to
choose for me, he must possess every great and amiable quality, have a large
fortune and a title. Now, as I am not vain enough to hope for the last, and
have a mortal aversion to all the other characters, I will even choose for
myself, and then I shall have no body to complain of.


L. Mary. Nor to -- remember that, Louisa.


L. Loui. I hope I shall have no cause, but if I should, I detest compassion of
all things; I should not like even to have your pity.


L. Mary. I am sorry for it, because I Am afraid you will want it.


L. Loui. Psha!


Enter Emily, followed by Mr. Belmont. Emil. Indeed, sir, you do me too much
honor, and I wish it was in my power to make a suitable return.


Bell. Pray speak softly, miss, don't you see my nieces? -- It was only a little
present I was offering to Miss Lawson. You know my parrot, Louisa?


L. Loui. Which of them, sir?


Bell. The handsomest, to be sure, niece; do press her to accept of it.


L. Loui. Miss Lawson, my uncle requests that you will not refuse such a
trifle, as he offers; it is a thing of no sort of value, indeed, I think of
neither use, nor ornament.


Bell. Not so despicable, neither, madam.


L. Mar. However highly you may rate it, sir, there is a degree of politeness
in lessening the value of what we bestow.


Bell. Circumstances vary cases, niece; there are some things we should not
depreciate.


Emi. I rate the gift so far above my worth, sir, that nothing shall ever tempt
me to accept of it.


L. Loui. Bless me, Miss Lawson, you are the very paragon of humility; though I
confess I think you are right not to be teized with such a disagreeable animal;
a thing, that by pretending to imitate human speech, puts one out of humor
with the sound of our own voice, as much as a monkey does with our species; I
hate parrots, and monkeys.


Bell. Yes, but you love fops, and coxcombs, don't you? Let me tell you, madam,
your tongue runs before your wit, you don't know what you are abusing.


L. Loui. I should be sorry to find fault with any thing you liked, sir, but I
thought it was merely as a naturalist, that you kept such a number of parrots;
I did not think it was for the pleasure of hearing them talk.


Bell. I can tell you, madam, I would rather hear them chatter, than you.


L. Mar. Yet they sometimes cast reflections, mal a propos, as well as my
sister, sir.


Bell. Pray, ladies, let me draw breath. -- Was there ever such a couple of
vixens! -- ( aside to Emily) Don't mind them, miss, but consider what I have
said; I am sure it is entirely for your good I speak. You don't know what a
vast collection of pretty things I have, and they shall all be yours.


Emi. Where things are in themselves indifferent, sir, persuasions and
temptations may avail; but where our resolutions are founded in reason, nothing
can or should alter them.


Bell. Hush, hush, miss, not a word more upon this subject, I have a great deal
of business upon my hands; but pray, miss, do think about it. I Will get you a
very fine noesgay tomorrow, I Will pull my paul diack tulip for you; the root
cost me twenty pounds, but you shall have it. Sure you will not be cruel to me
now! Don't say one word, for I must run, and you shall have the tulip at any
rate.

[Exit.
Enter Lord Belmont. L. Bell. Your servant, ladies, was not that Mr. Belmont
that left you? I suppose he has been entertaining you with some of his
curiosities?


L. Loui. I think he is himself a greater curiosity, than any in his
collection, my lord, but I fancy he has a mind to dispose of them all together,
and means to give a bargain of them to Miss Lawson.


Emi. He has done me the honor to offer me abundance of rarities, madam, but I
am not disposed to receive favors that I cannot return; therefore his
treasures are all safe for me


L. Mar. I fancy he loads his gifts with hard conditions, and would persuade
you to accept himself along with them. Is it not so, Miss Lawson?


L. Bell. I congratulate you on your conquest, Emily; your eyes can do wonders,
it seems, and light up sparks in dying embers.


Emi. I rather think, my lord, that Mr. Belmont's flame is of that kind, which
dying fires emit, to show their near extinction; and the faint blaze has, but
by accident, cast it is pale light on me; any other object might have been
brightened by the same glimmer.


L. Bell. You wrong my uncle's taste; I have not heard of his proposing to marry
any lady these five years. Before that time, he used to be generally in love
twice a year, and had his summer and winter passions, which he constantly
changed with his clothes for the season.


L. Mar. I am surpised, my lord, that among such a variety of mistresses, he
never found one that would marry him; his person must have been tolerable, when
he was young; his family and fortune unexceptionable.


L. Bell. Be assured, sister, that was not the case; but by the time he had
brought the lady to think favorably of him, he began to discover some
imperfection in her. Perhaps her nose was a hair's breadth longer or shorter
than it should be, according to the exact rules of proportion; a foot, or a
finger, perhaps, disgusted him; on which, he immediately quitted his pursuit,
and went in search of another model.


L. Loui. It is happy the men are not so nice, nowadays, or we should never
be able to fix a lover.


L. Bell. I fancy, Louisa, that must be at all times a difficult matter to
accomplish; a fine woman will, doubtless, captivate many, but there is
something more than beauty, necessary to preserve her conquest over one.


L. Loui. Why, so they say, my lord; but I protest I cannot credit it. It is
impossible, I think, for a woman to lose her power, while she retains her
beauty.


L. Mar. A moment's recollection must furnish you with such a number of
instances to contradict your assertion, Louisa, that I Am afraid the argument
will drop, on your conviction; and I should like vastly to have it carried on.


L. Loui. O! never fear, we'll keep it up; but I will not admit of odds; it is only
with my brother I argue.


L. Bell. Well then, I grant, that while beauty lasts, it will always have
admirers. But these, Louisa, are but pageants to a conqueror; the triumph must
be found at home, in the heartfelt love and esteem of a man of sense and honor.


L. Loui. True, my lord, but that same beauty, that causes admiration and
attention in other men, will necessarily preserve our husband's love.


L. Bell. By no means, Louisa; possession damps the ardor of desire; merit alone
can keep the flame alive, and hinder every wanton gale from blowing it abroad;
that, like the vestal fire, must be preserved by constant watching.


L. Loui. By your account, my lord, a married woman has just as bad a life as a
vestal, if her whole time is to be spent in keeping one spark alive.


L. Bell. I will allow her task is full as arduous, though more pleasing. Men are
naturally inconstant; and a husband may sometimes see a woman fairer than his
wife; but it is her fault, if in the whole circle, he can find one that so well
deserves his love; whose temper, manners, conduct, and behavior, are so much
suited to his sentiments; who knows no wish or will, but to please him -- these
charms, the homeliest woman may acquire; without them, the fairest form that
ever struck our eyes, cannot retain one heart.


L. Mar. Indeed, my lord, we are vastly obliged to you for this excellent
lesson; and ought to think ourselves extremely happy in such a sensible and
kind instructor.


L. Bell. You make me so, as I hope that these slight hints I have thrown out,
may be of use to you. But why so grave, Miss Lawson? I hope I have not made you
melancholy.


Emi. I have heard your lordship, with the utmost pleasure, and most sincerely
wish, that my whole sex had done so too.


L. Loui. I think though, we ought not to wish that the other sex had heard his
lordship; it would make some of them horridly insolent.


L. Bell. Be assured, Louisa, that I have only spoke the general opinion of
every rational man. But a truce with the subject; for I flatter myself, you
have no need of any other monitor, but your own sense and virtue. Pray, Miss
Lawson, do you know a Mr. Freeman?


Emi. No, my lord.


L. Bell. She seems not at all embarrass'd. [Aside.


L Loui [ aside to Lady Mary] What can he mean?


L. Bell. Is he of your acquaintance, Lady Mary? Or of yours, Louisa?


L. Mar. I am not at all acquainted with him, my lord.


L. Loui. One knows such a number of people, by meeting them in public, that it
is impossible to remember names; we might, perhaps, have met such a person at
Soho, or at Almack's. Sister, shall we go see my aunt? I think some one said
she was not well. -- Will you come, Miss Lawson?


Emi. I Will wait on your ladyship.

[ Exeunt Lady Mary and Lady Louisa.
L. Bell. Stop a moment, Emily, I have but just time to tell you, that your
father is arrived, and I have seen him.


Emi. Is he in health, my lord? I greatly fear this hasty journey may have
injured him; that would complete my wretchedness.


L. Bell. Quiet your fears, he is in perfect health, and has promised to give
his consent to your marrying Sir Charles Somerville; or, in short, whomever
else you please.


Emi. How happy would this kindness once have made me! now it is an aggravation
of my sorrow, and comes like a reprieve, when execution's past. Yet still I
thank my father; he will not press me then to the detested march he once
proposed. O let me fly to him, my lord, and on these trembling knees receive
his blessing.


L. Bell. You must not think of seeing him this night; tomorrow he will be here,
that is time enough. I flatter myself, that a very little time will serve to
clear this mystery.


Emi. O grant it heaven! let my poor heart be eased of this sad load, which
even imputed guilt can cause, and conscious innocence but ill sustain; then let
me yield that heart to undivided, and unceasing sorrow, for my lost Somerville.


L. Bell. Dry up your tears, he may not yet be lost. I now entreat you will, for
a little time, be guided by me; I would not have you suffer my sisters to
perceive any change in your looks, though I hope there will soon be a material
one in your situation.


Emi. I shall endeavor to obey your lordship.

[Exit.
L. Bell. What am I now to think? that Emily's innocent, I must believe; I took
her on a sudden, unprepared, and yet she answered with such calm indifference
as common questions usually produce. I Will keep a watchful eye upon Louisa; she
was not calm, nor did she answer fairly to the question. -- I fear the stain
comes nearer than I thought; and yet I cannot think so meanly of my conduct
toward her, as to suppose she fears me; why then should she conceal the most
important action of her life from her sincerest friend?

But men and women both have their capri^^.
We deal too hardly, when we call it vice.
[Exit.
END of the THIRD ACT
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Young Freeman 's lodgings; he is discovered on a couch, with a book in his
hand. Y. Free. " IS she not more than painting can express,
" Or youthful poets fancy when they love?"
[Looks at his watch. It Is now near ten; at eleven, I Will make another glorious
effort to carry off the prize. Her last words were, "Pray be gone, this
instant, though you should return." -- Dear creature! and shall I not accept thy
gentle invitation? I Will quarter her arms on my chariot, as if she were an
heiress. Lord, how it will fret the sober family in Lombard Street, who have
only a cipher on their coach.

[Rings a bell. Enter Ralph. Are my clothes come?


Ralph. Yes, please your honor.


Y. Free. Get out my white and silver, prepare every thing to dress, and step
to the next coach-maker; I want a chariot and six flying horses, to be got
ready in half an hour: tell the fellow, I shall deal with him for an elegant
equipage, in a few days. [ Exit Ralph.

Enter Elder Freeman. [Aside.] What brings him here? He is worse than the
devil, and comes before the termination of his contract.


E. Free. Well, brother, have you seen the lady?


Y. Free. Why, Jack, I thought you men of business were more exact? Do you
think I cannot hold it 'till Monday, that you call upon me before the three days
are out? This would be enough to hurt a man's credit in the city; and why it
should not be deemed a mark of insolvency, at this end of the town, I cannot
conceive.


E. Free. As you seem to think a citizen has no ideas but what relate to trade,
I shall, upon your own premises, explain my visit. When we have but a slight
opinion of our debtor, and find him tardy, we think it necessary to observe his
motions: but where a man of honor is concerned, though we may doubt his power,
we don't suspect his principles, and therefore never watch his motions.


Y. Free. Which is, in plain English, to say, you look upon me as a scoundrel.
-- Votre serviteur, tres humble.


E. Free. You have drawn this sarcasm upon yourself, by presuming too hastily
to explain my motives for this visit; the irksomness of which gives but a bad
idea of your integrity. Those who act fairly, need not fear inspection.


Y. Free. Indeed, brother, you seem to me quite on the qui vive, always in a
disposition to quarrel, which is a mighty improper temper of mind to visit a
lover in, who should be all tuned to harmony and joy.


E. Free. The mind should be at peace within itself, to feel those charming
sensations; they must arise from conscious worth -- not even the power of
beauty can awake them, in mean, dishonest hearts; I therefore should rejoice,
that you were capable of feeling their happy influence.


Y. Free. Ay, now you talk something like a brother, and in return for your
good nature, I will acquaint you, that I am this moment preparing to visit my
charmer.


E. Free. Surely you have been much to blame, to delay so long; this is not a
proper time of night, to wait upon a woman of fashion.


Y. Free. Not for a tradesmen, I grant you, but we pretty fellows are welcome
at all hours.


E. Free. Prithee, Harry, lay by the coxcomb, and though you don't act, speak at
least, like a rational creature; what could prevent your visiting the lady, all
this evening; upon the plan I proposed, and you agreed to?


Y. Free. Why, really, Jack, you are so very impetuous, you will not give a man
time to answer your why's, and your wherefores; but if it will satisfy you, I
did wait on the lady, this very evening; and am, by her appointment, to see her
again this night. I then hope to prevail on her to step into an hired equipage
with me, and for the rest of my life, to drive in my own.


E. Free. I don't understand you, sure; is she so romantically smitten, that
she cannot wait a few days, 'till her friends and yours have adjusted matters
for her honor and security? There can be no doubt, that my father will gladly
receive her as his daughter, and make a proper settlement, since she is
inclined to honor us with her alliance. -- She cannot have had time to consult
her friends.


Y. Free. No, truly, nor ever shall, with my consent. Why, Jack, it is
impossible you should be so ignorant as you seem; you will never be a rich man,
that is certain. There are coups de maitres in trade, as well as love; and if a
man has not courage to make a push, he will never make a fortune. -- Consult
her friends, ha, ha, ha!


E. Free. I thought, sir, when we parted, you had determined to act like an
honest man, and deal upon the square?


Y. Free. Why, faith, Jack, you overawed me then; but being at present a
little more assured of success, I laugh at your qualms, because I am sure that,
by and by, you will laugh with me; and I should deserve to be eternally laughed
at, if I were to be preached out of such an opportunity of making my fortune;
and so, my dear moral merchant, your most obedient, for I have scarce time to
dress.

[Exit.
E. Free. Incorrigible wretch! were I acquainted with the lady's name, I would
this moment alarm her family, and prevent her ruin. ( looks at his watch) It is
now near the time I am to meet Lord Belmont, upon business at his house; I
cannot break my word; but that finished, I will return, and watch every motion
of this worthless brother, whom, if I can, (in spite of all the ties of blood)
I will detect.

[Exit.
Enter Younger Freeman and Ralph. Y. Free. What Is to be done? A plague on that
stupid, money-making brother.


Ralph. Upon my word, sir, I don't know what you will do; they say it is too late
to get six horses for a journey, or even a fine chariot, to night.


Y. Free. Why did not you go sooner?


Ralph. Because you ordered me to get your things to dress.


Y. Free. It Is my own fault; why did I waste my time with that dull fellow? But
run, fly, try at the inns, get me even a post-chaise. Do any thing to make
dispatch.

[ Exit Ralph. I could hang myself for being such a negligent blockhead, to
defer a thing of so much consequence, 'till the last moment; if I should lose
this night, it is ten to one but my evil genius, Jack, may take it into his head
to describe me as a fortune-hunter, in tomorrow's newspapers, and put Louisa
on her guard against me.

Enter Ralph. Have you succeeded? Have you got the chaise?


Ralph. No, sir, but I have done much better. As your brother went out, I heard
him say he had business with Lord Belmont, and older his chariot there.


Y. Free. Business there! and at this late hour! -- no matter -- he cannot
guess my scheme. -- He has some plodding accounts to settle in a hurry,
perhaps, with his methodical lordship, which may be of use in detaining him
from any chance of discovering what is going forward.


Ralph. True, sir; now what I propose is this; I Will wait on your honor there,
and take James with me, and decoy your brother's servants to the alehouse --
treat them with plenty of liquor, while James drives the chariot round the
house to the garden-door, and waits ready to whip away, when your honor and
the lady come to him.


Y. Free. Bravo, Ralph. -- Fortune seems inclined to befriend me, and my
brother shall, at last, be a means of my success, in spite of his mechanical
morality. -- Follow me.

[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
Lord Belmont 's library. Lord Belmont at a table, with papers before him. L.
Bell. I am now ready for my banker. What a pleasure there is in regularity! Yet
many men, rather than take the trouble of settling their accounts, suffer their
fortunes to moulder through their hands, without enjoyment, and scarce find
themselves in possession of an estate before they feel the loss of it. I have a
noble surplus now for exigencies; I mean those of others, more than my own. For
the man, whose economy is properly regulated, seldom feels the force of that
sharp word; and I would treasure up my wealth in acts of liberality.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Mr. Southern is come again to wait upon your lordship.


L. Bell. Desire him to walk in.

[ Exit Servant. What can provoke him to return at this hour? I hoped he would
have allowed both himself and me to rest this night.


Enter Mr. Southern. South. Finding myself comfortably refreshed after my pipe
and tankard, my lord, and John having informed me that the horses are in good
heart, and able to set out tomorrow; I thought it was as good to pay my
respects to my brother and sister Belmont, to night, as to lose another day in
compliments. Therefore, if you please, I Will wait on them directly, and take my
leave.


L. Bell. It shall be as you please, sir; but I am surprised how you can think
of leaving town, 'till you have found your daughter.


South. Why, look'e, my lord, I am an old man, and have no time to lose from
the comforts of life. It is uncertain whether ever Emily may be found; and I
want to get home to my own dear, who will nourish and cherish me. However, if
you think there is any chance of finding my daughter, I don't much care if I
stay one day longer.


L. Bell. That is all I ask, sir.


South. Well then, my lord, I will bide at your request, and the horses will be
the better for it. And since I don't go out of town in the morning, if it is
agreeable, I Will stay and sup with your lordship.


L. Bell. I am sorry, sir, I happen to be engaged, but am certain that Lady
Bridget, and Mr. Belmont, will be glad of your company. I will acquaint them
you are here, and return immediately to conduct you to them. [aside] I must
take care that Emily be not seen.

[Exit.
South. What a deal of fuss and ceremony is here? Could not he let me go with
him? But as he has no wife, may be he is gone to order something for supper, as
I used to do, when I was a widower. Ah! I wish I had continued so still, and
then I need not be afraid of any body! My nephew is a wise man, that is certain.


Enter Lord Belmont. L. Bell. I am ready now, sir, to attend you; but must
entreat you will not mention Emily's misfortune to my aunt or sisters.


South. Come then, my lord; and since you desire it, I will not.

[Exeunt.
SCENE III.
A drawing room. Enter Lady Bridget, Lady Mary, and Lady Louisa. L. Brid. I am
doubtful whether I shall recollect Mr. Southern; it is a good many years since
I have seen him; and I was, at that era, extremely young; in my infantine
state, as I may say.


Enter Lord Belmont, and Mr. Southern. South. Your servant, sister; you look
purely, faith; not a whit altered: my poor first wife was a great deal younger
than you, and yet she is gone: but we must all go, one time or other, they say.


L. Bell. My sisters, sir. --

[ Presents Lady Mary and Lady Louisa.
South. Good pretty girls, my nieces are; the shortest of them is something
like my wife, when she was her age; do you remember your aunt, young lady?


L. Loui. No, sir; I don't believe I ever saw her.


South. Perhaps not. -- Well, Sister Biddy, and are you jolly, old girl? You
thrive rarely.


L. Brid. Your phrase is somewhat of the coarsest, Mr. Southern.


South. Why, yes, we all grow coarse, as we grow old, to be sure. I do remember
when you were almost as slender as that young miss there. But where is my
brother Belmont, the philosopher, as we used to call him? Is he poking after
cockle-shells, and old bits of copper, still, my lord?


L. Bell. My uncle, sir, is true to his former taste -- but I suppose they have
not acquainted him with your being here; I Will send to let him know it. You Will
be so good as to excuse me, sir, as I am engaged. Ladies, good night; I leave
Mr. Southern in your charge; pray take care of him.

[Exit.
L. Loui. [aside] He sups abroad; that is lucky.


L. Mar. What do you say, sister?


L. Loui. Not material.


L. Mar. Pray, sir, have not you a daughter by my aunt? A very accomplished
young lady, I have heard my brother say.


South. Yes, yes, madam, I have a daughter; and she ought to be accomplished,
as you call it: she has cost me many a fair pound; she was no less than ten
years at a boarding-school.


L. Loui. Was not that rather too long, sir, to let a young lady remain out of
her father's house? She must have been a perfect stranger to you.


South. Why, truly, madam, so she was; but Mrs. Southern said it was for her
good; and one must give up a great deal for the sake of one's children, you
know.


L. Brid. I am surpised, Mr. Southern, you did not think proper to present
Miss Southerne's duty to me, nor her respects to these young ladies her
cousins; in this you have certainly been deficient, sir.


South. Why, really, sister, as neither you or they ever set eyes on her, I
cannot say I thought it of any great consequence.


L. Brid. Notwithstanding our mutual misfortune in that case, sir, proper
decorum should be observed. But I shall not on this occasion enter into any
contest of sarcasm, or reciprocation of smartness.


Enter Mr. Belmont. Bell. Brother Southern, I am very glad to see you; how does
my niece, and your wife, and all your children? Egad, you are a fine old
Grecian, and would make a very curious bust; it might pass for an antique; will
you sit to Rysbrack for me?


South. As to the latter part of your discourse, Brother Belmont, I don't
thoroughly understand it; but as to my wife and children, they are very well;
and I am glad to see you so.


Bell. Pray, Lady Mary, where is Miss Lawson?


L. Mary. In her chamber, sir; I have not seen her some time.


Bell. Ay, ay, I guessed it; some of ye have vexed her. I found her crying to
day, ready to break her heart. I suppose this is your doings, Lady Bridget?


L. Brid. Certainly my poor brother is seized with a delirium, to suppose it
possible for me to transgress the laws of urbanity and hospitality in any
instance.


L. Loui. Surely, sir, you must mistake.


Bell. No, madam, I do not mistake, I am in my senses; though so many teizing
contradicting women are enough to put a man beside himself.


L. Mar. Pray, Brother Belmont, who may this same lady be? I don't remember any
of your family of that name.


L. Brid. She is no way allied to us, sir, either by affinity or consanguinity.


Bell. You cannot tell but she may.


L. Brid. You Will pardon me, brother, I do affirm she is not of our family.


Bell. Then I do affirm she is, for she lives in the house; and she may be
nearer to you than you imagine.


L. Brid. His senses are quite gone.


South. Faith, I think so; for he seems to me as if he had some thoughts of
marrying.


L. Loui. No, no, my dear uncle is not quite so mad, sir.


Bell. Don't be too sure of that, my lady malapert; I hope I am old enough to
take care of myself, without your advice or instruction, madam.


L. Brid. Don't oppose his insanity, irritation may augment it.


Bell. By Hercules Farnese, Lady Bridget, if you don't leave off your tricks,
you will put me in a devilish passion; and you had better be quiet, let me tell
you.


South. For my part, I don't understand all this; I know not who is mad or
sober among ye; I think ye are all at a game of cross purposes, and I wish I
was safe in the country again.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Please your ladyship, supper is served.


Bell. Is Miss Lawson in the parlour?


Serve. No, sir; she is not well, and desires to be excused.


Bell. Oh! now it is plain that you have made her sick somehow or other among ye
-- but I Will go comfort her as soon as supper is over.


SCENE IV.
Another apartment. Enter Emily, with a book in her hand. Emi. Reading's a
charming exercise for minds at peace; books can even smooth affliction's
furrowed cheek, or change the source and channel of our tears, from selfish to
humane; but when the mind is torn with doubts and fears, while mad contending
passions labor in the breast, reason itself must fail to calm their discord;
nor can the powers of eloquence or music attune the soul to peace or harmony.


Enter Lord Belmont. L. Bell. Emily, I thank you for the condescension you have
shown to my request, unknowing of the cause.


Emi. Your lordship's commands were rather an indulgence, than a force upon my
wishes; I therefore claim no merit from obedience.


L. Bell. Your father is at present in this house, which will account to you for
your confinement.


Emi. My father in the house! Will you not suffer me to see him, sir? O! let me
fly to him, and give a loose to that soft sorrow that overpowers my heart.


L. Bell. No, Emily; for a little time you have promised to be ruled; I think
you want not sense or virtue to conduct yourself; but as I hope that by
tomorrow we shall be able to clear up this dark scene which has perplexed us,
I wish you, for the present, to remain concealed: if my scheme should fail, I
then will give the reins into your hands, and suffer you to guide them.


Emi. It is an office I do not wish for -- by nature and by providence
designed, our helpless sex's strength lies in dependence; and where we are so
blessed to meet with generous natures, our servitude is empire: to such a state I
once aspired, but Somerville is gone; how lost my hopes of happiness!


L. Bell. Do not despair, Emily; you may possibly be nearer the completion of
your wishes than you imagine; mean while, rest assured of every thing, in the
power of true friendship, to alleviate your distress.


Emi. An honest heart, my lord, is always grateful; but when oppressed with
obligations, it may want the power of utterance; I cannot thank you, but I feel
your kindness.


L. Bell. My dear Emily, I am sorry to leave you in this dejected mood; but I
have two gentlemen to meet me upon business. I must therefore wish you a good
night, and hope tomorrow's sun will dispel those clouds that hang at present
on your fame and mind.

[Exit.
Emi. Let the bright radiance of unerring truth shine forth on Emily's every
thought and action; and pity, not reproach, will then attend her.

[Exit.
SCENE V.
Lord Belmont 's library. Enter Elder Freeman and a Servant. Serve. I shall let
my lord know you are here, sir.

[Exit.
E. Free. What an amiable man is Lord Belmont! I think no person so happily
unites the man of business and the nobleman; nicely exact in all his dealings,
yet generous as the most dissipated and extravagant; liberality and economy go
hand in hand with him, and mutually support each other.


Enter Lord Belmont. L. Bell. Your servant, Mr. Freeman; your accounts and mine
agree exactly; I have looked them over, the vouchers are all right: but I fear
I have trespassed upon you, by desiring to see you at an hour which men of
business generally do, and always ought to give up to amusement; but my being
obliged to go into the country so immediately, will, I hope, plead my excuse.


E. Free. I consider my attendance on your lordship at any hour, as one of the
rational pleasures of a man of business; as your conversation at once
entertains and enlarges my mind.


L. Bell. You are extremely polite, Mr. Freeman, and I shall be glad of every
opportunity to cultivate the friendship of a person, whose dealings, as a man,
and manners, as a gentleman, I so much esteem. If you can spare a little time
from business, I shall be very glad of the pleasure of your company in
Worcestershire.


E. Free. I am extremely obliged to your lordship; but my father now growing
infirm, his health requires a recess from trouble and fatigue, and he passes
most of the summer in the country; I therefore am confined.


L. Bell. You have a brother though, whose attendance, I should imagine, might set
you free -- he is bred to business, I think?


E. Free. Yes, my lord; but he is too fine a gentleman to follow it. The air of
Lombard Street is too heavy for his constitution; he usually resides at this
end of the town, has quitted business, and commenced fortune-hunter.


L. Bell. [aside] As I suspected. I fear then, Mr. Freeman, he will make but a
bad exchange; both a man's means and manners should be suited to his situation,
before he can possibly make a figure in it.


E. Free. Nothing can be truer than your lordship's remark; but reason has no
power over dissipated minds, and experience alone can reclaim them: however, I
will try once more to bring him back by argument.


L. Bell. I heartily wish you success, Mr. Freeman.


E. Free. And I your lordship a good night.


L. Bell. Your most obedient, sir.

[Exit Elder Freeman. His brother certainly must be the man -- How he could
possibly become acquainted with Louisa, I cannot conceive; but public places put
every person on a level; and at some of these he must have seen her. Tomorrow
I will find this Freeman, and bring him to a severe account, both for Emily and
Louisa.

[Exit.
END of the FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
Discovers Lady Louisa at her toilet, her Maid waiting. L. Loui. GIVE me that
book, and then you may withdraw; I shall not want you again tonight. [Exit
Maid.] What can keep Freeman? does he sleep when his good stars and mine are
all awake! It seems as if the god of love himself had interfer'd, and disposed
of the whole family in such a way as to prevent all interruption. -- In short,
there never was, nor will be such a charming opportunity.

Enter Younger Freeman. O, Mr. Freeman! what could tempt you to such a
dangerous act of indiscretion? I shall be totally ruined if you should be
discovered.


Y. Free. Fear nothing, my angel, I will protect you from all danger; this
happy night I shall become your guardian, and all my future life shall be
devoted to your service.


L. Loui. This night, did you say, Mr. Freeman? How is it possible?


Y. Free. If you consent to bless me with your hand, we may escape this moment:
I did not hear a creature in the house; they are all retired to rest; then do
not lose this lucky crisis, but fly to love and happiness this moment.


L. Loui. It will be deemed so rash a step, I fear my brother never will
forgive me. -- Had we not better ask his consent?


Y. Free. [aside] I must parry that stroke. -- What are brothers, fathers,
mothers, sisters, uncles, or aunts, to love? They might perhaps postpone our
happiness for settlements, and such dull stuff; for I can assure your ladyship,
there would be no fear of a refusal -- the family of Freeman --


L. Loui. I have no doubt but my friends would be extremely pleased with your
alliance, sir; and for that reason, wish we had consulted them.


Y. Free. Why, so do I, since you seem now to desire it; but, oh! my charmer,
think what I must suffer by the least delay? then let me gently press you to be
mine; my chariot's at the garden-door.


L. Loui. I know not how to consent, or to deny.


Y. Free. Dear, lovely angel, do not torture me, nor tear my faithful heart,
with doubts and fears; you must, you shall be mine.


L. Loui. What will the world say of me?


Y. Free. Say, that you had love, generosity, and spirit, to trust a man of
honor: but why will you thus waste the precious minutes?


L. Loui. I find you can persuade me to any thing.


Y. Free. Generous creature! now let us fly.


L. Loui. Ha! there is my sister going to her chamber, which overlooks the
garden; we must not stir, 'till she is in bed. Step into the next room, as it
is possible she may come here.

[Exit Y. Freeman. Louisa sits at her toilet reading.
Enter Lady Mary. L. Mar. What are you reading, Louisa?


L. Loui. Pope's Homer, sister.


L. Mar. Then you have no mind to compose yourself to rest, I perceive; the
loftiness of the subject, and elegance of the language, will be apt to rouse
your attention, and keep you awake.


L. Loui. I am vastly sleepy, notwithstanding that.


L. Mar. Then I will not trespass on your repose, though I am unaccountably
wakeful. -- Shall I go with you to your chamber?


L. Loui. No, sister, I Will go with you to yours.


L. Mar. Come then, and if you have any good nature, you will chat to me, while I
undress.

[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
Lord Belmont 's library. Enter Lord Belmont. L. Bell. Poor Charles! -- at last
he is gone -- what difficulty have I had in persuading him to seek for the only
relief his present situation can admit of -- rest. -- In some few hours, I hope
his passions will be as much raised with joy, as they are now depressed by
anxiety; for, as I can have no doubt of Emily's conduct, or his honor, they
must yet be happy. [A noise of laughing.] By that sound, I perceive that jolly
threescore are still at their bottle, perhaps they are in the right; age should
enjoy, or rather catch each passing moment of delight; youth should husband
time, and spend it sparingly; the spirit, not the lees of life, is worth
preserving

Enter Sir Charles Somerville. I hope you have met no accident to bring you
back, Sir Charles?


Sir Char. I scarce have breath to tell you. -- Passing again by your
garden-door, I saw it stand open, and at a little distance, a chariot: I asked
the coachman who he waited for? he said Mr. Freeman; he is this moment, in your
house, my lord, upon some clandestine purpose.


L. Bell. You have amazed me; but let us act with caution, nor trust my servants
with my sisters honor -- to one of them he comes. O Charles, this is a heavy
trial.


Sir Char. It may not be so bad as you imagine; your own maxim is, to hope the
best.


L. Bell. We are all philosophers, when others suffer, but tremblingly alive to
our own feelings. I Will go, this moment, and search every apartment. Do you
place yourself upon the center of the staircase, and lock the folding doors --
if the villain should fly from me, you must meet him. But remember, Sir
Charles, he is accountable to me this night, tomorrow he may answer you.

[Exeunt severally.
SCENE III.
Lady Louisa 's dressing room. Enter Lady Louisa. L. Loui. Was there ever any
creature so teizing, as Lady Mary? I really believe, if I had staid with her,
she would have continued talking 'till morning. It is amazing that she don't go
to bed. I dare not let Mr. Freeman out, 'till I think she is asleep. Bless me,
what noise is this?


Enter Lady Mary. L. Mar. O Louisa, my brother is this moment running from room
to room, and searching every corner with his sword drawn, and a wildness in his
countenance, not to be expressed: I am terrified to death.


L. Loui. I am undone! Freeman is in my chamber.


L. Mar. What shall we do? There may be murder if they meet.


L. Loui. I cannot speak, or think.


L. Mar. Let him fly down the back stairs.


L. Loui. It must be so, there is no other way. -- Do you return to your
chamber.

[Exeunt severally.
SCENE IV.
A passage, with a chamber door shut. Enter Young Freeman. Y. Free. The
staircase door is locked, there is no retreating. If I could get into any of
the rooms on the middle floor, I would leap out of the window, and hazard my
neck, rather than bear to be exposed. I hear Lord Belmont's voice, I Will force
this door, at all events.

[Pushes it open, and discovers Emily. Ha! what has conjured up the only form,
that at this moment could increase my terror?


Emi. Is it an apparition that I see! Defend me gracious heaven!


Y. Free. Dear madam, don't be alarmed; upon my knees I beg you will protect
me; my life's at stake, and what is dearer still, a lady's honor.


Emi. Inhuman wretch! you have already robbed me of all that was most precious,
my lover and my fame; I have now nothing but my life to lose, and you may take
it freely.


Y. Free. By heaven, madam, I never designed you the least injury; and if you
have the smallest grain of compassion, you will assist me to escape. I am
absolutely ruined if you don't, and so is Lady Louisa. -- Is there no way to
get out?


Emi. Thou worse than murderer! do not profane a lady's name, that I am certain
knows you not; but if you have the least compunction for all the sorrows you
have brought on me, say why you haunt me thus?


Enter Lord Belmont, Lady Mary, and Lady Louisa. L. Bell Now ladies, this affair
must be explained. -- Who are you, sir, that have thus broke into my house, at
midnight, and taken refuge in this lady's chamber?


Y. Free. I Am at my last push; there is but one way. [Aside.


L. Bell. This moment speak, who are you?


Y. Free. A gentleman, my lord, but one, I must confess, who, tempted by strong
passion, has infringed that just respect, which is your lordship's due, by
entering your house without your knowledge: but love, my lord.


L. Bell. Of whom? declare that, instantly.


L. Loui. [aside] Now I Am undone.


Y. Free. Your lordship will, I hope, excuse my mentioning the lady, as she is
equally involved in this unlucky accident.


L. Bell. No trifling, sir; explain yourself this moment.

[ Sir Charles appears.
Sir Char. [aside] Sure it is a vision! no, it is my Emily.


Y. Free. Will nothing, sir, avail, to save the lady's honor?


L. Bell. Nothing shall save your life, sir, but a fair confession.


Y. Free. Why then, my lord, I must own, though very unwillingly upon my honor,
that I came hither by this lady's appointment.

[Points to Emily.
Sir Char (...) my fears are true, and I can hold no longer. [comes forward]
Ungrateful woman.


Emi. Good heaven! this is too much.

[ Faints. L. Louisa, and Lady Mary carry her off.
L. Loui. This is lucky, however. [Aside.


L. Bell. I am struck dumb with wonder.


Y. Free. [aside] What the devil has brought him here? -- Your lordship sees
how much you have distressed the lady, by pressing her to own her passion;
ladies are apt to be bashful, when there are strangers by. -- Perhaps Sir
Charles may not know me. [Aside.


Sir Char. I beg, my lord, you will inform me.


L. Bell. Pray, Somerville, be calm; at a proper time, I shall satisfy all your
enquiries about Emily. -- [To Freeman.] I have one question more to ask you,
sir.


Y. Free. I am ready to answer with the same truth, my lord. -- Egad, I shall
come off with flying colors. [Aside.


L. Bell. Were not you in this house about seven this evening?


Y. Free. Why, as a man of honor, my lord, I cannot possibly tell a lie; I was
here about that time, but the lady was then afraid of being discovered, and
desired me to come at this hour, when we concluded the family would be at rest.


L. Bell. I am satisfied.


Y. Free. Why then, my lord, I beg leave to wish you, and the ladies, a very
good night, and ask a thousand pardons for disturbing your lordship's repose.
-- [Going]

Lady Louisa appears.
L. Loui. [aside] He has brought me off triumphantly, but I must see the event.


Sir Char. Stay, sir, I have yet something to say to you.


Y. Free. Well, sir, pray what are your commands?


Sir Char. In that light you are to understand them, sir, for they shall be
obeyed.


Y. Free. You Will please to be as brief as you can, sir, for it grows late.


Sir Char. That I have loved that wretched, hapless Emily, I need not now
inform you; I have no doubt, but she has already gratified your vanity, by
boasting of the sacrifice she made, however worthless she herself might think
it.


Y. Free. Upon my honor, sir, the lady never mentioned your name to me in her
life.


Sir Char. No interruption, nor evasion, sir, they cannot avail. Fallen as she
is at present, in my esteem, I will still, as far as she has left it possible,
preserve her same; you must marry her immediately, sir.


L Loui. Ha! what can this mean?


Y. Free. You are not in earnest, sir?


Sir Char. Quite determined.


Y. Free. You must excuse me, sir -- You do me honor. -- But I have particular
reasons -- which, at present, I cannot so well explain.


Sir Char. [draws] Villain, defend yourself.


L. Bell. [interposes] Not in this house, Sir Charles; I must not suffer it.


Sir Char. No place should be a sanctuary for such a monster.


Enter Mr. Belmont and Mr. Southern. Bell. Why, what the devil's the matter
here! if you are for a bout of tilting, have with you, I Will be on the weaker
side.


South. I say, what is the matter? I am a magistrate, and command the peace in
the king's name.


Sir Char. [To Free.] We are prevented now; but if you do not choose to join the
name of coward to that of villain, I shall expect to hear from you tomorrow.


Y. Free. Pray, sir, hear me now.


South. Why, hey! what the devil is this? Here are the two fellows that ran
away with my daughter; they shall give an account of her directly; who knows
but they have murdered her. I command you all to assist me to apprehend them.


Enter Emily, and falls at Mr. Southern 's feet. Emi. Behold that wretched
daughter at your feet, murdered, indeed, in her lost peace and fame; but still
alive to filial tenderness. O Somerville!


Bell. Why, Miss Lawson, what do you kneel to him for? get up, my pretty
creature, and come to your own love; don't cry, don't cry. -- Just as she
stands now, she would make a pretty model for a small Niobe.


South. No, don't cry, child, and I Will make one of them, at least, marry you,
or I Will hang them both.


Bell. Neither of them shall have her; I Will marry her myself.


South. What, marry your niece, brother Belmont? Why don't you know Emily is my
daughter?


Bell. None of your shams to me, I will not believe a word of it.


L. Bell. [To Freeman.] Have you had leisure, sir, to make your option, whether
you will accept this lady for your wife, or vindicate your refusal with your
sword?


Emi. What can you mean, my lord, why am I offered to that detested wretch? No
power on earth shall force me to be his.


Sir Char. Well acted, madam, but the farce is done.


Y. Free. You hear, my lord, that the lady absolutely refuses, you would not be
so cruel to compel her.


South. Ay, but I say I will compel her and you too; I Will have no more plague
with her: this was the way she served me about Winterbottom; I wish I had made
her marry him.


Bell. Egad, I begin to think she is his daughter; and if that be the case, she
shall get a husband. -- Do you hear, you hatchet-face gentleman, that are very
like my worst medal of Nero, if you don't marry my niece directly, you shall
have a couple of ounces of lead in your stomach for breakfast, instead of your
coffee to-morrow-morning; that is, if she says you promised her marriage; but
if not, you are at liberty to go about your business.


Y. Free. I dare appeal, sir, to the lady's truth and honor; if she says I
ever promised to marry her, I am ready to do so this moment.


Bell. Why that is fair enough.


South. I say right or wrong, nolens volens, he shall marry her.


Y. Free. Pray, madam, speak.


Emi. Though your inhuman artifices have undone me, I claim no promise from
you, and call on heaven to witness, that 'till within this hour I never spoke
to you, nor saw your face but once, 'till this unhappy night, in my whole life.


L. Bell. This is amazing!


Sir Char. By heaven she does not blush! Sure, madam, you forget that I stand
here. Is it not enough that you are sunk in my esteem? But will you teach me to
despise myself, for having ever loved a woman that can be capable of such mean,
such unavailing falsehood?


Emi. Sir Charles, I pity more than blame you.


Sir Char. Insolent generosity! But I disclaim your pity; keep it, madam, for
yourself, lest you should miss it elsewhere.


Bell. Pray, sir, don't scold my niece so; I don't see how she has deserved it
from you.


Emi. O Somerville! is it possible you yet can doubt my innocence?


Sir Char. No, madam, I have no doubts; but beg you will not profane a term that
is your sex's brightest ornament -- your innocence!


South. Come, gentlemen, all this talk signifies nothing; one or other of ye
must marry my daughter, that is certain. You have acquitted this gentleman,
child; now what have you to say to the other? I can safely swear he promised to
marry you, for he asked my consent.


Bell. If that be the case, I shall discourse him presently.


South. Come, don't be afraid to speak, child; I am in a very good humor now;
and if you have a mind for that same knight, before George he shall marry you,
or I Will hamper him at law, that I will.


Emi. You are so kind to promise, sir, you will confirm my option.


South. Ay, that I will, here is my hand for it.


Bell. And here is mine too, niece (though I am sorry to call you so) that no man
alive shall use you ill while I am able to draw a trigger, if it was only for
sake of that love I had for you, when I had a mind to be nearer related to you.


L. Bell. [To Sir Charles.] I cannot guess where this will end.


Sir Char. I am all impatience.


Emi. Though it must call a blush into a virgin's cheek, to own her love, before
so many witnesses, yet as it is the only declaration of this kind, that I shall
ever make, I will confess, that dearer than my life or fame, I love Sir Charles
Somerville,


Sir Char. Confusion! Belmont, what can she intend?


Emi. Pray hear me out, the difficulty's past: I have avowed my love: but were
that man, whom my heart owns its lord, to sue with all his former tenderness
and passion, to obtain my hand, not worlds should bribe me to bestow it.


Bell. [aside] That Is very odd, though.


Emi. While in his heart there could remain a single doubt of my truth or
honor; and as my injured fame is now obscured, all I request, is, that you
will permit me to retire to some distant part of the world, where my unhappy
story is not known, and where my name may never bring disgrace upon my family;
this, sir, is my sole request, and you have promised me to grant it.


Sir Char. O Belmont, she has torn my heart! but yet conviction cannot lie, my
eyes, my ears, are witness of her falsehood.


Bell. By Jupiter Ammon, you sha'n't go into any lonesome place, you shall live
with me.


Sir Char. [To Emily.] Madam, the kind confession you have made, at least
deserves my thanks, and I am truly sorry your conduct should have contradicted
it so far, as to make them the sole return I can with honor offer.


Y. Free. [aside] I begin to feel unhappy about this girl; I could almost
recant -- but what becomes of Louisa, then?


Emi. Had my resentment and resolves left it in your power to have shown
gratitude, in any other way, you never should have known your obligation.


L. Bell. Still more and more mysterious. [To Sir Charles.] I know not what to
think; but, let her faults be what they may, she carries her punishment in her
own breast, and bears it nobly.


Sir Char. [To L. Belmont.] I am distressed, beyond all measure; I cannot stand
this scene. [To Emily.] Madam, my ardent wishes for your happiness, though with
as little hopes of their success, as those I may bestow upon my own, shall
still be yours -- at present, I am sure, I rather increase, than lessen your
distress, I therefore take my leave.


Emi. Adieu, for ever!

[Sir Charles bows, as going off.
Enter Lady Louisa, and Lady Mary. L. Loui. Stay, sir! though I were sure to
forfeit as much happiness as Emily deserves to possess, I could not think of
saving it at her expense.


Sir Char. [ To Lady Louisa.] Speak, madam, quickly speak.


L. Loui. You must allow me time; I have a severe task to go through; and first
must own myself unworthy of the most unbounded confidence, that a kind brother
ever yet bestowed, or a rash girl abused.


Y. Free. [aside] Sure the devil will not tempt her to betray herself!


L. Bell. Speak without fear, Louisa, and be assured your motives for this
generous confession already have excused you.


L. Loui. Should even the loss of your esteem, my lord, attend the knowledge of
my fault, I cannot bear that innocence should suffer, and therefore will avow
it. That gentleman [ points to Freeman] came here this night to me.


Sir Char. Impossible!


Y. Free. [aside] I shall have my throat cut, that I see plainly.


L. Bell. By your appointment, sister; who did he come to in the afternoon?


Sir Char. Aye, my lord, what brought him hither, at that time? This is what
ladies call a pious fraud of friendship.


L. Mary. Equally inclined to clear that lady's character, though not equally
involved in the consequences, I own that I was acquainted with his visit at
that time. Your lordship may remember my confusion, when you came up this
evening.


Bell. Is the man bewitched? Did he court all my nieces, and will not marry any of
them? I Will fight him with three case of pistols.


South. I am in a stound, Brother Belmont; I don't understand all this.


L. Bell. I do remember that you seemed distressed, but pray was it to you he
came? [ To Lady Mary.


L. Loui. No, my lord, it was tome. Speak, Mr. Freeman, you have often told me
your family and fortune might claim me for your wife; are you ashamed of your
attachment to me?


Y. Free. O, by no means, madam, though I may appear a little awkward at present.


L. Loui. You see my brother is ready to forgive my folly, in carrying on a
match clandestinely, that I might have owned with honor; but indeed, my lord,
it was my own romance, though I think Mr. Freeman has acquiesced rather too far.


Y. Free. Why, to be sure, ma'am, it was entirely to gratify your ladyship's
humor, that I did not at first apply to my lord.


L. Loui. I have confessed it, sir.


Y. Free. But since matters have taken this odd, ridiculous turn, I think it
will be the best way to let my lawyer wait upon his lordship in the morning
with my rent-roll; your ladyship shall have a carte blanch, I assure you,
quite the same as if this affair had never happened. [Aside.] Egad, I wish I
was fairly out of the house.


L. Bell. [aside] Insolent puppy!


Y. Free. As matters seem now to be upon a proper footing, I think it will not
be amiss if I retire.


Sir Char. Hold, sir, did not I find you in this lady's closet [ points to
Emily] one night at Bath? You did not come to Lady Louisa there?


L. Loui. Ha! this I am quite a stranger to!


Y. Free. [aside] Egad, it is all out now. Why, sir, that this lady and I have
met before is most certain.

[ Points to Emily.
Emi. Good heaven! can you persist in such inhuman falsehood?


Sir Char. O, it is quite clear, and this affair of Lady Louisa's is all
pretense, my lord.


L. Loui. It Is not unlikely, I may be deceived. [ To Emily.] You should have
owned your acquaintance with Mr. Freeman sooner, madam, and not suffered me to
expose myself, by trying to save your character, which is already lost.


L. Mary. Do not insult her, sister; if she is innocent, it is a crime; if
guilty, she has load enough to bear.


Enter a Servant. Serve. My lord, the gentleman who was with you, upon business
to night, desires to be admitted to you upon a very particular occasion.


L. Bell. Bid him walk in.

[ Exit Servant.
Emi. Must my disgrace be made the common topic, and I the public gaze? Let me
retire, my lord.


L. Bell. No, Emily, I entreat your stay for a few minutes, perhaps this
gentleman may be of use.


Emi. I have no right, my lord, to hope relief from strangers, when love and
friendship have abandoned me. Yet I will stay, if you desire it; for grief like
mine is patient.


Enter Elder Freeman. Y. Free. [aside] Nay, then the devil does owe me a spite,
and is resolved to pay it.


E. Free. By the confusion I read in my brother's face, my lord, I begin to
think that my presence is unnecessary to his detection. But I beg the honor of
speaking a word or two to your lordship apart.

[They retire to the side of the scene.
L. Loui. His brother! It Is I that shall become the public topic now.


South. Hey day! Brother Belmont, what new adventure is going to open on us now?


Bell. [ To Lady Mary.] I suppose this gentleman must be your humble servant,
Lady Mary.


L. Bell. I am infinitely indebted to your friendship, sir. Sir Charles, this
gentleman has confirmed what Louisa has before confessed. What is your opinion
now?


Sir Char. I know not what to think, I am distracted; but still that Bath
affair dwells on my mind, and weighs down all my hopes.


Y. Free. Why, then, sir, since Mr. John Freeman has thought proper to expose
me before Lady Louisa, and that I have no farther hopes of recovering her
favor, I will, without reserve, ease your mind and my own, by discovering the
whole truth.


L. Bell. Do that, sir, and you may find a friend, where you had reason to
expect an enemy.


South. Ay, do, pray tell us how that same business came about.


Emi. Pray, sir, do not keep me longer on the rack.


Y. Free. I must have time to blush a little before Lady Louisa, madam, as I
may possibly appear in her eyes a most unworthy wretch.


L. Loui. Nothing that you can say, sir, will alter my opinion of you, or
remove the contempt I feel for myself; so pray proceed.


Y. Free. Well, madam, [ to Emily] the story is but short. You had a very
pretty maid at Bath.


South. A bold, pert slut; Mrs. Southern never liked her.


Y. Free. But I did, sir, nor was she in the least cruel; and by her
appointment I was passing through your chamber into hers, at the very instant
that gentleman [ points to Sir Charles] and you came into the room. She pushed
me into your closet, shut the door, and vanished. The rest you know too well.


Sir Char. How could you, sir, be so inhuman, to let my Emily suffer? O
Belmont, I dare not look upon her.


Y. Free. Sir Charles, had your passion suffered you to have asked me then my
errand, I should have frankly owned it; but while I had hopes of Lady Louisa. I
could not, with any decency, have revealed these last particulars. And now,
that I have done all in my power to set matters to rights, and atone my faults,
I can only, in palliation of my behavior, say, that it was not badness of
heart, but dislike to a sedentary life, which tempted me to leave my sphere,
and soar at higher objects. In which, I am now sensible, I have justly failed;
and must encounter the deserved fate of those, whom vanity seduces from the
situation of life provided for them.


E. Free. The daring to confess we have been wrong, is not only the highest act
of bravery, but the best security for our future amendment; and thus reclaimed,
I am proud to embrace my brother.


South. But what is all this to my poor child's character, that had like to be
ruined by you, and that impudent baggage?


Emi. O, sir, I am too happy to have my conduct cleared, both to the world and
you! And yet, how gladly would I now recall the fond confession, which
distraction wrung from my weak, sinking heart, and now o'erwhelms me with
blushes and confusion.


L. Loui. You have no cause to blush; it is for weakness, such as mine, to sink
under my own reproach.


L. Bell. You are both too rigid to yourselves; but there is one who well
deserves your pity, because he fears to ask it.


Sir Char. I do not, my lord, presume to ask for Emily's forgiveness, nor dare
I form a hope that she should grant it.


Emi. Sir Charles, I do not wish to triumph over your humility, but beg you
will allow me to indulge my own generosity, by assuring you, that through this
whole affair I never once condemned, but pitied your mistake.


Sir Char. My generous Emily!


Bell. Why, what is all this about? If you like my niece, why don't you come and
take her, and her pity, and her pardon together, and I Will give you a good five
thousand pounds into the bargain. Come, brother, give her hand to Sir Charles,
and let us make an end of it.


South. With all my heart, brother, if they are both willing, for I promised my
lord to give my consent.


L. Bell. Now, Emily, it rests on you alone, to show that noble minds most
easily forgive.


Emi. I have been only on the defensive, my lord, during this whole warfare;
and such an enemy is generally ready for terms of peace; therefore if you
should hold out the olive branch in my name, to your ally, you may suppose I
shall accede to the treaty.


Sir Char. No words can speak my gratitude; my heart's too full for utterance.
Transporting charmer! every way you have conquered, subdued me, by esteem, as
well as love.


L. Bell. From these events, the innocent may know,
That suffering is the lightest part of woe;
While our own conduct vindicates from blame,
Slander defeated, but augments our fame.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
Sent by a Person unknown.
Spoken by Miss WILFORD, in the character of Lady LOUISA. I Had an Epilogue to
speak to night,
But I Am so hurried, put in such a fright,
Deuce take me! -- if I ha'nt forgot it quite.
To see my name in first night's play-bill printed,
A character quite new, in time quite stinted;
An Epilogue, besides, to get by heart,
It Is most unmerciful, too long a part --
But they so coax'd and wheedled me to duty,
Lest I should fret -- for fretting spoils one's beauty,
That, in obedience to the kind command,
A suppliant to your favor, here I stand:
And hope, instead of what had been prepared,
Some nonsense of my own, may now be heard.
Well! I have had a great escape, I own,
From being made the jest of all the town;
For from the court end I could claim no pity,
Nor had I more to hope for, from the city;
Such matches rarely answer either side,
For industry is suited ill with pride.
But, to divert your censure, let me show
A folly more complete, a city beau!
What contrast can there be so strong in nature,
As English plainness apeing petit-maitre!
And yet poor I, by missing such a lover,
May wait, 'till all my dancing days are over!
Next, shift the scene -- behold a virtuoso!
An old illiterate, feeble amoroso!
What weakness can the human heart discover,
More shameful, than a climacteric lover?
Men, who have turned the period of threescore,
Become mere virtuoso's -- in amor.
Nor does Aunt Bridget merit better quarter,
Who, scorning to abide by female charter,
Invades a province, to our sex denied,
Aiming at knowledge with a pedant's pride;
When, after all our boast, we find, at length,
To know our weakness is our surest strength,
One path of science only, wise men say,
Is left for female learning -- to obey. --
[Curtsying. If characters like these your mirth excite,
And furnish some amusement for the night,
If naught offend the maxims of the stage,
Or shock the nicer morals of the age,
If only venial errors here you find,
Critics be dumb -- ye men of candor, kind.
FINIS.

