THE REPORT OF THE Physicians and Surgeons, Commanded to assist At the
Dissecting the Body of His Late Majesty at Kensington, March the Tenth MDCCI /
II

From the Original delivered to the Right Honorable the Privy Council.

London Printed for John Nutt, near Stationers' Hall. 1702.

THE REPORT OF THE Physicians and Surgeons, Commanded to assist At the
DISSECTING The BODY, etc.
IT having pleased Almighty God to put an end to the Glorious Life of his Late
Majesty King William III. The Right Honorable the Lord Chamberlain issued out
his Summons to such Physicians and Surgeons as his Lordship thought fit,
appointing them to meet at Kensington, and there to Examine by Dissection into
the State and Condition of the Royal Body. The day after the Dissection, the
said Physicians and Surgeons being met together again in order to the forming
an account of what they had observed, Sir Thomas Millington, Sir Richard
Blackmore and Doctor Hannes were deputed as a Committee to draw up the Report;
which they did accordingly. This REPORT was afterward signed by Them, and by
the rest of the Physicians and Surgeons, and is as follows.

1. Surface of the Body. Upon viewing the Body, before Dissection, the
following appearances were remarkable.

The Body in general was much emaciated.

Both the Legs up to the Knees and a little higher, as also the Right Hand and
Arm as far as the Elbow were considerably swelled.

There was likewise on the Left Thigh, near the Hip, a Bladder full of water,
as big as a small Pullets Egg, resembling a Blane.

2. Belly. Upon opening the Belly, the Gutts were found of a Livid Color; and
the Blood contained in their vessels, Black.

The Gutt called Ileon had in some places the marks of a slight Inflammation.

The Stomach, Pancreas, Mesentery, Liver, Gallbladder, Spleen, and Kidneys
were all sound and without fault.

3. Chest. In the Thorax, or Chest, we observed that the Right side of the
Lungs adhered to the Pleura; and the Left, much more: From which, upon
separation, there issued forth a quantity of purulent or frothy Serum.

The Upper Lobe on the Left side of the Lungs, and the part of the Pleura next
to it were Inflamed to a degree of Mortification. AND THIS WE LOOK UPON AS THE
IMMEDIATE CAUSE OF THE KING'S DEATH.

From the Ventricles of the Heart and the Greater Bloodvessels arising out of
them, were taken several large, tough, fleshlike substances of the kind called
Polypus.

The Heart it self was of the smaller size; but firm, and strong.

4. Collar Bone. Upon laying bare the Right Collar-Bone, we found it had been
broken near the Shoulder; and well set. Some extravasated Blood was lodged
above and below the Fracture.

5. Brain. The Brain was perfectly sound and without any sign of distemper.

6. Mass of Blood. It Is very rare to find a Body with so little Blood, as was
seen in This: there being more found in the Lungs, than in All the Parts,
besides, put together.

Doctors present.
Sir Rich. Blackmore. Sir Theod Colladon. Doctor Hannes. Doctor Harrel. Doctor
How. Doctor Hullen. Doctor Laurence. Sir Tho. Millington Professor Bidloo. etc.
Surgeons present.
Mr. Bernard. Mr. Cowper. Mr. Gardner. Mr. Ronjat. etc.


FINIS

