THE WEST INDIAN: A COMEDY. As it is Performed at the THEATER ROYAL IN
DRURY LANE. BY THE AUTHOR OF THE BROTHERS.

Quis novus hic Hospes? LONDON: Printed for W. GRIFFIN, at GARRICK's HEAD, in
CATHARINE-STREET, STRAND, MDCCLXXI.

PROLOGUE. SPOKEN BY MR. REDDISH.
CRITICS, hark forward! noble game and new;
A fine West Indian started full in view:
Hot as the soil, the clime, which gave him birth,
You Will run him on a burning scent to earth;
Yet don't devour him in his hiding place,
Bag him, he will serve you for another chase;
For sure that country has no feeble claim,
Which swells your commerce, and supports your fame.
And in this humble sketch, we hope you will find,
Some emanations of a noble mind;
Some little touches, which, though void of art,
May find perhaps their way into the heart.
Another hero your excuse implores,
Sent by your sister kingdom to your shores;
Doomed by Religion's too severe command,
To fight for bread against his native land:
A brave, unthinking, animated rogue,
With here and there a touch upon the brogue;
Laugh, but despise him not, for on his lip
His errors lie; his heart can never trip.
Others there are -- -- but may we not prevail
To let the gentry tell their own plain tale?
Shall they come in? They Will please you, if they can;
If not, condemn the bard -- -- but spare the Man.
For speak, think, act, or write in angry times,
A wish to please is made the worst of crimes;
Dire slander now with black envenomed dart,
Stands ever armed to stab you to the heart.
Rouse, Britons, rouse, for honor of your isle,
Your old good humor; and be seen to smile.
You say we write not like our fathers -- true,
Nor were our fathers half so strict as you,
Damned not each error of the poets pen,
But judging man, remembered they were men.
Awed into silence by the times abuse,
Sleeps many a wise, and many a witty muse;
We that for mere experiment come out,
Are but the light armed rangers on the scout:
High on Parnassus' lofty summit stands
The immortal camp; there lie the chosen bands!
But give fair quarter to us puny elves,
The giants then will sally forth themselves;
With wit's sharp weapons vindicate the age,
And drive even Arthur's magic from the Stage.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Stockwell, Mr. Aickin. Belcour, Mr. King. Captain Dudley, Mr. Packer. Charles
Dudley, Mr. Cautherly. Major O'Flaherty, Mr. Moody. Stukely, Mr. J. Aickin.
Fulmer, Mr. Baddely. Varland, Mr. Parsons. Servant to Stockwell, Mr. Wheeler.
WOMEN.
Lady Rusport, Mrs. Hopkins. Charlotte Rusport, Mrs. Abington. Louisa, daughter
to Dudley, Mrs. Baddely. Mrs. Fulmer, Mrs. Egerton. Lucy, Mrs. Love.
Housekeeper belonging to Stockwell, Mrs. Bradshaw.
Clerks belonging to Stockwell; servants, sailors, negroes, etc.

SCENE, LONDON.

THE WEST INDIAN.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A MERCHANT's COMPTING HOUSE.
In an inner room, set off by glass doors, are discovered several clerks,
employed at their desks. A writing table in the front room. STOCKWELL is
discovered reading a letter; STUKELY comes gently out of the back room, and
observes him some time before he speaks. STUKELY. HE seems disordered: some
thing in that letter; and I Am afraid of an unpleasant sort. He has many
ventures of great account at sea; a ship richly freighted for Barcelona;
another for Lisbon; and others expected from Cadiz of still greater value.
Besides these, I know he has many deep concerns in foreign bottoms, and
under-writings to a vast amount. I Will accost him. Sir! Mr. Stockwell!


STOCKWELL. Stukely! -- Well, have you shipped the cloths?


STUKELY. I have, Sir; here is the bill of lading, and copy of the invoice: the
assortments are all compared: Mr. Traffic will give you the policy upon Change.


STOCKWELL. It Is very well; lay these papers by; and no more of business for a
while. Shut the door Stukely; I have had long proof of your friendship and
fidelity to me; a matter of most intimate concern lies on my mind, and, 'twill
be a sensible relief to unbosom myself to you; I have just now been informed of
the arrival of the young West Indian, I have so long been expecting; you know
who I mean.


STUKELY. Yes, Sir; Mr. Belcour, the young gentleman, who inherited old
Belcour's great estates in Jamaica.


STOCKWELL. Hush, not so loud; come a little nearer this way. This Belcour is
now in London; part of his baggage is already arrived; and I expect him every
minute. Is it to be wondered at, if his coming throws me into some agitation,
when I tell you, Stukely, he is my son?


STUKELY. Your son


STOCKWELL. Yes, Sir, my only son; early in life I accompanied his grandfather
to Jamaica as his clerk; he had an only daughter, somewhat older than myself;
the mother of this gentleman; it was my chance (call it good or ill) to engage
her affections: and, as the inferiority of my condition made it hopeless to
expect her father's consent; her fondness provided an expedient, and we were
privately married; the issue of that concealed engagement is, as I have told
you, this Belcour.


STUKELY. That event, surely, discovered your connection.


STOCKWELL. You shall hear. Not many days after our marriage old Belcour set
out for England; and, during his abode here, my wife was, with great secresy,
delivered of this son. Fruitful in expedients to disguise her situation,
without parting from her infant, she contrived to have it laid and received at
her door as a foundling. After some time her father returned, having left me
here; in one of those favorable moments, that decide the fortunes of
prosperous men, this child was introduced; from that instant, he treated him as
his own, gave him his name, and brought him up in his family.


STUKELY. And did you never reveal this secret, either to old Belcour, or your
son?


STOCKWELL. Never.


STUCKELY. Therein you surprise me; a merchant of your eminence, and a member
of the British parliament, might surely aspire without offense to the daughter
of a planter. In this case too, natural affection would prompt to a discovery.


STOCKWELL. Your remark is obvious; nor could I have persisted in this painful
silence, but in obedience to the dying injunctions of a beloved wife. The
letter, you found me reading, conveyed those injunctions to me; it was dictated
in her last illness, and almost in the article of death; (you will spare me the
recital of it) she there conjures me, in terms as solemn, as they are
affecting, never to reveal the secret of our marriage, or withdraw my son,
while her father survived.


STUKELY. But on what motives did your unhappy lady found these injunctions?


STOCKWELL. Principally, I believe, from apprehension on my account, lest old
Belcour, on whom at her decease I wholly depended, should withdraw his
protection: in part from consideration of his repose, as well knowing the
discovery would deeply affect his spirit, which was haughty, vehement, and
unforgiving: and lastly, in regard to the interest of her infant, whom he had
warmly adopted; and for whom, in case of a discovery, every thing was to be
dreaded from his resentment. And, indeed, though the alteration in my condition
might. have justified me in discovering myself, yet I always thought my son
safer in trusting to the caprice than to the justice of his grandfather. My
judgment has not suffered by the event; old Belcour is dead, and has bequeathed
his whole estate to him we are speaking of.


STUCKELY. Now then you are no longer bound to secrecy.


STOCKWELL. True; but before I publicly reveal myself, I could wish to make
some experiment of my son's disposition; this can be only done by letting his
spirit take its course without restraint; by these means, I think I shall
discover much more of his real character under the title of his merchant, than
I should under that of his father.


SCENE II.
A Sailor enters, ushering in several black servants, carrying portmanteaus,
trunks, etc. SAILOR. Save your honor! is your name Stockwell pray?


STOCKWELL. It is.


SAILOR. Part of my master Belcour's baggage an't please you; there is another
cargo not far a stern of us; and the cockswain has got charge of the dumb
creatures.


STOCKWELL. Pr'ythee, friend, what dumb creatures do you speak of; has Mr.
Belcour brought over a collection of wild beasts?


SAILOR. No, Lord love him; no, not he: let me see; there is two green monkies,
a pair of gray parrots, a Jamaica sow and pigs, and a Mangrove dog; that is all.


STOCKWELL. Is that all?

SAILOR. Yes, your honor; yes, that is all, bless his heart; a'might have
brought over the whole island if he would; a didn't leave a dry eye in it.


STOCKWELL. Indeed! Stukely, show 'em where to bestow their baggage. Follow
that gentleman.


SAILOR. Come, bear a hand, my lads, bear a hand.


Exit with Stukely and Servants, STOCKWELL. If the principal tallies with his
purveyors, he must be a singular spectacle in this place: he has a friend,
however, in this seafaring fellow; it is no bad prognostic of a man's heart,
when his ship-mates give him a good word.


Exit. SCENE III.
Scene changes to a drawing room, a servant discovered setting the chairs by,
etc. a woman servant enters to him. HOUSEKEEPER. Why, what a fuss does our good
master put himself in about this West Indian: see what a bill of fare I Have been
forced to draw out: seven and nine I Will assure you, and only a family dinner as
he calls it: why if my Lord Mayor was expected, there couldn't be a greater
to-do about him.


SERVANT. I wish to my heart you had but seen the loads of trunks, boxes, and
portmanteaus he has sent hither. An ambassador's baggage, with all the smuggled
goods of his family, does not exceed it.


HOUSEKEEPER. A fine pickle he will put the house into: had he been master's own
son, and a Christian Englishman, there could not be more rout than there is
about this Creolian, as they call 'em.


SERVANT. No matter for that; he is very rich, and that is sufficient. They say
he has rum and sugar enough belonging to him, to make all the water in the
Thames into punch. But I see my master coming.


Exeunt. SCENE IV.
STOCKWELL enters, followed by a Servant. STOCKWELL. Where is Mr. Belcour? Who
brought this note from him?


SERVANT. A waiter from the London Tavern, Sir; he says the young gentleman is
just dressed, and will be with you directly.


STOCKWELL. Show him in when he arrives.


SERVANT. I shall, Sir. I Will have a peep at him first, however; I Have a great
mind to see this outlandish spark. The sailor fellow says he will make rare
doings amongst us

aside.
STOCKWELL. You need not wait; leave me. Exit Servant. Let me see reads.

Sir,
I write to you under the hands of the hair-dresser; as soon as I have made
myself decent, and slipped on some fresh clothes, I will have the honor of
paying you my devoirs.

Yours, BELCOUR.


He writes at his ease; for he is unconscious to whom his letter is addressed;
but what a palpitation does it throw my heart into; a father's heart! It Is an
affecting interview; when my eyes meet a son, whom yet they never saw, where
shall I find constancy to support it? Should he resemble his mother, I am
overthrown. All the letters I have had from him, (for I industriously drew him
into a correspondence with me) bespeak him of quick and ready understanding.
All the reports I ever recieved, give me favorable impressions of his
character; wild, perhaps, as the manner of his country is, but, I trust, not
frantic or unprincipled.


SCENE V.
SERVANT enters. SERVANT. Sir, the foreign gentleman is come.


Another SERVANT. SERVANT. Mr. Belcour.


BELCOUR enters. STOCKWELL. Mr. Belcour, I Am rejoiced to see you; you're
welcome to England.


BELCOUR. I thank you heartily, good Mr. Stockwell; you and I have long
conversed at a distance; now we are met, and the pleasure this meeting gives
me, amply compensates for the perils I have run through in accomplishing it.


STOCKWELL. What perils, Mr. Belcour? I could not have thought you would have
met a bad passage at this time o'year.


BELCOUR. Nor did we: courier like, we came posting to your shores, upon the
pinions of the swiftest gales that ever blew; it is upon English ground all my
difficulties have arisen; it is the passage from the riverside I complain of.


STOCKWELL. Ay, indeed! What obstructions can you have met between this and the
riverside?


BELCOUR. Innumerable! Your town's as full of defiles as the Island of Corsica;
and, I believe, they are as obstinately defended: so much hurry, bustle, and
confusion, on your quays; so many sugar-casks, porter-butts, and common
council-men, in your streets; that, unless a man marched with artillery in his
front, it is more than the labout of a Hercules can effect to make any tolerable
way through your town.


STOCKWELL. I am sorry you have been so incommoded.


BELCOUR. Why, faith 'twas all my own fault; accustomed to a land of slaves,
and, out of patience with the whole tribe of custom-house extortioners,
boat-men, tide-waiters, and water-bailiffs, that beset me on all sides, worse
than a swarm of musquetoes, I proceeded a little too roughly to brush them away
with my rattan; the sturdy rogues took this in dudgeon, and beginning to rebel,
the mob chose different sides, and a furious scuffle ensued; in the course of
which, my person and apparel suffered so much, that I was obliged to step into
the first tavern to refit, before I could make my approaches in any decent trim.


STOCKWELL. All without is as I wish; dear Nature add the rest, and I am happy
aside Well, Mr. Belcour, it is a rough sample you have had of my countrymen's
spirit; but, I trust, you will not think the worse of them for it.


BELCOUR. Not at all, not at all; I like 'em the better; was I only a visitor,
I might, perhaps, wish them a little more tractable; but, as a fellow subject,
and a sharer in their freedom, I applaud their spirit, though I feel the
effects of it in every bone in my skin.


STOCKWELL. That Is well; I like that well. How gladly I could fall upon his
neck, and own myself his father

aside.
BELCOUR. Well, Mr. Stockwell, for the first time in my life, here am I in
England; at the fountain head of pleasure, in the land of beauty, of arts, and
elegancies. My happy stars have given me a good estate, and the conspiring
winds have blown me hither to spend it.


STOCKWELL. To use it, not to waste it, I should hope; to treat it, Mr.
Belcour, not as a vassal, over whom you have a wanton and despotic power, but
as a subject, which you are bound to govern with a temperate and restrained
authority.


BELCOUR. True, Sir; most truly said; mine is a commission, not a right: I am
the offspring of distress, and every child of sorrow is my brother; while I
have hands to hold, therefore, I will hold them open to mankind: but, Sir, my
passions are my masters; they take me where they will; and oftentimes they
leave to reason and to virtue nothing but my wishes and my sighs.


STOCKWELL. Come, come, the man who can accuse corrects himself.


BELCOUR. Ah! that is an office I am weary of: I wish a friend would take it up:
I would to Heaven you had leisure for the employ; but, did you drive a trade to
the four corners of the world, you would not find the talk so toilsome as to
keep me free from faults.


STOCKWELL. Well, I am not discouraged; this candor tells me I should not have
the fault of self-conceit to combat; that, at least, is not amongst the number.


BELCOUR. No; if I knew that man on earth who thought more humbly of me than I
do of myself, I would take up his opinion and forego my own.


STOCKWELL. And, was I to choose a pupil, it should be one of your complexion;
so if you will come along with me, we'll agree upon your admission, and enter on
a course of lectures directly.


BELCOUR. With all my heart.


Exeunt. SCENE VI.
Scene changes to a Room in LADY RUSPORT's House: LADY RUSPORT and CHARLOTTE.
LADY RUSPORT. Miss Rusport, I desire to hear no more of Captain Dudley and his
destitute family: not a shilling of mine shall ever cross the hands of any of
them: because my sister chose to marry a beggar, am I bound to support him and
his posterity?


CHARLOTTE. I think you are.


LADY RUSPORT. You think I am; and pray where do you find the law that tells
you so?


CHARLOTTE. I am not proficient enough to quote chapter and verse; but I take
charity to be a main clause in the great statute of christianity.


LADY RUSPORT. I say charity, indeed! And pray, Miss, are you sure that it is
charity, pure charity, which moves you to plead for Captain Dudley? Amongst all
your pity, do you find no spice of a certain anti-spiritual passion, called
love? Don't mistake yourself, you are no saint, child, believe me; and, I am
apt to think, the distresses of old Dudley, and of his daughter into the
bargain, would never break your heart, if there was not a certain young fellow
of two and twenty in the case; who, by the happy recommendation of a good
person, and the brilliant appointments of an ensigncy, will, if I am not
mistaken, cozen you out of a fortune of twice twenty thousand pounds, as soon
as ever you are of age to bestow it upon him.


CHARLOTTE. A nephew of your ladyship's can never want any other recommendation
with me; and, if my partiality for Charles Dudley is acquitted by the rest of
the world, I hope Lady Rusport will not condemn me for it.


LADY RUSPORT. I condemn you! I thank Heaven, Miss Rusport, I am no ways
responsible for your conduct; nor is it any concern of mine how you dispose of
yourself; you are not my daughter; and, when I married your father, poor Sir
Stephen Rusport, I found you a forward spoiled Miss of fourteen far above being
instructed by me.


CHARLOTTE. Perhaps your ladyship calls this instruction.


LADY RUSPORT. You're strangely pert; but it is no wonder: your mother, I Am
told, was a fine lady; and according to the modern style of education you was
brought up. It was not so in my young days; there was then some decorum in the
world, some subordination, as the great Lock expresses it. Oh! 'twas an
edifying sight, to see the regular deportment observed in our family: no
gigling, no gossiping was going on there; my good father, Sir Oliver Roundhead,
never was seen to laugh himself, nor ever allowed it in his children.


CHARLOTTE. Ay; those were happy times, indeed.


LADY RUSPORT. But, in this forward age, we have coquets in the eggshell, and
philosophers in the cradle; girls of fifteen that lead the fashion in new caps
and new opinions, that have their sentiments and their sensations, and the idle
fops encourage 'em in it OF my conscience, I wonder what it is the men can see
in such babies.


CHARLOTTE. True, Madam; but all men do not overlook the maturer beauties of
your ladyship's age, witness your admirer Major Dennis O'Flaherty; there is an
example of some discernment; I declare to you, when your ladyship is by, the
Major takes no more notice of me than if I was part of the furniture of your
chamber.


LADY RUSPORT. The major, child, has traveled through various kingdoms and
climates, and has more enlarged notions of female merit than falls to the lot
of an English homebred lover; in most other countries, no woman on your side
forty would ever be named in a polite circle.


CHARLOTTE. Right, Madam; I Have been told that in Vienna they have coquets upon
crutches and Venuses in their grand climateric; a lover there celebrates the
wrinkles, not the dimples, in his mistress's face. The Major, I think, has
served in the imperial army.


LADY RUSPORT. Are you piqu'd, my young Madam? Had my sister Louisa now yielded
to the addresses of one of Major O'Flaherty's person and appearance, she would
have had some excuse; but to run away, as she did, at the age of sixteen too,
with a man of old Dudley's sort --


CHARLOTTE. Was, in my opinion, the most venial trespass that ever girl of
sixteen committed; of a noble family, an engaging person, strict honor, and
sound understanding, what accomplishment was there wanting in Captain Dudley,
but that which the prodigality of his ancestors had deprived him of?


LADY RUSPORT. They left him as much as he deserves; hasn't the old man
captain's half-pay? And is not the son an ensign?


CHARLOTTE. An ensign! Alas, p^or Charles! Would to Heaven he knew what my
heart feels and suffers for his sake.


SERVANT enters. SERVANT. Ensign Dudley to wait upon your ladyship.


LADY RUSPORT. Who! Dudley! What can have brought him to town?


CHARLOTTE. Dear, Madam, it is Charles Dudley, it is your nephew.


LADY RUSPORT. Nephew! I renounce him as my nephew; Sir Oliver renounced him as
his grandson: was not he son of the eldest daughter, and only male descendant of
Sir Oliver; and didn't he cut him off with a shilling? Didn't the poor dear
good man leave his whole f^rtune to me, except a small annuity to my maiden
sister, who spoiled her constitution with nursing him? And, depend upon it, not
a penny of that fortune shall ever be disposed of otherwise than according to
the will of the donor. CHARLES DUDLEY enters. So young man, whence come you?
What brings you to town?


CHARLES. If there is any offense in my coming to town, your ladyship is in
some degree responsible for it, for part of my errand was to pay my duty here.


LADY RUSPORT. I hope you have some better excuse than all this.


CHARLES. It Is true, madam, I have other motives; but, if I consider my trouble
repaid by the pleasure I now enjoy, I should hope my aunt would not think my
company the less welcome for the value I set upon here is.


LADY RUSPORT. Coxcomb! And where is your father, child; and your sister? Are
they in town too?


CHARLES. They are.


LADY RUSPORT. Ridiculous! I don't know what people do in London, who have no
money to spend in it.


CHARLOTTE. Dear Madam, speak more kindly to your nephew; how can you oppress a
youth of his sensibility?


LADY RUSPORT. Miss Rusport, I insist upon your retiring to your apartment;
when I want your advice I Will send to you. Exit CHARLOTTE. So you have put on a
red coat too, as well as your father; it is plain what value you set upon the
good advice Sir Oliver used to give you; how often has he cautioned you against
the army?


CHARLES. Had it pleased my grandfather to enable me to have obeyed his
caution, I would have done it; but you well know how destitute I am; and it is
not to be wondered at if I prefer the service of my king to that of any other
master.


LADY RUSPORT. Well, well, take your own course; it is no concern of mine: you
never consulted me.


CHARLES. I frequently wrote to your ladyship, but could obtain no answer; and,
since my grandfather's death, this is the first opportunity I have had of
waiting upon you.


LADY RUSPORT. I must desire you not to mention the death of that dear good man
in my hearing, my spirits cannot support it.


CHARLES. I shall obey you; permit me to say, that, as that event has richly
supplied you with the materials of bounty, the distresses of my family can
furnish you with objects of it.


LADY RUSPORT. The distresses of your family, child, are quite out of the
question at present; had Sir Oliver been pleased to consider them, I should
have been well content; but he has absolutely taken no notice of you in his
will, and that to me must and shall be a law. Tell your father and your sister
I totally disapprove of their coming up to town.


CHARLES. Must I tell my father that, before your ladyship knows the motive
that brought him hither? Allured by the offer of exchanging for a commission on
full pay, the veteran, after thirty years service, prepares to encounter the
fatal heats of Senegambia; but wants a small supply to equip him for the
expedition.


SERVANT enters. SERVANT. Major O'Flaherty to wait upon your ladyship.


MAJOR enters. MAJOR. Spare your speeches, young man, don't you think her
ladyship can take my word for that? I hope, madam, it is evidence enough, of my
being present, when I Have the honor of telling you so myself.


LADY RUSPORT. Major O'Flaherty, I am rejoiced to see you. Nephew Dudley, you
perceive I Am engaged.


CHARLES. I shall not intrude upon your ladyship's more agreeable engagements.
I presume I have my answer.


LADY RUSPORT. Your answer, child! what answer can you possibly expect; or how
can your romantic father suppose that I am to abet him in all his idle and
extravagant undertakings? Come, Major, let me show you the way into my
dressing room; and let us leave this young adventurer to his meditations.


Exit. O'FLAHERTY. I follow you, my lady. Young gentleman, your obedient! Upon
my conscience, as fine a young fellow as I would wish to clap my eyes on: he
might have answered my salute, however -- well, let it pass; Fortune, perhaps,
frowns upon the poor lad; she is a damned slippery lady, and very apt to jilt us
poor fellows, that wear cockades in our hats. Fare-thee-well, honey, whoever
thou art.


Exit. CHARLES. So much for the virtues of a Puritan; out upon it, her heart is
flint; yet that woman, that aunt of mine, without one worthy particle in her
composition, would, I dare be sworn, as soon set her foot in a pesthouse, as
in a playhouse.

going
MISS RUSPORT enters to him. CHARLOTTE. Stop, stay a little, Charles, whither
are you going in such haste?


CHARLES. Madam; Miss Rusport; what are your commands?


CHARLOTTE. Why so reserved? We had used to answer to no other names than those
of Charles and Charlotte.


CHARLES. What ails you? you have been weeping.


CHARLOTTE. No, no; or if I have -- your eyes are full too; but I have a
thousand things to say to you: before you go, tell me, I conjure you, where you
are to be found; here give me your direction; write it upon the back of this
visiting ticket -- Have you a pencil?


CHARLES. I have: but why should you desire to find us out? it is a pool little
inconvenient place; my sister has no apartment fit to receive you in.


Servant enters. SERVANT. Madam, my lady desires your company directly.


CHARLOTTE. I am coming -- well, have you wrote it? give it me. O Charles!
either you do not, or you will not, understand me.


Exeunt severally END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
A room in FULMER's House. FULMER and Mrs. FULMER. MRS. FULMER. Why, how you
sit, musing and mopeing, sighing and desponding! I Am ashamed of you, Mr.
Fulmer: is this the country you described to me, a second Eldorado, rivers of
gold and rocks of diamonds? You found me in a pretty snug retired way of life
at Bologne, out of the noise and bustle of the world, and wholly at my ease;
you, indeed, was upon the wing, with a fiery persecution at your back: but,
like a true son of Loyola, you had then a thousand ingenious devices to repair
your fortune; and this your native country was to be the scene of your
performances: fool that I was, to be inveigled into it by you; but thank
Heaven, our partnership is revocable: I am not your wedded wife, praised be my
stars! for what have we got, whom have we gulled but ourselves; which of all
your trains has taken fire; even this poor expedient of your bookseller's shop
seems abandoned, for if a chance customer drops in, who is there, pray, to help
him to what he wants?


FULMER. Patty, you know it is not upon slight grounds that I despair; there
had used to be a livelihood to be picked up in this country, both for the honest
and dishonest; I have tried each walk, and am likely to starve at last: there
is not a point to which the wit and faculty of man can turn, that I have not
set mine to; but in vain, I am beat through every quarter of the compass.


MRS. FULMER. Ah! common efforts all: strike me a master stroke, Mr. Fulmer, if
you wish to make any figure in this country.


FULMER. But where, how, and what? I have blustered for prerogative; I have
bellowed for freedom; I have offered to serve my country; I have engaged to
betray it; a master-stroke, truly; why, I have talked treason, writ treason,
and if a man cannot live by that he can live by nothing Here I set up as a
bookseller; why men left off reading; and if I was to turn butcher, I believe
of my conscience they would leave off eating.


CAPT. DUDLEY crosses the stage. MRS. FULMER. Why there now is your lodger, old
Captain Dudley, as he calls himself; there is no flint without fire; something
might be struck out of him, if you would the wit to find the way.


FULMER. Hang him, an old dry skinned curmudgeon; you may as well think to get
truth out of a courtier, or candor out of a critic: I can make nothing of him;
besides, he is poor, and therefore not for our purpose.


MRS. FULMER. The more fool he! Would any man be poor that had such a prodigy
in his possession?


FULMER. His daughter, you mean; she is indeed uncommonly beautiful.


MRS. FULMER. Beautiful! Why she need only be seen to have the first men in the
kingdom at her feet. Egad, I wish I had the leasing of her beauty; what would
some of our young Nabobs give --?


FULMER. Hush; here comes the captain; good girl, leave us to ourselves, and
let me try what I can make of him.


MRS. FULMER. Captain, truly; in faith I Would have a regiment, had I such a
daughter, before I was three months older.


Exit. SCENE II.
CAPT. DUDLEY enters to him. FULMER. Captain Dudley, good morning to you.


DUDLEY. Mr. Fulmer, I have borrowed a book from your shop; it is the sixth
volume of my deceased friend Tristram: he is a flattering writer to us poor
soldiers; and the divine story of Le Fevre, which makes part of this book, in
my opinion of it, does honor not to its author only, but to human nature.


FULMER. He is an author I keep in the way of trade, but one I never relished;
he is much too loose and profligate for my taste.


DUDLEY. That Is being too severe: I hold him to be a moralist in the noblest
sense; he plays indeed with the fancy, and sometimes perhaps too wantonly; but
while he thus designedly masks his main attack, he comes at once upon the
heart; refines, amends it, softens it; beats down each selfish barrier from
about it, and opens every sluice of pity and benevolence.


FULMER. We of the catholic persuasion are not much bound to him. -- Well, Sir,
I shall not oppose your opinion; a fevourite author is like a favorite
mistress; and there you know, Captain, no man likes to have his taste arraigned.


DUDLEY. Upon my word, Sir, I don't know what a man likes in that case; it is an
experiment I never made.


FULMER. Sir! -- Are you serious?


DUDLEY. It Is of little consequence whether you think so.


FULMER. What a formal old prig it is! aside I apprehend you, Sir; you speak
with caution; you are married?


DUDLEY. I have been.


FULMER. And this young lady, which accompanies you --


DUDLEY. Passes for my daughter.


FULMER. Passes for his daughter! humph -- aside She is exceedingly beautiful,
finely accomplished, of a most enchanting shape and air --


DUDLEY. You are much too partial; she has the greatest defect a woman can have.


FULMER. How so, pray?


DUDLEY. She has no fortune.


FULMER. Rather say that you have none; and that is a sore defect in one of your
years, Captain Dudley: you have served, no doubt?


DUDLEY. Familiar coxcomb! But I Will, humor him

aside.
FULMER. A close old fox! But I Will unkennel him

aside.
DUDLEY. Above thirty years I Have been in the service, Mr. Fulmer.


FULMER. I guessed as much; I laid it at no less: why it is a wearisome time;
it is an apprenticeship to a profession, fit only for a patriarch. But
preferment must be closely followed: you never could have been so far
behind-hand in the chase, unless you had palpably mistaken your way. You Will
pardon me, but I begin to perceive you have lived in the world, not with it.


DUDLEY. It may be so; and you perhaps can give me better council. I Am now
soliciting a favor; an exchange to a company on full pay; nothing more; and
yet I meet a thousand bars to that; though, without boasting, I should think the
certificate of services, which I sent in, might have purchased that indulgence
to me.


FULMER. Who thinks or cares about 'em? Certificate of services, indeed! Send
in a certificate of your fair daughter; carry her in your hand with you.


DUDLEY. What! Who! My daughter! Carry my daughter; well, and what then?


FULMER. Why then your fortune's made, that is all.


DUDLEY. I understand you: and this you call knowledge of the world? Despicable
knowledge; but, sirrah, I will have you know --

threatening him.
FULMER. Help! Who Is within? Would you strike me, Sir; would you lift up your
hand against a man in his own house?


DUDLEY. In a church, if he dare insult the poverty of a man of honor.


FULMER. Have a care what you do; remember there is such a thing in law as an
assault and battery; ay, and such trifling forms as warrants and indictments.


DUDLEY. Go, Sir; you are too mean for my resentment: it is that, and not the
law, protects you. Hence!


FULMER. An old, absurd, incorrigible blockhead! I Will be revenged of him aside.


Exit. SCENE III.
YOUNG DUDLEY enters to him. CHARLES. What is the matter, Sir? Sure I heard an
outcry as I entered the house.


DUDLEY. Not unlikely; our landlord and his wife are for ever wrangling. -- Did
you find your aunt Dudley at home?


CHARLES. I did.


DUDLEY. And what was your reception?


CHARLES. Cold as our poverty, and her pride, could make it.


DUDLEY. You told her the pressing occasion I had for a small supply to equip
me for this exchange; has she granted me the relief I asked?


CHARLES. Alas! Sir, she has peremptorily refused it.


DUDLEY. That Is hard; that is hard, indeed! My petition was for a small sum; she
has refused it, you say: well, be it so; I must not complain. Did you see the
broker about the insurance on my life?


CHARLES. There again I am the messenger of ill news; I can raise no money, so
fatal is the climate: alas! that ever my father should be sent to perish in
such a place!


SCENE IV.
MISS DUDLEY enters hastily. DUDLEY. Louisa, what is the matter? you seem
frighted.


LOUISA. I am, indeed: coming from Miss Rusport's, I met a young gentleman in
the streets, who has beset me in the strangest manner.


CHARLES. Insufferable! Was he rude to you?


LOUISA. I cannot say he was absolutely rude to me, but he was very importunate
to speak to me, and once or twice attempted to lift up my hat: he followed me
to the corner of the street, and there I gave him the slip.


DUDLEY. You must walk no more in the streets, child, without me or your
brother.


LOUISA. O Charles! Miss Rusport desires to see you directly; Lady Rusport is
gone out, and she has something particular to say to you.


CHARLES. Have you any commands for me, Sir?


DUDLEY. None, my dear; by all means wait upon Miss Rusport. Come, Louisa, I
shall desire you to go up to your chamber, and compose yourself.


Exeunt. SCENE V.
BELCOUR enters, after peeping in at the Door. BELCOUR. Not a soul, as I Am
alive. Why, what an odd sort of a house this is! Confound the little jilt, she
has fairly given the slip. A p^ague upon this London, I shall have no luck in
it: such a crowd, and such a hurry, and such a number of shops, and one so like
the other, that whether the wench turned into this house or the next, or
whether she went up stairs or down stairs, (for there is a world above and a
world below, it seems) I declare, I know no more than if I was in the blue
mountains. In the name of all the devils at once, why did she run away? If
every handsome girl I meet in this town is to lead me such a wild goose chase,
I had better have staid in the torrid zone: I shall be wasted to the size of a
sugar cane: what shall I do? Give the chase up: hang it, that is cowardly: shall
I, a true-born son of Phoebus, suffer this little nimble-footed Daphne to
escape me -- "Forbid it honor, and forbid it love." Hush! hush! here she
comes! Oh! the devil! What tawdry thing have we got here?


MRS. FULMER enters to him. MRS. FULMER. Your humble servant, Sir.


BELCOUR. Your humble servant, Madam.


MRS. FULMER. A fine summer's day, Sir.


BELCOUR. Yes, ma'am, and so cool, that if the calendar didn't call it July, I
should swear it was January.


MRS. FULMER. Sir!


BELCOUR. Madam!


MRS. FULMER. Do you wish to speak to Mr. Fulmer, Sir?


BELCOUR. Mr. Fulmer, Madam? I havn't the honor of knowing such a person.


MRS. FULMER. No, I Will be sworn, have you not; thou art much too pretty a
fellow, and too much of a gentleman to be an author thyself, or to have any
thing to say to those that are so. It Is the captain, I suppose, you are waiting
for.


BELCOUR. I rather suspect it is the Captain's wife.


MRS. FULMER. The Captain has no wife, Sir.


BELCOUR. No wife? I Am heartily sorry for it; for then she is his mistress; and
that I take to be the more desperate case of the two: pray, Madam, was not there
a lady just now turned into your house? 'Twas with her I wished to speak.


MRS. FULMER. What sort of a lady, pray?


BELCOUR. One of the loveliest sort my eyes ever beheld; young, tall, fresh,
fair; in short, a goddess.


MRS. FULMER. Nay, but dear, dear Sir, now I Am sure you flatter; for 'twas me
you followed into the shop door this minute.


BELCOUR. You! No, no, take my word for it, it was not you, Madam.


MRS. FULMER. But what is it you laugh at?


BELCOUR. Upon my soul, I ask your pardon; but it was not you, believe me; be
assured it was not.


MRS. FULMER. Well, Sir, I shall not contend for the honor of being noticed by
you; I hope you think you woudn't have been the first man that noticed me in
the streets; however, this I Am positive of, that no living woman but myself has
entered these doors this morning.


BELCOUR. Wy then I Am mistaken in the house, that is all; for it is not humanly
possible I can be so far out in the lady.

going
MRS. FULMER. Coxcomb! But hold -- a thought occurs; as sure as can be he has
seen Miss Dudley. A word with you, young gentleman; come back.


BELCOUR. Well, what is your pleasure?


MRS. FULMER. You seem greatly captivated with this young lady; are you apt to
fall in love thus at first sight?


BELCOUR. Oh, yes; it is the only way I ever can fall in love; any man may
tumble into a pit by surprise, none but a fool would walk into one by choice.


MRS. FULMER. You are a hasty lover it seems; have you spirit to be a generous
one? They that will please the eye mustn't spate the purse.


BELCOUR. Try me; put me to the proof; bring me to an interview with the dear
girl that has thus captivated me, and see whether I have spirit to be grateful.


MRS. FULMER. But how, pray, am I to know the girl you have set your heart on?


BELCOUR. By an undescribable grace, that accompanies every look and action
that falls from her: there can be but one such woman in the world, and nobody
can mistake that one.


MRS. FULMER. Well, if I should stumble upon this angel in my walks, where am I
to find you? What Is your name?


BELCOUR. Upon my soul, I cannot tell you my name.


MRS. FULMER. Not tell me! Why so?


BELCOUR. Because I don't know what it is myself; as yet I have no name.


MRS. FULMER. No name!


BELCOUR. None; a friend, indeed, lent me his; but he forbad me to use it on
any unworthy occasion.


MRS. FULMER. But where is your place of abode?


BELCOUR. I have none; I never slept a night in England in my life.


MRS. FULMER. Hey-dey!


SCENE VI.
FULMER enters. FULMER. A fine case, truly, in a free country; a pretty pass
things are come to, if a man is to be assaulted in his own house.


MRS FULMER. Who has assaulted you, my dear?


FULMER. Who! why this Captain Drawcansir, this old Dudley, my lodger; but I Will
unlodge him; I Will unharbour him, I warrant.


MRS. FULMER. Hush! Hush! Hold your tongue man; pocket the affront and be
quiet; I Have a scheme on foot will pay you for a hundred beatings. Why you
surprise me, Mr. Fulmer; Captain Dudley assault you! Impossible.


FULMER. Nay, I cannot call it an absolute assault; but he threatened me.


MRS. FULMER. Oh, was that all? I thought how it would turn out -- a likely
thing, truly, for a person of his obliging compassionate turn: no, no, poor
Captain Dudley, he has sorrows and distresses enough of his own to employ his
spirits, without setting them against other people. Make it up as fast as you
can: watch this gentleman out; follow him wherever he goes; and bring me word
who and what he is; be sure you don't lose sight of him; I Have other business in
hand.


Exit. BELCOUR. Pray, Sir, what sorrows and distresses have befallen this old
gentleman you speak of?


FULMER. Poverty, disappointment, and all the distresses attendant thereupon:
sorrow enough of all conscience: I soon found how it was with him by his way of
living, low enough of all reason; but what I overheard this morning put it out
of all doubt.


BELCOUR. What did you overhear this morning?


FULMER. Why, it seems he wants to join his regiment, and has been beating the
town over to raise a little money for that purpose upon his pay; but the
climate, I find, where he is going is so unhealthy, that nobody can be found to
lend him any.


BELCOUR. Why then your town is a damned good-for-nothing town; and I wish I
had never come into it.


FULMER. That Is what I say, Sir; the hard-heartedness of some folks is
unaccountable. There Is an old Lady Rusport, a near relation of this
gentleman's; she lives hard by here, opposite to Stockwell's, the great
merchant; he sent to her a begging, but to no purpose; though she is as rich as
a Jew, she would not furnish him with a farthing.


BELCOUR. Is the Captain at home?


FULMER. He is up stairs, Sir.


BELCOUR. Will you take the trouble to desire him to step hither? I want to
speak to him.


FULMER. I Will send him to you directly. I don't know what to make of this young
man; but, if I live, I will find him out, or know the reason why.


Exit. BELCOUR. I Have lost the girl it seems; that is clear: she was the first
object of my pursuit; but the case of this poor officer touches me; and, after
all, there may be as much true delight in rescuing a fellow creature from
distress, as there would be in plunging one into it -- But let me see; its a
point that must be managed with some delicacy -- Apropos! there is pen and ink
-- I Have struck upon a method that will do writes. Ay, ay, this is the very
thing; 'twas devilish lucky I happened to have these bills about me. There,
there, fare you well; I Am glad to be rid of you; you stood a chance of being
worse applied, I can tell you.

encloses and seals the paper.
SCENE VII.
FULMER brings in DUDLEY. FULMER. That Is the gentleman, Sir. I shall make bold,
however, to lend an ear.


DUDLEY. Have you any commands for me, Sir?


BELCOUR. Your name is Dudley, Sir --?


DUDLEY. It is.


BELCOUR. You command a company, I think, Captain Dudley?


DUDLEY. I did: I am now upon half-pay.


BELCOUR. You Have served some time?


DUDLEY. A pretty many years; long enough to see some people of more merit, and
better interest than myself, made general officers.


BELCOUR. Their merit I may have some doubt of; their interest I can readily
give credit to; there is little promotion to be looked for in your profession,
I believe, without friends, Captain?


DUDLEY. I believe so too: have you any other business with me, may I ask?


BELCOUR. Your patience for a moment. I was informed you was about to join your
regiment in distant quarters abroad.


DUDLEY. I have been soliciting an exchange to a company on full-pay, quartered
at James's-Fort, in Senegambia; but, I Am afraid, I must drop the undertaking.


BELCOUR. Why so, pray?


DUDLEY. Why so, Sir? It Is a home question for a perfect stranger to put; there
is something very particular in all this.


BELCOUR. If it is not impertinent, Sir, allow me to ask you what reason you
have for despairing of success.


DUDLEY. Why really, Sir, mine is an obvious reason for a soldier to have --
Want of money; simply that.


BELCOUR. May I beg to know the sum you have occasion for?


DUDLEY. Truly, Sir, I cannot exactly tell you on a sudden; nor is it, I
suppose, of any great consequence to you to be informed; but I should guess, in
the gross, that two hundred pounds would serve.


BELCOUR. And do you find a difficulty in raising that sum upon your pay? It Is
done every day.


DUDLEY. The nature of the climate makes it difficult: I can get no one to
insure my life.


BELCOUR. Oh! that is a circumstance may make for you, as well as against: in
short, Captain Dudley, it so happens, that I can command the sum of two hundred
pounds: seek no farther; I Will accomodate you with it upon easy terms.


DUDLEY. Sir! do I understand you rightly? -- I beg your pardon; but am I to
believe that you are in earnest?


BELCOUR. What is your surprise? Is it an uncommon thing for a gentleman to
speak truth; or is it incredible that one fellow creature should assist another?


DUDLEY. I ask your pardon -- May I beg to know to whom? Do you propose this in
the way of business?


BELCOUR. Entirely: I have no other business on earth.


DUDLEY. Indeed! you are not a broker, I Am persuaded.


BELCOUR. I am not.


DUDLEY. Nor an army agent, I think?


BELCOUR. I hope you will not think the worse of me for being neither; in
short, Sir, if you will peruse this paper, it will explain to you who I am, and
upon what terms I act; while you read it, I will step home, and fetch the
money; and we will conclude the bargain without loss of time. In the mean
while, good day to you.


Exit hastily. DUDLEY. Humph! there is something very odd in all this -- let me
see what we have got here -- -- This paper is to tell me who he is, and what are
his terms: in the name of wonder, why has he sealed it! Hey-dey! what is here?
Two bank notes, of a hundred each! I cannot comprehend what this means. Hold;
here is a writing; perhaps that will show me. "Accept this trifle; pursue your
fortune, and prosper." -- Am I in a dream? Is this a reality?


SCENE VIII.
Enter MAJOR O'FLAHERTY. MAJOR. Save you, my dear! Is it you now that are
Captain Dudley, I would ask? -- Whuh! What Is the hurry the man's in? If it is
the lad that run out of the shop you would overtake, you might as well stay
where you are; by my soul, he is as nimble as a Croat, you are a full hour's
march in his rear -- Ay, faith, you may as well turn back, and give over the
pursuit; well, Captain Dudley, if that is your name, there is a letter for you.
Read, man, read it; and I Will have a word with you, after you have done.


DUDLEY. More miracles on foot! so, so, from Lady Rusport.


O'FLAHERTY. You're right, it is from her ladyship.


DUDLEY. Well, Sir, I have cast my eye over it; it is short and peremptory; are
you acquainted with the contents?


O'FLAHERTY. Not at all; my dear, not at all.


DUDLEY. Have you any message from lady Rusport?


O'FLAHERTY. Not a syllable, honey; only when you have digested the letter, I Have
a little bit of a message to deliver you from myself.


DUDLEY. And may I beg to know who yourself is?


O'FLAHERTY. Dennis O'Flaherty, at your service; a poor major of grenadiers,
nothing better.


DUDLEY. So much for your name and title, Sir; now be so good to favor me with
your message.


O'FLAHERTY. Why, then, Captain, I must tell you I have promised Lady Rusport
you shall do whatever it is she bids you to do in that letter there.


DUDLEY. Ay, indeed; have you undertaken so much Major, without knowing either
what she commands, or what I can perform?


O'FLAHERTY. That Is your concern, my dear, not mine; I must keep my word you
know.


DUDLEY. Or else, I suppose, you and I must measure swords?


O'FLAHERTY. Upon my soul, you have hit it.


DUDLEY. That would hardly answer to either of us; you and I have, probably,
had enough of fighting in our time before now.


O'FLAHERTY. Faith and troth, Master Dudley, you may say that; it is thirty
years, come the time, that I have followed the trade, and in a pretty many
countries -- Let me see -- In the war before last I served in the Irish
Brigade, do you see; there after bringing off the French monarch, I left his
service, with a British bullet in my body, and this ribband in my button-hole.
Last war I followed the fortunes of the German eagle, in the corpse of
grenadiers; there I had my belly-full of fighting, and a plentiful scarcity of
every thing else. After six and twenty engagements, great and small, I went off
with this gash on my scull, and a kiss of the empress queen's sweet hand,
(Heaven bless it) for my pains: since the peace, my dear, I took a little turn
with the Confederates there in Poland -- but such another set of madcaps! -- by
the Lord Harry, I never knew what it was they were scuffling about.


DUDLEY. Well, Major, I will not add another action to the list, you shall keep
your promise with Lady Rusport; she requires me to leave London; I shall go in
a few days, and you may take what credit you please from my compliance.


O'FLAHERTY. Give me your hand, my dear boy, this will make her my own; when
that is the case, we shall be brothers you know, and we'll share her fortune
between us.


DUDLEY. Not so, Major; the man who marries Lady Rusport will have a fair title
to her whole fortune without division. But, I hope, your expectations of
prevailing are founded upon good reasons.


O'FLAHERTY. Upon the best grounds in the world; first I think she will comply,
because she is a woman; secondly, I am persuaded she will not hold out long,
because she is a widow; and thirdly, I make sure of her, because I Have married
five wives and never failed yet; and, for what I know, they are all alive and
merry at this very hour.


DUDLEY. Well, Sir, go on and prosper; if you can inspire Lady Rusport with
half your charity, I shall think you deserve all her fortune; at present, I
must beg your excuse: good morning to you.


O'FLAHERTY. A good sensible man, and very much of a soldier; I did not care if
I was better acquainted with him: but it is an awkward kind of a country for
that; the English, I observe, are close friends, but distant acquaintance. I
suspect the old lady has not been over generous to poor Dudley: I shall give
her a little touch about that; upon my soul I know but one excuse a person can
have for giving nothing, and that is, like myself, having nothing to give.


Exit. SCENE IX.
Scene changes to LADY RUSPORT's House. A dressing room. MISS RUSPORT and LUCY.
CHARLOTTE. Well, Lucy, you have dislodged the old lady at last; but me thought
you was a tedious time about it.


LUCY. A tedious time indeed; I think they who have least to spare, contrive to
throw the most away; I thought I should never have got her out of the house.


CHARLOTTE. Why, she is as deliberate in canvassing every article of her dress,
as an ambassador would be in settling the preliminaries of a treaty.


LUCY. There was a new hood and handkerchief, that had come express from
Holborn-Hill on the occasion, that took as much time in adjusting --


CHARLOTTE. As they did in making, and she was as vain of them, as an old maid
of a young lover.


LUCY. Or a young lover of himself. Then, madam, this being a visit of great
ceremony to a person of distinction, at the West end of the town, the old state
chariot was dragged forth on the occasion, with strict charges to dress out the
box with the Leopard skin hammer-cloth.


CHARLOTTE. Yes, and to hang the false tails on the miserable stumps of the old
crawling cattle. Well, well, pray Heaven the crazy affair don't break down
again with her! at least till she gets to her journey's end. -- but where is
Charles Dudley? Run down, dear girl, and be ready to let him in; I think he is
as long in coming, as she was in going.


LUCY. Why, indeed, madam, you seem the more alert of the two, I must say.


Exit. CHARLOTTE. Now the deuce take the girl for putting that notion into my
head; I Am sadly afraid Dudley does hot like me; so much encouragement as I have
given him to declare himself! I never could get a word from him on the subject;
this may be very honorable, but upon* my life it is very provoking; by the way
I wonder how I look today. Oh! shockingly, hideously pale! like a witch. This
is the old lady's glass, and she has left some of her wrinkles on it. How
frightfully have I put on my cap, all awry! and my hair dressed so unbecomingly!
altogether I Am a most complete fright.


SCENE X.
CHARLES DUDLEY comes in unobserved. CHARLES. That I deny.


CHARLOTTE. Ah!


CHARLES. Quarrelling with your glass, cousin? Make it up; make it up and be
friends; it cannot compliment you more, than by reflecting you, as you are.


CHARLOTTE. Well, I vow, my dear Charles, that is delightfully said, and
deserves my very best curtesy: your flattery, like a rich jewel, has a value
not only from its superior luster, but from its extraordinary scarceness: I
verily think this is the only civil speech you ever directed to my person in
your life.


CHARLES. And I ought to ask pardon of your good sense, for having done it now.


CHARLOTTE. Nay, now you relapse again: don't you know if you keep well with a
woman on the great score of beaury, she will never quarrel with you on the
trifling article of good sense? But any thing serves to fill up a dull yawning
hour with an insipid cousin; you have brighter moments, and warmer spirits for
the dear girl of your heart.


CHARLES. Oh! sie upon you, sie upon you.


CHARLOTTE. You blush, and the reason is apparent, you are a novice at
hypocrisy; but no practice can make a visit of ceremony pass for a visit of
choice: love is ever before its time, friendship is apt to lag a little after
it: pray, Charles, did you make any extraordinary haste hither?


CHARLES. By your question, I see you acquit me of the impertinence of being in
love.


CHARLOTTE. But why impertinence? why the impertinence of being in love? you
have one language for me, Charles, and another for the woman of your affection.


CHARLES. You are mistaken; the woman of my affection shall never hear any
other language from me, than what I use to you.


CHARLOTTE. I am afraid, then, you will never make yourself understood by her.


CHARLES. It is not fit I should; there is no need of love to make me
miserable; it is wretchedness enough to be a beggar.


CHARLOTTE. A beggar do you call yourself! O Charles, Charles, rich in every
merit and accomplishment, whom may you not aspire to? and why think you so
unworthily of our sex, as to conclude there is not one to be found with sense
to discern your virtue and generosity to reward it?


CHARLES. You distress me, I must beg to hear no more.


CHARLOTTE. Well, I can be silent -- Thus does he always serve me, whenever I
am about to disclose myself to him.


CHARLES. Why do you not banish me and my misfortunes for ever from your
thoughts?


CHARLOTTE. Ay, wherefore do I not? since you never allowed me a place in
yours: but go, Sir, I have no right to stay you; go where your heart directs
you, go to the happy, the distinguished fair one.


CHARLES. Now, by all that is good, you do me wrong: there is no such fair one
for me to go to, nor have I an acquaintance amongst the sex, yourself excepted,
which answers to that description.


CHARLOTTE. Indeed!


CHARLES. In very truth; there then let us drop the subject. May you be happy
though I never can!


CHARLOTTE. O, Charles, give me your hand; if I have offended you, I ask you
pardon; you have been long acquainted with my temper, and know how to bear with
its infirmities.


CHARLES. Thus, my dear Charlotte, let us seal our reconciliation kissing her
hand. Bear with thy infirmities! By Heaven, I know not any one failing in thy
whole composition, except that of too great a partiality for an undeserving man.


CHARLOTTE. And you are now taking the very course to augment that failing. A
thought strikes me: I have a commission that you must absolutely execute for
me: I have immediate occasion for the sum of two hundred pounds; you know my
fortune is shut up till I am of age: take this paltry box; it contains my
earrings, and some other bawbles I have no use for; carry it to our opposite
neighbor, Mr. Stockwell; I don't know where else to apply; leave it as a
deposit in his hands, and beg him to accomodate me with the sum.


CHARLES. Dear Charlotte, what are you about to do? How can you possibly want
two hundred pounds?


CHARLOTTE. How can I possibly do without it, you mean? Does Not every lady want
two hundred pounds? Perhaps I have lost it at play; perhaps I mean to win as
much to it; perhaps I want it for two hundred different uses.


CHARLES. Pooh! pooh! all this is nothing; don't I know you never play?


CHARLOTTE. You mistake; I have a spirit to set not only this trifle, but my
whole fortune upon a stake; therefore make no wry faces, but do as I bid you:
you will find Mr. Stockwell a very honorable gentleman.


LUCY enters in haste. LUCY. Dear Madam, as I live, here comes the old lady in
a hackney-coach.


CHARLOTTE. The old chariot has given her a second tumble* away with you; you
know your way out without meeting her; take the box, and do as I desire you.


CHARLES. I must not dispute your orders. Farewell!


Exeunt CHARLES and CHARLOTTE. SCENE XI.
LADY RUSPORT enters, leaning on MAJOR O'FLAHERTY's arm. O'FLAHERTY. Rest
yourself upon my arm; never spare it; it is strong enough: it has stood harder
service than you can put it to.


LUCY. Mercy upon me, what is the matter; I am frightened out of my wits: has
your ladyship had an accident?


LADY RUSPORT. O Lucy! the most untoward one in nature; I know not how I shall
repair it.


O'FLAHERTY. Never go about to repair it, my lady; even build a new one; 'twas
but a crazy piece of business at best.


LUCY. Bless me, is the old chariot broke down with you again?


LADY RUSPORT. Broke, child? I don't know what might have been broke, if, by
great good fortune, this obliging gentleman had not been at hand to assist me.


LUCY. Dear Madam, let me run and fetch you a cup of the cordial drops.


LADY RUSPORT. Do, Lucy. Alas! Sir, ever since I lost my husband, my poor
nerves have been shook to pieces: there hangs his beloved picture; that
precious relick, and a p^entiful jointure, is all that remains to console me
for the best of men.


O'FLAHERTY. Let me see; in faith a comely personage: by his fur cloak I suppose
he was in the Russian service, and by the gold chain round his neck I should
guess he had been honored with the order of St. Catharine.


LADY RUSPORT. No, no; he meddled with no St Catharines: that is the habit he
wore in his mayoralty; Sir Stephen was Lord Mayor of London; but he is gone,
and has left me a poor, weak, solitary widow behind him.


O'FLAHERTY. By all means, then, take a strong, able, hearty man to repair his
loss: if such a plain fellow as one Dennis O'Flaherty can please you, I think I
may venture to say, without any disparagement to the gentleman in the fur-gown
there --


LADY RUSPORT. What are you going to say? Don't shock my ears with any
comparisons, I desire.


O'FLAHERTY. Not I, by my soul; I don't believe there is any comparison in the
case.


LADY RUSPORT. Oh, are you come? Give me the drops; I Am all in a flutter.


O'FLAHERTY. Hark'e, sweetheart, what are those same drops? Have you any more
left in the bottle? I didn't care if I took a little sip of them myself.


LUCY. Oh! Sir, they are called the cordial restorative elixir, or the nervous
golden drops; they are only for ladies' cases.


O'FLAHERTY. Yes, yes, my dear, there are gentlemen as well as ladies that
stand in need of those same golden drops; they would suit my case to a tittle.


LADY RUSPORT. Well, Major, did you give o^d D^^l^y my letter, and will the
silly man do as I bid him, and be gone?


O'FLAHERTY. You are obeyed; he is on his march.


LADY RUSPORT. That Is well; you have managed this matter to perfection; I
didn't think he would have been so easily prevailed upon.


O'FLAHERTY. At the first word; no difficulty in life; 'twas the very thing he
was determined to do, before I came; I never met a more obliging gentleman.


LADY RUSPORT. Well, it is no matter; so I am but rid of him, and his
distresses: would you believe it, Major O'Flaherty, it was but this morning he
sent a begging to me for money to fit him out upon some wild-goose expedition
to the coast of Africa, I know not where.


O'FLAHERTY. Well, you sent him what he wanted?


LADY RUSPORT. I sent him, what he deserved, a flat refusal.


O'FLAHERTY. You refused him!


LADY RUSPORT. Most undoubtedly.


O'FLAHERTY. You sent him nothing!


LADY RUSPORT. Not a shilling.


O'FLAHERTY. Good morning to you -- Your servant --

going.
LADY RUSPORT. Heyday! What ails the man? Where are you going?


O'FLAHERTY. Out of your house, before the roof falls on my head -- to poor
Dudley, to share the little modicum that thirty years hard service has left me;
I wish it was more for his sake.


LADY RUSPORT. Very well, Sir; take your course; I shall not attempt to stop you;
I shall survive it; it will not break my heart if I never see you more.


O'FLAHERTY. Break your heart! No, of my conscience will it not. -- You preach,
and you pray, and you turn up your eyes, and all the while you're as
hard-hearted as a hyena -- A hyena, truly! By my soul there is not in the whole
creation so savage an animal as a human creature without pity.


Exit. LADY RUSPORT. A hyena, truly! Where did the fellow blunder upon that
word? Now the deuce take him for using it, and the Macaronies for inventing it.


END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
A room in STOCKWELL's house. STOCKWELL and BELCOUR. STOCKWELL. Gratify me so
far, however, Mr. Belcour, as to see Miss Rusport; carry her the sum she wants,
and return the poor girl her box of diamonds, which Dudley lost in my hands;
you know what to say on the occasion better than ^ do; that part of your
commission I leave to your own discretion, and you may season it with what
galantry you think fit.


BELCOUR. You could not have pitched upon a greater bungler at galantry than
myself, if you had rummag'd every company in the city, and the whole court of
aldermen into the bargain: p^rt o^ your errand, however, I will do; but whether
it shall be with an ill grace, or a go^d one, depends upon the capture of a
m^ment, the (...) the l^dy, the mode of our m^^ting, and a thousa^^ ^^^^sirable
small circumstances that nevertheless determine us upon all the great occasions
of life.


STOCKWELL. I persuade myself you will find Miss Rusport an ingenuous, worthy,
animated girl.


BELCOUR. Why I like her the better, as a woman; but name her not to me, as a
wife! No, if ever I marry, it must be a staid, sober, considerate damsel, with
blood in her vein as cold as a turtle's, quick of s^^nt (...) a (...) when
danger's in the wind, wary and sharp-sighted (...) when treachery is on foot:
with such a compan^^n at my elbow, for ever whispering in my ear -- have a ca^e
of this man, he is a cheat; don't go n^^r that woman, she is (...) over head
there^s a scaffold, under (...) Oh! Sir, such a woman might lead me up and down
in ^ great city without difficulty or danger, (...) with a (...) Miss Rusport's
complexion. (...) should be dup'd, undone, (...)


STOCKWELL. Ha! ha! ha! Why you are become wondrous circumspect of a sudden,
pupil; and if you can find such a prudent damsel as you describe, you have my
consent -- only beware how you choose; discretion is not the reigning quality
amongst the fine ladies of the present time; and I think in Miss Rusport's
particular I have given you no bad counsel.


BELCOUR. Well, well, if you will fetch me the jewels, I believe I can undertake
to carry them to her; but as for the money, I Will have nothing to do with that;
Dudley would be your fittest ambassador on that occasion; and, if I mistake
not, the most agreeable to the lady.


STOCKWELL. Why, indeed, from what I know of the matter, it may not improbably
be destined to find its way into his pockets.


Exit. BELCOUR. Then depend upon it these are not the only trinkets she means
to dedicate to Captain Dudley. As for me, Stockwell indeed wants me to marry;
but till I can get this bewitching girl, this incognita, out of my head, I can
never think of any other woman.

SERVANT enters, and delivers a letter. Heyday! Where can I have picked up a
correspondent already? It Is a most execrable manuscript -- Let me see -- Martha
Fulmer -- Who is Martha Fulmer? Pshaw! I will not be at the trouble of decyphering
her damned pothooks. Hold, hold, hold; What have we got here?

DEAR SIR,
"I Have discovered the lady you was so much smitten with, and can procure you an
interview with her; if you can be as generous to a pretty girl as you was to a
paltry old captain," (How did she find that out?) "you need not despair: come
to me immediately; the lady is now in my house, and expects you.

Yours, MARTHA FULMER.


O thou dear, lovely, and enchanting paper, which I was about to tear into a
thousand scraps, devoutly I entreat thy pardon: I have slighted thy contents,
which are delicious; slandered thy characters, which are divine; and all the
atonement I can make is implicitly to obey thy mandates.


STOCKWELL returns. STOCKWELL. Mr. Belcour, here are the jewels; this letter
encloses bills for the money; and, if you will deliver it to Miss Rusport,
you will have no farther trouble on that score.


BELCOUR. Ah, Sir! the letter which I Have been reading disqualifies me for
delivering the letter which you have been writing: I have other game on foot;
the loveliest girl my eyes ever feasted upon is started in view, and the world
cannot now divert me from pursuing her.


STOCKWELL. Hey-dey! What has turned you thus on a sudden?


BELCOUR. A woman: one that can turn, and overturn me and my tottering
resolutions every way she will. Oh, Sir, if this is folly in me, you must rail
at Nature: you must chide the sun, that was vertical at my birth, and would not
wink upon my nakedness, but swaddled me in the broadest, hottest glare of his
meridian beams.


STOCKWELL. Mere rhapsody; mere childish rhapsody; the libertine's familiar
plea -- -- Nature made us, it is true, but we are the responsible creators of
our own faults and follies.


BELCOUR. Sir!


STOCKWELL. Slave of every face you meet, some hussy has inveigled you, some
handsome profligate, (the town is full of them;) and, when once fairly bankrupt
in constitution, as well as fortune, nature no longer serves as your excuse for
being vicious, necessity, perhaps, will stand your friend, and you will reform.


BELCOUR. You are severe.


STOCKWELL. It fi^s me to be so -- it well becomes a father -- -- I would say a
friend -- How strangely I forget myself -- How difficult it is to counterfeit
indifference, and put a mask upon the heart -- I Have struck him hard; he reddens.


BELCOUR. How could you tempt me so? Had you not inadvertently dropped the name
of father, I fear our friendship, short as it has been, would scarce have held
me -- But even your mistake I reverence -- Give me your hand -- it is over.


STOCKWELL. Generous young man -- -- let me embrace you -- How shall I hide my
tears? I have been to blame; because I bore you the affection of a father, I
rashly took up the authority of one. I ask your pardon -- pursue your course; I
have no right to stop it -- What would you have me do with these things?


BELCOUR. This, if I might advise; carry the money to Miss Rusport immediately;
never let generosity wait for it is materials; that part of the business
presses. Give me the jewels; I Will find an opportunity of delivering them into
her hands; and your visit may pave the way for my reception.


Exit. STOCKWELL. Be it so: good morning to you. Farewell advice! Away goes he
upon the wing for pleasure. What various passions he awakens in me! He pains,
yet pleases me; affrights, offend, yet grows upon my heart. His very failings
set him off -- for ever trespassing, for ever atoning, I almost think he would
not be so perfect, were he free from fault: I must dissemble longer; and yet
how painful the experiment! -- Even now he is gone upon some wild adventure; and
who can tell what mischief may befall him! O Nature, what it is to be a father!
Just such a thoughtless headlong thing was I, when I beguiled his mother into
love.


Exit. SCENE II.
Scene changes to FULMER's House. FULMER and his WIFE. FULMER. I tell you,
Patty, you are a fool to think of bringing him and Miss Dudley together; 'twill
ruin every thing, and blow your whole scheme up to the moon at once.


MRS. FULMER. Why, sure, Mr. Fulmer, I may be allowed to rear a chicken of my
own hatching, as they say. Who first sprung the thought but I, pray? Who
contrived the plot? Who proposed the letter, but I, I?


FULMER. And who dogged the gentleman home? Who found out his name, fortune,
connection, that he was a West-Indian, fresh landed, and full of cash; a gull
to our heart's content; a hot-brained headlong spark, that would run into our
trap, like a wheat-ear under a turf?


MRS. FULMER. Hark! he is come: disappear, march; and leave the field open to my
machinations.


Exit FULMER. SCENE III.
BELCOUR enters to her. BELCOUR. O, thou dear minister to my happiness, let me
embrace thee! Why thou art my polar star, my propitious constellation, by which
I navigate my impatient bark into the port of pleasure and delight.


MRS. FULMER. Oh, you men are sly creatures! Do you remember now, you cruel,
what you said to me this morning?


BELCOUR. All a jest, a frolic; never think on it; bury it for ever in
oblivion; thou! why thou art all over nectar and ambrosia, powder of pearl and
odor of roles; thou have the youth of Hebe, the beauty of Venus, and the pen
of Sappho; but in the name of all that is lovely, where is the lady? I expected
to find her with you.


MRS. FULMER. No doubt you did, and these raptures were designed for her, but
where have you loitered? the lady's gone, you are too late; girls of her sort
are not to be kept waiting like negro slaves in your sugar plantations.


BELCOUR. Gone; whither is she gone? tell me that I may follow her.


MRS. FULMER. Hold, hold, not so fast young gentleman, this is a case of some
delicacy; should Captain Dudley know that I introduced you to his daughter, he
is a man of such scrupulous honor --


BELCOUR. What do you tell me! is she daughter to the old gentleman I met here
this morning?


MRS. FULMER. The same; him you was so generous to.


BELCOUR. There Is an end of the matter then at once; it shall never be said of
me, that I took advantage of the father's necessities to trepan the daughter

going.
MRS. FULMER. So, so, I Have made a wrong cast, he is one of your conscientious
sinners I find, but I will not lose him thus -- Ha! ha! ha!


BELCOUR. What is it you laugh at?


MRS. FULMER. Your absolute inexperience: have you lived so very little time in
this country, as not to know that between young people of equal ages, the term
of sister often is a cover for that of mistress? This young lady is, in that
sense of the word, sister to young Dudley, and consequently daughter to my old
lodger.


BELCOUR. Indeed! are you serious?


MRS. FULMER. Can you doubt it? I must have been pretty well assured of that
before I invited you hither.


BELCOUR. That Is true; she cannot be a woman of honor, and Dudley is an
unconscionable young rogue to think of keeping one fine girl in pay, by raising
contributions on another; he shall therefore give her up; she is a dear,
bewitching, mischievous, little devil; and he shall positively give her up.


MRS. FULMER. Ay, now the freak has taken you again; I say give her up; there is
one way, indeed, and certain of success.


BELCOUR. What Is that?


MRS. FULMER. Out-bid him, never dream of out-blustring him; buy out his lease
of possession, and leave her to manage his ejectment.


BELCOUR. Is she so venal? Never fear me then; when beauty is the purchase, I
shall not think much of the price.


MRS. FULMER. All things, then, will be made easy enough; let me see; some
little genteel present to begin with: what have you got about you? Ay, search;
I can bestow it to advantage, there is no time to be lost.


BELCOUR. Hang it, confound it; a plague upon it, say I! I hav'n't a guinea left
in my pocket; I parted from my whole stock here this morning, and have forgot
to supply myself since.


MRS. FULMER. Mighty well; let it pass then; there is an end; think no more of
the lady, that is all.


BELCOUR. Distraction! think no more of her? let me only step home and provide
myself, I Will be back with you in an instant.


MRS. FULMER. Pooh, pooh! that is a wretched shift: have you nothing of value
about you? money's a coarse slovenly vehicle, fit only to bribe electors in a
borough; there are more graceful ways of purchasing a lady's favors; rings,
trinkets, jewels!


BELCOUR. Jewels! Gadso, I protest I had forgot: I have a case of jewels; but
they will not do, I must not part from them; no, no, they are appropriated; they
are none of my own.


MRS. FULMER. Let me see, let me see! Ay, now, this were something-like: pretty
creatures, how they sparkle! these would ensure success.


BELCOUR. Indeed!


MRS. FULMER. These would make her your own for ever.


BELCOUR. Then the deuce take 'em for belonging to another person; I could find
in my heart to give 'em the girl, and swear I Have lost them.


MRS. FULMER. Ay, do, say they were stolen out of your pocket.


BELCOUR. No, hang it, that is dishonorable; here, give me the paltry things,
I Will write you an order on my merchant for double their value.


MRS. FULMER. An order! No; order for me no orders upon merchants, with their
value received, and three day* grace; their noting, protesting, and endorsing,
and all their counting house formalities; I Will have nothing to do with them;
leave your diamonds with me, and give your order for the value of them to the
owner: the money would be as good as the trinkets, I warrant you.


BELCOUR. Hey! how! I never thought of that; but a breach of trust; it is
impossible; I never can consent, therefore, give me the jewels back again.


MRS. FULMER. Take 'em; I am now to tell you the lady is in this house.


BELCOUR. In this house?


MRS. FULMER. Yes, Sir, in this very house; but what of that? you have got what
you like better; your toys, your trinkets, go, go: Oh! you're a man of a
notable spirit, are you not?


BELCOUR. Provoking creature! Bring me to the sight of the dear girl, and
dispose of me as you think fit.


MRS. FULMER. And of the diamonds too?


BELCOUR. Damn 'em, I would there was not such a bauble in nature! But come,
come, dispatch; if I had the throne of Dehli I should give it to her.


MRS. FULMER. Swear to me then that you will keep within bounds, remember she
passes for the sister of young Dudley. Oh! if you come to your flights, and
your rhapsodies, she will be off in an instant.


BELCOUR. Never fear me.

MRS. FULMER. You must expect to hear her talk of her father, as she calls him,
and her brother, and your bounty to her family.


BELCOUR. Ay, ay, never mind what she talks of, only bring her.


MRS. FULMER. You Will be prepared upon that head.


BELCOUR. I shall be prepared, never fear; away with you.


MRS. FULMER. But hold, I had forgot: not a word of the diamonds; leave that
matter to my management.


BELCOUR. Hell and vexation! Get out of the room, or I shall run distracted.
Exit Mrs. Fulmer. Of a certain, Belcour, thou art born to be the fool of woman:
sure no man sins with so much repentance, or repents with so little amendment,
as I do. I cannot give away another person's property, honor forbids me; and I
positively cannot give up the girl; love, passion, constitution, every thing
protests against that. How shall I decide? I cannot bring myself to break a
trust, and I am not at present in the humor to baulk my inclinations. Is there
no middle way? Let me consider -- There is, there is: my good genius has
presented me with one; apt, obvious, honorable; the girl shall not go without
her baubles, I Will not go without the girl, Miss Rusport shall not lose her
diamonds, I Will save Dudley from destruction, and every party shall be a gainer
by the project.


SCENE IV.
MRS. FULMER introducing MISS DUDLEY. MRS. FULMER. Miss Dudley, this is the
worthy gentleman you wish to see; this is Mr. Belcour.


LOUISA. As I live, the very man that beset me in the streets.

aside.
BELCOUR. An angel, by this light! Oh I am gone past all retrieving!

aside.
LOUISA. Mrs. Fulmer, Sir, informs me you are the gentleman from whom my father
has received such civilities.


BELCOUR. Oh! never name 'em.


LOUISA. Pardon me, Mr. Belcour, they must be both named and remembered; and if
my father was here --


BELCOUR. I am much better pleased with his representative.


LOUISA. That title is my brother's, Sir; I have no claim to it.


BELCOUR. I believe it.


LOUISA. But as neither he nor my father were fortunate enough to be at home, I
could not resist the opportunity --


BELCOUR. Nor I neither, by my soul, Madam: let us improve it, therefore. I am
in love with you to distraction; I was charmed at the first glance; I attempted
to accost you; you fled; I followed; but was defeated of an interview; at
length I have obtained one, and seize the opportunity of casting my person and
my fortune at your feet.


LOUISA. You astonish me! Are you in your senses, or do you make a jest of my
misfortunes? Do you ground pretenses on your generosity, or do you make a
practice of this folly with every woman you meet?


BELCOUR. Upon my life, no: As you are the handsomest woman I ever met, so you
are the first to whom I ever made the like professions: as for my generosity,
Madam, I must refer you on that score to this good lady, who I believe has
something to offer in my behalf.


LOUISA. Don't build upon that, Sir; I must have better proofs of your
generosity, than the mere divestment of a little superfluous dross, before I
can credit the sincerity of professions so abruptly delivered.

Exit hastily.
BELCOUR. Oh! ye Gods and Goddesses, how her anger animates her beauty!

Going out.
MRS. FULMER. Stay, Sir; if you stir a step after her, I renounce your interest
for ever; why you will ruin every thing.


BELCOUR. Well, I must have her, cost what it will: I see she understands her
own value though; a little superfluous dross, truly! She must have better proofs
of my generosity.


MRS. FULMER. It Is exactly as I told you; your money she calls dross; she is too
proud to stain her fingers with your coin; bait your ^^ok well with jewels; try
that experiment, and she is your own.


BELCOUR. Take 'em; let 'em go; lay 'em at her feet; I must get out of the
scrape as I can; my propensity is irresistible: there! you have 'em; they are
yours; they are here is; but remember they are a trust; I commit them to her
keeping till I can buy 'em off with something she shall think more valuable;
now tell me when shall I meet her?


MRS. FULMER. How can I tell that? Don't you see what an alarm you have put her
into? Oh! you are a rare one! But go your ways for this while; leave her to my
management, and come to me at seven this evening; but remember not to bring
empty pockets with you -- Ha! ha! ha!


Exeunt severally. SCENE V.
LADY RUSPORT's House. MISS RUSPORT enters, followed by a servant. CHARLOTTE.
Desire Mr. Stockwell to walk in.


Exit Servant. STOCKWELL enters. STOCWELL. Madam, your most obedient servant: I
am honored with your commands, by Captain Dudley; and have brought the money
with me as you directed: I understand the sum you have occasion for is two
hundred pounds.


CHARLOTTE. It is, Sir; I am quite confounded at your taking this trouble upon
yourself, Mr. Stockwell.


STOCKWELL. There is a Bank-note, Madam, to the amount: your jewels are in safe
hands, and will be delivered to you directly. If I had been happy in being
better known to you, I should have hoped you would not have thought it
necessary to place a deposit in my hands for so trifling a sum as you have now
required me to supply you with.


CHARLOTTE. The bawbles I sent you may very well be spared; and, as they are
the only security, in my present situation, I can give you, I could wish you
would retain them in your hands: when I am of age, (which, if I live a few
months, I shall be) I will replace your favor, with thanks.


STOCKWELL. It is obvious, Miss Rusport, that your charms will suffer no
impeachment by the absence of these superficial ornaments; but they should be
seen in the suite of a woman of fashion, not as creditors to whom you are
indebted for your appearance, but as subservient attendants, which help to make
up your equipage.


CHARLOTTE. Mr. Stockwell is determined not to wrong the confidence I reposed
in his politeness.


STOCKWELL. I have only to request, Madam, that you will allow Mr. Belcour, a
young gentleman, in whose happiness I particularly interest myself, to have the
honor of delivering you the box of jewels.


CHARLOTTE. Most gladly; any friend of yours cannot fail of being welcome here.


STOCKWELL. I flatter myself you will not find him totally undeserving your
good opinion; an education, not of the strictest kind, and strong animal
spirits, are apt sometimes to betray him into youthful irregularities; but an
high principle of honor, and an uncommon benevolence, in the eye of candor,
will, I hope, atone for any faults, by which these good qualities are not
impaired.


CHARLOTTE. I dare say Mr. Belcour's behavior wants no apology: we have no right
to be over strict in canvassing the morals of a common acquaintance.


STOCKWELL. I wish it may be my happiness to see Mr. Belcour in the list, not
of your common, but particular acquaintance, of your friends, Miss Rusport -- I
dare not be more explicit.


CHARLOTTE. Nor need you, Mr. Stockwell: I shall be studious to deserve his
friendship; and, though I have long since unalterably placed my affections on
another, I trust, I have not left myself insensible to the merits of Mr.
Belcour; and hope that neither you nor he will, for that reason, think me less
worthy your good opinion and regards.


STOCKWELL. Miss Rusport, I sincerely wish you happy: I have no doubt you have
placed your affection on a deserving man; and I have no right to combat your
choice.


Exit. CHARLOTTE. How honorable is that behavior! Now, if Charles was here, I
should be happy. The old lady is so fond of her new Irish acquaintance, that I
have the whole house at my disposal.


Exit CHARLOTTE. SCENE VI.
BELCOUR enters, preceded by a Servant. SERVANT. I (...) your honor's pardon;
I thought my young lady was ^ere: who shall I inform her would speak to her?


BELCOUR. Belcour is my name, Sir; and pray beg your lady to put herself in
(...) hurry on my account; for I Would sooner see the devil than see her face Exit
Servant. In the name of all that is mischievous, why did Stockwell drive me
hither in soon haste? A pretty figure, truly, I shall make: an ambassador
without credentials. Blockhead that I was to charge myself with her diamonds;
officious, meddling puppy! Now they are irretrievably gone: that suspicious
jade Fulmer woudn't part even with a fight of them, though I would have ransomed
'em at twice their value. Now must I trust to my poor wits to bring me off: a
lamentable dependence. Fortune be my helper! Here comes the girl -- If she is
noble minded, as she is said to be, she will forgive me; if not, it is a lost
cause; for I have not thought of one word in my excuse.


SCENE VII.
CHARLOTTE enters. CHARLOTTE. Mr. Belcour, I Am proud to see you: your friend,
Mr. Stockwell, prepared me to expect this honor; and I am happy in the
opportunity of being known to you.


BELCOUR. A fine girl, by my soul! Now what a cursed hang-dog do I look like!

aside.
CHARLOTTE. You are newly arrived in this country, Sir?


BELCOUR. Just landed, Madam; just set ashore, with a large cargo of Muscovado
sugars, rum-puncheons, mahogany-slabs, wet sweetmeats, and green paroquets.


CHARLOTTE. May I ask you how you like London, Sir?


BELCOUR. To admiration: I think the town and the town's-folk are exactly
suited; it is a great, rich, overgrown, noisy, tumultuous place: the whole
morning is a bustle to get money, and the whole afternoon is a hurry to spend
it.


CHARLOTTE. Are these all the observations you have made?


BELCOUR. No, Madam; I have observed the women are very captivating, and the
men very soon caught.


CHARLOTTE. Ay, indeed! Whence do you draw that conclusion?


BELCOUR. From infallible guides; the first remark I collect from what I now
see, the second from what I now feel.


CHARLOTTE. Oh, the deuce take you! but to wave this subject; I believe, Sir,
this was a visit of business, not compliment; was it not?


BELCOUR. Ay; now comes on my execution.


CHARLOTTE. You have some foolish trinkets of mine, Mr. Belcour; havn't you?


BELCOUR. No, in truth; they are gone in search of a trinket, still more
foolish than themselves.

aside.
CHARLOTTE. Some diamonds I mean, Sir; Mr. Stockwell informed me you was
charged with 'em.


BELCOUR. Oh, yes, Madam; but I have the most treacherous memory in life --
Here they are! Pray put them up; they are all right; you need not examine 'em

gives a box.
CHARLOTTE. Hey-dey! right, Sir! Why these are not my diamonds; these are quite
different; and, as it should seem, of much greater value.


BELCOUR. Upon my life I Am glad on it; for then I hope you value 'em more than
your own.


CHARLOTTE. As a purchaser I should, but not as an owner; you mistake, these
belong to somebody else.


BELCOUR. It Is yours, I Am afraid, that belong to somebody else.


CHARLOTTE. What is it yon mean? I must insist upon your taking 'em back again.


BELCOUR. Pray, madam, don't do that; I shall infallibly lose them; I have the
worst luck with diamonds of any man living.


CHARLOTTE. That you might well say, was you to give me these in the place of
mine; but pray, Sir, what is the reason of all this? Why have you changed the
jewels? and where have you disposed of mine?


BELCOUR. Miss Rusport, I cannot invent a lie for my life; and, if it was to
save it, I coudn't tell one: I am an idle, dissipated, unthinking fellow, not
worth your notice: in short, I am a West-Indian; and you must try me according
to the charter of my colony, not by a jury of English spinsters: truth is, I Have
given away your jewels; caught with a pair of sparkling eyes, whose luster
blinded their's, I served your property, as I should my own, and lavished it
away; let me not totally despair of your forgiveness: I frequently do wrong,
but never with impunity; if your displeasure is added to my own, my punishment
will be too severe. When I parted from the jewels, I had not the honor of
knowing their owner.


CHARLOTTE. Mr. Belcour, your sincerity charms me, I enter at once into your
character, and I make all the allowances for it you can desire. I take your
jewels for the present, because I know there is no other way of reconciling you
to yourself; but If I give way to your spirit in one point, you must yield to
mine in another; remember I will not keep more than the value of my own jewels:
there is no need to be pillaged by more than one woman at a time, Sir.


BELCOUR. Now may every blessing that can crown your virtues, and reward your
beauty, be shower'd upon you; may you meet admiration without envy, love
without jealousy: and old age without malady! may the man of your heart be ever
constant, and you never meet a less penitent, or less grateful offender than
myself.


Servant enters and delivers a letter. CHARLOTTE. Does your letter require such
haste?


SERVANT. I was bade to give it into your own hands, madam.


CHARLOTTE. From Charles Dudley, I see -- have I your permission? Good Heaven,
what do I read! Mr. Belcour you are concerned in this -- Dear Charlotte;
in the midst of our distress, Providence has cast a benefactor in our way,
after the most unexpected manner: a young West Indian, rich, and with a warmth
of heart peculiar to his climate, has rescued my father from his troubles,
satisfied his wants, and enabled him to accomplish his exchange: when I relate
to you the manner in which this was done, you will be charmed; I can only now
add, that it was by chance we found out that his name is Belcour, and that he
is a friend of Mr. Stockwell's. I lose not a moment's time in making you
acquainted with this fortunate event for reasons which delicacy obliges me to
suppress; but, perhaps, if you have not received the money on your jewels, you
will not think it necessary now to do it. I have the honor to be,

Dear Madam, most faithfully yours, CHARLES DUDLEY.




Is this your doing, Sir? Never was generosity so worthily exerted.


BELCOUR. Or so greatly overpaid.


CHARLOTTE. After what you have now done for this noble, but indigent, family,
let me not scruple to unfold the whole situation of my heart to you. Know then,
Sir, (and don't think the worse of me for the frankness of my declaration) that
such is my attachment to the son of that worthy officer whom you relieved, that
the moment I am of age, and in possession of my fortune, I should hold myself
the happiest of women to share it with young Dudley.


BELCOUR. Say you so, madam! then let me perish if I don't love and reverence
you above all woman kind; and if such is your generous resolution, never wait
till you're of age; life is too short, pleasure too fugitive; the soul grows
narrower every hour; I Will equip you for your escape; I Will convoy you to the man
of your heart, and away with you then to the first hospitable parson, that will
take you in.


CHARLOTTE. O blessed be the torrid zone for ever, whose rapid vegetation
quickens nature into such benignity! These latitudes are made for politics and
philosophy; friendship has no root in this soil. But had I spirit to accept
your offer, which is not improbable, would not it be a mortifying thing, for a
fond girl to find herself mistaken, and sent back to her home, like a vagrant;
and such, for what I know, might be my case.


BELCOUR. Then he ought to be proscribed the society of mankind for ever -- --
Ay, ay, it is the sham sister makes him thus indifferent; 'twill be a
meritorious office to take that girl out of the way.


Servant enters SCENE VIII.
SERVANT. Miss Dudley to wait on you, madam.


BELCOUR. Who?


SERVANT. Miss Dudley.


CHARLOTTE. What Is the matter, Mr. Belcour? are you frighted at the name of a
pretty girl? it is the sister of him we were speaking of -- pray admit her.


BELCOUR. The sister! So, so; he has imposed upon her too -- this is an
extraordinary visit truly. Upon my soul the assurance of some folks is not to
be accounted for.


CHARLOTTE. I insist upon your not running away; you will be charmed with Louisa
Dudley.


BELCOUR. Oh, yes, I am charmed with her.


CHARLOTTE. You Have seen her then; have you?


BELCOUR. Yes, yes, I Have seen her.


CHARLOTTE. Well, is not she a delightful girl?


BELCOUR. Very delightful.


CHARLOTTE. Why, you answer as if you was in a court of justice; Of My
conscience! I believe you are caught; I Have a notion she has tricked you out of
your heart.


BELCOUR. I believe she has, and you out of your jewels; for to tell you the
truth, she is the very person I gave 'em to.


CHARLOTTE. You gave her my jewels! Louisa Dudley my jewels? admirable;
inimitable! oh, the fly little jade! but hush, here she comes; I don't know how
I shall keep my countenance.

LOUISA enters. My dear, I Am rejoiced to see you; how do you do? I beg leave to
introduce Mr. Belcour, a very worthy friend of mine; I believe, Louisa, you
have seen him before.


LOUISA. I have met the gentleman.


CHARLOTTE. You have met the gentleman; well, Sir, and you have met the lady;
in short, you have met each other; why then don't you speak to each other? How
you both stand tongue-tied, and fixed as statues -- -- Ha, ha, ha! Why you will
fall a-sleep by-and-by.


LOUISA. Fie upon you; fie upon you; is this fair?


BELCOUR. Upon my soul I never looked so like a fool in my life; the assurance
of that girl puts me quite down aside..


CHARLOTTE. Sir -- Mr. Belcour -- Was it your pleasure to advance any thing?
Not a syllable. Come, Louisa, women's wit, they say, is never at a loss -- Nor
you neither? Speechless both -- Why you was merry enough before this lady came
in.


LOUISA. I am sorry I have been any interruption to your happiness, Sir.


BELCOUR. Madam.


CHARLOTTE. Madam! Is that all you can say? but come, my dear girl, I will not
teaze you: apropos! I must show you what a fine present this dumb gentleman has
made me; are not ^^ese handsome diamonds?


LOUISA. Yes, indeed, they seem very fine; but I am no judge of these things.


CHARLOTTE. Oh, you wicked little hypocrite, you are no judge of these things,
Louisa; you have no diamonds, not you.


LOUISA. You know I havn't, Miss Rusport: you know those things are infinitely
above my reach.


CHARLOTTE. Ha! ha! ha!


BELCOUR. She does tell a lie with an admirable countenance, that is true enough.


LOUISA. What ails you, Charlotte? What impertinence have I been guilty of that
you should find it necessary to humble me at such a rate? if you are happy,
long may you be so; but, surely, it can be no addition to it to make me
miserable.


CHARLOTTE. So serious! there must be some mystery in this -- Mr. Belcour will
you leave us together? You see I treat you with all the familiarity of an old
acquaintance already.


BELCOUR. Oh, by all means; pray command me. Miss Rusport, I Am your most
obedient! By your condescension in accepting those poor trifles, I am under
eternal obligations to you -- To you, Miss Dudley, I shall not offer a word on
that subject: you despise finery; you have a soul above it; I adore your
spirit; I was rather unprepared for meeting you here; but I shall hope for an
opportunity of making myself better known to you.


Exit. SCENE IX.
CHARLOTTE and LOUISA. CHARLOTTE. Louisa Dudley, you surprise me; I never saw
you act thus before: cannot you bear a little innocent raillery before the man
of your heart?


LOUISA. The man of my heart, Madam? Be assured I never was so visionary to
aspire to any man whom Miss Rusport honors with her choice.


CHARLOTTE. My choice, my dear! Why we are playing at cross purposes: how
entered it into your head that Mr. Belcour was the man of my choice?


LOUISA. Why didn't he present you with those diamonds?


CHARLOTTE. Well; perhaps he did -- and pray, Louisa, have you no diamonds?


LOUISA. I diamonds truly! Who should give me diamonds?


CHARLOTTE. Who, but this very gentleman: Apropos! here comes your brother --


SCENE X.
CHARLES enters. I insist upon referring our dispute to him: your sister and I,
Charles, have a quarrel; Belcour, the hero of your letter, has just left us --
some how or other, Louisa's bright eyes have caught him; and the poor fellow's
fallen desperately in love with her -- (don't interrupt me, hussy) -- Well,
that is excusable enough, you will say; but the jet of the story is, that this
hair-brained spark, who does nothing like other people, has given her the very
identical jewels, which you pledged for me to Mr. Stockwell; and will you
believe that this little demure slut made up a face, and squeezed out three or
four hypocritical tears, because I rallied her about it?


CHARLES. I Am all astonishment! Louisa, tell me without reserve, has Mr.
Belcour given you any diamonds?


LOUISA. None, upon my honor.


CHARLES. Has he made any professions to you?


LOUISA. He has, but altogether in a style so whimsical and capricious, that
the best which can be said of them is to tell you that they seemed more the
result of good spirits than good manners.


CHARLOTTE. Ay, ay, now the murder's out; he is in love with her, and she has no
very great dislike to him; trust to my observation, Charles, for that: as to
the diamonds, there is some mistake about them, and you must clear it up: three
minutes conversation with him will put every thing in a right train; go, go,
Charles, it is a brother's business; about it instantly; ten to one you will find
him over the way at Mr. Stockwell's.


CHARLES. I confess I Am impatient to have the case cleared up; I Will take your
advice, and find him out: good bye to you.


CHARLOTTE. Your servant; my life upon it you will find Belcour a man of honor.
Come, Louisa, let us adjourn to my dressing room; I Have a little private
business to transact with you, before the old lady comes up to tea, and
interrupts us.


END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
FULMER's house. FULMER and MRS. FULMER. FULMER. Patty, was not Mr. Belcour with
you?


MRS. FULMER. He was, and is now shut up in my chamber, in high expectation of
an interview with Miss Dudley; she is at present with her brother, and 'twas
with some difficulty I persuaded my hotheaded spark to wait 'till he has left
her.


FULMER. Well, child, and what then?


MRS. FULMER. Why then, Mr. Fulmer, I think it will be time for you and me to
steal a march, and be gone.


FULMER. So this is all the fruit of your ingenious project; a shameful
overthrow, or a sudden flight.


MRS. FULMER. Why, my project was a mere impromptu, and can at worst but
quicken our departure a few days; you know we had fairly outlived our credit
here, and a trip to Boulogne is no ways unseasonable. Nay, never droop, man --
Hark! hark! here is enough to bear charges.

showing a purse.
FULMER. Let me see, let me see: this weighs well; this is of the right sort:
why your West-Indian bled freely.


MRS. FULMER. But that is not all: look here! Here are the sparklers! showing
the jewels Now what do you think of my performances? Heh! a foolish scheme, is not
it? -- a silly woman --?


FULMER. Thou art a Judith, a Joan of Arc, and I Will march under thy banners,
girl, to the world's end: Come, let us begone; I Have little to regret; my
creditors may share the old books amongst them, they will have occasion for
philosophy to support their loss; they will find enough upon my shelves: The
world is my library; I read mankind -- Now, Patty, lead the way.


MRS. FULMER. Adieu, Belcour!


Exeunt. SCENE II.
CHARLES DUDLEY and LOUISA. CHARLES. Well, Louisa, I confess the force of what
you say: I accept Miss Rusport's bounty, and when you see my generous
Charlotte, tell her -- but have a care, there is a selfishness even in
gratitude, when it is too profuse; to be over thankful for any one favor, is
in effect to lay out for another; the best return I could make my benefactress
would be never to see her more.


LOUISA. I understand you.


CHARLES. We, that are poor, Louisa, should be cautious; for this reason I
would guard you against Belcour; at least till I can unravel the mystery of
Miss Rusport's diamonds; I was disappointed of finding him at Mr. Stockwell's,
and am now going in search of him again: he may intend honorably, but I
confess to you I am staggered; think no more of him, therefore, for the
present: of this be sure, while I have life, and you have honor, I will
protect you, or perish in your defense.


Exit. LOUISA. Think of him no more! Well, I Will obey; but if a wandering
uninvited thought should creep by chance into my bosom, must I not give the
harmless wretch a shelter? Oh! yes; the great artificer of the human heart
knows every thread he wove into its fabric, nor puts his work to harder uses
than it was made to bear: my wishes then, my guiltless ones I mean, are free;
How fast they spring within me at that sentence! Down, down, ye busy creatures!
Whither would you carry me? Ah! there is one amongst you, a forward, new
intruder, that in the likeness of an offending, generous man, grows into favor
with my heart. Fie, fie upon it! Belcour pursues, insults me; yet such is the
fatality of my condition, that what should rouse resentment, only calls up love.


SCENE III.
BELCOUR enters to her BELCOUR. Alone, by all that is happy!


LOUISA. Ah!


BELCOUR. Oh! shriek not, start not, stir not, loveliest creature! but let me
kneel, and gaze upon your beauties.


LOUISA. Sir, Mr. Belcour, rise! What is it you do?


BELCOUR. See, I obey you; mould me as you will, behold your ready servant! New
to your country, ignorant of your manners, habits, and desires, I put myself
into your hands for instruction; make me only such as you can like yourself,
and I shall be happy.


LOUISA. I must not hear this, Mr. Belcour; go; should he, that parted from me
but this minute, now return, I tremble for the consequence.


BELCOUR. Fear nothing; let him come: I love you, Madam; he will find it hard to
make me unsay that.


LOUISA. You terrify me; your impetuous temper frightens me; you know my
situation; it is not generous to pursue me thus.


BELCOUR. True; I do know your situation, your real one, Miss Dudley, and am
resolved to snatch you from it; 'twill be a meritorious act; the old Captain
shall rejoice; Miss Rusport shall be made happy; and even he, even your beloved
brother, with whose resentment you threaten me, shall in the end applaud and
thank me: Come, you are a dear enchanting girl, and I Am determined not to live
a minute longer without thee.


LOUISA. Hold, are you mad? I see you are a bold, assuming man, and know not
where to stop.


BELCOUR. Who that beholds such beauty can? By Heaven, you put my blood into a
flame. Provoking girl! is it within the stretch of my fortune to content you?
What is it you can further ask that I am not ready to grant?


LOUISA. Yes, with the same facility that you bestowed upon me Miss Rusport's
diamonds. For shame! for shame! was that a manly story?


BELCOUR. So! so! these devilish diamonds meet me every where -- Let me perish
if I meant you any harm: Oh! I could tear my tongue out for saying a word about
the matter.


LOUISA. Go to her then, and contradict it; till that is done, my reputation is
at stake.


BELCOUR. Her reputation! Now she has got upon that, she will go on for ever. --
What is there I will not do for your sake? I will go to Miss Rusport.


LOUISA. Do so; restore her own jewels to her, which I suppose you kept back
for the purpose of presenting others to her of a greater value; but for the
future, Mr. Belcour, when you would do a galant action to that lady, don't let
it be at my expense.


BELCOUR. I see where she points: she is willing enough to give up Miss
Rusport's diamonds, now she finds she shall be a gainer by the exchange. Be it
so! it is what I wished. -- Well, Madam, I will return Miss Rusport her own
jewels, and you shall have others of tenfold their value.


LOUISA. No, Sir, you err most widely; it is my good opinion, not my vanity,
which you must bribe.


BELCOUR. Why, what the devil would she have now? -- Miss Dudley, it is my wish
to obey and please you, but I have some apprehension that we mistake each other.


LOUISA. I think we do: tell me, then, in few words, what it is you aim at.


BELCOUR. In few words, then, and in plain honesty, I must tell you, so
entirely am I captivated with you, that had you but been such as it would have
become me to have called my wife, I had been happy in knowing you by that name;
as it is, you are welcome to partake my fortune, give me in return your person,
give me pleasure, give me love; free, disencumber'd, antimatrimonial love.


LOUISA. Stand off, and let me never see you more.


BELCOUR. Hold, hold, thou dear, tormenting, tantalizing girl! Upon my knees I
swear you shall not stir till you have consented to my bliss.


LOUISA. Unhand me, Sir: O Charles! protect me, rescue me, redress me.


Exit. SCENE IV.
CHARLES DUDLEY enters. CHARLES. How Is this? Rise, villain, and defend yourself.


BELCOUR. Villain!


CHARLES The man who wrongs that lady is a villain -- Draw!


BELCOUR. Never fear me, young gentleman; brand me for a coward, if I baulk you.


CHARLES. Yet hold! Let me not be too hasty: your name, I think, is Belcour?


BELCOUR. Well, Sir.


CHARLES. How is it, Mr. Belcour, you have done this mean, unmanly wrong;
beneath the mask of gener^^ity to g^ve this fatal stab to our domestic peace?
Your might have had my thanks, my blessing: take my defiance (...) Dudley
speaks to you, the brother, the pr^tect^^ of that i^jur'd lady.


BELCOUR. The brother? Give yourself a (...) title.


CHARLES. What is it you mean?


BELCOUR. Come, come, I know both her and you: I found you, Sir, (but how or
why I know not) in the good graces of Miss Rusport -- (yes, color at the
named) I gave you no disturbance there, never broke (...) upon you ^n that ^^ch
and plenteous quarter; but, when I could have blasted all your projects with a
word, spared you, in foolish pity spared you, nor roused her from the fond
credulity in which your artifice had lulled her.


CHARLES. No, Sir, nor boasted to her of the splendid present you had made my
poor Louisa; the (...), Mr. Bel^our. How was that? What can you plead to that
arraignment?


BELCOUR. You question me too late, (...) villain never met before* had you
^^quir^d (...) you uttered that rash word, you ^^ght have (...) or me a mortal
error: now, Sir, I neither give nor take an explanation; so, come on! They
(...).


SCENE V.
LOUISA, and afterward O'FLAHERTY. LOUISA. Hold, hold, for Heaven's fake hold!
Charles! Mr. Belcour! Help! Sir, Sir, make haste, they will murder one another.


O'FLAHERTY. Hell and confusion! What Is all this uproar for? Cannot you leave
off cutting one another's throats, and mind what the poor girl says to you?
You Have done a notable thing, hav'n't you, both, to put her into such a flurry?
I think, of my conscience, she is the most frighted of the three.


CHARLES. Dear Louisa, recollect yourself; why did you interfere? It Is in your
cause.


BELCOUR. Now could I kill him for caressing her.


O'FLAHERTY. O Sir, your most obedient! You are the gentleman I had the honor
of meeting here before; you was then running off at full speed like a Calmuck,
now you are tilting and driving like a Bedlamite with this lad here, that seems
as mad as yourself: It Is pity but your country had a little more employment for
you both.


BELCOUR. Mr. Dudley, when you have recovered the lady, you know where I am to be
found.


Exit. O'FLAHERTY. Well then, cannot you stay where you are, and that will save
the trouble of looking after you? Yon volatile fellow thinks to give a man the
meeting by getting out of his way: by my soul it is a round-about method that of
his. But I think he called you Dudley: Hark'e, young man, are you son of my
friend the old Captain?


CHARLES. I am. Help me to convey this lady to her chamber, and I shall be more
at leisure to answer your questions.


O'FLAHERTY. Ay will I: come along, pretty one; if you're had wrong done you,
young man, you need look no further for a second, Dennis O'Flaherty's your man
for that; but never draw your sword before a woman, Dudley; damn it, never
while you live draw your sword before a woman.


Exeunt. SCENE VI.
LADY RUSPORT's House. LADY RUSPORT and SERVANT. SERVANT. An elderly gentleman,
who says his name is Varland, desires leave to wait on your ladyship.


LADY RUSPORT. Show him in; the very man I wish to see: Varland; he was Sir
Oliver's solicitor, and privy to all his affairs; he brings some good tidings;
some fresh mortgage, or another bond come to light; they start up every day.
VARLAND enters. Mr. Varland, I Am glad to see you; you're heartily welcome,
honest Mr. Varland; you and I havn't met since our late irreparable loss: how
have you passed your time this age?


VARLAND. Truly, my lady, ill enough: I thought I must have followed good Sir
Oliver.


LADY RUSPORT. Alack-a-day, poor man! Well, Mr. Varland, you find me here
overwhelmed with trouble and fatigue; torn to pieces with a multiplicity of
affairs; a great fortune poured upon me unsought for and unexpected: 'twas my
good father's will and pleasure it should be so, and I must submit.


VARLAND. Your ladyship inherits under a will made in the year forty-five,
immediately after Captain Dudley's marriage with your sister.


LADY RUSPORT. I do so, Mr. Varland; I do so.


VARLAND. I well remember it; I engrossed every syllable; but I am surprised to
find your ladyship see so little store by this vast accession.


LADY RUSPORT. Why you know, Mr. Varland, I am a moderate woman; ^ had enough
before; a small matter satisfies me; and Sir Stephen Rusport (Heaven be his
portion!) took care I shoudn't want that.


VARLAND. Very true; very true, he did so; and I am overjoyed at finding your
ladyship in this disposition; for, truth to say, I was not without apprehension
the news I have to communicate would have been of some prejudice to your
ladyship's tranquillity.


LADY RUSPORT. News, Sir! What news have you for me?


VARLAND. Nay, nothing to alarm you; a trifle, in your present way of thinking:
I have a will of Sir Oliver's you have never seen.


LADY RUSPORT. A will! Impossible! How came you by it, pray?


VARLAND. I drew it up, at his command, in his last illness: it will save you a
world of trouble: it gives his whole estate from you to his grandson, Charles
Dudley.


LADY RUSPORT. To Dudley? His estate to Charles Dudley? I cannot support it! I
shall faint! You Have killed me, you vile man! I never shall survive it!


VARLAND. Lock'e there now: I protest, I thought you would have rejoiced at
being clear of the encumbrance.


LADY RUSPORT. It Is false; it is all a forgery, concerted between you and
Dudley; why else did I never hear of it before?


VARLAND. Have patience, my lady, and I Will tell you: By Sir Oliver's direction,
I was to deliver this will into no hands but his grandson Dudley's: the young
gentleman happened to be then in (...), I (...) thither in scatch of him; the
hurry and (...) of my journey brought on a fever by the way, wh^^ confined me
^n extreme danger for several days, (...), found your a (...), and am now
direct (...), doubtless, I (...), and (...) commission.


(...). Dudley then, a^ yet, ^^^ws nothing of this will?


VARLAND Nothing; that secret r^^ts with me.


LADY RUSPORT. A thought occur^^ by this f^llow'^ (...) of his conscience, I
should (...), Mr. Varland, if it is as you say, I must submit. I was somewhat
flurried at first, and (...) myself; I ask your pardon: this is no place to
talk of business; st^p with me into my room; we will there (...) the will, and
resolve accordingly -- Oh! would your fever had you, and I had your paper.


Exeunt. SCENE VII.
MISS RUSPORT, CHARLES, and O'FLAHERTY. CHARLOTTE. So, so! My lady and her
lawyer have retired to close confabulation: now, M^ster, if you are the
generous man I take you for, grant me o^e favor.


O'FLAHERTY. Faith will I, and (...) ^^vour y^u ask, look y^^ (...) my heart to
refuse it.


CHARLES. C^u'd this man's (...) eloquent would he (...)


CHARLOTTE. Plant yourself th^^ (...) moments, (...) ^^yond; and, (...) they
(...) a moment, till your friend here can make good his retreat down the
back-stairs.


O'FLAHERTY. A word to the wise! I Am an old campaigner; make the best use of
your time; and trust me for tying the old cat up to the picket.


CHARLOTTE. Hush! hush! not so loud.


CHARLES. It Is the office of a sentinel, Major, you have undertaken, rather
than that of a field-officer.


O'FLAHERTY. It Is the office of a friend, my dear boy; and, therefore, no
disgrace to a general.


Exit. SCENE VIII.
CHARLES and CHARLOTTE. CHARLOTTE. Well, Charles, will you commit yourself to
me for a few minutes?


CHARLES. Most readily; and let me, before one goes by, tender you the only
payment I can ever make for your abundant generosity.


CHARLOTTE. Hold, hold! so vile a thing as money must not come between us. What
shall I say! O Charles! O Dudley! What difficulties have you thrown upon me!
Familiarly as we have lived, I shrink at what I Am doing; and, anxiously as I
have sought this opportunity, my fears almost persuade me to abandon it.


CHARLES. You alarm me!


CHARLOTTE. Your looks and actions have been so distant, and at this moment are
so deterring, that, was it not for the hope that delicacy, and not disgust,
inspires this conduct in you, I should sink with shame and apprehension; but
time presses; and I must speak; and plainly too -- Was you now in possession of
your grandfather's estate, as justly you ought to be, and was you inclined to
seek a companion for life, should you, or should you not, in that case, honor
at your unworthy Charlotte with your choice?


CHARLES. My unworthy Charl^tte! So (...) me Heaven, there is not a
circumstance on (...) disgrace, (...) upon a generous ben^^actress; th^^vishly
to steal into an open, unreserved, (...) heart, O Charlotte! dear, u^h^ppy
(...).


CHARLOTTE. Nay, now you rate too highly the poor advantages fortune alone
(...) otherwise c^^ld we (...) dear Charles, I have enough; (...) that enough
still more by sharing it with me: sole heiress of my father's fortune, a short
time will put it in my disp^sal; in the mean while you will be sent (...); let
us prevent a separation, by setting out th^^ very night for that happy country
where marriage still is free: carry me this moment to Belcour's lodgings.


CHARLES. Belcour'^^ -- The (...), there is m^^der ^n it, bloody (...)


CHARLOTTE. Do You pause? Put me into his hands, while you prov^^^ the means for
our escape: he is the most generous, the most honorable of men.


CHARLES. Honorable! m^st honorable!


CHARLOTTE. Can you (...) it? Do you (...)? Have you (...) your letter? Why,
Belcour 'twas that prompted me to that proposal, that promised to supply the
means, that nobly offered his unasked assistance --


O'FLAHERTY enters hastily. O'FLAHERTY. Run, run, for holy St. Antony's sake,
to horse and away! The conscience is broke up, and the old lady advances upon a
full piedmontese trot, within pistol-shot of your encampment.


CHARLOTTE. Here, here, down the back-stairs! O, Charles, remember me!


CHARLES. Farewell! Now, now I feel myself a coward.


Exit. CHARLOTTE. What does he mean?


O'FLAHERTY. Ask no questions, but be gone: she has cooled the lad's courage,
and wonders he feels like a coward. There Is a damned deal of mischief brewing
between this hyena and her lawyer: egad I Will step behind this screen and
listen* a good soldier must sometimes fight in ambush as well as open field

retires.
SCENE IX.
LADY RUSPORT and VARLAND. LADY RUSPORT. Sure I heard somebody. Hark! No; only
the servants going down the back stairs. Well, Mr. Varland, I think then we are
agreed; you will take my money; and your conscience no longer stands in your way.


VARLAND. Your father was my benefactor; his will ought to be sacred; but, if I
commit it to the flames, how will he be the wiser? Dudley, it is true, has done
me no harm; but five thousand pounds will do me much good; so, in short, Madam,
I take your offer; I will confer with my clerk, who witnessed the will; and
tomorrow morning put it into your hands, upon condition you put five thousand
good pounds into mine.


LADY RUSPORT. It Is a bargain; I Will be ready for you: farewell.


Exit. VARLAND. Let me consider -- Five thousand pounds prompt payment for
destroying this scrap of paper, not worth five farthings; it is a fortune easily
earned; yes, and it is another man's fortune easily thrown away: it is a good
round sum to be paid down at once for a bribe, but it is a damned rogue's trick
in me to take it.


O'FLAHERTY. aside. So, so! this fellow speaks truth to himself, though he lies
to other people -- but hush!


VARLAND. It Is breaking the trust of my benefactor; that is a foul crime, but
he is dead, and can never reproach me with it: and it is robbing young Dudley of
his lawful patrimony, that is a hard case, but he is alive and knows nothing of
the matter.


O'FLAHERTY. aside. These lawyers are so used to bring off the rogueries of
others, that they are never without an excuse for their own.


VARLAND. Were I assured now that Dudley would give me half the money for
producing this will, that Lady Rusport does for concealing it, I would deal
with him, and be an honest man at half price; I wish every gentleman of my
profession could lay his hand on his heart and say the same thing.


O'FLAHERTY. A bargain, old gentleman! Nay, never start, nor stare, you was not
afraid of your own conscience, never be afraid of me.


VARLAND. Of you, Sir; who are you, pray?


O'FLAHERTY. I Will tell you who I am: you seem to wish to be honest, but want
the heart to set about it; now I am the very man in the world to make you so;
for if you do not give me up that paper this very instant, by the soul of me,
fellow, I will not leave one whole bone in your skin that shall not be broken.


VARLAND. What right have you, pray, to take this paper from me?


O'FLAHERTY. What right have you, pray, to keep it from young Dudley? I don't
know what it contains, but I am apt to think it will be safer in my hands than
in yours; therefore give it me without more words, and save yourself a
beating: do now; you had best.


VARLAND. Well, Sir, I may as well make a grace of necessity. There! I have
acquitted my conscience, at the expense of five thousand pounds.


O'FLAHERTY. Five thousand pounds! Mercy upon me! When there are such
temptations in the law, can we wonder if some of the corpse are a disgrace to it?


VARLAND. Well, you have got the paper; if you are an honest man, give it to
Charles Dudley.


O'FLAHERTY. An honest man! look at me friend, I am a soldier, this is not the
livery of a knave; I am an Irishman, honey, mine is not the country of
dishonor. Now, Sirrah, be gone; if you enter these doors, or give Lady Rusport
the least item of what has passed, I will cut off both your ears, and rob the
pillory of its due.


VARLAND. I wish I was once fairly out of his sight.


Exeunt. SCENE X.
A Room in STOCKWELL's House. STOCKWELL. I must disclose myself to Belcour;
this noble instance of his generosity, which old Dudley has been relating,
allies me to him at once; concealment becomes too painful; I shall be proud to
own him for my son -- But see, he is here.


BELCOUR enters and throws himself on a sopha. BELCOUR. O my cursed tropical
constitution! would to Heaven I had been dropped upon the snows of Lapland, and
never felt the blessed influence of the Sun, so I had never burnt with these
inflammatory passions!


STOCKWELL. So, so, you seem disordered, Mr. Belcour.


BELCOUR. Disordered, Sir! why did I ever quit the soil in which I grew; what
evil planet drew me from that warm sunny region, where naked nature walks
without disguise, into this cold contriving artificial country?


STOCKWELL. Come, Sir, you have met a rascal; what o'that? general conclusions
are illiberal.


BELCOUR. No, Sir, I Have met reflection by the way; I Have come from folly, noise
and fury, and met a silent monitor -- Well, well, a villian! 'twas not to be
pardoned -- pray never mind me, Sir.


STOCKWELL. Alas! my heart bleeds for him.


BELCOUR. And yet I might have heard him: now plague upon that blundering
Irishman for coming in as he did; the hurry of the deed might paliate the
event: deliberate execution has less to plead -- Mr. Stockwell, I am bad
company to you.


STOCKWELL. Oh, Sir; make no excuse. I think you have not found me forward to
pry into the secrets of your pleasures and pursuits; it is not my disposition;
but there are times, when want of curiosity, would be want of friendship.


BELCOUR. Ah, Sir, mine is a case wherein you and I shall never think alike;
the punctilious rules, by which I am bound, are not to be found in your
ledgers, nor will pass current in the compting-house of a trader.


STOCKWELL. It Is very well, Sir; if you think I can render you any service; it
may be worth your trial to confide in me; if not, your secret is safer in your
own bosom.


BELCOUR. That sentiment demands my confidence: pray, sit down by me. You must
know, I have an affair of honor on my hands with young Dudley; and though I put
up with no man's insult, yet I wish to take away no man's life.


STOCKWELL. I know the young man, and am appris'd of your generosity to his
father, what can have bred a quarrel between you?


BELCOUR. A foolish passion on my side, and a haughty provocation on his. There
is a girl, Mr. Stockwell, whom I have unfortunately seen, of most uncommon
beauty; she has withal an air of so much natural modesty, that had I not had
good assurance of her being an attainable wanton, I declare I should as soon
have thought of attempting the chastity of Diana.


SERVANT enters. STOCKWELL. Hey-day, do you interrupt us?


SERVANT. Sir, there is an Irish gentleman will take no denial; he says he must
see Mr. Belcour directly, upon business of the last consequence.


BELCOUR. Admit him; it is the Irish officer that parted us, and brings me young
Dudley's challenge; I should have made a long story of it, and he will tell it
you in three words.


O'FLAHERTY enters. O'FLAHERTY. Save you, my dear; and you, Sir! I have a
little bit of a word in private for you.


BELCOUR. Pray deliver your commands; this gentleman is my intimate friend.


O'FLAHERTY. Why then, Ensign Dudley will be glad to measure swords with you,
yonder at the London Tavern, in Bishopsgate-Street, at nine o'clock -- you know
the place.


BELCOUR. I do; and shall observe the appointment.


O'FLAHERTY. Will you be of the party, Sir? We shall want a fourth hand.


STOCKWELL. Savage as the customed, I close with that proposal, and though I am
not (...) quarrel. I shall (...) justice of it; and (...) ^ence.


O'FLAHERTY. Sir, you're a gentleman of honor, and I shall be glad of being
better known (...) ha^^'e^, Belcour, I had like to he^^ (...) part of my (...):
there is the (...) it over faith; it is (...) the (...) can p^t you to death
with a safe conscience, and when he has done that job for you, let it be a
warning how you attempt the sister of (...).


BELCOUR. The sister?


O'FLAHERTY. Ay, the sister: (...) English, (...) all one; you (...) ley, that
(...) by St. Patrick, (...) b^^cour, to (...) from her, when there are so many
to be met in this town, who have disposed of th^ir'^ to you hand^.

(...)
STOCKWELL. Why I am thunderstruck! what is it you have done, and what is the
shocking business in which I have engaged! If I understood him (...) young
Dudley you have been attempting* y^u (...) to me of a professed wanton; the girl he
speaks of has beauty enough indeed to inflame your desires, but she has honor,
innocence and simplicity to awe the most licentious passion; if you have (...)
that, Mr. Belcour, I renounce you, I abandon you, I forswear all fellowship or
friendship with you for ever.


BELCOUR. Have patience for a moment; we do indeed speak of the same person,
but she is not innocent, she is not young Dudley's sister.


STOCKWELL. Astonishing! who told you this?


BELCOUR. The woman where she lodges; the person who put me on the pursuit and
contrived our meetings.


STOCKWELL. What woman? What person?


BELCOUR. Fulmer her name is: I warrant you I did not proceed without good
grounds.


STOCKWELL. Fulmer, Fulmer? Who waits? a Servant enters send Mr. Stukely hither
directly; I begin to see my way into this dark transaction: Mr. Belcour, Mr.
Belcour, your are no match for the cunning and contrivances of this intriguing
town. Stukely enters prithee, Stukely, what is the name of the woman and her
husband, who were stopped upon suspicion of selling stolen diamonds at our
next-door neighbor's, the jeweller?


STUKELY. Fulmer.


STOCKWELL. So!


BELCOUR. Can you procure me a sight of those diamonds?


STUKELY. They are now in my hand; I was desired to show them to Mr. Stockwell.


STOCKWELL. Give 'em to me: what do I see? As I live, the very diamonds Miss
Rusport sent hither, and which I entrusted to you to return.


BELCOUR. Yes, but I betrayed that trust, and gave 'em Mrs. Fulmer to present
to Miss Dudley.


STOCKWELL. With a view no doubt to bribe her to compliance.


BELCOUR. I own it.


STOCKWELL. For shame, for shame? and 'twas this woman's intelligence you
relied upon for Miss Dudley's character?


BELCOUR. I thought she knew her; by Heaven, I would have died sooner than have
insulted a woman of virtue, or a man of honor.


STOCKWELL. I think you would, but mark the danger of licentious courses; you
are betrayed, robbed, abused, and but for this providential discovery in a fair
way of being sent out of the world with all your follies on your head -- Dear
Stukely, go to my neighbor, tell him I have an owner for the jewels, and beg
him to carry the people under custody to the London Tavern, and wait for me
there. Exit Stukely.

I fear the law does not provide a punishment to reach the villiany of these
people; but how in the name of wonder could you take any thing on the word of
such an informer?


BELCOUR. Because I had not lived long enough in your country to know how few
informers words are to be taken: persuaded however as I was of Miss Dudley's
guilt, I must own to you I was staggered with the appearance of such innocence,
especially when I saw her admitted into Miss Rusport's company.


STOCKWELL. Good Heaven! did you meet her at, Miss Rusport's, and could you
doubt her being a woman of reputation?


BELCOUR. By you perhaps such a mistake could not have been made, but in a
perfect stranger, I hope it is venial: I did not know what artifices young
Dudley might have used to conceal her character; I did not know what disgrace
attended the detection of it.


STOCKWELL. I see it was a trap laid for you, which you have narrowly escaped;
you addressed a woman of honor with all the loose incense of a profane
admirer, and you have drawn upon you the resentment of a man of honor who
thinks himself bound to protect her: Well, Sir, you must atone for this mistake.


BELCOUR. To the lady the most penitent submission I can make is justly due,
but in the execution of an act of justice it never shall be said my soul was
swayed by the least particle of fear: I have received a challenge from her
brother; now though I would give my fortune, almost my life itself, to purchase
her happiness, yet I cannot abate her one scruple of my honor; I have been
branded with the name of villain.


STOCKWELL. Ay, Sir, you mistook her character and he mistook yours; error
begets error.


BELCOUR. Villain, Mr. Stockwell, is a harsh word.


STOCKWELL. It is a harsh word, and should be unsaid.


BELCOUR Come, come, it shall be unsaid.


STOCKWELL. Or else what follows? why the sword is drawn and to heal the wrongs
you have done to the reputation of the sister, you make an honorable amends by
murdering the brother.


BELCOUR. Murdering!


STOCKWELL. It Is thus religion writes and speaks the word; in the vocabulary of
modern honor there is no such term -- But come, I don't despair of satisfying
the one without alarming the other; that done, I have a discovery to unfold
that you will then I hope be fitted to receive.


END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I. The London Tavern.
O'FLAHERTY, STOCKWELL, CHARLES, and BELCOUR. O'FLAHERTY. GEntlemen, well met!
you understand each other's minds, and as I see you have brought nothing but
your swords, you may set to without any further ceremony.


STOCKWELL. You will not find us backward in any worthy cause; but before we
proceed any further, I would ask this young gentleman, whether he has any
explanation to require of Mr. Belcour.


CHARLES. Of Mr. Belcour none; his actions speak for themselves: but to you,
sir, I would fain propose one question.


STOCKWELL. Name it.


CHARLES. How is it, Mr. Stockwell, that I meet a man of your character on this
ground?


STOCKWELL. I will answer you directly, and my answer shall not displease you.
I come hither in defense of the reputation of Miss Dudley, to redress the
injuries of an innocent young lady.


O'FLAHERTY. By my soul the man knows he is to fight, only he mistakes which
side he is to be of.


STOCKWELL. You are about to draw your sword to refute a charge against your
sister's honor; you would do well, if there were no better means within reach;
but the proofs of her innocence are lodged in our bosoms, and if we fall, you
destroy the evidence that most effectually can clear her fame.


CHARLES. How Is that, Sir?


STOCKWELL. This gentleman could best explain it to you, but you have given him
an undeserved name that seals his lips against you: I am not under the same
inhibition, and if your anger can keep cool for a few minutes, I desire I may
call in two witnesses, who will solve all difficulties at once. Here, waiter!
bring those people in that are without.


O'FLAHERTY. Out upon it, what need is there for so much talking about the
matter; cannot you settle your differences first, and dispute about 'em
afterward?


FULMER and Mrs. FULMER brought in. CHARLES. Fulmer and his wife in custody?


STOCKWELL. Yes, Sir, these are your honest landlord and landlady, now in
custody for defrauding this gentleman of certain diamonds intended to have been
presented to your sister. Be so good, Mrs. Fulmer, to inform the company why
you so grossly scandalized the reputation of an innocent lady, by persuading
Mr. Belcour that Miss Dudley was not the sister, but the mistress, of this
gentleman.


Mrs. FULMER. Sir, I don't know what right you have to question me, and I shall
not answer till I see occasion.


STOCKWELL. Had you been as silent heretofore, Madam, it would have saved you
some trouble; but we don't want your confession. This letter, which you wrote
to Mr. Belcour, will explain your design; and these diamonds, which of right
belong to Miss Rusport, will confirm your guilt: the law, Mrs. Fulmer, will
make you speak, though I cannot. Constable, take charge of your prisoners.


FULMER. Hold a moment: Mr. Stockwell, you are a gentleman that knows the
world, and a member of parliament; we shall not attempt to impose upon you; we
know we are open to the law, and we know the utmost it can do against us. Mr.
Belcour has been ill used to be sure, and so has Miss Dudley; and, for my own
part, I always condemned the plot as a very foolish plot, but it was a child of
Mrs. Fulmer's brain, and she would not be put out of conceit with it.


Mrs. FULMER. You are a very foolish man, Mr. Fulmer, so prithee hold your
tongue.


FULMER. Therefore, as I was saying, if you send her to Bride-well, it will not be
amiss; and if you give her a little wholesome discipline, she may be the better
for that too: but for me, Mr. Stockwell, who am a man of letters, I must
beseech you, Sir, not to bring any disgrace upon my profession.


STOCKWELL. It Is you, Mr. Fulmer, not I, that disgrace your profession,
therefore begone, nor expect that I will betray the interests of mankind so far
as to show favor to such incendiaries. Take 'em away; I blush to think such
wretches should have the power to set two honest men at variance.


Exeunt Fulmer, etc. CHARLES. Mr. Belcour, we have mistaken each other; let us
exchange forgiveness. I am convinced you intended no affront to my sister, and
I ask your pardon for the expression I was betrayed into.


BELCOUR. It Is enough, Sir; the error began on my side, and was Miss Dudley
here, I would be the first to atone.


STOCKWELL. Let us all adjourn to my house, and conclude the evening like
friends: you will find a little entertainment ready for you; and, if I am not
mistaken, Miss Dudley and her father will make part of our company. Come,
Major, do you consent?


O'FLAHERTY. Most readily, Mr. Stockwell; a quarrel well made up, is better
than a victory hardly earned. Give me your hand, Belcour; of my conscience you
are too honest for the country you live in. And now, my dear lad, since peace
is concluded on all sides, I have a discovery to make to you, which you must
find out for yourself, for deuce take me if I rightly comprehend it, only that
your aunt Rusport is in a conspiracy against you, and a vile rogue of a lawyer,
whose name I forget, at the bottom of it.


CHARLES. What conspiracy? Dear Major, recollect yourself.


O'FLAHERTY. By my soul, I Have no faculty at recollecting myself; but I Have a
paper somewhere about me, that will tell you more of the matter than I can.
When I get to the merchant's, I will endeavor to find it.


CHARLES. Well, it must be in your own way; but I confess you hare thoroughly
roused my curiosity.


Exeunt. SCENE II.
STOCKWELL's House. Capt. DUDLEY, LOUISA, and STUKELY. DUDLEY. And are those
wretches, Fulmer and his wife, in safe custody?


STUKELY. They are in good hands, I accompanied them to the Tavern, where your
son was to be, and then went in search of you. You may be sure Mr. Stockwell
will enforce the law against them as far as it will go.


DUDLEY. What mischief might their cursed machinations have produced, but for
this timely discovery!


LOUISA. Still I am terrified; I tremble with apprehension lest Mr. Belcour's
impetuosity and Charles's spirit should not wait for an explanation, but drive
them both to extremes, before the mistake can be unravelled.


STUKELY. Mr. Stockwell is with them, Madam, and you have nothing to fear; you
cannot suppose he would ask you hither for any other purpose, but to celebrate
their reconciliation and to receive Mr. Belcour's atonement.


DUDLEY. No, no, Louisa, Mr. Stockwell's honor and discretion guard us against
all danger or offense; he well knows we will endure no imputation on the honor
of our family, and he certainly has invited us to receive satisfaction on that
score in an amicable way.


LOUISA. Would to Heaven they were returned!


STUKELY. You may expect them every minute; and see Madam, agreeable to your
wish, they are here.


Exit. SCENE III.
CHARLES enters, and afterward STOCKWELL and O'FLAHERTY. LOUISA. O Charles, O
brother, how could you serve me so how could you tell me you was going to Lady
Rusport's and then set out with a design of fighting Mr. Belcour? But where is
he; where is your antagonist?


STOCKWELL. Captain, I am proud to see you, an you Miss Dudley, do me
particular honor: We have been adjusting, Sir, a very extraordinary and
dangerous mistake, which I take for granted my friend Stukely has explained to
you.


DUDLEY. He has; I have too good an opinion of Mr. Belcour to believe he could
be guilty of a designed affront to an innocent girl, and I am much too well
acquainted with your character to suppose you could abet him in such design; I
have no doubt therefore all things will be set to rights in very few words when
we have the pleasure of seeing Mr. Belcour.


STOCKWELL. He has only stepped into the compting-house and will wait upon you
directly: You will not be over strict, Madam, in weighing Mr. Belcour's conduct
to the minutest scruple; his manners, passions and opinions are not as yet
affimilated to this climate; he comes amongst you a new character, an
inhabitant of a new world and both hospitality as well as pity recommend him to
our indulgence.


SCENE IV.
BELCOUR enters, bows to Miss DUDLEY. BELCOUR. I am happy and ashamed to see
you; no man in his senses would offend you; I forfeited mine and erred against
the light of the sun, when I overlooked your virtues; but your beauty was
predominant and hid them from my sight; I now perceive I was the dupe of a most
improbable report, and humbly entreat your pardon.


LOUISA. Think no more of it; 'twas a mistake.


BELCOUR. My life has been composed of little else; 'twas founded in mystery
and has continued in error: I was once given to hope, Mr. Stockwell, that you
was to have delivered me from these difficulties, but either I do not deserve
your confidence, or I was deceived in my expectations.


STOCKWELL. When this lady has confirmed your pardon, I shall hold you
deserving of my confidence.


LOUISA. That was granted the moment it was asked.


BELCOUR. To prove my title to his confidence honor me so far with yours as
to allow me a few minutes conversation in private with you.

She turns to her father
DUDLEY. By all means, Louisa; come, Mr. Stockwell, let us go into another room.


CHARLES. And now, major O'Flaherty, I claim your promise of a sight of the
paper, that is to unravel this conspiracy of my aunt Rusport's: I think I have
waited with great patience.


O'FLAHERTY. I have been endeavoring to call to mind what it was I overheard;
I Have got the paper and will give you the best account I can of the whole
transaction.


Exeunt. SCENE. V.
BELCOUR and LOUISA. BELCOUR. Miss Dudley, I have solicited this audience to
repeat to you my penitence and confusion: How shall I atone? What reparation
can I make to you and virtue?


LOUISA. To me there is nothing due, nor any thing demanded of you but your more
favorable opinion for the future, if you should chance to think of me: Upon
the part of virtue I Am not empowered to speak, but if hereafter, as you range
through life, you should surprise her in the person of some wretched female, poor
as myself and not so well protected, enforce not your advantage, complete not
your licentious triumph, but raise her, rescue her from shame and sorrow, and
reconcile her to herself again.


BELCOUR. I will, I will; by bearing your idea ever present in my thoughts,
virtue shall keep an advocate within me; but tell me, loveliest, when you
pardon the offense, can you, all pe^fect as you are, approve of the offender?
As I now cease to view you in that false light I lately did, can you, and in
the fullness of your bounty will you, cease also to reflect upon the libertine
addresses I have paid you, and look upon me as your reformed, your rational
admirer?


LOUISA. Are sudden reformations apt to last; and how can I be sure the first
fair face you meet will not ensnare affections so unsteady, and that I shall
not lose you lightly as I gained you?


BELCOUR. Because though you conquered me by surprise, I have no inclination to
rebel; because since the first moment that I saw you, every instant has
improved you in my eyes, because by principle as well as passion I am
unalterably yours, in short there are ten thousand causes for my love to you,
would to Heaven I could plant one in your soft bosom that might move you to
return it!


LOUISA. Nay, Mr. Belcour. --


BELCOUR. I know I am not worthy your regard; I know I Am tainted with a
thousand faults, sick of a thousand follies, but there is a healing virtue in
your eyes that makes recovery certain; I cannot be a villain in your arms.


LOUISA. That you can never be; whomever you shall honor with your choice, my
life upon it that woman will be happy; it is not from suspicion that I hesitate,
it is from honor; it is the severity of my condition, it is the world that never
will interpret fairly in our case.


BELCOUR. Oh, what am I, and who in this wide would concerns himself for such a
nameless, such a friendless th^^* as I am? I set, Miss Dudley, (...) not yet
(...) your pardon.


LOUISA. Nay, that you are in full possession of.


BELCOUR. Oh, seal it with your hand then, loveliest of women, confirm it with
your heart; make me honorably happy, and crown your penitent not with your
pardon only, but your love.


LOUISA. My love! --


BELCOUR. By Heaven my soul is conquered with your virtues more than my eyes
are ravished with your beauty Oh, may this fo^^, this sensit^ve alarm be happy,
be a^^^^cious! Doubt not, deliberate not, delay (...). If happiness be the end
of life, why do we sup^a moment*


SCENE VI.
O'FLAHERTY enters, and afterward DUDLEY and CHARLES with STOCKWELL.
O'FLAHERTY. Joy, joy, joy! sing, dance, leap, laugh for joy! Have done making
love and fall down on your knees to every saint in the (...), for they are all
on your side and honest St. Patrick at the head of them.


CHARLES. O Louisa, such an event by the (...) chan^e in life we have
discovered a will of (...) grandfa^^er's made in his last illness, by which he
out of my Aunt Rusport with a small annuity, and leaves me heir to his whole
estate, with a fortune of fifteen thousand pounds to yourself.


LOUISA. What is it you tell me? O Sir, instruct me to support this unexpected
turn of fortune.

To her f^ther.
DUDLEY. Name not fortune; it is he work of providence, it is the justice of
Heaven that would not suffer innocence to be oppressed, nor your base aunt to
prosper in her cruelty and cunning.


A servant whispers Belcour, and he goes out. O'FLAHERTY. You shall pardon me,
Capt. Dudley, but you must not overlook St. Patrick neither, for by my soul if
he had not put it into my head to slip behind the screen when your righteous
aunt and the lawyer were plotting together, I don't see how you would ever have
come at the paper there, that Master Stockwell is reading.


DUDLEY. True my good friend, you are the father of this discovery, but how did
you contrive to get this will from the lawyer?


O'FLAHERTY. By force, my dear, the only way of getting any thing from a
lawyer's clutches.


STOCKWELL. Well, Major, when he brings his action of assault and battery
against you, the least Dudley can do is to defend you with the weapons you have
put into his hands.


CHARLES. That I am bound to do, and after the happiness I shall have in
sheltering a father's age from the vicissitudes of life, my next delight will
be in offering you an asylum in the bosom of your country.


O'FLAHERTY. And upon my soul, my dear, it is high time I was there, for it is
now thirty long years since I sat foot in my native country, and by the power
of St. Patrick I swear I think it is worth all the rest of the world put
together.


DUDLEY. Ay, Major, much about that time have I been heating the round of
service, and 'twere well for us both to give over; we have stood many a tough
gale and abundance of hard blows, but Charles shall lay us up in a little
private, but safe, harbor, where we'll rest from our labors, and peacefully
wind up the remainder of our days.


O'FLAHERTY. Agreed, and you may take it as a proof of my esteem, young man,
that Major O'Flaherty accepts a favor at your Bands, for by Heaven I Would sooner
starve, than say I thank you to the man I despise: But I believe you are an
honest lad, and I Am glad you have trounc'd the old cat, for on my conscience I
believe I must otherwise have married her myself to have let you in for a share
of her fortune.


STOCKWELL. Hey day, what is become of Belcour?


LOUISA. One of your servants called him out just now and seemingly on some
earnest occasion.


STOCKWELL. I hope, Miss Dudley, he has atoned to you as a gentleman ought.


LOUISA. Mr. Belcour, Sir, will always do what a gentleman ought, and in my
case I fear only you will think he has done too much.


STOCKWELL. What has he done; and what can be too much? Pray Heaven, it may be
as I wish!

aside.
DUDLEY. Let us hear it, child.


LOUISA. With confusion for my own unworthiness, I confess to you he has
offered me --


STOCKWELL. Himself.


LOUISA. It Is true.


STOCKWELL. Then I am happy; all my doubts, my cares are over, and I may own
him for my son. -- -- Why these are joyful tidings: come, my good friend,
assist me in disposing your lovely daughter to accept this returning prodigal;
he is no unprincipled, no hardened libertine; his love for you and virtue is
the same.


DUDLEY. 'Twere vile ingratitude in me to doubt his merit -- What says my child?


O'FLAHERTY. Begging your pardon now, it is a frivolous sort of a question, that
of yours; for you may see plainly enough by the young lady's looks, that she
says a great deal, though she speaks never a word.


CHARLES. Well, sister, I believe the Major has fairly interpreted the state of
your heart.


LOUISA. I own it; and what must that heart be, which love, honor and
beneficence like Mr. Belcour's can make no impression on?


STOCKWELL. I thank you: What happiness has this hour brought to pass!


O'FLAHERTY. Why don't we all sit down to supper then and make a night on it.


STOCKWELL. Hold, here comes Belcour.


SCENE VII.
BELCOUR introducing Miss RUSPORT. BELCOUR. Mr. Dudley, here is a fair refugee,
who properly comes under your protection; she is equipt for Scotland, but your
good fortune, which I have related to her, seems inclined to save you both the
journey -- Nay, Madam, never go back; you are amongst friends.


CHARLES. Charlotte!


CHARLOTTE. The same; that fond officious girl, that haunts you every where;
that persecuting spirit --


CHARLES. Say rather, that protecting angel; such you have been to me.


CHARLOTTE. O Charles, you have an honest, but proud heart.


CHARLES. Nay, chide me not, dear Charlotte.


BELCOUR. Seal up her lips then; she is an adorable girl; her arms are open to
you; and love and happiness are ready to receive you.


CHARLES. Thus then I claim my dear, my destined wife.

embracing her.
SCENE VIII.
Lady RUSPORT enters. Lady RUSPORT. Heyday! mighty fine! wife truly! mighty
well! kissing, embracing -- did ever any thing equal this? Why you shameless
hussy! -- But I will not condescend to waste a word upon you. -- You, Sir, you,
Mr. Stockwell, you fine, sanctified, fair-dealing man of conscience, is this
the principle you trade upon? Is this your neighbourly system, to keep a house
of reception for runaway daughters, and young beggarly fortune-hunters?


O'FLAHERTY. Be advised now, and don't put yourself in such a passion; we were
all very happy till you came.


Lady RUSPORT. Stand away, Sir; hav'nt I a reason to be in a passion?


O'FLAHERTY. Indeed, honey, and you have, if you knew all.


Lady RUSPORT. Come, Madam, I have found out your haunts; dispose yourself to
return home with me: young man, let me never see you within my doors again: Mr.
Stockwell, I shall report your behavior, depend on it.


STOCKWELL. Hold, Madam, I cannot consent to lose Miss Rusport's company this
evening, and I am persuaded you will not insist upon it; it is an unmotherly action
to interrupt your daughter's happiness in this manner, believe me it is.


Lady RUSPORT. Her happiness truly; upon my word! and I suppose it is an
unmotherly action to interrupt her ruin; for what but ruin must it be to marry
a beggar? I think my sister had a proof of that, Sir, when she made choice of
you.

To Captain Dudley.
DUDLEY. Don't be too lavish of your spirits, Lady Rusport.


O'FLAHERTY. By my soul you will have occasion for a sip of the cordial Elixir by
and bye.


STOCKWELL. It don't appear to me, Madam, that Mr. Dudley can be called a
beggar.


Lady RUSPORT. But it appears to me, Mr. Stockwell; I am apt to think a pair of
colors cannot furnish settlement quite sufficient for the heiress of Sir
Stephen Rusport.


CHARLOTTE. But a good estate in aid of a commission may do something.


Lady RUSPORT. A good estate, truly! where should he get a good estate pray?


STOCKWELL. Why suppose now a worthy old gentleman on his deathbed should have
taken it in mind to leave him one --


Lady RUSPORT. Hah! what is that you say?


O'FLAHERTY. O ho! you begin to smell a plot, do you?


STOCKWELL. Suppose there should be a paper in the world that runs thus -- "I
do hereby give and bequeath all my estates, real and personal, to Charles
Dudley, son of my late daughter Louisa, etc. etc. etc."


Lady RUSPORT. Why I am thunderstruck! by what contrivance, what villainy did
you get possession of that paper?


STOCKWELL. There was no villainy, Madam, in getting possession of it; the crime
was in concealing it, none in bringing it to light.


Lady RUSPORT. Oh, that cursed lawyer, Varland!


O'FLAHERTY. You may say that, faith, he is a cursed lawyer, and a cursed piece
of work I had to get the paper from him; your ladyship now was to have paid him
five thousand pounds for it, I forced him to give it me of his own accord for
nothing at all, at all.


Lady RUSPORT. Is it you that have done this? Am I foiled by your blundering
contrivances, after all?


O'FLAHERTY. 'Twas a blunder, faith, but as natural a one as if I Would made it of
purpose.


CHARLES. Come, let us not oppress the fallen; do right even now, and you shall
have no cause to complain.


Lady RUSPORT. Am I become an object of your pity then? Insufferable! confusion
light amongst you! marry and be wretched: let me never see you more.


Exit. CHARLOTTE. She is outrageous; I suffer for her, and blush to see her
thus exposed.


CHARLES. Come, Charlotte, don't let this angry woman disturb our happiness: we
will save her in spite of herself; your father's memory shall not be stained by
the discredit of his second choice.


CHARLOTTE. I trust implicitly to your discretion, and am in all things yours.


BELCOUR. Now, lovely but obdurate, does not this example soften?


LOUISA. What can you ask for more? Accept my hand, accept my willing heart.


BELCOUR. O bliss inutterable! brother, father, friend, and you the author of
this general joy --


O'FLAHERTY. Blessing of St. Patrick upon us all! it is a night of wonderful and
surprising ups and downs: I wish we were all fairly set down to supper, and
there was an end on it.


STOCKWELL. Hold for a moment! I have yet one word to interpose -- Entitled by
my friendship to a voice in your disposal, I have approved your match; there
yet remains a father's consent to be obtained.


BELCOOUR. Have I a father?


STOCKWELL. You have a father: did not I tell you I had a discovery to make?
Compose yourself: you have a father, who observes, who knows, who loves you.


BELCOUR. Keep me no longer in suspense; my heart is softened for the affecting
discovery, and nature fits me to receive his blessing.


STOCKWELL. I am your father.


BELCOUR. My father? Do I live?


STOCKWELL. I am your father.


BELCOUR. It is too much; my happiness o'erpowers me; to gain a friend and find
a father is too much; I blush to think how little I deserve you.

They embrace.
DUDLEY. See, children, how many new relations spring from this night's
unforeseen events, to endear us to each other.


O'FLAHERTY. O my conscience, I think we shall be all related by and bye.


STOCKWELL. How happily has this evening concluded, and yet how threatening was
its approach! let us repair to the supper room, where I will unfold to you
every circumstance of my mysterious story. Yes, Belcour, I have watched you
with a patient, but enquiring eye, and I have discovered through the veil of some
irregularities, a heart beaming with benevolence, an animated nature, fallible
indeed, but not incorrigible; and your election of this excellent young lady
makes me glory in acknowledging you to be my son.


BELCOUR. I thank you, and in my turn glory in the father I have gained:
sensibly impressed with gratitude for such extraordinary dispensations, I beseech
you, amiable Louisa, for the time to come, whenever you perceive me deviating
into error or offense, bring only to my mind the Providence of this night, and
I will turn to reason and obey.


EPILOGUE. Written by D. G. ESQUIRE. SPOKEN BY Mrs. ABINGTON.
N. B. The Lines in Italics are to be spoken in a catechist T^^^. CONFESS, good
folks, has not Miss Rusport shown,
Strange whim^ for SEVENTEEN HUNDRED SEVENTY-ONE?
What, pawn her jewels! -- there is a precious plan!
To extricate from want a brave old man;
And fall in love with poverty and honor;
A girl of fortune, fashion! -- Fie upon her.
But do not think we females of the stage,
So dead to the refinements of the age,
That we agree with our old fashioned poet:
I am point blank against him, and I Will show it:
And that my tongue may more politely run,
Make me a lady -- Lady Blabington.
Now, with a rank and title to be free,
I Will make a catechism -- and you shall see,
What is the veritable Braums de Vie:
As I change place, I stand for that, or this,
My Lady questions first -- then answers Miss.
She speaks at my Lady. "Come, tell me, Child, what were our modes and dress,
"In those strange times of that old fright Queen Bes^!" --
And now for Miss --
She changes place, and speaks for Miss. When Bess was England's queen,
Ladies were dismal beings, seldom seen;
They rose betimes, and breakfasted as soon
On beef and beer, then studied Greek till noon;
Unpainted cheeks with bl^sh of health did glow,
Beruff'd and fardingal'd from top to toe,
Nor necks, nor ancles would they ever show.
Learnt Greek! -- laughs. -- Our outside head takes half a day;
Have we much time to dress the inside, pray?
No heads dressed a la Greque; the ancients quote,
There may be learning in a papilloi^:
Cards are our classicks; and I, Lady B,
In learning will not yield to any she,
Of the late founded female university.
But now for Lady Blab --
Speaks as my Lady. "Tell me, Miss Nancy,
"What sports and what employments did they fancy?"
Speaks as Miss. The vulgar creatures seldom left their houses,
But taught their children, worked, and loved their spouses;
The use of cards at Christmas only knew,
They played for little, and their games were few,
One-and-thirty, P^t, All-f^^rs, and Laui^r^ Loo;
They here a rate of mortals stout and boney,
And never heard the name of Macaroni. --
Speaks as my Lady. "Oh brava, brava! that is my pretty dear --
"Now let a modern, modish fair appear;
"No more of these old dowdy maids and wives,
"Tell how superior beings pass their lives." --
Speaks as Miss. Till noon they sleep, from noon till night they dress,
From night till noon they gain it more or less,
Next night the same sweet course of joy run over,
Then the night after as the night before,
And the night after that, encore, encore! --
She comes forward. Thus with our cards we s^uff^e off all sorrow,
To mor^ow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow:
We deal apace, from youth unto our prime,
To the last moment of our (...)-time;
And all our ye^^erdays, from rout and d^^m,
Have lighted ^ools with empty pockets nome.
Thus do our lives with rapture roll away,
Not with the nonsense of our author's play;
This is true li^^ -- true spirit -- give it praise;
Don't s^a^l and sigh for good Q^^en ^ess's days:
For all you look so sour, and bend the ^^ow,
You all rejoice with me, you're living now,

