THE DEAF LOVER.

[Price One Shilling.]

THE DEAF LOVER, A FARCE IN TWO ACTS; AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL COVENT
GARDEN.

WRITTEN BY F. PILON.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. BOWEN, CORNER OF BEAUFORT BUILDINGS, IN THE STRAND.

M DCC LXXX.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following little piece meeting with uncommon success, after having been
withdrawn from the stage, it may be expected that the author will say something
by way of apology for the scene, which in its former state was deemed
exceptionable; it was almost a literal translation from the Poulet, a dramatic
proverb, and pronounced by men of unquestionable judgment an excellent
situation; but nothing is so difficult to decide on with certainty, as the
effect any incident will have in representation. Much as was thought of the
Poulet in the closet, it was much disliked on the stage, and the piece
consequently withdrawn for alteration. Fortunately for the author, he has
succeeded in his second attempt to please, and the farce is once more in
possession of the stage.

PROLOGUE.
Written by the AUTHOR,
and spoken by Mr. LEE JEWS. STATESMEN and Poets, often, one fortune find;
This Court being discontent, our Bard resigned;
That is to say, resigned as Courtiers mean,
He was turned out, but would come in again.
On one good point he is bent, a reformation,
And bade me tell this grand Association,
He now has made a total alteration.
M1stakingly, he built on Gallic ground,
But proved French wit was, like French faith, unsound;
Hence wiser grown, he is cautious in his views,
And makes no foreign compacts for his Muse.
On foreign aid it is hazardous reliance,
But certain ruin's in a French alliance.
By Gar, Monsieur will say, you m1stake quite,
Mon Pais, my country, be toujours right;
Il faut vous allor, you must go to France,
If you would learn to make bon alliance;
Par l'alliance Bourbon, we long trick you;
Par l'alliance Amerique, trick them too;
Voila Monsieur d'Estaing, has he not played,
One pretty trick, in taking de Grenade?
Is he not grand, invincible Hero?
Arrah, replies Teague, ask General Prevost!
So much with shot he bother'd him, they say,
He played an old French trick, and ran away,
Now home to France he is gone with broken thigh,
His leg being wounded, kays he came too nigh;
And, by St. Patrick, he deserved his fate,
Who would not give the women a retraat;
Had but the Irish brigade been there,
They Would given their hearts before they would hurt the fair.
But talk no more of Heroes -- name me one,
Like the brave tar, who met the Spanish Don
Without a sword, and gave him up his own.
Oh! such a trick, with all your gasconade,
No French Monsieur, or Spaniard, ever played.
But, whilst for valor's crown great nations sight,
And wild Ambition takes the name of Right;
Ambiguous states, each different power to fleece,
Equal suspend the scale of war and peace;
Abjure all principle, but that they have lent,
And know no interest, but cent. per cent;
But, roused by wrongs, the Genius of this land,
In self-collected might, more firm shall stand;
Hibernia's cause, and Britain's, now made one,
We boast a fam'ly compact of our own;
Defies the treacherous compact of Bourbon.
Whilst Justice, as a flaming AEgis, throws
Confusion and dismay on England's foes;
Her thunder to the world shall speak again,
She reigns the unshaken Sovereign of the Main.

Dramatis Personae.
Meadows, Mr. LEE JEWS. Young Wrongward, Mr. ROBSON. Old Wrongward, Mr.
WILSON. Canteen, Mr. WHITFIELD. Sternhold, Mr. BATES. Groom, Mr. FEARON. 2d
Servant, Mr. BRUNSDON. 3d Servant, Mr. CUSHING. 1st Gentleman, Mr. SMITH. 2d
Gentleman, Mr. LEDGER. Cook, Mr. PAINTER. William, Mr. STEVENS. John, Mr.
THOMPSON. Sophia, Mrs. MORTON. Betsy Blossom, Mrs. WILSON. 1st Lady, Miss
GREEN. 2d Lady, Miss STEWART.
THE DEAF LOVER.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A Room at an Inn. Meadows discovered in a Riding-dress with Canteen. MEADOWS.
WAS there no possibility of bribing one of the servants?


CANTEEN. None in the world, Sir, which indeed surprised me, for though I must
confess they have all good places, I have known folks with better, and in a
greater man's service, who would not let a bribe slip through their fingers for
want of the trouble of clinching the f1st upon it.


MEADOWS. What shall I do, Canteen? you are an old campaigner, and should be
ripe with stratagem in desperate cases!


CANTEEN. I have got a scheme to serve you, if you will undertake it.


MEADOWS. Can you doubt me?


CANTEEN. Then be attentive: Old Wrongward's house, on the approaching wedding,
is thronged as a fair with company; dress yourself in the style of an elderly
gentleman traveling the country; pretend to misapprehend every body; in short
assume the character of a deaf man, and, thus disguised, put up at his house,
as if you took it for an inn.


MEADOWS. Pho! Pho! I shall be taken before a Mag1strate.


CANTEEN. Not you, indeed, Sir; at all these public weddings there are a great
number of strangers, invited by the chief guests; you will pass as a friend to
some of the company -- But grant you are taken for the character you assume, an
old, deaf, blundering blockhead; your m1stakes will create so much
entertainment, that nobody will think of turning you out of doors till you have
full opportunity of discovering yourself to your m1stress.


MEADOWS. And do you think she will l1sten to me?


CANTEEN. I Am sure of it, Sir; I Would stake my life to a cartouch box, that your
letters from camp have been intercepted, and some damned story trump'd up by
that old villain her guardian, to make her marry his own son.


MEADOWS. It must be so, my Sophia otherwise could never have forgot me.


CANTEEN. It must be so! Lord, Sir, if you were not so much in love, it would
appear to you as plain as a pike-staff; but when once love gets into a man's
head, poor reason is brought before a court martial of the passions, and
cashiered without a hearing.


MEADOWS. But it will be necessary to apprise Sophia of this, if I can by any
means convey a letter to her.


CANTEEN. A light breaks in upon me; I met a little flower girl standing at the
inn-door, as fresh, and as blooming as the sweetest rose in her basket -- Don't
you imagine a letter may be conveyed by her into the garrison?


MEADOWS. Can we trust her?


CANTEEN. She Is as sure as a rifle barrel, Sir; -- You know what a smooth
tongue and a smart figure will do with a girl in the country; I have persuaded
her, that I am over head and ears in love with her -- and have swore, by the
god of love, and the god of battles, that I Will make her Mrs. Canteen, if she
pleases, before tomorrow morning.


MEADOWS. Where is she?


CANTEEN. Selling nosegays to passengers, as they go in and out of their
carriages; but I Will bring her to you, Sir, in the drawing of a trigger, in the
mean time write your letter; -- There Is pen, ink, and paper on the table.


Exit Canteen. MEADOWS. [Writing.] My all depends on her receiving this letter
-- otherwise, the surprise of so unexpectedly meeting me, might occasion a
discovery -- [ Seeing Canteen and Betsy Blossom.] Oh! here come Mars and Venus
already.


Enter Canteen and Betsy Blossom. BETSY. Nosegays, your Honor?


MEADOWS. Come hither, my pretty dear, and let me see them.

Looks in the basket.
BETSY. O Sir, don't tumble over my basket! I cannot let you pick and choose at a
common price.


CANTEEN. [Aside to her.] Let him take which he pleases, he is as generous as a
Prince, hussy.


BETSY. Is he? by Gosh then he shall have the myrtle and the jessamine, and the
two moss roses I was taking up to the Squire's, where the great wedding is to
be.


MEADOWS. What Is that you say? Are you going to the house, where the great
wedding is to be?


BETSY. Yes, and I shall sell all my nosegays there, and am promised a ribban
for a bride-favor, by John the Butler.


CANTEEN. O ho! John the Butler! I find I Am not sole proprietor of my little
nosegay merchant.


MEADOWS. [Taking her by the band.] Now, my sweet dear, blooming little Flora,
if you will grant me one favor, I will give you a guinea.


BETSY. Who I, Sir! I Would have you to know, Sir, that I scorn your guineas -- I
am no such parson -- though I Am poor, I Am honest, that let me tell you -- and
I Would rather sell nosegays with my vartue, than ride in a coach and six without
it.


CANTEEN. Zounds! what an explosion was there, from a carbine like a pocket
p1stol -- why who is going to meddle with your vartue? I tell you, you may keep
the guinea and your vartue together.


BETSY. May I?


CANTEEN. Yes; but I find, Betsy, I Am greatly deceived in your temper. I
thought you were as meek as a violet, but I find you are as sharp as a sweet
briar.


MEADOWS. I only want you, my dear, to take this letter for me, and deliver it
into the young Lady's hand who is to be married tomorrow; and to take care
that nobody sees you.


BETSY. As sure as a gun I know who you are.


MEADOWS. Ay, prithee who am I?


BETSY. You are her old sweetheart, and she has turned false-hearted.


CANTEEN. Oons what a witch it is! I Will go and prepare your dress, Sir.

Exit Canteen.
BETSY. It Is the talk of the whole village how Miss Sophia had forsaken a
malicious officer that was in love with her.


MEADOWS. Will you take this letter for me?


BETSY. That I will with all my heart, -- and between ourselves though I am a
poor girl, give her her own into the bargain.


MEADOWS. My dear, you must not say a word to her; only deliver the letter.


BETSY. What then you would not have me scold her?


MEADOWS. By no means, -- that would ruin me for ever in her esteem; but what
is your name, my love?


BETSY. Betsy Blossom, an't please you.

(Curtsying.)
MEADOWS. Well, my dear Betsy, go off immediately, and remember that the whole
happiness of my life depends on your care and secresy.


SONG.
BETSY. Believe me, Sir, you will find me true,
As any girl you ever knew,
I know no art,
To hide my heart,
And since with flowers first I stood
To young or old
I never sold
Two faces under a hood.
It Is true I dress in simple gown
And never saw the flaunting town
Where Ladies shine
In silks so fine
Still I think myself as good
As toasted belle
Whilst I never sell
Two faces under a hood.

Exeunt Meadows and Betsy Blossom. SCENE II.
Old Wrongward and Sternhold discovered. Sternhold reading the Papers to him,
Old Wrongward in his Gouty Chair, wrapped up in Flannels. OLD WRONGWARD. You are
a terrible reader, Sternhold: cannot you speak your words shorter? -- you sound
every syllable, as if you had a speaking-trumpet at your mouth.


STERNHOLD. I cannot help it, your honor; it is a way I have got.


OLD WRONGWARD. It Is like the grind of an ill-ton'd barrel-organ in my ears --
but go on, for you were born a parish clerk, and will chaunt every thing in
psalm-tune to the end of the chapter.


STERNHOLD. (reading) Rome, April 1st. Yesterday morning between twelve and
one, his Holiness the Pope was safely delivered of twins -- the mother and
children are well, and likely to live.


OLD WRONGWARD. Why is the fellow mad? the Pope delivered of twins! zounds! you
may as well tell me of St. Paul's dancing the hayes, or the Monument turning
prize-fighter.


STERNHOLD. Shall I go on?


OLD WRONGWOOD. Read over that last article again, for I Am sure you have made a
blunder.


STERNHOLD (reads.) Rome, April 1st. Yesterday morning between twelve and one,
his Holiness the Pope was safely delivered of twins -- the mother and children
are well, and likely to live.


OLD WRONGWARD. Truly this is a most extraordinary event if it be a fact, and
must cause strange confusion among the Cardinals; but upon second thoughts it is
not altogether past belief, for there is a well-known story of a female Pope,
who was discovered by her pregnancy, Pope Joan I think she was called -- but
give me the paper, for damn me if I can believe it yet -- (takes the paper and
reads) Mr. Printer, if you think the following cross readings -- cross
readings! ha! ha! ha! -- confound those cross readings -- as if things were not
cross enough of themselves.


Enter Sophia and Betsy Blossom. SOPHIA. (aside to Betsy.) And he seemed deeply
concerned?


BETSY. Oh, deeply concerned, and his eyes, poor soul, as red as blood with
crying.


OLD WRONGWARD. Is not that Soply I see? eh! how is this? where is my son George!
has the rascal the impudence to stir an inch from your apron-string?


SOPHIA. Sir, he cannot with propriety leave the company; more especially, as
infirmities prevent your entertaining them.


OLD WRONGWARD. Infirmities! why what infirmities have I got, except a little
touch of the gout, now and then? If I could walk, and had the use of my right
hand, and could see without spectacles, I Would be as hale a man as any in the
county. ( Seeing Betsy Blossom) But who is that little blooming rogue with you?


SOPHIA. A slower-girl, Sir; she has brought me some jessamine and moss roses.


OLD WRONGWARD. Ay? tell her to come this way, and let me look at her moss
roses.


SOPHIA. (aside to Betsy.) Go show him your nosegays, Betsy, and keep him in
chat, whilst I run and write an answer.


BETSY. But Lord, Ma'am, he bears such a terrible character, l'm atraid to go
nigh him.


SOPHIA. Pho! pho! never fear him; he has not been out of that chair, except at
bed times, these three months, but is rolled up and down the house like a great
baby; go to him, I say, and I Will return immediately.


Exit Sophia. OLD WRONGWARD. You may go about your business, Sternhold, I Am
tired of your damned drone -- It Is worse than an old clothes man in London.


STERNHOLD. Lord! Lord! What will this world come to!


Exit Sternhold BETSY. (Aside.) By Goss, as he cannot budge, I Will have a little
fun with him.


OLD WRONGWARD. Come hither, my pretty maid, and let me look at your moss roses.


BETSY. (Runs up to him.) Aye to be sure, Sir, there are not so fine ones in
all the country.


OLD WRONGWARD. (Taking up the flowers.) Upon my word they are fine ones -- But
is Sophy gone? Is there nobody sees us?


BETSY. Not a soul, we are both together, all alone by ourselves.


OLD WRONGWARD. But are you sure that there is nobody l1stening?


BETSY. Oh! very sartin, Sir,


OLD WRONGWARD. Then give me a kiss, you little smiling rogue.


BETSY. Oh dear Sir, woud'n't you be ashamed to kiss such a poor girl as I?


OLD WRONGWARD. Ashamed! not I, by the Lord Harry; come hither I say.


BETSY. (Aside.) Now to plague him -- Why you must know, Sir, that I Am afraid
some of the family will see us; but if you will fetch a walk with me any where.


OLD WRONGWARD. Fetch a walk with her! I could as soon fetch the Tower upon my
back.


BETSY. But now I look at your legs, I suppose you cannot walk. -- O Lud!
They Are like mill posts.


OLD WRONGWARD. No, no, not quite so bad, they are a little swelled to be sure,
but there is a great deal of flannel about them.


BETSY. Shall I help you, Sir?

(takes him by the hand and pulls him.)
OLD WRONGWARD (Roars out.) Zounds! you have broke my arm, you jade.


Sophia at the back of the Stage. SOPHIA. Betsy!


BETSY. I Am coming, Ma'am.

(going.)
OLD WRONGWARD. Then you will not come and kiss me, hussy?


BETSY. I think it is you that will not kiss me, Sir. -- Lord! Sir, if you want a
kiss, why don't you come and take it?


OLD WRONGWARD. O you wicked baggage, you know that I cannot stir -- I Would give
half my estate for a pair of legs to be revenged of you.


BETSY. Then you will not setch a walk, Sir, nor give me a kiss -- very well! --
I Will not be denied the next man I ask -- good by, Sir -- I must go, ha! ha! ha!


SONG.
What! refuse me a kiss?
I shall die sure with grief,
To be robbed of such bliss,
What can bring me relief?
One, one kiss, cruel man,
What! deny me again?
Then I Will go where the willow so green grows,
And trembling droops over the brook,
There, to each gentle zephyr that by blows,
My sighs shall tell I Am forsook.
But why should I, if man disdain
To heal this hapless bosom's pain,
Complete the tyrant's triumph quite
And foolish maiden die for spite?
No, no,
I Will go,
And since a false one you do prove,
I Will die of any thing but love.
Exit Betsy. Enter Young Wrongward. YOUNG WRONGWARD. What, Sir, is not Sophia
here?


OLD WRONGWARD. She was here this moment.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. What Is the matter with you, Sir? I hope you're not ill?


OLD WRONGWARD. No, but I was bargaining for some moss roses, and they have
pricked my fingers so confoundedly.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. I have very bad news to tell you, Sir; Meadows has been seen
about the house.


OLD WRONGWARD. The Devil he has! Then, boy, we are undone. If she sees him,
our intercepting his letters, and the story of his marriage with another will
all be discovered.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. She has seen no stranger today?


OLD WRONGWARD. Not a soul to my knowledge, except a poor little innocent
flower girl.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. It Is no matter; that woman, I Am persuaded, has brought her a
letter.


OLD WRONGWARD. Ecod, like enough.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. Then Sir, if you will sit with the company, I Will go in
pursuit of her, and if in the power of gold, I Will get every thing our of her.


Exit Young Wrongward: OLD WRONGWARD. Ay, with all my heart, -- here, William.


Enter William. WILLIAM. Did you call, Sir!


OLD WRONGWARD. Roll me into the company [William goes behind the chair and
rolls it] Softly you rascal, if legs could be purchased, what would not I give
for a new pair?


Exit William, rolling off Old Wrongward. SCENE III. Changes to the outside of
Old Wrongward's house.
Enter John. JOHN. What a couple of damned rogues my master and I are, to stop
all these here letters -- it would go greatly against my conscience, only for
what I get by it -- Well, my master cheats his ward, and I cheat my master, for
he has never seen this picture (pulls out a minature) nor the letter that came
with it yet -- if these ar'n't mock diamonds round it, it will bring a pretty
penny -- let me see now.


Enter Betsy Blossom. BETSY. Good day, Mr. John.


JOHN. Ah! my pretty Betsy -- come hither, my little dear.


BETSY. What Is that you are looking at so close, Mr. John?


JOHN. Only a picture, my love, are you a good judge of painting Betsy?


BETSY. Painting! Lord, Sir, you must ask some fine London Lady that question;
we poor folks in the country know nothing of the matter.


JOHN. How do you like that, Betsy?

shows her the miniature.
BETSY. It has a vast fine frame round it.


JOHN. Yes, yes, you are a great judge of painting, I see clearly.


BETSY. And looks as natural as you that are speaking to me.


JOHN. Eh! why, zounds! she takes it for my picture.


BETSY. What fine eyes!


JOHN. Fine eyes! oh! yes, she takes it for me.


BETSY. And two cheeks like cherries -- then such pretty hair -- so curled, so
frized and so flowered, it looks like a white thorn in full blossom.


JOHN. You must know, my dear, I wore my hair so when that was drawn for me.


BETSY. Is this your picture, Mr. John?


JOHN. I thought you knew that already.


BETSY. I vow, I took it for a gentleman's.


JOHN. What, then, you don't think it like me?


BETSY. Like you? no more like you than a carnation is like a butcher's broom.


JOHN. Butcher's broom! what a Fleet-market comparison! -- You think then I am
altered since it was drawn for me?


BETSY. Oh! quite changed, you are as brown as a chestnut to what you were; and
your eyes, that were once so blue, are now as gray as the very willows.


JOHN. I am sitting for a striking likeness, I find.


BETSY. Then your forehead's grown square -- your chin sharp -- your nose flat
-- your teeth -- no, they are not grown at all -- for I cant see above one or
two left in your head.


JOHN. Zounds! have done, you unmerciful baggage: give me my picture. I may be
altered a little, but it is impossible I can be so damnably metamorphos'd as
you describe.


BETSY. What, after making a bargain?


Enter Young Wrongward. YOUNG WRONGWARD. So, so, Mr. John, what bargain is this
you have been striking?


JOHN. Bargain! Sir -- I was only agreeing about some tulips.


BETSY. That was all, your honor -- John only wanted some tulips of me.


JOHN. (Aside to Betsy.) Not a word of the picture.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. But, Sir, cannot the gardener supply you?


JOHN. Sir, he says, I want too many, and that he will not spoil his beds to
please me or any man in England.


BETSY. Now, Sir, I can give him plenty, and never mind spoiling a bed when it
is made worth my while.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. I believe you, young damsel -- Harkee, John, ( aside to
John.) -- I suppose this girl has been employed by Meadows to convey a letter
to Sophia. Get you gone, and I Will sound her.


JOHN, You had better leave her to me, Sir.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. No, no, she is too artful for you.


JOHN. Ay, and for you too, I Will be sworn -- I don't like to leave her alone
with him.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. Not gone yet, Sir?


JOHN. Oh! yes, I Am gone -- (aside) -- Very far gone, I find, in love, for now
am I as jealous as the Devil of him -- Oh! my poor picture, I shall never see
it is face again.


Exit John. YOUNG WRONGWARD. Can you keep a secret, my dear?


BETSY. I don't know, Sir; I never was tried.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. Come, come, I know you have; and if you will divulge it to me,
I Will give you more than you got from Captain Meadows.


BETSY. Captain Meadows! who is he, Sir? I don't know him -- (aside) -- He Is
only pumping me now, but he shall get nothing by it.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. What, then, you have neither brought nor received a letter
here today?


BETSY. Lord! Sir, who'd trust the likes of me with a letter?


YOUNG WRONGWARD. Let me see now, in which pocket have you got it?

(attempts to search her.)
BETSY. Keep your hands to yourself, I have nothing smuggled about me -- you
shall not rummage me like a custom-house officer.


YOUNG WRONGWARD (pulls out a purse.) Look at this, hussy -- I have both power
and inclination to reward you.


BETSY. I Am sure, Sir, there is nothing I wouldn't do to serve you.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. Then you will give me the letter?


BETSY. Letter! Lord! Sir, what letter?


YOUNG WRONGWARD. Come, I ins1st upon your taking this [gives her money]. And
now.


BETSY. And now, your honor, I Will go home to my father's, and bring you the
letter immediately.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. Your father's! how came it there?


BETSY. It came by the post, yesterday, from Devonshire.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. Devonshire! what the Devil is Devonshire to me?


BETSY. I thought you wanted to know something about my brother the gardener,
who wrote us a main long letter yesterday, and, what surprised us all, he is
going to be married.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. A most interesting piece of information I must confess. She Is
a downright idiot. -- How ridiculous do my suspicions make me!


Exit young Wrongward. BETSY. By Goss, I have trickt him nicely. So now to my
dear Mr. Canteen.

[Canteen enters
CANTEEN. Ah! Betsy, I Have been watching you, and I feared you would have turned
traitor and betrayed us.


BETSY. No, Mr. Canteen, I never would do that -- I would not betray you, no,
not for five pound.


CANTEEN. What not for five pound? O matchless fidelity! -- But come, have you
got an answer?


BETSY. Yes, I have that and John's picture both together.


CANTEEN. John's picture? well, this is the first time I ever knew a man vain
of his ugliness! If I had such an old lion's head riveted upon my shoulders,
I Would quarrel with a basin of spring water, for reflecting my own countenance on
me.


BETSY. Ay -- but his picture is very handsome -- it is no more like him than
box is like southernwood.


CANTEEN. No, then he has set for his picture by proxy, or perhaps, like many
others coxcombs, purchased it, as we sometimes do shoes, ready made. But come,
let us look at it.


BETSY. Here it is.

shows the miniature.
CANTEEN. Zounds! this is my master's picture.


BETSY. What, captain Meadows's?


CANTEEN. His own likeness -- and the very miniature I saw him enclose about
six weeks ago to Miss Sophia.


BETSY. As sure as can be, he stole it.


CANTEEN. I don't know how he came by it: but you're certain he gave it you?


BETSY. Quite sartin.


CANTEEN. Then come along, my Betsy; if you behave well now, I Will make great
advantages of this discovery: you shall introduce me to John as your brother,
and I Will terrify him with a confession before I have done with him.


Exeunt Betsy and Canteen. SCENE changes to a View before the Stables.
Enter Meadows disguised as an old Gentleman, with the Groom. MEADOWS. I hope
your hay is good, friend?


GROOM. It Is no matter how my hay is. I tell you, you are m1staken in the
house; this is no inn.


MEADOWS. Why if you think so, give him a feed of oats; but take care to rub
him down well.


GROOM. Rub down the Devil! I tell you, my master keeps no inn.


MEADOWS. Throw a few beans among the oats, if you have any.


GROOM. Throw a few beans among the oats! Zounds! who promised to give you any
oats?


MEADOWS. That Is a good lad, I know you will take care of him.


GROOM. He Is as deaf as a door nail. -- He does not understand a word I say.


MEADOWS. Did you speak to me, young man?


GROOM. I have been bawling to you this hour, to tell you this is no inn:
yonder is the George, or the Swan, or the King's Arms, where you will get your
horse and yourself taken care of.


Bawling in his ear. MEADOWS. Well, well, I Will take your word for the goodness
of your corn; you had no occasion to be so loud in praise of it.


GROOM. What the Devil shall I do with him? He drove his horse into the stable,
before I knew where I was, and if I turn him adrift, I shall be prosecuted by
act of parliament.


MEADOWS. My good lad, do you hear me?


GROOM. I wish I could make you hear me as plain.


MEADOWS. I like your countenance.


GROOM. That Is more than I do yours.


MEADOWS. There Is something in it tells me, you will do the beast justice,
therefore here is a shilling for you -- and if I find I have not been m1staken
in the opinion I have formed of you, I shall remember you when I go away also.


GROOM. This is the first word of sense I have got out of him -- well, as his
horse is in the stable, let him stay there; my master, I Am sure, will never
miss his one night's keep; but then the best joke will be when he gets into the
house -- ha! ha! ha! I shall kill myself with laughing at the thoughts of it.


MEADOWS. Ha! ha! ha! Very good, very good indeed.


GROOM. What the Devil does he laugh at?


MEADOWS. I find you are a fellow of a good deal of humor.


GROOM. Humor! What does he mean?


MEADOWS. You tell a devilish good story, but I cannot stay to hear the end of
it, for I Am greatly fatigued and very weary -- now remember you rub him down
well, and don't forget the beans amongst the oats.


Exit Meadows. GROOM. I tell a devilish good story, and have a great deal of
humor! If'tis so, you are the first that ever discovered my talents -- Well! I
have got a shilling from you, so mum's the word, you're deaf -- I am dumb, old
gentleman.


Exit Groom. END OF FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. A Hall in Old Wrongward's House; several Servants running across the
Stage with Supper.
1st SERVANT. He Is swearing like a dragon about the iced cream.


2d SERVANT. I wish he was to feed upon nothing else till his temper became as
cool as his stomach.


Enter Cook. COOK. A man had better stand cook in Belzebub's kitchen. Here have
I been broiling myself, like a beef-steak, for these two hours, and am thanked
in a volley of oaths for it afterward.


Enter third Servant. 3d SERVANT. There Is not a drop of Madeira in the room;
and the Butler is to be turn'd-off tomorrow.


Enter Meadows, draws a Chair, and sits. MEADOWS. Aye, I like this. -- It Is an
old saying, good business makes a good house.


SERVANT. This is some gentleman invited to supper; we had better tell him it is
on the table.


2d SERVANT [going up to Meadows.] Certainly! -- It Is on the table, Sir.


MEADOWS. No, I Will not pull off my boots till I go to bed.


2d SERVANT. Pull of his boots! who said any thing about his boots? Though, now I
look at them, damn me if ever I saw a dirtier pair in the course of my life.


MEADOWS. What have you got for supper?


WILLIAM. Every thing the season can afford, is on the table, Sir?


MEADOWS. Why, you blockhead, woodcocks are not in season.


WILLIAM. I said nothing about woodcocks -- but, Sir, there is a delightful carp
stewed in claret -- a fine jack roasted with a pudding in his belly -- some
choice pheasants -- and such cherry tarts -- apple pies, jellies, iced creams,
and sweetmeats, that my teeth water at the bare thoughts of them.


MEADOWS. Very well, that will do, my friend; but take care you get me some
good mushroom sauce to it.


2d SERVANT. Mushroom sauce! to what, Sir?


MEADOWS. A broiled fowl will do well enough.


WILLIAM. A broiled fowl! I didn't mention a word of broiled fowl -- did I, Bob?


2d SERVANT. Not a syllable.


WILLIAM. Zounds! he is deaf.


2d SERVANT. Or mad; speak louder to him -- try if you can make him hear you.


WILLIAM. (Bawling in his ear.) Supper is on the table, Sir; and if you are
invited to the house by my master, it will be as much as our places are worth,
if we do not bring you up to him immediately.


MEADOWS. Well, do the best you can for me.


WILLIAM. Ah! it is all in vain to talk to him; let us see if we can make him
understand by signs.

(makes signs they will show him the way.)
MEADOWS. Bless you, my lad, I am not particular.


Exit Meadows and Servants. SCENE changes to an elegant apartment -- Old
Wrongward, Young Wrongward, and a large party at supper. OLD WRONGWARD. Fill me
a bumper of Madeira -- though the enemy has got possession of the greater part
of my outworks, I Will take care to keep him from the citadel, whilst there is a
flask in my cellar to support me.

(drinks.)
Enter Meadows and John. WILLIAM. This way, Sir.


MEADOWS. Aye! I see all your rooms are full, but it is no matter, I Am fond of
company.


OLD WRONGWARD (Aside to Young Wrongward.) Here Is a stranger! do you know him,
George?


YOUNG WRONGWARD. I suppose he is a friend to some of the company.


OLD WRONGWARD. Certainly -- go to him, boy, and ask him if he has supped.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. (comes to Meadows.) Sir, I esteem myself particularly
honored in the favor of this visit -- here, William, lay a side table for
this gentleman -- As we are just done supper, I beg, Sir, you will not consider
yourself a stranger.

retires to his seat.
MEADOWS. Very dear, indeed, Sir; good Virginia is hard to be come at, but I
always carry a box of Oroonoko in my pocket

(pulls out a box.)
A table is laid for Meadows; he sits. OLD WRONGWARD. (to Meadows.) Warm
traveling, Sir.


MEADOWS. There was none stirring, when I was in town, Sir.


OLD WRONGARD. Stirring! no nor moving for it, Sir, in this part of the world
-- though the gout consines me to this chair, I feel myself as hot as if I was
roasting on ths coast of Guinea.


Enter Sophia. SOPHIA. (aside.) Yonder he sits; if he should be discovered, all
my hopes of happiness are gone for ever.


MEADOWS. (aside.) I feel myself in such agitation at the sight of my Sophia,
that I fear it will mar my counterfeiting.


Sophia sits next to Young Wrongward; they talk. OLD WRONGWARD. Come, old
gentleman, I Will give you a toast, that I Am sure you will have no objection to --
here is to the young couple.

All the company drink.)
MEADOWS. With all my heart; I Am sure he has not a better subject in his
dominions.


OLD WRONGWARD. Ay, and what is better, he is going the right road to raise more
good subjects.


MEADOWS. The King!

(drinks.)
OLD WRONGWARD. The King! why I drank my son and daughter that is to be's
health.


MEADOWS. Ah, Sir! there is no answering for what people will say.


OLD WRONGWARD. No answering for what people will say! damn me if ever I knew
any thing so impudent in the whole course of my life before.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. Pray does any of the company know him?


1st LADY. I don't, for my part.


1st GENTLEMAN. Nor I.


2d LADY. Nor I.


2d GENTLEMAN. Nor I, nor any of us.


ALL. No, not one of us.


SOPHIA. How I tremble for him, now.


OLD WRONGWARD. Here, William, who showed this old fellow here?


WILLIAM. I did, Sir; I took him to be one of the company.


OLD WRONGWARD. Why, nobody here knows him.


MEADOWS. (to Old Wrongward.) Sir, I have the pleasure of drinking your health.


OLD WRONGWARD. (to Young Wrongward.) Did you ever know any thing like this,
George?


MEADOWS. (to William.) Do you hear, my lad? Send up the boot-catcher to me.


OLD WRONGWARD. Send up the boot-catcher to him, we'll send up the
thief-catcher to him -- this fellow is come to rob the house.


MEADOWS. This wine is devilish good; but I have a poor head, and am very
sleepy -- Bon repos, good folks; I must leave you.

(gets up.)
OLD WRONGWARD. Stop him, George.


[Young Wrongward and Company stop him. MEADOWS. Why, Gentlemen, all this
pressing: it is to no purpose; I am determined to go to bed; and as a proof of
it, there is half a crown for my share of the bill, as I cannot stay till its
called -- will nobody give me a light?


OLD WRONGWARD (to William.) Why, you rascal, can you give no rational account
of this man?


WILLIAM. All I can tell you is, he has set the whole family in an uproar --
the groom says, he is deaf -- the butler says, he is mad; but all agree in
pronouncing him the most impudent, troublesome, dirty old fellow, ever came
into a house -- do but look at his boots, Sir.


SOPHIA (aside.) Love has inspired me with a thought for his deliverance.
(comes forward.) Bless me! I know this Gentleman's face perfectly well -- it is
the celebrated Doctor Humdrum; I saw him several times at Bath, though I never
spoke to him: he is the first physician in England; but has been troubled with a
most obstinate deafness for several years; and, what is most extraordinary,
does every thing in this power to conceal it.


OLD WRONGWARD. Deaf! why does he come here to plague us with his deafness?


SOPHIA. I thought, Sir, you had more humanity than not to feel for such a
misfortune.


OLD WRONGWARD. But are you sure he is deaf?


SOPHIA. Does not hear a word you say to him.


MEADOWS. You Will let me go to bed then? Upon my soul, it gives me pain to part
from such good company; but I Am quite weary.


OLD WRONGWOOD. Ay, poor Gentleman, I pity him, he shall have a bed -- he has
taken the house for an inn, I suppose; a very good joke, faith -- ha! ha! ha!


MEADOWS. Ha! ha! ha! a devilish good song, a devilish good song indeed; but I
cannot stay to encore it.

Bon repos, bon repos!
Exit Meadows, lighted. OLD WRONGWARD. George, do you go and see the Gentleman
is taken great care of.


Fiddles behind. Exit Young Wrongward. OLD WRONGWARD. Ha! here come the fiddles
-- come girls, foot it away, I Will sit up with you an hour extraordinary, and if
this confounded gout would give my joints a holiday, I Would have a reel with the
youngest of you.


A Dance. [Exeunt, rolling off Old Wrongward. SCENE III.
Enter Sophia, Canteen, and Betsy Blossom. SOPHIA. So, Captain Meadows's
servant is your brother, Betsy.


BETSY. Oh, that was only -- he! he!

with affected confusion.
CANTEEN. Yes, Ma'am, as Betsy would say, that was only to deceive John, your
Guardian's privy counselor.


SOPHIA. I understand you, you are her sweetheart.


BETSY. Oh! dear, your lay'ship -- you do so shame one.


SOPHIA. But how have you proceeded since this discovery?


BETSY. Vastly clever, I warrant him; he has frightened the butler out of his
wits.


CANTEEN. I threatened him with a prosecution for stopping the picture, unless
he turned King's evidence and informed against his master -- my menaces had the
desired effect, and he is devoted to our service.


SOPHIA. Very well, don't be out of the way for a moment; I don't know how soon
we may want you and your evidence -- but, as a reward for your and Betsy's
services, whenever you have her consent, I will give her a portion.


Exit. BETSY. I thank your ladyship, I Am sure I do.


CANTEEN. Now is my freedom gone.


BETSY. What, you will not marry me?


CANTEEN. Else how should I lose my freedom?


BETSY. I don't know what you mean, Mr. Canteen, by losing your freedom; but, if
I thought you lost any thing when you married me, I would not have you for all
my love to you.


CANTEEN. Pho! pho! you little fool, by giving up my freedom, I mean, I give up
my heart into your possession for life.


BETSY. Do you? Then, by gosh! you shall have my heart for life instead of it.


Exeunt. SCENE changes to a Bedchamber. Enter Meadows followed by a
Chambermaid with lights. MAID. This is my young Lady's apartment; and you must
not stay here.


MEADOWS. My good girl, you needn't give yourself the trouble, I never have my
bed warmed.


MAID. I didn't come to warm your bed -- I want you to get out of the room.


MEADOWS. No, no, it is a bad custom; good night to you.


MAID. Odds my life but he would provoke a saint, (very loud.) I tell you again and
again that this is my young Lady's room, and you must quit it.


MEADOWS. A sack posset! I Will not taste it. Come let me lock my door, for I
must be stirring early.


She gets between him and the door. MAID. The Devil a door do you lock here
tonight.


MEADOWS. Ah! you wanton young baggage, I understand you; but all those days
are over with me.


MAID. Oh, Lord! what has the old nasty fellow got into his head now?


MEADOWS. But come, we'll have one smack, and then bon soir.


MAID. Help, help, murder!

Offers to kiss her.
Enter Servants. 1st SERVANT. What Is the matter, Sally?


MAID. This old villain was going to ruinate me.


2d SERVANT. I wish he was out of the house; I wonder my master gave him a bed.


MEADOWS. You Will take care to call me early.


2d SERVANT. Damn me! if I call you.


3d SERVANT. It Is a shame for a man at your years to behave so.


MAID. Ay, an old man like you, with one foot in the grave.


MEADOWS. You are m1staken, my dear, I can get up as well as any young fellow
in England. -- I am a mighty good riser, I must mount carly, therefore call me
by five.


2d SERVANT. We may as well talk to a stone wall.


MAID. I shall lose my place for this.


MEADOWS. You needn't wait for the light.


Sits down as if to undress. 2d SERVANT. Wait for the light! Damn me! if I had
my will, but I Would darken your lights for you, and leave you to grope your way
out of the house.


MEADOWS. Why, I believe, that is the safest way, so bring me an extinguisher;
you're a good natured lad, and I Will remember you for this.


WILLIAM. If I could write, I Would make him understand me at once. -- Can you
write, Joe?


2d SERVANT. I can chalk main well, but nobody can understand it except myself.


WILLIAM. Why you, Bob, went to school, I know.


3d SERVANT. Ay, but it is so long ago, I forgot all my larning: I Will make my
mark, if you please.


MAID. And it is my misfortune to neither read nor write


WILLIAM. 'Sdeath and fire, he is undressing! we must do somethign immediately.


[Meadows lays down a case of large pistols. 2d SERVANT. What swinging pistols
he has!


MEADOWS. Lay you there, my good friends -- I hope I shall not have the same need
for you here as at the last inn where I lay.


2d SERVANT. Do you hear that?


MEADOWS. I am sorry I shot the ostler and kitchen maid, I own; but what am I
to think of people who come into my room after I am in bed?


ALL SERVANTS. Oh! the bloody minded old rogue!


MEADOWS. I know the advantages which may be taken of my deafness, and am
determined to secure myself.


WILLIAM. I am determined to do the same, and so good night.


runs off. 2d SERVANT. I Will stay no longer.


Exit. 3d SERVANT. Oh! if I am hindmost, may I be shot like the poor ostler and
kitchen maid!


Exit. MAID. And may I be burnt if I stay to be shot!


Exit. MEADOWS. Oh, Fortune, auspicious to my warmest hopes! -- Now could I but
see, and converse one moment with my Sophia. -- Ha! yonder comes a light --
it is she -- it is she herself, my adorable Sophia.


Enter Sophia. SOPHIA. I am come to tell you to lock yourself in immediately --
tomorrow I Will speak to you -- it is dangerous for us to continue a moment
together.


MEADOWS. But is not tomorrow to be your wedding day? am I not to lose you for
ever tomorrow?


SOPHIA. No, Meadows, I am now satisfied of your honor and my guardian's
villainy; a plot has been just discovered to me, will astonish you -- Tomorrow
I will quit this house, and put myself under yonr protection.


MEADOWS. My love, my life! you transport me.


Falls upon his knees and kisses her hand. Enter Young Wrongward. YOUNG
WRONGWARD. He shall leave the house tonight. -- Ha! what do I see?


SOPHIA aside. It Is all over, and I may as well throw off the mask now as
tomorrow.


Old Wrongward rolled in. OLD WRONGWARD. He deserves a horse-pond instead of a
good bed.


MEADOWS. I should prefer a good bed notwithstanding, Mr. Wrongward.


OLD WRONGWARD. Why he has got his hearing.


MEADOWS. Yes, Sir, and my feeling too, of resentment for the base advantage
you took of me and this young lady.


OLD WRONGWARD. Advantage! who the devil are you?


MEADOWS. Cannot you discover Meadows under this disguise? that man whom you
have so much injured?


OLD WRONGWARD, Meadows! this is cursed unlucky -- but, George, we must get him
out of the house as fast as possible.


CANTEEN without. CANTEEN. If you don't come by fair means, I Will lay you by the
heels, and force you into court.


Enter Canteen, John, and Betsy. YOUNG WRONGWARD. All, I fear, is discovered.


OLD WRONGWARD. Eh! who is that fellow got hold of John?


CANTEEN. Let his worship know, John; or I shall be committed for an assault,
in the very act of thief-taking.


JOHN. Why, Sir, if I must speak, it is you and my young master have brought me
to this disgrace.


OLD WRONGWARD. Who, I and my Son? why the fellow has lost his wits -- or else
he is drunk -- take him to bed, I hate a drunkard.


JOHN. Lies will not do now, I must speak truth, or suffer for it -- Captain
Meadows, I humbly ask your forgiveness, but every letter you sent to Miss
Sophia, I stopped, by the positive orders of both my masters.


CANTEEN. It Is all very true, Sir, and amongst the rest, he stopped the
miniature you sent Miss Sophia, by which he was discovered -- for the ugly dog
had the impudence to attempt to pass it upon my Betsy, here, for his own proper
likeness.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. Out of my sight, rascal -- come Sophia, I am sorry you have
been d1sturbed -- Captain, you may have a bed, if you please.


MEADOWS. No, Sir, I shall quit your house, and take my Sophia with me.

Takes her by the hand.
OLD WRONGWARD. What, would you steal a ward from her guardian?


YOUNG WRONGWARD. Nay, if you proceed to force, make a prisoner of her -- take
the consequence.

Draws.
MEADOWS. She has been long a prisoner, Sir, in a place she dislikes; but here
is my habeas for her removal. (Pulls out a pistol.) So, as you respect the law,
gentlemen, stand by.


OLD WRONGWARD. Roll me out of the way; I shall be shot, or run through,
between them.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. What, have I no ass1stance? where are all my servants?


OLD WRONGWARD. George, a word with you, George, this is a very ugly story, and
we had better make the best of it.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. What, Sir, will you acquiesce in your dishonor?


MEADOWS. Good night; you shall hear from me.

Going.
OLD WRONGWARD. Stay, Captain; I have something to propose to you.


YOUNG WRONGWARD. I perceive what you intend, but I will not stay to be a
witness of your weakness, and my own shame -- I shall take other steps to right
myself.


Exit. OLD WRONGWARD. You see what an obstinate boy he is: but I will not cross
your inclinations, Sophia; you have my consent. -- This is always my way, when
I cannot help it.

(Aside.)
MEADOWS. I take you at your word, Sir; but tomorrow will put your ward under
the protection of the law, for I will never take advantage of her partiality in
my favor, until she is at full liberty to choose for herself.

True love a jealous delicacy knows,
And slights all dower, but what the heart bestows.

FINIS.

