SEVERAL CASES in PHYSIC, And One in particular, giving an Account of A Person
who was Inoculated for the Smallpox, and had the Smallpox upon the
Inoculation, and yet had it again.

Together with two or three other very remarkable SMALLPOX Cases, etc.

To which is added, A LETTER to Dr. LEE, Giving him an Account of a Letter of
Dr. FREIND'S concerning that Fever which infested the Army under the Conduct of
the Earl of Peterborough, while he was Physician to it, Anno 1705, etc. in
Spain: Together with the said LETTER.

By PIERCE DOD, M. D. Fellow of the COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS, and Physician to St.
Bartholomew's Hospital.

"Magnae sunt Progressiones, quae singulis fere saeculis, praestantes Ingenio
viri, a se observata, in commune contulerunt?" --

Carolus Piso, Epistola Dedicator. ad Observationes suas de Colluvie serosa.
LONDON: Printed for C. DAVIS against Gray's-Inn Gate in Holborn, Printer to the
Royal-Society. 1746.

THE PREFACE.
THE three first of the following Cases have already, in some measure, been
communicated to the Public, through the Candor of the Learned Gentleman to
whom they are addressed.

It may be seemingly unnecessary therefore perhaps to publish them again: But
as there is something in each of them which is very remarkable, and One of them
in particular, seems to clear up a Point of considerable Consequence with
respect to Inoculation, it cannot be amiss, I think, to give them a Chance at
least, of being, if possible, a little more public: Besides, there are several
Additions to the two last of them since they were sent to the Royal Society.

Most of the other Cases are taken from some Adversaria, or Manuscript Notes,
which I have, as well as an Account of several Diseases, both Acute and
Chronical, in Manuscript likewise, of Dr. Browne's, Son of the famous Author of
the Religio Medici. Nec satis est vulgasse Fidem -- but the Author likewise of
Pseudodoxia Epidemica, and of several other valuable Treatises.
Sir Thomas Brown, and who was himself likewise a Person of great Learning and
Eminence, and Physician to St. Bartholomew's Hospital for upwards of six and
twenty Years, and succeeded therein by Dr. Cade, in October, Anno Domini, 1708.

The first of them was communicated to him by one R. G. an Apothecary at the
Bath, and the Minutes of it are said to have been taken from Mr. Long's own
Mouth, as may be seen by the said R. G's Letter, dated July 11, 1692, and is by
no means an inaccurate Relation. The three others, viz. Mr. Dormer's, Mr.
Hales's, and the Marquis of Dorchester's, came directly within his own
Observation, and have something in them which is very well worth Notice, as
well as that brief Account of the Smallpox, which is chiefly likewise taken
from his Manuscript Papers.

There are but two Cases besides; One of them, of the same kind with That in
the first Letter to Mr. Folks, though not of the same fortunate Event: The
other, taken from Tulpius, which I hope there is no occasion to make any
Apology for, especially considering how apposite it seems to be to some of
those Observations, which occurred to me upon Mr. Hales's Case, and to another
Case of the Stone which has lately made a great deal of Noise in the World.

That Letter of Dr. Freind's to Dr. Cockburne, which is added after these
Cases, is accounted for in the Epistle that precedes it: I have nothing further
therefore, I think, to trouble the World with at present,

Parva perfunctus Opella.

ERRATA.
Page 5. l. 18. after Syrup, read and -- Page 8. l. 26. instead of affluente,
read effluente -- Page 24. l. 28. instead of Country, read Course -- Page 37.
l. 22. instead of Julep, read Jalap -- Page 41. l. 3. after Age, add when -- In
Epistola ad Doctorem Lee, Page ult. l. 11. instead of ejusvis, read cujusvis --
In Epistola Doctoris Friend, Page 51. l. 1. instead of litteras, read Literas.

AN Account of the several CASES.
Bloody Urine in the Smallpox, and yet the Patient recovered. Page 1 The
Smallpox cured by a very free Use of Strong Beer and Wine, and other Strong
and Spirituous Liquors. Page 10 A Person inoculated for the Smallpox, had the
Smallpox upon the Inoculation, and yet had it again. Page 12 The Way of curing
Fevers in Tartary. Page 17 Bloody Urine in the Smallpox, and the Patient lived
to the twentieth Day. Page 18 The Secondary Fever in the Smallpox, cured by
the Use of the Bark. Page 24 A thorough Decrepitacy from the Gout cured by the
Bath, and drinking of Bath-Waters. Page 27 Fifty grains of solid Opium taken
through a Mistake. Page 31 A Suppression of Urine from the Stone in the
Kidneys, cured by a large Quantity of Soap. Page 37 Mictus Calculorum
effractorum. Page 42
CASE the FIRST. AN ACCOUNT OF A Person who made Bloody Water in the Course of
the Smallpox, and yet recovered: In a LETTER to MARTIN FOLKS, Esquire; PRESIDENT
of the Royal Society.
SIR,
MAKING Bloody Water is universally esteemed as terrible a Symptom as any that
can happen in the Smallpox, and all who have wrote concerning that Distemper
do unanimously agree, that it is a certain Forerunner of approaching Death. Dr.
Cade indeed says, in his Letter to Dr. Friend concerning Purging in that
Distemper, that he has sometimes cured this Symptom by the help of Camphire,
and a copious Quantity of Acids; but then he adds, that this Relief was only
temporary, and that, to confess the Truth, he never knew any Body that made
that sort of Water, who ever survived the 16th Day from the Eruption, and there
is no Body whom I know of, that has been conversant in this Distemper, but has
constantly experienced, sooner or later, the like Fatality in consequence of
it: I mean, when this sort of Urine has plainly proceeded from a broken Crasis
or Contexture, or as it were a thorough Dissolution of the whole Mass of Blood:
For I know very well you shall now and then have several Streaks, and sometimes
larger Quantities of Blood, in the Urine, from the Acrimony of the Salts that
are in Spanish Flies, upon the Application of Blisters, which are frequently
ordered, and mostly likewise necessary, in one or other of the Stadia of this
Distemper, and yet the Patient shall do well. And Dr. Brown, who was a very
worthy Predecessor of mine in St. Bartholomew's Hospital, gives an Account of a
Gentlewoman that lived in Dean's Yard, Westminster, who made bloody Urine in
the Smallpox, for four or five Days together, and that Dr. Needham, who
attended her along with him, did, upon that account, forsake her, and yet she
did well; but that they found afterward, that this bloody Urine was not
occasioned by the Malignancy of the Distemper, but by a sharp Stone which was
at that time descending from one of the Kidneys, through the Ureters, into the
Bladder, and which she afterward voided. This I have from some Adversaria of
his, a good number of which I have had the fortune to be in possession of
several Years, and among which there are likewise several other remarkable
Cases that occurred to him during the course of a very long and extensive, as
well as successful Practice.

But to return to my Subject.

It cannot but be a Satisfaction therefore, to a Person of your Humanity and
Goodness, to hear of an Instance in which this frightful Symptom was not
attended with its usual Fatality; and it was in the Case of a young Gentleman
of about 16 Years of Age, Son to one Colonel Ellitson, a Gentleman of very
considerable Fortune and Worth in Jamaica.

He was taken with a Fever and great Pain in his Head on April the 20th last,
and had the Smallpox come out upon him the Day following, notwithstanding
which the same Symptoms still continued, and nothing almost would stay in his
Stomach, and his Head likewise was very delirious: He was obliged therefore to
be blooded, and had Blisters applied to his Neck and to his Arms, which,
together with a proper Quantity of Pulvis e chelis Cancror. comp. and Nitre,
were the first Things that I had an Opportunity of ordering for him.

The next Day every thing was more quiet, and so again the third Day from the
Eruption; but the Smallpox were very numerous all over him, and of a rank
angry Sort, as they generally are, I think, in most of your West India
Constitutions; but this young Gentleman had besides overheated himself a little
before, upon acting his Part among the rest of his School-Fellows, at the
Montum near Eaton.

Things continued in the same State the fourth Day, but toward the Evening
there were a few Streaks of Blood mixed with, and subsiding in his Water, which
did not much alarm me, because I did not know but it might be caused by the
Blisters. I had but one Reason to doubt the contrary, and that was, he had
little or no Strangury; but some Persons did assure me that they had known
such, or even a more bloody sort of Water occasioned by Blisters, even though
there was no Strangury. I was willing therefore to hope the best, and so made
no other Alteration in my Process than to direct a plentiful Use of Spirit of
Vitriol.

What was ordered happened to succeed: We had no more of that sort of Water,
either that Night, or the next Day, or the Morning following: But I was sent
for in a great hurry that Day, viz. the 6th in the Afternoon, and found his
Friends in the utmost Consternation, not only because it returned, but because
it began to increase upon them, and was pouring off in a very free manner; No
Notice was taken of this, either to the Society, or in the Account which is
given of this Affair in the Transactions, the Reasons for which you will see
toward the Beginning of the subsequent Letter.
a Specimen of which I herewith send you.

It was necessary therefore to proceed in another Method, and I accordingly
prescribed him Gum. Arabic. Oliban. and Pulv. Amyl. ana ^ss. Alumin. nup. gr.
iv. to be taken sextis horis, in 3 or 4 Spoonfuls of a Mixture, ex Aqua.
Cinnamom. ten. Ciras. nigr. ana. iii. Theriacal. iss. Terr. Japonic. ss. Tinct.
Antiphthisic. iss. and Syrup de Mecon. ss. Which, with Tinct. Rosar. rubrar.
strongly acidulated with Spirit of Vitriol, sweetened with the above Syrup.
Aqua Cinnamom. tem. Fort. ana. ii. to be used ad libit, had the desired Effect,
and the Bloodiness of the Urine began to abate in about 10 or 12 Hours, and in
10 or 12 Hours more to go thoroughly off, so that by the next Day in the
Evening the Urine was returned to its natural State and Color.

There was nothing farther observable in the course of this Case, except that
the Distemper was of the Coherent Kind, and accordingly attended with many
other dubious Symptoms likewise: For though it is generally thought that the
Coherent Sort is not so formidable as the Confluent, yet, as Dr. Friend has
judiciously observed, and Dr. Moreton before him, there is not so much
difference between them, but they are almost always attended with much the same
Appearances, and the same Fevers plainly, at the time of Maturation; for that
the Danger does not arise so much from the Sort, as from the Number of the
Pustules, which if it be great, there is the like Reason to be fearful of the
Event, whether they flux, or whether they only cohere: All which
notwithstanding this young Gentleman had the good Fortune to escape.

I have nothing farther to detain you with at present but one short Request,
and that is, that you will be so good as to believe me with all the Respect and
Esteem imaginable,

SIR, Your most Obedient, Faithful Servant, P. D.
June 23, 1745.
CASE the SECOND and THIRD. A SECOND LETTER to MARTIN FOLKS,Esquire; PRESIDENT of
the Royal Society.
In Vindication of the foregoing CASE. Together with Two other very remarkable
Smallpox Cases.
SIR,
I DID myself the Pleasure, some time since, to send you an Account of a young
Gentleman who made Bloody Water in the Course of the Smallpox, and yet
recovered, and you were so obliging as to give it a Place in a subsequent
Transaction.

There is one Thing however which I could wish had not been omitted, and that
is, that I sent you likewise a Sample of that Water, by which you might see
whether it was, or was not, of that formidable Sort which I took it to be; but
Dr. Mortimer tells me, there were several Gentlemen at the Society who had
never had the Smallpox, and that some of them might probably be very much
afraid of it, and that it was not therefore thought advisable that the said
Sample should be produced, and that it not having been produced before the
Society he, through Inadvertency, did forget to take any Notice of it in the
Publication.

The Case must therefore rest upon the bare Relation, as it does: All that I
shall say farther in relation to it is, That it was a more thorough bloody
Urine, and in a larger Quantity, than is ever occasioned by Blisters, and
entirely of that kind as seldom ever fails to be fatal: Et quamvis Remedia
proposita sint vulgaria, hic Casus tamen observationem meruit propter Eventum
non vulgarem, ex omnibus enim Variolis laborantibus quos mihi tota vita videre
contigit, hic unicus fuit qui ex Fluxu sanguineo evaserit, sed in caeteris
certum Mortis praesagium fuit, magna praesertim sanguinis copia affluente; as
Riverius had the Good-fortune to be able to say before me, in a parallel Case
which came before him, Centur. prima Observation:, -- Observat. lxxi. -- I call
it a parallel Case, though This was a Fluxus Alvei, because the Prognostic is
the same, whether the Effusion of Blood be per Alveum, vel per Vesicam.

What I have to offer to you now is a Case of a different Nature, but an
Instance likewise of the Recovery of a Gentleman who had this Distemper in as
terrible a manner as can well be conceived, and that by a Regimen altogether as
extraordinary.

It was one Mr. Prouse, Grandson to the learned and good Dr. Hooper, at that
time Bishop of Bath and Wells, and the present worthy and steady Representative
of his Country for the County of Somerset, and is taken from a Letter which was
sent to a Friend of mine, from one of the nearest Relations that Mr. Prouse
had, and who was with him during the whole time, viz. his Mother, dated October
31, 1719.

He had the Smallpox came out upon him October 15, 1719, and on the 17th, i.
e. the third Day, at Night, was seized with a violent Shortness of Breath,
which increased upon him the 18th in the Morning, so that he was in danger of
being what they call throttled, had the Hiccups, rattled in his Throat, fetched
his Breath double, grew senseless, looked black and blue, was convulsed all
over, and lost one Pulse in four.

This till Eight at Night, during which time they poured in as much Wine,
Brandy, and Spirits, as they could, every Quarter of an Hour, but about that
time he began to be in such a State as they could not get in any more, and he
fell into a sort of Slumber, out of which he waked in a very little time, and
was something better: So from thence they continued him in the same Course,
drinking nothing weaker than Strong Beer, and that with at least two or three
Spoonfuls of Brandy, or Spirits, in every Draught of it, once every Hour, to
the 27th, or the 13th after the Eruption: And what is very remarkable, if they
let him lie any time an Hour or two extraordinary without these Liquors, he
would grow lightheaded, hot, and sick, but upon returning to them would grow
cool and easy.

The Night between the 27th and the 28th was a very bad one, insomuch that it
was as much as three Persons could do to hold him in his Bed, but about Seven
in the Morning he came entirely to himself, and was from that time thoroughly
out of Danger; but during the Course that he was in before, which was from the
18th to the Morning of the 28th, besides his other Potables, which were all
heightened and made strong with Drops or Spirits, he drank six and twenty
Quarts and one Pint of Liquor, the smallest of which was Strong Beer, and the
greatest part the strongest Wine that could be got, besides a full Quart of
Brandy.

All this while he did not know that it was the Smallpox, but fancied it was a
Surfeit which he had got by his having eaten too heartily of Pork, and was
about 12 Years old when this happened.

The Eclat of this Recovery did a great deal of Credit to old Dr. Bettenson,
under whose Care he was at the Bath, who, as he was a very eminent and good
Physician, did every thing incumbent upon a Person of Skill and Integrity in a
regular manner, previous to these terrible Appearances, but found himself, as
he thought then, obliged to go a good deal out of the way, in order to support
him, if possible, under the Violence of them, and was afterward in a manner
necessitated to go on with it by what is above related: And his Success in this
Case, if I am rightly informed, encouraged him to treat some of his future
Smallpox Patients, more particularly the present Earl Powlet, and a Brother or
two of his, in much the same manner, and that without any sinister Event; but
not being Master of those Cases, I cannot say any thing more as to them.

Give me leave only to remark, That the Gentlemen of that County have, for the
most part, good Stamina, and that it happens likewise very fortunately,
especially in Cases of such extreme Danger as that of Mr. Prouse was, ut and
sint, as Horace expresses it, dura Ilia, and ut, quicquid Veneni saeviat in
praecordiis, Medici sinnt, qui iis auxiliatricem exporrigant manum.

I did not think to trouble you with any thing more at present, but another
Smallpox Case being lately come to my Hands, I was not willing to lose the
Opportunity of communicating it.

It is the Case of a little Boy, Son to Mr. Richards, Member of Parliament for
Bridport in Dorsetshire. He was inoculated about three Years ago, at the Age of
about 3, and had the Smallpox come out upon him to the number of 50 or 60, and
they maturated and scabb'd, and went off in the same manner that that sort of
Pock, which was a regular and distinct one, generally does: But about two Years
afterward, i. e. about a Year ago, he had the Smallpox again, and there came
out between 2 and 300, which maturated and scabb'd likewise, and went through
the same Stages, and in the same manner that the former did, only he was worse
before the Eruption, but when that was completed had no manner of Disorder
except too much of an Appetite, as is usual every now and then, in and after
the Smallpox.

This is authenticated to me by a Letter which I have from a learned and
experienced Physician in those Parts, Dr. Brodrepp, who is likewise Grandfather
to the Child, and attended him upon both Occasions: And, whatever may be said
in evasion of other Gases, in which Persons that have been inoculated have had
the Smallpox afterward, as That the Inoculation did not take place, There was
no Eruption, at least no Variolous one, and the like, is certainly an Instance
that All is not to be depended upon that is given out in favor of, or is
expected from Inoculation, and that it is, by no means, an effectual Security
from one's having the Smallpox again.

What is between these two Asterisks, added now upon the Printing.
But, as it has been observed long since by the inimitable Author of Hudibrass,

Surety the Pleasure is as great
In being Cheated, as to Cheat.
or else it is impossible that Inoculation should triumph so much as it is said
Appendix to Dr. Jurin's Case, p. 28.
that it does over all its Opposers? What is between these two Asterisks, added
now upon the Printing.


Addresses of this kind likewise ought not to be too long, I shall therefore
say no more with relation to this Point at present, but hasten to a Conclusion,
for fear that mine should not only be thought, but prove so, and am, with great
Respect,

SIR, Your most Obedient, humble Servant, P. D,
June, 1743.
POSTSCRIPT to the above Letter.
SINCE I wrote this, I have likewise had an Opportunity of being afresh
satisfied of what is above related with respect to Mr. Prouse, with these
further Particulars, viz.

That he was at first treated in the same manner that other People usually are,
and put into a very temperate, if not too cool a Regimen.

That the Smallpox, thereupon, did not come on, or rather struck in, and that
in consequence thereof, he was brought into the Straits in which he was upon
the third and fourth Days.

That, upon this, Dr. Bettenson told Mr. Prouse's Relations, of the good
Effects which he had sometimes seen from a free Use of Strong and Spirituous
Liquors, in his Practice among People in the Country, but did not care to
venture upon it in a Person of such tender Years, and of such consequence as
Mr. Prouse was; but that it was insisted upon that he should do it, it being
apparently a desperate Case, and there being nothing else seemingly to be done.

That they accordingly entered upon it, and went on with it, but more
frequently than as it is above mentioned, being never able to discontinue the
pouring in of them by as much as he could take, for a Quarter of an Hour,
without a sensible Detriment to him.

That the Strong Beer which he drank was some that his Grandfather had brewed
when he was Dean of Canterbury, and brought with him from thence, which was
then a matter of sixteen Years before, and of the Black or Noggish sort, of
near 20 Bushels to the Hogshead.

That the good Event of this Process occasioned a pretty general Run into a
like one, in those Parts, during the time that the Smallpox was so rife, and
of so malignant a Sort, as it was that Winter and the Spring following, and
that the Failure of it in some Instances was thought to be owing to too
negligent an Attendance to it, or the not plying them duly and sufficiently
with suchlike Liquors.

And lastly, That it had been generally thought that Mr. Prouse's Cure,
extraordinary as it was, could not well be ascribed to any thing else, but that
a Physician of the first Rank, who, has been concerned in his Family, seemed to
make light of it, and very frankly told them that he would have done every whit
as well if old Bettenson had ordered him to have been dragged through a
Horse-pond: At which, I perceive, they were somewhat surpised, and which is
more indeed than I should have thought, had it come from One of less Eminence
in the Profession, or less critical upon the Practice of others than himself:
But presume that he took it from a very good Way that they have of curing
Fevers among the Tartars Dum quis Febre corripitur, tunc comprehensa Coma ipsum
aliquantisper exagitantes, and circumrotantes in Aquam profluentem projiciunt,
hocque modo Humores and Spiritus alterando procurant Febrifugum. --
Observationes Medicinales circa Morbos in regionibus Septentrionalibus per
Philippum Lloyd, M. D. in Actis Philosophicis, No 256. page ^10.
, and that is, "When any one is seized with a Fever, they take him by the Hair
of the Head and shake him well for a little while, and swing him round and
round, and then throw him into the Water; by which means a Turn is given to the
Blood, and the Humors and Spirits are altered, and so the Fever is cured."

And thus much for this memorable Case.

CASE the FOURTH. BLOODY URINE in the SMALLPOX, And the Patient lived to the
20th Day.
Together with a short Account of the Smallpox in general.
SINCE I wrote the foregoing Letters, etc. I have met with a Case of the same
Nature with the First, in which there was Reason, as I thought, to hope for the
same fortunate Event, and of which I will likewise give a brief Account,
notwithstanding I was disappointed.

It was in a Servant of my own, a Lad of about 19 Years old, who was seized
with a violent Pain in his Back, which he imputed to his having helped the
Brewer's Servants in carrying down Drink; but which continuing, notwithstanding
he was blooded and had a Plaster put upon it, and being attended likewise with
a Pain in his Head (though not a great one) the Day following, I immediately
apprehended that it was the Forerunner of the Smallpox, and that of a bad
Sort; I say of a bad Sort, because I have scarce ever known that Symptom to
have preceded and to persist, but the Smallpox has proved of a very dangerous
Sort, and almost constantly fatal: Which is more than I remember to have been
observed by any body that has hitherto treated concerning this Distemper.

The Eruption ensued, i. e. began to show itself, on the third Day, and Bloody
Water upon the fourth from that, or the seventh from the Invasion, and
continued that and the next Day, and great part of the Day following; and there
were other Symptoms, viz. a Delirium and Diarrhoea, and great Restlesness and
Inquietude, which attended him likewise from just before the Eruption to almost
that time, notwithstanding he had been Blooded again, and had a Blister inter
Scapulas, and taken all proper temperate Restringents the whole while.

What was farther remarkable in this Case is, that he went on pretty tolerably
for Number and Sort, etc. after this until the fifteenth Day, but was then
seized with a sudden Deliquium, and in such a State that it was almost
impracticable to get any thing down, and he was seemingly expiring. They made a
shift however to get down, every now and then, a Spoonful or two of Lac
Ammoniac and Tinctura Croci, with some Serpentaria in it, and a couple of
Blisters were applied infra Cubitos, by means of which he came to himself, and
was likely enough to live the next Morning; and continuing so that Day, which
was the Sixteenth from the Eruption, and which has been observed Vide Case I.
Page 2.
to be the latest that any One has been known to survive who ever made such
dreadful Water; and continuing so likewise with not much of a Fever, and
something of an Appetite, and two or three Stools a Day, and good Apprehensions
for himself, for two Days more, I cannot but think there was Reason to hope he
might have done well: But unluckily for him, the Fever rose upon him again the
third time, to a very high degree, the next Day in the Evening, and threw every
thing into Confusion, and he died upon the 19th Day of December last, having
had the Smallpox come out upon him the 30th of the Month before.

SECT. II.
AS I am upon Smallpox Cases, it will not be unacceptable, I hope, if I add
something concerning that Distemper in general, especially as it is partly
taken from the Adversaria of that Learned Gentleman who is mentioned in the
Preface, and to whom the Reader will be further obliged in most of the
subsequent Cases.

The Smallpox is a contagious Distemper, and as terrible as any of them, very
many dying of it, more particularly when it is accompanied, as it generally is,
with a Fever of a dangerous Kind.

This, when they are many, or of the Flux, or Confluent Sort; on the contrary,
when the Patient has but a few, and the Fever ceases upon the Eruption, no
Disease is more favorable, and you may sometimes meet them walking about their
Affairs, with the Smallpox in their Faces, in the open Streets of London.

No Disease likewise in which there is more of a Crisis than in the Smallpox;
for by the fourth Day, at furthest, after the Invasion, the Eruption is
evident; by the seventh it is perfected, or all are come out; by the eleventh
they dry away, or turn into Scabs; and by the fourteenth they fall off; though in
the Flux Sort they are often slower, and some die after the fourteenth, nay on
the seventeenth, and twentieth Days, although few have Strength enough to hold
out so long.

A Fever, as has been said, generally joined with the Smallpox, and when it
ceases not upon the Eruption, apt however for some Days after it to be more
remiss: but on the seventh from the Eruption it increases again, and returns
with some Violence; and this is what is generally called the Second Fever, and
occasions the Danger, which continues for some Days: Nay in the Flux Sort some
are so unfortunate as to have a third Fever seven Days after the second, in
which Case very few escape.

The Smallpox favorable,

Quae cito maturae, quae erumpunt Febre remissa,
Rubrae, albae, paucae, nullae nigrore notatae;
Et ubi

Libera vox, facilis spiratio, non sitis ingens; Those on the contrary
unfavourable, and for the most part mortal where there is

Mictus sanguineus, fluxusve, Angina, Phrenitis; Qui Variolis pereunt vel
Angina fauces occludente, vel Peripneumonia aut Respiratione suffocatoria, vel
Syncope vires dejiciente, vel Febre, vel demum Diarrhoea aut Dysenteria, fatis
ut plurimum cedunt. The greatest Danger, as has been said before, mostly from
the Fever, upon which account Dr. Brown is of Opinion, that if that could be
respited there would not near so many die of this Disease, and was confirmed in
this Opinion from his own Experience, upon trying of the Bark, both in the
first Fever which brings them out, and in the second when they begin to dry and
should go away, and gives us some of the Instances, one of which, relating to
its Efficacy in the Secondary Fever, I shall here set down, and may be called,

The Fifth Case.
Mr. Dormer, who lodged then in Pall Mall, had a very ill Sort of Smallpox,
which ran all together, and covered most of the Superficies of his Skin, both
in Face and Body, and was in danger from the Beginning. When the time came that
they should dry away, and the second Fever increased upon him, they stood like
a Quagmire all about him, and would advance no further, notwithstanding many
powerful Remedies were given him. In this difficult Case the Doctor delayed no
longer, but gave him a Dram of the Bark in Substance, and repeated it every
six Hours at furthest, till he had taken about an Ounce and an half of it. His
Nights were so bad before, notwithstanding many quieting Remedies which he had
taken, that each of them, as it was feared, would be his last; but the first
Night after he began with the Bark was quieter, and the Smallpox on both Sides
of his Face began to dry; the second Night his Face was all dried, and some of
his Body advanced very much, and after the third Night all the Symptoms abated,
and he seemed to be in great Safety, and very suddenly recovered to the great
Joy of all his numerous Friends.

The Doctor's general Process as to this Distemper upon other Occasions, much
the same as has been ever since, except as to Bleeding, which he restrains to a
Plethoric Habit, and the Time before the Eruption; though at the same time he
informs us, that at Paris they let them Blood any Day after the Appearance, but
says this is not practiced here in England; and excepting likewise as to
Blisters, which he does not so much as advise the Use of, or make any mention
of in the whole Country, or in any State of the Disease, and which I am the
more surprised at, because he takes great Notice of them, and advises one at
least to be kept continually open and running during the whole course of the
malady, in Malignant and Pestilential Fevers, and says that the great Use of
them came first to be known during the Pestilential Constitution, which was
Anno 1664 and 1665, and had continued ever since.

The rest of his Process, Pectoral Drinks, Lambatives, and Posset Drink, with
Tares in it in case that the Lungs, and Gargles and Mucilages in case that the
Throat is affected, together with Diascordium, Theriaca, or Philonium, in case
of a Looseness, and an Ounce of Diacodium every Night in case of Inquietude;
and, if the Smallpox prove long lasting, some temperate Cordial, and to supply
the Spirits often with a Draught of it, in case of Faintness, and thorough
Purging when the Smallpox is well off, and the Patient fit for it.

There is one thing further which the Doctor takes notice of, and that is, that
many Waters, Oils and Unguents, or Liniments, are frequently made use of, in
order to preserve the Face, after the Smallpox; all which he thinks altogether
useless, if not hurtful; and that a little Flower, or white Starch, well dried,
and shaken upon the Face, is preferable to them all. Nay, if you let nothing
that is moist, or greasy, touch the Face for fifteen Days, the Face, he says,
will scarce be red, at least not so red as it will otherwise be; and if for a
long while after you forbear to wash it, it will be the better, and the most
that you need to do is to breathe upon a warm Handkerchief, and to wipe your
Face with it.

CASE the SIXTH. A general Decrepitacy from the GOUT. Cured by Bathing, and
Drinking of the Bath-Waters. Anno Domini 1691 and 1692.
MR. Long, of Downeside, in the Parish of Shepton Mallet, in the County of
Somerset, of about 49 Years of Age, was seized with the Gout about 14 Years
before, i. e. before the Year 91, and for the three Years immediately
preceding, was never without great Pains a Month together in the whole Year,
the Pains rambling from Part to Part, and upon Abatement leaving a Numbness
over the whole Body. In consequence of this likewise, the Joints of his Fingers
became crooked and inflexible; the Patella of his right Knee fixed; his Posture
decrepit, and quite double, with extreme Pain in his Hips and Small of the
Back; the Muscles and Joints of his Thighs, Legs, Ancles, and Feet, motionless,
so that he was carried about from Place to Place, not able to put the least
Stress upon the Ground; his Stomach, lost; his thirst, unquenchable; his Face
meagre, pale and yellow; the Hair of his Head, gray, and the whole Habit of his
Body, emaciated to Skin and Bones. To these Afflictions were frequently added,
terrible Fits of the Stone, to which sort of Concretions the Entrails of his
Body were so much disposed, that after six Weeks use of the Bath Waters,
leaving his Waters, by chance, for seven Days, the Urinal was crusted all over
with a perfect hard Stone like a Pumice, thicker than a Crown-piece.

This was his Case when he began to drink the Bath Waters at the End of April,
1691; and he drank them hot in the Morning, and cold at Meals; and in a little
time was reconciled to them for his constant Drink, without Desire of any
other. In a Week's time his Stomach came, and his Thirst abated; and after a
Month's constantly Drinking, and Bathing every other Day a little while, only
to stretch his Joints, it gave him perfect Ease from Pain.

The 28th of May he returned home, and carried some of the Waters along with
him, and sent for them constantly once a Week, using them for his ordinary
Drink, and sometimes drinking them warm in the Morning for a Stool or two, as
Occasion required, and they passed very well, but not so effectually as upon
the Place. This Course continued till the End of August 1691, when he came to
the Bath again, Drinking and Bathing as at the first, till the Middle of
October, with increasing Success; but toward that time he went home again, and
sent and continued to use the Waters as before.

Between Allhallowtide and Christmas the Gray Hairs began to fall off, and new
ones succeeded; and by Candlemas they were all gone, and a brown, curling Hair
came in their place, such as he had when he was about 20, growing so fast, that
he was obliged to cut above an Inch a Month, and still growing thicker and
fresher, so that he had a Head of Hair like a Wig, without a gray one in it.

This encouraged him to quit his own House, and come and take a House at the
Bath, and to renew and pursue the above Method very diligently, and it was
accordingly attended with daily Amendment, insomuch that in the Summer, 1692,
his Toe-Nails, which before were hard, rugged, and scaly, were thrust off by
some that were new, fresh, and smooth; his Arms were strengthened; his Legs
plump'd out, and his Feet could bear a strait pair of Shoes; and he that before
could not lay the least Stress upon them, could then bear to stamp upon the
Ground, and that forcibly, and without the least Regret, and found his
Strength, as he had done his Decay, still increasing upwards, so that he could
stand almost upright without any Pain.

He acquired likewise a fleshy Habit of Body, and a ruddy and plump Face, and a
lively vigorous Eye, and could bend his Knees, and did not want other Effects
or Powers of Youth: Nor had he any Fit of the Gout to lay him up, nor the least
Touch of the Stone, or any Sharpness of Urine, after he was once well entered
into drinking of the Bath-Waters.

This Case is related, among a great many others, by Dr. Pierce in his Memoirs
of the Bath, Page 334, etc. but neither so clearly, nor so fully as above; upon
which account I take the liberty to publish it, and think that it is so
remarkable and well-told a Case that it very well deserves the Notice which is
taken of it; and there is thus much farther remarkable in it, viz. that the
Cure seems to be, in a great measure, owing to the Bathing, as well as Drinking
of the Waters, though it is now thought to be extremely prejudicial, and
consequently prohibited to all who are in any manner afflicted with the GOUT.

CASE the SEVENTH. The Case of the Marquis of Dorchester.
A large Quantity of Opium taken through a Mistake.
HENRY, Marquis of Dorchester, Son to the Earl of Kingston, Lieutenant General
of his Majesty King Charles I. his Forces, within the Counties of Lincoln,
Rutland, etc. a great Lover of Learning, and a great Lover of learned Men, (and
to whom the College of Physicians is obliged for a valuable Collection of
Books, which he purchased at the Expense of some thousand Pounds, and gave to
the College) had a Cabinet of Choice Remedies, as was usual with Great Persons,
and in all great Families at that time, and among the rest a Metalline
Substance, which looked like Regulus of Antimony, but being in Wine, or any
other Liquor, was not Vomitive but Sudorifick.

He had likewise a well-compounded Cordial Electuary, of which he used to take
about the Quantity of a Walnut every Morning, and likewise always kept a
celebrated Extract, then much in use, and called Extractum Cardiac. Magistrale,
the seventh Part of which was Extract of, or purified Opium, and of which he
used also to give his Servants, or ethers that wanted it, every now and then, a
few Grains.

One Morning, as a Servant of his was passing through, his Bedchamber, he
called to her to reach him the Gallypot in which the Cordial Electuary was, out
of his Closet, but she through mistake brought him the Pot of the Extract, and
of which, as it happened, there were four Ounces, and he immediately took six
Drachms of it, as appeared upon weighing of what remained afterward; so that
what he took contained about two Scruples and an half, or fifty Grains of pure
Opium.

After this he slept four Hours, viz. from Eight to Twelve, before his Servants
perceived any thing of the Mistake, or attempted to wake him; but then they
could not, though they did what they could, and therefore sent immediately from
Highgate, where his Lordship then was, to Dr. Brown and Sir John Micklethwaite
to come and attend him.

Sir John Micklethwaite being abroad, Dr. Brown prescribed diverse Things, and
had them made up ready, and a little while afterward they met with Sir John,
and by Five in the Evening they were both of them with my Lord, at his House in
Highgate. His Servants in the mean time had been able to take him up, and put
on his Clothes, and to support and assist him to walk about his Chamber, and he
was sometimes able to open his Eyes, and to answer to what was spoken, but fell
asleep again presently, and they were not able to keep him awake a Quarter of a
Minute with all their Striving, calling upon him, giving him provoking
Language, nor any thing else that they could do.

He was therefore let Blood directly, and that plentifully, and then took
Infusion. Croci Metallor. iss, and after that Vitrioli albi i, twice, but could
not vomit, neither did he ever vomit in the whole course of his Life: However
the Medicines worked downwards, and he had a Stool in about an Hour's time, and
they then proceeded to give him a Draught of Decoct. Senn. iv, with two Ounces
of Syrupus de Spina, and repeated the same sort of Medicines every two or three
Hours afterward, and Sir John Micklethwait seeing little or no Alteration for
the better, returned to London about Nine at Night, bewailing the apparent Loss
of so great a Man, so good a Friend, and so kind a Master; but Dr. Brown
continued with him, and still to give what Assistance he could, and about
Midnight ordered my Lord to be put to Bed, and to be suffered to sleep without
those frequent Interruptions which had been hitherto given him.

The Purging Draughts continued to work plentifully, and as soon as the Day
began to appear, the Doctor walked down into the Garden to refresh himself with
the cool Air of the Morning, giving Orders to be called in half an Hour, or
upon any Alteration which might happen to his Lordship, and about that time
Notice was brought him that my Lord seemed to be more sensible, and was awake;
upon which the Doctor went in again, and found his Pulse not quite so high as
it had been before, and gave him a Cordial Draught, with 15 Drops of Spiritus
Salis Armoniaci in it.

My Lord being now not so desirous of Sleep as before, called for his Chaplain
to read to him, and in half an Hour more his Head was clear, and he seemed to
be totally recovered, and desired to see what had been ordered for him, and
spoke of the Praescriptions with a great deal of Candor and Reason, and Skill
and Judgment. And thus, in the space of less than twenty-four Hours from the
Time of the taking it, the Narcotick, or whatever other noxious Quality there
may be in too large a Quantity of Opium, was mastered and totally remedied.

This Case is without a Date, but what I have likewise among Dr. Browne's
Adversaria, and a clear Instance of his Abilities, and of the Justice with
which my Lord Marquis was pleased to speak of him in his Profession, Bleeding,
Vomiting, and Purging, or one, or more, if not All of them, being certainly the
most effectual, if not the unice necessaria upon all such Occasions: Upon which
account I have often wondered that so general a Notice only is taken of them,
that Acid Medicines and Lixivial Salts are put upon an equal foot of Efficacy
with them, in a celebrated Treatise upon the Subject of Poisons, with which the
World has been long obliged, and lately reoblig'd. But multiplicity of
Business, greater Concerns, and a Non vacat pro rebus exiguis, cannot but
prevent Persons of Eminence from being so particularly instructive as they
might otherwise be, and what is said in relation to it, in each of the Editions
A Mechanical Account of Poisons, London, 1702 and 1745, Page 147 of the First
Edition, and 267 of the Third.
, seems to be intended rather for Hints of all that is proper in general, than
to point out what may be more particularly necessary, and is principally to be
depended upon on such Occasions.

The said Marquis of Dorchester was educated at Emanuel-College in Cambridge,
and became afterward a hard Student, studying, as it is said, for the most
part, ten or twelve Hours a Day, and applying himself to the Study of the
Fathers, and Schoolmen, and Casuists, and of the Canon and Civil Law; as
likewise of the Common Law, and was accordingly admitted a Bencher of
Gray's Inn, Anno Dom. 1642, but about seven Years afterward, when he was about
43 Years old, viz. in the Year 1649, he betook himself to the Study of Physic
and Anatomy, and was admitted to be a Fellow of the College of Physcians in
1658, and became a Credit and Ornament to it, or, as Tony Wood Athenae
Oxonienses, Fasti, Vol. II. Page 22.
expresses it, their Pride and Glory, and was a great Lover of the whole
Society, and more particularly of Dr. Brown, who was the Person whom he
consulted principally, and entrusted likewise as to the Purchase of such Books
as were necessary for completing of his Library, for the future Service and
Benefit of the College. He was born Anno Dom. 1606, and died at his own House
in Charter House Yard, December. 8, 1680, aged 74 Years.

CASE the EIGHTH. A Suppression of Urine, from the Stone in the Kidneys, Cured
by a large Quantity of Soap.
MR. Hales, Brother to Sir Edward Hales of Kent, had Stones in both Kidneys,
and it so happened, that the Stones on each side descended together, and
stopped, or plugg'd up both the Ureters in such a manner, that he labored
under a total Suppression of Urine for twenty Days together. Dr. Brown visited
him from the Beginning of it, and gave him Glysters and Purges, and ordered him
to be bloodedseveral times, and as often as he could bear it for the Pain, to
go from his Brother's Chambers in the Temple, where he lodged, as far as to
Hyde-Park in a Coach: He gave him Vomits likewise, especially if ever he began
to be drowsy, which frequently happened, and they were of Vitriol. alb. Oxymel
of Squills, and Vin. Benedictum, as his Purges were of Decoct. Sennae and
Mannae, with Syrup of Buckthorn and Julep, and Resin of Julep, and Aloes, and
Scammony, which the Doctor gave chiefly because he hoped they would prove
Hydragogues, and help to carry off the Serous Parts of the Blood, lest they
should otherwise break in upon, and drown the Brain.

These and other Medicines were given, scarce any thing being omitted that
could any ways contribute either to the Support of him, or to the suppling of
the Passages, or the making a Discharge of the Stone, in all respects, more
easy; notwithstanding which there was no Relief, only that he was kept still
alive.

At length the Doctor thought of Castile Soap, and gave him not a little, but
from two or three Drachms to an Ounce, and an Ounce and an half, and to two and
more Ounces at a time, dissolved in Water, 'till he had taken two Pounds of it,
and at last there came away a Stuff, and some Water followed. -- This Stuff was
separated, as the Doctor imagines, from the Inside of the Ureter, and there
came away a large Stone along with it, and wrapped up in it, besides several
other small ones, and Dirt and Skin, and the gangrened Membrane, and after that
a foul and nasty Urine, and then, viz. the next Day in the Morning, a great
Quantity of Water. -- What he took afterward was Terebinthina Veneta, and
other soft and gentle Medicines of the same Tendency, and all was well.

This is a remarkable Account of a very happy Effect from the Use of Soap, and
an Instance how free it may be made with, even to a Degree which is almost
incredible. But then it must be considered, that this was likewise an almost
gone Case, and of extreme Exigence: Every thing else, in a manner, had been
tried, and there was no other Chance for his Survival. In which sort of Cases
it is not only the Judgment, but warrantable, to give things of the greatest
Efficacy, and that, not only in the common trifling Way and Doses, but to the
utmost Stretch that either the Patient can bear, or the Medicine shall be found
not to be going beyond the anceps Remedium.

It is to be observed likewise, that the Effect which this Medicine had, was
merely to bring away the Stuff, Stone, etc. Soap, more particularly that of
Castile, being, as Dr. Brown (immediately previous to this Case) has observed,
an excellent Diuretic; the Subtilty of its Parts, and the Activity and
Asperity of its Salts, softened by means of their Union with an Oil, admirably
qualifying it to stimulate and deterge, as well as to relax the Urinary
Passages, and consequently to facilitate the Exclusion of any thing that wants
to pass off that way.

How far it is capable of being improved into further Excellencies, and to
become a Lithontriptick, or possessed of the Virtue to break or dissolve the
Stone in a human Body, I will not pretend to determine. Dr. Brown, though he has
mentioned several things which are thought to be so, does not seem to think
that any thing is really so, or much to be relied upon for any such Purpose:
And Tulpius, that faithful Observer, says, " Nihil Medicis frequentius in ore
quam Medicamentum Calculos frangens; at vide fis arenosos and molles duntaxat
intelligas; Silices quippe ut vix comminuunt Mallei, sic profecto multo minus
acris aliquis humor, qui fortassis aptior foret exedendis tenuibus Vesicae
tunicis quam praeduris Lapidibus." -- Vide Tulpii Observationes, Lib. IV. Cap.
37. The rest of which, because it is not altogether foreign to the present
Purpose, I shall take the liberty to subjoin immediately after the present Case.

But I forget -- Physic is an ample Field, and there ever have been, and ever
will be Opportunities of adding to, or retrenching from, and making some
Improvements or Alterations or other in Medicine; and there have ever likewise
been some who have been Discreet enough to reserve the Pleasure of the
Knowledge of them to themselves, although at the same time they have never failed
to be so Publick-spirited as to acquaint the World, of whom, and where they
were to be had; and it is certainly an Argument of a refined and understanding
Age there either are any New Lights struck out in any Branch of Science,

vel Horatius, lib. 4. Od. ult. Verse. 12.
veteres revocantur Vulgo, Nostrums, or Remedies of superior Excellence to any
as yet known, and yet it is not known what they are, from the famous Oleum
Anodynum, etc. of some of our most eminent Physicians, down to Dr. Cr -- m -- l
M-rt-r's new Plan for the Practice of Physic.
Arts. CASUS ULTIMUS. Mictus Calculorum fractorum: Ex TULPIO.
Hic ille utrinque sospitator Tulpius,
Inserviendo sanitati and Patriae.

THOMAS FONTANUS, senex sum humanus, exantlatis aliquandiu acerbissimis
urgentis Urinae cruciatibus, eminxit tandem plurimos Calculos, color varios,
and forma moleque dispares; quorum alii in conspectum prodiere glab^i ac
politi, alii vicissim angulares, vel sphaerici; imo nonnulli quasi serrula a se
invicem praecisi. Quod inusitatum spectaculum eo majorem movit admirationem,
quo deinceps excreverit plures effractorum Calculorum cortices, qui aequantes
unguem humanum, seni, septenive singulis interdum prodiere diebus.

Attonitis interim, and haud parum suspensis Medicis, quo referrent hanc
Calculos effringendi ac poliendi vim, donec Aegro, ob omnimodam Urinae
suppressionem, ad meliorem vitam translato, Anatome veritatem, quasi ex umbra,
in claram lucem produxerit. Fluctuabant enim in Vesicae fundo undecim Calculi,
quorum maximus fragili cortice tectus, quasi alter Actaeon, a continuo
inaequalium Calculorum occursu adeo fuit detritus, ut plurima inde diffilierint
fragments, quae deinde cum Urina emingerentur. Praeter quem multijugum Lapidum
fragmentorumque acervum Familiae ibidem ostendimus tres Calculos, satis
insignes, qui Vesicae tunicis adeo fuere involuti, ut ne lynceis quidem oculis
illos perspexisses, nisi Scalpellum involucra abstulisset, cujus beneficio duos
etiam Calculos animadvertimus in Renibus latitantes.

Ecquid egisses, Lithotome, in hisce Syrtibus? Obvios forte Calculos facile
eduxisses, at qui eruisses tunicis inclusos? Vis signem tibi, quam deinceps
sequaris, Cynosuram? Quae supra hominem Deo commit, and consule non minus
tuae famae, quam aegrorum saluti.

Verum enimvero, quam latus hic patuit campus illis, qui nihil non Remediis
suis acceptum ferunt, sive vere, sive falso: Praedicassent quidem speciose
commentitiam suam gloriam, sed quam turpiter deinde aliis ludibrio essent,
veritate ab Anatome e latebris eruta, nae illi in speciem quidem apparuissent
Medici, at revera Nugivendi ac Sycophantae.

Calculorum fragmenta prodiere quidem aliquando ex mutuo eorundem attritu, sed
ex ac^i Medicamento Ecquis id vidit? -- Idem, h.e. Tulpius, inter Monita Medica.

FINIS.
Ad Doctissimum Virum MATTHAEUM LEE, M. D. EPISTOLA, Notam Illi faciens
Epistolam Clarissimi Doctoris JOHANNIS FRIEND Ad GULIELMUM COCKBURNE, M. D. De
Febre ea quae Copias in Hispania infestabat, quibus Ille ut Medicus praefuit,
Anno 1705, etc.
A PEIRCIO DOD, M. D. Collegii Regii Medicorum Socio, Et Nosocomii Sancti
Bartholomaei, apud Smithfield, Medico.
MATTHAEO LEE, M. D. PIERCIUS DOD,
SALUTEM.
CUM nemo uspiam vel naturam Morborum penitius intellexerit, vel illorum
Historias accuratius descripserit, vel clariora Eruditionis suae specimina in
omni ferme Doctrinae genere, and in re Medica praesertim ediderit, quam
praeclarus noster Doctor Johannes Friend, non ingratum tibi fore confido, Vir
Doctissime, out Literato cuipiam, si Epistolam quam scripsit ad Dignissinum
Virum Gulielmum Cockburne, M. D. dum ipse praefuit saluti Exercitus, qui sub
Illustrissimo Comite de Peterborough in Hispania militavit, Annis 1705 and
1706, and cujus inclyta facta domi reversus conscripsit Account of the Earl of
Peterborough's Conduct in Spain, printed for Jonah Boyer in 1707.
Tecum communicem.

Id vero sane mireris forsan, qui and Freindum probe nosti, and nosti etiam ut
ille Praefatione ad secund. Edition. Praelection. Chymicar.
Cockburneum redarguat, "tanquam inficetum quendam Edenburghensem, and jubeat
illius Scripta, vel longa pace in Sosiorum forulis requiescere, vel ut alicui
saltem usui esse possint, Diarrhoea laboratibus inservire," ut Ille, inquam,
Cockburneum unquam tam amice tamque magnifice compellarit: Sed fuit inter Illos
mutuum tunc temporis commercium, and mutua itidem. Amicitia, tam antea quam
postee, uit and Familiaritas non tanquam inter aliquando osuros: Quin and
Freindus illius meminit in "Hoc in loco non alienum erit Plethorae originem
paulo altius investigare, causasque exponere, quare neque ante secundum
septenarium inciplat Fluxus menstruus, nec ultra septimum perdurat; cujus rei
rationem primus tradidit Vir in Oeconomia Animali scientissimus Cockburneus."
-- Emmenolog. cap. 8. p. 83. Editionis Wigganeanae.
Emmenologia sua, non multis antea annis edita honorifice.

Qua ratione, and quibus de causis rescissa est, and nunquam deinde coiit haec
Conjunctio, non est hujusce loci, neque temporis disquirere; Utrinque forsan
peccabatur: Hoc solum Tibi spondere queo, Epistolam quae subsequitur fuisse
ipsius Freindi manu exaratam, and quod exscripta est ex ipso Autographo:
Epistola ipsa etiam clare indicat ex cujus divite vena ac penu profluxit, and
portio quaedam illius, paucissimis tantum mutatis, jamdudum adoptata est a
seipso inter sua Commentaria.

Cuinam igitur prius potiusve eandem mitterem quam Tibi, Vir Eruditissime, in
Freindi scriptis, aeque ac re Medica, and Literaria quacunque versatissimo,
Quique Freindi adinstar, proprio Mart, non ad gratiam modo and famam, sed ad
dignitatem in Medicina evectus es, and quo non alius rectius novit quanti
Illius scripta sunt aestimanda. Tuque adeo vicissim, Vir Humanissime, si recte
auguror, Schedulam hanc laetus accipies, saltem si sentias idem juxta mecum hoc
est, quod dolendum plane est, and ingens rei Medicae dispendium, si vel minima
Scriptoris ejusvis elegantioris monumenta intercidente.

Vale itaque, Vir Spectatissime, and Freindum, ut in caeteris rebus, ita in
Scriptis quoque aliquando aemulere: Neque autem hoc adeo esque differ, ac
Celeberrimus ille Vir, quem Freindus toties In Epistola nimirum inter
Commentar. ad Epidemicos Hippocratis; in Epistola de Purgantibus; in Epistola
de quibusdam Variolar. generibus; and alibi.
obsecrat, " ut quae apud se habeat de Variolarum omnium natura atque
discrepantia earumque eventu, and optima curandi via, vel tunc etiam jamdiu
meditata, and a se scripta, in lucem proferret" nec tamen adhuc, majori an
Medentium an decumbentium damno incertum, in commune protulit.

Festo Omnium Animarum, Anno Domini 1745.
Notula ad illud Freindi in Praefatione ad Praelectiones Chymicas, lin. 2. page
Penultima, Epistolae praecedentis.

Quaere, an non potius in Pace, cum requiescere in Pace sit usitatius saltem,
si non rectius etiam, quam Pace quavis requiescere?

JOHANNIS FRIEND AD Clarissimum Doctissimumque Virum GULIELMUM COCKBURNE, M. D.
EPISTOLA.
NE graveris, Amice Charissime, litteras quae nulla hilaritate se commendant
accipere, neque facetias ita semper ames quin aliquando te ad seria digneris
componere. Me quidem, ex quo te reliqui fugerunt lepores, ita ut nec
festivitates sectari possim, nec si possem, fortasse velim: hoc mihi, si laudi
esse ducis, gratulabere, si vitio, ignoscas; saltem si ineptus videar, modo ne
extra Artem meam ferar, in loco desipere concedes.

Morborum qui vel Classem vel Exercitum infestare folent, long frequentissimi
sunt Febris et Dysenteria, ita ut nec in Mari nec in Castris versari possimus,
quin hos comites fere perpetuos, et quasi indigenas, habeamus. Qui quidem quod
his in locis adeo Epidemici sint plurimum facit turn victitandi ratio, tum
corpora negligentius tractandi consuetudo. Fructibus horariis nimis licenter
vesci, inter bibendum et sudandum frigus contrahere, uti nihil frequentius, ita
nec quicquam morbis hisce intromittendis accommodatius; qui adhuc facilius
ingruere solent, si tempestas praecalida fuerit. De hisce, quibus signis hoc
anno se prodiderint, et cui demum medendi methodo libentius cefferint, pauca
sigillatim dicere liceat.

Febris ea, de qua jam loquuturi sumus, erat continua quidem, fere tamen
interdiu remittens, et ad stationariam quam annis 1685, etc. adumbravit
Sydenhamus, proxime visa est accedere; nisi quod in illa frigus calorem per
vices excesserit, in hac potius calor se remittere dicatur. Increbuit
potissimum ineunte Julio; nescio an in causa fuerit ille qui paulo ante
saevierit calor. Accessio morbi subito et atrox. Praeter vulgaria symptomata,
uti sitim, inquietudinem, Oculorum et Praecordiorum gravitatem, Linguoe
Scabritiem, Artuum dolorem, Virium imbecillitatem, Alvei desidiam, Caput
ingruentis mali indicia ferebat; neque quenquam novi Febre hac laborantem, qui
vel Cephalalgia vel Vertigine vacaret: In quamplurimis etiam Ventriculus male
se habuit, ita ut aut nihil cibi assumere potuerit aeger, aut assumptum prae
nausea rejecerit: Nonnullis Lumbi, quasi instantibus Variolis, dolebant: Sub
noctem ardor vehemens, qui non nisi mane deferbuit. Aliquando levi horrore
ingruebat Febris: Quando ad statum pervenerat, Dyspnocam, Tendinum subsultus,
Delirium, et mortem denique fere femper intulit, nisi art tempestive coercita.
Per totum morbi decursum, qui nunquam vel sponte vel Medicina, ante diem xivtum
evanuit, Pulsus per se, celer, parvus, inaequalis, aliquando et intermittens;
Urina coloris saturatissimi, nec tamen unquam turbata. Die decimo aut undecimo
saepius invadere solebat Singultus, qui nonnunquam ad biduum duravit citra
aegroti periculum. Athletici prae aliis acerbius affecti sunt, et perempti
citius; caeteri fere lenta morte sublati: Ii qui mari assueti sunt facilius
evaserunt. Nonnulli, cum cessasse penitus videretur Febris dies iv. vel v. sine
dolor aut aegritudine licet imbecilli jacuerunt, deinde Spasmis repent
obortis brevi expirabant. Atque hoc quidem neglectis Vesicatoriis plerumque
obtigit: Nullum vero certius mortis indicium quam Lingua aspera, et color
ferrugineo tincta. Convalescentibus aliquando supervenit Diarrhoea, quae tamen
perraro, nisi interveniente Dysenteria, in deterius terminata est. Aliis vires
perquam aegerrime redierunt, praecipue Phlegmaticis, quibus etiam diutius
incubuit morbus. In perpaucis Parotides, aut Bubones circa inguem orti, Febrem
judicabant; quae quidem, quantum advertere licebat, unica erat Criseos species
quae pure naturalis dici potuit: sed ne hoc quidem, nisi, Evacuantibus parcius
adhibitis, accidere solebat. Fuit etiam, licet rarissime, per sudores art
elicitos morbi solutio; Alia omnino, nisi morte, Crisis abfuit. Vena pertusa
satis magna seri copia reperta est; quae fere dicto citius a caetero sanguine
discessit, ita ut inde humorum Dyserasiam facile colligeres.

Sanguine ad hunc modum constituto, et in motus febriles incitato, non fortasse
arduum esset Symptomatum rationem exponere; sed hoc et meo instituto, quod in
Praxi potissimum versatur, et tibi qui omnem illam Scientiam animo
complecteris, prorsus supervacaneum: Quod igitur ad medendi methodum-potissimum
spectat, paucis sic accipito.

Sanguis quamprimum ad xvi. detractus est; deinde vesperi, vel si id commode
fieri non posset, mane Emeticum cepit aegrotus, unde non modo Praecordiorum et
Capitis levamen, sed caloris etiam remissio; Qui si diutius exarserit, Vena
iterum incisa est: Atque uti nemo erat, utcunque viribus prostratus, quin
Evacuationes istas facile ferret, ita earum omissio rarius non fuit fatalis.
Morituris non semel Sanguinis per os ejectio.

Cum jam consisteret Febris, Vesicatoria haud inconsulte visa sunt applicari,
ne Spasmo vel Phrenitidi locus pateret; certe alterutro inguente, nulla fere
sine Vesticatoriis salutis spes: Ita ut haec necessarii usus fuerint, sive
occurrendi malo, sive medendi gratia. Nam humores non modo a Capite et
Praecordiis revellunt, sed ita digerunt et disponunt ut pacatior fiat
Circuitus, et facilior per poros expiratio; Hinc pulsum vividiorem simul et
magis aequabilem reddunt. Quod si nec iis cesserit Delirium, incidenda est
Jugularis ad duas vel tres vices si opus fuerit; mira quippe praestat hac in re
Venae istius apertio, neque id sane, ubi Cerebrum afficitur, rationibus
Anatomicis incongruum.

De Cardiacis et Diaphoreticis non est quod multa dicam, nam ea frequentius
nocere comperi. Quippe in hac anni Constitutione humores ad perspirandum minime
erant dispositi: Ita hujusmodi remedia adeo parum auxilio fuerunt ut febrilem
aestum intenderent. Opiatorum, quae mihi non invisa esse satis nosti, idem
ferme Successus, et quamcunque Symptomatis levandis opem polticeri videantur,
nunquam nisi inclinata Febre profuerunt. Alias, et calorem exacerbare et
Deliria redintegrare magis quam compescere solebant. Quod quidem humoribus sic
constitutis, cum Opii natura minime disconvenit.

Quoniam semper interdiu remiserit Febris, exspedtabis forte hic aliquam de
Peruviano Cortice mentionem; nam iste in Anglia, continuis etiam Febribus, modo
etc. per vices remittant, satis feliciter medetur. Sed hic spem fefellit
exitus: quippe remedium illud nunquam adhibitum esse memini, quin ilico
recrudesceret Febris.

De Remediis Absorbentibus et Testaceis hoc mihi vere videor dicturus, quod nec
iis omissis invaluerit Febris, nec adhibitis remiserit: Quibus igitur si forte
usi sumus, id non tarn boni alicujus spe fadum est, quam ne nihil agere
putaremur.

Regimine opus erat tenui admodum et temperato. Aqua Hordeata ad libitum non
sine fructu indulta est, uti et Jusculum Avenaceum et Emulsiones, tum
simplices, tum Amygdalatae. Profuit et saporis et Refrigerii gratia Sal
Prunellae, et Succus Limonum. A calidis omnino abstinuimus, quae quandocunque
etiam minima dosi exhibita, ^ebrem alias languentem excitabant: Et hoc non modo
aegroti, sed et convalescentes satis periculose experti sunt. Recidiva eadem
prorsus methodo ac primaria Febris tractanda, alias ut plurimum exitio futura.

In permultis etiam adultae aetatis Febris a Vermibus originem traxit, qui
longi fuerunt, et plerumque in fasciculum collecti. Signa erant, Tussis arida,
Ardor continuus, et Delirium, nec Venae sectioni, nec Vesicantibus cedens. Sola
huic malo Medicina, cum Cathartico, Calomelas; qui tutissime exhiberi poterat,
etiam cum maxim ingravesceret Febris.

Habes compendiariam hujusce morbi Historiam. Possem aliquid forte de aliis
remediis, quae ad Febres magnopere commendantur, dicere; sed ingenuee fateor,
quantum ego observando assequi poteram, nihil nisi regimen temperatum et
Evacuantia profecisse.

Sum Tui Amantissimus, JOHANNES FRIEND,
Dat. a Barcelona, Sept. 9, 1706.
BOOKS printed for C. DAVIS against Gray's-Inn Gate in Holborn.
I. FRancisci Willughbeii Armig. de Historia Piscium Libri Quatuor, Jussu and
Sumptibus SOCIETATIS REGIAE Londinensis editi. In quibus non tantum De Piscibus
in genere agitur, sed and species omnes, tum ab aliis traditae, tum novae and
nondum editae been multae, naturae ductum servante Methodo dispositae, accurate
describuntur: Earumque effigies, quotquot haberi potuere, vel ad vivum
delineatae, vel ad optima exemplaria impressae, artifici manu elegantissime in
Aes incisae, ad Descriptiones illustrandas exhibentur. Cum Appendice Historias
and Observationes in Supplementum Operis collatas complectente. Totum opus
recognovit, coaptavit, supplevit, librum etiam primum and secundum integros
adjecit, Johannes Raius e Societate Regia. Accessit Index Nominum Piscium
variis Linguis, Cura Cromwelli Mortimeri, R. S. Secr. Folio.

II. A General System of Surgery, in three Parts. Containing the Doctrine and
Management 1. Of Wounds, Fractures, Luxations, Tumors, and Ulcers of all Kinds.
2. Of the several Operations performed on all Parts of the Body. 3. Of the
several Bandages applied in all Operations and Disorders. The whole illustrated
with Thirty Eight Copper Plates, exhibiting all the Operations, Instruments,
Bandages, and Improvements, according to the modern and most approved Practice.
To which is prefixed an Introduction concerning the Nature, Origin, Progress,
and Improvement of Surgery, with such other Preliminaries as are necessary to
be known by the younger Surgeons; being a Work of Thirty Years Experience.
Translated into English from the Latin of Dr. Lawrence Heister, Professor of
Physic and Surgery in the University of Helmstadt, Fellow of the Royal
Society, London, and of the Royal Academy at Paris, etc. The Second Edition.

III. A Treatise of the Fossil, Vegetable, and Animal Substances, that are made
use of in Physic; containing the History and Description of them, with an
Account of their several Virtues and Preparations: To which is prefixed, An
Inquiry into the constituent Principles of mixed Bodies, and the proper Methods
of discovering the Nature of Medicines. By the late Stephen Fr. Geoffroy, M. D.
Chemical Professor in the Royal Garden, Member of the Royal Academy of
Sciences, and Fellow of the Royal Society. Translated from a manuscript Copy of
the Author's Lectures read at Paris, by G. Douglas, M. D.

IV. A Treatise of the Smallpox: In Two Parts. Part I. Containing a
Description both of the distinct and confluent Kind, when they proceed
regularly; and of the curative Indications in every Period, and the Methods of
managing variolous Particles, as to Heat and Cold, Clothing and Diet,
Medicines, etc. Also an Account of the incidental Symptoms, as to their Causes
and Effects; and the Indications of Cure, and the proper Remedies, in reference
to each of them. Likewise Answers to the Arguments of the most celebrated
Physicians for Bleeding in this Disease; and then Proofs of a Probability of
curing it in the febrile State, so as to prevent the Eruption, and other
After-periods, and a Method likely to effect it; which, if effectual, may
preserve Persons from having this Distemper. Part II. Exhibiting Histories of
Cases, in which this Disease, and its various Symptoms, are exemplified. Also a
Dissertation on the Management of young Children under it, and a Method of
external Remedies for those who will not take internal Medicines; and then some
practical Aphorisms deduced from the Histories. By Theophilus Lobb, M. D. F. R.
S. and Fellow of the College of Physicians. The Second Edition, enlarged and
corrected.


