INDEPENDENCE: AN ODE.

[Price Sixpence.]

Entered in the Hall Book of the COMPANY of STATIONERS.

INDEPENDENCE: AN ODE.

By the Late T. SMOLLET, M. D.

LONDON: Printed for J. MURRAY, at No. 32, Fleet Street. MDCCLXXIV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THAT this Poem is authentic we have the best Authority: That it has high Merit
no one will doubt, who has the smallest Pretension to Taste. It has all the
Enthusiasm and poetic Coloring which suit the Ode; and it breathes a Spirit of
Liberty that would not have disgraced a Citizen of Sparta, or of Rome.

AN INSCRIPTION To the Memory of the late Dr. TOBIAS SMOLLET.
This Inscription was communicated to the Editor by a Gentleman, who
transcribed it from the Monument which it adorns near Leghorn. It is written by
Dr. ARMSTRONG, the Author of the beautiful Poem on HEALTH.
Hic ossa conduntur
Tobiae Smollet, Scoti;
Qui, prosapia generosa et antiqua natus,
Priscae virtutis exemplar emicuit;
Aspectu ingenuo,
Corpore valido,
Pectore animoso,
Indole apprime benigna,
Et fere supra facultates munifica,
Insignis.
Ingenio feraci, faceto, versatili,
Omnigenae fere doctrinae mire capaci,
Varia fabularum dulcedine
Vitam moresque hominum,
Ubertate summa ludens, depinxit.
Adverso, interim, nefas! tali tantoque alumno,
Nisi quo satyrae opipare supplebat,
Seculo impio, ignavo, fatuo,
Quo musae vix nisi nothae
Mecaenatulis Britannicis
Fovebantur.
In memoriam
Optimi et amabilis omnino viri,
Permultis amicis desiderati,
Hocce marmor,
Dilectissima simul et amantissima conjux
L. M.
Sacravit.
INDEPENDENCE: AN ODE.
STROPHE.
THY Spirit, INDEPENDENCE, let me share!
Lord of the Lion-Heart and Eagle-Eye,
Thy Steps I follow with my Bosom bare,
Nor heed the Storm that howls along the Sky.
Deep in the frozen Regions of the North,
A Goddess violated brought thee forth,
Immortal LIBERTY, whose look sublime
Has blanched the Tyrant's Cheek in every varying Clime.
What Time the iron-hearted Gaul
With frantic Superstition for his Guide,
Armed with the Dagger and the Pall,
The Sons of Woden to the Field defied:
The ruthless Hag, by Weser's flood,
In Heaven's Name urged the infernal Blow;
And red the Stream began to flow:
The vanquished were baptized with Blood Baptized with Blood -- ] Charlemagne
obliged Four Thousand Saxon Prisoners to embrace the Christian Religion, and
immediately after they were baptized, ordered their Throats to be cut. Their
Prince Vitikind fled for Shelter to Gotrick King of Denmark.
!
ANTISTROPHE.
The Saxon Prince in Horror fled
From Altars stained with human Gore;
And Liberty his routed Legions led
In Safety to the bleak Norwegian Shore.
There in a Cave asleep she lay,
Lulled by the hoarse-resounding Main;
When a bold Savage past that Way,
Impelled by Destiny, his Name Disdain.
Of ample Front the portly Chief appeared:
The hunted Bear supplied a shaggy Vest;
The drifted Snow hung on his yellow Beard;
And his broad Shoulders braved the furious Blast.
He stopped; he gazed; his Bosom glowed,
And deeply felt the Impression of her Charms:
He seized the Advantage Fate allowed;
And straight compressed her in his vigorous Arms.
STROPHE.
The Curlieu screamed; the Tritons blew
Their Shells to celebrate the ravished Rite;
Old Time exulted as he flew:
And INDEPENDENCE saw the Light.
The Light he saw in Albion's happy Plains,
Where under Cover of a flowering Thorn,
While Philomel renewed her warbled Strains,
The auspicious Fruit of stolen Embrace was born.
The Mountain Dryads seized with Joy,
The smiling Infant to their Charge consigned;
The Doric Muse caressed the favorite Boy;
The Hermit Wisdom stored his opening Mind.
As rolling Years matur'd his Age,
He flourished bold and sinewy as his Sire;
While the mild Passions in his Breast assuage
The fiercer Flames of his maternal Fire.
ANTISTROPHE.
Accomplished thus, he winged his Way,
And zealous roved from Pole to Pole,
The Rolls of Right eternal to display,
And warm with Patriot Thoughts the aspiring Soul.
On desert Isles On desert Isles -- ] Although Venice was built a considerable
Time before the Era here assigned for the Birth of INDEPENDENCE, the Republic
had not yet attained to any great Degree of Power and Splendour.
'twas he that raised
Those Spires that gild the Adriatic Wave,
Where Tyranny beheld amazed
Fair Freedom's Temple, where he marked her Grave.
He steeled the blunt Batavian's Arms
To burst the Iberian's double Chain To burst the Iberian's double Chain.] The
Low Countries were not only oppressed by grievous Taxations, but likewise
threatened with the Establishment of the Inquisition, when the Seven Provinces
revolted, and shook off the Yoke of Spain.
;
And Cities reared, and planted Farms,
Won from the Skirts of Neptune's wide Domain.
He, with the generous Rustics, sat
On Uri's Rocks in close Divan On Uri's Rocks -- ] Alluding to the known Story
of William Tell and his Associates, the Fathers and Founders of the Confederacy
of the Swiss Cantons.
;
And winged that Arrow sure as Fate,
Which ascertained the sacred Rights of Man.
STROPHE.
Arabia's scorching Sands he crossed Arabia's scorching Sands -- ] The Arabs,
rather than resign their Independency, have often abandoned their Habitations,
and encountered all the Horrors of the Desert.
,
Where blasted Nature pants supine,
Conductor of her Tribes adust,
To Freedom's adamantine Shrine;
And many a Tartar Hord forlorn, aghast And many a Tartar Hord -- ] From the
Tyranny of Jenghis-Khan, Timur-Bec, and other eastern Conquerors, whole Tribes
of Tartars were used to fly into the remoter Wastes of Cathay, where no Army
could follow them.
,
He snatched from under fell Oppression's Wing;
And taught, amidst the dreary Waste,
The all-chearing Hymns of Liberty to sing.
He Virtue finds, like precious Ore,
Diffused through every baser Mould;
Even now he stands on Calvi's rocky Shore,
And turns the Dross of Corsica to Gold And turns the Dross of Corsica -- ] The
noble Stand made by Paschal Paoli and his Associates against the Usurpation of
the French King, must endear them to all the Sons of Liberty and Independence.
.
He, Guardian Genius, taught my Youth
Pomp's tinsel Livery to despise:
My Lips, by him chastis'd to Truth,
Never paid that Homage which the Heart denies.
ANTISTROPHE.
Those sculptured Halls my Feet shall never tread,
Where varnished Vice and Vanity combined,
To dazzle and seduce, their Banners spread,
And forge vile Shackles for the freeborn Mind.
Where Insolence his wrinkled Front uprears;
And all the Flowers of spurious Fancy blow;
And Title his ill-woven Chaplet wears,
Full often wreathed around the Miscreant's Brow:
Wherever dimpling Falsehood, pert and vain,
Presents her Cup of stale Profession's Froth;
And pale Disease, with all his bloated Train,
Torments the Sons of Gluttony and Sloth.
STROPHE.
In Fortune's Car behold that Minion ride,
With either India's glittering Spoils oppressed:
So moves the Sumpter-Mule, in harnessed Pride,
That bears the Treasure which he cannot taste.
For him let venal Bards disgrace the Bay;
And hireling Minstrels wake the tinkling String;
Her sensual Snares let faithless Pleasure lay;
And all her gingling Bells fantastic Folly ring:
Disquiet, Doubt, and Dread shall intervene;
And Nature, still to all her Feelings just,
In Vengeance hang a damp on every Scene,
Shook from the baleful Pinions of Disgust.
ANTISTROPHE.
Nature I Will court in her sequestered Haunts,
By Mountain, Meadow, Streamlet, Grove, or Cell,
Where the poised Lark his Evening Ditty chaunts,
And Health, and Peace, and Contemplation dwell.
There, Study shall with Solitude recline;
And Friendship pledge me to his Fellow-Swains;
And Toil and Temperance sedately twine
The slender chord that fluttering Life sustains:
And fearless Poverty shall guard the Door;
And Taste unspoil'd the frugal Table spread;
And Industry supply the humble Store;
And Sleep unbrib'd his Dews refreshing shed:
White-mantl'd Innocence, etherial Spright,
Shall chase far off the Goblins of the Night:
And INDEPENDENCE over the Day preside;
Propitious Power! my Patron and my Pride.
FINIS.
BOOKS printed for J. MURRAY, No. 32, FLEET STREET, LONDON.
1. ARMINE and ELVIRA; a Legendary Tale, in Two Parts. By Mr. CARTWRIGHT. Fifth
Edition. Price 2 s. 2. ORIGINAL POEMS, from a Manuscript written in the Time of
Oliver Cromwell. Price 1 s. 6 d. 3. The EPIGONIAD: A Poem in Nine Books. To
which is added a Dream in the Manner of Spencer. By WILLIAM WILKIE, D. D. 12mo.
Price 3 s. bound. 4. A DISCOURSE upon Public Economy and Commerce. By the
celebrated Marquis Caesan Baccaria, Author of the Treatise on Crimes and
Punishments. Price 1 s. 6 d. 5. The TOILET of FLORA: Or, A Collection of the
most simple and approved Methods of preparing Baths, Essences, Pomatums,
Powders, sweet-scented Waters, and Opiates, for preserving and whitening the
Teeth, etc. for the Use of the Ladies. Price 3 s. bound. 6. A SKETCH of the
Secret History of Europe, since the Peace of Paris; with Observations on the
present critical State of Great Britain. Price 1 s. 7. An ESSAY on the
Advantages of a polite Education, joined with a learned one. Price 1 s. 6 d. 8.
The NUNNERY for COQUETS: A Novel. Price 3 s. 6 d. 9. The CASTLE of OTRANTO: A
Gothic Story. By Mr. H. Walpole. 8vo. Price 3 s. 6 d. 10. A DISSERTATION on the
Rise, Union, and Power, the Progressions, Separations, and Corruptions of
Poetry and Music. To which is prefixed, The Cure of Saul, a sacred Ode, written
by Dr. Brown. The Second Edition, in Quarto. Price 8 s. in Boards.

