THE POWER OF GOLD DISPLAYED, IN THE HUMANE PROPOSAL OF THE RIGHT HON. WILLIAM
PIT, CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER,

TO BRING FORWARD

An Act to put his MAJESTY into the disagreeable Situation of signing a Decree,
that no sick or lame Person, or diseased Cattle, in Great Britain, shall have a
Medicine of Repute without paying Tribute; which the Writer contends, is not
justifiable either by the Law of God, or Man, and is a disgraceful Impost, as
it places the Life of a human Being in competition with a Three-penny or
Six-penny Stamp, etc.

By Frs. SPILSBURY.

IT IS THE CAUSE OF HUMANITY I PLEAD.

LONDON: SOLD at the DISPENSARY, SOHO SQUARE.

Price 6d.

[ Entered at Stationers Hall.]

To the BOOKSELLERS of GREAT BRITAIN, Who had imposed on the Public, Stamps
with the common Medicines, only through fear of an Exchequer Threat.
GENTLEMEN,
IS there occasion to address myself once more on this mournful subject, to
persuade you to act as men, endowed with reason, as citizens of a free country,
blessed with the name of Britons? Survey your fetters, woven by imaginary
power, rivetted by terror, which have disgraced yourselves, and reflect no
credit either on your King or country. The Barons of the Exchequer, the
guardians of constitutional freedom, are now your friends; they have declared
from the bench of Justice, no such acts as the medicine act is, (which operates
only by fear, in a partial manner on the subject, contrary to the dictates of
reason, justice, and humanity, founded on no decree of the Legislature,) ought
to exist in this land; at the same time they observed, the more they read the
act, the less they understood it, and with alacrity granted Messrs. Wray a new
trial, who had been found guilty of the heinous crimes of selling two tooth
brushes with tooth powder.

Gentlemen, have I not reason to rejoice, have I not reason to triumph, who at
the first commencement of this ambiguous, ill-shapen act, opposed its monstrous
stride; and whose leviathan maw was only to be satiated with all that a man, or
a minister of state, should hold worth preserving, viz. the honor of his King,
the liberty of the subject, the dignity of his country? For these have I
pleaded, for these have I braved danger, in my tracts, Advice to Booksellers,
Discursory Thoughts, etc. How could you, ye men of books, sacrifice to fear
your known good opinion of your Monarch? How could you believe his royal heart
delighted to add distress to misery? What have you observed in your King, to
credit the disgraceful story? A King signing an act, that when his subject was
bit by a mad dog, it demanded a tribute from the terrified sufferer, or no
medicine to heal his wound; or that his Majesty's finances were so reduced, as
to oblige him to countenance an edict, which bows to the prostitute, in
pleasing view; by her, that baneful curse of health shall spread its poignant
sting, which demands inevitably the swift aid of medicine, fettered with a
stamp. Would Rome have thus chid her sons who had indiscreetly sacrificed to
nature's laws? No -- it is only at a Stamp Office where Haman's fell principles
in epitome are remembered. Can you reconcile to your minds, a King, and such a
paternal King as ours is, blessed with a Queen, an amiable Queen, whom even
slander never whispered surmise of ill; could her King, and our Monarch, sign
so ungracious an act, which wrests a tax from the helpless female servant,
because the imbecility of her sex demands the friendly aid of medicine at
certain times? It is not possible. Can a King take against his own subjects,
and exult in their misery? Is royalty a bar to disease? Will FEVERS, GOUT,
DROPSY, CONSUMPTION, EVIL, LEPROSY, STONE, CHOLIC, stand at a distance, nor
dare invade the palace? Then may we suppose that Kings feel not as common men.
Is it not enough for human nature to bear the ills which sickness, disease, or
accidents create, without being tortured by forward, cruel servants of the
crown, who to gratify the lust of power, trample on all laws, human and divine?
Whilst they reprobate a highwayman's proceedings, they act on the same
principle, only diversified in the application; for have not servants of the
crown demanded of you, by threats, to act contrary to the constitution of this
country, which militated against yourselves, and aggrandized your neighbor;
which must transfer your business to another shop, where no crossed stamp
marked the threshold, Who would have credited the report, should it have been
foretold, that ministers of this country would have insisted on their servants
to go round the kingdom with the Exchequer cudgel in their hand, and threaten
booksellers to commit an act which human nature revolts at, To refuse a woman
in labor a cheap medicine to ease her pains without paying for a stamp. Let
her die first, is the language of the Stamp Office; or, We'll exchequer you.
Again, find a parallel in any history, state, or country, of the following
impost; I challenge all the antiquarians of the age to do it; a tax (proclaim
not the disgraceful badge) which the officers of the crown of Great Britain
have demanded, in the King's name, on a Pot of Ointment to cure the Itch; and
insisted the polluted outcast wretch, though scarce clothes to cover his
nakedness, should pay Threepence for a stamp, or his disease should worry him
to death; or, what would turn to a better profit for the Stamp Office, he might
infect other persons, and then, joyful sound, more stamps would be disposed of.

These are the decrees, formed under the construction of the King's Stamp
Office! Are these deeds proper to be ranged in the Historian's page, as acts of
George the IIId? Why, then, not procure a law, that whatever person is
shipwrecked on your coast, he shall take so many stamps; or those persons who
have their houses burnt down, they shall be obliged to buy your paper currency,
id est stamps. These acts, ministers may say, are disgraceful, and no nation
but an abandoned one, would enact them. Are they so? Not more than the
imaginary medicine act, which is so pious, so loyally construed for the honor
and interest of the King, and he that will not gulp the creed down, is
flagelated with the Exchequer scourge, to urge the bookseller to be upon the
watch; where, if he sees a fellow creature fall from his horse and bruise
himself, the unfortunate person must purchase a stamp before he can receive a
medicine to sooth his pain. Can there be (to Britons I appeal) a more
humiliating, disgraceful circumstance in this country, than to see a set of
loyal subjects pointed at by a malignant partiality founded in a jealous
surmise, harrassed by the Stamp Office, under the shadow of an act of
Parliament, to commit actions which are almost as unnatural as if they were
required to sell their children. Yet no act of Parliament exists which will
warrant such encroachments on the subject. For the dignity of human nature, for
the honor of my King and Country, I have pleaded and opposed these arbitrary
unjustifiable deeds, which heretofore were never countenanced in this or any
other free country.

Who will join issue, and say, such heavy imposts torn from the sick, the lame,
the diseased part of the community, are to be countenanced in this Christian
land? Not the House of Commons, not the House of Lords, not his Majesty, nor
even the Hon. Wm. Pit, Chancellor of the Exchequer, whose great power stands
unrivalled; witness, Britons wearing a stamp on their heads. Then, if there is
no act of Legislature to justify these shameful, pilfering depredations from
the people, why does a minister withhold his protection one sessions after
another from a set of men, only sufferers because they are loyal, because they
are conscientious men, because they are fearful to contend with Government? Is
it for the honor of a minister to sport his strength with the man unarmed by
power, naked as to riches, and whom he can terrify with the anathema, wrote in
Exchequer form, in like manner as the approach of a wolf spreads terror to the
flock? Do ministers of the crown expect the people to act virtuously, to live
honestly, to possess integrity; let ministers look at the medicine act; there
they will see oppression stalk with gigantic stride, treading on the liberty of
the subject, laughing at justice, and sacrificing humanity to malignancy and
avarice. Why will ministers of state form such crippled paths for the inferior
ranks of mankind to walk on? Why will not the Rulers of the nation, when they
find errors in their acts of parliament, show a readiness to correct them? For
interest they will do it. Has, then, honor nor justice no claim to attention?
Is it not, ye guardians of the land, a sore affliction to the owner of cattle,
to hear his beast low with pain? Is that beast, or is an infant dying with
disease, an object of taxation? I only ask the question. Are they fit objects
for sport? If they are, throw off the mask, enact a law, that every person
shall consume a stamp between his bread and butter every morning; or that the
people inhabiting Great Britain shall be bled four times a year, or take a
stamp. These laws, these acts, would be more honorable, more equitable, than
your proceedings on the medicine act, where you doom a fellow creature to
death, rather than lose selling a stamp with a common medicine conveyed by a
bookseller, although no act of Legislature exists to justify such proceedings.
To tax Quacks, or any other titulary traders, if hurtful to the community, I am
not concerned; but when I observe his Majesty's honorable Commissioners of the
Stamp Office breathing a language, instead of villainous deceitful Quack, it is
now, Dear brother, good creature, sell your medicines, sell your stuff, sell
your poisons, or what you will, only sell our stamps. When I hear that men in
so honorable a station send their emissaries round the country, insisting on
booksellers taking out a Five Shilling License, on pain of being exchequered,
and oblige them to sell stamps, and say, you are the persons Government meant
to tax, as we construe it so and so; and at the same time let a next door
neighbor sell without stamps, the same commodity; can a person, unless he is
lost to all seeling which adorns the soul, do less than reprobate such actions,
which disgrace man, mar the beauty of our constitution, and render our Monarch
the object of pity. Reflection, awake not, lest thou bring to remembrance what
this country was a few years back, when the people paid their taxes as cheerful
as one who gives his corn to be ground and received flour in return: but now,
our corn is demanded, and bran is thought a sufficient recompense.

In former administrations, Justice and Humanity adorned our superiors'
councils; but now, an avaricious deceitful principle sways the officers of the
crown, who luxuriously bask in the thought of the vast wedges of gold which are
produced from scraps of paper, forgetting that the gold is wrung, from their
own bankers, the people, the strength of the nation; for this country, at this
present moment, is fast consuming its vital principle, on which its very
existence as a state depends; and a little time will loudly proclaim the deep
decline of this once flourishing empire.

N. B. The foregoing letter was partly printed when I read the medicine act was
to be cancelled, and a new one introduced of a more extensive nature, by the
Right Hon. William Pit, Chancellor of the Exchequer. In all my strictures on
the act, I never dictated what I thought was proper to be done on the occasion,
being persuaded whenever the medicine act came to be discussed, it would at
once appear with such a horrid aspect, that no minister, nor no other person
who had retained the principles of honor and humanity, would patronize the act
in any shape.

THE NEW MEDICINE ACT CONSIDERED, AS NOW SUBSTITUTED IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS,
JULY 8, 1785.
BY the new proposed bill as stated in the public prints, I observe the
medicine act is to be equalized, the rich as well as the poor are to swallow
stamps with their medicines, without exceptions: So far this may be thought
just. Does it alter the principles of the act? reconcile it to your minds, you
who consider medicines as only articles fit for TRAFFIC I abhor the act; a tax
on medicines is but a Title, but it has an object, as a warrant has, which ends
with an order for the execution of a fellow creature. Does it militate against
pleasure? No. -- Luxury? No. -- Or healthy persons? No. It is an act which eyes
the sink of corruption settled in the limb of a fellow creature; gladdens in
the reverberated sound of distress. Achs, pains, and groans, are music to the
spirit of the act, they are its very life; illness or disease, are its proper
food, for what is an act to raise specie without it is made productive?
Frequent alarms of the people being in danger of fevers may be raised, and the
usual time of quarantine dispensed with, that the plague may spread its baneful
insluence; the wells of water contaminated; then men, women, and children will
be seen in the streets grasping medicines most gorgeously decorated with
stamps, whilst the table of the illustrious supporters of this most amiable
christian device, shall smoke with the fat of venison, and rich viands grace
the board, equal to the lordly Despots.

To those who judge of these matters by what quantity of bullion this act
produces, this act will not want for embellishing titles, any more than the
marble monument a polish to render it pleasing to the sight, which covers a
rotten carcass. Call the medicine act by what name you please, I will protest
against it; it is armed with a sting against distress, groaning under
insupportable agony; it is a brutal act -- a brutal act did I say? -- from
whence borrowed we that idea? -- Do brutes prey on the same denominated race?
-- Will lions welter in the blood of lions? No. -- Will a tiger seek a tiger to
mangle his limbs for food? No. -- Whence then the term brutal? -- Beast acts
toward beast agreeable to the laws of nature; it is only man "who feeds on
man," who talks of reformation, of more refined notions, yet this man, arrayed
in scarlet or in purple, does not always remember the dignity of his station,
but ferrits, tortures, nay, for interest -- devours his fellow creature; then,
which deserves the epithet of brute most, man or beast?

Such a proposed medicine act no Heathen, Jew, or Mohammedan Minister was ever
recorded to have even brooded such a detested thought of, much more dare stand
up in a collective assembly to propose to force a tribute from women with
child, children afflicted with the smallpox, colds, sore throats, convulsions,
and from men afflicted with ulcerated legs, from whence purulent matter ouzes
in hot steams so virulent as to scald the seeming sound part of the skin, or
with other maladies, which our tinder constitutions are likely to catch, even
from the air we breathe in. This glorious discovery, this friendly act of
commisseration, which is to act as the Salvator of the nation, verging on
bankruptcy, a Christian claims the honor; not a professor of the Roman
Catholic religion; no, a purer one than that, the reformed one, a Protestant of
the Church of England. Who will credit the story? Does a minister of Great
Britain (will they say,) think to impose on the King's understanding, and cloud
his sensibility, with golden arguments, to sign the decree against his doleful
subjects, who stand in need of all the protection, either care or power can
bestow, that like a ship (which has been tossed by cross winds and storms, puts
into port to fit it once more to combat the boisterous wave) they become
renovated so as to pursue the course of life.

Let foreign nations, whom yet humanity blesses, reject the report with scorn;
as when a traveller relates he saw a lamb forsake the grass and feed on
vulture's prey; if Fame, in pity to Britannia, refuses to sound Avarice's
triumph; let Truth declare, last week the Senators of Great Britain met, where
it was proposed in parliament, under the sanction of a medicine tax, to raise
supplies from a spoil, extorted from his Majesty's most piteous unfortunate
subjects, stretched on the tenterhook of pain, tormented with diseases, which
terrify the poor or rich wretch, worse than any torments Hell can inflict, as
far as we know, or have a right to think. -- Harsh and ungenerous would be the
sojourner's surmise, whom night had overtaken in a lonely place, should he find
a hospitable roof, where himself and beast are bade a hearty welcome, expressed
by officious care, should he imagine, all this courteous kindness was but a
prelude to some horrid purpose, when fast in sleep his outward sentinels are
locked; yet thus ungrateful man often judges of his Creator's bounty, ere he
sheds the encumbered mantle, how will he smile at his childish fears when
robing with immortality, whilst experimentally he feels the attributes of a God.

A tax on illness! -- Set dogs to gnaw a human creature, bears no comparison to
those pains mankind feel when thus diseased, for dogs lead to mercy; in their
gripe they introduce that blessed friend DEATH, the great deliverer from
oppression, tyranny, disease, and misery.

Who can behold even a dog in pain that can avoid pity if he cannot relieve;
but to see officers of the crown harrassing a fellow creature, worried with the
evil, with a cancerous gashing wound, with a scald head, a human body covered
with ulcers, stinking most disgustfully horrible, detested by its inmate, the
soul chained to so vile a pestilential body, which is shunned by society, and
whose corrupted form breathes poisonous vapors, which petrify the man by
profession bred a champion in nature's cause, -- walking familiar with disease,
yet here pauses, and shrinks from power so, dreadfully armed, is a sorry sight.
Whilst from such diseased objects, and from diseased cattle, a Minister of
State, with as much composure as a rat-catcher kills vermin, meditated an act
of parliament which would pointedly militate against the welfare of the human
and brute creation, loaded with insupportable infirmities, for he enacted that
medicines of established reputation; which were administered either by outward
or inward application, should not be applied unless they gave a stipulated sum
for a piece of paper.

What is this decree but a secondary one to Nebuchadnezzar's which threatened
death to those who did not bow to the idol of Gold? Yet this medicine act,
under the dispensation of the gospel, is far more cruel. Does Christian power
act here like a Samaritan, to pour oil into the wound? How reversed! Does it
act, like the Levite and Priest, who are held up by the Savior of the world as
men actuated by selfish principles, void of compassion? No. -- The Priest and
the Levite, if they did not relieve the wounded man, were not as yet such
hardened monsters as to take advantage of his distress. Formerly Kings of
Albion delighted to act the physician's part, and invested the unhappy mortal,
afflicted with the EVIL, with a piece of gold; Heaven sanctified the deed: Now
a minister urges his Majesty to levy on his own diseased subject a piece of
money, or neither he, nor yet his beast, if ill, shall be entitled to the
general benefits of medicine, Heaven's gift, which by providence was designed
to be as free for all nature's children as the air we breathe, or the water of
the earth; the wretch who taxes one, would, could his unhumanized soul find
means, curse the other with his official breath -- for lucre.

The medicine act, whilst in debate, is the minister's; but when the King signs
the mandate it is then clothed with royalty, it speaks majestic, and awes the
subject to compliance with tremendous voice; the inhabitants of Great Britain
must hear a King speak to his officers of state agreeable to the act: "Let no
one of my subjects, who are grievously tormented with pains, mortifications,
gangrene wounds, fluxes, and other deadly diseases, have certain medicines they
desire, unless they pay a tribute, on pain of my displeasure, and the heavy
penalties the act prescribes."

Is not this a fair delineation of the intended act? -- Divines say bad
thoughts and diabolical actions originate below, from whence we pretend to
borrow colors to paint an infernal scene; but the original design, I am
inclined to think, is too often borrowed from earth.

Suppose a minister should have power to persuade the King to approve of the
edict -- what is this edict? Man may style it a medicine act, but I call it a
redemptory act -- What says the act? pay a tribute, or no medicine; woe to the
man who dares let any person have a medicinal packet without a stamp; here is
your redemption, or rather a passport to show you have the King's leave -- to
live -- Courteous Royal bequest -- what wonderful condescension. Is not this
the true explanation and intent of the act, fabricated in this once truly
honored island, the envy of all foreign powers? Rather than thus inflict the
sickly diseased subject, I ask the Minister, I ask the Rt. Hon. William Pit,
whether it would not redound more to his honor as a man, as minister of
collossian power, to send round a party of guards to the healthy persons, and
demand of them to give sixpence for the emblazoned paper or put them to death,
rather than go to the sick man, expiring with disease, tormented with ulcers
and carious bones, and insist on his taking the official stamps, by which the
gold already produced being sufficient to turn any minister's brain, he
imagines he is in character of the king's huntsman, head over the hounds,
hunting deer instead of his Majesty's people.

What sentiments do ministers imbibe by attending a king's throne? Is the life
of a Briton to be put in competition with a three-penny, six-penny, or a one
shilling stamp? Britons! there was a time you were not held so cheap; but now,
if no stamp at hand no medicine, or perhaps the needy shopkeeper may have a
stamp which may be turned to money, sells an old decayed medicine, which buys a
loaf to feed a famished child, whilst the parent of a worthy family falls a
sacrifice to the degenerate humanity of ministers, who enjoined a medicine to
be embalmed in red stripes, true emblem of the merciless act.

Wherewithal shall a minister find a charm to fascinate a king to sign an act,
which inadvertently may cost hundreds of his subjects their lives? -- Of what
materials do ministers suppose our Sovereign is composed of? -- Has not his
Majesty amiable fair daughters? -- Are they not women? -- Are they not princely
flowers nursed with peculiar state? -- Yet all the care Art and Nature can
bestow, sometimes those pretty plants will droop, nay die. -- If pain attacks
them does their royal birth fortify them to be indifferent as to the effects or
consequences? -- They are attended in stately forms, physic arrayed in pomp; do
the courts of princes make the power of physicians equal to the desires and the
necessities of their royal patients? suppose they do; what are the thousands of
females who reside in the inferior walk of life to do, who cannot afford to
charm the dispenser of health to visit them? -- Reason and experience hint a
cheap remedy, which may shorten their pains and restore them to health. How
horrid the idea, ye servants of the crown, to take advantage of the frailties
of the semale sex, not brought on by choice, by accident, or by remissness, to
raise a revenue? Is it not sporting with the great Creator who ordained these
causes for most important ends, which none but fools would mention but with
solemnity? But to raise money under pretense of supporting the honor of a King,
and the dignity of the nation, by such means, who would suggest and countenance?

To apologize for such a noxious act, specious reasons will not be wanted;
money may be the minister's plea for such an unprecedented step; it may bring
in thousands of pounds to the Treasury; let it bring in more gold than all the
nation's worth, not all the gold which earth can produce can wipe away the
stain -- Great Britain bartering Honor and Humanity for Gold.

Let ministers use all the art they are masters of to harmonise the canibal
deed, which muzzles the noble science of physic, and proclaims in tyrannical
accents to the sick, "you shall swallow our stamps, or linger under your
disease;" I trust this unexampled mode of taxation will not find patrons in the
House of Lords.

The Right Hon. Mr. Pit may plead, he only corrects the medicine act, first
formed by Lord John Cavendish, against the five patent medicines, but now
extends it to all medicines, pharmaceutical ones excepted. Is this justice? why
tax one medicine more than another, because the one has gone through an
expensive trial, before it has gained universal approbation to stamp its credit
as the best remedy we can ascertain, for such and such complaints, or for a
better reason, because ye know the afflicted will as regularly turn to the
advertised medicine for redress as the cattle go to the river to quench their
thirst, when the usual fountain ceases to relieve their wants. Is that Mr.
Pitt's excuse, let him enjoy it. Let him turn his thoughts to that stately
monument in Westminster Abbey reared by national gratitude, to the Earl of
Chatham, whereon is inscribed, "Under whose administration Divine Providence
exalted Great Britain to an height of prosperity and glory unknown to any
former age;" and let this question be asked him "if it would be agreeable to
his feelings as a Minister, to the love he bears his country, to his zeal for
the King's honor to let the sculptor add:" The son of this illustrious
nobleman, who was Prime Minister, proposed to his sovereign, 1785, to raise a
subsidy under the tenor of a medicine act, from the inhabitants of Great
Britain, who were afflicted with the ITCH, STONE, GOUT, LEPROSY, ULCERS, WEAK
EYES, SORE THROATS, DISEASED CATTLE, and other complaints, of a nature too bad
to describe in this sanctuary: This second inscription, which points to the
lamentable changes of State Maxims and Affairs, is a memento of the sudden
transition of worldly GRANDEUR."

If the Right Hon. Mr. Pit is not the proposer, chief patron and engineer --
who raises on this occasion this unnatural barrier in the afflicted's road, who
wish to gain a little ease, a small respite, before they are numbered with the
dead -- I do most respectfully beg his pardon for introducing any idea that may
appear personal. -- The reviewers have said, I am warm on the occasion. Happy
should I be, could I find a friend to prove the medicine act, bowed only to
reason and good policy, not swayed by lucre. At first, the plea was, the dart
was levied at Quacks, a supposed nefarious unprincipled set of beings. Was that
the case, how poor, how abject, a Minister would render his Monarch to persuade
him to become their patron, a nominal sharer of the spoil. Is not this to a
witness, a god kissing carrion? To heaven I appeal, I had rather see all
Quackery, or what you please to call it, banished from the land, than live to
see a British State, dependent on such vile prostitution to support its
existence as a kingdom.

May Heaven preserve our King in health, although his Majesty should be
constrained by looking through false mediums, to extort a tax from an
unfortunate yet loyal subject, because through accident he may be bit by a mad
dog, or infected with some dangerous loathsome disease.

Dispensary, Soho Square, July 15, 1785. Francis Spilsbury.

POSTSCRIPT.
THE proposed medicine act, I have read; perhaps it may now lay before that
venerable, truly honorable House of Lords, for their consideration, either to
countenance or reject.

Cool and dispassionate, as if now before their Lordships, I solemnly declare
in my humble opinion, the medicine act as now engrossed, cannot with propriety
be complied with; it requires moral impossibilities, and has many absurdities;
let it be tried by the penetration of wisdom; it is an impolitic proposal, it
militates powerfully against the interest of government, and the life of the
subject. Unhappy consequences will prove its baneful effects; nor shall I
wonder when a woman's mind is agitated with the cries of her infant, she seeks
the usual remedy on these occasions, and is told the King demands a tax for a
stamp, or no medicine; your child may perish. In astonishment she forgets the
mother, when she hears the monarch has forgot he is a father -- drops her child
insensibly, and marks the earth with BLOOD. Is there justice in the act? -- No;
-- justice is violated, the poor sick man is the glorious prize which this act
drags in triumph. -- Will Benevolence patronize the deed? -- No; -- cruelty
stands confessed. Mark the essence of the words, the very criterion of the act.
To tax all medicinal nostrums which are used either to heal the human body by
internal or external application, when diseased. Heavens!!! what a crime it is
now deemed to endeavor to restore health, the fountain of strength and beauty
to the sons and daughters of the land; rather say, what a heart that man must
have, if man you can call him, who could dictate these inimical wishes, with a
view to stamp them into a law. Let the prosecuted wretch who steals for bread,
plead this illustrious example of depravity in a higher power; then let
government put to death the victim, and be satisfied he suffered justly; in the
sight of his Maker, reason and equity will declare him murdered. Will
Christianity adopt this maxim of taxation for one of her precepts? -- No, --
nor no other religion in the world; nor can there be even a faint trace of any
state, nation, or human being so unhappily divested of the feelings of humanity
since the world began, as the authors of this uncharitable mode of taxation.
What is this but engrafting the tenets of an inquisition on a British stock?
Exact money, or let a person remain in torture; define it otherwise candor, if
you can. Inquisitors of Spain would abhor the idea of adding distress to the
afflicted for the sake of gain, they would abjure such a doctrine as the one
now proposed by the Minister of Great Britain; not to let a sick or lame, or
diseased person have a medicine to remedy his pain, his complaint, and render
himself once more a useful member to society, without paying a tribute; what a
language does this refined system of taxation display in this land, boasting of
a superlative degree of piety toward God? It is an awful circumstance, and a
new phenomenon, to behold the hand writing of a king, acting partially to his
innocent subjects, first cut off from the general society of the world by
illness, now made the proposed objects of singular chastisement of their
Sovereign. Let Britain talk no more of virtue, honor, valor, humanity,
charity, or whatever enobles man, exalts a state or dignifies a king, that
scrawl indented on the parchment, that hostile declaration against all diseased
subjects, or whatsoever preserves the human body from decay, if enforced,
cancels all pretensions to greatness, or whatsoever is praiseworthy.

If the arguments of sensibility intimately connected with the distresses of
mankind, cannot prevail against the only strong irresistible plea a minister's
salvo -- the treasury wants food, -- then ye sick and diseased victims of power
be composed, ye shall on this occasion be honorably embalmed and most royally
entombed.

FINIS.

