portrait of Alexander Pope Amicitiae Causa. J. Richardson f.


portrait of Alexander Pope Mr. Pope
OYTOS EKEINOS

J. Richardson. fecit. 1738.


Isaac Tailor del. et sculpt.


Plate I. Vol. I. facing the general Title.

Blakey del. Major Sculp


portrait of Alexander Pope Pond f.


THE WORKS OF Alexander Pope Esquire.

In Nine Volumes Complete. WITH HIS LAST CORRECTIONS, ADDITIONS, AND
IMPROVEMENTS; As they were delivered to the EDITOR a little before his Death:
TOGETHER WITH THE COMMENTARIES and NOTES OF Mr. WARBURTON

LONDON, Printed for J. and P. KNAPTON, H. LINTOT, J. and R. TONSON, and S.
DRAPER. MDCCLL

Alte spectare si voles, neque sermonibus VULGI dederis te, nec in Praemiis
humanis spem posueris rerum tuarum: suis te illecebris oportet ipsa Virtus
trahat ad verum decus. QUID DE TE ALII LOQUANTUR IPSI VIDEANT, SED LOQUENTUR
TAMEN. Cic. THE WORKS OF Alexander Pope Esquire.

VOLUME I.

CONTAINING HIS JUVENILE POEMS.

LONDON, Printed for H. LINTOT, J. and R. TONSON, and S. DRAPER. MDCCLL

ADVERTISEMENT.
MR. POPE, in his last illness, amused himself, amidst the care of his higher
concerns, in preparing a corrected and complete Edition of his Writings -- "I
own the late encroachments upon my constitution make me willing to see the end
of all further care about me or my works. I would rest for the one in a full
resignation of my Being to be disposed of by the Father of all Mercy; and for
the other (though indeed a trifle, yet a trifle may be some example) I would
commit them to the candor of a sensible and reflecting judge, rather than to
the malice of every short-sighted and malevolent critic, or inadvertent and
censorious Reader. And no hand can set them in so good a light, etc." Let. cxx.
to Mr. W.
; and, with his usual delicacy, was even solicitous to prevent any share of the
offense they might occasion, from falling on the Friend whom he had engaged to
give them to the Public -- "I also give and bequeath to the said Mr. Warburton,
the property of all such of my Works already printed as he has written or
shall write Commentaries or Notes upon, and which I have not otherwise disposed
of or alienated; and as he shall publish WITHOUT FUTURE ALTERATIONS." -- His
last Will and Testament.
.

In discharge of this trust, the Public has here a complete Edition of his
Works; executed in such a manner, as, I am persuaded, would have been to his
satisfaction.

The Editor has not, for the sake of profit, suffered the Author's Name to be
made cheap by a Subscription; nor his Works to be defrauded of their due
Honors by a vulgar or inelegant Impression; nor his memory to be disgraced by
any pieces unworthy of his talents or virtue. On the contrary, he has, at a
very great expense, ornamented this Edition with all the advantages which the
best Artists in Paper, Printing, and Sculpture could bestow upon it.

If the Public has waited longer than the deference due to it should have
suffered, it was owing to a reason which the Editor need not make a secret. It
was his regard to the family-interests of his deceased Friend. Mr. Pope, at his
death, left large impressions of several parts of his Works, unsold; the
property of which was adjudged to belong to his Executors; and the Editor was
willing they should have time to dispose of them to the best advantage, before
the publication of this Edition (which has been long prepared) should put a
stop to the sale.

But it may be proper to be a little more particular concerning the superiority
of this Edition above all the preceding; so far as Mr. Pope himself was
concerned. What the Editor has done, the Reader must collect for himself.

The FIRST Volume, and the original poems in the SECOND, are here printed from
a copy corrected throughout by the Author himself, even to the very preface:
Which, with several additional notes in his own hand, he delivered to the
Editor a little before his death. The Juvenile translations, in the other part
of the SECOND Volume, it was never his intention to bring into this Edition of
his Works, on account of the levity of some, the freedom of others, and the
little importance of any. But these being the property of other men, the Editor
had it not in his power to follow the Author's intention.

The THIRD Volume, all but the Essay on Man (which, together with the Essay on
Criticism, The Author, a little before his death, had corrected and published
in Quarto, as a specimen of his projected Edition) was printed by him in his
last illness (but never published) in the manner it is now given. The
disposition of the Epistle on the Characters of Men is quite altered; that on
the Characters of Women, much enlarged; and the Epistles on Riches and Taste
corrected and improved. To these advantages of the THIRD Volume, must be added
a great number of fine verses taken from the Author's Manuscript-copies of
these poems, communicated by him for this purpose to the Editor. These, when he
first published the poems to which they belong, he thought proper, for various
reasons, to omit. Some from the Manuscript-copy of the Essay on Man, which
tended to discredit fate, and to recommend the moral government of God, had, by
the Editor's advice, been restored to their places in the last Edition of that
Poem. The rest, together with others of the like sort from his Manuscript-copy
of the other Ethic Epistles, are here inserted at the bottom of the page, under
the title of Variations.

The FOURTH Volume contains the Satires; with their Prologue, the Epistle to
Dr. Arbuthnot; and Epilogue, the two poems entitled MDCCXXXVIII. The Prologue
and Epilogue are here given with the like advantages as the Ethic Epistles in
the foregoing Volume, that is to say, with the Variations, or additional verses
from the Author's Manuscripts. The Epilogue to the Satires is likewise enriched
with many and large notes now first printed from the Author's own Manuscript.

The FIFTH Volume contains a correcter and completer Edition of the Dunciad
than has been hitherto published; of which, at present I have only this
further to add, That it was at my request he laid the plan of a fourth Book. I
often told him, It was pity so fine a poem should remain disgraced by the
meanness of its subject, the most insignificant of all Dunces, bad Rymers and
malevolent Cavillers: That he ought to raise and enoble it by pointing his
Satire against the most pernicious of all, Minute-philosophers and
Free-thinkers. I imagined, too, it was for the interests of Religion to have it
known, that so great a Genius had a due abhorrence of these pests of Virtue and
Society. He came readily into my opinion; but, at the same time, told me it
would create him many Enemies. He was not mistaken. For though the terror of his
pen kept them for some time in respect, yet on his death they rose with
unrestrained fury in numerous Coffee-house tales, and Grub-street libels. The
plan of this admirable Satire was artfully contrived to show, that the follies
and defects of a fashionable EDUCATION naturally led to, and necessarily ended
in, FREE-THINKING; with design to point out the only remedy adequate to so
fatal an evil. It was to advance the same ends of virtue and religion, that the
Editor prevailed on him to alter every thing in his moral writings that might
be suspected of having the least glance toward Fate or NATURALISM; and to add
what was proper to convince the world, that he was warmly on the side of moral
Government and a revealed Will. And it would be injustice to his memory not to
declare that he embraced these occasions with the most unfeigned pleasure.

The SIXTH Volume consists of Mr. Pope's miscellaneous pieces in verse and
prose. Amongst the Verse several fine poems make now their first appearance in
his Works. And of the Prose, all that is good, and nothing but what is
exquisitely so, will be found in this Edition.

The SEVENTH, EIGHTH, and NINTH Volumes consist entirely of his Letters. The
more valuable, as they are the only true models which we, or perhaps any of our
neighbors have, of familiar Epistles. This collection is now made more
complete by the addition of several new pieces. Yet, excepting a short
explanatory letter to Col. M. and the Letters to Mr. A. and Mr. W. (the latter
of which are given to show the Editor's inducements, and the engagements he was
under, to intend the care of this Edition) excepting these, I say, the rest are
all here published from the Author's own printed though not published, copies
delivered to the Editor.

On the whole, the Advantages of this Edition, above the preceding, are these,
That it is the first complete collection which has ever been made of his
original Writings; That all his principal poems, of early or later date, are
here given to the public with his last corrections and improvements; That a
great number of his verses are here first printed from the Manuscript-copies of
his principal poems of later date; That many new notes of the Author's are here
added to his Poems; and lastly, that several pieces, both in prose and verse,
make now their first appearance before the Public.

The Author's life deserves a just Volume; and the Editor intends to give it.
For to have been one of the first Poets in the world is but his second praise.
He was in a higher Class. He was one of the noblest works of God. He was an
honest Man " A wit's a feather, and a chief's a rod,
" An honest Man's the noblest work of God.

. A Man, who alone possessed more real virtue than, in very corrupt times,
needing a Satirist like him, will sometimes fall to the share of multitudes. In
this history of his life It will be printed in the same form with this and
every future edition of his works, so as to make a part of them.
, will be contained a large account of his writings; a critique on the nature,
force, and extent of his genius, exemplified from these writings; and a
vindication of his moral character exemplified by his more distinguished
virtues; his filial piety, his disinterested friendships, his reverence for the
constitution of his country, his love and admiration of VIRTUE, and, (what was
the necessary effect) his hatred and contempt of VICE, his extensive charity to
the indigent, his warm benevolence to mankind, his supreme veneration of the
Deity, and, above all, his sincere belief of Revelation. Nor shall his faults
be concealed. It is not for the interests of his Virtues that they should. Nor
indeed could they be concealed if we were so minded, for they shine through his
Virtues; no man being more a dupe to the specious appearances of Virtue in
others. In a word I mean not to be his Panegyrist, but his Historian. And may
I, when Envy and Calumny take the same advantage of my absence (for, while I
live, I will freely trust it to my Life to confute them) may I find a Friend as
careful of my honest fame as I have been of His! Together with his Works, he
has bequeathed me his DUNCES. So that as the property is transferred, I could
wish they would now let his memory alone. The veil which Death draws over the
Good is so sacred, that to throw dirt upon the Shrine scandalizes even
Barbarians. And though Rome permitted her Slaves to calumniate her best
Citizens on the day of Triumph, yet the same petulancy at their Funeral would
have been rewarded with execration and a gibbet.

Contents of the First Volume.
PREFACE page i Recommendatory Poems xi A Discourse on Pastoral Poetry 37
SPRING, the first Pastoral 45 SUMMER, the second Pastoral 55 AUTUMN, the third
Pastoral 62 WINTER, the fourth Pastoral 69 MESSIAH, a Sacred Eclogue in
Imitation of Virgil's Pollio 79 WINDSOR FOREST 87 Ode on St. Cecilia's Day 117
Two Chorus's to the Tragedy of Brutus 124 Ode on Solitude 130 The Dying
Christian to his Soul, an Ode 131 Essay on Criticism 137 The Rape of the Lock
213 Elegy to the Memory of an unfortunate Lady 265 Prologue to Mr. Addison's
Tragedy 269
ERRATA.
Page 65 l. penult. for aqua read aquae 118 12. for number read numbers 159
Not. ad 180. ne quod (quod dele the first quod 176 Not. ad 337. for carmine
read carmina 226 24. for His figit read Hic figit
PREFACE.
I Am inclined to think that both the writers of books, and the readers of
them, are generally not a little unreasonable in their expectations. The first
seem to fancy that the world must approve whatever they produce, and the latter
to imagine that authors are obliged to please them at any rate. Methinks, as on
the one hand, no single man is born with a right of controuling the opinions of
all the rest; so on the other, the world has no title to demand, that the whole
care and time of any particular person should be sacrificed to its
entertainment. Therefore I cannot but believe that writers and readers are
under equal obligations, for as much fame, or pleasure, as each affords the
other.

Every one acknowledges, it would be a wild notion to expect perfection in any
work of man: and yet one would think the contrary was taken for granted, by the
judgment commonly past upon Poems. A Critic supposes he has done his part, if
he proves a writer to have failed in an expression, or erred in any particular
point: and can it then be wondered at, if the Poets in general seem resolved
not to own themselves in any error? For as long as one side will make no
allowances, the other will be brought to no acknowledgements In the former
editions it was thus -- For as long as one side despises a well meant
endeavor, the other will not be satisfied with a moderate approbation. -- But
the Author altered it, as these words were rather a consequence from the
conclusion he would draw, than the conclusion itself, which he has now inserted.
.

I am afraid this extreme zeal on both sides is ill-placed; Poetry and
Criticism being by no means the universal concern of the world, but only the
affair of idle men who write in their closets, and of idle men who read there.

Yet sure upon the whole, a bad Author deserves better usage than a bad Critic:
for a Writer's endeavor, for the most part, is to please his Readers, and he
fails merely through the misfortune of an ill judgment; but such a Critic's is
to put them out of humor; a design he could never go upon without both that and
an ill temper.

I think a good deal may be said to extenuate the fault of bad Poets. What we
call a Genius, is hard to be distinguished by a man himself, from a strong
inclination: and if his genius be ever so great, he cannot at first discover it
any other way, than by giving way to that prevalent propensity which renders
him the more liable to be mistaken. The only method he has, is to make the
experiment by writing, and appealing to the judgment of others: now if he
happens to write ill (which is certainly no sin in itself) he is immediately
made an object of ridicule. I wish we had the humanity to reflect that even the
worst authors might, in their endeavor to please us, deserve something at our
hands. We have no cause to quarrel with them but for their obstinacy in
persisting to write; and this too may admit of alleviating circumstances. Their
particular friends may be either ignorant, or insincere; and the rest of the
world in general is too well bred to shock them with a truth, which generally
their Booksellers are the first that inform them of. This happens not till they
have spent too much of their time, to apply to any profession which might
better fit their talents; and till such talents as they have are so far
discredited as to be but of small service to them. For (what is the hardest
case imaginable) the reputation of a man generally depends upon the first steps
he makes in the world, and people will establish their opinion of us, from what
we do at that season when we have least judgment to direct us.

On the other hand, a good Poet no sooner communicates his works with the same
desire of information, but it is imagined he is a vain young creature given up
to the ambition of fame; when perhaps the poor man is all the while trembling
with the fear of being ridiculous. If he is made to hope he may please the
world, he falls under very unlucky circumstances: for, from the moment he
prints, he must expect to hear no more truth, than if he were a Prince, or a
Beauty. If he has not very good sense (and indeed there are twenty men of wit,
for one man of sense) his living thus in a course of flattery may put him in no
small danger of becoming a Coxcomb: if he has, he will consequently have so
much diffidence as not to reap any great satisfaction from his praise; since,
if it be given to his face, it can scarce be distinguished from flattery, and
if in his absence, it is hard to be certain of it. Were he sure to be commended
by the best and most knowing, he is as sure of being envied by the worst and
most ignorant, which are the majority; for it is with a fine Genius as with a
fine fashion, all those are displeased at it who are not able to follow it: and
it is to be feared that esteem will seldom do any man so much good, as ill will
does him harm. Then there is a third class of people who make the largest part
of mankind, those of ordinary or indifferent capacities; and these (to a man)
will hate, or suspect him: a hundred honest Gentlemen will dread him as a Wit,
and a hundred innocent Women as a Satirist. In a word, whatever be his fate in
Poetry, it is ten to one but he must give up all the reasonable aims of life
for it. There are indeed some advantages accruing from a Genius to Poetry, and
they are all I can think of: the agreeable power of self-amusement when a man
is idle or alone; the privilege of being admitted into the best company; and
the freedom of saying as many careless things as other people, without being so
severely remarked upon.

I believe, if any one, early in his life, should contemplate the dangerous
fate of authors, he would scarce be of their number on any consideration. The
life of a Wit is a warfare upon earth; and the present spirit of the learned
world is such, that to attempt to serve it (any way) one must have the
constancy of a martyr, and a resolution to suffer for its sake. I could wish
people would believe what I am pretty certain they will not, that I have been
much less concerned about Fame than I durst declare till this occasion, when
methinks I should find more credit than I could heretofore: since my writings
have had their fate already, and it is too late to think of prepossessing the
reader in their favor. I would plead it as some merit in me, that the world
has never been prepared for these Trifles by Prefaces, biased by
recommendations, dazzled with the names of great Patrons, wheedled with fine
reasons and pretenses, or troubled with excuses. I confess it was want of
consideration that made me an author; I writ because it amused me; I corrected
because it was as pleasant to me to correct as to write; and I published
because I was told I might please such as it was a credit to please. To what
degree I have done this, I am really ignorant; I had too much fondness for my
productions to judge of them at first, and too much judgment to be pleased with
them at last. But I have reason to think they can have no reputation which will
continue long, or which deserves to do so: for they have always fallen short
not only of what I read of others, but even of my own Ideas of Poetry.

If any one should imagine I am not in earnest, I desire him to reflect, that
the Ancients (to say the least of them) had as much Genius as we: and that to
take more pains, and employ more time, cannot fail to produce more complete
pieces. They constantly applied themselves not only to that art, but to that
single branch of an art, to which their talent was most powerfully bent; and it
was the business of their lives to correct and finish their works for
posterity. If we can pretend to have used the same industry, let us expect the
same immortality: Though if we took the same care, we should still lie under a
farther misfortune: they writ in languages that became universal and
everlasting, while ours are extremely limited both in extent and in duration. A
mighty foundation for our pride! when the utmost we can hope, is but to be read
in one Island, and to be thrown aside at the end of one Age.

All that is left us is to recommend our productions by the imitation of the
Ancients: and it will be found true, that, in every age, the highest character
for sense and learning has been obtained by those who have been most indebted
to them. For, to say truth, whatever is very good sense, must have been common
sense in all times; and what we call Learning, is but the knowledge of the
sense of our predecessors. Therefore they who say our thoughts are not our own,
because they resemble the Ancients, may as well say our faces are not our own,
because they are like our Fathers: And indeed it is very unreasonable, that
people should expect us to be Scholars, and yet be angry to find us so.

I fairly confess that I have served myself all I could by reading; that I made
use of the judgment of authors dead and living; that I omitted no means in my
power to be informed of my errors, both by my friends and enemies: But the true
reason these pieces are not more correct, is owing to the consideration how
short a time they, and I, have to live: One may be ashamed to consume half
one's days in bringing sense and rhyme together; and what Critic can be so
unreasonable, as not to leave a man time enough for any more serious
employment, or more agreeable amusement?

The only plea I shall use for the favor of the public, is, that I have as
great a respect for it, as most authors have for themselves; and that I have
sacrificed much of my own self-love for its sake, in preventing not only many
mean things from seeing the light, but many which I thought tolerable. I would
not be like those Authors, who forgive themselves some particular lines for the
sake of a whole Poem, and vice versa a whole Poem for the sake of some
particular lines. I believe no one qualification is so likely to make a good
writer, as the power of rejecting his own thoughts; and it must be this (if any
thing) that can give me a chance to be one. For what I have published, I can
only hope to be pardoned; but for what I have burned, I deserve to be praised.
On this account the world is under some obligation to me, and owes me the
justice in return, to look upon no verses as mine that are not inserted in this
collection. And perhaps nothing could make it worth my while to own what are
really so, but to avoid the imputation of so many dull and immoral things, as
partly by malice, and partly by ignorance, have been ascribed to me. I must
farther acquit myself of the presumption of having lent my name to recommend
any Miscellanies, or Works of other men; a thing I never thought becoming a
person who has hardly credit enough to answer for his own.

In this office of collecting my pieces, I am altogether uncertain, whether to
look upon myself as a man building a monument, or burying the dead.

If Time shall make it the former, may these Poems (as long as they last)
remain as a testimony, that their Author never made his talents subservient to
the mean and unworthy ends of Party or Self-interest; the gratification of
public prejudices, or private passions; the flattery of the undeserving, or the
insult of the unfortunate. If I have written well, let it be considered that
it is what no man can do without good sense, a quality that not only renders one
capable of being a good writer, but a good man. And if I have made any
acquisition in the opinion of any one under the notion of the former, let it be
continued to me under no other title than that of the latter.

But if this publication be only a more solemn funeral of my Remains, I desire
it may be known that I die in charity, and in my senses; without any murmurs
against the justice of this age, or any mad appeals to posterity. I declare I
shall think the world in the right, and quietly submit to every truth which
time shall discover to the prejudice of these writings; not so much as wishing
so irrational a thing, as that every body should be deceived merely for my
credit. However, I desire it may then be considered, That there are very few
things in this collection which were not written under the age of five and
twenty: so that my youth may be made (as it never fails to be in Executions) a
case of compassion. That I was never so concerned about my works as to
vindicate them in print, believing, if any thing was good, it would defend
itself, and what was bad could never be defended. That I used no artifice to
raise or continue a reputation, depreciated no dead author I was obliged to,
bribed no living one with unjust praise, insulted no adversary with ill
language; or when I could not attack a Rival's works, encouraged reports
against his Morals. To conclude, if this volume perish, let it serve as a
warning to the Critics, not to take too much pains for the future to destroy
such things as will die of themselves; and a Memento mori to some of my vain
contemporaries the Poets, to teach them that, when real merit is wanting, it
avails nothing to have been encouraged by the great, commended by the eminent,
and favored by the public in general.

Nov. 10. 1716.
Variations in the Author's Manuscript Preface.
AFTER page v. l. 2. it followed thus -- For my part, I confess, had I seen
things in this view at first, the public had never been troubled either with my
writings, or with this apology for them, I am sensible how difficult it is to
speak of ones self with decency: but when a man must speak of himself, the best
way is to speak truth of himself, or, he may depend upon it, others will do it
for him. I Will therefore make this Preface a general confession of all my
thoughts of my own Poetry, resolving with the same freedom to expose myself, as
it is in the power of any other to expose them. In the first place I thank God
and nature, that I was born with a love to poetry; for nothing more conduces to
fill up all the intervals of our time, or, if rightly used, to make the whole
course of life entertaining: Cantantes licet usque (minus via laedet.) It Is a
vast happiness to possess the pleasures of the head, the only pleasures in
which a man is sufficient to himself, and the only part of him which, to his
satisfaction, he can employ all day long. The Muses are amicae omnium horarum;
and, like our gay acquaintance, the best company in the world as long as one
expects no real service from them. I confess there was a time when I was in
love with myself, and my first productions were the children of self love upon
innocence. I had made an Epic Poem, and Panegyrics on all the Princes in
Europe, and thought myself the greatest genius that ever was. I cannot but
regret those delightful visions of my childhood, which, like the fine colors
we see when our eyes are shut, are vanished for ever. Many trials and sad
experience have so undeceived me by degrees, that I am utterly at a loss at
what rate to value myself. As for fame I shall be glad of any I can get, and
not repine at any I miss; and as for vanity, I have enough to keep me from
hanging myself, or even from wishing those hanged who would take it away. It
was this that made me write. The sense of my faults made me correct; besides
that it was as pleasant to me to correct as to write.

At p. vii. l. 9. In the first place I own that I have used my best endeavors
to the finishing these pieces. That I made what advantage I could of the
judgment of authors dead and living; and that I omitted no means in my power to
be informed of my errors by my friends and by my enemies. And that I expect no
favor on account of my youth, business, want of health, or any such idle
excuses. But the true reason they are not yet more correct is owing to the
consideration how short a time they and I have to live. A man that can expect
but sixty years may be ashamed to employ thirty in measuring syllables and
bringing sense and rhyme together. We spend our youth in pursuit of riches or
fame, in hopes to enjoy them when we are old; and when we are old, we find it
is too late to enjoy any thing. I therefore hope the Wits will pardon me, if I
reserve some of my time to save my soul; and that some wise men will be of my
opinion, even if I should think a part of it better spent in the enjoyments of
life than in pleasing the critics.

On Mr. POPE and his Poems, By His GRACE JOHN SHEFFIELD, Duke of BUCKINGHAM.
WITH Age decayed, with Courts and business tired,
Caring for nothing but what Ease required;
Too dully serious for the Muse's sport,
And from the Critics safe arrived in Port;
I little thought of launching forth again,
Amidst adventurous Rovers of the Pen;
And after so much undeserved success,
Thus hazarding at last to make it less.
Encomiums suit not this censorious time,
Itself a subject for satiric rhyme;
Ignorance honored, Wit and Worth defamed,
Folly triumphant, and even Homer blamed!
But to this Genius, joined with so much Art,
Such various Learning mixed in every part,
Poets are bound a loud applause to pay;
Apollo bids it, and they must obey.
And yet so wonderful, sublime a thing,
As the great ILIAD, scarce could make me sing;
Except I justly could at once commend
A good Companion, and as firm a Friend.
One moral, or a mere well-natur'd deed
Can all desert in Sciences exceed.
It Is great delight to laugh at some men's ways,
But a much greater to give Merit praise.
To Mr. POPE, on his Pastorals.
IN these more dull, as more censorious days,
When few dare give, and fewer merit praise,
A Muse sincere, that never Flattery knew,
Pays what to friendship and desert is due.
Young, yet judicious; in your verse are found
Art strengthening Nature, Sense improved by Sound.
Unlike those Wits, whose numbers glide along
So smooth, no thought ever interrupts the song:
Laboriously enervate they appear,
And write not to the head, but to the ear:
Our minds unmoved and unconcerned they lull,
And are at best most musically dull;
So purling streams with even murmurs creep,
And hush the heavy hearers into sleep.
As smoothest speech is most deceitful found,
The smoothest numbers often are empty sound.
But Wit and Judgment join at once in you,
Sprightly as Youth, as Age consummate too:
Your strains are regularly bold, and please
With unforced care, and unaffected ease,
With proper thoughts, and lively images:
Such as by Nature to the Ancients shown,
Fancy improves, and judgment makes your own:
For great men's fashions to be followed are,
Although disgraceful it is their clothes to wear.
Some in a polished style write Pastoral,
Arcadia speaks the language of the Mall;
Like some fair Shepherdess, the Sylvan Muse,
Should wear those flowers her native fields produce;
And the true measure of the shepherd's wit
Should, like his garb, be for the Country fit:
Yet must his pure and unaffected thought
More nicely than the common swain's be wrought.
So, with becoming art, the Players dress
In silks the shepherd, and the shepherdess;
Yet still unchanged the form and mode remain,
Shaped like the homely russet of the swain.
Your rural Muse appears to justify
The long lost graces of Simplicity:
So rural beauties captivate our sense
With virgin charms, and native excellence.
Yet long her Modesty those charms concealed,
'Till by men's Envy to the world revealed;
For Wits industrious to their trouble seem,
And needs will envy what they must esteem.
Live and enjoy their spite! nor mourn that fate,
Which would, if Virgil lived, on Virgil wait;
Whose Muse did once, like thine, in plains delight;
Thine shall, like his, soon take a higher flight;
So Larks, which first from lowly fields arise,
Mount by degrees, and reach at last the skies.
W. WYCHERLEY.

To Mr. POPE, on his Windsor-Forest.
HAIL, sacred Bard! a Muse unknown before
Salutes thee from the bleak Atlantic shore.
To our dark world thy shining page is shown,
And Windsor's gay retreat becomes our own.
The Eastern pomp had just bespoke our care,
And India poured her gaudy treasures here:
A various spoil adorned our naked land,
The pride of Persia glittered on our strand,
And China's Earth was cast on common sand:
Tossed up and down the glossy fragments lay,
And dressed the rocky shelves, and paved the painted bay,
Thy treasures next arrived: and now we boast
A nobler cargo on our barren coast:
From thy luxuriant Forest we receive
More lasting glories than the East can give.
Wherever we dip in thy delightful page,
What pompous scenes our busy thoughts engage!
The pompous scenes in all their pride appear,
Fresh in the page, as in the grove they were.
Nor half so true the fair Lodona shows
The sylvan state that on her border grows,
While she the wondering shepherd entertains
With a new Windsor in her watery plains;
Thy juster lays the lucid wave surpass,
The living scene is in the Muse's glass.
Nor sweeter notes the echoing Forests cheer,
When Philomela sits and warbles there,
Than when you sing the greens and opening glades,
And give us Harmony as well as Shades:
A Titian's hand might draw the grove, but you
Can paint the grove, and add the Music too.
With vast variety thy pages shine;
A new creation starts in every line.
How sudden trees rise to the reader's sight,
And make a doubtful scene of shade and light,
And give at once the day, at once the night!
And here again what sweet confusion reigns,
In dreary deserts mixed with painted plains!
And see! the deserts cast a pleasing gloom,
And shrubby heaths rejoice in purple bloom:
Whilst fruitful crops rise by their barren side,
And bearded groves display their annual pride.
Happy the Man, who strings his tuneful lyre,
Where woods, and brooks, and breathing fields inspire!
Thrice happy you! and worthy best to dwell
Amidst the rural joys you sing so well.
I in a cold, and in a barren clime,
Cold as my thought, and barren as my rhyme,
Here on the Western beach attempt to chime.
O joyless flood! O rough tempestuous main!
Bordered with weeds, and solitudes obscene!
Snatch me, ye Gods! from these Atlantic shores,
And shelter me in Windsor's fragrant bowers;
Or to my much-loved Isis' walks convey,
And on her flowery banks for ever lay.
Thence let me view the venerable scene,
The awful dome, the groves eternal green:
Where sacred Hough long found his famed retreat,
And brought the Muses to the sylvan seat,
Reformed the wits, unlocked the Classic store,
And made that Music which was noise before.
There with illustrious Bards I spent my days,
Nor free from censure, nor unknown to praise,
Enjoyed the blessings that his reign bestowed,
Nor envied Windsor in the soft abode.
The golden minutes smoothly danced away,
And tuneful Bards beguiled the tedious day:
They sung, nor sung in vain, with numbers fired
That Maro taught, or Addison inspired.
Even I essayed to touch the trembling string:
Who could hear them, and not attempt to sing?
Roused from these dreams by thy commanding strain,
I rise, and wander through the field or plain;
Led by thy Muse from sport to sport I run,
Mark the stretched Line, or hear the thundering gun.
Ah! how I melt with pity, when I spy
On the cold earth the fluttering Pheasant lie;
His gaudy robes in dazzling lines appear,
And every feather shines and varies there.
Nor can I pass the generous courser by,
But while the prancing steed allures my eye,
He starts, he is gone! and now I see him fly
Over hills and dales, and now I lose the course,
Nor can the rapid sight pursue the flying horse.
Oh could thy Virgil from his orb look down,
He Would view a courser that might match his own!
Fired with the sport, and eager for the chase,
Lodona's murmurs stop me in the race.
Who can refuse Lodona's melting tale?
The soft complaint shall over time prevail;
The Tale be told, when shades forsake her shore,
The Nymph be sung, when she can flow no more.
Nor shall thy song, old Thames! forbear to shine,
At once the subject and the song divine.
Peace, sung by thee, shall please even Britons more
Than all their shouts for Victory before.
Oh! could Britannia imitate thy stream,
The world should tremble at her awful name:
From various springs divided waters glide,
In different colors roll a different tide,
Murmur along their crooked banks awhile,
At once they murmur and enrich the Isle,
A while distinct through many channels run,
But meet at last, and sweetly flow in one;
There joy to lose their long-distinguish'd names,
And make one glorious, and immortal Thames.
FR. KNAPP.

To Mr. POPE, In Imitation of a Greek Epigram on HOMER.
WHEN Phoebus, and the nine harmonious maids,
Of old assembled in the Thespian shades;
What theme, they cried, what high immortal air,
Befit these harps to sound, and thee to hear?
Replied the God; "Your loftiest notes employ,
" To sing young Peleus, and the fall of Troy."
The wondrous song with rapture they rehearse;
Then ask who wrought that miracle of verse?
He answered with a frown; "I now reveal
" A truth, that Envy bids me not conceal:
" Retiring frequent to this Laureat vale,
" I warbled to the Lyre that favorite tale,
" Which, unobserved, a wandering Greek and blind,
" Heard me repeat, and treasured in his mind;
" And fired with thirst of more than mortal praise,
" From me, the God of Wit, usurped the bays.
" But let vain Greece indulge her growing fame,
" Proud with celestial spoils to grace her name;
" Yet when my Arts shall triumph in the West,
" And the white Isle with female power is blessed;
" Fame, I foresee, will make reprisals there,
" And the Translator's Palm to me transfer.
" With less regret my claim I now decline,
" The World will think his English Iliad mine."
E. FENTON.

To Mr. POPE.
TO praise, and still with just respect to praise
A Bard triumphant in immortal bays,
The Learned to show, the Sensible commend,
Yet still preserve the province of the Friend;
What life, what vigor must the lines require?
What Music tune them, what Affection fire?
O might thy Genius in my bosom shine;
Thou should not fail of numbers worthy thine;
The brightest Ancients might at once agree
To sing within my lays, and sing of thee.
Horace himself would own thou do excel
In candid arts to play the Critic well.
Ovid himself might wish to sing the Dame
Whom Windsor Forest sees a gliding stream:
On silver feet, with annual Osier crowned,
She runs for ever through Poetic ground.
How flame the glories of Belinda's Hair,
Made by thy Muse the Envy of the Fair?
Less shone the tresses Aegypt's Princess wore,
Which sweet Callimachus so sung before.
Here courtly trifles set the world at odds;
Belles war with Beaux, and Whims descend for Gods.
The new Machines, in names of ridicule,
Mock the grave phrenzy of the Chemic fool.
But know, ye Fair, a point concealed with art,
The Sylphs and Gnomes are but a Woman's heart.
The Graces stand in sight; a Satire-train
Peeps over their head, and laughs behind the scene.
In Fame's fair Temple, over the boldest wits
Inshrin'd on high the sacred Virgil sits;
And sits in measures such as Virgil's Muse
To place thee near him, might be fond to choose.
How might he tune th'alternate reed with thee,
Perhaps a Strephon thou, a Daphnis he;
While some old Damon, over the vulgar wife,
Thinks he deserves, and thou deserve the Prize.
Rapt with the thought, my fancy seeks the plains,
And turns me shepherd while I hear the strains.
Indulgent nurse of every tender gale,
Parent of flowrets, old Arcadia, hail!
Here in the cool my limbs at ease I spread,
Here let thy poplars whisper over my head:
Still slide thy waters, soft among the trees,
Thy aspins quiver in a breathing breeze!
Smile, all ye valleys, in eternal spring,
Be hushed, ye winds, while Pope and Virgil sing.
In English lays, and all sublimely great,
Thy Homer warms with all his ancient heat;
He shines in Council, thunders in the Fight,
And flames with every sense of great delight.
Long has that Poet reigned, and long unknown,
Like Monarchs sparkling on a distant throne;
In all the Majesty of Greek retired,
Himself unknown, his mighty name admired;
His language failing, wrapped him round with night;
Thine, raised by thee, recalls the work to light.
So wealthy Mines, that ages long before
Fed the large realms around with golden Ore,
When choked by sinking banks, no more appear,
And shepherds only say, The mines were here:
Should some rich youth (if nature warm his heart,
And all his projects stand informed with art)
Here clear the caves, there open the leading vein;
The mines detected flame with gold again.
How vast, how copious, are thy new designs!
How every Music varies in thy lines!
Still, as I read, I feel my bosom beat,
And rise in raptures by another's heat.
Thus in the wood, when summer dressed the days,
While Windsor lent us tuneful hours of ease,
Our ears the lark, the thrush, the turtle blessed,
And Philomela sweetest over the rest:
The shades resound with song -- O softly tread,
While a whole season warbles round my head.
This to my Friend -- and when a friend inspires,
My silent harp its master's hand requires,
Shakes off the dust, and makes these rocks resound;
For fortune placed me in unfertile ground:
Far from the joys that with my soul agree,
From wit, from learning -- very far from thee.
Here moss-grown trees expand the smallest leaf;
Here half an acre's corn is half a sheaf;
Here hills with naked heads the tempest meet,
Rocks at their sides, and torrents at their feet;
Or lazy lakes unconscious of a flood,
Whose dull brown Naiads ever sleep in mud.
Yet here Content can dwell, and learned Ease,
A Friend delight me, and an Author please;
Even here I sing, when POPE supplies the theme,
Show my own love, though not increase his fame.
T. PARNELL.

To Mr. POPE.
LET vulgar souls triumphal arches raise,
Or speaking marbles, to record their praise;
And picture (to the voice of Fame unknown)
The mimic Feature on the breathing stone;
Mere mortals; subject to death's total sway,
Reptiles of earth, and beings of a day!
It Is thine, on every heart to grave thy praise,
A monument which Worth alone can raise:
Sure to survive, when time shall whelm in dust
The arch, the marble, and the mimic bust:
Nor 'till the volumes of th'expanded sky
Blaze in one flame, shall thou and Homer die:
Then sink together in the world's last fires,
What heaven created, and what heaven inspires.
If aught on earth, when once this breath is fled,
With human transport touch the mighty dead,
Shakespeare, rejoice! his hand thy page refines;
Now every scene with native brightness shines;
Just to thy Fame, he gives thy genuine thought;
So Tully published what Lucretius wrote;
Pruned by his care, thy laurels loftier grow,
And bloom afresh on thy immortal brow.
Thus when thy draughts, O Raphael! time invades,
And the bold figure from the canvass fades,
A rival hand recalls from every part
Some latent grace, and equals art with art;
Transported we survey the dubious strife,
While each fair image starts again to life.
How long, untuned, had Homer's sacred lyre
Jarr'd grating discord, all extinct his fire?
This you beheld; and taught by heaven to sing,
Called the loud music from the sounding string.
Now waked from slumbers of three thousand years,
Once more Achilles in dread pomp appears,
Towers over the field of death; as fierce he turns,
Keen flash his arms, and all the Hero burns;
With martial stalk, and more than mortal might,
He strides along, and meets the Gods in fight:
Then the pale Titans, chained on burning floors,
Start at the din that rends the infernal shores,
Tremble the towers of Heaven, earth rocks her coasts,
And gloomy Pluto shakes with all his ghosts.
To every theme responds thy various lay;
Here rolls a torrent, there Meanders play;
Sonorous as the storm thy numbers rise,
Toss the wild waves, and thunder in the skies;
Or softer than a yielding virgin's sigh,
The gentle breezes breathe away and die.
Thus, like the radiant God who sheds the day,
You paint the vale, or gild the azure way;
And while with every theme the verse complies,
Sink without grovelling, without rashness rise.
Proceed, great Bard! awake th'harmonious string,
Be ours all Homer! still Ulysses sing.
How long Odyssey, lib. xvi.
that Hero, by unskilful hands,
Stripped of his robes, a Beggar trod our lands?
Such as he wandered over his native coast,
Shrunk by the wand, and all the warrior lost:
Over his smooth skin a bark of wrinkles spread;
Old age disgraced the honors of his head;
Nor longer in his heavy eye-ball shined
The glance divine, forth-beaming from the mind.
But you, like Pallas, every limb infold
With royal robes, and bid him shine in gold;
Touched by your hand, his manly frame improves
With grace divine, and like a God he moves.
Even I, the meanest of the Muses' train,
Inflamed by thee, attempt a nobler strain;
Adventurous waken the Maeonian lyre,
Tuned by your hand, and sing as you inspire:
So armed by great Achilles for the fight,
Patroclus conquered in Achilles' right:
Like theirs, our Friendship! and I boast my name
To thine united -- for thy Friendship's Fame.
This labor past, of heavenly subjects sing,
While hovering angels listen on the wing,
To hear from earth such heartfelt raptures rise,
As, when they sing, suspended hold the skies:
Or nobly rising in fair Virtue's cause,
From thy own life transcribe th'unerring laws:
Teach a bad world beneath her saway to bend;
To verse like thine fierce savages attend,
And men more fierce: when Orpheus tunes the lay,
Even fiends relenting hear their rage away.
W. BROOM.

To Mr. POPE, On the publishing his WORKS.
HE comes, he comes! bid every Bard prepare
The song of triumph, and attend his Car.
Great Sheffield's Muse the long procession heads,
And throws a luster over the pomp she leads,
First gives the Palm she fired him to obtain,
Crowns his gay brow, and shows him how to reign.
Thus young Alcides, by old Chiron taught,
Was formed for all the miracles he wrought:
Thus Chiron did the youth he taught applaud,
Pleased to behold the earnest of a God.
But hark what shouts, what gathering crowds rejoice!
Unstained their praise by any venal voice,
Such as The Ambitious vainly think their due,
When Prostitutes, or needy Flatt'rers sue.
And see the Chief! before him laurels born;
Trophies from undeserving temples torn;
Here Rage enchain'd reluctant raves, and there
Pale Envy dumb, and sickening with despair,
Prone to the earth she bends her loathing eye,
Weak to support the blaze of majesty.
But what are they that turn the sacred page?
Three lovely Virgins, and of equal age;
Intent they read, and all enamored seem,
As he that met his likeness in the stream:
The GRACES these; and see how they contend,
Who most shall praise, who best shall recommend.
The Chariot now the painful steep ascends,
The Paeans cease; thy glorious labor ends.
Here fixed, the bright eternal Temple stands,
Its prospect an unbounded view commands:
Say, wondrous youth, whatColumn will thou choose,
What laurell'd Arch for thy triumphant Muse?
Though each great Ancient court thee to his shrine,
Though every Laurel through the dome be thine,
(From the proud Epic, down to those that shade
The gentler brow of the soft Lesbian maid)
Go to the Good and Just, an awful train,
Thy soul's delight, and glory of the Fane:
While through the earth thy dear remembrance flies,
" Sweet to the World, and grateful to the skies."
SIMON HARCOURT.

To Mr. POPE.
From Rome, 1730.
IMmortal Bard! for whom each Muse has wove
The fairest garlands of the Aonian Grove;
Preserved, our drooping Genius to restore,
When Addison and Congreve are no more;
After so many stars extinct in night,
The darkened Age's last remaining light!
To thee from Latian realms this verse is writ,
Inspired by memory of ancient Wit;
For now no more these climes their influence boast,
Fallen is their Glory, and their Virtue lost;
From Tyrants, and from Priests, the Muses fly,
Daughters of Reason and of Liberty.
Nor Baiae now, nor Umbria's plain they love,
Nor on the banks of Nar, or Mincio rove;
To Thames's flowery borders they retire,
And kindle in thy breast the Roman fire.
So in the shades, where cheered with summer rays
Melodious linnets warbled sprightly lays,
Soon as the faded, falling leaves complain
Of gloomy winter's unauspicious reign,
No tuneful voice is heard of joy or love,
But mournful silence saddens all the grove.
Unhappy Italy! whose altered state
Has felt the worst severity of Fate:
Not that Barbarian hands her Fasces broke,
And bowed her haughty neck beneath their yoke;
Nor that her palaces to earth are thrown,
Her cities desert, and her fields unsown;
But that her ancient Spirit is decayed,
That sacred Wisdom from her bounds is fled,
That there the source of Science flows no more,
Whence its rich streams supplied the world before.
Illustrious Names! that once in Latium shined,
Born to instruct, and to command Mankind;
Chiefs, by whose Virtue mighty Rome was raised,
And Poets, who those chiefs sublimely praised!
Often I the traces you have left explore,
Your ashes visit, and your urns adore;
Often kiss, with lips devout, some mouldering stone,
With ivy's venerable shade o'ergrown;
Those hallowed ruins better pleased to see
Than all the pomp of modern Luxury.
As late on Virgil's tomb fresh flowers I strow'd,
While with th'inspiring Muse my bosom glowed,
Crowned with eternal bays my ravished eyes
Beheld the Poet's awful Form arise:
Stranger, he said, whose pious hand has paid
These grateful rites to my attentive shade,
When thou shall breathe thy happy native air,
To Pope this message from his Master bear:
Great Bard, whose numbers I myself inspire,
To whom I gave my own harmonious lyre,
If high exalted on the Throne of Wit,
Near Me and Homer thou aspire to sit,
No more let meaner Satire dim the rays
That flow majestic from thy nobler Bays;
In all the flowery paths of Pindus stray,
But shun that thorny, that unpleasing way;
Nor, when each soft engaging Muse is thine,
Address the least attractive of the Nine.
Of thee more worthy were the task, to raise
A lasting Column to thy Country's Praise,
To sing the Land, which yet alone can boast
That Liberty corrupted Rome has lost;
Where Science in the arms of Peace is laid,
And plants her Palm beneath the Olive's shade.
Such was the Theme for which my lyre I strung,
Such was the People whose exploits I sung;
Brave, yet refined, for Arms and Arts renowned,
With different bays by Mars and Phoebus crowned,
Dauntless opposers of Tyrannic Sway,
But pleased, a mild AUGUSTUS to obey.
If these commands submissive thou receive,
Immortal and unblam'd thy name shall live;
Envy to black Cocytus shall retire,
And howl with Furies in tormenting fire;
Approving Time shall consecrate thy Lays,
And join the Patriot's to the Poet's Praise.
GEORGE LYTTELTON.

PASTORALS,
WITH A Discourse on PASTORAL.
Written in the Year MDCCIV.
Rura mihi et rigui placeant in vallibus amnes,
Flumina amem, sylvasque, inglorius!
VIRG.
A DISCOURSE ON PASTORAL POETRY Written at sixteen years of age. P.
.
THERE are not, I believe, a greater number of any sort of verses than of those
which are called Pastorals; nor a smaller, than of those which are truly so. It
therefore seems necessary to give some account of this kind of Poem, and it is
my design to comprize in this short paper the substance of those numerous
dissertations the Critics have made on the subject, without omitting any of
their rules in my own favor. You will also find some points reconciled, about
which they seem to differ, and a few remarks, which, I think, have escaped
their observation.

The original of Poetry is ascribed to that Age which succeeded the creation of
the world: and as the keeping of flocks seems to have been the first employment
of mankind, the most ancient sort of poetry was probably pastoral Fontenelle's
Disc. on Pastorals. P.
. It is natural to imagine, that the leisure of those ancient shepherds
admitting and inviting some diversion, none was so proper to that solitary and
sedentary life as singing; and that in their songs they took occasion to
celebrate their own felicity. From hence a Poem was invented, and afterward
improved to a perfect image of that happy time; which by giving us an esteem
for the virtues of a former age, might recommend them to the present. And since
the life of shepherds was attended with more tranquillity than any other rural
employment, the Poets chose to introduce their Persons, from whom it received
the name of Pastoral.

A Pastoral is an imitation of the action of a shepherd, or one considered
under that character. The form of this imitation is dramatic, or narrative, or
mixed of both Heinsius in Theocr. P.
; the fable simple, the manners not too polite nor too rustic: the thoughts are
plain, yet admit a little quickness and passion, but that short and flowing:
the expression humble, yet as pure as the language will afford; neat, but not
florid; easy, and yet lively. In short, the fable, manners, thoughts, and
expressions are full of the greatest simplicity in nature.

The complete character of this poem consists in simplicity Rapin de Carm.
Past. p. 2. P.
, brevity, and delicacy; the two first of which render an eclogue natural, and
the last delightful.

If we would copy Nature, it may be useful to take this Idea along with us,
that Pastoral is an image of what they call the golden age. So that we are not
to describe our shepherds as shepherds at this day really are, but as they may
be conceived then to have been; when the best of men followed the employment.
To carry this resemblance yet farther, it would not be amiss to give these
shepherds some skill in astronomy, as far as it may be useful to that sort of
life. And an air of piety to the Gods should shine through the Poem, which so
visibly appears in all the works of antiquity: and it ought to preserve some
relish of the old way of writing; the connection should be loose, the
narrations and descriptions short Rapin, Reflex. sur l'Art Poet. d'Arist. p. 2.
Refl. xxvii. P.
, and the periods concise. Yet it is not sufficient, that the sentences only be
brief, the whole Eclogue should be so too. For we cannot suppose Poetry in
those days to have been the business of men, but their recreation at vacant
hours.

But with a respect to the present age, nothing more conduces to make these
composures natural, than when some Knowledge in rural affairs is discovered
Pref. to Virg. Past. in Dryd. Virg. P.
. This may be made to appear rather done by chance than on design, and
sometimes is best shown by inference; lest by too much study to seem natural,
we destroy that easy simplicity from whence arises the delight. For what is
inviting in this sort of poetry proceeds not so much from the Idea of that
business, as of the tranquillity of a country life.

We must therefore use some illusion to render a Pastoral delightful; and this
consists in exposing the best side only of a shepherd's life, and in concealing
its miseries Fontenelle's Disc. of Pastorals. P.
. Nor is it enough to introduce shepherds discoursing together in a natural
way; but a regard must be had to the subject; that it contain some particular
beauty in itself, and that it be different in every Eclogue. Besides, in each
of them a designed scene or prospect is to be presented to our view, which
should likewise have its variety See the forementioned Preface. P.
. This variety is obtained in a great degree by frequent comparisons, drawn
from the most agreeable objects of the country; by interrogations to things
inanimate; by beautiful digressions, but those short; sometimes by insisting a
little on circumstances; and lastly, by elegant turns on the words, which
render the numbers extremely sweet and pleasing. As for the numbers themselves,
though they are properly of the heroic measure, they should be the smoothest,
the most easy and flowing imaginable.

It is by rules like these that we ought to judge of Pastoral. And since the
instructions given for any art are to be delivered as that art is in
perfection, they must of necessity be derived from those in whom it is
acknowledged so to be. It is therefore from the practice of Theocritus and
Virgil (the only undisputed authors of Pastoral) that the Critics have drawn
the foregoing notions concerning it.

Theocritus excels all others in nature and simplicity. The subjects of his
Idyllia are purely pastoral; but he is not so exact in his persons, having
introduced reapers THEPISTAI Idyl. x. and ALIEIS Idyl. xxi. P.
and fishermen as well as shepherds. He is apt to be too long in his
descriptions, of which that of the Cup in the first pastoral is a remarkable
instance. In the manners he seems a little defective, for his swains are
sometimes abusive and immodest, and perhaps too much inclining to rusticity;
for instance, in his fourth and fifth Idyllia. But it is enough that all others
learnt their excellencies from him, and that his Dialect alone has a secret
charm in it, which no other could ever attain.

Virgil, who copies Theocritus, refines upon his original: and in all points
where judgment is principally concerned, he is much superior to his master.
Though some of his subjects are not pastoral in themselves, but only seem to be
such; they have a wonderful variety in them, which the Greek was a stranger to
Rapin Refl. on Arist. part ii. refl. xxvii. -- Pref. to the Ecl. in Dryden's
Virg. P.
. He exceeds him in regularity and brevity, and falls short of him in nothing
but simplicity and propriety of style; the first of which perhaps was the fault
of his age, and the last of his language.

Among the moderns, their success has been greatest who have most endeavored
to make these ancients their pattern. The most considerable Genius appears in
the famous Tasso, and our Spenser. Tasso in his Aminta has as far excelled all
the Pastoral writers, as in his Gierusalemme he has outdone the Epic poets of
his country. But as this piece seems to have been the original of a new sort of
poem, the Pastoral Comedy, in Italy, it cannot so well be considered as a copy
of the ancients. Spenser's Calendar, in Mr. Dryden's opinion, is the most
complete work of this kind which any nation has produced ever since the time of
Virgil Dedication to Virg. Ecl. P.
. Not but that he may be thought imperfect in some few points. His Eclogues are
somewhat too long, if we compare them with the ancients. He is sometimes too
allegorical, and treats of matters of religion in a pastoral style, as Mantuan
had done before him. He has employed the Lyric measure, which is contrary to
the practice of the old Poets. His Stanza is not still the same, nor always
well chosen. This last may be the reason his expression is sometimes not
concise enough: for the Tetrastic has obliged him to extend his sense to the
length of four lines, which would have been more closely confined in the
Couplet.

In the manners, thoughts, and characters, he comes near to Theocritus himself;
though, notwithstanding all the care he has taken, he is certainly inferior in
his Dialect: For the Doric had its beauty and propriety in the Time of
Theocritus; it was used in part of Greece, and frequent in the mouths of many
of the greatest persons: whereas the old English and country phrases of Spenser
were either entirely obsolete, or spoken only by people of the lowest
condition. As there is a difference betwixt simplicity and rusticity, so the
expression of simple thoughts should be plain, but not clownish. The addition
he has made of a Calendar to his Eclogues, is very beautiful; since by this,
besides the general moral of innocence and simplicity, which is common to other
authors of Pastoral, he has one peculiar to himself; he compares human Life to
the several Seasons, and at once exposes to his readers a view of the great and
little worlds, in their various changes and aspects. Yet the scrupulous
division of his Pastorals into Months, has obliged him either to repeat the
same description, in other words, for three months together; or, when it was
exhausted before, entirely to omit it: whence it comes to pass that some of his
Eclogues (as the sixth, eighth, and tenth for example) have nothing but their
Titles to distinguish them. The reason is evident, because the year has not
that variety in it to furnish every month with a particular description, as it
may every season.

Of the following Eclogues I shall only say, that these four comprehend all the
subjects which the Critics upon Theocritus and Virgil will allow to be fit for
pastoral: That they have as much variety of description, in respect of the
several seasons, as Spenser's: that in order to add to this variety, the
several times of the day are observed, the rural employments in each season or
time of day, and the rural scenes or places proper to such employments; not
without some regard to the several ages of man, and the different passions
proper to each age.

But after all, if they have any merit, it is to be attributed to some good old
Authors, whose works as I had leisure to study, so I hope I have not wanted
care to imitate.


THE FIRST PASTORAL, OR DAMON.


Nor blush to sport on Windsor's blissful plains:
Fair Thames, flow gently from thy sacred spring,
While on thy banks Sicilian Muses sing;
Let vernal airs through trembling osiers play,
And Albion's cliffs resound the rural lay.
You, that too wise for pride, too good for power,
Enjoy the glory to be great no more,
And carrying with you all the world can boast,
To all the world illustriously are lost!
O let my Muse her slender reed inspire,

So when the Nightingale to rest removes,
The Thrush may chant to the forsaken groves,
But, charmed to silence, listens while she sings,
And all the aerial audience clap their wings.

Two Swains, whom Love kept wakeful, and the Muse,
Poured over the whitening vale their fleecy care,
Fresh as the morn, and as the season fair:
The dawn now blushing on the mountain's side,
Thus Daphnis spoke, and Strephon thus replied.
DAPHNIS. Hear how the birds, on every bloomy spray,
With joyous music wake the dawning day!
Why sit we mute when early linnets sing,
When warbling Philomel salutes the spring?
Why sit we sad when Phosphor shines so clear,


STREPHON. Sing then, and Damon shall attend the strain,
While yon' slow oxen turn the furrowed plain.
Here the bright crocus and blue vi'let glow;
Here western winds on breathing roses blow.
I Will stake yon' lamb, that near the fountain plays,


DAPHNIS.

Four figures rising from the work appear,

And what is that, which binds the radiant sky,
Where twelve fair signs in beauteous order lie?

DAMON.
Now hawthorns blossom, now the daisies spring,
Now leaves the trees, and flowers adorn the ground;
Begin, the vales shall every note rebound.

STREPHON. Inspire me, Phoebus, in my Delia's praise,


That threats a fight, and spurns the rising sand.

DAPHNIS.
And make my tongue victorious as her eyes;
No lambs or sheep for victims I Will impart,
Thy victim, Love, shall be the shepherd's heart.

STREPHON. Me gentle Delia beckons from the plain,
Then hid in shades, eludes her eager swain;
But feigns a laugh, to see me search around,
And by that laugh the willing fair is found.

DAPHNIS. The sprightly Sylvia trips along the green,

While a kind glance at her pursuer flies,
How much at variance are her feet and eyes!

STREPHON.
And trees weep amber on the banks of Po;
Blessed Thames's shores the brightest beauties yield,
Feed here my lambs, I Will seek no distant field.

DAPHNIS. Celestial Venus haunts Idalia's groves;
Diana Cynthus, Ceres Hybla loves;
If Windsor-shades delight the matchless maid,
Cynthus and Hybla yield to Windsor-shade.

STREPHON.
Hushed are the birds, and closed the drooping flowers;
If Delia smile, the flowers begin to spring,
The skies to brighten, and the birds to sing.

DAPHNIS. All nature laughs, the groves are fresh and fair,
The Sun's mild luster warms the vital air;
If Sylvia smiles, new glories gild the shore,
And vanquished nature seems to charm no more.

STREPHON. In spring the fields, in autumn hills I love,
At morn the plains, at noon the shady grove,
But Delia always; absent from her sight,
Nor plains at morn, nor groves at noon delight.

DAPHNIS. Sylvia's like autumn ripe, yet mild as May,
More bright than noon, yet fresh as early day;
Even spring displeases, when she shines not here;
But blessed with her, it is spring throughout the year.

STREPHON. Say, Daphnis, say, in what glad soil appears,

Tell me but this, and I Will disclaim the prize,
And give the conquest to thy Sylvia's eyes.

DAPHNIS. Nay tell me first, in what more happy fields

And then a nobler prize I will resign;
For Sylvia, charming Sylvia shall be thine.

DAMON. Cease to contend, for, Daphnis, I decree,
The bowl to Strephon, and the lamb to thee:
Blessed Swains, whose Nymphs in every grace excel:
Blessed Nymphs, whose Swains those graces sing so well!
Now rise, and haste to yonder woodbine bowers,
A soft retreat from sudden vernal showers;

While opening blooms diffuse their sweets around.
For see! the gathering flocks to shelter tend,
And from the Pleiads fruitful showers descend.

REMARKS.
These Pastorals were written at the age of sixteen, and then past through the
hands of Mr. Walsh, Mr. Wycherley, G. Granville afterward Lord Lansdown, Sir
William Trumbal, Dr. Garth, Lord Hallifax, Lord Summers, Mr. Mainwaring, and
others. All these gave our Author the greatest encouragement, and particularly
Mr. Walsh (whom Mr. Dryden, in his Postscript to Virgil, calls the best critic
of his age.) "The Author (says he) seems to have a particular genius for this
kind of Poetry, and a judgment that much exceeds his years. He has taken very
very freely from the Ancients. But what he has mixed of his own with theirs is
no way inferior to what he has taken from them. It is not flattery at all to
say that Virgil had written nothing so good at his Age. His Preface is very
judicious and learned." Letter to Mr. Wycherley, Ap. 1705. The Lord Lansdown
about the same time, mentioning the youth of our Poet, says (in a printed
Letter of the Character of Mr. Wycherley) "that if he goes on as he has begun
in the Pastoral way, as Virgil first tried his strength, we may hope to see
English Poety vie with the Roman," etc. Notwithstanding the early time of their
production, the Author esteemed these as the most correct in the versification,
and musical in the numbers, of all his works. The reason for his laboring them
into so much softness, was, doubtless, that this sort of poetry derives almost
its whole beauty from a natural ease of thought and smoothness of verse;
whereas that of most other kinds consists in the strength and fullness of both.
In a letter of his to Mr. Walsh about this time we find an enumeration of
several Niceties in Versification, which perhaps have never been strictly
observed in any English poem, except in these Pastorals. They were not printed
till 1709. P.

Sir William Trumball.] Our Author's friendship with this gentleman commenced
at very unequal years; he was under sixteen, but Sir William above sixty, and
had lately resigned his employment of Secretary of State to King William. P.

VER. 12. in your native shades] Sir W. Trumbal was born in Windsor-forest, to
which he retreated, after he had resigned the post of Secretary of State to
King William III. P.

VER. 17, etc. The Scene of this Pastoral a Valley, the Time the Morning It
stood originally thus, Daphnis and Strephon to the Shades retired,
Both warmed by Love, and by the Muse inspired,
Fresh as the morn, and as the season fair,
In flowery vales they fed their fleecy care;
And while Aurora gilds the mountain's side,
Thus Daphnis spoke, and Strephon thus replied.


VER. 28. purple year?] Purple here used in the Latin sense of the brightest
most vivid coloring in general, not of that peculiar tint so called.

VER. 34. The first reading was, And his own image from the bank surveys.


VER. 46. Granville -- ] George Granville, afterward Lord Lansdown, known for
his Poems, most of which he composed very young, and proposed Waller as his
model. P.

VER. 86. A wondrous Tree that sacred Monarchs bears.] An allusion to the
Royal Oak, in which Charles II. had been hid from the pursuit after the battle
of Worcester. P.

IMITATIONS
VER. 1. Prima Syracosio dignata est ludere versu,
Nostra nec erubuit sylvas habitare Thalia.
This is the general exordium and opening of the Pastorals, in imitation of the
sixth of Virgil, which some have therefore not improbably thought to have been
the first originally. In the beginnings of the other three Pastorals, he
imitates expressly those which now stand first of the three chief Poets in this
kind, Spencer, Virgil, Theocritus. A Shepherd's Boy (he seeks no better name)
--
Beneath the shade a spreading Beach displays, --
Thyrsis, the Music of that murmuring Spring, --
are manifestly imitations of -- A Shepherd's Boy (no better do him call)
-- Tityre, tu patulae recubans sub tegmine fagi.
-- (...).
P.

VER. 41. Then sing by turns.] Literally from Virgil, Alternis dicetis, amant
alterna Camoenae:
Et nunc omnis ager, nunc omnis parturit arbos,
Nunc frondent sylvae, nunc formosissimus annus.
P.

VER. 35, 36. Lenta quibus torno facili superaddita vitis,
Diffusos edera vestit pallente corymbos.
Virg. P.

VER. 38. The various seasons] The Subject of these Pastorals engraven on the
bowl is not without its propriety. The Shepherd's hesitation at the name of the
Zodiac, imitates that in Virgil, Et quis fuit alter,
Descripsit radio totum qui gentibus orbem?
P.

VER. 47. A milk-white Bull.] Virg. -- Pascite taurum,
Qui cornu petat, et pedibus jam spargat arenam.
P.

VER. 58. She runs, but hopes.] Imitation of Virgil, Malo me Galatea petit,
lasciva puella,
Et fugit ad salices, sed se cupit ante videri.
P.

VER. 69. All nature mourns,] Virg. Aret ager, vitio moriens sitit aeris herba,
etc.
Phyllidis adventu nostrae nemus omne virebit.
P.

VER. 90. The Thistle springs to which the Lilly yields,] Alludes to the device
of the Scots Monarchs, the Thistle, worn by Queen Anne; and to the arms of
France, the Fleur de lys. The two riddles are in imitation of those in Virg.
Ecl. iii. Dic quibus in terris inscripti nomina Regum
Nascantur Flores, and Phyllida solus habeto.
P.

VARIATIONS.
VER. 36. And clusters lurk beneath the curling vines.
P.

VER. 49. Originally thus in the MS. Pan, let my numbers equal Strephon's lays,
Of Parian stone thy statue will I raise;
But if I conquer and augment my fold,
Thy Parian statue shall be changed to Gold.


VER. 61. It stood thus at first, Let rich Iberia golden fleeces boast,
Her purple wool the proud Assyrian coast,
Blessed Thames's shores, etc.
P.

VER. 61. Originally thus in the MS. Go, flowery wreath, and let my Sylvia know,
Compared to thine how bright her Beauties show;
Then die; and dying teach the lovely Maid
How soon the brightest beauties are decayed.
DAPHNIS. Go, tuneful bird, that pleased the woods so long,
Of Amaryllis learn a sweeter song;
To Heaven arising then her notes convey,
For Heaven alone is worthy such a lay.



VER. 69. etc. These verses were thus at first: All nature mourns, the birds
their songs deny,
Nor wasted brooks the thirsty flowers supply;
If Delia smile, the flowers begin to spring,
The brooks to murmur, and the birds to sing.
P.

VER. 99. was originally, The turf with country dainties shall be spread,
And trees with twining branches shade your head.
P.

SUMMER.
THE SECOND PASTORAL, OR ALEXIS.
To Dr. GARTH.

Led forth his flocks along the silver Them,

And verdant alders formed a quivering shade.
Soft as he mourned, the streams forgot to flow,
The flocks around a dumb compassion show,
The Naiads wept in every watery bower,


That adds this wreath of Ivy to thy Bays;
Hear what from Love unpracticed hearts endure,
From Love, the sole disease thou can not cure.
Ye shady beeches, and ye cooling streams,
Defense from Phoebus', not from Cupid's beams,


The hills and rocks attend my doleful lay,
Why art thou prouder and more hard than they?
The bleating sheep with my complaints agree,
They parched with heat, and I inflamed by thee.
The sultry Sirius burns the thirsty plains,
While in thy heart eternal winter reigns.

While your Alexis pines in hopeless love?
In those fair fields where sacred Isis glides,
Or else where Came his winding vales divides?

Fresh rising blushes paint the watery glass;
But since those graces please thy eyes no more,
I shun the fountains which I sought before.
Once I was skilled in every herb that grew,
And every plant that drinks the morning dew;
Ah wretched shepherd, what avails thy art,
To cure thy lambs, but not to heal thy heart!
Let other swains attend the rural care,
Feed fairer flocks, or richer fleeces sheer:
But nigh yon' mountain let me tune my lays,
Embrace my Love, and bind my brows with bays.


He said; Alexis, take this pipe, the same
That taught the groves my Rosalinda's name:
But now the reeds shall hang on yonder tree,
For ever silent since despised by thee.
Oh! were I made by some transforming power
The captive bird that sings within thy bower!
Then might my voice thy listening ears employ,
And I those kisses he receives, enjoy.
And yet my numbers please the rural throng,
Rough Satyrs dance, and Pan applauds the song:
The Nymphs, forsaking every cave and spring,
Their early fruit, and milk-white turtles bring;
Each amorous nymph prefers her gifts in vain,
On you their gifts are all bestowed again.
For you the swains the fairest flowers design,
And in one garland all their beauties join;
Accept the wreath which you deserve alone,
In whom all beauties are comprised in one.
See what delights in sylvan scenes appear!

In woods bright Venus with Adonis strayed,
And chaste Diana haunts the forest-shade.
Come, lovely nymph, and bless the silent hours,
When swains from sheering seek their nightly bowers;
When weary reapers quit the sultry field,
And crowned with corn their thanks to Ceres yield,
This harmless grove no lurking viper hides,
But in my breast the serpent Love abides.
Here bees from blossoms sip the rosy dew,
But your Alexis knows no sweets but you.
Oh deign to visit our forsaken seats,
The mossy fountains, and the green retreats!
Wherever you walk, cool gales shall fan the glade,
Trees, where you sit, shall crowd into a shade:
Wherever you tread, the blushing flowers shall rise,
And all things flourish where you turn your eyes.
Oh! how I long with you to pass my days,
Invoke the Muses, and resound your praise!


But would you sing, and rival Orpheus' strain,
The wondering forests soon should dance again,
The moving mountains hear the powerful call,
And headlong streams hang listening in their fall!
But see, the shepherds shun the noonday heat,
The lowing herds to murmuring brooks retreat,
To closer shades the panting flocks remove;

But soon the sun with milder rays descends
To the cool ocean, where his journey ends:

By night he scorches, as he burns by day.
VARIATIONS.
VER. 1, 2, 3, 4. were thus printed in the first edition: A faithful swain,
whom Love had taught to sing,
Bewailed his fate beside a silver spring;
Where gentle Thames his winding waters leads
Through verdant forests, and through flowery meads.
P.

VER. 3. Originally thus in the MS. There to the winds he plained his hapless
love,
And Amaryllis filled the vocal grove.


VER. 27. Often in the crystal spring I cast a view,
And equaled Hylas, if the glass be true;
But since those graces meet my eyes no more,
I shun, etc.
P.

VER. 79, 80. Your praise the tuneful birds to heaven shall bear,
And listening wolves grow milder as they hear.
So the verses were originally written. But the author, young as he was, soon
found the absurdity which Spenser himself overlooked, of introducing Wolves
into England. P.

VER. 91. Me love inflames, nor will his fires allay.
P.

REMARKS.
VER. 3. The Scene of this Pastrol by the river's side; suitable to the heat of
the season; the time noon. P.

VER. 9.] Dr. Samuel Garth, Author of the Dispensary, was one of the first
friends of the Author, whose acquaintance with him began at fourteen or
fifteen. Their friendship continued from the year 1703 to 1718, which was that
of his death. P.

VER. 16. The woods shall answer, and their echo ring,] Is a line out of
Spenser's Epithalamion. P.

VER. 39. Colin] The name taken by Spenser in his Eclogues, where his mistress
is celebrated under that of Rosalinda. P.

IMITATIONS.
VER. 8. And Jove consented] Jupiter et laeto descendet plurimus imbri.
Virg. P.

VER. 15. nor to the deaf I sing,] Non canimus surdis, respondent omnia sylvae.
Virg. P.

VER. 23. Where stray ye Muses, etc.] Quae nemora, aut qui vos saltus habuere,
puellae
Naiades, indigno cum Gallus amore periret?
Nam neque Parnassi vobis juga, nam neque Pindi
Ulla moram fecere, neque Aonia Aganippe.
Virg. out of Theocr. P.

VER. 27. Virgil again from the Cyclops of Theocritus, nuper me in littore vidi
Cum placidum ventis staret mare, non ego Daphnim,
Judice te, metuam, si nunquam fallat imago.
P.

VER. 40. bequeathed in death; etc.] Virg. Ecl. ii. Est mihi disparibus septem
compacta cicutis
Fistula, Damoetas dono mihi quam dedit olim,
Et dixit moriens, Te nunc habet ista secundum.
P.

VER. 60. Descending Gods have found Elysium here.] Habitarunt Di quoque sylvas
--
Virg. Et formosus oves ad flumina pavit Adonis.
Idem. P.

VER. 80. And winds shall wast, etc.] Partem aliquam, venti, divum referatis ad
aures!
Virg. P.

VER. 88. Ye Gods! etc.] Me tamen urit amor, quis enim modus adsit amori?
Idem. P.


THE THIRD PASTORAL, OR HYLAS AND AEGON.
To Mr. WYCHERLEY.
BEneath the shade a spreading Beech displays,
Hylas and Aegon sung their rural lays,
This mourned a faithless, that an absent Love,
And Delia's name and Doris filled the Grove.
Ye Mantuan nymphs, your sacred succor bring;
Hylas and Aegon's rural lays I sing.



Whose judgment sways us, and whose spirit warms!
Oh, skilled in Nature! see the hearts of Swains,
Their artless passions, and their tender pains.
Now setting Phoebus shone serenely bright,
And fleecy clouds were streaked with purple light;
When tuneful Hylas with melodious moan,
Taught rocks to weep and made the mountains groan.
Go, gentle gales, and bear my sighs away!
To Delia's ear, the tender notes convey.
As some sad Turtle his lost love deplores,
And with deep murmurs fills the sounding shores;
Thus, far from Delia, to the winds I mourn,
A like unheard, unpitied, and forlorn.
Go, gentle gales, and bear my sighs along!
For her, the feathered quires neglect their song:
For her, the lymes their pleasing shades deny;
For her, the lillies hang their heads and die.
Ye flowers that droop, forsaken by the spring,
Ye birds that, left by summer, cease to sing,
Ye trees that fade when autumn-heats remove,
Say, is not absence death to those who love?
Go, gentle gales, and bear my sighs away!
Cursed be the fields that cause my Delia's stay;
Fade every blossom, wither every tree,
Die every flower, and perish all, but she.
What have I said? wherever my Delia flies,
Let spring attend, and sudden flowers arise;

And liquid amber drop from every thorn.
Go, gentle gales, and bear my sighs along!
The birds shall cease to tune their evening song,
The winds to breathe, the waving woods to move,
And streams to murmur, ever I cease to love.

Not balmy sleep to lab'rers faint with pain,
Not showers to larks, or sunshine to the be,
Are half so charming as thy sight to me.
Go, gentle gales, and bear my sighs away!

Through rocks and caves the name of Delia sounds,
Delia, each cave and echoing rock rebounds.
Ye powers, what pleasing frenzy sooths my mind!

She comes, my Delia comes! -- Now cease my lay,
And cease, ye gales, to bear my sighs away!
Next Aegon sung, while Windsor groves admired;
Rehearse, ye Muses, what yourselves inspired.
Resound, ye hills, resound my mournful strain!
Of perjured Doris, dying I complain:
Here where the mountains lessening as they rise
Lose the low vales, and steal into the skies:
While laboring oxen, spent with toil and heat,
In their loose traces from the field retreat:
While curling smoaks from village-tops are seen,
And the fleet shades glide over the dusky green.
Resound, ye hills, resound my mournful lay!
Beneath yon' poplar often we past the day:
Often on the rind I carved her amorous vows,
While she with garlands hung the bending boughs:
The garlands fade, the vows are worn away;
So dies her love, and so my hopes decay.
Resound, ye hills, resound my mournful strain!
Now bright Arcturus glads the teeming grain,
Now golden fruits on loaded branches shine,

Now blushing berries paint the yellow grove;
Just Gods! shall all things yield returns but love?
Resound, ye hills, resound my mournful lay!
The shepherds cry, " Thy flocks are left a prey --
Ah! what avails it me, the flocks to keep,
Who lost my heart while I preserved my sheep.
Pan came, and asked, what magic caused my smart,

What eyes but hers, alas, have power to move!
And is there magic but what dwells in love?
Resound, ye hills, resound my mournful strains!
I Will fly from shepherds, flocks, and flowery plains.
From shepherds, flocks, and plains, I may remove,
Forsake mankind, and all the world -- but love!

Wolves gave thee suck, and savage Tigers fed.
Thou were from Aetna's burning entrails torn,
Got by fierce whirlwinds, and in thunder born!
Resound, ye hills, resound my mournful lay!
Farewell, ye woods, adieu the light of day!
One leap from yonder cliff shall end my pains,
No more, ye hills, no more resound my strains!
Thus sung the shepherds till the approach of night,

When falling dews with spangles decked the glade,
And the low sun had lengthened every shade.
REMARKS.
This Pastoral consists of two parts, like the viiith of Virgil: The Scene, a
Hill; the Time at Sunset. P.

VER. 7. Thou, whom the Nine,] Mr. Wycherley, a famous Author of Comedies; of
which the most celebrated were the Plain-Dealer and Country-Wife. He was a
writer of infinite spirit, satire, and wit. The only objection made to him was
that he had too much. However he was followed in the same way by Mr. Congreve;
though with a little more correctness. P.

VER. 8. The Art of Terence and Menander's fire;] This line evidently alludes
to that famous Character given of Terence, by Caesar, Tu quoque, tu in summis,
o dimidiate Menander,
Poneris, et merito, puri sermonis amator;
Lenibus atque utinam scriptis adjuncta foret vis
Comica.
So that the judicious critic sees he should have said -- with Menander's fire.
For what the Poet meant, in this line, was, that his Friend had joined to
Terence's art what Caesar thought wanting in Terence, namely the vis comica of
Menander. Besides, -- and Menander's fire is making that the Characteristic of
Menander which was not. His character was the having art and comic spirit in
perfect conjunction, of which Terence having only the first, he is called the
half of Menander.

VER. 9. Whose sense instructs us] He was always very careful in his encomiums
not to fall into ridicule, the trap which weak and prostitute flatterers rarely
escape. For sense, he would willingly have said, moral; propriety required it.
But this dramatic poet's moral was remarkably faulty. His plays are all
monstrously immoral both in the Dialogue and Action.

VER. 74. And grateful clusters etc.] The scene is in Windsor-forest. So this
image not so exact.

VER. 98, 100.] There is a little inaccuracy here; the first line makes the
time after sunset; the second, before.

VARIATIONS.
VER. 48. Originally thus in the MS. With him through Libya's burning plains I Will
go,
On Alpine mountains tread the eternal snow;
Yet feel no heat but what our loves impart,
And dread no coldness but in Thyrsis' heart.


IMITATIONS.
VER. 37. Aurea durae
Mala ferant quercus; narcisso floreat alnus,
Pinguia corticibus sudent electra myricae.
Virg. Ecl. viii. P.

VER. 43, etc.] Quale sopor fessis in gramine, quale per aestum
Dulcis aquae saliente sitim restinguere rivo.
Ecl. v. P.

VER. 52. An qui amant, ipsi sibi somnia fingunt?
Id. viii. P.

VER. 82. Or what ill eyes] Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos.
P.

VER. 89. Nunc scio quid sit Amor: duris in cotibus illum, etc.
P.


THE FOURTH PASTORAL, OR DAPHNE.

LYCIDAS.
Is not so mournful as the strains you sing.
Nor rivers winding through the vales below,
So sweetly warble, or so smoothly flow.
Now sleeping flocks on their soft fleeces lie,
The moon, serene in glory, mounts the sky,
While silent birds forget their tuneful lays,
Oh sing of Daphne's fate, and Daphne's praise!

THYRSIS.
Their beauty withered, and their verdure lost.
Here shall I try the sweet Alexis strain,
That called the listening Dryads to the plain?

And bade his willows learn the moving song.

LYCIDAS. So may kind rains their vital moisture yield,
And swell the future harvest of the field.
Begin; this charge the dying Daphne gave,
And said, "Ye shepherds, sing around my grave!"
Sing, while beside the shaded tomb I mourn,
And with fresh bays her rural shrine adorn.

THYRSIS. Ye gentle Muses, leave your crystal spring,
Let Nymphs and Sylvans cypress garlands bring;

And break your bows, as when Adonis died;
And with your golden darts, now useless grown,
Inscribe a verse on this relenting stone:
" Let nature change, let heaven and earth deplore,
" Fair Daphne's dead, and love is now no more!

See gloomy clouds obscure the cheerful day!
Now hung with pearls the dropping trees appear,
Their faded honors scattered on her bier.
See, where on earth the flowery glories lie,
With her they flourished, and with her they die.
Ah what avail the beauties nature wore?
Fair Daphne's dead, and beauty is no more!
For her the flocks refuse their verdant food,
The thirsty heifers shun the gliding flood.
The silver swans her hapless fate bemoan,
In notes more sad than when they sing their own;
In hollow caves sweet Echo silent lies,
Silent, or only to her name replies;
Her name with pleasure once she taught the shore,
Now Daphne's dead, and pleasure is no more!
No grateful dews descend from evening skies,
Nor morning odours from the flowers arise;
No rich perfumes refresh the fruitful field,
Nor fragrant herbs their native incense yield.
The balmy Zephyrs, silent since her death,
Lament the ceasing of a sweeter breath;
The industrious bees neglect their golden store!
Fair Daphne's dead, and sweetness is no more!
No more the mounting larks, while Daphne sings,
Shall listening in mid air suspend their wings;
No more the birds shall imitate her lays,
Or hushed with wonder, hearken from the sprays:
No more the streams their murmurs shall forbear,
A sweeter music than their own to hear,
But tell the reeds, and tell the vocal shore,
Fair Daphne's dead, and music is no more!
Her fate is whispered by the gentle breeze,
And told in sighs to all the trembling trees;
The trembling trees, in every plain and wood,
Her fate remurmur to the silver flood;
The silver flood, so lately calm, appears
Swelled with new passion, and overflows with tears;
The winds and trees and floods her death deplore,
Daphne, our grief! our glory now no more!

Above the clouds, above the starry sky!
Eternal beauties grace the shining scene,
Fields ever fresh, and groves for ever green!
There while you rest in Amaranthine bowers,
Or from those meads select unfading flowers,
Behold us kindly, who your name implore,
Daphne, our Goddess, and our grief no more!

LYCIDAS. How all things listen, while thy Muse complains!
Such silence waits on Philomela's strains,
In some still evening, when the whispering breeze
Pants on the leaves, and dies upon the trees.

If teeming ewes increase my fleecy breed.

Thy name, thy honor, and thy praise shall live!

THYRSIS. But see, Orion sheds unwholesome dews,

Sharp Boreas blows, and Nature feels decay,


Adieu, ye shepherd's rural lays and loves;
Adieu, my flocks, farewell ye sylvan crew,
Daphne, farewell, and all the world adieu!

REMARKS.
WINTER.] This was the Poet's favorite Pastoral.

Mrs. Tempest.] This Lady was of an ancient family in Yorkshire, and
particularly admired by the Author's friend Mr. Walsh, who, having celebrated
her in a Pastoral Elegy, desired his friend to do the same, as appears from one
of his Letters, dated Sept. 9, 1706. "Your last Eclogue being on the same
subject with mine on Mrs. Tempest's death, I should take it very kindly in you
to give it a little turn as if it were to the memory of the same lady." Her
death having happened on the night of the great storm in 1703, gave a propriety
to this eclogue, which in its general turn alludes to it. The scene of the
Pastoral lies in a grove, the time at midnight. P.

VER. 9. shine with silver frost,] The image is a fine one, but improperly
placed. The idea he would here raise is the deformity of Winter, as appears by
the following line: but this contradicts it. It should have been -- glare with
hoary frost, or some such expression: the same inaccuracy in 31, where he uses
pearls, when he should have said tears.

VER. 89, etc.] These four last lines allude to the several subjects of the
four Pastorals, and to the several scenes of them, particularized before in
each. P.

IMITATIONS.
VER. 1. Thyrsis, the music, etc.] (...), etc.
Theocr. Id. i.

VER. 13. Thames heard etc.] Audiit Eurotas, jussitque ediscere lauros.
Virg. P.

VER. 23, 24, 25. Inducite fontibus umbras --
Et tumulum facite, et tumulo superaddite carmen.
P.

VER. 69, 70. miratur limen Olympi,
Sub pedibusque videt nubes et sydera Daphnis.
Virg. P.

VER. 81. illius aram
Saepe tener nostris ab ovilibus imbuet agnus.
Virg. P.

VER. 86. solet esse gravis cantantibus umbra,
Juniperi gravis umbra.
Virg. P.

VER. 88. Time conquers all, etc. Omnia vincit amor, et nos cedamus amori.
Vid. etiam Sannazarii Ecl. et Spencer's Calendar.

VARIATIONS.
VER. 29. Originally thus in the MS. It Is done, and nature's changed since you
are gone;
Behold the clouds have put their Mourning on.


VER. 83. Originally thus in the MS. While Vapors rise, and driving snows
descend,
Thy honor, name, and praise shall never end.


MESSIAH.
A Sacred Eclogue, In Imitation of VIRGIL's POLLIO.
Advertisement.
IN reading several passages of the Prophet Isaiah, which foretell the coming
of Christ and the felicities attending it, I could not but observe a remarkable
parity between many of the thoughts, and those in the Pollio of Virgil. This
will not seem surprising, when we reflect, that the Eclogue was taken from a
Sibylline prophecy on the same subject. One may judge that Virgil did not copy
it line by line, but selected such ideas as best agreed with the nature of
pastoral poetry, and disposed them in that manner which served most to beautify
his piece. I have endeavored the same in this imitation of him, though without
admitting any thing of my own; since it was written with this particular view,
that the reader, by comparing the several thoughts, might see how far the
images and descriptions of the Prophet are superior to those of the Poet. But
as I fear I have prejudiced them by my management, I shall subjoin the passages
of Isaiah, and those of Virgil, under the same disadvantage of a literal
translation. P.

MESSIAH.
A SACRED ECLOGUE, In Imitation of VIRGIL'S POLLIO.
YE Nymphs of Solyma! begin the song:
To heavenly themes sublimer strains belong.
The mossy fountains, and the sylvan shades,
The dreams of Pindus and th'Aonian maids,
Delight no more -- O thou my voice inspire
Who touched Isaiah's hallowed lips with fire!
Rapt into future times, the Bard begun:

From Isai. xi. 1.
Jesse's root behold a branch arise,
Whose sacred flower with fragrance fills the skies:
The Ethereal spirit over its leaves shall move,
And on its top descends the mystic Dove.
Chapter xlv. 8.
Heavens! from high the dewy nectar pour,
And in soft silence shed the kindly shower!
The Chapter xxv. 4.
sick and weak the healing plant shall aid,
From storms a shelter, and from heat a shade.

Returning Chapter ix. 7.
Justice lift aloft her scale;
Peace over the world her olive wand extend,
And white-rob'd Innocence from heaven descend.
Swift fly the years, and rise the expected morn!
Oh spring to light, auspicious Babe, be born!

With all the incense of the breathing spring:
See Chapter xxxv. 2.
lofty Lebanon his head advance,
See nodding forests on the mountains dance:
See spicy clouds from lowly Saron rise,
And Carmel's flowery top perfumes the skies!

Prepare the Chapter xl. 3, 4.
way! a God, a God appears:
A God, a God! the vocal hills reply,
The rocks proclaim the approaching Deity.
Lo, earth receives him from the bending skies!
Sink down ye mountains, and ye valleys rise,
With heads declined, ye cedars homage pay;
Be smooth ye rocks, ye rapid floods give way!
The Savior comes! by ancient bards foretold:
Hear Chapter xlii. 18. Chapter xxxv. 5, 6.
him, ye deaf, and all ye blind, behold!

And on the sightless eye-ball pour the day:
It Is he the obstructed paths of sound shall clear,
And bid new music charm the unfolding ear:
The dumb shall sing, the lame his crutch forego,
And leap exulting like the bounding roe.
No sigh, no murmur the wide world shall hear,
From every face he wipes off every tear.
In Chapter xxv. 8.
adamantine chains shall Death be bound,
And Hell's grim Tyrant feel the eternal wound.
As the good Chapter xl. 11.
shepherd tends his fleecy care,
Seeks freshest pasture and the purest air,
Explores the lost, the wandering sheep directs,
By day o'ersees them, and by night protects,
The tender lambs he raises in his arms,
Feeds from his hand, and in his bosom warms;
Thus shall mankind his guardian care engage,
The promised Chapter ix. 6.
father of the future age.
No more shall Chapter ii. 4.
nation against nation rise,
Nor ardent warriors meet with hateful eyes,
Nor fields with gleaming steel be covered over,
The brazen trumpets kindle rage no more;
But useless lances into scythes shall bend,
And the broad faulchion in a plow-share end.
Then palaces shall rise; the joyful Chapter lxv. 21, 22.
Son
Shall finish what his short-lived Sire begun;
Their vines a shadow to their race shall yield,
And the same hand that sowed, shall reap the field
Chapter xxxv. 1, 7.
deserts with surprise
See lillies spring, and sudden verdure rise;
And starts, amidst the thirsty wilds to hear
New falls of water murmuring in his ear.
On rifted rocks, the dragon's late abodes,
The green reed trembles, and the bulrush nods.
Waste sandy Chapter xil. 19. and Chapter lv. 13.
valleys, once perplexed with thorn,
The spiry fir and shapely box adorn:
To leafless shrubs the flow'ring palms succeed,
And odorous myrtle to the noisome weed.
Chapter xi. 6, 7, 8.
lambs with wolves shall graze the verdant mead,
And boys in flowery bands the tiger lead;
The steer and lion at one crib shall meet,
And harmless Chapter lxv. 25.
serpents lick the pilgrim's feet.
The smiling infant in his hand shall take
The crested basilisk and speckled snake,
Pleased the green luster of the scales survey,
And with their forky tongue shall innocently play.
Chapter lx. 1.
Salem, rise!
Exalt thy tow'ry head, and lift thy eyes!
See, a long Chapter lx. 4.
race thy spacious courts adorn;
See future sons, and daughters yet unborn,
In crouding ranks on every side arise,
Demanding life, impatient for the skies!
See barbarous Chapter lx. 3.
nations at thy gates attend,
Walk in thy light, and in thy temple bend;
See thy bright altars thronged with prostrate kings
And heaped with products of Chapter lx. 6.
Sabaean springs!
For thee Idume's spicy forests blow,
And seeds of gold in Ophyr's mountains glow.
See heaven its sparkling portals wide display,
And break upon thee in a flood of day!
No more the rising Chapter lx. 19, 20.
Sun shall gild the morn,
Nor evening Cynthia fill her silver horn;
But lost, dissolved in thy superior rays,
One tide of glory, one unclouded blaze
Overflow thy courts: the Light himself shall shine
Revealed, and God's eternal day be thine!
The Chapter li. 6. and Chapter live. 10.
seas shall waste, the skies in smoke decay,
Rocks fall to dust, and mountains melt away;
But fixed his word, his saving power remains;
Thy realm for ever lasts, thy own MESSIAH reigns!
IMITATIONS.
VER. 8. A Virgin shall conceive --
All crimes shall cease, etc.]
VIRG. E. iv. 6. Jam redit et Virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna;
Jam nova progenies caelo demittitur alto.
Te duce, si qua manent sceleris vestigia nostri,
Irrita perpetua solvent formidine terras --
Pacatumque reget patriis virtutibus orbem.


Now the Virgin returns, now the kingdom of Saturn returns, now a new Progeny
is sent down from high heaven. By means of thee, whatever relics of our
crimes remain, shall be wiped away, and free the world from perpctual fears. He
shall govern the earth in peace, with the virtues of his Father.

ISAIAH, Chapter vii. 14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son. -- Chapter ix.
6, 7. Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given; the Prince of Peace: of
the increase of his government, and of his peace, there, shall be no end: Upon
the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order and to stablish it, with
judgment, and with justice, for ever and ever. P.

VER. 23. See Nature hastes, etc] VIRG. E. iv. 18. At tibi prima, puer, nullo
munuscula cultu,
Errantes hederas passim cum baccare tellus,
Mixtaque ridenti colocasia fundet acantho --
Ipsa tibi blandos fundent cunabula flores.


For thee, O Child, shall the earth, without being tilled, produce her early
offerings; winding ivy, mixed with Baccar, and Colocasia with smiling Acanthus.
Thy cradle shall pour forth pleasing flowers about thee.

ISAIAH, Chapter xxxv. 1. The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad, and
the desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose. Chapter lx. 13. The glory of
Lebanon shall come unto thee, the firtree, the pine tree, and the box together,
to beautisy the place of thy sanctuary. P.

VER. 29. Hark, a glad Voice, etc.] VIRG. E. iv. 46. Aggredere o magnos, aderit
jam tempus, honores,
Cara deum soboles, magnum Jovis incrementum --
Ipsi laetitia voces ad sydera jactant
Intonsi montes, ipsae jam carmina rupes,
Ipsa sonant arbusta, Deus, deus ille Menalca!
E. v. 62.

Oh come and receive the mighty honors: the time draws nigh, O beloved
offspring of the Gods, O great increase of Jove! The uncultivated mountains
send shouts of joy to the stars, the very rocks sing in verse, the very shrubs
cry out, A God, a God!

ISAIAH, Chapter xl. 3, 4. The voice of him that cries in the wilderness, Prepare
ye the way of the Lord! make strait in the desert a high way for our God! Every
valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low, and the
crooked shall be made strait, and the rough places plain. Chapter iv. ver. 23.
Break forth into singing, ye mountains! O forest, and every tree therein! for
the Lord has redeemed Israel. P.

VER. 67. The swain in barren desarts] Virg. E. iv. 28. Molli paulatim
flavescet campus arista,
Incultisque rubens pendebit sentibus uva,
Et durae quercus sudabunt roscida mella.


The fields shall grow yellow with ripened cars, and the red grape shall hang
upon the wild brambles, and the hard oaks shall distill honey like dew.

ISAIAH, Chapter xxxv. 7. The parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty
land springs of water: In the habitations where dragons lay, shall be grass,
and reeds, and rushes. Chapter lv. 13. Instead of the thorn shall come up the
fir tree, and instead of the briar shall come up the myrtle tree. P.

VER. 77. The lambs with wolves etc] Virg. E. iv. 21. Ipsae lacte domum
referent distenta capellae
Ubera, nec magnos metuent armenta leones --
Occidet et serpens, et fallax herba veneni
Occidet. --


The goats shall bear to the fold their udders distended with milk: nor shall
the herds be afraid of the greatest lions. The serpent shall die, and the herb
that conceals poison shall die.

ISAIAH, Chapter xi. 16, etc. The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard
shall lie down with the kid, and the calf and the young lion and the fatling
together: and a little child shall lead them. -- And the lion shall eat straw
like the ox. And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the
weaned child shall put his hand on the den of the cockatrice. P.

VER. 85. Rise, crowned with light, imperial Salem, rise!] The thoughts of
Isaiah, which compose the latter part of the poem, are wonderfully elevated,
and much above those general exclamations of Virgil, which make the loftiest
parts of his Pollio. Magnus ab integro saeclorum nascitur ordo!
-- toto surget gens aurea mundo!
-- incipient magni procedere menses!
Aspice, venturo laetentur ut omnia saeclo! etc.
The reader needs only to turn to the passages of Isaiah, here cited. P.

REMARKS.
VER. 13. Ye Heavens! from high the dewy nectar pour,
And in soft silence shed the kindly shower!]
His Original says, Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour
down righteousness: let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation, and
let righteousness spring up together. -- This is a very noble description of
divine grace shed abroad in the hearts of the faithful under the Gospel
dispensation. And the poet understood all its force, as appears from the two
lines preceding these, -- The Ethereal Spirit, etc. The prophet describes this
under the image of rain, which chiefly fits the first age of the Gospel: The
poet, under the idea of dew, which extends it to every age. And it was his
purpose it should be so understood, as appears from his expression of soft
silence, which agrees with the common not the extraordinary effusions of the
Holy Spirit. The term of dewy nectar, for divine grace, is wonderfully happy.
For he who would moralize the ancient Mythology in the manner of Bacon, must
say, that by the poetical nectar, can be meant only theological grace.

VER. 17. ancient fraud] i. e. the fraud of the Serpent.

VER. 39. He from thick films shall purge the visual ray,] The fense and
language show, that, by visual ray, the poet meant the sight, or, as Milton
calls it, the visual nerve. And no critic would quarrel with the figure which
calls the instrument of vision by the name of the cause. But though this term be
just, nay noble, and even sublime, yet the expression of thick films is faulty;
and he fell into it by a common neglect of the following rule of good writing,
"That when a figurative term is used, whatsoever is predicated of it ought not
only to agree to the thing to which the figure is applied, but likewise to that
from which the figure is taken." Thick films agree only with the thing to which
it is applied, namely to the sight or eye; and not to that from which it is
taken, namely a ray of light coming to the eye. He should have said thick
clouds, which would have agreed with both. But these inaccuracies are not to be
found in his later poems.

WINDSOR-FOREST.
To the Right Honorable GEORGE Lord LANSDOWN.
Non injussa cano: Te nostrae, Vare, myricae,
Te Nemus omne canet; nec Phoebo gratior ulla est,
Quam sibi quae Vari praescripsit pagina nomen.
VIRG.
Plate II. Vol. I. facing p.89.

S. Wale inv: et del: J. S. Muller sc:

My humble Muse, in unambitious Strains
Paints the green Forests and the flowery Plains.
Windsor Forest.


To the Right Honorable GEORGE Lord LANSDOWN.
THY forests, Windsor! and thy green retreats,
At once the Monarch's and the Muse's seats,

Unlock your springs, and open all your shades.
GRANVILLE commands; your aid, O Muses, bring!

The Groves of Eden, vanished now so long,
Live in description, and look green in song:
These, were my breast inspired with equal flame,
Like them in beauty, should be like in fame.
Here hills and vales, the woodland and the plain,
Here earth and water seem to strive again;
Not Chaos-like together crushed and bruised,
But, as the world, harmoniously confused:
Where order in variety we see,
And where, though all things differ, all agree.
Here waving groves a checkered scene display,
And part admit, and part exclude the day;
As some coy nymph her lover's warm address
Nor quite indulges, nor can quite repress.
There, interspersed in lawns and opening glades,
Thin trees arise that shun each other's shades.
Here in full light the russet plains extend:
There wrapped in clouds the blueish hills ascend.

And 'midst the desert fruitful fields arise,
That crowned with tufted trees and springing corn,
Like verdant isles the sable waste adorn.
Let India boast her plants, nor envy we
The weeping amber or the balmy tree,
While by our oaks the precious loads are born,
And realms commanded which those trees adorn.

Though Gods assembled grace his towering height,
Than what more humble mountains offer here,
Where, in their blessings, all those Gods appear.
See Pan with flocks, with fruits Pomona crowned,
Here blushing Flora paints th'enamel'd ground,
Here Ceres' gifts in waving prospect stand,
And nodding tempt the joyful reaper's hand;
Rich Industry sits smiling on the plains,
And peace and plenty tell, a STUART reigns.
Not thus the land appeared in ages past,
A dreary desert, and a gloomy waste,

And kings more furious and severe than they;
Who claimed the skies, dispeopled air and floods,
The lonely lords of empty wilds and woods:

(For wiser brutes were backward to be slaves.)
What could be free, when lawless beasts obeyed,
And even the elements a Tyrant swayed?
In vain kind seasons swelled the teeming grain,
Soft showers distilled, and suns grew warm in vain;
The swain with tears his frustrate labor yields,
And famished dies amidst his ripened fields.

Were equal crimes in a despotic reign?
Both doomed alike, for sportive Tyrants bled,
But while the subject starved, the beast was fed.
Proud Nimrod first the bloody chase began,
A mighty hunter, and his prey was man:
Our haughty Norman boasts that barbarous name,
And makes his trembling slaves the royal game.

From men their cities, and from Gods their fanes:
The levelled towns with weeds lie covered over;
The hollow winds through naked temples roar;
Round broken columns clasping ivy twined;
Over heaps of ruin stalked the stately hind;
The fox obscene to gaping tombs retires,

Awed by his Nobles, by his Commons cursed,
Th'Oppressor ruled tyrannic where he durst,
Stretched over the Poor and Church his iron rod,
And served alike his Vassals and his God.
Whom even the Saxon spared and bloody Dane,
The wanton victims of his sport remain.
But see, the man who spacious regions gave


At once the chaser, and at once the prey:
Lo Rufus, tugging at the deadly dart,
Bleeds in the forest like a wounded heart.
Succeeding monarchs heard the subjects cries,
Nor saw displeased the peaceful cottage rise.
Then gathering flocks on unknown mountains fed,
Over sandy wilds were yellow harvests spread,

And secret transport touched the conscious swain.

Her cheerful head, and leads the golden years.
Ye vigorous swains! while youth ferments your blood,
And purer spirits swell the sprightly flood,
Now range the hills, the gameful woods beset,
Wind the shrill horn, or spread the waving net.

And in the new-shorn field the partridge feeds,
Before his lord the ready spaniel bounds,
Panting with hope, he tries the furrowed grounds;
But when the tainted gales the game betray,
Couched close he lies, and meditates the prey:
Secure they trust the unfaithful field beset,
'Till hovering over 'em sweeps the swelling net.
Thus (if small things we may with great compare)
When Albion sends her eager sons to war,

Near, and more near, the closing lines invest;
Sudden they seize the amazed, defenseless prize,
And high in air Britannia's standard flies.
See! from the brake the whirring pheasant springs,
And mounts exulting on triumphant wings:
Short is his joy; he feels the fiery wound,
Flutters in blood, and panting beats the ground.

His purple crest, and scarlet-circled eyes,
The vivid green his shining plumes unfold,
His painted wings, and breast that flames with gold?
Nor yet, when moist Arcturus clouds the sky,
The woods and fields their pleasing toils deny.
To plains with well-breathed beagles we repair,
And trace the mazes of the circling hare:
(Beasts, urged by us, their fellow-beasts pursue,
And learn of man each other to undo.)
With slaught'ring guns the unwearied fowler roves,

Where doves in flocks the leafless trees o'ershade,
And lonely woodcocks haunt the watery glade.

Strait a short thunder breaks the frozen sky:
Often, as in airy rings they skim the heath,
The clamorous Lapwings feel the leaden death:
Often, as the mounting larks their notes prepare,

In genial spring, beneath the quivering shade,
Where cooling vapors breathe along the mead,
The patient fisher takes his silent stand,
Intent, his angle trembling in his hand:
With looks unmoved, he hopes the scaly breed,
And eyes the dancing cork, and bending reed.
Our plenteous streams a various race supply,
The bright-ey'd perch with fins of Tyrian dye,
The silver eel, in shining volumes rolled,
The yellow carp, in scales bedrop'd with gold,
Swift trouts, diversified with crimson stains,
And pykes, the tyrants of the watery plains.
Now Cancer glows with Phoebus' fiery car:
The youth rush eager to the sylvan war,
Swarm over the lawns, the forest walks surround,
Rouse the fleet heart, and cheer the opening hound.

And pawing, seems to beat the distant plain:
Hills, vales, and floods appear already crossed,
And ever he starts, a thousand steps are lost.
See the bold youth strain up the threatening steep,
Rush through the thickets, down the valleys sweep,
Hang over their coursers heads with eager speed,

Let old Arcadia boast her ample plain,
The immortal huntress, and her virgin-train;
Nor envy, Windsor! since thy shades have seen

Whose care, like hers, protects the sylvan reign,
The Earth's fair light, and Empress of the Main.
Here too, it is sung, of old Diana strayed,
And Cynthus' top forsook for Windsor shade;
Here was she seen over airy wastes to rove,
Seek the clear spring, or haunt the pathless grove;
Here armed with silver bows, in early dawn,
Her buskined Virgins traced the dewy lawn.
Above the rest a rural nymph was famed,
Thy offspring, Thames! the fair Lodona named;
(Lodona's fate, in long oblivion cast,
The Muse shall sing, and what she sings shall last.)
Scarce could the Goddess from her nymph be known,
But by the crescent and the golden zone.

A belt her waist, a fillet binds her hair;
A painted quiver on her shoulder sounds,
And with her dart the flying deer she wounds.
It chanced, as eager of the chase, the maid
Beyond the forest's verdant limits strayed,
Pan saw and loved, and burning with desire
Pursued her flight, her flight increased his fire.

When the fierce eagle cleaves the liquid sky;
Not half so swiftly the fierce eagle moves,
When through the clouds he drives the trembling doves;
As from the God she flew with furious pace,
Or as the God, more furious, urged the chase.
Now fainting, sinking, pale, the nymph appears;
Now close behind, his sounding steps she hears;

His shadow lengthened by the setting sun;
And now his shorter breath, with sultry air,
Pants on her neck, and fans her parting hair.
In vain on father Thames she calls for aid,
Nor could Diana help her injured maid.
Faint, breathless, thus she prayed, nor prayed in vain;
" Ah Cynthia! ah -- though banished from thy train,
" Let me, O let me, to the shades repair,
" My native shades -- there weep, and murmur there.
She said, and melting as in tears she lay,
In a soft, silver stream dissolved away.
The silver stream her virgin coldness keeps,
For ever murmurs, and for ever weeps;

And bathes the forest where she ranged before.
In her chaste current often the Goddess laves,
And with celestial tears augments the waves.

The headlong mountains and the downward skies,
The watery landscape of the pendant woods,
And absent trees that tremble in the floods;
In the clear azure gleam the flocks are seen,
And floating forests paint the waves with green,
Through the fair scene roll slow the lingering streams,
Then foaming pour along, and rush into the Thames.
Thou too, great father of the British floods!
With joyful pride survey'st our lofty woods;
Where towering oaks their growing honors rear,
And future navies on thy shores appear.
Not Neptune's self from all her streams receives
A wealthier tribute, than to thine he gives.
No seas so rich, so gay no banks appear,
No lake so gentle, and no spring so clear.
Nor Po so swells the fabling Poet's lays,
While led along the skies his current strays,
As thine, which visits Windsor's famed abodes,
To grace the mansion of our earthly Gods:
Nor all his stars above a luster show,
Like the bright Beauties on thy banks below;

Might change Olympus for a nobler hill.

His Sovereign favors, and his Country loves:
Happy next him, who to these shades retires,
Whom Nature charms, and whom the Muse inspires,
Whom humbler joys of home-felt quiet please,
Successive study, exercise, and ease.
He gathers health from herbs the forest yields,
And of their fragant physic spoils the fields:
With chymic art exalts the min'ral powers,
And draws the aromatic souls of flowers:
Now marks the course of rolling orbs on high;
Over figured worlds now travels with his eye;
Of ancient writ unlocks the learned store,
Consults the dead, and lives past ages over:
Or wandering thoughtful in the silent wood,
Attends the duties of the wise and good,

To follow nature, and regard his end;
Or looks on heaven with more than mortal eyes,
Bids his free soul expatiate in the skies,
Amid her kindred stars familiar roam,
Survey the region, and confess her home!
Such was the life great Scipio once admired,
Thus Atticus, and TRUMBAL thus retired.
Ye sacred Nine! that all my soul possess,
Whose raptures fire me, and whose visions bless,

The bow'ry mazes, and surrounding greens:
To Thames's banks which fragrant breezes fill,
Or where ye Muses sport on COOPER'S HILL.
(On COOPER'S HILL eternal wreaths shall grow,
While lasts the mountain, or while Thames shall flow)

I hear soft music die along the grove:
Led by the sound, I roam from shade to shade,
By god-like Poets venerable made:
Here his first lays majestic DENHAM sung;

O early lost! what tears the river shed,
When the sad pomp along his banks was led?

And on his willows hung each Muse's lyre.
Since fate relentless stopped their heavenly voice,
No more the forests ring, or groves rejoice;
Who now shall charm the shades, where COWLEY strung
His living harp, and lofty DENHAM sung?
But hark! the groves rejoice, the forest rings!
Are these revived? or is it GRANVILLE sings?
It Is yours, my Lord, to bless our soft retreats,
And call the Muses to their ancient seats;
To paint anew the flowery sylvan scenes,
To crown the forests with immortal greens,
Make Windsor-hills in lofty numbers rise,
And lift her turrets nearer to the skies;
To sing those honors you deserve to wear,


SURREY, the GRANVILLE of a former age:
Matchless his pen, victorious was his lance,
Bold in the lists, and graceful in the dance:
In the same shades the Cupids tuned his lyre,
To the same notes, of love, and soft desire:
Fair Geraldine, bright object of his vow,
Then filled the groves, as heavenly Mira now.
Oh would thou sing what Heroes Windsor bore,
What Kings first breathed upon her winding shore,
Or raise old warriors, whose adored remains
In weeping vaults her hallowed earth contains!

Stretch his long triumphs down through every age,
Draw Monarchs chained, and Cressi's glorious field,
The lillies blazing on the regal shield:

And leave inanimate the naked wall,
Still in thy song should vanquished France appear,
And bleed for ever under Britain's spear.

And palms eternal flourish round his urn.
Here over the Martyr-King the marble weeps,

Whom not the extended Albion could contain,
From old Belerium to the northern main,
The grave unites; where even the Great find rest,
And blended lie the oppressor and the oppressed!
Make sacred Charles's tomb for ever known,
(Obscure the place, and un-inscrib'd the stone)

Heavens, what new wounds! and how her old have bled?
She saw her sons with purple deaths expire,
Her sacred domes involved in rolling fire,
A dreadful series of intestine wars,
Inglorious triumphs and dishonest scars.

She said, the world obeyed, and all was Peace!
In that blessed moment from his oozy bed
Old father Thames advanced his reverend head.

His shining horns diffused a golden gleam:
Engraved on his urn appeared the moon, that guides
His swelling waters, and alternate tides;
The figured streams in waves of silver rolled,
And on their banks Augusta rose in gold.
Around his throne the sea-born brothers stood,
Who swell with tributary urns his flood;
First the famed authors of his ancient name,
The winding Isis and the fruitful Tame:
The Kennet swift, for silver eels renowned;
The Loddon slow, with verdant alders crowned;
Cole, whose dark streams his flowery islands lave;
And chalky Wey, that rolls a milky wave:
The blue, transparent Vandalis appears;
The gulphy Lee his sedgy tresses rears;
And sullen Mole, that hides his diving flood;
And silent Darent, stained with Danish blood.
High in the midst, upon his urn reclined,
(His seagreen mantle waving with the wind)
The God appeared: he turned his azure eyes
Where Windsor-domes and pompous turrets rise;
Then bowed and spoke; the winds forget to roar,
And the hushed waves glide softly to the shore.
Hail, sacred Peace! hail long-expected days,
That Thames's glory to the stars shall raise!
Though Tyber's streams immortal Rome behold,
Though foaming Hermus swells with tides of gold,
From heaven itself though sev'n-fold Nilus flows,
And harvests on a hundred realms bestows;
These now no more shall be the Muse's themes,
Lost in my fame, as in the sea their streams.

And groves of lances glitter on the Rhine,
Let barbarous Ganges arm a servile train;
Be mine the blessings of a peaceful reign.
No more my sons shall die with British blood
Red Iber's sands, or Ister's foaming flood:
Safe on my shore each unmolested swain
Shall tend the flocks, or reap the bearded grain;
The shady empire shall retain no trace
Of war or blood, but in the sylvan chase;
The trumpet sleep, while cheerful horns are blown,
And arms employed on birds and beasts alone.
Behold! the ascending Villa's on my side,
Project long shadows over the crystal tide,
Behold! Augusta's glittering spires increase,

I see, I see, where two fair cities bend
Their ample bow, a new Whitehall ascend!
There mighty Nations shall enquire their doom,
The World's great Oracle in times to come;
There Kings shall sue, and suppliant States be seen
Once more to bend before a BRITISH QUEEN.

And half thy forests rush into thy floods,
Bear Britain's thunder, and her Cross display,
To the bright regions of the rising day;
Tempt icy seas, where scarce the waters roll,

Or under southern skies exalt their sails,
Led by new stars, and borne by spicy gales!
For me the balm shall bleed, and amber flow,
The coral redden, and the ruby glow,
The pearly shell its lucid globe infold,
And Phoebus warm the ripening ore to gold.
The time shall come, when free as seas or wind

Whole nations enter with each swelling tide,
And seas but join the regions they divide;
Earth's distant ends our glory shall behold,
And the new world launch forth to seek the old.
Then ships of uncouth form shall stem the tide,
And feathered people crowd my wealthy side,
And naked youths and painted chiefs admire
Our speech, our color, and our strange attire!
Oh stretch thy reign, fair Peace! from shore to shore,
'Till Conquest cease, and Slavery be no more;
'Till the freed Indians in their native groves
Reap their own fruits, and woo their sable loves,
Peru once more a race of Kings behold,
And other Mexico's be roof'd with gold.
Exiled by thee from earth to deepest hell,
In brazen bonds, shall barbarous Discord dwell;
Gigantic Pride, pale Terror, gloomy Care,
And mad Ambition shall attend her there:
There purple Vengeance bathed in gore retires,
Her weapons blunted, and extinct her fires:
There hateful Envy her own snakes shall feel,
And Persecution mourn her broken wheel:
There Faction roar, Rebellion bite her chain,
And gasping Furies thirst for blood in vain.

Touch the fair fame of Albion's golden days:
The thoughts of Gods let GRANVILLE'S verse recite,
And bring the scenes of opening fate to light.
My humble Muse, in unambitious strains,
Paints the green forests and the flowery plains,
Where Peace descending bids her olives spring,
And scatters blessings from her dove-like wing.
Even I more sweetly pass my careless days,
Pleased in the silent shade with empty praise;
Enough for me, that to the listening swains
First in these fields I sung the sylvan strains.
VARIATIONS.
VER. 3, etc. originally thus, Chaste Goddess of the woods,
Nymphs of the vales, and Naiads of the floods,
Lead me through arching bowers, and glimmering glades.
Unlock your springs --
P.

VER. 25. Originally thus; Why should I sing our better suns or air,
Whose vital draughts prevent the leach's care,
While through fresh fields th'enliv'ning odours breathe,
Or spread with vernal blooms the purple heath?
P.

VER. 49. Originally thus in the MS. From towns laid waste, to dens and caves
they ran
(For who first stooped to be a slave was man.)


VER. 57, etc. No wonder savages or subjects slain --
But subjects starved while savages were fed.
It was originally thus, but the word savages is not properly applied to beasts
but to men; which occasioned the alteration. P.

VER. 72. And wolves with howling fill etc. The Author thought this an error,
wolves not being common in England at the time of the Conqueror. P.

VER. 91. Oh may no more a foreign master's rage,
With wrongs yet legal, curse a future age!
Still spread, fair Liberty! thy heavenly wings,
Breath plenty on the fields, and fragrance on the springs.
P.

VER. 97. When yellow autumn summer's heat succeeds,
And into wine the purple harvest bleeds Perhaps the Author thought it not
allowable to describe the season by a circumstance not proper to our climate,
the vintage. P.
,
The partridge feeding in the new-shorn fields,
Both morning sports and evening pleasures yields.


VER. 107. It stood thus in the first Editions, Pleased, in the Gen'ral's
sight, the host lie down
Sudden before some unsuspecting town;
The young, the old, one instant makes our prize,
And over their captive heads Britannia's standard flies.


VER. 126. Over rustling leaves around the naked groves.


VER. 129. The fowler lifts his levelled tube on high.
P.

VER. 233. Happy the man, who to the shades retires,
But doubly happy, if the Muse inspires!
Blessed whom the sweets of home-felt quiet please;
But far more blessed, who study joins with ease.
P.

VER. 231. It stood thus in the MS. And force great Jove, if Jove's a lover
still,
To change Olympus, etc.


VER. 265. it stood thus in the MS. Methinks around your holy scenes I rove,
And hear your music echoing through the grove:
With transport visit each inspiring shade
By God-like Poets venerable made.


VER. 273. What sighs, what murmurs filled the vocal shore!
His tuneful swans were heard to sing no more.
P.

VER. 288. her silver star] All the lines that follow were not added to the
poem till the year 1710. What immediately followed this, and made the
Conclusion, were these, My humble Muse in unambitious strains
Paints the green forests and the flowery plains;
Where I obscurely pass my careless days,
Pleased in the silent shade with empty praise,
Enough for me that to the listening swains
First in these fields I sung the sylvan strains.
P.

VER. 305. Originally thus in the MS. When Brass decays, when Trophies lie over
thrown,
And mouldering into dust drops the proud stone.


VER. 319. Originally thus in the MS. Oh fact accursed! oh sacrilegious brood,
Sworn to Rebellion, principled in blood!
Since that dire morn what tears has Albion shed,
Gods! what new wounds, etc.


VER. 325. Thus in the MS. Till Anna rose and bade the Furies cease;
Let there be Peace -- she said, and all was Peace.


Between Verse 328 and 329, originally stood these lines, From shore to shore
exulting shouts he heard,
Over all his banks a lambent light appeared,
With sparkling flames heaven's glowing concave shone,
Fictitious stars, and glories not her own.
He saw, and gently rose above the stream;
His shining horns diffuse a golden gleam:
With pearl and gold his tow'ry front was dressed,
The tributes of the distant East and West.
P.

VER. 361. Originally thus in the MS. Let Venice boast her Towers amidst the
Main,
Where the rough Adrian swells and roars in vain;
Here not a Town, but spacious Realm shall have
A sure foundation on the rolling wave.


VER. 383, etc. were originally thus, Now shall our fleets the bloody Cross
display
To the rich regions of the rising day,
Or those green isles, where headlong Titan steeps
His hissing axle in the Atlantic deeps;
Tempt icy seas, etc.
P.

REMARKS.
This Poem was written at two different times: the first part of it, which
relates to the country, in the year 1704, at the same time with the Pastorals:
the latter part was not added till the year 1713, in which it was published. P.

VER. 33. Not proud Olympus etc.] Sir J. Denham, in his Cooper's Hill, had
said, Than which a nobler weight no mountain bears,
But Atlas only, which supports the spheres.
The comparison is childish, for this story of Atlas being fabulous, leaves no
room for a compliment. Our Poet has been more artful (though he employs as
fabulous a circumstance in his comparison) by showing in what the nobility of
the hills of Windsor-Forest consists -- Where, in their blessings, all those
Gods appear. etc.
not to speak of the beautiful turn of wit.

VER. 45. savage laws] The Forest Laws.

VER. 65. The fields are ravished etc.] Alluding to the destruction made in the
New Forest, and the tyrannies exercised there by William I. P.

VER. 80. himself denied a grave!] The place of his interment at Caen in
Normandy was claimed by a Gentleman as his inheritance, the moment his servants
were going to put him in his tomb: so that they were obliged to compound with
the owner before they could perform the King's obsequies.

VER. 81. second hope] Richard, second son of William the Conqueror.

VER. 162. Queen ANNE.

VER. 205. Still bears the name] The River Loddon.

VER. 209. Often in her glass, etc.] These six lines were added after the first
writing of this poem. P.

VER. 270. There the last numbers flowed from Cowley's tongue] Mr. Cowley died
at Chertsey, on the borders of the Forest, and was from thence conveyed to
Westminster. P.

VER. 289. Here noble Surrey] Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, one of the first
refiners of the English poetry; who flourished in the time of Henry VIII. P.

VER. 301. Edward's acts] Edward III. born here. P.

VER. 309. Henry mourn] Henry VI. P.

VER. 312. once-fear'd Edward sleeps:] Edward IV. P.

VER. 376. And Temples rise,] The fifty new Churches. P.

VER. 388. Where clearer flames glow round the frozen Pole.] The Poet is here
recommending the advantages of commerce, and therefore the extremities of heat
and cold are not represented in a forbidding manner: as again, Or under
southern skies exalt their sails,
Led by new stars, and borne by spicy gales.
But in the Dunciad, where the mischief of Dullness is described, they are
painted in all their inclemencies, See round the Poles where keener spangles
shine,
Where spices smoke beneath the burning line.


VER. 396. Unbounded Thames, etc.] A wish that London may be made a FREE PORT.
P.

IMITATIONS.
VER. 6. neget quis carmina Gallo?
Virg.

VER. 65. The fields were ravished from the industrious swains,
From men their cities, and from Gods their fanes:]
Translated from, Templa adimit divis, fora civibus, arva colonis,
an old monkish writer, I forget who. P.

VER. 89. Miraturque novas frondes et non sua poma.
Virg.

VER. 115. nec te tua plurima, Pantheu,
Labentem pietas, vel Apollinis infula texit.
Virg.

VER. 134. Praecipites alta vitam sub nube relinquunt.
Virg.

VER. 151. The impatient courser etc.] Translated from Statius, Stare adeo
miserum est, pereunt vestigia mill
Ante fugam, absentemque ferit gravis ungula campum.
These lines Mr. Dryden, in his preface to his translation of Fresnoy's Art of
painting, calls wonderfully fine, and says they would cost him an hour, if he
had the leisure to translate them, there is so much of beauty in the original;
which was the reason, I suppose, why Mr. P. tried his strength with them.

VER. 158. and earth rolls back] He has improved his original, terraeque
urbesque recedunt.
Virg.

VER. 175. Nec positu variare comas; ubi fibula vestem,
Vitta coercuerat neglectos alba capillos.
Ovid.

VER. 183, 186. Ut fugere accipitrem penna trepidante columbae,
Ut solet accipiter trepidas agitare columbas.
Ovid.

VER. 191, 194. Sol erat a tergo: vidi praecedere longam
Ante pedes umbram: nisi si timor illa videbat.
Sed certe sonituque pedum terrebar; et ingens
Crinales vittas afflabat anhelitus oris.


VER. 249, 50. Servare modum finemque tenere,
Naturamque sequi.
Lucr.

VER. 259. O qui me gelidis, etc.
Virg.

VER. 421. Quo, Musa, tendis? desine pervicax
Refer sermones Deorum et
Magna modis tenuare parvis.
Hor.

ODE ON ST. CECILIA's DAY, MDCCVIII.
AND OTHER PIECES for MUSIC.

I.
DEscend, ye Nine! descend and sing;
The breathing instruments inspire,
Wake into voice each silent string,
And sweep the sounding lyre!
In a sadly-pleasing strain
Let the warbling lute complain:

'Till the roofs all around
The shrill echos rebound:
While in more lengthened notes and slow,
The deep, majestic, solemn organs blow.
Hark! the numberssoft and clear,
Gently steal upon the ear;
Now louder, and yet louder rise
And fill with spreading sounds the skies;
Exulting in triumph now swell the bold notes,
In broken air, trembling, the wild music floats;
'Till, by degrees, remote and small,
The strains decay,
And melt away,
In a dying, dying fall.
II.
By Music, minds an equal temper know,
Nor swell too high, nor sink too low.
If in the breast tumultuous joys arise,
Music her soft, assuasive voice applies;
Or when the soul is pressed with cares,
Exalts her in enlivening airs.
Warriors she fires with animated sounds;
Pours balm into the bleeding lover's wounds:
Melancholy lifts her head,
Morpheus rouzes from his bed,
Sloth unfolds her arms and wakes,
Listening Envy drops her snakes;
Intestine war no more our Passions wage,
And giddy Factions hear away their rage.
III.
But when our Country's cause provokes to Arms,
How martial music every bosom warms!
So when the first bold vessel dared the seas,
High on the stern the Thracian raised his strain,
While Argo saw her kindred trees
Descend from Pelion to the main.
Transported demigods stood round,
And men grew heroes at the sound,
Enflamed with glory's charms:
Each chief his sev'nfold shield displayed,
And half unsheathed the shining blade:
And seas, and rocks, and skies rebound
To arms, to arms, to arms!
IV.
But when through all the infernal bounds,
Which flaming Phlegeton surrounds,
Love, strong as Death, the Poet led
To the pale nations of the dead,
What sounds were heard,
What scenes appeared,
Over all the dreary coasts!
Dreadful gleams,
Dismal screams,
Fires that glow,
Shrieks of woe,
Sullen moans,
Hollow groans,
And cries of tortured ghosts!
But hark! he strikes the golden lyre;
And see! the tortured ghosts respire,
See, shady forms advance!
Thy stone, O Sysiphus, stands still,
Ixion rests upon his wheel,
And the pale specter dance!
The Furies sink upon their iron beds,
And snakes uncurl'd hang listening round their heads.
V.
By the streams that ever flow,
By the fragrant winds that blow
Over the Elysian flowers;
By those happy souls who dwell
In yellow meads of Asphodel,
Or Amaranthine bowers;
By the hero's armed shades,
Glittering through the gloomy glades;
By the youths that died for love,
Wandering in the myrtle grove,
Restore, restore Eurydice to life:
Oh take the husband, or return the wife!
He sung, and hell consented
To hear the Poet's prayer:
Stern Proserpine relented,
And gave him back the fair.
Thus song could prevail
Over death, and over hell,
A conquest how hard and how glorious?
Though fate had fast bound her
With Styx nine times round her,
Yet music and love were victorious.
VI.
But soon, too soon, the lover turns his eyes:
Again she falls, again she dies, she dies!
How will thou now the fatal sisters move?
No crime was thine, if it is no crime to love.
Now under hanging mountains,
Beside the falls of fountains,
Or where Hebrus wanders,
Rolling in Maeanders,
All alone,
Unheard, unknown,
He makes his moan;
And calls her ghost,
For ever, ever, ever lost!
Now with Furies surrounded,
Despairing, confounded,
He trembles, he glows,
Amidst Rhodope's snows:
See, wild as the winds, over the desert he flies;
Hark! Haemus resounds with the Bacchanals cries --
Ah see, he dies!
Yet even in death Eurydice he sung,
Eurydice still trembled on his tongue,
Eurydice the woods,
Eurydice the floods,
Eurydice the rocks, and hollow mountains rung.
VII.
Music the fiercest grief can charm,
And fate's severest rage disarm:
Music can soften pain to ease,
And make despair and madness please:
Our joys below it can improve,
And antedate the bliss above.
This the divine Cecilia found,
And to her Maker's praise confined the sound.
When the full organ joins the tuneful quire,
The immortal powers incline their ear;
Borne on the swelling notes our souls aspire,
While solemn airs improve the sacred fire;
And Angels lean from heaven to hear.
Of Orpheus now no more let Poets tell,
To bright Cecilia greater power is given;
His numbers raised a shade from hell,
Hers lift the soul to heaven.
REMARKS.
Ode for Music.] This is one of the most artful as well as sublime of our
Poet's smaller compositions. The first stanza is a description of the various
tones and measures in music. The second relates their power over the several
passions in general. The third, their use in inspiring the Heroic passions in
particular. The fourth, fifth, and sixth, their power over all nature in the
fable of Orpheus's expedition to hell; which subject of illustration arose
naturally out of the preceding mention of the Argonautic expedition, where
Orpheus gives an example of the use of Music to inspire the heroic passions.
The seventh and last concludes in praise of Music, and the advantages of the
sacred above the profane.

VER. 7. Let the loud trumpet sound, etc.] Our Author in his rules for good
writing had said, that the sound should be an coho to the sense. The graces it
adds to the harmony are obvious. But we should never have seen all the
advantages arising from it had this ode not been written. In which, one may
venture to say, is found all the harmony that sound, when it comes in aid of
sense, is capable of producing.

Altered from Shakespeare by the Duke of Buckingham, at whose desire these two
Chorus's were composed to supply as many, wanting in his play. They were set
many years afterward by the famous Bononcini, and performed at
Buckingham-house. P.


.
CHORUS of ATHENIANS.
STROPHE I.
YE shades, where sacred truth is sought;
Groves, where immortal Sages taught:

And Epicurus lay inspired!
In vain your guiltless laurels stood
Unspotted long with human blood.
War, horrid war, your thoughtful walks invades,
And steel now glitters in the Muses shades.
ANTISTROPHE I.
Oh heaven-born sisters! source of art!
Who charm the sense, or mend the heart;
Who lead fair Virtue's train along,

To what new clime, what distant sky,
Forsaken, friendless, shall ye fly?
Say, will ye bless the bleak Atlantic shore?
Or bid the furious Gaul be rude no more?
STROPHE II.
When Athens sinks by fates unjust,
When wild Barbarians spurn her dust;
Perhaps even Britain's utmost shore
Shall cease to blush with stranger's gore,
See Arts her savage sons control,
And Athens rising near the pole!
'Till some new Tyrant lifts his purple hand,
And civil madness tears them from the land.
ANTISTROPHE II.
Ye Gods! what justice rules the ball?
Freedom and Arts together fall;
Fools grant whatever Ambition craves,
And men, once ignorant, are slaves.
Oh cursed effects of civil hate,
In every age, in every state!
Still, when the lust of tyrant power succeeds,
Some Athens perishes, some Tully bleeds.
REMARKS.
THESE two Chorus's were composed to enrich a very poor Play; but they had the
usual effect of ill-adjusted Ornaments, to make its meanness but the more
conspicuous.

VER. 3. Where heavenly visions Plato fired,
And Epicurus lay inspired!]
The propriety of these lines arises from hence, that Brutus, one of the Heroes
of this Play, was of the Old Academy; and Cassius, the other, was an Epicurean;
but this had not been enough to justify the Poet's choice, had not Plato's
system of Divinity, and Epicurus's system of Morals, been the most rational
amongst the various sects of Greek Philosophy.

VER. 12. Moral truth AND mystic song.] He had expressed himself better had he
said, " Moral truth IN mystic song!
In the Antistrophe he turns from Philosophy to Mythology; and Mythology is
nothing but moral truth in mystic song.

CHORUS of Youths and Virgins.
SEMICHORUS.
OH Tyrant Love! have thou possessed
The prudent, learned, and virtuous breast?
Wisdom and wit in vain reclaim,
And Arts but soften us to feel thy flame.
Love, soft intruder, enters here,
But entering learns to be sincere.
Marcus with blushes owns he loves,
And Brutus tenderly reproves.

Which Nature has impressed?
Why, Nature, do thou soonest fire
The mild and generous breast?
CHORUS.
Love's purer flames the Gods approve;
The Gods and Brutus bend to love:
Brutus for absent Portia sighs,
And sterner Cassius melts at Junia's eyes.
What is loose love? a transient gust,
Spent in a sudden storm of lust,
A vapor fed from wild desire,
A wandering, self-consuming fire.
But Hymen's kinder flames unite;
And burn for ever one;
Chaste as cold Cynthia's virgin light,
Productive as the Sun.
SEMICHORUS.
Oh source of every social tie,
United wish, and mutual joy!
What various joys on one attend,
As son, as father, brother, husband, friend?
Whether his hoary sire he spies,
While thousand grateful thoughts arise;
Or meets his spouse's fonder eye;
Or views his smiling progeny;
What tender passions take their turns,
What home-felt raptures move?
His heart now melts, now leaps, now burns,
With reverence, hope, and love.
CHORUS.
Hence guilty joys, distastes, surmizes,
Hence false tears, deceits, disguises,
Dangers, doubts, delays, surprises;
Fires that scorch, yet dare not shine:
Purest love's unwasting treasure,
Constant faith, sair hope, long leisure,
Days of ease, and nights of pleasure;
Sacred Hymen! these are thine These two Chorus's are enough to show us his
great talents for this species of Poetry, and to make us lament he did not
prosecute his purpose in executing some plans he had chalked out; but the
Character of the Managers of Playhouses was what (he said) soon determined him
to lay aside all thoughts of this nature.
.
REMARKS.
VER. 9. Why, Virtue, etc.] In allusion to that famous conceit of Guarini, " Se
il peccare e si dolce, etc.


ODE on SOLITUDE This was a very early production of our Author, written at
about twelve years old. P.
.
HAPPY the man, whose wish and care
A few paternal acres bound,
Content to breathe his native air,
In his own ground.
Whose herds with milk, whose fields with bread,
Whose flocks supply him with attire,
Whose trees in summer yield him shade,
In winter fire.
Blessed, who can unconcern'dly find
Hours, days, and years slide soft away,
In health of body, peace of mind,
Quiet by day,
Sound sleep by night; study and ease,
Together mixed; sweet recreation;
And innocence, which most does please
With meditation.
Thus let me live, unseen, unknown,
Thus unlamented let me die,
Steal from the world, and not a stone
Tell where I lie.
The dying Christian to his SOUL.
ODE This ode was written in imitation of the famous sonnet of Hadrian to his
departing soul; but as much superior in sense and sublimity to his original, as
the Christian Religion is to the Pagan.
.
I.
VITAL spark of heavenly flame!
Quit, oh quit this mortal frame:
Trembling, hoping, lingering, flying,
Oh the pain, the bliss of dying!
Cease, fond Nature, cease thy strife,
And let me languish into life.
II.
Hark! they whisper; Angels say,
Sister Spirit, come away.
What is this absorbs me quite?
Steals my senses, shuts my sight,
Drowns my spirits, draws my breath?
Tell me, my Soul, can this be Death?
III.
The world recedes; it disappears!
Heaven opens on my eyes! my ears
With sounds seraphic ring:
Lend, lend your wings! I mount! I fly!
O Grave! where is thy Victory?
O Death! where is thy Sting?
AN ESSAY ON CRITICISM.
Written in the Year MDCCIX.
CONTENTS OF THE ESSAY on CRITICISM.
PART I.
INtroduction. That it is as great a fault to judge ill, as to write ill, and a
more dangerous one to the public, 1. That a true Taste is as rare to be found,
as a true Genius, 9 to 18. That most men are born with some Taste, but spoiled
by false Education, 19 to 25. The Multitude of Critics, and causes of them, 26
to 45. That we are to study our own Taste, and know the Limits of it, 46 to 67.
Nature the best guide of Judgment, 68 to 87. Improved by Art and Rules, which
are but methodis'd Nature, 88. Rules derived from the Practice of the Ancient
Poets, id. to 110. That therefore the Ancients are necessary to be studied by a
Critic, particularly Homer and Virgil, 120 to 138. Of Licenses, and the use of
them by the Ancients, 140 to 180. Reverence due to the Ancients, and praise of
them, 181, etc.
PART II. Ver. 203, etc.
Causes hindering a true Judgment. 1. Pride, 208, 2. Imperfect Learning, 215.
3. Judging by parts, and not by the whole, 233 to 288. Critics in Wit,
Language, Versification, only, 288. 305. 339, etc. 4. Being too hard to please,
or too apt to admire, 384. 5. Partiality -- too much Love to a Sect, -- to the
Ancients or Moderns, 394. 6. Prejudice or Prevention, 408. 7. Singularity, 424.
8. Inconstancy, 430. 9. Party Spirit, 452, etc. 10. Envy, 466. Against Envy,
and in praise of Goodnature, 508, etc. When Severity is chiefly to be used by
Critics, 526, etc.
PART III. Ver. 560, etc.
Rules for the Conduct of Manners in a Critic, 1. Candor, 563. Modesty, 566.
Good-breeding, 572. Sincerity, and Freedom of advice, 578. 2. When one's
Counsel is to be restrained, 584. Character of an incorrigible Poet, 600. And
of an impertinent Critic, 610, etc. Character of a good Critic, 629. The
History of Criticism, and Characters of the best Critics, Aristotle, 645.
Horace, 653. Dionysius, 665. Petronius, 667. Quintilian, 670. Longinus, 675. Of
the Decay of Criticism, and its Revival. Erasmus, 693. Vida, 705. Boileau, 714.
Lord Roscommon, etc. 725. Conclusion.


Appear in writing or in judging ill;
But, of the two, less dangerous is the offense
To tire our patience, than mislead our sense.
Some few in that, but numbers err in this,
Ten censure wrong for one who writes amiss;
A fool might once himself alone expose,
Now one in verse makes many more in prose.

Go just alike, yet each believes his own.
In Poets as true genius is but rare,
True Taste as seldom is the Critic's share;
Both must alike from Heaven derive their light,
These born to judge, as well as those to write.

And censure freely who have written well.
Authors are partial to their wit, it is true,
But are not Critics to their judgment too?


Nature affords at least a glimmering light;
The lines, though touched but faintly, are drawn right.
But as the slightest sketch, if justly traced,
Is by ill-colouring but the more disgraced,


And some made coxcombs Nature meant but fools.

And then turn Critics in their own defense:
Each burns alike, who can, or cannot write,
Or with a Rival's, or an Eunuch's spite.

And fain would be upon the laughing side.
If Maevius scribble in Apollo's spite,
There are, who judge still worse than he can write.

Turned Critics next, and proved plain fools at last.
Some neither can for Wits nor Critics pass,
As heavy mules are neither horse nor ass.
Those half-learn'd witlings, numerous in our isle,
As half-form'd insects on the banks of Nile;
Unfinished things, one knows not what to call,

To tell 'em, would a hundred tongues require,
Or one vain wit's, that might a hundred tire.

And justly bear a Critic's noble name,
Be sure yourself and your own reach to know,
How far your genius, taste, and learning go;
Launch not beyond your depth, but be discreet,

Nature to all things fixed the limits fit,
And wisely curbed proud man's pretending wit.
As on the land while here the ocean gains,
In other parts it leaves wide sandy plains;

The solid power of understanding fails;
Where beams of warm imagination play,
The memory's soft figures melt away.
One science only will one genius fit;
So vast is art, so narrow human wit:
Not only bounded to peculiar arts,
But often in those confined to single parts.
Like Kings we lose the conquests gained before,
By vain ambition still to make them more;
Each might his several province well command,


By her just standard, which is still the same:
Unerring NATURE, still divinely bright,
One clear, unchanged, and universal light,
Life, force, and beauty, must to all impart,
At once the source, and end, and test of Art.
Art from that fund each just supply provides,
Works without show, and without pomp presides:
In some fair body thus the informing soul
With spirits feeds, with vigor fills the whole,
Each motion guides, and every nerve sustains;
Itself unseen, but in the effects, remains.

Want as much more, to turn it to its use;
For wit and judgment often are at strife,
Though meant each other's aid, like man and wife.
It Is more to guide, than spur the Muse's steed;
Restrain his fury, than provoke his speed;
The winged courser, like a generous horse,
Shows most true mettle when you check his course.

Are Nature still, but Nature methodiz'd;
Nature, like Liberty, is but restrained
By the same Laws which first herself ordained.

When to repress, and when indulge our flights:
High on Parnassus' top her sons she showed,
And pointed out those arduous paths they trod;
Held from afar, aloft, the immortal prize,
And urged the rest by equal steps to rise.

She drew from them what they derived from Heaven.
The generous Critic fanned the Poet's fire,
And taught the world with reason to admire.
Then Criticism the Muses handmaid proved,
To dress her charms, and make her more beloved:
But following wits from that intention strayed,
Who could not win the mistress, wooed the maid;
Against the Poets their own arms they turned,
Sure to hate most the men from whom they learned.
So modern 'Pothecaries, taught the art
By Doctor's bills to play the Doctor's part,
Bold in the practice of mistaken rules,
Prescribe, apply, and call their masters fools.

Nor time nor moths ever spoiled so much as they.
Some drily plain, without invention's aid,
Write dull receipts how poems may be made.
These leave the sense, their learning to display,
And those explain the meaning quite away.

Know well each ANCIENT'S proper character;
His Fable, Subject, scope in every page;
Religion, Country, genius of his Age:
Without all these at once before your eyes,

Be Homer's works your study and delight,
Read them by day, and meditate by night;
Thence form your judgment, thence your maxims bring,
And trace the Muses upward to their spring.
Still with itself compared, his text peruse;
And let your comment be the Mantuan Muse.

A work t'outlast immortal Rome designed,
Perhaps he seemed above the Critic's law,
And but from Nature's fountains scorned to draw:
But when t'examine every part he came,
Nature and Homer were, he found, the same.
Convinced, amazed, he checks the bold design;
And rules as strict his labored work confine,
As if the Stagirite o'erlook'd each line.
Learn hence for ancient rules a just esteem;
To copy nature is to copy them.

For there is a happiness as well as care.
Music resembles Poetry, in each
Are nameless graces which no methods teach,
And which a master-hand alone can reach.

(Since rules were made but to promote their end)
Some lucky License answer to the full
The Intent proposed, that License is a rule.

May boldly deviate from the common track;
From vulgar bounds with brave disorder part,
And snatch a grace beyond the reach of art,
Which without passing through the judgment, gains
The heart, and all its end at once attains.
In prospects thus, some objects please our eyes,
Which out of nature's common order rise,
The shapeless rock, or hanging precipice.

And rise to faults true Critics dare not mend.
But though the Ancients thus their rules invade,
(As Kings dispense with laws themselves have made)
Moderns, beware! or if you must offend
Against the precept, never transgress its End;
Let it be seldom, and compelled by need;
And have, at least, their precedent to plead.
The Critic else proceeds without remorse,
Seizes your fame, and puts his laws in force.

Those freer beauties, even in them, seem faults.
Some figures monstrous and mis-shap'd appear,
Considered singly, or beheld too near,
Which, but proportioned to their light, or place,
Due distance reconciles to form and grace.

His powers in equal ranks, and fair array,
But with the occasion and the place comply,
Conceal his force, nay seem sometimes to fly.
Those often are stratagems which errors seem,


Above the reach of sacrilegious hands;

Destructive War, and all-involving Age.
See, from each clime the learned their incense bring!
Hear, in all tongues consenting Paeans ring!
In praise so just let every voice be joined,
And fill the general chorus of mankind.

Immortal heirs of universal praise!
Whose honors with increase of ages grow,
As streams roll down, enlarging as they flow;
Nations unborn your mighty names shall sound,
And worlds applaud that must not yet be found!
Oh may some spark of your celestial fire,

(That on weak wings, from far, pursues your flights;
Glows while he reads, but trembles as he writes)
To teach vain Wits a science little known,


Man's erring judgment, and misguide the mind,
What the weak head with strongest bias rules,
Is Pride, the never-failing vice of fools.
Whatever Nature has in worth denied,
She gives in large recruits of needful Pride;
For as in bodies, thus in souls, we find
What wants in blood and spirits, swelled with wind:

And fills up all the mighty Void of sense.
If once right reason drives that cloud away,
Truth breaks upon us with resistless day.
Trust not yourself; but your defects to know,
Make use of every friend -- and every foe.
little learning is a dangerous thing;


And drinking largely sobers us again.
Fired at first sight with what the Muse imparts,
In fearless youth we tempt the heights of Arts,
While from the bounded level of our mind,
Short views we take, nor see the lengths behind;
But more advanced, behold with strange surprise
New distant scenes of endless science rise!

Mount over the vales, and seem to tread the sky,
The eternal snows appear already past,
And the first clouds and mountains seem the last:
But, those attained, we tremble to survey
The growing labors of the lengthened way,
The increasing prospect tires our wandering eyes,
Hills peep over hills, and Alps on Alps arise!

With the same spirit that its author writ:

Where nature moves, and rapture warms the mind;
Nor lose, for that malignant dull delight,
The generous pleasure to be charmed with wit.
But in such lays as neither ebb, nor flow,
Correctly cold, and regularly low,
That shunning faults, one quiet tenor keep;
We cannot blame indeed -- but we may sleep.
In Wit, as Nature, what affects our hearts
Is not the exactness of peculiar parts;
It Is not a lip, or eye, we beauty call,
But the joint force and full result of all.
Thus when we view some well-proportion'd dome,

No single parts unequally surprise,
All comes united to the admiring eyes;
No monstrous height, or breadth, or length appear;
The Whole at once is bold, and regular.

Thinks what never was, nor is, nor ever shall be.
In every work regard the writer's End,
Since none can compass more than they intend;
And if the means be just, the conduct true,
Applause, in spite of trivial faults, is due.
As men of breeding, sometimes men of wit,
TO avoid great errors, must the less commit:

For not to know some trifles, is a praise.

Still make the Whole depend upon a Part:
They talk of principles, but notions prize,
And all to one loved Folly sacrifice.

A certain Bard encount'ring on the way,
Discoursed in terms as just, with looks as sage,
As ever could Dennis, of the Grecian stage;
Concluding all were desperate sots and fools,
Who durst depart from Aristotle's rules.
Our Author, happy in a judge so nice,
Produced his Play, and begged the Knight's advice;
Made him observe the subject, and the plot,
The manners, passions, unities; what not?
All which, exact to rule, were brought about,
Were but a Combat in the lists left out.
" What! leave the Combat out?" exclaims the Knight;
Yes, or we must renounce the Stagirite.
" Not so by Heaven" (he answers in a rage)
" Knights, squires, and steeds, must enter on the stage."
So vast a throng the stage can never contain.
" Then build a new, or act it in a plain."

Curious not knowing, not exact but nice,
Form short Ideas; and offend in arts
(As most in manners) by a love to parts.
Conceit alone their taste confine,
And glittering thoughts struck out at every line;
Pleased with a work where nothing's just or fit;
One glaring Chaos and wild heap of wit.
Poets like painters, thus, unskilled to trace
The naked nature and the living grace,
With gold and jewels cover every part,
And hide with ornaments their want of art.

What often was thought, but never so well expressed;
Something, whose truth convinced at sight we find,
That gives us back the image of our mind.
As shades more sweetly recommend the light,
So modest plainness sets off sprightly wit.
For works may have more wit than does 'em good,
As bodies perish through excess of blood.
Language all their care express,
And value books, as women men, for Dress:
Their praise is still, -- the Style is excellent:
The Sense, they humbly take upon content.
Words are like leaves; and where they most abound,
Much fruit of sense beneath is rarely found.

Its gaudy colors spreads on every place;
The face of Nature we no more survey,
All glares alike, without distinction gay:
But true Expression, like the unchanging Sun,
Clears, and improves whatever it shines upon,
It gilds all objects, but it alters none.
Expression is the dress of thought, and still
Appears more decent, as more suitable;
A vile conceit in pompous words expressed,
Is like a clown in regal purple dressed:
For different styles with different subjects sort,
As several garbs with country, town, and court.

Ancients in phrase, mere moderns in their sense;
Such labored nothings, in so strange a style,
Amaze the unlearned, and make the learned smile.

These sparks with awkward vanity display
What the fine gentleman wore yesterday;
And but so mimic ancient wits at best,
As apes our grandfires, in their doublets dressed.
In words, as fashions, the same rule will hold;
Alike fantastic, if too new, or old:
Be not the first by whom the new are tried,
Nor yet the last to lay the old aside.

And smooth or rough, with them, is right or wrong:
In the bright Muse though thousand charms conspire,
Her Voice is all these tuneful fools admire;
Who haunt Parnassus but to please their ear,
Not mend their minds; as some to Church repair,
Not for the doctrine, but the music there.
These equal syllables alone require,


And ten low words often creep in one dull line:
While they ring round the same unvary'd chimes,
With sure returns of still expected rhymes;
Wherever you find "the cooling western breeze,"
In the next line, it "whispers through the trees;"
If crystal streams "with pleasing murmurs creep,"
The reader's threatened (not in vain) with "sleep:"
Then, at the last and only couplet fraught
With some unmeaning thing they call a thought,
A needless Alexandrine ends the song,
That, like a wounded snake, drags its slow length along.
Leave such to tune their own dull rhymes, and know
What Is roundly smooth, or languishingly slow;
And praise the easy vigor of a line,
Where Denham's strength, and Waller's sweetness join.
True ease in writing comes from art, not chance,
As those move easiest who have learned to dance.



And the smooth stream in smoother numbers flows;

The hoarse, rough verse should like the torrent roar:

The line too labors, and the words move slow;

Flies over the unbending corn, and skims along the main.

And bid alternate passions fall and rise!
While, at each change, the son of Libyan Jove
Now burns with glory, and then melts with love;
Now his fierce eyes with sparkling fury glow,
Now sighs steal out, and tears begin to flow:
Persians and Greeks like turns of nature found,
And the World's victor stood subdued by Sound!
The power of Music all our hearts allow,
And what Timotheus was, is DRYDEN now.

Who still are pleased too little or too much.
At every trifle scorn to take offense,
That always shows great pride, or little sense;
Those heads, as stomachs, are not sure the best,
Which nauseate all, and nothing can digest.
Yet let not each gay Turn thy rapture move;
For fools admire, but men of sense approve:
As things seem large which we through mists descry,
Dullness is ever apt to magnify.

The Ancients only, or the Moderns prize.
Thus Wit, like Faith, by each man is applied
To one small sect, and all are damned beside.
Meanly they seek the blessing to confine,
And force that sun but on a part to shine,
Which not alone the southern wit sublimes,
But ripens spirits in cold northern climes;

Enlights the present, and shall warm the last;
Though each may feel increases and decays,
And see now clearer and now darker days.
Regard not then if Wit be old or new,
But blame the false, and value still the true.

But catch the spreading notion of the Town;
They reason and conclude by precedent,
And own stale nonsense which they never invent.
Some judge of authors names, not works, and then
Nor praise nor blame the writings, but the men.
Of all this servile herd, the worst is he
That in proud dullness joins with Quality.
A constant Critic at the great man's board,
To fetch and carry nonsense for my Lord.
What woeful stuff this madrigal would be,
In some starved hackney sonneteer, or me?
But let a Lord once own the happy lines,
How the wit brightens! how the style refines!
Before his sacred name flies every fault,
And each exalted stanza teems with thought!

As often the Learned by being singular;
So much they scorn the crowd, that if the throng
By chance go right, they purposely go wrong:
So Schismatics the plain believers quit,
And are but damned for having too much wit.
Some praise at morning what they blame at night;
But always think the last opinion right.
A Muse by these is like a mistress used,
This hour she is idolized, the next abused;
While their weak heads like towns unfortify'd,
Twixt sense and nonsense daily change their side.
Ask them the cause; they are wiser still, they say;
And still tomorrow's wiser than today.
We think our fathers fools, so wise we grow;
Our wiser sons, no doubt, will think us so.
Once School-divines this zealous isle o'er-spread;
Who knew most Sentences, was deepest read;
Faith, Gospel, all, seemed made to be disputed,
And none had sense enough to be confuted:


If Faith itself has different dresses worn,

Often, leaving what is natural and fit,
The current folly proves the ready wit;

Which lives as long as fools are pleased to laugh.

Still make themselves the measure of mankind:
Fondly we think we honor merit then,
When we but praise ourselves in other men.
Parties in Wit attend on those of State,
And public faction doubles private hate.
Pride, Malice, Folly, against Dryden rose,
In various shapes of Parsons, Critics, Beaus;
But sense survived, when merry jests were past;
For rising merit will buoy up at last.
Might he return, and bless once more our eyes,

Nay should great Homer lift his awful head,
Zoilus again would start up from the dead.
Envy will merit, as its shade, pursue;
But like a shadow, proves the substance true;

The opposing body's grossness, not its own.
When first that sun too powerful beams displays,
It draws up vapors which obscure its rays;
But even those clouds at last adorn its way,
Reflect new glories, and augment the day.

His praise is lost, who stays 'till all commend.
Short is the date, alas, of modern rhymes,
And it is but just to let them live betimes.
No longer now that golden age appears,
When Patriarch-wits survived a thousand years:
Now length of Fame (our second life) is lost,
And bare threescore is all even that can boast;
Our sons their fathers failing language see,
And such as Chaucer is, shall Dryden be.

Some bright Idea of the master's mind,
Where a new world leaps out at his command,
And ready Nature waits upon his hand;
When the ripe colors soften and unite,
And sweetly melt into just shade and light;
When mellowing years their full perfection give,
And each bold figure just begins to live,
The treacherous colors the fair art betray,
And all the bright creation fades away!
Unhappy Wit, like most mistaken things,
Atones not sor that envy which it brings.
In youth alone its empty praise we boast,
But soon the short-lived vanity is lost:
Like some fair flower the early spring supplies,
That gayly blooms, but even in blooming dies.
What is this Wit, which must our cares employ?
The owner's wife, that other men enjoy;
Then most our trouble still when most admired,
And still the more we give, the more required;
Whose fame with pains we guard, but lose with ease,
Sure some to vex, but never all to please;
It Is what the vicious fear, the virtuous shun,

If Wit so much from Ignorance undergo,
Ah let not Learning too commence its foe!
Of old, those met rewards who could excel,
And such were praised who but endeavored well:
Though triumphs were to generals only due,
Crowns were reserved to grace the soldiers too.
Now, they who reach Parnassus' lofty crown,
Employ their pains to spurn some others down;
And while self-love each jealous writer rules,
Contending wits become the sport of fools:
But still the worst with most regret commend,
For each ill Author is as bad a Friend.
To what base ends, and by what abject ways,
Are mortals urged through sacred lust of praise!
Ah never so dire a thirst of glory boast,
Nor in the Critic let the Man be lost.
Goodnature and good-sense must ever join;
To err is human, to forgive, divine.

Not yet purged off, of spleen and four disdain;
Discharge that rage on more provoking crimes,
Nor fear a dearth in these flagitious times.
No pardon vile Obscenity should find,
Though wit and art conspire to move your mind;
But Dullness with Obscenity must prove
As shameful sure as Impotence in love.
In the fat age of pleasure, wealth, and ease,
Sprung the rank weed, and thrived with large increase:
When love was all an easy Monarch's care;
Seldom at council, never in a war:
Jilts ruled the state, and statesmen farces writ;
Nay wits had pensions, and young Lords had wit:
The Fair sat panting at a Courtier's play,
And not a Mask went unimprov'd away:
The modest fan was lifted up no more,
And Virgins smiled at what they blushed before.
The following license of a Foreign reign


And taught more pleasant methods of salvation;
Where Heaven's free subjects might their rights dispute,
Lest God himself should seem too absolute:
Pulpits their sacred satire learned to spare,
And Vice admired to find a flatt'rer there!
Encouraged thus, Wit's Titans braved the skies,
And the press groaned with licensed blasphemies.
These monsters, Critics! with your darts engage,
Here point your thunder, and exhaust your rage!
Yet shun their fault, who, scandalously nice,
Will needs mistake an author into vice;
All seems infected that the infected spy,
As all looks yellow to the jaundic'd eye.


It Is not enough, taste, judgment, learning, join;
In all you speak, let truth and candor shine:
That not alone what to your sense is due
All may allow; but seek your friendship too.
Be silent always when you doubt your sense;
And speak, though sure, with seeming diffidence:
Some positive, persisting fops we know,
Who, if once wrong, will needs be always so;
But you, with pleasure own your errors past,
And make each day a Critic on the last.
It Is not enough, your counsel still be true;
Blunt truths more mischief than nice falsehoods do;
Men must be taught as if you taught them not,
And things unknown proposed as things forgot.
Without Good Breeding, truth is disapproved;
That only makes superior sense beloved.
Be niggards of advice on no pretense;
For the worst avarice is that of sense.
With mean complacence never betray your trust,
Nor be so civil as to prove unjust.
Fear not the anger of the wise to raise;
Those best can bear reproof, who merit praise.

But Appius reddens at each word you speak,

Like some fierce Tyrant in old tapestry.
Fear most to tax an Honorable fool,
Whose right it is, uncensur'd to be dull;
Such, without wit, are Poets when they please,
As without learning they can take Degrees.
Leave dangerous truths to unsuccessful Satires,
And flattery to fulsome Dedicators,
Whom, when they praise, the world believes no more,
Than when they promise to give scribbling over.
It Is best sometimes your censure to restrain,
And charitably let the dull be vain:
Your silence there is better than your spite,
For who can rail so long as they can write?
Still humming on, their drouzy course they keep,
And lashed so long, like tops, are lashed asleep.
False steps but help them to renew the race,
As, after stumbling, Jades will mend their pace.
What crowds of these, impenitently bold,
In sounds and jingling syllables grown old,
Still run on Poets, in a raging vein,
Even to the dregs and squeezings of the brain,
Strain out the last dull droppings of their sense,
And rhyme with all the rage of Impotence.
Such shameless Bards we have; and yet it is true,
There are as mad, abandoned Critics too.
The bookful blockhead, ignorantly read,
With loads of learned lumber in his head,
With his own tongue still edifies his ears,
And always listening to himself appears.
All books he reads, and all he reads assails,
From Dryden's Fables down to Durfey's Tales.
With him, most authors steal their works, or buy;

Name a new Play, and he is the Poet's friend,
Nay showed his faults -- but when would Poets mend?
No place so sacred from such fops is barred,

Nay, fly to Altars; there they will talk you dead:
For Fools rush in where Angels fear to tread.
Distrustful sense with modest caution speaks,
It still looks home, and short excursions makes;
But rattling nonsense in full vollies breaks,
And never shocked, and never turned aside,


Still pleased to teach, and yet not proud to know?
Unbiased, or by favor, or by spite;
Not dully prepossessed, nor blindly right;
Though learned, well-bred; and though well-bred, sincere;
Modestly bold, and humanly severe:
Who to a friend his faults can freely show,
And gladly praise the merit of a foe?
Blessed with a taste exact, yet unconfined;
A knowledge both of books and human kind;
Generous converse; a soul exempt from pride;

Such once were Critics; such the happy few,
Athens and Rome in better ages knew.
The mighty Stagirite first left the shore,

He steered securely, and discovered far,
Led by the light of the Maeonian Star.
Poets, a race long unconfined, and free,
Still fond and proud of savage liberty,
Received his laws; and stood convinced 'twas fit,

Horace still charms with graceful negligence,
And without method talks us into sense,
Will, like a friend, familiarly convey
The truest notions in the easiest way.
He, who supreme in judgment, as in wit,
Might boldly censure, as he boldly writ,
Yet judged with coolness, though he sung with fire;
His Precepts teach but what his works inspire.
Our Critics take a contrary extreme,
They judge with fury, but they write with fle'me:
Nor suffers Horace more in wrong Translations
By Wits, than Critics in as wrong Quotations.

And call new beauties forth from every line!
Fancy and art in gay Petronius please,
The scholar's learning, with the courtier's ease.
In grave Quintilian's copious work, we find
The justest rules, and clearest method joined:
Thus useful arms in magazines we place,
All ranged in order, and disposed with grace,
But less to please the eye, than arm the hand,
Still fit for use, and ready at command.
Thee, bold Longinus! all the Nine inspire,
And bless their Critic with a Poet's fire.
An ardent Judge, who zealous in his trust,
With warmth gives sentence, yet is always just;
Whose own example strengthens all his laws;
And is himself that great Sublime he draws.

License repressed, and useful laws ordained.
Learning and Rome alike in empire grew;
And Arts still followed where her Eagles flew;
From the same foes, at last, both felt their doom,
And the same age saw Learning fall, and Rome.
With Tyranny, then Superstition joined,
As that the body, this enslaved the mind;
Much was believed, but little understood,

A second deluge Learning thus o'er-run,
And the Monks finished what the Goths begun.


Stem'd the wild torrent of a barbarous age,
And drove those holy Vandals off the stage.

Starts from her trance, and trim's her withered bays,
Rome's ancient Genius, over its ruins spread,
Shakes off the dust, and rears his reverend head.
Then Sculpture and her sister-arts revive;
Stones leaped to form, and rocks began to live;
With sweeter notes each rising Temple rung;
A Raphael painted, and a Vida sung.
Immortal Vida: on whose honored brow
The Poet's bays and Critic's ivy grow:
Cremona now shall ever boast thy name,


Their ancient bounds the banished Muses passed;
Thence Arts over all the northern world advance,
But Critic-learning flourished most in France:
The rules a nation, born to serve, obeys;
And Boileau still in right of Horace sways.
But we, brave Britons, foreign laws despised,
And kept unconquered, and unciviliz'd;
Fierce for the liberties of wit, and bold,
We still defied the Romans, as of old.
Yet some there were, among the sounder few
Of those who less presumed, and better knew,
Who durst assert the juster ancient cause,
And here restored Wit's fundamental laws.

" Nature's chief Masterpiece is writing well."
Such was Roscommon, not more learned than good,
With manners generous as his noble blood;
To him the wit of Greece and Rome was known,
And every author's merit, but his own.
Such late was Walsh -- the Muse's judge and friend,
Who justly knew to blame or to commend;
To failings mild, but zealous for desert;
The clearest head, and the sincerest heart.
This humble praise, lamented shade! receive,
This praise at least a grateful Muse may give:
The Muse, whose early voice you taught to sing,
Prescribed her heights, and pruned her tender wing,
(Her guide now lost) no more attempts to rise,
But in low numbers short excursions tries:
Content, if hence the unlearned their wants may view,
The learned reflect on what before they knew:
Careless of censure, nor too fond of fame;
Still pleased to praise, yet not afraid to blame;
Averse alike to flatter, or offend;
Not free from faults, nor yet too vain to mend.
COMMENTARY.
An Essay] The Poem is in one book, but divided into three principals parts or
members. The first [to 201.] gives rules for the Study of the Art of Criticism:
the second [from thence to 560.] exposes the Causes of wrong Judgment; and the
third [from thence to the end] prescribes the Morals of the Critic.

In order to a right understanding of this poem, it will be necessary to
observe, that though it be entitled simply an Essay on Criticism, yet several of
the precepts relate equally to the good writing as well as to the true judging
of a poem. This is so far from violating the Unity of the Subject, that it
rounds and compleats it: or from disordering the regularity of the Form, that
it produces the highest beauty which can arise out of method, as will appear by
the following considerations: 1. It was impossible to give a full and exact
idea of the Art of poetical Criticism, without considering, at the same time,
the Art of Poetry; so far as Poetry is an Art. These therefore being closely
connected in nature, the Author has with much judgment reciprocally interwoven
the precepts of both through his whole poem. 2. As all the rules of the ancient
Critics were taken from Poets who copied nature, this is another reason why
every Poet should be a Critic: Therefore, as the subject is poetical Criticism,
it is frequently addressed to the critical Poet. And 3dly, the Art of Criticism
is as necessarily, and much more usefully exercised in writing than in judging.

But Readers have been misled by the modesty of the Title: which only promises
an Art of Criticism, in a treatise, and that a complete one, of the Art both of
Criticism and Poetry. This, and the not attending to the considerations offered
above, perhaps was what misled a very candid writer, after having given this
Piece all the praises on the side of genius and poetry which his true taste
could not resuse it, to say, that the observations follow one another like
those in Horace's Art of Poetry, without that methodical regularity which would
have been requisite in a prose writer. Spec. No 235. I do not see how method
can hurt any one grace of Poetry; or what prerogative there is in verse to to
dispense with regularity. The remark is false in every part of it. Mr. Pope's
Essay on Criticism, the Reader will soon see, is a regular piece: And a very
learned Critic has lately shown, that Horace had the same attention to method
in his Art of Poetry.

VER. 1. It Is hard to say, etc.] The Poem opens [from 1 to 9.] with showing the
use and seasonableness of the subject. Its use, from the greater mischief in
wrong Criticism than in ill Poetry, this only tiring that misleading the
reader: Its seasonableness, from the growing number of false Critics, which now
vastly exceeds that of bad Poets.

VER. 9. It Is with our judgments, etc.] The author having shown us the
expediency of his subject, the Art of Criticism, next inquires [from 8 to 15]
into the necessary Qualities of a true Critic: And observes first, that
JUDGMENT, simply and alone, is not sufficient to constitute this character,
because Judgment, like the artificial measures of Time, goes different, and yet
each relies upon his own. The reason is conclusive; and the similitude
extremely just. For Judgment, when alone, is always regulated, or at least much
inflenced by custom, fashion, and habit; and never certain and constant but
when sounded upon TASTE: which is the same in the Critic, as GENIUS in the
Poet: both are derived from Heaven, and like the Sun (the natural measure of
Time) always constant and equal.

Nor need we wonder that Judgment alone will not make a Critic in poetry, when
we see that it will not make a Poet. And on examination we shall find, that
Genius and Taste are but one and the same faculty, differently exerting itself
under different names, in the two prosessions of Poet and Critic. For the Art
of Poetry consists in selecting, out of all those images which present
themselves to the fancy, such of them as are truly poetical: And the Art of
Criticism in judiciously discerning, and fully relishing what it finds so
selected. It Is the same operation of the mind in both cases, and consequently,
exerted by the same faculty. All the difference is, that in the Poet this
faculty is eminently joined with a bright imagination, and extensive
comprehension, which provide stores for the selection, and can form that
selection, by proportioned parts, into a regular whole: In the Critic, with a
solid judgment and accurate discernment; which penetrate into the causes of an
excellence, and can show that excellence in all its variety of lights. Longinus
had taste in an eminent degree; so this, which is indeed common to all true
Critics, our Author makes his distinguishing character, Thee, bold Longinus!
all the Nine inspire,
And bless their Critic with a Poet's fire.


VER. 15. Let such teach others, etc.] But it is not enough that the Critic
has these natural endowments to entitle him to the exercise of his Art, he
ought, as our Author shows us [from 14 to 19] to give a further test of his
qualification, by some acquired talents: And this on two accounts: 1. Because
the office of a Critic is an exercise of Authority. 2. Because he being
naturally as partial to his Judgment as the Poet is to his Wit, his partiality
would have nothing to correct it, as that of the person judged has. Therefore
some test is reasonable; and the best and most unexceptionable is his having
written well himself, an approved remedy against Critical partiality; and the
surest means of so maturing the Judgment, as to reap with glory what Longinus
calls the last and most perfect fruits of much study and experience. GAP TON
LOGON KPISIS POLLS ESTI PEIPAS TELEYTAION EPIGENNA.

VER. 19. Yet if we look, etc.] But having been so free with this fundamental
quality of Criticism, Judgment, as to charge it with inconstancy and
partiality, and as often warped by custom and affection; that this may not be
mistaken, he next explains [from 18 to 36.) the nature of Judgment, and the
accidents occasioning those disorders before objected to it. He owns, that the
seeds of Judgment are indeed sown in the minds of most men, but by ill culture,
as it springs up, it generally runs wild: either on the one hand, by false
knowledge which pedants call Philology; or by false reasoning which
Philosophers call School-learning: Or on the other, by false wit which is not
regulated by sense; or by false politeness which is solely regulated by the
fashion. Both these sorts, who have their Judgments thus doubly depraved, the
poet observes, are naturally turned to censure and reprehension; only with this
difference, that the Dunce always affects to be on the reasoning, and the Fool
on the laughing side. -- And thus, at the same time, our author proves the
truth of his introductory observation, that the number of bad Critics is vastly
superior to that of bad Poets.

VER. 36. Some have at first for Wits, etc.] The poet having enumerated, in
this account of the nature of Judgment and its various depravations, the
several sorts of bad Critics, and ranked them into two general Classes; as the
first sort, namely the men spoiled by false learning, are but few in comparison
of the other, and likewise come less within his main view (which is poetical
Criticism) but keep grovelling at the bottom amongst words and letters, he
thought it here sufficient just to have mentioned them, proposing to do them
right elsewhere. But the men spoiled by false taste are innumerable; and These
are his proper concern: He therefore, from 35 to 46. sub-divides them again
into the two classes of the volatile and heavy: He describes in few words the
quick progress of the One through Criticism, from false wit to plain solly, where
they end; and the fixed station of the Other between the confines of both; who
under the name of Wit^ings, have neither end nor measure. A kind of half formed
creature from the equivocal generation of vivacity and dullness, like those on
the banks of Nile, from heat and mud.

VER. 46. But you who seek, etc.] Our author having thus far, by way of
INTRODUCTION, explained the nature, use, and abuse of Criticism, in a
figurative description of the qualities and characters of Critics, proceeds now
to deliver the precepts of the Art. The first of which, from 47 to 68. is, that
he who sets up for a Critic should previously examine his own strength, and see
how far he is qualified for the exercise of his profession. He puts him in a
way to make this discovery, in that admirable direction given 51. AND MARK THAT
POINT WHERE SENSE AND DULLNESS MEET. He had shown above, that Judgment, without
Taste or Genius, is equally incapable of making a Critic or a Poet: In
whatsoever subject then the Critic's Taste no longer accompanies his Judgment,
there he may be assured he is going out of his depth. This our author finely
calls, that point where sense and dullness meet.
And immediately adds the REASON of his precept; the Author of Nature having so
constituted the mental faculties, that one of them can never excel but at the
expense of another.

From this state and ordination of the mental faculties, and the influence and
effects they have one on another, our Poet draws this CONSEQUENCE, that no one
genius can excel in more than one Art or Science. The consequence shows the
necessity of the precept, just as the premises, from which it is drawn, show
the reasonableness of it.

VER. 68. First follow Nature, etc] The Critic observing the directions here
given, and finding himself qualified for his office, is shown next how to
exercise it. And as he was to attend to Nature for a Call, so he is first and
principally to follow her when called. And here again in this, as in the
foregoing precept, the poet [from 67 to 88.] shows both the fitness and the
necessity of it. It Is fitness, 1. Because Nature is the source of poetic Art;
that Art being only a representation of Nature, who is its great exemplar and
original. 2. Because Nature is the end of Art; the design of poetry being to
convey the knowledge of Nature in the most agreeable manner. 3. Because Nature
is the test of Art, as she is unerring, constant, and still the same. Hence the
poet observes, that as Nature is the source, she conveys life to Art: As she is
the end, she conveys force to it, for the force of any thing arises from its
being directed to its end: And, as she is the test, she conveys beauty to it,
for every thing acquires beauty by its being reduced to its true standard. Such
is the sense of those two important lines, Life, force, and beauty must to all
impart,
At once the source, and end, and test of Art.
We now come to the necessity of the Precept. The two great constituent
qualities of a Composition, as such, are Art and Wit: But neither of these
attains perfection, 'till the first be hid, and the other judiciously
restrained; which is only then when Nature is exactly followed; for then Art
never makes a parade, nor can Wit commit an extravagance. Art, while it adheres
to Nature, and has so large a fund in the resources which Nature supplies,
disposes every thing with so much ease and simplicity, that we see nothing but
those natural images it works with, while itself stands unobserved behind: But
when Art leaves Nature, deluded either by the bold extravagance of Fancy, or
the quaint odnesses of Fashion, she is then obliged at every step to come
forward, in a painful or pompous ostentation, in order to cover, to soften, or
to regulate the shocking disproportion of unnatural images. In the first case,
the poet compares Art to the Soul within, informing a beauteous Body; but we
generally find it, in the last, only like the outward Habit, bolstering up, by
the Taylor's skill, the defects of a misshapen one. -- As to Wit, it might
perhaps be imagined that this needed only Judgment to govern it: But, as he
well observes, Wit and Judgment often are at strife,
Though meant each other's aid, like Man and Wife.
They want therefore some friendly Mediator or Reconciler, which is Nature: And
in attending to her, the Judgment will learn where to comply with the charms of
Wit, and the Wit how to obey the sage directions of Judgment.

VER. 88. Those Rules of old etc.] Having thus, in his first precept, to follow
Nature, settled Criticism on its true bottom; he proceeds to show what
assistance may be had from Art. But lest this should be thought to draw the
Critic from the foundation where he had before fixed him, he previously
observes [from 87 to 92] that those Rules of Art, which he is now about to
recommend to his study, were not invented by the Imagination, but discovered in
the book of Nature: And that, therefore, though they may seem to restrain Nature
by Laws, yet, as they are laws of her own making, the Critic is still properly
in the very liberty of Nature. Those Rules the ancient Critics borrowed from
the Poets, who received them immediately from Nature, Just Precepts thus srom
great Examples given,
These drew from them what they derived from Heaven;
and are both therefore to be well studied.

VER. 92. Hear how learned Greece, etc.] He speaks of the ancient Critics
first, and with great judgment, as the previous knowledge of them is necessary
for reading the Poets, with that fruit which the intent here proposed requires.
But having, in the previous observation, sufficiently explained the nature of
ancient Criticism, he enters on the subject [treated of from 91 to 118] with a
sublime description of its End; which was to illustrate the beauties of the
best Writers, in order to excite others to an emulation of their excellence.
From the admiration which these Ideas raise in him, the poet is naturally
brought back to reflect on the degeneracy of modern Criticism: And as the
restoring the Art to its original integrity and splendour is the great purpose
of his poem, he first takes notice of those, who seem not to understand that
Nature is exhaustless, that new models of good writing may be produced in every
age, and consequently new rules may be formed from these models in the same
manner as the old Critics formed theirs, from the writings of the ancient
Poets: but these men wanting art and ability to form these new rules, are
content to receive, and file up for use, the old ones of Aristotle, Quintilian,
Longinus, Horace, etc. with the same vanity and boldness that Apothecaries
practice with their Doctors bills: And thus rashly applying them to new
Originals (cases which they did not hit) it was no more in their power than
their inclination to imitate the candid practice of the Ancients, when The
generous Critic fanned the Poet's fire,
And taught the world with reason to admire.
For, as Ignorance, when joined with Humility produces stupid admiration, on
which account it is so commonly observed to be the mother of Devotion and blind
homage; so when joined with Vanity (as it always is in bad Critics) it gives
birth to every iniquity of impudent abuse and slander. See an example (for want
of a better) in a late worthless and now forgotten thing, called the Life of
Socrates. Where the head of the Author (as a man of wit observed, on reading
the book) has just made a shift to do the office of a Camera obscura, and
represent things in an inverted order; himself above, and Sprat, Rollin,
Voltaire, and every other Author of reputation, below.

VER. 118. You then whose judgment etc.] He comes next to the ancient Poets,
the other and more intimate commentators of Nature. And shows [from 117 to
141.] that the study of These must indispensably follow that of the ancient
Critics, as they furnish us with what the Critics, who only give us general
rules, cannot supply: while the study of a great original Poet, in His Fable,
Subject, scope in every page;
Religion, Country, genius of his Age;
will help us to those particular rules, which only can conduct us safely
through every considerable work we undertake to examine; and, without which, we
may cavil indeed, as the poet truly observes, but can never criticize. We might
as well suppose that Vitruvius's book alone would make a perfect Judge of
Architecture, without the knowledge of some great masterpiece of science, such
as the Rotonda at Rome, or the Temple of Minerva at Athens; as that Aristotle's
should make a perfect Judge of wit, without the study of Homer and Virgil.
These therefore he principally recommends to complete the Critic in his Art.
But as the latter of these Poets has, by superficial judges, been considered
rather as a copyer of Homer, than an original, our Author obviates that common
error, and shows it to have arisen (as often error does) from a truth, viz.
that Homer and Nature were the same; and how that the ambitious young Poet,
though he scorned to stoop at any thing short of Nature, when he came to
understand this great truth, had the prudence to contemplate Nature in the
place where she was seen to most advantage, collected in all her charms in the
clear mirror of Homer. Hence it would follow, that, though Virgil studied
Nature, yet the vulgar reader would believe him to be a copier of Homer; and
though he copied Homer, yet the judicious reader would see him to be an
imitator of Nature: the finest praise which any one, who came after Homer,
could receive.

VER. 141. Some beauties yet no Precepts can declare, etc.] Our Author, in
these two general precepts for studying Nature and her Commentators, having
considered Poetry as it is, or may be reduced to Rule; lest this should be
mistaken as sufficient to attain PERFECTION either in writing or judging, he
proceeds [from 140 to 201.] to point up to those sublimer beauties which Rules
will never reach, that is, enable us either to execute or taste: and which rise
so high above all precept as not even to be described by it; but being entirely
the gift of Heaven, Art and Reason have no further share in their production
than just to moderate their operations. These Sublimities of Poetry, like the
Mysteries of Religion (some of which are above Reason, and some contrary to it)
may be divided into two sorts, such as are above Rules, and such as are
contrary to them.

VER. 146. If, where the rules etc.] The first sort our author describes [from
145 to 158.] and shows, that where a great beauty is in the Poet's view which
no stated Rules will direct him how to reach, there, as the purpose of rules is
only to promote an end like this, a lucky License will supply the want of them:
nor can the Critic fairly object to it, since this License, for the reason
given above, has the proper sorce and authority of a Rule.

VER. 159. Great Wits sometimes may gloriously offend, etc.] He describes next
the second sort, the beauties against rule. And even here, as he observes [from
158 to 169] the offense is so glorious, and the fault so sublime, that the true
Critic will not dare either to censure or reform them. Yet still the Poet is
never to abandon himself to his Imagination: the rules our author lays down for
his conduct in this respect, are these: 1. That though he transgress the letter
of some one particular precept, yet that he still adhere to the end or spirit
of them all; which end is the creation of one uniform perfect Whole. And 2.
That he have, in each instance, the authority of the dispensing power of the
Ancients to plead for him. These rules observed, this license will be seldom
used, and only when he is compelled by need: which will disarm the Critic, and
screen the transgressor from his laws.

VER. 169. I know there are, etc.] But as some modern Critics have had the
presumption to say, that this last rule is only justifying one fault by
another, our author goes on [from 168 to 181] to vindicate the Ancients; and to
show that this censure proceeds from rank Ignorance. As where their partial
Judgment cannot see that this license is sometimes necessary for the symmetry
and proportion of a perfect whole, from the point, and in the light wherein it
must be viewed: or, where their hasty Judgment will not give them time to
discover, that a deviation from rule is for the sake of attaining some great
and admirable purpose. -- These observations are further useful as they tend to
give modern Critics an humbler opinion of their own abilities, and an higher of
the Authors they undertake to criticize. On which account He concludes with a
fine reproof of that common proverb perpetually in the mouths of Critics,
quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus; misunderstanding the sense of Horace, and
taking quandoque for aliquando: Those often are stratagems which errors seem,
Nor is it Homer nods, but we that dream.


VER. 181. Still green with bays, etc.] But now fired with the name of Homer,
and transported with the contemplation of those beauties which a cold Critic
can neither see nor conceive, the Poet [from 180 to 201.] breaks into a
rapturous exclamation on the rare felicity of those few Ancients who have risen
superior over time and accidents: And, as it were disdaining any longer to
reason with his Critics, offers this to them as the surest confutation of their
censures. Then with the humility of a supplicant at the shrine of Immortals,
and the Sublimity of a Poet participating of their fire, he turns again to
these ancient worthies, and apostrophises their Manes: Hail, Bards triumphant!
etc.


VER. 200. TO admire superior sense, and doubt their own.] This line concludes
the first division of the Poem; in which we see the subject of the first and
second part, and likewise the connection they have with one another. It serves
likewise to introduce the second. The effect of studying the Ancients, as
hitherto recommended, would be the admiration of their superior sense; which,
if it will not of itself dispose Moderns to a diffidence of their own (one of
the great uses, as well as natural fruits of that study) the poet, to help
forward their modesty, in his second part shows them (in a regular deduction of
the causes and effects of wrong Judgment) their own image and amiable turn of
mind.

VER. 201. Of all the Causes, etc.] Having, in the first part, delivered Rules
for perfecting the Art of Criticism, the second is employed in explaining the
Impediments to it. The order of the two parts is judicious. For the causes of
wrong Judgment being Pride, superficial Learning, a bounded Capacity, and
Partiality; Those to whom this part is principally addressed, would not readily
be brought either to see the malignity of the causes, or to own themselves
concerned in the effects, had not the Author previously both enlightened and
convicted them, by the foregoing observations, on the vastness of Art, and
narrowness of Wit; the extensive study of human Nature and Antiquity; and the
Characters of ancient Poetry and Criticism; the natural remedies to the four
epidemic disorders he is now endeavoring to redress.

Ibid. Of all the causes, etc.] The first cause of wrong Judgment is PRIDE. He
judiciously begins with it, [from 200 to 215] as on other accounts, so on this,
that it is the very thing which gives modern Criticism its character; whose
complexion is abuse and censure. He calls it the vice of Fools; by whom are not
meant those to whom Nature has given no Judgment (for he is here speaking of
what misleads the Judgment) but those in whom education and study has made no
improvement; as appears from the happy similitude of an ill-nourish'd body;
where the same words which express the cause, expres. likewise the nature of
pride: For as in bodies, thus in souls, we find,
What wants in blood and spirits, swelled with wind.
It Is the business of reason, he tells us, to dispel the cloud which pride
throws over the mind: But the mischief is, that the rays of reason, diverted by
self-love, sometimes gild this cloud, instead of dissipating it. So that the
Judgment, by false lights reflected back upon itself, is still apt to be a
little dazzled, and to mistake its object. He therefore advises to call in
still more helps: Trust not yourself; but your defects to know,
Make use of every Friend -- and every Foe.
Both the beginning and conclusion of this precept are remarkable. The question
is of the means to subdue Pride: He directs the Critic to begin with a distrust
of himself; and this is Modesty, the first mortification of Pride: And then to
seek the assistance of others, and make use even of an Enemy; and this is
Humility, the last mortification of Pride: For when a man can once bring
himself to submit to profit by an enemy, he has either already quite subdued
his Vanity, or is in a fair way of so doing.

VER. 215. A little learning, etc.] We must here remark the Poet's skill in his
disposition of the causes obstructing true Judgment. Each general cause which
is laid down first, has its own particular cause in that which follows. Thus,
the second cause of wrong Judgment, SUPERFICIAL LEARNING, is what gives birth
to that critical Pride, which he mentioned first.

VER. 216. Drink deep, etc.] Nature and Learning are the pole stars of all true
Criticism: But Pride hinders the sight of Nature; and a smattering of letters
takes away all sense of the want of Learning. To avoid this ridiculous
situation, the poet [from 214 to 233] advises, either to drink deep, or not to
taste at all; for the least sip is enough to make a bad Critic, while even a
moderate draught can never make a good one. And yet the labors and
difficulties of drinking deep are so great that a young author, "Fired with
ideas of fair Italy," and ambitious to snatch a palm from Rome, engages in an
undertaking as arduous almost as that of Hannibal: Finely illustrated by the
similitude of an unexperienced traveller penetrating through the Alps.

VER. 233. A perfect Judge, etc.] The third cause of wrong Judgment is a NARROW
CAPACITY; the natural and certain cause of the foregoing defect, acquiescence
in superficial learning. This bounded Capacity the poet shows [from 232 to
384.] betrays itself two ways; in the matter, and in the manner of the work
criticized. In the matter by judging by parts; or by having one favorite part
to a neglect of all the rest: In the manner, by confining the regard only to
conceit, or language, or numbers. This is our Poet's order; and we shall follow
him as it leads us; only just observing one great beauty which runs through this
part of the poem; it is, that under each of these heads of wrong Judgment, he
has intermixed excellent precepts for right. We shall take notice of them as
they occur.

He exposes the folly of judging by parts very artfully, not by a direct
description of that sort of Critic, but of his opposite, a perfect Judge, etc.
Nor is the elegance of this conversion inferior to the art of it; for as, in
poetic style, one word or figure is still put for another, in order to catch
new lights from different images, and to reflect them back upon the subject in
hand; so, in poetic matter, one person or thing may be advantageously employed
for another, with the same elegance of representation. It is observable that
our Author makes it almost the necessary consequence of judging by parts, to
find fault: And this not without much discernment: For the several parts of a
complete Whole, when seen only singly, and known only independently, must
always have the appearance of irregularity; often, of deformity: Because the
Poet's design being to create a resultive beauty from the artful assemblage of
several various parts into one natural whole; those parts must be fashioned
with regard to their mutual relations in the stations they occupy in that
whole, from whence, the beauty required is to arise: But that regard will
occasion so unreducible a form in each part, when considered singly, as to
present a very misshapen appearance.

VER. 253. Whoever thinks a faultless piece to see,] He shows next [from 252 to
263] that to fix our censure on single parts though they happen to want an
exactness consistent enough with their relation to the rest, is even then very
unjust: And for these reasons, 1. Because it implies an expectation of a
faultless piece, which is a vain imagination: 2. Because no more is to be
expected of any work than that it fairly attains its end: But the end may be
attained, and yet these trivial faults committed: Therefore, in spite of such
faults, the work will merit the praise due to that which attains its end. 3.
Because sometimes a great beauty is not to be procured, nor a notorious blemish
to be avoided, but by suffering one of these minute and trivial errors. 4. And
laftly, because the generous neglect of them is a praise; as it is the
indication of a Genius, busied about greater matters.

VER. 263. Most Critics, fond of some subservient art, etc.] II. The second way
in which a narrow capacity, as it relates to the matter, shows itself, is
judging by a favorite Part. The author has placed this [from 262 to 285] after
the other of judging by parts, with great propriety, it being indeed a natural
consequence of it. For when men have once left the whole to turn their
attention to the separate parts, that regard and reverence due only to a whole
is fondly transferred to one or other of its parts. And thus we see that Heroes
themselves as well as Heromakers, even Kings as well as Poets and Critics, when
they chance never to have had, or long to have lost the idea of that which is
the only legitimate object of their office, the care and conservation of the
whole, are wont to devote themselves to the service of some favorite part,
whether it be love of money, military glory, despotic power, etc. And all, as
our Author says on this occasion, to one loved Folly sacrifice.
This general misconduct much recommends that maxim in good Poetry and
Politics, to give a principal attention to the whole; a maxim which our author
has elsewhere shown to be equally true likewise in Morals and Religion; as being
founded in the order of things: For, if we examine, we shall find it arise from
this imbecility of our nature, that the mind must always have something to
rest upon, to which the passions and affections may be interestingly directed.
Nature prompts us to seek it in the most worthy object; and common sense points
out to a Whole or System: But Ignorance, and the false lights of the Passions,
confound and dazzle us; we stop short, and before we get to a Whole, take up
with some Part; which from thence becomes our Favorite.

VER. 285. Thus Critics of less judgment than caprice,
Curious not knowing, not exact but nice,
Form short Ideas, etc.]
2. He concludes his observations on those two sorts of judges by parts, with
this general reflection. -- The curious not knowing are the first sort, who
judge by parts, and with a microscopic sight (as he says elsewhere) examine bit
by bit: The not exact but nice, are the second, who judge by a favorite part,
and talk of a whole to cover their sondness for a part; as Philosophers do of
principles, in order to obtrude their notions or opinions for them. But the
fate common to both is, to be governed by caprice and not by Judgment, and
consequently, to form short ideas, or to have ideas short of truth: Though the
latter sort, through a fondness to their favorite part, imagine that they
comprehend the whole in epitome: As the famous Hero of La Mancha, mentioned
just before, used to maintain, that Knight Errantry comprised within itself the
quintessence of all Science, civil and military.

VER. 289. Some to Conceit alone, etc.] We come now to that second sort of
bounded capacity, which betrays itself in the manner of the work criticized.
And this our Author prosecutes from 288 to 384. These are again subdivided into
diverse classes.

Ibid. Some to Conceit alone, etc.] The first from 288 to 305.] are those who
confine their attention solely to Conceit or Wit. And here again the Critic by
parts, offends doubly in the manner, just as he did in the matter: For he not
only confines his attention to a part, when it should be extended to the whole;
but he likewise judges salsely of that part. And this, like the other, is
unavoidable, as the parts in the manner, bear the same close relation to the
whole, that the parts in the matter do; to which whole the ideas of this Critic
have never yet extended. Hence it is, that our author, speaking here of those
who confine their attention solely to Conceit or Wit, describes the two species
of true and false Wit; because they not only mistake a wrong disposition of
true Wit for a right, but likewise false Wit for true: He describes false Wit
first, from 288 to 297. Some to Conceit alone, etc.
Where the reader may observe our Author's skill in representing, in a
description of salse Wit, the false disposition of the true, as the Critic by
parts is apt to fall into both these errors.

He next describes true Wit, from 296 to 305. True Wit is Nature to advantage
dressed, etc.
And here again the reader may observe the same beauty, not only an explanation
of true Wit, but likewise of the right disposition of it; which the poet
illustrates, as he did the wrong, by ideas taken from the art of Painting.

VER. 305. Others for Language, etc.] He proceeds secondly to those
narrow-minded Critics, whose whole concern turns upon Language, and shows [from
304 to 337.] that this quality, where it holds the principal place, deserves no
commendation; 1. Because it excludes qualities more essential. And when the
abounding Verbiage has excluded the sense, the writer has nothing to do but to
gild over the defect, by giving his words all the false coloring in his power.

2. He shows, that the Critic who busies himself with this quality alone, is
altogether unable to make a right Judgment of it; because true Expression is
only the dress of Thought; and so must be perpetually varied according to the
subject, and manner of thinking. But those who never concern themselves with
the Sense, can form no judgment of the correspondence between that and the
Language: Expression is the dress of thought, and still
Appears more decent as more suitable, etc.
Now as these Critics are ignorant of this correspondence, their whole judgment
in Language is reduced to the examination of single words; of which, such as
are to his taste, are so only in proportion as they smack of Antiquity: On
which our author has therefore bestowed a little raillery; concluding with a
short and proper direction concerning the use of words, so far as regards their
novelty and ancientry.

VER. 337. But most by Numbers judge, etc.] The last sort are those [from 336
to 384.] whose ears are attached only to the Harmony of a poem. Of which they
judge as ignorantly and as perversely as the other sort did of Eloquence; and
for the very same reason. He first describes that false Harmony with which they
are so much captivated; and shows, that it is wretchedly flat and unvaried: For
Smooth or rough with them is right or wrong.
He then describes the true. 1. As it is in itself, constant; with a happy
mixture of strength and sweetness, in contradiction to the roughness and
flatness of false Harmony: And 2. as it is varied, in compliance to the
subject, where the sound becomes an who to the sense, so far as is consistent
with the preservation of numbers; in contradiction to the monotony of false
Harmony: Of this he gives us, in the delivery of his precepts, four fine
examples of smoothness, roughness, slowness, and rapidity. The first use of
this correspondence of the sound to the sense, is to aid the fancy in acquiring
a perfecter and more lively image of the thing represented. A second and
nobler, is to calm and subdue the turbulent and selfish passions, and to raise
and warm the beneficent: Which he illustrates in the famous adventure of
Timotheus and Alexander: where, in referring to Mr. Dryden's Ode on that
subject, he turns it to a high compliment on that great poet.

VER. 384. Avoid Extremes, etc.] Our Author is now come to the last cause of
wrong judgment, PARTIALITY; the parent of the immediately preceding cause, a
bounded capacity: Nothing so much narrowing and contracting the mind as
prejudices entertained for or against things or persons. This, therefore, as
the main root of all the foregoing, he prosecutes at large from 383 to 473.

First, to 394. he previously exposes that capricious turn of mind, which, by
running men into Extremes, either of praise or dispraise, lays the foundation
of an habitual partiality. He cautions therefore both against one and the
other; and shows that excess of Praise is the mark of a bad taste; and excess
of Censure, of a bad digestion.

VER. 394. Some foreign writers, etc.] Having explained the disposition of mind
which produces an habitual partiality, be preceeds to expose this partiality in
all the shapes in which it appeats both amongst the unlearned and the learned.

I. In the unlearned, it is seen, first, In an unreasonable fondness for, or
aversion to our own or foreign, to ancient or modern writers. And as it is the
mob of unlearned readers he is here speaking of, he exposes their solly in a
very apposite similitude: Thus Wit, like Faith, by each Man is applied
To one small sect, and all are damned beside.
But he shows [from 397 to 408] that these Critics have as wrong a notion of
Reason as those Bigots have of God: For that Genius is not confined to times or
climates; but, as the common gist of Nature, is extended throughout all ages
and countries: That indeed this intellectual light, like the material light of
the Sun itself, may not shine at all times, in every place, with equal
splendour; but be sometimes clouded with popular ignorance; and sometimes again
eclipsed by the discountenance of Princes; yet it shall still recover itself;
and, by breaking through the strongest of these impediments, manifest the
eternity of its nature.

VER. 408. Some never advance a Judgment of their own] A second instance of
unlearned partiality, he shows [from 407 to 424.] is men's going always along
with the cry, as having no fixed or well grounded principles whereon to raise
any judgment of their own. A third is reverence for names; of which sort, as he
well observes, the worst and vilest are the idolizers of names of quality; whom
therefore he stigmatizes as they deserve. Our author's temper as well as
judgment is here very observable, in throwing this species of partiality
amongst the unlearned Critics: His affection for letters would not suffer him
to conceive, that any learned Critic could ever fall to so low a prostitution.

VER. 424. -- The Vulgar thus --
As often the Learned -- ]
II. He comes, in the second place [from 423 to 452] to consider the instances
of partiality in the learned. 1. The first is Singularity. For, as want of
principles, in the unlearned, necessitates them to rest on the general judgment
as always right; so adherence to false principles (that is, to notions of their
own) misleads the learned into the other extreme, of supposing the general
judgment always wrong. And as, before, the Poet compared those to Bigots, who
made true faith to consist in believing after others; so he compares these to
Schismatics, who make it to consist in believing as no one ever believed
before. Which folly he marks with a lively stroke of humor in the turn of the
thought: So Schismatics the plain believers quit,
And are but damned for having too much Wit.
2. The second is Novelty. And as this proceeds sometimes from fondness,
sometimes from vanity; he compares the one to the passion for a mistress; and
the other, to the pride of being in fashion: But the excuse common to both is,
the daily improvement of their Judgment. Ask them the cause, they are wiser
still they say.
Now as this is a plausible pretense for their inconstancy; and our author has
himself afterward laid down the like thought, in a precept for a remedy
against obstinacy and pride, where he says, 570. But you with pleasure own your
errors past,
And make each day a critic on the last,
he has been careful, by the turn of the expression in this place, to show the
difference. For Time, considered only as duration, vitiates as frequently as it
improves: Therefore to expect wisdom as the necessary attendant of length of
years, unrelated to long experience, is vain and delusive. This he illustrates
by a remarkable example; where we see Time, instead of becoming wiser,
destroying good letters, to substitute school divinity in their place. -- The
genius of which kind of learning; the character of its professors; and the
sat, which, sooner or later, always attends whatsoever is wrong or false, the
poet sums up in those four lines; Faith, Gospel, all seemed made to be
disputed, etc.
And in conclusion, he observes, that perhaps this mischief, from love of
novelty, might not be so great, did it not, with the Critic, infect Writers
likewise; who, when they find their readers disposed to take ready Wit on the
standard of current Folly, never trouble themselves to make better payment.

VER. 452. Some valuing those of their own side or mind, etc.] 3. The third and
last instance of partiality in the learned, is Party and Faction. Which is
considered from 451 to 474. where he shows how men of this turn deceive
themselves when they load a writer of their own side with commendation. They
fancy they are paying tribute to merit, when they are only sacrificing to
self-love. But this is not the worst. He further shows, that this party spirit
has often very ill effects on Science itself; while, in support of Faction, it
labors to depress some rising Genius, that was, perhaps, raised by nature, to
enlighten his age and country. By which he would insinuate, that all the base
and viler passions seek refuge, and find support in party madness.

VER. 474. Be thou the first, etc.] The poet having now gone through the last
cause of wrong Judgment, and root of all the rest, PARTIALITY; and ended it
with the highest instances of it, in party-rage and envy; this affords him an
opportunity [from 473 to 560.] of closing his second division in the most
graceful manner, by concluding from the premises, and calling upon the TRUE
CRITIC to be careful of his charge, which is the protection and support of Wit.
For, the defense of it from malevolent censure is its true protection; and the
illustration of its beauties, its true support.

He first shows, the Critic ought to do this service without delay: And on
these motives. 1. Out of regard to himself: For there is some merit in giving
the world notice of an excellence; but none at all in pointing, like an Idiot,
to that which has been long in the admiration of men. 2. Out of regard to the
Poem: For the short duration of modern works requires they should begin to
enjoy their existence early. He compares the life of modern Wit, and of the
ancient, which survives in an universal language, to the difference between the
Patriarchal age and our own: And observes, that while the ancient writings live
for ever, as it were in brass and marble, the modern are but like Paintings,
which, of how masterly a hand soever, have no sooner gained their requisite
perfection by the incorporating, softening, and ripening of their tints, which
they do in a very few years, but they begin to fade and die away. 3. Lastly,
our author shows, that the Critic ought to do this service out of regard to the
Poet; when he considers the slender dowry the Muse brings along with her: In
youth it is only a short lived vanity; and in maturer years an accession of care
and labor, in proportion to the weight of Reputation to be sustained, and of
the increase of Envy to be opposed: And concludes his reasoning therefore on
this head, with that pathetic and insinuating address to the Critic, from 508
to 524. Ah! let not learning, etc.


VER 527. But if in noble minds some dregs remain, etc.] So far as to what
ought to be the true Critic's principal study and employment. But if the four
critical humor must needs have vent, he points to its right object; and shows
[from 526 to 556.] how it may be usefully and innocently diverted. This is very
observable; for our author makes spleen and disdain the characteristic of the
false Critic, and yet here supposes them inherent in the true. But it is done
with judgment, and a knowledge of nature. For as bitterness and acerbity in
unripe fruits of the best kind are the foundation and capacity of that high
spirit, race, and flavor which we find in them, when perfectly concocted by
the heat and influence of the Sun; and which, without those qualities, would
often gain no more by that influence than only a mellow insipidity: so spleen
and disdain in the true Critic, improved by long study and experience, ripen
into an exactness of Judgment and an elegance of Taste: But, lying in the false
Critic remote from the influence of good letters, continue in all their first
offensive harshness and astringency. The Poet therefore shows how, after the
exaltation of these qualities into their state of perfection, the very Dregs
(which, though precipitated, may possibly, on some occasions, rise and ferment
even in a noble mind) may be usefully employed in branding OBSCENITY and
IMPIETY. Of these he explains the rise and progress, in a beautiful picture of
the different genius's of the reigns of Charles II. and William III. the former
of which gave course to the most profligate luxury; the latter to a licentious
impiety. These are the criminals the poet assigns over to the caustic hand of
the Critic, but concludes however, from 556 to 561. with this necessary
admonition, to take care not to be misled into unjust censure; either on the
one hand, by a pharisaical niceness, or on the other by a consciousness of
guilt. And thus the second division of his Essay ends: The judicious conduct of
which is worthy our observation. The subject of it are the causes of wrong
Judgment: These he derives upwards from cause to cause, till he brings them to
their source, an immoral partiality: For as he had, in the first part, traced
the Muses upward to their spring,
and shown them to be derived from Heaven, and the Offspring of virtue; so has
he here pursued this enemy of the Muses, the bad Critic, to his low original,
in the arms of his nursing mother Immorality. This order naturally introduces,
and at the same time shows the necessity of, the subject of the third and last
division, which is, on the Morals of the Critic.

VER. 561. Learn then, etc.] We enter now on the third part, the MORALS of the
Critic; included in CANDOR, MODESTY, and GOOD-BREEDING. This third and last
part is in two divisions. In the first of which [from 560 to 632.] he
inculcates these morals by precept: In the second [from 631 to the end] by
example. His first precept [from 562 to 567.] recommends CANDOR, for its use
to the Critic, and to the writer criticized.

2. The second [from 566 to 573.] recommends MODESTY, which manifests itself by
these four signs: 1. Silence where it doubts, Be silent always when you doubt
your sense;
2. A seeming diffidence where it knows, And speak, though sure, with seeming
diffidence:
3. A free confession of error where wrong, But you with pleasure own your
errors past,
4. And a constant review and scrutiny even of those opinions which it still
thinks right: And make each day a Critic on the last.


3. The third [from 572 to 585.] recommends GOOD BREEDING, which will not force
truth dogmatically upon men, as ignorant of it, but gently insinuates it into
them, as not sufficiently attentive to it. But as men of breeding are apt to
fall into two extremes, he prudently cautions against them. The one is a
backwardness in communicating their knowledge, out of a false delicacy, and
fear of being thought Pedants: The other, and much more common extreme in men
of breeding, is a mean complacence, which such as are worthy of your advice do
not want to make it acceptable; for those can best bear reproof in particular
points, who best deserve commendation in general.

VER. 585. 'Twere well might Critics, etc.] The poet having thus recommended,
in these general rules of Conduct for the Judgment, the three critical Virtues
to the heart; shows next [from 584 to 632.] on what three sort of Writers these
Virtues, together with the advice conveyed under them, would be thrown away;
and, which is worse, be repaid with obloquy and slander. These are the false
Critic, the dull Man of Quality, and the bad Poet; each of which incorrigible
writers he has very justly and exactly characterized.

But having drawn the last of them at large, and being always attentive to his
main subject, which is, of writing and judging well, he re-assumes the
character of the bad Critic (whom he had but touched upon before) to contrast
him with the other; and makes the Characteristic common to both, to be a
neverceasing Repetition of their own impertinence. The Poet, -- still runs on
in a raging vein, etc. 607, etc. The Critic -- with his own tongue still
edifies his ears, 615, etc.

VER. 631. But where is the man, etc.] II. The second division of this last
part, which we now come to, is of the Morals of Critics by example. For, having
there drawn a picture of the false Critic, at large, he breaks out into an
apostrophe, containing an exact and finished character of the true, which, at
the same time, serves for an easy and proper introduction to this second
division. For, having asked [from 631 to 644.] Where Is the man, etc. he answers
[from 643 to 682.] That he was to be found in the happier ages of Greece and
Rome; in the persons of Aristotle and Horace, Dionysius and Petronius,
Quintilian and Longinus. Whose features he has not only exactly delineated, but
contrasted with a peculiar elegance; the profound science and logical method of
Aristotle being opposed to the plain common sense of Horace, conveyed in a
natural and familiar negligence; the study and refinement of Dionysius, to the
gay and courtly ease of Petronius; and the gravity and minuteness of
Quintilian, to the vivacity and general topics of Longinus. Nor has the Poet
been less careful, in these examples, to point out their eminence in the
several critical Virtues he so carefully inculcated in his precepts. Thus in
Horace he particularizes his Candor, in Petronius his Good Breeding, in
Quintilian his free and copious Instruction, and in Longinus his noble Spirit.

VER. 682. Thus long succeeding Critics, etc.] The next period in which the
true Critic (he tells us) appeared, was at the revival and restoration of
letters in the West. This occasions his giving a short history [from 683 to
710.] of the decline and re-establishment of arts and sciences in Italy. He
shows that they both fell under the same enemy, despotic power; and that when
both had made some little efforts to restore themselves, they were soon quite
overwhelmed by a second deluge of another kind, Superstition; and a calm of
Dullness finished upon Rome and Letters what the rage of Barbarism had begun: A
second deluge learning thus o'er-run,
And the Monk finished what the Goth begun.
When things had been long in this condition, and all recovery now appeared
desperate, it was a CRITIC, our author shows us for the honor of the Art he
here teaches, who at length broke the charm of Dullness, dissipated the
enchantment, and, like another Hercules, drove those cowl'd and hooded serpents
from the Hesperian tree of knowledge, which they had so long guarded from human
approach.

VER. 694. At length Erasmus, etc.] Nothing can be more artful than the
application of this example; or more happy than the turn of compliment to this
admirable man. To throw glory quite round his illustrious character, he makes
it to be (as in fact it really was) by his assistance chiefly, that Leo was
enabled to restore letters and the fine arts, in his Pontificate.

VER. 698. But see each Muse in Leo's golden days] This presents us with the
second period in which the true Critic appeared; of whom he has given us a
perfect idea in the single example of Marcus Hieronymus Vida: For his subject
being poetical Criticism, for the use principally of a critical Poet; his
example is an eminent poetical Critic, who had had written of that Art in verse.

VER. 710. But soon by impious arms, etc.] This brings us to the third period,
after learning had still traveled farther West; when the arms of the Emperor,
in the sack of Rome by the duke of Bourbon, had driven it out of Italy, and
forced it to pass the Mountains -- The Examples he gives in this period, are of
Boileau in France, and of the Lord Roscommon and the duke of Buckingham in
England: And these were all Poets, as well as Critics in verse. It is true, the
last instance is of one who was no eminent poet, the late Mr. Walsh. This small
deviation might be well over-looked, was it only for its being a pious office
to the memory of his friend: But it may be farther justified as it was an
homage paid in particular to the MORALS of the Critic, nothing being more
amiable than the character here drawn of this excellent person. He being our
Author's Judge and Censor, as well as Friend, it gives him a graceful
opportunity to add himself to the number of the later Critics; and with a
character of himself, sustained by that modesty and dignity which it is so
difficult to make consistent, this performance concludes.

I have given a short and plain account of the Essay on Criticism, concerning
which I have but one thing more to acquaint the reader: That when he considers
the Regularity of the plan, the masterly Conduct of each part, the penetration
into Nature, and the compass of Learning, so conspicuous throughout, he should
at the same time know, it was the work of an Author who had not attained the
twentieth year of his age.

NOTES.
VER. 15. Let such teach others] Qui scribit artificiose, ab aliis commode
scripta facile intelligere poterit. Cic. ad Herenn. lib. 4. De pictore,
sculptore, fictore, nisi artifex, judicare non potest. Pliny. P.

VER. 20. Most have the seeds] Omnes tacito quodam sensu, sine ulla art, aut
ratione, quae sint in artibus ac rationibus recta et prava dijudicant. Cic. de
Orat. lib. iii. P.

VER. 25. So by false learning] Plus sine doctrina prudentia, quam sine
prudentia valet doctrina. Quint. P.

VER. 26, 27. Some are bewildered, etc.] This thought is taken from Lord
Rochester, but more decently expressed: God never made a Coxcomb worth a groat,
We owe that name to industry and arts.


VER. 28. In search of wit these lose their common sense,] This observation is
extremely just. Search of wit is not only the occasion but the efficient cause
of loss of common sense. For wit consisting in choosing out, and setting
together, such ideas from whose likenesses pleasant pictures are made in the
fancy; the Judgment, through an habitual search of Wit, loses by degrees its
faculty of seeing the true relations of things; in which consists the exercise
of common sense.

VER. 32. All fools have still an itching to deride,
And fain would be upon the laughing side.]
The sentiment is just. And if Hobbes's account of laughter be true, that it
arises from pride, we see the reason of it. The expression too is fine, it
alludes to the condition of Idiots and natural-fools who are always on the grin.

VER. 43. Their generation's so equivocal:] It is sufficient that a principle
of philosophy has been generally received, whether it be true or false, to
justify a poet's use of it to set off his wit. But to recommend his argument he
should be cautious how he uses any but the true. For falsehood, when it is set
too near, will tarnish the truth he would recommend. Besides, the analogy
between natural and moral truth makes the principles of true Philosophy the
fittest for his use. Our Poet has been careful in observing this rule.

VER. 51. And mark that point where sense and dullness meet.] Besides the
peculiar sense explained above in the comment, the words have still a more
general meaning, and caution us against going on, when our Ideas begin to grow
obscure; as we are apt to do, though that obscurity is a monition that we should
leave off; for it arises either through our small acquaintance with the subject,
or the incomprehensibility of its nature. In which circumstances a genius will
always write as heavily as a dunce. An observation well worth the attention of
all profound writers.

VER. 56. Thus in the soul while memory prevails,
The solid power of understanding fails:
Where beams of warm imagination play,
The memory's soft sigures melt away.]
These observations are collected from an intimate knowledge of human nature.
The cause of that languor and heaviness in the understanding, which is almost
inseparable from a very strong and tenacious memory, seems to be a want of the
proper exercise and activity of that power; the understanding being rather
passive while the memory is cultivating. As to the other appearance, the decay
of memory by the vigorous exercise of Fancy, the poet himself seems to have
intimated the cause of it in the epithet he has given to the Imagination. For
if, according to the Atomic Philosophy, the memory of things be preserved in a
chain of ideas, produced by the animal spirits moving in continued trains; the
force and rapidity of the Imagination perpetually breaking and dissipating the
links of this chain by forming new associations, must necessarily weaken and
disorder the recollective faculty.

VER. 67. Would all but stoop to what they understand.] The expression is
delicate, and implies what is very true, that most men think it a degradation
of their genius to employ it in cultivating what lies level to their
comprehension, but had rather exercise their ambition in subduing what is
placed above it.

VER. 88. Those Rules of old, etc.] Cicero has, best of any one I know,
explained what that is which reduces the wild and scattered parts of human
knowledge into arts. -- Nihil est quod ad artem redigi possit, nisi ille prius,
qui illa tenet, quorum artem instituere vult, habeat illam scientiam, ut ex iis
rebus, quarum ars nondum sit, artem efficere possit. -- Omnia fere, quae sunt
conclusa nunc artibus, dispersa et dissipata quondam fuerunt, ut in Musicis,
etc. Adhibita est igitur ars quaedam extrinsecus ex alio genere quodam, quod
sibi totum PHILOSOPHI assumunt, quae rem dissolutam divulsamque conglutinaret,
et ratione quadam constringeret. De Orat. l. i. c. 41, 2.

VER. 98. Just precepts] Nec enim artibus editis factum est ut argumenta
inveniremus, sed dicta sunt omnia antequam proeciperentur; mox ea scriptores
observata et collecta ediderunt. Quintil. P.

VER. 112. Some on the leaves --
Some drily plain.]
The first, the Apes of those Italian Critics, who at the restoration of
letters having found the classic writers miserably mangled by the hands of
monkish Librarians, very commendably employed their pains and talents in
restoring them to their native purity. The second, the plagiaries from the
French, who had made some admirable Commentaries on the ancient critics. But
that acumen and taste, which separately constitute the distinct value of those
two species of foreign Criticism, make no part of the character of these paltry
mimics at home, described by our Poet in the following lines, These leave the
sense, their learning to display,
And those explain the meaning quite away.
Which species is the least hurtful, the Poet has enabled us to determine in
the lines with which he opens his poem, But of the two less dangerous is
the offense
To tire our patience than mislead our sense.
From whence we conclude, that the reverend Mr. Upton was much more innocently
employed when he quibbled upon Epictetus, than when he commented upon
Shakespeare.

VER. 130. When first young Maro etc.] Virg. Eclog. vi. Cum canerem reges et
proelia, Cynthius aurem
Vellit.
It is a tradition preserved by Servius, that Virgil began with writing a poem
of the Alban and Roman affairs; which he found above his years, and descended
first to imitate Theocritus on rural subjects, and afterward to copy Homer in
Heroic poetry. P.

VER. 146. If, where the rules etc.] Neque enim rogationibus plebisve scitis
sancta sunt ista Praecepta, sed hoc, quicquid est, Utilitas excogitavit. Non
negabo autem sic utile esse plerumque; verum si eadem illa nobis aliud suadebit
Utilitas, hanc, relictis magistrorum autoritatibus, sequemur. Quintil. lib. ii.
cap. 13. P.

VER. 150. Thus Pegasus, etc.] We have observed how the precepts for writing
and judging are interwoven throughout the whole work. He first describes the
sublime slight of a Poet, soaring above all vulgar bounds, to snatch a grace
directly, which lies beyond the reach of a common adventurer. And afterward,
the effect of that grace upon the true Critic: whom it penetrates with an equal
rapidity; going the nearest way to his heart, without passing through his
Judgment. By which is not meant that it could not stand the test of Judgment;
but that, it being a beauty uncommon, and above rule, and the Judgment
habituated to determine only by rule, it makes its direct application to the
Heart; which once gained, soon opens and enlarges the Judgment, whose
concurrence (it being now set above forms) is easily procured. That this is the
poet's sublime conception appears from the concluding words: and all its end at
once attains.
For Poetry does not attain all its end, till it has gained the Judgment as
well as Heart.

VER. 175. A prudent chief etc.] (...) (...) -- Dion. Hal. De struct. orat.

VER. 180. Nor is it Homer nods, but we that dream.] Modeste, et circumspecto
judicio de tantis viris pronunciandum est, ne quod (quod plerisque accidit)
damnent quod non intelligunt. Ac si necesse est in alteram errare partem, omnia
little legentibus placere, quam multa displicere maluerim. Quint. P.

VER. 183. Secure from flames, from envy's fiercer rage,
Destructive war, and all-involving age.]
The Poet here alludes to the four great causes of the ravage amongst ancient
writings: The destruction of the Alexandrine and Palatine libraries by fire;
the fiercer rage of Zoilus and Maevius and their followers against Wit; the
irruption of the Barbarians into the empire; and the long reign of Ignorance
and Superstition in the cloisters.

VER. 189. Hail, Bards triumphant!] There is a pleasantry in this title, which
alludes to the state of warfare that all true Genius must undergo while here
upon earth.

VER. 196. The last] This word, spoken in his early youth, as it were by
chance, seems to have been ominous.

VER. 209. Pride where Wit fails steps in to our defense,
And fills up all the mighty void of sense.]
A very sensible french writer makes the following remark on this species of
pride. "Un homme qui scait plusieurs Langues, qui entend les Auteurs Grecs et
Latins, qui s'eleve meme jusqu' a la dignite de SCHOLIASTE; si cet homme venoit
a peser son veritable merit, il trouveroit souvent qu'il se reduit a avoir eu
des yeux et de la memoire, il se garderoit bien de donner le nom respectable de
science a une erudition sans lumiere. Il y a une grande difference enter
s'enrichir des mots ou des chooses, enter alleguer des autoritez ou des raisons.
Si un homme pouvoit se surprendre a n' avoir que cette sort de merit, il en
rougiroit plutot que d'en etre vain."

VER. 217. There shallow draughts, etc.] The thought was taken from Lord
Verulam, who applies it to more serious enquiries.

VER. 233. A perfect Judge, etc.] Diligenter legendum est, ac paene ad
scribendi sollicitudinem: Nec per parts modo scrutanda sunt emnia, sed
perlectus liber utique ex integro resumendus. Quin*

VER. 235. Survey the Whole, nor seek slight faults to find,
Where nature moves, and rapture warms the mind;]
The second line, in apologizing for those faults which the first says should
be overlooked, gives the reason of the precept. For when a writer's attention
is fixed on a general view of Nature, and his imagination warmed with the
contemplation of great ideas, it can hardly be but that there must be small
irregularities in the disposition both of matter and style, because the
avoiding these requires a coolness of recollection, which a writer so busied is
not master of.

VER. 248. The world's just wonder, and even thine, O Rome!] The Pantheon.
There is something very Gothic in the taste and judgment of a learned man, who
despises this masterpiece of Art for those very qualities which deserve our
admiration. -- "Nous esmerveillons comme l'on fait si grand cas de ce Pantheon,
veu que son edifice n'est de si grande industry comme l'on cry: car chaque
petit Masson peut bien concevoir la maniere de sa facon tout en un instant car
estant la base si massive, et les murailles si espoisses, ne nous a semble
difficile d'y adjouster la voute a claire voye." Pierre Belon's Observations,
etc. The nature of the Gothic structures apparently led him into this mistake
of the Architectonic art in general; that the excellency of it consisted in
raising the greatest weight on the least assignable support, so that the
edifice should have strength without the appearance of it, in order to excite
admiration. But to a judicious eye it would have a contrary effect, the
Appearance (as our poet expresses it) of a monstrous height, or breadth, or
length. Indeed did the just proportions in regular Architecture take off from
the grandeur of a building, by all the single parts coming united to the eye,
as this learned traveller seems to insinuate, it would be a reasonable
objection to those rules on which this Masterpiece of Art was constructed. But
it is not so. The Poet tells us, The Whole at once is BOLD and regular.


VER. 261. verbal Critic] Is not here used in its common signification, of one
who retails the sense of single words; but of one who deals in large cargo's of
them without any sense at all.

VER. 267. Once on a time, etc.] This tale is so very apposite, that one would
naturally take it to be of the Poet's own invention; and so much in the spirit
of Cervantes, that one might easily mistake it for one of the chief strokes of
that incomparable Satire. But, in truth, it is neither this nor that; but a
story taken by our Author from the spurious Don Quixote; which shows how proper
an use may be made of General reading, when if there is but one good thing in a
book (as in that wretched performance there scarce was more) it may be picked
out, and employed to an excellent purpose.

VER. 285. Thus Critics of less judgment than caprice,
Curious not knowing, not exact but nice.]
In these two lines the poet finely describes the way in which bad writers are
wont to imitate the qualities of good ones. As true Judgment generally draws
men out of popular opinions, so he who cannot get from the crowd by the
assistance of this guide, willingly follows Caprice, which will be sure to lead
him into singularities. Again, true Knowledge is the art of treasuring up only
that which, from its use in life, is worthy of being lodged in the memory. But
Curiosity consists in a vain attention to every thing out of the way, and
which, for its uselessness the world least regards. Lastly, Exactness is the
just proportion of parts to one another, and their harmony in a whole: But he
who has not extent of capacity for the exercise of this quality, contents
himself with Nicety, which is a busying one's self about points and syllables.

VER. 297. True Wit is Nature to advantage dressed, etc.] This definition is
very exact. Mr. Lock had defined Wit to consist in the assemblage of ideas,
and putting those together, with quickness and variety, wherein can be found
any resemblance or congruity, whereby to make up pleasant pictures and
agreeable visions in the fancy. But that great Philosopher, in separating Wit
from Judgment, as he does in this place, has given us (and he could therefore
gives us no other) only an account of Wit in general: In which false Wit, though
not every species of it, is included. A striking Image therefore of Nature is,
as Mr. Lock observes, certainly Wit: But this image may strike on several
other accounts, as well as for its truth and amiableness; and the Philosopher
has explained the manner how. But it never becomes that Wit which is the
ornament of true Poesy, whose end is to represent Nature, but when it dresses
that Nature to advantage, and presents her to us in the clearest and most
amiable light. And to know when the Fancy has done its office truly, the poet
subjoins this admirable Test, viz. When we perceive that it gives us back the
image of our mind. When it does that, we may be sure it plays no tricks with
us: For this image is the creature of the Judgment; and whenever Wit
corresponds with Judgment, we may safely pronounce it to be true.

Naturam intueamur, hanc sequamur: id facillime accipiunt animi quod agnoscunt.
Quintil. lib. viii. c. 3.

VER. 311. False eloquence, like the prismatic glass, etc.] This simile is
beautiful. For the false coloring, given to objects by the prismatic glass, is
owing to its untwisting, by its obliquities, those threads of light, which
Nature had put together in order to spread over its works an ingenuous and
simple candor, that should not hide, but only heighten the native complexion of
the objects. And false Eloquence is nothing else but the straining and
divaricating the parts of true expression; and then daubing them over with what
the Rhetoricians very properly term, COLORS; in lieu of that candid light, now
lost, which was reflected from them in their natural state while sincere and
entire.

VER. 324. Some by old words, etc.] Abolita et abrogata retinere, insolentiae
cujusdam est, et frivolae in parvis jactantiae. Quintil. lib. i. c. 6. P.

Opus est ut verba a vetustate repetita neque crebra sint, neque manifesta,
quia nil est adiosius affectatione, nec utique ab ultimis repetita temporibus.
Oration cujus summa virtus est perspicuitas, quam sit vitiosa, si egeat
interpret? Ergo ut novorum optima erunt maxim vetera, ita veterum maxim
nova. Idem. P.

VER. 328. -- unlucky as Fungoso etc.] See Ben Johnson's Every Man in his
Humor. P.

VER. 337. But most by Numbers, etc.] Quis populi sermo est? quis enim? nisi
carmina molli
Nunc demum numero fiuere, ut per laeve severos
Effundat junctura ungues: scit tendere versum
Non secus ac si oculo rubricam dirigat uno.
Pers. Sat. i. P.

VER. 345. Though often the ear, etc.] Fugiemus crebras vocalium concursiones, quae
vastam atque hiantem orationem readunt. Cic. ad Heren. lib. iv. Vide etiam
Quintil. lib. ix. c. 4. P.

VER. 364. It Is not enough no harshness gives offense;
The sound must seem an Echo to the sense:
] The judicious introduction of this precept is remarkable. The Poets, and even
some of the best of them, have been so fond of the beauty arising from this
trivial precept, that, in their practice, they have violated the very End of
it, which is the increase of harmony; and, so they could but raise an Echo, did
not care whose ears they offended by its dissonance. To remedy this abuse
therefore, the poet, by the introductory line, would infinuate, that Harmony is
always presupposed as observed; though it may and ought to be perpetually varied,
so as to produce the effect here recommended.

VER. 365. The sound must seem an Echo to the sense,] Lord Roscommon says, The
sound is still a comment to the sense. They are both well expressed: only this
supposes the sense to be assisted by the sound; that, the sound assisted by the
sense.

VER. 374. Hear how Timotheus, etc.] See Alexander's Feast, or the Power of
Music; an Ode by Mr. Dryden. P.

VER. 402. Which from the first etc.] Genius is the same in all ages; but its
fruits are various; and more or less excellent as they are checked or matured
by the influence of Government or Religion upon them. Hence in some parts of
Literature the Ancients excel; in others, the modern; just as those accidental
circumstances influenced them.

VER. 444. Scotists and Thomists] These were two parties amongst the schoolmen,
headed by Duns Scotus and Thomas Aquinas, of different opinions, and from that
difference denominated Realists and Nominalists; they were perpetually
disputing on the immaculate conception, and on subjects of the like importance.

VER. 444. Scotists] So denominated from Johannes Duns Scotus. He suffered a
miserable reverse of fortune at Oxford in the time of Henry VIII. That grave
Antiquary Mr. Antony Wood sadly laments the deformation, as he calls it, of
that University by the King's Commissioners; and even records the blasphemous
speeches of one of them in his own Words -- We have set DUNCE in Boccardo, with
all his blind Glossers, fast nailed up upon posts in all common houses of
easement. Upon which our venerable Antiquary thus exclaims: "If so be, the
commissioners had such disrespect for that most famous Author J. Duns, who was
so much admired by our predecessors, and SO DIFFICULT TO BE UNDERSTOOD, that
the Doctors of those times, namely Dr. William Roper, Dr. John Kynton, Dr.
William Mowse, etc. professed, that, in twenty eight years study, they could
not understand him rightly, What then had they for others of inferior note?" --
What indeed! But then, If so be, that most famous J. Duns was so difficult to
be understood (for that this is a most classical proof of his great value, who
doubts?) I should conceive our good old Antiquary to be a little mistaken. And
that the nailing up this Proteus was done by the Commissioners in honor of the
most famous Duns: There being no other way of catching the sense of so slippery
an Author, who had eluded the pursuit of three of their most renowned Doctors,
in full cry after him, for twenty eight years together. And this Boccardo in
which he was confined, seemed very proper for the purpose; it being observed,
that men are never more serious and thoughtful than in that place. SCRIBL.

Ibid. Thomists,] From Thomas Aquinas, a truly great Genius, who was, in those
blind ages, the same in Theology that Friar Bacon was in natural Philosophy:
less happy than our Countryman in this, that he soon became surrounded with a
number of dark Glossers, who never left him till they had extinguished the
radiance of that light which had pierced through the thickest night of Monkery,
the thirteenth century, when the Waldenses were suppressed, and Wicklisse not
yet risen.

VER. 445. Duck-lane] A place where old and second-hand books were sold
formerly, near Smithfield. P.

VER. 450. And Authors think their reputation safe,
Which lives as long as fools are pleased to laugh.]
This is a just and admirable satire on those we call, Authors in fashion; for
they are the men who get the laugh on their side. He shows, on how pitiful a
basis their reputation stands, the changeling disposition of fools to laugh;
who are always carried away with the last joke.

VER. 463. Milbourn] The Rev. Mr. Luke Milbourn. Dennis served Mr. Pope in the
same office. And indeed the attendance of these slaves is necessary to render
the triumphs of a great Genius complete. They are of all times, and on all
occasions. Sir Walter Raleigh had Alexander Ross, Chillingworth had his
Cheynel, and Lock his EDWARDS: Not Fungoso of Lincoln's End. Mr. Locke's
Edwards was a Divine of parts and learning, this Edwards is a critic with
neither. Yet (as Mr. Pope says of Luke Milbourn) the fairest of all critics;
for having written against the Editor's remarks on Shakespeare, be did him
justice in printing at the same time his own.

VER 468 For envied Wit, like Sol eclipsed, etc.] This similitude implies a
fact too often verified; and of which we need not seek abroad for examples. It
is, that frequently those very Authors, who have at first done all they could
to obscure and depress a rising genius, have at length, in order to keep
themselves in some little credit, been reduced to borrow from him, imitate his
manner, and reflect what they could of his splendour. Nor has the poet been
less artful, to insinuate also what is sometimes the cause. A youthful genius,
like the Sun rising toward the Meridian, displays too strong and powerful
beams for the dirty genius of inferior writers, which occasions their
gathering, condensing, and blackening. But as he descends from the Meridian
(the time when the Sun gives its gilding to the surrounding clouds) his rays
grow milder, his heat more benign, and then -- even those Clouds at last adorn
its way,
Reflect new glories, and augment the day.


VER. 484. So when the faithful pencil, etc.] This similitude, in which the
poet discovers (as he always does on this subject) real science in the thing
spoken of, has still a more peculiar beauty, as at the same time that it
confesses the just superiority of ancient writings, it insinuates one advantage
the modern have above them; which is this, that in these, our intimate
acquaintance with the occasion of writing, and the manners described, lets us
into all those living and striking graces which may be well compared to that
perfection of imitation only given by coloring: While the ravage of Time
amongst the monuments of former ages, has left us but the gross substance of
ancient wit, so much of the form and matter of body only as may be expressed in
brass or marble.

VER. 507. -- by Knaves undone!] By which the Poet would insinuate, a common
but shameful truth, That Men in power, if they got into it by illiberal arts,
generally left Wit and Science to starve.

VER. 546. Did all the dregs of bold Socinus drain;] The seeds of this
religious evil, as well as of the political that encouraged it (for all
Revolutions are in themselves evils, though brought about through necessity, for
the removal of greater) were sown in the preceding fat age of pleasure. The
mischiefs done, during Cromwell's usurpation, by fanaticism, inflamed by
erroneous and absurd notions of the doctrine of grace and satisfaction, made
the loyal Latitudinarian divines (as they were called) at the Restoration, go
so far into the other extreme of resolving all Christianity into Morality, as
to afford an easy introduction to Socinianism: Which in that reign (founded on
the principles of Liberty) men had full opportunity of propagating.

VER. 547. The author has omitted two lines which stood here, as containing a
National Reflection, which in his stricter judgment he could not but disapprove
on any People whatever. P.

VER. 562. For it is but half a Judge's task, to know.] The Critic acts in two
capacities, of Assessor and of Judge: in the first, science alone is
sufficient; but the other requires morals likewise.

VER. 587. And stares, tremendous, etc.] This picture was taken to himself by
John Dennis, a furious old Critic by profession, who, upon no other
provocation, wrote against this Essay and its author, in a manner perfectly
lunatic: For, as to the mention made of him in 270. he took it as a Compliment,
and said it was treacherously meant to cause him to overlook this Abuse of his
Person. P.

VER. 620. Garth did not write, etc.] A common slander at that time in
prejudice of that deserving author. Our Poet did him this justice, when that
slander most prevailed; and it is now (perhaps the sooner for this very verse)
dead and forgotten. P.

VER. 632. But where is the man, etc.] The Poet, by his manner of asking after
this Character, and telling us, when he had described it, that such once were
Critics, does not encourage us to search for it in modern writers. And indeed
the discovery of him, if it could be made, would be but an invidious business.
I will venture no farther than to name the piece of Criticism in which these
marks may be found. It is entitled, Q. Hor. Fl. Ars Poetica, with an English
Commentary and Notes.

VER. 643. with REASON on his side?] Not only on his side, but actually
exercised in his service. That Critic makes but a mean figure, who, when he has
found out the excellencies of his author, contents himself in offering them to
the world, with only empty exclamations on their beauties. His office is to
explain the nature of those beauties, show from whence they arise, and what
effects they produce; or, in the better and fuller expression of the Poet, To
teach the world with Reason to admire.


VER. 653. Who conquered Nature, should preside over Wit.] By this is not meant
physical Nature, but moral. The force of the observation consists in our
understanding it in this sense. For the Poet not only uses the word Nature for
human nature, throughout this poem; but also, where, in the beginning of it, he
lays down the principles of the arts he treats of, he makes the knowledge of
human nature the foundation of all Criticism and Poetry. Nor is the observation
less true than apposite. For, Aristotle's natural enquiries were superficial,
and ill made, though extensive: But his logical and moral works are incomparable.
In these he has unfolded the human mind, and laid open all the recesses of the
heart and understanding; and by his Categories, not only conquered Nature, but
kept her in tenfold chains: Not as Dullness kept the Muses, in the Dunciad, to
silence them; but as Aristaeus held Proteus in Virgil, to deliver Oracles.

VER. 666. See Dyonysius] Of Halicarnassus. P.

VER. 695. The glory of the Priesthood and the shame!] Our author elsewhere
lets us know what he esteems to be the glory of the Priesthood as well as of a
Christian in general, where, comparing himself to Erasmus, he says, In
MODERATION placing all my glory,
and consequently, what he esteems to be the shame of it. The whole of this
character belonged most eminently and almost solely to Erasmus: For the other
Reformers, such as Luther, Calvin, and their followers, understood so little in
what true Christian Liberty consisted, that they carried with them, into the
reformed Churches that very spirit of persecution, which had driven them from
the church of Rome.

VER. 724. Such was the Muse -- ] Essay on Poetry by the Duke of Buckingham.
Our Poet is not the only one of his time who complimented this Essay, and its
noble Author. Mr. Dryden had done it very largely in the Dedication to his
translation of the Aeneid; and Dr. Garth in the first Edition of his Dispensary
says, The Tyber now no courtly Gallus sees,
But smiling Thames enjoys his Normanbys.
Though afterward omitted, when parties were carried so high in the reign of
Queen Anne, as to allow no commendation to an opposite in Politics. The Duke
was all his life a steady adherent to the Church of England-Party, yet an enemy
to the extravagant measures of the Court in the reign of Charles II. On which
account after having strongly patronized Mr. Dryden, a coolness succeeded
between them on that poet's absolute attachment to the Court, which carried him
some lengths beyond what the Duke could approve of. This Nobleman's true
character had been very well marked by Mr. Dryden before, the Muse's friend,
Himself a Muse. In Sanadrin's debate
True to his prince, but not a slave of state.
Abs. and Achit. Our Author was more happy, he was honored very young with his
friendship, and it continued till his death in all the circumstances of a
familiar esteem. P.

VARIATIONS.
Between 25 and 26 were these lines, since omitted by the author: Many are
spoiled by that pedantic throng,
Who with great pains teach youth to reason wrong.
Tutors, like Virtuoso's, often inclined
By strange transfusion to improve the mind,
Draw off the sense we have, to pour in new;
Which yet, with all their skill, they never could do.
P.

VER. 80. There are whom Heaven has blessed with store of wit,
Yet want as much again to manage it.


VER. 123. Cavil you may, but never criticize.] The author after this verse
originally inserted the following, which he has however omitted in all the
editions: Zoilus, had these been known, without a name
Had died, and Perault never been damned to fame;
The sense of sound Antiquity had reigned,
And sacred Homer yet been unprophan'd.
None ever had thought his comprehensive mind
To modern customs, modern rules confined;
Who for all ages writ, and all mankind.
P.

VER. 130. When first young Maro sung of Kings and Wars,
Ere warning Phoebus touched his trembling ears,


VER. 225. So pleased at first the towering Alps to try,
Filled with ideas of fair Italy,
The Traveller beholds with cheerful eyes
The lessening vales, and seems to tread the skies.


VER. 447. Between this and 448. The rhyming Clowns that gladded Shakespeare's
age,
No more with crambo entertain the stage.
Who now in Anagrams their Patron praise,
Or sing their Mistress in Acrostic lays?
Even pulpits pleased with merry puns of yore;
Now all are banished to the Hibernian shore!
Thus leaving what was natural and fit,
The current folly proved their ready wit;
And authors thought their reputation safe,
Which lived as long as fools were pleased to laugh.


VER. 624. Between this and 625. In vain you shrug and sweat, and strive to fly;
These know no Manners but of Poetry.
They Will stop a hungry Chaplain in his grace,
To treat of Unities of time and place.


Between 647 and 648. I found the following lines, since suppressed by the
author: That bold Columbus of the realms of wit,
Whose first discov'ry's not exceeded yet.
Led by the light of the Maeonian Star,
He steered securely, and discovered far.
He, when all Nature was subdued before,
Like his great Pupil, sighed, and longed for more:
Fancy's wild regions yet unvanquish'd lay,
A boundless empire, and that owned no sway.
Poets, etc.


Between 691 and 692. the author omitted these two, Vain Wits and Critics were
no more allowed,
When none but Saints had license to be proud.
P.

IMITATIONS.
VER. 346. While expletives their feeble aid do join,
And ten tow words often creep in one dull line.]
From Dryden. "He creeps along with ten little words in every line, and helps
out his numbers with [for] [to] and [unto] and all the pretty expletives he can
find, while the sense is left half tired behind it." Essay on Dram. Poetry.

VER. 366. Soft is the strain, etc.] Tum si laeta canunt, etc. Vida Poet. l.
iii. 403.

VER. 368. But when loud surges, etc.] Tum long sale saxa sonant, etc. Vida
ib. 388.

VER. 370. When Ajax strives, etc.] Atque ideo si quid geritur molimine magno,
etc. Vida ib. 417.

VER. 372. Not so, when swift Camilla, etc.] At mora si suerit damno, properare
jubebo, etc. Vida ib. 420.

VER. 708. As next in place to Mantua,] Alluding to Mantua vae miserae nimium
vicina Cremonae. Virg.

THE RAPE of the LOCK.
AN HEROI-COMICAL POEM.
Written in the Year MDCCXII.
TO Mrs. ARABELLA FERMOR.
MADAM,
IT will be in vain to deny that I have some regard for this piece, since I
dedicate it to You. Yet you may bear me witness, it was intended only to divert
a few young Ladies, who have good sense and good humor enough to laugh not
only at their sex's little unguarded follies, but at their own. But as it was
communicated with the air of a Secret, it soon found its way into the world. An
imperfect copy having been offered to a Bookseller, you had the goodnature for
my sake to consent to the publication of one more correct: This I was forced
to, before I had executed half my design, for the Machinery was entirely
wanting to complete it.

The Machinery, Madam, is a term invented by the Critics, to signify that part
which the Deities, Angels, or Demons are made to act in a Poem: For the
ancient Poets are in one respect like many modern Ladies: let an action be
never so trivial in itself, they always make it appear of the utmost
importance. These Machines I determined to raise on a very new and odd
foundation, the Rosicrucian doctrine of Spirits.

I know how disagreeable it is to make use of hard words before a Lady; but
it is so much the concern of a Poet to have his works understood, and
particularly by your Sex, that you must give me leave to explain two or three
difficult terms.

The Rosicrucians are a people I must bring you acquainted with. The best
account I know of them is in a French book called Le Comte de Gabalis, which
both in its title and size is so like a Novel, that many of the Fair Sex have
read it for one by mistake. According to these Gentlemen, the four Elements are
inhabited by Spirits, which they call Sylphs, Gnomes, Nymphs, and Salamanders.
The Gnomes or Demons of Earth delight in mischief; but the Sylphs, whose
habitation is in the Air, are the best-condition'd creatures imaginable. For
they say, any mortals may enjoy the most intimate familiarities with these
gentle Spirits, upon a condition very easy to all true Adepts, an inviolate
preservation of Chastity.

As to the following Canto's, all the passages of them are as fabulous, as the
Vision at the beginning, or the Transformation at the end; (except the loss of
your Hair, which I always mention with reverence.) The Human persons are as
fictitious as the Airy ones; and the character of Belinda, as it is now
managed, resembles you in nothing but in Beauty.

If this Poem had as many Graces as there are in your Person, or in your Mind,
yet I could never hope it should pass through the world half so Uncensur'd as You
have done. But let its fortune be what it will, mine is happy enough, to have
given me this occasion of assuring you that I am, with the truest esteem,

MADAM, Your most obedient, Humble Servant, A. POPE.

Plate III. Vol. I. facing p. 217.

Ant.y Walker Del: et Sculpt

This Lock the Muse shall consecrate to Fame,
And midst the Stars inscribe Belinda's Name.
Rape of the Lock.

THE RAPE of the LOCK.
It appears, by this Motto, that the following Poem was written or published at
the Lady's request. But there are some further circumstances not unworthy
relating. Mr. Caryl (a Gentleman who was Secretary to Queen Mary, wife of James
II. whose fortunes he followed into France, Author of the Comedy of Sir Solomon
Single, and of several translations in Dryden's Miscellanies) originally
proposed the subject to him in a view of putting an end, by this piece of
ridicule, to a quarrel that was risen between two noble Families, those of Lord
Petre and of Mrs. Fermor, on the trifling occasion of his having cut off a lock
of her hair. The Author sent it to the Lady, with whom he was acquainted; and
she took it so well as to give about copies of it. That first sketch, (we learn
from one of his Letters) was written in less than a fortnight, in 1711. in two
Canto's only, and it was so printed; first, in a Miscellany of Bern. Lintot's,
without the name of the Author. But it was received so well that he made it
more considerable the next year by the addition of the machinery of the Sylphs,
and extended it to five Canto's. We shall give the reader the pleasure of
seeing in what manner these additions were inserted, so as to seem not to be
added, but to grow out of the Poem. See Notes, Cant. I. 19, etc. P.

This insertion he always esteemed, and justly, the greatest effort of his
skill and art as a Poet.


Nolueram, Belinda, tuos violare capillos;
Sed juvat, hoc precibus me tribuisse tuis.
MART.
CANTO I.
WHAT dire offense from amorous causes springs,
What mighty contests rise from trivial things,
I sing -- This verse to CARYL, Muse! is due:
This, even Belinda may vouchsafe to view:
Slight is the subject, but not so the praise,
If She inspire, and He approve my lays.
Say what strange motive, Goddess! could compel
A well-bred Lord t'assault a gentle Belle?
Oh say what stranger cause, yet unexplor'd,
Could make a gentle Belle reject a Lord?

And in soft bosoms dwells such mighty Rage?

And ope'd those eyes that must eclipse the day:
Now lap-dogs give themselves the rousing shake,
And sleepless lovers, just at twelve, awake:
Thrice rung the bell, the slipper knocked the ground
And the pressed watch returned a silver sound.


'Twas He had summoned to her silent bed
The morning-dream that hovered over her head,
A Youth more glittering than a Birth-night Beau,
(That even in slumber caused her cheek to glow)
Seemed to her ear his winning lips to lay,
And thus in whispers said, or seemed to say.
Fairest of mortals, thou distinguished care
Of thousand bright Inbabitants of Air!
If ever one Vision touch thy infant thought,
Of all the Nurse and all the Priest have taught;
Of airy Elves by moonlight shadows seen,
The silver token, and the circled green,
Or virgins visited by Angel-pow'rs,
With golden crowns and wreaths of heavenly flowers;
Hear and believe! thy own importance know,
Nor bound thy narrow views to things below.
Some secret truths, from learned pride concealed,
To Maids alone and Children are revealed:
What though no credit doubting Wits may give?
The Fair and Innocent shall still believe.
Know then, unnumber'd Spirits round thee fly,
The light Militia of the lower sky:
These, though unseen, are ever on the wing,
Hang over the Box, and hover round the Ring.
Think what an equipage thou have in Air,
And view with scorn two Pages and a Chair.

And once enclosed in Woman's beauteous mould;
Thence, by a soft transition, we repair
From earthly Vehicles to these of air.
Think not, when Woman's transient breath is fled,
That all her vanities at once are dead;
Succeeding vanities she still regards,

Her joy in gilded Chariots, when alive,
And love of Ombre, after death survive.
For when the Fair in all their pride expire,
To their first Elements their Souls retire:
The Sprites of fiery Termagants in Flame
Mount up, and take a Salamander's name.
Soft yielding minds to Water glide away,
And sip, with Nymphs, their elemental Tea.
The graver Prude sinks downward to a Gnome,
In search of mischief still on Earth to roam.
The light Coquettes in Sylphs aloft repair,
And sport and flutter in the fields of Air.
Know farther yet; whoever fair and chaste

For Spirits, freed from mortal laws, with ease
Assume what sexes and what shapes they please.
What guards the purity of melting Maids,
In courtly balls, and midnight masquerades,
Safe from the treacherous friend, the daring spark,
The glance by day, the whisper in the dark,
When kind occasion prompts their warm desires,
When music softens, and when dancing fires?
It Is but their Sylph, the wise Celestials know,


For life predestined to the Gnomes embrace.
These swell their prospects and exalt their pride,
When offers are disdained, and love denied:
Then gay Ideas crowd the vacant brain,
While Peers, and Dukes, and all their sweeping train,
And Garters, Stars, and Coronets appear,
And in soft sounds, Your Grace salutes their ear.
It Is these that early taint the female soul,
Instruct the eyes of young Coquettes to roll,
Teach Infant-cheeks a bidden blush to know,
And little hearts to flutter at a Beau.
Often, when the world imagine women stray,
The Sylphs through mystic mazes guide their way,
Through all the giddy circle they pursue,
And old impertinence expel by new.
What tender maid but must a victim fall
To one man's treat, but for another's ball?
When Florio speaks what virgin could withstand,
If gentle Damon did not squeeze her hand?
With varying vanities, from every part,
They shift the moving Toyshop of their heart;

Beaux banish beaux, and coaches coaches drive.
This erring mortals Levity may call,
Oh blind to truth! the Sylphs contrive it all.
Of these am I, who thy protection claim,
A watchful sprite, and Ariel is my name.
Late, as I ranged the crystal wilds of air,

I saw, alas! some dread event impend,
Ere to the main this morning sun descend,
But heaven reveals not what, or how, or where:
Warned by the Sylph, oh pious maid, beware!

Beware of all, but most beware of Man!
He said; when Shock, who thought she slept too long,
Leaped up, and waked his mistress with his tongue.
'Twas then Belinda, if report say true,
Thy eyes first opened on a Billet-doux;
Wounds, Charms, and Ardors, were no sooner read,
But all the Vision vanished from thy head.

Each silver Vase in mystic order laid.
First, robbed in white, the Nymph intent adores,
With head uncovered, the Cosmetic powers.
A heavenly Image in the glass appears,
To that she bends, to that her eyes she rears;

Trembling, begins the sacred rites of Pride.
Unnumber'd treasures open at once, and here
The various offerings of the world appear;
From each she nicely culls with curious toil,
And decks the Goddess with the glittering spoil.
This casket India's glowing gems unlocks,
And all Arabia breathes from yonder box.
The Tortoise here and Elephant unite,
Transformed to combs, the speckled, and the white.
Here files of pins extend their shining rows,
Puffs, Powders, Patches, Bibles, Billet-doux.
Now awful Beauty puts on all its arms;
The fair each moment rises in her charms,
Repairs her smiles, awakens every grace,
And calls forth all the wonders of her face;
Sees by degrees a purer blush arise,
And keener lightnings quicken in her eyes.

These set the head, and those divide the hair,
Some fold the sleeve, whilst others plait the gown;
And Betty's praised for labors not her own.
VARIATIONS.
VER. 11, 12. It was in the first editions, And dwells such rage in softest
bosoms then,
And lodge such daring Souls in little Men?
P.

VER. 13, etc. Stood thus in the first Edition, Sol through white curtains did
his beams display,
And ope'd those eyes which brighter shone than they;
Shock just had given himself the rousing shake,
And Nymphs prepared their Chocolate to take;
Thrice the wrought slipper knocked against the ground,
And striking watches the tenth hour resound.
P.

NOTES.
VER. 19. Belinda still, etc.] All the verses from hence to the end of this
Canto were added afterward.

VER. 20. Her Guardian Sylph] When Mr. Pope had projected to give this Poem its
present form, he was obliged to find it with its Machinery. For as the subject
of the Epic Poem consists of two parts, the metaphysical and the civil; so this
mock epic, which is of the satiric kind, and receives its grace from a
ludicrous imitation of the other's pomp and solemnity, was to have the same
division of the subject. And, as the civil part is intentionally debased by the
choice of an insignificant action: so should the metaphysical, by the use of
some very extravagant system. A rule, which though neither Boileau nor Garth have
been careful enough to attend to, our Author's good sense would not suffer him
to overlook. And that sort of Machinery which his judgment taught him was only
fit for his use, his admirable invention supplied. There was but one System in
all nature which was to his purpose, the Rosicrucian Philosophy; and this, by
the well directed effort of his imagination, he presently seized upon. The
fanatic Alchemists, in their search after the great secret, had invented a
means altogether proportioned to their end. It was a kind of
Theological-Philosophy, made up of almost equal mixtures of Pagan Platonism,
Christian Quietism, and the Jewish Cabbala; a composition enough to fright
Reason from human commerce. This general system, he tells us, he took as he
found it in a little French tract called, Le Comte de Gabalis. This book is
written in Dialogue, and is a delicate and very ingenious piece of raillery of
the Abbe Villiers, upon that invisible sect, of which the stories that went
about at that time, made a great deal of noise at Paris. But, as in this
satirical Dialogue, Mr. P. found several whimsies, of a very high mysterious
kind, told of the nature of these elementary beings, which were very unfit to
come into the machinery of such a sort of poem, he has with great judgment
omitted them; and in their stead, made use of the Legendary stories of Guardian
Angels, and the Nursery Tales of the Fairies; which he has artfully
accommodated to the rest of the Rosicrucian System. And to this, (unless we
will be so uncharitable to believe he intended to give a needless scandal) we
must suppose he referred, in these two lines, If ever one Vision touched thy
infant thought,
Of all the nurse, and all the priest have taught.
Thus, by the most beautiful invention imaginable, he has contrived, that, as
in the serious Epic. the popular belief supports the Machinery; so, in his mock
Epic, the Machinery should be contrived to dismount philosophic pride and
arrogance.

VER. 47. As now your own, etc] He here forsakes the Rosicrucian system; which,
in this part, is too extravagant even for Poetry; and gives a beautiful fiction
of his own, on the Platonic Theology of the continuance of the passions in
another state, when the mind, before its leaving this, has not been purged and
purified by philosophy; which furnishes an occasion for much useful satire.

VER. 68. is by some Sylph embrac'd] Here again the Author resumes a tenet
peculiar to the Rosicrucian system. But the principle, on which it is founded,
was by no means fit to be employed in such a sort of poem.

VER. 78. Though Honor is the word with Men below.] Parody of Homer.

VER. 79. too conscious of their face,] i. e. too sensible of their beauty.

VER. 108. In the clear Mirror] The Language of the Platonists, the writers of
the intelligible world of Spirits, etc. P.

VER. 113. This to disclose etc.] There is much pleasantry in the conduct of
this scene. The Rosicrucian Doctrine was delivered only to Adepts, with the
utmost caution, and under the most solemn seal of secrecy. It is here
communicated to a Woman, and in that way of conveyance a Woman most delights to
make the subject of her conversation, that is to say, her Dreams.

VER. 121. And now, unveiled, etc.] The translation of these verses, containing
the description of the toilette, by our Author's friend Dr. Parnelle, deserve
for their humor, to be here inserted. P. Et nunc dilectum speculum, pro more
retectum,
Emicat in mensa, quae splendet pyxide densa:
Tum primum lympha, se purgat candida Nympha,
Jamque sine menda, coelestis imago videnda,
Nuda caput, bellos retinet, regit, implet ocellos.
Haec stupet explorans, ceu cultus numen adorans.
Inferior claram Pythonissa apparet ad aram,
Fertque tibi caute, dicatque Superbia! laute,
Dona venusta; oris, quae cunctis, plena laboris,
Excerpta explorat, dominamque deamque decorat.
Pyxide devota, se pandit hic India tota,
Et tota ex ista transpirat Arabia cista;
Testudo hic flectit, dum se mea Lesbia pectit;
Atque elephas lent, te pectit Lesbia dente;
Hunc maculis noris, nivei jacet ille coloris.
Hic jacet et munde, mundus muliebris abunde;
Spinula resplendens aeris longo ordine pendens,
Pulvis suavis odore, et epistola suavis amore.
Induit arma ergo Veneris pulcherrima virgo;
Pulchrior in praesens tempus de tempore crescens;
Jam reparat risus, jam surgit gratia visus,
Jam promit cultu, mirac'la latentia vultu;
Pigmina jam miscet, quo plus sua Purpura gliscet,
Et geminans bellis splendet mage fulgor ocellis.
Stant Lemures muti, Nymphae intentique saluti,
Hic figit Zonam, capiti locat ille Coronam,
Haec manicis formam, plicis dat et altera normam;
Et tibi vel Betty, tibi vel nitidissima Letty!
Gloria factorum temere conceditur horum.


VER. 127, et seq. The inferior Priestess,] There is a small inaccuracy in
these lines. He first makes his Heroine the chief Priestess, and then the
Goddess herself.

VER. 145. The busy Sylphs etc.] Ancient Traditions of the Rabbi's relate, that
several of the fallen Angels became amorous of Women, and particularize some;
among the rest Asael, who lay with Naamah, the wife of Noah, or of Ham; and who
continuing impenitent, still presides over the Women's Toilets. Bereshi Rabbi
in Genes. vi. 2. P.

IMITATIONS.
VER. 54, 55. Quae gratia currum
Armorumque fuit vivis, quae cura nitentes
Pascere equos, eadem sequitur tellure repostos.
Virg. Aen. vi. P.

VER. 101. Jam clypeus clypeis, umbone repellitur umbo,
Ense minax ensis, pede pes et cuspide cuspis, etc.
Stat.

THE RAPE of the LOCK.
CANTO II.
NOT with more glories, in the etherial plain,
The Sun first rises over the purpled main,
Than, issuing forth, the rival of his beams

Fair Nymphs, and well-drest Youths around her shone,
But every eye was fixed on her alone.
On her white breast a sparkling Cross she wore,
Which Jews might kiss, and Infidels adore.
Her lively looks a sprightly mind disclose,
Quick as her eyes, and as unfix'd as those:
Favors to none, to all she smiles extends;
Often she rejects, but never once offends.
Bright as the sun, her eyes the gazers strike,
And, like the sun, they shine on all alike.
Yet graceful ease, and sweetness void of pride
Might hide her faults, if Belles had faults to hide:
If to her share some female errors fall,
Look on her face, and you will forget 'em all.
This Nymph, to the destruction of mankind,
Nourished two Locks, which graceful hung behind
In equal curls, and well conspired to deck
With shining ringlets the smooth ivory neck.
Love in these labyrinths his slaves detains,
And mighty hearts are held in slender chains.

Slight lines of hair surprise the finny prey,
Fair tresses man's imperial race ensnare,

The adventurous Baron the bright locks admired;
He saw, he wished, and to the prize aspired.
Resolved to win, he meditates the way,
By force to ravish, or by fraud betray;
For when success a Lover's toil attends,
Few ask, if fraud or force attained his ends.
For this, ere Phoebus rose, he had implored
Propitions heaven, and every power adored,
But chiefly Love -- to Love an Altar built,
Of twelve vast French Romances, neatly gilt.
There lay three garters, half a pair of gloves;
And all the trophies of his former loves;
With tender Billet-doux he lights the pyre,
And breathes three amorous sighs to raise the fire.
Then prostrate falls, and begs with ardent eyes
Soon to obtain, and long possess the prize:

The rest, the winds dispersed in empty air.
But now secure the painted vessel glides,
The sunbeams trembling on the floating tides:
While melting music steals upon the sky,
And softened sounds along the waters die;
Smooth flow the waves, the Zephyrs gently play,
Belinda smiled, and all the world was gay.
All but the Sylph -- with careful thoughts oppressed,
The impending woe sat heavy on his breast.
He summons strait his Denizens of air;
The lucid squadrons round the sails repair;
Soft over the shrouds aerial whispers breathe,
That seemed but Zephyrs to the train beneath.
Some to the sun their insect-wings unfold,
Waft on the breeze, or sink in clouds of gold;
Transparent forms, too fine for mortal sight,
Their fluid bodies half dissolved in light.
Loose to the wind their airy garments flew,
Thin glittering textures of the filmy dew,
Dipped in the richest tincture of the skies,
Where light disports in ever-mingling dies,
While every beam new transient colors flings,
Colors that change whenever they wave their wings.
Amid the circle, on the gilded mast,
Superior by the head, was Ariel placed;
His purple pinions opening to the sun,
He raised his azure wand, and thus begun.
Ye Sylphs and Sylphids, to your chief give ear,
Fays, Fairies, Genii, Elves, and Demons hear!
Ye know the spheres and various tasks assigned
By laws eternal to the aerial kind.
Some in the fields of purest Ether play,
And bask and whiten in the blaze of day.
Some guide the course of wandering orbs on high,
Or roll the planets through the boundless sky.
Some less refined, beneath the moon's pale light
Pursue the stars that shoot athwart the night,
Or suck the mists in grosser air below,
Or dip their pinions in the painted bow,
Or brew fierce tempests on the wintry main,
Or over the glebe distill the kindly rain.
Others on earth over human race preside,
Watch all their ways, and all their actions guide:
Of these the chief the care of Nations own,

Our humbler province is to tend the Fair,
Not a less pleasing, though less glorious care;
To save the powder from too rude a gale,
Nor let the imprisoned essences exhale;
To draw fresh colors from the vernal flowers;
To steal from rainbows ever they drop in showers
A brighter wash; to curl their waving hairs,
Assist their blushes, and inspire their airs;
Nay often, in dreams, invention we bestow,
To change a Flounce, or add a Furbelow.
This day, black Omens threat the brightest Fair
That ever deserved a watchful spirit's care;
Some dire disaster, or by force, or slight;
But what, or where, the fates have wrapped in night.

Or some frail China jar receive a flaw;
Or stain her honor, or her new brocade;
Forget her prayers, or miss a masquerade;
Or lose her heart, or necklace, at a ball;
Or whether Heaven has doomed that Shock must fall.
Haste then, ye spirits! to your charge repair:
The fluttering fan be Zephyretta's care;
The drops to thee, Brillante, we consign;
And, Momentilla, let the watch be thine;
Do thou, Crispissa, tend her favorite Lock;
Ariel himself shall be the guard of Shock.
To fifty chosen Sylphs, of special note,
We trust the important charge, the Petticoat:

Though stiff with hoops, and armed with ribs of whale;

And guard the wide circumference around.
Whatever spirit, careless of his charge,
His post neglects, or leaves the fair at large,
Shall feel sharp vengeance soon overtake his sins,
Be stopped in vials, or transfixed with pins;
Or plunged in lakes of bitter washes lie,
Or wedged whole ages in a bodkin's eye:
Gums and Pomatums shall his flight restrain,
While clogged he beats his silken wings in vain;
Or Alum styptics with contracting power
Shrink his thin essence like a rivel'd flower:
Or, as Ixion fixed, the wretch shall feel
The giddy motion of the whirling Mill,
In fumes of burning Chocolate shall glow,
And tremble at the sea that froths below!
He spoke; the spirits from the sails descend;
Some, orb in orb, around the nymph extend;
Some third the mazy ringlets of her hair;
Some hang upon the pendants of her ear;
With beating hearts the dire event they wait,
Anxious, and trembling for the birth of Fate.
VARIATIONS.
VER. 4. Launched on the bosom] From hence the poem continues, in the first
Edition, to 46. The rest the winds dispersed in empty air;
all after, to the end of this Canto, being additional. P.

IMITATIONS.
VER. 25. With hairy springes] In allusion to Anacreon's manner.

VER. 28. with a single hair.] In allusion to those lines of Hudibras, applied
to the same purpose, And though it be a two-soot Trout,
It Is with a single hair pulled out.


VER. 45. The powers gave ear,] Virg. Aen. xi. P.

VER. 121. about the silver bound] In allusion to the shield of Achilles, Thus
the broad shield complete the Artist crowned,
With his last hand, and poured the Ocean round:
In living Silver seemed the waves to roll,
And beat the Buckler's verge, and bound the whole.


VER. 119. -- clypei dominus septemplicis Ajax. Ovid.

NOTES.
VER. 90. And guard with Arms] The Poet was too judicious to desire this should
be understood as a compliment. He intended it for a mere piece of raillery;
such as he more openly pursues on another occasion. Where Is now the Star which
lighted Charles to rise?
With that which followed Julius to the skies.
Angels, that watched the Royal Oak so well,
How chanced you slept when luckless Sarrel fell?


VER. 105. Whether the nymph etc.] The disaster, which makes the subject of
this poem, being a trifle, taken seriously; it naturally led the Poet into this
fine satire on the female estimate of human mischances.

THE RAPE of the LOCK.
CANTO III.

Where Thames with pride surveys his rising towers,
There stands a structure of majestic frame,
Which from the neighboring Hampton takes its name.
Here Britain's statesmen often the fall foredoom
Of foreign Tyrants, and of Nymphs at home;
Here thou, great ANNA! whom three realms obey,
Do sometimes counsel take -- and sometimes Tea.
Hither the heroes and the nymphs resort,
To taste awhile the pleasures of a Court;

Who gave the ball, or paid the visit last;
One speaks the glory of the British Queen,
And one describes a charming Indian screen;
A third interprets motions, looks, and eyes;
At every word a reputation dies.
Snuff, or the fan, supply each pause of chat,
With singing, laughing, ogling, and all that.
Mean while, declining from the noon of day,
The sun obliquely shoots his burning ray;
The hungry Judges soon the sentence sign,
And wretches hang that jurymen may dine;
The merchant from the Exchange returns in peace,

Belinda now, whom thirst of fame invites,
Burns to encounter two adven'trous Knights,
At Ombre singly to decide their doom;
And swells her breast with conquests yet to come.
Strait the three bands prepare in arms to join,
Each band the number of the sacred nine.
Soon as she spreads her hand, the aerial guard
Descend, and sit on each important card:
First Ariel perched upon a Matadore,
Then each, according to the rank they bore;
For Sylphs, yet mindful of their ancient race,
Are, as when women, wondrous fond of place.
Behold, four Kings in majesty revered,
With hoary whiskers and a forky beard;
And four fair Queens whose hands sustain a flower,
The expressive emblem of their softer power;
Four Knaves in garbs succinct, a trusty band,
Caps on their heads, and halberts in their hand;
And part colored troops, a shining train,
Draw forth to combat on the velvet plain.
The skilful Nymph reviews her force with care:
Let Spades be trumps! she said, and trumps they were.

In snow like leaders of the swarthy Moors.
Spadillio first, unconquerable Lord!
Led off two captive trumps, and swept the board.
As many more Manillio forced to yield,
And marched a victor from the verdant field.
Him Basto followed, but his fate more hard
Gained but one trump and one Plebeian card.
With his broad sabre next, a chief in years,
The hoary Majesty of Spades appears,
Puts forth one manly leg, to sight revealed,
The rest, his many-colour'd robe concealed.
The rebel Knave, who dares his prince engage,
Proves the just victim of his royal rage.
Even mighty Pam, that Kings and Queens o'erthrew
And mowed down armies in the fights of Lu,
Sad chance of war! now destitute of aid,
Falls undistinguished by the victor Spade!
Thus far both armies to Belinda yield;
Now to the Baron fate inclines the field.
His warlike Amazon her host invades,
The imperial consort of the crown of Spades.
The Club's black Tyrant first her victim died,
Spite of his haughty mien, and barbarous pride:
What boots the regal circle on his head,
His giant limbs, in state unwieldy spread;
That long behind he trails his pompous robe,
And, of all monarchs, only grasps the globe?
The Baron now his Diamonds pours apace;
The embroidered King who shows but half his face,
And his refulgent Queen, with powers combined
Of broken troops an easy conquest find.
Clubs, Diamonds, Hearts, in wild disorder seen,
With throngs promiscuous strew the level green.
Thus when dispersed a routed army runs,
Of Asia's troops, and Afric's sable sons,
With like confusion different nations fly,
Of various habit, and of various dye,
The pierced battalions dis-united fall,
In heaps on heaps; one fate o'erwhelms them all.
The Knave of Diamonds tries his wily arts,
And wins (oh shameful chance!) the Queen of Hearts.
At this, the blood the virgin's cheek forsook,
A livid paleness spread's over all her look;
She sees, and trembles at the approaching ill,
Just in the jaws of ruin, and Codille.
And now, (as often in some distempered State)
On one nice Trick depends the general fate.
An Ace of Hearts steps forth: The King unseen
Lurked in her hand, and mourned his captive Queen:
He springs to vengeance with an eager pace,
And falls like thunder on the prostrate Ace.
The nymph exulting fills with shouts the sky;
The walls, the woods, and long canals reply.

Too soon dejected, and too soon elate.
Sudden, these honors shall be snatched away,
And cursed for ever this victorious day.

The berries crackle, and the mill turns round;
On shining Altars of Japan they raise
The silver lamp; the fiery spirits blaze:
From silver spouts the grateful liquors glide,
While China's earth receives the smoking tide:
At once they gratify their scent and taste,
And frequent cups prolong the rich repaste.
Strait hover round the Fair her airy band;
Some, as she sipp'd, the fuming liquor fanned,
Some over her lap their careful plumes displayed,
Trembling, and conscious of the rich brocade.
Coffee, (which makes the politician wise,
And see through all things with his half-shut eyes)
Sent up in vapors to the Baron's brain
New stratagems, the radiant Lock to gain.
Ah cease, rash youth! desist ere it is too late,

Changed to a bird, and sent to flit in air,
She dearly pays for Nisus' injured hair!
But when to mischief mortals bend their will,
How soon they find fit instruments of ill?
Just then, Clarissa drew with tempting grace
A two-edged weapon from her shining case:
So Ladies in Romance assist their Knight,
Present the spear, and arm him for the fight.
He takes the gift with reverence, and extends
The little engine on his finger's ends;
This just behind Belinda's neck he spread,

Swift to the Lock a thousand Sprites repair,
A thousand wings, by turns, blow back the hair;
And thrice they twitch'd the diamond in her ear;
Thrice she looked back, and thrice the foe drew near.
Just in that instant, anxious Ariel sought
The close recesses of the Virgin's thought;
As on the nosegay in her breast reclined,
He watched the Ideas rising in her mind,
Sudden he viewed, in spite of all her art,
An earthly Lover lurking at her heart.
Amazed, confused, he found his power expired,
Resigned to fate, and with a sigh retired.
The Peer now spreads the glittering Forfex wide,
TO enclose the Lock; now joins it, to divide.
Even then, before the fatal engine closed,
A wretched Sylph too fondly interposed;
Fate urged the sheers, and cut the Sylph in twain,

The meeting points the sacred hair dissever
From the fair head, for ever, and for ever!
Then flashed the living lightning from her eyes,
And screams of horror rend the affrighted skies.
Not louder shrieks to pitying heaven are cast,
When husbands, or when lapdogs breathe their last;
Or when rich China vessels fallen from high,
In glittering dust, and painted fragments lie!
Let wreaths of triumph now my temples twine,
(The Victor cried) the glorious Prize is mine!

Or in a coach and six the the British Fair,

Or the small pillow grace a Lady's bed,
While visits shall be paid on solemn days,
When numerous wax-lights in bright order blaze,
While nymphs take treats, or assignations give,
So long my honor, name, and praise shall live!
What Time would spare, from Steel receives its date,
And monuments, like men, submit to fate!
Steel could the labor of the Gods destroy,
And strike to dust the imperial towers of Troy;
Steel could the works of mortal pride confound,
And hew triumphal arches to the ground.

The conquering force of unresisted steel?
VARIATIONS.
VER. 1. Close by those meads,] The first Edition continues from this line to
24. of this Canto. P.

VER. 11, 12. Originally in the first Edition, In various talk the cheerful
hours they past,
Of, who was bit, or who capotted last.
P.

VER. 24. And the long labors of the Toilet cease] All that follows of the
game at Ombre, was added since the first Edition, till 105. which connected
thus, Sudden the board with cups and spoons is crowned. P.

VER. 105. Sudden the board, etc.] From hence, the first Edition continues to
134. P.

VER. 134. In the first Edition it was thus, As over the fragrant stream she
bends her head.
First he expands the glittering forfex wide
TO enclose the Lock; then joins it to divide:
The meeting points the sacred hair dissever,
From the fair head, for ever and for ever. 154.
All that is between was added afterward.
P.

NOTES.
VER. 47. Now move to war etc.] The whole idea of this description of a game at
Ombre, is taken from Vida's description of a game at Chess, in his poem intit.
Scacchia Ludus.

VER. 122. and think of Scylla's Fate!] Vide Ovid Metam. viii. P.

VER. 152. But airy substance] See Milton, lib. vi. of Satan cut asunder by the
Angel Michael. P.

VER. 165. Atalantis] A famous book written about that time by a woman: full of
Court, and Party-scandal; and in a loose effeminacy of style and sentiment,
which well suited the debauched taste of the better Vulgar.

IMITATIONS.
VER. 101. Nescia men's hominum fati sortisque futurae,
Et servare modum, rebus sublata secundis!
Turno tempus erit, magno cum optaverit emptum
Intactum Pallanta; et cum spolia ista diemque
Oderit
Virg.

VER. 163, 170. Dum juga montis aper, fluvios dum piscis amabit,
Semper honos, nomenque tuum laudesque manebunt.
Virg.

VER. 177. Ille quoque eversus mons est, etc.
Quid faciant crines, cum ferro talia cedant?
Catull. de com. Berenices.

THE RAPE of the LOCK.
CANTO IV.

And secret passions labored in her breast.
Not youthful kings in battle seized alive,
Not scornful virgins who their charms survive,
Not ardent lovers robbed of all their bliss,
Not ancient ladies when refused a kiss,
Not tyrants fierce that unrepenting die,
Not Cynthia when her manteau's pinned awry,
Ever felt such rage, resentment, and despair,
As thou, sad Virgin! for thy ravished Hair.

And Ariel weeping from Belinda flew,
Umbriel, a dusky, melancholy sprite,
As ever sullied the fair face of light,
Down to the central earth, his proper scene,
Repaired to search the gloomy Cave of Spleen.
Swift on his sooty pinions flits the Gnome,
And in a vapor reached the dismal dome.
No cheerful breeze this sullen region knows,
The dreaded East is all the wind that blows.
Here in a grotto, sheltered close from air,
And screen'd in shades from day's detested glare,
She sighs for ever on her pensive bed,
Pain at her side, and Megrim at her head.
Two handmaids wait the throne: alike in place,
But differing far in figure and in face.
Here stood Ill Nature like an ancient maid,
Her wrinkled form in black and white arrayed;
With store of prayers, for mornings, nights, and noons,
Her hand is filled; her bosom with lampoons.
There Affectation, with a sickly mien,
Shows in her cheek the roses of eighteen,
Practiced to lisp, and hang the head aside,
Faints into airs, and languishes with pride,
On the rich quilt sinks with becoming woe,
Wrapped in a gown, for sickness, and for show.
The fair-ones feel such maladies as these,
When each new night-dress gives a new disease.
A constant Vapor over the palace flies;
Strange phantoms rising as the mists arise;

Or bright, as visions of expiring maids.
Now glaring fiends, and snakes on rolling spires,
Pale specter, gaping tombs, and purple fires:
Now lakes of liquid gold, Elysian scenes,
And crystal domes, and Angels in machines.
Unnumber'd throngs on every side are seen,
Of bodies changed to various forms by Spleen.
Here living Tea-pots stand, one arm held out,
One bent; the handle this, and that the spout:


Men prove with child, as powerful fancy works,
And maids turned bottles, call aloud for corks.
Safe past the Gnome through this fantastic band,
A branch of healing Spleenwort in his hand.
Then thus addressed the power -- Hail wayward Queen!
Who rule the sex to fifty from fifteen:
Parent of vapors and of female wit,
Who give the hysteric, or poetic fit,
On various tempers act by various ways,
Make some take physic, others scribble plays;
Who cause the proud their visits to delay,
And send the godly in a pet to pray.
A nymph there is, that all thy power disdains,
And thousands more in equal mirth maintains.
But oh! if ever thy Gnome could spoil a grace,
Or raise a pimple on a beauteous face,
Like Citron-waters matrons cheeks inflame,
Or change complexions at a losing game;
If ever with airy horns I planted heads,
Or rumpled petticoats, or tumbled beds,
Or caused suspicion when no soul was rude,
Or discomposed the head-dress of a Prude,
Or ever to costive lap-dog gave disease,
Which not the tears of brightest eyes could ease:
Hear me, and touch Belinda with chagrin,
That single act gives half the world the spleen.
The Goddess with a discontented air
Seems to reject him, though she grants his prayer.
A wondrous Bag with both her hands she binds,
Like that where once Ulysses held the winds;
There she collects the force of female lungs,
Sighs, sobs, and passions, and the war of tongues.
A Vial next she fills with fainting fears,
Soft sorrows, melting griefs, and flowing tears.
The Gnome rejoicing bears her gifts away,
Spreads his black wings, and slowly mounts to day.
Sunk in Thalestris' arms the nymph he found,
Her eyes dejected and her hair unbound.
Full over their heads the swelling bag he rent,
And all the Furies issued at the vent.
Belinda burns with more than mortal ire,
And fierce Thalestris fans the rising fire.
O wretched maid! she spread her hands, and cried,
(While Hampton's echoes, wretched maid! replied)
Was it for this you took such constant care
The bodkin, comb, and essence to prepare?
For this your locks in paper durance bound,
For this with torturing irons wreathed around?
For this with fillets strained your tender head,
And bravely bore the double loads of lead?
Gods! shall the ravisher display your hair,
While the Fops envy, and the Ladies stare!
Honor sorbid! at whose unrivaled shrine
Ease, pleasure, virtue, all our sex resign.
Methinks already I your tears survey,
Already hear the horrid things they say,
Already see you a degraded toast,
And all your honor in a whisper lost!
How shall I, then, your helpless fame defend?
'Twill then be infamy to seem your friend!
And shall this prize, the inestimable prize,
Exposed through crystal to the gazing eyes,
And heightened by the diamond's circling rays,
On that rapacious hand for ever blaze?
Sooner shall grass in Hyde-park Circus grow,
And wits take lodgings in the sound of Bow;
Sooner let earth, air, sea, to Chaos fall,
Men, monkeys, lap-dogs, parrots, perish all!

And bids her Beau demand the precious hairs:
(Sir Plume of amber snuff box justly vain,
And the nice conduct of a clouded cane)
With earnest eyes, and round unthinking face,
He first the snuff box opened, then the case,
And thus broke out -- "My Lord, why, what the devil?
" Z^ds! damn the lock! before Gad, you must be civil!
" Plague on it! it is past a jest -- nay prithee, pox!
" Give her the hair" -- he spoke, and rapp'd his box.
It grieves me much (replied the Peer again)
Who speaks so well should ever speak in vain.

(Which never more shall join its parted hair;
Which never more its honors shall renew,
Clipped from the lovely head where late it grew)
That while my nostrils draw the vital air,
This hand, which won it, shall for ever wear.
He spoke, and speaking, in proud triumph spread
The long-contended honors of her head.

He breaks the Vial whence the sorrows flow.
Then see! the nymph in beauteous grief appears,
Her eyes half-languishing, half-drown'd in tears;
On her heaved bosom hung her drooping head,
Which, with a sigh, she raised; and thus she said.
For ever cursed be this detested day,
Which snatched my best, my favorite curl away!
Happy! ah ten times happy had I been,
If Hampton Court these eyes had never seen!
Yet am not I the first mistaken maid.
By love of Courts to numerous ills betrayed.
Oh had I rather un-admir'd remained
In some lone isle, or distant Northern land;
Where the gilt Chariot never marks the way,
Where none learn Ombre, none ever taste Bohea!
There kept my charms concealed from mortal eye,
Like roses, that in deserts bloom and die.
What moved my mind with youthful Lords to roam?
O had I stayed, and said my prayers at home!
'Twas this, the morning omens seemed to tell,
Thrice from my trembling hand the patch-box fell;
The tottering China shook without a wind,
Nay Poll sat mute, and Shock was most unkind!
A Sylph too warned me of the threats of fate,
In mystic visions, now believed too late!
See the poor remnants of these slighted hairs!
My hands shall rend what even thy rapine spares:
These in two sable ringlets taught to break,
Once gave new beauties to the snowy neck;
The sister-lock now sits uncouth, alone,
And in its fellow's fate foresees its own;
Uncurl'd it hangs, the fatal sheers demands,
And tempts once more, thy sacrilegious hands.
Oh had thou, cruel! been content to seize
Hairs less in sight, or any hairs but these!
VARIATIONS.
VER. 11. For that sad moment, etc.] All the lines from hence to the 94th verse
that describe the house of Spleen are not in the first Edition; instead of them
followed only these, While her racked Soul repose and peace requires,
The fierce Thalestris fans the rising fires.
And continued at the 94th Verse of this Canto. P.

IMITATIONS.
VER. 1. Virg. Aen. iv. At regina gravi, etc. P.

VER. 51. Homer's Tripod walks;] See Hom. Iliad xviii. of Vulcan's walking
Tripods.

VER. 52. and there a Goose-pye talks.] Alludes to a real sact, a Lady of
distinction imagined herself in this condition. P.

VER. 133. But by this Lock,] In allusion to Achilles's oath in Homer, Il. i. P.

NOTES.
VER. 41. Dreadful as hermit's dreams in haunted shades,
Or bright as visions of expiring Maids.]
The poet by this comparison would insinuate, that the temptations of the
mortified recluses in the Church of Rome, and the extatic visions of their
female saints were as much the effects of hypocondriac disorders, the Spleen,
or, what was then the fashionable word, the Vapors, as any of the imaginary
transformations he speaks of afterward.

VER. 121. Sir Plume repairs,] Sir George Brown. He was the only one of the
Party who took the thing seriously. He was angry, that the Poet should make him
talk nothing but nonsense; and, in truth, one could not well blame him.

VER. 141. But Umbriel, hateful Gnome! forbears not so;
He breaks the Vial whence the sorrows flow.]
These two lines are additional; and assign the cause of the different
operation on the Passions of the two Ladies. The poem went on before without
that distinction, as without any Machinery to the end of the Canto. P.

THE RAPE of the LOCK.
CANTO V.
SHE said: the pitying audience melt in tears.
But Fate and Jove had stopped the Baron's ears.
In vain Thalestris with reproach assails,
For who can move when fair Belinda fails?
Not half so fixed the Trojan could remain,
While Anna begged and Dido raged in vain.

Silence ensued, and thus the nymph began.

The wise man's passion, and the vain man's toast?
Why decked with all that land and sea afford,
Why Angels called, and Angel-like adored?
Why round our coaches crowd the white-glov'd Beaux,
Why bows the side-box from its inmost rows?
How vain are all these glories, all our pains,
Unless good sense preserve what beauty gains:
That men may say, when we the front-box grace,
Behold the first in virtue as in face!
Oh! if to dance all night, and dress all day,
Charmed the smallpox, or chased old age away;
Who would not scorn what housewife's cares produce,
Or who would learn one earthly thing of use?
To patch, nay ogle, might become a Saint,
Nor could it sure be such a sin to paint.
But since, alas! frail beauty must decay,
Curled or uncurl'd, since Locks will turn to gray;
Since painted, or not painted, all shall fade,
And she who scorns a man, must die a maid;
What then remains but well our power to use,
And keep good humor still whatever we lose?
And trust me, dear! good humor can prevail,
When airs, and flights, and screams, and scolding fail.
Beauties in vain their pretty eyes may roll;
Charms strike the sight, but merit wins the soul.

Belinda frowned, Thalestris called her Prude.

And swift as lightning to the combat flies.
All side in parties, and begin the attack;
Fans clap, silks russle, and tough whalebones crack;
Heroes and Heroines shouts confusedly rise,
And base, and treble voices strike the skies.
No common weapons in their hands are found,
Like Gods they fight, nor dread a mortal wound.

And heavenly breasts with human passions rage;
Against Pallas, Mars; Latona, Hermes arms;
And all Olympus rings with loud alarms:
Jove's thunder roars, heaven trembles all around,
Blue Neptune storms, the bellowing deeps resound:
Earth shakes her nodding towr's, the ground gives way,
And the pale ghosts start at the flash of day!

Clapped his glad wings, and sat to view the fight:
Prop'd on their bodkin spears, the Sprites survey
The growing combat, or assist the fray.
While through the press enraged Thalestris flies,
And scatters death around from both her eyes,
A Beau and Witling perished in the throng,
One died in metaphor, and one in song.
" O cruel nymph! a living death I bear,
Cried Dapperwit, and sunk beside his chair.
A mournful glance Sir Fopling upwards cast,


The expiring Swan, and as he sings he dies.
When bold Sir Plume had drawn Clarissa down,
Chloe stepped in, and killed him with a frown;
She smiled to see the doughty hero slain,
But, at her smile, the Beau revived again.

Weighs the Men's wits against the Lady's hair;
The doubtful beam long nods from side to side;
At length the wits mount up, the hairs subside.
See fierce Belinda on the Baron flies,
With more than usual lightning in her eyes:
Nor feared the Chief the unequal fight to try,
Who sought no more than on his foe to die.
But this bold Lord with manly strength endu'd,
She with one finger and a thumb subdued:
Just where the breath of life his nostrils drew,
A charge of Snuff the wily virgin threw;

The pungent grains of titillating dust.
Sudden, with starting tears each eye overflows,
And the high dome re-echoes to his nose.
Now meet thy fate, incensed Belinda cried,
And drew a deadly bodkin from her side.

Her great great grandsire wore about his neck,
In three seal-rings; which after, melted down,
Formed a vast buckle for his widow's gown:
Her infant grandame's whistle next it grew,
The bells she jingled, and the whistle blew;
Then in a bodkin graced her mother's hairs,
Which long she wore, and now Belinda wears.)
Boast not my fall (he cried) insulting foe!
Thou by some other shall be laid as low.
Nor think, to die dejects my lofty mind:
All that I dread is leaving you behind!
Rather than so, ah let me still survive,
And burn in Cupid's flames, -- but burn alive.
Restore the Lock! she cries; and all around
Restore the Lock! the vaulted roofs rebound.
Not fierce Othello in so loud a strain
Roared for the handkerchief that caused his pain.
But see how often ambitious aims are crossed,
And chiefs contend 'till all the prize is lost!
The Lock, obtained with guilt, and kept with pain,
In every place is sought, but sought in vain:
With such a prize no mortal must be blessed,
So heaven decrees! with heaven who can contest?
Some thought it mounted to the Lunar sphere,

There Hero's wits are kept in ponderous vases,
And Beau's in snuff-boxes and tweezer-cases.
There broken vows, and deathbed alms are found,
And lovers hearts with ends of ribband bound,
The courtier's promises, and sick man's prayers,
The smiles of harlots, and the tears of heirs,
Cages for gnats, and chains to yoke a flea,
Dried butterflies, and tomes of casuistry.
But trust the Muse -- she saw it upward rise,
Though marked by none but quick, poetic eyes:
(So Rome's great founder to the heavens withdrew,
To Proculus alone confessed in view)
A sudden Star, it shot through liquid air,

Not Berenice's Locks first rose so bright,
The heavens bespangling with disheveled light.

And pleased pursue its progress through the skies.
This the Beau monde shall from the Mall survey,
And hail with music its propitious ray.
This the blessed Lover shall for Venus take,
And send up vows from Rosamonda's lake.

When next he looks through Galilaeo's eyes;
And hence the egregious wizard shall foredoom
The fate of Louis, and the fall of Rome.
Then cease, bright Nymph! to mourn thy ravished hair,
Which adds new glory to the shining sphere!
Not all the tresses that fair head can boast,
Shall draw such envy as the Lock you lost.
For, after all the murders of your eye,
When, after millions slain, yourself shall die;
When those fair suns shall set, as set they must,
And all those tresses shall be laid in dust,
This Lock, the Muse shall consecrate to fame,
And 'midst the stars inscribe Belinda's name.
VARIATIONS.
VER. 7. Then grave Clarissa, etc.] A new Character introduced in the
subsequent Editions, to open more clearly the MORAL of the Poem, in a parody of
the speech of Sarpedon to Glaucus in Homer. P.

VER. 37. To arms, to arms!] From hence the first Edition goes on to the
Conclusion, except a very few short insertions added, to keep the Machinery in
view to the end of the poem. P.

VER. 45. Triumphant Umbriel] These four lines added, for the reason before
mentioned. P.

VER. 131. The Sylphs behold] These two lines added for the same reason to keep
in view the Machinery of the Poem. P.

IMITATIONS.
VER. 9. Say why are Beauties, etc.] Why boast we, Glaucus! our extended reign,
Where Xanthus' streams enrich the Lycian plain;
Our numerous herds that range the sruitful field,
And hills where vines their purple harvest yield;
Our foaming bowls with purer nectar crowned,
Our feasts enhanc'd with music's sprightly sound;
Why on those shores are we with joy surveyed,
Admired as heroes, and as Gods obeyed;
Unless great acts superior merit prove,
And vindicate the bounteous powers above?
It Is ours, the dignity they give, to grace;
The first in valor, as the first in place:
That when with wondering eyes our martial bands
Behold our deeds transcending our commands,
Such, they may cry, deserve the sovereign state,
Whom those that envy, dare not imitate;
Could all our care elude the gloomy grave,
Which claims no less the fearful than the brave.
For lust of fame I should not vainly dare
In fighting fields, nor urge thy soul to war.
But since, alas! ignoble age must come,
Disease, and death's inexorable doom;
The life which others pay, let us bestow,
And give to fame what we to nature owe;
Brave though we fall, and honored if we live,
Or let us glory gain, or glory give.


VER. 35. So spoke the Dame,] It is a verse frequently repeated in Homer after
any speech, So spoke -- and all the Heroes applauded.
P.

VER. 53. Triumphant Umbriel] Minerva in like manner, during the Battle of
Ulysses with the Suitors in Odyss. perches on a beam of the roof to behold it.
P.

VER. 64. Those eyes are made so killing] The words of a Song in the Opera of
Camilla. P.

VER. 65. Thus on Maeander's flowery margin lies] Sic ubi fata vocant, udis
abjectus in herbis,
Ad vada Maeandri concinit albus olor.
Ov. Ep. P.

VER. 83. The Gnomes direct,] These two lines added for the above reason. P.

VER 89. The same, his ancient personage to deck,] In imitation of the progress
of Agamemnon's scepter in Homer, Il. ii. P.

VER. 128.

Flammiserumque trahens spatioso limite crinem
Stella micat
Ovid. NOTES.
VER. 45. So when bold Homer] Homer, Il. xx. P.

VER. 71. Now Jove, etc.] Vid. Homer Il. viii. and Virg. Aen. xii. P.

VER. 114. Since all things lost] Vid. Ariosto. Canto xxxiv. P.

VER. 137. This Partridge soon] John Partridge was a ridiculous Star-gazer, who
in his Almanacks every year never failed to predict the downfall of the Pope,
and the King of France, then at war with the English. P.

ELEGY To the MEMORY of an UNFORTUNATE LADY See the Duke of Buckingham's verses
to a Lady designing to retire into a Monastery compared with Mr. Pope's Letters
to several Ladies, p. 206. She seems to be the same person whose unfortunate
death is the subject of this poem. P.
.
WHAT beck'ning ghost, along the moonlight shade
Invites my steps, and points to yonder glade?
It Is she! -- but why that bleeding bosom gored,
Why dimly gleams the visionary sword?
Oh ever beauteous, ever friendly! tell,
Is it, in heaven, a crime to love too well?
To bear too tender, or too firm a heart,
To act a Lover's or a Roman's part?
Is there no bright reversion in the sky,
For those who greatly think, or bravely die?
Why bade ye else, ye Powers! her soul aspire
Above the vulgar flight of low desire?
Ambition first sprung from your blessed abodes;
The glorious fault of Angels and of Gods:
Thence to their images on earth it flows,
And in the breasts of Kings and Heroes glows.
Most souls, it is true, but peep out once an age,
Dull sullen prisoners in the body's cage:
Dim lights of life, that burn a length of years
Useless, unseen, as lamps in sepulchers;
Like Eastern Kings a lazy state they keep,
And close confined to their own palace, sleep.
From these perhaps (ere nature bade her die)
Fate snatched her early to the pitying sky.
As into air the purer spirits flow,
And separate from their kindred dregs below;
So flew the soul to its congenial place,
Nor left one virtue to redeem her Race.
But thou, false guardian of a charge too good,
Thou, mean deserter of thy brother's blood!
See on these ruby lips the trembling breath,
These cheeks, now fading at the blast of death;
Cold is that breast which warmed the world before,
And those love-darting eyes must roll no more.
Thus, if Eternal justice rules the ball,
Thus shall your wives, and thus your children fall:
On all the line a sudden vengeance waits,
And frequent herses shall besiege your gates.
There passengers shall stand, and pointing say,
(While the long fun'rals blacken all the way)
Lo these were they, whose souls the Furies steeled,
And cursed with hearts unknowing how to yield.
Thus unlamented pass the proud away,
The gaze of fools, and pageant of a day!
So perish all, whose breast never learned to glow
For others good, or melt at others woe.
What can atone (oh ever-injur'd shade!)
Thy fate unpitied, and thy rites unpaid?
No friend's complaint, no kind domestic tear
Pleased thy pale ghost, or graced thy mournful bier.
By foreign hands thy dying eyes were closed,
By foreign hands thy decent limbs composed,
By foreign hands thy humble grave adorned,
By strangers honored, and by strangers mourned!
What though no friends in sable weeds appear,
Grieve for an hour, perhaps, then mourn a year,
And bear about the mockery of woe
To midnight dances, and the public show?
What though no weeping Loves thy ashes grace,
Nor polished marble emulate thy face?
What though no sacred earth allow thee room,
Nor hallowed dirge be muttered over thy tomb?
Yet shall thy grave with rising flowers be dressed,
And the green turf lie lightly on thy breast:
There shall the morn her earliest tears bestow,
There the first roses of the year shall blow;
While Angels with their silver wings o'ershade
The ground, now sacred by thy relics made.
So peaceful rests, without a stone, a name,
What once had beauty, titles, wealth, and fame.
How loved, how honored once, avails thee not,
To whom related, or by whom begot;
A heap of dust alone remains of thee,
It Is all thou art, and all the proud shall be!
Poets themselves must fall, like those they sung,
Deaf the praised ear, and mute the tuneful tongue.
Even he, whose soul now melts in mournful lays,
Shall shortly want the generous tear he pays;
Then from his closing eyes thy form shall part,
And the last pang shall tear thee from his heart,
Life's idle business at one gasp be over,
The Muse forgot, and thou beloved no more!
PROLOGUE TO Mr. ADDISON's Tragedy OF CATO.
TO wake the soul by tender strokes of art,
To raise the genius, and to mend the heart;
To make mankind, in conscious virtue bold,
Live over each scene, and be what they behold:
For this the Tragic Muse first trod the stage,
Commanding tears to stream through every age;
Tyrants no more their savage nature kept,
And foes to virtue wondered how they wept.
Our author shuns by vulgar springs to move
The hero's glory, or the virgin's love;
In pitying Love, we but our weakness show,
And wild Ambition well deserves its woe.
Here tears shall flow from a more generous cause,
Such Tears as Patriots shed for dying Laws:
He bids your breasts with ancient ardour rise,
And calls forth Roman drops from British eyes.
Virtue confessed in human shape he draws,
What Plato thought, and godlike Cato was:
No common object to your sight displays,

A brave man struggling in the storms of fate,
And greatly falling with a falling state.
While Cato gives his little Senate laws,
What bosom beats not in his Country's cause?
Who sees him act, but envies every deed?
Who hears him groan, and does not wish to bleed?
Even when proud Caesar 'midst triumphal cars,
The spoils of nations, and the pomp of wars,
Ignobly vain and impotently great,
Showed Rome her Cato's figure drawn in state;
As her dead Father's reverend image past,
The pomp was darkened, and the day overcast;
The Triumph ceased, tears gushed from every eye;
The World's great Victor passed unheeded by;
Her last good man dejected Rome adored,
And honored Caesar's less than Cato's sword.

And show, you have the virtue to be moved.
With honest scorn the first famed Cato viewed
Rome learning arts from Greece, whom she subdued;
Your scene precariously subsists too long
On French translation, and Italian song.
Dare to have sense yourselves; assert the stage,
Be justly warmed with your own native rage:
Such Plays alone should win a British ear,

NOTES.
VER. 20. But what with pleasure] This alludes to a famous passage of Seneca,
which Mr. Addison afterward used as a motto to his play, when it was printed.

VER. 37. Britons, attend] Mr. Pope had written it arise, in the spirit of
Poetry and Liberty; but Mr. Addison frightened at so daring an expression,
which, he thought, squinted at rebellion, would have it altered, in the spirit
of Prose and Politics, to attend.

VER. 46. As Cato self, etc.] This alludes to the famous story of his going
into the Theater, and immediately coming out again.

EPILOGUE TO Mr. ROWE's JANE SHORE.
Designed for Mrs. OLDFIELD.
PRodigious this! the Frail-one of our Play
From her own Sex should mercy find today!
You might have held the pretty head aside,
Peeped in your fans, been serious, thus, and cried,
The Play may pass -- but that strange creature, Shore,
I cannot -- indeed now -- I so hate a whore --
Just as a blockhead rubs his thoughtless skull,
And thanks his stars he was not born a fool;
So from a sister sinner you shall hear,
" How strangely you expose yourself, my dear?"
But let me die, all raillery apart,
Our sex are still forgiving at their heart;
And did not wicked custom so contrive,
We'd be the best, good-natured things alive.
There are, it is true, who tell another tale,
That virtuous ladies envy while they rail;
Such rage without betrays the fire within;
In some close corner of the soul, they sin;
Still hoarding up, most scandalously nice,
Amidst their virtues a reserve of vice.
The godly dame, who fleshly failings damns,
Scolds with her maid, or with her chaplain crams.
Would you enjoy soft nights and solid dinners?
Faith, gallants, board with saints, and bed with sinners.
Well, if our Author in the Wife offends,
He has a Husband that will make amends:
He draws him gentle, tender, and forgiving,
And sure such kind good creatures may be living.
In days of old, they pardoned breach of vows,
Stern Cato's self was no relentless spouse:
Plu -- Plutarch, what is his name, that writes his life?
Tells us, that Cato dearly loved his Wife:
Yet if a friend, a night or so, should need her,
He Would recommend her as a special breeder.
To lend a wife, few here would scruple make,
But, pray, which of you all would take her back?
Though with the Stoic Chief our stage may ring,
The Stoic Husband was the glorious thing.
The man had courage, was a sage, it is true,
And loved his country -- but what is that to you?
Those strange examples never were made to fit ye
But the kind cuckold might instruct the City:
There, many an honest man may copy Cato,
Who never saw naked sword, or looked in Plato.
If, after all, you think it a disgrace,
That Edward's Miss thus perks it in your face;
To see a piece of failing flesh and blood,
In all the rest so impudently good;
Faith, let the modest Matrons of the town
Come here in crowds, and stare the strumpet down.

