ADDITIONS TO THE WORKS OF ALEXANDER POPE, ESQUIRE.

Entered in the HALL BOOK of the Company of STATIONERS.

ADDITIONS TO THE WORKS OF ALEXANDER POPE, ESQUIRE.

TOGETHER WITH MANY ORIGINAL POEMS AND LETTERS, OF COTEMPORARY WRITERS, NEVER
BEFORE PUBLISHED.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

-- foliis tantum ne carmina manda,
Ne turbata volent rapidis ludibria ventis.
VIRGIL. -- pulverem Olympicum
Collegisse juvat:
HOR.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR H. BALDWIN, T. LONGMAN, R. BALDWIN, G. ROBINSON, T.
CASLON, G. KEARSLY, AND J. RIDLEY. 1776.

PREFACE.
HOWEVER sparing modern Authors are in giving due praise to their
Cotemporaries, they seem to be more united in acknowledging the merit of those
who, to use the language of the Psalmist, "have ceased from their labors."
Writers, whose works have stood the test of years, have acquired a kind of
prescriptive title to celebrity, not on account of that superior wisdom which
is often attributed to times we have survived, or the supposed degeneracy of
the present, but because, what has been long known has been more reflected
upon, and what undergoes this examination is better understood.

In the catalogue of Authors, whose writings have met with public reception,
none have been more justly celebrated than those of POPE, and his
Cotemporaries; insomuch, that their names have not only been honorably
recorded, but the period in which they lived has been pre-eminently
distinguished by the title of the Augustan Age. Other points of time have here
and there given birth to a great genius, who, like a leading star, has
enlightened the horizon of literature, but no particular era, at least of our
history, has produced so general, and collected a light as this; a light which,
at once, shone upon every part of science, at the same time that it illuminated
the circle of morality.

What could have been the cause why such a cluster of great men flourished at
the same period of time, and why we have had no similar succession ever since?
Whether the first arose from the emulation of authorship, which, like the
collision of hard bodies, struck a fire from each other, or that the latter was
occasioned by the number of finished pieces they gave to the world, which has
ever since occasioned a kind of literary satiety, is a question, perhaps, not
so readily decided. This however is as generally known, as assented to, that
from the very few eminent geniuses who have arisen since the flourishing days
of this illustrious Junto, nature seems to have indulged herself in a temporary
repose.

When Authors, therefore, have thus long engaged the public attention, when
their works are read with avidity, and universally receive a classical stamp,
those who can add any thing to their illustration, and recover by time what has
eluded former diligence, bring an acceptable present to the public. It is with
good Authors as with good men; the nearer, and more intimately they are viewed,
the more we are able to set a proper value upon their characters, and look up
to them as more enforcing examples of imitation and instruction.

Under this idea, the Editor thinks he need make no apology in presenting the
public with two additional volumes to the Works of Mr. POPE, which contain such
of that celebrated Bard's pieces, in prose and verse, together with many of his
Cotemporaries, as for particular and local reasons were then suppressed, might
have been mislaid, or perhaps got into too remote hands to be collected with
ease. He is aware, at the same time, that the public rage for the remains of
celebrated men, has occasioned many spurious productions being fathered on
them, under the well-known titles of second parts, and posthumous works. Our
best Authors, and principally our best, have been subject to such impositions,
which, though they have been in time detected, have yet answered the illiberal
purposes of such a temporary publication. The Editor of the present Work, to
get clear of the shadow of an imputation in this line, is the first to remind
the public, that several of the pieces here exhibited originally appeared in
The St. James's Chronicle.

The favorable reception they met with in that fugitive mode of publication,
first suggested to him a wish to give them a more durable form; he accordingly
communicated this wish to his friends, who assisted him in his design, so much
beyond his expectation, that instead of one volume (his original intention) he
has, by their favor, been able to make out two; composed of such materials, as
he flatters himself will acquit him of the charge of an hasty, or
self-interested compiler.

Many of the Letters and Poems, of which this publication consists, were
transcribed with accuracy from the originals, in the collections of the late
Lords Oxford and Bolingbroke, who are well known to have lived in the strictest
intimacy with Mr. POPE, as well as his literary friends and associates. Some of
the latter will be found no way inferior to other productions of the same
Authors. All of the fragments, more or less, carry the marks of a master.
Others of the Letters are taken from pamphlets printed some years ago, which,
in the detached manner they then appeared, will, it is to be hoped, fully
justify their present mode of publication. They, for the most part, treat of
critical, friendly, humorous, and literary subjects, and abstracted from these,
throw new lights upon the character of Mr. POPE, as a man.

His Letters to his favorite Miss Blount lead to the support of a charge often
urged against him -- his want of original invention; for though the extent of his
erudition, and his elegant turn of thinking, gave him a superiority to all his
Cotemporaries in polishing, to a degree of originality, other people's
sentiments; yet here, whether from the carelessness arising from intimate
friendship, idleness, or the supposition of his not being detected by his fair
correspondent, he has committed a plagiarism on Voiture, which would be
unworthy a much less celebrated pen than his.

His Letter to Jabez Hughes, Esquire. brother to the author of the Siege of
Damascus, with that of his to Mr. Dennis, the critic, are melancholy proofs
that the greatest genius cannot always shield men from duplicity of conduct in
their literary characters, and bring another corroboration to the testimony of
Gay's assertion, that "Wits are game-cocks to each other."
But if these Letters show the weaknesses, perhaps the inseparable weaknesses
from human nature, others will show some of its fairest, and brightest sides;
they will exhibit the strongest traits of his humanity and friendship, his wit,
his learning, and his morals; they will confirm his more than Roman affection
to his parents, and particularly to his aged mother, whose life he watched over
with such soothing solicitude and exemplary reverence, as force us for a while
to turn from the luster of his talents to admire the superiority of his silial
character.

A few Poems and Letters will be found in this collection, which appeared only
in some of the editions of his works, in none of them quite perfect, which are
particularly distinguished in the latter, by the additional paragraphs being
printed in Italics. This will justify their republication here, more
particularly as many of them are written in that unreserved, open manner, which
his original Editor might have a wish to conceal for many reasons, that now no
longer remain; at present, the restoration of them can neither indulge vanity,
nor gratify spleen: they may be read without any other reason than the desire
of pleasure, and are therefore only to be praised as that object is obtained.

To many, in an age like this, where hypocrisy in morals is much practiced, (as
is shown by our dramatic, and other writers,) perhaps a few of the Poems may
appear too loose and descriptive, particularly "The Farewell to London," the
conclusion of the "Address to Miss Blount on leaving Town," and some passages
in "The Sober Advice from Horace, etc." by Mr. POPE; together with the Poem
called "Virtue in Danger," and others by Lady Mary Wortley Montague: but on a
proper examination this charge of indecency will be found to lie more in the
readers turn of thinking, than the defects of the writer. A poet who wants to
give his subject due force, should comply with the rules of his profession, by
using "proper words in proper places," and provided he keeps a steady eye on
the moral of his piece, the more he colors from nature, the more he assists
his design, whilst the hint and double entendrez, those mock draperies of
delicacy, often create a more indecent meaning than the circumstance will
allow, and urge the young and inexperienced reader more to the exercise of his
passions than his reason.

Swift's delicacy has been often arraigned on the same principle; and his
"Lady's Dressing Room," and others of his Poems of a similar stamp, are ever
sure to be adduced as convincing proofs of this charge. But where is the woman
of real sense and cleanliness offended at it? Conscious she deserves no such
reprehension in her own conduct, she sees the general force of the satire only
directed to the slatterns of her sex, and is pleased with the hope of a
consequent reformation. In short, the Editor is entirely of opinion, that the
same rule respecting decency, which a modern artist has laid down in painting,
will equally hold good in poetry.

"It is not in showing, or concealing the naked, that modesty or lewdness
depend. They arise entirely from the choice and intentions of the artist
himself. A great mind can raise great, or pleasing ideas, though he shows all
the parts of the body in their natural way, whilst the Cheapside prints of the
Buck and Quaker Girl, the charms of the Garter and High-wind, are proofs that
very lewd ideas might be produced, though little or nothing of the naked be
discovered; and there is no doubt, but that the Venus De Medicis might be
converted into a very lewd figure by dressing her out for that purpose Barry on
the Arts.
."

The letters which passed between Mr. POPE, and his booksellers, which are to
be found in the second of these volumes, may appear to those who are to be no
otherwise pleased with human genius than seeing it eternally on the stretch,
rather too trisling; and as the public voice is not a little raised upon like
occasions, the Editor thinks it may be necessary to say something on this
subject.

It is objected, that most of our great writers no sooner establish a
reputation for their works, but there are never wanting interested people, who
preferring a private lucre either to the fame of the author, or national
honor, busy themselves in gleaning up their most uninteresting thoughts on the
most uninteresting subjects; such as letters to tradesmen, etc. and that kind
of domestic correspondence, which, to use the language of a modern author, "a
wise man should be ashamed to remember."

Was a collection of this kind purposely made for the filling up a volume
without the least regard to amusement, curiosity, or instruction, it must soon
defeat its own purposes; for, however common readers may for a while be pleased
with the novelty, the reprobation it must receive from men of sense, would soon
distinguish it as the mortal part of an author, and in this state consign it to
oblivion. But trifling as these Letters appear to be, many of them referring to
literary business, help to settle dates, and explain references, which perhaps
before were not quite so intelligible, and like those well digested questions
on a legal examination, which however simple they may appear in respect to
their immediate enquiries are yet important, as they strengthen, or elucidate a
fact in their connections. Others will serve to show the degree of intimacy
between the poet and bookseller of that time, the process of publication, and
many other little anecdotes of parties and places, too trifling to be otherwise
recorded, but by this mode of preservation, and yet too curious (at least to
literary enquirers) to fall down the stream of obscurity.

The Editor having now made those apologies which he thought necessary for
offering these volumes to the public, he will no longer detain them from the
exercise of their own judgment. He cannot, however, conclude without assuring
them that his design in this compilation was no more than to collect in one
view, such pieces of our celebrated English Bard, and his Cotemporaries, as may
be lost to the world from a fugitive mode of publication, and others which
might be equally lost from their being only open to the inspection of the few.
In this, as he has spared no industry, or expense himself, and stands much
indebted to the researches and interest of many of his friends, he hopes to
have the merit of a faithful and useful Compiler, and that these volumes may
not be thought improper appendages to the present edition of POPE'S WORKS.

CONTENTS OF THE POEMS IN VOL. I.
A Farewell to London, in the year 1715 Page 1 Lines added to the Address to
Miss Martha Blount on her leaving Town 4 Lines sung by Durastanti on leaving
the English Stage 6 A Burlesque of the same Lines, by Dr. Arbuthnot 7 A
Fragment of Stanza's, taken from Mr. Pope's own handwriting 8 Mr. Gay's
Epitaph ibid Lord Coningshy's Epitaph 9 The beginning Lines of Homer's Iliad,
as originally translated by Mr. Pope ibid A Dialogue 10 Verses to Mrs. Martha
Blount on her Birthday, 1724 11 Epigram engraved on the Collar of a Dog, which
Mr. Pope gave to his Royal Highness ibid Epigrams occasioned by an Invitation
to Court 12 On Butler's Monument 13 Verses to be prefixed before Bernard
Lintot's New Miscellany 14 On the Duke of Marlborough's House at Woodstock 15
To Lady Mary Wortley Montague 16 A Version of the First Psalm, for the Use of a
young Lady 18 To Mr. Moore, Author of the celebrated Worm-Powder 19 A modern
Imitation of the Fourth Epistle of the First Book of Horace's Epistles 21 A
Fragment, attributed by some to Mr. Pope, and by others to Mr. Congreve 23
Verses left by Mr. Pope, on his lying in the same Bed which Wilmot the
celebrated Earl of Rochester slept in at Adderbury, then belonging to the Duke
of Argyle, July 9, 1739 24 Sober Advice from Horace, to the young Gentlemen
about Town, as delivered in his second Sermon, imitated in the Manner of Mr.
Pope; together with the original Text, as restored by the Rev. Richard Bentley,
D. D. and some Remarks on the Version 25, 29 An Epistle to Henry Cromwell, Esquire.
44 The Translator 49 Roxana, or the Drawing Room ibid The Looking-Glass 52 The
Challenge: A Court Ballad 53 The Three Gentle Shepherds 55 Lines copied from
Mr. Pope's Handwriting, on a Scrap of Paper 56 An Essay on Human Life 57 To
the Prince of Orange, 1677. By Edmund Waller, of Beaconsfield 86 A true and
faithful Inventory of the Goods belonging to the Dean of St. Patrick's. By Dr.
Swift 89 Lines written under the Print of Tom Britton, the Small-Coal-Man,
painted by Mr. Woolaston. By Mr. Prior 90 By the same ibid A Letter to Lady
Margaret Cavendish Harley when a Child. By Mr. Prior 91 To Lord Oxford; written
extempore by Mr. Prior, in Lady Oxford's Study ibid Verses written in Lady
Howe's Ovid's Epistles. By Mr. Prior 92 By Mr. Prior, 1716 ibid By the same
ibid True's Epitaph. By Mr. Prior 93 Mr. Pope's Welcome from Greece. By Mr.
Gay, upon Mr. Pope's having finished his Translation of Homer's Iliad 94 Motto
for the Opera of Mutius Scaevola. By Mr. Gay 104 Mr. Gay's Epigrammatical
Petition to the Earl of Oxford, Lord High Treasurer ibid The Duchess of
Queensberry's Reply to King George II. when she was forbid to appear at Court
105 Copies of Verses written on the above subject 106, etc. A Ballad on the
same subject, to the tune of Lillibullero 109 Written in Mr. Gay's Works,
presented to a Lady in very splendid binding. To the Book 112 On the
forbiddance of Gay's second part of the Beggar's Opera, and the damnation of
Cibber's Love in a Riddle ibid On Lady Pembroke's promoting the Cat-Calling of
Faustina, 1727 113 The Character of Lady Henrietta Cavendish Holles. By Mr.
Hughes. ibid To the same, on her choice of Truth, Honor, and Honesty for her
Motto. By Mr. Hughes 114 The humble Petition of a beautiful young Lady to the
Rev. Dr. Berkley, Dean of Londonderry, which he quits to go and settle a
College at Bermudas 115 Prologue to Music. By Dr. Garth 116 Butler's Complaint
against his pretended Monument in Westminster Abbey 117 Lines written with
charcoal upon Butler's Monument 118 Epigram on the Miracles wrought by Cuzzoni
ibid Epigram in behalf of Tom Southern, to the Duke of Argyle ibid A
Description of Dr. Delany's Villa. By Dr. Sheridan 119 Verses written in the
Earl of Oxford's Library at Wimpole, 1729. By Soame Jenyns 121 Ragg's Verses to
J. Philips 123 The Duke of Buckingham's Epitaph. Written by Himself 125 --
translated by George Sewell, M. D. ibid Epitaph on Mr. Craggs 126 On Sir
Abraham Elt being knighted, and taking the name of Elton 127 A Westminster
Exercise 128 Epitaph on Mr. Thynne 129 A Parson's Resolution ibid Verses to a
Lady ibid Epitaph on Dr. John Friend 131 Epitaph intended by Mr. Dryden for his
Wife ibid Epitaph on Mr. Molesworth, who erected a Monument, and placed an
Inscription upon it in honor of his favorite Dog 132 Verses on Dr. Evans,
Bursar, cutting down the trees in St. John's College Grove. By Dr. Tadlow ibid
Dr. Evans upon Dr. Tadlow ibid Verses to be published in the next edition of
Dryden's Virgil 133 To a Lady more cruel than fair. By Sir John Vanbrugh ibid
Verses on the Royston Bargain, or Alehouse Wedding 135 To Mrs. B. to invite
her from Virginia to Bermudas 138 A Bermudan Ode 140 Sir Charles Hanbury to Sir
Hans Sloane 145 Mr. Hanbury to Sir Harry Ashurst 148 Lord Harvey on the Duchess
of Richmond 149 On a Collar presented for Happy Gill. By Mr. Hughes 150 Lord
Middlesex to Mr. Pope, on reading Mr. Addison's Account of the English Poets
151 The 21st Ode of the Third Book of Horace translated. By Lord Middlesex 153
Verses on a Goose. By Lord Middlesex 154 On Lady A. 155 Dr. Winter's Questions
to Dr. Cheney 156 Dr. Cheney's Answer 157 Verses on the Art of Politics. By the
Rev. Mr. Bramston 158 A Ballad found in a cottage in Lancashire, and sent up to
Lord Oxford 160 Verses on Oxford Geniuses 163 Knight versus Parson. By the Rev.
Mr. Bramston ibid An Epistle to Lord Cobham. By Mr. Congreve 165 To Lady Irwin.
By Lady Mary Wortley Montague 168 Lady Irwin's Answer 170 An Elegy on Mrs.
Bows. By Lady Mary Wortley Montague 171 Verses on the above Elegy 172 The
Answer to the above Elegy ibid On a Lady mistaking a dying Trader for a dying
Lover. By Lady Mary Wortley Montague 173 Virtue in Danger: A lamentable story
how a virtuous Lady had like to have been ravished by her sister's footman. By
Lady Mary Wortley Montague 176 Epistle from Arthur Gray, the footman, after his
condemnation for attempting a Rape. By Lady Mary Wortley Montague 182 Mr. John
Philips's designed Dedication to his Poem called the Splendid Shilling 188
LETTERS, etc. IN VOL. I.
MR. PIT, the Translator of Virgil, to Mr. Spence 192 Original Letter from Mr.
George Virtue to Mr. Charles Christian 195 Mr. Prior to Mr. Wanley 198, 199 Mr.
E. Settle to Lord Oxford 200 Mr. Pope to a Lady 201, 204, 208, 209, 211, 214,
218, 221, 224, 225, 228, 231 Extract of a Letter from Lord Bolingbroke to
Monsieur Pouilly de Champeaux 235
ADDITIONS TO THE WORKS OF POPE, etc.
A FAREWELL TO LONDON IN THE YEAR 1715.
By Mr. POPE.
DEAR, damned, distracting town, farewell!
Thy fools no more I Will teize:
This year in peace, ye critics, dwell,
Ye harlots, sleep at ease!
Soft B^ Perhaps Bethel. His equal mind I copy what I can.
SAT. 2.
and rough C^s Secretary Craggs, famous for the roughness of his manners.
, adieu!
Earl Warwick make your moan,
The lively H^k and you
May knock up whores alone.
To drink and droll be Row allowed
Till the third watchman toll Dr. Wellwood observes, that Mr. Row was
inimitable in his manner of enlivening company.
;
Let Jervase gratis paint, and Frowde Philip Frowde, author of the Tragedies of
the Fall of Saguntum, and Philotas. He is spoken of by his biographers as a man
of a most amiable character. It is difficult to say why Mr. Pope has dropped
this stroke of satire upon him. Perhaps his offense was his too great intimacy
with Addison.

Save threepence and his soul.
Farewell Arbuthnot's raillery
On every learned sot;
And Garth, the best good christian he Thus at the conclusion of a letter from
Mr. Pope to a person unknown, "If ever there was good christian without knowing
himself to be so, it was Dr. Garth."


,
Although he knows it not.
Lintot, farewell! thy bard must go;
Farewell, unhappy Tonson!
Heaven gives thee for thy loss of Row -- thy loss of Row. i. e. when King
George I. made him one of the land-surveyors of the port of London.
,
Lean Philips, and fat Johnson Ambrose Philips and Charles Johnson, the latter
of whom "had probably thriven better in his vocation, had he been a small
matter leaner. He may be justly called a martyr to obesity, and be said to have
fallen a victim to the rotundity of his parts." -- See the Companion to the
Playhouse, etc.


.
Why should I stay? Both parties rage;
My vixen mistress squalls;
The wits in envious feuds engage;
And Homer (damn him!) calls.
The love of arts lies cold and dead
In Hallifax' s urn How does this agree with the character which he has
afterward given of Bufo in the epistle to Dr. Arbuthnot?
;
And not one Muse of all he fed,
Has yet the grace to mourn.
My friends, by turns, my friends confound,
Betray, and are betrayed:
Poor Y^r's sold for fifty pounds,
And B^ll is a jade Eustace Budgell, of whom he speaks in his epistle to Dr.
Arbuthnot. " Let Budgell charge low Grub-street on his quill,
" And write whatever he pleased, except his will."


Why make I friendships with the great,
When I no favor seek?
Or follow girls seven hours in eight? --
I need but once a week.
Still idle, with a busy air,
Deep whimsies to contrive;
The gayest valetudinaire,
Most thinking rake alive.
Solicitous for others ends,
Though fond of dear repose;
Careless or drowsy with my friends,
And frolic with my foes.
Laborious lobster-nights, farewell,
For sober, studious days!
And Burlington's delicious meal,
For sallads, tarts, and pease!
Adieu to all but Gay alone,
Whose foul, sincere and free,
Loves all mankind, but flatters none,
And so may starve with me.
These Lines were added by Mr. POPE after the present Conclusion of his Address
to Miss MARTHA BLOUNT on her leaving Town, etc. " As some fond Virgin, etc."
IN this strange Town a different course we take,
Refine ourselves to spirit, for your sake.
For want of you, we spend our random wit on
The first we find with Needham Needham, the Mrs. Cole of her age, for her
constant prayer was that she might "get enough by her profession to leave it
off in time, and make her peace with God." She was, however, so ill used by the
populace when she made her last appearance in the pillory, that she did not
survive it. We may suppose Brooks and Briton to have been of the same trade. --
See notes on the Dunciad.

Neither this fragment, nor the foregoing verses, very strongly controvert the
assertion of Colley Cibber concerning the time when a nobleman "proposed to
slip his little Homer, as he called him, at a girl of the game." See Cibber's
Letter to Pope, p. 47.


, Brooks, or Briton.
Hackney'd in sin, we beat about the town,
And like sure spaniels, at first scent lie down:
Were Virtue's self in silks -- faith keep away!
Or virtue's virtue scarce would last a day.
Thus, Madam, most men talk, and some men do:
The rest is told you in a line or two.
Some strangely wonder you're not fond to marry --
A double jest still pleases sweet Sir Harry --
Smallpox is rife, and Gay in dreadful fear --
The good priests whisper -- Where Is the chevalier?
Much in your absence B^'s heart endures,
And if poor Pope is cl^pt, the fault is yours.
The following Lines were sung by DURASTANTI Signora Durastanti came over with
Senesino, to assist Handel by singing in the Opera, about the year 1721.
when she took her Leave of the ENGLISH STAGE. The Words were in Haste put
together by Mr. POPE, at the Request of the Earl of PETERBOROW.
GENEROUS, gay, and gallant nation,
Bold in arms, and bright in arts;
Land secure from all invasion,
All but Cupid's gentle darts!
From your charms, oh who would run?
Who would leave you for the sun?
Happy soil, adieu, adieu!
Let old charmers yield to new.
In arms, in arts, be still more shining;
All your joys be still increasing;
All your tastes be still refining;
All your jars for ever ceasing:
But let old charmers yield to new: --
Happy soil, adieu, adieu!
A BURLESQUE of the same Lines.
By Dr. ARBUTHNOT.
PUPPIES, whom I now am leaving,
Merry sometimes, always mad,
who lavish most when debts are craving,
On fool, and farce, and masquerade!
Who would not from such bubbles run,
And leave such blessings for the sun?
Happy soil, and simple crew!
Let old sharpers yield to new:
All your tastes be still refining;
All your nonsense still more shining:
Blessed in some Berenstadt or Boschi Berenstadt, a castrato, was likewise
engaged by Handel in the Operas. Boschi was a bass singer in the same
entertainments.
,
He more awkward, he more husky;
And never want, when these are lost t'us,
Another Heidegger and Faustus Heidegger was the celebrated arbiter
elegantiarum in the time of Mr. Pope, who forgetting the defects of his own
person has ridiculed those of Heidegger in the Dunciad. "Something betwixt a
Heidegger and owl."


Faustus is Mr. Rich's Pantomime of that name.


.
Happy soil, and simple crew!
Let old sharpers yield to new!
Bubbles all, adieu, adieu!
A FRAGMENT of STANZAS, taken from Mr. POPE's own Handwriting.
XIII.
THEN he went to the side-board and called for much liquor,
And glass after glass he drank quicker and quicker;
So that Heidegger quoth,
Nay, faith on his oath,
Of two hogsheads of burgundy Satan drank both.
Then all like a (...) the Devil appeared,
And strait the whole table of dishes he cleared:
Then a friar, then a nun,
And then he put on
A face, all the company took for his own.
Even thine, O false Heidegger! who wort so wicked
To let in the Devil (...)
Mr. GAY's EPITAPH.
By Mr. POPE.
WELL then! poor Gay lies under ground,
So there is an end of honest Jack:
So little justice here he found,
It Is ten to one he will never come back.
Lord CONINGSBY's EPITAPH This Epitaph, originally written on Picus Mirandula,
is applied to F. Chartres, and printed among the works of Swift. See
Hawkesworth's Edition, Vol. VI.
.
By Mr. POPE.
HERE lies Lord Coningsby -- be civil;
The rest God knows -- so does the Devil.
The beginning Lines of HOMER's ILIAD as originally translated by Mr. POPE.
THE stern Pelides' rage, O Goddess! sing,
Of all the woes of Greece, the fatal spring,
That strow'd with warriors dead the Phrygian plain,
And peopled the dark shades with heroes slain;
Whose limbs unburied on the hostile shore,
Devouring dogs and greedy vulturs tore.
Since first Atrides and Achilles strove,
Such was the sovereign doom, and such the will of Jove.
Declare, O Goddess! what offended power
Enflamed their rage in that ill-omen'd hour!
Phoebus himself the dire debate procured,
T'avenge the wrongs his injured priest endured.
For this the God a dire infection spread,
And heaped the camp with millions of the dead.
The king of men the sacred Sire defied,
And for the king's offense the people died.
A DIALOGUE.
By Mr. POPE.
Pope. SINCE my old friend is grown so great,
As to be minister of state,
I Am told (but it is not true I hope)
That Craggs will be ashamed of Pope.

Craggs. Alas! if I am such a creature,
To grow the worse for growing greater;
Why faith, in spite of all my brags,
It Is Pope must be ashamed of Craggs It Is Pope must be ashamed of Craggs.] So
in the Epistle to James Craggs, Esquire. " Be not (exalted to whatever degree)
" Ashamed of any friend, not even of me:
" The patriot's plain, but untrod path pursue;
" If not, it is I must be ashamed of you."

.

To Mrs. MARTHA BLOUNT, on her Birthday, 1724.
By Mr. POPE.
IF added days of life bring nothing new,
But, like a sieve, let every pleasure through;
Some joy still lost, as each vain year runs over,
And all we gain, some pensive notion more;
Is this a birthday? ah! it is sadly clear,
It Is but the funeral of the former year.
If there is no hope with kind, though fainter ray,
To gild the evening of our future day;
If every page of life's long volume tell
The same dull story -- Mordaunt Colonel Mordaunt, who destroyed himself. The
last four lines are omitted in the modern editions, but the poem is otherwise
much enlarged.
! thou did well.
EPIGRAM
By Mr. POPE.
Engraved on the Collar of a Dog, which I gave to his Royal Highness.
I Am his Highness' dog at Kew;
Pray tell me, Sir, whose dog are you?
EPIGRAMS,
By Mr. POPE,
Occasioned by an Invitation to Court.
I.
IN the lines that you sent, are the Muses and Graces;
You have the nine in your wit, and three in your faces.
II.
THEY may talk of the goddesses in Ida vales,
But you show your wit, whereas they show their tails.
III.
YOU Bellenden, Griffin, and little Lepell,
By G^d you all lie like the D^l in hell;
To say that at Court there is a dearth of all wit,
And send what Argyle, would he write, might have writ.
IV.
ADAM had fallen twice, if for an apple
The D^l had brought him Bellenden and Lepell,
V.
ON Sunday at six, in the street that is called Gerrard,
You may meet the two champions who are no lord Sh^rd.
VI.
YOU say A^'s a wit, for what?
For writing? no -- for writing not.
On BUTLER's MONUMENT.
Perhaps by Mr. POPE Mr. Pope, in one of the prints from Scheemaker's monument
of Shakespeare in Westminster-Abbey, has sufficiently shown his contempt of
Alderman Barber, by the following couplet, which is substituted in the place of
"The cloud-capt towers, etc." " Thus Britain loved me; and preserved my same,
" Clear from a Barber's or a Benson's name."
A. POPE.

Pope might probably have suppressed his satire on the Alderman, because he was
one of Swift's acquaintances and correspondents; though in the 4th Book of the
Dunciad he has an anonymous stroke at him. " So by each bard an Alderman shall
sit,
" A heavy Lord shall hang at every wit."



.
RESPECT to Dryden, Sheffield justly paid,
And noble Villers honored Cowley's shade:
But whence this Barber? -- that a name so mean
Should, joined with Butler's, on a tomb be seen:
This pyramid would better far proclaim,
To future ages humbler Settle's name:
Poet and patron then had been well paired,
The city printer, and the city bard.
VERSES to be prefixed before BERNARD LINTOT's NEW MISCELLANY.
By Mr. POPE.
SOME Colinaeus praise, some Bleau,
Others account 'em but so, so;
Some Plantin to the rest prefer,
And some esteem Old Elzevir;
Others with Aldus would besot us;
I, for my part, admire Lintottus --
His character's beyond compare,
Like his own person, large and fair --
They print their names in letters small,
But LINTOT stands in capital:
Author, and He, with equal grace,
Appear, and stare you in the face.
Stephens prints Heathen Greek, it is said,
Which some cannot construe, some cannot read;
But all that comes from Lintot's hand
Even Rawlinson Thomas Rawlinson, Esquire.
might understand. --
Often in an Aldus, or a Plantin,
A page is blotted, or leaf wanting;
Of Lintot's books this cannot be said,
All fair, and not so much as read. --
Their copy cost 'em not a penny;
To Homer, Virgil, or to any,
They never gave sixpence for two lines,
To them, their heirs, or their assigns;
But Lintot is at vast expense,
And pays prodigious dear for sense. --
Their books are useful but to few,
A scholar, or a wit or two;
Lintot's for general use are fit,
For, some folks read, but all folks she.
Upon the Duke of MARLBOROUGH's House at Woodstock.
By Mr. POPE.
Atria long patent; sed nee coenantibus usquam,
Nec somno locus est; quam been non habites!
MART. Epig.
SEE, Sir, here is the grand approach,
This way is for his Grace's coach;
There lies the bridge, and here is the clock,
Observe the lion and the cock,
The spacious court, the colonnade,
And mark how wide the hall is made!
The chimneys are so well designed,
They never smoke in any wind.
This gallery's contrived for walking,
The windows to retire and talk in;
The council chamger for debate,
And all the rest are rooms of state.
Thanks, Sir, cried I, it is very fine.
But where do you sleep, or where do you dine?
I find by all you have been telling,
That it is a house, but not a dwelling.
To Lady MARY WORTLEY MONTAGUE This panegyric on Lady Mary Wortley Montague
might have been suppressed by Mr. Pope, on account of her having satirized him
in her verses to the imitator of Horace; which abuse he returned in the first
Sat. of the second book of Horace. " From furious Sappho, scarce a milder fate,
" P^'d by her love, or libelled by her hate."

.
By Mr. POPE.
I.
IN beauty, or wit,
No mortal as yet
To question your empire has dared;
But men of discerning
Have thought that in learning,
To yield to a lady was hard.
II.
Impertinent schools,
With musty dull rules,
Have reading to females denied:
So papists refuse
The Bible to use,
Lest flocks should be wise as their guide.
III.
'Twas a woman at first,
(Indeed she was cursed)
In knowledge that tasted delight,
And sages agree
The laws should decree
To the first of possessors the right.
IV.
Then bravely, fair dame,
Resume the old claim,
Which to your whole sex does belong;
And let men receive,
From a second bright Eve,
The knowledge of right, and of wrong.
V.
But if the first Eve
Hard doom did receive,
When only one apple had she,
What a punishment new
Shall be found out for you,
Who tasting, have robbed the whole tree?
A Version of the FIRST PSALM. For the Use of a young Lady,
By Mr. POPE.
I.
THE maid is blessed that will not hear
Of masquerading tricks,
Nor lends to wanton songs an ear,
Nor sighs for coach and six.
II.
To please her shall her husband strive
With all his main and might,
And in her love shall exercise
Himself both day and night.
III.
She shall bring forth most pleasant fruit,
He flourish still, and stand;
Even so all things shall prosper well
That this maid takes in hand.
IV.
No wicked whores shall have such luck,
Who follow their own wills,
But purged shall be to skin and bone,
With mercury and pills.
V.
For why, the pure and cleanly maids
Shall all good husbands gain;
But filthy and uncleanly jades
Shall rot in Drury Lane.
To the ingenious Mr. MOORE, Author of the celebrated Worm-Powder.
By Mr. POPE.
HOW much, egregious Moore, are we
Deceived by shows and forms!
Whatever we think, whatever we see,
All human race are Worms.
Man is a very Worm by birth,
Proud reptile Mr. Pope took this hint from Homer: " O son of Tydeus cease! be
wise and see
" How vast the difference of the gods and thee;
" Distance immense! between the powers that shine
" Above, eternal, deathless, and divine,
" And mortal man! a wretch of humble birth,
" A short-lived reptile in the dust of earth.
See Apollo's speech to Diomede, book XV.
, vile and vain,
A while he crawls upon the earth,
Then shrinks to earth again.
That woman is a Worm, we find,
Ever since our grannum's evil;
She first conversed with her own kind,
The ancient Worm, the devil.
But whether man, or he, God knows,
Foecundify'd her belly,
With that pure stuff from whence we rose,
The genial vermicelli.
The learned themselves we Book-worms name,
The blockhead is a Slow-worm;
The nymph, whose tail is all on flame,
Is aptly termed a Glowworm.
The fops are painted butterflies,
That flutter for a day;
First from a Worm they took their rise,
Then in a Worm decay.
The flatterer an ear-wig grows,
Some Worms suit all conditions;
Misers are Muck-worms, Silkworms, beaux,
And Death-watches, physicians.
That statesmen have a Worm, is seen
By all their winding play:
Their conscience is a Worm within,
That gnaws them night and day.
Ah! Moore! thy skill were well employed,
And greater gain would rise,
If thou could make the courtier void
The Worm that never dies.
O learned friend of Ab-church-lane,
Who sett'st our entrails free,
Vain is thy art, thy powder vain,
Since Worms shall eat even thee.
Thou only can our fate adjourn,
Some few short years; no more:
Even Button's wits to Worms shall turn,
Who Maggots were before.
The Fourth Epistle of the First Book of HORACE'S Epistles This satire on Lord
Bolingbroke, and the praise bestowed on him in a letter to Mr. Richardson,
where Mr. Pope says " The sons shall blush their fathers were his foes;"
being so contradictory, probably occasioned the former to be suppressed.
.
A modern Imitation. By Mr. POPE.
SAY Ad ALBIUM TIBULLUM.
Albi, nostrorum sermonum candide judex,
Quid nunc te dicam facere in regions Pedana?
Scribere, quod Cassi Parmensis opuscula vincat?

, St. John, who alone peruse
With candid eye, the mimick muse,
What schemes of politics, or laws,
In Gallic lands the patriot draws!
Is then a greater work in hand,
Than all the tomes of Haines's band?
" Or shoots he folly as it flies?
" Or catches manners as they rise?"
Or urged by unquench'd native heat,
An tacitam silvas inter reptare salubres?

Does St. John Greenwich sports repeat?
Where (emulous of Chartres' fame)
Even Chartres' self is scarce a name.
-- Di tibi formam,
Di tibi divitias dederant, artemque fruendi.

To you (the all-envy'd gift of Heaven)
The Indulgent gods, unasked, have given
A form complete in every part,
And, to enjoy that gift, the art.
Quid voveat dulci nutricula majus alumno,
Quam sapere, and fari posset quae sentiat, and cui
Gratia, fama, valetudo contingat abunde,
-- non deficiente crumena?

What could a tender mother's care
Wish better, to her favorite heir,
Than wit, and fame, and lucky hours,
A stock of health, and golden showers,
And graceful fluency of speech,
Precepts before unknown to teach?
Inter spem, curamque, timores inter and iras.

Amidst thy various ebbs of fear;
And gleaming hope, and black despair,
Yet let thy friend this truth impart,
A truth I tell with bleeding heart,
(In justice for your labors past)
Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum.
Me pinguem, and nitidum been curata cute vises,
Cum ridere voles Epicuri de grege porcum.

That every day shall be your last;
That every hour you life renew
Is to your injured country due.
In spite of fears, of mercy spite,
My genius still must rail, and write.
Haste to thy Twick'nham's safe retreat,
And mingle with the grumbling great:
There, half devoured by spleen, you will find
The rhyming bubbler of mankind;
There (objects of our mutual hate)
We'll ridicule both church and state.
A FRAGMENT, attributed by some to Mr. POPE, and by others to Mr. CONGREVE. It
has however been seen in the Handwriting of the former.
WHAT are the falling rills, the pendant shades,
The morning bowers, the evening colonnades,
But soft recesses for th'uneasy mind
To sigh unheard in, to the passing wind!
So the struck deer, in some sequestered part,
Lies down to die (the arrow in his heart)
There hid in shades, and wasting day by day,
Inly he bleeds, and pants his soul away.
VERSES left by Mr. POPE, on his lying in the same Bed which WILMOT the
celebrated Earl of Rochester slept in, at Adderbury, then belonging to the Duke
of Argyle, July 9th, 1739.
WITH no poetic ardour fired
I press the bed where Wilmot lay;
That here he loved, or here expired,
Begets no numbers grave, or gay.
But in thy roof, Argyle, are bred
Such thoughts as prompt the brave to lie
Stretched out in honor's nobler bed,
Beneath a nobler roof -- the sky.
Such flames as high in patriots burn,
Yet stoop to bless a child or wife;
And such as wicked kings may mourn,
When freedom is more dear than life.
SOBER ADVICE FROM HORACE The Editor is at a loss to assign a reason why the
Sober Advice from Horace; the version of the first Psalm (which was printed
from the original MS. under Mr. Pope's own hand), the fourth stanza in the
Worms; the rapturous lines in the letter to Mr. Cromwell, Jan. 22, 1708-9; the
letter to a lady in the name of her brother; (all which seem of a piece with
the lines in the letter to the above gentleman, April 25, 1708, which is
permitted to remain) are excluded from the works of Mr. Pope.
, TO THE YOUNG GENTLEMEN ABOUT TOWN.
As delivered in his SECOND SERMON. IMITATED [NOTAE BENTLEIANAE] Imitated. Why
imitated? Why not translated? Odi imitatores! A metaphrast had not turned
Tigellius, and Fusidius, Malchinus, and Gargonius (for I say Malchinus, not
Malthinus, and Gargonius not Gorgonius) into so many ladies. Benignus, hic,
hunc, etc. all of the masculine gender: every schoolboy knows more than our
Imitator.
in the Manner of Mr. POPE.
Together with the Original Text, as restored by The Rev. RICHARD BENTLEY, D. D.
And some REMARKS on the VERSION.
TO ALEXANDER POPE, ESQUIRE i. e. Alexander Pope, Esquire to himself.

.
SIR,
I HAVE so great a trust in your indulgence toward me, as to believe you
cannot but patronize this Imitation, so much in your own manner, and whose
birth I may truly say is owing to you This assertion proves most true.

. In that confidence, I would not suppress the criticisms made upon it by the
Reverend Doctor; the rather, since he has promised to mend the faults in the
next edition, with the same goodness he has practiced to Milton. I hope you
will believe that while I express my regard for you, it is only out of modesty
I conceal my name; since, though perhaps I may not profess myself your admirer so
much as some others, I cannot but be, with as much inward respect, good will,
and zeal, as any man,

Dear SIR, Your most affectionate, And faithful servant.

HORATII FLACCI, S. II. L. I.
TEXTUM RECENSUIT V. R. RICARDUS BENTLEIUS, S. T. P.
AMbubajarum collegia, pharmacopolae,
Mendici, mimae, balatrones; hoc genus omne
Moestum ac sollicitum est cantoris morte Tigelli:
Quippe benign us erat --
Contra hic, ne prodigus esse
Dicatur, metuens, inopi dare nolit amico,
Frigus quo duramque famem depellere possit,
Hunc si percon teris, avi cur atque parentis
Praeclaram ingrata stringat malus ingluvie rem,
Omnia conduct is coemens obsonia nummis:
" Sordidus, atque animi quod parvi nolit haberi,"
Respondet. Laudatur ab his, culpatur ab illis,
Fufidius vappae famam timet ac nebulonis,
Dives agris, dives positis in foenore nummis.
Quinas hic capiti mercedes exsecat; atque
Quanto perditior quisque est, tanto acrius urget.
Nomina sectatur, modo sumpta vest virili
Sub patribus duris, tironum. Maxim, quis non,
Jupiter, exclamat, simul atque audivit? "At in se
" Pro quaestu sumtum facit hic." Vix credere possis
Quam sibi non sit amicus: ita ut Pater ille, Terenti
Fabula quem miserum gnato vixisse fugato
Inducit, non se pejus cruciaverit atque hic.
Si quis nunc quaerat, Quo res haec pertinet? Illuc:
" Dum vitant stulti vitia, in contraria currunt."
Malchinus tunicis demissis ambulat: est qui
Inguen ad obscoenum subductis usque facetus:
Pastillos Rusillus olet, Gargonius hircum.
Nil medium est. Sunt qui nolint tetigisse, nisi illas,
Quarum subsuta talos tegat instita vest:
Contra alius nullam, nisi olente in fornice stantem.
Quidam notus homo cum exiret fornice; "Macte
" Virtute esto, inquit, sententia dia Catonis,
" Nam simul ac venas inflavit tetra libido,
" Huc juvenes aequum est descendere, non alienas
" Permolere uxores. -- "
-- Nolim laudarier, inquit,
Sic me, mirator CUNNI CUPENNIUS ALBI CUNNI CUPENNIUS ALBI, Hoary Shrine. "Here
the imitator grievously errs. Cunnus albus by no means signifying a white or
gray garment; which thing may be either black, brown, or party-colored." BENT.


.
Audire est operae pretium, procedere recte
Qui moechos non voltis, ut omni part laborent;
Utque illis multo corrupta dolor voluptas,
Atque haec rara, cadat dura inter saepe pericla.
Hic se praecipitem tecto dedit: ille flagellis
Ad mortem caesus: fugiens hic decidit acrem
Praedonum in turbam: dedit hic pro corpore nummos:
Hunc perminxerunt calones; quin etiam illud
Accidit, ut TESTIS CAUDAMQUE SALACEM Demeterent ferro "(for so I say, and not
demeteret ferrum) bleeds in person. Silly! was he let blood by a surgeon? How
short is this of the amputation of the testes and cauda salax? What ignorance
also of ancient learning appears in his shallow translation of perminxcrunt,
totally missing the mark, and not entering into the deep meaning of the author."


cuidam TESTIS, CAUDAMQUE SALACEM
Demeterent ferro. Jure omnes. Galba negabat.
Tutior at quanto merx est in class secunda!
Libertinarum dico: Sallustius in qua
Non minus insanit, quam qui moechatur. At hic si,
Qua res, qua ratio suaderet, quaque modeste
Munifico esse licet, vellet bonus atque benignus
Esse; daret quantum satis esset, nec sibi damno
Dedecorique foret. Verum hoc se amplectitur uno,
Hoc amat and laudat: Matronam nullam ego tango.
Ut quondam Marsaeus amator Originis, ille
Qui patrium mimae donat fundumque laremque,
Nil fuerit mi, inquit, cum uxoribus unquam alienis.
Verum est cum mimis, est cum meretricibus: unde
Fama malum gravius, quam res, trahit. An tibi abunde
Personam satis est, non illud, quicquid ubique
Officit, evitare? bonam deperdere famam,
Rem patris oblimare, malum est ubicumque, Quid inter-
Est in matrona, ancilla, peccesne togata?
Villius in Fausta Sullae gener, hoc miser uno
Nomine deceptus, poenas dedit usque, superque
Quam satis est; pugnis caesus, ferroque petitus,
Exclusus fore, cum Longarenus foret intus.
Huic si, mutonis verbis, mala tanta videnti
Diceret haec animus: Quid vis tibi? numquid ego a te
Magno prognatum deposco consule Magno prognatum deposco consule Cunnum.
" A thing descended from the conqueror."
A thing descended -- why thing? the poet has it Cunnum; which, therefore,
boldly place here. BENT.
CUNNUM,
Velatumque stola, mea cum conferbuit ira?
Quid responderet? Magno patre nata puella est.
At quanto meliora monet, pugnantiaque istis,
Dives opis natura suae! ut si modo recte
Dispensare velis, ac non fugienda petendis
Inmiscere.
-- Tuo vitio, rerumne labores,
Nil refer putas? quare, non poeniteat te,
Define matronas sectarier: unde laboris
Plus haurire mali est, quam ex re decerpere fructus.
Nec magis huic, inter niveos viridesque lapillos
Sit licet, o Cerinthe, tuo tenerum est femur, aut crus
Rectius: atque etiam melius persaepe togatae est.
Add huc, quod mercem sine fucis gestat; aperte
Qucd venale habet, ostendit; neque si quid honesti est
Jactat habetque palam, quaerit quo turpia celet.
Regibus hic mos est, ubi equos mercantur opertos
Inspiciunt: ne si facies, ut saepe, decora
Molli fulta pede est; emtorem ducat hiantem,
Quod pulchrae clunes, breve quod caput, ardua cervix.
Hoc illi recte. Tu corporis optima Lyncei
Contemplare oculis; Hypsaea caecior, illa
Quae mala sunt, spectas, O crus, O brachia! verum
Depygis, nasuta, brevi latere, ac pede longo est.
Matronae, praeter faciem, nil cernere possis;
Caetera, ni Catia est, demissa vest tegentis.
Si interdicta petes, vallo circumdata, (nam te
Hoc facit insanum) multa tibi tum officient res;
Custodes, lectica, ciniflones, parafitae;
Ad talos stola demissa, and circumdata palla:
Plurima, quae invideant pure apparere tibi rem.
Altera nil obstat: Cois tibi pene videre est
Ut nudam; ne crure malo, ne sit pede turpi:
Metiri possis oculo latus, an tibi mavis
Insidias fieri, pretiumque avellier, ante
Quam mercem ostendi?
-- LEPOREM venator ut alta
In nive sectetur, positum sic tangere nolit:
Cantat, and adponit MEUS est amor huic similis, nam
Transvolat in medio posita, and fugientia captat.
Hiscene versiculis speras tibi posse dolores,
Atque aestus, curasque graves e pectore tolli?
Nonne, cupidinibus statuat natura modum quem,
Quid latura, sibi quid sit dolitura negatum,
Quaerere plus prodest; and inane abscindere soldo?
Number, tibi cum fauces urit sitis, aurea quaeris
Pocula? number esuriens fastidis omnia praeter
PAVONEM, Pea-chicks.] "Not ill rendered, meaning a young or soft piece,
Anglice a tid-bit: such as that delicate youth Cerinthus, whose flesh, our
Horace expressly says, was as tender as a lady's, and our Imitator turned Such
nicety, as Lady or Lord F^
not amiss truly; it agrees with my own reading of tuo femore, instead of tuum
femur, and favors of the true taste of antiquity." BENT.


Pavonem rhombumque? tument tibi cum inguina, number, si
Ancilla aut verna est praesto puer, impetus in quem
Continuo fiat, malis tentigine rumpi?
Non ego: namque "parabilem amo venerem, facilemque."
ILLAM, post paulo, sed pluris si exierit vir,
Gallis: hanc Philodemus ait sibi, quae neque magno
Stet pretio; nec cunctetur, cum est jussa venire.
Candida rectaque sit; munda hactenus, ut neque longa,
Nec magis alba velit, quam det natura, videri.
Haec, ubi supposuit dextro corpus mihi laevum,
Ilia and Egeria est: do nomen quodlibet illi.
Nec vereor, ne, dum futuo, vir rure recurrat;
Janua frangatur; latret canis; undique magno
Pulsa domus strepitu resonet: ne pallida lecto
Defiliat mulier; miseram se conscia clamet;
Cruribus haec metuat, doti haec deprensa, egomet mi.
Discincta tunica fugiendum est, ac pede nudo;
Ne nummi pereant, aut pyga, aut denique fama.
Deprendi miserum est: Fabio vel judice vincam.
SOBER ADVICE FROM HORACE.
THE tribe of Templars, Play'rs, Apothecaries,
Pimps, Poets, Wits, Lord Fanny's, Lady Mary's,
And all the court in tears, and half the town,
Lament dear charming Oldfield, dead and gone!
Engaging Oldfield! who, with grace and ease,
Could join the arts, to ruin and to please.
Not so, who of ten thousand gulled her knight,
Then asked ten thousand for a second night;
The gallant too, to whom she paid it down,
Lived to refuse that mistress half a crown This is a piece of traveling
scandal, related of the late Duchess of C^d, and the late Duke of M^h. E. C.
.
Con. Philips cries, "A sneaking dog I hate,"
That Is all three lovers have for their estate!
" Treat on, treat on," is her eternal note,
And lands and tenements go down her throat.
Some damn the jade, and some the cullies blame,
But not Sir H^t, for he does the same.
With all a woman's virtues but the pox,
Fufidia thrives in money, land, and stocks:
For interest, ten per cent. her constant rate is;
Her body! hopeful heirs may have it gratis.
She turns her very sister to a Job,
And, in the happy minute, picks your fob:
Yet starves herself, so little her own friend,
And thirsts and hungers only at one end:
A self-tormentor, worse than (in the Sea my Terence, Heautontimorumenos: there
is nothing in Dr. Hare's. BENT.
Play)
The wretch, whose avarice drove his son away.
But why all this? Beloved, it is my theme:
" Women and fools are always in extreme."
Rufa's at either end a common-shoar,
Sweet Moll and Jack are civet-cat and boar:
Nothing in nature is so lewd as Peg,
Yet, for the world, she would not show her leg!
While bashful Jenny, even at morning prayer,
A verse taken from Mr. Pope; of which; Mr. Pope is so fond, that he has made
use of it no less than three times. E. C.
Spreads her fore-buttocks to the navel bare.
But different taste in different men prevails,
And one is fired by heads, and one by tails;
Some feel no flames but at the court or ball,
And others hunt white aprons in the Mall.
My lord of L^n, chancing to remark
A noted Dean much busied in the Park,
" Proceed (he cried) proceed, my reverend brother,
" It Is fornicatio simplex, and no other.
" Better than lust for boys, with Pope and Turk,
" Or others spouses, like Others read Lord Mayor Cork would have stopped this
hole. E. C.
.
my Lord of (...)."
May no such praise (cries J^s) ever be mine,
J^s, who bows at Hi^sb^w's hoary shrine.
All you, who think the city never can thrive,
'Till every cuckold maker's flead alive,
Attend, while I their miseries explain,
And pity men of pleasure still in pain!
Survey the pangs they bear, the risques they run,
Where the most lucky are but last undone.
See wretched Monsieur flies to save his throat,
And quits his mistress, money, ring, and note!
K^ of his footman's borrowed livery stripped,
By worthier footmen pist upon and whipped!
Plundered by thieves, or lawyers, which is worse,
One bleeds in person, and one bleeds in purse;
This meets a blanket, and that meets a cudgel --
And all applaud the Justice -- All, but A gentleman as celebrated for his
gallantries as his politics; an entertaining history of which may be
published, without the least scandal on the ladies. E. CURL This opinion I
agree to as true, but that this note was mine, is false. E. C.
.
Budgell.
How much more safe, dear countrymen! his state,
Who trades in frigates of the second rate?
And yet some care of S^st should be had,
Nothing so mean for which he cannot run mad;
His wit confirms him but a slave the more,
And makes a princess whom he found a whore.
The youth might save much trouble and expense,
Were he a dupe of only common sense.
But here is his point; a wench (he cries) for me!
" I never touch a dame of quality."
To P^l^r's bed no actress comes amiss,
He courts the whole personae dramatis:
He too can say, "With wives I never sin:"
But singing-girls and mimicks draw him in.
Sure, worthy Sir, the difference is not great,
With whom you lose your credit and estate?
This, or that person, what avails to shun?
What Is wrong is wrong, wherever it be done:
The ease, support, and luster of your life,
Destroyed alike with strumpet, maid, or wife.
What pushed poor E^s on the imperial whore?
'Twas but to be where CHARLES had been before.
The fatal steel unjustly was applied,
When not his lust offended, but his pride:
Too hard a penance for defeated sin,
Himself shut out, and Jacob Hall A famous rope-dancer.
let in.
Suppose that honest part that rules us all,
Should rise, and say -- "Sir Robert! or Sir Paul!
" Did I demand, in my most vigorous hour,
" A thing descended from the conqueror?
" Or when my pulse beat highest, ask for any
" Such nicety as Lady or Lord Fanny?" --
What would you answer? could you have the face,
When the poor suff'rer humbly mourned his case,
To cry, "You weep the favors of her Spoken not of one particular duchess,
but of diverse dutchesses.
GRACE?"
Has not indulgent nature spread a feast,
The original manuscript has it, -- " Spread a feast
" Of -- enough for man, enough for beast:"
but we prefer the present, as the purer diction.
And given enough for man, enough for beast?
But man corrupt, perverse in all his ways,
In search of vanities from nature strays:
Yea, though the blessing's more than he can use,
Shuns the permitted, the forbid pursues!
Weigh well the cause from whence these evils spring,
It Is in thyself, and not in God's good thing:
Then, lest repentance punish such a life,
Never, ah! never! kiss thy neighbor's wise.
First, silks and diamonds veil no finer shape,
Or plumper thigh, than lurk in humble crape:
And secondly, how innocent a belle
Is she who shows what ware she has to sell;
Not lady-like, displays a milk-white breast,
And hides in sacred sluttishness the rest.
Our ancient kings (and sure those kings were wise,
Who judged themselves, and saw with their own eyes)
A war-horse never for the service chose,
But eyed him round, and stripped of all the clothes;
For well they knew, proud trappings serve to hide
A heavy chest, thick neck, or heavy side.
But fools are ready chaps, agog to buy,
Let but a comely fore-hand strike the eye:
No eagle sharper, every charm to find,
To all defects, Ty^y not so blind:
Goose-rump'd, hawk-nos'd, swan-footed, is my dear:
They Will praise her elbow, heel, or tip of the ear.
A lady's face is all you see undressed;
(For none but Lady M^ showed the rest)
But if to charms more latent you pretend,
What lines encompass, and what works defend!
Dangers on dangers! obstacles by dozens!
Spies, guardians, guests, old women, aunts, and cozens There is a famous
stay-maker of this name, which stiffens the double entendre here meant. E. C.
!
Could you directly to her person go,
Stays will obstruct above, and hoops below,
And if the dame says yes, the dress says no.
Not thus at Needham's A quondam bawd of high renown, " In whose apartments P^
has often been seen,
" Patting fore-buttocks, to divert the spleen."

; your judicious eye
May measure there the breast, the hip, the thigh!
And will you run to perils, sword, and law,
All for a thing you never so much as saw?
" The hare once seized, the hunter heeds no more
" The little scut he so pursued before,
" Love follows flying game (as Sucklyn) sings
" And it is for that the wanton boy has wings."
Why let him sing -- but when you're in the wrong,
Think you to cure the mischief with a song?
Has nature set no bounds to wild desire?
No sense to guide, no reason to enquire,
What solid happiness, what empty pride?
And what is best indulged, or best denied?
If neither gems adorn, nor silver tip
The flowing bowl, will you not wet your lip?
When sharp with hunger, scorn you to be fed,
Except on Pea-Chicks, at the Bedford-head A noted tavern for eating, drinking,
and gaming, in Southampton-street, Covent Garden. E. C.
?
Or when a tight, neat girl, will serve the turn,
In errant pride continue stiff, and burn?
I Am a plain man, whose maxim is prosest,
" The thing at hand is of all things the best."
But her who will, and then will not comply,
Whose word is If, Perhaps, and By-and-by,
Z^ds! let some eunuch or platonic take --
So B^t cries, philosopher and rake!
Who asks no more (right reasonable peer)
Than not to wait too long, nor pay too dear.
Give me a willing nymph! it is all I care,
Extremely clean, and tolerably fair,
Her shape her own, whatever shape she have,
And just that white and red which nature gave.
Her I transported touch, transported view,
And call her Angel! Goddess! M^ue!
No furious husband thunders at the door;
No barking dog, no household in a roar;
From gleaming swords no shrieking women run;
No wretched wife cries out, Undone! Undone!
Seized in the fact, and in her cuckold's power,
She kneels, she weeps, and worse! resigns her dower.
Me, naked me, to posts, to pumps they draw,
To shame eternal, or eternal law.
Oh love! be deep tranquillity my luck Here the Imitator errs. The Latin has it
dum futuo, a most necessary circumstance! which ought to be restored; and may,
by the change of a single word, be the same with that of the author, and one
which would marvellously agree with the ladies in the second line. BENT.
!
No mistress H^ysh^m near, no Lady B^ck!
For, to be taken, is the devilish in hell;
This truth, let L^l, J^ys, O^w tell.
An Epistle to HENRY CROMWELL, Esquire The author's age 19.
.
By Mr. POPE.
DEAR MR. CROMWELL,
MAY it please ye!
Sit still a moment; pray be easy --
Faith it is not five; no play's begun;
No game at Ombre lost or won.
Read something of a different nature
Than Evening Post, or Observator;
And pardon me a little fooling,
-- Just while the coffee stands a cooling.
Since your acquaintance with one Brocas Commonly called Beau Brocas.
,
Who needs will back the muses cock-horse,
I know you dread all those who write,
And both with mouth and hand recite;
Who slow, and leisurely rehearse
As loath to enrich you with their verse;
Just as a still, with simples in it,
Betwixt each drop stays half a minute.
(That simile is not my own,
But lawfully belongs to Done;
You see how well I can contrive a
Interpolatio furtiva)
To Brocas' lays no more you listen,
Than to the wicked works of Whiston;
In vain he strains to reach your ear,
With what it, wisely, will not hear:
You bless the power who made that organ
Deaf to the voice of such a Gorgon,
(For so one sure may call that head,
Which does not look, but read men dead.)
I hope you think me none of those
Who show their parts as Pentlow does:
I but lug out to one or two
Such friends, if such there are, as you,
Such, who read Heinsius and Masson,
And as you please to pass their doom,
(Who are to me both Smith and Johnson)
So seize them flames, or take them Tonson.
But, Sir, from Brocas, Fouler, me,
In vain you think to 'scape Rhyme-free:
When was it known one bard did follow
Whig-maxims, and abjure Apollo?
Sooner shall major general cease
To talk of war, and live in peace;
Yourself for goose reject crow-quill,
And for plain Spanish quit Brasil;
Sooner shall Row lampoon the Union,
Tydcombe take oaths on the Communion;
The Granville's write their name plain Greenfield,
Nay, Mr. Wycherly see Binfield.
I Am told, you think to take a step some
Ten miles from town to a place called Epsom,
To treat those nymphs like yours of Drury,
With -- I protest, and I Will assure ye; --
But though from flame to flame you wander,
Beware; your heart's no Salamander!
But burnt so long, may soon turn tinder,
And so be fired by any cinder-
(Wench, I Would have said, did rhyme not hinder)
Should it so prove, yet who'd admire?
It Is known, a cook-maid roasted Prior;
Lardella fired a famous author,
And for a butcher's well-fed daughter
Great D^s roared, like ox at slaughter.
(Now, if you're weary of my style,
Take out your box of right Brasil,
First lay this paper under, then,
Snuff just three times, and read again.)
I had to see you some intent,
But for a cursed impediment,
Which spoils full many a good design,
That is to say, the want of coin.
For which, I had resolved almost,
To raise Tiberius Gracchus' ghost;
To get, by once more murdering Caius,
As much as did Septimuleius;
But who so dear will buy the lead,
That lies within a poet's head,
As that which in the hero's pate
Deserved of gold an equal weight?
Sir, you're so stiff in your opinion,
I wish you do not turn Socinian;
Or prove reviver of a schism,
By modern wits called Quixotism.
What moved you, pray, without compelling,
Like Trojan true, to draw for Hellen?
Quarrel with Dryden for a strumpet,
(For so she was, as ever showed rump yet,
Though I confess, she had much grace,
Especially about the face.)
Virgil, when called Pasiphae Virgo
(You say) he would more good-breeding; Ergo --
Well argued, faith! your point you urge
As home, as ever did Panurge:
And one may say of Dryden too,
(As once you said of you know who)
He had some fancy, and could write;
Was very learned, but not polite --
However, from my soul I judge
He never (good man) bore Hellen grudge,
But loved her full as well it may be,
As ever he did his own dear lady Mr. Dryden married Lady Elizabeth Howard.
.
You have no cause to take offense, Sir,
Z^ds, you're as sour as Cato Censor;
Ten times more like him, I profess,
Than I Am like Aristophanes.
To end with news -- the best I know
Is, I Have been well a week, or so.
The season of green pease is fled,
And artichokes reign in their stead.
The allies to bomb Toulon prepare;
G^d save the pretty ladies there!
One of our dogs is dead and gone,
And I, unhappy! left alone.
If you have any consolation
TO administer on this occasion,
Send it, I pray, by the next post,
Before my sorrow be quite lost.
The twelfth or thirteenth day of July,
But which, I cannot tell you truly 1707.
.
The TRANSLATOR.
By Mr. POPE.
OZELL, at Sanger's Egbert Sanger served his apprenticeship with Jacob Tonson,
and succeeded Bernard Lintot in his shop at the Middle Temple gate,
Fleet Street; Lintot printed Ozell's translation of Perault's Characters, and
Sanger his translation of Boileau's Lutrin, recommended by Mr. Row, anno 1709.
call, invoked his Muse,
For who to sing for Sanger could refuse?
His numbers such as Sanger's self might use.
Reviving Perault, murdering Boileau, he
Slandered the ancients first, then Wycherley;
Which yet not much that old bard's anger raised,
Since those were slandered most, whom Ozell praised.
Nor had the gentle satire caused complaining,
Had not sage Row pronounced it entertaining;
How great must be the judgment of that writer,
Who the Plain-dealer damns, and prints the Biter The Biter, an unsuccessful
comedy by Mr. Row.
!
ROXANA, or the DRAWING ROOM.
By Mr. POPE.
ROXANA from the court returning late,
Sighed her soft sorrow at St. James's gate:
Such heavy thoughts lay brooding in her breast;
Not her own chairmen with more weight oppressed:
They curse the cruel weight they are doomed to bear;
She in more gentle sounds expressed her care.
Was it for this, that I these roses wear?
For this, new-set the jewels for my hair?
Ah Princess! with what zeal have I pursued?
Almost forgot the duty of a prude.
This King, I never could attend too soon;
I missed my prayers, to get me dressed by noon.
For thee, ah! what for thee did I resign?
My passions, pleasures, all that ever was mine:
I Have sacrificed both modesty, and ease;
Left operas, and went to filthy plays:
Double entendres shocked my tender ear;
Yet even this, for thee, I choose to bear:
In glowing youth, when nature bids be gay,
And every joy of life before me lay;
By honor prompted, and by pride restrained,
The pleasures of the young my soul disdained:
Sermons I sought, and with a mien severe,
Censured my neighbors, and said daily prayer.
Alas, how changed! with this same sermon-mien,
The filthy What-d'ye-call-it -- I have seen.
Ah, royal Princess! for whose sake I lost
The reputation, which so dear had cost;
I, who avoided every public place,
When bloom and beauty bid me show my face,
Now near thee, constant, I each night abide,
With never-failing duty by thy side;
Myself and daughters standing in a row,
To all the foreigners a goodly show.
Often had your drawing room been sadly thin,
And merchants wives close by your side had been;
Had I not amply filled the empty place,
And saved your Highness from the dire disgrace:
Yet Cockatilla's artifice prevails,
When all my duty and my merit fails:
That Cockatilla, whose deluding airs
Corrupts our virgins, and our youth ensnares;
So sunk her character, and lost her fame,
Scarce visited, before your Highness came;
Yet for the bedchamber it is she you choose,
Whilst zeal, and fame, and virtue you refuse.
Ah worthy choice! not one of all your train
Which censures blast not, or dishonours stain.
I know the court, with all its treacherous wiles,
The false caresses, and undoing smiles.
Ah Princess! learned in all the courtly arts,
To cheat our hopes, and yet to gain our hearts.
The LOOKING-GLASS These verses were possibly secreted, from the author's
becoming soon after acquainted with the lady and her husband on whom they were
written, as appears by a letter to Mr. Gay, Nov. 8, 1718.

By Mr. POPE.
WITH scornful mien, and various toss of air,
Fantastic, vain, and insolently fair,
Grandeur intoxicates her giddy brain,
She looks ambition, and she moves disdain.
Far other carriage graced her virgin life,
But charming G^y's lost, in P^y's wife.
Not greater arrogance in him we find,
And this conjunction swells at least her mind:
O could the fire, renowned in glass, produce
One faithful mirror for his daughter's use!
Wherein she might her haughty errors trace,
And by reflection learn to mend her face:
The wonted sweetness to her form restore,
Be what she was, and charm mankind once more.
The CHALLENGE. A Court Ballad.
By Mr. POPE.
To the Tune of, To all you Ladies now at Land, etc.
I.
To one fair lady out of court,
And two fair ladies in,
Who think the Turk Ulrick, the little Turk.
, and Pope The Author.
a sport,
And wit and love no sin;
Come, these soft lines, with nothing stiff in,
To Bellenden, Lepell, and Griffin.
With a fa, la, la.
II.
What passes in the dark third row,
And what behind the scene,
Couches and crippled chairs I know,
And garrets hung with green;
I know the swing of sinful back,
Where many damsels cry alack.
With a fa, la, la.
III.
Then why to courts should I repair,
Where Is such ado with Townshend?
To hear each mortal stamp and swear,
And every speech with Zounds end;
To hear 'em rail at honest Sunderland,
And rashly blame the realm of Blunderland Ireland.

With a fa, la, la.
IV.
Alas! like Schutz I cannot pun,
Like Grafton court the Germans;
Tell Pickenbourg how slim she is grown,
Like Meadows run to sermons;
To court ambitious men may roam,
But I and Marlbro' stay at home.
With a fa, la, la.
V.
In truth, by what I can discern,
Of courtiers 'twixt you three,
Some wit you have, and more may learn
From court, than Gay or Me:
Perhaps, in time, you will leave high diet,
To sup with us on milk and quiet.
With a fa, la, la.
VI.
At Leicester-Fields, a house full high,
With door all painted green,
Where ribbons wave upon the tie,
(A Milliner I mean;)
There may you meet us three to three,
For Gay can well make two of Me.
With a fa, la, la.
VII.
But should you catch the prudish itch,
And each become a coward,
Bring sometimes with you lady Rich,
And sometimes mistress Howard;
For virgins to keep chaste must go
Abroad with such as are not so.
With a fa, la, la.
VIII.
And thus, fair maids, my ballad ends;
God send the king safe landing This Ballad was written anno 1717.
;
And make all honest ladies friends
To armies that are standing;
Preserve the limits of these nations,
And take off ladies limitations.
With a fa, la, la.
The THREE GENTLE SHEPHERDS The Three Gentle Shepherds being left out by Mr.
Pope, seems sufficiently explained in the letter to an honorable person, June
8th, 1714, and the Dunciad.
.
By Mr. POPE.
OF gentle Philips will I ever sing,
With gentle Philips shall the valleys ring.
My numbers too for ever will I vary,
With gentle Budgell, and with gentle Carey.
Or if in ranging of the names I judge ill,
With gentle Carey and with gentle Budgell.
Oh! may all gentle bards together place ye,
Men of good hearts, and men of delicacy.
May satire never befool ye, or beknave ye,
And from all wits that have a knack, Gad save ye.
LINES copied from Mr. POPE's Handwriting, on a Scrap of Paper.
BUT our great Turks in wit must reign alone,
And ill can bear a brother on the throne.
Can bear no living brother on the throne.
Wit has its bigots, who can bear no jest,
Who to be saved by one, must damn the rest.
Wit is like faith by such warm tools professed.
Wits starve, as useless to a commonweal,
While fools have places, purely for their zeal.
Some who grow dull, religious straight commence,
And gain in morals, what they lose in sense.
Now wits gain praise by copying other wits,
As one hog lives on what another she.
Would you your writings to some palates fit,
Purge all your verses from the sin of wit;
For authors now are so conceited grown,
They praise no works but what are like their own.
AN ESSAY ON HUMAN LIFE.
-- Sapientia prima est
Stultitia caruisse --
HOR.
THE PREFACE.
OF all kinds of poetry the Didascalic is the most valuable, if aiming at the
good of mankind be what justly entitles any thing to that character. The
descriptive kind is like a fine landscape, where you meet with two or three
principal figures; the rest is all rocks, rivulets, hanging woods and verdant
lawns, amusing to the eye, showing the taste of the painter, but carrying
little instruction along with it. But the Didascalic is like a curious piece of
history painting, where every figure must be highly wrought, every passion
strongly represented, all contributing in their several degrees to express the
main design; in short, it must be a finished piece.

That this is a very difficult work may be collected from the small number of
those poets who have ever attempted it. In the early ages of the Grecians, I
remember none who have wrote any thing in this way but old Hesiod, Aratus, and
Nicander; for Dionysius, the Periegetic, and Agesilaus, Oppian's father, was a
man of great learning and merit as well as wealth and power, in the city of
Anazarbus in Cilicia, where he lived: Severus making a progress, came to that
town, and Agesilaus being not at the procession to meet the Emperor at his
entrance, probably on account of his age and infirmities, that prince, to
punish him for so heinous a crime, banished the poor old man to Malta. Oppian,
to amuse his father under his misfortune, took to writing of poetry, and
afterward dedicated his Halieutics to the Emperor's son. The Emperor was so
pleased with the poem, that he ordered him a piece of gold for each line, and
offered him any other favor he would ask. The first part of the story is not
at all wonderful, but I must confess the last part is a little surprising.
Oppian, lived not 'till the time of the Roman Emperors. Hesiod's works and
days is the only piece remaining that is allowed to be genuine without dispute;
but by Virgil's, and especially Manilius's compliments to him, it is highly
probable he wrote others, and perhaps more valuable ones, though Quintilian
allows him the Palma in illo medio genere dicendi only, and Le Fevre is much
more hard upon him when he makes him little better than an almanack-maker, and
his work a mean performance. Paterculus and Plutarch set him next to Homer, as
well in the value of his works, as in the period of his age, says Mr. Kennet;
but perhaps that may be the other extreme. Aratus wrote a poem, in two books,
which he calls the Phenomenon, and Diosemeia, the one astronomical, giving an
account of the situation and the affection of the heavenly bodies, the other
astrological, showing the particular influences arising from their various
dispositions and relations Kennet's lives of the Greek poets.
. Tully commends him for his versification, and Quintilian says, he has fully
answered his argument, which put together, should make up a pretty good
character. As to Nicander, Vossius places him amongst his Greek historians, but
allows him to have been egregius grammaticus, poeta, and medicus. His surviving
works are, however, only poetry upon poisons, and the methods of cure for them.
Of the two latter Greek poets, Dionysius and Oppian, the one wrote a survey of
the world, and the other Cynegetics and Halieutics, in both which it is certain
there are very fine parts, however judgments may differ about them.

Amongst the Romans, Lucretius and Manilius may justly be said to be the chief
of the Didascalic poets. They both wrote with all the fire of their youth about
'em; for neither of them lived to be old. I have always fancied Manilius
imitated Lucretius in his manner, the beginning of his books being pretty much
in the same way, besides, that he loses no occasion of launching out into
descriptions, and is florid to a fault. He has likewise some reflections The
beginning of the fourth book.
on the follies of men, so very much of a piece with what you meet with in the
5th book of Lucretius, that one would almost think them taken from thence. In
general it may be said, they are both very noble poems, though that of Manilius
is far from being finished, as it might have been, if the author had lived.
What errors are to be found in the philosophy of the one, and the astronomy of
the other, are owing, perhaps, as much to the age of the world at that time, as
their own, and their beauties may, in some measure, atone for their faults.

Virgil's Georgics are in the same kind, though the subjects are of less dignity;
and I don't know whether I might not likewise add Ovid, on the account of his
Fasti, the most correct of all his works: Gratius too, about the same time,
wrote his Cynegetics, which are very justly esteemed.

Amongst the moderns, Fracastorius's Syphilis, Quillet's Callipaedia, and
Vida's Art of Poetry, are the best poems of this sort; Rapin of gardens, and
Vanier's Praedium Rusticum, are not without their merit, but much inferior to
the others. In our own language too we have some poems of this instructive
kind: The Essays on Poetry, Translated Verse, and Criticism, are fine instances
of the worth and excellency of this manner of writing, to which may be very
truly applied what Dr. Young says of Satyr, " Heroes and gods make other poems
fine,
" Plain satyr calls for sense in every line Universal Passion, Sat. II.
."
The strength of just observations, conveyed in smooth and flowing numbers, has
a prevailing influence, insinuates itself into the mind almost imperceptibly,
and makes a more lasting impression there than one would easily imagine. It Is
true these subjects are purely critical, and so of less consequence to mankind
in general; but yet, polishing the understanding, improving the judgment, and
regulating the taste, are far from being things indifferent to the world, since
they tend not a little to the shaming out of it that rusticity and barbarism,
those follies and affectations, in one word, all that littleness of mind which
is so effectual a bar in the way of generous and noble undertakings. But we
have had of late an undeniable proof that the finest and most useful sort of
philosophy, which consists in the knowledge of ourselves, may be conveyed in
such clear, strong, easy, and affecting strains, at the same time convincing
and captivating the understanding, that there remains no doubt but that poetry
in the hands of a great genius, may be made as beneficial as ever it has been
entertaining to mankind. The latter effect is indeed what has been generally
most aimed at, as it is compassed with less difficulty to the writer, and meets
with a more universal reception amongst the common sort of readers. -- Nec in
turbam nec turbae carmina condam.
MANIL. L. II.
Imagery, fine coloring, and bright antitheses, often disguise the want of
justness and force, and by pleasing the imagination, do, as it were, steal away
from the judgment, or sometimes impose upon it, as shadows pass for substances
with weak, distempered or fanciful men.

The Os magna sonaturum of Horace would make one almost think the muse must
never appear without her buskins, and that all simplicity of expression were to
be totally banished out of poetical writings. It Is true, the Epic Poem, the
Ode, and the Tragedy very often require, and consequently justify the use of
elevated language, as it may be more suitable to the greatness of the subjects,
and better fitted to raise the several passions they are designed to work upon.
But where the appeal lies only to the understanding, selfevident truths,
naturally and beautifully expressed, can never fail of the approbation of a
sound head and a good taste: And even Horace himself, as elevated and great a
poet as he must be allowed in his Odes, appears to much more advantage in his
Sermones and Epistles, where, as my Lord Roscommon observes on another
occasion, " Fancy labors less, but judgment more."


Sir John Denham's Cooper's Hill has met with universal applause, though its
subject seems rather descriptive than instructing; but it is not the hill, the
river, nor the stag chase; it is the good sense and the fine reflections so
frequently interspersed, and as it were interwoven with the rest, that gives it
the value, and will make it, as was said of true wit, everlasting like the sun.

The late Mr. Prior's Solomon seems to have cost him much time and pains, and
was, I believe, his favorite performance: He is in some doubt whether to call
it a Didascalic or Heroic poem. It has, indeed, something of both, and yet
strictly speaking, is perfectly neither: It has not fable, machinery, nor
variety enough to be an Heroic poem, and it is too diffusive and luxuriant in
the style, too florid and full of descriptions to be of the Didascalic sort. In
general, it may be justly said to be a very fine piece; though I must confess I
cannot help giving the preference to his Alma, in which the design is more
closely pursued, carried on with more spirit, and never loses your attention.

Upon the whole, what Mr. Dryden has said in the preface to his Religio Laici,
is, I think, very true. "The expressions of a poem, designed purely for
instruction, ought to be plain and natural, and yet majestic: for here the poet
is presumed to be a kind of lawgiver, and those three qualities which I have
named, are proper to the legislative style. The florid, elevated and figurative
way, is for the passions; for love and hatred, fear and anger are begotten in
the soul by showing their objects out of their true proportion; either greater
than the life or less; but instruction is to be given by showing them what they
naturally are. A man is to be cheated into passion, but to be reasoned into
truth."

The following short piece may be perhaps a little too pompously introduced by
the foregoing observations; all I shall say for it is, I endeavored to follow
Mr. Dryden's rules: how far I have succeeded, I can be no proper judge myself.
But whatever may be said of the poetry, and about that I am very indifferent,
the sentiments must surely be allowed to be just and good; and I am entirely of
Mr. Prior's opinion: "I had rather be thought a good Englishman, (which is but
another word for an honest man) than the best poet, or greatest scholar that
ever wrote."

AN ESSAY ON HUMAN LIFE The Essay on Human Life was printed soon after the
Essay on Man was ushered into the world by the same publisher, and asserted in
the title to be written by the same author. This circumstance was never
contradicted by Mr. Pope. The hint for the performance was probably taken from
Dr. Swift's letter, July 23, 1737, where he observes -- From these volumes of
letters might be collected the best system that ever was wrote for the conduct
of Human Life.

As to the other poems, they speak for themselves; and as they were universally
acknowledged to be Mr. Pope's at their first appearance, they will not, we
presume, be disputed now.



By Mr. POPE.
PLEASURE but cheats us with an empty name,
Still seems to vary, yet is still the same;
Amusement's all its utmost skill can boast,
By use it lessens, and in thought is lost.
The youth that riots and the age that hoards,
Folly that sacrifices things to words;
Pride, wit and beauty in one taste agree,
It Is sensual, or it is mental luxury.
Sad state of nature, doomed to fruitless pain,
Something to wish and want, but never gain:
Restless we live, and disappointed die,
Unhappy, though we know not how nor why.
Reason, perhaps, may lend her generous aid;
Reason, which never yet her trust betrayed:
Let her direct us in the doubtful strife,
Let her conduct us through the maze of life.
Is human reason then from weakness free?
Partakes she not of our infirmity?
Can she apply, with never-failing art,
The healing balsam to the wounded part?
Correct those errors, which the passions cause,
And teach the will to follow wisdom's laws?
Alas! experience but too plainly shows,
That man can act against the truths he knows:
By customs led, or by allurements won,
Discern that evil which he cannot shun.
Whatever we do, the motive's much the same,
It Is impulse governs under reason's name;
Each eagerly some favorite end pursues,
And different tempers furnish different views.
Is it for fear of wrong, or love of right,
That statesmen labor, or that warriors fight?
To Enrich his country, does the sailor brave
The cruel pirate, and the threatening wave?
In search of truth, unwearied sages try,
By certain rules, to fix uncertainty?
No! it is desire and hope that drive them on:
Thus greatest things for meanest ends are done.
Self-love, however disguised, misunderstood,
However misplaced, is still the sovereign good:
Virtue or wisdom but the vain pretense;
These may direct, but passions influence.
Presumptuous man! why boasts thou thy free will,
By constitution doomed to good or ill?
What feeble checks are all those studied rules,
Unpracticed lessons of the useless schools?
Say, can thy art, opposed to nature's force,
Obstruct her motions, or suspend her course?
Go, change in Africa their sable hue,
Or make our Europe bring her negroes too;
Roll back the tides, forbid the streams to flow,
Nor let this earth returning seasons know.
Slave to thyself, whilst lord of all beside,
Surmount thy weakness, or renounce thy pride.
That moving power, which first produced the whole,
To every thing has fixed a certain goal:
Thither all tend, and must their circles run,
For such the order when the whole begun.
To different creatures different ranks assigned,
Man claims the first, as of a nobler kind;
How just that claim, what wisdom must decide?
Reason is his alone, by which it is tried:
Inferior creatures silently submit,
It Is his to talk, and therefore to have wit.
Thus haughty Greece despised the world around,
And barbarous, all she understood not, found.
Look over the wide creation, see how all
Its several parts obey the Maker's call:
The earth how fertile, and how rich the sea,
In various salts, for nature's chemistry;
Slow air digests what burning suns exhale,
And dews, and snows, and rains, by turns, prevail.
Beasts, birds, and reptiles, see 'em all conspire,
To act whatever their several states require.
But wiser man disdains this meaner part,
Nature, with him, must still give way to art;
Vain of conceit, he boasts his fancied skill;
And, arbitrary, rules the world at will:
Now fierce and cruel, then as mild and kind,
Each action owing to each turn of mind;
One day a friend, the next as great a foe,
As humor, pique, caprice, or interests go;
Wisdom and folly thus, by turns, preside,
And chance alone inclines to either side.
Ask the bold freeman, or the coward slave,
What makes one abject, and the other brave?
What gives to sools their faith, to knaves their wiles,
To cynicks fourness, and to flatt'rers smiles?
This one great truth must stand by all confessed,
Some ruling passion lurks in every breast;
That weakness by a specious name they call,
For it is that weakness still which governs all.
Wisely the springs of action we conceal:
Thus sordidness is prudence; fury, zeal;
Ambition makes the public good her care,
And hypocrites the mask of saintship wear.
Inured to falsehood, we ourselves deceive;
Often what we wish, we fancy we believe;
We call that judgment which is only will,
And as we act, we learn to argue ill;
Like bigots, who their various creeds desend
By making reason still to system bend.
Customs or interests govern all mankind,
Some biass cleaves to the unguarded mind;
Through this, as in a false or flattering glass,
Things seem to change their natures as they pass.
Objects the same in different lights appear,
And but the colors which we give 'em wear.
Error and fraud from this great source arise,
All fools are modish, and all knaves are wise.
Who does not boast some merit of his own,
Though to himself perhaps it is only known?
Each suits reward to his own favorite vice,
Pride has its crowns, and lust its paradise:
Bonze, priest and dervise, all in this agree,
That heaven must be pomp or luxury;
Man, slave to sense, no higher bliss can know,
Still measures things above by things below.
Joys much the same, but differ in degree,
As time enlarged becomes eternity.
How vain is all that science we pursue!
Scorned by the many, useless to the few:
Since short of truth our utmost labors end,
Who knows but ignorance is our greatest friend?
The fruitless pains but show the weakness more,
And we, like misers, 'midst our wealth are poor.
Much hoarded learning but like lumber lies,
Or ends in guess-work and obscurities.
What though proud Greece her seven sages boast?
The names alone remain, the race is lost.
Satyrs, and Centaurs too, might live of old,
(For so we are in ancient story told)
But should we doubt in this our faithless age;
Who can produce a Centaur or a sage?
Such mighty births were nature's first essays,
The lusty offspring of her youthful days;
Our latter times can no such wonders show,
But what were giants then, are pigmies now.
Of all the painful follies of mankind,
Still to be seeking what they never must find,
Is sure the greatest, not unlike the toil
Of him who labors in a barren soil.
Beyond our state if our fond wishes tend,
Means must be vain where we mistake the end.
Pride whispers mighty projects in the ear,
Bids us be great, be wise, be happy here;
But sad experience shows the laws of fate,
And teaches us to know ourselves too late.
Error is a distemper of the mind,
Hard to be cured, because it is hard to find;
So mixed and blended with our very frame,
It lurks secure and borrows reason's name.
In different persons different ways it springs,
It Is factiousness in subjects, pride in kings;
Boundless alike they in extremes agree,
These in oppression, those in anarchy;
Both aim at what 'twere ruin to obtain,
A civil phrenzy, or a tyrant reign.
The wise must into nature's secrets pry,
The weak believe they know not what nor why;
And we may equally deluded call,
Who doubt of nothing, as who doubt of all.
Profane or pious, bigotry's the same,
The motives terror, avarice, or fame.
Opinion is but interest in disguise,
And right and wrong in strength of parties lies.
Some would be happy, know nor want nor care,
Others still find more evils than there are;
Whilst truth unheeded in the midway lies,
And all extremes are like absurdities.
Wrong turns of head are nature's greatest curse,
Improving everyday from bad to worse.
In some odd light all objects still they view,
Thus true with them is false, and false is true.
In trifles solemn, diligent and wise,
Important things as trifles they despise;
Caressing enemies, their friends they shun,
And dote on knaves, by whom they are undone.
Deaf to advice, or taking wrong for right,
They boldly blunder on in reason's spite;
And under clearer light's obscure pretense
Are the antipodes of common sense.
Would you persuade a wretch intent on pelf,
Though he starves others, not to starve himself;
To sense, at lead, his sapless trunk from cold,
Nor seem as fond of tatters as of gold;
No! he is too cunning for your fly design,
You Would have him like yourself, be poor and fine;
But he, in spite of envy, richer grows,
And scorns the luxury of meat and clothes.
Ask the ambitious why he wastes his life
In needless struggles and uncertain strife?
Why not in peace enjoy what plenty gives?
So the obscure, the weak, the lazy lives;
Exalted spirits have a nobler aim,
And know no happiness but toil and fame.
Well must it suit a selfish hollow heart,
To act the honest patriot's generous part;
No tool of party, nor no slave of state,
No mean dependant on the guilty great;
Boldly he pleads for liberty and laws,
Content to perish in his country's cause;
When lo! a ray divine of favor gleams,
Quite different topics then become his themes;
Old friends, old notions are at once forgot,
And shame and wages are the hireling's lot.
The little mind whose joy in mischief lies,
Hates all mankind, but most the good and wise;
Proud of his shame, he boasts his spiteful skill,
And places all his worth in doing ill.
But base-born fear often checks what rage devised,
And leaves him disappointed and despised.
Endless the task to point the various ways,
How each wrong head its different gifts displays;
How poverty in boasts its wants would hide,
And meanness shows itself in awkward pride;
How knaves are cunning at their own expense,
And coxcombs fancy forwardness is sense.
Vain is the attempt to be what heaven denies,
As vain the art that weakness to disguise.
Prudence alone can teach the useful skill,
T'improve the good, and to correct the ill.
True wisdom lies in practice more than rules,
For what are maxims when applied to fools?
Of wit and folly reason all you can,
Who acts most wisely is the wisest man.
Each state of life has its peculiar view,
Alike in each, there is a false and true:
This point to fix is reason's use and end,
On this success all other must depend;
But in this point no error can be small,
To deviate ever so little, ruins all.
The mark once missed, however near you aim,
Missed by an inch or furlong, it is the same:
Who sets out wrong is more than half undone,
Error has many ways, and truth but one.
Wrong estimates wrong conduct must produce,
They lose the blessing that mistake its use:
Who value wealth or power but more or less,
As that can riot, or as this oppress;
What say they else, but that they both are given
To execute the wrath of angry heaven.
Fools, ever vain, at some distinction aim,
And fancy madness is the way to fame:
No matter how the deathless name's acquired,
By countries ravaged, or a Erostratus, a very obscure man, set fire to the
temple of Diana at Ephesus, in order to immortalize his name, and has succeeded
in it, in spite of all endeavors to the contrary.
temple fired:
Alike transmitted down to latter times,
A Trajan's virtues, and a Nero's crimes.
Means are indiff'rent to the ends obtained,
Richard Richard the usurper.
was guilty, but what then? he reigned.
Would you be good and great, the hope is vain,
The business is not to deserve, but gain:
Fortune is fickle, and but short her stay,
He comes too late that takes the farthest way.
Is this, O grandeur! then thy envied state,
To raise men's wonder and provoke their hate?
By crimes procured, and then in fear enjoyed,
By mobs applauded, and by mobs destroyed.
Say, mighty cunning, which deserve the prize,
The courtier's promises or trader's lies?
Some short-lived profit all the pains rewards
Of bankrupt dealers, and of perjured lords.
Honest alike, you own, but wiser far,
The knave upon the bench than at the bar.
Where lies the difference? only in degree,
And higher rank is greater infamy.
Poor rogues in chains but dangle to the wind,
Whilst rich ones live the terror of mankind.
Pomp, power and riches, all mere trifles are,
When purchased by the loss of character:
Chance may the wise betray, the brave defeat,
But they correct, or are above their fate.
Credit once lost can never be retrieved,
How few will trust the man who once deceived?
Craft, like the mole, works only underground,
Is lost in daylight, and destroyed when found.
Notions mistaken, reas'nings ill applied,
And sophisms that conclude on either side;
Alike the unwary, and the weak mislead,
Who judge of men and things, as they succeed.
Did The Vitelli and Orsini bafely betrayed and murdered by order of the duke
of Valentinois.
rivals fall by Borgia's vile deceit,
A II Princip. cap. vii.
Machiavel will call a Borgia great:
The lucky cheat proclaims the villain wise,
And fraud and murder are but policies.
The same despair which made good Cato die,
To Caesar gave his last great The battle of Munda against Pompey's son.
victory.
Had right decided, and not fate, the cause,
Rome had preserved her Cato, and her laws.
Fortune sets off the bad, as tawdry dress
Shows but the more the wearer's homeliness.
So mad Caligula's Caligula drew up his army in battle array on the coast, and
then ordered them to gather shells, for which great exploit he returned to Rome
in triumph. See Suetonius.
vain triumph tells,
That all his conquests are but cockle shells.
True merit shines in native splendour bright,
Whilst false but glares awhile, and hurts the sight:
As midnight vapors cast a glimmering blaze,
And to the darkness owe their feeble rays.
The wise See Diodorus Siculus in the first book.
Egyptians when their monarch died,
By truth's sure standard all his actions tried.
When no false luster, wealth, or power appears
To biass judgment by its hopes or fears;
Then conquering chiefs, profuse of subjects blood,
And lazy dotards, indolently good,
That trust their people to a fav'rite's care,
Whose peaceful rapines cost them more than war,
By injured thousands wrongs are doomed to be
Perpetual marks of scorn and infamy.
Fortune with fools, and wit with knaves you find;
It Is social virtue shows the noble mind.
Above low wisdom, cunning's mean pretense,
There is no counterfeiting excellence:
The artful head may act the honest part,
But all true honor rises from the heart.
Faults are in all; but here the difference lies,
Clodius had vices, Tully vanities.
Which served his country best, let story show,
A guilty Clodius, or good Cicero?
Who loves mankind by social duty taught,
Will never think their good too dearly bought.
What though he sacrifice the vain desire
Of some gay baubles which the world admire?
Despising riches and abhorring power,
When blasted with the name of plunderer.
Still he may taste life's greatest good, content,
For who so happy as the innocent?
Jugurtha King of Numidia, famous for his wars with the Romans; remarkable for
his bravery and his crimes.
murdered, bribed and fought his way
From subject station to imperial sway;
But insecure 'midst all his guilty state,
The man was wretched, though the monarch great;
Like Cromwell daring in the doubtful fight,
But Sall. Bell. Jugur. Neque post id locorum Jugurthae dies aut nox ulla
quieta fuit: Neque loco, neque mortali cuipiam aut tempori satis credere: --
Alio atque alio loco saepe contra decus regium noctu requiescere --

Clarendon hist. rebel. of Cromwell he says, He was not easy of access, nor so
much as seen abroad, and seemed to be in some disorder when his eyes found any
stranger in the room, etc. rarely lodged two nights in one chamber, etc.


pale and trembling in the dead of night.
Passion is lawless, headstrong youth is mad,
But nature varies not in good and bad.
From the same causes same effects must flow,
Truth is but what it was an age ago:
Modes may be changed, but truths are stubborn things,
They court not favorites, nor will flatter kings.
Rome had her Caesar, and our Cromwell we,
Alike in fortune, power and infamy;
And should new Caesar's and new Cromwells rise,
They could but act the same dull tragedies:
Foes to mankind, themselves, and virtue's rules,
Whilst living heroes, and when dead but fools.
Fools, not to know the glory they pursue,
To honest bravery alone is due:
Not he who stretches his unjust command,
And rudely triumphs over his native land;
But he whose valor faves a sinking state,
In future annals shall be called the Great.
View well this world, and own the dear-bougut truth,
That happiness is but the dream of youth:
State of perfection, not for man designed,
However the fond idea fills his mind;
Itself an evil, whilst to good it tends,
But in a round of disappointments ends.
Man's state in life's uncertain, mixed at best,
Conduct some little does, but fate the rest:
Fantastic fate! to merit ever blind,
Whilst lavish to the worst of all mankind.
Judge then by outward things, you're sure to err,
And inward lie remote, few look so far.
Appearances still guide, and still deceive,
For giddy crowds must wonder and believe.
Who sees gay Codrus loll in gilt machine,
Grand his attendance, and self-pleas'd his mien:
Can he imagine all these trappings hide
A wretch made up of folly, guilt and pride?
Greedy to get, as he is profuse to spend,
Stiff when attended, servile to attend;
Good but by accident, by habit bad,
In reasoning specious, and in acting mad.
Princes we blame for benefits misplaced,
Some ill man raised, perhaps some good disgraced:
Cruel their lot! whom numbers join to blind!
How hard, 'midst labyrinths, the way to find!
For fortune's sons we see, without surprise,
Thrive by mismanagements, by blunders rise:
Events, like atoms, jumbling in a dance,
Create these wonders, like a world, by chance.
Search time's records, compare the old and new,
Set distant ages in one point of view;
Still the same prospects, under different dates,
All dark decrees of overruling fates:
Madness succeeds, where cautious wisdom fails,
And story's self more strange than fairy's tales:
Reason but seeks the hidden clue in vain,
Lost and bewildered in the entangled scene.
Where then the wonder, if succeeding times
Still vary only in the kinds of crimes?
Ages of iron, silver, gold, or lead,
What are they but the emblems of the dead?
The same low ends, by different means obtained,
As fury, avarice, or folly reigned.
In vain grave moralists, with specious skill,
Nicely distinguish actions, good and ill.
The world is led by much more easy rules,
Success determines who are wise or fools.
Causes lie hid, but their effects appear,
Few men can judge, but all can see and hear.
Each age must truckle to the reigning modes,
And worship devils, when-they've made them gods;
Call rapine industry, distraction sense,
And stupid squandering, magnificence:
No folly, crime, or whim too wild to be
Admired, when dressed in fashion's livery.
See the same notions variously received,
Legends, impostures, every thing believed;
See priests and tyrants full obedience find,
And sacred gibberish enslave mankind.
View next, with wonder, an extreme as odd,
Who knelt to carved work, now denies a God.
Wretches from chains and bondage just set free,
Presumptuous! know no bounds of liberty.
Wicked or pious, in a frantic way,
Mad, they blaspheme, or superstitious, pray.
By chance we live and act, now right, now wrong,
Both in excess, and therefore neither long:
Virtues too rigid, soften by degrees,
Refine themselves at first to policies:
When once declining, swiftly downwards tend,
And then in guilt and prostitutions end.
Follies, though opposite, yet still combine,
And jointly carry on heaven's great design.
Changes of manners change of empire cause,
States sink by license, as they rose by laws.
Thus human things their stated circles run,
Who flourish one age, are the next undone.
Virtue alone, unchangeable and wise,
Secure, above the reach of fortune lies,
Though doomed to meanness, poverty or scorn;
Whilst fools and tyrants are to empire born:
Blessed in an humble, but a peaceful state,
She feels no envy, and she fears no hate;
With stoic calmness views life's empty round,
Where good is sparing sown, but ills, abound.
To the Prince of ORANGE, 1677.
By EDMUND WALLER, of Beaconsfield.
I.
WELCOME, great Prince, unto this land,
Skilled in the arts of war and peace;
Your birth does call you to command,
Your nature does incline to peace.
II.
When Holland by her foes oppressed,
No longer could sustain their weight;
To a native Prince they thought it best
To recommend their dying state.
III.
Your very name did France expel;
Those conquered towns which lately cost
So little blood, unto you fell
With the same ease they once were lost.
IV.
'Twas not your force did them defeat;
They neither felt your sword nor fire;
But seemed willing to retreat,
And to your greatness did conspire.
V.
Nor have you since ungrateful been,
When at Seneff you did expose,
And at Mount Cassal, your own men
Whereby you might secure your soes.
VI.
Let Maestricht siege enlarge your name,
And your retreat at Charleroy;
Warriors by flying may gain same,
And Parthian-like their foes destroy.
VII.
Thus Fabius gained repute of old,
When Roman glory gasping lay;
In council slow, in action cold,
His country saved, running away.
VIII.
What better method could you take?
When you by beauty's charms must move,
And must at once a progress make
In The stratagems of war and love.
IX.
He that a Princess' heart would gain,
Must learn submissively to yield;
The stubborn never their ends obtain;
The vanquished masters are of the field.
X.
Go on, brave Prince, with like success.
Still to increase your hoped renown;
Till to your conduct and address,
Not to your birth, you owe a crown.
XI.
Proud Alva with the power of Spain.
Could not the noble Dutch enslave;
And wiser Parma strove in vain,
For to reduce a race so brave.
XII.
They now those very armies pay
By which they were forced to yield to you;
Their ancient birthright they betray,
By their own votes you them subdue.
XIII.
Who can then liberty maintain
When by such arts it is withstood?
Freedom to Princes is a chain,
To all that spring from Royal Blood.
A true and faithful Inventory of the Goods belonging to the Dean of ST.
PATRICK'S.
By Dr. SWIFT.
AN oaken broken elbow chair;
A caudle cup without an ear;
A battered shattered ash bedstead;
A box of deal, without a lid;
A pair of tongs, but out of joint;
A back-sword poker, without a point;
A pot that is cracked across, around;
With an old knotted garter bound;
An iron lock without a key;
A wig with hanging quite grown gray;
A curtain worn to half a stripe;
A pair of bellows without a pipe;
A dish which might good meat afford once;
An Ovid, and an old Concordance;
A bottle bottom, wooden platter,
One is for meal, and one for water:
There likewise is a copper skillet,
Which runs as fast as you can fill it;
A candlestick, snuff-dish, and save-all:
And thus his household goods you have all.
These, to your Lordship, as a friend,
Till you have built, I recommend;
They Will serve your workmen for a shift; --
Why not as well as Doctor SWIFT This little poem is omitted in Dr.
Hawkesworth's edition of Swift's works, and is therefore printed here.
?
LINES written under the Print of TOM BRITTON the Small-coal-man, painted by
Mr. WOOLASTON.
By Mr. PRIOR.
THOUGH doomed to small-coal, yet to arts allied,
Rich without wealth, and famous without pride;
Musick's best patron, judge of books and men,
Beloved and honored by Apollo's train:
In Greece or Rome sure never did appear
So bright a genius, in so dark a sphere:
More of the man had artfully been saved,
Had Kneller painted, and had Virtue engraved.
By the same.
I Pray, Lady Harriot, the time to assign
When she shall receive a turkey and chine,
That a body may come to St. James's to dine.
A LETTER to the Hon. Lady MARGARET CAVENDISH HARLEY, when a Child.
By Mr. PRIOR.
MY noble, lovely, little Peggy,
Let this my first epistle beg you,
At dawn of morn, and close of even,
To lift your heart and hands to heaven.
In double beauty say your prayer:
Our Father first, -- then, Notre Pere:
And, dearest child, along the day,
In every thing you do and say,
Obey and please my Lord and Lady,
So God shall love, and angels aid ye.
If to these precepts you attend,
No second letter need I send,
And so I rest your constant friend.
To Lord OXFORD.
Written extempore by Mr. PRIOR In Lady Oxford's Study, 1717.
PEN, ink, and wax, and paper send
To the kind wife, the lovely friend:
Smiling, bid her freely write
What her happy thoughts indite;
Of virtue, goodness, peace and love,
Thoughts which angels may approve.
VERSES written in Lady HOWE's Ovid's Epistles.
By Mr. PRIOR.
HOWEVER high, however cold, the fair,
However great the dying lover's care,
Ovid, kind author, found him some relief,
Ranged his unruly sighs, and set his grief;
Taught him what accents had the power to move,
And always gained him pity -- sometimes love.
But oh, what pangs torment the destined heart,
That feels the wound, yet dare not show the dart!
What care could Ovid to his sorrows give,
Who must not speak, and therefore cannot live?
By Mr. PRIOR, 1716.
I Pray, good Lord Harley, let Jonathan know,
How long you intend to live incognito.
Your humble Servant, ELKANAH SETTLE.

By the same.
TO Richmond and Peterburgh, Matt gave his letters,
And thought they were safe in the hands of his betters.
How happened it then that the packets were lost?
These were Knights of the Garter, not Knights of the Post.
TRUE's EPITAPH.
By Mr. PRIOR.
IF wit or honesly could save
Our mouldering ashes from the grave,
This stone had still remained unmarked,
I still writ prose, True still have barked.
But envious fate has claimed its due,
Here lies the mortal part of True;
His deathless virtues must survive,
To better us that are alive.
His prudence and his wit were seen
In that, from Mary's grace and mien,
He owned the power, and loved the Queen.
By long obedience he confessed
That serving her was to be blessed. --
Ye murmurers, let True evince
That men are beasts, and dogs have sense!
His faith and truth all Whitehall knows,
He never could fawn or flatter those
Whom he believed were Mary's foes:
Never sculk'd from whence his sovereign led him,
Or snarl'd against the hand that fed him. --
Read this, ye statesmen now in favor,
And mend your own, by True's behavior!
MR. POPE's WELCOME FROM GREECE.
A Copy of VERSES This Copy of Verses is a close imitation of the beginning of
the 46th Canto of the Orlando Furioso. Mr. Gay has even adopted the measure of
his original, and has comprised his design in almost the same number of lines,
viz. in twenty one octave stanza's instead of nineteen.
written by Mr. GAY, Upon Mr. POPE's having finished his Translation of HOMER's
ILIAD.
I.
LONG have thou, friend! been absent from thy soil,
Like patient Ithacus at siege of Troy;
I have been witness of thy six years toil,
Thy daily labors, and thy night's annoy,
Lost to thy native land, with great turmoil,
On the wide sea, often threatening to destroy:
Methinks with thee I Have trod Sigaean ground,
And heard the shores of Hellespont resound.
II.
Did I not see thee when thou first sett'st sail
To seek adventures fair in Homer's land?
Did I not see thy sinking spirits sail,
And wish thy bark had never left the strand?
Even in mid ocean often did thou quail,
And often lift up thy holy eye and hand,
Praying the Virgin dear, and saintly choir,
Back to the port to bring thy bark entire.
III.
Cheer up, my friend, thy dangers now are over;
Methinks -- nay, sure the rising coasts appear;
Hark how the guns salute from either shore,
As thy trim vessel cuts the Thames so fair:
Shouts answ'ring shouts; from Kent and Effex roar,
And bells break loud through every gust of air:
Bonfires do blaze, and bones and cleavers ring,
As at the coming of some mighty king.
IV.
Now pass we Gravesend with a friendly wind,
And Tilbury's white fort, and long Blackwall;
Greenwich, where dwells the friend of human kind,
More visited than or her park or hall,
Withers the good, and (with him ever joined)
Facetious Disney, greet thee first of all:
I see his chimney smoke, and hear him say,
Duke! that is the room for Pope, and that for Gay.
V.
Come in, my friends, here shall ye dine and lie,
And here shall breakfast, and here dine again;
And sup, and breakfast on, (if ye comply)
For I have still some dozens of champaign:
His voice still lessens as the ship sails by;
He waves his hand to bring us back in vain;
For now I see, I see proud London's spires;
Greenwich is lost, and Deptford dock retires.
VI.
Oh, what a concourse swarms on yonder key!
The sky re-echoes with new shouts of joy;
By all this show, I ween, it is Lord May'rs day;
I hear the voice of trumpet and Hautboy. --
No, now I see them near -- oh, these are they
Who come in crowds to welcome thee from Troy.
Hail to the bard whom long as lost we mourned,
From siege, from battle, and from storm returned!
VII.
Of goodly dames, and courteous knights, I view
The silken petticoat, and broider'd vest;
Yea Peers, and mighty Dukes, with ribbands blue,
(True blue, fair emblem of unstained breast.)
Others I see, as noble, and more true,
By no court-badge distinguished from the rest:
First see I Methuen, of sincerest mind,
As Arthur As Arthur grave, etc.] This person is mentioned in the Epistle to
Arbuthnot. v. 23. " Arthur, whose giddy son neglects the laws,
" Imputes to me, and my damned works, the cause."

grave, as soft as womankind.
VIII.
What lady's that, to whom he gently bends?
Who knows not her? ah! those are Wortley's eyes:
How art thou honored, numbered with her friends?
For she distinguishes the good and wise.
The sweet-tongu'd Murray The present Lord Mansfield.
near her side attends.
Now to my heart the glance of Howard flies;
Now Harvey, fair of face, I mark full well,
With thee, youth's youngest daughter, sweet Lepell.
IX.
I see two lovely sisters, hand in hand,
The fair hair'd Martha, and Teresa brown;
Madge Bellenden, the tallest of the land;
And smiling Mary, soft and fair as down.
Yonder I see the cheerful Duchess stand,
For friendship, zeal, and blithsome humors known:
Whence that loud shout in such a hearty strain?
Why, all the Hamiltons are in her train.
X.
See next the decent Scudamore advance,
With Winchelsea, still meditating song:
With her perhaps Miss How came there by chance,
Nor knows with whom, or why she comes along.
Far off from these see Santlow, famed for dance She afterward married Booth
the player. Mrs. Bicknell, the actress, is mentioned either in the Spectator or
Tatler, with applause.
;
And frolic Bicknell, and her sister young;
With other names, by me not to be named,
Much loved in private, not in public sam'd!
XI.
But now behold the female band retire,
And the shrill music of their voice is stilled!
Methinks I see famed Buckingham admire,
That in Troy's ruin thou had not been killed;
Sheffield, who knows to strike the living lyre,
With hand judicious, like thy Homer skilled.
Bathurst impetuous hastens to the coast,
Whom you and I strive who shall love the most.
XII.
See generous Burlington, with goodly Bruce,
(But Bruce comes wafted in a soft sedan)
Dan Prior next, beloved by every muse,
And friendly Congreve, unreproachful man!
(Oxford by Cunningham has sent excuse)
See hearty Watkins comes with cup and cann;
And Lewis, who has never friend forsaken;
And Laughton whispering asks -- Is Troy town taken?
XIII.
Earl Warwick comes, of free and honest mind;
Bold, generous Craggs, whose heart was never disguised:
Ah why, sweet St. John, cannot I thee find?
St. John for every social virtue prized. --
Alas! to foreign climates he is confined,
Or else to see thee here I well surmiz'd:
Thou too, my Swift, do breathe Boeotian air;
When will thou bring back wit and humor here?
XIV.
Harcourt I see for eloquence renowned,
The mouth of justice, oracle of law!
Another Simon is beside him found,
Another Simon, like as straw to straw.
How Lansdown smiles, with lasting laurel crowned!
What mitred prelate there commands our awe?
See Rochester approving nods his head See Rochester approving nods bit bead.]
So in the Epistle to Dr. Arbuthnot: " Even mitred Rochester would nod the head."

,
And ranks one modern with the mighty dead.
XV.
Carlton and Chandois thy arrival grace;
Hanmer, whose eloquence the unbiased sways;
Harley, whose goodness opens in his face,
And shows his heart the seat where virtue stays.
Ned Blount advances next, with busy pace,
In haste, but sauntring, hearty in his ways:
I see the friendly Carylls come by dozens,
Their wives, their uncles, daughters, sons, and cousins.
XVI.
Arbuthnot there I see, in physick's art,
As Galen learned, or famed Hippocrate;
Whose company drives sorrow from, the heart,
As all disease his medicines dissipate:
Kneller amid the triumph bears his part This is no more than a compliment to
the vanity of Sir Godfrey, which Pope and other wits were always putting to the
strongest trials. "Sir Godfrey (says Pope) I believe if God Almighty had had
your assistance, the world would have been formed more perfect" "Fore God (says
Kneller) I believe so." He was likewise (as Mr Walpole observes) very free and
singular in his conversation on religion. This adulation of Pope, Addison,
Prior, etc. appears to have heightened his natural absurdities, as he had not
discernment enough to discover that they were only foothing him to paint for
them gratis, or diverting themselves at the expense of his credulity. Sir
Godfrey had drawn for Pope the statues of Apollo, Venus, and Hercules. Pope
paid for them with the following stanza: " What god, what genius did the pencil
move,
" When Kneller painted these!
" 'Twas friendship warm as Phoebus, kind as love,
" And strong as Hercules."


On these lines (which their author wisely suppressed) Mr. Walpole has offered
a very just criticism. See his Anecdotes, etc. Vol. III. p. 112.


,
Who could (were mankind lost) anew create:
What can the extent of his vast soul confine?
A painter, critic, engineer, divine!
XVII.
Thee Jervas hails, rohust and debonair,
Now have [we] conquered Homer, friends, he cries:
Dartneuf, grave joker, joyous Ford is there Charles Ford, Esquire. was by Swift's
interest appointed Gazetteer. See the Dean's Letter to Mrs. Dingley, dated July
1, 1712.
,
And wondering Maine, so fat with laughing eyes:
(Gay, Maine, and Cheney, boon companions dear,
Gay fat, Maine fatter, Cheney huge of size)
Yea Dennis, Gildon, (hearing thou have riches)
And honest, hatless Cromwell, with red breeches.
XVIII.
O Wanley, whence come thou with shortened hair,
And visage from thy shelves with dust besprent -- With dust besprent?] So in
the Dunciad. B. iii. v. 185. " But who is he in closet close ypent
" Of sober face, with learned dust besprent?"
Humphrey Wanley was librarian to Lord Oxford.
?
" Forsooth (quoth he) from placing Homer there,
" For ancients to compyle is mine entente:
" Of ancients only has Lord Harley care;
" But hither me has my meek lady sent: --
" In manuscript of Greek read we thilke same,
" But book yprint best plesyth mine good dame,"
XIX.
Yonder I see, among the expecting crowd,
Evans with laugh jocose, and tragic Young;
High-buskin'd Booth, grave Mawbert, wandering Frowd,
And Titcomb's belly waddles slow along The names of the majority of persons
here enumerated, are in want of no illustration; and concerning a few of them,
it would be difficult to supply any. Titcomb, however, is mentioned in a Letter
from Pope to Congreve. "There is a grand revolution at Will's, Morris has
quitted for a coffee-house in the city, and Titcomb is restored to the great
joy of Cromwell, who was at a loss for a person to converse with on the
fathers, and church history." It appears that he was a catholic from the
following passage in the Poetical Epistle to Mr. Cromwell: " Sooner shall Row
lampoon the union,
" Titcomb take oaths on the communion."



.
See Digby faints at Southern talking loud,
Yea Steel and Tickell mingle in the throng;
Tickell whose skiff (in partnership they say)
Set forth for Greece, but foundered in the way.
XX.
Lo the two Doncastles in Berkshire known!
Lo Bickford, Fortescue, of Devon land!
Lo Tooker, Eckershall, Sykes, Rawlinson!
See hearty Morley takes thee by the hand!
Ayrs, Graham, Buckridge, joy thy voyage done;
But who can count the leaves, the stars, the sand?
Lo Stonor, Fenton, Caldwell, Ward and Broom!
Lo thousands more, but I want rhyme and room!
XXI.
How loved! how honored thou! yet be not vain;
And sure thou art not, for I hear thee say,
All this, my friends, I owe to Homer's strain,
On whose strong pinions I exalt my lay.
What from contending cities did he gain;
And what rewards his grateful country pay?
None, none were paid -- why then all this for me?
These honors, Homer, had been just to thee.
A MOTTO for the Opera of Mutius Scaevola.
By Mr. GAY.
WHO here blames words, or verses, songs, or singers,
Like Mutius Scaevola will burn his fingers Mutius Scaevola, an opera by Mr.
Rolli, performed in 1721.
.
To the most Honorable the Earl of OXFORD, The Lord High Treasurer.
The epigrammatical Petition of your Lordship's most humble Servant, JOHN GAY.
I AM no more to converse with the swains,
But go where fine people resort;
One can live without money on plains,
But never without it at court.
Yet if when with swains I did gambol,
I arrayed me in silver and blue,
When abroad and in courts I shall ramble,
Pray, my Lord, how much money will do?
The Duchess of QUEENS BERRY's Reply to King GEORGE II. when she was forbid to
appear at Court.
Thursday, Feb. 27, 1728 9.
THAT the Duchess of Queensberry is surpised and well pleased that the King
has given her so agreeable a command as to stay from Court, where she never
came for diversion, but to bestow a great civility upon the King and Queen. She
hopes by such an unprecedented order as this, that the King will see as few as
he wishes at his court (particularly such as dare think or speak the truth.) I
dare not do otherwise, and ought not; nor could I have imagined that it would
not have been the highest compliment that I could possibly pay the King, to
endeavor to support truth and innocence in his house.

C. QUEENSBERRY.
Particularly when the King and Queen had both told me that they had not read
Mr. Gay's play. I have certainly done right then to stand to my own word,
rather than his Grace of Grafton's, who has neither made use of truth,
judgment or honor through this whole affair, either for himself or his friends.


What follows was written by her Grace at the bottom of the copies of the above
answer, which she gave to her particular friends:

"This is the answer I gave in writing to the Vice Chamberlain to read to the
King, in answer to the message he brought me from the King to refrain coming to
court."

All the seven following Copies of VERSES were written on the foregoing Subject.
THY dull request, my friend, give over,
Against that place I vow,
Whence truth was long discharged before,
And beauty's banished now.
On the forbidding Command to the Duchess of QUEENSBERRY.
HOW blessed the court? How loft the fair
Who Is banished thence, where all submit
(Such is our prudent monarch's care!)
To Cibber's The mention of Cibber's modesty, is sufficiently authorized by the
following particulars in the 7th chapter of his Apology, etc. "After the vast
success of that new species of poetry, the Beggar's Opera; the year following,
I was so stupid as to attempt something of the same kind, upon quite a
different foundation, that of recommending virtue and innocence, etc." This
passage, which is too long to be quoted here, will show at once the cause of
his enmity to Gay, and afford a specimen of his very singular modesty. It will
likewise illustrate the other pieces of poetry written on the same occasion. --
It may be observed, that the Middlesex justices have done Mr. Cibber the honor
to adopt his sentiments concerning the immorality of the Beggar's Opera. Happy
Cibber!


modesty and wit.
True wit can never want support
Where learned Grafton's the Mecaenas;
And ladies must adore that court
Where Ganymede takes place of Venus.
BOILEAU, Sat. IX.
EN vain contre le Cid un ministre se ligue,
Tout Paris pour Chimene a les yeux de Rodrigue.
The same paraphrased.
IN vain was ministerial breath,
In vain monarchic folly:
All eyes saw Walpole in Macheath,
And Queensberry in Polly.
To the Duchess of QUEENSBERRY.
LET the knight Sir Robert Walpole.
on beauty lower,
Loveliest ornament of power;
Let him at a stager's nod,
Painted, prostitute, and proud,
Hate to real charms display,
Basely sworn to ruin Gay.
Happy Gay! ordained to know
Such a friend and such a foe!
What though wit, and sense to love,
Courtiers' idle rage may move?
Calmly you unhurt retreat,
Banished by the vulgar great.
Take your beauties thence away,
Full revenge is to obey.
Let the meaner rank and face
Borrow luster from the place.
There where friendship false beguiles,
Basely murdering while it smiles;
There where proud despotic will
Boasts the power of doing ill;
There where paltry gold outvies
All the luster of your eyes;
Generous, and just, and fair,
Why, ah why should you be there!
To JOHNNY GAY.
THE great ones justly, Johnny Gay,
Have damned thy second opera,
And to Macheath refuse to give
The favor of three days reprieve.
Felons from transportation come
Are hanged forthwith when caught at home;
And Robin swears he ought to swing
For plund'ring but an Indian king.
A BALLAD.
To the Tune of Lillibullero.
I.
SAYS a friend to a knight, shall a friend by whose skill
All the houses are taught all their parts every day,
Let Lincolns-inn-fields house do just what it will?
There Is another Macheath, sir; prohibit the play.
Cibber's your friend,
A play he has penned This play was Love in a Riddle. See Cibber's Apology for
his Life, etc.
,
In which there is nothing that can be applied;
For he does not mention
The word bribe or pension,
Nor any one vice that can fit you beside.
II.
So Macheath was forbid by authority good,
To Cibber were sent many hands to applaud;
But in this house it seems men judged as they would,
Not by promises swayed nor by promises awed.
Harsh catcalls sound,
The hiss goes round,
The courtiers join hisses and give up the wight:
As in this house they show it,
They dare damn the poet,
Who knows but in the other they will give up the knight?
III.
But Young Sir William Young, who had likewise a hand in some operatical
performances.
at this omen is nothing dismayed,
He Would show to the town, as 'twas certainly fit,
If Broom, Floyd and Room Broom had been a menial servant to Ben Jonson He
was the original author of the Jovial Crew, which was afterward altered by Mr.
Room, (the son of our first undertaker) and since by another hand. Concerning
Floyd even the Dunciad is silent.
could come to his aid;
That the friends of the ministry might have some wit;
And so they took
An old play book
Writ in Ben Jonson's time by his man master Broom:
Some speeches they mangled,
Some songs intertangled;
Sing the courtiers in praise of Broom, Floyd and Room.
IV.
It Is said, that this piece in good breeding so nice,
Can never any gentleman's pleasure molest;
For they mention no modish, no politic vice,
They censure no knaves, nor make coxcombs a jest.
Thus Young and Broom,
And Floyd and Room,
Have learnt to be mannerly, cautious, and sage:
From Gay's Newgate satire,
Whose vulgar ill nature
Treated rich rogues and poor rogues alike on the stage.
V.
Then sure we must own it was prudent and fit
To stop our Macheath in his second attack;
And Cibber to set up against it for wit,
Whom two pair of bards with a sequel should back.
'Twas Floyd and Broom
And Young and Room;
Clap your hands, ye good courtiers, and grin at this play:
In two days died Cibber,
But Young will go glibber,
And all these court poets be damned the first day.
Written in Mr. GAY's WORKS.
Presented to a Lady in very splendid Binding.
To the BOOK.
SILLIER than Gildon could thou be,
Nay, did James Baker breathe in thee,
She Will keep thee, book, I Will lay my head: --
What! throw away a fool in red?
No: trust the sex's sacred rule,
The gaudy dress will save the fool.
On the Forbiddance of GAY's Second Part of the Beggar's Opera, and the
Damnation of CIBBER's Love in a Riddle.
TWO accidents the weekly bills have missed,
One poet muzzled up, the other hissed.
Both from the stage and towering hopes cast down,
One by the court, the other by the town.
The one as much despised as the other feared;
Philautus damned by trial, Gay unheard.
Philautus with Corinthian air had drawn
Corinthian courage in primaeval dawn:
With his Corinthian lords he kept the field; --
It cost a second day to make him yield.
None but a rude Corinthian bold and rough
Could talk of courtiers' heads being made of stuff.
Philautus, thou art safe; thy Tinker's stroke
May grate the ear, but never can provoke:
But he is justly dreaded, who can fit
The Spartan virtue to the Athenian wit.
Upon Lady PEMBROKE's promoting the Catcalling of FAUSTINA, 1727.
OLD poets sing that beasts did dance
Whenever Orpheus played;
So to Faustina's charming voice
Wise Pembroke's asses brayed.
The Character of the Lady HENRIETTA CAVENDISH HOLLES.
By Mr. HUGHES. 1712-13.
SUCH early wisdom, such a lovely face,
Such modest greatness, such attractive grace;
Wit, beauty, goodness, charity, and truth,
The riper sense of age, the bloom of youth!
Whence is it that in one fair piece we find
These various beauties of the female kind?
Sure but in one such different charms agree,
And Henrietta is that phoenix-she.
To Lady HENRIETTA CAVENDISH HOLLES, On her Choice of Truth, Honor, and
Honesty for her Motto.
By Mr. HUGHES.
IN thee, bright maid, though all the virtues shine,
With rival beams, and every grace is thine,
Yet three, distinguished by thy early voice,
Excite our praise, and well deserve thy choice.
Immortal Truth in heaven itself displays
Her charms celestial born, and purest rays,
Which thence in streams like golden sunshine flow,
And shed their light on minds like yours below.
Fair Honor, next in beauty and in grace,
Shines in her turn, and claims the second place:
She fills the well-born soul with noble fires,
And generous thoughts, and godlike acts inspires.
Then Honesty, with native air, succeeds,
Plain is her look, unartful are her deeds;
And just alike to friends and foes she draws
The bounds of right and wrong, nor errs from equal laws.
From heaven this scale of virtues thus descends
By just degrees, and thy full choice defends.
So when, in visionary trains, by night
Attending angels blessed good Jacob's sight,
The mystic ladder thus appeared to rise,
Its foot on earth, its top amidst the skies.
The humble Petition of a beautiful young LADY, To the Rev. Dr. BERKLEY, Dean
of Londonderry He was afterward bishop of Cloyne.
, which he quits to go and settle a College at Bermudas.
DEAR doctor, here comes a young virgin untainted,
To your shrine at Bermudas, to be married and sainted;
I am young, I am soft, I am blooming and tender,
And of all that I have, I make you a surrender.
My innocence, led by the voice of your fame,
To your person and virtue must put in its claim;
And now I behold you, I truly believe,
That you're as like Adam as I am like Eve:
But then (as in you a new race has begun)
Are teaching to fly from the shade to the sun:
Before, the dire serpent their virtue betrayed,
And taught them to fly from the sun to the shade,
For you, in great goodness, your friends are persuading
To go, and to live, and be wise in your Eden.
Oh let me go with you; oh pity my youth;
Oh take me from hence, let me not lose my truth.
Sure you, that have virtue so much in your mind,
Cannot think to leave me, who am virtue, behind.
If you make me your wife, sir, in time you may fill a
Whole town with your children, and likewise your villa:
I famous for breeding, you famous for knowledge,
I Will found a whole nation, you will found a whole college:
And when many long ages in joys we have spent,
Our souls we'll resign with the utmost content;
And gently we'll sink between cypress and yew,
You lying by me, and I lying by you.
PROLOGUE Prologues and epilogues to concerts, were anciently very common. Of
these many were spoken by Mr. Wilkes the celebrated comedian.
to MUSIC.
By Dr. GARTH.
WHERE music, and more powerful beauty reign,
Who can resist the pleasure or the pain?
Here their soft magic those two sirens try,
And if we listen, or but look, we die.
Why should we the romantic tales admire
Of Orpheus' numbers, or Amphion's lyre,
Of walls erected by harmonious skill,
How mountains moved, and rapid streams stood still?
See here a scene of beauty, and confess
The wonder greater, but the fiction less.
Like human victims here we stand decreed,
To worship those bright altars where, we bleed.
Who braves his fate in fields, must tremble here,
Triumphant love more vassals makes than fear.
No faction homage to the fair denies,
The right divine's apparent in their eyes.
The empire's fixed that is founded on desire,
Those flames the vestals guard, can never expire.
BUTLER's COMPLAINT against his pretended MONUMENT in Westminster Abbey.
Poeta loquitur.
AGAIN my garret-poverty is shown,
By the mean covering of this Portland stone;
I lose my fame as martyrs lose their breath,
For like Saint Stephen I am stoned to death.
Two LINES written with Charcoal upon BUTLER's MONUMENT.
THIS monument for Hudibras,
Erected was by John de Brass.
EPIGRAM On the Miracles wrought by CUZZONI.
BOAST not how Orpheus charmed the rocks,
And set a dancing stones and stocks,
And tigers' rage appeased;
All this Cuzzoni has surpassed,
Sir Wilfred seems to have a taste,
And Smith and Gage are pleased.
EPIGRAM In Behalf of TOM SOUTHERN, To the Duke of ARGYLE.
ARGYLE, his praise when Southern wrote,
First struck out this, and then that thought;
Said this was flattery, that a fault:
How shall the bard contrive?
My lord, consider what you do --
He Will lose his pains and verses too;
For if these praises fit not you,
They Will serve no man alive.
A Description of Dr. DELANY's Villa.
By Dr. SHERIDAN.
WOULD you that Delville I describe,
Believe me, sir, I will not gibe;
For who would be satirical
Upon a thing so very small?
You scarce upon the borders enter,
Before you're at the very center.
A single crow can make it night,
When over your farm she takes her flight.
Yet in this narrow compass, we
Observe a great variety;
Both walks, walls, meadows, and parterres,
Windows and doors, and rooms and stairs;
And hills and dales, and woods and fields,
And hay, and grass, and corn it yields;
All to your haggard brought so cheap in,
Without the mowing or the reaping;
A razor, though to say it I Am loath,
Would shave you and your meadows both.
Though small's the farm, yet here is a house,
Full large to entertain a mouse;
But where a rat is dreaded more
Than savage Caledonian boar:
For, if it is entered by a rat,
There is no room to bring a cat.
A little rivulet seems to steal
Down through a thing you call a vale;
Like tears a-down a wrinkled cheek,
Or rain along a blade of leek;
And this you call your sweet meander,
Which might be sucked up by a gander,
Could he but force his nether bill
To scoop the channel of the rill:
I Am sure you would make a mighty clutter,
Were it as big as city gutter.
Next come I to your kitchen garden,
Which one poor slug would fare but hard in:
And round his garden is a walk,
No longer than a taylor's chalk:
Thus I compute what space is in it,
A snail creeps round it in a minute.
One lettuce makes a shift to squeeze
Up through a tust you call your trees;
And once a year a single rose
Peeps from the bud, but never blows:
In vain you then expect its bloom;
It cannot blow for want of room.
In short, in all your boasted seat,
There Is nothing, but yourself, that is great.
Written in the Right Honorable the Earl of OXFORD'S Library at Wimpole, 1729.
By SOAME JENYNS.
WHO uninspir'd can tread this sacred ground,
With all the sons of fame encompassed round?
Where crowned with wreaths of ever verdant bays,
Each sister art her willing charms displays.
Mellow'd by time, here beauteous paintings glow,
There marble busts illustrious faces show;
And in old coins are little heroes seen,
With venerable rust of ages, green.
Around, unwounded by the teeth of age,
By gothic fire, or persecution's rage,
Perfect and fair, un-number'd volumes stand,
By Providence preserved for Oxford's hand.
Whilst thus within these learned walls I stray,
At once all climes and ages I survey:
On fancy's wings I fly from shore to shore,
Recall past time, and live whole Aeras over;
Converse with heroes famed in ancient song,
And bards, by whom those heroes breathe so long;
Observe each progress wit and learning makes;
How harassed nations trembling she forsakes,
And chooses still to build her downy nest
In happier climes with peace and plenty blessed.
See how, in famed Augustus' golden days
She triumphs, crowned with universal praise!
Approaches thrones with a majestic air,
The prince's mistress, and the statesman's care;
Mecaenas shines in every classic page,
Mecaenas, once the Harley of his age
No meaner charms in Albion she displays,
Invited thither by Saturnian days,
When Anna's prudent hand the scepter swayed,
And Oxford lent the drooping muses aid:
By him inspired, see all the tuneful train,
In Britain's glorious sons revive again!
Prior like Horace strikes the trembling strings,
And in harmonious Pope again great Maro sings,
Again she waves her pinions to be gone,
And only hopes protection from his son.
Chased from the senate and the court she flies;
Cunning and party-zeal her place supplies:
Yet still, since fixed in Wimpole's happy plain,
(Her last retreat) she knows not to complain:
There, in great Oxford's converse, does engage
The instructed ear, and shames a vicious age:
Or in his consort's accents stands confessed,
And charms with graceful ease each listening guest;
Or, with her loved companions, gladly tied,
Unstudied charms, and beauty void of pride,
Transported dwells in the celestial place,
And ever smiles in Margaretta's face.
RAGG's Capt. Ragg was a nickname bestowed on Mr. Smith on account of his
uncommon slovenliness.
VERSES to J. PHILIPS.
ASPICIS hunc plantis qui fulcitur elephantis;
Quem genuit Bamton, quem moesta eduxerat Hampton;
Queen Wickham fovit, sed non Wintonia novit.
Vir vere bellus, cui valde parvus ocellus.
Cui candelarum ritu fluit ordo comarum.
Cui chara est mamma, sed charius est epigramma.
Cui non est lodix, nec habet femoralia podex.
Prudens legatus, licet haud ad praelia natus.
Surripit hic fartum, suadetque resurgere smartum.
Mox vocat ad bellum, mox effugit art duellum.
Qui dum non jurat, saltem sua corpora curat;
Vescitur et bobus, dum tondet prata Jacobus James II. after his abdication.
.
Quem juvat et paetum facit et cerevisia laetum;
At vinum est summum, possit si gignere nummum.
Mane vocat panes, cyathosque relinquit inanes,
Et toga humum verrit, Albanaqque moenia terret The Albana moenia are the walls
of Alban-hall, Oxford; the most insignificant of all possible Colleges, and as
little known to fame, as its late master Dr. Laban to the literary world, or to
his parishioners at Stepney.
.
Prandere absque olla gaudens, et scalpere colla;
Trahere sermones, et tollere simmersones A Simmerson (as we are informed by an
Antiquarian whose knowledge stops short of its etymology) was the cant term for
a beer measure, perhaps, still in vogue at some of the colleges in the
university of Oxford. We should be loath to deliver too hasty an opinion, or we
might observe, that it probably contained the same quantity of malt liquor as a
Tantum non at Cambridge, (that is, something less than a pint) a potation in
use only among the Fellows of King's College.
.
EDMUND SMITH.

The Duke of BUCKINGHAM's EPITAPH, Written by Himself, And left in his Will to
be fixed on his Monument.
Pro Rege saepe, pro Republica semper.
DUBIOUS sed non improbus vixi:
Incertus morior, sed inturbatus:
Humanum est nescire et errare.
Christum adveneror, Deo confido
Omnipotenti, benevolentissimo.
Ens entium miserere mihi!
Thus translated by GEORGE SEWELL Dr. George Sewell (whose name is joined with
that of Mr. Pope in a duodecimo edition of Shakespeare) followed his profession
with some degree of success, after he had retired to Hampstead; but three other
physicians being soon settled in the place, his profits at last became very
inconsiderable. He kept no house, but was a boarder. He was much esteemed, and
so frequently invited to the tables of gentlemen in the neighborhood, that he
had seldom occasion to dine at home. An ancient inhabitant of Hampstead, now
living, was present at his funeral. He was supposed to be very indigent at the
time of his death, as he was interred on the 12th of February 1726 in the
meanest manner, his coffin being little better than those allotted by the
parish to their poor who are buried from the workhouse; neither did a single
friend, or relation, attend him to the grave. No memorial was placed over his
remains; but they lie just under a holly tree which formed a part of a hedgerow
that was once the boundary of the churchyard.
, M. D. Author of the Tragedy of Sir Walter Raleigh.
OFTEN for my King I drew my sword,
Take it on John of Bucks's word;
But always for my country dear
I stickled; -- instance once, -- Tangier.
I changed my side, like weathercock,
Yet never was rogue nor bully-rock.
I whor'd, and played at bowls and dice,
But never was constant to one vice.
For Christ -- I leave that question dark,
'Twixt Bennet, Whiston, and Sam Clarke:
I worship him in all I can,
But neither say, as God, or man.
My chiefest hopes on God are bent,
Eternal and omnipotent.
Being of Beings, hear my prayer,
And for this creed, my graceship spare!
On Sir ABRAHAM ELT being knighted, and taking the name of ELTON.
IN days of yore, old Abraham-Elt,
When living, had nor sword nor belt;
But now his son, Sir Abraham Elton,
Being knighted, has both sword and belt on.
EPITAPH On Mr. CRAGGS.
M. S. Ja. Craggs, Arm.
Pro meipso semper.
Pro Republica nunquam.
Nil dubious; improbus vixi.
Opio, opibusque intoxicatus, morior.
Ducem Marlburium creatorem
meum adveneror.
In Mammone solo confido,
Deo mihi omnipotenti.
Prolem meam dilectissimam
et probam sequor.
Spe certa Edmund Smith (the author of Phaedra and Hippolitus) had been pitched
on as a proper person to write the history of the Revolution. In consequence of
this appointment, he waited on Mr. Addison, who encouraged him to undertake it.
To this he agreed; but asking what was to be done with the character of Lord
Sunderland, Mr. Addison seemed confused, and replied that he was not prepared
to answer such a question. From that instant, Mr. Smith heard no more of the
design.

Pium Sunderlandium secuturum expectans.
Dii inferi accipite vestros!
A WESTMINSTER EXERCISE.
Usque adeo nihil est quod nostra infantia coelum
Hausit Aventini?

INSPIRED with joy, we see the learned throng
Listen propitious to our humble song.
Within these walls, the infant muse delights
To plume her new-fledg'd wings for future flights.
Here trembling voices uncouth strains repeat,
Here bards first totter on poetic feet;
Till by degrees grown bold, with active skill,
They gain the summit of the sacred hill.
Thus Cowley, Dryden, Buckhurst, Prior came
First in the lists of poetry and fame.
Not by our steps, nor labors such as these,
The brazen-faced Corinthian tried to please;
But spite of Phoebus and the muse's art,
The actor fondly played the poet's part:
While with harsh untaught notes he wakes the plains
The sweeter cat-call emulates his strains.
Hissed, hooted, damned, despised, the scribbling fool
Finds to his cost, he was not bred at school.
He might have 'scap'd a yawning gallery's curses,
Had our third form first known his nonsense verses;
By humble steps he might have risen to praise,
And having felt our Birch, deserved your Bays.
EPITAPH on Mr. THYNNE, Who was shot by CONINGSMARK's Direction.
HERE lies Tom Thynne of Long Leat-hall,
Who never would thus have miscarried,
Had he married the woman he lay withal,
Or lay with the woman he married.
A PARSON's RESOLUTION.
GOD prosper long our noble King,
Our lives and fortunes all;
A woeful preachment once there did
In Mamble church befall.
I preached, all the live-long day,
Repentance to a sinner;
But I Will preach there no more, I swear,
For they gave me no dinner.
To a LADY.
HOW perfect, Chloris, and how free
Would these enjoyments prove,
But you with formal jealousy
Are still tormenting love!
Let us (since wit instructs us how)
Raise pleasure to the top:
If rival bottle you will allow,
I Will suffer rival fop.
There Is not a brisk insipid spark
That flutters in the town,
But with your wanton eyes you mark
Him out to be your own.
You never think it worth your care,
How empty nor how dull
The heads of your admirers are,
So that their backs be full.
All this you freely may confess,
Yet we'll not disagree;
For did you love your pleasures less,
You were not fit for me.
Whilst I, my passion to pursue,
Am whole nights taking in
The lusty juice of grapes, take you
The juice of lusty men!
Upbraid me not that I design
Tricks to delude your charms,
When running after mirth and wine
I leave your longing arms.
For wine (whose power alone can raise
Our thoughts so far above)
Affords ideas fit to praise
What we think fit to love.
An EPITAPH on Dr. JOHN FRIEND, the Physician, who died in 1728.
HERE lie the bones of Dr. Friend
Once thought an honest man;
But who can tell before the end,
Though life is but a span?
To be physician to a Queen
Was all his chief ambition,
Which made him quit poor Clementeen
For her who rules in Britain.
Now mark the end of avarice and pride;
His reputation cracked, and then he died.
EPITAPH Intended by Mr. DRYDEN for his Wife.
HERE lies my wife: here let her lie:
Now she is at rest, and so am I.
EPITAPH on Mr. MOLESWORTH, Who erected a Monument, and placed an Inscription
upon it in Honor of his favorite DOG.
UNDER this stone both dog and master lie,
Neither deserved to live, or thought to die.
Do not disturb the happy sleeping pair,
Who once in love, now joined in burial are.
But here is the curse, which Molesworth little thought, --
He Will one day rise again, the other not.
Upon Dr. EVANS, Bursar, cutting down the Trees in ST. JOHN's COLLEGE GROVE.
By Dr. TADLOW.
INDULGENT nature to each kind bestows
A secret instinct to discern its foes.
The goose, a silly bird, yet knows the fox;
Hares fly from dogs, and sailors steer from rocks:
This rogue, the gallows for his fate foresees,
And bears a like antipathy to trees.
Dr. EVANS upon Dr. TADLOW.
TEN thousand tailors, with their length of line,
Strove, though in vain, his compass to consine;
At length, bewailing their exhausted store,
Their packthread ceased, and parchment was no more.
To be published in the next Edition of DRYDEN's VIRGIL.
OLD Jacob Jacob Tonson.
, by deep judgment led,
To please the wise beholders,
Has placed old Nassau's King William.
hook-nos'd head
Upon Aeneas' shoulders.
To make the parallel complete,
Methinks, there is little lacking;
One took his father on his back,
And the other sent his packing.
To a LADY more cruel than fair.
By Sir JOHN VANBRUGH.
I.
WHY do you with such disdain refuse
An humble lover's plea?
Since heaven denies you power to choose,
You ought to value me.
II.
Ungrateful mistress of a heart
Which I so freely gave,
Though weak your bow, though blunt your dart,
I soon resigned your slave.
III.
Nor was I weary of your reign,
Till you a tyrant grew,
And seemed regardless of my pain,
As nature seemed of you.
IV.
When thousands with unerring eyes
Your beauty would decry,
What graces did my love devise
To give their truths the lie?
V.
To every grove I told your charms,
In you my heaven I placed,
Proposing pleasures in your arms
Which none but I would taste,
VI.
For me t'admire at such a rate
So damned a face, will prove
You have as little cause to hate,
As I have had to love.
Upon the ROYSTON BARGAIN, or ALEHOUSE WEDDING; i. e. the Marriage of Mr.
CHARLES CAESAR to Miss LONG, October 1729.
I.
YE fathers and mothers,
Ye sisters and brothers,
That have a rich heiress in guard,
I Will tell you a tale,
If you mind, it will not fail
To preserve in all safety your ward.
II.
Never keep her at Hammel's,
In traces and trammels,
Nor think an old man and his cat,
Are company fit
For a girl that has wit,
And is eager to know what is what.
III.
She Is too frolic and gay,
To be tempted to stay
The return of a fiddling son;
She will not feed on song,
For her name is Miss Long,
And her business in short must be done.
IV.
While Ralph and his spouse
Were employed in the house,
With Wiseman, their chief secretary;
Away went the gay thing
In search of a plaything,
And so she began the vagary.
V.
Quoth he then to his wife,
I Will venture my life
She Is gone to the alehouse at Munden:
And who can be there,
As I honor small beer,
But Caesar aut nullus from London!
VI.
I Have told you, dear Ralph,
If you would keep that girl safe,
Never trust her alone with Miss Cremer;
And as for Miss Jenning,
Her ways are so winning,
She Will make her as gallant a schemer.
VII.
Just as she had said,
Came in the poor maid,
With message and face most importune;
That Caesar with forces,
And coach and six horses,
Had stolen away their great fortune.
VIII.
You see, you old fool,
You are made a mere tool,
And dup'd by Caesar and your sister;
You thought the girl safe,
By the care of son Ralph,
But the booby cracked walnuts, and mist her This is a piece of true history
just come from Hamels. As the girls went into the garden, the old lady would
have had her son follow them, but he answered, he would crack a walnut or two
more first.
.
IX.
Then out went the scouts,
To the towns thereabouts,
In hopes to have luckily found them;
But Saygrace, the parson,
Had carried the farce on,
And in cottage had just before bound them.
X.
And then from her bed,
Having lost maidenhead
In the joyous and amorous strife,
She cried, hang your master,
I Have felt no disaster
In passing from maiden to wife.
XI.
And now turn your face
To Benington Place,
And see with what joy this is taken;
Where madam does chatter
To all that come at her,
And cries, we have now saved our bacon,
XII.
Now my foes I despise,
And my grotto shall rise,
Though some folks may call it my folly;
And when all is sold,
The rest shall be told
'Twixt Julius, Betty, and Molly.
To Mrs. B. to invite her from Virginia to Bermudas.
Hic canit Hesperidum miratam mala puellam.
I.
FROM distant climes Lucinda came
To conquer and disdain,
Then leading captive every heart,
In triumph crossed the main.
II.
Ye fleets that over the Atlantic spread
Your sails, neglect to trade;
Forget the treasures of Peru
To seek the lovely maid:
III.
But if the fair, resolved to shine
Upon the western shore,
Will never with her presence bless
Benighted Europe more;
IV.
As Cytherea fixed her throne
In Cyprus, happy isle,
So let the new world's queen of love
On her Bermuda smile.
V.
The orange and the citron groves
That blossom all the year,
For her the Hesperides preserve
Without the dragon's care.
VI.
Swift, swift as Atalanta fly,
The golden fruit depends,
And none but golden arrows arm
The boy that there attends.
VII.
The choicest spirits of the age
All for the west prepare:
The muses all are on the wing,
To meet Lucinda there.
A BERMUDAN ODE.
Down-Hall, Sunday, April 10, 1727.
I.
WHEN in a state devoid of sense
Inanimate I lay,
A particle of scattered dust,
Or unregarded clay;
II.
This human elevated form
Thy plastic breath bestowed,
And in the image of thyself
Conscious existence slow'd.
III.
To thee my prayers in feeble cries
Upon my birth I paid;
Then innocence was sacrifice,
A babe the offering made.
IV.
An angel that beholds thy face,
The guardian of a state,
Or ruler of some happy world
Amidst the seraphs, great,
V.
Held up and led me on in life,
With care and kind regard,
Well pleased that office to perform,
And tend an infant ward.
VI.
When in the wilderness of youth,
Vice strewn a slow'ry way;
When phantoms fair allured to pass
Where hidden serpents lay;
VII.
Thy grace to virtue's rugged paths
Inclined my tender feet,
Taught them to climb the steep ascent,
And made the labor sweet.
VIII.
As reason dawned, my rising soul
The vast expanse beheld;
The suns that shine, the worlds that roll
In nature's azure field.
IX.
Wondrous, said I, are all thy works,
Above the thoughts of men,
Above imagination's reach,
Thyself how wondrous then!
X.
Happy the comprehensive mind
That fired with heavenly flame,
Aspires in youthful vigor fresh,
To regions whence it came.
XI.
Sublime, serene, among the stars,
With great ideas crowned,
Soars over creation's fruitful plains,
And views the amazing round.
XII.
Oh! that my soul had held that height,
That glorious height attained!
Nor ever sunk beneath the pitch
Her early pinions gained!
XIII.
Not riches, honors, pleasures, power,
Not all this world can pay,
If made eternal, would be worth
The joys of one such ^ay.
XIV.
Unworthy of celestial scenes,
Detruded from the spheres,
Prone and precipitate I fell,
Sinking for thrice three years:
XV.
Then toiled among the groveling herd,
In the dull beaten road;
Or strayed in error's devious paths
Dragging the uneasy load.
XVI.
Affliction's far-extended tide
Came on, wave after wave;
Whilst all the comforts of my life
Were laid in Anna's grave.
XVII.
With her, the sun seemed ever set,
All loveliness decayed;
Not the least glimmering ray of joy
Pierced the Cimmerian shade.
XVIII.
Then on the precipice I stood,
Where death and sin laid wait
To cast me down into the flood
Of that eternal state.
XIX.
On eagles' wings, above their flight,
The swift deliv'rer bore
The destined prey, snatched from the foe,
Safe to a distant shore;
XX.
Where parents of the world, that make
The poor their god-like care,
A spring, imparadis'd, enjoy
Perpetual through the year.
XXI.
In orange groves and cedar schools
The savages refine;
Hesperian nations trained to arts,
In Indian Athens shine.
XXII.
The waters wide smile many a league,
The winds, the surges, sleep;
Nor was old ocean better pleased
When Israel passed the deep.
XXIII.
Angels, reclined on purple clouds
Bordered with burnished gold,
Applaud the work, the spreading faith
With ecstasy behold.
Sir CHARLES HANBURY to Sir HANS SLOANE, Who saved his Life, and desired him to
send over all the Rarities he could find in his Travels.
SINCE you, dear Doctor, saved my life,
To bless by turns and plague my wise,
In conscience I Am obliged to do
Whatever is enjoined by you.
According then to your command,
That I should search the western land
For curious things of every kind,
And send you all that I should find,
I Have ravaged air, earth, seas, and caverns,
Men, women, children, towns, and taverns;
And greater rarities can show
Than Gresham's children ever knew,
Which carrier Dick shall bring you down,
Next time his wagon comes to town.
First, I Have three drops of that same shower
Which Jove in Danae's lap did pour;
From Carthage brought, the sword I Will send
Which brought Queen Dido to her end;
The stone whereby Goliath died,
Which cures the headache well applied;
The snake-skin, which you may believe,
The devil cast who tempted Eve;
A fig-leaf apron -- it is the same
That Adam wore to hide his shame,
But now wants darning; I Have beside,
The blow by which poor Abel died;
A whetstone worn exceeding small,
Time used to whet his scythe withal;
The pigeon stuffed, which Noah sent
To tell him where the waters went.
A ring I Have got of Sampson's hair,
The same which Dalilah did wear;
Saint Dunstan's tongs, which story shows,
Did pinch the devil by the nose;
The very shaft, as all may see,
Which Cupid shot at Antony;
And, which above the rest I prize,
A glance of Cleopatra's eyes;
Some strains of eloquence which hung
In Roman times on Tully's tongue,
Which long concealed and lost had lain,
Till (...) found them out again.
Then I Have, most curious to be seen,
A scorpion's bite to cure the spleen:
A goad that, rightly used, will prove
A certain remedy to love:
As Moore cures worms in stomach bred,
I Have pills cure maggots in the head;
With the receipts too how to take 'em
--
I Have got a ray of Phoebus' shine,
Found in the bottom of a mine;
A lawyer's conscience, large and fair,
Fit for a judge himself to wear.
I Have a choice nostrum fit to make
At oath a catholic will take.
In a thumb vial you shall see,
Close cork'd, some drops of honesty,
Which after searching kingdoms round,
At last, were in a cottage found.
An antidote, if such there be,
Against the charms of flattery.
I ha'nt collected any care,
Of that there is plenty every where;
But after wondrous labors spent,
I Have got one grain of rich content.
This my wish -- it is my glory --
To furnish your nicknackatory;
I only beg that when you show 'em,
You Will tell your friends to whom you owe 'em;
Which may your other patients teach
To know, as has done yours, C. H.
To Sir HENRY ASHURST, at Bath; From Mr. HANBURY.
TO you addressing, gentle Knight,
I choose in humble verse to write;
For you delight in dance and song,
For ever gay, for ever young:
But let not Biller's learned eye
O'erlook my feeble poetry;
For London's fogs the muses choke,
With seas of dirt and clouds of smoke.
Not so at Bath, where morning air
Breathes on the early-rising fair;
Where love once dipped his fiery darts,
And, with the waters, warms our hearts;
Where battledores beat tuneful time,
And teach young poets how to rhyme;
Where snowy arms at once inspire
The flying cock, and soft desire.
Where happy walks and groves are free
From politics and calumny;
Nor sword, nor hoop, dares gives offense;
Such was the state of innocence.
These various pleasures that possess
Where health and joy and beauty please,
Unwearied at the longest ball,
It Is you alone enjoy 'em all:
Whilst I, oppressed with grief of mind,
Lament the joys I left behind,
With aching heart I bid adieu,
For ever yours, E. U.
Pray give my services and kisses
Amongst the widows and the misses.
January 28 is the date, you find
One thousand 7 hundred 28 and nine.
And now, dearest Knight, we are all
Arrived in safety at Whitehall.
Lord HARVEY on the Duchess of RICHMOND.
WHAT do scholars and bards and astrologers wise
Mean by stuffing one's head with such nonsense and ly^^?
By telling one Venus must always appear
In a car, or a shell, or a twinkling star,
Drawn by sparrows, or swans, or by dolphins or doves,
And attended in form by the Graces and Loves;
That ambrosia and nectar is all she will taste,
And her passport to hearts is a belt round her waist?
Without all this bustle I saw the bright dame,
For to supper last night to Poultney's she came,
In a good warm sedan, no fine open car,
Two chairmen for doves, and a flambeau her star:
No nectar she drank, no ambrosia she eat,
Her cup was plain claret, a chicken her meat;
Nor wanted the cestus her bosom to grace,
For Richmond for that night had lent her her face.
On a COLLAR Presented for HAPPY GILL.
By Mr. HUGHES.
THOU little favorite of the fair!
When thou these golden bands shall wear,
The hand that binds them softly kiss,
With conscious joy, and own thy bliss.
Proud of his chain, who would not be
A slave, to gain her smiles, like thee?
Lord MIDDLESEX to Mr. POPE, On reading Mr. ADDISON's Account of the English
Poets.
IF all who ever invoked the tuneful nine
In Addison's majestic numbers shine,
Why then should Pope, ye bards, ye critics tell,
Remain unsung, who sings himself so well?
Hear then, great bard, who can alike inspire
With Waller's softness, or with Milton's fire;
Whilst I, the meanest of the muses' throng,
To thy just praises tune the adventurous song.
How am I filled with rapture and delight
When gods and mortals mixed, sustain the fight!
Like Milton then, though in more polished strains,
Thy chariots rattle over the smoking plains,
What though archangel against archangel arms,
And highest Heaven resounds with dire alarms!
Does not the reader with like dread survey
The wounded gods repulsed with foul dismay?
But when some fair one guides your softer verse,
Her charms, her godlike features to rehearse;
See how her eyes with quicker lightnings arm,
And Waller's thoughts in smoother numbers charm.
When fools provoke, and dunces urge thy rage,
Flecknoe improved bites keener in each page.
Give over, great bard, your fruitless toil give over,
For still king Tibbald scribbles as before;
Poor Shakespeare suffers by his pen each day,
While Grubstreet alleys own his lawful sway.
Now turn, my muse, thy quick, poetic eyes,
And view gay scenes and opening prospects rise.
Hark! how his rustic numbers charm around,
While groves to groves, and hills to hills resound.
The listening beasts stand fearless as he sings,
And birds attentive close their useless wings.
The swains and satyrs trip it over the plain,
And think old Spenser is revived again.
But when once more the godlike man begun
In words smooth flowing from his tuneful tongue,
Ravished they gaze, and struck with wonder say,
Sure Spenser's self never sung so sweet a lay:
Sure once again Eliza glads the isle,
That the kind muses thus propitious smile. --
Why gaze ye thus? Why all this wonder, swains? --
It Is Pope that sings, and Carolina reigns.
But hold, my muse! whose awkward verse betrays
Thy want of skill, nor shows the poet's praise;
Cease then, and leave some fitter bard to tell
How Pope in every strain can write, in every strain excel.
The Twenty-First ODE of the Third Book of HORACE, translated.
By Lord MIDDLESEX.
O nate mecum, etc.
O HAPPY cask, coaeval with thy Lord,
One year to both did equal life afford;
What though your hidden power alike can move
To quarrel furious, or more furious love;
Can call brisk puns, bid quaint conundrums rise,
Or cast a heavy slumber over the eyes?
O now descend, Corvinus bids, descend,
For him your best, your choicest liquor lend.
Let him with rules of Socrates be wise;
Fear not, he will never your generous juice despise;
For well he knows, that Cato's self with wine
Often made his rigid virtues brighter shine.
You, with soft violence or mirth, can wrest
The deepest secrets from the closest breast:
By you inspired, the anxious mind's relieved,
Thinks but of mirth, and wonders why it grieved.
By thee, the poor, in all their rags grown bold,
Unawed the pomp of majesty behold;
Hear unconcerned shrill trumpets from afar,
Nor dread the thunder of approaching war.
Bacchus (to whom bright liquor owes its birth)
If Venus smiles propitious on our mirth,
For you, Corvinus, will prolong our joy:
(For how can Bacchus joined with Venus cloy?)
Till yon bright tapers cast a fainter light,
Till Phoebus rising over the mountains bright,
Chases the friendly darkness of the night.
Upon a GOOSE.
By Lord MIDDLESEX.
NOW the full barns with yellow sheaves are stored,
That yield a double product to their Lord;
To glean the fields, the Geese direct their way,
And far from hence through unknown stubbles stray.
The jolly farmer views with joyful eyes
The sacred light of Michael's dawn arise,
While new-shorn vales a pleasant prospect yield,
And Geese unnumber'd whiten all the field.
Obedient to his voice and well-known call,
A grateful victim to their saint they fall.
Before his hospitable gate he stands,
And welcomes in his guest with greeting hands.
And now the neat though homely cloth displayed,
And earthern plates in shining order laid
Provoke each hungry guest. The Goose appears,
The reeking load a bending servant bears;
With sage well stuffed to add a sav'ry taste,
And sugared apples crown the rich repast.
Brimful with ale the nut-brown bowls go round,
While every voice of Geese the praises sound:
The gods themselves might envy such a feast,
And thundering Jove might wish to prove a guest.
And thus, O sacred bird, each coming year
You keep the strictest bands of friends sincere.
Oh could I sing your far-resounding praise
In Prior's smooth, or Pope's sublimer lays!
Then should the Mantuan Swan exult no more,
Nor higher than the British Goose should soar:
Thy glory should the plains and valleys fill,
While muses could inspire, or Geese afford a quill.
On Lady A.
YOUNG, thoughtless, gay, unfortunately fair,
Her pride to please, and pleasureall her care;
With too much kindness, and too little art,
Prone to indulge the dictates of the heart;
Flattered by all, solicited, admired;
By women envied, and by men desired;
At once from full prosperity she is torn,
By friends deserted, of defense forlorn,
Exposed to talkers, insults, want, and scorn;
By every idle tongue her story told,
The novel of the young, the lecture of the old.
But let the scoffer, or the prude, relate
With rigour's utmost force, her hapless fate,
Goodnature still to soft compassion wrought
Shall weep her ruin while it owns her fault:
For if her conduct, in some steps betrayed,
To virtue's rule too little reverence paid,
Yet dying, still she showed so dear her fame,
She could survive her guilt, but not her shame;
Her honor, dearer than her life she proved,
And dearer far than both, the man she loved.
Dr. WINTER's QUESTIONS to Dr. CHENEY.
TELL me from what fat-headed Scot
Thou did thy system learn:
From Hippocrate thou had it not,
From Celsus nor Pitcairn.
Suppose we own that milk is good,
And say the same of grass;
The one for babes is proper food,
The other for an ass.
Doctor, this new prescription try;
A friend's advice forgive:
Eat grass, reduce thy head, or die,
Thy patients then may live.
Dr. CHENEY's ANSWER.
MY system, Doctor, 's all my own,
No tutor I pretend;
My blunders hurt myself alone,
But yours your dearest friend.
Were you to milk and straw confined,
Thrice happy might you be;
Perhaps you might regain your mind,
And from that wit get free.
I cannot your kind prescription try,
But heartily forgive;
It Is natural that you bid me die,
That you yourself may live.
VERSES on The ART of POLITICS By the Rev. Mr. Bramston.
.
SUCH artless art did ever mortal see,
Or politics so void of policy?
To wit and humor there is fair pretense,
But none to just design or solid sense.
Let sourer critics point each faulty place,
I Will even let Tickell and Avignon pass.
Let boys their loyalty huzzaing show,
And kind Louisa teach our girls to go.
But on immortal Joseph let us fix,
That pattern rare of whiggish politics;
Slave to vain glory, out of danger stout,
Who prints on Brunswick -- after Preston's rout;
Coward to blame, and envious to commend,
A sneaking patriot, and a half-fac'd friend.
Sell not French claret at the Ormond's head,
But hang up Horace Walpole in his stead;
Nor at the Devil tavern make your sport: --
The Devil always has a friend at court.
What bard but this could Pelham's train compare
To Roman Scipio's thunderbolts of war?
Did ever their wars enrich their native isle,
With foreign treasures and with Spanish spoil?
But hark! and stare with all your ears and eyes!
Walpole is friend to Universities!
Who crossed the clause (so generous has he been)
Which Sandys with his advice had ushered in.
Though whigs of forty-one may raise a cry,
New livings he permits them still to buy.
His part of odium let Sir Robert bear,
Or Sandys his moiety of glory share,
For'twould have puzzled Knighthood's craft, no doubt,
Had it been never brought in, to throw it out.
Hail politician bard! we ask not whether
A whig or tory; thou art both and neither.
Poultney and Walpole each adorn thy lays,
Which one for love, and one for money praise.
Alike are mentioned, equally are sung
Will. Shippen staunch, and slight Sir Wm. Young.
Bromley and Wyndham share the motley strain,
With Cart'ret, Maidstone, and the Pelhams twain.
Not Jove and Dragon could worse matched appear;
Nor fins of cod with front of Heydegger.
A BALLAD Found in a Cottage in Lancashire, and sent up to Lord OXFORD.
I.
HARD by the hall, our master's house,
Where Mersey flows to meet the main,
Where woods, and winds, and waves dispose
A lover to complain.
II.
With arms across, along the strand,
A shepherd walked, and hung his head;
Viewing the footsteps on the sand,
Which a bright nymph had made.
III.
The tide, says he, will soon erase
The marks so lightly here impressed;
But time, or tide, will never deface
Her image in my breast.
IV.
Am I some savage beast of prey?
Am I some monster grown,
That thus she flies so swift away,
Or meets me with a frown?
V.
That bosom soft, that lily skin,
(Trust not to outward show!)
Contains a marble heart within,
A rock hid under snow.
VI.
Ah me! the flints and pebbles wound
Her tender feet, from whence there fell
These crimson drops that stain the ground,
And beautify each shell.
VII.
O fair one, moderate thy flight,
I will no more pursue,
But take my leave for a long night: --
Adieu! loved maid, adieu!
VIII.
This said, he took a running leap,
A lover's leap, indeed!
And plunged into the sounding deep,
Where hungry fishes feed.
IX.
The melancholy hern stalks by " On dreary Arvon's shore they lie,
" Smeared with gore, and ghastly pale:
" Far, far aloof the affrighted ravens sail,
" The famished eagle screams and passes by."
GRAY'S Ode.
;
Around the squawling sea-gulls yell;
Aloft the croaking ravens fly,
And toll his passing bell.
X.
Thus died a shepherd in his prime,
The whirlpool sucked him down;
Not unregarded by the Nine,
Beloved by all but one.
XI.
The waters roll above his head,
The billows toss it over and over;
His ivory bones lie scattered,
And whiten all the shore.
Alma novem genuit claros Rhedycina poetas.
TRAPP, YOUNG, BUBB, STUBB, COBB, CRAB, CARRY, TICKEL, EVANS.
FAMOUS for rhimes
In these our times,
Oxford has three times three;
Trapp, Young, and Bubb,
Cobb, Crab, and Stubb,
Tickel, Evans, Carry.
KNIGHT versus PARSON; Or a Dialogue between Sir HENRY PEACHY of Sussex, and
Mr. BRAMSTON, a Clergyman of the same County.
By the same Mr. BRAMSTON.
AN upstart knight of late tormented me
With his defense of odious S^y A lane that passes by New Grove, the seat of
the family, is still called S^m Corner.
;
Then smartly, in his own opinion, slic't
The Duke of Somerset and Jesus Christ.
I beg, Sir knight, you this discourse will end,
Christ is my savior, Somerset my friend.
Come, end this talk, and drink our new king's health: --
G^d damn you, priest; I Am for a commonwealth;
But rot you, parson, prove it if you can,
That Christ of Nazareth is God, or man:
But you're a hired priest; and by that rule
You are a liar, blockhead, coxcomb, fool:
And as for scripture, priest, G^dz^s, G^d's blood,
The devil take me if I believe a word.
Must this, thought I, for reason then go down?
Is this the mighty knowledge of the town?
To be of the Quorum, and to serve the crown?
Repent, vain knight, repent it if you may,
Know that my God's all spirit, knight of clay!
But were thou Julian, earth's apostate head,
I Would worship Jesus, though I lost my head;
My God can make me most alive when dead.
Heathen confessed, a spirit thou to be sent
A member to a Christian parliament!
Repent, and be instructed to do well,
Or thou wilt a fitting member be in hell;
From whence there is no way to Westminster;
The devil's no Returning Officer.
An EPISTLE to Lord COBHAM,
By Mr. CONGREVE,
Being one of the last Copies of Verses he wrote before his Death.
Albi nostrorum sermonum candide judex.
SINCEREST critic of my prose or rhyme,
Tell, how thy pleasing Stowe employs thy time.
Say, Cobham, what amuses thy retreat,
Or schemes of war, or stratagems of state?
Do thou recall to mind with joy or grief,
Great Marlbrough's actions? that immortal chief,
Whose slightest trophies raised in each campaign
More than sufficed to signalize a reign.
Does thy remembrance rising warm thy heart
With glory past, where thou thyself had part?
Or do thou grieve indignant now, to see,
The fruitless end of all that victory?
To see the audacious foe so late subdued,
Dispute the terms for which so long they su'd,
As if Britannia now were sunk so low
To beg that peace she wonted to bestow?
Far be that guilt! Be never known that shame;
That England should retract her rightful claim;
Or ceasing to be dreaded and adored,
Stain with the pen the luster of her sword,
Or do thou give the winds afar to blow
Each vexing thought and heart-devouring woe?
And fix thy mind alone on rural scenes,
To turn the levelled lawns to liquid plains;
To raise the creeping rills from humble beds,
And force the latent springs to lift their heads?
On watery columns capitals to rear,
That lift their flowing curls with upper air?
Or do thou, weary grown, these works neglect,
No temples, statues, obelisks erect?
But seek the morning breeze from fragrant meads,
Or shun the noontide ray in wholesome shades?
Or slowly walk alone the mazy wood,
To meditate on all that is wise and good?
For nature bountiful in thee has joined
A person pleasing, with a worthy mind;
Not given thee form alone, but means and art,
To draw the eye, and to allure the heart.
Poor were the praise in fortune to excel,
Yet want the way to use that fortune well.
While thus adorned, while thus with virtue crowned,
At home in peace, abroad in arms renowned;
Graceful in form, and winning in address,
While well you think what aptly you express;
With health, with honor, with a fair estate,
A table free, and elegantly neat,
What can be added more to mortal bliss?
What can he want, who stands possessed of this?
What can the fondest wishing mother more
Of heaven, attentive for her son, implore?
And yet a happiness remains unknown,
Or to philosophy revealed alone;
A precept which, unpracticed, renders vain
Thy flowing hopes, and pleasures turns to pain.
Should hope, or fear, thy heart alternate tear,
Or love, or hate, or rage, or anxious care,
Whatever passions may thy mind infest,
(Where is that mind which passions never molest?)
Amidst the pangs of such intestine strife,
Still think the present day thy last of life.
Defer not till tomorrow to be wise,
Tomorrow's sun to thee may never rise.
Or should tomorrow chance to cheer thy sight
With her enlivening and unlooked for light,
How grateful will appear her dawning rays?
As favors unexpected doubly please.
Who thus can think, and who such thoughts pursues,
Content may keep his life, or calmly lose.
All proof of this thou may thyself receive,
When leisure from affairs will give thee leave.
Come see thy friend retired without regret,
Forgetting care, or trying to forget.
In easy contemplation soothing time,
With morals much, and now and then, with rhyme.
Not so robust in body as in mind,
And always undejected, though declined.
Not wondering at the world's new wicked ways,
Compared with those of our forefathers' days:
For virtue now is neither more nor less,
And vice is only varied in her dress.
Believe it, men have ever been the same,
And Ovid's Golden Age is but a dream.
By Lady MARY WORTLEY MONTAGUE,
To Lady IRWIN This poem has been already printed in Dodsley's Collection, and
is here reprinted for the sake of the answer, which never appeared before. In
the original copy of the former, the fourth stanza is wanting, which we may
suppose to have been afterward added by the authoress, as in Lady Irwin's
reply there is none that corresponds with it.
.
WHY will Delia thus retire,
And languish life away?
While the sighing crowds admire,
It Is too soon for hartshorn tea.
All these dismal looks and fretting,
Cannot Damon's life restore;
Long ago the worms have eat him,
You can never see him more.
Once again consult your toilet,
In the glass your face review;
So much reading soon will spoil it,
And no spring your charms renew.
I like you was born a woman,
Well I know what vapors mean;
The disease, alas! is common,
Single, we have all the spleen.
All the morals that they tell us,
Never cured the sorrow yet;
Choose among the pretty fellows
One of humor, youth, and wit.
Prithee hear him every morning,
For at least an hour or two;
Once again at night returning,
I believe the dose will do.
The ANSWER.
By Lady IRWIN.
THOUGH Delia often retires,
It Is not from spleen or hate;
No lovers she desires,
Nor envies others' fate.
Though her Damon's dead, it is true,
Yet he lives in Delia's heart;
None a constancy can show,
Where a virtue has no part.
Should she consult her toilet,
Alas! she will quickly find
Her face, there is naught can spoil it,
So she will improve her mind.
If the morals that they tell us,
Cannot cure us of despair;
I believe the pretty fellows
Will bring us only double care.
It Is our interest then to shun 'em,
Since their practice it is such;
They who venture boldly on 'em,
Often find one dose too much.
An ELEGY on Mrs. BOWS Mrs. Bows was the first wife of Mr. Bows, father to
the present Lady Strathmore.
.
By Lady M. W. MONTAGUE.
HAIL happy bride! for thou art truly blessed,
Three months of pleasure crowned with endless rest!
Merit like yours was heaven's peculiar care;
You loved -- yet tasted happiness sincere:
The sweets of love to you were only shown,
The sure, succeeding, bitter dregs unknown.
You had not yet the fatal change deplored,
The tender lover for the imperious lord;
Nor felt the pangs that jealous fondness brings,
Nor wept the coldness from possession springs.
Above your sex distinguished in your fate,
You trusted, yet experienced no deceit,
Swift were your hours, and winged with pleasure flew;
No vain repentance gave a sigh to you;
And, if superior bliss heaven can bestow,
With fellow angels you enjoy it now.
On Lady MARY WORTLEY MONTAGUE's VERSES on the Death of Mrs. BOWS.
CLOE her thoughts has so expressed,
Each chosen word so justly put,
And yet how neat soever they are dressed,
We through the lawn may see the smut.
Such lechery, dressed up so clean,
And with so chaste a look,
Is hardly to be felt or seen
But under Cloe's s^ck.
The ANSWER to Lady MARY's VERSES on Mrs. BOWS.
THOUGH every one knows
The fate of poor Bows,
Yet doctors about it do vary;
Some make a sad face,
And pity her case:
It Is the envy of good Lady Mary.
She says, she don't know
How heaven can bestow
Any joy like the death of that bride;
Whence some people say,
Could she choose her own way,
Before now she had certainly died.
But here lies the mistake,
If her sense she would speak;
Her meaning appears but too plain;
She would always be trying,
But to Bows leaves the dying,
Her choice is to live in the pain.
On a LADY mistaking a DYING TRADER for a DYING LOVER.
By Lady MARY WORTLEY MONTAGUE,
on Mrs. LOWTHER, Lord LONSDALE's Sister.
AS Chloris on her downy pillow lay,
'Twixt sleep and wake the morning slid away.
Soft at her chamber door a tap was heard,
She listened, and again no one appeared.
Who Is there, the sprightly nymph with courage cries?
Madam, it is one who for your la'ship dies.
Sure! it is delusion! what! a dying Lover!
Yet speak once more: what is it you say, discover.
A second time these accents pierced the air:
Sweet was the sound, transported was the fair.
At length, mankind are just, her la'ship said;
Threw on her gown, and stepping out of bed
Looked in her glass; confessed him to be right; --
Who thinks me not a beauty, it is mere spite.
Assemble ye coquets! with envy frown
To see the wonders that my eyes have done.
In vain your pert and forward airs you try,
Mankind, the more you court, the farther fly,
And it is for me, and only me, they die.
But how shall I receive him? cried the dame;
Prudence allows not pity: -- I must blame.
Perhaps, poor soul! he has sighed in secret long,
Ere the presumptuous thought escaped his tongue.
I am the cause, yet innocent, by Heaven: --
Why were these eyes for such destruction given?
It Is not my fault; I did not make one feature: --
Then turned her look to view the dying creature.
Butah! who should the enamored swain now prove? --
A wretch who dies by Trade and not by Love.
No mortal pen can figure her surprise,
Willing to trust her ears but not her eyes:
The approaching storm her swelling bosom showed,
Awhile now pale, then red with anger glowed.
She wept, she raved, invoked the powers above,
Who give no ear when old maids talk of love.
Fruitless her prayers, and impotent her rage,
Yet sierce as when two female scolds engage.
At length the fire was spent, all was serene;
A calm succeeded this tempestuous scene.
And thus she spoke:
Ye blooming maids! let my example prove
How often your sex mistaken are in love!
When young, we are cruel, and with beauty play,
Which while we vainly parley, fades away.
When old, to increase the rigor of our fate,
We wish and talk of lovers when too late.
As idle travelers who have lost the day,
And hope in night through shades to find the way;
Forlorn they tread the thorny paths in vain,
Not of themselves, but their hard fate complain.
So peevish maids when past their youthful bloom,
On sad remains, and fancied charms presume;
Lonely they wander, no companion find,
Then rail, and quarrel with all human kind.
But let us to ourselves for once be just,
And see our own decays and wrinkles first.
Whenever to melting sighs we lend an ear,
Think, youth and beauty make the men sincere.
No other powers their stubborn hearts can move: --
Did ever virtue light the torch of love?
From sad experience I this truth declare;
I am now abandoned, though I once was fair.
VIRTUE IN DANGER. A lamentable STORY how a virtuous LADY had like to have been
ravished by her Sister's Footman.
To the Tune of the Children in the Wood.
By Lady M. W. MONTAGUE.
I.
NOW ponder well, ye ladies fair,
These words that I shall write;
I Will tell a tale shall make you stare,
Of a poor lady's fright.
II.
She laid her down all in her bed
And soon began to snore;
It never came into her head
To lock her chamber door.
III.
A Arthur Gray.
Footman of her sister dear,
A sturdy Scot was he;
Without a sense of godly fear,
Bethought him wickedly.
IV.
Thought he, this lady lies alone,
I like her comely face:
It would most gallantly be done,
Her body to embrace.
V.
In order to this bold attempt,
He ran up stairs apace;
While this poor lady nothing dreamt,
Or dreamt it was his Grace.
VI.
The candle flaring in her eyes
Made her full soon awake;
He scorned to do it by surprise,
Or her a sleeping take.
VII.
A sword he had, and it hard by
A thing appeared withal,
Which we, for very modesty,
A pistol choose to call.
VIII.
This pistol in one hand he took,
And thus began to woo her; --
Lord, how this tender creature shook
When he presented to her!
IX.
Lady, quoth he, I must obtain --
For I have loved you long;
Would you know how my heart you gained,
You had it for a song.
X.
Resolve to quench my present flame,
Or you must murdered be:
It was those pretty eyes, fair dame,
That first have murdered me.
XI.
The lady looked with fear around,
As in her bed she lay;
And though half-dying in a swound,
Thus to herself did say,
XII.
Who rashly judge (it is a rule)
Do often judge amiss;
I thought this fellow was a fool,
But there is some sense in this.
XIII.
She then recovered heart of grace,
And did to him reply;
Sure, Arthur, you have forgot your place,
Or know not that it is I.
XIV.
Do you consider who it is
That you thus rudely treat?
It Is not for scoundrel scrubs to wish
To taste their master's meat.
XV.
Tut, tut, quoth he, I do not care;
And so pulled down the clothes:
Uncovered lay the lady fair,
From bosom down to toes.
XVI.
Oh Arthur, cover me, she said,
Or sure I shall get cold;
Which presently the rogue obeyed;
He could not hear her scold.
XVII.
He laid his sword close by her side,
Her heart went pit-a-pat:
You Have but one weapon left she cried,
Sure I can deal with that.
XVIII.
She saw the looby frighted stand,
Out of the bed jumpt she;
Caught hold of his so furious hand;
A fight it was to see!
XIX.
His pistol hand she held fast closed,
As she remembers well;
But how the other was disposed,
There Is none alive can tell.
XX.
The sword full to his heart she laid,
But yet him did not slay,
For when he saw the shining blade,
God wot, he run away.
XXI.
When she was sure the knave was gone
Out of her father's hall,
This virtuous lady strait begun
Most grievously to bawl.
XXII.
In came papa and mamma dear,
Who wondered to behold:
Out Grisle! what a noise is here!
Why stand you in the cold?
XXIII.
Mamma, she said (and then she wept)
I have a battle won;
But if that I had soundly slept,
My honor had been gone.
XXIV.
A footman of my sister, he --
A footman! cried mamma;
Dear daughter, this must never be,
Z^ds we must go to law.
XXV.
This lady's fame shall ever last,
And live in British song;
For she was like Lucretia chaste,
And eke was much more strong.
Epistle from ARTHUR GRAY, the Footman, after his Condemnation for attempting a
RAPE This animated poem is omitted in the latter editions of Mr. Dodsley's
collection, and is therefore reprinted here.
.
By the RIGHT HONORABLE LADY MARY WORTLEY MONTAGUE.
READ lovely nymph, and tremble not to read;
I have no more to wish, nor you to dread;
I ask not life, for life to me were vain,
And death a refuge from severer pain.
My only hope in these last lines I try;
I would be pitied, and I then would die.
Long had I lived as sordid as my fate,
Nor cursed the destiny that made me wait,
A sordid slave: content with homely food,
The gross instinct of appetite pursued,
Youth gave me sleep at night, and warmth of blood.
Ambition yet had never touched my breast;
My lordly master knew no sounder rest;
With labor healthy, in obedience blessed.
But when I saw -- Oh had I never seen --
That wounding softness, that engaging mien,
The mist or wretched education flies;
Shame, fear, desire, despair and love arise,
The new creation of those beauteous eyes.
But yet that love pursued no guilty aim,
Deep in my heart I hid the secret flame:
I never hoped my fond desire to tell,
And all my wishes were -- to serve you well.
Heavens! how I flew, when winged by your command,
And kissed the letters given me by your hand!
How pleased, how proud, how fond was I to wait,
Present the sparkling glass, or change the plate!
How, when you sung, my soul devoured the sound,
And every sense was in the rapture drowned!
Though bid to go, I quite forgot to move --
You knew not that
stupidity was love.
But oh! the torment not to be expressed,
The grief, the rage, the hell, that fired this breast,
When my great rivals, in embroidry gay,
Sat by your side, or led you from the play!
I still
contrived near as I could to stand,
(The flambeau trembling in my careless hand)
I saw, or thought I saw, those fingers pressed;
For thus their passion by my own I guessed,
And jealous fury all my soul possessed:
Like torrents, love and indignation meet,
And madness would have thrown me at your feet.
Turn, lovely nymph, (for so I would have said)
Turn from those triflers who make love a trade;
This is true passion in my eyes you see;
They cannot, no -- they cannot love like me.
Frequent debauch has palled their sickly taste,
Faint their desire, and in a moment past:
They sigh not from the heart, but from the brain;
Vapors of vanity and more champagne.
Too dull to feel what forms, like yours, inspire,
After long talking of their painted fire,
To some lewd brothel they at night retire;
There pleased with fancied quality and charms,
Enjoy your beauties in a strumpet's arms.
Such are the joys those toasters have in view,
And such the wit and pleasure they pursue: --
And is this love that ought to merit you?
Each Opera night, a new address begun,
They swear to thousands what they swear to one.
Not thus I sigh -- but all my sighs are vain --
Die, wretched Arthur, and conceal thy pain;
It Is impudence to wish, and madness to complain.
Fixed on this view, my only hope of ease,
I waited not the aid of slow disease;
The keenest instruments of death I sought,
And death alone employed my laboring thought.
Thus all the night -- when I remember well
The charming tinkle of your morning bell,
Fired by the sound, I hastened with your tea,
With one last look to smooth the darksome way --
But oh, how dear that fatal look cost!
In that fond moment my resolves were lost.
Hence all my guilt, and all my sorrows rise --
I saw the languid softness of your eyes;
I saw the dear disorder of your bed;
Your cheeks all glowing with a tempting red;
Your night-clothes tumbled with resistless grace;
Your flowing hair played careless round your face;
Your nightgown fastened with a single pin --
Fancy improved the wondrous charms within!
I fixed my eyes upon that heaving breast,
And hardly, hardly, I forebore the rest;
Eager to gaze, unsatisfied with sight,
My head grew giddy with the near delight: --
Too well you know the fatal, following night!
The extremest proof of my desire, I give,
And since you will not love, I will not live.
Condemned by you, I wait the righteous doom,
Careless and fearless of the woes to come.
But when you see me waver in the wind,
My guilty flame extinct, my soul resigned,
Sure you may pity what you cannot approve,
The cruel consequence of furious love.
Think, the bold wretch who could so greatly dare,
Was tender, faithful, ardent, and sincere:
Think when I held the pistol to your breast,
Had I been of the world's large rule possessed,
That would have then been yours, and I been blessed!
Think that my life was quite below my care,
Nor feared I any hell beyond despair. --
If these reflections, though they seize you late,
Give some compassion for your Arthur's fate,
Enough you give, nor ought I to complain;
You pay my pangs, nor have I died in vain.
Mr. JOHN PHILIPS's designed Dedication to his Poem called THE SPLENDID
SHILLING.
To W. BROM, Esquire. of Ewithington, in the County of Hereford.
SIR,
IT would be too tedious an undertaking at this time to examine the rise and
progress of Dedications. The use of them is certainly ancient, as appears both
from Greek and Latin authors; and we have reason to believe that it was
continued without any interruption till the beginning of this century, at which
time, mottos, anagrams, and frontispieces being introduced, Dedications were
mightily discouraged, and at last abdicated. But to discover precisely when
they were restored, and by whom they were first ushered in, is a work that far
transcends my knowledge; a work that can justly be expected from no other pen
but that of your operose Doctor Bentley. Let us therefore at present acquiesce
in the dubiousness of their antiquity, and think the authority of the past and
present times a sufficient plea for your patronizing, and my dedicating this
poem. Especially since in this age Dedications are not only fashionable, but
almost necessary; and indeed they are now so much in vogue, that a book without
one, is as seldom seen as a bawdy house without a Practice of Piety, or a poet
with money. Upon this account, Sir, those who have no friends, dedicate to all
good christians; some to their booksellers; some for want of a sublunary patron
to the manes of a departed one. There are, that have dedicated to their whores:
God help those hen-peck'd writers that have been forced to dedicate to their
own wives! but while I talk so much of other men's patrons, I have forgot my
own; and seem rather to make an essay on Dedications, than to write one.
However, Sir, I presume you will pardon me for that fault; and perhaps like me
the better for saying nothing to the purpose. You, Sir, are a person more
tender of other men's reputation than your own; and would hear every body
commended but yourself. Should I but mention your skill in turning, and the
compassion you showed to my fingers ends when you gave me a tobacco stopper,
you would blush and be confounded with your just praises. How much more would
you, should I tell you what a progress you have made in that abstruse and
useful language, the Saxon? Since, therefore, the recital of your excellencies
would prove so troublesome, I shall offend your modesty no longer. Give me
leave to speak a word or two concerning the poem, and I have done. This poem,
Sir, if we consider the moral, the newness of the subject, the variety of
images, and the exactness of the similitudes that compose it, must be allowed a
piece that was never equalled by the moderns or ancients. The subject of the
poem is myself, a subject never yet handled by any poets. How it to be handled
by all, we may learn by those few divine commendatory verses written by the
admirable Monsieur le Bog. Yet since I am the subject, and the poet too, I
shall say no more of it, lest I should seem vainglorious. As for the moral, I
have took particular care that it should lie incognito, not like the ancients
who let you know at first sight they design something by their verses. But here
you may look a good while, and perhaps, after all, find that the poet has no
aim or design, which must needs be a diverting surprise to the reader. What
shall I say of the similes that are so full of geography, that you must get a
Welshman to understand them? that so raise our ideas of the things they are
applied to? that are so extraordinarily quaint and well chosen that there is
nothing like them? So that I think I may, without vanity, say Avia Pieridum
peragro loca, etc. Yet however excellent this poem is, in the reading of it you
will find a vast difference between some parts and others; which proceeds not
from your humble servant's negligence, but diet. This poem was begun when he
had little victuals, and no moneys, and was finished when he had the misfortune
at a virtuous lady's house to meet with both. But I hope, in time, Sir, when
hunger and poverty shall once more be my companions, to make amends for the
defaults of this poem, by an essay on Minced Pies, which shall be devoted to
you with all submission, by,

SIR, Your most obliged, And humble servant, J. PHILIPS.

Copy of a Letter from Mr. PIT, the Translator of VIRGIL,
To Mr. SPENCE.
July 18, Blanford, 1726. DEAR Jo,
I Am entering into proposals with a bookseller for printing a little
miscellany of my own performances, consisting of some originals and select
Translations. I beg you to be altogether silent in the matter. Mr. Pope has
used so little of the 23d Odyssey that I gave Dr. Young, that if I put it in
among the rest I shall hardly incur any danger of the penalty concerning the
patent. However, I will not presume to publish a single line of it after Mr.
Pope's Translation, if you advise me (as I desire you to do sincerely) to the
contrary. I shall send you a small specimen of my Translation, which if you
approve of, I can assure you the remainder of the book is not inferior to it.

THE nurse all wild with transport seemed to swim,
Joy winged her feet and lightened every limb;
Then to the room with speed impatient born
Flew with the tidings of her lord's return.
There bending over the sleeping Queen, she cries,
Rise, my Penelope, my daughter, rise
To see Ulysses thy long absent spouse,
Thy soul's desire and lord of all thy vows:
Though late, he comes, and in his rage has slain,
For all their wrongs, the haughty suitor train.
Ah Euryelea, she replies, you rave;
The gods resume that reason which they gave;
For Heaven deep wisdom to the fool supplies,
But often infatuates and confounds the wise.
And wisdom once was thine! but now I find
The gods have ruined thy distempered mind.
How could you hope your fiction to impose?
Was it to flatter or deride my woes?
How could you break a sleep with talk so vain
That held my sorrows in so soft a chain?
A sleep so sweet I never could enjoy
Since my dear lord left Ithaca for Troy:
Cursed Troy -- oh! why did I thy name disclose?
Thy fatal name awakens all my woes:
But fly -- some other had provoked my rage,
And you but owe your pardon to your age.
No artful tales, no studied lies, I frame,
Ulysses lives (rejoins the reverend dame)
In that dishonored stranger's close disguise,
Long has he past all unsuspecting eyes,
All but thy son's -- and long has he suppressed
The well-concerted secret in his breast;
Till his brave father should his foes defeat,
And the close scheme of his revenge complete.
Swift as the word the Queen transported sprung,
And round the dame in strict embraces hung;
Then as the big round tears began to roll,
Spoke the quick doubts and hurry of her soul.
If my victorious hero safe arrives,
If my dear lord, Ulysses, still survives,
Tell me, oh tell me, how he fought alone?
How were such multitudes destroyed by one?
Naught I beheld, but heard their cries, she said,
When death flew raging, and the suitors bled:
Immured we listened, as we fat around,
To each deep groan and agonizing sound.
Called by thy son to view the scene I fled,
And saw Ulysses striding over the dead!
Amidst the rising heaps the hero stood
All grim, and terribly adorned with blood.
This is enough in conscience for this time; besides I am desired by Mr. Pope
or Mr. Lintot, I don't know which, to write to Mr. Pope on a certain, affair.

Original Letter from Mr. GEORGE VIRTUE This letter from Mr. George Virtue, and
the other from Prior and Elkanah Settle, have no immediate relation to Mr.
Pope's correspondence, but were found in the same Repository.
,
To Mr. CHARLES CHRISTIAN.
MR. CHRISTIAN,
PRAY inform my Lord Harley that I have on Thursday last seen the daughter of
Milton the poet. I carried with me two or three different prints of Milton's
picture, which she immediately knew to be like her father; and told me her
mother-in-law (if living in Cheshire) had two pictures of him, one when he was
a school boy, and the other when he was about twenty. She knows of no other
picture of him, because she was several years in Ireland, both before and after
his death. She was the youngest of Milton's daughters by his first wife, and
was taught to read to her father several languages.

Mr. Addison was desirous to see her once, and desired she would bring with her
testimonials of being Milton's daughter, but as soon as she came into the room
he told her she needed none, her face having much of the likeness of the
pictures he had seen of him.

For my part, I find the features of her face very much like the prints. I
showed her the painting I have to engrave, which she believes not to be her
father's picture, it being of a brown complexion, and black hair, and curled
locks. On the contrary, he was of a fair complexion, a little red in his
cheeks, and light brown lank hair.

I desire you would acquaint Mr. Prior I was so unfortunate to wait on him on
Thursday morning last, just after he was gone out of town. It was with the
intent to enquire of him if he remembers a picture of Milton in the late Lord
Dorset's collection, as I am told this was; or if he can inform me how I shall
enquire or know the truth of this affair, I should be much obliged to him,
being very willing to have all the certainty on that account before I begin to
engrave the plate, that it may be the more satisfactory to the public, as well
as to myself.

The sooner you communicate this the better, because I want to resolve, which I
cannot do till I have an answer, which will much oblige

Your friend to command, GEO. VIRTUE.
Saturday, Aug. 12, 1721.
Mr. PRIOR to Mr. WANLEY.
MY GOOD AND KIND WANLEY,
I Send you these sheets as looked over first by Mr. Bedford, and then by
myself. I have made great letters at ye, me, and emphatical words, that this
may answer to the tenor of the other poems; but if in the old it be otherwise
printed, or you please to alter any thing, you know and may use your
dictatorial power. In a book called the Customs of London, a folio, printed, I
think, in Harry the Eight's time, which I gave our wellbeloved Lord Harley, you
will find this poem The Not-Browne Maid.
. I hope I am to see you at dinner at Mr. Black's, and am always,

Your obliged and Faithful servant, M. PRIOR.
Thursday noon, 11th April, 1718.
Mr. PRIOR to Mr. WANLEY.
DEAR WANLEY,
I Must beg the continuance of your care in the names of the subscribers, as
you have given it to me in the printing of the books. I send you my phiz. Pray
give my service to Mrs. Wanley, desiring her to accept it, and assuring her
that no man loves or esteems her husband and my friend more, than

Yours, M. PRIOR.
January 8.
Mr. E. SETTLE to Lord OXFORD.
MY LORD,
HAVING laid at your Lordship's feet a divine poem on the Holy Eucharist, I
humbly pay my duty to your Lordship to know how you are pleased to accept of
it, being,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most dutiful servant, E. SETTLE.

LETTERS by Mr. POPE.
To a LADY.
Twitenham, October 18. MADAM,
WE are indebted to Heaven for all things, and above all for our sense and
genius (in whatever degree we have it); but to fancy yourself indebted to any
thing else, moves my anger at your modesty. The regard I must bear you,
seriously proceeds from myself alone; and I will not suffer even one I like so
much as Mrs. H. to have a share in causing it. I challenge a kind of relation
to you on the soul's side, which I take to be better than either on a father's
or mother's; and if you can overlook an ugly body (that stands much in the way
of any friendship, when it is between different sexes) I shall hope to find you
a true and constant kinswoman in Apollo. Not that I would place all my
pretensions upon that poetical foot, much less confine them to it; I am far
more desirous to be admitted as yours, on the more meritorious title of
friendship. I have ever believed this as a sacred maxim, that the most
ingenious natures were the most sincere; and the most knowing and sensible
minds made the best friends. Of all those that I have thought it the felicity
of my life to know, I have ever found the most distinguished in capacity, the
most distinguished in morality: and those the most to be depended on, whom one
esteemed so much as to desire they should be so. I beg you to make me no more
compliments. I could make you a great many, but I know you neither need them,
nor can like them: be so good as to think I do not. In one word, your writings
are very good, and very entertaining; but not so good, nor so entertaining, as
your life and conversation. One is but the effect and emanation of the other.
It will always be a greater pleasure to me, to know you are well, than that you
write well, though every time you tell me the one, I must know the other. I am
willing to spare your modesty; and therefore, as to your writing, may perhaps
never say more (directly to yourself) than the few verses I send here; which
(as a proof of my own modesty too) I made so long ago as the day you sat for
your picture, and yet never till now durst confess to you.

Though sprightly Sappho force our love and praise,
A softer wonder my pleased soul surveys,
The mild Erinna, blushing in her bays.
So while the sun's broad beam yet strikes the sight,
All mild appears the moon's more sober light,
Serene, in virgin majesty, she shines;
And, un-observ'd, the glaring sun declines.
The brightest wit in the world, without the better qualities of the heart,
must meet with this fate; and tends only to endear such a character as I take
yours to be. In the better discovery, and fuller conviction of which, I have a
strong opinion, I shall grow more and more happy, the longer I live your
acquaintance, and (if you will indulge me in so much pleasure)

Your faithful friend, And most obliged servant, A. POPE.

To the same.
Twitenham, Nov. 5. MADAM,
THOUGH I am extremely obliged by your agreeable letter, I will avoid all
mention of the pleasure you give me, that we may have no more words about
compliments; which I have often observed people talk themselves into, while
they endeavor to talk themselves out of. It is not more the diet of friendship
and esteem, than a few thin wafers and marmalade were of so hearty a stomach as
Sancho's. In a word, I am very proud of my new relation, and like Parnassus
much the better, since I found I had so good a neighbor there. Mrs. H^, who
lives at court, shall teach two country-folks sincerity; and when I am so happy
as to meet you, she shall settle the proportions of that regard, or
goodnature, which she can allow you to spare me, from a heart, which is so
much her own as yours is.

That lady is the most trusty of friends, if the imitation of Shakespeare be
yours; for she made me give my opinion of it with assurance it was none of Mrs.
(...). I honestly liked and praised it, whosesoever it was; there is in it a
sensible melancholy, and too true a picture of human life; so true an one, that
I can scarce wish the verses yours at the expense of your thinking that way, so
early. I rather wish you may love the town (which the author of those lines
cannot immoderately do) these many years. It is time enough to like, or affect
to like, the country, when one is out of love with all but one's-self, and
therefore studies to become agreeable or easy to one's-self. Retiring into
one's-self is generally the pis-aller of mankind. Would you have me describe my
solitude and grotto to you? What if, after a long and painted description of
them in verse (which the writer I have just been speaking of could better make,
if I can guess by that line, No noise but water, ever friend to thought)
what if it ended thus? What are the falling rills, the pendant shades,
The morning bowers, the evening colonnades:
But soft recesses for the uneasy mind,
To sigh un-heard in, to the passing wind!
So! the struck deer, in some sequestered part,
Lies down to die (the arrow in his heart);
There hid in shades, and wasting day by day,
Inly he bleeds, and pants his soul away.
If these lines want poetry, they do not want sense. God Almighty long preserve
you from a feeling of them! The book you mention, Bruyere's Characters, will
make any one know the world; and I believe at the same time despise it (which
is a sign it will make one know it thoroughly). It is certainly the proof of a
master-hand, that can give such striking likenesses, in such slight sketches,
and in so sew strokes on each subject. In answer to your question about
Shakespeare, the book is about a quarter printed, and the number of emendations
very great. I have never indulged my own conjectures, but kept merely to such
amendments as are authorized by old editions, in the author's lifetime: but I
think it will be a year at least before the whole work can be finished. In
reply to your very handsome (I wish it were a very true) compliment upon this
head, I only desire you to observe, by what natural, gentle degrees I have sunk
to the humble thing I now am: first from a pretending poet to a critic, then
to a low translator, lastly to a mere publisher. I am apprehensive I shall be
nothing that is of any value long, except,

MADAM, Your most obliged, and Most faithful humble servant, A. POPE.
I long for your return to town, a place I am unfit for, but shall not be long
out of, as soon as I know I may be permitted to wait on you there.



To the same.
Thursday night. MADAM,
IT was an agreeable surprise to me, to hear of your settlement in town. I lie
at my Lord Peterborow's in Bolton-street, where any commands of yours will
reach me tomorrow, only on Saturday evening I am pre-engaged. If Mrs. H^ be to
be engaged (and if she is by any creature, it is by you) I hope she will join
us. I am, with great truth,

MADAM, Your most faithful friend, And obliged servant, A. POPE.

To the same.
MADAM,
I Could not play the impertinent so far as to write to you, till I was
encouraged to it by a piece of news Mrs. H^ tells me, which ought to be the
most agreeable in the world to any author, That you are determined to write no
more -- It is now the time then, not for me only, but for every body, to write
without fear, or wit: and I shall give you the first example here. But for this
assurance, it would be every way too dangerous to correspond with a lady, whose
very first sight and very first writings had such an effect, upon a man used to
what they call fine sights, and what they call fine writings. Yet he has been
dull enough to sleep quietly, after all he has seen, and all he has read; till
yours broke in upon his stupidity and indolence, and totally destroyed it. But,
God be thanked, you will write no more; so I am in no danger of increasing my
admiration of you one way; and as to the other, you will never (I have too much
reason to fear) open these eyes again with one glimpse of you.

I am told, you named lately in a letter a place called Twitenham, with
particular distinction. That you may not be mis-construed and have your meaning
mistaken for the future, I must acquaint you, Madam, that the name of the place
where Mrs. H^ is, is not Twitenham, but Richmond; which your ignorance in the
geography of these parts has made you confound together. You will unthinkingly
do honor to a paltry hermitage (while you speak of Twitenham) where lives a
creature altogether unworthy your memory or notice, because he really wishes he
had never beheld you, nor yours. You have spoiled him for a solitaire, and a
book, all the days of his life; and put him into such a condition, that he
thinks of nothing, and enquires of nothing but after a person who has nothing
to say to him, and has left him for ever without hope of ever again regarding,
or pleasing, or entertaining him, much less of seeing him. He has been so mad
with the idea of her, as to steal her picture, and passes whole days in sitting
before it, talking to himself, and (as some people imagine) making verses; but
it is no such matter, for as long as he can get any of hers, he can never turn
his head to his own, it is so much better entertained.

To the same.
MADAM,
I Am touched with shame when I look on the date of your letter. I have
answered it a hundred times in my own mind, which I assure you has few
thoughts, either so frequent or so lively, as those relating to you. I am
sensibly obliged by you, in the comfort you endeavor to give me upon the loss
of a friend. It is like the shower we have had this morning, that just makes
the drooping trees hold up their heads, but they remain checked and withered at
the root: the benediction is but a short relief, though it comes from Heaven
itself. The loss of a friend is the loss of life; after that is gone from us,
it is all but a gentler decay, and wasting and lingering a little longer. I was
the other day forming a wish for a lady's happiness, upon her birthday: and
thinking of the greatest climax of felicity I could raise, step by step, to end
in this -- a Friend. I fancy I have succeeded in the gradation, and send you
the whole copy to ask your opinion, or (which is much the better reason) to
desire you to alter it to your own wish: for I believe you are a woman that can
wish for yourself more reasonably, than I can for you. Mrs. H^ made me promise
her a copy; and to the end she may value it, I beg it may be transcribed, and
sent her by you.

To a LADY, on her BIRTHDAY, 1723.
Oh! be thou blessed with all that Heaven can send:
Long life, long youth, long pleasure -- and a friend!
Not with those toys the woman-world admire,
Riches that vex, and vanities that tire:
Let joy, or ease; let affluence, or content;
And the gay conscience of a life well-spent,
Calm every thought; inspirit every grace;
Glow in thy heart; and smile upon thy face!
Let day improve on day, and year on year;
Without a pain, a trouble, or a fear!
And ah! (since death must that dear frame destroy),
Die by some sudden ecstasy of joy:
In some soft dream may thy mild soul remove,
And be thy latest gasp, a sigh of love!
Pray, Madam, let me see this mended in your copy to Mrs. H^;and let it be an
exact scheme of happiness drawn, and I hope enjoyed, by yourself. To whom I
assure you I wish it all, as much as you wish it her. I am always, with true
respect,

MADAM, Your most faithful friend, And most humble servant, A. POPE.

To the same.
Twitenham, August 29. MADAM,
YOUR last letter tells me, that if I do not write in less than a month, you
will fancy the length of yours frighted me. A consciousness that I had upon me
of omitting too long to answer it, made me look (not without some fear and
trembling) for the date of it: but there happened to be none; and I hope,
either that you have forgot how long it is, or at least that you cannot think
it so long as I do, since I writ to you. Indeed a multitude of things (which
singly seem trifles, and yet all together make a vast deal of business, and
wholly take up that time which we ought to value above all such things) have
from day to day made me wanting, as well to my own greatest pleasure in this,
as to my own greatest concerns in other points. If I seem to neglect any friend
I have, I do more than seem to neglect myself, as I find daily by the
increasing ill constitution of my body and mind. I still resolve this course
shall not, nay I see it cannot, be long; and I determine to retreat within
myself to the only business I was born for, and which I am only good for (if I
am entitled to use that phrase for any thing). It is great folly to sacrifice
one's self, one's time, one's quiet (the very life of life itself), to forms,
complaisances, and amusements, which do not inwardly please me, and only please
a sort of people who regard me no farther than a mere instrument of their
present idleness, or vanity. To say truth, the lives of those we call great and
happy are divided between those two states; and in each of them, we poetical
fiddlers make but part of their pleasure, or of their equipage. And the misery
is, we, in our turns, are so vain (at least I have been so) as to choose to pipe
without being paid, and so silly to be pleased with piping to those who
understand music less than ourselves. They have put me of late upon a task
before I was aware, which I am sick and sore of: and yet engaged in honor to
some persons whom I must neither disobey nor disappoint (I mean two or three in
the world only) to go on with it. They make me do as mean a thing as the
greatest man of them could do; seem to depend, and to solicit, when I do not
want; and make a kind of court to those above my rank, just as they do to those
above theirs, when we might much more wisely and agreeably live of ourselves,
and to ourselves. You will easily find I am talking of my translating the
Odyssey by subscription: which looks, it must needs look, to all the world as a
design of mine both upon fame and money, when in truth I believe I shall get
neither; for one I go about without any stomach, and the other I shall not go
about at all.

This freedom of opening my mind upon my own situation, will be a proof of
trust, and of an opinion your goodness of nature has made me entertain, that
you never profess any degree of good will without being pretty warm in it. So I
tell you my grievances; I hope in God you have none, wherewith to make me any
return of this kind. I hope that was the only one which you communicated in
your last, about Mrs. H^ silence; for which she wanted not reproaches from me;
and has since, she says, amply atoned for. I saw a few lines of yours to her,
which are more obliging to me than I could have imagined: if you put my welfare
into the small number of things which you heartily wish (for a sensible person,
of either sex, will never wish for many), I ought to be a happier man than I
ever yet deserved to be.

Upon a review of your papers, I have repented of some of the trivial
alterations I had thought of, which were very few. I would rather keep them
till I have the satisfaction to meet you in the winter, which I must beg
earnestly to do; for hitherto methinks you are to me like a spirit of another
world, a being I admire, but have no commerce with: I cannot tell but I am
writing to a Fairy, who has left me some favors, which I secretly enjoy, and
shall think it unlucky, if not fatal, to part with. So pray do not expect your
verses till farther acquaintance.

To the same.
Twitenham, Sept. 30, 1722. MADAM,
NO confidence is so great, as that one receives from persons one knows may be
believed, and in things one is willing to believe. I have (at last) acquired
this; by Mrs. H^ repeated assurances of a thing I am unfeignedly so desirous
of, as your allowing me to correspond with you. In good earnest, there is
sometimes in men as well as in women, a great deal of unaffected modesty: and I
was sincere all along, when I told her personally, and told you by my silence,
that I feared only to seem impertinent, while perhaps I seemed negligent, to
you. To tell Mrs. (...) any thing like what I really thought of her, would have
looked so like the common traffic of compliment, that pays only to receive;
and to have told it her in distant or bashful terms, would have appeared so
like coldness in my sense of good qualities (which I cannot find out in any
one, without feeling, from my nature, at the same time a great warmth for them)
that I was quite at a loss what to write, or in what style, to you. But I am
resolved, plainly to get over all objections, and faithfully to assure you, if
you will help a bashful man to be past all preliminaries, and forms, I am ready
to treat with you for your friendship. I know (without more ado) you have a
valuable soul; and wit, sense, and worth enough, to make me reckon it (provided
you will permit it) one of the happinesses of my life to have been made
acquainted with you.

I do not know, on the other hand, what you can think of me; but this, for a
beginning, I will venture to engage, that whoever takes me for a poet, or a wit
(as they call it), takes me for a creature of less value than I am: and that
wherever I profess it, you shall find me a much better man, that is, a much
better friend, or at least a much less faulty one, than I am a poet. That
whatever zeal I may have, or whatever regard I may show, for things I truly am
so pleased with as your entertaining writings; yet I shall still have more for
your person, and for your health, and for your happiness. I would, with as much
readiness, play the apothecary or the nurse, to mend your head-akes, as I would
play the critic to improve your verses. I have seriously looked over and over
those you entrusted me with; and assure you, Madam, I would as soon cheat in
any other trust, as in this. I sincerely tell you, I can mend them very little,
and only in trifles, not worth writing about; but will tell you every tittle
when I have the happiness to see you.

I am more concerned than you can reasonably believe, for the ill state of
health you are at present under: but I will appeal to time, to show you how
sincerely I am (if I live long enough to prove myself what I truly am)

MADAM, Your most faithful servant, A. POPE.
I am very sick all the while I write this letter, which I hope will be an
excuse for its being so scribbled.



To the same.
Twitenham, Nov. 9. MADAM,
IT happened that when I determined to answer yours, by the post that followed
my receipt of it, I was prevented from the first proof I have had the happiness
to give you of my warmth and readiness, in returning the epitaph, with my
sincere condolements with you on that melancholy subject. But nevertheless I
resolved to send you the one, though unattended by the other: I begged Mrs. H^
to enclose it, that you might at least see I had not the power to delay a
moment the doing what you bid me; especially when the occasion of obeying your
commands was such, as must affect every admirer and well-wisher of honor and
virtue in the nation.

You had it in the very blots, the better to compare the places; and I can only
say it was done to the best of my judgment, and to the extent of my sincerity.

I do not wonder that you decline the poetical amusement I proposed to you, at
this time. I know (from what little I know of your heart) enough at least to
convince me, it must be too deeply concerned at the loss, not only of so great,
and so near a relation; but of a good man (a loss this age can hardly ever
afford to bear, and not often can sustain). Yet perhaps it is one of the best
things that can be said of poetry, that it helps us to pass over the toils and
troubles of this tiresome journey, our life; as horses are encouraged and
spirited up, the better to bear their labor, by the jingling of bells about
their heads. Indeed, as to myself, I have been used to this odd cordial, so
long, that it has no effect upon me: but you, Madam, are in your honeymoon of
poetry; you have seen only the smiles, and enjoyed the caresses, of Apollo.
Nothing is so pleasant to a Muse as the first children of the Imagination; but
when once she comes to find it mere conjugal duty, and the care of her numerous
progeny daily grows upon her, it is all a sour tax for past pleasure. As the
Psalmist says on another occasion, the age of a Muse is scarce above five and
twenty: all the rest is labor and sorrow. I find by experience that his own
fiddle is no great pleasure to a common fiddler, after once the first good
conceit of himself is lost.

I long at last to be acquainted with you; and Mrs. H^ tells me you shall soon
be in town, and I blessed with the vision I have so long desired. Pray believe I
worship you as much, and send my addresses to you as often, as to any female
Saint in Heaven: it is certain I see you as little, unless it be in my sleep;
and that way too, holy hermits are visited by the Saints themselves.

I am, without figures and metaphors, yours: and hope you will think, I have
spent all my fiction in my poetry; so that I have nothing but plain truth left
for my prose; with which I am ever,

MADAM, Your faithful humble servant.

To the same.
Five o'clock. MADAM,
I Think it a full proof of that unlucky star, which upon too many occasions I
have experienced, that this first, this only day that I should have owned happy
beyond expectation (for I did not till yesterday hope to have seen you so soon)
I must be forced not to do it. I am too sick (indeed very ill) to go out so
far, and lie on a bed at my doctor's house, as a kind of force upon him to get
me better with all haste.

I am scarce able to see these few lines I write; to wish you health and
pleasure enough not to miss me today, and myself patience to bear being absent
from you as well as I can being ill.

I am truly, Your faithful servant, A. POPE.

To the same.
Jan. 17, 1722-23. MADAM,
AFTER a very long expectation and daily hopes of the satisfaction of seeing
and conversing with you, I am still deprived of it in a manner that is the most
afflicting, because it is occasioned by your illness and your misfortune. I can
bear my own, I assure you, much better: and thus to find you lost to me, at the
time that I hoped to have regained you, doubles the concern I should naturally
feel in being deprived of any pleasure whatever.

Mrs. H^ can best express to you the concern of a friend, who esteems and
pities: for she has the liberty to express it in her actions, and the
satisfaction of attending on you in your indisposition.

I wish sincerely your condition were not such as to debar me from telling you
in person how truly I am yours. I wish I could do you any little offices of
friendship, or give you any amusements, or help you to what people in your
present state most want, better spirits. If reading to you, or writing to you,
could contribute to entertain your hours, or to raise you to a livelier relish
of life, how well should I think my time employed! indeed I should, and think
it a much better end of my poor studies, than all the vanities of fame, or
views of a character that way, which engage most men of my fraternity.

If you thoroughly knew the zeal with which I am your servant, you would take
some notice of the advice I would give you, and suffer it to have a weight with
you proportionable to the sincerity with which it is given.

I beg you to do your utmost to call to you all the succors, which your own
good sense and natural reflection can suggest, to avoid a melancholy way of
thinking, and to throw up your spirits by intervals of moderate company; not to
let your distemper fix itself upon your mind at least, though it will not
entirely quit your body. Do not indulge too much solitariness. Though most
company be not proper or supportable during your illness, force yourself to
enter into such as is good and reasonable, where you may have your liberty, and
be under no restraint.

Why will you not come to your friend Mrs. H^, since you are able to go out,
and since motion is certainly good for your health? Why will you not make any
little sets of such as you are easiest with, to sit with you sometimes?

Do not think I have any interested aim in this advice: though I long to see
you, and to try to amuse you, I would not for the world be considered as one
that would ever require for my own gratification, any thing that might be
improper or hurtful to you.

Pray let me know, by our friend Mrs. H^, if there can be anything in my power
to serve, or to amuse you. But use me so kindly, as not to think ever of
writing to me till you are so well as that I may see you, and then it will be
needless. Do not even read this, if it be the least trouble to your eyes or
head.

Believe me, with great respect, and the warmest good wishes for your speedy
recovery,

MADAM, Your most faithful, And most humble servant, A. POPE.

To the same.
Twitenham, June 2, 1723. MADAM,
IT was an inexpressible pleasure to me to see your letter, as I assure you it
had long been a great trouble, to reflect on the melancholy reason of your
silence and absence. It was that only which hindered my writing, not only
again, but often, to you; for fear your goodnature should have been prompted
to oblige me too much at your own expense, by answering. Indeed I never
expressed (and never shall be able to express) more concern and good wishes for
you, than I shall ever feel for one of your merit.

I am sorry, the moment you grow better, to have you snatched from those, who I
may say deserve the pleasure of seeing you in health, for having so long
lamented and felt your illness.

Mrs. H^, I hope, will find it not impossible to draw you to Richmond: and if
not, I dare say will not be long out of Hertfordshire. I want nothing but the
same happy pretense she has, of a title through your friendship, and the
privilege of her sex, to be there immediately. I cannot but wonder you have not
heard from her, though I should wonder if any body else had; for I am told by
her family she has had much of the head-ake at Bath, besides the excuse of a
great giddiness occasioned naturally by the waters. I writ to her at the first
going, and have not had a word from her; and now you tell me the same thing, I
conclude she has been worse than I imagine. I hear she returns on Wednesday,
when I shall have the satisfaction (I doubt not) to talk and hear a great deal
of Mrs. (...).

I wish I could say any thing, either to comfort you when ill, or entertain you
when well. Though nothing could, in the proper proportion of friendship, more
affect me than your condition; I have not wanted other occasions of great
melancholy, of which the least is the loss of part of my fortune by a late Act
of Parliament.

I am at present in the afflicting circumstance of taking my last leave of one
of the Bishop Atterbury.
truest friends I ever had, and one of the greatest men in all polite learning,
as well as the most agreeable companion, this nation ever had.

I really do not love life so dearly, or so weakly, as to value it on any other
score, than for that portion of happiness which a friend only can bestow upon
it: or, if I must want that myself, for the pleasure which is next it, of
seeing deserving and virtuous people happy. So that indeed I want comfort; and
the greatest I can receive from you (at least unless I were so happy as to
deserve what I never can) will be to hear you grow better till you grow
perfectly well, perfectly easy, and perfectly happy, which no one more
sincerely wishes than,

MADAM, Your faithful and obliged Friend and servant, A. POPE.

To the same.
Twitenham, Sept. 26, 1723. MADAM,
IT would be a vanity in me to tell you why I trouble you so soon again: I
cannot imagine myself of the number of those correspondents whom you call
favorite ones; yet I know it is thought, that industry may make a man what
merit cannot: and if an old maxim of my Lord Oxford's be true, That in England
if a man resolve to be any thing, and constantly stick to it, he may (even a
Lord Treasurer): if so, I say, it shall not be want of resolution that shall
hinder me from being a favorite. In good earnest, I am more ambitious of being
so to you, Madam, than I ever was, or ever shall be, of being one to any
Prince, or (which is more) any Prince's minister, in Christendom.

I wish I could tell you any agreeable news of what your heart is concerned in;
but I have a sort of quarrel to Mrs. H^ for not loving herself so well as she
does her friends: for those she makes happy, but not herself.

There is an air of sadness about her which grieves me, and which, I have
learnt by experience, will increase upon an indolent (I will not say an
affected) resignation to it. It will do so in men, and much more in women, who
have a natural softness that sinks them even when reason does not. This I tell
you in confidence; and pray give our friend such hints as may put her out of
humor with melancholy: your censure, or even your raillery, may have more
weight with her than mine: a man cannot either so decently, or so delicately,
take upon him to be a physician in these concealed distempers.

You see, Madam, I proceed in trusting you with things that nearly concern me.
In my last letter I spoke but of a trifle, myself: in this I advance farther,
and speak of what touches me more, a friend.

This beautiful season will raise up so many rural images and descriptions in a
poetical mind, that I expect, you, and all such as you (if there be any such),
at least all who are not downright dull translators, like your servant, must
necessarily be productive of verses.

I lately saw a sketch this way on the bower of The lines here alluded to are
as follows: In Tempe's shades the living lyre was strung,
And the first Pope (immortal Phoebus) sung,
These happy shades, where equal beauty reigns,
Bold rising hills, slant vales, and far-stretch'd plains,
The grateful verdure of the waving woods,
The soothing murmur of the falling floods,
A nobler boast, a higher glory yield,
Than that which Phoebus stamped on Tempe's field:
All that can charm the eye, or please the ear,
Says, Harmony itself inhabits here.

BEDINGTON: I could wish you tried something in the descriptive way on any
subject you please, mixed with vision and moral; like pieces of the old
provencal poets, which abound with fancy, and are the most amusing scenes in
nature. There are three or four of this kind in Chaucer admirable: "The Flower
and the Leaf" every body has been delighted with.

I have long had an inclination to tell a Fairy tale, the more wild and exotic
the better; therefore a vision, which is confined to no rules of probability,
will take in all the variety and luxuriancy of description you will; provided
there be an apparent moral to it. I think, one or two of the Persian Tales
would give one hints for such an invention: and perhaps if the scenes were
taken from real places that are known, in order to compliment particular
gardens and buildings of a fine taste (as I believe several of Chaucer's
descriptions do, though it is what nobody has observed), it would add great
beauty to the whole.

I wish you found such an amusement pleasing to you: if you did but, at
leisure, form descriptions from objects in nature itself, which struck you most
livelily, I would undertake to find a tale that should bring them all together:
which you will think an odd undertaking, but in a piece of this fanciful and
imaginary nature I am sure is practicable. Excuse this long letter; and think
no man is more

Your faithful And obliged servant, A. POPE.

IN the Preface to an edition of Monsieur POUILLY DE CHAMPEAUX's Works very
lately published, is the Extract of a Letter from Lord BOLINGBROKE to that
Gentleman. The original and translation are inserted here. The comment is left
to the reader.

It may be necessary to add, That Monsieur POUILLY DE CHAMPEAUX is a writer
much esteemed on account of the elegance and spirit of humanity that breathe
throughout his literary productions. The chief of these is his Theory of
Agreeable Sensations. As to his political powers, they have never yet been
celebrated by his countrymen in such a strain as to authorize the following
compliment to him on the part of Lord BOLINGBROKE.

EXTRACT.
"ENFIN, mon cher Pouilly, dans cette foul d'hommes que j'ai pu connoitre, et
don't j'ai cherche a etudier l'esprit et le charactere, je n'en ai vu que TROIS
qui m'aient paru dignes qu'on leur confiat le soin de gouverner des nations.
Notre amity est trop etroite, elle est, ainsi que le diroit Montaigne, trop
libre et trop franche dans ses allures, pour que je m'enveloppe avec vous de
cette fausse modesty, don't il faut quelquefois se fair un bouclier contre
l'envie. Je vous dirai donc hardiment que ces trois hommes sont vous, MOI, et
POPE."

TRANSLATION.
"MY dear friend, among the crowd of men whom it may have fallen in my way to
know, and whose understandings and characters I have endeavored to study, I
have not yet marked out above THREE that appeared to me worthy of being trusted
with the care of governing nations. Our friendship is too intimate, and, as
Montaigne would perhaps choose to express himself, too frank and free in its
paces for me to need, with you, the wrapping myself up in that false modesty,
of which there is sometimes a necessity for making a shield against envy. I
shall then tell you boldly that these three men are YOU, MYSELF, and POPE."

END OF VOL. I.

