A MISCELLANY ON TASTE.

By Mr. POPE, etc.

Viz.

I. Of TASTE in ARCHITECTURE. An Epistle to the Earl of Burlington. With NOTES
Variorum, and a Complete KEY.

II. Of Mr. POPE' S TASTE in DIVINITY, viz. The FALL of MAN, and the First
PSALM. Translated for the Use of a YOUNG LADY.

III. Of Mr. POPE' S TASTE of Shakespeare.

IV. -- His Satire on Mrs. P -- y.

V. Mr. CONGREVE' S fine EPISTLE on RETIREMENT and TASTE. Addressed to Lord
Cobham.

No Author ever spared a Brother,
Wits are Game-Cocks to one another.
GAY' S Fab. the 8th. LONDON: Printed; and sold by G. Lawton, in Fleet Street;
T. Osborn, below Bridge; and J. Hughes in High-Holborn. 1732. Price 1 s.

CLAVIS.
Topham, Richard Topham, of Old Windsor, Esquire late Keeper of the Records in the
Tower. Fountain, Sir Andrew Fountain, to whom the late Dean Hickesdedicated
his most learned Work, entitled, Linguarum Septentrionalium the saurus, two
Toms Folio. Curio, Dr. A -- tt. Hearne, That ingenious and learned Antiquary
Mr. Thomas Hearne of Edmund-Hall, Oxon. Mead, The learned Richard Mead, M. D.
Sloan, Sir Hans Sloan, M. D. Virro, Mr. S -- es of Hertfordshire. Sir. Shylock,
Sir R -- W -- S -- d, One Stafford, a Carpenter. Babo, Lord C -- d -- n.
Villario, Lord C -- le -- n. Sabinus, The Son of Virro. Bridgman, A Gardener of
that Name. Timon, Duke of C --.
Of TASTE: Or, (As it is altered in the SECOND EDITION) * Of FALSE TASTE.
AN EPISTLE To the Right Honorable RICHARD Earl of BURLINGTON.
a IT IS strange, the Miser should his Cares employ
To gain those Riches he can never enjoy:
a Is it less strange, the Prodigal should waste
His Wealth to purchase what he never can taste?
b Not for himself he sees, or hears, or eats;
c Artists must choose his Pictures, Music, Meats:
d He buys for e Topham Drawings and Designs,
For Fountain Statues, and for Curio Coins,
a Rare Monkish Manuscripts for Hearne alone,
b And Books for Mead, c and Rarities for Sloan.
Think we all these are for himself? no more
a Than his fine Wife (my Lord) or finer Whore.
a For what has Virro painted, built, and planted:
Only to show how many Tastes he wanted.
What brought Sir Shylock's ill-got Wealth to waste?
b Some Demon whispered, " Knights should have a Taste."
c Heaven visits with a Taste the welath Fool,
And needs no Rod, but S -- d with a Rule.
See sportive Fate, to punish awkward Pride,
Bids Babo build, and sends him such a Guide:
A standing Sermon! at each Year's Expense,
a That never Coxcomb reached Magnificence.
b Often have you hinted to your Brother Peer,
A certain Truth which many buy too dear:
Something there is more needful than Expense,
And something previous even to Taste -- It Is Sense;
c Good Sense, which only is the Gift of Heaven,
And though no Sience, fairly worth the Seven.
A Light, which in yourself you must perceive;
Mr. Pope's NOTE. Inigo Jones.
Jones and Mr. Pope's NOTE. The famous Artist who designed the best Gardens in
France; and planned Greenwich and St. James's Parks, etc.
Le Notre have it not to give.
To build, to plant, whatever you intend,
To rear the Column, or the Arch to bend,
To swell the Terras, or to sink the Grot;
In all, let Nature never be forgot.
Consult the Genius of the Place in all,
That tells the Waters or to rise, or fall,
Or helps the ambitious Hill the Heavens to scale,
Or scoops in circling Theaters the Vale,
Calls in the Country, catches opening Glades,
Joins willing Woods, and varies Shades from Shades,
Now breaks, or now directs, the intending Lines;
Paints as you plant, and as you work, Designs.
a Begin with Sense, of every Art the Soul,
Parts answ'ring Parts, shall slide into a Whole,
Spontaneous Beauties all around advance,
Start, even from Difficulty, strike, from Chance;
Nature shall join you; Time shall make it grow
A Work to wonder at -- perhaps a * STOW.
Without it, proud Versailles! thy Glory salls,
And Nero's Terrasses desert their Walls:
The vast Parterres a thousand Hands shall make,
Lo! Bridgman comes, and floats them with a Lake:
Or a cut wide Views through Mountains to the Plain,
b You Will wish your Hill, and sheltered Seat, again.
Behold Villario's ten-years Toil complete,
His Quincunx darkens, his Espaliers meet,
a The Wood supports the Plain; the Parts unite,
And strength of Shade contends with strength of Light;
His bloomy Beds a waving Glow display,
Blushing in bright Diversities of Day,
b With silver-quiv'ring Rills maeander'd over --
-- Enjoy them, you! Villario can no more;
Tried of the Scene Parterres and Fountains yield,
a He finds at last he better likes a Field.
Through his young Woods how pleased Sabinus strayed,
Or fate delighted in the thick'ning Shade,
With annual Joy the red'ning Shoots to greet,
And see the stretching Branches long to meet!
b His Son's fine Taste an op'ner Vista loves,
Foe to the Dryads of his Father's Groves,
One boundless Green or flourished Carpet Views,
With all the mournful Family of Yews;
The thriving Plants ignoble Broomsticks made
Now sweep those Allies they were born to shade.
a Yet hence the Poor are clothed, the Hungry fed;
Health to himself, and to his Infants Bread
The Lab'rer bears; what thy hard Heart denies,
Thy charitable Vanity supplies.
b Another Age shall see the golden Ear
Imbrown thy Slope, and nod on thy Parterre,
Deep Harvests bury all thy Pride has planned,
And laughing Ceres reassume the Land.
At Timon's Villa let us pass a Day,
a Where all cry out, "What Sums are thrown away!
So proud, so grand, of that stupendous Air,
Soft and Agreeable come never there.
Greatness, with Timon, dwells in such a Draught
As brings all Brobdignag before your Thought:
To compass this, his Building is a Town,
His Pond an Ocean, his Parterre a Down;
a Who but must laugh the Master when he sees?
b A puny Insect, shivering at a Breeze!
Lo! what huge Heaps of Littleness around!
The Whole, a labored Quarry above ground!
Two Cupids squirt before: a A Lake behind
Improves the keenness of the Northern Wind.
His Gardens next your Admiration call,
b On every side you look, behold the Wall
No pleasing Intricacies intervene,
No artful Wildeness to perplex the Scene:
a Grove nods at Grove, each Ally has a Brother,
And half the Platform just reflects the other.
b The suffering Eye inverted Nature sees,
Trees cut to Statues, Statues thick as Trees,
With here a Fountain, never to be played,
And there a Summer House, that knows no Shade.
Here Amphritrite sails through Myrtle bowers;
Then Mr. Pope's NOTE. The two famous Statues of the Gladiator pugnans, and
Gladiator moriens.
Gladiators fight or die, in flowers;
Un-water'd see the drooping See-horse mourn,
a And Swallows roost in Nilus' dusty Urn.
Behold! my Lord advances over the Green,
Smit with the mighty pleasure, to be seen:
But soft -- by regular approach -- not yet --
First through the length of yon hot Terras sweat,
And when up ten steep Slopes you have dragged your thighs,
b Just at his Study-door he will bless your Eyes.
His Study? with what Authors is it stored?
a In Books, not Authors, curious is my Lord;
To all their dated Backs he turns you round,
These Aldus printed, those Du Sueil has bound.
Lo! some are Vellum, and the rest as good
For all his Lordship knows, but they are Wood.
b For Lock or Milton it is in vain to look,
These Shelves admit not any Modern book.
And now the Chappel's silver Bell you hear,
That summons you to all the Pride of Prayer:
Light Quirks of Music, broken and uneven,
Make the Soul dance upon a a Jig to Heaven.
On painted Cielings you devoutly stare,
Where sprawl the Saints of Verrio, or Laguerre,
On gilded Clouds in fair expansion lie,
b And bring all Paradise before your Eye.
To Rest, the Cushion, and soft Dean invite,
Who never mentions Hell to Ears polite.
But hark! the chiming Clocks to Dinner call;
a A hundred Footsteps scrape the marble Hall:
The rich Buffet well-colour'd Serpents grace,
And gaping Tritons spew to wash your Face.
b Is this a Dinner? this a Genial Room?
No, it is a Temple, and a Hecatomb;
A solemn Sacrifice, performed in State,
You drink by Measure, and to Minutes eat.
c So quick retires each flying Course, you would swear
Sancho's dread Doctor and his Wand were there:
Between each Act the trembling Salvers ring,
From Soup to Sweetwine, and God bless the King.
In plenty starving, tantaliz'd in State,
a And complaisantly helped to all I hate,
Treated, caressed, and tired, I take my leave,
Sick of his civil Pride from Morn to Eve;
I curse such lavish Cost, and little Skill,
b And swear, no Day was ever past so ill.
In you, my Lord, Taste sanctifies Expense,
For Splendour borrows all her Rays from Sense.
a You show us, Rome was glorious, not profuse,
And pompous Buildings once were things of use.
b Just as they are, c yet shall your noble Rules
Fill half the Land with Imitating Fools,
Who random Drawings from your Sheets shall take,
And of one Beauty many Blunders make;
Load some vain Church with old Theatric State;
Turn Arcs of Triumph to a Garden-gate;
Reverse your Ornaments, and hang them all
On some patched Doghole ek'd with Ends of Wall,
Then clap four slices of Pilaster on it,
And laced with bits of Rustic, it is a Front:
Shall call the Winds through long Arcades to roar,
a Proud to catch cold at a Venetian door;
Conscious they act a true Palladian part,
And if they starve, they starve by Rules of Art.
a Yet thou proceed; be fallen Arts thy care,
Erect new Wonders, and the Old repair,
Jones and Palladio to themselves restore,
And be, whatever Vitruvius was before:
Till Kings call forth the Idea's of thy Mind,
Proud to accomplish what such Hands designed,
Bid Harbors open, public Ways extend,
b And Temples, worthier of the God, ascend;
Bid the broad Arch the dangerous Flood contain,
The Mole projected break the roaring Main;
Back to his bounds their subject Sea command,
And roll obedient Rivers through the Land:
These Honors, Peace to happy Britain brings,
These are Imperial Works, and worthy Kings.
REMARKS.
* Of Taste,] Some of our little Second-Hand Smatterers in Criticism, will be
apt to imagine our Author ought to have wrote On Taste, rather than Of Taste,
as if Of and On had two different Significations. But Mr. Pope has declared
himself in favor of Of, and thereby clapped a Gag into the Mouths of all
Gainsayers. His hoc volo, sic jubeo is sufficient to make any Expression* pass
for Standard, and stet pro Ratione Voluntas.

a It Is strange, etc.] This is a vast deal too strange to be true; and the
Misfortune is, every common Observer knows it to be quite otherwise. The
Miser's Enjoyment consists in hoarding up his Wealth, and feasting his Eyes
with the Sight thereof. Our old Friend Horace has assured us of this, almost
Two Thousand Years ago; for he introduces a Man of this Character, saying, --
Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo
Ipse domi, simul ac Nummos contemplor in Arca.


a It is less strange, etc.] This Assertion is equally weak, and inconclusive.
The Prodigal, like every Body else, lays out his Money in something, which he
chooses rather than the Money he parts with. And though perhaps his Taste in
Painting, Architecture, etc. may not be altogether so exquisite as Mr. Pope's
in Philosophy or Poetry, yet still he certainly tastes the Purchase he makes,
better than the Purchase Money; for otherwise, he deserves to be begged for a
Fool for parting with it.

b Not for himself, he sees, or hears, or eats;] If this Sentence has any
Meaning at all, it must certainly be, either that he sees, or hears, or eats
for somebody else or that somebody else; sees, or hears, or eats for him. As
for any Body's seeing, or hearing for me, I might not perhaps scruple it much;
but for any Body's eating for me, I should humbly beg he would not insist upon
it; my Stomach would never consent to it.

c Artists must choose, etc.] I cannot forbear owning our Author perfectly in
the right here, in allowing the Prodigal, Artists to choose for him, when he is
incapable of choosing for himself; for who, in his Wits, would not rather employ
real Artists, in any Affair, than a Parcel of Blunderers and Blockheads?

d He buys] He buys! Who buys? Not the Miser, I hope, his Money is too fast
locked up in his Chest, ever to be let loose on any such Occasions. Nor the
Prodigal! for he is forced to make use of other People's Eyes and Ears to
supply some certain Deficiencies in his own. Who can it be then? Why, it must
certainly be the Artists, mentioned in the preceding Line: But if so, why
false Grammar? And why would not They buy, have done full as well as He buys?
This I shall leave to be corrected in his next Edition.

e For Topham, Fountain, and Curio] What strange Gentlemen must these be, who
cannot go to Market, and buy these Things themselves, rather than employ
others, as their Factors, and be forced to allow Brokerage. But the World needs
not be informed, at this Time of Day, that few of These are the Produce of this
Island; How famous soever we may be for modern Improvements in Mechanics,
Mathematics, etc. we certainly were never very famous for Antiquities,
Drawings and Coins. Greece and Italy are well known to be the grand Magazines
for all these; and whoever has not his present Residence in these Parts, must,
of Necessity, purchase the Produce of them from Second or Third Hands.

a Rare Monkish Manuscripts for Hearne alone,] Poor Tom Hearne! I dare swear,
so polite a Genius as Mr. Pope never once strained his Optic Nerves with
poring over one of thy Monkish Manuscripts. Robert of Gloucester, and Jeffrey
of Monmouth are quite out of his Way; and he knows no more of Florence of
Warcester, nor the Textus Roffensis, than a Dancing Master does of Algebra, or
a Lawyer's Clerk of Divinity. -- But to the Matter in Hand. -- I cannot imagine
Mr. Hearne obliged to trot round the Kingdom in quest of Manuscripts,
wherever an old Abbey may have stood; or to travel into foreign Countries
wherever such Books may have been dispersed at the Reformation. It Is enough if
he knows the Value of them when they are brought to him, and how to oblige the
World with them afterward, at a proper Opportunity.

b And Books for Mead,] This worthy Gentleman has a vast and valuable Library,
stored with all Sorts of Books Foreign and Domestic; and he is not only a
Person of extraordinary Learning himself, but one of the greatest Patrons and
Encouragers of it, in this Kingdom. However, it is not impossible but he may
have bought Books from Second and Third Hands, and he may very likely have
some, among so prodigious a Collection, which he has hardly deigned a reading.
But I hope Mr. Pope's Works are none of that Number, though he may well save
himself the Trouble even of looking into them; for whether Mr. Pope knows it or
no, he can read Homer and Statius, nay, and Chaucer and Shakespeare, in their
Originals, without Recourse either to a rhiming Translator, or a Modernizer to
point him out their Meaning. -- But Mead is not only famous for Books, but for
several choice Curiosities, among which is his celebrated Head of Homer, for a
Copy of which, if I mistake not, Mr. Pope has been obliged to him, to grace his
Odyssey. -- And the World tells strange Stories, if Mr. Pope be not obliged for
the best Part of his own Head to some Body else, who may, not unlikely, meet
the same Treatment in his next Performance, as these have done in This.

c And Rarities for Sloan.] Whether Dr. Sloan has a full Knowledge of the true
Value of every individual Rarity in so extraordinary a Collection, is what
neither Mr. Pope nor I can tell. -- But to allege that he employs others to
choose for him, is as much as to say, that he is unable to choose for himself; or
in other Words, that he has not Judgment enough to distinguish a Crocodile from
a Rattle Snake. Sir Hans has purchased Rarities from all known Parts of the
Globe. -- But must he travel to all these Parts himself to pick them up? An Age
would not bring that about: And between Mr. Pope and I, he has much better
Business at Home, where he has Wealth enough to purchase whatever valuable
Thing is offered him; and has, at this Time the richest private Collection in
Europe, or perhaps in the Universe.

a Than his fine Wife (my Lord) or finer Whore.] What a spiteful Insinuation is
here, against the poor Artists, that they keep their Whores finer than their
Wives. I am sorry to hear our Author is a Bachelor, or we should see how he
would manage in that important Affair of Life. He is certainly an Artist, for
all the World owns him a Rhimer; and some perhaps may look upon him as a
Reasoner. -- But these two Faculties do not always go together; and if they
did, -- He is not indispensably obliged to reason his best on every little
Occasion. Rhyme may sometimes do the Business full as well without it.

a For what has Virro painted, built, and planted? etc.] What pity it is that
Virro did not consult our Author, before he went to work? Had he done that, I
dare vouch, all would have been well, though every Thing appeared just as it
does. But for want of this Unum Necessarium, for want of consulting this
universal Genius, his Paintings are monstrous, his Buildings barbarous, his
Planting ridiculous, and he has no Taste, or what is worse, an ill one.

b Some Demon whispered, "Knights should have a Taste," Mr. Pope has not half
the Modesty of this good natured Demon, who only whispered a Secret softly
into one Knight's Ear, -- He has proclaimed it to the World. How does he know,
now, but Squires and private Gentlemen may put in for their respective Shares;
If so, what an Inundation of Taste will then break in upon us: The Nation will
be over run with it, and the Government obliged at last to put a Stop to it, as
a growing Evil.

c Heaven visits with a Taste the Wealthy Fool,] Our Author, I think, is
generally supposed to be pretty rich; and most People allow him to have a
Taste, at least of something. -- Now as Heaven has visited him with a Taste,
how ought he to bless himself that he is no Fool; for if he had, he might have
had no more Wit than to have fallen to Building, or something as bad, and
thereby wasted his Wealth as simply as some other People.

a That never Coxcomb reached Magnificence.] When Coxcombs of Quality will
employ Fools of Architects, they can never reasonably expect to reach
Magnificence, should they lay out their whole Estates: And indeed the Case
would be much the same should they take it into their Heads to turn Architects
themselves, with a Design to save Charges.

b Often have you hinted to your Brother Peer, etc.] How much had the World been
obliged to this noble Lord, if he had once generously published that grand
Secret to the World, which he so often hinted to his Brother Peer in private
Conversation. -- But if he had, others would have been presented with that
Experience, which they have since purchased at so dear a Rate; and this Lord's
Buildings would never have been found Non-pareils, had not some hundreds fallen
short of them, out of an Ambition of excelling them.

c Good Sense which only is the Gift of Heaven, etc.] This is a much greater
Compliment to good Sense, than ever one would have expected from Mr. Pope: But
the Truth is, he has a Mind to set Sense and the Sciences at Variance, by
showing that they have not the least Affinity with each other; and insinuating,
that it is no great Difficulty for a Man to become an Adept in any of the Seven
Sciences, though he was a Changeling himself, and his whole Family had been Fools
for fifteen Generations.

a Begin with Sense, etc.] It Is somewhat odd that Mr. Pope should be capable of
giving so good Advice to others, and mind it so little himself. -- What a
woeful Beginning did he make, and how miserably did he blunder between his
Miser and Prodigal! -- But enough of that: -- I am surpised to find Sense here
styled the Soul of every Art or Science, when there was a strong Insinuation
not much above a dozen Lines before, that they had very little Business
together; or, in other Words, that Sense might, without any Detriment to the
Sciencies, be divorced from them, and put to a separate Maintenance.

* The Seat and Gardens of the Lord Viscount Cobham in Buckinghamshire.

a Cut wide Views through Mountains] If Ten Thousand Hands were employed in any
Work without some good Head to direct them, it is no Wonder if they make mad or
foolish Work on it: But how a Mountain in one Line should dwindle to a Hill in
the next, without any visible Means, surpasses my Comprehension, unless it be
merely to answer the Measure of the Verse.

b You Will wish your Hill, and sheltered Seat, again.] Then he may have it. He
had a Mountain to remove, in the former Line; and, without doubt, he was at the
Charge of doing it. Now he he has only a Hill to bring back, and all is right
again, and his House in statu quo. And sure less Charge will bring a Hill Home
again, than would carry a Mountain Abroad.

a The Wood supports the Plain;] I have heard of a Plain supporting a Wood a
thousand Times, because the Plain was below, and the Wood above. -- But how Mr.
Pope's Wood comes to support his Plain, I own myself unable to determine,
unless His was a subterraneous Wood, which supported the Plain above, as a
convenient Number of Columns do a Stately Cupola.

b His bloomy Beds, etc. with Silver quivering Rills maeander'd over.] This is
the most mysterious Passage I have lately met with. How, in the Name of
Goodness, can Silver quivering Rills maeander Beds over. Had it been maeander
them through, that is, divide them with a winding Stream, it had been Sense; but
then the next Rhyme must have suffered. -- But now I recollect, these
superterraneous Rills were, perhaps, designed for his subterraneous Wood; and
as such, I shall leave them to perform their Office.

a He finds at last he better likes a Field.] That is, he finds at last, he
likes a Field better. Where is the Poetry here? Where, the Majesty of Thought,
The Sublimity of Diction? -- But to pass these by, and proceed to the
Sentiment. I can see no Manner of Wonder, why a Gentleman, in his declining
Years should be tired with the Diversions of his Youth, when we find it common
for most of us to dislike those Things to Day which we doted on but Yesterday.

b His Son's fine Taste an op'ner Vista loves, etc.] The Father was of the same
Opinion before he died, (if we may suppose Villario and Sabinus Relations, and
believe what has been advanced half a Dozen Lines before.) But how comes his
Son to have a Taste so much finer than his Father? The Father planted noble
Gardens in his Youth, and delighted to walk in the Fields in his old Age.
However he had his Choice, and might have taken a Turn in his Gardens whenever
he had thought fit. -- The Son, to show a Specimen of his superior Taste, makes
quick Work, grubs up his Father's Woods, and converts his thriving Plants to
Broomsticks.

a Yet hence the Poor are clothed, etc.] This would certainly be a fine
Reflection, were it not designed for the sake of a Stroke of Satyr in the next
Stanza. Villario is here brought upon the Stage again, and accused for what
every wise and good Man ought to applaud him; namely, for setting the Poor to
Work, and rather choosing to have his Money circulate through the Neighborhood,
than suffer it to lie pil'd up in his Chests, and see his Poor Dependants
starve for want of Employment.

b Another Age shall see, etc.] This is no more than what has ever been common
to all Nations in all the later Ages of the World. The Stately Palaces of the
Egyptian and Persian Monarchs lie now buried under huge Heaps of Dust and
Rubbish: All the pleasant Gardens of Ancient Rome are long since turned to a
Wilderness: Nay, the very situation of several of the most renowned Cities in
the World are now become so obscure, that Travelers into those Parts, cannot
agree where they have formerly stood. -- In one Word, the whole of the Story
rests here. Villario pleased himself with Planting and Gardening, and by that
Means kept his poor Neighborhood from Want. A descendant of his, of a
different Taste (or, if Mr. Pope pleases, of a finer Taste) may possibly, some
Ages hence, cut down his shady Woods, plow up his fine Walks, and turn the
whole to Corn-Ground again. This will also be Employment and Bread for the
Neighborhood, whenever it happens. -- And whether Mr. Pope be sensible of it,
or no, Satyr rebounds back upon the Author, whenever it is pointed at a wrong
Object.

a Where all cry out, what Sums are thrown away! etc.] It Is somewhat strange
that all should conspire, with one Voice, to blame Timon's profuseness in
Building; and what is stranger still, how it came to our Author's Knowledge.
But perhaps this is only his private Opinion, which he has a mind to father
upon the Public. -- Be that as it will, any other Extravagance would have
produced as ill an Effect, and several, much worse. -- But Timon has thrown
away vast Sums in Building. -- The Public certainly gathered up as much as he
threw away, and this was no more than changing Hands. The whole was undoubtedly
given to Stone-Cutters, Carvers, Statuaries, Bricklayers, Carpenters, Joyners,
Laborers, etc. All the Materials too were undoubtedly the Produce of our own
Island, except a little foreign Marble, and some other Trifles of small
Importance. So that such a private Expense is so far from being a Public Loss,
that the Nation would not be one Farthing the poorer, if fifty such Fabrics
were erected every ten or a dozen years.

a Who but must laugh the Master] Who but must laugh at our Poet for writing
such barbarous English? I am really surpised to think how he suffered such an
Impropriety to escape him. The Truth is, laugh at the Master would have
stretched the Verse a Syllable beyond its ordinary Length, for which Reason He,
having more Regard to Sound than Sense, chose to omit the Particles.

b A puny Insect, shivering at a Breeze!] The puny Insect in this Page, is
declared a Lord in the next; and it is undeniable that there may be little
Lords as well as great ones. -- Every one who has the Honor to be acquainted
with Mr. Pope, owns him to be a fine, tall, proper, well-shap'd agreeable,
jolly Gentleman, with a Constitution strong enough to enable him to defy Winds
and Weather: But how he happens, here, to reflect upon a little Lord, merely
for shrinking at a fit of Cold Weather, is what I cannot well reconcile, either
to good Sense, or good Manners. However, if our Author has here, confined
himself to one Day, a he assures us, it seems a little extraordinary, methinks,
that my Lord should be taken with a shivering Fit when several of his Visitors
were sweating upon a Hot Terras. But if he takes in the Compass of several
Months, it is not unlikely but the whole Company might shiver and sweat at
different. Times of the Year, and by that Means keep his Lordship in
Countenance.

a A Lake behind improves the keenness of the Northern Wind.] It Is not
improbable that the Lake mentioned here, may be the same with the Pond or Ocean
in the preceding Page; if so, it is no great Wonder it should chill the Part
of the House adjacent to it, which our Author has assured us was the North
Side. And if the Lake lay on the North Side of the House, then the House most
certainly stood on the South Side of the Lake.

b On every Side you look, behold the Wall!] If a Person could behold my Lord's
Garden Wall on every Side, from any particular Station within, it is strange how
it was capable of containing that Down of a Parterre and that Ocean of a Pond:
or how that Brobdignagian Palace, or Town of a House (mentioned about half a
Score Lines ago) could lie adjacent to it.

a Grove nods at Grove, each Ally has a Brother, etc.] This is the very first
Time I ever heard either a House or Gardens condemned for Regularity. Groves,
Allys, etc. are, or may be all, in their proper Places, beautiful and
agreeable; and why an exact Regularity should make them otherwise, is
impossible to know. The best of all the Gardens, as well as Fabrics, of
ancient Times, were perfectly Regular: And had Mr. Pope been the Designer of
these, I dare almost venture to assert, he would either have planned them out
in a regular Form, or every good Judge would have condemned his Gothic Fancy.

b The suffering Eye inverted Nature sees, etc.] It Is a thousand Pities, one of
so exquisite a Taste as Mr. Pope is owned to be, should meet with any Thing
disagreeable. Trees cut to Statues are held abominable. Statues standing too
thick, detestable. A dry Fountain, insupportable; (This indeed ought to have
been set a playing to welcome so great a Personage to Lord Timon's Villa) and
an unshaded Summer House, an unpardonable Object.

a And Swallows roost in Nilus' dusty Urn.] These Printers are some of the most
ignorant, and withal the most self-conceited Coxcombs breathing; One may tell
them their Faults Ten Thousand Times over, yet still they will go on in a
Mill-Horse Tract, and commit the same Blunders afresh. For Swallows roost in
Nilus' dusty Urn, read, Sparrows nest in Nilus' dusty Urn. If the House was a
Town, a Brobdignagian Palace, or a labored Quarry above Ground, (as we are
told some lines before) then, nothing could be more fit than Nilus's Urn to
clap up against one of the Walls for a Bird-Bottle.

b Just at his Study door he will bless your Eyes.] Here we find my Lord, first
of all, advancing over the Green on purpose to expose his Person to view; --
And now we are told that our Eyes must not be blessed with the Sight, till he
appears at his Study-door. -- Quere, Whereabouts, upon the Green, my Lord's
Study-door stands? Aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus.

a In Books, not Authors, curious is my Lord;] If Mr. Pope has thoroughly
examined my Lord in Greek, Latin, French, Italian, or any other Language, and
found him defective, we may safely take his Word; for He has already given the
World an ample Specimen, as well of his profound Skill in Languages, as of his
extraordinary Candor and Humanity. But should the Case prove otherwise, and
our Author takes my Lord's Ignorance, as most of the World do his Learning,
merely from Hearsay, then he will go a great Way toward the forfeiting so
amiable a Character. -- It is not improbable that he may have seen the dated
Backs of my Lord's Books, and have made no further Observations than that some
of them were bound in Vellum, and others in Past-board. But that is no Argument
why my Lord should have looked no more upon the Insides than He, who perhaps
was not a full half Hour in the Place.

b For Lock or Milton it is in vain to look,] If my Lord admits neither Lock
nor Milton, how can we reasonably expect he should allow Mr. Pope's Works a
Place in his Library; and this cannot but be a sensible Mortification to an
Author, whose Ambition prompts him to cry out with Aeneas. Quae Regio in Terris
nostri non plena Laboris?


a Make the Soul dance upon a Jig] This is a palpable Mistake; they are always
Minuet or Rigadoon Aires, and the Jig is only inserted here, to suite the
Measure of the Verse.

b And bring all Paradise before your Eye.] If by this, our Author means either
Moses's or Mahomet's Paradise, nothing can be more foreign to his purpose, for
in the Account of either of them, we read not one Word of Silver Bells, Musical
Quirks, Dancing Souls, Painted Cielings, Sprawling Saints, nor gilded Clouds,
and these make up the whole of Mr. Pope's Paradise, which must certainly be a
new one, different from both the other. Ignotusque locus Graiis, simul atque
Latinis.


a A Hundred Footsteps scrape the Marble Hall:] Our Author, it seems, was
admitted, among a vast Crowd, to a magnificent Entertainment. How well he
requited his Benefactor, we shall see afterward.

b Is this a Dinner?] No, I Will be sworn, nor nothing like One, as it has been
hitherto described. We have heard of nothing yet but Serpents gracing the
Buffet, and Tritons spewing out Water, and then he calls out -- Is this a
Dinner. -- However I am afraid he cries out before he has Occasion.

c So quick retires each flying Course, etc.] Now we come to a Dinner, in good
Earnest, but our Author very justly complains of their taking all his Victuals
from before him, out of an Excess of Complaisance, which indeed was
intolerable to one so sharp set. Howbeit, if ever he should have the Honor to
be admitted to my Lord's Table again, I would advise him to copy after his
Brother Durfey's bright Example, and take a Hammer and a Ten-penny Nail in his
Pocket, to fix the first good Plate full of Meat, he lays his Hands on, fast to
the Table.

a And complaisantly helped to all I hate,] I wonder how my Lord's Servants
came to know his Palate so exquisitely well, as to help him to nothing but what
he hated. -- And yet what is strange, he complained, but a few Lines before,
that the Courses were taken too soon away. -- If we hate every Dish upon a
Table, the sooner they are removed the better. -- But he seems resolved not to
be satisfied, and therefore I am really of Opinion, his best Way would have
been to have dined at Home, and paid my Lord a Visit afterward. -- He would
hardly have been chid for coming so late.

b And swear, no Day was ever past so ill.] So my Lord swears too, I dare
affirm, if all the rest of his Guests were of his Stamp. But if the rest were
of a different Disposition, it is not unlikely but Mr. Pope might pass
unobserved in the Crowd, and that may be one grand Cause of his Uneasiness.

a You show us, Rome was glorious, not profuse,
And pompous Buildings once were things of use.
] The Roman Buildings were undoubtedly the most expensive upon Earth, but, at
the same time, they were the least useful, whatever Mr. Pope may allege to the
contrary. -- Their most noted Structures were their Circi, for Horse, and
Chariot Races. Amphitheatres for Combats with Gladiators and wild Beasts.
Theaters for Scenical Diversions. Naumachiae for Naval Exercises. Baths,
Temples, Triumphal Arches, Monumental Pillars, Pyramids, etc. All these were
built in the most sumptuous and stately Manner possible; and it is well known,
that some of them were of little Use to the Republic, some of no Use, and
others of vast Detriment, as their own Writers allow.

b Just as they are, yet shall your noble Rules, etc.] This, as it stands, is
downright Nonsense, Yet shall your noble Rules, just as they are, fill half
the Land, etc. that is, your noble Rules, such as they are, good or bad, rough
as they run, shall fill. -- This, I dare say, is none of your Meaning. The
Truth is, your Design was to have been understood in a Sense very different
from what the Expressions will bear. Your Aim was to have said, Yet shall your
noble Rules, as just as they are, fill, etc. This would have been Sense, and
something to your Purpose, but then it would have stretched your Verse out a
Syllable too long, and you rather chose to transgress against Sense, than
Sound. However, for once, I will help you to an Expression which shall suite
you exactly. Just though they be, yet shall --

c Yet shall your noble Rules -- Fill half the Land with Imitating Fools,]
Better by half were it for the Land that my Lord's Rules, how just soever, had
never been published, than they should add such vast Numbers to the Stock of
Fools we have already. -- However, I hope, my Lord had no such Design in the
Publication, but what he did was out of a generous Principle of serving his
Country, and not with any sinister View of raising himself a Name by making
half the Nation appear ridiculous.

a Proud to catch Cold at a Venetian door;] If either a Roman, or a Gothic Door
would exempt the Master of the House from catching Cold, no Venetian Door
should ever find a Place round my Mansion -- If otherwise, I cannot imagine
what Business the Venetian Door has here, since the Wind's roaring through long
Arcades would cause a Man to catch Cold at a Door of any other Form, every whit
as soon.

a Yet thou proceed; be fallen Arts thy care,] This Verse is Lame, and wants a
Crutch. However I shall overlook it, as only a Printer's Error. Be the fallen
Arts thy care, is the true reading.

b And Temples worthier of the God,] To talk of a Temple worthy of a God, is
unworthy any Man of Sense. Whether such an Idea will go down in Poetry, I know
not; I am sure it will never do, either in Philosophy or Divinity* Why should
one Temple be worthier of an omnipresent Being than another? Why should a large
Temple suite him better than a small One? A Marble Fabric, than one of Free
Stone, or that, than one of Brick or Timber. Solomon has assured us, long
enough ago, that God dwells not in Houses made with Hands. And though the Pagans
were taught that their Local Dieties might he confined within certain Limits,
yet the wiser Sort among them, condemned the Notion; and Christianity has not
only set us free from that, but a Thousand other Fopperies; so that whoever
advances such Doctrine, at this Time of the Day, is making a fresh Attempt to
put a Hook in our Noses, and a Bridle in our Lips, to draw us back to Paganism.
or, which is much the same, to Popery.

APPENDIX.
THUS have I given my Readers a few plain Remarks upon Mr. Pope's last doughty
Performance: I shall now add Mr. Congreve's Epistle to the Lord Viscount
Cobham, (on a Subject not much different) whereby the World will easily
perceive that this Work falls as far short of Mr. Congreve's, as his Ode on
Music did of Mr. Dryden's; His Pastorals of Mr. Philips's; His Windsor Forest
of Sir John Denham Cooper's Hill; His first Book of Homer, of that done by Mr.
Tickell, or his Dunciad of the Dispensary.

But, what is most surprising, Mr. Pope has not once named, nor so much as
hinted at, his Patron's polite Taste so well known to all Mankind.

Numb. I. OF RETIREMENT AND TASTE.
An EPISTLE to the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount COBHAM.
By Mr. CONGREVE.
SINCEREST Critic of my Prose, or Rhyme,
Tell how thy pleasing STOWE employs thy Time.
Say, COBHAM, what amuses thy Retreat?
Or Stratagems of War, or Schemes of State?
Do thou recall to Mind with Joy, or Grief,
Great MARLBRO's Actions? That immortal Chief,
Whose slightest Trophy raised in each Campaign,
More than sufficed to signalize a Reign?
Does thy Remembrance rising, warm thy Heart,
With Glory past, where Thou thy self had Part;
Or do thou grieve indignant, now to see,
The fruitless End of all thy Victory?
To see th'Audacious Foe, so late subdued,
Dispute those Terms for which so long they su'd,
As if BRITANNIA now were sunk so low,
To beg that PEACE she wonted to bestow?
Be far that Guilt! be never known that Shame!
That ENGLAND should retract her righful Claim,
Or ceasing to be dreaded and adored,
Stain with her Pen the Luster of her Sword.
Or do thou give the Winds a-far to blow,
Each vexing-Thought, and Heart-devouring Woe,
And fix thy Mind alone on rural Scenes,
To turn the levelled Lawns to liquid Plains,
To raise the creeping Rills from humble Beds,
And force the latent Springs to lift their Heads,
On watery Colums, Capitals to rear,
That mix their flowing Curls with upper Air?
Or do Thou, weary grown, these Works neglect,
No Temples, Statues, Obelisks erect,
But catch the morning Breeze from fragrant Meads
Or shun the Noontide Ray in wholesome Shades?
Or slowly walk along the mazy Wood,
To meditate on all that is wise and good?
For Nature bountiful, in Thee has joined,
A Person pleasing, with a worthy Mind;
Not given thee Form alone, but Means, and Art,
To draw the Eye, or to allure the Heart.
Poor were the Praise in Fortune to excel,
Yet want the Way to use that Fortune well.
While thus adorned, while thus with Virtue crowned,
At Home, in Peace; Abroad, in Arms renowned;
Graceful in Form, and winning in Address,
While well you think what aptly you express,
With Health, with Honor, with a fair Estate,
A Table free, and elegantly neat:
What can be added more to mortal Bliss?
What can he want, that stands possessed of This?
What can the fondest wishing Mother more,
Of Heaven attentive for her Son implore?
And yet a Happiness remains unknown,
Or to Philosophy revealed alone;
A Precept, which unpracticed renders vain
Thy flowing Hopes, and Pleasure turns to Pain.
Should Hope and Fear thy Heart alternate tear,
Or Love, or Hate, or Rage, or anxious Care,
Whatever Passions may thy Mind infest,
(Where is that Mind which Passions never molest?)
Amidst the Pangs of such intestine Strife,
Still think the PRESENT DAY, the LAST of LIFE;
Defer not till Tomorrow to be Wise,
Tomorrow's SUN, to Thee may never rise.
Or should Tomorrow chance to cheer thy Sight,
With her enlivening and unlook'd-for Light,
How grateful will appear her dawning Rays!
As Favors unexpected doubly please.
Who thus can think, and who such Thoughts pursues,
Content may keep his Life, or calmly lose:
All Proofs of this Thou may thyself receive,
When Leisure from Affairs will give thee Leave.
Come see thy Friend retired, without Regret,
Forgetting Care, or striving to forget;
In easy Contemplation soothing Time
With Morals much, and now and then with Rhyme;
Not so robust in Body, as in Mind,
And always undejected, though declined:
Not wondering at the World's new wicked Ways,
Compared with those of our Forefathers Days,
For Virtue now is neither more nor less,
And Vice is only varied in the Dress:
Believe it, Men have always been the same,
And OVID's Golden Age is but a Dream.
Numb II.
To the AUTHOR.
Demitte auriculas, at iniquae mentis Asellus
Cum gravius dorso subit onus. --
Hor.
SIR,
IF we will look a little into the Conduct and Custom of the World, it may not
appear so extraordinary as some have thought it, that Mr. Pope because he
cannot be the Fountain of Honor to Mankind, should be fond of usurping the
Fountain of Infamy, and please himself with dealing out a Fund of dirty
Promotions from that inexhaustible Spring. And as nothing yields a more sincere
Delight than to see the Workings of a beneficent Mind; I doubt not but every
good Man is rejoiced to observe this Great Prince creating Dunces upon Dunces,
of his own free Will and Motion, with so much Alacrity, and all in a due
Subordination. It is certain, I ought to be very well satisfied with my Share
of Honors in this Kingdom of Dullness, since the Preamble to my Patent is, That
He could not find One more fit to wear them. I would not willingly act like the
Favorite, whom Shakespeare somewhere describes, who being made proud by his
Prince, advanced his Pride against the Power that bred it: But I would rather,
like a grateful Favorite, lay out my Talents in asserting the Legality of my
Master's Title to those Dominions, in which he exercises so free a Sway, and
from whence he so unsparingly dispenses his Promotions.

And since I have mentioned Shakespeare, (one of the Tributaries by Conquest
made subservient to his Throne) I will attempt to convince Unbelievers, by some
few Instances of his Prowess, with what a Strength of Arm, and Fineness of
Head, he has humbled that proud Adversary to his Scepter; Or, (to step out of
all Metaphor at once) I will attempt to show with what Fidelity he has
performed the dull Office of an Editor, hardly without aiming to understand his
Author himself, or having any Ambition that his Readers ever should: Or, where
he does aim, to show he has such a happy Fatality at Mistaking, that we are to
wish he would not explain the Author into Nonsense. Give me Leave to subjoin
some Examples just as they occur to my Observation.

I. Much ado about Nothing. Act. 3. Scene 5. Sometimes fashioning them like
Pharoah's Soldiers* in the reechy Painting, sometimes like the God Bel's
Priests in the old Church-Window, etc.

Mr. Pope is pleased to tell us, that reechie signifies valuable. But the Poet
had no Intention here of complimenting the Richness, or Value of the Painting:
On the other Hand, he would speak despieably of it, as of a common
Wall-Painting; as he does in another Play of the Story of the Prodigal, and the
German-hunting in Water-Work. We may be pretty sure therefore our Author wrote,
the reechy Painting; i. e. Smoke-dry'd, exposed to Weather, or reeking and
steaming with Nastiness. There are two other Passages, where, I remember, this
Word again occurrs in our Author.

Coriolanus. Act 2. Scene 4. -- The Kitchen-Maukin pins
Her richest Lockram 'bout her reechy Neck, etc.
And Hamlet. Act 3. Scene 11. And let him for a Pair of reechy Kisses,
Or padling in your Neck, etc.
Now if reechy, in either of these Passages, signifies valuable, I shall be
content to allow Mr. Pope's Gloss upon the Passage first quoted.

II. Henry VIII. Act 1. Scene 1. One sare that promises no Element
In such a Business.
Here we are told that Element is Rudiment, or Beginning: But here again the
common Sense of the Passage is explained away. Shakespeare means no more than
that, He is One who promises no Qualifications, no Talents for such a Business;
or, is not in a Sphere for it. In these Acceptations, I think, our Poet
generally uses the Phrase. So,

Merry Wives of Windsor. Act 4. Scene 4. And such Dawbry as this is beyond our
Element.
Twelfth-Night. Act 3. Scene 2. What you would is out of my Welkin, I might say
Element,
but the Word is over-worn.
And again. Act 3. Scene 9. You are idle shallow Things, I am not of your
Element.

In every one of which Quotations Mr. Pope's Gloss would be out of the Way: It
were not amiss, perhaps, that this Commentator should remember, A Man may
sometimes be out of his Element.

III. King Lear. Act 3. Scene 2. Crack Nature's Mould, all All Relations, or
kindred Elements that compose Man, as Mr. Pope expounds it. But, with
Submission, the Text must first be slightly amended, and we shall easily come
at a better Explication. Read,

-- all Germins spill at once, etc.
i. e. Germina, Seeds of Matter.
So, again, in Mackbeth. Act 4. Scene 2.

-- though the Treasure

Germains spill at once
That make ungrateful Man.
Of Nature's Germins tumble all together,
Even 'till Destruction sicken. --
For so it must here like wise be corrected. And to put this Emendation beyond
all Doubt, I will produce one more Passage, where our Author not only uses the
same Thought again, but the Word that ascertains my Explication into the
Bargain.

Winter's Tale. Act 4. Scene 9. Let Nature crush the Sides o'th'Earth together,
And mar the Seeds within.
IV. King Lear, Act 1. Scene 6. -- wherefore should I
Stand in the Plague of Custom, and permit
The Nicety of Nations to deprive me, etc.
I would very willingly know, as Mr. Pope declares against his having made any
Innovations, from what Authority he has adopted this quaint Word, Nicety. It is
in none of the Old Copies, that ever I have seen; and if he derives it either
from Mr. Row's Edition, or Mr. Tate's Alteration of this Play, he must give me
Leave to except against it. The Old Reading, (which, I presume, Mr. Pope did
not know what to make of) it is true, is corrupted. -- The Curiosity of Nations.
-- but out of it I will venture to restore the Poet's genuine Word;

The Courtesy of Nations to deprive me, etc. Our accurate Editor might have
observed, that his Author chooses the very Term upon the like Occasion, in
another of his Plays. As you like it. Act 1. Scene 1.

The Courtesy of Nations allows you my better, in that you are the firstborn.
So, in another Place, he substitutes it for Birthright. Cymbelyne. Act 4. Scene
8.

-- aye hopeless
To have the Courtesy your Cradle promised.
And, for the more vulgar Use of the Phrase, I do not doubt but Mr. Pope may
have heard, that certain Lands and Honors are held by the Courtesy of England.

V. Measure for Measure. Act. 3. Scene 4. -- say to thyself,
From their abominable and beastly Touches,
I drink, I eat away myself, and live.
This is a very excellent Instance of our Editor's Sagacity, and I wish
heartily he would have obliged us with his physical Solution, how a Man may eat
away himself and live. Till he does this, I would crave Leave to substitute by
Conjecture;

-- say to thyself,
By their abominable, and beastly Touches,
I drink, I eat, array myself, and live.
i. e. I feed myself and put Clothes on my Back, by exercising the vile Trade
of a Bawd.

VI. Twelfth-Night. Act 1. Scene 4. Sir Andr. -- O had I but followed the Arts.


Sir Tob. Then had thou had an excellent Head of Hair.


Sir Andr. Why, would that have mended my Hair?


Sir Tob. Past Question, for thou see it will not cool my Nature.

Prodigious Sagacity! -- The Dialogue is of a very light Strain here betwixt
two foolish Knights; but I would be very glad to know, methinks, why Sir
Andrew's Hair hanging lank, should, or should not, cool Sir Toby's Nature. Till
I can be informed in this Point, I fancy we may make Sense of it thus,


Sir Andr. Why, should that have mended my Hair?


Sir Tob. Past Question, for thou see it will not curl by Nature.


VII. Love's Labor Lost. Act 3. Scene 3. This Signior Junio, giant dwarf, Dan
Cupid.
Some Readers, it is probable, would have been glad to know why the Poets call
Cupid Signior Junio. Has it an Allusion to any old Tale, or to any Charactar in
any old Play? No such Thing. As there is a Contrast of Terms in Giant-Dwarf, so
I have a great Suspicion there should be in these other Words, if we could
retrieve the true Reading. And why might it not have been?

This Senior-junior, giant-Dwarf, Dan Cupid.
i. e. this Old Young Man. I am sure there is a Description afterward of him
in this very Play, which will be no bad Confirmation of this Conjecture.

That was the way to make his Godhead wax,
For he has been Five thousand Years a Boy.
VIII. Ibid. Act 4. Scene 3. And why indeed Naso, but for smelling out the
odoriferous Flowers of Fancy? The Jerks of Invention imitary is Nothing: So
does the Hound his Master, etc.

Sagacity with a Vengeance! What? Neither osund Sense, true Grammar, right
Inserence, Pointing, or Meaning? -- Then, what is Invention imitary? Invention
and Imitation are certainly two distinct Things. In short, is Mr. Pope will not
merrily call it pidling, I will venture to give Light to this very difficult
Passage. The Speech is by a Pedant, who frequently throws in a Word of Latin
amongst his English; and he is here flourishing upon the Merit of Invention,
beyond that of Imitation, or copying after another. Correct it thus, and all is
plain and intelligible.

-- And why indeed Naso, but for smelling out the odoriserous Flowers of Fancy?
the Jerks of Invention? -- imitari, is nothing; so does the Hound his Mlaster,
etc.

imitari, i. e. to imitate, copy, or follow after.

IX. Titus Andronicus. Act 3. Scene 3. Which of your Hands has not defended
Rome,
And reared alost the bloody Battle-Ax,
Writing Destruction on the Enemies Castle?
Sagacity again! unless Mr. Pope means an Improvement of the Art Military, by
teaching us that it was ever a Custom to hew down Castles with a Battle-Ax. Or,
how if he should have a Mind to tell us, that they wore Castles, formerly, upon
their Heads for defensive Armor? There is, indeed a Passage in Troilus and
Cressida, which such a Commentator might take in such a Sense.

-- And, Diomede, Stand fast and wear a Castle on thy Head, etc. But as I
cannot come in to this Interpretation, I shall venture to read the Passage in
Andronicus thus,

Writing Destruction on the Enemies Caske?

A broken k in the Manuscript might be mistaken for a tl, and thus a Castle was
built at once: But I think it would be something easier to split an Helmet with
a Battle-Ax, than cut down a Castle, and that is one Reason which induces me to
propose this Reading.

I had designed to throw in another Emendation upon the Word Castle; but I have
already transgressed the Limits of a Letter, and there are two, or three,
Topics still behind, that I have an Occasion to touch upon.

Mr. Pope's DUNCIAD having lately made its Appearance in so pompous a Shape,
with Notes variorum, (I am sorry the Editor could not spare us this short Scrap
in a single Language;) I am very well content to pass over the Slander of his
Wit; but ought not, as I apprehend, to rest Silent under that of his Malice, in
which he would fix a pretended Charge of Ingratitude upon Me, a Vice, I hope,
of all others the least ingrasted in my Nature. This Charge is, That during the
Space of two Years, while Mr. Pope was preparing his Edition of Shakespeare, I,
who had then some Correspondence with him, and was soliciting Favors by
Letters, did wholly conceal my Design (upon that Author) till after his
Publication.

To one Part of this Accusation I have replied in a former Letter in this
Paper. To say I concealed my Design, is a slight Mistake: for I had no such
certain Design, till I saw how incorrect an Edition Mr. Pope had given the
Public. To the other Part, I think, I dare securely charge my Memory with all
the Favors that ever I ventured to ask of Mr. Pope: and I challenge him to
produce my Letters against me, if he thinks there is any Room for it. The first
Favor that I asked, was, when I introduced a Play upon the Stage, that he
would assist me in a few Tickets toward my Benefit. In about a Month after
this Request, I received my Packet back, with this civil Excuse, That he had
been all the while from home, and had not my Parcel till it was too late to do
any thing with it. This, I confess, induced me, when I put out my Proposals for
Aeschylus, to solicit Mr. Pope for this Second Favor, that he would please to
recommend that my Design, if it did not interfere with his own Affair of the
Odyssey. To this Mr. Pope replied by Letter, That he was glad I had undertaken
this Work, and should be as glad to promote my Interest, notwithstanding his
own Subscription to the Odyssey: That his own Awkwardness, and indeed
Inability, of soliciting in any Kind, made him quite useless to his own
Interest; but that he might not be entirely so to mine, he would ask those of
his Friends for me, with whom he was familiar enough to ask any thing. -- But
from that Day to the Publication of my Shakespeare Restored, (an Interval of
above Two Years) I never received one Line more from Mr. Pope, no Intimation of
one Subscriber by his Interest, not even an Order that I should put his own
Name down in my List. Upon this naked Fact, I submit the Censure both of my
Obligations and Ingratitude.

The Public should not have been troubled with this State of the Case, had not
these Insinuations been industriously propagated at this Crisis, both to hurt
my Interest in my Subscription for my Remarks on SHAKESPEARE, which will now
shortly appear in the World; and in that Play, which is designed for my Benefit
on Monday next in the Theater at Drury Lane. Double Falsehood.
It is my Misfortune, I can boast but of a very scanty Interest, and much less
Merit; and, consequently, Both are the more easily to be shocked. I had no
Method, but This, of appealing to those Many, whom I have not the Honor of
approaching, for their Favor: and of humbly hoping it the rather, because all
my poor Attempts in Writing are calculated to entertain, and none at the
Expense of any Man's Character.

I am, Sir, Your very humble Servant, Lew. Theobald.
Wyan's-Court in Great-Russel-Street, April 16, 1729.
No III. Of Mr. POPE's TASTE of RELIGION.
Being a Translation of the First Psalm. For the Use of a Young LADY.
THE Maid is blessed that will not hear
of Masquerading Tricks,
Nor lends to wanton Songs an Ear,
Nor sighs for Coach and Six.
To please her shall her Husband strive
With all his Main and Might,
And in her Love shall Exercise
Himself both Day and Night.
She shall bring forth most Pleasant Fruit,
He flourish still, and Stand,
Even so all Things shall prosper well,
That this Maid takes in Hand.
No wicked Whores shall have such Luck,
Who follow their own Wills,
But purged shall be to Skin and Bone,
With Mercury and Pills.
For why, The Pure and Cleanly Maids
Shall All, good Husbands gain;
But Filthy and Uncleanly Jades
Shall Rot in Drury Lane.
Numb IV.
Of Mr. Pope's TASTE of Original Sin.
To the Ingenious Mr. MOORE, Author of the Celebrated WORM-POWDER.
I.
HOW much, egregious MOORE, are We
Deceived by Shows, and Forms?
Whatever we think, whatever we see,
All Human Race are WORMS.
II.
Man, is a very WORM by Birth,
Proud Reptile, vile and vain,
A while he crawls upon the Earth,
Then shrinks to Earth again.
III.
That Woman, is a WORM, we find,
Ever since our Granum's Evil;
She first conversed with her own kind,
That Ancient WORM, the Devil.
IV.
But whether Man, or He, God knows,
Foecundified her Belly,
With that pure Stuff from whence we rose,
The Genial Vermicelli.
V.
The Learned themselves we BOOK-WORMS name,
The Block-Head is a SLOW-WORM!
The Nymph, whose Tail is all on Flame,
Is aptly termed a GLOWWORM.
VI.
The Fops are painted Butter-Flies,
That flutter for a Day;
First from a WORM they took their Rise,
Then in a WORM decay.
VII.
The Flatterer an Ear-Wig grows,
Some WORMS suit all Conditions;
Misers are MUCK-WORMS, SILKWORMS Beaus,
And DEATH-WATCHES, Physicians.
VIII.
That Statesmen have a WORM is seen,
By all their winding Play:
Their Conscience is a WORM within,
That gnaws them Night and Day.
IX.
Ah! MOORE! Thy Skill were well Employed,
And greater Gain would rise,
If thou could make the Courtier void
The WORM that never dies.
X.
O Learned Friend of Abchurch-Lane,
Who sett'st our Entrails free,
Vain is thy Art, thy Powder Vain,
Since WORMS shall Eat even Thee.
XI.
Thou only can our Fate Adjourn;
Some few short Years, no more:
Even BUTTON's Wits to WORMS shall turn,
Who Maggots were before.
NB. Mr. Pope has lately reprinted this Poem, but has omitted the ivth Stanza*

No V. Mr. POPE'S Satire on Mrs. P --
The LOOKING-GLASS.
WITH Scornful Mein, and various toss of Air
Fantastic, vain and insolently Fair.
Grandeur intoxicates her giddy Brain,
She looks Ambition, and she moves Disdain.
Far other Carriage, graced her Virgin Life,
But charming G -- y's lost, in P -- y's Wise.
Not greater Arrogance in Him we find,
And this Conjunction swells at least her Mind:
O could the Sire, renowned in Glass, produce
One faithful Mirror for his Daughter's Use,
Wherein she might her haughty Errors trace,
And by Reflection learn to mend her Face.
The wonted Sweetness to her Form restore,
Be what she was, and charm Mankind once more.
FINIS.

