A POETICAL EPISTLE FROM The late LORD MELCOMBE TO The EARL of BUTE: WITH
CORRECTIONS, By the Author of the NIGHT THOUGHTS.

LONDON: Printed for T. BECKET, Corner of the Adelphi, in the Strand. MDCCLXXVI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE distinguished NAMES on the Title Page can excite no Expectations in the
Public which the Poetical Merit of the following Epistle is not capable of
gratifying. It bears Date the 26th of October 1761. To preclude every Doubt,
concerning it is Authenticity, the Original Manuscript, in LORD MELCOMBE's
Handwriting, with the Corrections, in THAT of Dr. YOUNG, is left for
Inspection at the Shop of the Publisher.

PROEMIUM.
POLLIO, to Thee, my Patron and my Friend,
The secret counsels of my soul I send:
Long since thy godlike Uncle JOHN Duke of ARGYLL.
held me dear
(Fate gave me early to thy House's care);
He died, and left me unattach'd and free,
Left me a legacy from Him to Thee.
Memory, rare gift! but given us to our cost,
Thou faithful Register of Good, when lost!
Each feature of the favorite picture trace,
Recall his Ease, and Dignity, and Grace;

Trace every feature of the favorite piece,
Revive his Grace, his Dignity, and Ease;
His Courage cool, his Wisdom void of art,
The gentlest Manners, and the warmest Heart;
His Soul with every nobler
noblest passion fraught,
And pushing
carrying Friendship sometimes to a fault;
In Arts or Arms, in Battle, or Debate,
He guarded, graced, and dignified the State;
Deserved the Laurel and the Bay that crown
The distant
blended honors of the Sword and Gown;
His Country's Bulwark, her Delight and Pride,
In War he conquered, and in Peace he died:
His Memory shall to latest times descend.
Such was the Man who
that bade me call him Friend.
And now let Envy all his actions scan,
Then brand me for a Flatt'rer, if she can:

Then let her call me Flatt'rer, if she can:
The vain reproach I shall with scorn receive;
I wanted no distinction He could give,
Save one, -- of all Distinctions the supreme!
His Friendship, and, more precious! his Esteem.

to all superior and supreme,
His Friendship, his Affection, his Esteem.
Oh! long and much beloved, sincerely
Oh! dearly mourned,
How often has my throbbing bosom burned
The fullness
The effusions of a grateful heart to pour
Over sacred Friendship -- -- Friendship now no more!
now, alas! no more.
Ere long, my gentle Friend, will come thy turn
To check a tear, or drop it on my urn;

To drop a pious tear on my poor urn;
Thy feeling heart will not the task decline --
The virtues of Humanity are thine:
But though from Friendship's source the Passions rise
Which melt
That flood the Soul, and swell into the Eyes,
The effect will differ, though the source the same;
My tear paid Gratitude, but Thine gives Fame.

My tear is Gratitude, but Thine is Fame.
Farewell, illustrious Shade! for ever rest
Distinguished in the Mansions of the Blessed!
Thence let thy bright Example's brilliant ray
To Wisdom point, and light us on our way.

From thence, while, darkling, we thy Star survey,
Thy bright Example marks and lights the way.
It Is well. -- The throbbing of the heart subsides,
The blood begins to flow in sprightlier tides:
By
From Thee, my Friend, the soul with joy surveys
The Page of Memory marked with brighter days;
By
From Thee -- thy Mien, thy Manners, and thy Smile
Recall the generous, graceful, brave ARGYLL.
By Thee thus owned, a Client of thy Race,
Where could I with such Dignity or Grace,

Thus owned by Thee, thus Client of thy Race,
Where could I else, with Dignity or Grace,
From every Prejudice and Passion free,
Lay bare the Mind's Recesses, as
but to Thee?
Often, as from the pomp thy state requires,
To Contemplation's cell thy Friend retires,
Fast by the banks of Thames, his active mind
Dwells on the motley mask he left behind:
So far the wide Society extends,
So numerous those -- kind Custom calls our Friends;
we call from Custom Friends;
Yet, numerous as they are, so very few
Wish what they ought, or as they ought pursue,
He scarce can tell what the dark
whole Drama means,
Or
Can fix the Plan, or separate the Scenes;
All would be great, but who with Care attends
Whence Greatness springs, it is Progress, and it is Ends?
How to direct their wandering footsteps right,
Or place their Errors in a stronger light,
And mark the Failings that mislead the Throng
Through Life, shall be the Subject of my Song.
AN EPISTLE.
POLLIO, to Thee; thy well-conducted youth
Has formed thy mind to hear and follow Truth;
From Thee the crowds that Wisdom's laws despise
May learn that none are happy but the Wise;
That Wisdom blunts the darts Misfortune flings,
And lifts to noblest heights Ambition's wings.
What then is Wisdom? -- It Is what gilds Success,
What makes it solid, infelt Happiness;
What keeps the enlarged pursuit to Virtue true,
And sinks the selfish in the social view.
Say then, bright Guide! since thy auspicious
celestial beam
Lights us, through Social Happiness, to Fame;
Say, whence the general Groan, the ensanguin'd Plain,
The royal Butcher
purple Murderer striding over the Slain,
Sweeping half Human Kind from Nature's face,
And forging fetters for the rising race?
Say, whence, and why,
Whence then, and why, the Venal and the Vile,
The Voice of Honor, but
and the Heart of Guile,
Hardened to crimes, and resolute to rise
On holy Friendship's
Love and Friendship's violated ties?
The mad Voluptuary? the selfish Drone,
That stifles Merit, ardent
struggling to be known?
From CUNNING; -- CUNNING, which
that deforms the mind,
Poisons the soil for noblest growths designed;
Blasts Heroes' Laurels, withers
blights the Statesman's Bays;
Cunning o'erturns the Throne she means to raise,
Corrupts the Heart, contracts the Social Plan,
And strangles, or smothers
narrows to Self-love the Love of Man:
By That the Soul, a
in prey to mean desires,
Her flight obstructed, and impaired her fires,
Panting for Glory, anxious to be great,
Toils
Moyls through the paths of Baseness and Deceit;
But still, though Fortune all her aid should lend,
She finds the Means have overturned the end;
She loathes
Shrinks at the servile Crowd and bribed Address,
And sickens in the bosom of Success.
Would thou, my Friend, survey with closer
stricter ken
These Rival Rulers of the Sons of Men?
We'll analyze their complicated frame,
And show their Powers, their Passions, and their Aim;
How they dispense to Mortals Good or Ill,
And how affect the bosom which
that they fill.
WISDOM's the Health and Vigor of the Mind,
It
That flows from every talent, justly joined;
From Judgment temp'ring Wit's excessive blaze,
And Genius bright'ning what Reflection weighs.

Where Judgment tempers Wit's enlivening blaze,
And Genius quickens what Reflection weighs.
Parent of Peace, and Guardian of the Brave,
And teaching how to conquer and to save;
Draws not the sword to fetter, but to free,
And Vice alone is slain by her decree;

She wars on Vice alone, and her decree
Draws not the sword to fetter, but to free;
Her arms bid social Arts and Science rise,
And Conquest scatter
Victory shed blessings as she flies.
If to a narrower sphere her cares descend,
Here Is is
She gives the Father, Citizen, and Friend,
The indulgent Husband, and the endearing Wife,
And all the tender Charities of Life.
What rich gifts flow from Wisdom's high command?

These gifts, then, flow from Wisdom's high command:
She makes the Vanquished bless the Victor's hand;
Adorns and dignifies
To raise, to dignify an humble state,
Or fits the Robes of Greatness to the Great:
She leads where Virtue calls, and Fame attends.
CUNNING's the timorous Guide to sordid Ends:
Composed of parts which Wisdom calls Defects,
And
She apes her with the talents she rejects:
Hence one proceeds with Firmness, one with Fear;
There manly Caution, low Suspicion here.
It Is like false coin, by Cheats invented first,
The best materials mimick'd
copied with the worst;
Like that, it makes the wealth of Knaves alone,
And brings as sure destruction when it is known.
As Liberal Arts and Love of Virtue fail
In Courts, the Cunning over the Wise prevail.
The crowds that Vice and Vanity pour forth,
Whose claims are founded on their Wants, not Worth,
Ill brook the manly manners of the Wise,
Who scorn to flatter what they must despise.
Where solid Worth first forms the fair pretense,
Upborne by Probity, enforced by Sense;
Where virtuous Toil must earn what cannot be sold,
And Genius pants for Glory, not for Gold;
Where Brib'ry Birth, Cabal, neglected wait,
And Wisdom's hand unbars Preferment's gate,
This tribe the unhospitable mansions shun,
And to the all-courting dome of Cunning run;
Run to the important shrug, the unmeaning hint,
Which
That Cunning ever coins in Falshood's mint;
To warm Professions, strangers to the mind;
To Speech, the Interpreter of Truth designed,
Now taught not to discover, but disguise,
While the whole Man, each Look, each Gesture lies,
With all the train of ineffectual cant,
To soothe, not satisfy -- to lure, not grant.
Here the gay scenes with smiles perpetual strike,
All smooth, all flattering, and all false alike;
Insidious Praise extols, while Envy burns,
And feigned Attachments meet with feigned Returns;
The garb of Worth distressed cloaks Squandring's tribes,
That Interest may seem generous when she bribes:
Patron and Client, turn by turn, deceive,
Ask from false motives, from false motives give;
Ill-founded all, Pretension, Promise, Grant,
Naught real, but Profusion, Bribe, and Want.
Brib'ry, Want.
Thus Prudence, Virtue, Parts, crowd Wisdom's train;
Thus Cunning sweeps the Lavish,
Squand'rer, False, and Vain:
Just to the Tiller's care, the crop succeeds,
One binds the sheaf, and one collects the weeds.
By this we see, and see without surprise,
The Cunning far divided from the Wise.

By this we see how far the distance lies,
How wide, that parts the Cunning from the Wise.
Hear, then, her Voice, whose comprehensive call
Extends to the Great Vulgar and the Small.
When Men unfit for Greatness will be Great,
Why trust they not
Why don't they trust to Title and Estate?
What Demon, envious of their Peace and Fame,
Drives them to make the Care of States their aim;
To quit the shade of private life, and stray
Where every weakness glares in open day?
Whoever in life mistakes his destined place
Becomes sure
the Author of his own Disgrace;
For Heaven bestows on All sufficient skill
To grace the station which they ought to fill;
And, though to All not equally profuse,
Ordained us All for Decency and Use.
Is Wit denied?
Have thou not Wit? be generous and sincere:
Fails Learning too?
Does Learning fail? let Social Love appear;
Let Truth, Goodnature, Virtue, be improved,
And, since thou can not be admired, be loved.
Had Nature's bounty partially been shown,
And barred up every road to Fame but one,
'Twould seem less strange to see the unequal strife
That drives us all to shine in Public Life;
Less strange, that Thirst of Power over All prevails,
And calls to Vice for aid, when Genius fails.

How Thirst of Power over All alike prevails,
And calls in Vice to aid, where Genius fails.
Is Private Life, then, void of graceful aims?
Are Father, Husband, Friend, ignoble
ungraceful names?
So far ignoble
ungraceful that we rather choose
Power, we want Genius to become or use?
The rule that leads us with unerring pace
To tread the various paths of Life with Grace
(Let Genius fire the blood, or Damps restrain)
Confined to precepts obvious, easy, plain,
Alike through every rank, for practice fit,
To guard the plain good Man, and grace the Wit,
Through Court, Camp, Cottage, heard, felt, understood,
Consist in this -- be honest, just, and good:
This, well observed, shall shield the Weak from blame,
And lend Defects themselves a softer name:
Neglect of this debases all our thoughts,
And heightens all our Failings into Faults.
Failings and Faults from different springs proceed;
Faults from the Heart, and Failings from the Head.
Quick to discern, and wisely to pursue,
And tread Life's labyrinth with Judgment's clue,
Are parts that few, indulged by Heaven, can fill;
But all Men may be honest -- if they will.
This Wisdom's laws, which
that first taught Virtue, teach,
And place Esteem and Love in all Men's reach.
Her Guardian Influence then, to none unkind,
severely kind,
Which different powers to different parts assigned,
And, through the whole impartial and exact,
Never deals the part without the powers to act,
Gave Honesty, her general gift and best,
To guide, support, and dignify the rest.
To Genius this secures immortal Fame,
And consecrates Ambition's boldest aim;
Without it all the sparks of heavenly fire,
Or blaze destructive, or in smoke, expire,
Given to distress Mankind, and not to save:
Thus the same Sword, which,
that, weilded by the Brave,
In Virtue's cause, has saved a sinking Land,
Does Midnight Murder in a Ruffian's hand.
If WISDOM, then, to All those powers imparts
Which lead us on
That lead alone to Fame through Arms or Arts,
And sows, with bounty free and unconfined,
The seeds of Honesty in every mind,
Which, varied by the soil, yet must produce
Or Private Peace of Mind, or Public Use,
(That Use which consecrates the Patriot's dust,
That Peace of Mind which ever crowns the Just):
Then boldly let the Muse this truth proclaim,
Wisdom's the source, and Honesty the stream,
That wafts us safe, through Danger and Distress,
To Public Fame, or Private Happiness;
While Cunning weaves a maze without a clue,
And, purblind,
wavering, grasps False Greatness for the True.
See the foul monster, of gigantic size,
On broken Faith and injured Friendship rise,
Fearful and rash, rapacious and profuse,
In Temper rigid, and in Morals loose;
By smiling Treach'ry led, with downcast eyes,
And prompted by Suspicion, whispering lies;
See Ribald Mirth, and Begg'ry void of shame,
Demure Detraction, and loud-bawling Blame,
These Fiends,
Chos'n Friends! by Interest ranked, in order stand,
And Flattery next, with Falsehood in her hand;
Riot and Guile the wild procession ends,
And what Oppression gains Corruption spends.
Descend a moment from this fancied height,
And view the treacherous scene by Wisdom's light;
This pageant Pomp, this Homage of an Hour,
This painted Grandeur, this unweildy Power,
Shall shrink, when Truth displays her piercing beam,
Like the vain visions of a fev'rish dream,
Which promise Health and Youth for ever gay,
But yield us back to Death at break of day:
So soon shall ill-got Greatness change it is state,
Turned to Reproach, Contempt, and Public Hate.
Proceed, and think what balm can cure the breast,
Where Guilt has entered once, and banished Rest:
If we have Friends, what Friendship can we trust,
That knows us mean, ungen'rous, and unjust?
If we have Foes, how grateful to those Foes
To see us toil against our own repose!
Such is the fate of Greatness built on Vice,
Remorse the purchase, Innocence the price.
When Wisdom's eye surveys the guilty Great,
They move our Pity, rather than our Hate:
I know they scorn the tricks by which they rise,
And view their ill-got Power with joyless eyes;
They scorn the Prince on whom that Power depends,
They scorn their Slaves, and most they scorn their Friends.
Friendship well chose, of every blessing chief,
Doubles our Pleasures, and divides our Grief:
But view their Friendships, can we call them Choice?
No; it is Necessity, imposed by Vice,
Which, vile and weak itself, must always seek
For safety from the Wicked and the Weak:
Vileness must on the Villain's aid depend,
To plan fresh mischiefs, and the past defend;
And Weakness trusts the Weak, through jealous care,
As Impotence with Eunuchs guards the Fair.
But let this truth into thy mind descend,
The Man that makes a Fool or Knave his Friend,
Whatever pretense may seem his choice to guide,
Has crimes to perpetrate, or crimes to hide.
True Greatness, sure, unfolds a nobler scene,
Without majestic, and within serene;
On Wisdom's height sublime, securely placed,
She plans new glories, and enjoys the past;
And, while the blasts of Rage and Faction blow,
Hears the Storm rave and Thunder roll below:
There, high enthroned, with silent joy surveys
Whole Kingdoms lift their hands in grateful praise;
And
Or soaring still (though pleased with deathless Fame)
Never fails beyond our World to stretch her aim.

Extends, perhaps, beyond one World, her aim.
It Is here is to plead the suffering Orphan's cause,
And dry the tear that stern Oppression draws;
To call each latent seed of Virtue forth,
And wind up
kindle modest Diffidence to Worth.
If gentle Slumber over her eyelids creeps,
The Prayers of Nations guard her as she sleeps;
If Cares the fettered Sense from Sleep unbind,
Those Cares ensure the Quiet of Mankind:
She knows no guilty pang, no secret shame,
No start of horror from the midnight dream;
But, wrapped in pleasing thought, with ravished eyes
Sees Public Good on proud Oppression rise;
And, watchful over the blessings of her hand,
Wakes, like the Guardian Angel of the Land.
Is there a Land, which
that such a Guard can claim,
Led by fair Virtue to the mount of Fame?

By Virtue's tut'ring hand, borne up to Fame?
Where sacred Liberty each breast inflames,
And Wealth and Life itself are second names;
Which
That dares, when Tyrants strike, repel the blow,
And lay the mighty Sons of Ruin low;
Which
That once, though safe herself, by Heaven's decree,
Dared fight and conquer, to set Europe free;
And, starting at her captive Neighbor's groan,
Stepped forth, and made the glorious cause her own.
Is there where Learning may securely soar,
Uncurb'd by Churchmen, unconstrained by Power;
Where free Devotion wears an open face,
And Reason leads her to the throne of Grace;
Though various, unconfus'd, to none a Slave,
It Is God adoring --

Sincere, though various, and to none a Slave,
But God is worshipped by the lights he gave?
Is there a Prince, intrepid, just, and wise,
Who views his People with a Father's eyes,
And, pleased to guard that Right which Nature gave,
Scorns to debase a Subject to a Slave?
Should his bright Influence fill the courtly sphere,
And Courtiers dare be honest and sincere;
Serve, though they promised; feel, though they professed;
Nor check the Social Virtues of the Breast.
Should Truth ascend
usurp suspicious Falshood's seat,
And Honesty grow graceful in the Great;
Should Wit presume to speak, and Learning write,
And Power and Liberal Arts at length unite;
Pronounce that Land the favorite Land of Fate,
Pronounce the Prince who
that rules it truly great.
Smit with true Glory's charms, thus far the Muse
With eager steps the shining track pursues;
Strains every nerve to raise the favorite theme,
And fix fair Glory in the blaze of Fame:
It Is here is to praise True Greatness on the Throne,
It Is thine, O GEORGE! to make that Praise thy own.
FINIS.

