AN ESSAY ON CRITICISM.

AN ESSAY ON CRITICISM.

Written by Mr. POPE

-- Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum.
HORAT. The SECOND EDITION.

LONDON: Printed for W. Lewis in Russel Street Covent Garden. MDCCXIII.

AN ESSAY ON CRITICISM.
IT IS hard to say, if greater Want of Skill
Appear in Writing or in Judging ill;
But, of the two, less dangerous is the Offense,
To tire our Patience, than mis-lead our Sense.
Some few in that, but Numbers err in this,
Ten Censure wrong for one who Writes amiss;
A Fool might once himself alone expose,
Now One in Verse makes many more in Prose.
It Is with our Judgments as our Watches, none
Go just alike, yet each believes his own.
In Poets as true Genius is but rare,
True Taste as seldom is the Critick's Share;
Both must alike from Heaven derive their Light,
These born to Judge, as well as those to Write.
Qui scribit artificiose, ab aliis commode scripta facile intelligere poterit.
Cic. ad. Herenn. lib. 4.
Let such teach others who themselves excel,
And censure freely who have written well.
Authors are partial to their Wit, it is true,
But are not Critics to their Judgment too?
Yet if we look more closely, we shall find
Omnes tacito quodam sensu, sine ulla art, aut ratione, quae sint in artibu ac
rationibus recta ac prava dijudicant. Cic. de Orat. lib. 3.
Most have the Seeds of Judgment in their Mind;
Nature affords at least a glimmering Light;
The Lines, though touched but faintly, are drawn right.
But as the slightest Sketch, if justly traced,
Is by ill Coloring but the more disgraced,
So by false Learning is good Sense defaced.
Some are bewildered in the Maze of Schools,
And some made Coxcombs Nature meant but Fools.
In search of Wit these lose their common Sense,
And then turn Critics in their own Defense:
Those hate as Rivals all that write; and others
But envy Wits, as Eunuchs envy Lovers.
All Fools have still an Itching to deride,
And fain would be upon the Laughing Side:
If Maevius Scribble in Apollo's spite,
There are, who judge still worse than he can write.
Some have at first for Wits, then Poets past,
Turned Critics next, and proved plain Fools at last.
Some neither can for Wits nor Critics pass,
As heavy Mules are neither Horse nor Ass.
Those half-learn'd Witlings, numerous in our Isle,
As half-form'd Infects on the Banks of Nile;
Unfinished Things, one knows not what to call,
Their Generation's so equivocal:
To tell 'em, would a hundred Tongues require,
Or one vain Wit's, that might a hundred tire.
But you who seek to give and merit Fame,
And justly bear a Critick's noble Name,
Be sure your self and your own Reach to know,
How far your Genius, Taste, and Learning go;
Launch not beyond your Depth, but be discreet,
And mark that Point where Sense and Dullness meet.
Nature to all things fixed the Limits fit,
And wisely curbed proud Man's pretending Wit.
As on the Land while here the Ocean gains,
In other Parts it leaves wide sandy Plains;
Thus in the Soul while Memory prevails,
The solid Power of Understanding fails;
Where Beams of warm Imagination play,
The Memory's soft Figures melt away.
One Science only will one Genius fit;
So vast is Art, so narrow Human Wit:
Not only bounded to peculiar Arts,
But often in those, confined to single Parts.
Like Kings we lose the Conquests gained before,
By vain Ambition still t'extend them more.
Each might his several Province well command,
Would all but stoop to what they understand.
First follow NATURE, and your Judgment frame
By her just Standard, which is still the same:
Unerring Nature, still divinely bright,
One clear, unchanged, and Universal Light,
Life, Force, and Beauty, must to all impart,
At once the Source, and End, and Test of Art.
That Art is best which most resembles Her;
Which still presides, yet never does Appear:
In some fair Body thus the sprightly Soul
With Spirits feeds, with Vigor fills the whole,
Each Motion guides, and every Nerve sustains;
It self unseen, but in the Effects, remains.
There are whom Heaven has blessed with store of Wit,
Yet want as much again to manage it;
For Wit and Judgment ever are at strife,
Though meant each other's Aid, like Man and Wife.
It Is more to guide than spur the Muse's Steed;
Restrain his Fury, than provoke his Speed;
The winged Courser, like a generous Horse,
Shows most true Mettle when you check his Course.
Those RULES of old discovered, not devised,
Are Nature still, but Nature Methodiz'd:
Nature, like Monarchy, is but restrained
By the same Laws which first herself ordained.
First learned Greece just Precepts did indite,
When to repress, and when indulge our Flight.
High on Parnassus' Top her Sons she showed,
And pointed out those arduous Paths they trod,
Held from afar, aloft, the Immortal Prize,
And urged the rest by equal Steps to rise.
From great Examples useful Rules were given;
She drew from them what they derived from Heaven.
The generous Critic fanned the Poet's Fire,
And taught the World, with Reason to Admire.
Then Criticism the Muses Handmaid proved,
To dress her Charms, and make her more beloved:
But following Wits from that Intention strayed;
Who could not win the Mistress, wooed the Maid,
Set up themselves, and drove a separate Trade;
Against the Poets their own Arms they turned,
Sure to hate most the Men from whom they learned.
So modern Pothecaries, taught the Art
By Doctor's Bills to play the Doctor's Part,
Bold in the Practice of mistaken Rules,
Prescribe, apply, and call their Masters Fools.
Some on the Leaves of ancient Authors prey,
Nor Time nor Moths ever spoiled so much as they.
Some dryly plain, without Invention's Aid,
Write dull Receipts how Poems may be made.
These lost the Sense, their Learning to display,
And those explained the Meaning quite away.
You then whose Judgment the right Course would steer,
Know well each ANCIENT's proper Character;
His Fable, Subject, Scope in every Page;
Religion, Country, Genius of his Age:
Without all these at once before your Eyes,
Cavil you may, but never Criticize.
Be HOMER's Works your Study, and Delight,
Read them by Day, and meditate by Night;
Thence form your Judgment, thence your Notions bring,
And trace the Muses upward to their Spring.
Still with It self compared, his Text peruse;
And let your Comment be the Mantuan Muse.
Virgil Eclog. 6. Cum canerem Reges and Praelia, Cynthius aurem Vellit --
When first young Maro sung of Kings and Wars,
Ere warning Phoebus touched his trembling Ears,
Perhaps he seemed above the Critick's Law,
And but from Nature's Fountains scorned to draw:
But when t'examine every Part he came,
Nature and Homer were, he found, the same:
Convinced, amazed, he checked the bold Design,
And did his Work to Rules as strict confine,
As if the Stagyrite o'erlook'd each Line.
Learn hence for Ancient Rules a just Esteem;
To copy Nature is to copy Them.
Some Beauties yet, no Precepts can declare,
For there is a Happiness as well as Care.
Music resembles Poetry, in each
Are nameless Graces which no Methods teach,
And which a Master-Hand alone can reach.
Neque tam sancta sunt ista Praecepta, sed hoc quicquid est, Utilitas
excogitavit; Non negabo autem sic utile esse plerunque; verum si eadem illa
nobis aliud suadebit utilitas, hanc, relictis magistrorum autoritatibus,
sequemur. Quintil. l. 2. cap. 13.
If, where the Rules not far enough extend,
(Since Rules were made but to promote their End)
Some Lucky LICENSE answers to the full
The Intent proposed, that License is a Rule.
Thus Pegasus, a nearer way to take,
May boldly deviate from the common Track.
Great Wits sometimes may gloriously offend,
And rise to Faults true Critics dare not mend;
From vulgar Bounds with brave Disorder part,
And snatch a Grace beyond the Reach of Art,
Which, without passing through the Judgment, gains
The Heart, and all its End at once attains.
In Prospects, thus, some Objects please our Eyes,
Which out of Nature's common Order rise,
The shapeless Rock, or hanging Precipice.
But Care in Poetry must still be had,
It asks Discretion even in running Mad:
And though the Ancients thus their Rules invade,
(As Kings dispense with Laws Themselves have made)
Moderns, beware! Or if you must offend
Against the Precept, never transgress its End;
Let it be seldom; and compelled by Need;
And have, at least, Their Precedent to plead.
The Critic else proceeds without Remorse,
Seizes your Fame, and puts his Laws in force.
I know there are, to whose presumptuous Thoughts
Those Freer Beauties, even in Them, seem Faults.
Some Figures monstrous and mis-shap'd appear,
Considered singly, or beheld too near,
Which, but proportioned to their Light, or Place
Due Distance reconciles to Form and Grace.
A prudent Chief not always must display
His Powers in equal Ranks, and fair Array,
But with the Occasion and the Place comply,
Conceal his Force, nay seem sometimes to Fly.
Those often are Stratagems which Errors seem,
Nor is it Homer Nods, but We that Dream.
Still green with Bays each ancient Altar stands,
Above the reach of Sacrilegious Hands;
Secure from Flames, from Envy's fiercer Rage,
Destructive War, and all-devouring Age.
See, from each Clime the Learned their Incense bring;
Hear, in all Tongues consenting Paeans ring!
In Praise so just, let every Voice be joined,
And fill the General Chorus of Mankind!
Hail Bards Triumphant! born in happier Days;
Immortal Heirs of Universal Praise!
Whose Honors with Increase of Ages grow,
As Streams roll down, enlarging as they flow!
Nations unborn your mighty Names shall sound,
And Worlds applaud that must not yet be found!
Oh may some Spark of your Celestial Fire
The last, the meanest of your Sons inspire,
(That on weak Wings, from far, pursues your Flights;
Glows while he reads, but trembles as he writes)
To teach vain Wits a Science little known,
T'admire Superior Sense, and doubt their own!
OF all the Causes which conspire to blind
Man's erring Judgment, and misguide the Mind,
What the weak Head with strongest Bias rules,
Is Pride, the never-failing Vice of Fools.
Whatever Nature has in Worth denied,
She gives in large Recruits of needful Pride;
For as in Bodies, thus in Souls, we find
What wants in Blood and Spirits, swelled with Wind:
Pride, where Wit fails, steps in to our Defense,
And fills up all the mighty Void of Sense!
If once right Reason drives that Cloud away,
Truth breaks upon us with resistless Day;
Trust not your self; but your Defects to know,
Make use of every Friend -- and every Foe.
A little Learning is a dangerous Thing;
Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian Spring:
There shallow Draughts intoxicate the Brain,
And drinking largely sobers us again.
Fired with the Charms fair Science does impart,
In fearless Youth we tempt the Heights of Art,
While from the bounded Level of our Mind,
Short Views we take, nor see the Lengths behind;
But more advanced, behold with strange Surprise
New, distant Scenes of endless Science rise!
So pleased at first the towering Alps we try,
Mount over the Vales, and seem to tread the Sky,
The Eternal Snows appear already past,
And the first Clouds and Mountains seem the last:
But those attained, we tremble to survey
The growing Labors of the lengthened Way,
The increasing Prospect tires our wandering Eyes,
Hills peep over Hills, and Alps on Alps arise!
Diligenter legendum est, ac poene ad scribendi sollicitudinem: Nec per parts
modo scrutanda sunt omnia, sed perlectus liber utique ex Integro resumendus.
Quintilian.
A perfect Judge will read each Work of Wit
With the same Spirit that its Author writ,
Survey the Whole, nor seek slight Faults to find;
Where Nature moves, and Rapture warms the Mind;
Nor lose, for that malignant dull Delight,
The generous Pleasure to be charmed with Wit.
But in such Lays as neither ebb, nor flow,
Correctly cold, and regularly low,
That shunning Faults, one quiet Tenor keep;
We cannot blame indeed -- but we may sleep.
In Wit, as Nature, what affects our Hearts
Is not the Exactness of peculiar Parts;
It Is not a Lip, or Eye, we Beauty call,
But the joint Force and full Result of all.
Thus when we view some well proportioned Dome,
(The World's just Wonder, and even thine, O Rome!)
No single Parts unequally surprise;
All comes united to the admiring Eyes;
No monstrous Height, or Breadth, or Length appear;
The Whole at once is Bold, and Regular.
Whoever thinks a faultless Piece to see,
Thinks what never was, nor is, nor ever shall be.
In every Work regard the Writer's End,
Since none can compass more than they Intend;
And if the Means be just, the Conduct true,
Applause, in spite of trivial Faults, is due.
As Men of Breeding, often the Men of Wit
TO avoid great Errors, must the less commit,
Neglect the Rules each Verbal Critic lays,
For not to know some Trifles, is a Praise.
Most Critics fond of some subservient Art,
Still make the Whole depend upon a Part,
They talk of Principles, but Parts they prize,
And All to one loved Folly Sacrifice.
Once on a time, La Mancha's Knight, they say,
A certain Bard encountering on the Way,
Discoursed in Terms as just, with Looks as Sage,
As ever could D^s, of the Laws of the Stage;
Concluding all were desperate Sots and Fools,
That durst depart from Aristotle's Rules.
Our Author, happy in a Judge so nice,
Produced his Play, and begged the Knight's Advice;
Made him observe the Subject and the Plot,
The Manners, P assions, Unities, what not?
All which, exact to Rule were brought about,
Were but a Combat in the Lists left out.
What! Leave the Combat out? Exclaims the Knight;
Yes, or we must renounce the Stagyrite.
Not so by Heaven (he answers in a Rage)
Knights, Squires, and Steeds, must enter on the Stage.
The Stage can never so vast a Throng contain.
Then build a New, or act it in a Plain.
Thus Critics, of less Judgment than Caprice,
Curious, not Knowing; not exact, but nice;
Form short Ideas; and offend in Arts
(As most in Manners) by a Love to Parts.
Some to Conceit alone their Taste confine,
And glittering Thoughts struck out at every Line;
Pleased with a Work where nothing's just or fit;
One glaring Chaos and wild Heap of Wit.
Poets like Painters, thus, unskilled to trace
The naked Nature and the living Grace,
With Gold and Jewels cover every Part,
And hide with Ornaments their Want of Art.
Naturam intueamur, hanc sequamur; Id facillime accipiunt animi quod agnoscunt.
Quintil. lib. 8. c. 3.
True Wit is Nature to Advantage dressed,
What often was Thought, but never so well Expressed;
Something, whose Truth convinced at Sight we find,
That gives us back the Image of our Mind.
As Shades more sweetly recommend the Light,
So modest Plainness sets off sprightly Wit:
For Works may have more Wit than does 'em good,
As Bodies perish through Excess of Blood.
Others for Language all their Care express,
And value Books, as Women Men, for Dress:
Their Praise is still -- The Style is excellent:
The Sense, they humbly take upon Content.
Words are like Leaves; and where they most abound,
Much Fruit of Sense beneath is rarely found.
False Eloquence, like the Prismatic Glass,
Its gaudy Colors spreads on every place;
The Face of Nature we no more survey;
All glares alike, without Distinction gay:
But true Expression, like th'unchanging Sun,
Clears, and improves whatever it shines upon,
It gilds all Objects, but it alters none.
Expression is the Dress of Thought, and still
Appears more decent as more suitable;
A vile Conceit in pompous Words expressed,
Is like a Clown in regal Purple dressed:
For different Styles with different Subjects sort,
As several Garbs with Country, Town, and Court.
Abolita and abrogata retinere, insolentiae cujusdam est, and frivolae in
parvis jactantiae. Quint. lib. 1. c. 6. Opus est ut Verba a vetustate repetita
neque crebra sint, neque manifesta, quia nil est odiosius affectatione, nec
utique ab ultimis repetita temporibus. Oration, cujus summa virtus est
perspicuitas, quam sit vitiosa si egeat interpret? Ergo ut novorum optima
erunt maxim vetera, ita veterum maxim nova. Idem.
Some by Old Words to Fame have made Pretense;
Ancients in Phrase, mere Moderns in their Sense!
Such labored Nothings, in so strange a Style,
Amaze the unlearned, and make the Learned Smile.
Unlucky, as Fungoso in the Ben. Johnson's Every Man in his Humor.
Play,
These Sparks with awkward Vanity display
What the Fine Gentlemen wore Yesterday:
And but so mimick ancient Wits at best,
As Apes our Grandsires, in their Doublets dressed.
In Words, as Fashions, the same Rule will hold;
Alike Fantastic, if too New, or Old;
Be not the first by whom the New are tried,
Nor yet the last to lay the Old aside.
Quis populi sermo est? quis enim? nisi carmine molli Nunc demum numero fluere,
ut per laeve severes Effugit junctura ungues: scit tendere versum, Non secus ac
si cculo rubricam dirigat uno. Persius, Sat. 1.
But most by Numbers judge a Poet's Song,
And smooth or rough, with such, is right or wrong;
In the bright Muse though thousand Charms conspire,
Her Voice is all these tuneful Fools admire;
Who haunt Parnassus but to please their Ear,
Not mend their Minds; as some to Church repair,
Not for the Doctrine, but the Music there.
These Equal Syllables alone require,
Fugiemus crebras vocalium concursiones, quae vastam atque hiantem oratimem
reddunt. Cic. ad Herenn. lib. 4. Vide etiam Quintil. lib. 9. c. 4.
Though often the Ear the open Vowels tire;
While Expletives their feeble Aid do join;
And ten low Words often creep in one dull Line;
While they ring round the same unvary'd Chimes,
With sure Returns of still-expected Rhymes.
Wherever you find the cooling Western Breeze,
In the next Line, it whispers through the Trees;
If Crystal Streams with pleasing Murmurs creep,
The Reader's threatened (not in vain) with Sleep.
Then, at the last, and only Couplet fraught
With some unmeaning Thing they call a Thought,
A needless Alexandrine ends the Song,
That like a wounded Snake, drags its slow Length along.
Leave such to tune their own dull Rhimes, and know
What Is roundly smooth, or languishingly slow;
And praise the Easy Vigor of a Line,
Where Denham's Strength, and Waller's Sweetness join.
It Is not enough no Harshness gives Offense,
The Sound must seem an Echo to the Sense.
Soft is the Strain when Zephyr gently blows,
And the smooth Stream in smoother Numbers flows;
But when loud Surges lash the sounding Shore,
The hoarse, rough Verse should like the Torrent roar.
When Ajax strives, some Rock's vast Weight to throw,
The Line too labors, and the Words move slow;
Not so, when swift Camilla scours the Plain,
Flies over the unbending Corn, and skims along the Main.
Hear how Alexander's Feast, or the Power of Music; An Ode by Mr. Dryden.
Timotheus' various Lays surprise,
And bid Alternate Passions fall and rise!
While, at each Change, the Son of Lybian Jove
Now burns with Glory, and then melts with Love;
Now his fierce Eyes with sparkling Fury glow,
Now Sighs steal out, and Tears begin to flow:
Persians and Greeks like Turns of Nature found,
And the World's Victor stood subdued by Sound!
The Power of Music all our Hearts allow;
And what Timotheus was, is Dryden now.
Avoid Extremes; and shun the Fault of such,
Who still are pleased too little, or too much.
At every Trifle scorn to take Offense,
That always shows Great Pride, or Little Sense;
Those Heads, as Stomachs, are not sure the best,
Which nauseate all, and nothing can digest.
Yet let not each gay Turn thy Rapture move,
For Fools Admire, but Men of Sense Approve;
As things seem large which we through Mists descry,
Dullness is ever apt to Magnify.
Some the French Writers, some our own despise;
The Ancients only, or the Moderns prize.
(Thus Wit, like Faith, by each Man is applied
To one small Sect, and All are damned beside.)
Meanly they seek the Blessing to confine,
And force that Sun but on a Part to Shine,
Which not alone the Southern Wit sublimes,
But ripens Spirits in cold Northern Climes;
Which from the first has shone on Ages past,
Enlights the present, and shall warm the last.
(Though each may feel Increases and Decays,
And see now clearer and now darker Days)
Regard not then if Wit be Old or New,
But blame the False, and value still the True.
Some never advance a Judgment of their own,
But catch the spreading Notion of the Town;
They reason and conclude by Precedent,
And own stale Nonsense which they never invent.
Some judge of Author's Names, not Works, and then
Nor praise nor damn the Writings, but the Men.
Of all this Servile Herd the worst is He
That in proud Dullness joins with Quality,
A constant Critic at the Great-man's Board,
To fetch and carry Nonsense for my Lord.
What woeful stuff this Madrigal would be,
In some starved Hackny Soneteer, or me?
But let a Lord once own the happy Lines,
How the Wit brightens! How the Style refines!
Before his sacred Name flies every Fault,
And each exalted Stanza teems with Thought!
The Vulgar thus through Imitation err;
As often the Learned by being Singular;
So much they scorn the Crowd, that if the Throng
By Chance go right, they purposely go wrong:
So Schismatics the plain Believers quit,
And are but damned for having too much Wit.
Some praise at Morning what they blame at Night;
But always think the last Opinion right.
A Muse by these is like a Mistress used,
This hour she is idolized, the next abused;
While their weak Heads, like Towns unfortify'd,
'Twixt Sense and Nonsense daily change their Side.
Ask them the Cause; They Are wiser still, they say;
And still To Morrow's wiser than To Day.
We think our Fathers Fools, so wise we grow;
Our wiser Sons, no doubt, will think us so.
Once School-Divines this zealous Isle overspread;
Who knew most Sentences was deepest read;
Faith, Gospel, All, seemed made to be disputed,
And none had Sense enough to be Confuted:
Scotists and Thomists, now, in Peace remain,
Amidst their kindred Cobwebs in Duck-Lane.
If Faith it self has different Dresses worn,
What wonder Modes in Wit should take their Turn?
Often, leaving what is Natural and fit,
The current Folly proves our ready Wit,
And Authors think their Reputation safe,
Which lives as long as Fools are pleased to Laugh.
Some valuing those of their own Side, or Mind,
Still make themselves the measure of Mankind;
Fondly we think we honor Merit then,
When we but praise Our selves in Other Men.
Parties in Wit attend on those of State,
And public Faction doubles private Hate.
Pride, Malice, Folly, against Dryden rose,
In various Shapes of Parsons, Critics, Beaus;
But Sense survived, when merry Jests were past;
For rising Merit will buoy up at last.
Might he return, and bless once more our Eyes,
New S^s and new M^ns must arise:
Nay should great Homer lift his awful Head,
Zoilus again would start up from the Dead.
Envy will Merit, as its Shade, pursue;
But like a Shadow, proves the Substance too.
For envied Wit, like Sol eclipsed, makes known
The opposing Body's Grossness, not its own.
When first that Sun too powerful Beams displays,
It draws up Vapors which obscure its Rays;
But even those Clouds at last adorn its Way,
Reflect new Glories, and augment the Day.
Be thou the first true Merit to befriend,
His Praise is lost, who stays till All commend.
Short is the Date, alas, of Modern Rhymes,
And it is but just to let 'em live betimes.
No longer now that Golden Age appears,
When Patriarch-Wits survived a thousand Years;
Now Length of Fame (our second Life) is lost,
And bare Threescore is all even That can boast:
Our Sons their Father's failing Language see,
And such as Chancer is, shall Dryden be.
So when the faithful Pencil has designed
Some fair Idea of the Master's Mind,
Where a new World leaps out at his command,
And ready Nature waits upon his Hand;
When the ripe Colors soften and unite,
And sweetly melt into just Shade and Light,
When mellowing Time does full Perfection give,
And each Bold Figure just begins to Live;
The treacherous Colors in few Years decay,
And all the bright Creation fades away!
Unhappy Wit, like most mistaken Things,
Attones not for that Envy which it brings.
In Youth alone its empty Praise we boast,
But soon the short-lived Vanity is lost!
Like some fair Flower that in the Spring does rise,
And gaily blooms, but even in blooming dies.
What is this Wit which does our Cares employ?
The Owner's Wife, that other Men enjoy;
It Is most our Trouble when it is most admired;
The more we give, the more is still required:
The Fame with Pains we gain, but lose with ease;
Sure some to vex, but never all to please;
It Is what the Vicious fear, the Virtuous shun;
By Fools it is hated, and by Knaves undone!
Too much does Wit from Ignorance undergo,
Ah let not Learning too commence its Foe!
Of old, those met Rewards who could excel,
And such were Praised as but endeavored well:
Though Triumphs were to Generals only due,
Crowns were reserved to grace the Soldiers too*
Now, they who reach Parnassus' lofty Crown,
Employ their Pains to spurn some others down;
And while Self-Love each jealous Writer rules,
Contending Wits become the Sport of Fools.
But still the Worst with most Regret commend,
For each Ill Author is as bad a Friend.
To what base Ends, and by what abject Ways,
Are Mortals urged by Sacred Lust of Praise?
Ah never so dire a Thirst of Glory boast,
Nor in the Critic let the Man be lost!
Goodnature and Good-Sense must ever join;
To Err is Humane; to Forgive, Divine.
But if in Noble Minds some Dregs remain,
Not yet purged off, of Spleen and sow'r Disdain,
Discharge that Rage on more provoking Crimes,
Nor fear a Dearth in these Flagitious Times.
No Pardon vile Obscenity should find,
Though Wit and Art conspire to move your Mind;
But Dullness with Obscenity must prove
As Shameful sure as Impotence in Love.
In the fat Age of Pleasure, Wealth, and Ease,
Sprung the rank Weed, and thrived with large Increase;
When Love was all an easy Monarch's Care;
Seldom at Council, never in a War:
Jilts ruled the State, and Statesmen Farces writ;
Nay Wits had Pensions, and young Lords had Wit:
The Fair sat panting at a Courtier's Play,
And not a Mask went un-improv'd away:
The modest Fan was lifted up no more,
And Virgins smiled at what they blushed before --
The following License of a Foreign Reign
Did all the Dregs of bold Socinus drain;
Then first the Belgian Morals were extolled;
We their Religion had, and they our Gold:
Then Unbelieving Priests reformed the Nation,
And taught more Pleasant Methods of Salvation;
Where Heavens free Subjects might their Rights dispute,
Lest God himself should seem too Absolute.
Pulpits their Sacred Satire learned to spare,
And Vice admired to find a Flatt'rer there!
Encouraged thus, Wit 's Titans braved the Skies
And the Press groaned with Licensed Blasphemies --
These Monsters, Critics! with your Darts engage,
Here point your Thunder, and exhaust your Rage
Yet shun their Fault, who, Scandalously nice,
Will needs mistake an Author into Vice;
All seems Infected that the Infected spy,
As all looks yellow to the Jaundic'd Eye.
Learn then what Morals Critics ought to show,
For it is but half a Judge's Task, to Know.
It Is not enough, Wit, Art, and Learning join;
In all you speak, let Truth and Candor shine:
That not alone what to your Judgment's due,
All may allow; but seek your Friendship too.
Be silent always when you doubt your Sense;
And speak, though sure, with seeming Diffidence:
Some positive, persisting Fops we know,
That, if once wrong, will needs be always so;
But you, with Pleasure own your Errors past,
And make, each Day, a Critic on the last.
It Is not enough your Counsel still be true;
Blunt Truths more Mischief than nice Falsehoods do;
Men must be taught as if you taught them not;
And things never known proposed as Things forgot.
Without Good Breeding, Truth is not approved;
That only makes Superior Sense beloved.
Be Niggards of Advice on no Pretense;
For the worst Avarice is that of Sense.
With mean Complacence never betray your Trust,
Nor be so Civil as to prove Unjust:
Fear not the Anger of the Wise to raise;
Those best can bear Reproof, who merit Praise.
'Twere well, might Critics still this Freedom take;
But Appius reddens at each Word you speak,
And stares, Tremendous! with a threatening Eye;
Like some fierce Tyrant in Old Tapestry!
Fear most to tax an Honorable Fool,
Whose Right it is, uncensur'd to be dull;
Such without Wit are Poets when they please,
As without Learning they can take Degrees.
Leave dangerous Truths to unsuccessful Satyrs,
And Flattery to fulsome Dedicators,
Whom, when they Praise, the World believes no more,
Than when they promise to give Scribbling over.
It Is best sometimes your Censure to restrain,
And charitably let the dull be vain.
Your Silence there is better than your Spite,
For who can rail so long as they can write?
Still humming on, their drowzy Course they keep,
And lashed so long, like Tops, are lashed asleep.
False Steps but help them to renew the Race,
As after Stumbling, Jades will mend their Pace.
What Crowds of these, impenitently bold,
In Sounds and jingling Syllables grown old,
Still run on Poets, in a raging Vein,
Even to the Dregs and Squeezings of the Brain;
Strain out the last, dull droppings of their Sense,
And Rhyme with all the Rage of Impotence!
Such shameless Bards we have; and yet it is true,
There are as mad, abandoned Critics too.
Nihil pejus est iis, qui paullum aliquid ultra primas litteras progressi,
falsam sibi scientiae persuasionem induerunt: Nam and cedere praecipiendi
peritis indignantur, and velut jure quodam potestatis, quo fere hoc hominum
genus intumescit, imperiosi, atque interim; aevientes, Stultitiam suam
perdocent. Quintil. lib. 1. chapter 1.
The Bookful Blockhead, ignorantly read,
With Loads of Learned Lumber in his Head,
With his own Tongue still edifies his Ears,
And always Listening to Himself appears.
All Books he reads, and all he reads assails,
From Dryden's Fables down to D^y's Tales.
With him, most Authors steal their Works, or buy;
Garth did not write his own Dispensary.
Name a new Play, and he is the Poet's Friend,
Nay showed his Faults -- but when would Poets mend?
No Place so Sacred from such Fops is barred,
Nor is Paul's Church more safe than Paul's Churchyard:
Nay, fly to Altars; there they will talk you dead;
For Fools rush in where Angels fear to tread.
Distrustful Sense with modest Caution speaks;
It still looks home, and short Excursions makes;
But rattling Nonsense in full Vollies breaks;
And never shocked, and never turned aside,
Bursts out, resistless, with a thundering Tide!
But where is the Man, who Counsel can bestow,
Still pleased to teach, and yet not proud to know?
Unbiased, or by Favor, or by Spite;
Not dully prepossest, or blindly right;
Though Learned, well-bred; and though well-bred, sincere;
Modestly bold, and Humanly severe?
Who to a Friend his Faults can freely show,
And gladly praise the Merit of a Foe?
Blessed with a Taste exact, yet unconfined;
A Knowledge both of Books and Humankind;
Generous Converse; a Soul exempt from Pride;
And Love to Praise, with Reason on his Side?
Such once were Critics; such the Happy Few,
Athens and Rome in better Ages knew.
The mighty Stagyrite first left the Shore,
Spread all his Sails, and durst the Deeps explore;
He steered securely, and discovered far,
Led by the Light of the Maeonian Star.
Poets, a Race long unconfined and free,
Still fond and proud of Savage Liberty,
Received his Laws; and stood convinced 'twas fit
Who conquered Nature, should preside over Wit.
Horace still charms with graceful Negligence,
And without Method talks us into Sense,
Does like a Friend, familiarly convey
The truest Notions in the easiest way.
He, who supreme in Judgment, as in Wit,
Might boldly censure, as he boldly writ,
Yet judged with Coolness though he sung with Fire,
His Precepts teach but what his Works inspire.
Our Critics take a contrary Extreme,
They judge with Fury, but they write with Fle'me:
Nor suffers Horace more in wrong Translations
By Wits, than Critics in as wrong Quotations.
See Dionysius of Halicarnassus.
Dionysius Homer's Thoughts refine,
And call new Beauties forth from every Line!
Fancy and Art in gay Petronius please,
The Scholar's Learning, with the Courtier's Ease.
In grave Quintilian's copious Work we find
The justest Rules, and clearest Method joined.
Thus useful Arms in Magazines we place,
All ranged in Order, and disposed with Grace,
Nor thus alone the curious Eye to please,
But to be found, when Need requires, with Ease.
The Muses sure Longinus did inspire,
And blessed their Critic with a Poet's Fire.
An ardent Judge, who zealous in his Trust,
With Warmth gives Sentence, yet is always Just;
Whose own Example strengthens all his Laws,
And Is himself that great Sublime he draws.
Thus long succeeding Critics justly reigned,
License repressed, and useful Laws ordained.
Learning and Rome alike in Empire grew,
And Arts still followed where her Eagles flew.
From the same Foes, at last, both felt their Doom,
And the same Age saw Learning fall, and Rome.
With Tyranny, then Superstition joined,
As that the Body, this enslaved the Mind;
Much was Believed, but little understood,
And to be dull was construed to be good;
A second Deluge Learning thus o'er-run,
And the Monks finished what the Goths begun.
At length Erasmus, that great, injured Name,
(The Glory of the Priesthood, and the Shame!)
Stemmed the wild Torrent of a barbarous Age,
And drove those Holy Vandals off the Stage.
But see! each Muse, in Leo's Golden Days,
Starts from her Trance, and trims her withered Bays!
Rome's ancient Genius, over its Ruins spread,
Shakes off the Dust, and rears his reverend Head!
Then Sculpture and her Sister-Arts revive;
Stones leaped to Form, and Rocks began to live;
With sweeter Notes each rising Temple rung;
A Raphael painted, and a M. Hieronymus Vida, an excellent Latin Poet, who writ
an Art of Poetry in Verse. He flourished in the time of Leo the Tenth.
Vida sung!
Immortal Vida! on whose honored Brow
The Poet's Bays and Critick's Ivy grow:
Cremona now shall ever boast thy Name,
As next in Place to Mantua, next in Fame!
But soon by Impious Arms from Latium chased,
Their ancient Bounds the banished Muses past;
Thence Arts over all the NorthernWorld advance;
But Critic Learning flourished most in France.
The Rules, a Nation born to serve, obeys,
And Boileau still in Right of Horace sways.
But we, brave Britains, Foreign Laws despised,
And kept unconquered, and unciviliz'd,
Fierce for the Liberties of Wit, and bold,
We still defied the Romans, as of old.
Yet some there were, among the sounder Few
Of those who less presumed, and better knew,
Who durst assert the juster Ancient Cause,
And here restored Wit's Fundamental Laws.
Such was Roscommon -- not more learned than good,
With Manners generous as his Noble Blood;
To him the Wit of Greece and Rome was known,
And every Author's Merit, but his own.
Such late was Walsh, -- the Muses Judge and Friend,
Who justly knew to blame or to commend;
To Failings mild, but zealous for Desert;
The clearest Head, and the sincerest Heart.
This humble Praise, lamented Shade! receive,
This Praise at least a grateful Muse may give!
The Muse, whose early Voice you taught to Sing,
Prescribed her Heights, and pruned her tender Wing,
(Her Guide now lost) no more attempts to rise,
But in low Numbers short Excursions tries.
Content, if hence the Unlearned their Wants may view,
The Learned reflect on what before they knew.
Careless of Censure, nor too fond of Fame,
Still pleased to praise, yet not afraid to blame;
Averse alike to Flatter, or Offend,
Not free from Faults, nor yet too vain to mend.
FINIS.

