MESSIAH.

Advertisement.
IN reading several passages of the prophet Isaiah, which foretell the coming
of Christ and the felicities attending it, I could not but observe a remarkable
parity between many of the thoughts, and those in the Pollio of Virgil. This
will not seem surprising, when we reflect, that the Eclogue was taken from a
Sibylline prophecy on the same subject. One may judge that Virgil did not copy
it line by line, but selected such ideas as best agreed with the nature of
pastoral poetry, and disposed them in that manner which served most to beautify
his piece. I have endeavored the same in this imitation of him, though without
admitting any thing of my own; since it was written with this particular view,
that the reader, by comparing the several thoughts, might see how for the
images and descriptions of the Prophet are superior to those of the Poet. But
as I fear I have prejudiced them by my management, I shall subjoin the passages
of Isaiah, and those of Virgil, under the same disadvantage of a literal
translation.

POPE.

MESSIAH, A SACRED ECLOGUE, In Imitation of VIRGIL's POLLIO.

By ALEXANDER POPE, Esquire

Printed for the PROPRIETORS, and sold by all the BOOKSELLERS. M,DCC,LXVI.

MESSIAH, A SACRED ECLOGUE.
YE nymphs of Solyma! begin the song;
To heavenly themes sublimer strains belong.
The mossy fountains, and the sylvan shades,
The dreams of Pindus and the Aonian maids,
Delight no more -- O thou my voice inspire,
Who touched Isaiah's hallowed lips with fire!
RAPT into future times, the Bard begun:
A Virgin shall conceive, a Virgin bear a Son!
From Isa. ix. 1.
Jesse's root behold a branch arise,
Whose sacred flower with fragrance fills the skies:
The Ethereal spirit over its leaves shall move,
And on its top descends the mystic Dove.
Ye Isa. xlv. 8.
Heavens! from high the dewy nectar pour,
And in soft silence shed the kindly shower!
The Chap. xxv. 4.
sick and weak the healing plant shall aid,
From storms a shelter, and from heat a shade.
All crimes shall cease, and ancient fraud shall fail;
Returning Chap. ix. 7.
Justice lift aloft her scale;
Peace over the world her olive wand extend,
And white-rob'd innocence from heaven descend.
Swift fly the years, and rise the expected morn!
Oh spring to light, auspicious Babe, be born!
See Nature hastes her earliest wreaths to bring,
With all the incense of the breathing spring:
See Isa. xxxv. 2.
lofty Lebanon his head advance,
See nodding forests on the mountains dance,
See spicy clouds from lowly Saron rise*
And Carmel's flowery top perfumes the skies!
Hark! a glad voice the lonely desert cheers;
Prepare the Isa. xl. 3, 4.
way! a God, a God appears:
A God, a God! the vocal hills reply,
The rocks proclaim the approaching Deity.
Lo, earth receives him from the bending skies!
Sink down, ye mountains, and, ye valleys, rise;
With heads declined, ye cedars, homage pay;
Be smooth, ye rocks, ye rapid floods give way!
The SAVIOR comes! by ancient bards foretold:
Hear Chap. xliii. 18. xxxv. 5. 6,
him, ye deaf, and, all ye blind, behold!
He from thick films shall purge the visual ray,
And on the sightless eye-ball pour the day.
^Tis he the obstructed paths of sound shall clear,
And bid new music charm the unfolding ear:
The dumb shall sing, the lame his crutch forego,
And leap exulting like the bounding roe;
No sigh, no murmur the wide world shall hear,
From every face he wipes off every tear:
In Isa. xxv. 8.
adamantine chains shall death be bound,
And hell's grim tyrant feel the eternal wound.
As the good Chap. xl. 11.
shepherd tends his fleecy care,
Seeks freshest pastures and the purest air,
Explores the lost, the wandering sheep directs,
By day o'ersees them, and by night protects,
The tender lambs he raises in his arms,
Feeds from his hand, and in his bosom warms;
Thus shall mankind his guardian care engage,
The promised Isa. ix. 6.
father of the future age.
No more shall Chap. ii. 4.
nation against nation rise,
Nor ardent warriors meet with hateful eyes,
Nor fields with gleaming steel be covered over,
The brazen trumpets kindle rage no more;
But useless lances into scythes shall bend,
And the broad faulchion in a plow-share end.
Then palaces shall rise; the joyful Chap. lxv. 21, 22.
Son
Shall finish what his short-lived Sire begun;
Their vines a shadow to their race shall yield,
And the same hand that sowed shall reap the field.
The swain in barren Chap. xxxv. 1, 7.
deserts with surprise
See lilies spring, and sudden verdure rise,
And starts amidst the thirsty wilds to hear
New falls of water murmuring in his ear:
On rifted rocks, the dragon's late abodes,
The green reed trembles, and the bulrush nods.
Vaste sandy Isa. xli. 19. and Chap. lv. 13.
valleys, once perplexed with thorn,
The spiry fir and shapely box adorn:
To leafless shrubs the flow'ring palms succeed,
And odorous myrtle to the noisome weed.
The Chap. xi. 6, 7, 8.
lambs with wolves shall graze the verdant mead,
And boys on flowery banks the tiger lead!
The steer and lion at one crib shall meet,
And harmless Chap. lxv. 25.
serpents lick the pilgrim's feet.
The smiling infant in his hand shall take
The crested basilisk and speckled snake;
Pleased, the green luster of the scales survey,
And with their forky tongue shall innocently play.
Rise, crowned with light, imperial Chap. lx. 1.
Salem, rise!
Exalt thy tow'ry head, and lift thy eyes!
See, a long Isa. lx. 4.
race thy spacious courts adorn;
See future sons, and daughters yet unborn,
In crowding ranks, on every side arise,
Demanding life, impatient for the skies!
See barbarous Chapter lx. 3.
nations at thy gates attend,
Walk in thy light, and in thy temple bend;
See thy bright altars thronged with prostrate Kings,
And heaped with products of Sabean Chapter lx. 6.
springs!
For thee Idume's spicy forests blow,
And seeds of gold in Ophir's mountains glow.
See heaven its sparkling portals wide display,
And break upon thee in a flood of day.
No more the rising Chapter lx. 19, 20.
Sun shall gild the morn,
Nor evening Cynthia fill her silver horn,
But lost, dissolved in thy superior rays,
One tide of glory, one unclouded blaze
Overflow thy courts: the LIGHT HIMSELF shall shi^
Revealed, and God's eternal day be thine!
The Chapter li. 6. and Chapter live. 10.
seas shall waste, the skies in smoke decay,
Rocks fall to dust, and mountains melt away;
But fixed his word, his saving power remains,
Thy realm for ever lasts, thy own MESSIAH reign
IMITATIONS.
VER. 8. A Virgin shall conceive -- All crimes shall cease, etc.

VIRG. Ecl. iv. ver. 6. Jam redit et Virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna;
Jam nova progenies caelo demittiur alto.
Te duce, si qua manent sceleris vestigia nostri,
Irrita perpetua solvent formidine terras --.
Pacatumque reget patriis virtutibus orbem.
Now the Virgin returns, now the kingdom of Saturn returns, now a new progeny
is sent down from high heaven. By means of thee, whatever relics of our
crimes remain, shall be wiped away, and free the world from perpetual fears. He
shall govern the earth in peace, with the virtues of his Father.

ISAIAH, Chap. vii. ver. 14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive and born a Son. --
Chap. ix. ver. 6, 7. Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given; the
Prince of Peace: of the increase of his government, and of his peace, there
shall be no end: Upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order and
establish it, with judgment, and with justice for ever and ever. P.

VER. 23. See Nature hastes, etc.] VIRG. Ecl. iv. ver. 18.

At tibi prima, puer, nullo munuscula cultu,
Errantes hederas passim cum baccare tellus,
Mixtaque ridenti colocasia funder acantho --
Ipsa tibi blandos fundent cunabula flores.
For thee, O Child, shall the earth, without being tilled, produce her early
offerings; winding ivy, mixed with Baccar, and Colocasia with smiling
Achanthus. Thy cradle shall pour forth pleasing flowers about thee.

ISAIAH, Chapter xxxv. ver. 1. The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad,
and the desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose. Chapter lx. ver. 13. The
glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the fir tree, the pine tree, and the box
together, to beautify the place of thy sanctuary. P.

VER. 29. Hark, a glad voice, etc.] VIRG. Ecl. iv. 46.

Aggredere o magnos, aderit jam tempus, honores,
Cara deum soboles, magnum Jovis incrementum --
Ipsi laetitia voces ad sydera jactant
Intonsi montes, ipsae jam carmina rupes,
Ipsa sonant arbusta, Deus, deus ille Menalca!
Ecl. v. ver. 62.

Oh come and receive the mighty honors: the time draws nigh, O beloved
offspring of the Gods, O great increase of Jove! The uncultivated mountains
send shouts of joy to the stars, the very rocks sing in verse, the very shrubs
cry out, A God, a God!

ISAIAH, Chapter xl. ver. 3, 4. The voice of him that cries in the wilderness,
Prepare ye the way of the Lord! make strait in the desert a highway for our
God! Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made
low, and the crooked shall be made strait, and the rough places plain. Chapter iv.
ver. 23. Break forth into singing, ye mountains! O forest, and every tree
therein! for the Lord has redeemed Israel. P.

VER. 67. The swain in barren deserts, etc.] VIRG. Ecl. iv. ver. 28.

Molli paulatim flavescet campus arista
Incultisque rubens pendebit sentibus uva,
Et durae quercus sodabunt roscida mella.
The fields shall grow yellow with ripened ears, and the red grape shall hang
upon the wild brambles, and the hard oaks shall distill honey like dew.

ISAIAH, Chapter xxxv. ver 7. The parched ground shall become a pool, and the
thirsty land springs of water: In the habitations where dragons lay, shall be
grass, and reeds and rushes. Chapter lv. ver. 13. Instead of the thorn shall come
up the fir tree, and instead of the briar shall come up the myrtle-tree. P.

VER. 77. The lambs with wolves, etc.] VIRG. Ecl. iv. ver. 21.

Ipsae lacte domum referent distenta capellae
Ubera, nec magnos metuent armenta leones --
Occidet et ser pens, et fallax herba veneni,
Occidet. --
The goats shall bear to the fold their udders distended with milk: nor shall
the herds be afraid of the greatest lions. The serpent shall die, and the herb
that conceals poison shall die.

ISAIAH, Chapter xi. ver. 16, etc. The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the
leopard shall lie down with the kid, and the calf and the young lion and the
fatling together: and a little child shall lead them. -- And the lion shall eat
straw like the ox. And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and
the weaned child shall put his hand on the den of the cockatrice. P.

VER. 85. Rise, crowned with light, imperial Salem, rise!] The thoughts of
Isaiah, which compose the latter part of the poem, are wonderfully elevated,
and much above thos^ general exclamations of Virgil, which make the loftiest
part of his Pollio.

Magnus ab integro saeclorum nascitur ordo!
-- toto surget gens aurea mundo!
-- incipient magni procedere menses!
Aspice, venturo laetentur ut omnia saeclo! etc.
The reader needs only to turn to the passages of Isaiab, here cited. P.

REMARKS.
VER. 15. Ye Heavens! from high the dewy nectar pour,
And in soft silence shed the kindly shower!
His Original says, Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour
down righteousness; let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation, and
let righteousness spring up together. -- This is a very noble description of
divine grace shed abroad in the hearts of the faithful under the Gospel
dispensation. And the poet understood all its force as appears from the two
lines preceding these, -- The Ethereal Spirit, etc. The prophet describes this
under the image of rain, which chiefly fits the first age of the Gospel: The
poet, under the idea of dew, which extends it to every age. And as it was his
purpose it should be ^o understood, as appears from this expression of soft
silence, which agrees with the common, not the extraordinary effusions of the
Holy Spirit. The figurative term is wonderfully happy. He who would moralize
the ancient Mythology in the manner of Bac^n, must say, that by the poetical
nectar, is meant theological grace.

VER. 17. ancient fraud] i. e. the fraud of the Serpent.

VER. 39. He from thick films shall purge the visual ray.] The sense and
language show, that by visual ray, the poet meant the sight, or, as Milton
calls it, indeed, something less boldly, visual nerve. And no critic would
quarrel with the figure which calls the instrument of vision by the name of the
cause. But though the term be just, nay noble, and even sublime, yet the
expression of thick films is faulty, and he fell into it by a common neglect of
the following rule of good writing, That when a figurative word is used,
whatsoever is predicated of it ought not only to agree in terms to the thing to
which the figure is applied, but likewise to that from which the figure is
taken. Thick films agree only with the thing to which it is applied, namely, to
the sight or eve; and not to that from which it is taken, namely, a ray of
light coming to the eye. He should have said thick clouds, which would have
agreed with both. But these inaccuracies are not to be found in his later poems.


