AN EPISTLE FROM Mr. POPE, TO Dr. ARBUTHNOT.

Neque sermonibus Vulgi dederis te, nec in Praemiis humanis spem posueris rerum
tuarum: suis te oportet illecebris ipsa Virtus trahat ad verum decus. Quid de
te alii loquantur, ipsi videant, sed loquentur tamen. TULLY. LONDON: Printed by
J. Wright for LAWTON GILLIVER at Homer's Head in Fleetstreet, 1734.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS Paper is a Sort of Bill of Complaint, begun many years since, and drawn
up by snatches, as the several Occasions offered. I had no thoughts of
publishing it, till it pleased some Persons of Rank and Fortune [the Authors of
Verses to the Imitator of Horace, and of an Epistle to a Doctor of Divinity
from a Nobleman at Hampton Court,] to attack in a very extraordinary manner,
not only my Writings (of which being public the Public judge) but my Person,
Morals, and Family, whereof to those who know me not, a truer Information may
be requisite. Being divided between the Necessity to say something of Myself,
and my own Laziness to undertake so awkward a Task, I thought it the shortest
way to put the last hand to this Epistle. If it have any thing pleasing, it
will be That by which I am most desirous to please, the Truth and the
Sentiment; and if any thing offensive, it will be only to those I am least
sorry to offend, the Vicious or the Ungenerous.

Many will know their own Pictures in it, there being not a Circumstance but
what is true; but I have, for the most part spared their Names, and they may
escape being laughed at, if they please.

I would have some of them know, it was owing to the Request of the learned and
candid Friend to whom it is inscribed, that I make not as free use of theirs as
they have done of mine. However I shall have this Advantage, and Honor, on my
side, that whereas by their proceeding, any Abuse may be directed at any man,
no Injury can possibly be done by mine, since a Nameless Character can never be
found out, but by its Truth and Likeness.

AN EPISTLE TO Dr. ARBUTHNOT.
SHUT, shut the door, good John! fatigued I said,
Tie up the knocker, say I Am sick, I Am dead,
The Dog Star rages! nay it is past a doubt,
All Bedlam, or Parnassus, is let out:
Fire in their eye, and Papers in their hand,
They rave, recite, and madden round the land.
What Walls can guard me, or what Shades can hide?
They pierce my Thickets, through my Grot they glide,
By land, by water, they renew the charge,
They stop the Chariot, and they board the Barge.
No place is sacred, not the Church is free,
Even Sunday shines no Sabbath Day to me:
Then from the Mint walks forth the Man of Ryme,
Happy! to catch me, just at Dinnertime.
Is there a Parson, much be-mus'd in Beer,
A maudlin Poetess, a ryming Peer,
A Clerk, foredoom'd his Father's soul to cross,
Who pens a Stanza when he should engross?
Is there, who locked from Ink and Paper, scrawls
With desperate Charcoal round his darkened walls?
All fly to Twit'nam, and in humble strain
Apply to me, to keep them mad or vain.
Arthur, whose giddy Son neglects the Laws,
Imputes to me and my damned works the cause:
Poor Cornus sees his frantic Wife elope,
And curses Wit, and Poetry, and Pope.
Friend to my Life, (which did not you prolong,
The World had wanted many an idle Song)
What Drop or Nostrum can this Plague remove?
Or which must end me, a Fool's Wrath or Love?
A dire Dilemma! either way I Am sped,
If Foes, they write, if Friends, they read me dead.
Seized and tied down to judge, how wretched I!
Who cannot be silent, and who will not lie;
To laugh, were want of Goodness and of Grace,
And to be grave, exceeds all Power of Face.
I sit with sad Civility, I read
With honest anguish, and an aching head;
And drop at last, but in unwilling ears,
This saving counsel, "Keep your Piece nine years."
Nine years! cries he, who high in Drury Lane
Lulled by soft Zephyrs through the broken Pane,
Rymes e're he wakes, and prints before Term ends,
Obliged by hunger and Request of friends:
"The Piece you think is incorrect? why take it,
"I Am all submission, what you would have it, make it."
Three things another's modest wishes bound,
My Friendship, and a Prologue, and ten Pound.
Pitholeon sends to me: "You know his Grace,
"I want a Patron; ask him for a Place."
Pitholeon libelled me -- "but here is a Letter
"Informs you Sir, 'twas when he knew no better.
"Dare you refuse him? Curl invites to dine,
"He Will write a Journal, or he will turn Divine."
Bless me! a Packet. -- "'It Is a stranger sues,
"A Virgin Tragedy, an Orphan Muse."
If I dislike it, "Furies, death and rage!
If I approve, "Commend it to the Stage."
There (thank my Stars) my whole Commission ends,
The Play'rs and I are, luckily, no friends.
Fired that the House reject him, "'Sdeath I Will print it
"And shame the Fools -- your Interest, Sir, with Lintot."
Lintot, dull rogue! will think your price too much.
"Not Sir, if you revise it, and retouch."
All my demurrs but double his attacks,
At last he whispers "Do, and we go snacks."
Glad of a quarrel, strait I clap the door,
Sir, let me see your works and you no more.
It Is sung, when Midas' Ears began to spring,
( Midas, a sacred Person and a King)
His very Minister who spied them first,
(Some say his The Story is told by some of his Barber, but by Chaucer of his
Queen. See Wife of Bath's Tale in Dryden's Fables.
Queen) was forced to speak, or burst.
And is not mine, my Friend, a sorer case,
When every Coxcomb perks them in my face?
"Good friend forbear! you deal in dangerous things,
"I Would never name Queens, Ministers, or Kings;
"Keep close to Ears, and those let Asses prick,
"It Is nothing" -- Nothing? if they bite and kick?
Out with it, Dunciad! let the secret pass,
That Secret to each Fool, that he is an Ass:
The truth once told, (and wherefore should we lie?)
The Queen of Midas slept, and so may I.
You think this cruel? take it for a rule,
No creature smarts so little as a Fool.
Let Peals of Laughter, Codrus! round thee break,
Thou unconcerned can hear the mighty Crack.
Pit, Box and Gall'ry in convulsions hurled,
Thou stand'st unshook amidst a bursting World.
Who shames a Scribler? break one cobweb through,
He spins the slight, self-pleasing thread anew;
Destroy his Fib, or Sophistry; in vain,
The Creature's at his dirty work again;
Throned in the Center of his thin designs;
Proud of a vast Extent of flimzy lines.
Whom have I hurt? has Poet yet, or Peer,
Lost the arched eye-brow, or Parnassian sneer?
And has not C^lly still his Lord, and Whore?
His Butchers H^ley, his Free-masons M^r?
Does not one Table Bavius still admit?
Still to one Bishop Ph^ps seem a Wit?
Still Sapho -- "Hold! nay see you, you will offend:
"No Names -- be calm -- learn Prudence of a Friend:
"I too could write, and I am twice as tall,
"But Foes like these! -- One Flatt'rer's worse than all;
Of all mad Creatures, if the Learned are right,
It is the Slaver kills, and not the Bite.
A Fool quite angry is quite innocent;
Trust me, it is ten times worse when they repent.
One dedicates, in high Heroic prose,
And ridicules beyond a hundred foes;
One from all Grubstreet will my fame defend,
And, more abusive, calls himself my friend.
This prints my Letters, that expects a Bribe,
And others roar aloud, "Subscribe, subscribe.
There are, who to my Person pay their court,
I cough like Horace, and though lean, am short,
Ammon's great Son one shoulder had too high,
Such Ovid's nose, and "Sir! you have an Eye --
Go on, obliging Creatures, make me see
All that disgraced my Betters, met in me:
Say for my comfort, languishing in bed,
"Just so immortal Maro held his head:
And when I die, be sure you let me know
Great Homer died three thousand years ago.
Why did I write? what sin to me unknown
Dipped me in Ink, my Parent's, or my own?
As yet a Child, nor yet a Fool to Fame,
I lisp'd in Numbers, for the Numbers came.
I left no Calling for this idle trade,
No Duty broke, no Father dis-obey'd.
The Muse but served to ease some Friend, not Wife,
To help me through this long Disease, my Life,
To second, ARBURTHNOT! thy Art and Care,
And teach, the Being you preserved, to bear.
But why then publish? Granville the polite,
And knowing Walsh, would tell me I could write;
Well-natur'd Garth inflamed with early praise,
And Congreve loved, and Swift endured my Lays;
The Courtly Talbot, Summers, Sheffield read,
Even mitred Rochester would nod the head,
And St. John's self (great Dryden's friends before All these were Patrons or
Admirers of Mr. Dryden, though a scandalous Libel against him, entitled,
Dryden's Satyr to his Muse, has been printed in the Name of the Lord Summers, of
which he was wholly ignorant.
)
With open arms received one Poet more.
Happy my Studies, when by these approved!
Happier their Author, when by these beloved!
From these the world will judge of Men and Books,
Not from the Authors of secret and scandalous History.
Burnets, Oldmixons, and Cooks.
Soft were my Numbers, who could take offense
While pure Description held the place of Sense?
Like gentle Damon's was my flowery Theme,
A painted Mistress, or a purling Stream.
Yet then did Gildon draw his venal quill;
I wished the man a dinner, and sat still:
Yet then did Dennis rave in furious fret;
I never answered, I was not in debt:
If want provoked, or madness made them print,
I waged no war with Bedlam or the Mint.
Did some more sober Critics come abroad?
If wrong, I smiled; if right, I kissed the rod.
Pains, reading, study, are their just pretense,
And all they want is spirit, taste, and sense.
Comma's and points they set exactly right,
And 'twere a sin to rob them of their Mite.
Yet never one sprig of Laurel graced these ribalds,
From slashing B^ley down to pidling T^ds.
The Wight who reads not, and but scans and spells,
The Word-catcher that lives on syllables,
Such piecemeal Critics some regard may claim,
Preserved in Milton's or in Shakespeare's name.
Pretty! in Amber to observe the forms
Of hairs, or straws, or dirt, or grubs, or worms;
The things, we know, are neither rich nor rare,
But wonder how the Devil they got there?
Were others angry? I excused them too;
Well might they rage; I gave them but their due.
A man's true merit it is not hard to find,
But each man's secret standard in his mind,
That Casting-weight Pride adds to Emptiness,
This, who can gratify? for who can guess?
The Bard whom pilf'red Pastorals renown,
Who turns a Persian Tale for half a crown,
Just writes to make his barrenness appear,
And strains from hard-bound brains eight lines a year:
He, who still wanting though he lives on theft,
Steals much, spends little, yet has nothing left:
And he, who now to sense, now nonsense leaning,
Means not, but blunders round about a meaning:
And he, whose Fustian's so sublimely bad,
It is not Poetry, but Prose run mad:
All these, my modest Satire bid translate,
And owned, that nine such Poets made a Tate.
How did they fume, and stamp, and roar, and chafe?
How did they swear, not Addison was safe.
Peace to all such! but were there One whose fires
True Genius kindles, and fair Fame inspires,
Blessed with each Talent and each Art to please,
And born to write, converse, and live with ease:
Should such a man, too fond to rule alone,
Bear, like the Turk, no brother near the throne,
View him with scornful, yet with jealous eyes,
And hate for Arts that caused himself to rise;
Damn with faint praise, assent with civil leer,
And without sneering, teach the rest to sneer;
Willing to wound, and yet afraid to strike,
Just hint a fault, and hesitate dislike;
Alike reserved to blame, or to commend,
A timorous foe, and a suspicious friend,
Dreading even fools, by Flatterers besieged,
And so obliging that he never obliged;
Like Cato, give his little Senate laws,
And sit attentive to his own applause;
While Wits and Templers every sentence raise,
And wonder with a foolish face of praise.
Who but must laugh, if such a man there be?
Who would not weep, if Atticus were he!
What though my Name stood rubric on the walls?
Or plastered posts, with Claps in capitals?
Or smoking forth, a hundred Hawkers load,
On Wings of Winds came flying all abroad?
I sought no homage from the Race that write;
I kept, like Asian Monarchs, from their sight:
Poems I heeded (now be-rym'd so long)
No more than Thou, great GEORGE! a Birthday Song.
I never with Wits and Witlings past my days,
To spread about the Itch of Verse and Praise;
Nor like a Puppy daggled through the Town,
To fetch and carry Sing-song up and down;
Nor at Rehearsals sweat, and mouthed, and cried,
With Handkerchief and Orange at my side:
But sick of Fops, and Poetry, and Prate,
To Bufo left the whole Castalian State.
Proud, as Apollo on his forked hill,
Sat full-blown Bufo, puffed by every quill;
Fed with soft Dedication all day long,
Horace and he went hand in hand in song.
His Library, (where Busts of Poets dead
And a true Pindar stood without a head)
Received of Wits an undistinguished race,
Who first his Judgment asked, and then a Place:
Much they extolled the Pictures, much the Seat,
And flattered every day, and some days eat:
Till grown more frugal in his riper days,
He paid some Bards with Port, and some with Praise,
To some a dry Rehearsal was assigned,
And others (harder still) he paid in kind.
May some choice Patron bless each gray goose quill!
May every Bavius have his Bufo still!
So, when a Statesman wants a Day's defense,
Or Envy holds a whole Week's war with Sense,
Or simple Pride for Flattery makes demands;
May Dunce by Dunce be whistled off my hands!
Blessed be the Great! for those they take away,
And those they leave me -- For they left me GAY,
Left me to see neglected Genius bloom,
Neglected die! and tell it on his Tomb;
Of all thy blameless Life the sole Return
My Verse, and QUEENSB'RY weeping over thy Urn!
Give me on Thames's Banks, in honest Ease,
To see what Friends, or read what Books I please;
There let me live my own, and die so too,
"To live and die is all I have to do!"
Above a Patron, though I condescend
Sometimes to call a Minister my Friend:
I was not born for Courts or great Affairs,
I pay my Debts, believe, and go to Prayers,
Can sleep without a Poem in my head,
Nor know, if Dennis be alive or dead.
Why am I asked, what next shall see the light?
Heavens! was I born for nothing but to write?
Has Life no Joys for me? or (to be grave)
Have I no Friend to serve, no Soul to save?
"I found him close with Swift -- Indeed? no doubt
(Cries prating Balbus) "something will come out."
It Is all in vain, deny it as I will.
"No, such a Genius never can lie still,"
And then for mine obligingly mistakes
The first Lampoon Sir Will. or Bubo makes.
Poor guiltless I! and can I choose but smile,
When every Coxcomb knows me by my Style?
Cursed be the Verse, how well soever it flow,
That tends to make one worthy Man my foe,
Give Virtue scandal, Innocence a fear,
Or from the soft-ey'd Virgin steal a tear!
But he, who hurts a harmless neighbor's peace,
Insults fallen Worth, or Beauty in distress,
Who loves a Lie, lame slander helps about,
Who writes a Libel, or who copies out:
The Fop whose pride affects a Patron's name,
Yet absent, wounds an Author's honest fame;
Who can your Merit selfishly approve,
And show the Sense of it, without the Love;
Who has the Vanity to call you Friend,
Yet wants the Honor injured to defend;
Who tells whatever you think, whatever you say,
And, if he lies not, must at least betray:
Who to the Sea the Epistle to the Earl of Burlington.
Dean and silver Bell can swear,
And sees at Cannons what was never there:
Who reads but with a Lust to mis-apply,
Make Satire a Lampoon, and Fiction, Lie.
A Lash like mine no honest man shall dread,
But all such babbling blockheads in his stead.
Let Paris tremble -- "What? that Thing of silk,
" Paris, that mere white Curd of Ass's milk?
"Satire or Shame alas! can Paris feel?
"Who breaks a Butterfly upon a Wheel?"
Yet let me flap this Bug with gilded wings,
This painted Child of Dirt that stinks and stings;
Whose Buzz the Witty and the Fair annoys,
Yet Wit never tastes, and Beauty never enjoys,
So well-bred Spaniels civilly delight
In mumbling of the Game they dare not bite.
Eternal Smiles his Emptiness betray,
As shallow streams run dimpling all the way.
Whether in florid Impotence he speaks,
And, as the Prompter breathes, the Puppet squeaks;
Or at the Ear of In the fourth Book of Milton, the Devil is represented in
this Posture. It is but justice to own, that the Hint of Eve and the Serpent
was taken from the Verses on the Imitator of Horace.
Eve, familiar Toad,
Half Froth, half Venom, spits himself abroad,
In Puns, or Politics, or Tales, or Lies,
Or Spite, or Smut, or Rymes, or Blasphemies.
Did ever Smock-face act so vile a Part?
A trifling Head, and a corrupted Heart!
Eve's Tempter thus the Rabbis have expressed,
A Cherub's face, a Reptile all the rest;
Beauty that shocks you, Parts that none will trust,
Wit that can creep, and Pride that licks the dust.
Not Fortune's Worshipper, nor Fashion's Fool,
Nor Lucre's Madman, nor Ambition's Tool,
Nor proud, nor servile, be one Poet's praise
That, if he pleased, he pleased by manly ways;
That Flattery, even to Kings, he held a shame,
And thought a Lie in Verse or Prose the same:
In Fancy's Maze that wandering not too long,
He stooped to Truth, and moraliz'd his song:
That not for Fame, but Virtue's better end,
He stood the furious Foe, the timid Friend,
The damning Critic, half-approving Wit,
The Coxcomb hit, or fearing to be hit;
Laughed at the loss of Friends he never had,
The dull, the proud, the wicked, and the mad;
The Tales of Vengeance; Lies so often overthrown; Lies so often overthrown.] Such
as those in relation to Mr. A^, that Mr. P. writ his Character after his death,
etc. that he set his Name to Mr. Broom's Verses, that he received Subscriptions
for Shakespeare, etc. which though publicly disproved by the Testimonies prefixed
to the Dunciad, were nevertheless shamelesly repeated in the Libels, and even
in the Paper called, The Nobleman's Epistle.

The imputed Trash, The imputed Trash.] Profane Psalms, Court Poems, and many
Libellous Things in his Name, printed by Curl, etc.
the Dullness not his own;
The Morals blackened when the Writings escape;
The libel'd Person, and the pictured Shape;
The Abuse on all he loved, or loved him, spread, Abuse on all he loved, or
loved him spread.] Namely on the Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Burlington, Bishop
Atterbury, Dr. Swift, Mr. Gay, Dr. Arbuthnot, his Friends, his Parents, and his
very Nurse, aspersed in printed Papers.

A Friend in Exile, or a Father, dead;
The Whisper that to Greatness still too near,
Perhaps, yet vibrates on his SOVEREIGN'S Ear --
Welcome for thee, fair Virtue! all the past:
For thee, fair Virtue! welcome even the last!
"But why insult the Poor, affront the Great?"
A Knave's a Knave, to me, in every State,
Alike my scorn, if he succeed or fail,
Glencus at Court, or Japhet in a Jayl,
A hireling Scribler, or a hireling Peer,
Knight of the Post corrupt, or of the Shire,
If on a Pillory, or near a Throne,
He gain his Prince's Ear, or lose his own.
Yet soft by Nature, more a Dupe than Wit,
Sapho can tell you how this Man was bit:
This dreaded Sat'rist Dennis will confess
Foe to his Pride, but Friend to his Distress:
So humble, he has knocked at T^b^ld's door,
Has drank with C^r, nay has rym'd for M^r.
Full ten years slandered, Ten Years.] It was so long, before the Author of the
Dunciad published that Poem, till when, he never writ a word of the many
Scurrilities and Falsehoods concerning him.
did he once reply?
Three thousand Suns went down on Welsted's Lie: Welsted's Lie.] This Man had
the Impudence to tell in print, that Mr. P. had occasioned a Lady's death, and
to name a person he never heard of. He also published that he had libelled the
Duke of Chandos; with whom (it was added) that he had lived in familiarity, and
received from him a Present of five hundred pounds: The Falsehood of which is
known to his Grace, whom Mr. P. never had the honor to see but twice, and
never received any Present farther than the Subscription for Homer, from him,
or from Any Great Man whatsoever.

Budgel in a Weekly Pamphlet called the Be, bestowed much abuse on him, in the
imagination that he writ some things about the Last Will of Dr. Tindal, in the
Grubstreet Journal; a Paper wherein he never had the least Hand, Direction, or
Supervisal, nor the least knowledge of its Authors. He took no notice of so
frantic an Abuse; and expected that any man who knew himself Author of what he
was slandered for, would have justified him on that Article.



To please a Mistress, One aspersed his life;
He lashed him not, but let her be his Wife:
Let Budgel charge low Grubstreet on his quill,
And write whatever he pleased, except his Will;
Let the Two Curls of Town and Court, abuse
His Father, Mother, Body, Soul, and Muse. His Father, Mother, etc.] In some of
Curl's and other Pamphlets, Mr. Pope's Father was said to be a Mechanic, a
Hatter, a Farmer, nay a Bankrupt. But, what is stranger, a Nobleman (if such a
Reflection can be thought to come from a Nobleman) has dropped an Allusion to
this pitiful Untruth, in his Epistle to a Doctor of Divinity: And the following
Line, Hard as thy Heart, and as thy Birth Obscure,
had fallen from a like Courtly pen, in the Verses to the Imitator of Horace.
Mr. Pope's Father was of a Gentleman's Family in Oxfordshire, the Head of which
was the Earl of Down, whose sole Heiress married the Earl of Lindsey. -- His
Mother was the Daughter of William Turnor, Esquire; of York: She had three
Brothers, one of whom was killed, another died in the Service of King Charles,
the eldest following his Fortunes, and becoming a General Officer in Spain,
left her what Estate remained after the Sequestrations and Forfeitures of her
Family -- Mr. Pope died in 1717, aged 75; She in 1733, aged 93, a very few
Weeks after this Poem was finished.
.
Yet why? that Father held it for a rule
It was a Sin to call our Neighbor Fool,
That harmless Mother thought no Wife a Whore, --
Hear this! and spare his Family, James M *
Unspotted Names! and memorable long,
If there be Force in Virtue, or in Song.
Of gentle Blood (part shed in Honor's Cause,
While yet in Britain Honor had Applause)
Each Parent sprung -- "What Fortune, pray? -- Their own,
And better got than Bestia's from a Throne.
Born to no Pride, inheriting no Strife,
Nor marrying Discord in a Noble Wife,
Stranger to Civil and Religious Rage,
The good Man walked innoxious through his Age.
No Courts he saw, no Suits would ever try,
Nor dared an Oath, nor hazarded a Lie:
Un-learn'd, he knew no Schoolman's subtle Art,
No Language, but the Language of the Heart.
By Nature honest, by Experience wise,
Healthy by Temperance and by Exercise:
His Life, though long, to sickness past unknown,
His Death was instant, and without a groan.
Oh grant me thus to live, and thus to die!
Who sprung from Kings shall know less joy than I.
O Friend! may each Domestic Bliss be thine!
Be no unpleasing Melancholy mine:
Me, let the tender Office long engage
To rock the Cradle of reposing Age,
With lenient Arts extend a Mother's breath,
Make Languor smile, and smooth the Bed of Death,
Explore the Thought, explain the asking Eye,
And keep a while one Parent from the Sky!
On Cares like these if Length of days attend,
May Heaven, to bless those days, preserve my Friend,
Preserve him social, cheerful, and serene,
And just as rich as when he served a QUEEN!
Whether that Blessing be denied, or given,
Thus far was right, the rest belongs to Heaven.

