A FURTHER ACCOUNT Of the most Deplorable Condition OF Mr. EDMUND CURLL,
BOOKSELLER.

Price Three Pence.

A FURTHER ACCOUNT Of the most Deplorable Condition OF Mr. EDMUND CURLL,
BOOKSELLER. Since his being POISONED on the 28th of March.

To be published Weekly.

LONDON Printed, and Sold by all the Publishers, Mercuries, and Hawkers, within
the Bills of Mortality. 1716.

A FURTHER ACCOUNT Of the most Deplorable Condition Of Mr. EDMUND CURLL,
Bookseller.
THE Public is already acquainted with the Manner of Mr. Curll's Impoisonment,
by a faithful, though unpolite, Historian of Grubstreet. I am but the Continuer
of his History; yet I hope a due Distinction will be made, between an
undignify'd Scribler of a Sheet and half, and the Author of a Three-Penny
stitcht Book, like my self.

Wit (says Sir Richard Blackmore) proceeds from a Concurrence of regular and
exalted Ferments, and an Affluence of Animal Spirits rectified and refined to a
degree of Purity. On the contrary, when the igneous Particle rise with the
vital Liquor, they produce an Abstraction of the rational Part of the Soul,
which we commonly call Madness. The Verity of this Hypothesis, is justified by
the Symptoms with which the unfortunate Mr. Edmund Curll, Bookseller, has been
afflicted ever since his swallowing the Poison at the Swan Tavern in
Fleetstreet. For though the Neck of his Retort, which carries up the Animal
Spirits to the Head, is of an extraordinary Length, yet the said Animal Spirits
rise muddy, being contaminated with the inflammable Particles of this uncommon
Poison.

The Symptoms of his Departure from his usual Temper of Mind, were at first
only speaking civilly to his Customers, taking a Fancy to say his Prayers,
singeing a Pig with a new purchased Libel, and refusing Two and Nine Pence for
Sir R^ B^ 's Essays.

As the poor Man's Frenzy increased, he began to void his Excrements in his
Bed, read Rochester 's bawdy Poems to his Wife, gave Oldmixon a slap on the
Chops, and would have kissed Mr. Pemberton's A^ by Violence.

But at last he came to such a pass, that he would dine upon nothing but Copper
Plates, took a Clyster for a whipped Syllabub, and eat a Suppository for a
Raddish with Bread and Butter.

We leave it to every tender Wife to imagine how sorely all this afflicted poor
Mrs. Curll: At first she privately put a Bill into several Churches, desiring
the Prayers of the Congregation for a wretched Stationer distempered in Mind.
But when she was sadly convinced that his Misfortune was public to all the
World, writ the following Letter to her good Neighbor Mr. Lintott. A true Copy
of Mrs. Curll's Letter to Mr. Lintott.
Worthy Mr. Lintott,
YOU, and all the Neighbors know too well, the Frenzy with which my poor Man
is visited. I never perceived he was out of himself, till that melancholy Day
that he thought he was poisoned in a Glass of Sack; upon this, he took a
strange Fancy to run a Vomiting all over the House, and in the new washed
Dining Room. Alas! this is the greatest Adversity that ever befell my poor Man
since he lost one Testicle at School by the bite of a black Boar. Good Lord! if
he should die, where should I dispose of the Stock? unless Mr. Pemberton or you
would help a distressed Widow; for God knows he never published any Books that
lasted above a Week, so that if we wanted daily Books, we wanted daily Bread. I
can write no more, for I hear the Rap of Mr. Curll's Ivory headed Cane upon the
Counter. -- Pray recommend me to your Pastry Cook, who furnishes you yearly
with Tarts in exchange for your Papers, for Mr. Curll has disobliged ours since
his Fits came upon him; -- before that, we generally lived upon baked Meats. --
He is coming in, and I have but just time to put his Son out of the way for
fear of Mischief: So wishing you a merry Easter, I remain your

most humble Servant, C. Curll.
P. S. As to the Report of my poor Husband's stealing a Calf, it is really
groundless, for he always binds in Sheep.






But return we to Mr. Curll, who all Wednesday continued outragiously Mad. On
Thursday he had a lucid Interval, that enabled him to send a general Summons to
all his Authors. There was but one Porter who could perform this Office, to
whom he gave the following Bill of Directions where to find 'em. This Bill,
together with Mrs. Curll's Original Letter, lie at Mr. Lintott's Shop to be
perused by the Curious.

Instructions to a Porter how to find Mr. Curll's Authors.
AT a Tallow-chandlers in Petty France, half way under the blind Arch: Ask for
the Historian.

At the Bedsted and Bolster, a Music House in Morefields, two Translators in a
Bed together.

At the Hercules and Still in Vinegar-yard, a Schoolmaster with Carbuncles on
his Nose.

At a Blacksmiths Shop in the Friars, a Pindarick Writer in red Stockings.

In the Calendar Mill Room at Exeter Change, a Composer of Meditations.

At the Three Tobacco Pipes in Dog and Bitch Yard, one that has been a Parson,
he wears a blue Camblet Coat trimmed with black: my best Writer against revealed
Religion.

At Mr. Summers a Thief-catchers, in Lewkners Lane, the Man that wrote against
the Impiety of Mr. Rowe's Plays.

At the Farthing Pie House in Tooting Fields, the young Man who is writing my
new Pastorals.

At the Laundresses, at the Hole in the Wall in Cursitors Alley, up three Pair
of Stairs, the Author of my Church History -- if his Flux be over -- you may
also speak to the Gentleman who lies by him in the Flock Bed, my Index-maker.

The Cook's Wife in Buckingham Court; bid her bring along with her the Similes
that were lent her for her next new Play.

Call at Budge Row for the Gentleman you use to go to in the Cockloft; I have
taken away the Ladder, but his Landlady has it in keeping.

I don't much care if you ask at the Mint for the old Beetlebrow'd Critic, and
the purblind Poet at the Alley over against St. Andrews Holbourn. But this as
you have time.


All these Gentlemen appeared at the Hour appointed, in Mr. Curll's Dining
Room, two excepted; one of whom was the Gentleman in the Cock-loft, his
Landlady being out of the way, and the Gradus ad Parnassum taken down; the
other happened to be too closely watched by the Bailiffs.

They no sooner entered the Room, but all of them showed in their Behavior
some Suspicion of each other; some turning away their Heads with an Air of
Contempt; others squinting with a Leer that showed at once Fear and
Indignation, each with a haggard abstracted Mien, the lively Picture of Scorn,
Solitude, and short Commons. So when a Keeper feeds his hungry Charge, of
Vultures, Panthers, and of Lybian Leopards, each eyes his Fellow with a fiery
Glare: High hung, the bloody Liver tempts their Maw. Or as a Housewife stands
before her Pales, surrounded by her Geese; they fight, they hiss, they gaggle,
beat their Wings, and Down is scattered as the Winter's Snow, for a poor Grain
of Oat, or Tare, or Barley. Such Looks shot through the Room transverse, oblique,
direct; such was the stir and din, till Curll thus spoke, (but without rising
from his Close-stool.) ' Whores and Authors must be paid beforehand to put them
in good Humor; therefore here is half a Crown a piece for you to drink your
own Healths, and Confusion to Mr. Addison, and all other successful Writers.'

'Ah Gentlemen! What have I not done, what have I not suffered, rather than the
World should be deprived of your Lucubrations? I have taken involuntary Purges,
I have been vomited, three Times have I been can'd, once was I hunted, twice
was my Head broke by a Grenadier, twice was I tossed in a Blanket; I have had
Boxes on the Ear, Slaps on the Chops; I have been frighted, pumped, kicked,
slandered and beshitten. -- I hope, Gentlemen, you are all convinced that this
Author of Mr. Lintott's could mean nothing else but starving you by poisoning
me. It remains for us to consult the best and speediest Methods of Revenge.'



He had scarce done speaking, but the Historian proposed a History of his Life.
The Exeter Exchange Gentleman was for penning Articles of his Faith. Some
pretty smart Pindarick, (says the Red-Stocking Gentleman,) would effectually do
his Business. But the Index-maker said their was nothing like an Index to his
Homer.

After several Debates they came to the following Resolutions. Resolved, That
every Member of this Society, according to his several Abilities, shall
contribute some way or other to the Defamation of Mr. Pope. Resolved, That
toward the Libelling of the said Mr. Pope, there be a Sum employed not
exceeding Six Pounds Sixteen Shillings and Nine Pence (not including
Advertisements.) Resolved, That Mr. D^ make an Affidevit before Mr. Justice
Tully, that in Mr. Pope's Homer, there are several Passages contrary to the
established Rules of OUR Sublime. Resolved, That he has on Purpose in several
Passages perverted the true ancient Heathen Sense of Homer, for the more
effectual Propagation of the Popish Religion. Resolved, That the Printing of
Homer's Battles at this Juncture, has been the Occasion of all the Disturbances
of this Kingdom. Ordered, That Mr. Barnivelt be invited to be a Member of this
Society, in order to make further Discoveries. Resolved, That a number of
effective Errata's be raised out of Mr. Pope's Homer (not exceeding 1746.) and
that every Gentleman, who shall send in one Error, for his Encouragement shall
have the whole Works of this Society Gratis. Resolved, That a Sum not
exceeding Ten Shillings and Sixpence be distributed among the Members of this
Society for Coffee and Tobacco, in order to enable them the more effectually to
defame him in Coffee-Houses. Resolved, That toward the further lessening the
Character of the said Mr. Pope, some Persons be deputed to abuse him at Ladies
Tea Tables, and that in Consideration our Authors are not well dressed enough,
Mr. C^y be deputed for that Service. Resolved, That a Ballad be made against
Mr. Pope, and that Mr. Oldmixon, Mr. Gildon and Mrs. Centlivre do prepare and
bring in the same. Resolved, That above all, some effectual Ways and Means be
found to increase the Joint Stock of the Reputation of this Society, which at
present is exceedingly low, and to give their Works the greater Currency;
whether by raising the Denomination of the said Works by counterfeit Title
Pages, or mixing a greater Quantity of the fine Metal of other Authors, with
the Alloy of this Society. Resolved, That no Member of this Society for the
future mix Stout in his Ale in a Morning, and that Mr. B. remove from the
Hercules and Still. Resolved, That all our Members, (except the Cook's Wife) be
provided with a sufficient Quantity of the vivifying Drops, Or Byfield's Sal
Volatile. Resolved, That Sir R. B. be appointed to endue this Society with a
large Quantity of regular and exalted Ferments, in order to enliven their cold
Sentiments (being his true Receipt to make Wits)


These Resolutions being taken, the Assembly was ready to break up, but they
took so near apart in Mr. Curll's Afflictions, that none of them could leave
him without giving some Advice to re-instate him in his Health.

Mr. Gildon was of Opinion, That in order to drive a Pope out of his Belly, he
should get the Mummy of some deceased Moderator of the General Assembly in
Scotland, to be taken inwardly as an effectual Antidote against Antichrist; but
Mr. Oldmixon did conceive, that the Liver of the Person who administered the
Poison, boiled in Broth, would be a more certain Cure.

While the Company were expecting the Thanks of Mr. Curll, for these
Demonstrations of their Zeal, a whole Pile of Essays on a sudden fell on his
Head; the Shock of which in an Instant brought back his Dilirium. He
immediately rose up, over-turn'd the Close-stool, and beshit the Essays (which
may probably occasion a second Edition) then without putting up his Breeches,
in a most furious Tone, he thus broke out to his Books, which his distempered
Imagination represented to him as alive, coming down from their Shelves,
fluttering their Leaves, and flapping their Covers at him.

Now G^d damn all Folio's, Quarto's, Octavo's and Duodecimo's! ungrateful
Varlets that you are, who have so long taken up my House without paying for
your Lodging? -- Are you not the beggarly Brood of fumbling Journey-men; born
in Garrets, among Lice and Cobwebs, nursed upon Gray Peace, Bullocks Liver, and
Porter's Ale? -- Was not the first Light you saw, the Farthing Candle I paid
for? Did you not come before your Time into dirty Sheets of brown Paper? -- And
have not I clothed you in double Royal, lodged you handsomely on decent
Shelves, laced your Backs with Gold, equipt you with splendid Titles, and sent
you into the World with the Names of Persons of Quality? Must I be always
plagued with you? -- Why flutter ye your Leaves, and flap your Covers at me?
Damn ye all, ye Wolves in Sheeps Clothing; Rags ye were, and to Rags ye shall
return. Why hold you forth your Texts to me, ye paltry Sermons? Why cry ye --
at every Word to me, ye bawdy Poems? -- To my Shop at Tunbridge ye shall go, by
G^ and thence be drawn like the rest of your Predecessors, bit by bit, to the
Passage-House: For in this present Emotion of my Bowels, how do I compassionate
those who have great need, and nothing to wipe their Breech with?

Having said this, and at the same Time recollecting that his own was yet
unwiped, he abated of his Fury, and with great Gravity, applied to that
Function the unfinished Sheets of the Conduct of the E^ of N^m.

FINIS.

