CURSORY CRITICISMS ON THE EDITION OF SHAKSPEARE PUBLISHED BY EDMOND MALONE.

A FAULCON, TOWERING IN HER PRIDE OF PLACE,
WAS BY A MOUSING OWL HAWK'D AT AND KILLED.
MACBETH. LONDON: PRINTED FOR HOOKHAM AND CARPENTER, NEW AND OLD BOND-STREET.

M DCC XCII.

TO THE MONTHLY AND CRITICAL REVIEWERS.
GENTLEMEN,
I PREFIX this address in order to induce you, before you pass sentence on the
following pages, to read them through: "Strike, but hear!" To enable you to do
this I have desired my publishers to send each of you a copy; for, though you
may have Jack the Giant-killers coat, it has never been suspected that you
possess Fortunatus's purse; and the title of a book, read in a newspaper, or
through a shop-window, may not be always a sufficient ground for unqualifyed
condemnation and virulent abuse.

On second thoughts, however, I believe I might as well have saved them the
trouble; since you will, most probably, allow Mr. Malone the grateful privilege
of reviewing it himself: the virtue and honor of this literary hero frequently
condescending to bring down an unsuspicious enemy from the masked battery of a
Review. And yet, I see, one of your "gangs" These societies of gentlemen (as
they modestly entitle themselves) are, with equal justice and ability,
characterised by Dr. Brown as -- "two notorious gangs of monthly and critical
book-thieves, hackney'd in the ways of wickedness, who, in the rage of hunger
and malice, first plunder, and then abuse, maim, or murder, every honest author
who is possessed of ought worth their carrying off; yet skulking among other
vermin in cellars and garrets, keep their persons tolerably out of sight, and
thus escape the hands of literary justice." ESTIMATE OF THE MANNERS AND
PRINCIPLES OF THE TIMES, vol. II. p. 75.
has the effrontery to boast that it -- Nothing extenuates,
Nor sets down aught in malice.
That you "nothing extenuate," unless it be in favor of yourselves or your
employers, I can easily believe; but the next line certainly requires, if not a
different reading, an opposite construction. It suits your purpose, no doubt,
to delude the unwary by false colors; as the devil, when he commences
innkeeper, hangs out an angel for his sign. The real meaning, however, is that
you -- set down ALL in malice. Shakspears morality, in the hands of a Reviewer,
is to be read backward, like a witch's prayer.

Accustomed as you are to every species of misrepresentation, you must by no
means do me the injustice to say that I treat you with contempt. For, though a
literary prostitute be, in reality, a most despicable character, I cannot but
consider you in, if not a far superior, at least, a very different light; -- as
two formidable, in short, and mischievous gangs of nocturnal banditti, or
invisible footpads, equally cowardly and malignant, who attack when there can
be no defense, and assassinate or destroy where you cannot plunder. And yet,
surprising as it is, while offenders of comparative insignificance are almost
every day exposed on pillories, or perishing in dungeons, you have the luck to
escape the resentment of the injured, and the vengeance of the law! Upon my
word, gentlemen, I admire your good fortune, though I cannot persuade myself
you deserve it; and, indeed, as guilt is only hardened by impunity, the sooner,
I think, you are brought to justice the better. Nor is this event, perhaps, at
so great a distance as you may imagine: even the Monster, you know, was caught
at last; and, though you possibly conceive this brother assassin to have been
as inferior to you in cunning, as he certainly was in criminality, it will not
be amiss to let his fate be a warning to you.

I shall make no apology for having taken up so much of your time, which would,
most probably, have been worse employed. You may now proceed to gratify your
malice, and take your revenge; and (as I know you are fond of Scripture
quotations) the Lord reward you according to your works!

I am, Gentlemen, Your humble servant.

PREFACE.
MR. MALONE, in the year 1780, when publishing a Supplement to Shakspeare of
plays which he never wrote, modestly remarked that by a diligent collation of
all the old copies thitherto discovered, and the judicious restoration of
ancient readings, the text of this author seemed then finally settled. Since
that period, however, he has been laboring "with unceasing solicitude," for
the space of "eight years" to convince the public that he had, if not directly
asserted the thing which was not, at least gone a little further than was
consistent with the exact state of the case. For, if the text had been already
diligently collated with all the old copies, why should he make such a parade
of having collated it himself? If it had not been so collated, why should he
say it had? This fact is therefore manifest, upon Mr. Malones own evidence, that
the text of Shakspeare had never been collated, whether diligently or not, with
all or any of the old copies, by any person before Mr. Malone. To which one may
add that even this great critics collation has not been either so diligent or
so successful as he would induce us to believe; Of this the following
instances, occasionally noticed, in the two first vols. may serve as the
specimen of a proof: Vol. I. p. 80. "If thou be pleased" -- Both the folios
read -- you. Vol. I. p. 140. "For love is still more precious in itself." --
The old editt. agree in reading -- most. Vol. I. p. 154. " Speed. Item, she can
sew. " Lance. That Is as much as to say, can she so." Both the folios read sow,
which is manifestly requisite. Probably, however, the editor may suppose sew
and so to have the same pronunciation. Vol. I. p. 155. "And that I cannot
help." In the old editions -- cannot I. Vol. I. p. 174. "As easily as I do tear
this paper." Both folios read -- his. Vol. II. p. 70. "But grace being the soul
of your complexion should keep the body of it ever fair." -- In the folios --
shall. Vol. II. p. 71. "Let me hear you speak further." Both editions --
farther; a word entirely different from further, though too frequently
confounded with it by ignorant persons: the one being the comparative of forth;
the other a corruption of farer. Vol. II. p. 143. "In what safe place you have
disposed my money." The old editions read -- bestowed Vol. II. p. 151. "If it
be, sir, pray eat none of it." In the folio -- I pray. Vol. II. p. 157. "Ay let
none enter" -- The old copies -- Ay, and let. Vol. II. p. 190. "And much
different from the man he was," The folios read: "And much much different;" --
the additional syllable being necessary to the meter, which the editor could
not perceive. Vol. II. p. Ibi. "And therefore came it that the man was mad." In
the old copies -- "And thereof came it." Vol. II. p. 477. "Through the forest
have I gone, "But Athenian found I none." All the old editions read -- find,
which is not only more elegant but more grammatical.


There is not reason to believe that each of the remaining volumes would not
have contributed an equal number of these damning proofs; but in fact the
search required too large a portion of both time and patience.


and also that it would have been much better for the said text if he had never
collated it at all. By a judicious restoration of ancient readings, Mr. Malone
seems to understand the replacing of all the gross and palpable blunders of the
first folio, from which it has been the labor of such critics as Row, Pope,
Theobald, Warburton, and Hanmer to purge the text. Mr. Malone is a critic of a
very different description.

I have thought proper, in the following pages, to make a few observations on
some of Mr. Malones notes. Now Mr. Malone will take this exceedingly ill; for
Mr. Malone has a very high opinion of himself, and a very mean one of every
body else. But I confess I do not seek to please Mr. Malone: I wish to rescue
the language and sense of an admirable author from the barbarism and corruption
they have acquired in passing through the hands of this incompetent and
unworthy editor. In a word, I mean to convict and not to convince him.

The total want of ear and judgment, under which Mr. Malone will be found to
labor, is undoubtedly a natural defect, for which he would be an object rather
of pity than of reprehension, if he had not forced himself into an employment
for which ear and judgment were essential, and nature, of course, in depriving
him of those indispensable requisites, had utterly disqualifyed him. Want of
courage, in a common man, may be considered as mere weakness of nerves; in a
commander, it is punished with death.

But it is not the want of ear and judgment only of which I have to accuse Mr.
Malone: he stands charged with diverse other high crimes and misdemeanors
against the divine majesty of our sovereign lord of the drama; with deforming
his text, and degrading his margin, by intentional corruption, flagrant
misrepresentation, malignant hypercriticism, and unexampled scurrility. These
charges shall be proved -- not, as Mr. Malone proves things, by groundless
opinion and confident assertion, but -- by fact, argument, and demonstration.
How say thou, culprit? Guilty or not guilty?

Whoever may think fit to censure the language of these "criticisms," Mr.
Malone has no such right; having himself rifled the blooming beds of
Billings-gate to grace his commentaries with the choicest rhetorical flowers.
He seldom introduces the author of the Remarks, etc. without a compliment on
his profound ignorance or crude notions, the feebleness of his attempts at
jocularity, the slenderness of his criticism, and the like; or the favorite
epithet of a shallow or half-informed remarker. "And thus the whirligig of time
brings in his revenges."
It is surely lawful to return an enemy the shot of his own poisoned arrows:
and, as for the rest, whatever respect may be due to the errors of genius, the
blunders of ignorance and presumption deserve no quarter.

* Since these sheets were printed off, Mr. Malone has issued proposals for a
new and splendid edition of the plays and poems of this admired author, IN
FIFTEEN VOLUMES ROYAL QUARTO!!! The reciprocal good opinion which the public
and Mr. Malone appear to entertain of each other does both parties infinite
honor; the one from his singular confidence, the other from its refined taste.
Having sufficiently, and, I trust, satisfactorily, proved how peculiarly
qualifyed this ingenious gentleman is for an editor of our great poet, I have
only to add my sincerest wishes that completion of so magnificent a work may
happen in time to afford me another equally favorable opportunity of giving my
humble testimony to his very extraordinary merit.

O! while, along the stream of time, thy name
Expanded flies, and gathers all its fame,
Say, shall my little bark attendant sail,
Pursue the triumph, and partake the gale?
CURSORY CRITICISMS, etc.
VOL. I.
PART I.
PREFACE. PP. xix. xxi. etc.
THERE cannot well be a more flagrant proof of disingenuity in the support of a
particular opinion than is here manifested by the editor in his treatment of
the second folio, in order to substantiate his position "that the editor of
that book was entirely ignorant of our poet phraseology and meter; and that
various alterations were made by him, in consequence of that ignorance, which
render his edition of no value whatever." Many of the instances adduced in
support of this assertion are mere self-evident errors of the press, the
accidental omission or insertion of a single word, or the inadvertent
transposition of a couple of letters; One passage of this kind is very
remarkable. The first folio reading.

Is straightway calm and boarded with a pirate

The editor of the second edition, or some one for him, had added the d; and
the printer made it claimed. So where, instead of Car^at, in the first folio,
the second has Raccat; and instead of vigilance, viligance, we are to impute
the compositors carelessness to ignorance or intentional corruption.


faults to which every copy is equally subject; and consequently prove that
editors ignorance much less than his accusers malice; which is the more
remarkable as he has actually availed himself of a very considerable number of
the corrections of the identical edition which he thus anxiously labors to
depreciate as a sink of ignorance and corruption. It must be evident, that by
this partial mode of proceeding, the same charge might be brought home not only
to the first folio, but to almost any edition of any author. A person who had
only truth and justice in view would have exhibited a faithful statement, a
fair debtor and creditor account of the merits and defects of the two editions.
But this method, Mr. Malone is conscious, so far from answering his purpose,
would have completely disproved and give the lie direct to his accusation;
since, in fact, for one instance of an alteration for the worse it will be easy
to produce ten instances of alterations for the better, and such, at the same
time, as not only no ignorant or capricious person, but not even a man of sense
and sagacity would have hit upon, without the assistance of manuscript
corrections or personal information: and after all, it is not in the least
improbable that both editions were printed by one and the same person, there
being only nine years difference in their dates, and the one, whether
intentionally or otherwise, just as inaccurate as the other. Both editors, at
least, if two there were, were Shakspeares contemporaries; probably his
acquaintance; possibly his friends; and, in all events, equally familiar with
the language of his time and his peculiar phraseology. But, leaving Mr. Malones
partiality and ingratitude out of the question, I am by no means disposed to
admit his judgment as to any ones ignorance of Shakspeares phraseology and
meter: in neither of which, I believe, we shall find him a proficient. Some of
these identical instances prove the direct reverse of what they are brought to
do, and convict the prosecutor of both ignorance and malignity.

I. "His[ i. e. the second editors] ignorance of Shakspeares phraseology"
consists in printing --

"I can go no further," instead of "I can not go no further;"

" I appointed him," instead of " I am appointed him," the syllable having
slipped out in the press:

"The way to study death," instead of "the way to dusty death;" a mere
accidental transposition of two letters; which is constantly happening. The
following is of more consequence.

"The seventh [fifth] scene of the fourth act of this play [Antony and
Cleopatra] concludes with these words: -- "Dispatch, -- Enobarbus!" Anthony,
who, is the speaker, desires his attendant Eros to dispatch, and then
pronounces the name Enobarbus, who had recently deserted him, and whose loss he
here laments. But there being no person in the scene but Eros, and the point
being inadvertently omitted after the word dispatch, the editor of the second
folio supposed that Enobarbus must have been an error of the press, and
therefore reads; "Dispatch, Eros."

Such is Mr. Malones account of the matter, in which it is only necessary to
supply a small omission of the very accurate writer, viz. that the line, of
which the two words in question are part, is intended for meter, of which he is
too good a judge for the omission to have been designed. This intention,
however, would be defeated by the word Enobarbus; unless we are to accent it
thus: -- my fortunes have
Corrupted honest men. Dispatch. -- Eno^ba^rbu^s?
Antony is continually repeating the name of Eros; he does it no less than five
times in the preceding scene, and once before in this. The manuscript, it is
probable, had, in this place, only an E. of which the original printer
improperly made Enobarbus: this mistake must have been some how or other made
known to the editor of the second folio, most likely by a MS. correction in the
copy he printed from; he has therefore rightly corrected the word, but, at the
same time, has neglected to observe the transposition which had been made by
his predecessor (supposing the printer of each copy two different persons).
Take the line, therefore, as Shakspeare gave it, and let us acknowledge our
obligation to the second folio, for so valuable an alteration: Corrupted honest
men. -- Eros! dispatch. If he had meant that Anthony should apostrophise his
absent officer, he would have given it thus: Corrupted honest men. -- O
Enobarbus! The editor of the second folio was therefore right in supposing, if
indeed he was not sure, "that Enobarbus must have been an error of the press."

"In K. Henry VIII. are these lines " -- If we did think
"His contemplation were above the earth, -- "
Not understanding this phraseology, and supposing that were must require a
noun in the plural number, he reads: " -- If we did think
His contemplations were above the earth, etc."


Now, one would be glad to know where there is a single person to be found,
setting aside this petulant dogmatist, who ever heard of such a phraseology, or
who does not know "that were must require a noun in the plural number."

It would be well if charges of no better foundation or greater strength could
be brought against the ignorance of M. Malone.

II. "Let us now examine how far he was acquainted with the meter of these
plays." Ay marry, now for it; this is a subject upon which we are quite at home.

"In the Winter's Tale, we find, --
"What wheels? racks? fires? what flaying? boiling?
"In leads, or oils?" --
"Not knowing that fires was used as a dissyllable he added the word burning at
the end of the line."

He did so; and it will be evident to every one who can read that the addition
was absolutely necessary, in point of quantity, to the perfection of the line.
Mr. Malone can not read, and is totally ignorant of the consequences of his own
absurd ideas; he could never else have thought such a line as the following
consistent with the laws of meter: "What wheels? racks? fi-ers? what flaying?
boiling? Thus, however, he insists that Shakspeare intended us to read --
swor-en, cha-rums, instead of sworn, charms; su-ar, for sure, etc. etc.
converting one syllable into two, two into three or four and so on.

Instead of "And so to arms, victorious noble father," with the second folio,
we are to read "And so to a-rums, vic-to-ri^-ous father," because noble, or
some other word of equal quantity, has been omited by the printer of the first.

Instead of " But prove it, Henry, and thou shall be king." As given by the
editor of the second folio, "not knowing Henry to be used as a trisyllable," we
are to read: "Prove it He-ne^-ry, and shall be king."

Instead of "Pours into captains wounds! ha! banishment. pours being a
dissyllable, we are to adopt the following harmonious line: " Po-u^rs in- to^
cap-ta^ins wounds! banishment.

Instead of She Is tickled now, her fume can need no spurs. he thinks it more in
the authors manner to read: "She Is tickcle^d now; he^r fume needs no spurs,"

Instead of "The body of the city, country, court:"
"The body of ci-ty, coun-te^-ry, court."


And Instead of " Burn hotter than my faith. O but dear sir.
" Bu-u^rn hot-te^r than my^ faith. O but sir."


"The editor, indeed" he says, "was even ignorant of the author's manner of
accenting words, for in the Tempest, where we find, " -- Spirits, which by mine
art
"I have from their confines called to enact
"My present fancies," --
he exhibits the second line thus: "I have from all their confines called to
enact." It is somewhat lucky, however, for the editor of the second folio, that
we are able to produce in his defense no less decisive a testimony than that of
Shakspeare himself. The word in question occurs in Julius Caesar: "And Caesar's
spirit, ranging for revenge,
"Shall, on these confines, with a monarch's voice,
"Cry havoc, and let slip the dogs of war."


The reader will now judge for himself which of these two editors, the
prosecutor or defendant, is most ignorant of his authors "phraseology, meter,"
and "manner of accenting words."

"Had he consulted the original quarto," says M. Malone, "he would have found
that the poet wrote" -- so and so. Well, but how if he could not get, or never
heard of the original quarto? how then? Had he not, in common with every other
editor, the right of supplying imperfections or correcting mistakes, according
to the best of his judgment? It is no imputation upon the sagacity of Dr.
Thirlby or sir Thomas Hammer that they have suggested readings, which, however
plausible, are disproved by the more recent discovery of the old quartos: all
of which have not been yet seen, even by Mr. Malone; who has, at the same time,
been indebted to chance or favor for many of the others; for which he has not,
on every occasion, made the most grateful or liberal return.

I shall now proceed to make the editor of the second folio some amends for the
injustice, malevolence, and personal abuse of his Hibernian adversary, by
displaying a few instances not only of his actual superiority to his
predecessor (if, in fact, either edition had any other editor than the
compositor of the press), but also where that superiority is admitted by Mr.
Malones own adoption. The latter case is distinguished by an asterisk. It was
once my intention to have given, what Mr. Malone ought to have done, a fair and
faithful collation of the various readings of the two editions; but the space
and press-work required even by the following specimen and the necessity I
should have thought myself under of going through them a second time, which no
one needs to be told is a word of time and patience, will be a sufficient
apology for not having carried it into effect at present. However, as Mr.
Malone has preserved all the errors of the second folio, and I shall exhibit a
considerable number, at least, of its emendations, the reader will, between us,
have a tolerably complete view of the controversy. The first reading is that of
the folio 1623, the other that of the folio 1632.

TEMPEST.
I Will show thee every fertile inch of the island.
I Will show thee every fertile inch of the i will.


-- who to advance and who To trash for overtopping.
-- whom to advance and whom To trash for overtopping.


If I should say I saw such islands.
If I should say I saw such islanders. *


Earths increase, foison plenty.
Earths increase, and foison plenty.


You brother mine that entertain ambition.
You brother mine that entertained ambition.


TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA.
You conclude then that may master is a shepherd, and I sheep.
You conclude then that my master is a shepherd, and I a sheep. *


You have cestern'd me.
You have testern'd me. *


I see you have a months mind to them.
I see you have a months mind to them.


With Valentinus in the emperors court.
With Valentino in the emperors court.


If thou will go to the alehouse.
If thou will go to the alehouse, so, *


And instances of infinite of love.
And instances as infinite of love. *


That they should harbor where their lord should be.
That they should harbor where their lord would be.


Who would thou strike.
Whom would thou strike. *


Who Silvia?
Whom Silvia? *


Therefore know thee for this I entertain thee.
Therefore know thou for this I entertain thee. *


It seems you loved not her not leave her token.
It seems you loved not her to leave her token.


Which of you saw Eglamour of late.
Which of you saw sir Eglamour of late.*


For such is a friend now, treacherous man.
For such is a friend now thou treacherous man.


MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR.
Hold sirrah, bear these letters tightly.
Hold sirrah, bear these letters rightly. Thus also the old quarto. Tightly,
however, being stark nonsense, is judiciously preferred by Mr. Malone.



We cannot misuse enough.
We cannot misuse him enough.*


Let him strike the old woman.
Let him not strike the old woman.*


MEASURE FOR MEASURE.
Where youth and cost witless bravery keeps.
Where youth and cost and witless bravery keeps.*


More reasons in this action.
More reasons for this action.


May call it again. Well believe this.
May call it back again. Well, believe this.


Than the soft myrtle, but man proud man.
Than the soft myrtle, O but man, proud man. This, says Malone, "like all the
other emendations of that copy, is the worst and most improbable that could
have been chosen." Ipse dixit! He proposes -- "but man, weak, proud man."



Bring them to speak where I may be concealed.
Bring them to speak where I may be concealed.
Yet near them.
The prenzie Angelo.
The princely Angelo.*


In prenzie guards.
In princely guards.*


That age ache perjury and imprisonment.
That age ache penury and imprisonment.*


Was affianced to her oath.
Was affianced to her by oath.*


From our faults as faults from seeming free.
Free from our faults, as faults from seeming free.


First let her show your face.
First let her show her face.*


Although by confutation they are ours.
Although by confiscation they are ours.* Confutation, however, he thinks, "may
be right, by his being confuted." If that is the case Mr. Malone himself may be
right.



COMEDY OF ERRORS.
And by me had not our hap been bad.
And by me too had not our hap been bad.*


A mean woman was delivered.
A poor mean woman was delivered.*


Which being violently born up.
Which being violently born upon.*


Gave healthful welcome to their shipwrecked guests.
Gave helpful welcome to their shipwrecked guests.*


What have befallen of them and they till now.
What has befallen of them and thee till now.*


That his attendant ( so his case was like).
That his attendant ( for his case was like).*


Look when I serve him so he takes it.
Look when I serve him so he takes it ill. This word, he says, which the rhyme
seems to countenance, was furnished, etc. Q. If the rhyme does not absolutely
require it, or he can find another to supply its place.



Would that a love he would detain.
Would that alone he would detain.*


Here is no time for all things.
There is no time for all things.*


In no time to recover hair lost by nature.
No time to recover hair lost by nature.*


We talk with goblins owls and sprites.
We talk with goblins owls and elves [elvish] sprites.*


I Will meet you at that place some hour hence.
I Will meet you at the place some hour sir hence.


Ill deeds is doubled with an evil word.
Ill deeds are doubled with an evil word.


To drown me in thy sister flood of tears.
To drown me in thy sisters flood of tears.


And as a bud I Will take thee and there lie.
And as a bed I Will take thee and there lie.*


Making war against her heir.
Making war against her hair.*


And then, sir, she bears away our fraughtage, sir.
Then, sir, she bears away our fraughtage, sir.


Oh his hearts meteors tilting in his face.
Of his hearts meteors tilting in his face.


Thus he, unknown to me, should be in debt.
That he unknown to me should be in debt.


Master, if do, expect spoon meat.
Master, if you do, expect spoon meat.*


LOVES LABOR LOST.
Well fitted in arts, glorious in arms.
Well fitted in the arts, glorious in arms.*


Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue, groan.
Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue and groan.


The prayful princess --
The praiseful princess.*


With men like men, of inconstancy.
With men like men, of strange inconstancy.


It mourns that painting usurping hair.
It mourns that painting and usurping hair.


And shape his service wholly to my device.
And shape his service wholly to my behests.* "One of the very few corrections
of any value to be found in that copy." MALONE.



As gravitys revolt to wantons be.
As gravitys revolt to wantonness.*


But, while it is spoke, each turn away his face.
But while it is spoke each turn away her face.*


The rest will ever come in if he be out.
The rest will never come in if he be out.


They were all in lamentable cases.
O they were all in lamentable cases.


This jest is dry to me. -- Gentle sweet.
This jest is dry to me. -- fair, gentle sweet.


MIDSUMMER NIGHTS DREAM.
This man has bewitched the bosom of my child.
This has bewitched the bosom of my child.*


Unto his lordship whose unwish'd yoke.
Unto his lordship to whose unwish'd yoke.


For I am sick when I do look on you.
For I am sick when I do look on thee.*


Transparent Helena, Nature shows art.
Transparent Helena, Nature here shows art.


MERCHANT OF VENICE.
If a Christian do not play the knave and get thee.
If a Christian did not play the knave and get thee.*


So begone, you are sped.
So begone sir, you are sped.*


There is no voice so simple.
There is no vice so simple.*


More rich than only to stand high in your account.
More rich than to stand high in your account.


And never a true one. In such a night.
And never a true one. And in such a night.


AS YOU LIKE IT.
After my flight. Now go in we content.
After my flight. Now go we in content.*


To that which had too must.
To that which had too much.*


Know you not master to seem kind of men
Know you not master to some kind of men.*


Wearing thy hearer in thy mistress praise
Wearying thy hearer in thy mistress praise.*


-- searching of they would.
-- searching of they [thy] wound.*


And I remember the kissing of her batler.
And I remember the kissing of her batlet.


Good even to your friend.
Good even to you friend.*


Thou art right welcome as thy masters is.
Thou art right welcome as thy master is.*


Have more cause to hate him than to love him.
I have more cause, etc.


Let me better acquainted with thee.
Let me be better acquainted with thee.*


In which by often rumination.
In which my often rumination.*


Like a ripe sister: the woman low.
Like a ripe sister: but the woman low.


My gentle Phebe did bid me give you this. So Malone. Phebe must therefore be a
monosyllable.

My gentle Phebe bid me give you this.


TAMING OF THE SHREW.
Were she is as rough.
Were she as rough.*


Of all thy suitors here I charge tell.
Of all thy suitors here I charge thee tell.*


No such sir, as you, if me you mean.
No such jade sir, as you, if me you mean.*


Much more a shrew of impatient humor.
Much more a shrew of thy impatient humor.*


As before imparted to your worship.
As I before imparted to your worship.*


As much news as will thou.
As much news as thou will.*


I fear it is too choleric a meat.
I fear it is too phlegmatic a meat. It is a neats foot, which cannot be
thought to engender choler. Besides, the word choleric, which Malone prefers,
occurs three lines lower.



Then at my lodging, an it like you.
Then at my lodging, an it like you, sir.


I cannot tell, expect they are busied in a counterfeit assurance.
I cannot tell, expect they are busied in a counterfeit assurance.


He will make the man mad to make the woman of him.
He will make the man mad to make a woman of him.*


Whither away or whither is thy abode.
Whither away or where is thy abode.*


Did thou never see thy mistress father?
Did thou never see thy masters father?*


Well, I say no: and therefore, sir, assurance.
Well, I say no: and therefore for assurance.*


ALL IS WELL THAT ENDS WELL.
It blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads.
It blots thy beauty as frosts bite the meads.*


Yet in this captious and intemible sieve.
Yet in this captious and intenible sieve.*


And would not have knaves thrive long under.
And would not have knaves thrive long under her.*


TWELFTH NIGHT.
Yet you will be hanged to be turned away.
Yet you will be hanged, or be turned away.


Enter Violenta.
Enter Viola.


That methought her eyes had lost her tongue.
That sure methought her eyes had lost her tongue.*


Let thy tongue langer with arguments of state.
Let thy tongue tang with arguments of state.*


WINTERS TALE.
-- clear stores.
-- clear stones.


With hey, the thrush and the jay.
With hey, with hey, the thrush and the jay.*


Digest with a custom.
Digest it with a custom.


Burn hotter than my faith. O but sir.
Burn hotter than my faith. O but dear sir.


Before this ancient sir, whom, it should seem.
Before this ancient sir, who, it should seem.*


Of excellent witchcraft, whom perforce must know.
Of excellent witchcraft, who, perforce must know.*


You know my fathers temper.
You know your fathers temper.*


With her who here I cannot hold on shore.
With her whom here I cannot hold on shore.*


MACBETH.
Of kernes and gallow- grosses --
Of kernes and gallow- glasses --


Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders.
Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders breaking [break].


Is execution done on Cawdor or not
Those in commission yet returned?
Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not
Those in commission yet returned.*


Whom we to gain our peace have sent to peace.
Whom we to gain our place have sent to peace.*


Whether, in deed, before they here approach.
Whether, indeed, before thy here-approach.


K. JOHN.
It would not be sir Nob in any case.
I would not be sir Nob in any case.


Say, shall the current of our right roam on.
Say shall the current of our right run on.*


Strong reasons make strange actions.
Strong reasons make strong actions. Malone, in this, as in other places,
prefers the nonsense of the first edition to the sense of the second.



It Is true to hurt his master, no man's else.
It Is true to hurt his master, no man else.*


FIRST PART OF K. HENRY IV.
With such a heady currance.
With such a heady current.*


To furnish with all appertinents.
To furnish him with all appertinents.*


Which in sufferance heartily will rejoice.
Which I in sufferance heartily will rejoice.*


To his full height. On, on, you noblish English.
To his full height. On, on, you noblest English.*


Of headly murder.
Of heady murder.*


Poor we call them in their native lords.
Poor we may call them in their native lords.


Pales in the flood with men, wives, and boys.
Pales in the flood with men, with wives and boys.*


FIRST PART OF K. HEN. VI.
Shall be whipped out in the next parliament.
Shall be wiped out in the next parliament.*


If Richard will be true, not that all alone.
If Richard will be true, not that alone.


Yes, my lord, her father is a king.
Yes, my good lord, her father is a king.*


She Is tickled now, her fume needs no spurs.
She Is tickled now, her fume can need no spurs.


Trust nobody, for fear you betrayed.
Trust nobody for fear you be betrayed.*


When I return with victory to the field.
When I return with victory from the field.*


To Lynn, my lord; and ship from thence to Flanders.
To Lynn, my lord; and shipped from thence to Flanders.


HENRY VIII.
Good man, those joyful tears show thy true hearts.
Good man, those joyful tears show thy true hearts.
JULIUS CAESAR.
Are then in council, and the state of a man.
Are then in council, and the state of man.


Passion I see is catching from mine eyes.
Passion I see is catching, for mine eyes.


For I have neither writ, nor words nor worth.
For I have neither wit, nor words nor worth.


CORIOLANUS.
Our best friends made, our means stretched.
Our best friends made, and our best means stretched out.
ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA.
-- my fortunes have
Corrupted honest men. Dispatch Enobarbus.
-- my fortunes have
Corrupted honest men. Dispatch Eros. [Eros, dispatch!]


Let him come in. What a poor instrument.
Let him come in. How poor an instrument.


TITUS ANDRONICUS.
Was none in Rome to make a stale.
Was there none else in Rome to make a stale of.*


Even from Eptons rising in the east.
Even from Hyperions rising in the east.*


ROMEO AND JULIET.
Jul. Romeo!

Romans My niece.

Jul. Romeo!

Romans My sweet.

Misshapen chaos of well-seeing forms.
Misshapen chaos of well- seeming forms.


Among fresh fennel buds --
Among fresh female buds --


A dimne saint, an honorable villain.
A damned saint, an honorable villain.


But which a rear-ward following Tybalts death.
But with a rear-ward following Tybalts death.


The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To many ashes --
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To mealy ashes --


HAMLET.
-- this pursy times.
-- these pursy times.*


Lord Hamlet is a prince out of thy Star.
Lord Hamlet is a prince out of thy sphere.


The inobled queen.
The mobled queen.


OTHELLO.
Out ran my purpose; and I returned then rather
Out ran my purpose and I returned the rather -- *


Did Michael Cassio, when you wooed my lady
Know of your love?
I did not think he had been acquainted with her.
Did etc.
Know etc.
I did not think he had been acquainted with it.


P. 249.
"The Quip Modest, etc."

"THE author of this pamphlet, after a few copies had got abroad, had the
modesty to suppress it. Some time afterward, repenting as it were of his
repentance, he issued it out. One instance may be sufficient to show his
profound ignorance of the poet whom he attempted to illustrate; he supposed the
words ignomy and intergatory, in a late edition of Shakspeare, to be errors of
the press! So, when the clown in Measure for Measure says "there were but two
stewed prunes in the house, which at that very distant time stood, as it were
in a fruit-dish, etc. this Remarker for distant would read instant."

The veracity of this note is no less remarkable than its decency. That the
author of the pamphlet in question ever "had the modesty to suppress it" is an
absolute falsehood, known to his printer, his bookseller, and all who bought
it. The truth is that, "after a few copies were got abroad," the further sale
was delayed till a leaf could be reprinted, in which some erroneous references
had been detected, and an expression used which was thought too strong for the
person alluded to, even if that person had been Mr. Malone, and another added
to convict the editor or reviser of the "late edition" of a gross and wilful
misrepresentation. All this might take up a week, when the publication was
continued. As to the rest, both Mr. Malone and the author of that pamphlet may
have sufficient reason to wish that neither of them had ever betrayed more
profound ignorance of this great poet than in barely prefering the reading of
one edition to that of another. That ignominy, the correction of the second
folio, and of which ignomy is every where either a contraction or a corruption,
is requisite in the present instance will be evident to all, except Mr. Malone,
and perhaps the editor (or reviser) of the edition in question, from the line
itself: "Ignominy in ransom and free pardon."

Intergatories, is likewise nothing more than a contraction of interrogatories,
as Shakspeare would always have written it, if his meter had not required the
sacrifice of a syllable, which prose does not. So, in K. John: "What earthly
name to interrogatories."

Instant is also the reading of the second folio, and of every other edition
before that of 1785. As however it was thought distant might be intentional,
the instance was omitted in the cancel.

After all, if the "Quipsters ignorance" of his author was so "profound," why
has this infallible judge adopted any of his remarks or suggestions, sometimes
word for word, and elsewhere with sneaking approbation, or at second-hand. See
vol. ii. 11. 256. 491. 507. iii. 27. 77. 316. 394. iv. 497. 504. vi. 146. 273.
v. 495. viii. 634. etc. etc. How say you to this M. Malone?

VOL. I. PART II.
P. 293.
"Richard the Confessor."

"THIS piece," Mr. Malone observes, "should seem to have been written by the
tinker in The Taming of the Shrew, who talks of Richard Conqueror."
Unfortunately, however, the observation is but one out of many instances of our
"half-informed" editors pleasantry being occasioned by his ignorance. He
supposes Richard a blunder for Edward; because he does not know that there is
such a personage as Richard the Confessor; whereas there are no less than four
Confessors of that name, any of whom might have been, and one certainly was,
the hero of the above play. In the first place there is saint Richard the
Confessor, an imaginary king of England, supposed to be buried at Lucca, where
he is said to have dyed on his return from a pilgrimage to Rome. Another was
bishop of Chichester; a third of St. Andrews in Calabri; and the fourth hermit
of Hampole near Doncaster, whose somniferous lucubrations have contributed in
no small degree to the bulk of Mr. Wartons History of English Poetry. All of
these are expressly styled Confessors in the English Martyrologe, 1608, and
other books of the same cast: so that the editors "attempt at jocularity" is as
"feeble" as his "ignorance" is "profound."

TEMPEST.
P. 21.
Pro. Go make thyself like a nymph of the sea; be subject
To no sight but thine and mine; invisible
To every eye-ball else.

The elder folio regulates the passage thus: Go make thyself like a nymph of the
sea:
Be subject to no sight but thine and mine; invisible
To every eye-ball else.


The second reads: -- like to nymph of the sea.

And now comes our Irish editor, and pronounces as positively as if he had been
at the copyists or compositors elbow that the words be subject were transfered
to the second line "by the carelessness of the transcriber or printer." "The
regulation that I have made," says he, "shows that the addition [of the second
folio] was unnecessary."

The only difference between the editor of the second folio and Mr. Malone is
that the former perfected the meter of the only defective line, and the latter
has destroyed that of each. Had this "very fond and skill-less" editor
possessed one thousandth part of the sense and sagacity he assumes the credit
of, he would have perceived that the blunder of the transcriber or printer
consisted, not in transposing the words be subject, but, in the insertion of
two other syllables which certainly have no business there, and could not
possibly have come from Shakspeare, unless Shakspeare had written like Mr.
Malone. "The regulation that I have made shows that the addition was
necessary:" I appeal to those who have ears: Go make thyself like to a nymph
of the sea,
Be subject to no sight but mine, invisible
To every eye-ball else.


If this alteration have been made already, it is more than I know.

P. 24.
Cursed be I that I did so! -- all the charms. "The latter word (charms)" we
are told "like many others of the same kind is here used as a dissyllable."

How other words "of the same kind" may be used is of little consequence: all
we want to know is why the word charms should be so used; or, in short, how one
syllable comes to be two. The meter of the line is manifestly and simply
perfect, as consisting of ten monosyllables, alternately short and long: so
that it is absolutely impossible to conceive a less exceptionable instance of
heroic verse. Is this laborious octennial editor ignorant that his authors
measure consists of ten syllables? or is he, like many of his wild countrymen,
unable to reckon to ten, or to count his fingers? The only reason, I can
perceive, for his making charms a word of two syllables, is that it cannot
possibly be more than one.

P. 37.
-- the fair soul herself
Weighed, between lothness and obedience, at
Which end of the beam she would bow.
The old edition reads -- should -- and Mr. Pope, by the omission of a single
superfluous letter -- Which end the beam should bow; an easy and apposite
sense, which our ingenious and consistent critic, who thinks that "an omission
of any word in the old copy," however nonsensical or absurd, "without
substituting another in its place, is seldom safe," has rejected for a much
more violent alteration, and no sense at all.

P. 39.
Bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyard, none. "Bourn," the editor says, "might
have been used as a dissyllable."

Certainly, -- by such a judge of harmony as himself. Bo-urn, bound of land,
tilth, vi-ne-yard, none. He could not perceive that there are two syllables
wanting to complete the measure. Shakspeare might have written: Bourn, limit,
bound of land, tilth, vineyard, none.

P. 52.
Stephano here asks Trinculo how he escaped, and the latter says that he "swam
ashore like a duck;" adding, "I can swim like a duck, I Will be sworn:" than
which nothing can be more simple. Our Irish editor, however, in the profundity
of his conceit, believes that "Trinculo is speaking of Caliban, and that we
should read -- " a' can swim, etc." than which nothing can be more absurd.

P. 55.
All former editions reading -- most poor matters
Point to rich ends. This my mean task
Would be as heavy to me as odious; but
The mistress whom I serve quickens what is dead
And makes my labors pleasures, --
our notable critic, for the improvement of the meter, of which he is a
complete judge, alters it thus: -- most poor matters
Point to rich ends. This my mean task would be
As heavy to me as odious, but
The mistress, etc.
And justifies the alteration by gravely telling us that "our author and his
contemporaries generally use odious as a trisyllable." How then, will he tell
us, do he and his contemporaries use it?

It is evident that all we get by this capricious change is a transfer to one
line of the defect of another; at least, to make any meter of the second we
must read it thus: "As heavy to me as o-di-ous, but;" as, the editor will
undoubtedly pretend, our author and his contemporaries generally pronounced it.

The insertion of a single syllable perfects the measure: -- most poor matters
Point to rich ends. This my mean task would be
As heavy to me as it is odious; but
The mistress, etc.


P. 65.
Trin. The sound is going away: let us follow it, And after do our work.

Ste. Lead monster, we'll follow, -- I would I could see this taborer: he lays
it on.

Trin. Wilt come? I Will follow Stephano.

The words Wilt come, our sagacious editor believes, are addressed to Stephano,
who, from a desire to see the "taborer" lingers behind. Will you come or not
(says Trinculo)? If you will not, I Will follow Caliban without you."

Such an "idle conjecture" could only, one would think, proceed from a dabbler
equally ignorant of our authors manner and unconscious of his meaning. It is,
notwithstanding, very much in character. The music is going away, and Stephano
lingers behind to see the performer: this is Paddy from Cork with a vengeance!
Suppose now we were to treat the passage thus: Ste. Lead monster; we'll follow,
-- I would I could see this taborer: he lays it on. Wilt come? Trin. I Will
follow, Stephano. It is Trinculo who "lingers behind."

TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA.
P. 120.
O how this spring of love resembles. The editor has inserted both Mr.
Tyrwhitts notes, without taking the least notice of the conclusive reply
already made to the latter, and which it is unnecessary here to repeat. In
return for this piece of candor, I shall only say that I do not in the least
wonder to find him as ignorant of the principles of English orthography, as he
is of the sense and language of the author he has had the presumption to think
himself qualifyed to illustrate. Mr. Tyrwhitt was a man of indisputable
learning and critical abilities; but, perhaps on that very account could not,
like Cicero, be expected to -- follow any thing
That other men begin.


P. 133.
Pro. I Will die on him that says so but yourself.

Sil. That you are welcome.

Pro. That you are worthless.

Dr. Johnson, finding the measure defective, prefixed the word No to the latter
hemistich, "But perhaps," says Mr. Malone, "the particle which he has supplied
is unnecessary. Worthless was, I believe, used as a trisyllable. See Mr.
Tyrwhitt's note, p. 120."

The gentleman, as his friend Bottom observes, has "a reasonable good ear in
music," and "the tongs and the bones" would be no improper accompaniment for
such kind of harmony as he thus makes of our all-excellent poets versification.
If worthless be a trisyllable, it will be necessary to insert a vowel in order
to receive the accent, which it must be evident can neither fall upon worth nor
less. One must therefore read: That you are welcome.
That you are worth-i-less.


The editor seems to have acquired the secret of multiplying syllables from a
well-known story in Joe Millers Jests, where an equally ingenious Oxford
scholar proves two capons to be three, and gets the third for his pains.

They who look for information upon the subject in Mr. Tyrwhitts note will be
as much disappointed as that learned gentleman would have been surprised to
find them sent thither for it.

MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR.
P. 265.
Farewell, gentle mistress; farewell Nan. "Mistress" the editor says, "is here
used as a trisyllable." The accent, of course, falls as usual upon the second:
e. g.

Farewell, gentle mis-te-ress; farewell Nan. P. 261.
-- to be compassed like a good bilbo in the circumference of a peck, hilt to
point. -- "Thus," says our editor, "the folio. The old 4to reads -- of a pack,
and perhaps rightly. Pedlars packs are sometimes of such a size as to admit of
Falstaffs description; but who but a Lilliputian could be "compassed in a peck."

O feeble, shallow, profoundly ignorant annotator! It is the bilbo, not
Falstaff, that is "compassed in a peck:" He was in a similar condition in the
buck-basket.

VOL. II.
MEASURE FOR MEASURE.
P. 101.
Ere twice the sun has made his daily greeting
To yond generation, you shall find, etc.
If the editor had followed the practice he imputes to the editor of the second
folio, "of altering whatever he did not understand," we should scarcely have
had a single word of Shakspeares left. It is therefore rather fortunate that he
has so frequently affected to understand, not only what he was perfectly
ignorant of, but what in fact is utterly unintelligible and absolute nonsense.

Yond, in the above passage, being an evident misprint for the under, which had
been written in the copy Ye vnd', and is requisite both to the sense and to the
meter, our notable Hibernian explains it to mean "the without door generation."
The meter of the line will therefore be very properly in unison with the sense.

To yond ge-ne-ra-ti-on, you shall find. P. 140.
And live if not then thou art doomed to die: -- " if not,] Old copy -- no.
Corrected in the second folio."

The second folio, now under my eye, does not differ from the first. Is this a
specimen of the editors accuracy or of his veracity?

MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING.
P. 269.
Leon. What do you mean my lord?

Claud. Not to be married, Not to knit my soul to an approve^ wanton.

Leon. Dear my lord, if you in your own proof.

These lines have been differently regulated; but let that pass; "Dear," our
editor says, "like door, fire, hour, and many similar words, is here used as a
dissyllable. "We must therefore read: De-ar, my lord, if you, in your own proof:
which, it must be confessed, is one of the best dissyllable lines throughout
this harmonious edition.

LOVES LABOR LOST.
P. 414.
Taffata phrases, silken terms precise,
Three-pil'd hyperboles, spruce affection,
Figures pedantical, these summer-flies
Have blown me full of maggot ostentation.
"The modern editors," it seems, "read affectation;" but "there is no need of
change. The word was used by our author and his contemporaries, as a
quadrisyllable."

In the Devils name (God forgive me for swearing!) what has the number of
syllables to do here? It is the rhyme we are at a loss for, not the meter.
Surely, surely, if ever man was peculiarly disqualifyed by nature for an editor
of Shakspeare, or, in short, for a reader of poetry, it was this identical Mr.
Malone! Could it have been imagined that a writer in the eighteenth century
would be so profoundly ignorant of the commonest rules of versification, so
totally destitute of every idea of harmony and arithmetic, as to propose such a
stanza as the following? Taf-fa-ta phras-es, silk-en terms pre-cise,
Three-pil'd hy-per-bo-les, spruce af-fec-ti-on,
Fi-gures pe-dan-ti-cal; these sum-mer flies,
Have blown me full of mag-got os-ten-ta-ti-on.
Perhaps, however, he will contend that hyperboles is a trisyllable, as nothing
can be improbable, in reference to such a genius, on the score of absurdity.
Let it be so, it will make no sort of difference: Three-pil'd hy-per-boles,
spruce af-fec-ti-on. Only, in the one case, we see that on will be the rhyme to
a^tion; in the other, i^on.

MIDSUMMER NIGHTS DREAM.
P. 459.
-- Are you not he
That fright the maidens of the villagery;
Skim milk; and sometimes labor in the quern,
And bootless make the breathless housewife churn.
"Perhaps," observes our sagacious editor, "the construction is -- and
sometimes make the breathless housewife labor in the quern, and bootless
churn. This," he adds, "would obviate the objection made by Dr. Johnson, viz.
that "the mention of the mill seems out of place, for she is not now telling
the good but the evil that he does." Such a construction may be perfectly
natural to the maker, whose ideas seem to sport in a most lovely confusion, but
how is it possible for any other person to approve it? Nothing can be more easy
and intelligible than the passage as it now stands; and the objection taken by
Dr. Johnson does not seem well founded: as the fairy may have enumerated
mischievous acts only. Pucks labor in the quern might be either to disturb the
family with the noise, or, if he actually ground the corn, when it was not
wanted, or to throw the flour about the house.

P. 464.
The human mortals want their winter here. The position too hastily advanced by
Mr. Steevens of the mortality of fairies has been so fully and completely
refuted, that I do not at all wonder to find our present candid and liberal
editor continuing that gentleman's note, though I own I am not a little surprised
to see the swaggering comment in the edition of 1785 reduced to half a dozen
words --

"See the Faery Queen B. II. c. 10; and Wartons OBSERVATIONS on Spenser, vol.
i. p. 55. REED."

And why not likewise to "Tickell's poem, called Kensington Gardens," which was
to show "that the opinion prevailed in the present century?" This poem is
printed in Dodsleys Collection, of which the editor or reviser of the edition
of 1785 had been a very few years before employed in the republication. He must
therefore know that it proved the direct reverse of that for which he refered to
it, and consequently that he was asserting an untruth.

I should like to know from the gentleman concerned, or any other able casuist,
the exact difference between asserting that a book proves what the asserter
knows it disproves, and producing, like Lauder, supposititious extracts for the
purpose.


But the reduction and omission are sufficient to prove that our modest editor
was himself convinced of the fallacy of Mr. Steevens's assertion, and Mr. Reeds
authorities, though he has not had the candor to acknowledge it. See the Quip
Modest. pp. 11. 33.

The passage three quoted from Ariosto is thus translated by Sir J. Harington:
"But (either ancient folk believed a lie,
"Or this is true) a fayrie cannot die."


The following instances, from this very play, were accidentally omited: "But
she, being mortal, of that boy did die."
"I am a spirit of no common sort."


If ever any position was or can be demonstrated by literary evidence it is
that the fairies of Shakspeare were not subject to mortality. There is no
evidence whatever on the other side.

P. 499.
So, with two seeming bodies, but one heart
Two of the first, like coats in heraldry,
Due but to one, and crowned with one crest.
"According to the rules of heraldry," it is the editors note, "the first house
only, (e. g. a father who has a son living, or an elder brother as
distinguished from a younger,) has a right to bear the family coat. The son's
coat is distinguished from the father's by a label; the younger brother's from
the elder's by a mullet. The same crest is common to both. Helena therefore
means to say, that she and her friends were as closely united, as much as one
person, as if they were both of the first house; as if they both had the
privilege due but to one person, (viz. to him of the first house,) the right of
bearing the family coat without any distinguishing mark."

Every reader of this incomparable edition will have frequent occasion to
observe that the editor "draws out the thread of his verbosity finer than the
staple of his argument." The present instance, indeed, is nothing in comparison
to pages of inanity with which the work abounds, and which, on account of their
"true no-meaning," are actually incapable of refutation or discussion. What, in
the name of Shakspeare, of sense or reason, has either the father or his eldest
son to do with the passage in question? The two seeming bodies united by one
heart are resembled to coats in heraldry, crowned with one crest. And this
happens either where the heir keeps his paternal and maternal coats, or the
husband his own and his wifes, in separate shields, as is done on the
continent; or, as at present with us, in the quarterings of the same shield; in
both cases there are two coats, due but to one, and crowned with one crest:
which is clearly the authors allusion. But I am sorry to add that he must have
entirely misunderstood, since he has so strangely misapplyed, the expression,
Two of the first; which, in heraldical jargon, always means two objects of the
first color mentioned; that is the field. For instance: in blazoning a coat
they will say, Argent, upon a fesse gules, two mullets of the first, that is,
argent, the color of the field. These words are therefore a melancholy proof
that our great author sometimes retained the phrase after he had lost the idea,
or up the former without sufficient precaution as to the latter. It is not
indeed the only one; but "quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus." With respect to
the note, as it is the offspring of ignorance, it becomes naturally the parent
of contempt.

P. 473.
I know a bank where the wild thyme blows. "Where," Mr. Malone informs us, "is
here used as a dissyllable. The modern editors," he says, unnecessarily read --
whereon."

We must therefore, it seems, necessarily read: "I know a bank whe-ar the wild
thyme blows.

This, to be sure, is no despicable line; Mr. Malone is a very pretty
harmonist, in his way. But, if we must have a dissyllable, why not bank? "I
know a ba-ank where the wild thyme blows." Or thyme, still better, as old
Geoffrey might have had it?

"I know a bank where the wild thyme blows."

VOL. III.
MERCHANT OF VENICE.
P. 25.
-- away, says the fiend, for the heavens; rouse up a brave mind and run. Away
for the heavens, that is, as our editor explains it, "Begone to the heavens."
Now was it possible to imagine that a man who has been laboring for eight
years, "with unceasing solicitude, to give a faithful and correct edition of
Shakspeare" should be so profoundly and completely ignorant of his meaning in
this very simple passage? Can any thing be so unnatural and absurd as for the
Devil to advise the person he is tempting to go to heaven? But why to the
heavens? or how get thither? Mr. Malone, it is believed, will find the journey
somewhat more difficult than he seems to apprehend it would have been to honest
Lancelot. In the mean time, every one, but this floundering commentator, knows
that for the heavens is nothing more than an adjuration, or, as we now say, for
the heavens sake.

P. 33.
If a Christian do not play the knave, and get thee, I am much deceived. "If a
Christian (says Lancelot, on receiving a love-letter for Lorenzo,) do not play
the knave, and carry thee away from thy fathers house, I am much deceived."
Such is the ingenious editors explanation, which he "would not have attempted
of so easy a passage, if the ignorant editor of the second folio, thinking
probably that the word get must necessarily mean beget, had not altered the
text, and substituted did in the place of do, in which he has been copied by
every subsequent editor." Every subsequent editor must therefore be, at least,
equally ignorant; and I dare say, if Mr. Malone is to be the judge, there never
was editor, commentator or critic of Shakspeare who had a grain of sense beside
himself. A refutation cannot be expected of such peculiar absurdity.
"Lancelot," he says, "is not talking about Jessica's father, but about her
future husband." But how does he know this? who told him so? can he be better
acquainted with the subject of Launcelots conversation than the man himself? He
is aware, at the same time, that, in a subsequent scene, he says to Jessica,
"Marry, you may partly hope your father got you not;" but he is now, it seems,
on another subject. That, however, is but the idle opinion of Mr. Malone; the
editor of the second folio, and all his successors, and, I will venture to add,
Shakspeare himself, and all his readers, think very differently.

P. 38.
Shut doors after you: fast bind, fast find. Former editors had supplied a
syllable, which is equally necessary to the sense and to the meter. But the
delicate ear and critical acumen of their Hibernian successor have enabled him
to discover that " doors is here used as a dissyllable." A previous
acquaintance with the Irish howl must be of infinite service in the perusal of
this harmonious edition.

Ibi.
How like a younker, and a prodigal. This elegant and judicious emendation of
the old copies, which read younger, was made by Mr. Row. Our more ingenious
editor, however, with becoming diffidence and profound knowledge, doubts
"whether younker was a word of our authors time." It, however, happens, a
little unluckily, not only to be a word of our authors time, but to be
elsewhere used by our author himself. "What!" says Falstaff, in the Second part
of King Henry IV. "will you make a younker of me?" Again in the Third part of
K. Henry VI.

Trimmed like a younker prancing to his love. If he has elsewhere doubted of his
doubt, it only proves how little he is any where to be depended on.

P. 59
For fear I surfeit!
Bass. What find I here.

"The latter word is here employed as a dissyllable."

Of this there can be no doubt, as the line itself will prove: For fear I
surfeit.
What find I he-ar.


P. 92.
As far as Belmont.
Jes. In such a night, did
Young Lorenzo swear he loved her well.

" Swear is here, as in many other places, a dissyllable."

This as usual is confirmed by the meter: As fa^r as Be^lmont. In such a^ nght
di^d
Young Lo^-rn-zo^ sw-a^r he lo^v'd her we^ll.


Who can say that our harmonious editor has not employed his eight years labor
to advantage when he produces such lines as these?

AS YOU LIKE IT.
P. 141.
-- Now go we in content. Go in we, an accidental transposition of the first
folio, being thus properly corrected in the second, our editor, who will not
allow that edition the merit or liberty of correcting the most glaring
typographical blunder, is "not sure that the transposition is necessary;" for,
as he sagaciously observes, "our author might have used content as an
adjective:" Whence, I presume, we must necessarily infer that the correction
has rendered it a substantive, pronoun, verb, participle, adverb, conjunction,
preposition or interjection. He seems a very pretty grammarian.

P. 145.
The body of country, city, court. Every one who has either ear or eye, will
instantly perceive here the want of a syllable, which was supplied by the
editor of the second folio, who reads The body of the country, city, court; a
reading which is essential to the sense and measure of the verse, and which one
may therefore reckon indisputably Shakspeares. The present editor, however, who
is in fact, what he would have the other thought to be, "utterly ignorant of
our authors phraseology and meter," omits the article, under pretense that "
Country is here used as a trisyllable." To reason with a man who has no more
ear for poetry than Dr. Johnson had for music, and he scarcely "knew a drum
from a trumpet, or a bagpipe from a guitar," would be absurd: every other
person will see it was utterly impossible for Shakspeare to write such a line
as this, or indeed for any one but Mr. Malone to conceive it: "The body of
coun-te-ry, city, court. What a pity it is that the public cannot have the
pleasure of hearing Mr. Malone read his own text! I say pleasure, because
undoubtedly it would be a most laughable performance.

P. 195.
Over the wretched? What though you have mo beauty. The old copies reading --
no beauty, the editor will have it to be a misprint for mo, or more, as he has
every where else thought proper to write it. This, he says, "appears clearly
from the passage in Lodge's Rosalynde, which Shakspeare has here imitated: --
"Because thou art beautiful, be not so coy, etc." A passage which, as it
contains neither no nor mo, can not certainly prove what it is brought to do.
The construction adopted by this penetrating critic is that though a woman has
more beauty than her lover she is not on that account to insult him: an idea
which one can easily suppose never entered into any head but his own; one would
not, therefore, wish to deprive the present edition of an emendation so worthy
of it. But, however, Mr. Malone may read, his author certainly wrote Over the
wretched? what though you have beauty. He could not perceive that no or mo was
as injurious to the meter, as his quotation from Lodge might have led him to
suspect it was to the sense: though I believe he understands both equally well.
But, I well know that "my learned friend is above taking notice of such slender
criticism."

P. 205.
-- I will weep for nothing like Diana in the fountain. Our perspicacious
editor had some years ago conjectured that these words had an allusion to some
well-known conduit; he has since found his conjecture confirmed, and elsewhere
observed "that our author without doubt alluded to the ancient Cross in
Cheapside," in which was an alabaster image of Diana, and water prilling from
her naked breasts." So that, unfortunately, the very instance which he has
adduced in confirmation of the above sagacious conjecture totally destroys it;
unless the tears of his Cheapside Diana flowed from her breasts, instead of her
eyes. This would have done well enough in Dublin.

P. 214
Ah, sir, a body would think this was well counterfeited. "The old copy reads
-- Ah, Sir, etc. Corrected by the editor of the second folio."

It ought, indeed, to have been so corrected by that editor: but the fact is
that the second folio reads -- Ah, Sir.

TAMING OF THE SHREW.
P. 258.
Vincentio's son brought up in Florence. "Vincentio's" according to Mr. Malone,
"is here used as a quadrisyllable. Mr. Pope," he adds, "not perceiving this,
unnecessarily reads -- Vincentio his son, which has been too hastily adopted by
the subsequent editors."

Mr. Malone, no doubt, is able to perceive a great many thing which neither Mr.
Pope nor any body else would dream of; though, if Mr. Pope did not perceive
that a word of four syllables was a word of four syllables, he must have been a
more extraordinary person than he is generally reputed. No, no, Mr. Malone, it
was not because he did not perceive Vincentio's to be used as a quadrisyllable,
that he read Vincentio his, but because, not having had the advantage of an
Irish education, he perceived that such a line as the following could not have
been written by Shakspeare: Vin-ce^n-ti-o^'s son, bro^ught up i^n Flore^nce.

Whatever people may choose to say of Mr. Malones edition, no one will deny him
the exclusive merit of deforming his authors verse in the most ridiculous and
asinine manner possible.

P. 295.
But, wrangling pedant, this is. "Probably," the editor admits," our author
wrote -- this lady is, which," he says, "completes the meter, wrangling being
used as a trisyllable.' Now, in my humble opinion, it rather completes the
evidence that the editor does not know what meter is. He should have accented
his lines. What delectable harmony is here! But, wra^ng-gle-i^ng peda^nt, this
lady is.

There is a poem, entitled Teisa, which was published a few years ago, entirely
written in this way, and on that account a sort of curiosity. If it had not
born the name of the author (Anna Fisher) and been upon a different subject, I
should have been positive that is was the production of our musical editor. The
said poem, however, and his own Shakspeare are, so far as I know, the only
specimens of this kind of meter extant either in the English or any other
language.

P. 315.
Where be these knaves? What no man at door. " Door is here, and in other
places, used as a dissyllable." Right; you have told us so once before: let us
therefore read the line, as it should be, in the Irish way:

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Where 1 be 2 these 3 knaves 4? What 5 no 6 man 7 at 8 do 9-oo 10r.

A dealer in dissyllables, possessed of the slightest notion of harmony, would
rather have made one of knaves; but an editor of common sense would read -- the
door.

PERICLES.
P. 556.
To please the fool and death. "The Fool and Death," Mr. Malone observes, "were
principal personages in the old Moralities." Mr. Malone is hereby called upon
to mention one single Morality in which there is any such character as either
the Fool or Death. If he can not, what are we to think of the morality of Mr.
Malone?

VOL. IV
TWELFTH NIGHT.
P. 25
With adoration's fertile tears. "Tears," the editor says, "is here used as a
dissyllable;" and dissyllable are the most convenient things in the world for
patching up a broken verse. Now, what, for instance, can run more smoothly than
the following? With a^-do-ra^-ti-o^ns fer-ti^le te-a^rs. Ah, to be sure Mr.
Malone is not a very good judge of harmony; to be sure he is not!

P. 42.
Mar. My purpose is indeed a horse of that color.

Sir And. And your horse now would make him an ass.

Mar. Ass, I doubt not.

Mr. Tyrwhitt believing that this conceit, which, though bad enough, shows, he
thought, too quick an apprehension for sir Andrew, should be given to sir Toby;
"An anonymous writer" asks, if the ingenious critic imagined it "probable that
Maria would call sir Toby," whom, according to his own account, she adored, and
ass; upon which our truly affable and diffident Hibernian, after premising that
his "learned friend is above taking notice of such slender criticism," roundly
asserts that "Maria is not speaking of sir Andrew, or sir Toby, but of
Malvolio!" I should insult the reader by descending to refute an assertion so
wantonly confident, and extravagantly absurd.

P. 37.
And thanks, and ever thanks: Often good turns. Theobald inserted the second
thanks, and added likewise the word and to perfect the meter. Mr. Malone, who
is a much better judge of meter, suffers the former word to remain, but rejects
the latter; having no doubt that turns was used as a dissyllable. We must
therefore take care to read: And thanks, and ever thanks: often good tu-urns. But
why, Mr. Malone, should not good be a dissyllable, since a dissyllable there
must be, as well as turns, and then, you see, we shall have no need of
interpolating the true original reading of the only ancient authentic copy?

WINTERS TALE.
P. 138.
Mr. Malone reads -- (for cogitation
Resides not in that man that does not think)
which being, as Fabian says, "exceeding good sense-less," is judiciously
prefered to the correction of former editors: -- that does not think it. This
is not, however, as he asserts, the reading of the second folio. But certainly
it ought to have been so, which, in Irish, may be the same thing.

P. 164.
The pretty dimples of his chin, and cheek, his smiles. Dimples, according to
our metrical Procrustes, as well as of his, is here employed as a monosyllable;
which is must be confessed will make one of the prettyest namby pamby lines
that we can any where meet with.

The pretty dimp's of's chin, and cheek, his smiles. Shakspeare had no
conception of these little Malonian beauties: he only wrote the line thus: The
pretty dimples of his cheek, his smiles; leaving it for such superior geniuses
as Mr. Malone to improve and finish off.

P. 200.
Burn hotter than my faith.
Per. O but sir.

The editor of the second folio, who, ignorant as he was, seems to have had the
use his ears, eyes, and fingers, reads -- O but dear sir. This addition,
however, our infallible metre-master pronounces unnecessary, " burn in the
preceding hemistic being," he says, "used as a dissyllable." A dissyllable! nay
then, all will be right enough, as we have only to read this most beautiful and
harmonious line: "Bu-urn hot-ter than my faith. O but sir. Ah, well! and who
finds fault with it? For "Dare you think your clumsy lugs so proper to decide as
"The delicate ears of justice Midas?"


P. 242
Here where we are.
Leon. The blessed Gods.

"Unless both here and where were employed as dissyllables, the meter is
defective." O by all means let them be employed as dissyllables: they are most
useful and excellent things, and make the sweetest versification imaginable.
For instance: He-ar, whe-ar we are. The blessed Gods. Or thus, more softly:
He-ree whe-ree we are. The blessed Gods.

Here is again "employed as a dissyllable in Macbeth, p. 270,

Who comes he-ar? The worthy thane of Ross. KING JOHN.
P. 454.
Kneel thou down, Philip, but rise more great. " More is here used as a
dissyllable."

To be sure it is: and this Mr. Tyrwhitt might have thought an additional proof
that our poet "had not forgotten his Chaucer:" Kneel thou down, Philip, but
rise more great. What an admirable thing is it to have a delicate ear! A plain
hobbling fellow unblessed with that advantage would have only thought the
little word up wanting, and spoiled, of course, a most excellent
mono-dissyllable.

P. 468.
It lies as sightly on the back of him
As great Alcides' shoes upon an ass:
"i. e. upon the hoofs of an ass."

This comment is at least in unison with the text. The idea of Hercules's shoes
( N. B. Hercules wore no shoes) lying upon the hoofs of an ass is every way
worthy of ingenious Hibernian, from whom alone it could proceed.

VOL. V.
KING RICHARD II.
P. 46.
My lord, my answer is -- to Lancaster. The editors note on this passage has
been already refuted; but if ignorance would suffer him to perceive his error,
obstinacy would not permit him to confess it.

P. 72.
I would the plants thou graft'st may never grow.
Guard. Poor queen! so that thy state might be no worse,
I would my skill were subject to thy curse.

"An anonymous writer suggests that the queen perhaps meant to wish him
childless. The gardeners answer shows that this was not the authors meaning."

The gardeners answer shows no such thing: he merely pursues the allusion.

FIRST PART OF KING HENRY IV.
P. 114.
Mordake earl of Fife, and eldest son. "The word earl," our editor tells us, "
is here used as a dissyllable;" but "Mr. Pope, not perceiving this," reads --
the earl. "Mordake e-arl of Fife, and eldest son. Mr. Pope could no more have
conceived Shakspeare capable of writing such a line, than he could have written
it himself: these discoveries were reserved for a second-sighted Hibernian.

P. 142.
Fall. A bastard son of the kings?

Dr. Johnson, having observed that the improbability of this scene is scarcely
balanced by the humor, our Irish editor perceives no improbability: asserting
roundly that Falstaff does NOT mistake the prince for a bastard of the kings,
but means to inform him at once that he knows him a Poins, notwithstanding
their disguise.

The text, which is too plain to be misunderstood by a reader of common sense,
will speak for itself, and clearly prove that neither Falstaff nor the hostess
knows the prince till he says he is "come to draw him out by the ears."
Falstaff himself allows that he did not know the prince was within hearing: but
this perspicacious critic, who can see into the midst of a millstone, would be
thought to know what passes better than either Falstaff, or Falstaffs creator.

P. 162.
Eastcheap. A room in the boars head tavern. "Shakspeare," says the editor,
"has hung up a sign that he saw daily; for the Boars head tavern was very near
Blackfriars playhouse. See Stows Survey, 4to. 1618. p. 686.

No doubt there might be many signs of the Boars head, in and about London,
besides that in East-cheap; but why need Shakspeare be at the trouble of
carrying a sign from Blackfriars and hanging it up in Eastcheap, where, he must
know, it existed already? If the Boars head were not the sign of the Boars head
Tavern, in Eastcheap, let the editor tell us what it was. If it were not,
Shakspeare might have looked long enough about Blackfriars playhouse before he
had found either the Boars head or the Boars head Tavern. The sign which Stow
mentions was a Bears head, and he speaks of it -- not as hanging at the time
he wrote, but -- as having formerly been one of the signs of the stew-houses,
which had been long suppressed, and which, every one knows, were not near
Blackfriars playhouse. See his Survay, 1598, p. 332.

P. 188.
Fall. I deny your major: if you will deny the sheriff, so.

"An anonymous writer," we are informed, "supposes, that Falstaff here intends
a quibble. Major, which sheriff brought to his mind, signifies as well one of
the parts of a logical proposition, as the principal officer of a corporation."
-- "To render this supposition probable," says the editor, "it should be
proved, that the mayor of a corporation was called in Shakspeares time ma-jor."

The supposition would appear sufficiently probable although the pronunciation
contended for could not be established by a quotation. Every one knows that
Mayor is Major in Latin, which would be enough for the present purpose. The
proof required can only be necessary for one who has every where betrayed the
profoundest ignorance of his authors language, and who pretends to have
collated editions, which, if we may judge from the blunders of his own, he has
never looked into. The identical pronunciation in question happens, fortunately
enough, to be preserved in one of our authors own plays, the First part of K.
Henry VI. as printed in the "only ancient authentic edition," the folio of 1623.

Major farewell: thou doo'st but what thou may.

KING HENRY V.
P. 508
Flu. Gots ploot! up to the preaches, etc.

Nothing need or can be added to what has been already urged against this
corrupted text and prevaricating comment. See the Quip Modest, etc. p. 27.

How unfortunate is it, how injurious to the memory of this great and admirable
writer, that his best scenes should be thus mangled and deformed by a
restoration, equally impudent and foolish, of what he himself has thought fit
to alter or reject! Such conduct deserves a pillory rather than a pamphlet.

P. 584.
Toward Calais: grant him there; there seen. "If Toward," the editor observes,
"be not abbreviated, our author with his accustomed license uses one of these
words as a dissyllable, while to the other he assigns only its due length."

Arrah! my dear, this will be after mending the matter by making bad worse. The
line already wants one syllable, if toward be abbreviated it will want two --
and then there will be ten. So that take two from ten, and there remains ten.
Our editor is a notable arithmetician in his way: he can multiply one syllable
into two or three, reduce two or three to one, and play a thousand such tricks,
which neither Cocker nor Breslaw ever once dreamt of. I am apt to suspect,
however, after all, that the above observation labors under a capital error of
the press; and that, instead of the words "our author with his accustomed
license," we should read "our editor with his accustomed ignorance."

VOL. VI.
FIRST PART OF KING HENRY VI.
P. 22.
Gloucester, we'll meet to thy cost, be sure. "The latter word" being "here used
as a dissyllable," we are to read the line thus: Glos-ter, we'll meet to thy
cost be su-ure, than which nothing can be more Malonious -- harmonious I would
say.

P. 30
A statelier pyramid to her I Will rear
Than Rhodope's or Memphis every was.
Mr. Steevens having proposed to read -- of Memphis, as Shakspeare
unquestionably wrote, this sagacious Hibernian observes "Rhodope was of Thrace,
not of Memphis." Well! and whoever supposed she was of Memphis? But her pyramid
was there; which is sufficient authority for the correction.

P. 44.
Enter Mortimer. Mr. Steevens, from the MS. notes of Mr. Edwards, having
observed "that Shakspeare has varied from the truth of history, to introduce
this scene between Mortimer and Richard Plantagenet," "a half-informed Remarker
on this note" (they are the words of the gentle Edmond) "seems to think that he
has totally over-turned it, by quoting the following passage from Hall's
Chronicle: "During which parliament [held in the third year of Henry VI. 1425.]
came to London Peter Duke of Quimber, -- which of the Duke of Exeter, etc. was
highly fested. -- During which season Edmond Mortymer, the last Earl of March
of that name, (which long time had been restrained from his liberty and
finally waxed lame) disceased without issue, whose inheritance descended to
Lord Richard Plantagenet," etc. as if a circumstance which Hall has mentioned
to mark the time of Mortimer's death, necessarily ascertained the place where
it happened also. The fact is, that this Edmund Mortimer did not die in London,
but at Trim in Ireland." So far, so good.

This testy critic seems to smart so much from some corrections of that same
"half-informed Remarker," that he may be readily allowed to avail himself of
every opportunity of abusing him, particularly where he happens to anticipate a
quotation which an all-informed editor would have been glad to produce. The
passage in Hall (and it is copyed by Hollinshed) would be sufficient, it was
said, to justify Shakspeare "even if the fact were otherwise;" and so it
undoubtedly is, notwithstanding either the great learning or little scurrility
of Edmond Malone. The historian does not, to be sure, expressly say that the
Earl of March dyed in the Tower; but no person of common sense can think that
he meant to relate an event which happened to a sound, free man in Ireland, as
happening to a lame prisoner during the time a particular person was feasting
in London. In fact, he does say that this nobleman dyed in prison, and that by
such prison he meant either the Tower, or some place of confinement at no great
distance, is almost certain, not only from the circumstance already mentioned,
but from a passage in the preceding part of his book, where he expressly tells
us that "the Earl of March was ever kept in the court under such a keeper
that he could nether do or attempt any thing against the king without his
knowledge, and dyed without issue." If he did not mean the Tower, let Mr.
Malone say what prison he did mean. To what purpose is it that the actual truth
was otherwise? Our author had neither Rymer, nor Dugdale, nor Sandford, to
consult, and it cannot surely be expected that he should have gone to examine
the record office: He naturally took for fact what he found in History, and if
the historian were but half-informed, how could he help it? He was writing a
play, not a chronicle. I know, much better, I am persuaded, than Mr. Malone,
how little either Hall or Hollinshed is to be depended on in matter of fact. Is
the death of Edmond Mortimer of greater consequence than the intended marriage
of lady Bona, or the capture, imprisonment and escape of K. Edward IV. both
which are absolutely fabulous and without the slightest possible foundation.
And why is not Shakspeare, who has adopted these two lying stories, charged
with having in these instances "varyed from the truth of history?" The remark
was natural enough to Mr. Edwards, who did not know what sort of histories our
author consulted; neither indeed is the editors defense of it otherwise, being
a pedantic parade of historical knowledge picked up for the occasion, to fasten
Shakspeare with a charge which every one must think frivolous, and which he
knew to be unjust.

SECOND PART OF K. HENRY VI.
P. 134.
She Is tickled now, her fume needs no spurs. "Tickled," it seems, "is here used
as a trisyllable. The editor of the second folio, not perceiving this, reads --
"her fume can need no spurs;" in which he has been followed by all the
subsequent editors."

The editor of the second folio, then, has had the use of his ears, which is
more than can be said of his Hibernian successor. It requires a certain degree
of folly, peculiar to this all-accomplished critic, not to perceive -- that
whether tickled be a dissyllable, or a trisyllable or a quadrisyllable, cannot
make the slightest difference; the defect of the line being in another quarter.
-- According to the hypothesis of our Boeotian editor, we ought to read the
line as follows: She Is tic-kle-ed now, her fume needs no spurs. What a pity it
is that Mr. Malone does not appear upon the stage!

THIRD PART OF K. HENRY VI.
P. 267.
Prove it, Henry, and thou shall be king. "Henry," being "frequently used by
Shakspeare and his contemporaries as a word of three syllables," must be thus
pronounced: Prove it, He-ne-ry, and thou shall be king.

P. 272.
When I return with victory from the field. "Folio -- to the field. The true
reading is found in the old play."

The true reading is found in the second folio; which affords one out of many
proofs that this edition is not what the editors malice or ignorance has chosen
to represent it.

P. 276.
Ms. The queen will all the Northern earls and lords
Intend here to besiege you in this castle.

"An anonymous Remarker," we are told, "very confidently asserts that "this
scene, so far as respects Yorks oath and his resolution to break it, proceeds
entirely from the authors imagination. His oath," however, "is in record, and
what his resolution was when he marched from London at the head of a large body
of men, and sent the message abovestated to his son, it is not very difficult
to conjecture."

A little superficial reading, and a consummate stock of assurance authorize
this hypercritical commentator to abuse what he does not understand. The
"anonymous Remarker," confidently if it must be, asserts that the scene in
question, in which Edward and Richard persuade their father to break his oath,
had no foundation in history; and gives this reason for it, that, "neither the
Earl of March nor Richard was then at Sandal; the latter being likewise a mere
child, scarcely more than (if indeed so much as) nine years old:" in fact he
was but just turned of eight. How, therefore, does the Irish editor, with all
his pitiful caviling and malignity, pick out from these words that York had
never taken an oath? And, though he and Warwick did leave London with 5 or
6,000 men, and might send a message to his son to follow them, it was with the
kings own authority, to suppress an insurrection against the established
government: nor could either his attacking, or his defending himself against,
the queen or prince be any breach of his oath. So that the Remarkers assertion,
however confident, is strictly true; which is more than this ingenuous
Hibernian can always say of his own, which are at the same time very seldom
distinguishable by diffidence.

It is not true that the queen and prince were at York, nor do we find from any
good authority that they were sent to by the King. Though, if they had been
sent to, and, instead of obeying the requisition, had employed themselves in
raising a rebellion, it would have been perfectly consonant with the dukes oath
and duty to have prevented or quelled it. But in fact, whatever concern the
queen might have in the Yorkshire insurrection, she did not return from
Scotland till after the battle of Wakefield.

What sort of histories the Irish editor consults I am at a loss to imagine;
and as he does not choose to cite them, I shall for once follow his example. I
collect from another note (p. 321) where he says that "neither of his daughters
was married at the time when Warwick was in France negotiating a marriage
between lady Bona and the king," that the learned gentleman is content either
with the same historians whom Shakspeare used, or with those who have followed
them: Warwick never was in France for any such purpose: as no one but such a
"half-informed" note-writer can be ignorant.


The absurd note at p. 278. being founded in gross misapprehension, or profound
ignorance, is unworthy of more particular notice.

P. 289.
So many years ere I shall sheer the fleece. "Mr. Row," we are told, "changed
years to months; which was followed by the subsequent editors; and in the next
line inserted the word weeks, not observing that hours is used as a
dissyllable. Years," it seems, "is in that line likewise used as a word of two
syllables."

The reason of Mr. Rows changing years to months, and inserting weeks was not,
as this equally superficial and blundering commentator imagines, purely on
account of the measure, but because the king has already mentioned weeks and
years, and afterward enumerates months. These two curious dissyllables it must
be confessed, help the meter prodigiously: but, in fact, the editor should be
expected to rehearse his text to the purchaser, as no one will ever be able to
read it without his instructions. The line in question would seem to be
accented thus: So mi-nutes, hou-ers, days, months, and ye-ars.

P. 360.
Now brother Richard, lord Hastings, and the rest. One of the former
commentators having, very judiciously, proposed to omit the word lord, our
ingenious editor observes that brother, like many similar words, is here used
by Shakspeare as a monosyllable, and the meter was to his ear perfect. He
should rather have said, that it is so to his own: which indeed, I can as
easily believe as pardon; since the gentleman unfortunately labors under a
natural defect, to which whoever interpolated the word must have been also
subject, though not in an equal degree. The ears of Shakspeare were formed very
differently from Mr. Malones. Observe how smoothly the verse will run! Now
bro'r Ri-chard, lord Hastings, and the rest.

The editor is unable to perceive the consequences of his own system. The
luminous arrangement of his ideas is altogether wonderful!

K. RICHARD III.
P. 569.
When did thou sleep when such a deed was done?
Q. Mar. When holy Harry died, and my sweet son.

"The editor of the second folio," says our acute critic, "changed When to Why,
which has been adopted by all the subsequent editors; though Margarets answer
evidently refers to the word found in the original copy."

The editor of the second folio seems to have understood his authors meaning,
which is by no means the case with his "flimsy" antagonist. Why is "evidently"
right. How happens it, exclaims the queen, that Heaven slept when such a deed
was done! Margaret, catching at the words such a deed, adds when holy Henry and
my son were murdered.

If When were right the queen would be guilty of a manifest absurdity, as the
question would answer itself. But an Irish editor must have an Irish text.

P. 588.
What heir of York is there alive, but we?
And who is Englands king, but great Yorks heir?
"Richard," says the editor, "asks this question in the plenitude of power, and
no one dares to answer him. But they whom he addresses, had they not been
intimidated, might have told him, that there was a male heir of the house of
York alive, who had a better claim to the throne than he; Edward earl of
Warwick the only son of the usurpers elder brother George duke of Clarence; and
Elizabeth, the eldest daughter of Edward IV. and all her sisters, had a better
title than either of them."

Either this frivolous commentator is "profoundly ignorant" of the history of
the monarch whom he chooses to call usurper, or wilfully misrepresents it. King
Richard, it is well known, had as good a title to the crown as the late king
William or queen Anne, or the reigning house of Hanover. The issue of King
Edward had been bastardized, the duke of Clarence attainted, and himself
declared the undoubted heir of Richard duke of York, BY ACT OF PARLIAMENT: and
what better title has the present king? It might as well be said that, when he,
by his champion, challenged all the world to dispute his right, he did it "in
the plentitude of power;" and that they whom he addressed, "had they not been
intimidated, might have told him that there was a male heir of the house of
'STUART' alive, who had a better claim to the throne than he!" An act of
parliament is of no more force in the 17th or 18th century than it was in the
15th.

VOL. VII.
CORIOLANUS.
P. 193.
"The etymology which Dr. Johnson has given in his dictionary -- "MALKIN, from
Mal or Mary, and kin, the diminutive termination," -- is, I apprehend,
erroneous." MALONE.

Mr. Malones apprehension arises from his ignorance of the English language.
The diminutives Wilkin, Tomkin, Jenkin, Perkin, Simkin, and. etc. sufficiently
corroborate Dr. Johnsons etymology; and they who know to what the diminutive of
Margaret has given a name can be at no loss to account for the reason of Malkin
being degraded to signify a mop of clouts, or a scarecrow: neither of which
significations, by the way, has anything to do with the text. But such is the
absurd consequence of an Irish editor attempting the illustration of an English
author.

P. 159.
Corioli.] As the editor makes an uncommon fuss with his pretensions of
adhering to the old copy, let him give reason why he has chosen to read
Corioli, not only in opposition to his original, but to Shakspeares authority,
-- Norths Plutarch. This, however, is not mentioned as the only instance he has
given us of his want of truth, fidelity, candor, and consistency.

P. 220.
Sic. You show too much of that.

"This speech is given in the old copy to Cominius. It was rightly attributed
to Sicinius by Mr. Theobald."

Having neither Theobalds edition nor the first folio at present before me, I
shall leave the above assertion to its credit. But this I can say, that the
second folio, which, if it is not to be called an "old copy," is clearly not a
very modern one, gives the speech to Sicinius; and I, for one, do not believe
that the first gives it to any body else. If it does, the second folio is good
for something; which is more than any one will be found to say of Mr. Malones
edition, at the end of a century and a half, should it so long have the
unmerited good fortune to escape the figs and pepper to which it is destined.

P. 237.
Because that now it lies you on to speak,
To the people; not by your own instruction,
Nor by the matter which your heart prompts you,
But with such words that are but roted in
Your tongue, though but bastards and syllables
Of no allowance to your bosoms truth.
The editor being as devoid of harmony as one of the long eared fraternity,
naturally thinks, if he be capable of thinking, -- for, as he elsewhere makes
his author observe, -- cogitation
Resides not in the man who does not think, --
that all his readers must be as defectively organized as himself. How else
could he have printed such execrable hobbling lines as coming from Shakspeare?
He will not have sense to perceive the superiority of the following
arrangement; -- it is not intended for him. To offer him harmonious verses
would be literally throwing pearls to swine.

Because
That now it lies you on to speak to the people,
Not by your own instruction, nor by the matter
Which your heart prompts you to, but with such words
That are but roted in your tongue, but bastards,
Of no allowance to your bosoms truth.
Prompts you to is the reading of the second folio. The words Though and and
syllables have been interpolated by such another editor as himself; as they
only serve to make nonsense of the passage. But, indeed, sense or nonsense,
harmony or discord, verse or prose are all the same to him.

P. 283.
If you have heard your general talk of Rome,
And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks,
My name has touched your ears.
A lot, here, Dr Johnson says, is a prize. It certainly is so; though our
sagacious Hibernian believes him mistaken. Menenius, he imagines, only means to
say that it is mo^^ (...) an equal chance that his name had touched their ears:
which is precisely the effect of Dr. Johnsons explanation. But, adds he, if lot
signified prize, there being in every lottery many more blanks than prizes,
Menenius must be supposed to say, that the chance of his name having reached
their ears was very small: a criticism exactly calculated for the meridian of
Tipperary. Menenius says it is prizes to blanks, something to nothing, 20,000l.
to a piece of waste paper, etc. A lot is what one gains in the lottery; and our
learned editor, no doubt, if he got a blank, would say he had gained a loss.
Neither Shakspeare, however, nor Menenius was an Irishman.

JULIUS CAESAR.
P. 334.
Are then in council and the state of a man. Such, it seems, is the reading of
the elder copy. "The editor of the second folio omitted the article, probably
from a mistaken notion concerning the meter; and all the subsequent editors
have adopted his alteration. Many words of two syllables," however, "are used
by Shakspeare as taking up the time of only one; as whether, either, brother,
lover, gentle, spirit; etc. and I suppose," concludes this profound critic, "
council is so used here."

There can be no occasion, I should think, to make any remark upon a note of
which the premises are so false, and the conclusion so foolish. Neither our
author nor any other author in the world ever used such words as either,
brother, lover, gentle, spirit as monosyllables; and though whether is
sometimes so contracted, the old copies on that occasion usually print where.
It is, in short, morally impossible that two syllables should be no more than
one.

P. 356.
-- If this be known,
Cassius or Caesar never shall turn back,
For I will slay myself.
The editor believes that Shakspeare wrote Cassius on Caesar never shall turn
back, And says, the next line strongly supports this conjecture. He must mean,
it is presumed, in the Irish way; as a mere English reader would conclude that
the next line totally destroys it. If, adds he, the conspiracy was discovered,
and the assassination of Caesar rendered impracticable by "prevention," Cassius
could have no hope of being able to prevent Caesar from "turning back; and in
all events this conspirators "slaying himself" could not produce that effect.

It is much to be lamented that the legislature has not prevented this
misconceiving, blundering foreigner from dishonouring and debasing the margin
of Shakspeare by such palpable absurdities. Cassius says, if the plot be
discovered, at all events either he or Caesar shall never return alive, for, if
the latter cannot be killed, he is determined to slay himself. The sense is as
plain, as the alternative is just and necessary, or the proposed reading
ignorant and absurd.

P. 376.
Even at the base of Pompeys statue. If even, says the editor, be considered as
a monosyllable, the meter, of which to be sure he is an admirable judge, will
be defective. But though it is not our authors practice to make this adverb a
dissyllable, yet clearly if we treat it as one, the defect is removed, and the
meter exactly suited to "the delicate ears" of this Irish Midas; whose admirers
are to read the line thus: E-ve^n at the^e base o^f Pompe^yes sta-tu^e,

P. 377.
For I have neither writ, nor words, nor worth. The first folio, by an evident
blunder, having writ, is followed by our congenial editor, who does not like to
see a blunder corrected. Wit, the reading of the second folio, will receive the
approbation of every one who has sense.

P. 383.
Our best friends made, our means stretched to the utmost. We are indebted for
the three last words to the conceit of the present editor, who has had the
modesty to advance them to the honor of a place in the text. The second folio,
from some good authority, no doubt, reads: Our best friends made, and our best
means stretched out. Which, whether he understand it or not, has an evident and
easy sense, and is perfectly in our authors manner. -- stretched to the utmost
is much too Malonish for so correct and elegant a writer.

ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA.
P. 466.
Go to then; your considerate stone. Sir W. Blackstone having remarked that the
meter of this line is deficient, the editor, with his usual modesty observes
that " Your, like hour, is used as a dissyllable; the meter therefore is not
defective." Defective? no, certainly; nothing can be more harmonious: Go to^
then; yo^u-er co^n-si-de^-rate sto^ne. However, as Enobarbus, to whom it
belongs, generally speaks in plain prose, there is no occasion for any further
attempt to harmonize it.

P. 474.
-- Good night dear lady. --
Good night, sir.
"These last words, which in the only authentic copy of this play are given to
Antony, the modern editors," according to Mr. Malone, "have assigned to
Octavia. I," however, he adds, "see no need of change." He addresses himself to
Caesar, who immediately replies, Good night." The first of these "modern
editors" happens to be his old friend the editor of the second folio (which he
pretends to have collated with so much care), who appears, from this and
numberless other instances, to have had a copy of the first folio corrected by
the players who published it, or some other well-informed person. That Mr.
Malone sees "no need of change" is the strongest possible reason for believing
that a change is absolutely necessary. And so it certainly is: Antony has
already said "Good night, sir," to Caesar, in the three first words of his
speech: the repetition would be absurd.

P. 479.
Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears,
That long time have been barren.
Though the first word is evidently a misprint for Rain, as it has been given
by Sir T. Hanmer and others, the editor suspects no corruption. "The term
employed in the text," he says, "is much in the style of the speaker;" (what he
means by that is difficult to say;) "and is supported incontestably by a
passage in Julius Caesar," which incontestably does not support it at all, the
idea being perfectly distinct. The term employed, however, as well as the note
upon it, is much in the style of the editor; and it would be a pity to lose any
opportunity of laughing at his bulls and blunders; which, it must be
nevertheless admitted, are as impertinent in the margin of Shakspeare as a
buffoon would be in a church.

Ram is likewise a vulgar word, never used in our authors plays, but once by
Falstaff, where he describes his situation in the buck-basket. Though if, in
the Tempest, the negligence of a press-man had left. -- Heavens ram grace, this
judicious critic would have supported that authentic reading in the same way.
For, as he has elsewhere justly observed, "If such capricious innovations were
to be admitted, every line in these plays might be changed." Some people are
too ignorant to innovate.

P. 499.
Spoke you of Caesar? How? the nonpareil! " How, I believe, was here printed by
mistake for ho!" MALONE.

It was not; and ho, which this ingenuous annotator found in the second folio,
is nothing more than an accidental transposition of oh. Oh Antony! oh thou
Arabian bird! The editor can pilfer, though he cannot praise.

P. 508
Then, world, thou have a pair of chaps no more,
And throw between them all the food thou have,
They Will grind the one the other. Where Is Antony?
Dr. Johnsons emendation certainly deserved a place in the text; and a very
slight alteration would prevent its destroying the meter, which any but our
asinego of an editor will instantly perceive. -- grind the one the other --
will never do. The measure is perfect in the old reading, which requires only
one syllable for another. Shakspeare wrote: They Will grind each other. Where is
Antony?

P. 575.
Being so frustrate, tell him he mocks us by
The pauses that he makes.
The two last words of the first line are added by the present Irish editor,
who observes that "the defect of the meter," of which he knows as much as a
superannuated jack-ass, "shows that something was omitted." Former editors
supplied the measure by reading Being so frustrated, tell him he mocks; which,
it must be confessed, does not afford an easy sense. Shakspeare, however, would
never have written the above hobbling line, which has no sort of pretensions to
meter. We may read: Being so frustrated, he mocks us by.

VOL. VIII.
TIMON OF ATHENS.
P. 27.
The ear, taste, touch, smell, all pleased from thy table rise. "The ear," it
seems, "was intended to be contracted into one syllable; and table also was
probably used as taking up only the time of a monosyllable." This nonsense is
to justify the retention of all, which better judges had found it necessary to
omit, or rather to change for smell. Mr. Malone reads the line thus, that is,
if he can read at all: Th'ear, taste, touch, smell, all pleased from thy ta^il
rise.

P. 40.
The clamorous demands of date-broken bonds. The old editions read: -- of debt,
broken bonds. Hanmer and others omit the syllable, which the present editor has
thus judiciously restored; being unable to perceive that he was injuring the
meter, without improving the sense.

P. 52.
-- This slave
Unto his honor has my lords meat in him.
The modern editors have concurred in reading -- Unto this hour -- as
unquestionably Shakspeare wrote. But the corruption, being manifest nonsense,
is properly replaced in the present text, where it will find nothing to put it
out of countenance.

P. 61.
The devil knew not what he did, when he made man politic; he crossed himself
by it: and I cannot think but in the end, the villainies of man will set him
clear. The meaning, as elucidated by this perspicacious critic is as follows:
The devil did not know what he was about when he made man crafty and
interested; he thwarted himself by it; and I cannot but think that at last the
enormities of mankind will rise to, such a height as to make even Satan
himself, in comparison appear (what he would least of all wish to be) spotless
and innocent; which seems much more obscure than the text itself. The editor
has omitted three very weak notes of Warburton, Johnson and Tollett, to make
way for his own nonsense; but why the passage should have required a note,
except to inform us that the commentator did not understand it, is not easy to
conceive. The devils folly in making man politic is to appear in this, that he
will at the long run be too many for his old master, and get free of his bonds.
The villainies of man are to set himself clear, not the devil, to whom he is, by
ignorant enthusiasts, supposed to be in thralldom.

P. 63.
Your masters confidence was above mine,
Else, surely, his had equaled,
Our modest Hibernian, after giving an interpretation, which he professes to
think wrong, because "a shallow Remarker" has endeavored to represent it as
unintelligible, allows it may be so to him, as the wit of some men (meaning, of
course, his own) like Falstaffs desert "is too thick to shine, and too heavy to
mount." "This Remarker, however," he proceeds to relate, " after a feeble
attempt at jocularity, and saying that he shall take no further notice of this
editors see-saw conjectures, with great gravity proposes a comment evidently
formed on the latter of them, as an original interpretation of his own, on
which the reader may safely rely."

Friend Butler somewhere tells us, there is no argument like matter of fact: we
shall presently see who is the thief.

In the edition of 1778, the latter of this ingenious gentleman's "see-saw
conjectures" is as follows: "The passage however may be explained thus: -- His
may refer to mine; as if he had said: Your master's confidence was above my
masters; else surely his, i. e. the sum demanded from my master (for that is
the last antecedent) had been equal to the sum demanded from yours."

The Remark is: "Your master, it seems, had more confidence in lord Timon than
mine, otherwise, his ( i. e. my masters) debt ( i. e. the sum due to him from
Timon) would, certainly, have been as great as your master ( i. e. as the money
which Timon owes to your master); that is, my master, being as rich as yours,
could and would have advanced Timon as large a sum as your master has advanced
him, if he ( i. e. my master) had thought it prudent to do so."

Very well: now comes "the true explication," which the editor says he "also
formerly proposed;" an assertion, if he mean in the edition of 1778, which is
evidently untrue. The reader may compare them.

" His may refer to mine. "It should seem that the confidential friendship
subsisting between your master and Timon was greater than that subsisting
between Timon and my master; else surely his sum, i. e. the sum borrowed from
my master, [the last antecedent] had been as large as the sum borrowed from
yours."

It must be perfectly clear, that the Remarker could not be indebted to a note
which, so far as it is intelligible, seems diametrically opposite to his idea.
It is equally so, that the editor has availed himself of the above "shallow"
Remark, to vary the expression of his "see-saw conjecture," and give it a sense
it would otherwise never have had. Q. E. D.

TROILUS AND CRESSIDA.
P. 145.
And skill-less as unpracticed infancy. Dr. Johnson says that "Mr. Dryden, in
his alteration of this play, has changed skill-less to artless, not for the
better, because skill-less refers to skill and skilful. "A very fond and
skill-less Remarker, on this note," adds the editor, "asks and does not artless
refer to art and artful."

Without interesting myself at all in what I do not profess to understand, I
shall only beg leave to say that if Mr. Malone meant, by this piece of insolent
vulgarity, to assert that there was any such question in the " Remarks on the
last edition, etc. 1785, the assertion is a gross falsehood. He seems to commit
forgery for the sake of abuse.

K. LEAR.
P. 583.
Here our learned editor, incapable of distinguishing history from romance,
quotes Geoffrey of Monmouth for "an historical fact." In a subsequent page
(601) he assures us that " Nero is introduced in the present play above 800
years before he was born." He should therefore seem to have some secret method
for ascertaining the era of persons that never existed, and of events that
never happened. It cannot, however, be by means of the black art, as he is
certainly no conjurer.

P. 587.
Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave you all. Father, brother, rather,
he has already observed, he says, were sometimes used by Shakspeare as
monosyllables: Your old kind fa'r, whose frank heart gave you all.

The folios read: Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all.

The poetical reader will judge which line is most likely to have fallen from
Shakspeare.

VOL. IX.
ROMEO AND JULIET.
P. 66.
Jul. Romeo!

Romans Madam.

"Thus," says Mr. Malone, "the original copy of 1597. In the two subsequent
copies and the folio we have -- My niece. What word was intended by it is
difficult," for him, "to say. The editor of the second folio," he adds,
"substituted -- My sweet:" which, being an emendation equally just and
beautiful, and, by his own admission, more "tender" than what he calls "the
original word," he rejects as an arbitrary substitution, "all the alterations
in that copy" being "made at random;" not excluding those which this candid
commentator has elsewhere thought fit to adopt.

Madam, which is given to Romeo, in the first copy, by a mere mistake of the
compositor, evidently belongs to the nurse, who is supposed to call Juliet from
within. Shakspeare, however, thought proper to alter the word to sweet, and
give it to Romeo; or indeed one of the speeches may have dropped out at the
press. Niece is a palpable misprint.

P. 100.
Hood my unmann'd blood. "To hood a hawk, that is to cover its head with a
hood," we are here told, "was an usual practice, before the bird was suffered
to fly at its quarry."

If such a practice ever prevailed, I conclude it must have been in our
luminous editors native country. It will appear a very strange doctrine to the
amateurs of this savage amusement, that the hawk should be flown at game which
it was not suffered to see. The fact is that they, on this occasion, took the
hood off.

P. 113.
But thou stew'st Tybalt; there are thou happy too. "Thus," he says, "the first
quarto. In the subsequent quartos, and the folio too is omitted."

Now, reader, be pleased to mark the candor, the integrity of this ingenuous
critic. The editor of the second folio, who, he pretends, has been the most
arbitrary, ignorant and capricious of the whole set, reads exactly with the
first quarto. What say you to this, M. Malone? Is this too an alteration made
at random and suggested by ignorance and caprice?

P. 123.
When the sun sets the air does drizzle dew. The reading of some editions is --
the earth does drizzle dew -- which our editor says is philosophically true,
and ought to be preferred.

No one I believe ever before heard of the earths drizzleing dew. The editor
seems to have got his philosophy our of Dr. Hills Inspector, which, to be sure,
is a very proper school for such a novice. That Shakspeare, however, thought it
was the air and not the earth that drizzled dew is evident from other passages.

So in K. John: Before the dew of evening fall.

Again in K. Henry VIII.

His dews fall every where. Again, in the same play: The dews of heaven fall
thick in blessings on her.

Again, in Hamlet: Dews of blood fell.

I suppose we are in these places to read earth for heaven and rise or rose
instead of fall or fell.

HAMLET.
P. 217.
Lends the tongue vows: these blazes, daughter. Some epithet, he says, has been
omitted in consequence of which the meter is defective. There is not the
smallest ground for such a supposition: Blazes is a quadrisyllable. We may
therefore read: Lends the tongue vows: these bla-a-a-zes, daughter.

P. 426.
Of carnal, bloody and unnatural acts. "A feeble Remarker," as this Herculean
commentator elegantly observes, "asks "was the relationship between the usurper
and the deceased king a secret confined to Horatio?" "No," he answers, "but the
murder of Hamlet by Claudius was a secret which the young prince had imparted
to Horatio alone; and to this it is he principally, though covertly alludes."

And, pray, what is all this to the signification of the word carnal? But it is
natural enough for a feeble Remark to produce a pitiful cavil from a
half-informed hypercritic.

OTHELLO.
P. 445.
-- must be belee'd and calmed. "The lee-side of a ship," we are told, "is that
on which the wind blows. To lee, or to be lee'd may," therefore "mean, to fall
to leeward, or to lose the advantage of the wind."

Alexander the great, after listening to the labored oration of a pedantic
philosopher on the art of war, observed that he had never heard a fool talk so
learnedly. This compliment cannot possibly be applied to our editor, who always
talks like himself; pretending to know every thing and knowing nothing. One
would have thought that every fool knew that the lee side of a ship is that --
not on which, but from which the wind blows. The editor has read in the
newspapers of a lee-shore, which would be there rightly interpreted, a shore on
which the wind blows; but it is so termed in reference to the ship, as being a
shore on its lee side. Belee'd is a word formed like becalmed, etc. and means,
as other persons have rightly explained it, that Cassio intercepted the wind of
favor or preferment.

P. 537.
Keep leets and lawdays. "The leet," our learned editor observes, "according to
Lambard, was a court or jurisdiction above the wapentake or hundred,
comprehending three or four hundreds. The jurisdiction of this court is now in
most places merged in that of the county court."

There is, I am persuaded, some misrepresentation as well as some ignorance in
this note. As to the first charge, he may acquit himself of it by producing a
passage in which Lambard has any such assertion. Upon the second count,
Ignorance, he must be clearly convicted. The Leet being a criminal court as
well as a court of record never had, nor possibly could have, the slightest
connection with the county court, which is neither the one nor the other, and
consequently cannot have merged in it. You see, therefore, M. Malone, that your
friend Minshew is not always to be depended upon.

VOL. X.
TITUS ANDRONICUS.
P. 388.
Was there none else in Rome to make a stale of. "The words, there, else, and
of, are not found in the old copies. This conjectural emendation was made by
the editor of the second folio."

Since our critic has elsewhere shown (as he says) "that all the alterations in
this edition were made at random," and that the editor was entirely ignorant of
our authors phraseology and meter, how comes i^; that his arbitrary innovation
of no less than three words should have been honored with a place in our
authors text? Because, for once, he has omitted to perceive that Shakspeare
used the words none Rome, and other words of that kind, as dissyllables and
consequently the meter "was to his ear perfect."

Was none in Rome to make a stale.

P. 451.
Even from Hyperion's rising in the east. "The [first] folio," says Mr.
Steevens, "reads Epton's; the quarto Epion's: to which Mr. Malone, without
blushing, adds, "the correction was made in the second folio;" most
inconsistently deserting the only true ancient authentic copies for the
arbitrary emendation of an ignorant editor in an edition of no value whatever?

P. 467.
It is observable that our equally modest and consistent critic thinks it
"highly probable" that the second scene of the third act of this play "was
added by our author:" an opinion for which he has here attempted to ridicule a
much more respectable character than himself; and one whose judgment seems,
from this instance, at least, to have been altogether upon a par with his own.
See the Preface, p. lix.

APPENDIX.
P. 599.
Vol. iv. Tw. N. p. 46. He has observed, he says, that lover is elsewhere used
by our poet as a word of one syllable. So, in A Midsummer Night's Dream: "Tie
up my lover's tongue; bring him silently."

Again, in King Henry VIII. "Is held no great good lover of the archbishops,"
As to the first of these pretended instances, it proves nothing; being only
(whatever he may say to the contrary) a misprint for love's. And every one but
this sagacious critic will perceive that the other is to be pronounced like
what it is, a word of two syllables: Is held no great good lover of the
archbishops.

P. 643.
H. V.

P. 492. His nose was as sharp as a pen, and 'a babbled of green fields. On
this difficult passage our editor had one conjecture which had luckily, it
seems, escaped him when the play was printing, but he unfortunately recollected
it in time for his appendix. It is that the word table is right, and the
corrupted word and, which may have been misprinted for in; and thus then the
passage will mean -- "and his note was as sharp as a pen in a table of green
fields." A pen may have been used for a pin-fold, and a table for a picture.
The pointed stakes, he adds, of which pinfolds are sometimes formed were
perhaps in the poets thoughts.

Risum teneatis? If Shakspeare had had the pointed stakes of a pinfold in his
minds eye he would have mentioned it, for though the stake may be sharp, the
pinfold is not. But why waste a moment in the consideration of such miserable
nonsense? Whoever knew the word pen used for pinfold, or a pinfold placed
amidst a parcel of green fields? We have pens for geese, indeed, and pens for
sheep; but no one ever before heard of the pen of an ass.

P. 643.
P. 495. "An anonymous writer," we are told, "supposes that by the words --
keep close, Pistol means keep within doors. That this was not the meaning," it
seems, "is proved decisively by the words of the quarto."

That this is not the meaning in the quarto may be proved decisively by the
words of that edition, but the meaning of the folio is to be ascertained by its
own: so that the supposition may be right enough.

Such are the observations which I have had to make upon this most sagacious of
editors, and his unparalleled edition. I must not, however, be understood to
say that I have paid equal attention to all his absurdities. His pages abound
with examples of profound ignorance, idle conjectures, crude actions, feeble
attempts at jocularity, slender criticism, shallow, half-informed, fond,
skill-less, tasteless and unfounded remarks, no less, or possibly much more,
worthy of contempt and derision than those exposed in the present sheets. They
can only, therefore, serve as a hasty or imperfect sketch of what may be done by
others; if indeed either Mr. Malone or his edition be entitled to any further
notice. It will be easily seen that, in the course of this investigation, "I
have endeavored, as much as possible, to avoid all controversy;" and Mr.
Malone, I am sure, has too exalted an opinion of his peculiar merits, and too
sovereign a contempt for those who dare call them in question, to permit that
the serenity of his mind should suffer a moments discomposure by the appearance
of an insignificant pamphlet; well knowing that "of such flimzy materials are
many of the hyper-criticisms composed to which the labors of the editors and
commentators on Shakspeare have given rise."

THE END.

