POEMS Occasioned by Reading the TRAVELS OF Captain Lemuel Gulliver,
EXPLANATORY AND COMMENDATORY.

DUBLIN: Printed by and for J. HYDE, Bookseller in Dame's- Street, 1727.

TO QVVINBVS FLESTRIN THE Man-Mountain.
AN ODE.
By TITTY TITT, Esquire Poet-Laureat to his Majesty of LILLIPUT.
Translated into ENGLISH.
I.
IN amaze
Lost, I gaze!
Can our Eyes
Reach thy Size?
May my Lays
Swell with Praise
Worthy thee!
Worthy me!
Muse inspire,
All thy Fire!
Bards of old
Of him told,
When they said
Atlas Head
Propt the Skies:
See and believe your Eyes!
II.
See him stride
Valleys wide:
Over Woods,
Over Floods.
When he treads,
Mountains Heads
Groan and shake;
Armies quake,
Lest his Spurn
Overturn
Man and Steed:
Troops take heed!
Left and Right,
Speed your Flight!
Lest an Host
Beneath his Foot be lost.
III.
Turned aside
From his Hide,
Safe from Wound
Darts rebound.
From his Nose
Clouds he blows;
When he speaks,
Thunder breaks!
When he eats,
Famine threats;
When he drinks,
Neptune shrinks!
Nigh thy Ear,
In Mid Air,
On thy Hand
Let me stand,
So shall I,
Lofty Poet, touch the Sky.
THE LAMENTATION Of Glumdalclitch for the Loss of Grildrig.
A PASTORAL.
SOON as Glumdalclitch mist her pleasing Care,
She wept, she blubbered, and she tore her Hair.
No British Miss sincerer Grief has known,
Her Squirrel missing, or her Sparrow flown.
She furled her Sampler, and hawl'd in her Thread,
And stuck her Needle into Grildrig's Bed;
Then spread her Hands, and with a Bounce let fall
Her Baby, like the Giant in Guild Hall.
In Peals of Thunder, now she roars, and now
She gently whimpers like a lowing Cow.
Yet lovely in her Sorrow still appears:
Her Locks dishevelled, and her Flood of Tears
Seem like the lofty Barn of some rich Swain,
When from the Thatch drips fast a Shower of Rain.
In v^^n she searched each Cranny of the House,
Each gaping Chink impervious to a Mouse.
" Was it for this (she cried) with daily Care
" Within thy reach I set the Vinegar?
" And filled the Cruet with the acid Tide,
" While Pepper-Water-Worms thy Bait supplied;
" Where twined the Silver Eel around thy Hook,
" And all the little Monsters of the Brook.
" Sure in that Lake he dropped -- My Grilly's drowned.
She dragged the Cruet, but no Grildrig found.
" Vain is thy Courage, Grilly, vain thy Boast,
" But little Creatures enterprise the most.
" Trembling, I Have seen thee dare the Kitten's Paw;
" Nay, mix with Children, as they played at Taw;
" Nor fear the Marbles, as they bounding flew:
" Marbles to them, but rolling Rocks to you.
" Why did I trust thee with that giddy Youth?
" Who from a Page can ever learn the Truth?
" Versed in Court Tricks, that Money-loving Boy
" To some Lord's Daughter sold the living Toy;
" Or rent him Limb from Limb in cruel Play,
" As Children tear the Wings of Flies away:
" From Place to Place over Brobdingnag I Will roam,
" And never will return, or bring thee home.
" But who has Eyes to trace the passing Wind,
" How then thy fairy Footsteps can I find?
" Do thou bewildred wander all alone,
" In the green Thicket of a Mossy Stone,
" Or tumbled from the Toadstool's slippery Round,
" Perhaps all maimed, lie grovelling on the Ground?
" Do thou, imbosom'd in the lovely Rose,
" Or sunk within the Peach's Down, repose?
" Within the King-Cup if thy Limbs are spread,
" Or in the golden Cowslip's velvet Head;
" O show me, Flora, 'midst those Sweets, the Flower
" Where sleeps my Grildrig in the fragrant Bower*
" But ah! I fear thy little Fancy roves
" On little Females, and on little Loves;
" Thy pigmy Children, and thy tiny Spouse,
" The Baby Playthings that adorn thy House,
" Doors, Windows, Chimneys, and the spacious Rooms
" Equal in Size to Cells of Honeycombs.
" Have thou for these now ventured from the Shore,
" Thy Bark a Bean-shell, and a Straw thy Oar?
" Or in thy Box, now bounding on the Main?
" Shall I never bear thy self and House again?
" And shall I see thee on my Hand no more,
" To see thee leap the Lines, and traverse over
" My spacious Palm? of Stature scarce a Span,
" Mimick the Actions of a real Man?
" No more behold thee turn my Watches Key,
" As Seamen at a Capstern Anchors weigh?
" How were thou wont to walk with cautious Tread,
" A Dish of Tea like Milk-Pale on thy Head?
" How chase the Mite that bore thy Cheese away,
" And keep the rolling Maggot at a Bay?
She spoke; but broken Accents stopped her Voice,
Soft as the speaking Trumpets mellow Noise:
She sob'd a Storm, and wiped her flowing Eyes,
Which seemed like two broad Suns in misty Skies:
O! squander not thy Grief, those Tears command
To weep upon our Cod in Newfound-Land:
The plenteous Pickle shall preserve the Fish,
And Europe taste thy Sorrows in her Dish.
TO Mr. Lemuel Gulliver, The Grateful ADDRESS of the Unhappy HOUYHNHNMS, now in
Slavery and Bondage in England.
TO thee, we Wretches of the Houhnhnm Band,
Condemned to labor in a barbarous Land,
Return our Thanks. Accept our humble Lays,
And let each grateful Houyhnhnm neigh thy Praise.
O happy Yahoo, purged from human Crimes,
By thy sweet Sojourn in those virtuous Climes,
Where reign our Sires! There, to thy Countrey's Shame,
Reason, you found, and Virtue were the same.
Their Precepts razed the Prejudice of Youth,
And even a Yahoo learned the Love of Truth.
Art thou the first who did the Coast explore;
Did never Yahoo tread that Ground before?
Yes Thousands. But in Pity to their Kind,
Or swayed by Envy, or through Pride of Mind,
They hid their Knowledge of a nobler Race,
Which owned, would all their Sires and Sons disgrace.
You, like the Samian, visit Lands unknown,
And by their wiser Morals mend your own.
Thus Orpheus traveled to reform his Kind,
Came back, and tamed the Brutes he left behind.
You went, you saw, you heard: With Virtue fought,
Then spread those Morals which the Houyhnhnms taught.
Our Labors here must touch thy generous Heart,
To see us strain before the Coach and Cart;
Compelled to run each knavish Jockey's Heat!
Subservient to New-market's annual Cheat!
With what Reluctance do we Lawyers bear,
To fleece their Country Clients twice a Year?
Or managed in your Schools, for Fops to ride,
How foam, how fret beneath a Load of Pride!
Yes, we are Slaves -- but yet, by Reason's Force,
Have learnt to bear Misfortune, like a Horse.
O would the Stars, to ease my Bonds, ordain,
That gentle Gulliver might guide my Rein!
Safe would I bear him to his Journey's End,
For it is a Pleasure to support a Friend.
But if my Life be doomed to serve the Bad,
O! may thou never want an easy Pad!
MARY GVLLIVER TO Capt. Lemuel Gulliver; AN EPISTLE
The Captain some time after his Return, being retired to Mr. Sympson's in the
Country, Mrs. Gulliver, apprehending from his late Behavior some Estrangement
of his Affections, writes him the following expostulating, soothing, and
tenderly-complaing EPISTLE.

WELCOME, thrice welcome to thy native Place!
-- What, touch me not? what,
shun a wife's Embrace?
Have I for this thy tedious Absence born,
And waked and wished whole Nights for thy Return?
In five long Years I took no second Spouse;
What Redriff Wife so long has kept her Vows?
Your Eyes, your Nose, Inconstancy betray;
Your Nose you stop, your Eyes you turn away.
It Is said, that thou should cleave unto thy Wife;
Once thou did cleave, and I could cleave for Life.
Hear and relent! hark, how thy Children moan;
Be kind at least to these, they are thy own:
Behold, and count them all; secure to find
The honest Number that you left behind.
See how they pat thee with their pretty Paws:
Why start you? are they Snakes? or have they Claws?
Thy Christian Seed, our mutual Flesh and Bone:
Be kind at least to these, they are thy own.
Biddel like thee, might farthest India rove;
He changed his Country, but retained his Love.
There Is Captain Panel, absent half his Life,
Comes back, and is the kinder to his Wife.
Yet Pannel's Wife is brown, compared to me,
And Mistress Biddel sure is Fifty three.
Not touch me! never Neighbor called me Slut!
Was Flimnap's Dame more sweet in Lilliput?
I Have no red Hair to breath an odious Fume;
At least thy Consort's cleaner than thy Groom.
Why then that dirty Stable-boy thy Care?
What mean those Visits to the Sorrel Mare?
Say, by what Witchcraft, or what Demon led,
Preferr'st thou Litter to the Marriage Bed?
Some say the Devilish himself is in that Mare:
If so, our Dean shall drive him forth by Prayer.
Some think you mad, some think you are possessed,
That Bedlam and clean Straw would suit you best:
Vain means, alas, this Frenzy to appease!
That Straw, that Straw would heighten the Disease.
My Bed, (the Scene of all our former Joys,
Witness two lovely Girls, two lovely Boys)
Alone I press; in Dreams I call my Dear,
I stretch my Hand; no Gulliver is there!
I wake, I rise, and shivering with the Frost,
Search all the House; my Gulliver is lost!
Forth in the Street I rush with frantic Cries;
The Windows open; all the Neighbors rise:
Where sleeps my Gulliver? O tell me where?
The Neighbors answer, " With the Sorrel Mare.
At early Morn, I to the Market haste,
(Studious in every thing to please thy Taste)
A curious Fowl and Sparagrass I chose,
(For I remembered you were fond of those)
Three Shillings cost the first, the last sev'n Groats;
Sullen you turned from both, and called for Oats.
Others bring Goods and Treasures to their Houses.
Something to deck their pretty Babes and Spouses;
My only Token was a Cup like Horn,
That Is made of nothing but a Lady's Corn.
It Is not for that I grieve; O, it is to see
The Groom and Sorrel Mare preferred to me!
These for some Moments when you deign to quit,
And (at due distance) sweet Discourse admit,
It Is all my Pleasure thy past Toil to know,
For pleased Remembrance builds Delight on Woe.
At every Danger pants thy Consort's Breast,
And gaping Infants squawle to hear the rest.
How did I tremble, when by Tousands bound,
I saw thee stretched on Lilliputian Ground;
When scaling Armies climbed up every Part,
Each Step they trod, I felt upon my Heart.
But when thy Torrent quenched the dreadful Blaze,
King, Queen and Nation staring with Amaze,
Full in my view how all my Husband came,
And what extinguished theirs, increased my Flame.
Those Spectacles, ordained thine Eyes to save,
Were once my Present; Love that Armor gave.
How did I mourn at Bolgolam's Decree!
For when he signed thy Death, he sentenced me.
When Folks might see thee all the Country round
For Six pence, I Would have given a Thousand pound.
Lord! when the Giant-babe that Head of thine
Got in his Mouth, my Heart was up in mine!
When in the Marrow-bone I see thee ramm'd,
Or on the Housetop by the Monkey crammed;
The piteous Images renew my Pain,
And all thy Dangers I weep over again!
But on the Maiden's-Nipple when you rid,
Pray Heaven, 'twas all a wanton Maiden did!
Glumdalclitch too! -- with thee I mourn her Case,
Heaven guard the gentle Girl from all Disgrace!
O may the King that one Neglect forgive,
And pardon her the Fault by which I live!
Was there no other Way to set him free?
My Life, alas, I fear proved Death to Thee!
O teach me, dear, new words to speak my Flame;
Teach me to woo thee by thy best-lov'd Name!
Whether the Style of Grildrig please thee most,
So called on Brobdingnag's stupendous Coast,
When on the Monarch's ample Hand you sat,
And hollowed in his Ear, Intrigues of State:
Or Quinbus Flestrin more Endearment brings,
When like a Mountain you looked down on Kings:
If Ducal Nardae, Lilliputian Peer,
Or Glumglum's humbler Title sooth thy Ear;
Nay, would kind Jove my Organs so dispose,
To hymn harmonious Houyhnhnm through the Nose,
I Would call thee Houyhnhnm, that high sounding Name,
Thy Children's Noses all should twang the same.
So might I find my loving Spouse of course
Endu'd with all the Virtues of a Horse.
FINIS.

