AN ESSAY on ACTING: In which will be considered The Mimical Behavior OF A
Certain fashionable faulty ACTOR, AND THE Laudableness of such unmannerly, as
well as inhumane Proceedings. To which will be added, A short CRITICISM On His
acting MACBETH.

-- So have I seen a Pygmie strut,
Mouth and rant, in a Giant's Robe.
Tom Thumb. -- Oh! Macbeth has murdered G -- k.
Shakespeare. LONDON: Printed for W. BICKERTON, at the Gazette, in the Temple
Exchange, near the Inner Temple Gate, Fleet Street. M, DCC, XLIV. [Price
Sixpence.]

AN ESSAY ON ACTING, etc.
AS I have a long Time (twenty Years, or more) made the STAGE, and ACTING, my
Study and Entertainment, I look upon myself, and indeed am thought by my
Intimates, a proper Person to animadvert upon, or approve, the Errors and the
Excellencies of the Theater; and as there can be no better Opportunity offer
itself than now, when the Town is running after their little fashionable Actor,
in a Character of which he is, properly speaking, the Anticlimax of, or rather
the Antipode of Shakespeare; I will endeavor in the following Dissection of our
Puppet Hero, to convince my dear Country Men and Country Women, that they are
madly following an Ignis fatuus, or Will of the Whisp, which they take for real
substantial Light, and which I shall prove to be only the Rush-light of Genius,
the Idol of Fashion, and an Air-drawn Favorite of the Imagination.

HOW are we degenerated in Taste! Oh how changed! how fallen! Milton's Paradise
Lost.
That our Theater shall be crowded with Nobility, Ladies and Gentry, to see
Macbeth Burlesqu'd, or Be -- g -- k'd, which are synonimous, when they might
read Mr. Theobald's Edition of him, without throwing away their Money,
mispending their Time, ruining their Taste, or running the Hazard of catching a
violent Cold, for a mere Nonentity: However, that I may not seem to be
prejudiced against Mr. G -- k, as I really am not, for I admire him, for thus
boldly daring to deceive and cheat three Parts of the Nation; I shall, having
now cracked the Shell of my Spleen against the Town, come to the Kernel of
Reason, and present 'em this little sweet Nut of theirs, worm-eaten to the
Sight, embittered to their Taste, and abhorred to their Imaginations, as
Shakespeare terms it.

IN order to do this, I shall present my Readers with the following short
Treatise upon ACTING, which will show 'em what ACTING ought to be, and what the
present Favorite in Question is not.

A Short TREATISE UPON ACTING. By which The PLAYERS may be Instructed, and the
TOWN Undeceived.
That I may convince the World, that the Public Good, and no Private
Animosity, has extracted the following Treatise from its Author. I shall first
give an ample and clear Definition of ACTING, and make the Natural,
Metaphysical, and Consequential Deductions, that will immediately elicite the
Right from the Wrong, and show my Designs are merely Scientifical, and not
Subservient to Pique and partial Prejudice.

ACTING is an Entertainment of the Stage, which by calling in the Aid and
Assistance of Articulation, Corporeal Motion, and Occular Expression, imitates,
assumes, or puts on the various mental and bodily Emotions arising from the
various Humors, Virtues and Vices, incident to human Nature.

THERE are Two different Kinds of Exhibitions, viz. TRAGEDY and COMEDY; the
first fixes her Empire on the Passions, and the more exalted Contractions and
Dilations of the Heart; the last, though not inferior (quotidem Science) holds
her Rule over the less enobled Qualities and Districts of human Nature, which
are called the Humors: Now in some Cases, Passions are Humors, and Humors
Passions; for the Revenges of an Alexander and a Haberdasher, may have the same
Fountain, and differ only in their Currents, and though the one (Alexander)
cannot content himself but with the total Subversion of his Enemy's Kingdom,
and the other (the Haberdasher) is satisfied with rolling his Antagonist in the
Kennel; yet, still it is Revenge, the Mind of one is equally affected in
Proportion to the other, and all the Difference lies in the different Ways of
satisfying their common Passion. But now to the Application* and Design in
Hand. If an Actor, and a favorite Actor, in assuming these different
Characters with the same Passions, shall unskilfully differ only in Dress, and
not in Execution; and supposing him right in One, and of Consequence absolutely
ridiculous in the Other. Shall this Actor, I say, in Spite of Reason, Physics,
and common Observation, be caressed, applauded, admired? But to illustrate it
more by Example. -- Suppose the Murder of Duncan, and the Breaking a Urinal
shall affect the Player in the same Manner, and the only Difference is the blue
Apron and laced Coat, shall we be chilled at the Murderer, and roar at the
Tobacconist? Fie for Shame! -- As the One must be absolutely the Reverse of
Right, I think the Public, for so gross an Imposition, should drive both off
the Stage. When Drugger becomes Macbeth, and Macbeth Drugger, I feel for the
Manes of the Immortal Shakespeare, and Inimitable Ben; I bemoan the Taste of my
Country, and I would have the Buffoon sacrificed to appease the Muses, and
restore to us a true Dramatick Taste, by such an examplary Piece of Justice. I
shall now, as relative to my my present Subject, describe in what Manner the
two abovementioned Characters ought to be mentally and corporeally Agitated,
under the different Circumstances of the Dagger, and Urinal; and by that shall
more fully delineate what is meant by Passions and Humors. When Abel Drugger
has broke the Urinal, he is mentally absorbed with the different Ideas of the
invaluable Price of the Urinal, and the Punishment that may be inflicted in
Consequence of a Curiosity, no way appertaining or belonging to the Business he
came about. Now, if this, as it certainly is, the Situation of his Mind, How
are the different Members of the Body to be agitated? Why Thus, -- His Eyes
must be reversed from the Object he is most intimidated with, and by dropping
his Lip at the some Time to the Object, it throws a trembling Languor upon
every Muscle, and by declining the right Part of the Head toward the Urinal,
it casts the most comic Terror and Shame over all the upper Part of the Body,
that can be imagined; and to make the lower Part equally ridiculous, his Toes
must be inverted from the Heel, and by holding his Breath, he will unavoidably
give himself a Tremor in the Knees, and if his Fingers, at the same Time, seem
convulsed, it finishes the compleatest low Picture of Grotesque Terror that can
be imagined by a Dutch Painter. -- Let this be compared with the modern Copies,
and then let the Town judge. -- Now to Macbeth. -- When the Murder of Duncan is
committed, from an immediate Consciousness of the Fact, his Ambition is
ingulph'd at that Instant, by the Horror of the Deed; his Faculties are
intensely rivited to the Murder alone, without having the least Consolation of
the consequential Advantages, to comfort him in that Exigency. He should at
that Time, be a moving Statue, or indeed a petrified Man; his Eyes must Speak,
and his Tongue be metaphorically Silent; his Ears must be sensible of imaginary
Noises, and deaf to the present and audible Voice of his Wife; his Attitudes
must be quick and permanent; his Voice articulately trembling, and confusedly
intelligible; the Murderer should be seen in every Limb, and yet every Member,
at that Instant, should seem separated from his Body, and his Body from his
Soul: This is the Picture of a complete Regicide, and as at that Time the Orb
below should be hush as death; I hope I shall not be thought minutely
circumstantial, if I should advise a real Genius to wear Cork Heels to his
Shoes, as in this Scene he should seem to tread on Air, and I promise him he
will soon discover the great Benefit of this (however seeming trifling) Piece
of Advice.

THE only Way to arrive at great Excellency in Characters of Humor, is to be
very conversant with Human Nature, that is the noblest and best Study, by this
Way you will more accurately discover the Workings of Spirit (or what other
Physical Terms you please to call it) upon the different Modifications of
Matter. Would the Painter produce a perfect Piece to the World, let him Copy
from the Life, let Nature herself sit to the Artist: Would a Player perform
equally excellent in his Profession, let him be introduced into the World, be
conversant with Humors of every Kind, digest 'em in his Mind, let 'em be
cherished by the genial Warmth of his Conception, transplanted into the fair
Garden of his Judgment, there let 'em ripen to Perfection, and become his own.
Hic Labor! Hoc Opus! The late celebrated Mr. Dogget, before he performed the
Character of Ben, in Love for Love, took Lodgings in Wapping, and gathered
thence a Nosegay for the whole Town: Another Comedian now living, though not upon
the Stage (it being so replete with greater Geniuses) has been observed
constantly to attend the 'Change for Weeks together, before he exhibited one of
Shakespeare's most inimitable and difficult Characters, and so far succeeded by
his great Attention and Observation of the Manners, Dress, and Behavior of a
particular Tribe of People, that the Judgment, Application, and extraordinary
Pains he took to divert the Public rationally, was amply returned with crowded
Theaters, and unequalled Applauses; nay, to so great a Degree did they show
their Approbation to this Pains-taking Genius, that he is at present more known
by the Name of the Character he performed, than by his own.

I shall not enter into the Reasons why he is at present excluded Theater, but
shall only, as an Advocate for the Public, say that I wish for their Sake,
that there were many such Actors as him upon both Theaters.

I have, in as concise a Manner as possible, given my Sentiments of Acting, by
Example and Precept; but there will very soon be publish d a more complete and
expanded Treatise upon ACTING, with an accurate Description of each Humor and
Passion, their Sources and Effects; by which the Players may be taught to
renounce their Errors, and the Town its Judgment of Acting and Actors. --

Here Ends the Essay upon Acting.
Some Critical OBSERVATIONS upon the Character of MACBETH, as it is at present
Attempted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane.
THE following Critque is designed as a Supplementary Appendix to the foregoing
Essay on ACTING, and as that was not so full and investigating, as my
Imagination had at first formed it, I shall in this short Survey of Heroism in
Miniature, still have my Eye upon the Essay on ACTING, and at the same Time
convince the Public, that they have insensibly been misguided by Fashion, and
that they have in the Dark run-a-ground their Reputation on the Sandy Banks of
Error: But I shall now fix a Lanthorn at the Poop of their Misconceptions, they
shall see their Distress, I will set my Hand to the Pump of Conviction, clear
the Vessel from sixteen Feet Water of Anti-Taste, keep it from foundering,
hoist up the Flag of Criticism, and once more pilot their Understandings into
the Harbor of True Judgment: But Metaphor apart, what is the Character of
Macbeth? He is an experienced General, crowned with Conquest, innately
Ambitious, and religiously Humane, spurred on by metaphysical Prophecies, and
the unconquerable Pride of his Wife, to a Deed, horrid in itself, and repugnant
to his Nature; but as it is the Ladder to the swelling Act of the Imperial
Theme, his Milk soon becomes Gall, imbitters his whole Disposition, and the
Consequence is the Murder of Duncan, the taking off of Banquo, and his own
Coronation. Thus stands Macbeth. Now to our Inferences. Valor and Ambition,
the two Grand Characteristicks of Macbeth, form in the Mind's Eye a Person of
near six Feet High, corpulently Graceful, a round Visage, a large hazel Eye,
aquiline Nose, prominent Chest, and a well-calv'd Leg, rather inclined to that
which is called an Irish Leg; this, I say, would be the Painter's Choice, was
he to give us the Macbeth of his Imagination; I mention this only to prove that
Mr. G -- k is not formed in the least, externally, no more than internally, for
that Character, and though there are many Figures in the World would become it
very well, though not exactly co-incident with my Description, yet the nearer
they approach to it, they will the better look Ambition, Heroism, and Murder.
Mr. G -- k, could he Speak the Part, is well formed for Fleance, or one of the
Infant Shadows in the Cauldron Scene, but for the Manager to impose him upon
the Town for a Macbeth, and to refuse taking another Comedian into his House,
is such an Example of Ignorance and Impudence, that is not to be paralelled but
by his own unparalleled Behavior. -- Mr. G -- k's Dress is very faulty too,
his Coat should be Banquo's, and Banquo's his, and for this Reason; Red and
Gold suits the Dignity of Macbeth, and at the same Time implies, a more
principal and exalted Character, without derogating, or taking from the Rank of
Banquo in Red and Silver, who titularly bears an equal Station as Commander,
though militarily bears an inferior Proportion as Man: This Distinction is very
nice, and perhaps may not glare upon common Readers, as defined here, but was
this Decorum nicely preserved, the Eyes of all, from the Critic to the
Groundling (as Shakespeare calls 'em) would immediately convey to the Mind the
several Degrees and minute Distinctions of the Character, from the Color and
Trimmings of his Apparel: -- I shall leave it to the Consideration of the
Public, whether or no a Tie Wig is more eligible than a Major, or a plain Hat,
than a laced one, for my own Part, I say, No.

SO much for Dress and Figure; now I shall proceed to the more difficult and
physical Parts of the Character, and shall consider the Action, Speaking and
Conception of our modern Hero.

THE first Words of the Part, -- So foul and fair a Day I have not seen, in my
Opinion are spoke wrong; Mackbeth before his Entrance has been in a great Storm
of Rain, Thunder, etc. Now as the Audience have been appriz'd of this, by the
three* Witches, he should very emphatically describe the quick Transition from
being wet to the Skin, to being almost instantaneously dried again: Though I
cannot convey in Writing the Manner how it should be spoke, yet every Reader may
comprehend how it ought to be spoke, and know that in the Manner it is now
spoke, the Sentiment is languid, unintelligible, and undescriptive. I shall now
examine the most remarkable Scene in the whole Play, which is that of the
Air-drawn Dagger. This I shall make appear he has mistook from the Beginning to
the End. -- Macbeth, as a Preparation for this Vision, is so prepossessed, from
his Humanity, with the Horror of the Deed, which by his more prevailing
Ambition he is incited to, and for the Perpetration of which, he lies under a
promissary Injunction to his Lady, that his Mind being torn by these different
and confused Ideas, his Senses fail, and present that fatal Agent of his
Cruelty, -- the Dagger, to him: -- Now in this visionary Horror, he should not
rivet his Eyes to an imaginary Object, as if it really was there, but should
show an unsettled Motion in his Eye, like one not quite awaked from some
disordering Dream; his Hands and Fingers should not be immovable, but
restless, and endeavoring to disperse the Cloud that over shadows his optic
Ray, and bedims his Intellects; here would be Confusion, Disorder, and Agony!
Come let me clutch thee! is not to be done by one Motion only, but by several
successive Catches at it, first with one Hand, and then with the other,
preserving the same Motion, at the same Time, with his Feet, like a Man, who
out of his Depth, and half drowned in his Struggles, catches at Air for
Substance: This would make the Spectator's Blood run cold, and he would almost
feel the Agonies of the Murderer himself. I have spoke of the Scene following
the Murder, in my Essay on Acting, and shall only say, that the Daggers are
near an Inch and half too long, in Proportion to the Height of the Murderer.
The Nightgown, he appears in, after the Murder, ought to be a Red Damask, and
not the fripperyflower'd one of a Foppington; but when Taste is wanting in
Trifles, and Judgment in Essentials, how can we hope to see the THEATER
flourish? I must make a Remark upon him in the Banquet Scene, which is the most
glaring Absurdity that ever was committed by an Actor: When Banquo's Ghost gets
Possession of Macbeth's Chair, and the latter, frighted at his Appearance, by
Words and Actions, says, Which of you have done this? Meaning the Murder of
Banquo; here the Actor should address himself to the Guests, and not keep a
fixed Eye upon the Ghost; he should turn his Head from Banquo, and say, to the
Lords at Supper, Which of you have done this? For to speak to the plural
Number, and look at the singular (Banquo only) is most absurd and ridiculous.
Then at the second Appearance of the Ghost, at the Words, Dare me to the Desert
with thy Sword, Macbeth should draw his Sword, and put himself in a Posture of
Defense; and when he comes to, Hence horrid Shadow! he should make a home
Thrust at him, recover himself upon the Ghost's moving, and keep passing at him
till he has got him quite out of the Room: The Manner it has been done
heretofore, which is keeping the Hand upon the Sword, and following him out, is
not so natural and effecting, as the Way I propose; and if any Objection is
made, that Macbeth should know, that Ghosts are not vulnerable, I answer,
Macbeth's Horror confounds him, and his Actions must denote the Non Compos.
Here I must take Notice of an Omission in the Part of Banquo; when he appears
at the Banquet, he ought to rise in a Red Cloak, as he was seen to cross the
Stage in one, immediately before his Murder; this would throw a great Solemnity
upon the Figure of Banquo, and preserve the Decorum of the Stage. -- I must
likewise observe, that in Shakespeare's Time, the Actors wore their own Hair,
and now, from the present Fashion of wearing Wigs, some Speeches are become
absurd, such, for Instance, is this of Macbeth, Never shake thy Goary Locks at
me; when at the same Time the Ghost is seen in a Tie Wig: If I might be allowed
to propose an Alteration (with all imaginable Deference to the immortal
Shakespeare) in order to avoid this Blunder, I would have the Actor say, Never
shake thy Goary TIE at me; if the Word Wig is thought more Poetical, it will be
equally good, as they are both Monosyllables.

AS I have not yet left the Banquet Scene, I must observe that the Attitude G
-- k stands in, at the second Appearance of the Ghost, is absolutely wrong:
Macbeth here should sink into himself, or rather, if I may be allowed the
Expression, hide himself behind himself; or to illustrate it more by Example,
Si parvis comporere, etc. he should imitate the contracting Power of a Snail,
preserving at the same Time a slow awful manly folding up of his Faculties, and
as his Body gathers up gradually at the Vision* his Mind should keep the same
Time, and denote its strong Workings and Convulsions* at his Eyes; the Glass of
Wine in his Hand should not be dashed upon the Ground, but it should fall
gently from him, and he should not discover the least Consciousness of having
such a Vehicle in his Hand, his Memory being quite lost in the present Guilt
and Horror of his Imagination. The Banquet itself, which is supposed to be a
Regal one, should not be composed of a few Apples, Oranges, and such like
Trash, but of hot costly Viands, and large Pyramids of wet Sweetmeats, and
Savoy Biscuits; this would cast an inconceiveable Grandeur upon the Scene, and
add greatly to the Horror of the Ghost. -- Macbeth says, To Night we hold a
SOLEMN Supper, Sir; which Solemnity should be preserved, by having several
Bishops and inferior Clergy at the Table, and of Consequence the supernatural
Appearance of Banquo, would strike with double Force on the Minds of the
Audience, by their Spiritual Presence. I could show that this Play is even
deficient in every little Decoration, but this one gross Blunder will suffice
to give us an Idea of all the rest.

AS my Criticisms upon the three first Acts of Macbeth have been more full and
extended than I at first designed 'em, I shall reserve my Observations upon the
two last, for another Sixpenny Pamphlet, to which I shall subjoin a Criticism
upon Colombine Courtezan, which I shall examine critically, Scene by Scene, and
lay open the Imperfections of that Piece, discernable to the meanest Capacity,
and shall prove, by undeniable Conclusions, drawn from known Postulata, that
the worst Play that ever Shakespeare wrote, is greatly preferable to the whole
Performance of Colombine Courtezan. I am very sensible what Difficulties and
Prejudices I have to surmount in such an Undertaking; but as I have the
Reputation of my Country at Heart, I am resolved to prosecute my laudable
Intentions with indefatigable Care, and unwearied Diligence.

IN short, to sum up the Whole of my present Observations upon this Head, as I
profess the strictest Adherence to Truth, despise Flattery, and am incapable of
Fear, I will venture to affirm, there is not one pleasure-giving Scene
throughout the whole Play of Macbeth, as it is now acted: But as I will ever do
Justice to Merit, I must own I felt some Pleasure at seeing Mr. Mills's Green
Ribbon and Star, in the Character of Duncan; the unexpected Introduction of the
Scotch Order was an agreeable Novelty, and discovered great Fancy in the Actor;
therefore I could not refrain from giving it here a deserved Commendation, and
it shall always meet with my Approbation in the Theater.

I think I cannot better finish a Criticism on Macbeth, than with a succinct
Description of the Talents and Capacity of its Author. Shakespeare was a Writer
not to be confined by Rule; he had a despotick Power over all Nature; Laws
would be an Infringement of his Prerogative; his sceptered Pen waved Control
over every Passion and Humor; his Royal Word was not only Absolute, but
Creative; Ideas, Language, and Sentiment were his Slaves, they were chained to
the Triumphal Car of his Genius; and when he made his Entry into the Temple of
Fame, all Parnassus rung with Acclamations; the Muses sung his Conquests,
crowned him with never-fading Laurels, and pronounced him Immortal. AMEN.

Here ends the Criticism on Macbeth.
I shall at once convince the World of my Impartiality with Regard to Mr. G --
k, by allowing him all the Merit that Mimickry can give him, which, to be sure,
is very pleasant over a Bottle, though despicable on the Stage. -- But how his
being a good Mimick should entitle him to be a great Actor, I cannot so easily
comprehend; the Punch of a Puppet Show, and the Hero of a Theater, are as
different in their Characters as the Materials they are each composed of. But
how can he answer it to Conscience, and his fellow Creatures, his endeavoring,
by modulating his Organs of Speech and Action, to those of other Actors, to
render them contemptible, by such a visible Exposure of their Infirmities? It Is
wicked, it is unjust, it is inhumane! and the People who are diverted by it, and
applaud him for it, are barbarous, unciviliz'd, and unfeeling. A Pick-pocket is
less culpable than a Mimick: Suppose, for Instance, an Actor of either Theater,
coming out of the Playhouse, has his Pocket picked of Ten or a Dozen
Shillings, in the Piazza, or in Catherine-street; Care, Economy and his
Business, makes the Loss easy: But if the same Actor is made ridiculous, and
looses the Means of replenishing his aforesaid pick'd-pocket, the Mimick that
deprives him of ever having his Pocket picked again, either in the Piazza, or
Catharine-street, is the Pick-pocket himself. I believe Mimickry was never
thought of before in this Light; therefore let it be considered, let it be
condemned. Besides, as a farther Confirmation of the Unlaudableness of such
Proceedings, I am told the very mimick'd Actors themselves are not very easy
under this Treatment, and are resolved never to be reconciled to any future
Analysis of their Looks, Tones, or Gestures.

AS I am now obliged (for want of Room) to curb the Impetuosity of my Pen, and
stop its critical Carears, I shall in a very short Time lay before the Public,
another Pamphlet, with some more additional Remarks upon the same Subject,
which will be a proper Appendix to the Essay on Acting; and called An Essay on
the common Sewers, vulgarly styled Common Shores, in which will be considered
the Use and Abuse of Bumfodder, with some curious Observations upon the present
State of Politics, both at Home and Abroad.

FINIS.

