AN ESSAY ON MAN.

AN ESSAY on MAN, Being the FIRST BOOK of ETHIC EPISTLES.

TO HENRY St. JOHN, L. BOLINGBROKE.

GNOTHI SEAYTON

(...)



LONDON: Printed by JOHN WRIGHT, for LAWTON GILLIVER, MDCCXXXIV.

THE DESIGN.
HAVING proposed to write some Pieces on Human Life and Manners, such as (to
use my Lord Bacon's expression) come home to Men's Business and Bosoms, I
thought it more satisfactory to begin with considering Man in the Abstract, his
Nature and his State: since to prove any moral Duty, to enforce any moral
Precept, or to examine the Perfection or Imperfection of any Creature
whatsoever, it is necessary first to know what Condition and Relation it is
placed in, and what is the proper End and Purpose of its Being.

The Science of Human Nature is, like all other Sciences, reduced to a few,
clear Points: There are not many certain Truths in this World. It is therefore
in the Anatomy of the Mind as in that of the Body; more Good will accrue to
mankind by attending to the large, open, and perceptible parts, than by
studying too much such finer nerves and vessels as will for ever escape our
observation. The Disputes are all upon these last, and I will venture to say,
they have less sharpened the Wits than the Hearts of Men against each other,
and have diminished the Practice, more than advanced the Theory, of Morality.
If I could flatter my self that this Essay has any Merit, it is in steering
betwixt Doctrines seemingly opposite, in passing over Terms utterly
un-intelligible, and in forming out of all a temperate yet not inconsistent,
and a short yet not imperfect System of Ethics.

This I might have done in Prose; but I chose Verse, and even Rhyme, for two
reasons. The one will appear obvious; that Principles, Maxims, or Precepts so
written, both strike the reader more strongly at first, and are more easily
retained by him afterward. The other may seem odd but is true; I found I could
express them more shortly this way than in Prose itself, and nothing is more
certain than that much of the Force as well as Grace of Arguments or
Instructions depends on their Conciseness. I was unable to treat this part of
my subject more in detail, without becoming dry and tedious; or more
poetically, without sacrificing Perspicuity to Ornament, without wandering from
the Precision, or breaking the Chain of Reasoning. If any man can unite all
these, without diminution of any of them, I freely confess he will compass a
thing above my capacity.

What is now published, is only to be considered as a general Map of MAN,
marking out no more than the Greater Parts, their Extent, their Limits, and
their Connection, but leaving the Particular to be more fully delineated in the
Charts which are to follow. Consequently, these Epistles in their progress will
become less dry, and more susceptible of Poetical Ornament. I am here only
opening the Fountains, and clearing the passage; To deduce the Rivers, to
follow them in their Course, and to observe their Effects, will be a task more
agreeable.

(...)



THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST BOOK.
EPISTLE I. Of the NATURE and STATE of MAN, with respect to the UNIVERSE. OF
Man in the Abstract. We can judge only with regard to our own System, being
ignorant of the Relations of Systems and Things, VER. 17, etc. to 68. Man is
not therefore to be deemed Imperfect, but a Being suited to his Place and Rank
in the Creation, agreeable to the General Order of Things, and conformable to
Ends and Relations to him unknown. 69, etc. It is partly upon this Ignorance of
future Events, and partly upon the Hope of a Future State, that all his
Happiness in the present depends, 73, etc. His Pride, in aiming at more
Knowledge and pretending to more Perfection, the cause of his Error and Misery,
109. 119. The Impiety of putting himself in the place of God, and judging of
the fitness or unfitness, perfection or imperfection, justice or injustice of
his dispensations, 109 to 120. The Absurdity of conceiting himself the final
cause of the creation, or expecting that Perfection in the moral world which is
not in the natural, 127 to 164. The Unreasonableness of his complaints against
Providence, while on the one hand he demands the perfections of the Angels, on
the other the bodily qualifications of the Brutes, 165. That the gift of Reason
alone countervails all the latter, and that to possess any of the sensitive
faculties in a higher degree, would render him miserable, 181 to 198. That
throughout the whole visible world, an universal Order and gradation in these
is observed, which causes a subordination of creature to creature, and of all
creatures of man. The gradations of sense, instinct, thought, reflection,
reason, 199 to 224. How much farther this order and subordination of living
creatures may extend, above and below us? 225. Were any part of this broken,
not that part only, but the whole connected Creation must be destroyed. The
extravagance, madness, and pride of such a desire, 239, etc. Consequently, the
absolute submission due to Providence, both as to our present and future state,
292, etc.

EPISTLE II. Of the NATURE and STATE of MAN, with respect to HIMSELF as an
Individual. THE business of man not to pry into God, but to study himself. His
Middle Nature; his powers and frailties, and the Limits of his capacity, VER. 3
to 43. His two Principles, Self-love and Reason, 43. both necessary, 49.
Self-love the stronger, and why?, 57. their End the same, 71. The Passions, and
their Use, 83 to 120. The Predominant Passion, and its force, 122 to 150. its
necessity, in directing men to different purposes, 153, etc. its providential
use, in fixing our principle, and ascertaining our virtue, 167. Virtue and Vice
joined in our mixed nature; the limits near, yet the things separate, and
evident. What is the office of Reason? 187, etc. How odious Vice in itself, and
how we deceive our selves into it, 209. That however, the Ends of Providence
and general Good are answered in our Passions, and Imperfections, 230, etc. How
usefully these are distributed to all Orders of men, 233. how useful they are
to Society, 241. and to the Individuals, 253. In every State, and in every Age
of life, 263 to the end.

EPISTLE III. Of the NATURE and STATE of MAN, with respect to SOCIETY. THE
whole Universe one system of Society, VER. 7, etc. Nothing is made wholly for
itself, nor yet wholly for another, 27. The happiness of animals mutual, 53.
Reason or Instinct operate alike to the good of each individual, 83. Reason or
instinct operate to society, in all animals, 109. How far Society carried by
Instinct, 119. How much farther by Reason, 132. Of that which is called the
State of Nature, 148. Reason instructed by Instinct in the invention of Arts,
170. and in the Forms of society, 180. Origin of political Societies, 199.
Origin of Manarchy, 211. Patriarchal government, 216. Origin of true Religion
and Government, from the same principle, of Love, 235, etc. Origin of
Superstition and Tyranny, from the same principle, of Fear, 241, etc. The
influence of Self-love operating to the social and public good, 269.
Restoration of true Religion and Government on their first principle, 285. Mixed
Government, 289. Various Forms of each, and the true end of all, 303, etc.

EPISTLE IV. Of the NATURE and STATE of MAN, with respect to HAPPINESS.
HAppiness ill defined by the Philosophers, VER. 19. That it is the End of all
men, and attainable by all, 28. God governs by general, not particular laws:
intends Happiness to be equal; and to be so it must be social, since all
particular happiness depends on general, 35. As it is necessary for Order, and
the peace and welfare of Society, that External goods should be unequal,
happiness is not made to consist in these, 47. But, notwithstanding that
inequality, the Balance of Happiness among mankind is kept even by Providence,
by the two Passions of Hope and Fear, 66. What the happiness of Individuals is?
as far as is consistent with the constitution of this world, 76. That the good
man has here the advantage, 80. The error of imputing to Virtue what are only
the calamities of Nature, or of Fortune, 92. The folly of expecting that God
should alter his General Laws in favor of particulars, 118. That we are not
judges who are good? but that whoever they are, they must be happiest, 130,
etc. That external goods are not the proper rewards, often inconsistent with,
or destructive of Virtue, 166. But that even these can make no man happy
without Virtue. Instanced in Riches, 176. Honors, 184. Birth, 203. Greatness,
213. Fame, 233. Superior talents, 257. with pictures of human Infelicity in men
possessed of them all, 275, etc. That VIRTUE ONLY constitutes a Happiness, whose
Object is universal 311. and whose Prospect eternal, 345. The perfection of
which consists in a conformity to the Order of Providence, here, and in a
resignation to it, here and hereafter, 534. Or (in other words) in Love of God
and Charity to all men, etc. to the end.


NIL ADMIRARI

W.K.^^ P.F.sc.


EPISTLE I.
AWAKE! my ST. JOHN! leave all meaner things
To low Ambition and the Pride of Kings.
Let Us (since Life can little more supply
Than just to look about us, and to die)
Expatiate free, over all this Scene of Man,
A mighty Maze! but not without a Plan;
A Wild, where weeds and flowers promiscuous shoot,
Or Garden, tempting with forbidden fruit.
Together let us beat this ample field,
Try what the open, what the covert yield;
The latent tracts or giddy heights explore,
Of all who blindly creep, or sightless soar;
Eye Nature's walks, shoot Folly as it flies,
And catch the manners living as they rise;
Laugh where we must, be candid where we can,
But vindicate the Ways of GOD to Man.
Say first, of God above, or Man below,
What can we reason, but from what we know?
Of Man, what see we but his Station here,
From which to reason, or to which refer?
Through Worlds unnumber'd though the God be known,
It Is ours to trace him, only in our own.
He who through vast Immensity can pierce,
See worlds on worlds compose one Universe,
Observe how System into System runs,
What other Planets, and what other Suns?
What varied Being peoples every Star?
May tell, why Heaven has made us as we are.
But of this frame the bearings, and the Ties,
The strong connections, nice dependencies,
Gradations just, has thy pervading soul
Looked through? or can a Part contain the Whole?
Is the great Chain that draws all to agree,
And drawn supports, upheld by God, or thee?
Presumptuous Man! the Reason would thou find
Why formed so weak, so little, and so blind?
First, if thou can, the harder reason guess
Why formed no weaker, blinder, and no less?
Ask of thy mother Earth, why oaks are made
Taller or stronger than the weeds they shade?
Or ask of yonder argent fields above,
Why Jove's Satellites are less than Jove?
Of Systems possible, if it is confessed
That Wisdom infinite must form the best,
Where all must full, or not coherent be,
And all that rises, rise in due degree;
Then, in the scale of life and sense, it is plain
There must be, some where, such a rank as Man;
And all the question (wrangle 'ere so long)
Is only this, if God has placed him wrong?
Respecting Man whatever wrong we call,
May, must be right, as relative to All.
In human works, though labored on with pain,
A thousand movements scarce one purpose gain;
In God's, one single can its End produce,
Yet serves to second too some other Use.
So Man, who here seems principal alone,
Perhaps acts second to a Sphere unknown,
Touches some wheel, or verges to some gole;
It Is but a part we see, and not a whole.
When the proud Steed shall know, why Man restrains
His fiery course, or drives him over the plains;
When the dull Ox, why now he breaks the clod,
Now wears a Garland, an Egyptian God;
Then shall Man's pride and dullness comprehend
His action's, passion's, being's, Use and End;
Why doing, suffering, checked, impelled; and why
This hour a Slave, the next a Deity?
Then say not Man's imperfect, Heaven in fault;
Say rather, Man's as perfect as he ought;
His being measured to his State, and Place,
His time a moment, and a point his space.
Heaven from all Creatures hides the book of Fate,
All but the page prescribed, their present state,
From Brutes what Men, from Men what Spirits know,
Or who could suffer Being here below?
The Lamb thy riot dooms to bleed to day,
Had he thy Reason, would he skip and play?
Pleased to the last, he crops the flowery food,
And licks the hand just raised to shed his blood.
Oh blindness to the future! kindly given,
That each may fill the Circle marked by Heaven,
Who sees with equal eye, as God of All,
A Hero perish, or a Sparrow fall,
Atoms, or Systems, into ruin hurled,
And now a Bubble burst, and now a World!
Hope humbly then; with trembling pinions soar;
Wait the great teacher, Death, and God adore!
What future bliss, he gives not thee to know,
But gives that Hope to be thy blessing now.
Hope springs eternal in the human breast;
Man never is, but always to be blessed;
The soul uneasy, and confined at home,
Rests, and expatiates, in a life to come.
Lo! the poor Indian, whose untutored mind
Sees God in clouds, or hears him in the wind;
His soul, proud Science never taught to stray
Far as the Solar walk, or Milky way;
Yet simple Nature to his Hope has given
Behind the cloud-topt hill an humbler heaven,
Some safer world in depth of woods embraced,
Some happier Island in the watery waste,
Where Slaves once more their native land behold,
No Fiends torment, no Christians thirst for Gold.
To be, contents his natural desire,
He asks no Angel's wing, or Seraph's fire,
But thinks, admitted to that equal sky,
This faithful Dog shall bear him company.
Go, wiser thou! and in thy scale of sense
Weigh thy Opinion against Providence:
Call Imperfection what thou fancy'st such;
Say, here he gives too little, there too much;
Destroy all Creatures for thy sport or gust,
Yet cry, if Man's unhappy, God's unjust,
If Man, alone, engross not Heavens high care,
Alone, made perfect here, immortal there;
Snatch from his hand the Balance and the Rod,
Re-judge his Justice, Be the GOD of GOD!
In reasoning Pride (my Friend) our error lies;
All quit their sphere, and rush into the Skies.
Pride still is aiming at the blessed abodes,
Men would be Angels, Angels would be Gods.
Aspiring to be Gods, if Angels fell,
Aspiring to be Angels, Men rebel:
And who but wishes to invert the Laws
Of ORDER, sins against the Eternal Cause.
Ask for what end the heavenly Bodies shine?
Earth for whose use? Pride answers, " It Is for mine:
" For me kind Nature wakes her genial power,
" Suckles each herb, and spreads out every flower;
" Annual for me the grape, the rose renew
" The juice nectareous, and the balmy dew;
" For me the mine a thousand treasures brings,
" For me health gushes from a thousand springs;
" Seas roll to waft me, suns to light me rise,
" My footstool earth, my canopy the skies.
But errs not Nature from this gracious end,
From burning Suns when livid deaths descend,
When Earthquakes swallow, or when Tempests sweep
Towns to one grave, and Nations to the Deep?
No ('it is replied) the first Almighty Cause
" Acts not by partial, but by general Laws;
" The Exceptions few; some Change since all began;
" And what created, perfect?" -- Why then Man?
If the great End be human Happiness,
And Nature deviates, how can Man do less?
As much that End a constant course requires
Of showers and sunshine, as of Man's Desires,
As much eternal springs and cloudless skies,
As men for ever temperate, calm, and wise.
If Plagues or Earthquakes break not heavens design,
Why then a Borgia or a Catiline?
From Pride, from Pride, our very reasoning springs;
Account for moral, as for natural things:
Why charge we heaven in those, in these acquit?
In both, to reason right, is to submit.
Better for us, perhaps, it might appear,
Were there all harmony, all virtue here;
That never air or ocean felt the wind;
That never passion discomposed the mind:
But All subsists by elemental strife;
And Passions are the Elements of life.
The general Order, since the whole began,
Is kept in Nature, and is kept in Man.
What would this Man? now upward will he soar,
And little less than Angel, would be more;
Now looking downward, just as grieved appears
To want the strength of Bulls, the fur of Bears.
Made for his use all Creatures if he call,
Say what their use, had he the powers of all?
Nature to these without profusion kind,
The proper organs, proper powers assigned,
Each seeming want compensated of course,
Here, with degrees of Swiftness, there, of Force; It is a certain Axiom in the
Anatomy of Creatures, that in proportion as they are formed for Strength their
Swiftness is lessened; or as they are formed for Swiftness, their Strength is
abated.

All in exact proportion to the state,
Nothing to add, and nothing to abate.
Each Beast, each Insect, happy in its own,
Is Heaven unkind to Man, and Man alone?
Shall he alone, whom rational we call,
Be pleased with nothing, if not blessed with all?
The bliss of Man (could Pride that blessing find)
Is, not to think, or act, beyond Mankind;
No powers of Body or of Soul to share,
But what his Nature and his State can bear.
Why has not Man a microscopic eye?
For this plain reason, Man is not a Fly.
Say what the use, were finer optics given,
TO inspect a Mite, not comprehend the Heaven?
Or Touch, if tremblingly alive all over,
To smart, and agonize at every pore?
Or keen Effluvia darting through the brain,
Die of a Rose, in aromatic pain?
If Nature thundered in his opening ears,
And stunned him with the music of the Spheres,
How would he wish that Heaven had left him still
The whispering Zephyr, and the purling rill?
Who finds not Providence all-good and wise,
Alike in what it gives, and what denies?
Far as Creation's ample range extends,
The scale of sensual, mental powers ascends;
Mark how it mounts to Man's imperial race,
From the green myriads in the peopled grass!
What modes of Sight, betwixt each wide extreme,
The Mole's dim curtain, and the Lynx's beam:
Of smell, the headlong Lioness The manner of the Lions hunting their Prey in
the Deserts of Africa is this; at their first going out in the nightime they
set up a loud Roar, and then listen to the Noise made by the Beasts in their
Flight, pursuing them by the Ear, and not by the Nostril. It is probable, the
story of the Jackall's hunting for the Lion was occasioned by observation of
the Defect of Scent in that terrible Animal.
between,
And hound, sagacious on the tainted green:
Of hearing, from the Life that fills the flood,
To that which warbles through the vernal wood:
The spider's touch, how exquisitely fine!
Feels at each thread, and lives along the line:
In the nice be, what sense so subtly true
From poisonous herbs extracts the healing dew.
How Instinct varies! in the grovelling swine,
Compared, half-reas'ning Elephant! with thine;
'Twixt that, and Reason, what a nice Barrier,
For ever separate, yet for ever near:
Remembrance, and Reflection, how allied;
What thin partitions Sense from Thought divide:
And middle natures, how they long to join,
Yet never pass the insuperable line!
Without this just Gradation, could they be
Subjected these to those, or all to thee?
The powers of all subdued by thee alone,
Is not thy Reason all those powers in one?
See, through this air, this ocean, and this earth,
All Matter quick, and bursting into birth.
Above, how high progressive life may go?
Around how wide? how deep extend below?
Vast Chain of Being! which from God began,
Natures Ethereal, human, Angel, Man,
Beast, bird, fish, insect; what no Eye can see,
No Glass can reach: from Infinite to thee,
From thee to Nothing! -- On superior powers
Were we to press, inferior might on ours;
Or in the full Creation leave a Void,
Where, one step broken, the great Scale's destroyed:
From Nature's Chain whatever link you strike,
Tenth or ten thousandth, breaks the chain alike.
And if each System in gradation roll,
Alike essential to the amazing Whole;
The least confusion but in one, not all
That System only, but the whole must fall.
Let Earth unbalanc'd from her Orbit fly,
Planets and Suns rush lawless through the sky,
Let ruling Angels from their spheres be hurled,
Being on Being wrecked, and World on World,
Heavens whole foundations to their Center nod,
And Nature tremble, to the Throne of God.
All this dread ORDER break -- For whom? for thee,
Vile Worm! -- O Madness! Pride! Impiety!
What if the foot ordained the dust to tread,
Or hand to toil, aspired to be the Head?
What if the head, the eye or ear, repined
To serve mere Engines to the ruling Mind?
Just as absurd, for any Part to claim
To be Another, in this general Frame:
Just as absurd, to mourn the tasks, or pains,
The great directing Mind of All ordains.
All are but parts of one stupendous Whole,
Whose Body Nature is, and God the Soul;
That, changed through all, and yet in all the same,
Great in the Earth as in the Ethereal frame,
Warms in the Sun, refreshes in the Breeze,
Glows in the Stars, and blossoms in the Trees,
Lives through all Life, extends through all Extent,
Spreads undivided, operates unspent,
Breathes in our soul, informs our mortal part,
As full, as perfect, in a hair, as heart,
As full, as perfect, in vile Man that mourns,
As the rapt Seraphim that sings and burns;
To Him no high, no low, no great, no small;
He fills, he bounds, connects, and equals all.
Cease then, nor ORDER Imperfection name:
Our proper bliss depends on what we blame.
Know thy own Point: This kind, this due degree
Of blindness, weakness, Heaven bestows on thee.
Submit -- in this, or any other Sphere,
Secure to be as blessed as thou can bear;
Safe in the hand of one disposing Power,
Or in the natal, or the mortal Hour.
All Nature is but Art, unknown to thee;
All Chance, Direction which thou can not see;
All Discord, Harmony not understood;
All partial Evil, universal Good:
And spite of Pride, in erring Reason's spite,
One truth is clear; "Whatever Is, is RIGHT."
W.K.^^ P.F.sc.



EPISTLE II.
KNow then thy-self, presume not God to scan;
The proper study of mankind is Man.
Placed on this Isthmus of a middle state,
A Being darkly wise, and rudely great;
With too much knowledge for the Skeptic side,
With too much weakness for a Stoic's pride,
He hangs between; in doubt to act, or rest,
In doubt to-deem himself a God, or Beast,
In doubt his mind or body to prefer,
Born but to die, and reasoning but to err;
Alike in ignorance, his Reason such,
Whether he thinks too little, or too much.
Chaos of Thought and Passion, all confused;
Still by himself abused, or dis-abus'd;
Created half to rise, and half to fall;
Great Lord of all things, yet a Prey to all;
Sole Judge of Truth, in endless Error hurled;
The Glory, Jest, and Riddle of the world!
Go, wondrous Creature! mount where Science guides,
Go measure Earth, weigh Air, and state the Tides,
Instruct the Planets in what Orbs to run,
Correct old Time, and regulate the Sun.
Go, soar with Plato to the empyreal sphere,
To the first Good, first Perfect, and first Fair;
Or tread the mazy round his Follow'rs trod,
And quitting Sense call Imitating God,
As Eastern Priests in giddy circles run,
And turn their heads, to imitate the Sun.
Go, teach Eternal Wisdom how to rule;
Then drop into thy-self, and be a Fool!
Superior Beings, when of late they saw
A mortal Man unfold all Nature's Law,
Admired such Wisdom in an earthly shape,
And showed a NEWTON, as we show an Ape.
Could He who taught each Planet where to roll,
Describe, or fix, one Movement of the Soul?
Who marked their points, to rise and to descend,
Explain, or his Beginning, or his End?
Alas what wonder! Man's superior part
Uncheck'd may rise, and climb from Art to Art;
But when his own great work is but begun,
What Reason weaves, by Passion is undone.
Two Principles in human Nature reign;
Self-Love, to urge; and Reason, to restrain;
Nor this a good, nor that a bad we call,
Each works its end, to move, or govern all:
And to their proper operation still
Ascribe all Good; to their improper, Ill.
Self-Love, the Spring of motion, acts the soul;
Reason's comparing Balance rules the whole;
Man, but for that, no Action could attend,
And but for this, were active to no End.
Fixed like a Plant, on his peculiar spot,
To draw nutrition, propagate, and rot;
Or Meteor-like, flame lawless through the void,
Destroying others, by himself destroyed.
Most strength the moving Principle requires,
Active its task, it prompts, impels, inspires:
Sedate and quiet the comparing lies,
Formed but to check, delib'rate, and advise.
Self-Love yet stronger, as its objects nigh;
Reason's at distance and in prospect lie;
That sees immediate Good, by present sense,
Reason the future, and the consequence;
Thicker than Arguments, Temptations throng,
At best more watchful this, but that more strong.
The action of the stronger to suspend,
Reason still use, to Reason still attend:
Attention, Habit and Experience gains,
Each strengthens Reason, and Self-love restrains.
Let subtle Schoolmen teach these Friends to fight,
More studious to divide, than to unite,
And Grace and Virtue, Sense and Reason split,
With all the rash dexterity of Wit.
Wits, just like fools, at war about a Name,
Have full as often, no meaning, or the same.
Self-love and Reason to one end aspire,
Pain their aversion, Pleasure their desire;
But greedy that its object would devour,
This taste the honey, and not wound the flower.
Pleasure, or wrong or rightly understood,
Our greatest Evil, or our greatest Good.
Modes of Self-love the PASSIONS we may call;
It Is real Good, or seeming, moves them all:
But since not every Good we can divide,
And Reason bids us for our own provide,
Passions though selfish, if their Means be fair,
List under Reason, and deserve her care:
Those that imparted, court a nobler aim,
Exalt their kind, and take some Virtue's name.
In lazy Apathy let Stoics boast
Their Virtue fixed; it is fixed as in a Frost:
Contracted all, retiring to the breast:
But Strength of Mind is Exercise, not Rest:
The rising tempest puts in act the soul,
Parts it may ravage, but preserves the whole.
On Life's vast Ocean diversely we sail,
Reason the Card, but Passion is the Gale:
Nor GOD alone in the still Calm we find,
He mounts the Storm, and walks upon the Wind.
Passions, like Elements, though born to fight,
Yet mixed and softened, in his work unite:
These, it is enough to temper and employ;
But what composes Man, can Man destroy?
Suffice that Reason keep to Nature's road,
Subject, compound them, follow her, and God.
Love, Hope, and Joy, fair Pleasure's smiling train,
Hate, Fear, and Grief, the Family of Pain;
These mixed with art, and to due bounds confined,
Make, and maintain, the Balance of the Mind:
The Lights and Shades, whose well-accorded strife
Gives all the Strength and Color of our life.
Pleasures are ever in our hands, or eyes,
And when in Act they cease, in Prospect rise;
Present to grasp, and future still to find,
The whole employ of Body and of Mind.
All spread their charms, but charm not all alike;
On different Senses different Objects strike:
Hence different Passions more or less inflame,
As strong, or weak, the Organs of the Frame;
And hence one Master Passion in the breast,
Like Aaron's Serpent, swallows up the rest.
As Man perhaps, the moment of his breath,
Receives the lurking Principle of death,
The young Disease that must subdue at length,
Grows with his growth, and strengthens with his strength:
So, cast and mingled with his very Frame,
The Mind's disease, its ruling Passion came:
Each vital humor which should feed the whole,
Soon flows to this, in Body and in Soul.
Whatever warms the heart, or fills the head,
As the mind opens, and its functions spread;
Imagination plies her dangerous art,
And pours it all upon the peccant part.
Nature its Mother, Habit is its Nurse;
Wit, Spirit, Faculties, but make it worse;
Reason itself but gives it edge and power,
As Heaven's blessed Beam turns Vinegar more sow'r.
The ruling Passion, be it what it will,
The ruling Passion conquers Reason still.
We, wretched subjects though to lawful sway,
In this weak Queen, some Favorite still obey.
Ah! if she lend not Arms as well as Rules,
What can she more, than tell us we are Fools?
Teach us to mourn our nature, not to mend,
A sharp Accuser, but a helpless Friend?
Or from a Judge turn Pleader, to persuade
The choice we make, or justify it made?
Proud of imagined Conquests all along,
She but removes weak Passions for the strong;
So, when small Humors gather to a Gout,
The Doctor fancies he has driven them out.
Yes; Nature's Road must ever be preferred;
Reason is here no Guide, but still a Guard;
It Is here is to rectify, not overthrow,
And treat this Passion more as Friend than Foe:
A MIGHTIER POWER the strong Direction sends,
And several Men impells to several Ends:
Like varying Winds, by other passions tossed,
This drives them constant to a certain Coast.
Let Power or Knowledge, Gold, or Glory please,
Or (often more strong than all) the Love of ease,
Through life it is followed, even at life's expense;
The Merchant's toil, the Sage's indolence,
The Monk's humility, the Hero's pride,
All, all alike find Reason on their side.
The Eternal Art, educing Good from Ill,
Grafts on this Passion our best Principle:
It Is thus, the Mercury of Man is fixed,
Strong grows the Virtue with his Nature mixed;
The Dross cements what else were too refined,
And in one interest Body acts with Mind.
As Fruits ungrateful to the Planter's care
On savage stocks inserted, learn to bear,
The surest Virtues thus from Passions shoot,
Wild Nature's Vigor working at the root.
What Crops of Wit and Honesty appear,
From Spleen, from Obstinacy, Hate or Fear!
See Anger, Zeal and Fortitude supply;
Even Avarice Prudence; Sloth Philosophy;
Envy, to which the ignoble mind's a slave,
Is Emulation in the Learned and Brave:
Lust, through some certain Strainers well refined,
Is gentle Love, and charms all Womankind.
Nor Virtue, male or female, can we name,
But what will grow on Pride, or grow on Shame.
Thus Nature gives us (let it check our pride)
The Virtue nearest to our Vice allied;
Reason the Byas turns to Good from Ill,
And Nero reigns a Titus, if he will.
The fiery soul abhorred in Catiline
In Decius charms, in Curtius is divine.
The same Ambition can destroy or save,
And makes a Patriot, as it makes a Knave.
This Light and Darkness, in our Chaos joined,
What shall divide? The God within the Mind.
Extremes in nature equal ends produce,
In man, they join to some mysterious use;
Though often so mixed, the difference is too nice
Where ends the virtue, or begins the vice,
Now this, now that the other's bound invades,
As in some well-wrought Picture, lights and shades.
Fools! who from hence into the notion fall,
That Vice or Virtue there is none at all.
If white and black, blend, soften, and unite
A thousand ways, is there no black or white?
Ask your own Heart, and nothing is so plain;
It Is to mistake them, costs the time and pain.
Vice is a monster of so frightful mien,
As, to be hated, needs but to be seen;
Yet seen too often, familiar with her face,
We first endure, then pity, then embrace.
But where the Extreme of Vice, was never agreed;
Ask, where is the North? at York'tis on the Tweed,
In Scotland at the Orcades, and there
At Greenland, Zembla, or the Lord knows where.
No creature owns it, in the first degree,
But thinks his Neighbor farther gone than he.
Even those who dwell beneath her very Zone,
Or never feel the rage, or never own;
What happier Natures shrink at with affright,
The hard Inhabitant contends is right.
Virtuous and vicious every man must be,
Few in the Extreme, but all in the Degree:
The Rogue and Fool by fits is fair and wise,
And even the best by fits what they despise,
It Is but by Parts we follow Good or Ill,
For, Vice or Virtue, Self directs it still;
Each Individual seeks a several goal:
But HEAVEN'S great view is One, and that the WHOLE:
That counter-works each Folly and Caprice;
That disappoints the Effect of every Vice:
That, happy Frailties to all ranks applied,
Shame to the Virgin, to the Matron Pride,
Fear to the Statesman, Rashness to the Chief,
To Kings Presumption, and to Crowds Belief.
That, Virtue's Ends from Vanity can raise,
Which seeks no interest, no reward but Praise;
And build on Wants, and on Defects of mind,
The Joy, the Peace, the Glory of Mankind.
Heaven forming each on other to depend,
A Master, or a Servant, or a Friend,
Bids each on other for assistance call,
'Till one man's weakness grows the strength of all.
Wants, Frailties, Passions, closer still allye
The common interest, or endear the tie:
To these we owe true Friendship, Love sincere,
Each home-felt joy that Life inherits here:
Yet from the same we learn, in its decline,
Those joys, those loves, those interests to resign;
Taught half by reason, half by mere decay,
To welcome Death, and calmly pass away.
Whatever the Passion, Knowledge, Fame, or Pelf,
Not one will change his Neighbor with himself.
The learned are happy, Nature to explore;
The fool is happy, that he knows no more;
The rich are happy in the plenty given;
The poor contents him with the care of Heaven.
See the blind Beggar dance, the Cripple sing,
The Sot a Hero, Lunatic a King,
The starving Chemist in his golden Views
Supreamly blessed, the Poet in his Muse.
See! some strange Comfort every State attend,
And Pride bestowed on all, a common Friend;
See! some fit Passion every Age supply,
Hope travels through, nor quits us when we die.
'Till then, Opinion gilds with varying rays
Those painted clouds that beautify our days;
Each want of Happiness by Hope supplied,
And each vacuity of Sense by Pride.
These build up all that Knowledge can destroy;
In Folly's cup still laughs the bubble, Joy;
One Prospect lost, another still we gain,
And not a Vanity is given in vain:
Even mean Self-Love becomes, by force divine,
The Scale to measure others wants by thine.
See! and confess, one comfort still must rise,
It Is this, though Man's a Fool, yet GOD IS WISE.
W.K.^^ P.F.sc.



EPISTLE III.
LEarn Dullness, learn! "The Universal Cause
" Acts to one End, but acts by various Laws."
In all the Madness of superfluous Health,
The Trim of Pride, and Impudence of Wealth,
Let that great Truth be present night and day;
But most be present, if thou preach, or pray.
View thy own World: behold the Chain of Love
Combining all below, and all above.
See, plastic Nature working to this End,
The single Atoms each to other tend,
Attract, attracted to, the next in place,
Formed, and impelled, its Neighbor to embrace.
See Matter next, with various life endu'd,
Press to one Center still, the General Good.
See dying Vegetables Life sustain,
See Life dissolving vegetate again.
All Forms that perish other forms supply,
By turns they catch the vital breath, and die;
Like Bubbles on the Sea of Matter born,
They rise, they break, and to that Sea return.
Nothing is foreign: Parts relate to Whole:
One all-extending, all-preserving Soul
Connects each Being, greatest with the least?
Made Beast in aid of Man, and Man of Beast;
All served, and serving, nothing stands alone;
The Chain holds on, and where it ends, unknown!
Has GOD, thou Fool! worked solely for thy good,
Thy joy, thy pastime, thy attire, thy food?
Who for thy Table feeds the wanton Fawn,
For him as kindly spreads the flowery Lawn.
Is it for thee the Lark ascends and sings?
Joy tunes his voice, Joy elevates his wings:
Is it for thee the Linnet pours his throat?
Loves of his own, and raptures swell the note.
The bounding Steed you pompously bestride,
Shares with his Lord the pleasure and the pride.
Is thine alone the Seed that strows the plain?
The Birds of heaven shall vindicate their grain:
Thine the full Harvest of the golden year?
Part pays, and justly, the deserving Steer.
The Hog that plows not, nor obeys thy call,
Lives on the labors of this Lord of all.
Know, Nature's Children all divide her care;
The Furr that warms a Monarch, warmed a Bear.
While Man exclaims, "see all things for my use!
See Man for mine," replies a pampered Goose:
What care to tend, to lodge, to cram, to treat him,
All this he knew; but not that 'twas to eat him.
As far as Goose could judge, he reasoned right,
But as to Man, mistook the matter quite:
And just as short of Reason, Man will fall,
Who thinks All made for One, not One for All.
Grant, that the powerful still the weak control,
Be Man the Wit and Tyrant of the whole.
Nature that Tyrant checks; He only knows
And feels, another creature's wants and woes.
Say will the falcon, stooping from above,
Smit with her varying plumage, spare the dove?
Admires the jay the insect's gilded wings,
Or hears the hawk, when Philomela sings?
Man cares for All: to birds he gives his woods,
To beasts his pastures, and to fish his floods;
For some his Interest prompts him to provide,
For more his Pleasure, yet for more his Pride:
All feed on one vain Patron, and enjoy
The extensive blessing of his Luxury.
That very life his learned hunger craves,
He saves from famine, from the savage saves;
Nay, feasts the Animal he dooms his feast,
And 'till he ends the Being, makes it blessed:
Which sees no more the stroke, or feels the pain,
Than favored Man, by Touch aetherial slain. Several of the Ancients, and many
of the Orientals at this day, esteam'd those who were struck by Lightning as
sacred Persons, and the particular Favorites of Heaven.

The Creature had his feast of life before;
Thou too must perish, when thy feast is over!
To each unthinking being Heaven a friend,
Gives not the useless knowledge of its End;
To Man imparts it; but with such a View,
As while he dreads it, makes him hope it too:
The hour concealed, and so remote the fear,
Death still draws nearer, never seeming near.
Great standing Miracle! that Heaven assigned
Its only thinking thing, this turn of mind.
Whether with Reason, or with Instinct blessed,
Know, all enjoy that power which suits 'em best,
To Bliss, alike, by that direction tend,
And find the means proportioned to their end.
Say, where full Instinct is the unerring guide,
What Pope or Council can they need beside?
Reason, however able, cool at best,
Cares not for service, or but serves when pressed,
Stays till we call, and then not often near;
But honest Instinct comes a Volunteer.
This too serves always, Reason never long;
One must go right, the other may go wrong.
See then the acting and comparing powers
One in their nature, which are two in ours,
And Reason raise over Instinct, as you can;
In this it is God directs, in that it is Man.
Who taught the Nations of the field and wood,
To shun their Poison, and to choose their Food?
Prescient, the Tides or Tempests to withstand,
Build on the Wave, or arch beneath the Sand?
Who made the Spider Parallels design,
Sure as De-Moivre, without rule or line?
Who bid the Stork, Columbus-like, explore
Heavens not his own, and worlds unknown before?
Who calls the Council, states the certain day,
Who forms the Phalanx, and who points the way?
God, in the Nature of each being, founds
Its proper bliss, and sets its proper bounds:
But as he framed a Whole, the whole to bless
On mutual Wants built mutual Happiness:
So from the first Eternal ORDER ran,
And Creature linked to Creature, Man to Man.
What'ere of Life all-quickening Ether keeps,
Or breathes through Air, or shoots beneath the Deeps,
Or pours profuse on Earth; one Nature feeds
The vital flame, and swells the genial seeds.
Not Man alone, but all that roam the wood,
Or wing the sky, or roll along the flood,
Each loves Itself, but not itself alone,
Each Sex desires alike, till two are one:
Nor ends the pleasure with the fierce embrace;
They love themselves, a third time, in their Race.
Thus beast and bird their common charge attend,
The mothers nurse it, and the sires defend;
The young dismissed to wander earth or air,
There stops the Instinct, and there ends the care,
The link dissolves, each seeks a fresh embrace,
Another love succeeds, another race.
A longer care Man's helpless kind demands;
That longer care contracts more lasting bands:
Reflection, Reason, still the ties improve,
At once extend the Interest, and the Love:
With Choice we fix, with Sympathy we burn,
Each Virtue in each Passion takes its turn;
And still new Needs, new Helps, new Habits rise,
That graft Benevolence on Charities.
Still as one brood, and as another rose,
These natural Love maintained, habitual those;
The last scarce ripened into perfect Man,
Saw helpless Him from whom their life began:
Memory, and Forecast, just returns engage,
That pointed back to Youth, this on to Age;
While Pleasure, Gratitude, and Hope combined,
Still spread the Interest, and preserved the Kind.
Nor think, in Nature's State they blindly trod;
The State of NATURE was the Reign of GOD:
Self-Love, and Social, at her birth began,
UNION the Bond of all things, and of Man.
Pride then was not; nor Arts, that Pride to aid;
Man walked with Beast, joint Tenant of the Shade;
The same his Table, and the same his Bed;
No murder clothed him, and no murder fed.
In the same Temple, the resounding Wood,
All vocal Beings hymn'd their equal God:
The Shrine with Gore unstained, with Gold undrest,
Unbrib'd, unbloody, stood the blameless Priest.
Heavens Attribute was Universal Care,
And Man's Prerogative to rule, but spare.
Ah how unlike the man of times to come!
Of half that live, the Butcher, and the Tomb;
Who, foe to Nature, hears the general groan,
Murders their species, and betrays his own.
But just disease to luxury succeeds,
And every death its own Avenger breeds;
The Fury-Passions from that blood began,
And turned on Man a fiercer savage, Man.
See him from Nature rising slow to Art!
To copy Instinct then was Reason's part;
Thus then to Man the Voice of Nature spoke --
" Go! from the Creatures thy instructions take;
" Learn from the Birds, what food the thickets yield;
" Learn from the Beasts, the Physic of the field:
" Thy Arts of building from the Be receive;
" Learn of the Mole to plow, the Worm to weave;
" Learn of the little Oppian. Halieut. Lib. I. describes this Fish in the
following manner. They swim on the surface of the Sea, on the back of their
Shells, which exactly resemble the Hulk of a Ship; they raise two Feet like
Mafts, and extend a Membrane between which serves as a Sail; the other two Feet
they employ as Oars at the side. They are usually seen in the Mediterranean.
Nautilus to sail,
" Spread the thin oar, and catch the driving gale.
" Here too all Forms of social Union find,
" And hence let Reason, late, instruct mankind:
" Here subterranean Works and Cities see,
" There Towns aerial on the waving Tree.
" Learn each small people's Genius, Policies;
" The Ants Republic, and the Realm of Bees;
" How those in common all their stores bestow,
" And Anarchy without confusion know,
" And these for ever, though a Monarch reign,
" Their separate Cells and Properties maintain.
" Mark what unvary'd Laws preserve their State,
" Laws wise as Nature, and as fixed as Fate.
" In vain thy Reason finer webs shall draw,
" Entangle Justice in her Net of Law,
" And Right too rigid harden into Wrong,
" Still for the strong too weak, the weak too strong.
" Yet go! and thus over all the Creatures sway,
" Thus let the wiser make the rest obey,
" Who for those Arts they learned of Brutes before,
" As Kings shall crown them, or as Gods adore.
Great Nature spoke; observant Men obeyed;
Cities were built, Societies were made:
Here rose one little State; another near
Grew by like means, and joined through Love, or Fear.
Did here the Trees with ruddier burdens bend,
And there the Streams in purer rills descend?
What War could ravish, Commerce could bestow,
And he returned a friend, who came a foe.
Converse and Love mankind might strongly draw,
When Love was Liberty, and Nature Law.
Thus States were formed; the name of King unknown,
'Till common Interest placed the sway in One.
Then VIRTUE ONLY (or in Arts, or Arms,
Diffusing blessings, or averting harms)
The same which in a Sire the Sons obeyed,
A Prince the Father of a People made.
'Till then, by Nature crowned, each Patriarch sat,
King, Priest, and Parent of his growing State:
On him, their second Providence, they hung,
Their Law, his Eye; their Oracle, his Tongue.
He, from the wondering furrow called their food,
Taught to command the Fire, control the Flood,
Draw forth the Monsters of the Abyss profound,
Or fetch the aerial Eagle to the ground.
Till drooping, sickening, dying, they began
Whom they revered as God, to mourn as Man.
Then, looking up from Sire to Sire, explored
One great, first Father, and that first adored.
Or plain Tradition that this All begun,
Conveyed unbroken Faith from Sire to Son,
The Workman from the Work distinct was known,
And simple Reason never sought but One:
E're Wit oblique had broke that steady light,
Man, like his Maker, saw, that all was right,
To Virtue in the paths of Pleasure trod,
And owned a Father when he owned a God.
LOVE all the Faith, and all the Allegiance then;
For Nature knew no Right Divine in Men,
No Ill could fear in God; and understood
A Sovereign Being but a Sovereign Good.
True Faith, true Policy, united ran,
That was but Love of God, and this of Man.
Who first taught souls enslaved, and realms undone,
The enormous Faith of Many made for One?
That proud Exception to all Nature's laws,
T'invert the World, and counter-work its Cause?
Force first made Conquest, and that Conquest, Law;
Till Superstition taught the Tyrant Awe,
Then shared the Tyranny, and lent it aid,
And Gods of Conqu'rors, Slaves of Subjects made:
She, midst the Light'ning's blaze and Thunder's sound,
When rocked the Mountains, and when groaned the ground,
She taught the weak to bend, the proud to pray
To Power unseen, and mightier far than they.
She, from the rending earth, and bursting skies,
Saw Gods descend, and Fiends infernal rise;
Here fixed the dreadful, there the blessed abodes;
Fear made her Devils, and weak Hope her Gods:
Gods partial, changeful, passionate, unjust,
Whose Attributes were Rage, Revenge, or Lust:
Such as the souls of Cowards might conceive,
And formed like Tyrants, Tyrants would believe.
Zeal then, not Charity, became the guide,
And Hell was built on Spite, and Heaven on Pride.
Then sacred seemed the Ethereal Vault no more;
Altars grew marble then, and reek'd with gore:
Then first the Flamen tasted living food;
Next his grim Idol smeared with human blood;
With Heavens own Thunders shook the world below,
And played the God an Engine on his foe.
So drives Self-love, thro'just and through unjust,
To One man's Power, Ambition, Lucre, Lust:
The same Self-love, in All, becomes the cause
Of what restrains him, Government and Laws.
For what one likes if others like as well,
What serves one Will when many Wills rebel?
How shall he keep, what sleeping or awake
A weaker may surprise, a stronger take?
His Safety must his Liberty restrain;
All join to guard what each desires to gain.
Forced into Virtue thus by Self-defence,
Even Kings learned Justice and Benevolence:
Self-love forsook the path it first pursued,
And found the private in the public Good.
'Twas then, the studious Head, or generous Mind,
Follo'wer of God, or Friend of Humankind,
Poet or Patriot rose, but to restore
The Faith and Moral, Nature gave before;
Re-lum'd her ancient light, not kindled new;
If not God's Image, yet his Shadow drew;
Taught Powers due use to People and to Kings,
Taught, not to slack nor strain its tender strings;
The Less, and Greater, set so justly true,
That touching one must strike the other too,
And jarring Interests of themselves create
The according Music of a well-mix'd State.
Such is the WORLD'S great Harmony, that springs
From Union, Order, full Consent of things!
Where small and great, where weak and mighty made
To serve, not suffer, strengthen, not invade,
More powerful each as needful to the rest,
And in proportion as it blesses, blessed,
Draw to one point, and to one Center bring
Beast, Man, or Angel, Servant, Lord, or King.
For Forms of Government let fools contest,
Whatever is best administered, is best:
For Modes of Faith let graceless Zealots fight,
His cannot be wrong whose Life is in the right:
All must be false, that thwart this One, great End,
And all of God, that bless Mankind, or mend,
Man, like the generous Vine, supported lives,
The Strength he gains is from the Embrace he gives.
On their own Axis as the Planets run,
Yet make at once their Circle round the Sun;
So two consistent Motions act the soul,
And one regards Itself, and one the Whole.
Thus God and Nature linked the general Frame,
And bade Self-Love and Social be the same.


EPISTLE IV.
O HAPPINESS! our Being's End and Aim!
Good, Pleasure, Ease, Content! whatever thy name:
That Something still, which prompts the eternal sigh,
For which we bear to live, nor fear to die;
Which still so near us, yet beyond us lies,
O'erlook'd, seen double, by the fool -- and wise.
Plant of Caelestial seed! if dropped below,
Say, in what mortal soil thou deign'st to grow?
Fair-opening to some Court's propitious Shine,
Or deep with diamonds in the flaming Mine,
Twined with the wreaths Parnassian Laurels yield,
Or reaped in Iron Harvests of the Field?
Where grows -- where grows it not? -- If vain our toil,
We ought to blame the Culture, not the Soil:
Fixed to no spot is Happiness sincere;
It Is no where to be found, or every where;
It Is never to be bought, but always free,
And fled from Monarchs, ST. JOHN! dwells with thee.
Ask of the Learned the way, the Learned are blind,
This bids to serve, and that to shun mankind:
Some place the bliss in Action, some in Ease,
Those call it Pleasure, and Contentment these:
Who thus define it, say they more or less
Than this, that Happiness is Happiness?
One grants his Pleasure is but Rest from pain,
One doubts of All, one owns even Virtue vain.
Take Nature's path, and mad Opinion's leave,
All States can reach it, and all Heads conceive;
Obvious her goods, in no Extreme they dwell,
There needs but thinking right, and meaning well;
And mourn our various portions as we please,
Equal is common Sense, and common Ease.
Remember Man! "the Universal Cause
" Acts not by partial, but by general Laws;
And makes what Happiness we justly call,
Subsist not in the Good of one, but all.
There Is not a blessing Individuals find,
But some way leans and hearkens to the Kind.
No Bandit fierce, no Tyrant mad with pride,
No cavern'd Hermit, rest self-satisfy'd;
Who most to shun or hate mankind pretend,
Seek an Admirer, or would fix a Friend.
Abstract what others feel, what others think,
All Pleasures sicken, and all Glories sink;
Each has his share, and who would more obtain
Shall find, the pleasure pays not half the pain.
ORDER is Heaven's first Law; and this confessed,
Some are, and must be, greater than the rest,
More rich, more wise: but who infers from hence
That such are happier, shocks all common sense.
Heaven to mankind impartial we confess
If all are equal in their happiness:
But mutual wants this happiness increase,
All Nature's difference keeps all Nature's peace.
Condition, Circumstance is not the thing:
Bliss is the same, in Subject or in King;
In who obtain defense, or who defend;
In him who is, or him who finds, a friend.
Heaven breathes through every member of the whole
One common Blessing, as one common Soul:
But Fortune's gifts if each alike possessed,
And each were equal, must not all contest?
If then to all men Happiness was meant,
God in Externals could not place Content.
Fortune her gifts may variously dispose,
And these be called unhappy, happy those;
But Heaven's just balance equal will appear,
While those are placed in Hope, and these in Fear:
Not present Good or Ill, the joy or curse,
But future views, of Better, or of Worse.
Oh Sons of Earth! attempt ye still to rise
By mountains pil'd on mountains, to the Skies?
Heaven still with laughter the vain toil surveys,
And buries Madmen in the Heaps they raise.
Know, all the Good that Individuals find,
Or God and Nature meant to mere mankind,
Reason's whole pleasures, all the joys of Sense,
Lie in three words, Health, Peace, and Competence.
But Health consists with Temperance alone,
And Peace, fair Virtue! Peace is all thy own;
The gifts of Fortune good or bad may gain;
But these less taste them, as they worse obtain.
Say, in pursuit of Profit or Delight,
Who risque the most, that take wrong means, or right?
Of Vice or Virtue, whether blessed or cursed,
Which meets Contempt, or which Compassion first?
Count all the advantage prosperous Vice attains,
It Is but what Virtue flies from, and disdains;
And grant the bad what happiness they would,
One they must want, which is, to pass for good.
Oh blind to Truth, and God's whole Scheme below!
Who fancy Bliss to Vice, to Virtue Woe:
Who sees and follows that great Scheme the best,
Best knows his blessing, and will most be blessed.
But Fools the Good alone unhappy call,
For Ills or Accidents that chance to All.
See FALKLAND falls, the virtuous and the just!
See godlike TURENNE prostrate on the dust!
See SIDNEY bleeds amid the martial strife!
Was this their Virtue, or Contempt of life?
Say was it Virtue, more though Heaven never gave,
Lamented DIGBY! sunk thee to the Grave?
Tell me, if Virtue made the Son expire,
Why, full of Days and Honor, lives the Sire?
Why drew Marseilles good Bishop purer breath,
When Nature sicken'd, and each gale was death?
Or why so long (in Life if long can be)
Lent Heaven a Parent to the Poor and Me?
What makes all Physical or Moral Ill?
There deviates Nature, and here wanders Will.
God sends not Ill, it is Nature lets it fall
Or Chance escape, and Man improves it all.
We just as wisely might of Heaven complain,
That righteous Abel was destroyed by Cain,
As that the virtuous Son is ill at ease,
When his lewd Father gave the dire disease.
Think we like some weak Prince the Eternal Cause,
Prone for his Favorites to reverse his Laws?
Shall burning Aetna, if a Sage requires,
Forget to thunder, and recall her fires?
On Air or Sea new motions be impressed,
O blameless Bethel! to relieve thy breast?
When the loose Mountain trembles from on high,
Shall Gravitation cease, if you go by?
Or some old Temple nodding to its fall,
For Chartres head reserve the hanging Wall?
But still this World (so fitted for the Knave)
Contents us not. A better shall we have?
A Kingdom of the Just then let it be:
But first consider how those Just agree?
The Good must merit God's peculiar care;
But who but God can tell us, who they are?
One thinks on Calvin Heaven's own spirit fell,
Another deems him Instrument of Hell;
If Calvin feel Heaven's Blessing, or its Rod,
This cries there is, and that, there is no God.
What shocks one part will edify the rest,
Nor with one System can they all be blessed.
Give each a System, all must be at strife;
What different Systems for a man and wife?
The very best will variously incline,
And what rewards your Virtue, punish mine.
" Whatever is, is right." -- This world, it is true,
Was made for Caesar -- but for Titus too:
And which more blessed? who chained his Country, say,
Or he, whose Virtue sighed to lose a day?
" But sometimes Virtue starves while Vice is fed."
What then? is the reward of Virtue, Bread?
That, Vice may merit; it is the price of Toil:
The Knave deserves it when he tills the Soil,
The Knave deserves it when he tempts the Main,
Where Madness fights, for Tyrants, or for Gain.
The good man may be weak, be indolent,
Nor is his claim to Plenty, but Content.
But grant him Riches, your demand is over?
" No -- shall the good want health, the good want Power?
Add health and power, and every earthly thing:
" Why bounded power? why private? why no King?
Nay, why external for internal given,
Why is not Man a God, and Earth a Heaven?
Who ask and reason thus, will scarce conceive
God gives enough while he has more to give:
Immense the Power, immense were the demand;
Say, at what part of Nature will they stand?
What nothing earthly gives, or can destroy,
The Soul's calm sunshine, and the heartfelt joy,
Is Virtue's Prize: A better would you fix,
And give Humility a Coach and six?
Justice a Conqu'ror's sword, or Truth a Gown,
Or Public Spirit, its great cure, a Crown?
Rewards that either would to Virtue bring
No joy, or be destructive of the thing.
How often by these at sixty are undone
The Virtues of a Saint at twenty-one!
For Riches, can they give but to the Just,
His own Contentment, or another's Trust?
Judges and Senates have been bought for gold,
Esteem and Love were never to be sold.
O Fool! to think, God hates the worthy Mind,
The Lover, and the Love, of Human kind,
Whose Life is healthful, and whose Conscience clear;
Because he wants a thousand pounds a year!
Honor and Shame from no Condition rise;
Act well your part, there all the Honor lies.
Fortune in men has some small difference made,
One flaunts in Rags, one flutters in Brocade,
The Cobbler apron'd, and the Parson gown'd,
The Friar hooded, and the Monarch crowned.
" What differ more (you cry) than Crown and Cowl?"
I Will tell you, friend: a Wise man and a Fool.
You Will find, if once the Monarch acts the Monk,
Or Cobler-like, the Parson will be drunk,
Worth makes the Man, and want of it the Fellow;
The rest, is all but Leather or Prunella.
Stuck over with Titles, and hung round with Strings,
That thou may be, by Kings, or Whores of Kings.
Thy boasted Blood, a thousand years or so,
May from Lucretia to Lucretia flow;
But by your Father's worth if yours you rate,
Count me those only who were good and great.
Go! if your ancient but ignoble blood
Has crept through Scoundrels ever since the Flood,
Go! and pretend your Family is young;
Not own your Fathers have been fools so long.
What can ennoble Sots, or Slaves, or Cowards?
Alas! not all the blood of all the HOWARDS.
Look next on Greatness, say where Greatness lies?
" Where, but among the Heroes, and the Wise?"
Heroes are much the same, the point's agreed,
From Macedonia's Madman to the Suede;
The whole strange purpose of their lives, to find
Or make, an Enemy of all Mankind:
Not one looks backward, onward still he goes,
Yet never looks foreward, further than his nose.
No less alike the Politic and wise,
All sly slow things, with circumspective eyes;
Men in their loose, unguarded hours they take,
Nor that themselves are wise, but others weak.
But grant that those can conquer, these can cheat,
It Is phrase absurd to call a Villain great.
Who wickedly is wise, or madly brave,
Is but the more a fool, the more a knave.
Who noble ends by noble means obtains,
Or failing, smiles in Exile or in Chains,
Like good Aurelius let him reign, or bleed
Like Socrates, that Man is great indeed.
What Is Fame? that fancied Life in others breath!
A thing beyond us even before our death.
Just what you hear you have, and what is unknown
The same (my Lord) if Tully's, or your own.
All that we feel of it begins and ends
In the small circle of our foes or friends;
To all beside as much an empty Shade
An Eugene living, as a Caesar dead,
Alike or when or where, they shone or shine,
Or on the Rubicon, or on the Rhine.
A Wit's a Feather, and a Chief a Rod;
An honest man's the noblest Work of God:
Fame but from death a Villain's name can save,
As Justice tears his body from the grave;
When what to oblivion better were resigned,
Is hung on high, to poison half mankind.
All Fame is foreign, but of true desert,
Plays round the head, but comes not to the heart.
One self-approving hour whole years out-weighs
Of stupid Starers, and of loud huzza's;
And more true joy Marcellus exiled feels
Than Caesar with a Senate at his heels.
In Parts superior what advantage lies!
Tell (for You can) what is it to be wise?
It Is but to know, how little can be known;
To see all others faults, and feel our own;
Condemned in Business or in Arts to drudge
Without a Second, or without a Judge:
Truths would you teach, or save a sinking Land?
All fear, none aid you, and few understand.
Painful Pre-eminence! yourself to view
Above Life's Weakness, and its Comforts too.
Bring then these Blessings to a strict account,
Make fair deductions, see to what they mount?
How much of other each is sure to cost?
How each for other often is wholly lost?
How inconsistent greater Goods with these?
How sometimes Life is risqu'd, and always Ease?
Think, and if still the Things thy envy call,
Say, would thou be the Man to whom they fall?
To sigh for Ribbands if thou art so silly,
Mark how they grace Lord Umbra, or Sir Billy.
Is yellow Dirt the passion of thy life?
Look but on Gripus, or on Gripus' wife.
If Parts allure thee, think how Bacon shined,
The wisest, brightest, meanest of Mankind:
Or ravished with the whistling of a Name,
See Cromwell, damned to everlasting Fame!
If all, united, thy ambition call,
From ancient Story learn to scorn them all.
There, in the rich, the honored, famed, and great,
See the false Scale of Happiness complete!
In hearts of Kings or arms of Queens who lay,
(How happy!) those to ruin, these betray,
Mark by what wretched steps their Glory grows,
From dirt and sea-weed as proud Venice rose;
In each, how Guilt and Greatness equal ran,
And all that raised the Hero sunk the Man.
Now Europe's Laurels on their brows behold,
But stained with Blood, or ill exchanged for Gold:
Then see them broke with Toils, or lost in Ease,
Or infamous for plundered Provinces.
Oh Wealth ill-fated! which no Act of same
Ever taught to shine, or sanctified from shame!
What greater bliss attends their close of life?
Some greedy Minion, or imperious Wife,
The trophy'd Arches, story'd Halls invade,
And haunt their slumbers in the pompous Shade.
Alas! not dazzled with their Noontide ray,
Compute the Morn and Evening to the Day:
The whole amount of that enormous Fame
A Tale! that blends their Glory with their Shame!
Know then this Truth (enough for man to know)
VIRTUE alone is Happiness below.
The only point where human bliss stands still,
And tastes the Good without the fall to Ill:
Where only, Merit constant pay receives,
Is blessed in what it takes and what it gives:
The joy unequaled, if its end it gain,
And if it lose, attended with no pain:
Without satiety, though ever so blessed,
And but more relished as the more distressed:
The broadest Mirth unfeeling Folly wears,
Less pleasing far than Virtue's very Tears:
Good, from each object, from each place acquired,
For ever exercised, yet never tired;
Never elated, while one Man's oppressed;
Never dejected, while another's blessed:
And where no wants, no wishes can remain,
Since but to wish more Virtue, is to gain.
See! the sole Bliss Heaven could on all bestow,
Which who but feels, can taste, but thinks, can know:
Yet, poor with Fortune and with Learning blind,
The Bad must miss, the Good untaught will find,
Slave to no Sect, who takes no private road,
But looks through Nature up to Nature's GOD,
Pursues that Chain which links the immense Design,
Joins Heaven, and Earth, and mortal, and divine;
Sees, that no Being any Bliss can know
But touches some above, and some below;
Learns, from this Union of the rising Whole,
The first, last Purpose of the human Soul;
And knows, where Faith, Law, Morals all began,
All end, in LOVE of GOD and LOVE of MAN.
For him alone, Hope leads from gole to gole,
And opens still, and opens, on his Soul,
Till lengthened on to Faith, and unconfined,
It pours the bliss that fills up all the mind.
He sees, why Nature plants in Man alone
Hope of known bliss, and Faith in bliss unknown?
(Nature, whose dictates to no other Kind
Are given in vain, but what they seek they find)
Wise is the Present: she connects in this
His greatest Virtue with his greatest Bliss,
At once his own bright Prospect to be blessed,
And strongest Motive to assist the rest.
Self-Love thus pushed to Social, to Divine,
Gives thee to make thy Neighbor's blessing thine:
Is this too little for the boundless heart?
Extend it, let thy Enemies have part!
Grasp the whole Worlds, of Reason, Life, and Sense,
In one close System of Benevolence!
Happier, as kinder! in whatever degree;
And height of Bliss but height of CHARITY.
GOD loves from whole to parts: but human Soul
Must rise from individual to the whole.
Self-love but serves the virtuous Mind to wake,
As the small pebble stirs the peaceful Lake;
The Center moved, a Circle strait succeeds,
Another still, and still another spreads;
Friend, Parent, Neighbor, first it will embrace,
His Country next, and next all Human-race;
Wide, and more wide, the O'erflowings of the mind
Take every Creature in, of every kind;
Earth smiles around, with boundless bounty blessed,
And Heaven beholds its Image in his Breast,
Come then, my Friend! my Genius come along,
Oh Master of the Poet, and the Song!
And while the Muse now stoops, or now ascends,
To Man's low Passions or their glorious Ends,
Teach me like thee, in various Nature wise,
To fall with Dignity, with Temper rise,
Formed by thy Converse, happily to steer
From grave to gay, from lively to severe,
Correct with spirit, eloquent with ease,
Intent to reason, or polite to please.
O! while along the stream of Time, thy Name
Expanded flies, and gathers all its fame,
Say, shall my little Bark attendant sail,
Pursue the Triumph, and partake the Gale?
When Statesmen, Heroes, Kings, in dust repose,
Whose Sons shall blush their Fathers were thy foes,
Shall then this Verse to future age pretend
Thou were my Guide, Philosopher, and Friend?
That urged by thee, I turned the tuneful Art
From Sounds to Things, from Fancy to the Heart;
For Wit's false Mirror held up Nature's Light;
Showed erring Pride, Whatever Is, is Right;
That Reason, Passion, answer one great Aim;
That true Self-love and Social are the same;
That Virtue only makes our Bliss below;
And all our Knowledge is, Ourselves to know.
GNOTHI SEAYTON

(...)




