GENUINE EDITION.

THE TRIAL OF THOMAS PAIN, FOR A LIBEL, CONTAINED IN THE SECOND PART OF RIGHTS
OF MAN, BEFORE LORD KENYON, AND A SPECIAL JURY, AT GUILDHALL, DECEMBER 18.

WITH THE SPEECHES OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND MR. ERSKINE, AT LARGE.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR C. AND G. KEARSLEY, FLEET STREET.

1792.

THE TRIAL OF THOMAS PAIN.
GUILDHALL, Tuesday, Dec. 18.
The KING against THOMAS PAIN.

Before LORD KENYON, by the following Special Jury:

John Campbell, Merchant, Foreman, John Lightfoot, Christopher Taddy, Robert
Oliphant, Cornelius Donovan, Robert Rolleston, John Lubbock, Riehard Tugwell,
John Porter, Thomas Druce, Isaac Railton, Henry Evans, Merchants.
MR PERCIVAL opened the pleadings on the part of the Crown. He said, this was
an Information against Thomas Pain, for that he being a person of a wicked,
malicious, and seditious disposition; and wishing to introduce disorder and
confusion, and to cause it to be believed, that the Crown of this kingdom was
contrary to the Rights of the Inhabitants of this kingdom; and to cause it to
be believed also, that the Bill of Rights was a Bill of Wrongs and Insults; all
tending to bring the Government of this Country into contempt, and endeavoring
to cause it to be believed, that the Parliament of this country was openly
corrupt in the face of day; and in order to withdraw the affections of the
people of this kingdom, against the Law and Constitution of this country, that
the THOMAS PAIN, wishing and intending this mischief, did, on the 16th of
February, 1791, wickedly, falsely, maliciously, scandalously, and seditiously
publish a certain book, called the Second Part of Rights of Man, signed THOMAS
PAIN, containing many false, wicked, scandalous, malicious, and seditious
assertions; with which he would not trouble the Jury, as they would have them
from the Attorney General. The Defendant had pleaded Not Guilty, upon which
issue was joined.

The ATTORNEY GENERAL said, the Jury would permit him to state, in this stage
of the proceeding, that in his mind a cause, which brought its own merit with
it, a cause more plain, more clear, more certain, and indisputable, never came
before a Court. Was it not that certain circumstances had happened, and
contributed to make the book in question an object of considerable magnitude,
and rendered it important, he should at once propose reading the pages of the
book, as they were included in the information to the Jury, and then have left
the case to be disposed by their good sense; but the particular mischief that
naturally flowed from this wicked publication, had rendered it necessary for
him to open the case in a fuller way than usual upon such occasions. To speak
of himself was what he had no delight in, and what could not be entertaining to
the Jury; but as circumstances made it necessary, he hoped the Jury would
forgive it. A rum our had been spread that this prosecution did not correspond
with his private judgment. To this he answered, that if he did not think this a
fit object for prosecution, he should think such an opinion disqualified him
from holding the office he now filled, he would be degraded in the estimation
of very professional man, and he ought to be despised if he felt any
unwillingness to bring this enormous case before a Jury of this Country.

This was not the first of the kind which this Defendant had thought fit to
publish against Government. He was not, perhaps, warranted in not bringing the
first before the Gentlemen of the Jury. He passed it by, however, as it was
ushered into the world in that shape, that it was likely to fall only into the
hands of tolerably informed persons, who would have the sense to see the
poison, and consequently would be able to apply the antidote, and refute it as
they went along: but when another appeared in a smaller size, printed on white
brown paper, and thrust in the hands of all persons, of all ages, sexes, and
conditions: they were even wrapped up with sweet meats for children. Such were
the steps that had been taken to forward this publication, and he did what his
duty demanded of him, he filed an information against the Defendant the first
day of the succeeding term, putting the question upon record, which they, the
Jury, had to try.

What it was that was the intention of this man by these publications, would
not be matter of difficulty for the Jury to discover; it was manifested by
every test that could apply to the explanation of a man's intention, and the
Jury would have to say, whether they were not satisfied that the whole of the
book in question did not deserve the blame which had been imputed to it by the
information. It was written with a view to vilify, degrade, and to bring into
abhorrence and contempt all the establishment of this country in all the
departments of the state. The whole of the book, the Jury would see, was
artfully written for the purpose for which it was intended, namely, to make the
lower orders of society disaffected to Government, and it was the most gross
artifice that ever imposed upon the credulous part of mankind. It was all
written in the dogmatical manner It consisted of so many ready-made
propositions, without regard to truth, and without the least application to
circumstances, and also without the least reasoning or deduction whatever;
addressed to men who were very properly anxious about their rights, but who,
from too little knowledge of our Constitution, and from being too little
habituated to reflection, were easily imposed upon by shallow artifice; and
when these honest, but deluded men, came to be persuaded that they were
deprived, by the despotic temper of Government, of Rights, to which they were
clearly entitled, it was a matter of no wonder they should manifest an
abhorrence of the whole fabric. He defied any man to show a system capable of
creating more mischief than this book. It stated that the regular system of our
legislation was inherently corrupt, and that the whole formed a mass of
abominable tyranny. Secondly, that the Legislature altogether was, without a
single exception, grounded upon usurpation; that this usurped authority framed
what was called law, but that in reality there was scarcely such a thing as law
in the country. Thus ten or twelve millions of people were told they were
governed by usurpation, and that of course, as there was no such thing as law,
each individual would be left to govern all his actions by his own partial
notions of moral duty. Were we, indeed, to follow these doctrines? -- Were we
to fall into a lawless banditti? Were we to be reduced back again into a savage
state of nature, where man was the enemy of man, where all his faculties were
useless, except strength and cunning? -- Were we to return to this state? --
The Jury knew what the answer was to these questions. What was to be said to a
man who would thus, with a general sweep, take away all law, or the force of
all law, by asserting that all laws which had been hitherto made, are null and
void; this sort of artifice was very gross, it was true, but it did not appear
so to those who could not detect the artifice. Objections too were started in
this book to Monarchy, in general terms, without one word being said of its
advantages. The power of the Aristocracy was objected to, but not a word was
said about the Democratic part of our Constitution. It was well known that
England had a powerful Democracy; but not a word of that, because it would not
make the lower classes of the people discontented; this was the common
artifice; an artifice so very shallow, that some people might wonder perhaps at
the success of it; but to whom were these things addressed? to the ignorant,
the credulous, and the desperate -- the latter were naturally the enemies of
all government, order, or regularity; every restaint was irksome to them, and
nothing was so plausible or convincing to them, even upon the point of
propriety, as to inform them we shall have no government at all; the others
were easily to be imposed upon, and made the dupes of the crafty and designing,
who might choose to deceive them.

The Jury, in order to judge accurately of the merits of this political
performance, would take into their consideration, the phrases and manner in
which the author was pleased to express his thoughts in this publication: the
manner was sneering and contemptuous; and, as to the matter, he called it an
utterdefiance to all law, morality, and religion. The indecency with which
Monarchy was treated was quite shocking, and the conclusions in that work, upon
that topic, discovered that the author was destitute of knowledge, as to the
various provisions, and wise ones too, which the law made in that particular.
-- Here the learned Gentleman entered into an historical detail of the various
permanent Council for Minor Kings, Regents, hereditary and official advisers,
etc. of the Throne, in various cases of necessity; so that the provisions by
law were such, that no material inconvenience could be sustained by the public
on account of the monarchical system -- a system which Mr. Pain had been
pleased to say was such, that a case might occur where there would be a
complete chasm in that branch of our form of government. The truth was, that
our Constitution was the best upon earth, and that for the plainest and
clearest reason -- it had had longer time for melioration than that of any
other in the world. Seven hundred years ago freedom was its basis. From the
days of Julius Caesar it had from age to age been improved, until it was
completed at the Revolution.

He apprehended it to be no difficult operation of the human mind, to
distinguish reasoning from a deliberate design to withdraw men's minds from the
Constitution; it was done by the operation of good sense, and not difficult for
a Jury of the city of London. They would observe, whether the whole of the book
was not calculated to convince the sober part of mankind, or to produce
disaffection, to inflame passions instead of reasoning with the mind. He knew
of no circumstance that could leave a doubt in the mind of the Jury as to what
was passing in the heart of the Defendant, at the time he penned this
publication.

He had thought it more becoming, as well as beneficial to the public, to
select out of this wicked work six or seven passages, than to encumber the
record with too many recitals. He would now take them in their order:

The first passage is to be found in page 21, large edition, and is in these
words:

All hereditary Government is in its nature tyranny. An heritable crown, or an
heritable throne, or by what other fanciful name such things may be called,
have no other significant explanation than that mankind are heritable property.
To inherit a Government, is to inherit the people, as if they were flocks and
herds.

Now what was the tendency of this? to destroy all subordination and submission
to the law. It was neither more nor less than this; to hold out to the people
of this country, that they were slaves; this was one of these short ready-made
propositions, which, if a man believes, he must say, I can bear this no longer.
As to the King's inheriting the people, that was a piece of sophistry; he had
no inheritance in the people, his inheritance was his office, and that was an
office under the law.

The next passage is in page 47.

This Convention met at Philadelphia, in May, 1787, of which General Washington
was elected President. He was not at that time connected with any of the State
Governments, or with Congress. He delivered up his Commission when the war
ended, and since then had lived as a private Citizen.

The Convention went deeply into all subjects: and having, after a variety of
debate and investigation, agreed among themselves upon the several parts of a
federal Constitution; the next question was the manner of giving it authority
and practice.

For this purpose they did not, like a cabal of Courtiers, send for a Dutch
Stadtholder, or a German Elector, but they referred the whole matter to the
sense and interest of the country.

What was this? Why the whole was written for the sake of introducing a sneer
against a Dutch Stadtholder and German Elector, this discovered the temper of
the man; but it was another dogma or ready-made proposition, without the least
deduction.

Another passage was to be found in page 52.

The history of the Edwards and the Henry's, and up to the commencement of the
Stuarts, exhibits as many instances of tyranny as could be acted within the
limits to which the nation had restricted it. The Stuarts endeavored to pass
those limits, and their fate is well known. In all those instances we hear
nothing of a constitution, but only of restrictions on assumed power.

After this, another William, descended from the same stock, and claiming from
the same origin, gained possession; and of the two evils, James and William,
the nation preferred what it thought the least; since, from circumstances, it
must take one. The act, called the Bill of Rights, comes here into view. What
is it but a bargain, which the parts of the government made with each other to
divide powers, profits, and privileges? You shall have so much, and I will have
the rest; and with respect to the nation, it said, for your share YOU shall
have the right of petitioning. This being the case, the bill of rights is more
properly a bill of wrongs, and of insult. As to what is called the Convention
Parliament, it was a thing that made itself, and then made the authority by
which it acted. A few persons got together, and called themselves by that name.
Several of them had never been elected, and none of them for the purpose.

From the time of William, a species of Government arose, issuing out of this
coalition bill of rights; and more so, since the corruption introduced at the
Hanover succession, by the agency of Walpole; that can be described by no other
name than a despotic legislation. Though the parts may embarrass each other,
the whole has no bounds; and the only right it acknowledges out of itself, is
the right of petitioning. Where then is the Constitution, either that gives, or
that restrained power?

It is not because a part of the government is elective, that makes it less a
despotism, if the persons so elected possess afterward, as a Parliament,
unlimited powers. Election, in this case, becomes separated from
representation, and the candidates are candidates for despotism.

Thus this author would have us believe, that, from the days of the Edwards and
the Henry's, up to the Stuarts, we had nothing but tyranny; and the Bill of
Rights, it seemed, was a bill of wrongs and insults. Who was so infatuated as
to believe all this? Who among us was ignorant of the character of that great
founder of our jurisprudence, Edward the Third. And as to the Bill of Rights,
strangely must that heart be constituted, which had not a grateful reverence
for the memory of those who procured it. But as eulogium would be lost on that
bill, let it speak for itself. -- Here he recited almost the whole of the Bill
of Rights. -- Such was the bill of wrongs and insults -- he would not profane
it by a comment.

The next passage was in page 56.

The attention of the government of England (for I rather choose to call it by
this name than the English government) appears, since its political connection
with Germany, to have been so completely engrossed and absorbed by foreign
affairs, and the means of raising taxes, that it seems to exist for no other
purposes. Domestic concerns are neglected; and, with respect to regular law,
there is scarcely such a thing.

Here was a reflection of the most wicked sort on the government of this
country, and an invitation to the people to rebel, by telling them there was
scarcely such a thing as law in England.

The next passage was a note in page 63.

With respect to the two houses, of which the English Parliament is composed,
they appear to be effectually influenced into one, and, as a legislature to
have no temper of its own. The Minister, whoever he at any time may be, touches
it as with an opium wand, and it sleeps obedience.

But if we look at the distinct abilities of the two houses, the difference
will appear so great, as to show the inconsistency of placing power where there
can be no certainty of the judgment to use it. Wretched as the state of
representation is in England, it is manhood compared with what is called the
House of Lords; and so little is this nicknamed house regarded, that the
people scarcely inquire at any time what it is doing. It appears also to be
most under influence, and the farthest removed from the general interest of the
nation.

There was no occasion to defend the House, it always had and has at this
moment some of the most illustrious men in Europe.

The next passage was in pages 107 and 108.

Having thus glanced at some of the defects of the two Houses of Parliament, I
proceed to what is called the Crown, upon which I shall be very concise.

It signifies a nominal office of a million sterling a year, the business of
which consists in receiving the money. Whether the person be wise or foolish,
sane or insane, a native or a foreigner, matters not. Every ministry acts upon
the same idea that Mr. Burke writes, namely, that the people must be
hood-winked, and held in superstitious ignorance by some bugbear or other; and
what is called the Crown answers this purpose, and therefore it answers all the
purposes to be expected from it. This is more than can be said of the other two
branches.

The hazard to which this office is exposed in all countries, is not from any
thing that can happen to the man, but from what may happen to the nation -- the
danger of its coming to its senses.

So that if the people of this country come into their senses, we shall have no
Crown. -- We had been out of for senses for centuries, if this was the case;
and all he could wish was that we might remain lunatics for ever.

The next passage was a note in page 116 and 117.

I happened to be in England as the celebration of the centenary of the
Revolution of 1688. The character of William and Mary have always appeared to
me detestable; the one seeking to destroy his uncle, and the other her father,
to get possession of power themselves; but the nation was disposed to think
something of that event. I felt hurt at seeing it ascribe the whole reputation
of it to a man who had undertaken it as a job, and who, besides what he
otherwise got, charged six hundred thousand pounds for the expense of the
little fleet that brought him from Holland. George the First acted the fame
close-fisted part as William had done, and bought the Duchy of Bremen with the
money he got from England, two hundred and fifty thousand pounds over and above
his pay as King; and having thus purchased it at the expense of England, added
it to his Hanoverian dominions for his own private profit. In fact, every
nation that does not govern itself, is governed as a job. England has been the
prey of jobs ever since the Revolution.

The Attorney General made a few observations upon these slanders on William
and Mary, and the whole of the House of Hanover.

The last passage was in page 161.

The fraud, hypocrisy, and imposition of governments, are now beginning to be
too well understood to promise them any long career. The farce of monarchy and
aristocracy, in all countries, is following that of chivalry, and Mr. Burke is
dressing for the funeral. Let it then pass quietly to the tomb of all other
follies, and the mourners be comforted.

The time is not very distant when England will laugh at itself for sending to
Holland, Hanover, Zell, or Brunswick for men, at the expense of a million a
year, who understood neither her laws, her language, nor her interest, and
whose capacities would scarcely have fitted them for the office of a parish
constable. If government could be trusted to such hands, it must be some easy
and simple thing indeed, and materials fit for all the purposes may be found in
every town and village in England.

Mr. Attorney General, after commenting able on the various passages adverted
to, made several observations on the great advantages derived from an
hereditary when compared to an elective Monarchy. This was manifested in the
Constitution of Poland, which obliged a great, a humane, and a worthy Prince to
abdicate his throne. He then called the attention of the Jury, to arguments
that had been urged against Mr. Paine's Rights of Man, by an American Gentleman
of the name of Adams; he read several extracts out of this book, and said,
these arguments seemed to him to be complete answers to the Rights of Man --
Having finished his observations, he thought it unnecessary to trouble the
Gentlemen of the Jury further in this stage of the business. According as they
should or should not be of opinion that this book had a dangerous tendency,
would be their verdict. He had done his duty by bringing an offender of this
sort before the Gentlemen of the Jury, and thereby putting the Public under the
shield of their protection.

Thomas Haynes was the first witness called on the part of the prosecution; who
said he had bought the Second Part of the Rights of Man on the 20th of February
last, at the shop of Mr. Jordan, No. 166, Fleet Street.

Thomas Chapman said he was a printer, and knew the defendant Thomas Pain. He
was introduced to Mr. Pain by Mr. Thomas Charistie. He was introduced as a
printer to print some books. In the year 1791 he printed the First part of the
Rights of Man; he also printed part of the Second Part of the Rights of Man, to
wit, to page 112, to signature H. He had the manuscript in his possession to p.
146, and had composed as far as 140. But when sheet I came into his hands, upon
examining it, part of it appeared to have a dangerous tendency. He then
determined in his own mind not to proceed with the work. He wrote a short note
to Mr. Pain for that purpose, and it was with a degree of reluctance that he
did it, owing to the civilities he had received from Mr. Pain. An accident,
however, occurred, which made this business easy. About the 16th of January Mr.
Pain called on him, and was rather intoxicated with liquor. He had been dining
at Mr. Johnson's, in St. Paul's Churchyard. Mr. Pain introduced a subject
upon which they had often differed -- that of religion, which was a favorite
topic when he was intoxicated. The subject of debate running very high, Mr.
Pain at last came to personal abuse. An observation was made by Mrs. Chapman,
at which Mr. Pain was greatly offended, and said he had not been so much
affronted in the whole course of his life. He rose in a great passion,
declaring that as the witness was a dissenter, he had a bad opinion of him, as
they were a set of hypocrites. Mr. Pain told the witness he wished to settle
with him. He called on the witness the next morning, and made many apologies
for what he had said; that it was the effect of liquor, and wished him to go on
with the work. But the witness would not, as he thought a part of it had an
evil tendency. He made three separate proposals to Mr. Pain during the
publication of this work; first, he offered him 100 guineas for the copy;
secondly; he offered him 500 l. and, thirdly, he offered him 1000 guineas. He
answered, as he intended to publish a small edition of the work, that he wished
to reserve it in his own hands.

The witness said he had seen Pain write, and thought he should know his hand
writing. He looked at several letters signed Thomas Pain, and believed they
were the handwriting of the defendant. One of these letters empowered Mr.
Jordan of Fleet Street, who was the publisher of this work, to declare that if
any person enquired who was the author of the work, to say, that he, Pain, was
the author. Others of these letters were orders to Mr. Chapman to deliver
copies of the Rights of Man to Mr. Jordan.

John Perdue said, he was formerly acquainted with Mr. Pain when he was in the
Excise, and before he went to America. A letter, was shown him, which Pain
wrote to Archibald M'Donald, Esquire. his Majesty's Attorney General. The witness
said, he believed it was the handwriting of Mr. Pain. This letter was dated
Paris, Nov. 11th, first year of the Republic. -- There were passages in this
letter, reflecting on the Royal Family of England.

Mr. Erskine objected to this letter being read in evidence, as it was not
relevant to the subject of the present trial. My Lord, said he, the Attorney
General states, that it contains a Libel of the most atrocious kind against his
Majesty, and his illustrious progeny; if so, let him be prosecuted by another
information.

It cannot prove any thing contained in the Second Part of the Rights of Man,
nor will be evidence whether any thing therein contained be libellous or not.
The present Information charges nothing respecting this Letter, and Mr.
Attorney General may as well read any other work of Mr. Pain as this pretended
Letter.

Lord Kenyon said, he felt the force of Mr. Erskine's objection in the light
which he put it, and he should certainly reject the Letter, if the Attorney
General had attempted to introduce it, either as matter of aggravation or
inducement to the Jury to find the Defendant guilty on the present charge. But
the Letter contained an avowal that Mr Pain was the Author of the Book which
is the subject of this Trial; and as the Attorney General offered it only to
prove this fact, he could not resist its being read.

The Attorney General then stated the substance of the letter; which was, that
he wrote to the Attorney General as a Friend; that he had nothing to do with
the trial himself. Whatever was the event, it could affect him in no other way
than the increase of his reputation; that it was not his trial, but a trial of
the English Government with the people of England; that getting a verdict
against him (which however would be difficult except by a packed jury), was the
same as a verdict against the man in the moon; that had he time when he was in
England, he would have published the information, with remarks upon it, but
that now he would wait until the trial was over, and then he should have some
observations. It stated, that it was possible for him to believe that Mr.
Guelph, or any of his profligate sons, had not capacity to govern a nation. --
In stating this part, the Attorney General felt great emotion; he made several
suitable comments on it. -- The letter then went on, stating several other
particulars, together with a request that it might be read by the Attorney
General to the Jury at the trial.

Several other letters were produced, all of which were proved to be the
handwriting of Mr. Pain -- In short, there was no occasion for all these
proofs, as nothing was denied upon the facts on the part of Mr. Pain by his
council, except the letter to the Attorney General.

The Prosecution being thus closed, Mr. Erskine addressed the Court as follows:

Gentlemen of the Jury,

In that part of the Attorney General's address in which he commented on the
subject of a letter stated to have been received from France, he did not appear
to me to play the actor, when he exhibited signs of of emotion proceeding from
feelings that did honor to his nature -- from feelings which, animated by his
duty, must make him eager to express his abhorrence of the direct and
scandalous attack upon the honor of his Royal Master, and upon the character
of his family. If his embarrassment was so great, and if his feeling were so
deeply wounded, he will do me the justice, that mine must be equally, if not
more deeply affected. In the high office which he holds, he must feel the
strongest sense of duty in correcting every imputation that may be thrown on
the august Personage whom he serves; but that high Personage is too far
removed, too elevated above society, for the learned Gentleman to enter into
those habits which beget the nicer sensibilities of the heart. I stand in the
same situation with the Attorney General, in respect of another august and
illustrious Person, implicated in the most improper manner in the forged letter
which he has read; and in addition to my official situation, he has had the
condescension to admit me to the honor of his friendship, and therefore I owe
him, I feel for him, all the duty of a grateful servant, to an indulgent
master; and all the affection which man can owe to man. What then must be my
embarrassment this day, I must be without feelings and without affections, if I
did not experience at this moment, the most afflicting emotions. But great,
though they are, they have not been able to detach me from the duty which I owe
to my profession, to justice, to honor, and to my country. Gentlemen, it is
the first and dearest benefit of an Englishman, that he is entitled to an
impartial trial. The author of the Rights of Man would have had ample ground of
detraction, if there appeared the smallest tincture of partiality in the
proceedings of this Court. If the man whom he had chosen to defend him, had
been intimidated by threats -- had been reduced by prejudice -- had been
prevailed upon in any way to abandon the cause, he might have had occasion to
complain. It would, indeed, be a blur and a blot on our Constitution, if a man
could say that the slightest impediment was thrown in the way of justice. I
lament, therefore, that the Attorney General thought it necessary to read that
forged letter. If he knew it to be genuine and authentic, it was his duty to
make it the subject of a distinct prosecution. It has nothing to do with the
present trial. I feel the impression it has made on my own. But I stand here as
the advocate of Thomas Pain for the book that is the subject of the
information, and knowing how essential it is to the character of British
justice that the Bar should be free, I will still maintain what I conceive to
be my professional duty as far as nature can struggle. That forged letter was
admitted only under the pretext of its serving to decypher the quo animo of the
Author in writing the book. Granting even that it be a genuine letter, which I
expressly deny, it has not the smallest tendency to establish that fact. It was
written months after the publication: nay, after the Author had withdrawn from
his country; after a time when, from the treatment he received at Dover, he
might consider himself as one expelled from his country. Granting, therefore,
that the letter were genuine, it is immaterial; it is foreign to the present
trial; and the Attorney General has utterly failed in that which I contend to
be essential to a prosecution, in pruducing evidence of the evil mind with
which the Author wrote his book. No one fact, previous to the publication, has
he stated. Nothing to delineate the malignity, the wicked design, the seditous
spirit with which the Author propagated his doctrines; nothing has he brought
forward but this forged letter written so many months after, and in such
circumstances.

The Attorney General has said, that a rumor has gone abroad that the present
prosecution has been carried on without his approbation, and he has thought it
necessary to do away this impresion by slating his direct concurrence. No one
can be more ready than myself to do liberal justice to the candor,
impartiality, and fairness of the learned Gentleman. I have no doubt of the
integrity with which he has brought even the present action; but if he felt
himself a little embarrassed by these rumors, which at best must have been
heard only in a narrow circle, what must be my situation this day? standing up
as I do against prejudices that have been openly, widely, generally circulated
-- Against imputations of the grossest and the most affecting kind --
Gentlemen, you cannot be ignorant of the disgraceful means that have been
taken, not merely to inflame the public mind against the Defendant, but to
stamp and brand every man with the mark and reproach of disaffection to the
Government and Constitution, who shall venture to hazard the slightest
approbation of his doctrines. Can you go into any places of public resort,
either for pleasure or business, without hearing the cry against this man --
without hearing every description of persons who may be inclined to wish for
the reform of certain abuses in the administration of Government, confounded
into one band of desperate destroyers of the Constitution? Can you go into any
of these places without seeing the newspapers filled with the most direct
attacks upon my character, for having undertaken his defense, as if it were not
the bounden duty of a professional man to exercise his faculties in the cause
of justice, impartially? Without making myself a party to the cause of my
client, I hold myself bound to stand up in his defense, and to take care that
whatever be the offense alleged against him, he shall have all the benefits to
be derived from the law, and from the pure administration of it. I say,
Gentlemen, that the Constitution would be gone indeed, if the feelings, the
foibles, the virtues, the caprices of Barristers were to be indulged, in the
causes in which they take a a part. -- What would be the consequence of giving
them an election? What would be the consequence if it were to be permitted to a
man high in his profession to exercise his discretion in stating what causes he
would appear in, and in what not? Would it not be giving a previous judgment in
the case? Would it not be arrogating to himself the province of the Judge, and
giving a color and prejudice to the case? I am sure the Noble Lord will tell
you, that it is inconsistent with the pure administration of justice, that
personal feelings should be permitted to weigh against public duty. I do not
affect to hold myself out as a person so high in the profession as that weight
should be given to the authority of my example; but yet from my station at this
Bar, I may say, without the imputation of vanity, that it would be a flagrant
breach of the integrity of the practice, detrimental and injurious to the
character of the Bar, if I could be induced by any considerations to forego the
defense of a client. I have, therefore, Gentlement, treated with the contempt
that they merited, all the sarcasms, all the calumnies, with which the
conversation of companies, and the columns of newspapers, have been loaded.
Regardless of all that folly, and of all that malice, can utter, I shall
maintain until I die, the equal right of every man of this kingdom to a fair
trial; and on this ground I stand up to defend this book, and this author, as
by the law of England he, and it, can be defended. It is my duty, Gentlemen, to
state the Question of this day. The Question is not whether the English
Constitution be preferable to that of America, or that of France, for the
common sense of the most uninformed person must revolt at such an idea; for how
can a Court, constituted by English Government and English law, give a decision
against that which creates its authority and constitutes its jurisdiction. It
is not, therefore, the question this day, to try whether the doctrines of this
author are congenial with the Constitution of England; nor whether they are
doctrines opposite to, and in hostility with, the Constitution of England; but
whether the book has been written and published agreeable to, and in conformity
with, the law of the land.

I will make myself clearly understood -- Suppose then that the doctrines of
Thomas Pain were doctrines, Gentlemen, of which every one of you approved, and
that I were now addressing myself to a Jury of Republicans, I say that you
would not be authorized to give a verdict for the Defendant, if it should be
made manifest to you, by the evidence, that he wrote these doctrines, and
published them for the malignant purpose of promoting an insurrection in the
country, thereby offending against the laws of the land; you have no
jurisdiction and authority but from law; you have no right to give a verdict in
favor of a man offending against the law, because you may happen to entertain
opinions of the same kind which produced this breach of the law. This the Noble
Lord will tell you from the Bench, and it is material for you to reflect upon
this clear description of your duty; for it matters not how perfectly
consistent with your opinions the doctrines might be; if they are contrary to
the spirit and letter of the law, you must condemn. Were I therefore, as I say,
addressing a body of men who lived upon this book, of whom it was the soul, who
doated on it, as on an angel from heaven, I would say, Gentlemen, you cannot
acquit this man if he has committed an offense against the law. It is not
whether his opinion be yours; you are not to try his opinions, for the law has
nothing to do with opinions; the law binds only conduct, it leaves opinion
open. You must see, therefore, what his conduct has been, and suffer not the
congeniality of your opinions to blind and influence your judgment. This may be
considered as a large concession, by some, as an artful maneuver by others;
but I assert, that it is a clear distinct description of the office of the
Jury; for, on the other hand, if you shall disapprove of the doctrines of
Thomas Pain, if you shall think that the Government of England has not the
infirmities he imputes to it, nay, that the passages of the book related by the
Attorney General tend to injure that Constitution, and to alienate the minds of
the people of this country from the love of it; I say, that you cannot convict
this man, unless you shall be convinced that he has overstepped the Freedom of
the Press; for, Gentlemen, you must look at the mind, you must enquire whether
he has written this book with an honest intention, from the genuine sentiments
of his heart, and from a pure conviction that he was thereby promoting
discussions for the benefit of his fellow citizens; and this is to be collected
from the matter on the record. If a man is to be judged on extrinsic matter,
that matter must be brought into connection, and put upon the record, that the
Jury may be able to judge of it, and that the Defendant may have all the
benefits of the law. What crime then is charged upon this man? -- That he has
written and published this book, and that this book is hostile to the
Constitution of England? -- No. The law of England knows no such crime. It must
be proved, in order to constitute his guilt, not whether the Attorney General
approves the book -- not whether you approve the book -- but whether Pain did
not sit down and write a book against a Constitution which he admired and
loved, with the diabolical intention of provoking discord and sedition in the
country. If this were proved, Thomas Pain could not be defended; but if he
thinks, what I and you do not think, that the Constitution of England is not
the best calculated to promote the happiness of the people of this country, he
is not guilty of any offense against the law, though his opinions may be
inconsistent with the principles of the Constitution. Every man is protected in
his opinions, it is only his conduct that makes guilt.

I hold it, Gentlemen, to be the duty of an advocate, if he should happen to
have sentiments different from his client, that he is bound to conceal them. I
hold him equally bound to disclose his opinions, if they should happen to be
favorable to him; for he is bound to exert his whole saculties in support of
his client. I am sure that it will be of little weight, what may be my opinions
upon those doctrines; but I am ready to give my client all the benefit that he
can derive from the declaration of my sentiments. I profess myself then to love
the genuine principles of the British Constitution; and I solemnly believe,
that the Constitution, as administered by King, Lords, and Commons, is the best
calculated to secure the happiness of the people of this country, of any frame
of Government, ever conceived by man. I think it necessary thus to preface my
particular opinions, that you, Gentlement, may see that they come from no
suspected quarter; that we are in unison with each other; and that in striving
to ascertain the truth, and to secure the happiness of this country, we are
animated by a common principle. I proceed, therefore, to say, and this
proposition I pledge myself to maintain, from the very nature of civil society
and Government, as well as from the theory and practice of the English law,
that unless it can be proved, which I contend it has not been, that he has
endeavored to excite individuals to rebellion against the national will, from
an evil mind, you cannot convict him of a libel on the record. Though you and I
may think differently, that is no object; there would be an end of the liberty
of English men if they could not write and speculate freely upon the principles
of Government. The Freedom of the Press of England, Gentlemen, consists in
this, that a man must not address to individuals, upon the spur of some
occasion, opinions that shall provoke them to sedition, to insurrection, and
tumult; but he may freely address to the universal reason of a whole nation,
principles of Government, congenial with, or hostile to, the form of Government
under which he lives. He may canvas the forms of Government in general, or he
may discuss those of his own in particular; he may take them to pieces, he may
scrutinize them with the greatest rigor -- he may state what he thinks to be
wrong in the original conception; he may trace the gradual progress of decay,
or of corruption; he may point out the consequences; he may dwell on their
enormity; he may warn the people of their fate; and, in all this, he is not the
subject of a criminal prosecution. He is not criminal, unless he did it, not
contemplating the hope of meliorating the condition of the people, but seasting
on the misery, with the prospect of which he indulged a diabolical nature. The
Liberty of the Press consists in this, that any individual may teach his
fellow-citizens doctrines in opposition to those under which they live; he may
exercise his own faculties: he may provoke them to the exercise of theirs; he
may persuade the whole people to agree with him in these doctrines, and he is
not guilty; but if he shall teach it as a doctrine, that any individual may
oppose the law of the land, may resist the legal authority, and may, by
himself, or in conjunction with others, not merely disobey, but thwart and
impede the settled order of society, he would be guilty of a libel upon the
record. Show me an expression like these in the books of Thomas Pain; show me,
from any part of the evidence which the Attorney General has brought forward,
any thing to prove the evil mind of the author. The Attorney General has
brought forward a set of passages, but he knows that passages are not to be
taken without the context. You must discover the mind of Thomas Pain in his
book, and as you must take his book out of Court with you it will be your duty
to read it carefully. What will you say, Gentlemen, when you find, in the very
Preface to his book, the following sentiments? Every one knows, that the very
end of a preface is to announce to the reader the intention and substance of
the following tract; and here you will find, Gentlemen, in the very outset of
this dangerous and diabolical performance, an antidote to the very poison which
it is stated to disseminate.

"If a law be bad, it is one thing to oppose the practice of it, but it is
quite a different thing to expose its errors, to reason on its defects, and to
show cause why it should be repealed, or why another ought to be substituted in
its place. I have always held it an opinion (making it also my practice), that
it is better to obey a bad law, making use, at the same time, of every argument
to show its errors, and procure its repeal, than forcibly to violate it:
because the precedent of breaking a bad law might weaken the force, and lead to
discretionary violations of those which are good The case is the same with
respect to principles and forms of Government, or to what are called
Constitutions, and the parts of which they are composed.
.

"It is for the good of Nations, and not for the emolument or aggrandizement of
particular individuals, that Government ought to be established, and that
mankind are at the expense of supporting it. The defects of every Government
and Constitution, both as to principle and form, must, on a parity of
reasoning, be as open to discussion as the defects of a law; and it is a duty
which every man owes to society to point them out. When these defects, and the
means of remedying them are generally seen by a Nation, that Nation will reform
its Government or its Constitution in the one case, as the Government repealed
or reformed the law in the other. The operations of Government are restricted
to the making and the administering of laws; but it is to a Nation that the
right of forming or reforming, generating or re-generating Constitutions and
Governments belong; and consequently those subjects, as subjects of
investigation, are always before a country as a matter of right, and cannot,
without invading the general right of that country, be made subjects for
prosecution."

These, Gentlemen, are the Rights of Man: for no man can, without rebellion,
withdraw his obedience; nothing short of the will of the whole can alter the
Constitution of a country, but every individual of that country may publish his
opinions, may give his advice, and may endeavor to bring over other people to
his sentiments. If a man taught that his fellow-citizens might act at their
discretion, if he were to say that their natural rights freed them from all
restraint, and that they were to form to themselves the rule of their own
conduct, in direct opposition to the existing law, he could not be acquitted by
a tribunal of English justice; but if a man teaches the wisdom of Revision and
Reform, the duty of meliorating our condition to the uttermost, or even the
advantages that would flow, in his opinion, from a complete alteration of the
form of our Government, he acts upon the known, acknowledged, valuable
privileges of an Englishman. Thanks be to God, and to the wisdom of our
ancestors, such has ever been our advantageous Liberty, with some slight and
melancholy interruption, which I shall bye and bye state to you. If no man
could have gone before the day in which he lived, and pointed out, from the
force of superior intellect, improvements in our social system, how could
Government have passed on from stage to stage, from state to state, until at
last it has acquired the beautiful shape and prosperous establishment, which
the Attorney General thinks it would be profanation to touch, and to such a
state of perfection as to make it a vain hope to look for any further
melioration?

What is the fairest fruits of the English Tree of Liberty? -- The security of
our rights and of the law, and that no man shall be brought to trial where
there is prejudice existing against him. If any thing appears that can infect
the minds of the Jury, the Court upon motion will postpone the trial. The Noble
Lord will recollect, that upon this principle the trial of the Dean of St.
Asaph was postponed; for it was stated in the Court, that a number of extracts
from ancient books, asserting the rights of Jurors, had been circulated; and
the Noble Lord put off the trial. If such was the case upon the more
circulation of a set of extracts from a set of writers of high authority, what
must be the situation of my client? -- This book, and this desendant, have been
the subjects of every sort of imputation. Pending the trial, even a set of
Associators, who know so little of the Constitution of England, as to interfere
with the course of justice, circulate an answer to this very pamphlet. It is
given away at turnpikes, thrown down our areas, thrust into every man's hand.
The coffee-houses, the newspapers, are full of it -- nay, that high tribunal,
which is the guardian, and the representative of the popular branch of England,
has been insulted with anathemas against this man, and against this book. What
is the result of all this? -- That the cause is prejudged -- that the mind of
no man within the sweep of this torrent can be free; and that if I had made a
motion in the Court, I am confident that the justice of the Noble Lord would
have postponed the trial. What is the consequence of all this? You, Gentlemen,
must guard your minds against the approach of this frenzy; that you must
collect firmness with conscience, and elevate yourselves above the feebleness
of human weakness. -- You must discover his mind in his book, not in the rage,
nor in the cant of the times. You must throw away every thing but the book --
the forged letter that has been read to you, you must equally reject. I heard
of this same forged letter, and I have reason to believe it to be a foul
forgery, brought forward at this moment, not merely to embarrass me, but to
embarrass you; but you must prove that you are not men whose understandings are
to be tortured by such appeals. You will prove by your verdict, that you will
deal by this man as you would wish to be dealt with in a similar situation. --
Remember this doctrine of Englishmen, that opinion is free. -- If I were to
move an amendment in any part of the existing laws of the land, would it be
right, would it be reasonable, that you should convict me of a libel, because
you differed from me in opinion? It is the opinion of this author, that it is
the duty of citizens to obey a law while it exists. "When a nation," says he,
"changes its opinions and habits of thinking, it is no longer to be governed as
before; but it would not only be wrong, but bad policy to attempt by force,
what ought to be accomplished by reason. Rebellion consists in forcibly
opposing the general will of a nation, whether by a party or by individuals."
Such is the doctrine of Thomas Pain; and I assert this to be the true law of
England; and I say, that I give the best proof of my attachment to the
illustrious family upon the throne, when I maintain these doctrines: and when I
assert, that they are the safest for their desirable interests, and for their
honor. The Attorney General, in his observation upon the infamous aspersion on
the Royal Family, speaks of the heir-apparent of the Crown from hope -- I speak
from knowledge. Without detaining you for one moment to animadvert on what I
think, the indecency of the tameness with which imputations on the Royal
progeny have been suffered of late, of the apparent disinclinations to
prosecute what tends to break the best hopes of Englishmen, and wound the
fondest feelings of the Royal bosom, while there is an eagerness to prosecute
the discussion of popular opinions. I believe, and I know, that if ever there
was a man more firmly attached than another to the pure principles of the
British Constitution, to those rights of the people, the exercise of which
seated the present Family upon the throne, it is the heir-apparent of the Crown
of these realms. If there shall come a time that, by the course of nature, and
God forbid that it should ever happen otherwise than by the course of nature,
he should succeed to the throne of his ancestors, I have the firmest confidence
that he will make the Constitution the rule of his conduct. I know that these
sentiments are congenial to his breast. I had the honor, in my place in the
House of Commons, when I believe that august person was present, to pronounce
my opinion on political doctrines, and to put the title of the King's Majesty
upon the right which the people have to choose their chief Magistrate -- the
only right upon which, in my opinion, the title can be truly safe.

In endeavoring to find the true spirit with which this book was written, you
must go back to the train of circumstances which have formed the habits and
opinions of the author. You cannot have forgotten that calamitous era in our
history, to which no man can look back without horror, -- the era of the
American war. This man performed a considerable part on that memorable theater;
and of his conduct there, Mr. Burke, that celebrated character, of whom I
cannot speak otherwise than with great respect, however he may affect to treat
me with contempt, has spoken of the conduct of Thomas Pain with high respect.
Here Mr. Erskine read some quotations from his Thoughts on he Causes of the
present discontent, and other works in commendation of Thomas Pain, and he
said that these two persons used to be of the same mind, though they now
differ. Pain might be right, but Mr. Burke could not be right, for Mr. Pain
had been consistent with himself, but Mr. Burke had contradicted every former
opinion. Pain seeing the consequences of the conduct of Britain with regard to
America, had attacked the English Constitution, for Mr. Erskine said, he does
attack the English Constitution -- I do not affect to deny it. He speaks
against the original frame of our Constitution, what I think is only applicable
to its decay, and what, for I will not mince the matter, proceeds from
corruptions which would bring on the ruin of us all, if I did not know and
believe that the Constitution contains the seeds of its own reform. Is it
libellous in him, however, to say what he has said against the constitutent
branches of our Constitution? -- the grandest authorities of England have done
the same. Mr. Erskine quoted a passage of a letter from Sir George Savile to
his constituents -- [Vide Annual Register for 1780, p. 400.] -- "I return to
you," says Sir George, "baffled and dispirited, and, I am sorry that truth
obliges me to add, with hardly a ray of hope, of seeing any change in the
miserable course of public calamities." And of Sir George Savile, Mr. Erskine
gave the admirable character as drawn by Mr. Burke. At this time Mr. Pain and
Mr. Burke fought in the same field -- Mr. Burke spoke to Parliament, Mr. Pain
to the People. Mr. Pain has only been a plagiary from himself; he has been
drawn on in the same train of thinking; and, therefore, I assert that his book
is the product of his real sentiments, the genuine efforts of a mind struggling
for what he conceives to be the interests of Humanity. The cause is potent, it
produced the revolution in America, it produced the revolution in France; where
a Government, incurable from its corruption, and profligacy, was totally
overthrown; but can the same doctrines affect the Constitution of England? No.
His doctrines had no effect, nor could there have occurred a period when the
public mind could have been excited by any such doctrines, if it had not been
previously provoked by the inflammatory, the ill-judged, and the exasperating
doctrines of Mr. Burke. He it was who led the van in all this war of sedition.
-- Let us go back for a moment to this origin. When the people of this country
saw this despicable government of France demolished -- that government which
had been the scourge of England -- they rejoiced in the happiness of so many
millions. A reverend divine, now no more, made it the subject of exhortation
from the pulpit. A society of gentlemen met to celebrate it, and Mr. Burke was
roused by this into the fever of opposition. Though he represented them as an
insignificant body of obscure individuals, he attacked the whole system of
England with such bitterness of invective, and attacked the most established
doctrines, with such vehemence of dissent, that from that day till this the
flame of contention has not ceased to rage. -- What was the principle of this
work? -- That the People of England had no right, no power, to change a tittle
of their Constitution; that it was an indissoluble compact, which at no time,
on no ground, for no reason, could be broken: so that neither reason nor
revelation, however they might point out to the people of England a better form
of government, wiser institutes of peace, stronger bases of liberty, they durst
not strive to attain them. If it be so, for God's sake, let policy and
discretion strive to conceal the afflicting truth, for it will surely lead to
the convulsion which he affects to deprecate. Rather put Pain into the hands
of every man, make the lowest ignorance acquainted with his doctrines, and
chase away, if it be possible, the impressions which Mr. Burke has made. How
different is the doctrine of truth and of peace! -- How different is the
doctrine of the Revolution! Look at the Constitution, say the friends of
liberty, it is your own treasure. Will you keep it as it is, or will you change
it at the suggestion of every theorist? Your own happiness is at stake; but
remember the happiness that it has produced you. Will they not be likely to
touch with awe a Constitution which comes thus recommended to them by parental
tenderness? and will they not protect it with parental authority? -- Look now
at the address of Mr. Burke. Here is your Constitution, which we have made for
you, and for your posterity for ever. We buckle it on your backs, for you are
beasts of burden. You must not dare to touch it -- you have entered into a
compact which is indissoluble. Are such doctrines the legitimate way of
endearing the Constitution to the people? And I mention all this in order to
show you what the book of Mr. Pain is; for Paine's book is an answer to those
doctrines of Mr. Burke -- doctrines more injurious than any that could be
asserted by Republicans and Levellers!

Mr. Erskine then cited several of our most eminent English writers, whose
sentiments are congenial with those of Mr. Pain on the subject of Government.
-- He first quoted Mr. Paley on the Principles of Moral and Political
Philosophy, p. 426.

V. No usage, law, or authority whatever is so binding, that it need or ought
to be continued, when it may be changed with advantage to the Community. The
family of the Prince, the order of succession, the prerogative of the Crown,
the form and parts of the Legislature, together with the respective powers,
office, duration, and mutual dependency of the several parts, are all only so
many laws, mutable like other laws, whenever expediency requires, either by the
ordinary act of the Legislature, or, if the occasion deserve it, by the
interposition of the People. These points are wont to be approached with a kind
of awe; they are represented to the mind as principles of the Constitution
settled by our ancestors, and, being settled, to be no more committed to
innovation or debate; as foundations never to be stirred; as the terms and
conditions of the social compact, to which every citizen of the state has
engaged his fidelity, by virtue of a promise, which he cannot now recall. Such
reasons have no place in our system? to us, if there be any good reason for
treating these with more deference and respect than other laws; it is either
the advantage of the present Constitution of Government (which reason must be
of different force in different countries), or because in all countries, it is
of importance, that the form and usage of governing be acknowledged and
understood, as well by the governors as the governed, and because the seldomer
it is changed, the more it will be respected by both sides.

Mr. Erskine then introduced Hume's History of England, vol. ii. p. 88.

It must be confessed that the former articles of the Great Charter contain
such mitigations and explanations of the Feodal Law as are reasonable and
equitable; and that the latter involve all the chief outlines of a Loyal
Government, and provide for the equal distribution of Justice, and free
enjoyment of property; the great object for which political society was at
first founded by men, which the people have a perpetual and unalienable right
to recall, and which no time, nor precedent, nor statute, nor positive
institution, ought to deter them from keeping ever uppermost in their thoughts
and attention.

The next Writer was the immortal Lock, and he cited the following passages
from his Treatise on Civil Government, p. 268, 270, 309, 3^3.

All men, say they, are born under Government, and therefore they cannot be at
liberty to begin a new one. Every one is born a subject to his father, or his
prince, and is therefore under the perpetual tie of subjection and allegiance.
It is plain mankind never owned nor considered any such natural subjection that
they were born in, to one or to the other, that tied them, without their own
consents, to a subjection to them and their heirs.

Those who would persuade us, that by being born under any government we are
naturally subjects to it, and have no more any title or pretense to the freedom
of the state of Nature, have no other reason (bating that of paternal power,
which we have already answered) to produce for it, but only because our fathers
or progenitors passed away their natural liberty, and thereby bound up
themselves and their posterity to a perpetual subjection to the government,
which they themselves submitted to. It is true, that whatever engagements or
promises any one has made for himself, he is under the obligation of them, but
cannot, by any compact whatsoever, bind his children or posterity; for his son,
when a man, being altogether as free as the father, any act of the father can
no more give away the liberty of the son, that it can of any body else.

And therefore they have a very wrong notion of Government who say, that the
people have incroached upon the prerogative, when they have got any part of it
to be defined by positive laws; for in so doing, they have not pulled from the
prince any thing that of right belonged to him, but only declared that that
power which they indefinitely left in his or his ancestor's hands to be
exercised for their good; was not a thing which they intended him when he used
it otherwise; for the end of Government being the good of the Community,
whatsoever alterations are made in it, tending to that end, cannot be an
encroachment upon any body, since nobody in Government can have a right tending
to any other end: and those only are encroachments which prejudice or hinder
the public good. Those who say otherwise, speak as if the prince had a distinct
and separate interest from the good of the Community, and was not made for it;
the root and source from which spring almost all those evils and disorders
which happen in Kingly Governments. And indeed, if that be so, the people under
his government are not a society of rational creatures, entered into a
community for their mutual good; they are not such as have set rulers over
themselves, to guard and promote that good; but are to be looked on as an herd
of inferior creatures, under the dominion of a master, who keeps them and works
them for his own pleasure or profit. If men were so void of reason, and
brutish, as to enter into society upon such terms, Prerogative might indeed be,
what some men would have it, an arbitrary power to do things hurtful to the
people.

And, therefore, though the People cannot be judge, so as to have, by the
constitution of that society, any superior power, to determine and give
effective sentence in the case; yet, they have, by a law antecedent and
paramount to all positive laws of men, reserved that ultimate determination to
themselves which belongs to all mankind; God and Nature never allowing a man so
to abandon himself, as to neglect his own preservation; and since he cannot
take away his own life, neither can he give another power to take it. Nor let
any one think this lays a perpetual foundation for disorder; for this operates
not till the inconveniency is so great, that the majority feel it, and are
weary of it, and find a necessity to have it amended. But this the executive
power, or wise princes, never need come in the danger of; and it is the thing,
of all others, they have most need to avoid, as of all others the most
perilous.

Whenever, therefore, the legislative shall transgress this fundamental will
of society, and either by ambition, fear, folly, or corruption, endeavor to
grasp themselves, or put into the hands of any other, an absolute power over
the lives, liberties, and estates of the people; by this breach of truth they
forfeit the power the people had put into their hands for quite contrary ends,
and it devolves to the people, who have a right to resume their original
liberty, and, by the establishment of a new legislative, (such as they shall
think fit) provide for their own safety and security, which is the end for
which they are in society. What I have said here, concerning the legislative,
(such as they shall think fit) provide for their own safety and security, which
is the end for which they are in society. What I have said here, concerning the
legislative in general, holds true concerning the supreme executor, who having
a double trust put in him, both to have a part in the legislative, and the
supreme execution of the law, acts against both, when he goes about to set up
his own arbitary will as the law of the society. He acts also contrary to his
trust, when he either employs the force, treasure, and offices, of the Society,
to corrupt the representatives, and gain them to his purposes: or openly
pre-engages the electors, and prescribes to their choice such, whom he has by
solicitations, threats, promises, or otherwise, won to his designs; and employs
them to bring in such, who have promised beforehand what to vote, and what to
enact. Thus to regulate candidates and electors, and newmodel the ways of
election, what is it but to cut up the Government by the roots, and poison the
very fountain of public security? For the people having reserved to themselves
the choice of their representatives, as the fence to their properties, could do
it for no other end, but that they may always be freely chosen, and so chosen,
freely act and advise, as the necessity of the commonwealth, and the public
good, should, upon examination, and mature debate, be judged to require. This
those who give their votes before they hear the debate, and have weighed the
reasons on all sides, are not capable of doing. To prepare such an assembly as
this, and endeavor to set up the declared abettors of his own will, for the
true representatives of the people, and the lawmakers of the society, is
certainly as great a breach of trust, and as perfect a declaration of a design
to subvert the Government, as is possible to be met with. To which, if one
shall add rewards and punishments visibly employed to the same end, and all the
arts of perverted law made use of to take off and destroy all that stand in the
way of such a design, and will not comply and consent to betray the liberties
of their country, it will be past doubt what is doing. What power they ought to
have in the society, who thus employ it contrary to the trust which went along
with it in its first institution, is easy to determine; and one cannot but see,
that he who has once attempted any such thing as this, cannot any longer be
trusted.

But it will be said, this hypothesis lays a ferment for frequent rebellion. To
which I answer.

First, No more than any other hypothesis: for when the People are made
miserable and find themselves exposed to the ill usuage of arbitrary power, cry
up their governors, as much as you will, for sons of Jupiter; let them be
sacred and divine, descended or authorized from Heaven; give them out for whom
or what you please, the same will happen. The People generally ill-treated, and
contrary to right, will be ready upon any occasion to ease themselves of a
burden that sits heavy upon them. They will wish, and seek for the opportunity,
which in the change, weakness and accidents of human affairs, seldom delays
long to offer itself. He must have lived but a little while in the world, who
has not seen examples of this in his time; and he must have read very little,
who cannot produce examples of it in all sorts of government in the world.

Secondly, I answer such revolutions happen not upon every little mismanagement
in public affairs. Great mistakes in the ruling part, many wrong and
inconvenient laws, and all the slips of human frailty, will be borne by the
People, without mutiny or murmur. If a long train of abuses, prevarications and
artifices, all tending the same way, make the design visible to the people, and
they cannot but feel what they lie under, and see whither they are going; it is
not to be wondered at, that they should then rouse themselves, and endeavor to
put the rule into such hands as may secure to them the ends for which
Government was at first erected; and without which, ancient names, and specious
forms, are so far from being better, that they are much worse, than the state
of nature, or pure Anarchy; the inconveniences being all as great and as near,
but the remedy farther off and more difficult.

Thirdly, I answer, that this doctrine of a power in the people of providing
for their safety anew, by a new legislative, when their legslators have acted
contrary to their trust, by invading their property, is the best fence against
rebellion, and the probablest means to hinder it: for rebellion being an
opposition, not to persons, but authority, which is founded only in the
Constitutions and Laws of the Government; those, whoever they be, who by force
break through, and by force justify their violation of them, are truly and
properly rebels: for when men, by entering into society and civil government,
have excluded force, and introdueed laws for the preservation of property,
peace and unity amongst themselves, those who set up force again in opposition
to the laws, do rebellure, that is, bring back again the state of war, and are
properly rebels: which they who are in power, (by the pretense they have to
authority, the temptation of force they have in they their hands, and the
flattery of those about them) being likeliest to do; the properest way to
prevent the evil, is to show them the danger and injustice of it, who are under
the greatest temptation to run into it.

Nor let any one say, that mischief can arise from hence, as often as it shall
please a busy head, or turbulent spirit, to desire the alteration of the
Goyernment. It is true, such men may stir whenever they please; but it will be
only to their own just ruin and perdition: for till the mischief be grown
general, and the ill designs of the rulers become visible, or their attempts
sensible to the greater part, the people, who are more disposed to suffer than
right themselves by resistance, are not apt to stir. The examples of particular
injustice, or oppession of here and there an unfortunate man, moves them not.
But if they universally have a persuasion grounded upon manifest evidence, that
designs are carrying on against their liberties, and the general course and
tendency of things cannot but give them strong suspicions of the evil intention
of their Governors, who is to be blamed for it? Who can help it, if they who
might avoid it, bring themselves into this suspicion? Are the people to be
blamed, if they have the sense of rational creatures, and can think of things
no otherwise than as they find and feel them? -- And is it not rather their
fault who put things into such a posture, that they would not have them thought
to be as they are? I grant that the pride, ambition, and turbulency of private
men, have sometimes caused great disorders in commonwealths, and factions have
been fatal to states and kingdoms. But whether the mischief has oftener begun
in the people's wantonness, and a desire to cast off the lawful authority of
their rulers, or in the rulers' insolence, and endeavors to get and exercise
an arbitrary power over their people; whether oppression or disobedience gave
the first rife to the disorder, I leave it to impartial history to determine.

Mr. Burkes's Letter to the Sheriffs of Bristol, was then introduced; and Mr.
Erskine read the following passages from p. 55. 57, 58.

If there be one fact in the world perfectly clear, it is this, 'That the
disposition of the people of America is wholly averse to any other than a free
government;' and this is indication enough to any honest Statesman, how he
ought to adapt whatever power he finds in his hands to their case. If any ask
me what a free government is, I answer, that, for any practical purpose it is
what the people think so; and that they and not I, are the natural, lawful, and
competent judges of this matter. If they practically allow me a greater degree
of authority over them, than is consistent with any correct ideas of perfect
freedom, I ought to thank them for so great a trust, and not to endeavor to
prove from thence, that they have reasoned amiss, and that having gone so far,
by analogy, they must hereafter have no enjoyment but my pleasure.

Civil Freedom, gentlemen, is not, as many have endeavored to persuade you, a
thing that lies hid in the depth of abstruse science. But is a blessing and a
benefit, not an abstract speculation; and all the just reasoning that can be
upon it, is of so coarse a texture, as perfectly to suit the ordinary
capacities of those who are to enjoy and to defend it.

For Liberty is a good to be improved, and not an evil to be lessened. It is
not only a private blessing of the first order, but the vital spring and energy
of the state itself, which has just so much life and vigor as there is liberty
in it. But whether liberty be advantageous or not, (for I know it is a fashion
to decry the very principle) none will dispute that peace is a blessing; and
peace must, in the course of human affairs, be frequently bought by some
indulgence and toleration at least of liberty. For as the Sabbath (though of
divine institution) was made for man, not man for the Sabbath, Government,
which can claim no higher origin or authority, in its exercise at least, ought
to conform to the exigencies of the times, and the temper and character of the
people with whom it is concerned, and not always to attempt, violently, to bend
the people to their theories of Subjection. The bulk of Mankind, on their part,
are not excessively curious concerning any theories, while they are really
happy; and one sure symptom of an ill-conducted State, is the propensity of the
people to resort to them.

Do not let us be rash, Gentlemen, in deciding upon this great question. Before
we condemn this author by bell, book, and candle, let us reflect a little on
the progress of the principles of freedom. It is but one year ago, that I could
have an opportunity of addressing to you such an argument. Gentlemen, your
authority to judge of a Libel is but a year old. It is but seven or eight years
ago when I stood upon a question like the present, upon very different grounds,
when I had less to support me against the embarrassment with which I was
sorrounded in the presence of an enlightened profession, and holding a doctrine
that was scouted. The Earl of Mansfield, who, though he could not treat me with
unkindness, for it was not in his nature, laughed at me as you laugh at the
prattle of a child; and I was desired to go to school with my newfangled
doctrines, to learn the law of the land. Here is an argument against rashness.
I have lived to see the Parliament of England unanimously declare that I was in
the right. Knowing then that it has been by slow and gradual degrees, that the
constitution of England has grown to what it is, for God's sake let us be
careful not to stifle the voice of reason by a rash and hasty decision. If Mr.
Burke's doctrine be right, no opinions upon government can be published, for
the people have no jurisdiction. If the people have not the power to alter and
amend, advice is not merely impertinent, it is dangerous. A jurisdiction to be
competent must have power; and when, therefore, he asserts that the people of
this country are utterly and for ever deprived of the power of changing their
Constitution, he pronouces a prohibition upon all reasoning, upon all opinion,
upon all discussion. What has been the course of man? That he has been led by
awful authorities, step by step, from his savage state in the woods, to our
present blessed condition of light, of knowledge, and of enjoyments. We should
still be savages, we should yet be in the woods, if this prohibition had
existed; and to what must we return, if every man is to be condemned, who shall
now promulgate the opinions that he entertains upon the nature of government?

Of all the seize of a people, the Liberty of the Press has been
uniformly the last -- Uniformly despotism has resisted the propagation of
truth. All other concessions power has been willing to make, but against the
truths of reason -- against the light of knowledge, it has maintained an
eternal war. Let us recollect the course of the world, the universal God of
Nature, the Savior of Mankind, the Fountain of all Light, who came to save man
from eternal darkness, expired on a cross -- the object of Infidel scorn -- of
impious incredulity, because they rashly opposed the meek and mild propagation
of the truths that were to point to peace and happiness in the world. His
blessed followers felt victims to the same horrid spirit. The Savior might
have come, invested with eternal power, and compelled the instantaneous
acceptance of his doctrines. But he came to confound the pride of worldly
power. He came clothed in meekness, in benevolence, in humility, and he
preached his consolations to the poor; in this way did political power continue
to exercise its tyranny, until religion had arisen to such a standard as to
make it formidable; and then political power took ecclesiastical power into
partnership, when they exerted their combined efforts at once against the
reason, and the conscience of man. Thus, upon the revival of letters, was
superstition made the instrument of political tyranny; but at length the
inquisitive spirit of Englishmen burst the chains, and the Liberty of the Press
had its beginning. It was free until, (in 1637), the Star Chamber was erected;
mark the consequence, the people suffered under restraint indeed; but in eleven
years Charles I. perished on a scaffold. Gentlemen, the human mind cannot live
under restraint. Let men communicate their thoughts with freedom, and their
indignation fly off like a fire spread on the surface; like gunpowder scattered
they kindle, they communicate; but the explosion is neither loud nor dangerous:
-- keep them under restraint, it is a subterraneous fire, whose agitation is
unseen until it bursts into earthquake or volcano. Such was the whole effect
of the restraints in England. Cromwell suffered almost all his misfortunes from
this cause, and the vigor of his government could not save it against the
consequences of his attack on the liberty of the press. The restraint continued
under Charles II. and the emotions that it produced, happily for England and
for man, ended in the revolution. All the licenses were done away, the press
was made free, and the Constitution has already endured a century. Thus,
gentlemen, our government has been safe in proportion to the freedom of
writing. Here Mr. Erskine produced some of the finest authorities of England --
the glorious Milton led the van: his memorable passage, that in former times
the issue of the brain was no more stifled than the issue of the womb, and his
fine illustration of the consequences of suppressing truth, in the fate of
Galileo, were dexterously used by Mr. Erskine -- He perished in a prison,
because he ventured to think, from observing the phases of Venus, that the sun
was that center of our system, and yet, said he, we know that the sun is in
that center, and by our knowledge, we are enabled to push our navigation to the
extreme limits of the world, and, by line and rule, to make our way through
regions the most unknown.

He then cited the following passage from Milton's Areopagatica, p. 58.

If it be desired to know the immediate cause of all this free writing, and
free speaking, there cannot be assigned a truer than your own mild, and free,
and humane government; it is the liberty, Lords and Commons, which your own
valourous and happy counsels have purchased us; liberty which is the nurse of
all great wits this is that which has rarefied and enlightened our spirits
like the influence of heaven; this is that which has enfranchised, enlarged,
and lifted up our apprehensions degrees above themselves. Ye cannot make us now
less capable, less knowing, less eagerly pursuing of the truth, unless ye first
make yourselves, that made us so, less the lovers, less the founders of our
true liberty. We can grow ignorant again, brutish, formal, and slavish, as ye
found us; but you then must first become that which ye cannot be, oppressive,
arbitrary, and tyrannous, as they were from whom ye have freed us. That our
hearts are now more capacious, our thoughts now more erected to the search and
expectation of the greatest and exactest things, is the issue of your own
virtue propagated in us; ye cannot suppress that, unless ye reinforce an
abrogated and merciless law, that fathers may dispatch at will their own
children. And who shall then stick closest to ye, and excite others? Not he who
takes up arms for coat and conduct, and his four nobles of Danegelt. Although I
dispraise not the defense of just immunities, yet love my peace better, if that
were all. Give me the liberty to know, to utter, and to argue freely according
to conscience, above all liberties.

What would be best advised then, if it be found so hurtful and so unequal to
suppress opinions for the newness or unsuitableness to a customary acceptance,
will not be my task to say; I shall only repeat what I have learnt from the
Lord Brook -- he exhorts us to hear with patience and humility, those, however
they may be miscalled, that desire to live purely in such a use of God's
Ordinances as the best guidance to their consciences gives them, and to
tolerate them, though in some disconformity to ourselves. -- And now the time
in special is by privilege to write and speak what may help to further the
discussing of matters in agitation. -- The Temple of Janus, with his two
controversial faces, might now not insignificantly be set open; and although
all the Winds of Doctrine were let loose to play upon the earth, so Truth be in
the field, we do injurious by licensing and prohibiting to misdoubt her
strength -- let her and falsehood grapple; who ever knew truth put to the worse
in a free and open encounter? her confuting is the best and surest suppressing
-- when a man has been laboring the hardest labor in the deep mines of
knowledge; has furnished out his findings in all their equipage; drawn forth
his reason as it were a battle ranged; scattered and defeated all objections in
his way; calls out his adversary into the plain; offers him all the advantage
of wind and sea, if he please that he may try the matter by dint of argument --
for his opponents then to sculk, to lay ambushments, to keep a narrow bridge of
licensing where the challenger should pass, though it be valor enough in
soldiership, is but weakness and cowardice in the wars of truth, for who knows
not that Truth, like the Almighty, is strong, she needs no policies nor
stratagems (he might have added prosecutions) "to make her victorious."

There is such a connection between licentiousness and liberty, that it is not
easy to correct the one, without dangerously wounding the other; it is
extremely hard to distinguish the true limit between them: Like a changeable
silk, we can easily see there are two different colors, but we cannot easily
discover where the one ends, or where the other begins.

The Attorney General had given no principles to draw the line by which we were
to know where the Liberty of the Press ended, and the licentiousness began. He
applied Lord Loughborough's memorable observation of the application. "To your
tents, O Israel," as a pregnant instance of what would be seditious. Earl
Stanhope had, with great shrewdness, ridiculed this sort of Liberty of the
Press, which was to be all on one side -- a liberty to praise Ministers. This
is a sort of liberty that even the Empress of Russia would give you, and it may
be called the Russian Liberty of the Press. To make the work of the author
appear seditious, the doctrine of Lord Loughborough must be proved. It must be
shown that his doctrine was coupled with circumstances, or with expressions,
tending clearly to provoke tumult; such as, "We shall see how this will work --
this will bring on a new revolution -- we shall have French insurrections."
But, said Mr. Erskine, no such thing: if one such expression had been proved, I
would have thrown up my brief -- as they are not, I stand up to give him the
benefits of a fair trial, and I am not to be slandered with the charge of
disaffection for exercising my faculties in his defense. When my Lord and I
were engaged together as counsel for Lord George Gordon, as well might we have
been suspected of savouring tumult and disorder, as that I now should be of
sedition and disaffection.

Mr. Erskine then cited a passage from Lord Stanhope's Rights of Juries
Defended, as follows, page 142, 143, 144.

The thing that is illegal, is the exciting any one to sedition, or to a breach
^f the Peace. The question, therefore, upon a Libel is, whether the Paper
published did thus excite and was so intended. Consequently mere speculative
writings on the Constitution are not Libels, however absurd they may be.
Suppose, for instance, that a man were to write a speculative work, to prove
that a trial by a single Judge would be far preferable to the Trial by Jury; or
that a Parliament, composed only of a King and House of Peers, would be beyond
comparison better than a Legislature of King, Lords, and Commons. No man could
possibly reprobrate such a work more than I should: but if the work did not
excite the people to sedition, such a speculative Publication could certainly
never be deemed a Libel: for absurdity is no part of the definition of a Libel.

If our boasted Liberty of the Press were to consist only in the Liberty to
write in praise of the Constitution; that is a Liberty enjoyed under many an
arbitrary Government. I suppose it would not be deemed quite an unpardonable
Offense even by the Empress of Russia, if any man were to take it into his head
to write a panegyric upon the Russian form of Government. Such a Liberty as
that might therefore properly be termed the Russian Liberty of the Press. But,
the English Liberty of the Press, is of a very different description: for, by
he Law of England, it is not prohibited to publish speeulative Works upon the
Constitution, whether they contain Praise or Censure.

The Liberty of the Press is of inestimable value, for, without it, this Nation
might soon be as thoroughly enslaved as France was, or as Turkey is. Every man
who detests the old Government of France, and the present Government of Turkey,
must be, therefore, earnest to secure that Palladium of Liberty; and must also
be anxious to preserve to the People, inviolate, the Trial by Jury, that
transcendant, that incomparable and guardian Right.

Mr. Erskine came now to examine the passages set forth in the Information. We
have already gone at so much length into his general argument, as to be unable
to follow him in the ingenuity of his observations on his Extract. As to the
first, that all hereditary government was a tyranny, he desired the Jury to
look at the context. I deny, says Pain, that hereditary Monarchy is the
Constitution. He does not inherit us like floks, for the People may confer it;
they have conferred it. This is his argument. The second was an extraordinary
selection -- it would be no attack upon the Revotion, if it had been
accomplished by demons. Do we love the Reformation less for being accomplished
by one of the most profligate of our Kings? No matter that the Revolution was
brought about by intrigue; that it was the work of a Coalition. It is not by
whom, but what it is, that the People will enquire. He contended, that the
People had, by the freedom of opinion, obtained every thing from Magna Charta
downwards? The third quotation, that we had hardly any law in England; was no
libel; for he did not arraign the administration of law, and many of our best
writers had asserted, that there was much confusion, much difficulty, much to
be mended in our jurisprudence. With regard to the passages on the two Houses
of Parliament, it was strange that Mr. Burke should accuse him; he who had so
severely, so outrageously impeached both Houses in their turn; and here he
quoted some of the memorable passages of Mr. Burke, of the Lords voting
themselves useless, and of an addressing House of Commons, when there was a
petitioning People. He quoted also the memorable Proclamation of Mr. Pit and
the Duke of Richmond, from the Thatched House Tavern. On the celebrated passage
of Mr. Burke, that Kings were naturally fond of low company, and that Lords
were only low buffoons, he made a severe comment. It was a scandalous aspersion
on the King, and on the Nobility; but these associators might write, though
they would suffer no one to write but themselves lawyers, though so ignorant of
the character and delicacy of the saw, as to propagate every species of
prejudice against this man, and to create such a hue and cry against him, that
if he had been slained with blood instead of ink -- if he had been degraded by
the crimes that make humanity abhorrent, ought not to have been raised against
him in the moment of his trial -- such a clamor, that even he was almost beat
down and abashed by the roar. Even in the House of Parliament he was
stigmatized by name, but he had delivered his opinion with the spirit and
independence that becaume a professional man, determined not to shrink from his
duty, whatever might be the hazard. These associators, had, with equal
ignorance, said, that the great Harrington was as great a thief, and as obscure
a ruffian, even as Pain. -- Who was Harrington? -- It might have satisfied
them to have read his pedigree; -- he was descended from eight Dukes, three
Marquisses, seventy Earls, twenty-seven Viscounts, and thirty-six Barons, of
which number sixteen were Knights of the Garter. Will not this do, said Mr.
Erskine, even for this time? -- In a Court of Germany it would be decisive; but
what was better than his descent was his conduct. He was the faithful servant
of his Master Charles; he was a man of such undoubted honor, that he avowed
his Republican principles, yet retained the confidence and affection of his
master. "I know not," says Toland, which most to commend -- the King for
trusting an honest man, though of Republican principles, or Harrington for
owning his principles while he served a King. How did he serve him? he staid in
the Isle of Wight, to watch the fortune of his Royal Master; he came up by
stealth, concealed in the boot of a coach, to take his last farewell of him; he
fell into his arms, and fainted at his feet on the scaffold. After Charles's
death, he wrote the famous Oceana, and in the work pays a tribute of truth to
the virtues of his unfortunate Sovereign, and ascribes his misfortunes to the
feeble nature of a Monarchy. Mr. Erskine stated the interesting anecdote, by
which he recovered his Oceana from the gripe of Cromwell. He applied to his
favorite daughter, and seeing her infant at her side, he snatched it up in his
arms, and ran away; alarmed for its fate, the mother followed him -- "I have
seized your child," said Harrington, your father has seized mine -- I restore
to you your child -- supplicate your father to restore my child. The daughter
supplicated, and Cromwell yielded. "If my Government," said Cromwell, be made
to stand, it will not be battered down by paper shot. After various other
quotations from Montesquieu, Milton, and other classics, he made a warm and
affecting conclusion. Do not think that Englishmen are to be bent to your
purpose by this froward course.

Be to their fau'ts a little blind --
Be to their virtues very kind --
Let all their thoughts be unconfined,
And clap your padlock on the mind.
Engage them by their affections, convince their reason and they will be loyal
from the only principle that can make loyalty sincere, vigorous, or rational, a
conviction that it is their truest interest, and that their form of Government
is for their common good. Constraint is the natural parent of resistance, and
this is no new doctrine. In all times where one side has been tyrannical, the
other has been refractory. You must all remember, Gentlemen, Lucian's pleasant
story -- Jupiter and a countryman were walking together, conversing with great
freedom and familiarity upon the subjects of heaven and earth. The countryman
listened with attention and acquiescence, while Jupiter strove only to convince
him, but happening to hint a doubt, Jupiter turned hastily round, and
threatened him with his thunder. -- "Ah! ah!" said the countryman, now,
Jupiter, I know that your are wrong; you're always wrong, when you appeal to
your thunder.

The Attorney General rose to reply; but Mr. Campbell, the foreman of the Jury,
said he was instructed by his brother jurors to say that he might save himself
the trouble of any observations, unless he thought otherwise himself, for that
they were satisfied. The Attorney General sat down, and the Jury immediately
gave a verdict of Guilty.

FINIS.

