A COLLECTION OF LETTERS, Never before printed: WRITTEN By ALEXANDER POPE, Esquire
AND Other ingenious GENTLEMEN, To the Late AARON HILL, Esquire

LONDON: Printed for W. OWEN, at Homer's Head, near Temple Bar, Fleet Street.
Price 1 s. M.DCC.LI.

LETTERS FROM Several ingenious GENTLEMEN To the Late AARON HILL, Esquire
LETTER I. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Dear Sir,
THE little Thing which you take so kindly, is but a very small Part of what I
owe you; and whatever my Studies, or (to use a properer Word) Idleness, are
capable of producing, ought to be returned you in mere Gratitude for the
Pleasure I have received from your own Writings: In which give me Leave to say,
your good Will to me in particular, is as distinguishable, as the Obligation
you lay on the Public in general. I am very happy in the Envy and silly
Attacks of such People, as have awakened the Generosity of so powerful a
Defender. Nor am I ashamed of those Weaknesses of mine, which they have exposed
in Print (the greatest of which was my thinking too heartily of them, to whom I
wrote my Letters with so much unguarded Friendliness, and Freedom), since you
have found a Way to turn those Weaknesses into Virtue, by your partial Regard
of them. The Eye of Candor, like the Sun, makes all the Beauties which it
sees; it gives Color and Brightness to the meanest Objects purely by looking
on them. I agree with you, that there is a Pleasure in seeing the Nature and
Temper of Men in the plainest Undress; but few Men are of Consequence enough to
deserve, or reward, that Curiosity. I shall indeed (and so will all Mankind) be
highly pleased to see the Great Czar of Muscovy in this Light, drawn by
himself, like an ancient Master, in rough Strokes, without heightening, or
shadowing: What a Satisfaction to behold that perfect Likeness, without Art,
Affectation, or even the Gloss of Coloring, with a noble Neglect of all that
Finishing and Smoothing, which any other Hand would have been obliged to bestow
on so principal a Figure? I write this to a Man whose Judgment I am certain of,
and therefore am as certain you will give the World this great Depositum, just
as you have received it: There will be no Danger of your dressing this Mars too
finely, whose Armor is not Gold, but Adamant, and whose Style in all
Probability is much more strong, than it is polished. I congratulate you, that
this great Treasure is fallen into your Hands; and I congratulate all Europe,
that it is to be delivered to them. through the Hands of one, who will think it
Sacrilege to touch upon, much less to alter, any great Lines of such an
Original.

I can make you no better Return for your great Compliment upon me (which it
would be Arrogance in me to show to any other, and dangerous even to remember
myself) but by telling you, that it is Honor enough to reward all my Studies,
to find my Character and Reputation is Part of the Care of that Person, to whom
the Fame and Glory of Peter Alexiowitz was committed.

SIR,

I am forced to make use of another Hand than my own in this Letter, having
received a Wound cross all the Veins of my right Hand, by which the Tendons of
two Fingers are separated; however, it was a Fine paid for my Life, which has
been very narrowly saved, and which may now continue me some Years longer,

Dear Sir, Your most faithful, affectionate, and obliged Servant, A. POPE.

LETTER II. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Jan. 5, 1730-1. SIR,
I WAS unwilling to answer your too obliging Letter (which puts much too great
a Stress upon my Opinion) till I had read your Play with the Attention it
deserves; I mean, not once, but several times over. In a Word, to comply with
my Judgment will cost you no Trouble, except to your Modesty; which is, to act
it as soon as possible. Nothing but Trifles have I to object, and which were
such as did not once stop me at the first Reading; the Spirit, Design, and
Characters, carrying me on, without Stop, Check, or even Intermission. You
certainly are Master of the Art of the Stage, in the manner of forming and
conducting the Design, which I think impossible to be mended; of that Great
Part, and of the other, the raising the Passions, I will say nothing to you,
who know them so much better than myself. I would only point out a few
Particularities in Thought or Expression, as material as excepting to a Button
on your Coat, or a loose Hair. Two or three Lines I have with great
Timorousness written on one of your blank Leaves, in Black Lead, half afraid to
be legible, and not without some Hope that before you see them, they may be
vanished: So may perhaps my Objections, every one of them. Shall I see you
soon, to tell you these Nothings? Whenever I shall see you, I hope to find, we
can employ the Time better, than I, in telling, or you, in hearing them. Or
must I return you the Play now? Your Orders will be obeyed as soon as you give
them. -- I really rejoice at your Lady's Recovery: I would have her and you
think, the Air of Richmond is particularly good to re-establish her. Pray let
Miss Hill know, I am ready to believe all the good Things her own Father can
see in her: I can safely trust both his Judgments, and his Affections. I am,
truly,

SIR, Your obliged and sincerely affectionate Servant, A. POPE.

LETTER III. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Feb. 5. 1730-1. Dear Sir,
I MADE a strong Essay to have told you in Person how very kindly I took your
two last Letters. The only Hours I had in my Power from a necessary Care that
brought me back immediately, I would have imposed on you. It will please you to
know the poor Woman is rather better, though it may be but like the Improvement
of a Light on the End of a dying Taper, which brightens a little before it
expires. -- Your Hint about my Title Of false Taste, you will see, is made use of
in the Second Edition. Your Opinion also of my giving some public Dissent or
Protest against the silly malicious Misconstruction of the Town, I agree to;
but I think no one Step should be taken in it, but in Concert with the Duke
whom they injure. It will be a Pleasure felt by you, to tell you, his Grace has
written to me the strongest Assurance imaginable of the Rectitude of his
Opinion, and of his Resentment of that Report, which to Him is an Impertinence,
to me a Villainy.

I am afraid of tiring you, and (what is your best Security) I have not Time to
do it. I Will only just tell you, that many Circumstances you have heard, as
Resemblances to the Picture of Timon, are utterly Inventions of Liars; the
Number of Servants never was an Hundred, the Paintings not of Venio or La
Guerre, but Bellucci and Zaman; no such Buffet, Manner of Reception at the
Study, Terras, etc. all which, and many more, they have not scrupled to forge,
to gain some Credit to the Application: And (which is worse) belyed Testimonies
of Noblemen, and of my particular Friends, to condemn me. In a word, the Malice
is as great as the Dullness, of my Calumniators: The one I forgive, the other I
pity, and I despise both. Adieu; the first Day I am near you I will find you
out, and show you something you will like. My best good Wishes are yours, and
Miss Urania's

Your affectionate Servant, A. POPE.

LETTER IV. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
SIR, Parsons Green, Feb. 5. 173^-^
SINCE I am fully satisfied we are each of us sincerely and affectionately
Servants to the other, I desire we may be no further misled by the Warmth of
writing on this Subject. If you think I have shown too much Weakness, or if I
think you have shown too much Warmth, let us forgive one another's Temper. I
told you I thought my Letter a filly one; but the more I thought so, the more
in sending it I showed my Trust in your good Disposition toward me. I am sorry
you took it to have an Air of Neglect, or Superiority: Because I know in my
Heart, I had not the least Thought of being any way superior to Mr. Hill; and,
far from the least Design to show Neglect to a Gentleman who was showing me
Civility, I meant in Return to show him a better Thing, Sincerity; which I Am
sorry should be so ill expressed as to seem Rudeness. I meant but to complain
as frankly as you, that all Complaints on both Sides might be out, and at a
Period for ever: I meant by this to have laid a surer Foundation for your
Opinion of me for the future, that it might no more be shaken by Mistakes or
Whispers.

I am sure, Sir, you have a higher Opinion of my Poetry than I myself. But I am
so desirous you should have a just one of me every way, that I wish you
understood both my Temper in general, and my Justice to you in particular,
better than I find my Letter represented them. I wish it the more, since you
tell me how ill a Picture my Enemies take upon 'em to give, of the Mind of a
Man they are utter Strangers to. However, you will observe, that much Spleen
and Emotion are a little inconsistent with Neglect, and an Opinion of
Superiority. Toward Them, God knows, I never felt any Emotions, but what bad
Writers raise in all Men, those gentle ones of Laughter or Pity: That I was so
open, concerned, and serious, with respect to you only, is sure a Proof of
Regard, not Neglect. For in Truth, nothing ever vexed me, till I saw your
Epigram against Dr. S. and me come out in their Papers: And this, indeed, did
vex me, to see One Swan among the Geese.

That the Letters A. H. were applied to you in the Papers, I did not know (for
I seldom read them); I heard it only from Mr. Savage, as from yourself, and
seat my Assurances to the contrary. But I don't see how the Annotator on the D.
could have rectified that Mistake, publicly, without particularizing your
Name, in a Book where I thought it too good to be inserted. No doubt he has
applied that Passage in the D. to you, by the Story he tells; but his Mention
of Bombast, only in some of your Juvenile Pieces, I think, was meant to show,
that Passage hinted only at that allegorical Muddiness, and not at any worse
sort of Dirt, with which some other Writers were charged. I hate to say what
will not be believed: Yet when I told you, "Many asked me to whom that Oblique
Praise was meant?" I did not tell you I answered, it was you. Has it escaped
your Observation, that the Name is a Syllable too long? Or (if you will have it
a Christian Name) is there any other in the whole Book? Is there no Author of
two Syllables whom it will better fit, not only as getting out of the
allegorical Muddiness, but as having been dipped in the Dirt of Party-writing,
and recovering from it betimes? I know such a Man, who would take it for a
Compliment, and so would his Patrons too -- But I ask you not to believe this,
except you are vastly inclined to it. I will come closer to the Point: Would
you have the Note left out? It shall. Would you have it expressly said, you were
not meant? It shall, if I have any Influence on the Editors.

I believe the Note was meant only as a gentle Rebuke, and friendlily: I
understood very well the Caveat on your Part to be the same; and complained
(you see) of nothing but two or three Lines reflecting on my Behavior and
Temper to other Writers; because I knew they were not true, and you could not
know they were.

You cannot in your cool Judgment think it fair to fix a Man's Character on a
Point, of which you do not give one Instance? Name but the Man, or Men, to whom
I have unjustly omitted Approbation or Encouragement, and I Will be ready to do
them Justice. I think I have publicly praised all the best Writers of my Time,
except yourself, and such as I have had no fair Opportunity to praise. As to
the Great and Popular, I Have praised but few, and those at the Times when they
were least popular. Many of those Writers have done nothing else but flattered
the Great and Popular, or been worse employed by 'em in Party-stuff. I do
indeed think it no great Pride in me, to speak about them with some Air of
Superiority; and this, Sir, must be the Cause (and no other) that made me
address that Declaration of my Temper toward them, to you, who had accused me
of the contrary; not, I assure you, from the least Imagination of any
Resemblance between you and them, either in Merit or Circumstances.

I named Mr. Dennis, because you distinguish him from the rest: So do I. But,
moreover, he was uppermost in my Thoughts, from having endeavored ( before
your Admonition) to promote his Affair, with Lord Wilmington, Lord Lansdown,
Lord Blandford, and Mr. Pulteney, etc. who promised me to favor it. But it
would be unjust to measure my Good Will by the Effects of it on the Great, many
of whom are the last Men in the World who will pay Tributes of this sort, from
their own un-giving Nature; and many of whom laugh at me when I seriously
petition for Mr. Dennis. After this, I must not name the many whom I have
fruitlesly solicited: I hope yet to be more successful. But, Sir, you seem too
iniquitous in your Conceptions of me, when you fansy I called such Things
Services. I called 'em but humane Offices: Services I said I would render him,
if I could. I would ask a Place for Life for him; and I have; but that is not
in my Power: If it was, it would be a Service, and I wish it.

I mentioned the Possibility of Mr. D.'s abusing me for forgiving him, because
he actually did, in Print, lately represent my poor, undesigning, Subscriptions
to him, to be the Effect of Fear and Desire, to stop his Critiques upon me. I
wish Mr. Hill would (for once) think so heartily of me, as to believe me
sincere in one Declaration, that "I desire no Man to belie his own Judgment in
my Favor." Therefore, though I acknowledge your generous Offer to give Examples
of Imperfections rather out of your own Works than mine, in your intended Book;
I consent, with all my Heart, to your confining them to mine; for two Reasons:
The one, that I fear your Sensibility that way is greater than my own (by
observing you seem too concerned at that Hint given by the Notes on the D. of a
little Fault in the Works of your Youth only): The other is a better, namely,
that I intend to amend by your Remarks, and correct the Faults you find, if
they are such as I expect from Mr. Hill's cool Judgment.

I am very sensible, that my Poetical Talent is all that may (I say not, will)
make me remembered: But it is my Morality only that must make me Beloved, or
Happy: And if it be any Deviation from Greatness of Mind, to prefer Friendships
to Fame, or the honest Enjoyments of Life to noisy Praises; I fairly confess
that Meanness. Therefore it is, Sir, that I much more resent any Attempt
against my moral Character (which I know to be unjust) than any to lessen my
poetical one (which, for all I know, may be very just).

Pray then, Sir, excuse my weak Letter, as I do your warm one. I end as I
begun. You guessed right, that I was sick when I wrote it: Yours are very well
written, but I have neither Health nor Time to make mine so. I have writ a
whole Book of Retractations of my Writings (which would greatly improve your
Criticisms on my Errors), but of my Life and Manners I do not yet repent one
Jott, especially when I find in my Heart I continue to be, without the least
Acrimony (even as little as I desire you should bear to myself), sincerely, Sir,

Yours affectionately, A. POPE.
If I did not acknowledge as I ought, both the Father's agreeable Present, and
the Daughter's pretty one, which you sent me, I very ill expressed myself. If
Miss Urania Hill has not my 4 to Edition of the Odyssey, I beg your Leave to
send it her. You had sooner heard from me, but I saw yours, here, but three
Days ago. I return Home Tomorrow.



LETTER V. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Feb. 15. 1731. SIR,
EVER since I returned Home, I have been in almost roaring Pain, with a violent
Rheumatism in my Shoulder, so that all I am able to do is to return you Thanks
for yours. The Satisfaction it gave me is proportioned to the Regard I have for
you. I will not praise your Poem further than to say, the Generosity of its
Sentiments must charm every Man: Its other Merit you know well. You Will pardon
the few Doubts I start in the Interlinings; they are such as you can efface as
easily as they may deserve. I wish to tell my Lord Peterborough (who has so
long honored me with so particular and familiar an Acquaintance) the Honor
done him.

I am very desirous to leave out that Note, if you like so. The two Lords, and
one Gentleman, who really took and printed that Edition, I can (I doubt not)
bring easily to it.

The chief Objection I have to what you say of myself in this Poem, is, that
the Praise is too strong. I may well compound for the rest.

Suffer me to send the young Lady the Odyssey, full of Faults as I know it to
be, before she grows old enough to know how mean a Present it is. I am, with
great Truth,

SIR, Your most humble obedient Servant, A. POPE.

LETTER VI. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
March 2. 1731. SIR,
I AM extremely pleased with the Favor you have done me in sending me your
Poem, and the more, as it gives me the Opportunity of assuring you I never did,
or meant you, the least Injury; in which I should have fully satisfied you long
since, had you asked me the Question. I remember, Mr. Lintot showed me a Piece
of yours, of which (he said) you desired my Opinion: I was just then in a great
Hurry, going a Journey out of Town upon Business for a few Days; and therefore
told him I would call for it in a Day or two, to read carefully: However, I
cast my Eye on some Parts of it, which I liked, and told him so. This was all,
to the best of my Memory, that passed between us; and you may imagine it was
some Surprise to me when I saw your Preface a very short time after. I think it
incumbent on any well-meaning Man, to acquit himself of an ill-grounded
Suspicion in another, who perhaps means equally well, and is only too
credulous. I am sincerely so far from resenting this Mistake, that I am more
displeased, at your thinking it necessary to treat me so much in a Style of
Compliment as you do in your Letter. I will say nothing of the Poem you favor
me with, for fear of being in the wrong; but I am sure, the Person who is
capable of writing it, can need no Man to judge it. I am, with all Respect,

SIR, Your most obedient humble Servant, A. POPE.
I received yours but four Days since, it being directed to Chiswick, where I
have not lived this Twelvemonth.



LETTER VII. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Twickenham, March 14. 1731. Dear Sir,
I AM not more happy, nor feel a greater Ease in comparison of my former Pain,
in the Recovery from my Rheumatism, than in that from your Displeasure. Be
assured, no little Offenders ever shall be distinguished more by me. Your
Dedication pleases me almost equally with the Poem; our Hearts beat just
together, in regard to Men of Power and Quality: But a Series of Infirmities
(for my whole Life has been but one long Disease) has hindered me from
following your Advices. I this Day have writ to Lord Peterborough a Letter with
your Poem. The Familiarity in which we have lived some Years, makes it not
unusual, in either him or me, to tell each other any thing that pleases us:
Otherwise you might think it arrogant in me, to pretend to put so good a Thing
into his Hands, in which I have no Merit. Your Mention of our Friend Mr. Mallet
I thank you for, and should be glad he would give me an Opportunity of thanking
you in Person, who am, with Sincerity,

SIR, Your obliged, and faithful Servant, A. POPE.

LETTER VIII. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Twickenham, April 4. 1731. Dear Sir,
IT is a serious Pleasure to me to find you concerned, that I should do your
good Sense and Discernment the Justice it deserves. It is impossible for me not
to think just what you would have me on this Head; the whole Spirit and Meaning
of your Poem shows all little Thoughts to be Strangers to your Soul. I happen
to know many Particulars relating to the Earl of Peterborough's Conduct, and
just Glory, in that Scene you draw so well: But no Man ought (I think) to
attempt what you hint at, or can pretend to do him more Honor than what you
yourself here have done, except himself: I have long pressed him to put
together many Papers lying by him, to that End. On this late Occasion he told
me you had formerly endeavored the same, and it comes into my Mind, that, on
many of those Papers, I Have seen an Endorsement A. H. which I fansy might be
those you overlooked. My Lord spoke of you with great Regard, and told me how
narrowly you both missed of going together on an adventurous Expedition On an
Expedition to the West Indies.
. The real Reason I carried him your Poem was, that I imagined you would never
send it him, of all Mankind; and that I was truly pleased with it.

I am troubled to reflect, how unequal a Correspondent I am to you, partly
through want of Health (for I have since had a Fever), partly through want of
Spirits, and want of Solitude; for the last Thing we Poets care to own, is the
other Want; that of Abilities.

But I am sensibly pleased with your Letter, not only with that which seemed to
prompt it, but with the Things said in it: And I thank you for both -- Believe
me desirous to see you: When, and where, you shall determine; though I wish it
were here: You Will see a Place seeming more fit for me than it is; looking
Poetical, yet too much in the World; Romantic, and not Retired: However, I can
lock up all Avenues to it sometimes, and I know no better Reason for doing so,
or for shutting out the World, than to enjoy such an one as yourself.

I am, Sir, with Esteem and Sincerity,

Your most obedient faithful Servant, A. POPE.

LETTER IX. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
August 30. 1731. Dear Sir,
THE very Moment I receive yours, I dispatch this, to tell you with Sincerity
both my Guest's and my own Concern to have no Hopes of seeing you; as well as,
what is unfeignedly a yet greater Concern, our Sorrow at what you express to be
the Occasion of it. He wishes, now, for Power, for no other Reason, than to be
able to elevate Merit above that Fortune it commonly finds, from Power. And I
can truly add, for my own Part, who never tasted Power, that I never felt any
Uneasiness in a low Fortune, but that which it causes when I find it cannot
prove the Regard and Love I bear to true Worth in any afflictive Circumstance.

Excuse my pretending to say a Word on that Subject; all I meant to say (but
the Overflowings of my Heart vented thus much) was, to beg you to think too
favorably of us both, to imagine we should not be unhappy as much as
dissatisfied, if we did not read once or twice more your Tragedy, after what
you tell us of your having altered it on our Suggestions. We have a
conscientious Fear, that you may have complied too implicitly with those Marks,
rather of our scrupulous Sincerity, than of any certain Judgment; and have
quenched sometimes a Flame we admire, though we may fear; or sometimes heightened
what may be natural, though we might think it low. Pray ease us, by favoring us
with a second View of it.

And whenever you send me that Essay, you may be assured of my sincere Answer;
though upon that Head I could rather wish it were given you personally. I hope a
little Time will bring us together. Know me, most affectionately, dear Sir,

Yours, A. POPE.

LETTER X. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Sept. 1. 1731.
I COULD not persuade myself to write to you since your great Loss, till I
hoped you had received some Alleviation to it, from the only Hand which can
give any, that of Time. Not to have mentioned it, however fashionable it may
be, I think unnatural, and in some Sense inhuman; and I fear the contrary
Custom is too much an Excuse, in reality, for that Indifference we too usually
have for the Concern of another: In truth, that was not my Case: I know the
Reason of one Man is of little Effect toward the Resignation of another; and
when I compared the Forces of yours and mine, I doubted not which had the
Advantage, even though in your own Concern. It Is hard, that in these tender
Afflictions the Greatness of the Mind and the Goodness are opposite to each
other; and that while Reason, and the Consideration upon what Conditions we
receive all the Goods of this Life, operate toward our Quiet; even the best of
our Passions (which are the same Things with the softest of our Virtues) refuse
us that Comfort. But I Will say no more on this melancholy Subject. The whole
Intent of this Letter is to tell you how much I wish you capable of
Consolation, and how much I wish to know when you find yourself so. I would
hope you begin to seek it, to amuse your Mind with those Studies of which Tully
says, Adversis perfugium and solatium praebent, and to transcribe (if I may so
express it) your own Softnesses and generous Passions into the Hearts of others
who more want them. I do not flatter you in saying, I think your Tragedy will
do this effectually (to which I had Occasion, the other Day, to do Justice to
Mr. Wilks), or whatever else you choose to divert your own Passion with, and to
raise that of your Readers. -- I wish the Change of Place, or the Views of
Nature in the Country, made a Part of your Scheme. -- You once thought of
Richmond -- I wish you were there, or nearer. I have thrice missed of you in
Town, the only Times I have been there: My last Month was passed at my Lord
Cobham's, and in a Journey through Oxfordshire: I wish you as susceptible, at
this Time, of these Pleasures as I am. I have been truly concerned for you, and
for your Daughter, who I believe is a true Part of you. I will trouble you no
farther, but with the Assurance that I am not unmindfully,

SIR, Your most sincere humble Servant, A. POPE.

LETTER XI. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Sept. 3. 1731. Dear Sir,
I HAVE been, and yet am, totally confined by my Mother's Relapse, if that can
be called so, which is rather a constant and regular Decay. She is now on her
last Bed, in all Probability, from whence she has not risen in some Weeks, yet
in no direct Pain, but a perpetual Languor. I suffer for her, for myself, and
for you, in the Reflection of what you have felt at the Side of a sick Bed
which I now feel, and of what I probably soon shall suffer which you now
suffer, in the Loss of one's best Friend. I have wished (ever since I saw your
Letter) to ask you, since you find your own House a Scene of Sorrows, to pass
some Days in mine; which I begin to think I shall soon have the same melancholy
Reason to shun. In the mean time, I make a sort of Amusement of this melancholy
Situation itself, and try to derive a Comfort in imagining I give some to her.
I am seldom prompted to Poetry in these Circumstances; yet I Will send you a few
Lines I sent to other Day from her Bedside to a particular Friend. Indeed I
want Spirits and Matter, to send you any thing else, or on any other Subject.
These too are spirit-less, and incorrect.

While every Joy, successful Youth! is thine,
Be no unpleasing Melancholy mine.
Me long, ah long! may these soft Cares engage;
To rock the Cradle of reposing Age,
With lenient Arts prolong a Parent's Breath,
Make Languor smile, and smooth the Bed of Death.
Me, when the Cares my better Years have shown
Another's Age, shall hasten on my own;
Shall some kind Hand, like B***'s or thine,
Lead gently down, and favor the Decline?
In Wants, in Sickness, shall a Friend be nigh,
Explore my Thought, and watch my asking Eye?
Whether that Blessing be denied, or given,
Thus far, is right; the rest belongs to Heaven.
Excuse this, in a Man who is weak and wounded, but not by his Enemies, but for
his Friends. I wish you the Continuance of all that is yet dear to you in Life,
and am truly

Yours, A. POPE.

LETTER XII. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Twickenham, Sept. 25. 1731. SIR,
THE Hurry I was in to send to you, made it a Message instead of a Letter,
which I ask your Excuse for by this. If now you have Thoughts of the Country,
pray think no further than my own House: I am wholly at your Service. The
Weather is yet inviting: I could wish (if Miss Hill, under a Father's
Authority, might venture), she saw me before I am quite decayed (I mean all of
me that is yet half flourishing, my Garden). You Will very much oblige me, and
give Countenance to my Judgment, in letting your Tragedy pass through my Hands to
any Persons to whom you care I should show it. Believe me with great Truth (and
a real Concern for what must so much afflict a good Mind),

SIR, Your affectionate obedient Servant, A. POPE.

LETTER XIII. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Sept. 29. 1731. Dear Sir,
I Return you the Enclosed the Day after I received it, lest it should retard
your finishing the Copy, now the Year draws toward Winter: And though I am in a
great Hurry, which allows me to say little, only to tell you, in my Lord's Name
and my own, that we think you show even more Friendship and Confidence in us,
than we have hitherto been justly entitled to, from any Use our Opinion could
be of, to a Judgment so good as your own. We are fully satisfied; and it is but
at a Word or two, that I can carp, with the utmost and most extended Severity
of a Friend. It will be with infinitely greater Promptitude, and Pleasure, that
I shall speak (everywhere) my real Approbation and Esteem of the Performance,
in which I shall do no more than discharge my Conscience. I wish sincerely, I
could as well serve you in promoting its Success, as I can testify it deserves
all Success. You will, I am sure, be so candid, and so reasonable, as to
conclude, I would not decline writing your Epilogue on any but a just Reason,
and indeed (to me) an invariable Maxim, which I have held these Twenty Years.
Every poetical Friend I have, has had my Word, I never would; and my Leave to
take the same Refusals I made him, ill, if ever I wrote one for another: And
this very Winter, Mr. Thomson and Mr. Mallet excuse me, whose Tragedies either
are to appear this Season, or the next. I fansy the latter, as I have seen or
heard of no more but a first Act, yet, of each.

I have lately had an Address of another Kind from a Man of Letters, which
gives me more Embarrass, and in the Conduct whereof I could wish I had your
Advice, though I hardly know how to ask it. I hope soon to see the Critical Work
you promised me, in which I hope to have some further Occasion of proving to
you the real Deference I have to your Sentiments, and Esteem for your Person. I
am, dear Sir,

Your faithful and affectionate, obliged Servant, A. POPE.

LETTER XIV. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Oct. 1. 1731. Dear Sir,
IT was my Hope you had Thoughts of passing a few Days hereabouts, that made me
impertinent enough to wish, you would make use of this Place, which is as much
at your Service as its Master. It is otherwise too great a Trouble to you, no
less than too great a Distinction shown to me, to have you come purposely; much
less to give the young Lady the Fatigue of an Afternoon's Visit to what so
little merits it. My Wish was, that you could have taken a Bed here, as long as
you could allow yourself to be in the Country; and have done me the Pleasure to
see the Person you, now, love best in the World, with you; either as giving you
to me, or receiving you from me, on the Day that you came, or that you went. Be
assured I always am with Truth,

Dear Sir, Your most obliged, affectionate, faithful Servant, A. POPE.
If Miss Hill does not dine with us, I shall think all the Rites of Hospitality
violated.



LETTER XV. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Monday Night, Oct. 9. 1731. Dear Sir,
I SEE the Season will not allow me the Pleasure of seeing you, nor of showing
my faded Garden this Year to Miss Urania. I assure you I would willingly make a
Trip to London on purpose to see you and her, but my Constitution, of late, has
been faster in Decline than the Year. I have been as ill, as when I writ you
that peevish Image of my Soul, a Letter, some Time since, which had the good
Effect of making us know one another.

This is the first Day I have been able to see Lady S. who showed me a very
polite Letter of yours that put her out of Countenance. The Truth is, she makes
no Pretension to judge of Poetry. But the Tragedy will be shown, as I told you,
to One, or rather (I think) to Both will be better. I wish you was not so soon
to bring it on, by what Mr. Savage tells me of Mr. Booth and Mrs. Porter. I
think it will be a Loss both to the Play, and to them, if they do not make one
another shine: I hope, in a Week, to wait on you in London, and tell you with
what plain Truth I am, dear Sir,

Yours, A. POPE.
My Book I have no manner of Thought of publishing: It is of so various a
Nature, that I know not under what Denomination, yet, to rank the many Parts of
it; and shall write, just as I live, without knowing the End of my Works, or
Days: The Whole will proceed, as my Life proceeds; and probably die, as I die.



LETTER XVI. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Thursday, Oct. 29. 1731. Dear Sir,
THERE is an ill Fate hangs upon me in relation to the Pleasure I Have often
(from the very first Time I saw you at Dr. Young's) proposed in our
Acquaintance. I really stayed that Night in Town, upon Bowry's Notice, which he
left in Writing, that you should be at Home all Wednesday, and had dedicated
three Hours to you, or, more properly, to myself with you. I asked,
particularly, for Miss Urania; but thought myself, though old enough, not
familiar enough, to ask to see her. I desire your first Notice, if you come
this Way; or, rather, I wish you would take up your Lodging with me. In the
mean time, pray send the Tragedy of Athelwold (for so I would call it), under
Cover, to the Countess of Suffolk, before Monday, at her Lodgings in St.
James's. I promised it her again; and if you think it of any Consequence that
the K. should see it in Manuscript, I think nothing more easy. In Truth, all
this is doing it no Credit; it is only doing some to those who may commend it. I
could not imagine in what Parts it needed Addition; sure every Incident is well
prepared: But no Man can see so far into his own Work as the Author, if a good
one; so little, if a bad or indifferent one. -- I am with Truth,

SIR, Your very obliged and faithful Servant, A. POPE.

LETTER XVII. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Chiswick, Nov. 1. 1731. SIR,
I Troubled you with a hasty Scrawl at Lord Tyrconnel's, in which I mentioned
Gilliver's Desire to be the Publisher of your Tragedy: Since, he requests my
Letter to recommend him. I find Mr. Savage has raised his Hope, by saying you
had kept yourself unengag'd, in Expectation that I would plead for him, and
that you wondered I did not sooner. If this be not one of those Things in which
Mr. S. speaks upon Imagination, I am more obliged to you than ever I intended.
For I assure you, I had no Thought of imposing, nay, not even of proposing a
Bookseller, for fear your great Complacency toward me, should lead you, more,
than your own Inclination, to another Bookseller. But if you have no such
Byafs, this Man I really think honest, and capable in his Business. I hope in a
few Days to meet you in Town, and am sincerely yours, and the young Lady's,

A. POPE.
I just now receive your very kind Letter, but can answer it no otherwise than
by going about what you propose. I Will write first, and then see every body I
can in Town on Tuesday, etc.



LETTER XVIII. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Nov. 12. 1731. Dear Sir,
I SHALL have the Pleasure (sick or well) to be at the first Representation of
your Play Tomorrow, with Lord Burlington and Lord Bathurst, and one or two
more. Another noble Lord, who understands you best, must be contented to read
the two last Acts in his Study: But Sir Will. Wyndham, with Mr. Gay, and some
others, will be there also, in another Place, in his stead. -- I write this
that I may not take up a Minute of your Time in calling on me Tomorrow; but if
you will send to the Office Tonight for Places for four People, we will order a
Man or two to go to keep 'em for us: Lord Burlington comes on purpose to Town.
I am, with great Truth,

Yours, A. POPE.
I Have yet heard no Account from Court.



LETTER XIX. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Sat. Morn. Nov. 14. 1731. Dear Sir,
I Cannot leave London without thanking you for the Pleasure you gave me last
Night, by which I see you can as well make Actors, as Plays: Yet I own I
receive more Pleasure from reading, than seeing your Athelwold. I thought the
best Part of the Audience very attentive, and was told, several Ladies were
moved to Tears. It is Pity Mrs. Cibber's Voice and Person were not a little
higher; she speaks extremely justly, and seems to be Mistress of her Part. I
could not come soon enough for the Prologue, but the Epilogue is a very
humorous one. I am ashamed to trouble you; but being gone out of Town, and
fearing the Mistakes of Servants, I beg a Box may be had for Monday, the third
Night (if there be any empty), for Mrs. Blount, a particular Friend of mine. I
yesterday saw Lady Suffolk, and found, though their Majesty's had not had Time to
read, yet they were possessed with a good Opinion of the Play; and she would
not part with the Copy, expecting it would be called for every Day. I must once
more acknowledge the very obliging Manner in which you favored the Bookseller,
as well as the particular Generosity to him. I can add no more, but an
Assurance of the Sincerity with which I am,

Dear Sir, Your most obliged and affectionate Servant, A. POPE.
I am hastened away, on hearing my Mother is not well: As soon as I return, I
hope we may pass more Time together.



LETTER XX. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Twickenham, Dec. 22. 1731. Dear Sir,
I Thank you for your Tragedy, which I have now read over a sixth Time, and of
which I not only preserve, but increase, my Esteem. You have been kind to this
Age, in not telling the next, in your Preface, the ill Taste of the Town, of
which the Reception you describe it to have given of your Play (worse, indeed,
than I had heard, or could have imagined), is a more flagrant Instance than any
of those Trifles mentioned in my Epistle; which yet, I hear, the sore Vanity of
our Pretenders to Taste flinches at extremely -- The Title you mention had been
a properer to that Epistle -- I have heard no Criticisms about it, nor do I
listen after 'em; Nos haec novimus esse nihil (I mean, I think the Verses to be
so): But as you are a Man of tender Sentiments of Honor, I know it will grieve
you to hear another undeservedly charged with a Crime his Heart is free from:
For, if there be Truth in the World, I declare to you, I never imagined the
least Application of what I said of Timon could be made to the D. of Ch^s, than
whom there is scarce a more blameless, worthy and generous, beneficent
Character, among all our Nobility: And if I have not lost my Senses, the Town
has lost 'em, by what I heard so late, as but two Days ago, of the Uproar on
this Head. I am certain, if you calmly read every Particular of that
Description, you will find almost all of 'em point blank the Reverse of that
Person's Villa. It Is an awkward Thing for a Man to print, in Defense of his own
Work, against a Chimaera: You know not who, or what, you fight against: The
Objections start up in a new Shape, like the Armies and Phantoms of Magicians,
and no Weapon can cut a Mist, or a Shadow. Yet it would have been a Pleasure to
me, to have found some Friend saying a Word in my Justification, against a most
malicious Falsehood. I speak of such, as have known by their own Experience,
these twenty Years, that I always took up their Defense, when any Stream of
Calumny ran upon 'em. If it gives the Duke one Moment's Uneasiness, I should
think myself ill paid, if the whole Earth admired the Poetry; and believe me,
would rather never have written a Verse in my Life, than that any one of 'em
should trouble a truly good Man. It was once my Case before, but happily
reconciled; and among generous Minds nothing so endears Friends, as the having
offended one another.

I lament the Malice of the Age, that studies to see its own Likeness in every
thing; I lament the Dullness of it, that cannot see an Excellence: The first is
my Unhappiness, the second yours. I look upon the Fate of your Piece, like that
of a great Treasure, which is buried as soon as brought to Light; but it is
sure to be dug up the next Age, and enrich Posterity.

I have been very sensible, on these two Occasions, to feel them (as I have
done) at a Time, when I daily feared the Loss of (what is, and ought to be
dearer to me than any Reputation, but that of a Friend, or than any thing of my
own, except my Morals) the Loss of a most tender Parent -- She is alive, and
that is all! I have perceived my Heart in this, and you may believe me
sincerely,

Dear Sir, Your faithful and really affectionate Servant, A. POPE.

LETTER XXI. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Twickenham, Nov. 13. 1732. Dear Sir,
I Writ to you a very hasty Letter, being warmed in the Cause of an old
Acquaintance, in which I was sure you would concur, I mean John Dennis, whose
Circumstances were described to me in the most moving Manner. I went next Day
with the Lord to whom you directed your Letter and Play, which, at my Return
home, I received but Yesterday. I thank you for your agreeable Present to my
Grotto, for your more agreeable Letter, and your most excellent Translation of
Voltaire, to whom you have preserved all the Beauty he had, and added the
Nerves he wanted. This short Acknowledgment is all I can make just now; I am
just taken up by Mr. Thomson; in the Perusal of a new Poem he has brought me: I
wish you were with us. The first Day I see London; I will wait on you, on many
Accounts, but on none more than my being affectionately, and with true Esteem,
dear Sir,

Yours, A. POPE.
I desire Miss Urania will know me for her Servant.



LETTER XXII. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Twickenham, May 22. 1733. SIR,
YOUR very kind Letter came hither in my Absence, which occasioned my Delay
till now in acknowledging it. Your Partiality to me, both as a Poet, and as a
Man, is great; the former I deserve not, but the latter I will never forfeit.
It would be wronging your Modesty to say much of the Verses you enclose, but it
would be wronging Sense and Poetry, not to say they are fine ones, and such as
I could not forget, having once seen them.

I have almost forgot what I told you of the Patent; but at the Time I told it,
I could not well be mistaken, having just then had the Account from Mr.
Davenant the Envoy: Indeed I fansy it was only of his Ancestors Patent that he
spoke (unless Sir William Davenant bought up Killigrew's); I know no Way of
coming to the Knowledge of this Affair, Mr. Davenant being now abroad, and I
know not where. But if you would have me write about it, I will learn his
Direction.

I am at all Times glad to hear of you, on any Occasion. I would willingly wait
on you in the Park, if I knew your Times: I have called twice or thrice there
in vain, without being heard. I guessed you were in the Country. My sincere
good Wishes attend you; and your agreeable Family, as far as I have seen of it,
I cannot but wish well to. I am,

Dear Sir, Your most affectionate and faithful Servant, A. POPE.

LETTER XXIII. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
June 2. 1738. SIR,
I SENT you as honest an Answer as I could, to the Letter you favored me with;
and am sorry you imagine any civil Reproach, or latent Meaning, where I meant
to express myself with the utmost Openness. I would assure you, if you please,
by my Oath, as well as my Word, that I am in no Degree displeased at any
Freedom you can take with me in a private Letter, or with my Writings in
public. I again insist, that you alter or soften no one Criticism of yours in
my Favor; nor deprive yourself of the Liberty, nor the World of the Profit, of
your freest Remarks on my Errors.

In what I said, I gave you a true Picture of my own Heart, as far as I know it
myself. It is true, I have shown a Scorn of some Writers; but it proceeded from
an Experience that they were bad Men, or bad Friends, or vile Hirelings; in
which Case, their being Authors did not make them, to me, either more
respectable, or more formidable. As for any other Pique, my Mind is not so
susceptible of it as you have seemed, on each Occasion, too much inclined (I
think) to believe. What may have sometimes seemed a Neglect of others, was
rather a Laziness to cultivate or contract new Friends, when I was satisfied
with those I had; or when I apprehended their Demands were too high for me to
answer.

I thank you for the Confidence you show you have in me, in telling me what you
judge amiss in my Nature. If it be (as you too partially say) my only Fault, I
might soon be a perfect Character: For I would endeavor to correct this Fault
in myself, and entreat you to correct all those in my Writings; I see, by the
Specimen you generously gave me in your late Letter, you are able to do it; and
I would rather owe (and own I owe) that Correction to your Friendship, than to
my own Industry.

For the last Paragraph of yours, I shall be extremely ready to convey what you
promise to send me, to my Lord B. I am in Hopes very speedily to see him
myself, and will, in that Case, be the Bearer; if not, I shall send it, by the
first safe Hand, to him. I am truly glad of any Occasion of proving myself,
with all the Respect that is consistent with Sincerity,

SIR, Your most obliged and affectionate Servant, A. POPE.

LETTER XXIV. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
June 9. 1738. SIR,
THE Favor of yours of May the 11th, had not been unacknowledged so long, but
it reached me not till my Return from a Journey, which had carried me from
Scene to Scene, where Gods might wander with Delight. I am sorry yours was
attended with any Thoughts less pleasing, either from the Conduct toward you
of the World in general, or of any one else, in particular. As to the
Subject Matter of the Letter, I found what I have often done in receiving
Letters from those I most esteemed, and most wished to be esteemed by; a great
Pleasure in reading it, and a great Inability to answer it. I can only say, you
oblige me, in seeming so well to know me again; as one extremely willing that
the free Exercise of Criticism should extend over my own Writings, as well as
those of others, whenever the Public may receive the least Benefit from it; as
I question not they will a great deal, when exerted by you. I am sensible of
the Honor you do me, in proposing to send me your Work before it appears: If
you do, I must insist, that no Use in my Favor be made of that Distinction, by
the Alteration or softening of any Censure of yours on any Line of mine.

What you have observed in your Letter I think just; only I would acquit myself
in one Point: I could not have the least Pique to Mr. Th. in what is cited in
the Treatise of the Bathos from the Play which I never supposed to be his: He
gave it as Shakespeare's, and I take it to be of that Age: And indeed the
Collection of those, and many more of the Thoughts censured there, was not made
by me, but Dr. Arbuthnot. -- I have had two or three Occasions to lament, that
you seem to know me much better as a Poet, than as a Man. You can hardly
conceive how little either Pique or Contempt I bear to any Creature, unless for
immoral or dirty Actions: Any Mortal is at full Liberty, unanswered, to write
and print of me as a Poet, to praise me one Year, and blame me another; only I
desire him to spare my Character as an honest Man, over which he can have no
private, much less any public, Right, without some personal Knowledge of my
Heart, or the Motives of my Conduct: Nor is it a sufficient Excuse, to allege
he was so or so informed, which was the Case with those Men.

I am sincere in all I say to you, and have no Vanity in saying it. You really
overvalue me greatly in my Poetical Capacity; and I am sure your Work would do
me infinitely too much Honor, even if it blamed me oftener than it commended:
For the first you will do with Lenity, the last with Excess. But I could be
glad to part with some Share of any good Man's Admiration, for some of his
Affection, and his Belief that I am not wholly undeserving to be thought, what
I am to you,

SIR, A most faithful, affectionate Servant, A. POPE.

LETTER XXV. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
July 21. 1738. SIR,
I NEED not assure you in many Words, that I join my Suffrage entirely with
Lord B.'s in general, after a fourth reading your Tragedy of Caesar. I think no
Characters were ever more nobly sustained than those of Caesar and Brutus in
particular: You excel throughout in the Greatness of Sentiment; and I add, that
I never met with more striking Sentences, or lively short Reprizes. There is
almost everywhere such a Dignity in the Scenes, that instead of pointing out
any one Scene, I can scarce point out any that wants it, in any Degree (except
you would a little raise that of the Plebeians in the last Act). That Dignity
is admirably reconciled with Softness, in the Scenes between Caesar and
Calpurnia: And all those between Caesar and Brutus are a noble Strife between
Greatness and Humanity. The Management of the Whole is as artful as it is
noble. Whatever particular Remarks we have made further, will be rather the
Subject of Conversation than a Letter, of which we shall both be glad of an
Opportunity, either here at Twickenham, or in Town, as shall best suit your
Convenience. Pray, Sir, let this confirm you in the Opinion you kindly, and
indeed justly, entertain of the Wish I feel (and ever felt, notwithstanding
Mistakes) to be, and to be thought,

Sincerely your obliged, affectionate, and faithful Servant, A. POPE.

LETTER XXVI. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Twickenham, Aug. 17. 1738. SIR,
I AM forced to say but little to you, though my Spirit has been warmed by the
kind (and let me add, the just) Manner, in which you took our last Letter. My
Lord (who has not only resolved to make himself my Guest, but an Inhabitant of
this Place during all his Stay in this Kingdom) is at this Time fixed to this
Place too closely, by a Fever, which has confined him to his Bed and Chamber
some Days. I am but just now satisfied that he is out of Danger; and I am as
sure, as that he lives, that he will be glad to see you here. And I think it
certain (if you can get those Affairs over which you mention, as soon as I wish
you at Ease), that you may find him here this Fortnight: That I shall take a
warm Part in bringing you together, my own Heart knows: And let me tell you,
when you know that Heart as well, as I hope Fortune will not long hinder you
from doing (though many unlucky Strokes of her Influence have been too strong
upon us both, who must else have naturally united, as we mutually love and hate
the same Things), I believe, trust, and pray, we shall perfectly understand one
another. Believe me till then, upon my bare Assurance, very faithfully, without
superfluous Words, in one Word,

Dear Sir, Yours, A. POPE.

LETTER XXVII. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Sept. 12. 1738. SIR,
I HAVE now little to say of your Tragedy, which I return with my Thanks for
your Indulgence to my Opinion, which I see so absolutely deferred to, that I
wish I had crossed less frequently. I cannot find another Thing I think a Fault
in you.

But my Lord thinks, three Things may yet be reconsider'd. Brutus, on Sight of
the Warrant signed for his Death, takes at once the Resolution of murdering
Caesar, as none of his Father. Quere, Whether in the Scene that follows between
him and Caesar, all Tenderness on the Side of Brutus, and all beyond the Point
of Honor that Friendship exacted, should not rather be avoided than heightened?

Another Quere is, Whether it would not beget more Indignation in the Audience
against Cassius, and more Compassion for Caesar, to show that Cassius suspected
Brutus to be Caesar's Son, and therefore exacted from Brutus the Oath of
sparing neither Father; Relation, etc.

The third Thing is, Whether the Efforts made by Caesar to prevent the Civil
War, not only by the equal Offer he made, while the Matter was under Debate in
the Senate (and which the Consuls Lentulus and Marcellus refused to report to
the Senate), but by the Message he sent to Pompey, when he was at Brundusium,
to desire a Meeting, to settle the Matter, and avoid the Civil War. -- Vid.
Caes. Comm. de bell, Civili, lib. 1. The Mention of these somewhere in the Play
might help to remove the Prepossession against Caesar.

After our little Cavils (for so we will rather call minute and verbal Points
of Criticism) we owe you the Justice to extol highly, what we highly approve,
and you need not desire us to speak as we think: It Is what we have (in
different Ways) done all our Lives, where it was to our Prejudice, and cannot
but do here, where it is to our Honor. I only wish you a Stage, Actors, and an
Audience worthy of you, and It. -- I have often wished to live to see the Day
when Prologues and Epilogues should be no more. I wish a great Genius would
break through the silly, useless, Formality. But at least I would have one try,
to leave the Audience full of the Effects of a good Tragedy, without an
Epilogue. Let me add another Hint, concerning the Apparatus and Circumstantials
of your Play (since I have nothing left more to wish in the Play itself); that
you would entitle it barely, The Tragedy of Caesar, and give no Intimation of
his being a Patriot; for I fear, instead of preparing the Audience, it might
revolt them, and put all the little Critics upon carping previously at the
very Design and Character; which would appear by Degrees, and with the proper
Preparations, in the Piece on the Stage. Another thing was a Thought of my
Lord's, that it should be printed before acting, a Day or two; for the
Sentiments are so thick-sown, and the Sense so deep sometimes, that they
require more Attention and Thought than the Hearer may be apt to give on the
first Representation. I am not positive, either as to his, or my Thought, but
submit them to your Consideration.

I have nothing to add, but to lament our Unhappiness, that we cannot see you
personally to confirm what these Letters tell you, of our real Opinion of your
Work, Esteem of its Author, and Wishes for your Success, in this, and every
thing. I am,

SIR, Your most faithful and obliged Servant, A. POPE.

LETTER XXVIII. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Nov. 5. 1738. Dear Sir,
THIS is quite a Letter of Business, and therefore excuse it; I will not mix in
it a Word of Affection, which I have not a Moment's time to express, and will
not prejudice the sacred Idea of Friendship.

It is near a Month ago that I tried to see Mr. Thomson, to know the Time of
his Tragedy: He was not within my Reach; and therefore at last I wrote to him,
and also to Mr. M^, to let them both know the Deference you paid them, and the
heroic (I will not call it less) Disinterestedness you expressed in regard to
them. I have not yet been able to hear where they are, or any way to have an
Answer further, than I have learned it will be impossible for either of them to
bring on their Plays early (a Friend of theirs telling me they are in no
Forwardness) till the Middle or End of the Winter; therefore you may have room.
I wish from my Soul you may get yours first, as well acted as it deserves. A
better, that may eclipse it, or even worthily follow it, I hardly expect to
see. -- But upon this Notice, I believe you may safely advance it, the sooner
the better.

My Lord B. is yet with me, more properly I yet belong to him, Body as well as
Mind (for my Mind is everywhere his). I would to God you had any Opportunity
of seeing us before we part; my House should be yours, as much of it as is not
his. I believe I shall soon go with him on a little Journey before he quits
England. You Will forgive the abrupt Conclusion of this; yet it may tell you all
the longest and best-written Letter could tell you, that I am very sincerely,

SIR, Your much obliged, and really affectionate Servant, A. POPE.

LETTER XXIX. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Dec. 8. 1738. Dear Sir,
I HAVE been confirmed by Mr. Thomson as to the Retardment of his Play, of
which he has written but two Acts. I have since seen Mr. M^, who has finished
his, but is very willing yours should be first brought on, in January as you
propose, or after his in February, whichsoever may be most agreeable to you. He
farther offers any Assistance he can give you, in case of your own Absence, as
to treating with Mr. F^ (with whom he thinks you cannot be too careful or
explicit), or attending the Rehearsals for you, which he promises to undertake
with all Diligence, if you are not provided with another Friend in that Case.
He has heard of some Impertinence, which may be apprehended from one Person's
Refusal or Unwillingness to act, and believes he can employ some proper
Influence to bring him to a right Behavior. These, with any other Services in
which you may please to employ him, he bids me assure you, it will be a high
Satisfaction to him to engage in.

I must express, on my own Part, a real Regret to be so little useful to you. I
can do no more than join with Lord B. in paying due Praises to so meritorious a
Work; our Suffrage is an airy Tribute, from whence no solid Good redounds to
you; and I find myself still more inclined to the Man, than the Author, if I
could be any way instrumental to the Happiness or Ease of so generous an one. I
could almost wish myself a Minister to patronize such a Genius, and I could
almost wish my Lord one again, for no other Reason; even though his Country wants
such an one, as well as his Friends.

I have never once been able to see Mr. Thomson in Person; when I do (and it
shall be soon) he shall know how much he is obliged to you for that Plan of an
Alteration of his Tragedy, which is too good for me, with any Honesty, to put
upon him as my own. Believe me, Sir, with great Truth, and the warmest
Disposition to do you Justice (before Men and Angels),

Yours faithfully, A. POPE.

LETTER XXX. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
London, Feb. 12. 1738-9. Dear Sir,
I HAVE felt an Uneasiness of Mind (occasioned by a conscious Sense, how
unequally I have expressed my Anger and Contempt, at the Treatment of your
Caesar by the Man of the Stage) ever since I last wrote to you; and a hundred
Interruptions from Day to Day (for I have lived in the World, and a busy and
idle World both, it is) have ever since hindered me from enjoying one Hour of
collected Thought. Yet I am the less concerned, since, by my Delay, I can now
tell you I have last Night seen Mr. Mallet's Play, the fifth Act of which I had
not before read, through those Interruptions I have mentioned. It succeeded
(hitherto at least; for Yesterday was the first Day) as well as I could expect:
But so vilely acted in the Women's Parts and the Men's (except two) that I wonder
it could succeed. Mr. Thomson, after many shameful Tricks from the Manager, is
determined to act his Play at the other Theater, where the Advantage lies as to
the Women, and the Success of his will depend upon them (I heartily wish you
would follow his Example, that we might not be deprived of Caesar). I have yet
seen but three Acts of Mr. Thomson's, but I am told, and believe by what I have
seen, that it excels in the Pathetic. The Dignity of Sentiment, and Grandeur of
Character, will still be Caesar's, as in his History, so in your Poetry,
superior to any.

The Person to whom you intended so great a Compliment as to address that Piece
to his Name, is very sensible of your delicate Manner of Thinking: He bids me
assure you, his own Knowledge of your Intention is sufficient Pleasure to him,
and desires you would not think of doing him either Favor or Justice, till the
World knows better how to do itself the former, in doing you the latter. He is
still detained here by the Perverseness of his Affairs; and wishes, as I most
heartily do also, that Fortune did not treat you so much alike. The Stage is as
ungrateful to you, as his Country to him: You are both sure of Posterity, and
may say in the mean time with Scipio, Ingrata Patria, ne ossa quidem habeas!
Believe me most truly,

SIR, Your affectionate, angry Servant, A. POPE.

LETTER XXXI. From Mr. POPE, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Jan. 26. 1730-31. SIR,
I AM obliged to you for your Compliment, and can truly say, I never gave you
just Cause of Complaint. You once mistook on a Bookseller's idle Report, and
publicly expressed your Mistake; yet you mistook a second time, that two
initial Letters, only, were meant of you, though every Letter in the Alphabet was
put in the same manner: And, in Truth (except some few), those Letters were set
at Random to occasion what they did occasion, the Suspicion of bad and jealous
Writers, of which Number I could never reckon Mr. Hill. and most of whose Names
I did not know.

Upon this Mistake you were too ready to attack me, in a Paper of very pretty
Verses, in some public Journal. -- I should imagine the Dunciad meant you a
real Compliment, and so it has been thought by many, who have asked, to whom
that Passage made that oblique Panegyric? As to the Notes, I am weary of
telling a great Truth, which is, that I am not Author of 'em; though I love Truth
so well, as fairly to tell you, Sir, I think even that Note a Commendation, and
should think myself not ill used to have the same Words said of me: Therefore,
believe me, I never was other than friendly to you, in my own Mind.

Have I not much more Reason to complain of The Caveat? Where give me Leave,
Sir, to tell you, with the same Love of Truth, and with the Frankness it
inspired (which, I hope, you will see, through this whole Letter), I am falsely
abused, in being represented " sneakingly to approve, and want the Worth to
cherish, or befriend Men of Merit." It is, indeed, Sir, a very great Error: I
am sorry the Author of that Reflection knew me no better, and happened to be
unknown to those who could have better informed him: For I have the Charity to
think, he was misled only by his Ignorance of me, and the Benevolence to
forgive the worst Thing that ever (in my Opinion) was said of me, on that
Supposition.

I do faithfully assure you, I never was angry at any Criticism, made on my
Poetry, by whomsoever: If I could do Mr. Dennis any humane Office, I would,
though I were sure he would abuse me personally Tomorrow; therefore it is no
great Merit in me, to find, at my Heart, I am your Servant. I am very sorry you
ever was of another Opinion. -- I see, by many Marks, you distinguished me from
my cotemporary Writers: Had we known one another, you had distinguished me from
others, as a Man, and no ill, or ill-natured one. I only wish you knew, as well
as I do, how much I prefer Qualities of the Heart to those of the Head: I vow
to God, I never thought any great Matters of my poetical Capacity; I only
thought it a little better, comparatively, than that of some very mean Writers,
who are too proud. -- But, I do know certainly, my moral Life is superior to
that of most of the Wits of these Days. This is a silly Letter, but it will
show you my Mind honestly, and, I hope, convince you, I can be, and am,

SIR, Your very affectionate and humble Servant, A. POPE.

As there had, formerly, been some little Misunderstanding between Mr. Pope and
Mr. Hill, it is thought necessary to insert, in this Place, two or three of Mr.
Hill's Letters, that the Reader might be fully apprised of the Reason, each
thought he had to take it ill of the other: And, in Mr. Hill's Works, which are
going to be printed by Subscription, it is humbly conceived, there will be many
Letters (not only writ to Mr. Pope, but also to Persons of the highest Rank)
that will be both instructive, and entertaining, to the curious Reader.

LETTER XXXII. From Mr. HILL, To Mr. POPE.
Jan. 28. 1730-1. SIR,
YOUR Answer, regarding no Part of mine, but the Conclusion, you must pardon my
Compliment to the Close of yours, in return; if I agree with you, that your
Letter is weaker, than one would have expected.

You assure me, that I did not know you so well, as I might, had I happened to
be known to others, who could have instructed my Ignorance; and I begin to
find, indeed, that I was less acquainted with you, than I imagined: But your
last Letter has enlightened me, and I can never be in Danger of mistaking you,
for the future.

Your Enemies have often told me, that your Spleen was, at least, as
distinguishable, as your Genius: And it will be kinder, I think, to believe
them, than impute to Rudeness, or ill Manners, the Return you were pleased to
make, for the Civility, with which I addressed you.

I will, therefore, suppose you to have been peevish, or in Pain, while you
were writing me this Letter: And, upon that Supposition, shall endeavor to
undeceive you. -- If I did not love you, as a good Man, while I esteem you, as
a good Writer, I should read you without Reflection: And it were doing too much
Honor to your Friends, and too little to my own Discernment, to go to them for
a Character of your Mind, which I was able enough to extract from your Writings.

But, to imitate your Love of Truth, with the Frankness you have taught me, I
wish the Great Qualities of your Heart were as strong in you as the Good ones:
You would then have been above that Emotion and Bitterness, wherewith you
remember Things which want Weight to deserve your Anguish.

Since you were not the Writer of the Notes to the Dunciad, it would be
impertinent to trouble you with the Complaint I intended: -- I will only
observe, that the Author was in the Right, to believe me capable of a second
Repentance; but, I hope, I was incapable of that second Sin, which should have
been previous to his Supposition. -- If the initial Letters A. H. were not
meant to stand for my Name, yet, they were, everywhere, read so, as you might
have seen in Mist's Journal, and other public Papers; and I had shown Mr. Pope
an Example, how reasonable I thought it to clear a Mistake, publicly, which
had been publicly propagated. -- One Note, among so many, would have done me
this Justice: And the Generosity of such a Proceeding could have left no Room,
for that offensive Sneakingly, which, though, perhaps, too harsh a Word, was
the properest a Man could choose, who was satirizing an Approbation, that he had
never observed warm enough to declare itself to the World, but in Defense of
the Great, or the Popular.

Again, if the Author of the Notes knew, that A. H. related not to me, what
Reason had he to allude to that Character, as mine, by observing, that I had
published Pieces bordering upon Bombast -- A Circumstance so independent on any
other Purpose of the Note, that I should forget to whom I am writing, if I
thought it wanted Explanation.

As to your oblique Panegyric, I am not under so blind an Attachment to the
Goddess I was devoted to in the Dunciad, but that I knew it was a Commendation;
though a dirtier one than I wished for; who am, neither fond of some of the
Company, in which I was listed -- the noble Reward, for which I was to become a
Diver; -- the allegoric Muddiness, in which I was to try my Skill; -- nor the
Institutor of the Games, you were so kind to allow me a Share in.

Since, however, you could see, so clearly, that I ought to be satisfied with
the Praise, and forgive the Dirt it was mixed with, I am sorry, it seemed not
as reasonable, that you should pardon me for returning your Compliment, with
more, and opener, Praise, mixed with less of that Dirtiness, which we have,
both, the good Taste to complain of.

The Caveat, Sir, was mine. -- It would have been ridiculous to suppose you
ignorant of it: I cannot think, you need be told, that it meant you no Harm; --
and it had scorned to appear under the borrowed Name, it carries, but that the
whimsical Turn of the Preface, would have made my own a Contradiction. -- I
promise you, however, that, for the future, I will publish nothing, without my
Name, that concerns you, or your Writings. I have, now, almost finished, An
Essay on Propriety, and Impropriety, in Design, Thought, and Expression,
illustrated, by Examples, in both Kinds, from the Writings of Mr. Pope; and, to
convince you how much more Pleasure it gives me, to distinguish your Lights,
than your Shades; -- and that I am as willing as I ought to be, to see, and
acknowledge my Faults; I am ready, with all my Heart, to let it run thus, if it
would, otherwise, create the least Pain in you: -- An Essay on Propriety, and
Impropriety, etc. illustrated by Examples, of the first, from the Writings of
Mr. Pope, and of the last, from those of the Author.

I am sorry to hear you say, you never thought any great Matters of your
Poetry. -- It is, in my Opinion, the Characteristic you are to hope your
Distinction from: To be Honest is the Duty of every plain Man! Nor, since the
Soul of Poetry is Sentiment, can a Great Poet want Morality. But your Honesty
you possess in common with a Million, who will never be remembered; whereas
your Poetry is a Peculiar, that will make it impossible, you should be
forgotten.

If you had not been in the Spleen, when you wrote me this Letter, I persuade
myself, you would not, immediately after censuring the Pride of Writers, have
asserted, that you, certainly, know your moral Life, above that of most of the
Wits of these Days: At any other Time, you would have remembered, that Humility
is a moral Virtue. It was a bold Declaration; and the Certainty with which you
know it, stands in need of a better Acquaintance than you seem to have had with
the Tribe; since you tell me, in the same Letter, that many of their Names were
unknown to you.

Neither would it appear, to your own Reason, at a cooler Juncture,
over-consistent with the Morality you are so sure of, to scatter the Letters of
the whole Alphabet, annexed, at Random, to Characters of a light and ridiculous
Cast, confusedly, with Intent to provoke jealous Writers, into Resentment, that
you might take Occasion, from that Resentment, to expose and depreciate their
Characters.

The Services, you tell me, you would do Mr. Dennis, even though he should abuse
you, in Return, will, I hope, give him some Title to expect an Exertion of your
recommendatory Influence in his Behalf: A Man, so popular, as you, might secure
him a great Subscription: This would merit to be called a Service; and, the
more the World should find you abused in the Works you had recommended, so much
the more glorious Proof would they see, that your Morals were, in Truth, as
superior, as you represent them, to those of your Cotemporaries. Though you will
pardon me the Pride of wondering, a little, how this Declaration came to be
made to me, whose Condition not standing in need of such Services, it was not,
I think, so necessary, you should have taken the Trouble to talk of them.

Upon the Whole, Sir, I find, I am so sincerely your Friend, that it is not, in
your own Power, to make me your Enemy: Else, that unnecessary Air, of Neglect,
and Superiority, which is so remarkable, in the Turn of your Letter, would have
nettled me to the Quick; and I must triumph, in my Turn, at the Strength of my
own Heart, who can, after it, still find, and profess myself, most
affectionately and sincerely,

Your humble Servant, A. HILL.

LETTER XXXIII. From Mr. HILL, To Mr. POPE.
Feb. 10. 1731-32. SIR,
I AM obliged to you for your Letter from Parsons Green, and come heartily into
the Proposal, it begins with: A mutual Resolution to forget in each other, the
Appearance of every Thing, that has been distasteful to either, agrees, I am
sure, with the Affection, I feel for you, at my Heart, where it is founded on a
natural Strength, both of Reason, and Inclination.

The Caveat began, originally, with the Vision: I added not, till after it was
finished, those Lines, among which are the unlucky Ones, that displeased you. I
was scarful, lest, without something of that kind, by way of Introduction, the
Reader might think himself pushed, too abruptly, into the Allegory: But, I
confess, it was unreasonable in me to cover your Praise, which I delighted in,
under the Veil of an Allegory; and explain my Censure, too openly, in which I
could take no Pleasure.

The Truth is, I loved you so well, and thought of you so often, that it was
not easy for me, in any Humor, to write Verse, and not dwell upon you. -- Have
you never been jealous of a favorite Mistress? -- Have you never, under a
Pique, at her supposed Neglect, said, what she could no more deserve, than you
could think she did, upon cooler Reflection? -- And have you not found, after
all, that you was never the less her Lover?

Your Offer is very kind, to prevail on the Editor of the Dunciad, to leave out
the Note, or declare, that I was not meant in it; But I am satisfied: -- It is
over; -- and deserves no more of your Application.

I agree with you, It is Morality makes us beloved: I know it, from the Effect
of your Writings; where I but admire the Harmony, and the Elegance, while I
love the Generosity, and the Candor of the Sentiments. I prefer too, as you do,
Friendships, and the honest Enjoyments of Life, to Fame, and noisy Praises; but
I am glad you are happier, than you wish to be, who enjoy both Benefits,
together.

Yet, if there was nothing desirable in Fame, there could be nothing detestable
in Slander; and your honest Uneasiness, at being thought worse than you are,
would, in that Case, be in Danger of passing for a Weakness.

I know, however, that you consider Praise in a nobler Light than Vanity. --
There is, in Fame, the Promulgation of a good Man's Example, which his natural
Life being too short to extend so far as he wishes, That Defect is supplied by
the second Life, he receives, from his Memory.

I have seen, and been ashamed of that low Turn, which Mr. Dennis gave, to your
Goodnature. -- Where a Man's Passions are too strong for his Virtues, his
Suspicion will be too hard for his Prudence: He has often been weak enough to
treat you in a Manner that moves too much Indignation against Himself, not to
leave it unnecessary for you, also, to punish him. -- Neither of us would choose
him for a Friend; but none of the Frailties of his Temper, any more than the
heavy Formalities of his Style, can prevent your acknowledging, there is often
Weight, in his Arguments; and Matter, that deserves Encouragement, to be met
with, in his Writings.

I will soon, Sir, convince you, that my Sensibility is not so tender, as you
suppose it to be: I am so far from an Inclination to defend some Pieces, which
I was too much a Boy, when I published, that I embrace all Occasions of
exposing 'em, myself, to the Contempt they have merited.

I am already too much obliged, not to blush at your Mention of the Odyssey,
with a View of sending it to my Daughter; and She is too inquifitive a Lover of
what gives her Instruction with Delight, to have been satisfied without
finding, in her Closet, whatever she had heard you had published.

As a Proof, how determined I am, to throw nothing upon the World, that may
give you Cause of Complaint, I will send you, in Manuscript, the Essay on
Propriety, as soon as it is finished: I do the same, now, by a smaller Piece, I
am about to publish, because you will find yourself concerned in some Part of
it. -- I am, Sir, with great Truth,

Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, A. HILL.

LETTER XXXIV. From Mr. HILL, To Mr. POPE.
June 17. 1738. SIR,
THE Pleasure, I was sure to receive with your Letter, brought an unexpected
Chagrin in its Company, from a Vein of civil Reproach, that runs through it;
which I can better discern, than account for; since I must not suspect, without
wronging my Ideas of your Equity, that you could be displeased at the Freedom I
took in my Sentiments. If I believed they had given you the smallest Offense, I
would rather commit my Essay, in its present rough State, to the Flames, than
transcribe it, either for yourself, or the Public.

Indeed it was with a kind of foreboding Reluctance that I censured any Passage
of yours; and to confess the Truth, frankly, I had only one Reason for doing
it. After I had convinced myself, thoroughly, that Propriety, in some of the
Lights I was considering it under, had been universally neglected, in Poetry, I
foresaw, it would be impossible to establish the Belief of a Fact so unlikely,
without citing the strongest Examples: -- To do this, from the Works of our
dead Authors only, carried the Face of a Meanness, I could not tell how to
submit to. -- To draw formal Citations from any Pieces that had appeared of my
own (though full enough, God knows, of Absurdities, to have furnished more Proofs
than I wanted), would have looked too assuming, and silly: -- To borrow such
Instances out of other, less faulty, Cotemporaries, not however reputed among
the sparkling great Luminaries of Wit, would have induced a mistaken
Conclusion, that, in the Works of more masterly Writers, there were no such
Examples to be met with. -- And now, -- Is there a good Judge in England
(except one) who will not see, and acknowledge, the Necessity that threw me,
unavoidably, upon your Writings?

However, I am glad, at my Heart, it was Dr. A^t who made that Collection you
mention; for I am almost unwilling to be found in the Right, when I disapprove
what your Name has been stamped on; yet your own honest Argument (that it is
not enough to excuse a Reporter of Falsehoods, that he was told, and believed,
what he published) must defend me against its Advancer: For neither is it a
sufficient Excuse, that a Writer, whose Name, in the Front of a Book, has given
Weight to the Censures it propagates, was not Author of some of those Censures;
since whatever a Man sets his Hand to, he ought, first, to examine the Truth of.

I am charmed, while I hear you disclaim that Propensity to Pique and Contempt,
which, to speak with the Soul of a Friend, seems, to me, the only Spot on your
Character. -- We are, All of us, in some Lights, or other, the Dupes of our
natural Frailties: And when Mr. Pope, with the Warmth that becomes a great
Mind, tells me how far he is from despising Defects in Men's Genius, -- never
feeling any Contempt but for the Dirt of their Actions; I am sure he says
nothing but what he firmly believes to be true. And yet there are Pieces, well
known to be his, many Passages whereof no Man, less appris'd than himself of
his Heart's secret Views and Intentions, can read, without being strongly
convinced of a Scorn, that regards Genius only: Though, if he loves you but half
so sincerely as I do, you have no sooner disavow'd the Design, than he
concludes, the Imputation was groundless.

In the mean Time, it is Pity that a Thinker, so humane and benevolent, should
indulge an Ambiguity, in the Turn of his Expression, that scatters Gall, which
his Heart never licensed; since I believe it a general Truth, that Men, of the
openest and honestest Natures, sooner catch Fire at Contempt, than Oppression.
-- And, as to any Dirtiness in Actions which take Birth from Effect of such
Influence, we may conclude, from those irresistible little Sallies of Fury,
whereby, even among undesigning and innocent Infants, we see Brother
precipitated into Outrage against Brother, immediately upon any cold
Provocation of Scorn, that there is nothing immoral in what may be done, or
declared, too offensively, under Impressions so violent, so involuntary, and
natural.

After all this grave Face of Apology, I am an absolute Stranger to the Grounds
upon which those Men, you refer to, proceeded. -- Nay, I am so, for the most
part, even to the Measures by which they provoked you: All the Reason, indeed,
that I have for giving you any of my Thoughts on the Subject, is derived from
your own starting into it (a little digressively) immediately after hinting
some Occasions you had to lament, that I knew you less justly, as a Man, than a
Poet. -- I will appeal to impartial Posterity, whether I do not know you much
better, in both Lights, than ten thousand of those pretending Esteemers, of
whose Affection you think yourself surer. It will never be in my Will, nor my
Power, to transmit such a Picture, as yours, without its best, and most
beautiful Likeness: I shall leave to duller Dutch Painters in Criticism, their
unenvied Delight, to draw Monsters. And know very well, for my own Part, that I
should but disgrace the desired Reputation of my Pencil, if I missed the
Resemblance, too widely, in a Piece which must expect to be compared with
Originals of the same, by many different Masters.

Though I acquit you of any further Allusion to me, than by that retrospect
Glance, en passant, I have, affectionately, caught the Occasion of pointing
out, to one of the least intentionally guilty among Men, a seeming Tartness of
Spirit in himself, which he will easily find, when he looks for; and which,
whenever he does find, and guard against, by submitting his Wit to his
Philosophy, he will become the most unnatural good Man in the World; for he
will leave himself not a Fault, to be blamed for!

As to myself, who was born to mix Sin with Repentance, I plead guilty to all
such Indictments as you, in that Place, present to my Memory. -- I was always
too perceptibly quick, in my Apprehension of Contempts, or Indignities: -- A
Temper, which would have been as unpardonable, as I confess it to be weak, and
self-mortifying; but that the Fault, though of too swelling a Nature, leaves no
Voids for Admission of Malice. -- It is an offensive, indeed, but reconcilable
Imbecility of Mind: Shakespeare felt, and understood it, very finely. " It
carries Anger, as the Flint does Fire!
" Which, being struck, throws out a hasty Spark,
" And then, grows cold again. -- "


Yet I will endeavor to redress this wrong Bent in my Temper, and make Way for
the Rectification you are so good as to show me my WANT OF. -- And thus, in the
Commerce of Friendship, as in Traffic, less generous, there is offered a
mutual Exchange of Advantages: -- Something, always, to give and to gain: And
this makes both Sides more rich, and more satisfied. -- What a Loss, then, have
unsocial and vain Dispositions, which, by a sullen Seclusion from these Rights
of Reproof, and Plain-dealing, cut off all the kind Use of Correction! -- Human
Nature, let it be as susceptible of Grace as it can, never yet wanted Pride
enough to make Mortifications, of this Kind, a Requisite. Far from hating our
Friends for a little faithful, though unwelcome, Asperity, let us think him, of
all Men, unhappiest, who has never been blessed with an Enemy.

And now, let me ask you (with a Transition very fashionably abrupt and
uncritical) -- How is your good and great Friend, Lord B^, to be reached? --
You will scarce think I mean, -- to be emulated! Ours is an Age that exposes
such an old-fashioned Politician, as HE is, to any Fear, sooner than that of a
Rival. I have a Packet to send him, a little too large for the Post. It is a
manuscript Piece, which I purpose to dedicate to him, when published. But it
would be Prudence, and Decency, as Affairs stand at present, to wait his
Permission, after reading it: Not that there is any thing nice, or
exceptionable, in the Subject; and, I am sure, I have no need to add, though I
speak of a Dedication, that mine has no Views like a modern one. If you will be
so kind as to think how it may reach my Lord's Hands, I shall, in a few Days,
send it open, to yours; begging you, first, to peruse, and then give it a Seal,
and a Forwarding. If you will have the Goodness to authorize such a Trouble,
please to do it under a Direction, like your last, to

SIR, Your most humble and affectionate Servant, A. HILL.

LETTER XXXV. From Mr. HILL, To Mr. POPE.
June 25. 1738. SIR,
IT is Time to relieve you from Subjects, and Lengths, like my last; yet you
will hardly suspect such a Blindness, in my bad Understanding, as to think, I
distinguish not the true Cast of some Colors which you need not have held
quite so near me. -- Notwithstanding all which, if I had not more Cause to
distrust it, on your Side, than my own, I should flatter myself, we were born
to be Lovers; we are so often, and so unaccountably, mistaking one another into
Reserves, and Resentments! Yet I am sorry, whenever this happens, because the
most lost Time, in Men's Lives, is that which they waste in Expostulation. They,
who are Friends, find it selfish, and diffident -- and between Enemies it is
inflaming, and fruitless.

Indeed there would be no End of such -- what must I call 'em? --
Eclaircissements is an affected French Word, and I am heartily sorry I want it.
-- In plain Truth, and English, I always did, and I still do, most
affectionately esteem you, both as Man, and as Poet: And if now-and-then, for a
Start, I have been put out of Humor with either, I would fain have you think,
it was no less your own Fault, than mine: At least, I am sure, I believed so.
And if, whenever you supposed me to have acted inconsistently with myself, on
that Principle, you had only been so kind, as to have declared why you thought
so, I would openly, and immediately, either have demonstrated the Mistake to be
yours, or confessed, and abhorred, my own Error. -- I will always stand bound
to give, if not a rational, yet a moral, Account of my Actions: Not alone, as
they regard Mr. Pope, but Men, in the remotest Situation below him: And whoever
(let him be accused, either by Misapprehension or Calumny) would decline such a
Test of his Conduct in Life, is so far from being worthy your Friendship, that
he is a Stranger to both Spirit and Honesty.

Here, then, let us rest this Debate; and either resolve to let fall an
unconfiding, and cold Correspondence, or much rather agree (if you please) to
understand one another better, for the future. -- As to my own Part, I never
will -- I never did -- disoblige you, unprovoked. And if, how unkindly soever
impelled, I write or do any thing unbecoming the Occasion -- Think of me, as I
would of your Enemies.

In the mean time, let even the little Trouble, you have so kindly allowed me
to give you, in the Enclosed, be received as some Proof that I know, and
respect, at my Heart, your double Claim, both in Morals and Genius. For you
know me, I am sure, much less justly, if you can imagine me capable of
corresponding, with an Air of Good Will, where I wanted a personal Attachment;
or of begging, as I now very earnestly do (upon any Inducement, but the high
Sense I have of your Skill), your frank and friendly Inspection of the Tragedy.
It would charm me, to have the Benefit of your Hand, or your Hints, before it
appears on the Theater.

As to my Essay on Propriety, you have obligingly convinced me, I may lay it
before you, without Pain: Indeed, if I had made it unfit for your Eye, the
World would have been still less likely to see it: I shall punctually obey your
Command, neither to omit, nor to soften, in the Transcript: It is an Injunction
I may safely comply with, since, if I have any thing to value myself upon in
this Tract, it is from the Proofs, you will find it abound in, that some of
your most retired, and most delicate Touches, have been, chiefly, the Search
and the Subject of,

SIR, Your truly affectionate, and most humble Servant, A. HILL.

LETTER XXXVI. From Mr. THOMSON, To AARON HILL, Esquire
April 5. 1726. SIR,
HAVING seen a Letter you wrote to my Friend Mr. Mallet, on Saturday last, though
I cannot boast the Honor and Happiness of your Acquaintance, and ought with
the utmost Deference and Veneration to approach so supreme a Genius; yet my
full Heart is not to be repressed by Formalities; and you must allow me the
Pleasure of pouring forth my best Acknowledgments.

I will not affect a moderate Joy at your Approbation, your Praise: It pleases,
it delights, it ravishes me! Forgive me for the Lowness of the Truth, when I
vow, I Would rather have it than the Acclamations of Thousands: It Is so sincere, so
delicate, so distinguishing, so glowing, and, what peculiarly marks and endears
it, so beautifully generous.

That great Mind, and transcendent Humanity, that appear in the Testimony you
have been pleased to give my first Attempt, would have utterly confounded me,
if I had not been prepared for such an Entertainment, by your well-known
Character; which the Voice of Fame, and your own masterly Writings, loudly
proclaim.

It would both be disingenuous, and rudely unjust, in me, after what you have
observed, to dissemble my Satisfaction at several Passages in the Poem: This
let me say, that your Reflections have entered into the very Soul of my
Purpose, and, even to myself, cast a Light over the Whole.

How rare, how happy, is it to find a Judge whose discerning Goodness overlooks
the Faults of what is well meant, at the same Time that his fine enthusiastic
Taste improves the Beauties!

To you, alone, it belongs, to write so inimitably, and to read so indulgently.

If I wrote all that my Admiration of your Perfections, and my Gratitude,
dictate, I should never have done; but, left I tire you, I Will for the present
rather put a Violence on myself: Only let me cherish one Hope further -- of
being, some time or other, admitted into the most instructive and entertaining
Company in the World. I am, with the greatest Devotion,

SIR, Your most obliged, and most faithful, humble Servant, JAMES THOMSON.

LETTER XXXVII. From Mr. THOMSON, To AARON HILL, Esquire
April 18. 1726. SIR,
I Received yours with a Soul awakened all to Joy, Gratitude, and Ambition.
There is such a noble Excellence of Mind, so much uncommon Goodness, and
Generosity of Heart, in every thing you say, as at once charms and astonishes
me.

As you think, imagine, and write, with a diviner Warmth, superior to the rest
of Mankind; so the very Praises, you bestow, bear the Stamp of Eminence, and
reflect stronger on yourself.

While I meditate your encouraging Lines, for a while, I forget the
Selfishness, Degeneracy, and Cruelty of Men, and seem to be associated with
better and more exalted Beings.

The Social Love, of which you are so bright an Example, though it be the
distinguishing Ornament of Humanity, yet there are some ill-natured enough to
degrade it into a Modification of Self-love, according to them, its Original.

Those Gentlemen, I am afraid, mingle their Tempers too much with their
Speculations.

Self-love is, indeed, indispensably necessary for the Well-being of every
Individual, but carries not along with it an Idea of moral Beauty and
Perfection; whereas Social Love is of quite another Nature; the just and free
Exercise of which, in a particular manner, renders one amiable, and divine. The
accomplished Man I admire, the honest Man I trust; but it is only the
truly-generous Man I entirely love. Humanity is the very Smile and Consummation
of Virtue; it is the Image of that fair Perfection, in the Supreme Being, which,
while he was infinitely happy in himself, moved him to create a World of Beings
to make them so.

The Excellent ones of the Earth, in the Exercise of Social Love, feel it as
much to be an original Impulse, as the low World that blind Affection, they
bear themselves; nor are they, in the least, conscious of that forced, cold
Reasoning, by which it is deduced from so mean an Original.

How many deathless Heroes, Patriots, and Martyrs, have been so gloriously
concerned for the Good of Mankind, and so strongly actuated by Social Love, as
frequently to act in direct Contradiction to that of Self?

A great many more Arguments might be adduced to prove, that Social Love is a
nobler, independent Principle, by itself, were not the secret Sense, that every
good Man has of the Matter, instead of a thousand.

Your Writings, while they glow with innumerable Instances of strong Thinking,
and sublime Imagination, are peculiarly marked with this beautiful Benevolence
of Mind; and it is that which, at this time, has awakened, in me, these
Reflections.

I am ravished with the Hope, you give me, of your nearer Acquaintance; and
that it should ever prove unprofitable, is as impossible, as that it should not
be, in the highest Degree, delightful to,

SIR, Your most obliged and most faithful, humble Servant, JAMES THOMSON.

LETTER XXXVIII. From Mr. THOMSON, To AARON HILL, Esquire
April 27. 1726. SIR,
WHEN I reflect how truly happy I was, Yesterday, in your Company, it is
impossible for me to restrain my Sense of it, from breaking out into this
Acknowledgment.

There is, in your Conversation, such a Beauty, Truth, Force, and Elegance of
Thought, and Expression; such animated, fine Sense, and chastis'd Fancy; so
much Dignity and Condescension, Sublimity and Sweetness; in a Word, such a
Variety of Entertainment and Instruction, as is beyond all Admiration.

Your Smiles have all the encouraging Power of Humanity in them: What one says,
is received with great Taste, and Indulgence; and to listen to you, gives one a
secret, and more ravishing Pleasure, than to be Author of the best Things in
other Company.

There is downright Inspiration in your Society: It enlarges and exalts all the
Powers of the Soul, chases every low Thought, throws the Passions into the most
agreeable Agitations, and gives the Heart the most affecting Sentiments -- It Is
moral Harmony!

It gives me an additional Pleasure, to reflect how justly pleased, too, Mr.
Savage was.

Nothing is, to me, a stronger Instance of the unimprovable Nature of that
unhappy Creature of whom you speak so compassionately, notwithstanding of the
barbarous Provocation he has given you, than his remaining bleak, and withered,
under the Influences of your Conversation -- a certain Sign of a Field that the
Lord has cursed.

There is none that renders human Nature more amiable than you; and, at the
same time, none that renders the greatest Part of it more contemptible: And to
descend from your Company, and mingle with the Herd of Mankind, is like
Nebuchadnezzar's descending from a Throne, to graze with the Beasts of the
Field.

Now I feast on Reflection -- and am like a poor Man, that has brought as much
from a rich Entertainment with him, as must sustain him for many Days
afterward.

What charms and amuses me, in a particular Manner, is, the Account you gave us
of that little Seraph, the young Urania! Her elegant Turn of Mind; her
Innocence, and Goodness, in the Choice of her Subjects; her Fancy, Judgment,
and Ambition, above her Years; and the beautiful Struggle of the last ('it is
unfair to call it Vanity), occasioned by the rude Stupidity of the Schoolboy,
are most agreeably surprising.

What you, obligingly, observed of good Company's being Ariosto's Fountain of
Thirst, is remarkably true of yours -- I shall long impatiently for the farther
Refreshment of it, and am, with the most entire Regard,

Dear Sir, Your most obliged, and most faithful, humble Servant, JAMES THOMSON.

LETTER XXXIX. From Mr. THOMSON, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Oldman's Coffee-house, May 24. 1726. Dear Sir,
I HOPE that your uncommon Goodness will forgive me, what I scarcely can
forgive myself, my not having, hitherto, answered the last encouraging Letter,
and Copy of Verses, you honored me with.

The Approbation which, out of the Fullness of a beneficent Heart, you are
pleased to give me, I am fond and ambitious of, next to that of Heaven: It Is my
best Reward for what I have done, and a noble Incitement to go on. When you
approve, my whole Soul is awaked, and charmed.

Pleasing is your Praise, but severe is your Satire: It Is particularly marked
with exalted Sentiment, and generous Contempt. There is a Force in it, that
strikes through the Heart; and a Majesty, not to be expressed. In a Word, it is
the unaffected Resentment of a great Mind.

It is impossible for me, in the Compass of this Letter, to say how much I
admire every particular Line; yet it is as impossible for me to restrain myself
from dwelling on some. " Smile at your vanished Hope -- convinced, too late,
" That Greatness dwells not, always, with the Great."
I feel the first Line, too sensibly; and the last finely insinuates the
Absurdity of vulgar and hereditary Greatness.

Your sinking of the Lord's unlasting Name in the Depth of Time, is pleasingly
and nobly just: Sir John Falstaff sunk not with greater Alacrity, in a literal
Sense, than they and all their Fopperies do in a metaphorical.

I never read any thing more glorious, than the four following Lines. " Patrons
are Nature's Nobles, not the State's;
" And Wit's a Title, no Broad Seal creates.
" Kings, from whose Bounty Wealth's chief Currents flow,
" Are poor in Power, when they would Souls bestow."
They are the most divine Triumph of Merit, and Virtue, that was ever writ. The
best way of displaying all their Beauties is, to read them a thousand and a
thousand Times over.

Your Description of the Court-haunting, Winkobserving Bard, is so natural,
that, if I am not mistaken, it may be found a Picture of some living Originals.

The last Paragraph is very strongly and delicately wrought off; but so
favorable to me, as obliges me to suppress all Sentiments, save such as flow
from Gratitude; with which my Heart is as full, as yours is with Goodness and
Perfection.

You have given me Fame; and what have I to return you, but the Acknowledgment
of a grateful Soul?

How powerfully was I charmed with the four Acts of Elfrid, you were so
condescendingly good as to read us! There is in them such a rich Assemblage of
all the Excellencies of the best Poetry, as is not anywhere to be found. I
never met, before, with such a Force, and Dignity of Passion. My Heart
trembles, yet, when I reflect. But I will not cramp my Admiration into the
small Space this Letter allows.

Mr. Mallet is now gone into the Country, where he justly expects to be vastly
entertained, and instructed, by your Correspondence. I have been somewhat
melancholy since his Departure, touched with these pensive Emotions, parting
with such a Friend gives.

Bounteous Creator of the tender Heart!
Is there no World, where Friends shall never part?
Be that our future Lot, and of such Bliss
Grant us an Earnest, ere we die, in this.
I go, on Saturday next, to reside at Mr. Watts's Academy in Little
Tower-street, in Quality of Tutor to a young Gentleman there.

Since you have been pleased to raise me, in some measure, to the new Life of
your Favor, let me never fall from it, but frequently be allowed the Honor of
subscribing myself, dear Sir,

Your most obliged, and most devoted, humble Servant, JAMES THOMSON.

LETTER XL. From Mr. THOMSON, To AARON HILL, Esquire
June 4. 1726. SIR,
MR. Bowman, and I, are at Long's Coffee house, in Queen's Square, Westminster;
and, if it be consistent with your Convenience, would be glad to attend the
Honor, and Happiness, of your Company, as you shall be pleased to direct. Mr.
Mallet left with me, what they call a Spanish Cheese, which he begs you to
accept of. At last, I have been with the Speaker, this Morning; but would
rather give you an Account of my Reception by Word of Mouth. We beg Pardon for
this Freedom, which the delightful Prospect of your Company irresistibly tempts
us to. I am, Sir, with the deepest Respect,

Your most obliged, and most devoted, humble Servant, JAMES THOMSON.

LETTER XLI. From Mr. THOMSON, To AARON HILL, Esquire
June 7. 1726. Dear Sir,
Encouraged by that most divine of all Virtues, your charming Goodness, I
frequently, you see, take the Liberty to address you.

On Saturday last I wrote to you, from a Coffee-house in Westminster, but had
the Misfortune to hear you were gone out, only Half an Hour, before the Letter
was sent.

Flattering myself, then, with some Hopes of your Company, I did not mention a
Copy of Verses I received, on Friday last, from Mr. Mallet, to be prefixed to
the Second Edition of Winter; and which I send you enclosed. That you should
read them, was his particular Desire, in the following Terms: -- "Offer my
Verses to Mr. Hill's Perusal, and tell him, that I will not determine their
Fate, till I first learn his Opinion of them: For I know him too nobly sincere,
to indulge my Vanity, at the Expense of your Credit. Say, likewise, that I will
shortly venture to make use of that Permission he so generously granted me, of
writing to him, as often as my Fear of becoming troublesome will let me." --
All that I shall observe concerning them, to such a finished Judge as you are,
is, that their only glorious Fault, if they have any, is, an Excess of that
beautiful Benevolence of Mind, which, among a thousand other Things, make you
and him so greatly amiable.

I hinted to you in my last, that, on Saturday Morning, I was with Sir Spencer
Compton. A certain Gentleman, without my Desire, spoke to him concerning me;
his Answer was, that I had never come near him: Then the Gentleman put the
Question, if he desired that I should wait on him; he returned, he did: On
this, the Gentleman gave me an introductory Letter to him. He received me in
what they commonly call a civil Manner, asked me some Commonplace Questions,
and made me a Present of Twenty Guineas. I am very ready to own, that the
Present was larger than my Performance deserved; and shall ascribe it to his
Generosity, or any other Cause, rather than the Merit of the Address.

As the Case now is, one of your infinite Delicacy will be the best Judge,
whether it will be proper to print these two inimitable Copies of Verses I have
from you, and Mr. Mallet, without such little Alterations as shall clear Sir
Spencer of that best Satire I ever read. I shall say no more on that Head; for
if there be any Reasons for such Alterations, you will, of Necessity, at one
Glance, see them in the strongest and finest Light. Only this let me add,
should you find that the Case required some small Alterations, and yet not
indulge me with them, I shall reckon what my Patron gave me, a fatal Present.
-- It Is a Thought too shocking to be born -- to lose the Applause of the great
Genius of the Age, my Charter of Fame! for -- I will not name it! -- But you
are too good to plague me so severely. -- I expect this Favor from Mr. Mallet,
next Post.

When you honor me with an Answer, for which I shall be anxious, please to
direct for me at Mr. Watts's Academy, in Little Tower-street. I am, dear Sir,
with the most hearty Respect,

Your most devoted, and most humble Servant, JAMES THOMSON.

LETTER XLII. From Mr. THOMSON, To AARON HILL, Esquire
London, June 11. 1726. Dear Sir,
I HAVE been, for some Days last past, in the Country, else the enclosed
Sheets, to which you yourself have given the greatest Sanction and Value,
should have waited on you ere now.

It was your Approbation that gave me, formerly, an equally just and noble
Satisfaction; and the Continuance of it is my inviolable Ambition.

Since I put you to the Trouble of altering your Verses, I ought to give you an
Account why Mr. Mallet's were not altered, likewise. -- The Truth is, he
promised me to alter them, as I wrote to you; but, in a following Letter, told
me, that, after several Attempts, he found it absolutely out of his Power; and,
rather than lose them, I resolved to print them, as they at first were. To this
Resolution your last favorable Letter, in a great measure, raised me: And who,
that has a Soul in him, could forbear to follow the Advice you give me, in
those generous Lines? Heedless of Fortune, then look down on State,
Balanced, within, by Reason's conscious Weight:
Divinely proud of independent Will,
Prince of your Passions, live their Sovereign still.


I wish, that the Declaration, from my Heart, with regard to you, in the
Preface, may not be disagreeable. These Sentiments I could not suppress; and
they are but a faint Expression of the full Esteem and Admiration, I shall ever
bear you.

May I hope that one of the enclosed Copies of my Poem can be acceptable to a
Lady of Mrs. Hill's fine Taste, and the young Darling of the Muses, Urania,
who, in such a tender Age, has encountered with all the Horrors of so rough a
Description?

Shall I languish out a whole Summer, in the same City with you, and not once
be re-inspir'd with your Company? Such a Happiness would much brighten my
Description of that Season; from which, to fill out this Letter, I venture to
transcribe the following Lines. Often in this Season, too, the Horse, provoked,
While his big Sinews, full of Spirits, swell,
Trembling with Vigor, in the Heat of Blood,
Springs the high Fence; and over the Field effus'd,
Darts on the gloomy Flood, with steady Eye,
And Heart estranged to Fear; his nervous Chest,
The Seat of Strength! bears down th'opposing Stream,
Luxuriant, and arrect: Quenchless his Thirst,
He takes the River, at redoubled Draughts,
And, with wide Nostrils, snorting, skims the Wave.


In your last you were pleased to threaten me, as you term it, with a long
Letter. I beg you would be as exact, in the Execution of your Threatenings, as
you always are, in the Performance of your Promises; which shall be submitted
to, with the most cheerful Resignation, by him who is, dear Sir, with the
utmost Devotion,

Your most obliged, and most obedient, humble Servant, JAMES THOMSON.

LETTER XLIII. From Mr. THOMSON, To AARON HILL, Esquire
London, June 17. 1726. SIR,
I HAD the enclosed for you, from Mr. Mallet, this Day, which emboldens me to
give you the present Trouble.

He is so good as to promise me another Copy of Verses, next Post, which gives
me a very great Pleasure: But my Satisfaction is far from being complete, so
long as I am uncertain of the like Favor from you. Perhaps my Forwardness, if
not Vanity, presumes too much on your Goodness; but your already wondrous
Generosity, in this Regard, has raised in me an Expectation and Ambition you
ought, in all poetical Justice, to satisfy. If you knew the Gladness it would
inspire into my Heart, you would, certainly, steal a kind Hour from your more
important Affairs, to smile upon my, I will not scruple to say, reasonable
Fondness. -- But by being importunate, I shall offer an Injury to your
ever-ready Humanity.

All that I shall further add is, that on Monday next the Poem will be printed
off. I am, Sir, with the utmost Gratitude and Regard,

Your most devoted, humble Servant, JAMES THOMSON.
P. S. The Press, if you please, shall wait your Leisure.



LETTER XLIV. From Mr. THOMSON, To AARON HILL, Esquire
London, Oct. 20. 1726. Dear Sir,
MR. Savage was so kind as to show me a Letter you lately favored him with, by
which I had the true Pleasure of learning your safe Arrival at Berwick,
intended Tour, and Halt at Inverness.

It is with a Mixture of Joy, Pride, and Confusion, I read the favorable.
Mention you were pleased to make of me: What unusual good Fortune has thus
entitled me to your kind Regard? It Is nothing, sure, but your own generous
Goodness, which, with your other many matchless Perfections, shall ever be my
Love, and Wonder, while Truth and Harmony are the Objects of these Passions.

Every Muse, every Virtue, here, languishes for your Return: To me your Absence
would be much severer, if my partial Sympathy in the Happiness of my native
Country did not alleviate the Misfortune. I congratulate her on the Presence of
such a kind Inspirer, and candid Observer: There, you may chance to find, in
that neglected Corner of the World, depressed Merit, uninform'd Beauty, and
good Sense clothed in the Rags of Language.

Nothing has appeared in Print here, since your Departure, unless it be some
mushroomish Pamphlets, Beings of a Summer's Night! whose only Merit is the
violent Propension with which they tend into Oblivion. Memory abhors them, and
their Essence is, to die. I beg Mr. Pope's Pardon, some of whose Letters, to
Mr. Cromwell, were surreptitiously printed by Curll; and yet, though writ
careless, and uncorrected, full of Wit and Gaiety.

We have got, O rare! a Rostrum, and an Orator, since you left us; an Orator!
whose pretended great Design is to restore primitive Christianity; and his
hopeful Candidates are all the Beaus, and pretty powdered Fellows about Town.

You were, a Week or two ago, traduced by the Praises of one of our
Journalists, who can no more understand the Beauties of your Writings, than you
write to his Understanding.

A new Torrent of Italian Farces is lately poured in upon us. The
Advertisement, which just now lies before me, and begins thus -- "By his
Majesty's Command, at the King's Theater in the Hay-market, Tomorrow, being
Friday the 21st of October, will be acted, by the Company of Italian Comedians
newly arrived, a Comedy called The Enchanted Island of Arcadia, or Arlequin
King of the Forests, etc." is such a Maze of incredible Impertinence, and
promises so much Folly, that it is to be presumed the House will be very full,
and that, too, with Persons of the first Quality.

May you soon return to Town, resume the Plain-dealer, and, if we are not
devoted to Destruction, restore the great dramatic Taste by that Tragedy, Part
of which I had the Honor and sublime Pleasure of hearing read, by the finest
Reader, as well as the finest Author, in England.

If your Business will allow me one Line, please to direct for me at the
Academy in Little Tower-street. I am,

Dear Sir, Your most obliged, faithful humble Servant, JAMES THOMSON.

LETTER XLV. From Mr. THOMSON, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Oldman's Coffee-house, Monday Morn. Mar. 4. 1726-7. Dear Sir,
THE News of your safe Arrival in Town gave me a Joy, I have not felt, since
the Receipt of your most agreeable Letter from the North of Scotland. But while
I have not the Honor of seeing you, Westminster is at a more gloomy Distance,
than Skor-urran's snowy Top.

Mr. Mallet and I, wish, with the fondest Impatience, the Happiness of your
Company; which, if we may hope this Afternoon, we'll wait upon you, as you
shall please to appoint, by a short Line with the Bearer. I will not make any
Apology for this Freedom to one of your unbounded Goodness. I am, with the most
inviolable Regard,

Dear Sir, Your devoted humble Servant, JAMES THOMSON.

LETTER XLVI. From Mr. THOMSON, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Tuesday, Dec. 18. 1733. Dear Sir,
I HAVE been almost entirely in the Country, since I had the Honor of yours,
and of the enclosed Papers, you were so good, as to send me. The two or three
Days since my Return to Town have been rather hurried than employed in
soliciting for the Benefit of old Dennis. Your well-known and
formerly-experienc'd Goodness will, I hope, forgive me for having been so
selfish as to keep your Papers so long. Though I would have had some Objections
to your undertaking the Translation of Zaire; now that it is so affectingly
done, I should be very ungrateful, for the great Pleasure it has given me, to
think of them any more. In reading of Zara, I forget what it was that I
objected to Zaire. You have heightened it with mere Imagination, but such a
chastis'd one, as accords perfectly well with the nobler Fervency of the Heart.
The Sentiments and Reflections, too, rise in the Translation, and glow
stronger, as well as the Touches of the poetical Pencil. Allow me to say, that,
in these Respects, I deeply feel the Difference betwixt Mr. Voltaire and Mr.
Hill. The more generous Warmth of your Heart more animates the Scene, raises
the dear Tumult in the Breast, and moves me much more. I observed nothing that
I wished altered but a Word here and there, which are mere Trifles, and not
worth Regard. One, however, I will take the Liberty to mention: It is in a
Speech of the first Scene, which marks the Civility and Gallantry of France --
"Where Men adore their Wives" -- The two last Words I would change into -- the
Fair. -- I imagine you smiling at my important Criticism, and ready to reply --
that though the present French are not famous for adoring their Wives, yet those
in the good old unrefin'd Days of St. Lewis might. If they do not now adore
their Wives, they perhaps do better, they make them easy.

I shall long to renew the Pleasure your Play has given me at its
Representation. What Attention I can contribute to the promoting of that, will
greatly be its own Reward. Mr. Dodington is expected, in a few Days, from
Ireland: He, I dare say, will warmly favor it, from a double Cause -- both the
Love of the fine Arts, and his own Pleasure. Had you but Players equal to those
Voltaire had, I would not doubt, in this Instance, the Taste of our Countrymen
-- Almighty Nature is everywhere the same.

Soon I propose to fix in Town for the Winter, during which time I hope to pass
several happy Evenings in your Company: Mr. Pope earnestly wishes the same.
Believe me to be, most affectionately and sincerely,

Dear Sir, Yours, etc. J. THOMSON.

LETTER XLVII. From Mr. THOMSON, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Aug. 23. 1735. Dear Sir,
UPON my Return to Town, from Mr. Dodington's Seat in Dorsetshire, where I had
for some time been, I found your Letter, about a Month after its Date: Had it
been sent me in the Country, I could not have neglected, till now,
acknowledging the Pleasure it, and the Packet of Prompters you sent along with
it, gave me. Though very happy in the Company where I then was, yet cannot I help
sincerely regretting the Loss of that Entertainment to which you was so good as
to give me an Invitation. With the greatest Pleasure would I have beheld, and
with the greatest Zeal would I have countenanced, to the utmost of my little
Power, the Revival of Action, which seems on all our Theaters to be now both
dead and rotten. A Friend of mine, who was there, did not, by what he told me,
soften my Loss.

I was very much enlightened and warmed by the Prompters upon Action: They
present no less a strong and beautiful Idea of what Actors ought to be, than a
mortifying one of what they are. As the Stage is a powerful School of humane
polite Morality, so nothing can contribute more to barbarize the Age than the
present Condition of ours. There, human Nature is represented in as awkward,
false, and monstrous a Manner, as the human Form was in ancient Gothic
Sculpture and Painting. If that were all, it might be laughed at, and
contemned: But since it tends, at the same time, to confound the Head, and
corrupt the Heart; since Crowds grow stupid, or barbarous, as they gaze; who
can consider it in that View, without feeling an honest Indignation? And what
crowns the Misfortune is, that there is no Hope of its ever being otherwise:
The Root of the Evil lies too deep to be plucked up. Was there ever an equal
Absurdity heard of, among a civilized People? That such an important public
Diversion, the School which forms the Manners of the Age, should be made the
Property of private Persons; who, did they happen in the first Instance, by an
infinite Chance, to be Judges of the Matter, yet may transfer that Property to
the most profligate, tasteless, and ignorant of Mankind! But this, alas! is
only one of the Pillars of that vast Temple of Corruption, under which this
Generation, more than any other that ever boasted Freedom, worships the dirty,
low-minded, insatiable Idol of Self-interest. Even to this Idol is every public
Work, which we have the Soul to attempt, made an immediate Sacrifice. -- You
see how much your Prompters have inflamed me; and the melancholy Conclusion I
draw from all is, that I never hope to see Gentlemen of equal Genius, Taste,
Judgment, and Generosity of Heart, to the Author of these Prompters, at the
Head of our Theaters. I may, however, very well live to see all Poetry reduced
to Magazine-Miscellanies, all Plays to Mummery Entertainments, and, in short,
all Learning absorbed into the Sink of hireling scurrilous Newspapers. Pardon
this Supposition in a Letter to one, who, while he I ves, will never suffer it
wholly to take Place: In the mean time, go on to stem the Torrent of Barbarism.
I wish you could find an Assistant, though never so weak a one, in,

Dear Sir, Your most affectionate humble Servant, JAMES THOMSON.

LETTER XLVIII. From Mr. THOMSON, To AARON HILL, Esquire
May 11. 1736. Dear Sir,
IT is far from being the want of a due Sense of the Honor, your two last
Letters did me, that has prevented my thanking you for them before now: The
Truth is, they plunged me so deep into your Debt, that I was dispirited, through
mere Despair, of clearing it. But now I am rather willing to declare myself an
irrecoverable Bankrupt, than any longer neglect to acknowledge the refined
Pleasure, which your generous Approbation of my late Performance gives me -- I
call it generous, that Epithet having a peculiar Relation to whatever you do;
besides, I cannot help being afraid that it must, in a great measure, proceed
from so humane a Cause. In the mean time, however that be, I will avow, that I
am justly proud of, charmed with, and most agreeably rewarded by, your good
Opinion of my Poem. Allow me here, by the bye, to remark, that though Poets have
been long used to this truly-spiritual and almost only Emolument arising from
their Works; yet I doubt much, if Booksellers have any manner of Relish for it:
I think, therefore (notwithstanding that the Ghosts of many Authors walk
unrevenged), of annulling the Bargain I made with mine, who would else be a
considerable Loser, by the Paper, Printing, and Publication, of Liberty. As I
shall, in this Case, be possessed of the entire Property of it again, I
propose, in a Year or two hence, to give a new Edition of it; and beg that you
would, ere then, enrich me with some Criticisms, which I hope I shall have the
Grace to relish as well as Praises.

Your Observation, with regard to political Corruption, like natural, when come
to a Crisis, producing more exalted Scenes of Animation, is fine, and pleases
by the future Prospect it opens; but it awakens, at the same time, a Sentiment
no less mortifying, should we find our Lot cast in the Times of Putrefaction;
should we find ourselves devoted, in an anti-heroic Manner, for the Good of
Posterity. I wish, heartily, that I could refute what you likewise observe with
regard to the Cause of this Corruption. Certainly the kind Exchanger of the
Super-abundance for the Sweets and Elegancies of Life, is itself corrupted, and
its Gifts abused, from the want of Taste: For whence is it, save the Want of
Taste, that the continual Tides of Riches, poured in upon this Nation by
Commerce, have been lost again in a Gulf of ungraceful, inelegant, inglorious
Luxury? But whence, you will say, this want of Taste? Whence this sordid Turn
to cautious Time-serving, Money-making, sneaking Prudence, instead of
regardless, unfettered Virtue? To private Jobs, instead of public Works? To
profitable, instead of fine Arts? To Gain, instead of Glory? In a Word, to the
whole venal System of modern Administration? And to those gross perishing
Luxuries, that reconcile, at once, Avarice and Profusion, centering all in
Self, and even in the meanest, the material Part of Self. This Disquisition, I
am afraid, would very near lead me back again to your Observation. It must be
owned, however, that the better Genius of this Nation has often nobly exerted
itself, and will struggle hard before it expire. With regard to Arts and
Learning, one may venture to say, that they might yet stand their Ground, were
they but merely protected. In lieu of all Patrons that have been, are, or will
be, in England, I wish we had one good Act of Parliament for securing to
Authors the Property of their own Works; and that the Stage were put upon the
Footing of common Sense and Humanity. And can it be, that those who impress
Paper with what constitutes the best and everlasting Riches of all civilized
Nations, and of all Ages, should have less Property in the Paper, so enriched,
than those who deal in the Rags, which make that Paper? Can it be, that the
great, the delightful School of Manners, should be abandoned to common Sale,
and become the Property of any one, who can purchase it, to be, perhaps, the
School of Folly, and Corruption? -- A Simony this, in Virtue; which, if not so
wicked, yet is as pernicious as that in Religion. What would Athenians have
said to this! what Laughter, what Contempt, what Indignation, would it have
raised among them!

Now that I mention the Stage, I must still insist upon my Copy of that only
humane new Entertainment I have seen upon it of late. I know not what Gothic
Devil possessed the Maid at my Lodgings, but my few Books must not be so robbed
of the Honor of boasting Zara among them from its Author. Having been
tantaliz'd lately by seeing you at a Distance, I wish you would be so good as
to make me Amends some Evening, and let me know of it a few Days before. Mr.
Pope was the other Day inquiting kindly after you: I should be glad we could,
at the same time, engage him. Poor Mr. Savage would be happy to pass an Evening
with you; his Heart burns toward you with the eternal Fire of Gratitude: But
how to find him, requires more Intelligence than is allotted to Mortals. Life
is too short to lose Years without the Conversation of those one most loves,
and esteems; one of which Number you must ever be to, dear Sir,

Your most affectionate humble Servant, JAMES THOMSON.
P. S. Please to direct to me in Kew-Lane, Richmond, Surrey; and order your
Letter to be put into the General Post.



LETTER XLIX. From Mr. THOMSON, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Friday Morning. Dear Sir,
I AM sorry that my present Hurry cannot allow me Time to answer your kind and
excellent Letter, in the Manner it deserves. The Freedom of your Criticism I
love, and am more proud of your Approbation than it becomes me to say: In one
the Taste of Fame is not more delicious, than that of Friendship in the other.

You, in the last Paragraph of your Letter, prescribe me a glorious Task; to
perform which, would demand the same elegant and powerful Pen, that prescribed
it. Only to attempt it is my Ambition.

Please to accept of the Second Part of my Poem, and believe me to be, with the
most affectionate Esteem, dear Sir,

Your most obedient humble Servant, JAMES THOMSON.

LETTER L. From Mr. BOOTH, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Charles-street, Mar. 24. 1730. SIR,
IT IS plain, that Affairs of much greater Consequence have prevented your
Inquiry about York Stock: I find now how much better you have employed your
spare Hours -- You have been attempting to make Mankind what they ought to be:
The Advice you have lately given to such, who deserve the Names of Poet and
Patron, is a sufficient Proof of that public Spirit, which ever did and ever
will appear in all your Actions. -- Give me Leave to thank you for the vast
Delight I received in the Perusal of that daring Flight from the warm
Indignation of your Mind -- What an everlasting Reproach have you justly thrown
upon those Great ones, whom Fortune has placed high above their
Fellow Creatures, and, in some Sense, even above their Superiors! -- A
Panegyric would be a vain Attempt; the Poem itself can best speak its Praise.
-- I confess, I could not possibly resist the natural Impulse of expressing my
Transport upon this great Occasion. -- You force me to write to you, though
Writing by no means agrees with my Distemper. -- Your Time is precious. --
Think, no Man living has a warmer Regard for the uncommon Qualities, that are
peculiar to Mr. Hill, than,

SIR, Your most obliged and most humble Servant, B. BOOTH.

LETTER LI. From Mr. BOOTH, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Monday Nov. 8. 1731. SIR,
I HAVE with infinite Pleasure finished the reading of your Tragedy: I don't
wonder Mr. Pope should say, upon the Perusal of it, that no Play had ever more
warmed him. I wish we had a Set of Actors capable of doing it the Justice it
deserves.

You were pleased to tell me, that you had Thoughts of my Wife for Elfrid; I
was apprehensive, not having read it, that the Part might require great Force,
and be too powerful for her Voice: But I find, it is neither long, nor violent;
and, as our Company stands, I think, she might undertake it.

When I told her, you had been pleased to name her for it, she blamed me for
not letting her know it, that she might have thanked you for your good Opinion
of her. She now desires me to tell you, she is highly obliged to you, and if
you still continue in that Opinion, she will do you all the Justice that lies
in her Power.

Next time your Affairs bring you into Covent Garden, I should be proud to kiss
your Hands. I am,

SIR, Your most faithful, and most obedient Servant, B. BOOTH.

LETTER LII. From Mr. BOOTH, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Sunday Morning. SIR,
I HAD answered yours last Night, but it came to my Hands as I was dressing,
about Half an Hour before the Play began.

I confess I am under some Difficulty, how to account for the Failure of so
good a Play. But notwithstanding its present Reception, I am positively, and
absolutely of Opinion, that after it has slept some time, it will appear again
upon the Stage, with a much better Grace, and continue in the Stock in the
first Form of Tragedy for ever. My Reasons for this are, as follow:

If you please to remember, I hinted to you, that (as the Town has been lately
led, and managed) there was a kind of Necessity to form and prepare a strong
Body to support even its real Merit in the first Run of it; and I have often
thought the best Tragedy not supported by this necessary, scandalous Artifice,
would naturally sink in five or six Days, at most: The Fate of K. H. has
sufficiently confirmed that Opinion.

However, though there is a good deal in what is abovementioned, I take the main
Cause of its Failure to proceed from what follows.

I find by some few Persons, who are highly pleased with that noble Simplicity,
and Decency, that runs quite through the Play, that the Multitude in general
look on it, not as a new Play, but as a Play altered from Shakespeare: The many
Beauties you have improved from him, and some noted Speeches, you have made use
of with no very material Alterations (which was certainly well judged), have
possessed the gross Imaginations of the Audience, that most of the fine
Passages of your own, are his too; the two Speeches of Justice, and Mercy, at
the Council Table, and Harry's Reflection, when he first hears of the Treason,
are universally mistaken for Shakespeare: This I have found from some, whose
Education, Understanding, and Acquaintance with Shakespeare, I imagined, might
have taught 'em better: And yet their knowing his Manner of Writing so well,
perhaps, might the sooner lead 'em into the Mistake.

Add to this, that some Understrappers of Parnassus, and the Partisans of
the other House, have improved this Notion of its being a Play of Shakespeare's
not very much altered. Now, Sir, allowing what I have observed above to be
certainly the Game played upon K. H. I can no longer wonder, that his Success
is little more, than what a good revived Play commonly meets with.

Far be it from me to profane K. H. with odious Comparisons; but give me Leave
to observe to you, that C^r once brought the Double Gallant upon the Stage,
which was made up of Hints stolen from a Play of Burnaby's, and another of
Centlivre's, both heartily damned the first Night, many Years before; as soon
as the good-natured Town found him out, they resented his calling it a new
Play, and hounded it in the most outrageous Manner. Two Years after we revived
it, it met with most extravagant Success, and it has continued in the Stock
ever since, and never fails of a great Audience.

The Kind Impostor, though taken (I mean the Hints only) from a Translation of a
Spanish Play acted about Thirty Years ago, was damned, at its first Appearance,
only because it was called a new Play; but was revived some time after, and met
with universal Approbation, like the former, and is generally acted twice every
Year.

King Lear, and Timon of Athens, met with the same Fate, from the same Reasons,
at their first Appearance; but have both proved excellent Stock-Plays upon
their being revived.

Thus, if it can be artfully insinuated to the Town, that the Managers, or an
Author, would pass an altered Play upon 'em for a new one, That alone would
make 'em outrageous after three or four Days, and give the Multitude an
Opportunity (which they never let slip) of exerting their proper Qualities.
Audiences are never guided by Reason, but always by Prepossession.

I believe, when you fairly consider what I have said to you, the present
Disappointment will give you less Surprise. I assure you, the Play was more
applauded the second Night, than the first; because it was infinitely better
acted. As to my own Part, the Concern I was under for the Success of it, the
first Night, threw me into the utmost Confusion. I should be extremely pleased,
if you would give yourself the Trouble of seeing it acted Tomorrow Night. Come
but behind the Scenes, and we will place you in some Corner, where you shall be
invisible to the Audience. Dear Sir, let me prevail upon you to come. I like
your Preface; there is a very decent Scorn, and a mettled Contempt of the Town,
in it. You have hindered me from going to Church this Morning, and I have tired
your Patience, to be revenged of you. I am, Sir, with the utmost Regard and
Sincerity,

Your most faithful, and most obedient Servant, B. BOOTH.
Richard the Third had the same Fate with the other altered Plays.



LETTER LIII. From Mr. BOOTH, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Charles-str. June 19. 1732. SIR,
WERE I not well assured, that Mr. Hill is the best-natur'd Gentleman living, I
should not expect a favorable Answer to the Request I now make to him in
behalf of Mr. V^r.

I know you have sufficient Reason not to be pleased with the Taste of the
Town, which is, as it always was, and as it ever will be. -- Mr. Betterton
observed to me many Years ago, that Don Carlos succeeded much better than
either Venice Preserved or the Orphan, and was infinitely more applauded and
followed for many Years. -- We know what Reception Paradise Lost met with in
the Author's Lifetime. -- In short, Rome and Athens were full as partial, or
rather heedless, in observing the Merit of living Authors, as London. -- In the
former City, Fannius had more Hearers than Horace. -- In the latter City,
Euripides, so justly admired by all Posterity, could not stand the Ridicule of
Aristophanes, but chose to die in voluntary Banishment, to avoid the Flouts of
the People; and we may conclude, that Sophocles himself escaped the Burlesque
of that Buffoon Comic (for such he was, notwithstanding his Merit in other
Respects), only because he was a Man of Quality and Fortune. -- So that, upon
the Whole, I may venture to affirm, that Posterity only will do Justice to Mr.
Hill, who was ever above the low Artifice of forming Cabals to support his
Reputation. -- Mr. Addison was so sensible of this Truth, that he took whole
Years to bespeak and court Friends, in order to secure the Success of Cato. --
And is it not thus with Preferments in general, both civil and ecclesiastical?
Do not the Meritorious fail, while the industrious Levee-Haunter runs away with
the Prize?

I take the Liberty of saying thus much to you upon this Subject, because I
have been told, you are determined to write no more for the Stage: I confess, I
would a little soften that Resolution, if I could, in regard to Mr. V^r, and
hope to prevail upon you to touch up his Tragedy, and make it fit for the
Stage: And when I assure you, that your Assistance in this Affair may be a
Means to make him easy, and happy in his Circumstances, I flatter myself, that
your generous Disposition will need no other Motive to engage you in so good an
Office -- I am, dear Sir, with much Respect and Sincerity,

Your most obedient humble Servant, B. BOOTH.

LETTER LIVE. From Mr. BOOTH, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Charles-str. Dec. 24. 1732. SIR,
I AM every way obliged to you, and shall ever acknowledge your Favors.

As to the Affairs of the Playhouse, Half a Dozen such Farces, as The Devil in
the Wine-Cellar, and one Pantomime, would restore Drury Lane -- But where shall
we find them? I long to talk with you on this Subject, and upon another of much
greater Consequence to me, I mean my Health. I have not forgot the Drops you
brought me, but I durst not take them at that Time, because I dreaded the
Colic, which has now left me. -- You are sensible, Sir, to what little Purpose
it is to talk of Jaundices, overheated Blood, Obstructions, etc. unless it be
with the Unhappy, who have felt those Distempers. -- Till I was sick myself, I
had as confused a Notion of the Disorders occasioned by a Fever, as the Deaf
have of Sounds, or the Blind of Colors.

I know Mr. V^r fancies, I could act, I pleased; but he is mistaken -- at least
he thinks, I could speak a Prologue; but he is mistaken in that too. -- I have
often told him, I am not able -- and that I am so unhappy, at this Time, is a
double Affliction to me; because Mr. Hill seems to wish I would do it, in so
engaging a Manner, that all Excuses, but that of Incapacity, would be
unpardonable.

I had answered yours sooner, had I not been prevented from writing by this
open, warm Weather, which is too apt to discompose me. A hard Frost agrees best
with me.

I have a thousand Things to say to you. You will pardon me, if I flatter
myself with the Hopes of seeing you shortly. I am, Sir, with utmost Respect and
Sincerity,

Your most obliged, and most humble Servant, B. BOOTH.
P. S. I could be lavish in the Praises of your Tragedy. -- If it meet not with
deserved Success, we must hereafter regale our Audiences, as the Ghost in the
Libertine does Don John, and his Companions, with the Liquor they most delight
in.



LETTER LV. From Mr. WILKS, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Feb. 25. 1730. SIR,
FROM the Observations you have been pleased to make of the Conduct,
Sentiments, and Diction, of Eurydice; permit me to say, that, without
Exception, I think you the best Judge of Dramatic Performance, in all its
Branches, I have ever known. It were to be wished, that every Spectator had
your Penetration, and could so justly distinguish the different Passions, and
the Manner of working 'em. -- No Actor, then, could hope for a favorable
Reception, but from his Endeavors, upon all Occasions, to copy Nature: But,
alas! the Taste, in general, is so depraved, that there is little or no
Applause to be gained, in Tragedy, but at the Expense of Lungs. I am,
therefore, the less concerned, that (by the Course of Years) I have Reason to
think myself so near my Exit. I should be proud, however, of an Opportunity to
tell you how much I am,

SIR, Your Admirer, and obliged humble Servant, R. WILKS.

LETTER LVI. From Mr. WILKS, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Bow-str. Sept. 24. 1731. SIR,
I HAVE read your Play with vast Pleasure, and Mr. Cibber highly approves of
it; but, if Athelwold be the Part you design for me, I have too much Reason to
fear, that it is next to impossible, at my Time of Day, to do it common Justice;
and if I decline it, from a thorough Conviction of my own Insufficiency (which
is truly the Case), I am sure, I may depend upon your Justice, and Goodnature,
to excuse me.

I should be very sorry, after some little Success in my Business, to run the
Hazard of falling under your Censure, by a very weak Performance of so capital
a Part, which requires not only more Youth and Vigor, than I am Master of; but
all the Requisites, that are necessary to form a complete Actor.

If you will be pleased to let me know, in what Manner you design to cast it, I
will order the Parts to be writ out immediately, that it may be ready for
acting, about the Time you mention. I am,

SIR, Your most obliged, and most obedient humble Servant, R. WILKS.

LETTER LVII. From Mr. WILKS, To AARON HILL, Esquire
Bow-str. Oct. 10. 1731. SIR,
IF I said any thing about the Part of Athelwold, that amounted to a Promise,
it was from the strong Desire which I had to appear in a Play, so highly, and
so deservedly recommended; but, to my greater Mortification, I find, that the
Affair of Tragedy (at least for any Continuance) is over with me: I may,
perhaps, rub through my Parts in Comedy; but daily Experience teaches me, that it
is absolutely out of my Power to support the Weight of such a Character as
Athelwold, during the Run of a new Play, that, I am persuaded, must make its
Way, in spite of Prejudice.

If anybody should make me the Compliment of asking, why I did not appear in
the Part of Athelwold, I shall deal frankly with him, as I have done with you,
and tell him the true Reason; and my Sentiments of the Play will be better
justified, by the Manner in which I speak of it every where.

You are so obliging to ask me (in case the Play were to come on without me),
Who else will be capable of supporting the Character of Athelwold? -- Mr.
Mills, with your Instructions, I am sure, will do it well; and he must be a
wretched Actor, indeed, who is not qualified to enter into the Beauties of the
most difficult Part, by the Assistance, which you are able to give him: And
whoever has the Pleasure of conversing with Mr. Hill, will be fully convinced
of this Truth. I am,

SIR, Your most obliged, and obedient humble Servant, R. WILKS.
P. S. I am far from having changed my Opinion, as to the Merits of the Play;
and I heartily wish, it were as much in my Power, as it is in my Inclination,
to act conformably to your Sentiments, in every thing.



LETTER LVIII. From Dr. BLINMAN, To AARON HILL, Esquire
May 21. 1736. SIR,
I Should be glad of the Honor of renewing our Acquaintance, having a very
great Esteem for you: I brought you once a Gold The Medal, abovementioned, was
a Compliment from the Czarina, Confort of the great Peter Alexiowitz (by his
own Order), to Aaron Hill, Esquire for a Poem, called The Northern Star, which he
wrote in Justice to that truly Great Monarch about the Year 1718. and which had
reached his Eye and Regard, by means of some foreign Translation.
Medal, from the late great Empress of Russia. So if you please to appoint any
Place, and direct to Doctor Blinman, at Mr. Williams's, over against White's
Chocolate-house, St. James's, I shall be ready to meet you; who am with all
Respect,

Your most obedient humble Servant, J. BLINMAN.

FINIS.

