WINDSOR-FOREST.

To the Right Honorable GEORGE Lord LANSDOWN.

By Mr. POPE.

Non injussa cano: Te nostrae, Vare, Myricae
Te Nemus omne canet; nec Phaebo gratior ulla est
Quam sibi quae Vari praescripsit Pagina nomen.
Virg. LONDON: Printed for Bernard Lintott at the Cross-Keys in Fleet Street.
1713.

WINDSOR-FOREST.
To the Right Honorable GEORGE Lord LANSDOWN.
THY Forests, Windsor! and thy green Retreats,
At once the Monarch's and the Muse's Seats,
Invite my Lays. Be present, Sylvan Maids!
Unlock your Springs, and open all your Shades.
Granville commands: Your Aid O Muses bring!
What Muse for Granville can refuse to sing?
The Groves of Eden, vanished now so long,
Live in Description, and look green in Song:
These, were my Breast inspired with equal Flame,
Like them in Beauty, should be like in Fame.
Here Hills and Vales, the Woodland and the Plain,
Here Earth and Water seem to strive again,
Not Chaos-like together crushed and bruised,
But as the World, harmoniously confused:
Where Order in Variety we see,
And where, though all things differ, all agree.
Here waving Groves a checkered Scene display,
And part admit and part exclude the Day;
As some coy Nymph her Lover's warm Address
Nor quite indulges, nor can quite repress.
There, interspersed in Lawns and opening Glades,
Thin Trees arise that shun each others Shades.
Here in full Light the russet Plains extend;
There wrapped in Clouds the blueish Hills ascend:
Even the wild Heath displays her Purple Dies,
And' midst the Desert fruitful Fields arise,
That crowned with tufted Trees and springing Corn,
Like verdant Isles the sable Waste adorn.
Let India boast her Plants, nor envy we
The weeping Amber or the balmy Tree,
While by our Oaks the precious Loads are born,
And Realms commanded which those Trees adorn.
Not proud Olympus yields a nobler Sight,
Though Gods assembled grace his towering Height,
Than what more humble Mountains offer here,
Where, in their Blessings, all those Gods appear.
See Pan with Flocks, with Fruits Pomona crowned,
Here blushing Flora paints the enameled Ground,
Here Ceres' Gifts in waving Prospect stand,
And nodding tempt the joyful Reaper's Hand,
Rich Industry sits smiling on the Plains,
And Peace and Plenty tell, a STUART reigns.
Not thus the Land appeared in Ages past,
A dreary Desert and a gloomy Waste,
To Savage Beasts and The Forest Laws.
Savage Laws a Prey,
And Kings more furious and severe than they:
Who claimed the Skies, dispeopled Air and Floods,
The lonely Lords of empty Wilds and Woods.
Cities laid waste, they stormed the Dens and Caves
(For wiser Brutes were backward to be Slaves)
What could be free, when lawless Beasts obeyed,
And even the Elements a Tyrant swayed?
In vain kind Seasons swelled the teeming Grain,
Soft Showers distilled, and Suns grew warm in vain;
The Swain with Tears to Beasts his Labor yields,
And famished dies amidst his ripened Fields.
No wonder Savages or Subjects slain
Were equal Crimes in a Despotick Reign;
Both doomed alike for sportive Tyrants bled,
But Subjects starved while Savages were fed.
Proud Nimrod first the bloody Chase began,
A mighty Hunter, and his Prey was Man.
Our haughty Norman boasts that barbarous Name,
And makes his trembling Slaves the Royal Game.
The Alluding to the New Forest, and the Tyrannies exercised there by William
the First.
Fields are ravished from the industrious Swains,
From Men their Cities, and from Gods their Fanes:
The levelled Towns with Weeds lie covered over,
The hollow Winds through naked Temples roar;
Round broken Columns clasping Ivy twined;
Over Heaps of Ruins stalked the stately Hind;
The Fox obscene to gaping Tombs retires,
And Wolves with Howling fill the sacred Quires.
Awed by his Nobles, by his Commons cursed,
The Oppressor ruled Tyrannick where he durst,
Stretched over the Poor, and Church, his Iron Rod,
And treats alike his Vassals and his God.
Whom even the Saxon spared, and bloody Dane,
The wanton Victims of his Sport remain.
But see the Man who spacious Regions gave
A Waste for Beasts, himself denied a Grave!
Stretched on the Lawn his Richard, second Son of William the Conqueror.
second Hope survey,
At once the Chaser and at once the Prey.
Lo Rufus, tugging at the deadly Dart,
Bleeds in the Forest, like a wounded Heart.
Succeeding Monarchs heard the Subjects Cries,
Nor saw displeased the peaceful Cottage rise.
Then gathering Flocks on unknown Mountains fed,
Over sandy Wilds were yellow Harvests spread,
The Forests wondered at the unusual Grain,
And secret Transports touched the conscious Swain.
Fair Liberty, Britannia's Goddess, rears
Her cheerful Head, and leads the golden Years.
Ye vigorous Swains! while Youth ferments your Blood,
And purer Spirits swell the sprightly Flood,
Now range the Hills, the thickest Woods beset,
Wind the shrill Horn, or spread the waving Net.
When milder Autumn Summer's Heat succeeds,
And in the new-shorn Field the Partridge feeds,
Before his Lord the ready Spaniel bounds,
Panting with Hope, he tries the furrowed Grounds,
But when the tainted Gales the Game betray,
Couched close he lies, and meditates the Prey;
Secure they trust the unfaithful Field, beset,
Till hovering over 'em sweeps the swelling Net.
Thus (if small Things we may with great compare)
When Albion sends her eager Sons to War,
Pleased, in the Gen'ral's Sight, the Host lie down
Sudden, before some unsuspecting Town,
The Young, the Old, one Instant makes our Prize,
And high in Air Britannia's Standard flies.
See! from the Brake the whirring Pheasant springs,
And mounts exulting on triumphant Wings;
Short is his Joy! he feels the fiery Wound,
Flutters in Blood, and panting beats the Ground.
Ah! what avail his glossie, varying Dies,
His Purple Crest, and Scarlet-circled Eyes,
The vivid Green his shining Plumes unfold;
His painted Wings, and Breast that flames with Gold?
Nor yet, when moist Arcturus clouds the Sky,
The Woods and Fields their pleasing Toils deny.
To Plains with well-breathed Beagles we repair,
And trace the Mazes of the circling Hare.
(Beasts, taught by us, their Fellow Beasts pursue,
And learn of Man each other to undo.)
With slaught'ring Guns the unwearied Fowler roves,
When Frosts have whitened all the naked Groves;
Where Doves in Flocks the leafless Trees o'ershade,
And lonely Woodcocks haunt the watery Glade.
He lifts the Tube, and levels with his Eye;
Strait a short Thunder breaks the frozen Sky.
Often, as in Airy Rings they skim the Heath,
The clamorous Plovers feel the Leaden Death:
Often as the mounting Larks their Notes prepare,
They fall, and leave their little Lives in Air.
In genial Spring, beneath the quivering Shade
Where cooling Vapors breathe along the Mead,
The patient Fisher takes his silent Stand
Intent, his Angle trembling in his Hand;
With Looks unmoved, he hopes the Scaly Breed,
And eyes the dancing Cork and bending Reed.
Our plenteous Streams a various Race supply;
The bright-ey'd Perch with Fins of Tyrian Dye,
The silver Eel, in shining Volumes rolled,
The yellow Carp, in Scales bedrop'd with Gold,
Swift Trouts, diversified with Crimson Stains,
And Pykes, the Tyrants of the watery Plains.
Now Cancer glows with Phoebus' fiery Car;
The Youth rush eager to the Sylvan War;
Swarm over the Lawns, the Forest Walks surround,
Rowze the fleet Heart, and cheer the opening Hound.
The impatient Courser pants in every Vein,
And pawing, seems to beat the distant Plain,
Hills, Vales, and Floods appear already crossed,
And ere he starts, a thousand Steps are lost.
See! the bold Youth strain up the threatening Steep,
Rush through the Thickets, down the Valleys sweep,
Hang over their Coursers Heads with eager Speed,
And Earth rolls back beneath the flying Steed.
Let old Arcadia boast her spacious Plain,
The Immortal Huntress, and her Virgin Train;
Nor envy Windsor! since thy Shades have seen
As bright a Goddess, and as chaste a Queen;
Whose Care, like hers, protects the Sylvan Reign,
The Earth's fair Light, and Empress of the Main.
Here, as old Bards have sung, Diana strayed
Bathed in the Springs, or sought the cooling Shade;
Here armed with Silver Bows, in early Dawn,
Her buskined Virgins traced the Dewy Lawn.
Above the rest a rural Nymph was famed,
Thy Offspring, Thames! the fair Lodona named,
( Lodona's Fate, in long Oblivion cast,
The Muse shall sing, and what she sings shall last)
Scarce could the Goddess from her Nymph be known,
But by the Crescent and the golden Zone,
She scorned the Praise of Beauty, and the Care;
A Belt her Waste, a Fillet binds her Hair,
A painted Quiver on her Shoulder sounds,
And with her Dart the flying Deer she wounds.
It chanced, as eager of the Chase the Maid
Beyond the Forest's verdant Limits strayed,
Pan saw and loved, and furious with Desire
Pursued her Flight; her Flight increased his Fire.
Not half so swift the trembling Doves can fly,
When the fierce Eagle cleaves the liquid Sky;
Not half so swiftly the fierce Eagle moves,
When through the Clouds he drives the trembling Doves;
As from the God with fearful Speed she flew,
As did the God with equal Speed pursue.
Now fainting, sinking, pale, the Nymph appears;
Now close behind his sounding Steps she hears;
And now his Shadow reached her as she run,
(His Shadow lengthened by the setting Sun)
And now his shorter Breath with sultry Air
Pants on her Neck, and fans her parting Hair.
In vain on Father Thames she calls for Aid,
Nor could Diana help her injured Maid.
Faint, breathless, thus she prayed, nor prayed in vain;
" Ah Cynthia! ah -- though banished from thy Train,
" Let me, O let me, to the Shades repair,
" My native Shades -- there weep, and murmur there.
She said, and melting as in Tears she lay,
In a soft, silver Stream dissolved away.
The silver Stream her Virgin Coldness keeps,
For ever murmurs, and for ever weeps;
Still bears the The River Loddon.
Name the hapless Virgin bore,
And bathes the Forest where she ranged before.
In her chaste Current often the Goddess laves,
And with Celestial Tears augments the Waves.
Often in her Glass the musing Shepherd spies
The headlong Mountains and the downward Skies,
The watery Landscape of the pendant Woods,
And absent Trees that tremble in the Floods;
In the clear azure Gleam the Flocks are seen,
And floating Forests paint the Waves with Green.
Through the fair Scene roll slow the lingering Streams,
Then foaming pour along, and rush into the Thames.
Thou too, great Father of the British Floods!
With joyful Pride survey'st our lofty Woods,
Where towering Oaks their spreading Honors rear,
And future Navies on thy Banks appear.
Not Neptune's self from all his Floods receives
A wealthier Tribute, than to thine he gives.
No Seas so rich, so full no Streams appear,
No Lake so gentle, and no Spring so clear.
Not fabled Po more swells the Poets Lays,
While through the Skies his shining Current strays,
Than thine, which visits Windsor's famed Abodes,
To grace the Mansion of our earthly Gods.
Nor all his Stars a brighter Luster show,
Than the fair Nymphs that gild thy Shore below:
Here Jove himself, subdued by Beauty still,
Might change Olympus for a nobler Hill.
Happy the Man whom this bright Court approves,
His Sovereign favors, and his Country loves;
Happy next him who to these Shades retires,
Whom Nature charms, and whom the Muse inspires,
Whom humbler Joys of home-felt Quiet please,
Successive Study, Exercise and Ease.
He gathers Health from Herbs the Forest yields,
And of their fragrant Physic spoils the Fields:
With Chymic Art exalts the Min'ral Powers,
And draws the Aromatic Souls of Flowers.
Now marks the Course of rolling Orbs on high;
Over figured Worlds now travels with his Eye.
Of ancient Writ unlocks the learned Store,
Consults the Dead, and lives past Ages over.
Or wandering thoughtful in the silent Wood,
Attends the Duties of the Wise and Good,
TO observe a Mean, be to himself a Friend,
To follow Nature, and regard his End.
Or looks on Heaven with more than mortal Eyes,
Bids his free Soul expatiate in the Skies,
Amidst her Kindred Stars familiar roam,
Survey the Region, and confess her Home!
Such was the Life great Scipio once admired,
Thus Atticus, and Trumbal thus retired
Ye sacred Nine! that all my Soul possess,
Whose Raptures fire me, and whose Visions bless,
Bear me, oh bear me to sequestered Scenes
Of Bow'ry Mazes and surrounding Greens;
To Thames's Banks which fragrant Breezes fill,
Or where ye Muses sport on Cooper's Hill.
(On Cooper's Hill eternal Wreaths shall grow,
While lasts the Mountain, or while Thames shall flow)
I seem through consecrated Walks to rove,
And hear soft Music dye along the Grove;
Led by the Sound I roam from Shade to Shade,
By God-like Poets Venerable made:
Here his first Lays Majestic Denham sung;
There the last Numbers flowed from Mr. Cowley died at Chertsey on the Borders
of the Forest, and was from thence conveyed to Westminster.
Cowley's Tongue.
O early lost! what Tears the River shed
When the sad Pomp along his Banks was led?
His drooping Swans on every Note expire,
And on his Willows hung each Muse's Lyre.
Since Fate relentless stopped their Heavenly Voice,
No more the Forests ring, or Groves rejoice;
Who now shall charm the Shades where Cowley strung
His living Harp, and lofty Denham sung?
But hark! the Groves rejoice, the Forest rings!
Are these revived? or is it Granville sings?
It Is yours, my Lord, to bless our soft Retreats,
And call the Muses to their ancient Seats,
To paint anew the flowery Sylvan Scenes,
To crown the Forests with Immortal Greens,
Make Windsor Hills in lofty Numbers rise,
And lift her Turrets nearer to the Skies;
To sing those Honors you deserve to wear,
And add new Luster to her Silver Star.
Here noble Henry Howard E. of Surrey, one of the first Resiners of the English
Poetry; famous in the Time of Henry the VIIIth for his Sonnets, the Scene of
many of which is laid at Windsor.
Surrey felt the sacred Rage,
Surrey, the Granville of a former Age:
Matchless his Pen, victorious was his Lance;
Bold in the Lists, and graceful in the Dance:
In the same Shades the Cupids tuned his Lyre,
To the same Notes, of Love, and soft Desire:
Fair Geraldine, bright Object of his Vow,
Then filled the Groves, as heavenly Myra now.
Oh would thou sing what Heroes Windsor bore,
What Kings first breathed upon her winding Shore,
Or raise old Warriors whose adored Remains
In weeping Vaults her hallowed Earth contains!
With Edward III. born here.
Edward's Acts adorn the shining Page,
Stretch his long Triumphs down through every Age,
Draw Kings enchain'd; and Cressi's glorious Field,
The Lillies blazing on the Regal Shield.
Then, from her Roofs when Verrio's Colors fall,
And leave inanimate the naked Wall;
Still in thy Song should vanquished France appear,
And bleed for ever under Britain's Spear.
Let softer Strains Ill-fated Henry VI.
Henry mourn,
And Palms Eternal flourish round his Urn.
Here over the Martyr-King the Marble weeps,
And fast beside him, once-fear'd Edward IV.
Edward sleeps:
Whom not the extended Albion could contain,
From old Belerium to the German Main,
The Grave unites; where even the Great find Rest,
And blended lie the Oppressor and the Oppressed!
Make sacred Charles's Tomb for ever known,
(Obscure the Place, and uninscrib'd the Stone)
Oh Fact accursed! What Tears has Albion shed,
Heavens! what new Wounds, and how her old have bled?
She saw her Sons with purple Deaths expire,
Her sacred Domes involved in rolling Fire.
A dreadful Series of Intestine Wars,
In glorious Triumphs, and dishonest Scars.
At length great ANNA said -- Let Discord cease!
She said, the World obeyed, and all was Peace!
In that blessed Moment, from his Oozy Bed
Old Father Thames advanced his reverend Head.
His Tresses dropped with Dews, and over the Stream
His shining Horns diffused a golden Gleam:
Engraved on his Urn appeared the Moon, that guides
His swelling Waters, and alternate Tides;
The figured Streams in Waves of Silver rolled,
And on their Banks Augusta rose in Gold.
Around his Throne the Sea-born Brothers stood,
That swell with Tributary Urns his Flood.
First the famed Authors of his ancient Name,
The winding Isis, and the fruitful Tame:
The Kennet swift, for silver Eels renowned;
The Loddon slow, with verdant Alders crowned:
Cole, whose clear Streams his flowery Islands lave;
And chalky Wey, that rolls a milky Wave:
The blue, transparent Vandalis appears;
The gulphy Lee his sedgy Tresses rears:
And sullen Mole, that hides his diving Flood;
And silent Darent, stained with Danish Blood.
High in the midst, upon his Urn reclined,
(His Seagreen Mantle waving with the Wind)
The God appeared; he turned his azure Eyes
Where Windsor-Domes and pompous Turrets rise,
Then bowed and spoke; the Winds forget to roar,
And the hushed Waves glide softly to the Shore.
Hail Sacred Peace! hail long-expected Days,
Which Thames's Glory to the Stars shall raise!
Though Tyber's Streams immortal Rome behold,
Though foaming Hermus swells with Tides of Gold,
From Heaven it self though sev'nfold Nilus flows,
And Harvests on a hundred Realms bestows;
These now no more shall be the Muse's Themes,
Lost in my Fame, as in the Sea their Streams.
Let Volga's Banks with Iron Squadrons shine,
And Groves of Lances glitter on the Rhine,
Let barbarous Ganges arm a servile Train;
Be mine the Blessings of a peaceful Reign.
No more my Sons shall dye with British Blood
Red Iber's Sands, or Ister's foaming Flood;
Safe on my Shore each unmolested Swain
Shall tend the Flocks, or reap the bearded Grain;
The shady Empire shall retain no Trace
Of War or Blood, but in the Sylvan Chase,
The Trumpets sleep, while cheerful Horns are blown,
And Arms employed on Birds and Beasts alone.
Behold! the ascending Villa's on my Side
Project long Shadows over the Crystal Tide.
Behold! Augusta's glittering Spires increase,
And Temples rise, the beauteous Works of Peace.
I see, I see where two fair Cities bend
Their ample Bow, a new White Hall ascend!
There mighty Nations shall inquire their Doom,
The World's great Oracle in Times to come;
There Kings shall sue, and suppliant States be seen
Once more to bend before a British QUEEN.
Thy Trees, fair Windsor! now shall leave their Woods,
And half thy Forests rush into my Floods,
Bear Britain's Thunder, and her Cross display,
To the bright Regions of the rising Day;
Tempt Icy Seas, where scarce the Waters roll,
Where clearer Flames glow round the frozen Pole;
Or under Southern Skies exalt their Sails,
Led by new Stars, and born by spicy Gales!
For me the Balm shall bleed, and Amber flow,
The Coral redden, and the Ruby glow,
The Pearly Shell its lucid Globe infold,
And Phoebus warm the ripening Ore to Gold.
The Time shall come, when free as Seas or Wind
Unbounded Thames shall flow for all Mankind,
Whole Nations enter with each swelling Tide,
And Oceans join whom they did first divide;
Earth's distant Ends our Glory shall behold,
And the new World launch forth to seek the Old.
Then Ships of uncouth Form shall stem the Tide,
And Feathered People crowd my wealthy Side,
While naked Youth and painted Chiefs admire
Our Speech, our Color, and our strange Attire!
Oh stretch thy Reign, fair Peace! from Shore to Shore,
Till Conquest cease, and Slavery be no more:
Till the freed Indians in their native Groves
Reap their own Fruits, and woo their Sable Loves,
Peru once more a Race of Kings behold,
And other Mexico's be roof'd with Gold.
Exiled by Thee from Earth to deepest Hell,
In Brazen Bonds shall barbarous Discord dwell:
Gigantick Pride, pale Terror, gloomy Care,
And mad Ambition, shall attend her there.
There purple Vengeance bathed in Gore retires,
Her Weapons blunted, and extinct her Fires:
There hateful Envy her own Snakes shall feel,
And Persecution mourn her broken Wheel:
There Faction roars, Rebellion bites her Chain,
And gasping Furies thirst for Blood in vain.
Here cease thy Flight, nor with unhallowed Lays
Touch the fair Fame of Albion's Golden Days.
The Thoughts of Gods let Granville's Verse recite,
And bring the Scenes of opening Fate to Light.
My humble Muse, in unambitious Strains,
Paints the green Forests and the flowery Plains,
Where Peace descending bids her Olives spring,
And scatters Blessings from her Dove-like Wing.
Even I more sweetly pass my careless Days,
Pleased in the silent Shade with empty Praise;
Enough for me, that to the listening Swains
First in these Fields I sung the Sylvan Strains.
FINIS.

