THE SECOND EPISTLE OF THE SECOND BOOK OF HORACE, IMITATED by Mr. POPE.

Ludentis speciem dabit and torquebitur --

LONDON: Printed for R. DODSLEY, at Tully' s Head, in Pall Mall.

M.DCC.XXXVII.

(Price One Shilling.)

THE SECOND EPISTLE OF THE SECOND BOOK of HORACE.
Flore, bono claroque fidelis amice Neroni.
DEar Col'nel! Cobham's and your Country's Friend!
You love a Verse, take such as I can send.
Si quis forte, etc.
A Frenchman comes, presents you with his Boy,
Bows and begins. -- "This Lad, Sir, is of Blois:
"Observe his Shape how clean! his Locks how curled!
"My only Son, I Would have him see the World:
"His French is pure; his Voice too -- you shall hear --
"Sir, he is your Slave, for twenty pound a year.
"Mere Wax as yet, you fashion him with ease,
"Your Barber, Cook, Upholst'rer, what you please.
"A perfect Genius at an Opera-Song --
"To say too much, might do my Honor wrong:
"Take him with all his Virtues, on my word;
"His whole Ambition was to serve a Lord,
"But Sir, to you, with what would I not part?
"Though faith, I fear 'twill break his Mother's heart.
"Once, (and but once) I caught him in a Lie,
"And then, unwhipp'd, he had the grace to cry:
"The Fault he has I fairly shall reveal,
"(Could you o'erlook but that) -- it is," to steal.
Ille ferat pretium, etc.
If, after this, you took the graceless Lad,
Could you complain, my Friend, he proved so bad?
Faith, in such case, if you should prosecute,
I think Sir Godfry should decide the Suit;
Who sent the Thief who stole the Cash, away,
And punished him that put it in his way.
Dixi me pigrum, etc.
Consider then, and judge me in this light;
I told you when I went, I could not write;
You said the same; and are you discontent
With Laws, to which you gave your own assent?
Nay worse, to ask for Verse at such a time!
Do You think me good for nothing but to rhyme?
Luculli miles, etc.
In ANNA'S Wars, a Soldier poor and old,
Had dearly earned a little purse of Gold:
Tired with a tedious March, one luckless night,
He slept, poor Dog! and lost it, to a doit.
This put the Man in such a desperate Mind,
Between Revenge, and Grief, and Hunger joined,
Against the Foe, himself, and all Mankind,
He leapt the Trenches, scaled a Castle-Wall,
Tore down a Standard, took the Fort and all.
"Prodigious well!" his great Commander cried,
Gave him much Praise, and some Reward beside.
Next pleased his Excellence a Town to batter;
(Its Name I know not, and it is no great matter)
"Go on, my Friend (he cried) see yonder Walls!
"Advance and conquer! go where Glory calls!
"More Honors, more Rewards, attend the Brave" --
Don't you remember what Reply he gave?
"Do You think me, noble General, such a Sot?
"Let him take Castles who has never a Groat."
Romae nutriri mihi contigit, etc.
Bred up at home, full early I begun
To read in Greek, the Wrath of Peleus' Son.
Besides, my Father taught me from a Lad,
The better Art to know the good from bad:
(And little sure imported to remove,
To hunt for Truth in Maudlin's learned Grove.)
But knottier Points we knew not half so well,
Deprived us soon of our Paternal Cell;
And certain Laws, by Suff'rers thought unjust,
Denied all Posts of Profit or of Trust:
Hopes after Hopes of pious Papists failed,
While mighty WILLIAM'S thundering Arm prevailed.
For Right Hereditary taxed and fined,
He stuck to Poverty with Peace of Mind;
And me, the Muses helped to undergo it;
Convict a Papist He, and I a Poet.
But (thanks to Homer) since I live and thrive,
Indebted to no Prince or Peer alive,
Sure I should want the Care of ten Dr. MONROE, Physician to Bedlam Hospital.
Monroes,
If I would scribble, rather than repose.
Singula de nobis anni, etc.
Years foll'wing Years, steal something every day,
At last they steal us from our selves away;
In one our Frolicks, one Amusements end,
In one a Mistress drops, in one a Friend:
This subtle Thief of Life, this paltry Time,
What will it leave me, if it snatch my Rhyme?
If every Wheel of that unwearied Mill
That turned ten thousand Verses, now stands still.
Denique non omnes, etc.
But after all, what would you have me do?
When out of twenty I can please not two;
When this Heroicks only deigns to praise,
Sharp Satire that, and that Pindaric lays?
One likes the Pheasant's wing, and one the leg;
The Vulgar boil, the Learned roast an Egg;
Hard Task! to hit the Palate of such Guests,
When Oldfield loves, what Dar -- n -- f detests.
Praeter caetera, me Romae-ne, etc.
But grant I may relapse, for want of Grace,
Again to rhyme, can London be the Place?
Who there his Muse, or Self, or Soul attends?
In Crowds and Courts, Law, Business, Feasts and Friends?
My Counsel sends to execute a Deed:
A Poet begs me, I will hear him read:
In Palace-Yard at Nine you will find me there --
At Ten for certain, Sir, in Bloomsb'ry-Square --
Before the Lords at Twelve my Cause comes on --
There Is a Rehearsal, Sir, exact at One. --
"Oh but a Wit can study in the Streets,
"And raise his Mind above the Mob he meets."
Not quite so well however as one ought;
A Hackney-Coach may chance to spoil a Thought,
And then a nodding Beam, or Pig of Lead,
God knows, may hurt the very ablest Head.
Have you not seen at Guild-hall's narrow Pass,
Two Aldermen dispute it with an Ass?
And Peers give way, exalted as they are,
Even to their own S-r-v -- nce in a Carr?
Inunc, and versus, etc.
Go, lofty Poet! and in such a Crowd,
Sing thy sonorous Verse -- but not aloud.
Alas! to Grotto's and to Groves we run,
To Ease and Silence, every Muse's Son:
Blackmore himself, for any grand Effort,
Would drink and doze at Two Villages within 3 or 4 Miles of London.
Tooting or Earl's-Court.
How shall I rhyme in this eternal Roar?
How match the Bards whom none ever matched before?
The Man, who stretched in Isis' calm Retreat
To Books and Study gives sev'n years complete,
See! strow'd with learned dust, his Nightcap on,
He walks, an Object new beneath the Sun!
The Boys flock round him, and the People stare:
So stiff, so mute! some Statue, you would swear,
Stepped srom its Pedestal to take the Air.
And here, while Town, and Court, and City roars,
With Mobs, and Duns, and Soldiers, at their doors;
Shall I, in London, act this idle part?
Composing Songs, for Fools to get by heart?
Frater erat Romae, etc.
The Temple late two Brother Sergeants saw,
Who deemed each other Oracles of Law;
With equal Talents, these congenial Souls
One lulled the Exchequer, and one stunned the Rolls;
Each had a Gravity would make you split,
And shook his head at M -- y, as a Wit.
'Twas,"Sir your Law" -- and"Sir, your Eloquence" --
"Yours Cooper's Manner -- and yours Talbot's Sense."
Carmina compono, hic elegos, etc.
we dispose of all poetic Merit,
Yours Milton's Genius, and mine Homer's Spirit.
Call Tibbald Shakespeare, and he will swear the Nine
Dear Cibber! never matched one Ode of thine.
Lord! how we strut through Merlin's Cave, to see
No Poets there, but Stephen, you, and me.
Walk with respect behind, while we at ease
Weave Laurel Crowns, and take what Names we please.
"My dear Tibullus!" if that will not do,
"Let me be Horace, and be Ovid you.
"Or, I Am content, allow me Dryden's strains,
"And you shall rise up Otway for your pains."
Multa fero, ut placeam, etc.
Much do I suffer, much, to keep in peace
This jealous, waspish, wrong-head, rhiming Race;
And much must flatter, if the Whim should bite
To seek applause by printing what I write:
But let the Fit pass over, I Am wise enough,
To stop my ears to their confounded stuff.
Ridentur, mala qui componunt, etc.
In vain, bad Rhimers all mankind reject,
They treat themselves with most profound respect;
It Is to small purpose that you hold your tongue,
Each praised within, is happy all day long.
But how severely with themselves proceed
The Men, who write such Verse as we can read?
Their own strict Judges, not a word they spare
That wants or Force, or Light, or Weight, or Care,
However unwillingly it quits its place,
Nay though at Court (perhaps) it may find grace:
Such they will degrade; and sometimes, in its stead,
In downright Charity revive the dead;
Mark where a bold expressive Phrase appears,
Bright through the rubbish of some hundred years;
Command old words that long have slept, to wake,
Such as wise Bacon, or brave Raleigh spoke;
Or bid the new be English, Ages hence,
(For Use will father what is begot by Sense)
Pour the full Tide of Eloquence along,
Serenely pure, and yet divinely strong,
Rich with the Treasures of each foreign Tongue;
Prune the luxuriant, the uncouth refine,
But show no mercy to an empty line;
Then polish all, with so much life and ease,
You think it is Nature, and a knack to please:
"But Ease in writing flows from Art, not Chance,
"As those move easiest who have learned to dance."
Praetulerim scriptor delirus, etc.
If such the Plague and pains to write by rule,
Better (say I) be pleased, and play the fool;
Call, if you will, bad Rhiming a disease,
It gives men happiness, or leaves them ease.
There lived, in primo Georgii (they record)
A worthy Member, no small Fool, a Lord;
Who, though the House was up, delighted sat,
Heard, noted, answered, as in full Debate:
In all but this, a man of sober Life,
Fond of his Friend, and civil to his Wife,
Not quite a Madman, though a Pasty fell,
And much too wise to walk into a Well:
Him, the damned Doctors and his Friends immured,
They bled, they cupp'd, they purged; in short, they cured:
Whereat the Gentleman began to stare --
My Friends? he cried, p -- x take you for your care!
That from a Patriot of distinguished note,
Have bled and purged me to a simple Vote.
Nimirum sapere est, etc.
Well, on the whole, then Prose must be my fate:
Wisdom (curse on it) will come soon or late.
There is a time when Poets will grow dull:
I Will even leave Verses to the Boys at school:
To Rules of Poetry no more confined,
I learn to smooth and harmonize my Mind,
Teach every Thought within its bounds to roll,
And keep the equal Measure of the Soul.
Quocirca mecum loquor haec, etc.
Soon as I enter at my Country door,
My Mind resumes the thread it dropped before;
Thoughts, which at Hyde-Park-Corner I forgot,
Meet and rejoin me, in my pensive Grott.
There all alone, and Compliments apart,
I ask these sober questions of my Heart.
Si tibi nulla sitim, etc.
If, when the more you drink, the more you crave,
You tell the Doctor; when the more you have,
The more you want, why not with equal ease
Confess as well your Folly, as Disease?
The Heart resolves this matter in a trice,
"Men only feel the Smart, but not the Vice."
Si vulnus tibi, etc.
When golden Angels cease to cure the Evil,
You give all royal Witchcraft to the Devil:
When servile Chaplains cry, that Birth and Place
Indue a Peer with Honor, Truth, and Grace,
Look in that Breast, most dirty D --! be fair,
Say, can you find out one such Lodger there?
Yet still, not heeding what your Heart can teach,
You go to Church to hear these Flatt'rers preach.
Indeed, could Wealth bestow or Wit or Merit,
A grain of Courage, or a spark of Spirit,
The wisest Man might blush, I must agree,
If D *** loved Sixpence, more than he.
Si proprium est, etc.
If there be truth in Law, and Use can give
A Property, that is yours on which you live.
Delightful Abs-court, is its Fields afford
Their Fruits to you, confesses you its Lord:
All He -- te's Hens, nay Partridge, sold to town,
His Ven'son too, a Guinea makes your own:
He bought at thousands, what with better wit
You purchase as you want, and bit by bit;
Now, or long since, what difference will be found?
You pay a Penny, and he paid a Pound.
Emptor Aricini, quondam, etc.
H -- te himself, and such large-acred Men,
Lords of fat E'sham, or of Lincoln Fen,
Buy every stick of Wood that lends them heat,
Buy every Pullct they afford to eat.
Yet these are Wights, who fondly call their own
Half that the Devilish o'erlooks from Lincoln Town.
The Laws of God, as well as of the Land,
Abhor, a Perpetuity should stand:
Estates have wings, and hang in Fortune's power
Si proprium est, etc.
Loose on the point of every wavering Hour;
Ready, by force, or of your own accord,
By sale, at least by death, to change their Lord.
Man? and for ever? Wretch! what would thou have?
Heir urges Heir, like Wave impelling Wave:
All vast Possessions (just the same the case
Whether you call them Villa, Park, or Chase)
Alas, my BATHURST! what will they avail?
Join Cotswold Hills to Saperton's fair Dale,
Let rising Granaries and Temples here,
There mingled Farms and Pyramids appear,
Link Towns to Towns with Avenues of Oak,
Enclose whole Downs in Walls, it is all a joke!
Inexorable Death shall level all,
And Trees, and Stones, and Farms, and Farmer fall.
Gemmas, marmor, ebur, etc.
Gold, Silver, Ivory, Vases sculptured high,
Paint, Marble, Gems, and Robes of Persian Dye,
There are who have not -- and thank Heaven there are
Who, if they have not, think not worth their care.
Cur alter fratrum cessare, etc.
Talk what you will of Taste, my Friend, you will find,
Two of a Face, as soon as of a Mind.
Why, of two Brothers, rich and restless one
Ploughs, burns, manures, and toils from Sun to Sun;
The other slights, for Women, Sports, and Wines,
All Townshend's Turnips, and all Grovenor's Mines:
Why one like Bu -- with Pay and Scorn content,
Bows and votes on, in Court and Parliament;
One, driven by strong Benevolence of Soul,
Shall fly, like Oglethorp, from Pole to Pole:
Is known alone to that Directing Power,
Who forms the Genius in the natal Hour,
That God of Nature, who, within us still,
Inclines our Action, not constrains our Will;
Various of Temper, as of Face or Frame,
Each Individual: His great End the same.
Utar, and ex modico, etc.
Yes, Sir, how small soever be my heap,
A part I will enjoy, as well as keep.
My Heir may sigh, and think it want of Grace
A man so poor would live without a Place:
But sure no Statute in his favor says,
How free, or frugal, I shall pass my days:
I, who at some times spend, at others spare,
Divided between Carelessness and Care.
It Is one thing madly to disperse my store,
Another, not to heed to treasure more;
Glad, like a Boy, to snatch the first good day,
And pleased, if sordid Want be far away.
-- Ego utrum Nave ferar magna an parva, ferar unus and idem.
What is it to me (a Passenger God wot)
Whether my Vessel be first-rate or not?
The Ship it self may make a better figure,
But I that sail, am neither less nor bigger.
I neither strut with every favoring breath,
Nor strive with all the Tempest in my teeth.
In Power, Wit, Figure, Virtue, Fortune, placed
Behind the foremost, and before the last.
Non es avarus, etc.
"But why all this of Avarice? I have none."
I wish you joy, Sir, of a Tyrant gone;
But does no other lord it at this hour,
As wild and mad? the Avarice of Power?
Does neither Rage inflame, nor Fear appall?
Not the black Fear of Death, that saddens all?
With Terrors round can Reason hold her throne,
Despise the known, nor tremble at the unknown?
Survey both Worlds, intrepid and entire,
In spite of Witches, Devils, Dreams, and Fire?
Pleased to look forward, pleased to look behind,
And count each Birthday with a grateful mind?
Has Life no sourness, drawn so near its end?
Can thou endure a Foe, forgive a Friend?
Has Age but melted the rough parts away,
As Winter-fruits grow mild ever they decay?
Or will you think, my Friend, your business done,
When, of a hundred thorns, you pull out one?
Vivere si recte nescis, etc.
Learn to live well, or fairly make your Will;
You Have played, and loved, and eat, and drank your fill:
Walk sober off; before a sprightlier Age
Comes titt'ring on, and thoves you from the stage:
Leave such to trifle with more grace and ease,
Whom Folly pleases, and whose Follies please.
FINIS.

