THE FIRST EPISTLE OF THE FIRST BOOK OF HORACE IMITATED.

By Mr. POPE.

LONDON: Printed for R. DODSLEY at Tully's Head in Pall Mall, and sold by T.
Cooper in Paternoster Row, MDCCXXXVII. [ Pric. 1 s.]

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF THE FIRST BOOK OF HORACE.
Q. HORATII FLACCI
EPIST. I. LIB. I.
AD MAECENATEM.
PRIMA dicte mihi, summa dicende Camena!
2 Spectatum satis, and donatum jam rude, quaeris
(Maecenas) iterum antiquo me includere ludo?
Non eadem est aetas, non men's. 3 Vejanius Armis
4 Herculis ad postem fixis, latet abditus agro,
Ne populum 5 extrema, toties, exoret arena.
6 Est mihi, purgatam crebro qui personet aurem;
" Solve 7 senescentem mature sanus equum, ne
" Peccet ad extremum ridendus, and ilia ducat."
Nunc itaque, and 8 Versus and caetera ludicra pono,
Quid 9 verum atque decens, curo and rogo, and omnis in hoc sum.
10 Condo and compono quae mox depromere possim.
Ac ne forte roges, 11 quo me duce, quo Lare tuter?
Nullius addictus jurare in verba Magistri,
12 Quo me cunque rapit tempestas, deferor Hospes.
Nunc agilis fio, and mersor 13 civilibus undis,
Virtutis verae Custos, 14 rigidusque satelles.
Nunc in Omnis Aristippum decuit color, and status, and res.
Aristippi 15 furtim praecepta relabor
Et mihi res, non me rebus, submittere conor.
16 Ut nox longa quibus mentitur amica, diesque
Longa videtur opus debentibus, ut piger annus
Pupillis, quos dura premit custodia matrum:
Sic mihi tarda 17 fluunt ingrataque tempora, quae spem
Consiliumque morantur agendi gnaviter 18 id, quod
Aeque pauperibus prodest, locupletibus aeque,
Aeque neglectum pueris, senibusque nocebit.
19 Restat, ut his ego me ipse regam, 20 solerque, Elementis.
21 Non possis oculo quantum contendere Lynceus,
Non tamen idcirco contemnas lippus inungi:
Nec, quia desperes invicti membra Glyconis,
Nodosa corpus nolis prohibere chiragra.
Est quadam prodire 22 tenus, si non datur ultra.
23 Fervet Avaritia, miseroque Cupidine pectus?
Sunt verba and voces, quibus hunc lenire dolorem
Possis, and 24 magnam morbi deponere partem.
Laudis amore tumes? sunt 25 certa piacula, quae te
Ter pure lecto poterunt recreare libello.
26 Invidus, iracundus, iners, vinosus, 27 Amator,
Nemo 28 adeo ferus est ut non mitescere possit,
Si modo culturae patientem commodet aurem.
29 Virtus est vitium fugere, and Sapientia prima
Stultitia caruisse --
-- Vides, quae 30 maxima credis
Esse mala, exiguum censum, turpemque repulsam,
Quanto devites animi, capitisque labor?
Impiger extremos curris mercator ad Indos,
Per 31 mare pauperiem fugiens, per saxa, per ignes:
Ne cures 32 ea que stulte miraris and optas
Discere, and audire, and meliori credere non vis?**
" 33 Vilius argentum est auro, virtutibus aurum --
" 34 O cives, cives! quaerenda Pecunia primum est,
" Virtus post nummos -- Haec 35 Janus summus ab imo
Prodocet: haec recinunt juvenes dictata, senesque,
36 Laevo suspensi loculos tabulamque lacerto.
Est 37 animus tibi, sunt mores, est lingua, fidesque --
Si quadringentis sex, septem millia desint,
38 Plebs eris --
39 At pueri ludentes, ' Rex eris (aiunt)
" Si recte facies." Hic 40 murus aheneus esto,
Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa!
41 Roscia, dic sodes, melior lex, an puerorum
Noenia? quae regnum recte facientibus offert,
Et Maribus 42 Curiis, and decantata Camillis?
43 Isne tibi melius suadet, qui "Rem facias, rem,
" Si possis, recte, si non, quocunque modo rem."
Ut 44 proprius spectes lacrymosa Poemata Pupi!
An, 45 qui Fortunae te responsare superbae
Liberum and erectum, 46 praesens hortatur, and aptat?
47 Quod si me Populus Romanus forte roget, cur
Non, ut 48 porticibus, sic judiciis fruar iisdem,
Nec sequar aut fugiam, quos diligit ipse, vel odit?
Olim quod 49 Vulpes aegroto cauta Leoni
Respondit, referam: "Quia me vestigia terrent
" Omnia te adversum spectantia, nulla retrorsum.
50 Bellua multorum est capitum, nam quid sequar aut quem?
Pars hominum gestit 51 conducere Publica. Sunt qui
52 Crustis and Pomis, Viduas venentur avaras,
Excipiantque Senes quos in vivaria mittunt.
53 Multis occulto crescit res foenore --
-- 54 Verum
Esto, aliis alios rebus, studiisque teneri:
Iidem eadem possunt horam durare probantes?
55 " Nullus in orb locus Baiis prelucet amaenis:"
Si dixit Dives, 56 lacus and mare sentit amorem
Festinantis heri. Cui si 57 vitiosa Libido
Fecerit auspicium, cras, "ferramenta Teanum
" Tolletis fabri! --
-- 58 Lectus genialis in aula est?
Nil ait esse prius, melius nil caelibe vita:
59 Si non est, jurat been solis esse maritis.
60 Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo?
Quid 61 pauper? ride: mutat 62 caenacula, lectos,
Balnea, 63 tonsores; conducto 64 navigio, aeque
Nauseat ac locuples, quem ducit priva tirremis.
65 Si curtatus inaequali tonsore capillos
Occurro, rides; si forte subucula pexae
Trita subest tunicae, vel si toga dissidet impar,
Rides: quid? 66 mea cum pugnat Sententia secum,
Quod petiit, spernit; repetit quod nuper omisit;
67 Aestuat, and Vitae disconvenit ordine toto;
68 Diruit, aedificat, mutat quadrata rotundis?
69 Insanire putas solennia me; neque rides,
Nec 70 Medici credis, nec Curatoris egere
A Praetore dati? rerum 71 Tutela mearum
Cum sis, and prave sectum stomacheris ob unguem,
De te pendentis, te suspicientis, Amici.
Ad summam, Sapiens uno 72 minor est Jove! 73 Dives!
74 Liber! 75 honoratus! 76 pulcher! --
-- 77 Rex denique regum!
Praecipue sanus --
-- 78 Nisi cum pituita molesta est.
EPISTLES OF HORACE.
BOOK I.
EPISTLE I.
S** whose love indulged my labors past,
Matures my present, and shall bound my last!
Why 2 will you break the Sabbath of my days?
Now sick alike of Envy and of Praise.
Public too long, ah let me hide my Age!
See modest 3 Cibber now has left the Stage:
Our Generals now, 4 retired to their Estates,
Hang their old Trophies over the Garden gates,
In Life's cool evening satiate of applause,
Nor 5 fond of bleeding, even in BR^'s cause.
6 A Voice there is, that whispers in my ear,
('It Is Reason's voice, which sometimes one can hear)
" Friend Pope! be prudent, let your7 Muse take breath,
" And never gallop Pegasus to death;
" Lest stiff, and stately, void of fire, and force,
" You limp, like Blackmore, on a Lord Mayor's horse.'
Farewell then 8 Verse, and Love, and every Toy,
The rhymes and rattles of the Man or Boy:
What 9 right, what true, what fit, we justly call,
Let this be all my care-for this is All:
To lay this 10 harvest up, and hoard with haste
What every day will want, and most, the last.
But ask not, to what 11 Doctors I apply?
Sworn to no Master, of no Sect am I:
As drives the 12 storm, at any door I knock,
And house with Montagne now, or now with Lock.
Sometimes a 13 Patriot, active in debate,
Mix with the World, and battle for the State,
Free as young Lyttleton, her cause pursue,
Still true to Virtue, 14 and as warm as true:
Sometimes, with Aristippus, or St. Paul,
Indulge my Candor, and grow all to all;
Back to my 15 native Moderation slide,
And win my way by yielding to the tide.
16 Long, as to him who works for debt, the Day,
Long as the Night to her whose love's away;
Long as the Year's dull circle seems to run,
When the brisk Minor pants for twenty-one;
So slow the 17 unprofitable Moments roll,
That lock up all the Functions of my soul;
That keep me from Myself; and still delay
Life's instant business to a future day:
That 18 task, which as we follow, or despise,
The eldest is a fool, the youngest wise;
Which done, the poorest can no wants endure,
And which not done, the richest must be poor.
19 Late as it is, I put my self to school,
And feel some 20 comfort, not to be a fool.
21 Weak though I am of limb, and short of sight,
Far from a Lynx, and not a Giant quite,
I Will do what MEAD and CHESELDEN advise,
To keep these limbs, and to preserve these eyes.
Not to 22 go back, is somewhat to advance,
And Men must walk at least before they dance.
Say, does thy 23 blood rebel, thy bosom move
With wretched Avarice, or as wretched Love?
Know, there are Words, and Spells, which can control
(24 Between the Fits) this Fever of the soul:
Know, there are Rhymes, which (25 fresh and fresh applied)
Will cure the arrant'st Puppy of his Pride.
Be 26 furious, envious, slothful, mad or drunk,
27 Slave to a Wife or Vassal to a Punk,
A Switz, a High Dutch, or a Low Dutch 28 Bear --
All that we ask is but a patient Ear.
29 It Is the first Virtue, Vices to abhor;
And the first Wisdom to be Fool no more.
But to the world, no 30 bugbear is so great,
As want of figure, and a small Estate.
To either India see the Merchant fly,
Scared at the spectre of pale Poverty!
See him, with pains of body, pangs of soul,
Burn through the Tropic, freeze beneath the Pole!
Will thou do nothing for a nobler end,
Nothing, to make Philosophy thy friend?
To stop thy foolish views, thy long desires,
And 32 ease thy heart of all that it admires?
Here, Wisdom calls: 33 "Seek Virtue first! be bold!
" As Gold to Silver, Virtue is to Gold."
There, London's voice: 34 "Get Money, Money still!
" And then let Virtue follow, if she will."
This, this the saving doctrine, preached to all,
From 35 low St. James's up to high St. Paul;
From him whose 36 quills stand quiver'd at his ear,
To him who notches Sticks at Westminster.
BARNARD in 37 spirit, sense, and truth abounds.
" Pray then what wants he?" fourscore thousand pounds,
A Pension, or such Harness for a slave
As Bug now has, and Bestia fain would have.
BARNARD, thou art a 38 Cit, with all thy worth;
Bestia and Bug, Their Honors, and so forth.
Yet every 39 child another song will sing,
" Virtue, brave boys! it is Virtue makes a King."
True, conscious Honor is to feel no sin,
He Is armed without that is innocent within;
Be this thy 40 Screen, and this thy Wall of Brass;
Compared to this, a Minister's an Ass.
41 And say, to which shall our applause belong,
This new Court jargon, or the good old song?
The modern language of corrupted Peers,
Or what was spoke at 42 CRESSY and POITIERS?
43 Who counsels best? who whispers, "Be but Great,
" With Praise or Infamy, leave that to fate;
" Get Place and Wealth, if possible, with Grace;
" If not, by any means get Wealth and Place.
For what? to have a 44 Box where Eunuchs sing,
And foremost in the Circle eye a King.
Or 45 he, who bids thee face with steady view
Proud Fortune, and look shallow Greatness through:
And, 46 while he bids thee, sets the Example too?
If 47 such a Doctrine, in St. James's air,
Should chance to make the well-drest Rabble stare;
If honest S* take scandal at a spark,
That less admires the 48 Palace than the Park;
Faith I shall give the answer 49 Reynard gave,
" I cannot like, Dread Sir! your Royal Cave;
" Because I see by all the Tracks about,
" Full many a Beast goes in, but none comes out."
Adieu to Virtue if you're once a Slave:
Send her to Court, you send her to her Grave.
Well, if a King's a Lion, at the least
The 50 People are a many-headed Beast:
Can they direct what measures to pursue,
Who know themselves so little what to do?
Alike in nothing but one Lust of Gold,
Just half the land would buy, and half be sold:
Their 51 Country's wealth our mightier Misers drain,
Or cross, to plunder Provinces, the Main:
The rest, some farm the Poor-box, some the Pews;
Some keep Assemblies, and would keep the Stews;
Some 52 with fat Bucks on childless Dotards fawn;
Some win rich Widows by their Chine and Brawn;
While with the silent growth of ten per Cent,
In Dirt and darkness 53 hundreds stink content.
Of all these ways, if each 54 pursues his own,
Satire be kind, and let the wretch alone.
But show me one, who has it in his power
To act consistent with himself an hour.
Sir Job 55 sailed forth, the evening bright and still,
" No place on earth (he cried) like Greenwich hill!"
56 Up starts a Palace, lo! the obedient base
Slopes at its foot, the woods its sides embrace,
The silver Thames reflects its marble face.
Now let some whimzy, or that 57 Devilish within
Which guides all those who know not what they mean
But give the Knight (or give his Lady) spleen;
" Away, away! take all your scaffolds down,
" For Snug's the word: My dear! we'll live in Town."
At amorous Flavio is the 58 Stocking thrown?
That very night he longs to lie alone.
59 The Fool whose Wife elopes some thrice a quarter,
For matrimonial Solace dies a martyr.
Did ever 60 Proteus, Merlin, any Witch,
Transform themselves so strangely as the Rich?
" Well, but the 61 Poor -- the Poor have the same itch:
They change their 63 weekly Barber, weekly News,
Prefer a new Japanner to their shoes,
Discharge their 62 Garrets, move their Beds, and run
(They know not whither) in a Chaise and one;
They 64 hire their Sculler, and when once aboard,
Grow sick, and damn the Climate -- like a Lord,
65 You laugh, half Beau half Sloven if I stand,
My Wig all powder, and all snuff my Band;
You laugh, if Coat and Breeches strangely vary,
White Gloves, and Linen worthy Lady Mary!
But when 66 no Prelate's Lawn with Hair-shirt lined,
Is half so incoherent as my Mind,
When (each Opinion with the next at strife,
One 67 ebb and flow of follies all my Life)
I 68 plant, root up, I build, and then confound,
Turn round to square, and square again to round;
69 You never change one muscle of your face,
You think this Madness but a common case,
Nor 70 once to Chanc'ry, nor to The Doctor of Bedlam.
Hales apply;
Yet hang your lip, to see a Seam awry!
Careless how ill I with myself agree;
Kind to my dress, my figure, not to Me.
Is this my 71 Guide, Philosopher, and Friend?
This, He who loves me, and who ought to mend?
Who ought to make me (what he can, or none,)
That Man divine whom Wisdom calls her own,
Great without Title, without Fortune blessed,
Rich 73 even when plundered, 75 honored while oppressed,
Loved 76 without youth, and followed without power,
At home though exiled, 74 free, though in the Tower.
In short, that reasoning, high, immortal Thing,
Just 72 less than Jove, and 77 much above a King,
Nay half in Heaven -- 78 except (what is mighty odd)
A Fit of Vapors clouds this Demi-god.

