THE GHOST. BOOK IV. BY C. CHURCHILL.

LONDON: Printed for J. COOTE, in Paternoster Row; W. FLEXNEY, at Gray's-Inn
Gate, Holborn; G. KEARSLY, Ludgate Street; T. HENDERSON, at the Royal Exchange;
J. GARDNER, in Charles-Street, Westminster; and J. ALMON, in Piccadilly.
MDCCLXIII.

THE GHOST. BOOK IV.
COXCOMBS, who vainly make pretense
To something of exalted sense
'Bove other men, and, gravely wise,
Affect those pleasures to despise,
Which, merely to the eye confined,
Bring no improvement to the mind,
Rail at all pomp; They would not go
For millions to a Puppet-Show,
Nor can forgive the mighty crime
Of countenancing Pantomime;
No, not at COVENT GARDEN, where,
Without a head for play or play'r,
Or, could a head be found most fit,
Without one play'r to second it,
They must, obeying Folly's call,
Thrive by mere show, or not at all.
With these grave Fops, who (bless their brains)
Most cruel to themselves, take pains
For wretchedness, and would be thought
Much wiser than a wise man ought
For his own happiness to be,
Who, what they hear, and what they see,
And what they smell, and taste, and feel,
Distrust, till REASON sets her seal,
And, by long trains of consequences
Ensur'd, gives Sanction to the Senses;
Who would not, Heaven forbid it! waste
One hour in what the World calls Taste,
Nor fondly deign to laugh or cry
Unless they know some reason why;
With these grave Fops, whose system seems
To give up Certainty for dreams,
The Eye of Man is understood
As for no other purpose good
Than as a door, through which of course
Their passage crouding objects force,
A downright Usher, to admit
New-Comers to the Court of Wit.
(Good GRAVITY, forbear thy spleen
When I say Wit, I Wisdom mean.)
Where (such the practice of the Court,
Which legal Precedents support)
Not one Idea is allowed
To pass unquestioned in the crowd,
But e're It can obtain the grace
Of holding in the brain a place,
Before the Chief in Congregation
Must stand a strict Examination.
Not such as Those, who PHYSIC twirl,
Full fraught with death, from every curl,
Who prove, with all becoming State,
Their voice to be the voice of Fate,
Prepared with Essence, Drop, and Pill,
To be another WARD, or HILL,
Before they can obtain their Ends
To sign Death-warrants for their Friends,
And talents vast as their's employ,
Secundum Artem to destroy,
Must pass (or Laws their rage restrain)
Before the Chiefs of Warwick Lane.
Thrice happy Lane, where uncontrolled,
In Power and Lethargy grown old,
Most fit to take, in this blessed Land,
The reins which fell from WYNDHAM's hand,
Her lawful throne great DULLNESS rears,
Still more herself as more in Years;
Where She (and who shall dare deny
Her right, when REEVES and CHAUNCY's by)
Calling to mind, in ancient time,
One GARTH who erred in Wit and Rhyme,
Ordains from henceforth to admit
None of the rebel Sons of Wit,
And makes it her peculiar care
That SCHOMBERG never shall be there.
Not such as Those, whom FOLLY trains
To Letters, though unblessed with brains,
Who, destitute of power and will
To learn, are kept to learning still;
Whose heads, when other methods fail,
Receive instruction from the tail,
Because their Sires, a common case,
Which brings the Children to disgrace,
Imagine it a certain rule,
They never could beget a Fool,
Must pass, or must compound for, ere
The Chaplain, full of beef and prayer,
Will give his reverend Permit,
Announcing them for Orders fit,
So that the Prelate (what is a Name?
All Prelates now are much the same)
May with a conscience safe and quiet,
With holy hands lay on that Fiat,
Which does all faculties dispense,
All Sanctity, all Faith, all Sense,
Makes MADAN quite a Saint appear,
And makes an Oracle of CHEER.
Not such as in that solemn seat,
Where the nine Ladies hold retreat,
The Ladies nine, who, as we are told,
Scorning those haunts they loved of old,
The banks of ISIS now prefer,
Nor will one hour from OXFORD stir,
Are held for form; which BALAAM's Ass
As well as BALAAM's self might pass,
And with his Master take degrees,
Could he contrive to pay the Fees.
Men of sound parts, who, deeply read,
O'erload the Storehouse of the head
With furniture they never can use,
Cannot forgive our rambling Muse
This wild excursion; cannot see
Why Physic and Divinity,
To the Surprise of all beholders,
Are lugg'd in by the head and shoulders;
Or how, in any point of view,
OXFORD has any thing to do;
But Men of nice and subtle Learning,
Remarkable for quick discerning,
Through Spectacles of critic mould,
Without instruction, will behold
That We a Method here have got,
To show What is, by What is not,
And that our drift (Parenthesis
For once apart) is briefly this.
Within the brain's most secret cells,
A certain Lord Chief Justice dwells
Of sovereign power, whom One and All,
With common Voice, We REASON call;
Though, for the purposes of Satire,
A name in Truth is no great Matter,
JEFFERIES or MANSFIELD, which You will,
It means a Lord Chief Justice still.
Here, so our great Projectors say,
The Senses all must homage pay,
Hither They all must tribute bring,
And prostrate fall before their King.
Whatever unto them is brought,
Is carried on the wings of Thought
Before his throne, where, in full state,
He on their merits holds debate,
Examines, Cross-examines, Weighs
Their right to censure or to praise;
Nor does his equal voice depend
On narrow Views of foe and friend,
Nor can or flattery or force
Divert him from his steady course;
The Channel of Enquiry's clear,
No sham Examination's here.
He, upright Justicer, no doubt,
Ad libitum puts in and out,
Adjusts and settles in a trice
What Virtue is, and What is Vice,
What is Perfection, what Defect,
What we must choose, and what reject;
He takes upon him to explain
What Pleasure is, and what is Pain,
Whilst We, obedient to the Whim,
And resting all our faith on him,
True Members of the Stoic weal,
Must learn to think, and cease to feel.
This glorious System formed, for Man
To practice when and how he can,
If the five Senses in alliance
To Reason hurl a proud defiance,
And, though often conquered, yet unbroke,
Endeavor to throw off that yoke,
Which they a greater slavery hold,
Than Jewish Bondage was of old;
Or if They, something touched with shame,
Allow him to retain the name
Of Royalty, and, as in Sport,
To hold a mimic formal Court;
Permitted, no uncommon thing,
To be a kind of Puppet King,
And suffered, by the way of toy,
To hold a globe, but not employ;
Our System-mongers, struck with fear,
Prognosticate destruction near;
All things to Anarchy must run;
The little World of Man's undone.
Nay should the Eye, that nicest Sense,
Neglect to send intelligence
Unto the Brain, distinct and clear,
Of all that passes in her sphere,
Should She presumptuous joy receive,
Without the Understanding's leave,
They deem it rank and daring Treason
Against the Monarchy of REASON,
Not thinking, though they are wondrous wise,
That few have Reason, most have Eyes;
So that the Pleasures of the Mind
To a small circle are confined,
Whilst those which to the Senses fall,
Become the Property of All.
Besides (and this is sure a Case
Not much at present out of place)
Where NATURE Reason does deny,
No Art can that defect supply,
But if (for it is our intent
Fairly to state the argument)
A Man should want an eye or two,
The Remedy is sure, though new;
The Cure's at hand -- no need of Fear --
For proof -- behold the CHEVALIER --
As well prepared, beyond all doubt,
To put Eyes in, as put them out.
But, Argument apart, which tends
TO embitter foes, and separate friends,
(Nor, turned apostate for the Nine,
Would I, though bred up a Divine,
And foe of course to Reason's weal,
Widen that breach I cannot heal)
By his own Sense and Feelings taught,
In speech as liberal as in thought,
Let every Man enjoy his whim;
What Is He to Me, or I to him?
Might I, though never robbed in Ermine,
A matter of this weight determine,
No Penalties should settled be
To force men to Hypocrisy,
To make them ape an awkward zeal,
And, feeling not, pretend to feel.
I would not have, might sentence rest
Finally fixed within my breast,
Even ANNET censured and confined,
Because we are of a different mind.
NATURE, who in her act most free,
Herself delights in Liberty,
Profuse in Love, and, without bound,
Pours joy on every creature round;
Whom yet, was every bounty shed
In double Portions on our head,
We could not truly bounteous call,
If FREEDOM did not crown them all.
By Providence forbid to stray,
Brutes never can mistake their way,
Determined still, they plod along
By Instinct, neither right nor wrong;
But Man, had he the heart to use
His Freedom, has a right to choose,
Whether He acts or well, or ill,
Depends entirely on his will;
To her last work, her favorite Man,
Is given on NATURE's better plan
A Privilege in power to err,
Nor let this phrase resentment stir
Amongst the grave ones, since indeed,
The little merit Man can plead
In doing well, depends still
Upon his power of doing ill.
Opinions should be free as air;
No man, whatever his rank, whatever
His Qualities, a claim can found
That my Opinion must be bound,
And square with his; such slavish chains
From foes the liberal soul disdains,
Nor can, though true to friendship, bend
To wear them even from a friend.
Let Those, who rigid Judgment own,
Submissive bow at Judgment's throne,
And if They of no value hold
Pleasure, till Pleasure is grown cold,
Palled and insipid, forced to wait
For Judgment's regular debate
To give it warrant, let them find
Dull Subjects suited to their mind;
Their's be slow Wisdom; Be my plan
To live as merry as I can,
Regardless as the fashions go,
Whether there is Reason for it, or no;
Be my employment here on earth
To give a liberal scope to mirth,
Life's barren vale with flowers to adorn,
And pluck a rose from every thorn.
But if, by Error led astray,
I chance to wander from my way,
Let no blind guide observe, in spite,
I Am wrong, who cannot set me right.
That Doctor could I never endure,
Who found disease, and not a cure,
Nor can I hold that man a friend,
Whose zeal a helping hand shall lend
To open happy Folly's eyes,
And, making wretched, make me wise;
For next, a Truth which cannot admit
Reproof from Wisdom or from Wit,
To being happy here below,
Is to believe that we are so.
Some few in knowledge find relief,
I place my comfort in belief.
Some for Reality may call,
FANCY to me is All in All.
Imagination, through the trick
Of Doctors, often makes us sick,
And why, let any Sophist tell,
May it not likewise make us well?
This am I sure, whatever our view,
Whatever shadows we pursue,
For our pursuits, be what they will,
Are little more than shadows still,
Too swift they fly, too swift and strong,
For man to catch, or hold them long.
But Joys which in the FANCY live,
Each moment to each man may give.
True to himself, and true to ease,
He softens Fate's severe decrees,
And (can a Mortal wish for more?)
Creates, and makes himself new over,
Mocks boasted vain Reality,
And Is, whatever, he wants to Be.
Hail, FANCY -- to thy power I owe
Deliverance from the gripe of Woe,
To Thee I owe a mighty debt,
Which Gratitude shall never forget,
Whilst Memory can her force employ,
A large increase of every joy.
When at my doors, too strongly barred,
Authority had placed a guard,
A knavish guard, ordained by Law
To keep poor Honesty in awe;
Authority, severe and stern,
To intercept my wished return;
When Foes grew proud, and Friends grew cool,
And Laughter seized each sober fool;
When Candor started in amaze,
And, meaning censure, hinted praise;
When Prudence, lifting up her eyes
And hands, thanked Heaven, that she was wise;
When All around Me, with an air
Of hopeless Sorrow, looked Despair,
When They or said, or seemed to say,
There is but one, one only way;
Better, and be advised by us,
Not be at all, than to be thus;
When Virtue shunned the shock, and Pride
Disabled, lay by Virtue's side,
Too weak my ruffled soul to cheer,
Which could not hope, yet would not fear;
Health in her motion, the wild grace
Of Pleasure speaking in her face,
Dull Regularity thrown by,
And Comfort beaming from her eye,
FANCY, in richest robes arrayed,
Came smiling forth, and brought me aid,
Came smiling over that dreadful time,
And, more to bless me, came in Rhyme.
Nor is her Power to Me confined,
It spreads, It comprehends Mankind.
When (to the Spirit-stirring sound
Of Trumpets breathing Courage round,
And Fifes, well mingled to restrain,
And bring that Courage down again,
Or to the melancholy knell
Of the dull, deep, and doleful bell,
Such as of late the good Saint Bride
Muffled, to mortify the pride
Of those, who, ENGLAND quite forgot,
Paid their vile homage to the SCOT,
Where ASGILL held the foremost place,
Whilst my Lord figured at a race)
Processions ('it is not worth debate
Whether They are of Stage or State)
Move on, so very very slow,
It Is doubtful if they move or no;
When the Performers all the while
Mechanically frown or smile,
Or, with a dull and stupid stare,
A vacancy of Sense declare,
Or, with down-bending eye, seem wrought
Into a Labyrinth of Thought,
Where Reason wanders still in doubt,
And, once got in, cannot get out;
What cause sufficient can we find
To satisfy a thinking mind,
Why, dup'd by such vain farces, Man
Descends to act on such a plan?
Why They, who hold themselves divine,
Can in such wretched follies join,
Strutting like Peacocks, or like Crows,
Themselves and Nature to expose?
What Cause, but that (you will understand
We have our Remedy at hand,
That if perchance we start a doubt,
Ere it is fixed, we wipe it out,
As Surgeons, when they lop a limb,
Whether for Profit, Fame, or Whim,
Or mere experiment to try,
Must always have a Styptic by)
FANCY steps in, and stamps that real,
Which, ipso facto, is Ideal.
Can none remember, yes, I know,
All must remember that rare show,
When to the Country SENSE went down,
And Fools came flocking up to Town,
When Knights (a work which all admit
To be for Knighthood much unfit)
Built booths for hire; when Parsons played,
In robes Canonical arrayed,
And, Fiddling, joined the Smithfield dance,
The price of Tickets to advance;
Or, unto Tapsters turned, dealt out,
Running from Booth to Booth about,
To every Scoundrel, by retail,
True pennyworths of Beef and Ale,
Then first prepared, by bringing beer in,
For present grand Electioneering;
When Heralds, running all about
To bring in Order, turned it Out;
When, by the prudent Marshal's care,
Lest the rude populace should stare,
And with unhallowed eyes profane
Gay Puppets of Patrician strain,
The whole Procession, as in spite,
Unheard, unseen, stole off by Night;
When our Loved Monarch, nothing loath,
Solemnly took that sacred oath,
Whence mutual firm agreements spring
Betwixt the Subject, and the King,
By which, in usual manner crowned,
His Head, his Heart, his Hands he bound,
Against himself, should Passion stir
The least Propensity to err,
Against all Slaves, who might prepare
Or open force, or hidden snare,
That glorious CHARTER to maintain,
By which We serve, and He must reign;
Then FANCY, with unbounded sway,
Revell'd sole Mistress of the day,
And wrought such wonders, as might make
Egyptian Sorcerers forsake
Their baffled mockeries, and own
The Palm of Magic Here Is alone.
A KNIGHT (who in the silken lap
Of lazy Peace, had lived on Pap,
Who never yet had dared to roam
'Bove ten or twenty miles from home,
Nor even that, unless a Guide
Was placed to amble by his side,
And troops of Slaves were spread around
To keep his Honor safe and sound,
Who could not suffer for his life
A Point to sword, or Edge to knife,
And always fainted at the sight
Of Blood, though 'twas not shed in fight,
Who disinherited one Son
For firing off an Elder Gun,
And whipped another, six years old,
Because the Boy, presumptuous, bold
To Madness, likely to become
A very Swiss, had beat a drum,
Though it appeared an instrument
Most peaceable and innocent,
Having from first been in the hands
And service of the City Bands)
Graced with those ensigns, which were meant
To further Honor's dread intent,
The Minds of Warriors to inflame,
And spur them on to deeds of Fame,
With little Sword, large Spurs, high Feather,
Fearless of every thing but Weather,
(And all must own, who pay regard
To Charity, it had been hard
That in his very first Campaign
His Honors should be soiled with rain)
A Hero all at once became,
And (seeing others much the same
In point of Valor as himself,
Who leave their Courage on a shelf
From Year to Year, till some such rout
In proper season calls it out)
Strutted, looked big, and swagger'd more
Than ever Hero did before,
Looked up, Looked down, Looked all around,
Like MAVORS, grimly smiled and frowned,
Seemed Heaven, and Earth, and Hell to call
To fight, that he might rout them all,
And personated Valor's style
So long, Spectators to beguile,
That passing strange, and wondrous true,
Himself at last believed it too,
Nor for a time could he discern
Till Truth and Darkness took their turn,
So well did FANCY play her part,
That Coward still was at the heart.
WHIFFLE (who knows not WHIFFLE's name,
By the impartial voice of fame
Recorded first, through all this land,
In Vanity's illustrious band?)
Who, by all bounteous Nature meant
For offices of hardiment,
A modern HERCULES at least,
To rid the world of each wild beast,
Of each wild beast which came in view,
Whether on four legs or on two,
Degenerate, delights to prove
His force on the Parade of Love,
Disclaims the joys which camps afford,
And for the Distaff quits the sword;
Who fond of women would appear
To public eye, and public ear,
But, when in private, let us them know
How little they can trust to show;
Who sports a Woman, as of course,
Just as a Jockey shows a horse,
And then returns her to the stable,
Or vainly plants her at his table,
Where he would rather VENUS find,
(So palled, and so depraved his mind)
Than, by some great occasion led,
To seize Her panting in her bed,
Burning with more than mortal fires,
And melting in her own desires;
Who, ripe in years, is yet a child,
Through fashion, not through feeling, wild;
Whatever in others, who proceed
As Sense and Nature have decreed,
From real passion flows, in him
Is mere effect of mode and whim;
Who Laughs, a very common way,
Because he nothing has to say,
As your choice SPIRITS oaths dispense
To fill up vacancies of Sense;
Who, having some small Sense, defies it,
Or, using, always misapplies it;
Who now and then brings something forth,
Which seems indeed of Sterling Worth,
Something, by sudden Start and Fit,
Which at a distance looks like wit,
But, on Examination near,
To his confusion will appear
By Truth's fair glass, to be at best
A Threadbare Jester's threadbare jest;
Who frisks and dances through the street,
Sings without voice, rides without seat,
Plays over his tricks, like AESOP's Ass,
A gratis fool to all who pass;
Who riots, though he loves not waste,
Whores without lust, drinks without taste,
Acts without sense, talks without thought,
Does every thing but what he ought,
Who, led by forms, without the power
Of Vice, is Vicious, who one hour,
Proud without Pride, the next will be
Humble without Humility;
Whose Vanity we all discern,
The Spring on which his actions turn;
Whose aim in erring, is to err,
So that he may be singular,
And all his utmost wishes mean,
Is, though he is laughed at, to be seen.
Such (for when FLATT'RY's soothing strain
Had robbed the Muse of her disdain,
And found a method to persuade
Her art, to soften every shade,
JUSTICE enraged, the pencil snatched
From her degenerate hand, and scratched
Out every trace; then, quick as thought,
From life this striking likeness caught)
In Mind, in Manners, and in Mien,
Such WHIFFLE came, and such was seen
In the World's eye, but (strange to tell!)
Misled by FANCY's magic spell,
Deceived, not dreaming of deceit,
Cheated, but happy in the cheat,
Was more than human in his own.
O bow, bow All at FANCY's throne,
Whose Power could make so vile an Elf,
With Patience bear that thing, himself.
But, Mistress of each art to please,
Creative FANCY, what are these,
These Pageants of a trifler's Pen,
To what thy Power effected then?
Familiar with the human mind,
As swift and subtle as the wind,
Which we all feel, yet no one knows
Or whence it comes, or where it goes,
FANCY at once in every part
Possessed the Eye, the Head, the Heart,
And in a thousand forms arrayed,
A thousand various gambols played.
Here, in a Face which well might ask
The Privilege to wear a mask
In spite of Law, and Justice teach
For public good t'excuse the breach,
Within the furrow of a wrinkle
'Twixt Eyes, which could not shine but twinkle,
Like Sentinels in the starry way,
Who wait for the return of day
Almost burnt out, and seem to keep
Their watch, like Soldiers, in their sleep,
Or like those lamps which, by the power
Of Law, must burn from hour to hour,
(Else they, without redemption, fall
Under the terrors of that Hall,
Which, once notorious for a hop,
Is now become a Justice-shop)
Which are so managed, to go out
Just when the time comes round about,
Which yet through emulation strive
To keep their dying light alive,
And (not uncommon, as we find,
Amongst the children of mankind)
As they grow weaker, would seem stronger,
And burn a little, little longer;
FANCY, betwixt such eyes enshrined,
No brush to daub, no mill to grind,
Thrice waved her wand around, whose force
Changed in an instant Nature's course,
And, hardly credible in Rhyme,
Not only stopped, but called back Time.
The Face, of every wrinkle cleared,
Smooth as the floating stream appeared,
Down the Neck ringlets spread their flame,
The Neck admiring whence they came;
On the Arched Brow the Graces played;
On the full Bosom Cupid laid;
Suns, from their proper orbits sent,
Became for Eyes a supplement;
Teeth, white as ever Teeth were seen
Delivered from the hand of GREEN,
Started, in regular array,
Like Train-Bands on a grand Field-day,
Into the Gums, which would have fled,
But, wondering, turned from white to red,
Quite altered was the whole machine,
And Lady -- -- -- -- was fifteen.
Here She made lordly temples rise
Before the pious DASHWOOD's eyes,
Temples which built aloft in air,
May serve for show, if not for prayer;
In solemn form Herself, before,
Arrayed like Faith, the Bible bore.
There, over MELCOMB's feathered head,
Who, quite a man of Gingerbread,
Savored in talk, in dress, and phyz,
More of another World than this,
To a dwarf Muse a Giant Page,
The last grave Fop of the last Age,
In a superb and feathered hearse,
Bescutcheon'd and betagg'd with Verse,
Which, to Beholders from afar,
Appeared like a triumphal Car,
She rode, in a cast Rainbow clad;
There, throwing off the hallowed played,
Naked, as when (in those drear Cells
Where, Self-bless'd, Self-curs'd, MADNESS dwells),
PLEASURE, on whom, in Laughter's shape,
FRENZY had perfected a rape,
First brought her forth, before her time,
Wild Witness of her shame and crime,
Driving before an Idol band
Of driv'ling STUARTS, hand in hand,
Some, who to curse Mankind, had Wore
A Crown they never must think of more,
Others, whose baby brows were graced
With Paper Crowns, and Toys of Paste,
She Jigg'd, and playing on the Flute,
Spread raptures over the soul of BUTE.
Big with vast hopes, some mighty plan,
Which wrought the busy soul of man
To her full bent, the CIVIL LAW,
Fit Code to keep a world in awe,
Bound over his brows, fair to behold,
As Jewish Frontlets were of old,
The famous CHARTER of our land,
Defaced, and mangled in his hand;
As one whom deepest thoughts employ,
But deepest thoughts of truest joy,
Serious and slow he strode, he stalked,
Before him troops of Heroes walked,
Whom best He loved, of Heroes crowned,
By TORIES guarded all around,
Dull solemn pleasure in his face,
He saw the honors of his race,
He saw their lineal glories rise,
And touched, or seemed to touch the skies.
Not the most distant mark of fear,
No sign of axe, or scaffold near,
Not one cursed thought, to cross his will,
Of such a place as Tower Hill.
Curse on this Muse, a flippant Jade,
A Shrew, like every other Maid
Who turns the corner of nineteen,
Devoured with peevishness and spleen.
Her Tongue (for as, when bound for life,
The Husband suffers for the Wife,
So if in any works of rhyme
Perchance there blunders out a crime,
Poor Culprit Bards must always rue it,
Although it is plain the Muses do it)
Sooner or later cannot fail
To send me headlong to a jail.
Whatever my theme (our themes we choose
In modern days without a Muse,
Just as a Father will provide
To join a Bridegroom and a Bride,
As if, though they must be the Play'rs,
The game was wholly his, not theirs)
Whatever my theme, the Muse, who still
Owns no direction but her will,
Flies off, and, ere I could expect,
By ways oblique and indirect,
At once quite over head and ears,
In fatal Politics appears;
Time was, and, if I ought discern
Of Fate, that Time shall soon return,
When decent and demure at least,
As grave and dull as any Priest,
I could see Vice in robes arrayed,
Could see the game of Folly played
Successfully in Fortune's school,
Without exclaiming rogue or fool;
Time was, when nothing loath or proud,
I lacquied, with the fawning crowd,
Scoundrels in Office, and would bow
To Ciphers great in place; but now
Upright I stand, as if wise Fate,
To compliment a shattered state,
Had me, like ATLAS, hither sent
To shoulder up the firmament,
And if I stooped, with general crack
The Heavens would tumble from my back;
Time was, when rank and situation
Secured the great Ones of the Nation
From all control; Satire and Law
Kept only little Knaves in awe,
But now, Decorum lost, I stand
Bemus'd, a Pencil in my hand,
And, dead to every sense of shame,
Careless of Safety and of Fame,
The names of Scoundrels minute down,
And Libel more than half the Town.
How can a Statesman be secure
In all his Villainies, if poor
And dirty Authors thus shall dare
To lay his rotten bosom bare?
Muses should pass away their time,
In dressing out the Poet's rhyme
With Bills and Ribbands, and array
Each line in harmless taste, though gay.
When the hot burning Fit is on,
They should regale their restless Son
With something to allay his rage,
Some cool Castalian Beverage,
Or some such draught (though They, it is plain,
Taking the Muses name in vain,
Know nothing of their real court,
And only fable from report)
As makes a WHITEHEAD's Ode go down,
Or slakes the Feverette of Brown:
But who would in his Senses think
Of Muses Giving gall to drink,
Or that their folly should afford
To raving Poets Gun or Sword?
Poets were never designed by fate
To meddle with affairs of State,
Nor should (if we may speak our thought
Truly as men of Honor ought)
Sound Policy their rage admit,
To Launch the thunderbolts of Wit
About those heads, which, when they are shot,
Cant't tell if 'twas by Wit, or not.
These things well known, what Devil in spite
Can have seduced me thus to write
Out of that road, which must have led
To riches, without heart or head,
Into that road, which, had I more
Than ever Poet had before,
Of Wit and Virtue, in disgrace
Would keep me still, and out of place,
Which, if some Judge (You Will understand
One famous, famous through the land
For making Law) should stand my friend,
At last may in a Pill'ry end,
And all this, I myself admit,
Without one cause to lead to it. -- --
For instance now -- this book -- the GHOST --
Methinks I hear some Critic Post
Remark most gravely -- "The first word
Which we about the Ghost have heard."
Peace my good Sir -- not quite so fast --
What is the first, may be the last,
Which is a point, all must agree,
Cannot depend on You or Me.
FANNY, no Ghost of common mould,
Is not by forms to be controlled,
To keep her state, and show her skill,
She never comes but when she will.
I wrote and wrote (perhaps you doubt,
And shrewdly, what I wrote about,
Believe me, much to my disgrace,
I too am in the self-same case)
But still I wrote, till FANNY came
Impatient, nor could any shame
On me with equal justice fall,
If She had never come at all.
An Underling, I could not stir
Without the Cue thrown out by her,
Nor from the subject aid receive
Until She came, and gave me leave.
So that (Ye Sons of Erudition
Mark, this is but a supposition,
Nor would I to so wise a nation
Suggest it as a Revelation)
If henceforth dully turning over
Page after Page, Ye read no more
Of FANNY, who, in Sea or Air,
May be departed God knows where,
Rail at jilt Fortune, but agree
No censure can be laid on me,
For sure (the cause let MANSFIELD try)
FANNY is in the fault, not I.
But to return -- and this I hold,
A secret worth its weight in gold
To those who write, as I write now,
Not to mind where they go, or how,
Through ditch, through bog, over hedge and style,
Make it but worth the Reader's while,
And keep a passage fair and plain
Always to bring him back again.
Through dirt, who scruples to approach,
At pleasure's call, to take a coach,
But we should think the man a clown
Who in the dirt should set us down?
But to return -- if WIT, who never
The shackles of restrain could bear,
In wayward humor should refuse
Her timely succor to the Muse,
And to no rules and orders tied
Roughly deny to be her guide,
She must renounce Decorum's plan,
And get back when, and how she can,
As Parsons, who, without pretext,
As soon as mentioned, quit their text,
And, to promote Sleep's genial power,
Grope in the dark for half an hour,
Give no more Reason (for we know
Reason is vulgar, mean, and low)
Why they come back (should it befall
That ever they come back at all)
Into the road, to end their rout,
Than they can give Why they went out.
But to return -- this Book -- the GHOST --
A mere amusement at the most,
A trifle, fit to wear away
The horrors of a rainy day,
A slight shot silk, for summer wear,
Just as our modern Statesmen are,
If rigid honesty permit
That I for once purloin the Wit
Of him, who, were we all to steal,
Is much too rich the theft to feel.
Yet in this Book, where Ease should join
With Mirth to sugar every line,
Where it should all be mere Chit Chat,
Lively, Good-humored, and all that,
Where honest SATIRE, in disgrace,
Should not so much as show her face,
The Shrew, o'erleaping all due bounds,
Breaks into Laughter's sacred grounds,
And, in contempt, plays over her tricks
In Science, Trade, and Politics.
But why should the distempered Scold
Attempt to blacken Men enrolled
In Pow'r's dread book, whose mighty skill
Can twist an Empire to their will,
Whose Voice is Fate, and on their tongue
Law, Liberty, and Life are hung,
Whom, on enquiry, Truth shall find,
With STUARTS linked, time out of mind
Superior to their Country's Laws,
Defenders of a Tyrant's cause,
Men, who the same damned maxims hold
Darkly, which they avowed of old,
Who, though by different means, pursue
The end which they had first in view,
And, force found vain, now play their part
With much less Honor, much more Art?
Why, at the corners of the Streets,
To every Patriot drudge She meets,
Known or unknown, with furious cry
Should She wild clamours vent, or why,
The minds of Groundlings to inflame,
A DASHWOOD, BUTE, and WYNDHAM name?
Why, having not to our surprise
The fear of death before her Eyes,
Bearing, and that but now and then,
No other weapon but her pen,
Should She an argument afford
For blood, to Men who wear a sword,
Men, who can nicely trim and pare
A point of HONOR to a hair,
(HONOR -- a Word of nice import,
A pretty trinket in a Court,
Which my Lord quite in rapture feels
Dangling, and rattling with his Seals --
HONOR -- a Word, which all the Nine
Would be much puzzled to define --
HONOR -- a Word which torture mocks
And might confound a thousand LOCKS --
Which (for I leave to wiser heads,
Who fields of death prefer to beds
Of down, to find out, if they can,
What HONOR is, on their Wild plan)
Is not, to take it in their Way,
And this we sure may dare to say
Without incurring an offense,
Courage, Law, Honesty, or Sense)
Men, who all Spirit, Life, and Soul,
Neat Butchers of a Button-hole,
Having more skill, believe it true
That they must have more courage too,
Men, who without a place or name,
Their Fortunes speechless as their fame,
Would by the Sword new Fortunes carve,
And rather die in fight than starve?
At Coronations, a vast field
Which food of every kind might yield,
Of good sound food, at once most fit
For purposes of health and wit,
Could not ambitious SATIRE rest,
Content with what she might digest;
Could she not feast on things of course,
A Champion, or a Champion's horse;
A Champion's horse -- no, better say,
Though better figured on that day --
A horse, which might appear to us,
Who deal in rhyme, a PEGASUS,
A Rider, who, when once got on,
Might pass for a BELLEROPHON,
Dropped on a sudden from the skies,
To catch and fix our wondering eyes,
To witch, with wand instead of whip,
The world with noble horsemanship,
To twist and twine, both Horse and Man,
On such a well-concerted plan,
That, Centaur-like, when all was done,
We scarce could think they were not one?
Could She not to our itching ears
Bring the new names of new-coin'd Peers,
Who walked, Nobility forgot,
With shoulders fitter for a knot,
Than robes of Honor, for whose sake
Heralds in form were forced to make,
To make, because they could not find,
Great Predecessors to their mind?
Could She not (though it is doubtful since
Whether He Plumber is, or Prince)
Tell of a simple Knight's advance
To be a doughty Peer of France,
Tell how he did a Dukedom gain,
And ROBINSON was AQUITAIN,
Tell how our City-Chiefs, disgraced,
Were at an empty table placed,
A gross neglect, which, whilst they live,
They cannot forget, and will not forgive,
A gross neglect of all those rights
Which march with City Appetites,
Of all those Canons, which we find
By Gluttony, time out of mind,
Established; which they ever hold,
Dearer than any thing but Gold?
Thanks to my Stars -- I now see shore --
Of Courtiers, and of Courts no more --
Thus stumbling on my City Friends,
Blind Chance my guide, my purpose bends
In line direct, and shall pursue
The point which I had first in view,
Nor more shall with the Reader sport
Till I have seen him safe in port.
Hushed be each fear -- no more I bear
Through the wide regions of the air
The Reader terrified, no more
Wild Ocean's horrid paths explore.
Be the plain track from henceforth mine --
Cross-roads to ALLEN I resign,
ALLEN, the honor of this nation,
ALLEN, himself a Corporation,
ALLEN, of late notorious grown
For writings none, or all his own,
ALLEN, the first of lettered men,
Since the good Bishop holds his pen,
And at his elbow takes his stand
To mend his head, and guide his hand.
But hold -- once more Digression hence --
Let us return to Common-Sense,
The Car of PHOEBUS I discharge;
My Carriage now a LORD-MAYOR's Barge.
Suppose we now -- we may suppose
In Verse, what would be Sin in Prose --
The Sky with darkness overspread,
And every Star retired to bed,
The gew-gaw robes of Pomp and Pride
In some dark corner thrown aside,
Great Lords and Ladies giving way
To what they seem to scorn by day,
The real feelings of the heart,
And Nature taking place of Art,
Desire triumphant through the Night,
And Beauty panting with delight,
Chastity, Woman's fairest crown,
Till the return of Morn laid down,
Then to be worn again as bright
As if not sullied in the Night,
Dull Ceremony, business over,
Dreaming in form at COTTRELL's door,
Precaution trudging all about
To see the Candles safely out,
Bearing a mighty Master-Key,
Habited like Economy,
Stamping each lock with triple seals,
Mean AVARICE creeping at her heels.
Suppose we too, like sheep in Pen,
The Mayor and Court of Aldermen
Within their barge, which, through the deep,
The Rowers more than half asleep,
Moved slow, as over-charg'd with State;
THAMES groaned beneath the mighty weight,
And felt that bawble heavier far
Than a whole fleet of men of war.
SLEEP over each well-known faithful head,
With liberal hand his Poppies shed,
Each head, by DULLNESS rend'red fit
SLEEP and his Empire to admit.
Through the whole passage not a word,
Not one faint, weak, half sound was heard;
SLEEP had prevailed to overwhelm
The Steersman nodding over the helm;
The Rower, without force or skill,
Left the dull Barge to drive at will;
The sluggish Oars suspended hung,
And even BEARDMORE held his tongue.
COMMERCE, regardful of a freight,
On which depended half her State,
Stepped to the helm, with ready hand
She safely cleared that bank of Sand,
Where, stranded, our West-Country Fleet
Delay and Danger often meet;
Till NEPTUNE, anxious for the trade,
Comes in full tides, and brings them aid;
Next (for the Muses can survey
Objects by Night as well as day,
Nothing prevents their taking aim,
Darkness and Light to them the same)
They past that building, which of old
Queen-Mothers was designed to hold,
At present a mere lodging-pen,
A Palace turned into a den,
To Barracks turned, and Soldiers tread
Where Dowagers have laid their head;
Why should we mention Surrey-Street,
Where every week grave Judges meet,
All fitted out with hum and ha,
In proper form to drawl out Law,
To see all causes duly tried
'Twixt Knaves who drive, and Fools who ride?
Why at the Temple should we stay?
What of the Temple dare we say?
A dangerous ground we tread on there,
And words perhaps may actions bear,
Where, as the Brethren of the seas
For fares, the Lawyers ply for fees.
What of that Bridge, most wisely made
To serve the purposes of trade,
In the great Mart of all this Nation,
By stopping up the Navigation,
And to that Sand-bank adding weight,
Which is already much too great? --
What of that Bridge, which, void of Sense,
But well supplied with impudence,
Englishmen, knowing not the Guild,
Thought they might have a claim to build,
Till PATERSON, as white as milk,
As smooth as oil, as soft as silk,
In solemn manner had decreed,
That, on the other side the TWEED,
ART, born and bred, and fully grown,
Was with one MYLNE, a man unknown,
But grace, preferment, and renown
Deserving, just arrived in town;
One MYLNE, an Artist perfect quite,
Both in his own, and country's right,
As fit to make a bridge, as He,
With glorious Patavinity,
To build inscriptions, worthy found
To lie for ever under ground.
Much more, worth observation too,
Was this a season to pursue
The theme, Our Muse might tell in rhyme;
The Will She has, but not the time;
For, swift as shaft from Indian bow,
(And when a Goddess comes, we know,
Surpassing Nature acts prevail,
And boats want neither oar, nor sail)
The Vessel past, and reached the shore
So quick, that Thought was scarce before.
Suppose we now our City-Court
Safely delivered at the port,
And, of their State regardless quite,
Landed, like smuggled goods, by night;
The solemn Magistrate laid down,
The dignity of robe and gown
With every other ensign gone;
Suppose the woollen Nightcap on;
The Flesh-brush used with decent state
To make the Spirits circulate,
(A form, which to the Senses true,
The liq'rish Chaplain uses too,
Though, something to improve the plan,
He takes the Maid instead of Man)
Swathed, and with flannel covered over
To show the vigor of threescore,
The vigor of threescore and ten
Above the proof of younger men,
Suppose the mighty DULLMAN led
Betwixt two slaves, and put to bed;
Suppose, the moment he lies down,
No miracle in this great town,
The Drone as fast asleep, as He
Must in the course of Nature be,
Who, truth for our foundation take,
When up, is never half awake.
There let him sleep, whilst we survey
The preparations for the day,
That day, on which was to be shown
Court-Pride by City-Pride outdone.
The jealous Mother sends away,
As only fit for childish play,
That Daughter, who, to gall her pride,
Shoots up too forward by her side.
The Wretch, of God and man accursed,
Of all Hell's instruments the worst,
Draws forth his pawns, and for the day
Struts in some Spendthrift's vain array;
Around his awkward doxy shine
The treasures of GOLCONDA's mine,
Each Neighbor, with a jealous glare,
Beholds her folly published there.
Garments, well-sav'd (an anecdote
Which we can prove, or would not quote)
Garments well-sav'd, which first were made,
When Tailors, to promote their trade,
Against the Picts in arms arose,
And drove them out, or made them clothes;
Garments, immortal, without end,
Like Names, and Titles, which descend
Successively from Sire to Son;
Garments, unless some work is done
Of Note, not suffered to appear
'Bove once at most in every year,
Were now, in solemn form, laid bare
To take the benefit of air,
And, ere they came to be employed
On this Solemnity, to void
That scent, which RUSSIA's leather gave,
From vile and impious Moth to save.
Each head was busy, and each heart
In preparation bore a part.
Running together all about
The Servants put each other out,
Till the grave Master had decreed,
The more haste, ever the worst speed;
Miss, with her little eyes half-clos'd,
Over a smuggled toilet dos'd,
The Waiting-Maid, whom Story notes
A very Scrub in petticoats,
Hired for one Work, but doing all,
In slumbers leaned against the wall;
Milliners, summoned from afar,
Arrived in shoals at Temple Bar,
Strictly commanded to import
Cart-loads of foppery from Court;
With labored visible design
ART strove to be superbly fine,
NATURE, more pleasing, though more wild,
Taught otherwise her darling child,
And cried, with spirited disdain,
Be H -- -- elegant and plain.
Lo! from the chambers of the East,
A welcome prelude to the feast,
In saffron-colour'd robe arrayed,
High in a Car by VULCAN made,
Who worked for JOVE himself, each Steed
High-mettled, of celestial breed,
Pawing and Pacing all the way,
AURORA brought the wished for day,
And held her empire, till outrun
By that brave jolly groom the SUN.
The Trumpet -- hark! it speaks -- It swells
The loud full harmony, It tells
The time at hand, when DULLMAN, led
By form, his Citizens must head,
And march those troops, which at his call
Were now assembled, to Guild Hall,
On matters of importance great
To Court and City, Church and State.
From end to end the sound makes way,
All hear the Signal and obey,
But DULLMAN, who, his charge forgot,
By MORPHEUS fettered, heard it not;
Nor could, so sound he slept and fast,
Hear any Trumpet, but the last.
CRAPE, ever true and trusty known,
Stole from the Maid's bed to his own,
Then, in the Spirituals of pride,
Planted himself at DULLMAN's side.
Thrice did the ever-faithful Slave,
With voice which might have reached the grave,
And broke death's adamantine chain,
On DULLMAN call, but called in vain;
Thrice with an arm, which might have made
The THEBAN Boxer curse his trade,
The drone he shook, who reared the head,
And thrice fell backward on his bed.
What could be done? where force has failed,
Policy often has prevailed,
And what, an inference most plain,
Had been, CRAPE thought might be again.
Under his pillow (still in mind
The Proverb kept, fast bind, fast find)
Each blessed night the keys were laid,
Which CRAPE to draw away assayed.
What not the power of voice or arm
Could do, this did, and broke the charm;
Quick started He with stupid stare,
For all his little Soul was there.
Behold him, taken up, rubbed down,
In Elbow-Chair, and Morning-Gown;
Behold him, in his latter bloom,
Stripped, washed, and sprinkled with perfume;
Behold him bending with the weight
Of Robes, and trumpery of State;
Behold him (for the Maxim's true,
Whatever we by another do,
We do ourselves, and Chaplain paid,
Like slaves, in every other trade,
Had muttered over God knows what,
Something which he by heart had got)
Having, as usual, said his prayers,
Go titter, totter, to the stairs;
Behold him for descent prepare,
With one foot trembling in the air;
He starts, he pauses on the brink,
And, hard to credit, seems to think;
Through his whole train (the Chaplain gave
The proper cue to every slave)
At once, as with infection caught,
Each started, paused, and aimed at thought;
He turns, and they turn; big with care,
He waddles to his Elbow-Chair,
Squats down, and, silent for a season,
At last with CRAPE begins to reason;
But first of all he made a sign
That every soul, but the Divine,
Should quit the room; in him, he knows,
He may all confidence repose.
CRAPE -- though I Am yet not quite awake --
Before this awful step I take,
On which my future all depends,
I ought to know my foes and friends.
By foes and friends, observe me still,
I mean not those who well, or ill
Perhaps may wish me, but those who
Have't in their power to do it too.
Now if, attentive to the State,
In too much hurry to be great,
Or through much zeal, a motive, CRAPE,
Deserving praise, into a scrape
I, like a Fool, am got, no doubt,
I, like a Wise Man, should get out.
Not that, remark without replies,
I say that to get out is wise,
Or, by the very self-same rule
That to get in was like a Fool;
The marrow of this argument
Must wholly rest on the event,
And therefore, which is really hard,
Against events too I must guard.
Should things continue as they stand,
And BUTE prevail through all the land
Without a rival, by his aid,
My fortunes in a trice are made;
Nay, Honors on my zeal may smile,
And stamp me Earl of some great Isle;
But if, a matter of much doubt,
The present Minister goes out,
Fain would I know on what pretext
I can stand fairly with the next?
For as my aim at every hour
Is to be well with those in power,
And my material point of view,
Whoever's in, to be in too,
I should not, like a blockhead, choose
To gain these so as those to lose;
It Is good in every case, You know,
To have two strings unto our bow.
As one in wonder lost, CRAPE viewed
His Lord, who thus his speech pursued.
This, my good CRAPE, is my grand point,
And, as the times are out of joint,
The greater caution is required
To bring about the point desired.
What I would wish to bring about
Cannot admit a moment's doubt,
The matter in dispute, You know,
Is what we call the quomodo.
That be thy task -- The Reverend Slave,
Becoming in a moment grave,
Fixed to the ground, and rooted stood,
Just like a man cut out of wood,
Such as we see (without the least
Reflection glancing on the Priest)
One or more, planted up and down,
Almost in every Church in town;
He stood some minutes, then, like one
Who wished the matter might be done,
But could not do it, shook his head,
And thus the man of Sorrow said:
Hard is this task, too hard I swear,
By much too hard for me to bear,
Beyond expression hard my part,
Could mighty DULLMAN see my heart,
When He, alas! makes known a will,
Which CRAPE's not able to fulfill.
Was ever my obedience barred
By any trifling nice regard
To Sense and Honor? could I reach
Thy meaning without help of speech,
At the first motion of thy eye
Did not thy faithful creature fly?
Have I not said, not what I ought,
But what my earthly Master taught?
Did I ever weigh, through duty strong,
In thy great biddings, right and wrong?
Did ever Interest, to whom Thou
Can not with more devotion bow,
Warp my sound faith, or will of mine
In contradiction run to thine?
Have I not, at thy table placed,
When business called aloud for haste,
Torn myself thence, yet never heard
To utter one complaining word,
And had, till thy great work was done,
All appetites, as having none?
Hard is it, this great plan pursued
Of Voluntary servitude,
Pursued, without or shame or fear,
Through the great circle of the Year,
Now to receive, in this grand hour,
Commands which lie beyond my power,
Commands which baffle all my skill,
And leave me nothing but my will:
Be that accepted; let my Lord
Indulgence to his slave afford;
This Task, for my poor strength unfit,
Will yield to none but DULLMAN's wit.
With such gross incense gratified,
And turning up the lip of pride,
Poor CRAPE -- and shook his empty head --
Poor puzzled CRAPE, wise DULLMAN said,
Of judgment weak, of sense confined,
For things of lower note designed,
For things within the vulgar reach,
To run of errands, and to preach,
Well have Thou judged, that heads like mine
Cannot want help from heads like thine;
Well have Thou judged thyself unmeet
Of such high argument to treat;
'Twas but to try thee that I spoke,
And all I said was but a joke.
Nor think a joke, CRAPE, a disgrace
Or to my Person, or my place;
The wisest of the Sons of Men
Have deigned to use them now and then.
The only caution, do You see,
Demanded by our dignity,
From common use and men exempt,
Is that they may not breed contempt.
Great Use they have, when in the hands
Of One, like me, who understands,
Who understands the time, and place,
The persons, manner, and the grace,
Which Fools neglect; so that we find,
If all the requisites are joined
From whence a perfect joke must spring,
A joke's a very serious thing.
But to our business -- my design,
Which gave so rough a shock to thine,
To my Capacity is made
As ready as a fraud in trade,
Which, like Broad-Cloth, I can, with ease,
Cut out in any shape I please.
Some, in my circumstance, some few,
Ay, and those men of Genius too,
Good Men, who, without Love or Hate,
Whether they early rise or late,
With names uncrack'd, and credit sound,
Rise worth a hundred thousand pound,
By threadbare ways and means would try
To bear their point -- so will not I.
New methods shall my wisdom find
To suit these matters to my mind,
So that the Infidels at Court,
Who make our City Wits their sport,
Shall hail the honors of my reign,
And own that DULLMAN bears a brain.
Some, in my place, to gain their ends,
Would give relations up, and friends;
Would lend a wife, who, they might swear
Safely, was none the worse for wear;
Would see a Daughter, yet a maid,
Into a Statesman's arms betrayed,
Nay, should the Girl prove coy, nor know
What Daughters to a Father owe,
Sooner than schemes so nobly planned
Should fail, themselves would lend a hand;
Would vote on one side, whilst a brother,
Properly taught, would vote on the other;
Would every petty band forget;
To public eye be with one set,
In private with a second herd,
And be by Proxy with a third;
Would (like a Queen, of whom I read
The other day -- her name is fled --
In a book (where, together bound,
WHTTINGTON and his CAT I found,
A tale most true, and free from art,
Which all LORD-MAYORS should have by heart)
A Queen (O might those days begin
Afresh when Queens would learn to spin)
Who wrought, and wrought, but, for some plot,
The cause of which I Have now forgot,
During the absence of the Sun
Undid, what She by day had done)
Whilst they a double visage wear,
What Is sworn by Day, by Night unswear.
Such be their Arts, and such perchance
May happily their ends advance:
From a new system mine shall spring,
A LOCUM-TENENS is the thing.
That Is your true Plan -- to obligate
The present Ministers of State,
My Shadow shall our Court approach,
And bear my power, and have my coach,
My fine State-Coach, superb to view,
A fine State-Coach, and paid for too;
To curry favor, and the grace
Obtain, of those who are out of place,
In the mean time I -- that is to say --
I proper, I myself -- here stay.
But hold -- perhaps unto the Nation,
Who hate the Scot's administration,
To lend my Coach may seem to be
Declaring for the Ministry,
For where the City-Coach is, there
Is the true essence of the MAYOR.
Therefore (for wise men are intent
Evils at distance to prevent,
Whilst Fools the evils first endure,
And then are plagued to seek a cure)
No Coach -- a Horse -- and free from fear
To make our Deputy appear,
Fast on his back shall he be tied,
With two grooms marching by his side,
Then for a Horse -- through all the land,
To head our solemn City-band,
Can any one so fit be found,
As He, who in Artill'ry-ground,
Without a Rider, noble Sight,
Led on our bravest troops to fight.
But first, CRAPE, for my Honor's sake,
A tender point, enquiry make
About that Horse, if the dispute
Is ended, or is still in suit.
For whilst a cause (observe this plan
Of Justice) whether Horse or Man
The parties be, remains in doubt,
Till it is determined out and out,
That Power must tyranny appear,
Which should, Pre-judging, interfere,
And weak faint Judges overawe
To biass the free course of Law.
You have my will -- now quickly run,
And take care that my will be done.
In public, CRAPE, You must appear,
Whilst I in privacy sit here;
Here shall great DULLMAN sit alone,
Making this Elbow-Chair my throne,
And, You performing what I bid,
Do all, as if I nothing did.
CRAPE heard, and speeded on his way;
With him to hear was to obey;
Not without trouble be assured,
A proper Proxy was procured
To serve such infamous intent,
And such a Lord to represent,
Nor could one have been found at all
On the other side of London-wall.
The trumpet sounds -- solemn and slow
Behold the grand Procession go,
All moving on, Cat after kind,
As if for motion never designed.
Constables, whom the Laws admit
To keep the Peace by breaking it;
Beadles, who hold the second place
By virtue of a silver mace,
Which every Saturday is drawn,
For use of Sunday, out of pawn;
Treasurers, who with empty key
Secure an empty Treasury;
Churchwardens, who their course pursue
In the same state, as to their pew
Churchwardens of Saint Marg'ret go,
Since PEIRSON taught them pride and show,
Who in short transient pomp appear,
Like Almanacks changed every year,
Behind whom, with unbroken locks,
CHARITY carries the Poor's Box,
Not knowing that with private keys
They open and shut it when they please,
Overseers, who by frauds ensure
The heavy curses of the poor;
Unclean came flocking, Bulls and Bears,
Like Beasts into the ark, by pairs.
Portentous flaming in the van
Stalked the Professor SHERIDAN;
A Man of wire, a mere Pantine,
A downright animal Machine.
He knows alone in proper mode
How to take vengeance on an Ode,
And how to butcher AMMON's Son,
And poor Jack Dryden both in one.
On all occasions next the Chair
He stands for service of the MAYOR,
And to instruct him how to use
His A's, and B's, and P's, and Q's.
Over Letters, into tatters worn,
Over Syllables, defaced and torn,
Over Words disjointed, and over Sense
Left destitute of all defense,
He strides, and all the way he goes,
Wades, deep in blood, over Criss-Cross-Rows.
Before him every Consonant
In agonies is seen to pant;
Behind, in forms not to be known,
The Ghosts of tortured Vowels groan.
Next HEART and DUKE, well worthy grace
And City favor, came in place.
No Children can their toils engage,
Their toils are turned to Reverend Age.
When a Court-Dame, to grace his brows
Resolved, is wed to City Spouse,
Their aid with Madam's aid must join
The awkward Dotard to refine,
And teach, whence truest glory flows,
Grave Sixty to turn out his toes.
Each bore in hand a Kit, and each
To show how fit he was to teach
A Cit, an Alderman, a Mayor,
Led in a string a dancing Bear.
Since the revival of Fingal,
Custom, and Custom's all in all,
Commands that we should have regard,
On all high seasons, to the Bard.
Great acts like these, by vulgar tongue
Profaned, should not be said, but sung.
This place to fill, renowned in fame,
The high and mighty LOCKMAN came,
And, never forgot in DULLMAN's reign,
With proper order to maintain
The Uniformity of Pride,
Brought Brother WHITEHEAD by his side.
On Horse, who proudly paw'd the ground,
And cast his fiery eyeballs round,
Snorting, and champing the rude bit,
As if, for warlike purpose fit,
His high and generous blood disdained
To be for sports and pastimes rein'd,
Great DYMOCK, in his glorious station,
Paraded at the Coronation.
Not so our City DYMOCK came,
Heavy, dispirited, and tame,
No mark of sense, his eyes half-clos'd,
He on a mighty Dray-horse doz'd.
Fate never could a horse provide
So fit for such a man to ride,
Nor find a Man, with strictest care,
So fit for such a horse to bear.
Hung round with instruments of death,
The sight of him would stop the breath
Of braggart Cowardice, and make
The very Court-Drawcansir quake.
With Durks, which, in the hands of Spite,
Do their damned business in the Night,
From Scotland sent, but here displayed
Only to fill up the Parade;
With Swords, unflesh'd, of maiden hue,
Which Rage or Valor never drew;
With Blunderbusses, taught to ride,
Like Pocket-Pistols, by his side,
In girdle stuck, he seemed to be
A little moving Armory.
One thing much wanting to complete
The sight, and make a perfect treat,
Was that the Horse (a Courtesy
In Horses found of high degree)
Instead of going forward on,
All the way backward should have gone.
Horses, unless they breeding lack,
Some Scruple make to turn their back,
Though Riders, which plain Truth declares,
No scruple make of Turning theirs.
Far, far apart from all the rest,
Fit only for a standing jest,
The independent (can you get
A better suited Epithet)
The independent AMYAND came,
All burning with the sacred flame
Of Liberty, which well he knows
On the great stock of slavery grows.
Like Sparrow, who, deprived of Mate
Snatched by the cruel hand of Fate,
From spray to spray no more will hop,
But sits alone on the Housetop,
Or like Himself, when all alone
At Croydon, he was heard to groan,
Lifting both hands in the defense
Of Interest, and Common-Sense;
Both hands, for as no other man
Adopted and pursued his plan,
The Left Hand had been lonesome quite,
If He had not held up the right,
Apart He came, and fixed his eyes
With rapture on a distant prize,
On which in Letters worthy note,
There, TWENTY THOUSAND POUNDS, was wrote.
False trap, for Credit sapp'd is found
By getting twenty thousand pound;
Nay, look not thus on Me, and stare,
Doubting the Certainty -- to swear
In such a case I should be loath --
But PERRY CUST may take his oath.
In plain and decent garb arrayed,
With the prim Quaker, FRAUD, came TRADE;
CONNIVANCE, to improve the plan,
Habited like a Jury-man,
Judging as Interest prevails,
Came next with measures, weights, and scales;
EXTORTION next, of hellish race,
A Cub most damned, to show his face
Forbid by fear, but not by shame,
Turned to a Jew, like -- came;
CORRUPTION, MIDAS-like, behold
Turning whatever She touched to gold,
IMPOTENCE led by LUST, and PRIDE
Strutting with PONTON by her side,
HYPOCRISY, demure and sad,
In garments of the Priesthood clad,
So well disguised, that You might swear,
Deceived, a very Priest was there;
BANKRUPTCY, full of ease and health,
And wallowing in well-sav'd wealth,
Came sneering through a ruined band,
And bringing B -- -- in her hand;
VICTORY, hanging down her head,
Was by a highland Stallion led;
PEACE, clothed in sables, with a face
Which witnessed sense of huge disgrace,
Which spoke a deep and rooted shame
Both of Herself and of her Name,
Mourning creeps on, and blushing feels
WAR, grim WAR treading on her heels;
Pale CREDIT, shaken by the arts
Of men with bad heads and worse hearts,
Taking no notice of a band
Which near her were ordained to stand,
Well nigh destroyed by sickly fit,
Looked wistful all around for PIT.
FREEDOM -- at that most hallowed name
My Spirits mount into a flame,
Each pulse beats high, and each nerve strains
Even to the cracking; through my veins
The tides of life more rapid run,
And tell me I am FREEDOM's Son --
FREEDOM came next, but scarce was seen,
When the sky, which appeared serene
And gay before, was overcast;
Horror bestrode a foreign blast,
And from the prison of the North,
To FREEDOM deadly, Storms burst forth.
A Car like those, in which, we are told,
Our wild Forefathers warred of old,
Loaded with Death, six Horses bear
Through the blank region of the air.
Too fierce for time or art to tame,
They poured forth mingled smoke and flame
From their wide Nostrils; every Steed
Was of that ancient savage breed
Which fell GERYON nursed; their food
The flesh of Man, their drink his blood.
On the first Horses, ill-match'd pair,
This fat and sleek, That lean and bare,
Came ill-match'd Riders side by side,
And POVERTY was yoked with PRIDE:
Union most strange it must appear,
Till other Unions make it clear.
Next, in the gall of bitterness,
With rage, which words can ill express,
With unforgiving rage, which springs
From a false zeal for holy things,
Wearing such robes as Prophets wear,
False Prophets placed in PETER's chair,
On which, in Characters of fire,
Shapes Antic, horrible and dire,
Inwoven flamed, where, to the view,
In groups appeared a rabble crew
Of Sainted Devils, where all round
Vile Relics of vile men were found,
Who, worse than Devils, from the birth
Performed the work of Hell on earth,
Jugglers, Inquisitors, and Popes,
Pointing at axes, wheels, and ropes,
And Engines, framed on horrid plan,
Which none but the destroyer, Man,
Could, to promote his selfish views,
Have heads to make, or hearts to use,
Bearing, to consecrate her tricks,
In her left hand a Crucifix,
Remembrance of Our dying Lord,
And in her right a two-edged sword;
Having her brows, in impious sport,
Adorned with words of high import,
On earth PEACE, amongst men, GOOD WILL,
LOVE bearing, and forbearing still,
All wrote in the hearts-blood of those
Who rather Death than Falsehood chose;
On her breast (where, in days of Yore,
When God loved Jews, the HIGH PRIEST wore
Those Oracles, which were decreed
T'instruct and guide the chosen seed)
Having, with glory clad and strength,
The VIRGIN pictured at full length,
Whilst at her feet, in small portrayed,
As scarce worth notice, CHRIST was laid,
Came SUPERSTITION, fierce and fell,
An Imp detested, even in hell;
Her Eye inflamed, her face all over
Foully besmeared with human gore,
Over heaps of mangled Saints She rode;
Fast at her heels DEATH proudly strode,
And grimly smiled, well-pleased to see
Such havoc of mortality.
Close by her side, on mischief bent,
And urging on each bad intent
To its full bearing, Savage, Wild,
The Mother fit of such a child,
Striving the empire to advance
Of Sin and Death, came IGNORANCE.
With looks, where dread command was placed,
And Sovereign Power by Pride disgraced,
Where, loudly witnessing a mind
Of savage more than human kind,
Not choosing to be loved, but feared,
Mocking at right, MISRULE appeared,
With Eyeballs glaring fiery red
Enough to strike beholders dead,
Gnashing his teeth, and in a flood
Pouring corruption forth and blood
From his chafed jaws; without remorse
Whipping, and spurring on his horse,
Whose sides, in their own blood embay'd,
Even to the bone were open laid,
Came TYRANNY; disdaining awe,
And trampling over Sense and Law.
One thing and only one He knew,
One object only would pursue,
Though Less (so low does Passion bring)
Than man, he would be more than King.
With every argument and art,
Which might corrupt the head and heart,
Soothing the frenzy of his mind,
Companion meet, was FLATTERY joined.
Winning his carriage, every look
Employed, whilst it concealed a hook;
When simple most, most to be feared;
Most crafty, when no craft appeared;
His tales, no man like him could tell;
His words, which melted as they fell,
Might even a Hypocrite deceive,
And make an infidel believe,
Wantonly cheating over and over
Those who had cheated been before:
Such FLATTERY came in evil hour,
Pois'ning the royal ear of power,
And, grown by Prostitution great,
Would be first Minister of State.
Within the Chariot, all alone,
High seated on a kind of throne,
With pebbles graced, a Figure came,
Whom Justice would, but dare not, name.
Hard times when Justice, without fear,
Dare not bring forth to public ear
The names of those, who dare offend
Against Justice, and pervert her end;
But, if the Muse afford me grace,
Description shall supply the place.
In foreign garments he was clad,
Sage Ermine over the glossy Played
Cast reverend honor, on his heart,
Wrought by the curious hand of Art,
In silver wrought, and brighter far
Than heavenly or than earthly Star,
Shone a White Rose, the Emblem dear
Of him He ever must revere,
Of that dread Lord, who, with his host
Of faithful native rebels lost,
Like those black Spirits doomed to hell,
At once from power and virtue fell;
Around his clouded brows was placed
A Bonnet, most superbly graced
With mighty Thistles, nor forgot
The sacred motto, Touch me not.
In the right hand a sword He bore
Harder than Adamant, and more
Fatal than winds, which from the mouth
Of the rough North invade the South;
The reeking blade to view presents
The blood of helpless Innocents,
And on the hilt, as meek become
As Lambs before the Shearers dumb,
With downcast eye, and solemn show
Of deep unutterable woe,
Mourning the time when FREEDOM reigned,
Fast to a rock was Justice chained.
In his left hand, in wax impressed,
With bells and gewgaws idly dressed,
An Image, cast in baby mould,
He held, and seemed o'erjoy'd to hold.
On this he fixed his eyes, to this
Bowing he gave the loyal kiss,
And, for Rebellion fully ripe,
Seemed to desire the ANTITYPE.
What if to that Pretender's foes
His greatness, nay, his life he owes,
Shall common obligations bind,
And shake his constancy of mind?
Scorning such weak and petty chains,
Faithful to JAMES he still remains,
Though he the friend of GEORGE appear:
Dissimulation's Virtue here.
Jealous and Mean, he with a frown
Would awe, and keep all merit down,
Nor would to Truth and Justice bend,
Unless out-bullied by his friend;
Brave with the Coward, with the brave
He is himself a Coward slave;
Awed by his fears, he has no heart
To take a great and open part;
Mines in a subtle train he springs,
And, secret, saps the ears of Kings;
But not even there continues firm
Against the resistance of a worm;
Born in a Country, where the will
Of One is Law to all, he still
Retained the infection, with full aim
To spread it wheresoe'er he came;
Freedom he hated, Law defied,
The Prostitute of Power and Pride;
Law he with ease explains away,
And leads bewildered Sense astray;
Much to the credit of his brain
Puzzles the cause he cannot maintain,
Proceeds on most familiar grounds,
And, where he cannot convince, confounds;
Talents of rarest stamp and size,
To Nature false, he misapplies,
And turns to poison what was sent
For purposes of nourishment.
Paleness, not such as on his wings
The Messenger of Sickness brings,
But such as takes its coward rise
From conscious baseness, conscious vice,
Overspread his cheeks; Disdain and Pride,
To upstart Fortunes ever tied,
Scowl'd on his brow; within his eye,
Insidious, lurking like a spy
To Caution principled by Fear,
Not daring open to appear,
Lodged covert Mischief; Passion hung
On his lip quivering; on his tongue
Fraud dwelt at large; within his breast
All that makes Villain found a nest,
All that, on hell's completest plan,
E're joined to damn the heart of man.
Soon as the Car reached land, He rose,
And with a look which might have froze
The heart's best blood, which was enough
Had hearts been made of sterner stuff
In Cities than elsewhere, to make
The very stoutest quail, and quake,
He cast his baleful eyes around;
Fixed without motion to the ground,
Fear waiting on surprise, All stood,
And Horror chilled their curdled blood.
No more they thought of Pomp, no more
(For they had seen his face before)
Of Law they thought; the cause forgot,
Whether it was or Ghost, or Plot,
Which drew them there, They All stood more
Like Statues than they were before.
What could be done? Could Art, could Force,
Or Both direct a proper course
To make this savage Monster tame,
Or send him back the way he came?
What neither Art, nor Force, nor Both
Could do, a Lord of foreign growth,
A Lord to that base wretch allied
In Country, not in Vice and Pride,
Effected; from the self-same land,
(Bad news for our blaspheming band
Of Scribblers, but deserving note)
The Poison came, and Antidote.
Abashed the Monster hung his head,
And, like an empty Vision, fled;
His Train, like Virgin Snows which run,
Kissed by the burning bawdy Sun,
To lovesick streams, dissolved in Air;
JOY, who from absence seemed more fair,
Came smiling, freed from slavish awe;
LOYALTY, LIBERTY, and LAW,
Impatient of the galling chain,
And Yoke of power, resumed their reign;
And, burning with the glorious flame
Of Public Virtue, MANSFIELD came.
FINIS.

