PASTORALS.

BY ALEXANDER POPE.

PRINTED BY G. NICHOLSON AND CO. Palace-street, Manchester. Sold by T. KNOTT,
No. 47, Lombard Street; (...) CHAMPANTE and WHITROW, Jewry-street, London. 1793.

PASTORALS.
I. SPRING: OR, DAMON.
TO SIR WILLIAM TRUMBALL.
First in these fields I try the sylvan strains,
Nor blush to sport on Windsor's blissful plains:
Fair Thames! flow gently from thy sacred spring,
While on thy banks Sicilian muses sing;
Let vernal airs through trembling osiers play,
And Albion's cliffs resound the rural lay.
You, that too wise for pride, too good for power,
Enjoy the glory to be great no more,
And carrying with you all the world can boast,
To all the world illustriously are lost!
O let my Muse her slender reed inspire,
Till in your native shades you tune the lyre:
So when the nightingale to rest removes,
The thrush may chant to the forsaken groves,
But charmed to silence, listens while she sings,
And all the aerial audience clap their wings.
Soon as the flocks shook off the nightly dews.
Two swains, whom love kept wakeful, and the muse,
Poured over the whitening vale their sleecy care,
Fresh as the morn, and as the season fair:
The dawn now blushing on the mountain's side.
Thus Daphnis spoke, and Strephon thus replied.
Daph. Hear how the birds every blooming spray
With joyous music wake the dawning day!
Why sit we mute, when early linnets sing.
When warbling Philomel salutes the spring?
Why sit we sad, when Phosphor shines so slear,
And lavish Nature paints the purple year?

Streph. Sing then, and Damon shall attend the strain,
While yon' slow oxen turned the furrowed plain.
Here the bright crocus and blue vi'let glow;
Here western winds on breathing roses blow.
I Will stake yon' lamb, that near the fountain plays,
And from the brink his dancing shade surveys.

Daph. And I this bowl, where wanton ivy twines,
And swelling clusters bend the curling vines:
Four figures rising from the work appear,
The various seasons of the rolling year;
And what is that, which binds the radiant sky,
Where twelve fair signs in beauteous order ly?

Dam. Then sing by turns, by turns the Muses sing,
Now hawthorns blossom, now the daisies spring;
Now leaves the trees, and flowers adorn the ground;
Begin, the vales shall every note rebound.

Streph. Inspire me, Phoebus! in my Delia's praise,
With Waller's strains, or Granville's moving lays:
A milk-white bull shall at your altars stand,
That threats a fight, and spurns the rising sand.

Daph. O Love! for Sylvia let me gain the prize,
And make my tongue victorious as her eyes:
No lambs or sheep for victims I Will impart,
Thy victim, Love, shall be the shepherd's heart.

Streph. Me gentle Delia beckons from the plain,
Then, hid in shades, eludes her eager swain;
But feigns a laugh, to see me search around,
And by that laugh the willing fair is found.

Daph. The sprightly Sylvia trips along the green
She runs, but hopes she does not run unseen;
While a kind glance at her pursuer flies,
How much at variance are her feet and eyes!

Streph. Over golden sands let rich Pactolus flow,
And trees weep amber on the banks of Po;
Blessed Thames^s shores the brightest beauties yield,
Feed here my lambs, I Will seek no distant field.

Daph. Celestial Venus haunts Idalia's groves;
Diana Cynthus, Ceres Hybla loves:
If Windsor shades delights the matchless maid,
Cynthus and Hybla yield to Windsor shade.

Streph. All Nature mourns, the skies relent in showers,
Hushed are the birds, and closed the drooping flowers;
If Delia smile the flowers begin to spring,
The skies to brighten, and the birds to sing.

Daph. All Nature laughs, the groves are fresh and fair,
The sun's mild luster warms the vital air;
If Sylvia smiles, new glories gild the shore,
And vanquished Nature seems to charm no more.

Streph. In spring the fields, in autumn hills I love,
At morn the plains, at noon the shady grove,
But Delia always; absent from her sight,
Nor plains at morn, nor groves at noon delight.

Daph. Sylvia's like autumn ripe, yet mild as May,
More bright than noon, yet fresh as early day:
Even spring displeases, when she shines not here;
But blessed with her, 't is spring throughout the year.

Streph. Say, Daphnis, say, in what glad soil appears,
A wondrous tree, that sacred Monarchs bears?
Tell me but this, and I Will disclaim the prize,
And give the conquest to thy Sylvia's eyes.

Daph. Nay, tell me first, in what more happy fields
The thistle springs, to which the lily yields:
And then a nobler prize I will resign;
For Sylvia, charming Sylvia, shall be thine.

Dam. Cease to contend; for, Daphnis, I decree
The bowl to Strephon, and the lamb to thee.
Blessed swains, whose nymphs in every grace excel;
Blessed nymphs, whose swains those graces sing so well!
Now rise, and haste to yonder woodbine bowers,
A soft retreat from sudden vernal showers;
The turf with rural dainties shall be crowned,
While opening blooms diffuse their sweets around.
For see! the gathering flocks to shelter tend,
And from the Pleiads fruitful showers descend.

II. SUMMER: OR, ALEXIS.
TO DR. GARTH.
A shepherd's boy (he seeks no better name)
Led forth his flocks along the silver Them,
Where dancing sunbeams on the waters played,
And verdant alders formed a quivering shade.
Soft as he mourned, the streams forgot to flow,
The flocks around a dumb compassion show,
The Naiads wept in every watery bower,
And Jove consented in a silent shower.
Accept, O Garth, the Muse's early lays,
That adds this wreath of ivy to thy bays;
Hear what from love unpracticed hearts endure,
From love, the sole disease thou can not cure,
Ye shady Beeches, and ye cooling Streams,
Defense from Phoebus', not from Cupid's beams,
To you I mourn; nor to the deaf I sing,
The woods shall answer, and their echo ring.
The hills and rocks attend my doleful lay,
Why art thou prouder and more hard than they?
The bleating sheep with my complaints agree,
They parched with heat, and I inflamed by thee,
The sultry Sirius burns the thirsty plains,
While in thy heart eternal Winter reigns.
Where stray, ye Muses! in what lawn or grove,
While your Alexis pines in hopeless love?
In those fair fields where sacred Isis glides,
Or else where Came his winding vales divides?
As in the crystal spring I view my face,
Fresh rising blushes paint the watery glass;
But since those graces please thy eyes no more,
I shun the fountains which I sought before.
Once I was skilled in every herb that grew,
And every plant that drinks the morning dew;
Ah, wretched shepherd, what avails thy art,
To cure thy lambs, but not to heal thy heart!
Let other swains attend the rural care,
Feed fairer flocks, or richer fleeces sheer:
But nigh yon' mountain let me tune my lays,
Embrace my love, and bind my brows with bays.
That flute is mine which Colin's tuneful breath
Inspired when living, and bequeathed in death:
He said, Alexis, take this pipe, the same
That taught the groves my Rosalinda's name:
But now the reeds shall hang on yonder tree,
For ever silent, since despised by thee.
Oh! were I made by some transforming power
The captive bird that sings within thy bower!
Then might my voice thy listening ears employ
And I those kisses he receives enjoy.
And yet my numbers please the rural throng,
Rough satyrs dance, and Pan applauds the song:
The nymphs, forsaking every cave and spring,
Their early fruit, and milk-white turtles bring!
Each amorous nymph prefers her gifts in vain,
On you their gifts are all bestowed again.
For you the swains the fairest flowers design,
And in one garland all their beauties join;
Accept the wreath which you deserve alone,
In whom all beauties are comprised in one.
See what delights in sylvan scenes appear!
Descending gods have found Elysium here.
In woods bright Venus with Adonis strayed,
And chaste Diana haunts the forest-shade.
Come, lovely nymph, and bless the silent hours,
When swains from sheering seek their nightly bowers;
When weary reapers quit the sultry field,
And, crowned with corn, their thanks to Ceres yield.
This harmless grove no lurking viper hides,
But in my breast the serpent Love abides.
Here bees from blossoms sip the rosy dew,
But your Alexis knows no sweets but you.
Oh deign to visit our forsaken seats,
The mossy fountains, and the green retreats!
Wherever you walk, cool gales shall fan the glade,
Trees, where you sit, shall crowd into a shade:
Wherever you tread, the blushing flowers shall rise,
And all things flourish where you turn your eyes.
Oh! how I long with you to pass my days,
Invoke the Muses, and resound your praise!
Your praise the birds shall chant in every grove,
And winds shall waft it to the powers above.
But would you sing, and rival Orpheus' strain,
The wondering forests soon should dance again,
The moving mountains hear the powerful call.
And headlong streams hang listening in their fall!
But see the shepherds shun the noonday heat,
The lowing herds to murmuring brooks retreat,
To closer shades the panting flocks remove;
Ye Gods! and is there no relief for love?
But soon the sun with milder rays descends
To the cool ocean, where his journey ends:
On me Love's fiercer flames for ever prey,
By night he scorches, as he burns by day.
III. AUTUMN: OR, HYLAS AND AEGON.
TO MR. WYCHERLEY.
Beneath the shade a spreading beech displays,
Hylas and Aegon sung their rural lays;
This mourned a faithless, that an absent love,
And Delia's name and Doris' filled the grove.
Ye Mantuan Nymphs, your sacred succor bring,
Hylas and Aegon's rural lays I sing.
Thou, whom the Nine, with Plautus' wit inspire,
The art of Terence, and Menander's fire;
Whose sense instructs us, and whose humor charms,
Whose judgment sways us, and whose spirit warms,
Oh, skilled in Nature! see the hearts of swains,
Their artless passions, and their tender pains.
Now setting Phoebus shone serenely bright,
And fleecy clouds were streaked with purple light;
When tuneful Hylas, with melodious moan,
Taught rocks to weep, and made the mountains groan.
Go, gentle Gales, and bear my sighs away!
To Delia's ear the tender notes convey.
As some sad turtle his lost love deplores,
And with deep murmurs fills the sounding shores;
Thus, far from Delia, to the winds I mourn,
Alike unheard, unpitied, and forlorn.
Go, gentle Gales, and bear my sighs along!
For her, the feathered quires neglect their song;
For her, the limes their pleasing shades deny;
For her, the liles hang their heads and die.
Ye Flowers that droop, forsaken by the spring,
Ye Birds, that left by summer, cease to sing,
Ye Trees, that fade when autumn-heats remove,
Say, is not absence death to those who love?
Go, gentle Gales, and bear my sighs away!
Cursed be the fields that cause my Delia's stay:
Fade every blossom, wither every tree,
Die every flower, and perish all but she.
What have I said? Wherever my Delia flies,
Let spring attend, and sudden flowers arise!
Let opening roses knotted oaks adorn,
And liquid amber drop from every thorn.
Go, gentle Gales, and bear my sighs along!
The birds shall cease to tune their evening song,
The winds to breathe, the waving woods to move,
And streams to murmur, ere I cease to love.
Not bubbling fountains to the thirsty swain,
Not balmy sleep to lab'rers faint with pain,
Not showers to larks, or sunshine to the be,
Are half so charming as thy sight to me.
Go, gentle Gales, and bear my sighs away!
Come, Delia, come; ah, why this long delay?
Through rocks and caves the name of Delia sounds,
Delia, each cave and echoing rock rebounds.
Ye Powers, what pleasing frenzy soothes my mind!
Do lovers dream, or is my Delia kind?
She comes, my Delia comes! -- Now cease my lay,
And cease, ye Gales, to bear my sighs away!
Next Aegon sung, while Windsor groves admired;
Rehearse, ye Muses, what yourselves inspired.
Resound, ye Hills, resound my mournful strain!
Of perjured Doris, dying I complain:
Here where the mountains, lessening as they rise,
Lose the low vales, and steal into the skies:
While laboring oxen, spent with toil and heat,
In their loose traces from the field retreat:
While curling smoaks from village-tops are seen,
And the fleet shades glide ever the dusky green.
Resound, ye Hills, resound my mournful lay!
Beneath yon' poplar often we passed the da^:
Often on the rind I carved her amorous vows,
While she with garlands hung the bending boughs:
The garlands fade, the vows are worn away;
So dies her love, and so my hopes decay.
Resound, ye Hills, resound my mournful strain!
Now bright Arcturus glads the teeming grain;
Now golden fruits on loaded branches shine,
And grateful clusters swell with floods of wine;
Now blushing berries paint the yellow grove:
Just Gods! shall all things yield returns but love?
Resound, ye Hills, resound my mournful lay!
The shepherds cry, "The flocks are left a prey." --
Ah! what avails it me the flocks to keep,
Who lost my heart while I preserved my sheep?
Pan came and asked, What magic caused my smart,
Or what ill eyes malignant glances dart?
What eyes but here is, alas, have power to move!
And is there magic but what dwells in love!
Resound, ye Hills, resound my mournful strains!
I Will fly from shepherds, flocks, and flowery plains;
From shepherds, flocks, and plains, I may remove,
Forsake mankind, and all the world, -- but Love!
I know thee, Love! on foreign mountains bred,
Wolves gave thee suck, and savage tigers fed,
Thou were from Aetna's burning entrails torn,
Got by fierce whirlwinds, and in thunder born!
Resound, ye Hills, resound my mournful lay!
Farewell, ye Woods, adieu the light of day!
One leap from yonder cliff shall end my pains,
No more, ye Hills, no more resound my strains!
Thus sung the shepherds till the approach of night,
The skies yet blushing with departing light,
When falling dews with spangles decked the glade,
And the low sun had lengthened every shade.
IV. WINTER: OR, DAPHNE.
TO THE MEMORY OF MRS. TEMPEST.
Lycidas. Thyrsis! the music of that murmuring spring
Is not so mournful as the strains you sing;
Nor rivers winding through the vales below,
So sweetly warble, or so smoothly flow.
Now sleeping flocks on their soft fleeces ly,
The moon, serene in glory, mounts the sky,
Whilst silent birds forget their tuneful lays,
Oh sing of Daphne's fate, and Daphne's praise!

Thyr. Behold the groves that shine with silver frost,
Their beauty withered, and their verdure lost.
Here shall I try the sweet Alexis' strain,
That called the listening Dryads to the plain?
Thames heard the numbers, as he flowed along,
And bade his willows learn the moving song.

Lyc. So may kind rains their vital moisture yield,
And swell the future harvest of the field.
Begin; this charge the dying Daphne gave,
And said, "Ye shepherds, sing around my grave!"
Sing, while beside the shaded tomb I mourn,
And with fresh bays her rural shrine adorn.

Thyr. Ye gentle Muses, leave your crystal spring;
Let nymphs and sylvans cypress garlands bring:
Ye weeping Loves, the stream with myrtles hide,
And break your bows, as when Adonis died;
And with your golden darts, now useless grown,
Inscribe a verse on this relenting stone:
" Let nature change, let heaven and earth deplore,
" Fair Daphne's dead, and love is now no more!"
'T is done; and Nature's various charms decay,
See gloomy clouds obscure the cheerful day!
Now hung with pearls the dropping trees appear,
Their faded honors scattered on her bier.
See, where on earth the flowery glories ly,
With her they flourished, and with her they die.
Ah! what avail the beauties Nature wore?
Fair Daphne's dead, and beauty is no more!
For her the flocks refuse their verdant food,
The thirsty heifers shun the gliding flood,
The silver swans her hapless fate bemoan,
In notes more sad than when they sing their own;
In hollow caves sweet Echo silent lies,
Silent, or only to her name replies;
Her name with pleasure once she taught the shore,
Now Daphne's dead, and pleasure is no more!
No grateful dews descend from evening skies,
Nor morning odours from the flowers arise;
No rich perfumes refresh the fruitful field.
Nor fragrant herbs their native incense yield.
The balmy zephyrs, silent since her death,
Lament the ceasing of a sweeter breath;
The industrious bees neglect their golden store!
Fair Daphne's dead, and sweetness is no more!
No more the mounting larks, while Daphne sings,
Shall, listening in mid air, suspend their wings;
No more the birds shall imitate her lays,
Or, hushed with wonder, hearken from the sprays:
No more the streams their murmurs shall forbear,
A sweeter music than their own to hear,
But tell the reeds, and tell the vocal shore,
Fair Daphne's dead, and music is no more!
Her fate is whispered by the gentle breeze,
And told in sighs to all the trembling trees;
The trembling trees, in every plain and wood,
Her fate remurmur to the silver flood;
The silver flood, so lately calm, appears
Swelled with new passion, and overflows with tears;
The winds, and trees, and floods, her death deplore,
Daphne, our grief, our glory now no more!
But see! where Daphne wondering mounts on high
Above the clouds, above the starry sky!
Eternal beauties grace the shining scene,
Fields ever fresh, and groves for ever green!
There while you rest in amaranthine bowers,
Or from those meads select unfading flowers,
Behold us kindly, who your name implore,
Daphne, our goddess, and our grief no more!

Lyc. How all things listen while thy Muse complains!
Such silence waits on Philomela's strains,
In some still evening, when the whispering breeze
Pants on the leaves, and dies upon the trees.
To thee, bright Goddess, often a lamb shall bleed,
If teeming ewes increase my fleecy breed.
While plants their shade, or flowers their odours give,
Thy name, thy honor, and thy praise shall live!

Thyr. But see, Orion sheds unwholesome dews;
Arise, the pines a noxious shade diffuse;
Sharp Boreas blows, and Nature feels decay,
Time conquers all, and we must Time obey.
Adieu, ye Vales, ye Mountains, Streams and Groves;
Adieu, ye Shepherds' rural Lays and Loves;
Adieu, my Flocks; farewell, ye Sylvan Crew;
Daphne, farewell; and all the World adieu!

END OF POPE'S PASTORALS.

