SOME REFLECTIONS UPON THE Modern Practisers OF PHYSIC, In Relation to the
SMALL POX.

Written for the particular Use and Perusal of the NOBILITY and GENTRY.

By WALTER LYNN.

Filii Magnatum frequentius ex inutili remediorum copia, quam ex vi morbi
pereunt, praesertim si acute laboraverint, etc. Paucis utaris, and cum
prudentia. Bagliv. LONDON: Printed for R. KNAPLOCK, at the Bishop's Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1715.

THE PREFACE.
I Published an Essay on this Subject the last Year; upon which some of the
Faculty were pleased to pass this Judgment, That it was only written on purpose
to diminish the Practice of the Physicians and Apothecaries in Town.

I here declare, That it was not written with that Design; though if it had, I
believe it would not have been the less esteemed by most Persons.

I have used in that Piece all Deference and Respect to the Good and Worthy
Practisers of Physic at least: And if by Accident it may prove detrimental to
the rest of the Faculty, or those that depend upon it, or rather (to take it in
a right Sense) whom those latter Gentlemen are too much depending upon, it
ought not, I presume, to be reckoned as a Fault of mine.

The Reosons and Design of that Piece I have delivered very plainly in my
Preface to it; and how far suiting to such a Design the Work it self was, is
given in the Judgment of those two very Learned and Unprejudiced Persons I have
mentioned toward the latter End of this.

The Fault, as I am informed, of that other Piece, was, in my not being open
and plain enough: But from henceforward I shall be more free in declaring my
own, and others Sentiments, upon this Subject; of which I here give the Reader
the following short Specimen.

SOME REFLECTIONS UPON THE Modern Practisers of Physic, In Relation to the
SMALL POX.
SYDENHAM Sydenham was both a great Admirer and Follower of Hippocrates. The
first is most apparent in those Passages of his Preface, where he tells us,
That Hippocrates, who arrived to the Top of Physic, laid the solid Foundation
upon Nature cures Diseases. And again, It Is from the Ancients, and chiefly
Hippocrates, we have received the best part of the Therapeuticks; that is [the
Art of administering to, or healing of the Sick:] So that both the true Theory
and Practice of Physic was chiefly this great Writer's, in Sydenham's Opinion;
and still more so, I judge, in his we are going to recount.
was a great Admirer of Hippocrates; nevertheless, we must not allow him to
have been either the closest, or the most successful Follower of him; as will
appear by the following Account I shall give of one that was his great Crony
and Cotemporary; I mean the good Dr. Mapletoft. I had Occasion to wait upon
this Reverend, and very Venerable Person the last Year, and to discourse with
him something about the Small Pox, which was no uncommon Subject then, nor now,
in London. He told me, That he once thought he understood that Distemper
himself; for in Six Years that he was a Practiser (of considerable He was
President of the College of Physicians.
Eminence in London) he lost not one Patient by the Small Pox. At length, he
said, two or three died under his Hands; which (though there were other
Physicians, whom he named, employed with him in those Patients) it gave him
that Concern, as to hasten the leaving off his Practice of Physic; which was
gainful enough to him, being better worth than a Thousand Pounds a Year, as he
assured me; and which he did not probably expect the same Profit from his Pains
in Divinity, to which Calling nevertheless he said he had a greater Inclination
than to the other: and during his Employment in Physic, was as constant in
Public Acts of Devotion as since.

This whole Relation was very much surprising to me; especially from one of his
Character: The perfect Veracity of whose Words I could no ways scruple or make
a Doubt of. And it gave me Occasion to enquire of him, what were his Ways or
Methods in the Cure of the Small Pox. He very frankly told me, That his general
Way, was to do nothing at all; That a Patient of his, when his Apothecary's
Bill was brought in, it came but to Three Pence; another's, (which was
accidently viewed by him at the same Time,) amounting to Ten Pounds: that
Person died. This last Account was not altogether so surprising. But that the
Doctor's good Success should continue for so many Years, when it is probable
there were different Seasons and Constitutions of those Years, and some more
dangerous than others to this Distemper, as well as has been since; that the
Doctor's Method, the same I presume with Hippocrates's, viz. a proper Diet was
the first, the principal, and oftentimes the only Remedy, that Hippocrates made
use of, to satisfy the greatest part of the Intentions we have touched upon.
By these means he opposed moiss to dry; hot to cold: He added or supplied what
was deficient; and took off from what was superfluous, etc. And that that was
to him the most considerable Point he supported Nature, and assisted it to
overcome the Cause of the Malady* and in a word, put it in a Condition to do of
it self what was necessary for the Cure of Distempers, says Le Clark, p. 273.
of the History of Physic; and it is confirmed in Hippocrates's Books De Morbis,
and in his Epidemicks, which were his Practice.
Diet prescribed, and a Regulation in the other The Non-Naturals are Diet, Air,
Sleeping or Watching, Evacuation or Retention of Excrements, Exercise or Rest,
and Passions of the Mind.
Non-Naturals, should so infallibly succeed, when a Multitude of Medicines then
and since given by others has proved either ineffectual, noxious, or deadly,
deserves a thorough Consideration: And before my Departure I could not forbear
telling the Doctor my Sentiments, That the Practice of the Town seemed to be
far different from his. He confessed it was so; and that the Physicians now
made use of Bleeding, Blistering, etc. by which, they told him, they saved the
Lives of many. I answered him, that I thought Matter of Fact was too plainly
against their Practice; and if they saved the Lives of many, they destroyed far
more.

To all this, and likewise what Sydenham mentions concerning the Poor's
generally escaping well in this Distemper, there can be, I think, but one
plausible Answer given: which though it may be so to this latter of Sydenham's,
yet can scarce be allowed to the foregoing. It Is this; That whoever concerns
himself with Physic, ought always to consider, that there is a very great
difference in the Constitutions of most Persons, which makes the very same
Distemper severe and dangerous to one, yet mild and very easy to to be born in
another: that nothing appears more plainly than this Observation in the Small
Pox. And from hence we are told, we ought to infer for a generat Reason, why
the Poor, who use little or no Physic in this Distemper, yet commonly escape
well in it: That it is from the lowness of their Diet, and their different ways
of Living from the Rich; which causes their Bodies to be of another Nature, and
not liable to the Virulency, or high Malignity of the Disease: But the Rich are
subject to it, and therefore they must use Means, and all the Powers of Art to
quell, lessen and destroy it in their Bodies, or to prevent it. And after all
that can be done for them, if great Numbers of these latter miscarry in the
Hands of their Physicians, notwithstanding their utmost Care and Medicines,
it is not to be imputed to their Fault: for they cannot alter Nature so very
speedily, and create a good and strong Constitution or Habit of Body, where it
was not at all to be found in the Patient before. This has passed, with many,
for a good Answer to what Sydenham has said, relating to the Poor's escaping
better than the Rich, though they used no Physic, nor Methods of Art in the
Small Pox; but will not serve, I think, to what Dr. Mapletoft's constant
Practice proved, viz. that the same Methods being used to both, were successful
alike; except we suppose he had no Rich Patients: which, after what I have but
now related of him, 'twere a mere Absurdity to imagine.

This therefore is some Proof of what I hinted at in my Title Page and Preface;
but shall make out more fully in a larger Piece concerning Physick's being
grown in this Age too much an Art or Craft, it being used too much, and not to
a right Intention, in the present Case before us.

But least I should be any ways mistaken, in either the receiving, or
delivering of these Matters; or I may seem to my Reader to have over-weighted
them with Consequences, which, in his Opinion, they will not so very well bear,
I shall go on; and take a View of the other part of Hippocrates's Practice, in
the Exceptions against his general Rule of Diet only. For so we may properly
call them; Exceptions; being but few, and not to be met with in many Pages of
his Works, especially of his Practice. It Is certain however, that he made use
both of Evacuations, and other Means or Medicines, in Acute and Chronical
Distempers: though not near so often in the former, as the latter: Nature being
generally better able, of her self, to bring Matters to a Crisis without them.
I design to consider several of these, but at present can only go upon one of
them, without swelling this Piece to too large a Bulk: But it is pretty
material, namely, the Evacuation of Bleeding; to see upon what Reasons or
Tokens (scarcely upon slight ones) Hippocrates made use of it.

The first Indication in him, taken notice of by a certain Author Le Clarke.
, who has undertaken to put them in Order, is a Plethora, or over-fulness of
the Blood Vessels, in which Case, he used Bleeding to evacuate, or take away
the Superfuity of what was in them.

This I own is highly requisite, where the Case by certain or very numerous
Indications, is manifest. But where not, it is as indispensibly necessary to let
alone or omit it: for by Bleeding we most certainly weaken Nature, if we do not
relieve her. Nay, tho we do, as is most certainly known in many Cases, and
ought to be well noted in Distempers that are both long and violent, as this we
are now treating of, at present most commonly is.

But, say some of our Modern Practisers in defense of their own Ways and
Methods, though not successful; The Gentry or rich Persons who have Plenty of
every thing, are apt to indulge themselves to excess, and so must needs be full
of Blood and Humors, which renders Evacuations necessary to them.

This Assertion I hold to contain very considerable Falsities; and to be most
pernicious in its Consequences, as I shall make appear both by Reasons and
Facts themselves. And for that purpose, shall enter upon a brief Consideration
and Account of the general ways of living, both of the Rich and Poorer Sort,
and what are the common Diet and Delights of both.

The common Diet both of those whose Circumstances are good and plentiful, as
also of almost the meanest Mechanic here in London, is Butchers Meat, little
differently dressed, excepting some few, who delight in made Dishes, Sauces,
etc. but neither in this nor in the variety of Courses, do the Generality of
Wealthy Persons exceed those of the Poorer, or Commonalty, who dine at the
Cooks Shops in London. This then can make no great Difference in their
Constitutions, either for good or bad. We shall descend therefore to the
Deliciae, the Entertainments of the Gentry, or richer Sort, amongst one
another. In this there is a considerable Difference and Distinction of them
from the meaner sort. The Entertainments of the First, where they give any in
their Visits, being with Coffee, Tea, Chocolate, a Cup of Cordial Waters, or a
single Glass of Wine, and the like. Now whoever considers these, and compares
them with the good roast Beef, Ale and Cheese which the meaner sort, both in
City and Country, are apt to set before their Friends or Visitors at all Hours,
will think, there is no Comparison in the Substantialness of the Treat, and
that the latter is much more likely to fill the Body with Blood and Humors,
than the former. For to consider of Coffee, it is a noted Dryer up of the Blood
and Humors; of Tea, the Green first, it is an Evacuator both by Urine and
Sweat; this last by its own Heat, and by being drank in a fashionable manner,
that is, in large Quantities and excessive hot. The Bohea Tea is something of
another Nature, being reckoned good in Consumptions by many: Yet no Person that
I have met with, has complained of their growing too gross, bulky, or
Plethorick by feeding on it, or that it put too much Blood in their Faces, as
is the Complexion of those who too much abound with it. This might make it
become altogether an unfashionable Liquor, which I do not hear that it is at
least upon this account.

The third thing I have mentioned is, Chocolate; which though not so often used
in Visits, is yet drank constantly by many; and this to be sure will be
reckoned an high Diet; Yet I cannot find, that those Persons, who take it (even
in Bed, which way it should be most nourishing) are obliged to make use of any
Evacuations, as bleeding, purging, vomiting once a Month, or Quarter, upon that
account.

I need not mention the Nature or Effects of the other two Liquors, which
People of Fashion and Sobriety, especially the Ladies, though they may taste of,
yet we must believe it is sparingly enough. And as for those Genlemen, who make
too free with their own Constitutions by an over-liberal Use of Wine and other
Liquors, this does not always render them Plethorick, or too abounding with
Blood, Spirits and Humors in their Veins and Nerves: such Persons rather
wanting them, and even a natural Heat in their Bodies upon any Intermission of
their usual Debauch. To these the greatest This must not be taken to extend to
an accidental Debauch or Excess, where it is not customary in young Persons;
for in these latter the Blood is apt to swell and boil up upon it, which may
endanger bursting of the Vessels. In this Case we must use Bleeding, though with
Caution.
Caution therefore ought to be used, how we too much impair their Spirits by
any Exhaustion; when nothing but even a Riot can repair them again; so much is
Custom a second Nature, and as hardly to be put off as the first.

These are but short Hints, which might be cleared and enlarged upon very much:
but such as they are at present, they are enough to show, That this Supposal of
a Plethora, or fullness of Blood in rich Persons, rather than in the poor, or
middle sort, has no good Foundation. And another thing that may plainly
convince us of this Mistake is, the very Countenances, as well as Shape of
Body, of such as live nicely and delicately in the City, compared with those
who live more hardily and in the Country: For in the first it is thin, pale, and
without Color; but in the other Sanguine and full: which made one of our best
Poets, when he brings in two City-Ladies ridiculing the Country-Gentleman's
ill-bred Daughters, to mention their being Congreve's Old Bachelor, Act 4.
Scene 3.
Plump, Cherry-Cheek'd, and Fat as Barn-Door-Fowl: which none doubts was
naturally, though satyrically expressed in him.

I shall go not much farther, nor use many more Arguments at present in this
thing; being not so far swayed in my own Judgment and Opinion, (though grounded
upon Reason and Observation) as to disbelieve there are any Plethorick Persons
at all amongst the Rich; who may need Evacuations in the very beginning of
this, as well as other Distempers: but I am nearly of Opinion, that there may
at least as many be found among the poorer or middle sort of People, and of
such as live upon a plainer Diet too, than any I have yet mentioned. I shall
give the following Instances.

There was, some Years since, living in Cotherstock, near Oundle in
Northamptonshire, a Family of the Whiteings, consisting of the Grandmother,
three Grandsons and a Daughter. The four young Persons were pretty well grown
up, when the eldest of them, about Nineteen, and a very lusty Youth, fresh and
sanguine, fell ill of a Cold or Cough only; which being neglected, presently
turned to a Consumption. Advice was at length called for him, when it was too
late; but who gave it as their Opinion, That if he had been let Blood early
enough, when he had only a Cough, and not a Consumption, or wasting of the
Lungs and other Parts, he had avoided this fatal Distemper; which, in a short
Time, carried him off.

About a Year after the second Brother, of much the some Habit of Body, and not
yet quite at his full Growth, fell ill of the Small Pox, and was taken with an
inward Bleeding, before the Distemper well appeared; which carried him off
speedily. The third Brother caught them of this last; and with the same
Symptoms, viz. voiding bloody Urine, died likewise. Whilst he was yet unburied,
the only now surviving Child, the Granddaughter, of a clear, florid, and
something sanguine Complexion, fell ill: and her they got presently blooded in
the Arm; notwithstanding which, she had a most violent [Haemorrhage, or]
Bleeding at the Nose; which lasted so long, till her Friends about her thought
she would have expired by it; they having tried several Things in vain to stop
it. At length they bethought themselves of a very good Bloodstone; which being
applied, the Bleeding immediately staid. The Small Pox however, notwithstanding
this (one would think) cooling of the Blood by emptying, proved of the worst
and most confluent Kind; yet she escaped with great Difficulty, and is alive at
this Day.

What I introduced these Examples for, is to show, that Persons either of a
mean Estate, or that live almost as frugally as possible, may be over full of
Blood and Humors. The Grandmother of these Persons, who was Manager and
Provider of the Family, being noted for her Parsimonious Temper; and though, I
suppose, the House did not want for Necessaries, having Means to provide them,
yet she allowed very little Superfluities either to her self, or
Grandchildren; their Diets being both plain and common. And as for those
Refreshments of Coffee, Tea, Chocolate, etc. they were scarce at that time
known in the Family, no more than Wine or Brandy, commonly used or permitted in
it; yet these Persons seemed manifestly Plethorick in their Constitutions, as I
have showed; and perhaps they were the more inclined to be so, for living after
their plain manner, and upon a low Diet. For I remember, that communicating
these Cases, and some others, to an old Physician of my Acquaintance, he asked
me if the forementioned Persons fed upon a Milk-Diet. I told him, I could not
directly affirm that was their constant Food: But that the Family kept a Dairy,
and I supposed it might be a considerable part of it. This Physician told me,
the Reason of his asking was, that he had observed Persons who voluntarily
chose a Milk-Diet, and lived upon it, were generally more turgid and fuller
fleshed than others: which we may commonly observe of the poorer sort, who are
not over-labour'd, and especially of their Children.

Another common Diet of the meaner sort is Cheese, which though reckoned by some
not to be a nourishing nor good Food, yet has been reputed otherwise by the
most judicious. For we find there were so long since as in Hippocrates's Days,
various Opinions about this Edible, as to the Wholefomness or Unwholesomness of
it: which in one Place he ridicules, as only given by ignorant People at
random, without considering the different Constitutions of Persons, who may
feed upon it and find different Effects, viz. an Agreeableness or
Disagreeableness of it. And he tells us, that for many De Veteri Medicina,
part. 37.
thin and lean Persons it is found good and wholesome Food: which argues that it
someways nourishes, and fills up such Bodies.

Thus we see, that notwithstanding the supposed luxuriant and riotous living of
the Rich, the Poor or Meaner Sort, both may and do, abound with Blood and other
Juices, at least as much, or rather more, and as often as the former: and
consequently may have as great Occasion for Bleeding, and other Evacuations, as
those first. But that they do make very seldom any use of them, especially of
Bleeding, I am pretty thoroughly persuaded; not only from their general and
natural abhorrence to it, but a particular one in this Distemper of the Small
Pox; which is so great, that I have heard more than one Person affirm, they
would sooner admit a Dagger to their Hearts, than suffer it to be done upon any
account in this Disease. Yet these are the same Persons that escape the best, as
Sydenham observes, and suffer the fewest Miscarriages by it.

There is one thing however, which my most timorous Readers will be too apt to
conclude from the foregoing particular Cases (two of which having proved mortal
to all appearance for want of this Precaution of Bleeding, before Nature had
forced her way by the secret Passages) which is that this inward Bleeding,
being both a very common and dangerous Symptom, we ought to use a Fence and
Precaution against it; and that nothing is so Good and safe as Bleeding at the
Arm. I can agree with such a Person in none of these things. For first, were
this both a very common and very fatal Symptom, Dr. Mapletoft must no doubt
have often met with it, and not knowing how to cure, would have lost some of
his Patients by it; which we do not find that he did, or by any other means, of
a long time, viz. Six whole Years. If he had a certain Remedy for this Symptom,
I do not question but he would have communicated it to the Public long e're
this; especially when he had left off his Practice. If we suppose he used the
forementioned Precaution, and blooded all his Patients in the beginning, the
Supposition is very unreasonable; for this is far from doing See P. 2.
Nothing. It Is too frequently doing Mischief, as I have shown by some See my
Essay, p. 76, 77, etc.
Arguments, and mean to do hereafter by more; but in the mean time shall
consider something farther of this Symptom, and of a way to prevent or cure it.

This bad Symptom, as it is commonly and truly accounted, seems most incident
to Persons of a pretty full, but lax Habit of Body; whose Fibers have not a
true Strength, Tone, and Resistance, when any thing of Force or Violence is
impressed upon them. It seems to require too, that their Blood and Humors be
not only pretty much abounding, but that they should be of a thin and watery
Consistance. I speak this as not only knowing one of the three Persons
aforementioned, who had been my Patient, to have been of this Constitution,
from certain Tokens plainly discovering both the Solids and Fluids to be so
constituted; but the other two were in outward appearance, and upon this Trial
of the Distemper, as we see, inwardly affected almost the same. These things,
together with another Remark I shall mention by and by, have made me take some
notice of a Reflection Dr. Lister has thrown upon Sydenham, for his Method of
using Dilutives, viz. Quantities of thin and small Liquors in this Distemper.
He tells us, that this celebrated Author carried it to an Excess in that Point,
and the Effect of it was, to his Knowledge, very often a voiding of bloody
Urine. Dr. Lister was a Person of some considerable Practice, though far inserior
to Sydenham, and upon whom he is too severe in his Reflections. Yet if his
Experience (or rather The Passage in Dr. Lister is, Salivatio, addis,
promovetur multa and tenui potatione; ita quidem, and interdum diarrhaea
funesta, and micturitio tua mortifera: haec tibi in medicina facienda, scio
saepius accidisse: at causam non vidisti; tantus tuarum hypothesium amer est.
prying Temper into the Miscarriages of others) discovered this to him, 'twas
very well the discovering it to the World; especially when Sydenham plainly
shows himself at a loss upon this Symptom.

I cannot say my self that I have seen this Effect upon any one in the Small
Pox: but I have seen a very sudden and apparent Diabetes, caused by a Person's
only drinking a very large Quantity of Small Beer in the Paroxism or Fit of an
Ague; which failing to be discharged by Vomit, as it had used to have been to
the same Person, presently turned downwards, and the Patient had at least
twenty discharges by Urine in less than twelve Hours: and with such a
Prostration of Strength and Spirits, that Life seemed to be in danger, before
we could get proper Remedies in a Country-Village; which nevertheless this
Distemper soon yielded to, when received; and the Person recovered from the
Ague and Diabetes, thus accidentally attending it, in a very few Days; there
being no contrariety in the two Methods that I used for both. However, I have
reflected upon it since; That if in such a Distemper as a common Ague, a
Diabetes succeeded, by only thinning the Blood with too much Liquids, as is
mentioned; In the Small Pox, which has a much greater Acrimony, the Blood it
self, by corrosion of the Vessels, might be carried down with those Liquids the
same way. I am therefore altogether for a Moderation in this, as well as in
other Methods or Administrations for this Distemper, and not for large
Quantities of Liquors to be given, except the Patient has been long and
injuriously detained from them, so that the excessive Heat and Drought of his
Body does absolutely require them: for then only they are both safe and useful.
All this is by way of Precaution only against this Symptom of inward Bleeding;
which, if due Care be taken, I mean, if no violent Methods, or ill Regimen has
been used, in, or immediately before the Distemper, few Persons Constitutions,
in my Opinion, would make them directly liable to it.

As for the Cure of it, I shall advise but to a seemingly slight and easy
Method at Present, which was recommended to me by a Lady; one of a very
generous and charitable Disposition, who visits equally both Rich and Poor in
any Distress; and in one that her own tender Sex is only liable to, when she
makes a ready Visit, she tells me, she never goes unfurnished with an Herb
called Rosfolis, or Sun-dew; which has this powerful Virtue to stop immediately
the greatest Hoemorrhages or Fluxes of Blood, that often happen in those Cases,
by hanging it in a Bag upon the Breast of the Person: and that its Force is so
great, as to hinder the Evacuation of what is necessary and natural afterward,
if it be not removed in time: For which reason, she takes it off at the end of
twelve or four and twenty Hours at farthest. This she assures me she has
likewise made use of in those inward Bleedings of the Small Pox, and with
perfect good Success; it stopping them immediately, as she had clearly
experimented more than once, and does not doubt but it will always answer the
same. However, there is one thing to be taken care of, that this Herb be pretty
fresh and good, for if it be either decayed, or has been too long or too often
used, its Virtue is then lost; as she particularly proved upon Persons who have
bled at the Nose habitually: For though it will both stop and prevent such
Bleedings while worn upon the Person, yet it must be renewed at the end of two
or three Months at farthest. I have seen my self some Effects of it in this
latter Case: but have not had Opportunities of the former. However, I am far
from discountenancing the Trials of it, as some, I question not, will do, who
are of another Temper, as well as intellect from their great Master
Hippocrates; who says, "That a Physician ought not to be ashamed to inform
himself, though by the meanest People, of Remedies confirmed by Experience. By
this means, in my Opinion, the Art of Physic grew up by degrees, that is, by
amassing and collecting Observations of the several particular Cases one by
one, which being all put together, make one entire Body."

But to return (from this something long, though not useless Digression) to the
Examination of Hippocrates's other Reasons for Bleeding. This first and
chiefest of a Plethora supposed, being not so common or probable a Case
(especially among the Rich) as has been mistakenly imagined.

A second Reason in LeClark's Collection of them was, "to divert or Recall the
Course of the Blood, which was going where it ought not to be."

This might probably have been useful in those Cases I lately mentioned: but we
are not to suppose a Necessity for a thing, where there is none. For this would
be, like a Person, who having seen another die of an Apoplexy, and hearing it
after reported, that if the deceased had used Bleeding, Vomiting, and
Blistering, he had escaped his Death; this should make him upon the first time
he was dozie, or his Head ach'd, send for an Apothecary and a Surgion, and
order himself to be immediately Blooded, Blister'd, etc. by way of Prevention:
Which, if not the first time, yet if this Humor often took him, would
infallibly ruin the best Constitution in the World, and bring upon him such
Weaknesses and Disorders, as he would never have been attacked with, had he
forborne those Methods.

That this is a parallel Case, and that there is as great Hazards, and commonly
as little Necessity (bating perhaps a little present Ease, (which might happen
too in both Cases, it commonly causing an Enlivening or Briskness) for such a
Practice in the one Case as in the other; I appeal to the experienced and
successful Dr. Mapletoft abovementioned, p. 1, 2. But to proceed.

A third end of Bleeding was, to procure a free Motion of the Blood and
Spirits: which, though Dr. Le Clarke has quoted in his History of Physic a long
Case, that will not much resemble the Small Pox, nor any Distemper known in
England at this Day: Yet since there are Disorders of the Nerves, and there may
be Stagnations both of the Blood and Spirits in this present Distemper, I shall
be told, that we are not to take these as slight Indications, or Symptoms; and
I confess they are not, being such as put not only Sydenham, but many others, I
believe, upon forcible Methods to remove them. Yet if we have showed that there
are very great Hazards in going that way to work for the Relief of the Patient;
and that there is a safer and better way, and one more peculiarly adapted to
this Distemper, and that carries several great Advantages with it, of use in
the whole course of it after: This is certainly to be preferred before any
precarious or hazardous Method: And such an one I published in my last Treatise
or Essay, which had so far the Approbation of two of the Greatest Men in this
Nation, one for his unparalled Skill in Mathematics and natural Philosophy.
The other for his equal Reading and Experience too in the practical part of
Physic. That the Sir Isaac Newten.
first of them told me upon his through Perusal of my Tenth Experiment or Case,
with what follows upon it, It was a better way than any thing else in the
beginning; and in a second Visit he terth'd it, A very fair Proposal and
Design. The other Late Bishop of Ely.
Dignified Person, perusing and approving my whole Book through, told me upon
the same Passage or Experiment, That he thought long till he could try it
himself: so much was he satisfied with the apparent Safety, and more than
probable Efficacy, of it.

However, I have not yet attained my end of publishing that Piece, which was,
to have the forementioned, and some other things, fully tried for public Use.
Nor have I yet, on the contrary, received an account of any the least Matters
of Fact, nor so much as Arguments (except what I have mentioned in my Preface,
which I really received) urged against the whole or a part; so true is it (what
that highly skilful Person in a Profession scarce less See Hippocrates's Divine
Character of a Physician; Lib. De Decenti Ornatu; and Le Clarke's History of
Physic, p. 99. where he tells us, that in the most Ancient Times none but
Kings, Priests, and Grandees, were allowed the Study and Practice of Physic.
sacred than his own, and therefore worthy of his Study and Practice) told me,
viz. That I should find it an hard Matter to introduce a new Invention in
Medicin: The Physicians of the Town, as he had experienced, being all inclined
tenaciously to follow their own way; at least not to admit of any that was more
plain and easy. What Alteration this second Treatise of mine (which I designed
to have been much longer) will make, I must wait a little while to know.

One thing more I shall mention here; which is, that when I last paid my Duty
to his Lordship, he gave me fresh Assurances of the Goodness of his own plain
Medicine, or that I call his own, he having recommended it to me: he now again
commended the same: and told me he had done good things with it.

This I speak, because its having been laid aside in common Practice, seems to
me for little other Reason, but, because it did not suit the Humor of the Town
when formerly published: though it is far more safe, and commonly effectual too,
than those in present vogue, which I have given Reasons for in that Essay. But
to return.

A Fourth Intention of Hippocrates in Bleeding, was, for Refreshment or Ease.
The Instance there is in the Iliack Passion. But I have given an Instance where
Sydenham has used both that and Vomiting for the same Intention of acquiring
Ease and Refreshment only, in the Small Pox; which is very often better
procured another way. See p. 81, 82, etc. of my beforementioned Essay.

In the next Paragraph he tells us, That the Conduct of Hippocrates was much
the same in Bleeding, as Purging, in respect of Time and Persons. We ought,
says he, to let Blood in acute Diseases, when they are violent, and if the
Party be lusty, and in the Flower of his Age.

In those Instances I have given, page 11, 12. of an excessive Athletick [or
full] Habit of Body, the Flower of Youth, etc. I should not have been against
Bleeding, but for it, for the speedy taking off a Plethora, and for turning the
Course of the Blood as speedily as might be: But that this is to be done
always, and to all Persons indifferently who have this Distemper, and are in
Youth, I must deny; and once more appeal to the safer and better Practice of
Dr. Mapletoft, who generally omitted this, as we may most reasonably infer from
page 4. As for those Circumstances of Diseases acute and violent, though the
Small Pox is both, yet we must not falsely, or upon ill grounds, draw in
Hippocrates's Advice or Authority, even though the Distemper be attended with
Pain too; which is another of his Indications for Bleeding; those Distempers he
directed it for, being Quinzies, Pleurisies, etc. (as is plain in the Original)
which, we know by Experience, not only admit of Alleviation or Abatement of
their Pain by Bleeding, but very often of a most speedy Cure too by that alone.
But the Case of the Small Pox is widely different: For the greatest Progress we
can make toward its finishing its Course by this, or using other Evacuations,
is only to bring it into Act, or to make its plain, and too commonly very evil
Appearance; but the Patient is obliged to undergo almost the whole Course of it
afterward, which how tedious and harassing, as well as dangerous a one it is
frequently in those Cases, I my self have sufficiently felt as well as seen.
These last therefore are no Precedents to go by; and I wish all who have to do
in directing for the Cure of this Distemper, would not insist upon the
Precepts, (especially as collected by others, or taken from particular Cases in
Hippocrates, no ways parallel to ours) but would rather follow the Practice of
this sage and well experienced Physician, (which would most exactly suit this
Distemper, as plainly appears by See again, p. 1, 2.
Fact) and in it they would find, that he used the greatest Caution against
Evacuations in the Beginning of all acute Distempers, this of bleeding
especially, which Le Clark tells us he very seldom used; and that in his First
and Third Book of Epidemicks, (which he calls the most finished of his Works)
we find but one single Instance, and that in a Pleurisy. So much did he trust
to the Power of Nature, whom he endeavored always to support, and not, by the
too often false Reliefs of Art, to weaken and destroy.

There is one thing still to be considered, with relation to the first Question
started to my Best, most Honorable, and I presume now, Impartial Readers,
which was, Whether the Rich in this Distemper, did, or did not, require
different Methods of Cure from the Poor in it? The Question it self supposing
them of something different Constitutions, and that the Rich are not quite so
strong and hardy to endure its Force as the Poor: which is the Reason given why
they cannot likewise go through this Distemper, but fail commonly before the
end of it (even when Appearances have been good, or made so seemingly by Art,
in the beginning); which Supposition Of their being not quite so strong
naturally to bear it, we must perhaps grant: but then it makes highly against
the present ordinary Practice, which is opposite to the Authority of the Great
Hippocrates too; this Passage from him, warning or instructing in all violent
Methods De Locis in homine, Part. 46.
, Si vero morbum fortiorem, aegrotum autem debilem acceperis, debilibus
pharmacis curabis, quae ipsum morbum superent and abducant, verum aegrotum
nihilo debiliorem reddant. Which plainly signifies, I think, thus much, That if
we meet with a strong Disease in a weak Patient, we ought to use milder It Is
such safe and easy Remedies I attempted to bring in Practice, and should still
farther promote others of the like Kind, could I see any Possibility of having
repeated and fair Trials made of them. The Causes of opposing those Trials,
appear, many of them, in this and in my other Essay.
Remedies, which may diminish or overcome the Distemper, but not weaken the
Patient's Strength. Now it is to the Rich, who are either confessed, or
demonstratively ('it is thought) of a weaker Nature, that we see daily violent
and exhausting Remedies are used; and not to the Poorer, but more robust and
stronger sort of Persons, who might perhaps bear them better, but do not at all
care for the Trial; as we find by their not only avoiding, but even detesting
the Physicians as much as may be in this Disease. And for what too apparent
Reasons they do both, is in part showed.

Tantum.
BOOKS Printed for R. Knaplock at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul 's, Churchyard.
AN Essay toward a more easy and safe Method of Cure in the Small Pox;
founded upon Experiments, and a Review of Dr. Sydenham's Works. To which is
prefixed so much of the Author's own Case as relates to this present Tract. By
Walter Lynn, M. B.

Originei Ecclesiasticae: Or, The A^^^quities of the Christion Church. Vol. I.
In two Books, whereof the first treats of Christians in general; their several
Names and Degrees; of Catechumens, Laity and Ciergy: And the second gives a
particular Account of the several Superior Orders and Offices in the Primitive
Church. The Second Edition.

Origines Ecclesiasticae: Vol. II. giving an Account, I. Of the Inferior Orders
of the Ancient Clergy. II. Of the manner of their Elections and Ordinations,
and the particular Qualifications of such as were to be Ordained. III. Of their
Privileges, Immunities and Revenues. IV. Of the several Laws relating to their
Employment, Life and Conversation. The Second Edition.

Origines Ecclesiasticae: Vol. III. Wherein is contained, I. An Account of the
Ancient Asceticks, and the Original of Monks succeeding them, with the several
Laws and Rules relating to the Monastic Life. II. An Account of the Ancient
Churches, their Originals, Names, Parts, Utensils, Consecrations, Immunities,
etc. III. A Geographical Description of the Districts of the Ancient Church, or
an Account of its Division into Provinces, Dioceses, and Parishes, and of the
first Original of these. The whole illustrated with Curs Maps, and Indexes.

Origines Ecclesiasticae: Vol. IV. In three Books; giving an Account, I. Of the
Institution of the Catechumens, and the first Use of the Creeds in the Church.
II. Of the Rites and Customs observed in the Administration of Baptism. III. Of
Confirmation to other Rites following Baptism before Men were made Partakers of
the Eucharist.

The French Churches Apology for the Church of England: Or, the Objections of
Dissenters against the Articles, Homilies, Liturgy, and Canons of the English
Church, considered and answered upon the Principles of the Reformed Church of
France.

These Five by Joseph Bingham, Rector of Havant.


