REASONS Against the PRACTICE OF Inoculating the Smallpox.

AS ALSO A Brief Account of the Operation of this Poison, infused after this
manner into a Wound.

Audax omnia perpeti
Gens humana ruit per vetitum nefas.
Horat. By LEGARD SPARHAM, Surgeon.

LONDON, Printed for J. PEELE, at Locke's Head in Paternoster-Ro^ M.DCC.XXII.

(Price Sixpence.)

TO My Worthy Friend Mr. William Beckett, Surgeon, and F.R.S.
DEAR SIR,
I HAD rather permit this little Tract to creep into the World by your
Approbation and Favor, than daringly push it out under the Patronage of some
Noble L -- d, or Rich Citizen; for Truth wants no such bulky Supports, and
Fallacy can never deserve them. Flattery was never my Talent, as appears by my
Dedication, in which I purposely omit a Recital of your Virtues and Knowledge;
because I would neither offend you, nor trouble the World with a Repetition of
what your own Works have abundantly set forth; but presume rather by this small
Offering to strengthen the Ties of our Friendship, than attract by fulsome
Panegyric the Admiration of any.

Accept therefore these Sheets as Pledges of my Wishes for your Prosperity; and
how much I have at Heart the Public Good. The small Interruption this Brevity
will give it by your Perusal, may plead my Excuse for the Trouble and believe
me,

SIR, Your Sincere Friend And Humble Servant, Legard Sparham.

REASONS against the Practice of Inoculating the Smallpox.
TO give an Account of the Smallpox, or to run through the different Sorts and
Stages of it, would be too tedious at present; and which having been already
done by Men of Eminency in the Profession of Physic, it would be Presumption
and Trifling in me, to offend by a less perfect Account of my own.

THIS Epidemical contagious Disease, contracted from the Inspiration of Air
heterogene to our Bodies, betrays itself by Pains of the Back and Head,
Weariness in the Limbs, Vomitings, etc. usually two or three Days before the
Eruption of the Pustules; after which, for the most part, the Patient feels a
Remission of Symptoms: and the kind Maturation of the Pustules generally frees
the infected Person in twelve or fourteen Days, unless something unexpected
succeeds. In this Distemper, Nature labors with all her Force, to clear the
Blood of the Poison, till by degrees she drives it from the Center to the
Surface, and effects an universal Depuration: but how far this laudable Work
will be carried on by the new Method of Ingrafting or Inoculating, shall be our
next Consideration.

IN order to which, we will presume the Infection of the ordinary way to be
with the Air first admitted into the Lungs, whence, by the common Circle of the
Blood, by degrees it pervades the whole Body; which Pollution being thus
gradually introduced, occasions not such mighty Revels in the Blood, as to take
off one in twenty, unless a more Malignant Sort than usual (God be praised)
rages in our Clime; and then I fear the Inoculation of such a one would prove
as dangerous to us as the worst of the accidental. And unless the present
Method was wholly void of any fatal Symptoms, and the Patient entirely secure
in the Experiment, ( My Lord Sandecland's Son, who died of this ne^ Method.
of which we have had a late melancholy Instance to the contrary) it would be
the highest Piece of Rashness and Cruelty to give up our Children Sacrifices to
the fond Delusion of averting an Ill that may be, by the Anticipation of it at
present, when the Prospect of a good Event in this, is as uncertain as it may
prove to them in any Period of Life from the other; nay, perhaps the longest
may be spun without the Trial of it at all.

THE instilling of Poison into a Wound has always been accounted the most
destructive of any; for though the Blood thus fermented may betray itself in
the shape of the Smallpox, yet it has always a Resort to a poisonous Fountain,
from which it every Moment receives new Supplies: and as by degrees the
venomous Particles in the Wound begin to abate of their Fury, the Symptoms
become more languid, which though incapable to excite the highest Disorders,
yet in their Return may create Obstructions in the smaller Vessels of the
Groins, Armpits, Joints, etc. the Consequences of which are frequently greater
than the Disease itself, and sometimes incurable.

WHICH brings to my Memory an Experiment of a Pretender to Physic, whose
Ability consisted in a Secret to fortify the Stomach against the Attacks of the
most malignant Poison: The Curiosity of the Populace soon eased him of his
Packets, in which was found this plain Direction, Take this, you will want no
other; and indeed he spoke Truth: for the Patient whose Stupidity led him to
the Trial, narrowly escaped with Life; of which, if he makes a Repetition, he
justly deserves to lose it. However, the Quack got what he wanted, and the
Peoples Safety was the least of his Concern.

IT is very observable in Phagedenical Ulcers, when at any time they appear
dryer than ordinary, that the least Portion of Matter licked up by the Vessels,
excites Fevers, Frenzies, and other direful Symptoms; and if Nature is not
compensated by some critical Swelling, or other Evacuation, the Patient dies:
in whom oftentimes the Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, are so affected, as to become
monstrously big and knotty. How then can we determine for the Infusion of this
Poison, that it shall not produce the like Effects? There is a wide Difference
between extravasated Matter in a State of Digestion, and the Poison of the
Blood not yet thrown out: the former, as the Yeast or Flowers of fermented
Liquors, will in the smallest Proportion subdue large Quantities; when the
other whilst it maintains its common Course with the Blood, receives constant
Checks from the repeated Additions of that Liquor, and the several Ways of
Evacuation; as is evident from some Instances of the Smallpox, where the Skin
is so sparingly beset with Pimples, as not to exceed five or six in number, and
yet the Patient as secure from a second Infection as those who have suffered
from a Redundancy of them. Yet even in these, when there shall happen a Recall
of that Matter, though inconsiderable in Quantity, the worst of Symptoms arise,
and Death oftentimes follows.

THE Degrees of Activity in the Poison of this Distemper, will vary much,
according to the Degrees of Exaltation it may receive from the different Juices
of different Constitutions, the Stimulus of which will in some be more pointed,
and in others less; and the Injuries succeeding, of course will be adequate to
the Nature of these Spicula or Darts, so inimical to the Crasis of our Blood.

WE find in the Poison of the Viper, when thoroughly provoked to an Emission of
it, the Salts of that Liquor to be so obdurate and inflexible, that unless some
of the Fat of that Animal be instantly instilled into the Wound made by his
Teeth, no Remedy proves equal to the Cure; and if perchance the Patient
survives the Accident, I dare be bold to say, a second Attack would prove as
fatal as the first.

PERHAPS it may be replied, That it is peculiar to the Smallpox to affect us
but once; indeed Experience happily declares this Truth; for were we subject to
the Repetition of it, Life would prove a Burden: and we might well with St.
Paul say, Of all, we are the most Wretched. But how far this new Exhibition of
it will agree with the accidental Infection, shall be our next Task.

THE rendering a Wound in any part of the Body, and inflaming the same with a
poisonous Juice, till by the Irritation of it, each Fibril becomes so fretted,
as to produce an Ulcer, is a dangerous Experiment; for that, whatsoever Blood
is sent to that Part, will be changed into the Nature of the Leaven in the
Sore, which may furnish it with greater Supplies than the Constitution can
bear, the Rancour of which increasing every Moment in proportion to the Ferment
made there, the Symptoms will hasten according to the Addition received, that
if a kind Maturation ensues not in a stated time, the Part thus wounded may be
in danger of a Gangrene, and the Malignancy of the Sore so complicated, as to
communicate the Corruption of the one, and the Infection of the other, at the
same time. From whence I need not prognosticate the Event, which would but too
evidently infer Death, or at least the Loss of that Member.

WHEN in the natural Way the Matter is gradually thrown out, and is contained
under the Skin, where it forms to itself distinct Eminencies or Pustules,
receiving their common Capsule from the Cutis, or true Skin; which pushing
forwards, the more watery or thin Substance transpires, and raises the Cuticula
into the like Protuberances, that you may plainly discern a Pock contained in a
Pock; that in the Cutis holding the grossest Substance, and most fitted for
Digestion, according to the Increase of which, is the Bulk of the other. Which
Contrivance is admirable; for that the Coldness of the Air frequently damps the
more superficial Appearances, which sink and flatten, when by the Use of warm
Internals, the inward ones revive, and both are renewed afresh; at last the
thinner Part is perspired, and the thicker left to incrustate and shell off,
without any Fears of fresh Supplies of Infection. Nature having by this kind
Suppuration finished her Work, when in the inoculated Way, the Sore shall
continue for Weeks after the Pox, and not without Difficulty heal at last. And
though the Blood be dispirited and broken from its late Conflict, as not easily
to admit a second, or to occasion the same Velocity or Heat, yet such
Impressions may be made on it, as to dispose it for Swellings on the Joints,
Shoulders, Groins, and other Parts; Consequences confessed by Dr. Nettleton, in
his Book to Dr. Whittaker, to have happened.

IT is certain that Poison licked up by the Vessels from a Wound, will ever
produce Effects answerable to its Nature; and those Pustules thrown out by this
new Method, are but so many Efforts industriously made to expel the Enemy;
which Method, as often as renewed, will cause the same Symptoms either to those
who have suffered by the natural or artificial Pox, as has been experienced on
a Patient at St. Thomas's Hospital; who though he had had them, yet labored
with the usual Symptoms of their new Method. Nor can Reason justify the
contrary; for the Condition of this Matter, thus infused, will always be the
same; that unless we could suppose some singular Virtue to remain in the Blood
as a proper Antagonist, it would be absurd to think them secure from a second
Insection, any more than that the Transsusion of the Blood or Matter of a
venereal pocky Person into a sound Habit, should secure him from any future
Amor with Impunity. What though the Symptoms may ape those of the Smallpox,
and the Protuberances of the Skin bear a near Resemblance, yet the Way of
Communication differs much. Here the Blood is sated with a gross tenacious
Matter, impregnated with the most envenomed Salts, which will necessarily
create Obstructions in the Capillary Vessels; from whence those Pains in the
Head: And as the Circulation becomes less free, the Vessels will be more
turgid, till by degrees the Pressure affects the Nerves, and the Pains of the
Back ensue; which are Symptoms not uncommon to other Distempers, and can be no
certain Proof of this.

BESIDES, these inoculated Pustules are thrown out in the manner of those
proceeding from Wines mingled with Arsenick, where the Quantity has been too
small immediately to offend the Stomach and Guts, which being mixed with the
Blood, innumerable Pustules of bad Aspect, of a fiery red kind, arise like the
inocu^ated ones, having no regular Increase, or stated Period for their
Declension; but depend wholly on the contaminated Fountain (I mean the Wound)
to determine both. While those of the natural sort are slowly ejected, and
contain at first a Latex, or thin watery Substance, which, from the Heat of the
Part, thickens, and converts to Pus usually in the space of nine D^y^ being
covered with a thin and fine Pellicle. These Inoculated, are at first produced
from Blood, and are of a hard Substance; which shows the manner of their
Propagation to be different from the others; and possibly the Symptoms from
this insused Poison, no more than what might have ensued from the Infusion of
any other: that it may be justly questioned, Whether this artificial Pox so
squares with the natural one, as to deserve the same Appellation; much less,
from the Mode of its Operation, should it secure to us the Blessing of having
it but once. Besides, the fortuitous Contraction of this Distemper being from
infected Air, the Vesicles of the Lungs may become so altered and changed, as
to their Texture, as not to suffer Violence from the same venenate Effluvia a
second time: which cannot be said of a sermented Matter admitted into the Blood
by a Sore, that at any time it should prove innocent, though the same were
repeated after a Recovery.

WE will now recite the Symptoms of this inoculated Pox, as set down by Dr.
Nettleton in his Book to Dr. Whittaker, and show how inconsistent to Reason and
Self-Preservation the Experiment is.

Violent Fevers, Convulsive Fits.

Face and Throat swelled.

Vomitings, and other bad Symptoms before the Eruptions.

Swellings on the Shoulders, Thighs, and Inguinal Glands, after the Smallpox
was off; with more, too tedious here to be inserted.

CONSIDER a little this Train of Symptoms, not inferior to any of the worst
sort from the common Way; yet in a sound and healthy State, by the mercenary
and cunning Artifice of some, Wretches are persuaded to change their sound
Condition for a diseased; their Expectation of one day falling ill, for a
certain Sickness now, under pretense of future Security: as if a Person
laboring with the Toothache should advise his Friend to the drawing of his,
lest one Day he may fall under the like Predicament, the timely Extraction of
which would have prevented it; which though not equal in its Consequence, yet
altogether as absurd to enforce the Practice.

WE have seen South Sea Schemes, good Parliaments, Bills for preventing the
Plague; heard of Plots: but, till now, never dreamt that Mankind would
industriously plot to their own Ruin, and barter Health for Diseases. Nay, what
is worse, give up little Innocents a Prey to, the most calamitous Ill, from a
wrong judged Indulgence of averting a worse; who, could they answer for
themselves, I question not but would leave Time and Providence to determine
better for them. Would it not be egregiously absurd in a Soldier, whose Life
perchance in a Battle might fall a Sacrifice to his Country, first to request
his Comrade to season him against Powder and Ball, by making Experiments at him
at some Distance?

THE Life of every one thus inoculated, is as emirently in danger, as in those
who suffer from it the accidental Way; as appears by the Symptoms enumerated by
Dr. Nettleton to Dr. Whittaker; and the Continuance of it much longer, though
perchance the poisonous Wound should occasion no worse Ills than usually
expected. And that the Inclinations of Mankind should prompt them to throw a
Dye for their Lives, when no Necessity obliges, because there is a Possibility
of surviving the Chance, is Matter of the greatest Admiration: sed Gens
miserrima ad omne malum praeceps fertur. Our Condition is desperate, and these
Gentlemen, these new Operators are kindly furnishing us with Materials for our
Dispatch: Which that Providence may put a stop to, are the hearty Prayers of
the Publick's Wellwisher and Friend,

L. Sparham.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHoever Nettleton and Whittaker are, shall not be our Enquiry now; or whether
the Book subscribed Nettleton to Whittaker, was not a Contrivance here in Town,
under those Names, to spread the Practice, the following Paragraph (taken out
of Nettleton's Book) will best prove the Design:

"THERE is one Observation which I have made (though I would not lay any great
Stress upon i^) that in Families where any have been inoculated, those who were
afterward seized, never had any ill sort of Smallpox, but always recovered
very well."

He must be very dull, who cannot construe this.

FINIS.

