A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE HUMANE SOCIETY, [PRICE ONE SHILLING.]

A SERMON PREACHED AT ST. GEORGE'S BLOOMSBURY, ON SUNDAY, MARCH 28, FOR THE
BENEFIT OF THE HUMANE SOCIETY, INSTITUTED FOR THE RECOVERY OF PERSONS
APPARENTLY DEAD BY DROWNING.

BY THOMAS FRANCKLIN, D.D. CHAPLAIN TO HIS MAJESTY, AND RECTOR OF BRASTED, KENT.

LATEAT SCINTILLVLA FORSAN

HOC PRETIVM CIVE SERVATO TVLIT

SOC. LAND. IN RESVSCITAT. INTERMORTVORVM INS. MDCCLXXIV



LONDON: PRINTED FOR THE SOCIETY, And sold by T. CADELL in the Strand, J. F.
and C. RIVINGTON in St. Paul's Churchyard, E. and C. DILLY in the Poultry, W.
FOX Holborn, and W. OWEN at Temple Bar, MDCCLXXIX.

Anniversary Meeting of the Society, 9th April, 1779.
Ordered unanimously,

THAT the Thanks of this Society be given to the Rev. Dr. FRANCKLIN, for his
excellent Sermon preached in Favor of this Institution, and that the Doctor be
requested to publish the same.

W. HAWES, Secretary.

TO ROBERT PALMER, ESQUIRE. ONE OF THE FIRST PATRONS AND SUPPORTERS OF THE HUMANE
SOCIETY, THIS SERMON IS INSCRIBED

BY HIS OBEDIENT HUMBLE SERVANT THE AUTHOR.

A SERMON.
SAMUEL, B. I, C. XX. V. 3. THERE IS BUT A STEP BETWEEN ME AND DEATH.
THESE, my brethren, are the words of the afflicted David, which he uttered in
the deepest anguish, to his beloved Jonathan. Readiness anger, which he had
unwarily though undeservedly incurred, had to the last degree terrified and
alarmed him; he knew the power of his adversary, and dreaded, not without
reason, the warmth of his resentment. The danger appeared so great, and the
consequence so unavoidable, that he could not entertain the least hope of
safety, but gave himself up to despair: There is but a step, said he, between
me and death. His situation indeed, all things considered, seemed extremely
desperate; ruin and destruction were immediately before him, and there was
scarce a probability of escaping it: but what is there which active benevolence
and disinterested friendship will not at tempt, what is there which they cannot
perform? Jonathan, whose heart glowed with the tenderest affection for his
persecuted and afflicted friend, soon devised the means of unexpected safety,
and stepped in between him and death; turned aside the uplifted dart, and
restored him to peace, honor, and felicity. The manner in which he acted on
this occasion, and the ingenious device which he put in practice to redeem his
friend, are described at large in the chapter from whence my text is taken,
where the whole interesting tale is told in that pathetic language, and with
that artless simplicity, which so eminently distinguish the sacred writings.

Leaving therefore the recollection and perusal, with all those reflections
which will naturally occur to you from the consideration of it, to your own
leisure and opportunity, I shall proceed immediately to that obvious
application of it, which naturally presents itself on the present occasion, and
to the original of that excellent and benevolent institution which we are here
met to commemorate.

The words before us seem to point out and describe the general state of man,
and the precarious condition of our frail and transitory being, so aptly
compared in scripture to the grass of the field, which springs up in the
morning, and in the evening is cut down, dried up and withered: life is in its
nature so uncertain, and even at its utmost extent so short and fleeting, that
every one of us might with propriety cry out with David -- there is but a step
between me and death.

But the exclamation of Jonathan's distressed friend seems peculiarly adapted
to the situation of those whose lives are endangered on a sudden by some
unforeseen accident or calamity, which from a state of perfect safety and
happiness reduces them to that of extreme peril, and from which nothing but a
change as unhoped for as unexpected can possibly deliver them: and this, my
brethren, is immediately applicable to the objects which the Charity I am here
endeavoring to recommend is intended to relieve.

Great as the improvements are which in this and other nations have of late
years been made in every branch of medical knowledge, yet is the investigation
of our own complicated frame still attended with insuperable difficulties: like
the rest of the works of God, it mocketh the art of man; we are, as the
Psalmist long since observed, so fearfully and wonderfully made, that we know
not with any degree of precision where our own existence either begins or ends,
and the resemblance of death is too often mistaken for death itself: the marks
are so equivocal as to deceive the nicest judgment, and to mislead the most
acute sagacity; hence it has arisen, as the recommenders of this charity have
frequently remarked, that before this excellent institution took place amongst
us, many, too many, alas! have paid the debt of nature long before it became
due unto her, many are lost in the valley of the shadow of death who might even
now have trodden in the cheerful paths of life and being.

Simple as the process is which we have adopted, plain and obvious as the means
are which we have invariably pursued, it cannot indeed but raise our
astonishment and wonder that they were not long since embraced, and universally
put into practice; but there is perhaps a time appointed by providence for all
things that happen in this world, which we can neither anticipate nor retard.
In the days of bigotry and superstition an attempt of this nature would have
been styled rash and presumptuous; in the days of ignorance and indolence it
would have been derided as useless and impracticable: even in our own, even in
this enlightened era, it has been a work of no little toil and labor to
confirm and establish it. This child of benevolence, fair and well proportioned
as it now appears before you, was frowned on at its birth; it had to combat
with the fears of the diffident, the opposition of the selfish, the sneer of
the malevolent, and the reproof of the scornful. But, thanks be to the great
inspirer of every good word and work! our little bark has at length stemmed
the torrent of prejudice, broke through the waves of envy and malice, and is
landed safely in the harbor of public approbation. We are surprised at what
has been already done, when we consider how short a space has been employed
in the peformance of it; we look back with astonishment, and forwards with
delight and satisfaction.

Not five years, my brethren, have elapsed since first we went forth to sow our
seed, and see what noble sheaves we have to boast, and what a plenteous
harvest. In this short space, I am authorized to inform this assembly, four
hundred and sixty-seven cases have been brought before us -- Now, mark, I
beseech you, with attention what follows -- of these no less than two hundred
and seventy have been miraculously successful. More than one half of them. Have
we not then, my brethren, fought nobly with the king of terrors? we have
diminished his conquests, and abridged his triumphs: we have at least divided
the spoils, and more than poised in equal balance the scale of victory.

True Charity, like true beauty, to be admired and embraced needs only to be
seen and known. It wants no patronage to recommend, no art to emblazon, no
eloquence to adorn it. And such is the happy lot of the institution now before
you, which has already met with more success than our most sanguinary hopes
could ever have formed an idea of.

The blessing which we have been so fortunate as to confer, is of such a nature
that it is not confined to the individual who receives it; many a dependant
friend, many a thankful relation, many a happy family crowd round, and pour
forth their grateful acknowledgments for it.

But in cases of this nature argument must ever give way to fact: the tinsel of
oratory will avail but little, unless supported by the unerring testimony of
experience. To this therefore I would wish to appeal. I would wish to draw your
attention toward some of those interesting scenes which this institution has
at various times exhibited and called forth. Permit me to carry you with me but
in imagination to one of the most tender and affecting, and which, if you had
heen eyewitness of, would never have been forgotten by you. O, for the
eloquence of a Demosthenes to describe, or the pencil The little imperfect
narrative here given might, I think, furnish matter to some of our eminent
artists for an excellent picture; I would therefore recommend it to my friends,
Sir Joshua Reynolds, Mr. West, or that ingenious moral painter Mr. Penny, to
try their skill upon it.
of a Raphael to delineate it!

Suppose yourselves then, my brethren, but for a few moments, in your evening
walk of rural retirement, on the borders of a delightful stream, imagine your
contemplations interrupted by a strange and uncommon appearance. At a little
distance from you behold a busy bustling crowd of industrious laborers
encircling the body of their hapless companion, whom they have taken, at the
hazard of their own lives, out of the neighboring river, and dragged to the
shore without life or motion. Scarce an hour has passed since the object of
their grief and attention had left his little circle of domestic happiness in
all the glow of youth, health, and vigor. And now behold his body swolln, his
eyes closed and sunk, his face pale and livid, his limbs torpid and motionless:
without the least signs of life they convey him in hopeless despondency to his
own home. The whole afflicted family, summoned by the dreadful news are
gathered together. Fear, despondency, horror, and astonishment are spread over
every countenance. On one side behold the aged mother lamenting her lost child,
the prop and support of her declining years; on the other stands mute and
insensible the afflicted wife, afraid to look up to the horrid spectacle before
her; whilst the innocent little ones, happy only in not knowing how much they
have lost, look with amazement at the motionless hands which so lately were
stretched out to embrace them, and wonder at the silence of him who always so
kindly greeted them on his return. Those who would most gladly take upon them
the task of restoring him are most unable to perform it; their faculties are
all absorbed in grief, their limbs petrified with despair, and all the precious
moments which should have been employed in the means of his recovery, are lost
in fruitless tears and useless lamentation. They hang over him in silent
anguish, take their last farewell in the agonies of despair, and consign him to
the grave.

And now, my brethren, observe the change. It chances that one of the sons of
humanity, (which is but another name for this institution) is passing by; as
soon as he hears of the event, he flies, like the good Samaritan, to the
chambers of sorrow, he stops the retreating multitude, the idle sons of
curiosity who had assembled but to gaze at and desert him, calls on the most
vigorous and active amongst them, to assist him, applies with zeal and alacrity
those plain and simple means which reason dictates, as the most proper to
reanimate, if possible, the lifeless mass, and pursues them with ceaseless toil
and unwearied assiduity. Death, yet unwilling to quit his hold, or relinquish
his devoted prey, struggles long and powerfully to detain it: seems to smile,
as it were, at the ineffectual labor; till at length subdued by fortitude and
perseverance he gives up the contest. Nature, no longer able to resist such
repeated solicitatations, resumes her suspended powers, and exerts her
enlivening influence. A ray of hope breaks in upon the gloom, and lights up
every countenance. Behold, at last, again he moves, he breathes, he lives. What
follows is not within the power of language to describe; imagination alone can
suggest to you the delightful scene of wonder and astonishment, of mutual joy,
transport and felicity.

This, my brethren, is not merely the ideal visionary work of creative fancy,
but a real and true, however imperfect representation of what has not once but
often happened since the institution of this benevolent society. Had you, who
are here assembled, all been present at it, I hope and believe there is not one
of you but on his return from it would most cheerfully contribute toward the
support of such a charity. Why then should I not also hope that even this faint
idea and resemblance of such a scene will strike so forcibly on your minds as
to expand them into cheerful beneficence?

But this, my brethren, great as it may seem, is not all which we have to urge
in favor of this noble charity, we can boast of still greater triumphs, and
glory in a yet nobler victory, a triumph over despair, and a victory over sin
and satan.

If there be a crime that seems to preclude all hopes of the divine mercy, it
is certainly that of self murder; as it admits not, like all others, either of
reparation or repentance; it is indeed the highest and most unpardonable
offense against our Almighty Creator, being at the same time an impious
distrust of his goodness, and a daring defiance of his power. And yet this
horrid practice is become of late years a darling and a fashionable vice
amongst us; this pestilence that used to walk in darkness, now stalketh in the
noon day.

Whether it be owing to that penury and distress which are the inevitable
consequence of universal dissipation and extravagance, to the want of true, or
the prevalence of false religion amongst us, to the daring confidence of
infidelity, or the equally fatal desponding gloom of methodism, I am informed
by a gentleman of fortune and undoubted veracity in the country of L -- r, that
since the building of two chapels by a pious Lady of Quality, for the reception
of the Methodists, there have been repeated instances of self-murder, a crime
which was scarce ever heard of or practiced in that part of the kingdom, till
after the introduction and encouragement of those pernicious people.
we cannot possibly determine, but certain it is, that not a year, not a month,
scarce a day passes but we have some melancholy instances and examples of it:
how happy then, my brethren, must we esteem ourselves, in being able to trace
the steps of our blessed redeemer, and to have contributed toward the saving
even a few of our fellow creatures from everlasting misery! Without our kind
and seasonable assistance, they would have rushed with all their sins into the
presence of their judge, and the waters would have gone even over their souls.
It may be said, indeed, (and something is always said by the malevolent and
injudicious to lessen the merit of good works) that those who are determined to
rush on death, if they are deprived of one method, will only have resource to
another; and that we shall not therefore by this institution, much lessen the
number of self-destroyers. But surely, my brethren, if we can turn aside but
one of the arrows of death, if we can shut up one door to eternal misery and
perdition, the trial is worthy of all our pains and all our assiduity. Happy,
thrice happy are we to add on this occasion, that not one of those who have
been prevented by us from executing their horrid purpose, have from the hour of
their deliverance, ever sought for the opportunity of repeating it.

But that the facts here alleged may want no proof to establish or confirm,
behold the seal of truth here affixed unto them. Behold a A number of the happy
objects who had been restored to life, men, women, and children, attended
divine service, and were placed in the gallery immediately opposite to the
preacher.
sight that will plead more powerfully than all which human eloquence could
ever produce. Behold these living testimonies of human benevolence, these
speaking monuments of the divine Mercy. Is it in the power of any sensual
enjoyment to impart a pleasure equal to that which this glorious spectacle must
bestow upon you?

What will prejudice and prepossession say to witnesses like these? Send us one
from the grave, said Dives to the Patriarch, and we will believe. Behold, ye
incredulous, not one but many: what Abraham then refused is now granted unto
you. Behold them, my brethren, assembled in the house of God, to return their
unfeigned thanks for his unmerited goodness toward them. Shall I not seize the
opportunity to speak to and exhort them?

To you, then, ye favorites of Providence, ye chosen objects of its gracious
attention, permit me to address myself; permit me to hope that you meet us here
with hearts full of gratitude; that ye will not, that ye never can be unmindful
of your benefactors; that ye will endeavor to return the obligations conferred
on you, by a diligent and punctual discharge of every duty becoming Men and
Christians. You are peculiarly indebted to Benevolence; you owe her a richer
sacrifice than the rest of mankind, and there is nothing so dear and precious,
which you should not offer up unto her: show therefore, your regard to those
who have preserved you by acts of kindness and friendship; not to them, they
neither want nor desire it, but to your fellow creatures in distress; to all
those who may fall into the like or any other calamity; be ever ready to fly
with zeal and alacrity to rescue them from every danger, and relieve them under
every affliction.

But above all, my friends, remember that gracious Providence which smiled on
our endeavors, and blessed them with success. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto
us, but unto thy name be all honor and glory. We are but weak and powerless
instruments in the hands and under the guidance of the Almighty Creator, the
great fountain of life and being, even the God of your salvation. Except the
Lord build the house, their labor is but vain that build it. Except the Lord
keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain. To him, therefore, pour forth
all your gratitude; to him give the tribute of praise and adoration. You, my
brethren, have been graciously distinguished by him who gave you a second life,
and raised you to a double being; there is no way for you to repay the
blessing, but by endeavoring, if possible, to deserve it. It becomes all men,
but above all men it becomes those who have been thus miraculously preserved
to take heed unto their ways, to be cautious and circumspect in every word and
in every action. If ye are not the most diligent and faithful, ye must be the
basest and most unprofitable of servants; if ye are not the most sober, chaste,
the most thankful, pious and religious, ye are doubtless the most ungrateful
and most abandoned of men. This, my brethren, we most seriously and earnestly
entreat, this we have an indisputable right to demand of you. Very ungrateful
indeed would it be to your benefactors, to spend that life which they have been
so fortunate as to restore in the pursuit of vice and folly, in scenes of
dissipation, riot, and debauchery. On you it depends, whether we are to
consider the continuance of your being as a blessing or a curse unto you,
whether we are to rejoice in our success, or with tears of shame and sorrow to
repent of it. If your days are but prolonged into guilt, and extended into sin
and corruption, if you are given back to life only to offend the great Author
of it, it were better that the waves had long since overwhelmed you; it were
better, as our Savior says, that a millstone were hanged about your necks,
and that ye were cast into the sea.

Need I add an exhortation to those whom the phrenzy of despair once urged to
the commission of a crime which they have since that time, I am satisfied, so
often, so heartily, and sincerely repented of? Those who have learned the value
of that treasure which they despised, and know the extent of that blessing
which has been restored to them. Need I call on them to reflect with horror on
the dreadful precipice which they have escaped from, need I beseech them to
consider, how much is owing to the friendly hand that stepped between them and
death, that was kindly stretched out to save them from everlasting perdition?

We saw you, my unhappy brethren, deserting from that service to which you had
been appointed by the great Captain of your salvation. We stopped, we arrested
you in your flight, and brought you back to the post of duty, which ye had
ingloriously forsaken: do ye not think it incumbent on you, if you hope for
pardon or reward from your Almighty leader, to maintain it for the future with
courage and resolution, to preserve it with honor, to dignify it with more
than ordinary zeal, fortitude, and perseverance? alas! how many are there, who
at this moment, if they had worlds to bestow, would gladly give them for that
seasonable relief, that happier fate which you were so fortunate as to
experience! how -- Quam vellent aethere in alto
Nunc and pauperiem and duros perferre labores!
VIRGIL AENd.
gladly would they now return, if possible, to that penury and sorrow, to all
those evils which they fled from, to that door of life which is now shut
against them! Think seriously, my brethren, of this your wonderful deliverance;
be thankful to the Lord of life for this his gracious preservation of you, and
spend the remainder of your days as becomes those who have been thus redeemed
of the Lord. This is all which we request of you in return for our endeavors
to serve and to restore you. We will not doubt your cheerful compliance with
it; your public and voluntary appearance on this occasion pleads strongly with
us in your favor, and from your present exemplary behavior, we draw a
propitious omen of your future conduct.

And now, my brethren, to you I revert, to you we apply for the further support
and encouragement of this noble work. The fabric is raised, but on you we must
rely for the support, and preservation of it. We have already received, with
the utmost gratitude we acknowledge, much kind assistance from the generous and
humane. But, favored as we have been by the protection of our blessed Lord and
Master, we wish still more closely to imitate his conduct, and to follow his
divine Example, to go about doing good. There are several parts of this wide
commercial kingdom, from their situation peculiarly liable to accidents of this
kind, which are at a great distance from the metropolis, and where consequently
the ignorance and indolence joined to the poverty and distress of the
inhabitants, stand in more immediate want of all possible incitements to duty
and to humanity. To these we would wish to extend our influence; we would
gladly expand our circle of benevolence. We would have, in short, such is our
ambition, and such our hope, we would have the noble Charity we are here
pleading for, embrace and flow round this whole capacious island, even like the
ocean that encompasseth it. We would wish, if possible, to make the institution
itself still more useful, so to cherish this our little tree of life, as to see
Alluding to the use which this Society may be of not only in regard to the
immediate object of saving persons apparently drowned, but in varicus other
cases, suffocation by the cord, apoplexies, hysteric fits, the effects of
sulphurous acids, the steam of acids, etc. in many of which the methods
practiced by the Society have already been used with success, and we trust may
hereafter be of still greater service.
new branches spreading from it. Some scyons we have already grafted on it,
which have blossomed and borne fruit upon them.

One would naturally suppose that distresses so alarming must awaken the most
lethargic; that a call so powerful and so irresistible must be heard even by
the deaf ear of listlesness and insensibility; that the heartfelt satisfaction
of relieving a fellow creature, of restoring him to life and being, would be a
sufficient reward for the exertion of every faculty; but experience, which is
ever giving the lie to sanguine expectation, and confuting the shallow
reasonings of philosophy, will teach us another lesson, will inform us that we
must too often be bribed to our duty, and persuaded even with difficulty to
embrace the means of our own best interest and truest happiness. Men may talk
largely of the virtue, the disinterestedness, and the dignity of human nature,
but it will ever be sound, weak, impotent, and vain. God never designed that
this transitory life should be a state of perfection. After all that can be
said, and all that can be done, we must take mankind therefore as they are, and
not as we would wish them to be. Happy if we can so guide their affections, so
direct their passions and infirmities as to render them productive of the
general good, to make the wants and weaknesses of some continue to the welfare
and the happiness of others. Add to this, that many of those, whose immediate
assistance we frequently stand in need of, are often in such circumstances and
situations of life as render them unable to bestow their time and attention
without a proper and adequate recompense for it, even though they may in their
nature and disposition be ever so willing, tender, and compassionate. From such
it would be ungrateful as well as impolitic to withhold it. It must on the
other hand be acknowledged, and it is a melancholy truth which we are obliged
to subscribe to, that on these pressing occasions, some are often called in to
the relief of the unhappy object, who from education, from habit, from example,
from we know not what invisible cause, are as unfeeling and insensible as the
element that stifled, and the waves that overwhelmed him. Souls thus narrow and
contracted, there is but one way to expand, hearts thus hard and callous, there
is but one method to soften and subdue; and that we have prudently and
successfully put in practice, whilst at the same time we lament the necessity
of it. But the gracious providence of God has so ordained that out of every
evil some good arises; one happy effect of that torpor and insensibility which
prevails amongst the poor, the vulgar, and the illiterate, is the opportunity
which it bestows on the rich and affluent to be liberal and beneficent. It
secures to you, my brethren, the glorious privilege of contributing, every one
of you, as far as your rank and abilities will permit, to one of the most
humane and benevolent institutions that was ever supported and encouraged in
this kingdom. I doubt not, my friends, but you will cheerfully adopt, embrace,
and rejoice in it.

Let us then, my brethren, if we would see many days, be careful to employ
those which God has given us in acts of mercy, charity, and benevolence. Who
knows but our Almighty creator, loath as it were to interrupt us in the
performance of a work so pleasing unto him, when he beholds us thus usefully
engaged in restoring and extending the lives of others, may graciously
condescend to prolong our own, who knows but at the last and great day these
our grateful fellow creatures, whose years we have added to on earth, may plead
for us in the courts of Heaven, may intercede with the father of mercies for
our pardon and forgiveness! so shall we, who have been kind and benevolent to
our distressed brethren here below, be rewarded for it above, so shall the
blessing of those that were ready to perish, come upon us.

Which GOD of his infinite mercy grant, etc.

A LIST OF THE DIRECTORS.
MR. ALDERMAN BULL, PRESIDENT. JAMES HORSFALL, ESQUIRE. F.R.S. TREASURER.
N.B. Those marked with **, have subscribed two or more Guineas; -- those with
***, are perpetual Directors; -- those marked with, have served the Office of
Steward.

A
MR. Adams, Fleet Street *** Mr Adderly, Doctors Commons *** Mr Ager,
Mansfield-st. Goodman's-fields Mr Andrews, Charing Cross ** Anonymous, by J.
Ford, Esquire 2 l. 2 s. Anonymous, by Mr Thompson, 1 l. 12 s. 7 d. Mrs Andree, New
Broad-street Mr Armiger, Old Fish-street Mr Arnold, Tower Hill Mr Asherton,
Inner Temple *** Mr R. Atkinson, Minories *** Mr Ayscough, Chapel-street Mr
Aylett, Windsor *** Mr Ayrton, Inner Temple-lane
B
*** Hon. Mr. Justice Blackstone, one of the Judges of the Court of Common
Pleas *** Rev. Mr Banks, Northd.-st. Marybone Dr. Baker, Richmond *** John
Baker, jun. Esquire London Hospital ** Mr Banner, Red Cross-street Hon. Daines
Barrington, Esquire Inner Temple *** J. Barwick, Esquire Waltham-abbey Mr Barlow,
Crown-office, Temple *** Francis Barroneau, Esquire Bedford Row *** John Barker,
Esquire Mansell-street Mr Belfour, Surgeons Hall Mr Beauchamp, Twickenham Mr
Beaumont, York Buildings Percival Beaumont, Esquire Chelsea College Mr Beaumont,
Hyde-street, Bloomsbury John Beson, Esquire China *** Clement Bellamy, Esquire
Charlotte-row Mr Bennett, Dyers-court, Aldermanbury J. Benson, Esquire Bartlett's
Buildings William Bentinck, Esquire Winchester Mr Biddle, Windsor Mr Billinghurst,
Shepherd-st. May fair Mr Birks, Laleham *** Eben. Blackwell, Esquire Banker, London
Mr Boodle, Upper Brook-street Mr Boon, Sunbury *** Rev. Sir G. Booth, Bart.
St. John's-square Rev. Mr Boullier, Red-lion-street, Spital-fields *** The Hon.
Philip Bouverie, Esquire 21 l. Mr Boydell, Cheapside Mr Boyse, near Blackfriars
Bridge Mr Brabant, Fleet Street G. T. Braithwait, Esquire Custom-house Mr Brandram,
Budge-Row Mr Breese, Watling-street Mr Brewer, King Street, West Smithfield Guy
Brian, Esquire Vine-court, Spital-fields *** Edward Bridgen, Esquire Lovell-court Mr
Brien, Shadwell-street Mr Bruin, Snow-hill ** Mr Briggs, Queen Street,
Cheapside Geo. Bristow, Esquire Mer. Taylors-hall *** G. Brough, Esquire of Guy's
Hospital *** I. H. Brown, Esquire F.R.S. Great Russel Street 10 l. 10 s. and 2 l.
2 s. per annum C. Brown, Esquire Islington *** Mr Brown, Fleet Street Mr Buck,
Strand *** Mr Bucklee, Barbican Mr Buck, Holbrook *** Mr Alderman Bull 31 l. 10
s. and 5 l. 5 s. per ann. Mr Bulley, Reading Mr Burgess, Lambeth Mr Burtoff,
King Street, Covent Garden *** Philip Burton, Esquire, Hatton-Garden Mr Bushnan,
Guildhall
C
Mrs A. C. -- 150 l. Dr. Cadogan, George-str. Hanover-sq. *** Mr Caldwall,
Budge-Row Thomas Calverly, Esquire ** Peter Calvert, Esquire Richmond Mr F. W.
Campbell, Love-lane Mr Campion, Surgeon, Oundle Gov. Cartier, Bedgbury, Kent
Capt. Chambers of the African Trade *** Mr Carter, Minories ** H. Chapman, Esquire
Savage-gardens, Tower Hill Mr Charlton, Richmond Mr Cheale, Grace Church Street
F. Charteris, Esquire Fulham *** Sir J. Chetwode, Bart. North Audley-street Mr
Church, Surgeon, Islington *** Mr Clark, Shoe-lane, Fleet Street *** Mr Clear,
Clifford's-Inn C. Clowes, Esquire Inner Temple *** Dr. Cogan, Paternoster-Row Mr
Coghlan, Fulham Mr Coals, Bow *** B. Coney, Esquire by the Rev. Dr. Markham ***
Hon. R. Conway, Esquire by Mr Hawes *** Dr. Cooper, Norfolk-street -- Cooper, Esquire
Ilford Mr Cooper, Drury Lane Mr Cooper, Gravesend Mr Cooper, Saxmundham Mr
Corrance, Battersea Mr Cox, Fleet Street Mr Cox, Radcliffe Mr Cox, Harwich ***
Mr Cranage, Hungerford-Wharf Mr Crockett, Snow-hill
D
William Daffy, Esquire Mr Davies, Mortlake Mr Day, Colchester Mr Davenport, Strand
C. Daussy, Esquire by the Rev. Dr. Markham Mr Dearnes, Shoreditch ** Right Hon. the
Countess of Denbigh Mr Denham, Foster-lane *** Mr William Denham, Foster-lane
*** Mrs Derby, Coalbrook-dale, Salop 20 l. *** Mr Derby, Thames Street Mr Dick,
Isleworth ** John Diggles, Esquire York-street *** Mr Dighton, Fetter-lane *** Mr
E. Dilly, Poultry *** Mr C. Dilly, Poultry Mr Dymond, Holborn Michael Dodson,
Esquire Boswell-Court *** John Dorien, Esquire Banker, London *** Josiah Dornford, Esquire
Philpot-lane *** Mr Downing, Hackney Drapers, (the worshipful Company of) 50 l.
Mr Drysdale, at Lady Lade's *** Mr Dubellamy *** Sir John Duntz, Pall Mall
E
Mr Earley, Great Marlow Rev. Mr Van Effen, Lemon-street *** Mr Evans,
Fleet Street
F
Mr Fairclough, Nayland Rev. Mr Fayting, Bishopsgate-street Mr Fidoe, Temple
Fishmongers (the Worshipful Comp. of) 100 l. Rev. Dr. Fleming, Hoxton ** Mr
Fletcher, Borough *** Rev. Mr Henry Fly, Islington Mr Forbes, Fleet Street Mr
Forbes, Halstead *** Dr. Ford, Old Jury *** The Rev. Mr Foster, Watling-street
*** Mr Fox, Holborn *** Zacharian Foxall, Esquire Ashford near Stains C. Fraley,
Esquire Knight-Rider-street *** Rev. Dr. Francklin, Great Queen Street F. Freeman,
Esquire by the Rev. Dr. Markham J. Freeman, Esquire Devonshire-square Mr French,
Barbican Mr Frith, Kensington
G
*** David Garrick, Esquire Adelphi *** W. Gardner, Esquire Richmond *** W. Garret, Esquire
by the Rev. Dr. Markham Mr Garrett, Stoke Newington Mr Gale, Parson's Green Dr.
Garthshore, St. Martin's-lane Mr Gatfield, Newgate-street *** William
Gilchrist, Esquire Mr Gilchrist, Twickenham *** Mr Good, Gracechurch-street *** Mr
Good, Fleet Street Mr Gorst, Eastcheap *** Rev. Mr Gosset, Edward-street Mr
Gotobed, Inner Temple *** Mr Grote, Leadenhall-street 25 l. Mr Graffty,
Cheapside Mr Graves, St. Bride's Passage *** Edward Grubb, Esquire Fishmongers Hall
*** J. Grubb, Esquire Gray's-Inn D. Gustavson, Esquire Fenwick-court, Holborn
H
G. Hadley, Esquire Southampton-street Mr Hammerton, Bread-street Jonas Hanway, Esquire
Red-Lion-square Rev. H. Hankey, East-Bergholt, Sussolk Mr Harrington,
Red-Lion-street Southwark Mr Harris, New Palace-yard *** Mr Harris, St.
Paul's-church-yard *** Rev. Mr. Harrison, Brompton *** Mr Harriot, Minories
Isaac Hawkins, Esquire *** Miss Hawkins *** S. Hawkins, Esquire E. Hawkins, Esquire
by the Rev. Dr. Markham *** Mr W. Hawes, Palsgrave Place, Strand *** Mr Hawes,
Thames Street Mr Hawes, Enfield Mr Hawys, Fowkes Buildings, Tower-st. ** Mr
Hayward, Hackney ** Dr. Heberden, F.R.S. Pall mall Mrs Heath, Temple Bar Mr G.
Hebert, Crispin-str. Spitalfields *** -- Henbury, Esquire *** Mr Henley, F.R.S.
Borough *** Hon. Mr Herbert *** Mr Herne, Paternoster-row Mr Heron,
Waltham-abbey *** Rev. Mr Herries, Lancaster-court ** J. Hingeston, Esquire
New-North-street James Hezletine, Esquire Doctors Commons Dr. Hicks, Stable-yard,
St. James's Mr Hill, Lothbury *** Peter Hodgson, Esquire *** Mr Hodgson, Wapping Mr
Hodgson, New Basinghall-street *** Mrs V. D. Hoeck, Great Russel Street ** Mr
Hole, Islington Mr Hooper, Tooley-street *** Benj. Hopkins, Esquire Chamberlain of
London Mr Hopkins, Harwich *** James Horsfall, Esquire F.R.S. Temple Mr Howard,
Walton Dr. Hossack, Colchester T. Hull, Esquire Martlet-court, Bow-str. *** Mr
Hunter, Fetter-lane *** Mr H. Hurford, St. John's-street *** Mr John Hurford,
Highgate
I
Francis Ingram, Esquire Inner Temple Mrs Inge, Welbeck-street Mr Inwood, Isleworth
Mr Jackson, Knightsbridge *** Mr Jacob, Fish-street-hill *** Mr Jacob, St.
Mary-axe Hugh James, Esquire Fleet Street Edward Jeffries, Esquire Lothbury Rev. Dr.
Jeffries, Bishopsgate-street Dr. Johnson, Brentford Thomas Jones, Esquire
Park-street, Westminster Rev. Mr Jones, Peckham *** Mr Jones, Middle Temple Mr
Jones, Mansion House-street Mr Jones, Gravesend Mr Jones, Lambeth-hill Mr
Inman, St. Osyth
K
*** F. Kemble, Esquire New-co. Swithin's-la. Mr Kennet, Essex-stairs Mr Kenny, St.
James's-street T. King, Esquire Great Queen Street Mr King, Mortlake Mr Kinnard,
Chelsea Rev. Dr. Kippas, Crown-str. Westminster. Mr Kite, Gravesend Mr Knott,
King Street, Covent Garden Dr. Koostray, Union-coart, Broad-street
L
** Sir John Lade, Bart. Grosvenor-place A Lady, by Mr Jackson Mr Ladyman,
Budge-row Mr Lancaster, Theobald's-row Mr Langley, Church-lane, Whitechapel ***
Dr. Lettsom, F.R.S. -- F.A.S. *** Mr Alderman Lee Sir Ashton Lever, Leicester
House *** Mr. Lewin, Hackney ** Mr R. Lewin Dr. Lewis, Kingston Mr Ley,
Wandsworth I. H. Lisle, Esquire Colchester Mr Lumsden, Battersea
M
Mr Maddox, Rotherhithe Mr Mallet, Mark-lane Mr Man, Gravesend *** R. Manning,
Esquire Knight Rider-street *** J. Manwaring, Esquire Islington *** Rev. Dr. Markham,
Whitechapel ** Mr Marratt, jun. Hatton-street Mrs Mattocks, Covent garden ***
Mr Mead, Hackney *** Mr Miers, jun. Lad-lane *** Rev. Dr. Milne, Deptford ***
Samuel Moody, Esquire Leadenhall-street *** Mr Morgan, West Smithfield Mr Morson,
King Street *** Cha. Murray, Esquire Consul at Madeira
N
Joseph Nash, Esquire New-court, Sweeting's-lane Mr Newell, Colchester Mr Nodin,
Leadenhall-street Mr Norris, Putney
O
*** Mr Oaks, Snow-hill *** Mr Oldham, Manchester Mr Oliver, Brentford Mr
Oliver, King Street, Smithfield Mr Oliver, Bartholomew-close Mrs Osgood,
Crutched-friars Mr W. Owen, Temple Bar
P
Robert Palmer, Esquire Great Russel-str. *** Mr Parry, Fulham Mr Parkinson,
Hoxton-square Mr Parsons, Coventry-street Mr Patch, Norfolk-street Mr Patten,
Ratcliff-cross Mr Pain, Bridgewater-square *** Mr Pearson, Spital-square Mr
Pearson, Cheapside Mr Phipps, Wardrobe-court Mr Pierce, Wapping dock Stairs ***
Mr Lewis Pingo, Grays-inn-lane Mr H. Pingo, Holborn W. Pocock, Esquire
Devonshire-street, Queen's-sq. *** Mr Pollard, Middle Temple *** J. Porter,
Esquire: Comptroller General of his Majesty's Customs in America Mr Powell,
Newgate-street Richard Price, D.D. F.R.S. *** Samuel Prime, Esquire F.R.S.
Bedford-row, 5l. 5s. per annum Sir John Pringle, Bart. F.R.S. and Physician to
their Majesty's Charles Pryse, Esquire Parson's-green
R
Humfreys Ram, Esquire Richmond, Surry Mr Read, Ludgate Hill Samuel Reynardson, Esquire
F.R.S. G. Ormond-st. *** A. Richardson, Esquire Paddington-green Mr Richardson,
Racquet-court, Fleet-str. ** -- Richardson, Esquire John Rivington, Esquire St.
Paul's-church-yard *** Mr Robinson, Gray's-inn Dr. Rogers, Red Lion-str.
Clerkenwell Mr Rogers, Manningtree *** Rev. Mr Roman, Blackfriars Mrs Rode,
Lemon-street Mr Roots, Kingston ** John Rose, Esquire Putney Bartholomew Ruspini,
Esquire Pall mall
S
*** The Right Hon. the Earl of Stamford, by the Rev. Dr. Markham 21 l. *** Mr
W. Salt, Poultry Mr Sanders, Cheshunt *** Mr Alderman Sawbridge Mr Scott,
Peterborough-court, Mr Sealy, Throgmorton-street *** Rev. Mr Sellon,
Clerkenwell Mr She, Craven-street J. Sherwood, Esquire Shadwell Dr. Sequeira,
Mark-lane *** W. Sharp, Esquire Old Jury Mr Sherwin, Enfield Dr. Sims,
Tokenhouse-yard Mr Simson, East Bergholt Mr Skinner, Aldersgate Street Mrs
Skinner, Aldersgate Street Mr Slack, Gravel-lane, Houndsditch Dr. Smith,
Bride-street Allyn Smith, Esquire Battersea H. Smith, Esquire Scott's Yard, Cannon-st.
Mr Smith, Limehouse Mr Smith, Fan-court, Fenchurch-street *** W. Smith, Esquire
Cannon-street Mr Smithson, Castle-yard Medical Society at Colchester, by Mr.
Hawes 21l. Society, assembling at Coachmaker's-hall, Foster-lane, by Mr.
Denham, 5 l. 5 s. *** Rev. Mr Sowden, Winchester Mr Squire, Wandsworth Mr
Stapleton, Colchester *** Mr Stenson, Kensington R. Sterling, Esquire F.R.S.
Colchester *** Mr Styles, Fleet Street *** Mr Stone, Cheapside Lion De Symons,
Esquire Winchester-street
T
E. Tailor, Esquire Inner Temple *** Mr James Tailor, Tower Hill Mr Tailor,
Brentford Mr Tailor, Woolwich *** Rev. Mr Tice, Enfield Dr Thackeray, Windsor
Mr Thomas, Greenwich ** Mr Thompson, Houndsditch Mr Thornthwaite, Islington Mr
Tondero, Twickenham W. Toll, Esquire Chelsea Mr Toulmin, Hackney Dr. Topping,
Colchester Mr Topham, Cheapside *** T. Tower, Esquire by Mr Hawes 21 l. *** Rev. Mr
Joseph Towers, Well-street Matthew Twogood, Esquire America-sq. *** Mr Townsend,
Fleet Street *** Mr Towes, Salisbury-court, Fleet Street Mr Torin, Walworth Mr
Tuson, Boxford *** Arthur Tyton, Esquire Buckingham-str. York-buildings
V
Mr. W. Vaughan, Mincing-lane Mr Vaux, Pudding-lane J. Vernon, Esquire
Lincoln's End *** John Vowell, Esquire Watling-street
W
Mr Waddington, Cheapside Mr Wade, Bride-lane Mr Wade, Colchester *** Rev. Mr
Walker, Islington Mr Walford, Garlick-hill Mrs Walpole *** Boucher Walton, Esquire
Throgmorton-street *** Mr Warrant, Minories *** Mrs Ann Wastefield, Mile-End,
the Legacy of R. Wastefield, Esquire 10 l. Dr Watkinson, Fenchurch-street ***
Richard Watlington, Esquire Pall Mall Dr Watson, F.R.S. Lincoln's-inn-fields Mr
Watson, Holborn Mr Watson, Ponder's-End *** Rev. Mr John Wesley, City-Road ***
Mr T. Wisdom, Watford 20 l. *** Mr Whipham, Fleet Street R. Willet, Esquire
Dean-street, Soho Rev. Dr. Williams, Library, Redcross-street ** Edward Win,
Esquire Temple *** Rev. Dr Wilson, Westminster *** Mr Willson, Minories *** S.
Whitebread, Esquire Chiswell-st. 21 l. *** Mr Withy, Craven-street, Strand G. Wood,
Esquire London Coffee-house Mr Wood, Woolwich *** Rev. Mr Woodroffe, Rector of
Cranham, Essex, by Mr. Hawes, 10 l. 10 s. ** Mr Woodfall, Salisbury-court Mr
Wright, Bolt-court Mr Wright, near Westminster-bridge Mr Wyatt, Albion Place Mr
Wyatt, Minories ** Mr Wind, Warwick-court Mr Wrigglesworth, Minories
X
A. X. at the London Coffee-House
Y
His Grace the Archbishop of York
MEDICAL ASSISTANTS.
MIDDLESEX.
LONDON and WESTMINSTER SIDE.
Below LONDON BRIDGE.
LIMEHOUSE -- Mr Smith Ratcliffe-Cross -- Mr Patten and Mr Cox Shadwell -- Mr
Bryen Wapping -- Mr Pierce, Mr Hodgson, Mr Williams, Mr Midford, and Mr Teise
Minories -- Mr Wyat Billingsgate -- Mr Vaux America-Square -- Mr Crawford
Between London and Westminster Bridges.
Lawrence Pountney-Lane -- Mr Be Great Eastcheap -- Dr Lettsom Broad-Street --
Dr Kooystra Garlick-Hill -- Mr Walford Old Jury -- W. Sharp, Esquire Old
Fish-Street -- Mr Armiger, and Mr James Holborn -- Mr Watson and Mr Dymond
Paternoster Row -- Dr Cogan Fleet Street -- Mr Forbes Red Lion-street -- Dr
Rogers Strand -- Mr Hawes (Palsgrave-Place) Mr Buck Norfolk-Street -- Dr Cooper
York-Buildings -- Mr Beaumont Whitehall -- Mr Andrews Westminster -- Mr Harris
and Mr Wright Chelsea -- Mr Halford, Mr Greenhead, and Mr Kinnard Fulham -- Mr
Parry and Mr Coghlan Parson's-Green -- Dr Cadogan and Mr Messiter Hammersmith
-- Mr Loveday, Mr Palser, and Mr Terry Chiswick -- Mr Hedges and Mr Tenison
Brentford -- Dr Johnson and Mr Corson, Messrs Oliver and Ansell, Mr Downing, Mr
Harding, Mr Tailor and Mr Webb Isleworth -- Messrs Dick and Inwood Twickenham
-- Messrs Beauchcamp and Tondero -- Mr Gilchrist Hampton -- Mr Griffenhoofe
Laleham -- Mr Birks Sunbury -- Mr Boon Stains -- Mr Pope
BERKS.
Wallingford -- Mr Hunter, Mr Golding, and Mr Flamank Reading -- Mr Snowden, Mr
Pope Windsor -- Dr Biddle, Dr Thackeray, Mr Aylett
SERPENTINE RIVER.
Knightsbridge -- Mr Jackson Shepherd-Street -- Mr Billinghurst
KENT and SURRY SIDE.
Below London Bridge.
Gravesend -- Mr Bolger, Mr Cooper, Mr Harrison, Mr Jones, Mr Kite, and Mr Man
Woolwich -- Mr Bickerton, Mr Irwin, Mr Tailor Deptford -- Mr Harrison and Mr
Sutton Greenwich -- Mr Mills, Mr Wheeler, Mr Pocock Tooley-Street -- Mr Breach
and Mr Hooper Dock-Head -- Mr Penry Allard's-Point -- Mr Chapman Rotherhithe --
Messrs W. and G. Chapman, Mr Gray, Mr Maddox and Mr Green
SURRY.
Blackfriars -- Mr Boyse and Mr Ridout Lambeth -- Mr Burgess Battersea --
Messrs Lumsden, Alderman and Corrance Wandsworth -- Messrs Squire and Ley
Putney -- John Rose, Esquire and Mr Norris Mortlake -- Mr Davies and Mr King
Richmond -- Dr Baker, Mr Jackson, Mr Smith, and Mr Charlton Kingston -- Dr
Lewis, Dr Bennett, Mr Hemmings, Mr Roots, Mr Smith, and Mr Waterbouse Henley --
Mr Pope and Mr Mapleton Great Marlow -- Messrs Sneath and Trash, Mr Eardly
Walton -- Messrs Howard and Carpenter Weybridge -- Mr Webb Chertsey -- Mr
Mapletoft and Mr Smith
NEW RIVER, ISLINGTON.
Islington -- Mr Hole and Mr Church Hoxton -- Mr Parkinson, Hoxton-Square
Shoreditch -- Mr Dearnes Stoke Newington -- Mr Garrett and Mr John Hackney --
Mr Downing, Mr Howard, and Mr Toulmin Enfield -- Mr Sherwin and Mr Harrison Bow
-- Mr Wilkinson and Mr Coals
ESSEX.
Waltham-Abbey -- Mr Cannon and Mr Heron Stratford -- Messrs How, Talbutt, and
Miller Colchester -- Dr Hossack, Dr Topping, J. H. Lisle, Esquire Mr Sterling, Mr
Day, Mr Staples, Mr Wade, and Mr Newel Harwich -- Mr Cox and Mr Hopkins
Halstead -- Mr Forbes St Osyth -- Mr Inman Manningtree -- Mr Rogers
HERTFORD-SHIRE.
Hertford -- Mr Chandler, Mr Frost, and Mr Cutler Ware -- Mr Burr, Mr Welford
and Mr Tice Cheshunt -- Mr Hooper and Mr Sanders Hoddesdon -- Mr Baker
BEDFORD.
Mr Gadsby, Mr Pulley and Mr Jackson
SUFFOLK.
Nayland -- Mr Fairclough East Bergholt -- Mr Simson Boxford -- Mr Juson
Holbrook -- Mr Buck Saxmundham -- Mr Cooper Long-Milford -- Mr Bolton
SHREWSBURY.
Dr Owen, Mr Cooper, Mr Sanford, Mr Lomax, Messrs Winnals, Mr Simons, Mr
Cartwright, Messrs Holt and Bromfield, Mr Rogers, Mr Stainer, Mr Tudor, Mr
Win, Mr Yomans Bridgenorth -- Mr Beale and Mr Stedman Newport -- Mr Collins
and Mr Jones Wenlock -- Mr Granger Coalbrook-Dale -- Mr Bodens and Mr Wright
Brosley -- Mr Corbet, Mr Rowley and Mr Wyke Wellington -- Mr Cartwright and Mr
Roe Shiffnell -- Mr Young Church-Stretton -- Mr Langslow Oswestry -- Mr Price,
Mr Griffiths, Mr Evans, and Mr Read
A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE HUMANE SOCIETY, From its first ESTABLISHMENT in MAY,
1774, To the End of the Year 1777.
From May to the End of December, 1774. RESTORED TO LIFE THE FOLLOWING PERSONS,
For whose RECOVERY the SOCIETY paid the PREMIUMS. 1 JOHN JOSEPH, Iron-Founder,
Falcon-Stairs 2 Dederic Woolbert, attended by Mr Hodson, at Wapping 3 John
Herrington, attended by Mr Patten, of Radcliffe-Cross 4 Capt. Scott, attended
by Mr. Nelham, of Limehouse 5 James Beckett, attended by Mr Corney, of St.
John's 6 Nicholas Groom, attended by Mr Smith, of Limehouse 7 Robert Horn,
attended by Mr Hales, of Limehouse 8 A Young Woman, attended by Mr Midford


N.B. The REPORTS for the Year 1774 give a circumstantial Account of the above
CASES.

From January to December 31, 1775. 1 Bernard Riley, restored by Mr Waring,
Thames Street 2 -- Bailey, attended by Mr Macglassan 3 Francis Bickup saved by
Leonard Cowley and William Mason 4 -- Cambell, attended by Mr Church, Islington
5 Jacob Hill, saved by Roger Dufty and Joseph Campbell 6 Thomas Pattenson,
restored by Mr Church, Islington 7 James Pike, attended by Mr Powsey, of Poplar
8 William Plunkett, saved by Lucius Vandeprump and Others 9 Anthony Sulivan,
attended by Mr Powell, Chelsea 10 John Venables, attended by Mr Jos. Knight 11
James Johnson, saved by Richard Thomas and Others 12 James Norris, saved by Mr
Bennet, Wapping 13 A Child, attended by Mr Thomas, Wapping 14 William Gardener,
restored by Mr Goodwin, Shad-Thames 15 Thomas Williams, saved by Mr Battiscomb,
Blackfriars 16 William Scotsam, restored by Mr Ansel, Brentford 17 A Boy, saved
by Mr Stevens, Radcliffe Cross 18 A Boy, saved by Mr Jones, Islington 19 A Man,
saved by Thomas Flyde 20 Deborah Green, attended by Mr Clifton, Islington 21
David Adamson, restored by Mr Cotton, Blackwall 22 A Child, aged three Years,
attended by Mr Morrison 23 Sarah Anderson, attended by Mr Burgess 24 James
Bates, saved by Richard Couter and Others 25 Mary Riley, saved by Mr Haynes,
Islington 26 A Man taken out of an Ice-Well, attended by Mr Billinghurst 27
George Posnett, restored by Mr Waring, Rotherhithe 28 Thomas Garland, attended
by Mr. House, Lambeth 29 Catharine Leveridge, restored by Mr Church, Islington
30 A Child, aged five Years, attended by Mr Palser, Hammersmith 31 John Adam
Falkenhagen, attended by Mr Curtis, Islington 32 William Lane, attended by Mr
Vaux
The following PERSONS have been RESTORED TO LIFE, (the Particulars of which
were communicated to the SOCIETY by MEDICAL GENTLEMEN and OTHERS) in
consequence of their METHOD of TREATMENT being GENERALLY KNOWN. 33 Jane
Donnelly in a disordered state hanged herself, and was to all appearance Dead;
she was recovered by Mr Thomas, of Greenwich 34 A Girl, restored by Mr Clowes,
of Henley 35 John Beesley, restored by J. Rose, Esquire of Putney 36 James Sims,
restored by Mr Rundell, of Bath 37 A Young Man, restored by Mr Badger, of
Worcester 38 A Young Man, restored by Mr Agar, of New York 39 A Girl, restored
by Mr Squires, of Wardour-street, Soho 40 A Boy, restored by Dr Townsend, of
Cork 41 Christopher Walton, restored by Dr Ward and Mr Lascelles, of
Gainsborough 42 Thomas Tuffield, restored by Mr Rigby, of Norwich 43 A -- B --
restored to Life by Dr Kipping, of Brighthelmstone 44 A Man, restored by Mr
House, of Wycomb, etc. 45 John Sage, restored by Mr Stebbing, of Ipswich 46
Master S --, restored by Dr Pumphry and Dr Townsend, of Cork 47 James Wynch,
restored by Mr Goldwyer, of Reading


N.B. The REPORTS for the Year 1775 give a circumstantial Account of the above
CASES.

From January to December, 1776. 1 Jane Duffin, attended by Messrs Beaumont and
Hawes 2 Elizabeth Martin, restored by Mr Burges, of Lambeth 3 Mary Ann Richer,
saved from drowning in the New-River, by Mr Wood 4 James Carmichael, restored
by Mr Burges of Lambeth 5 James Hervey, taken out of a pond, Islington, by John
Day and Others 6 Samuel Rosswell, a Child, saved by John Hunt 7 -- Moore,
apparently dead half an hour, restored by Mr Adams 8 Mary Harris, attended by
Mr Clifton of Islington 9 10 Two Men, saved from drowning in the Thames, near
Limehouse, by John Stanley, a Waterman 11 Thomas Mallat, a Child, apparently
dead, and restored by Mr Clowes 12 Mary Smith, taken out of a pond near Hoxton,
attended by Mr Roberts 13 Elizabeth Jones, taken out of the Thames, apparently
dead, and restored by Mr Beaumont 14 Ann Bethel, a Child, restored by Mr
Squires, of Wandsworth 15 John Chesterman, restored by Mr Walford, of
Garlick-hill 16 Stephen Wilrick, attended by Mr Matthews 17 A Poor Man,
attended by Mr Midford 18 A Boy, saved from drowning in the New-River,
Islington, by John Bell 19 William Jones, saved from being drowned, by Thomas
Hatfield, a Waterman 20 Robert Chishelm, taken out of the Thames, apparently
dead, restored by Mr Beaumont 21 A Girl, attended by the 'Prentice of Mr Tailor
22 Edward Swan, almost dead, attended by Mr Buck of the Strand 23 William
Sykes, saved from being drowned by Weston, Waterman 24 Paul Oldfield, taken out
of the Thames, almost dead, and restored by Four Watermen 25 Williams, saved
from being drowned in the Thames, by John Goodacre, a Waterman 26 A Woman with
Child, apparently dead, restored by Mr Blunt, of St. Catharine's 27 Ann Russel,
carried to St. Martin's Workhouse for dead, restored by Messrs Jervis 28
Elizabeth Henfield, taken out of a Pond near Islington, by Mary Addison and
Elizabeth Bridge 29 John Mattocks, saved from drowning in the New-River, by
John Jennings 30 Dennis Sulivan, taken out of the Thames, apparently dead,
restored by Mr Corney 31 Thomas Orlebar, taken out of the River at Manningtree,
and restored by Mr Rogers 32 George Williams, taken out of the Thames, saved by
C. Maynard, a Waterman 33 Jane Wright, taken out of the Thames, near
Billingsgate, apparently dead, restored by Mr Vaux 34 Elizabeth Tailor, saved
from drowning in the New-River, by R. Potter and Others 35 Mrs. Patrick, taken
out of the Thames, nearly drowned, recovered by Mr H nry Pierce 36 Mrs Beck, 37
Mrs Buckland, 38 Mrs Cambell,
Taken out of the Thames near Rotherhithe, (being overset in a Greenwich Hoy)
Mrs Cambell, apparently dead, was restored by Mr Maddox 39 Pierce Blois, a
French Mariner, taken out of the Thames, by J. Hill, a Waterman 40 Mary Cooper,
taken out of the New-River, Islington, apparently dead, restored Mr Church 41
Judith ^ve, taken out of the New-River, attended by Mr Church


CASES communicated to the SOCIETY in the Year 1776 1 Robert Lunt, taken out of
Dock, apparently dead, restored by Messrs Shertcliffe and Lion 2 William
Roberts, taken out of the Salt-House Dock, attended by Dr Hou^ton 3 Philip
Smith, an invalid, saved from Drowning, and attended by Mr Lion 4 James Bryan,
taken up almost drowned, and attended by Mr Park 5 James Jones, taken up,
apparently dead, attended by Mr Lion 6 Amelia Houghton, saved from drowning by
a Sailor
Liverpool. 7 A Fisherman, taken up in extreme Danger, attended by Dr Townsend
8 A Fisherman, apparently dead, restored by Dr Townsend
Cork. 9 Thomas Ferguson, apparently dead, restored by Dr Dawson 10 Jane
Nutman, rendered lifeless, by an extraordinary Species of Suffocation, restored
by Dr Dawson
Coldstream 11 John Dick, taken out of a Canal, apparently dead, restored by Mr
Meak, Falkirk


The REPORTS for the Year 1776, give a Circumstantial Account of the CASES.

From January to December, 1777. 1 J. Barton, of St Clement Danes, restored to
life by Mr Hawes, Palsgrave Place 2 Samuel Russel, restored by Mr Gray,
Rotherhithe 3 G. Monkton, attended by Mr Vaux, Billingsgate 4 J. Dickson,
restored by Mr Boyse, Blackfriars 5 Sarah Prior, attended by Mr Church,
Islington 6 Rachael Fossey, attended by Mr Church, Islington 7 Robert Noel,
attended by Mr. Curtis, Islington 8 John South, attended by Mr Hodgson, Wapping
9 Sarah Binder, restored by Mr Dymond, Holborn 10 W. Macgray, attended by Mr
Smith, Wapping 11 Aaron Richards, restored by Mr Church, Islington 12 A Young
Woman, after hanging half an Hour, restored by Messrs Squire and Ley 13 John
Richards, restored by Mr Beaumont, junior 14 Ruth Skip, restored by Mr Dymond,
Blackfriars 15 Sarah Dubel, attended by Mr Gray, Rotherhithe 16 Samuel Wadley,
attended by Mr Gray, Rotherhithe 17 William Broad, attended by Mr Hawes,
Palsgrave-Place 18 A Young Man, attended by Mr Church, Islington 19 T. George,
restored by a Publican 20 J. Wild, restored by ditto
Both authenticated by the Rev. Dr. Milne 21 G. Phelps, attended by Mr. Palser,
Hammersmith 22 C. Goodwin, (a Child) attended by Mr. Penry, Dock-Head 23 A
Child, attended by Mr Hole, Islington 24 J. Thompson, restored by Mr
Williamson, Boyle-Street 25 J. Millett, (a Child) saved by T. Ives, a Waterman
26 C. Jackson, restored by Mr Dunn 27 A Young Man, saved by John Rhodes, a
Waterman 28 A Child, restored to Life by Mary Sherborn, Southhall-Green 29 J.
Necks, attended by Mr Forbes's Journeyman 30 W. Findlayson, restored by Mr
Brien, Shadwell 31 R. Angel, restored by Mr Hooper, Tooley-Street 32 C.
Anderson, attended by Mr Smith, Limehouse 33 Jane Hodges, attended by Mr
Billinghurst, Piccadilly 34 John Morgan, attended by Mr Church, Islington 35
John Pain, saved by Samuel Robins 36 Elizabeth Cleave, attended by Mr Church,
Islington 37 B. M. after hanging half an Hour, restored to Life by Mr.
Parkinson 38 A Child, fifteen months old, restored by Mr Fairclough, of
Manningtree 39 Martha Wood, attended by Mr Hooper, Tooley-Street 40 A Boy,
attended by Mr Curtis's Journeyman 41 Peter Hepburn, saved by J. Minden, a
Waterman 42 J. Barber, saved by Mr Baker, Deptford 43 A Young Woman, restored
to Life, authenticated by Mr Stewart 44 Sarah Johnson, attended by Mr Jones 45
A Young Woman, attended by Mr Newell, of Colchester 46 A Woman, restored to
Life by Mr Simson, East-Bergholt 47 -- Smith, saved by Mashack, and other
Watermen 48 W. Abbot, attended by Mr Wale and others 49 W. Higgs, saved by some
Watermen 50 Sarah Burden, restored to Life by Mr Davies 51 T. Haylet, saved by
Mr Pocock 52 W. Squires, attended by Mr Bliss and others 53 F. Bates, saved by
Derham, a Waterman, etc. 54 A Young Woman, restored at Oundle, in
Northamptonshire 55 A Child suffocated, restored to Life by Mr Wyat, Minories


CASES communicated to the SOCIETY in the Year 1777. A Boy, ten Minutes under
Water, and recovered Mary Hill, fifteen Minutes and recovered A Child, five
Minutes, and recovered The Lives of Six Persons saved by the Rewards Mary Rice,
restored to Life
Liverpool. R. Alsop, restored to Life by Mr Hinchliffe, Birmingham E. G. after
hanging fifteen Minutes, restored to Life by Mr Stebbing, Ipswich A Young
Woman, restored by a Mr Nicholas, of Bath A Young Man, recovered by Mr
Aspennal, Abberford A Man found apparently dead, from being exposed to the Cold
all Night, the Body was kept in hot Ashes, and other Means used for upwards of
two Hours before any signs of Life appeared. -- The Restoration was performed
by Dr Garrioch, Old Meldrum, near Aberdeen.


The REPORTS for this Year 1777, just published, give a circumstantial Account
of the above CASES.

The Number of LIVES Preserved and Restored since our first institution,
amounts to Two Hundred and Fifteen.

One Hundred and Eight Persons have been preserved and restored to Life by the
MEDICAL ASSISTANTS of the Society within the last Fifteen Months; so that in
Five Years, 467 Accidents have come under the Notice of this charity, and TWO
HUNDRED and SEVENTY Persons out of that Number have been snatched from the
Grave. The Reports for the Year 1778, are shortly to be published, which will
give a circumstantial Account of many very extraordinary Cases of Recovery from
Death.

The preceding happy instances of Restoration to Life prove, to a
Demonstration, the Practicability of recovering those who are to all appearance
dead; and ascertain a very affecting and humiliating Truth; -- "that hundreds
might have been restored, and have remained to this Moment a Blessing to their
Connections, and to the World, if such an Institution had been earlier
established in these Kingdoms."

The Directors, encouraged by the surprising Success of the Society in its
Infancy, propose to exert themselves with double Vigor.

It is also intended, as soon as the Fund will permit, to extend the Rewards to
a greater Distance, and include every other Instance of sudden Death.

N.B. A large Number of Advertisements, containing the Methods of Treatment
alone are printed, in order to be dispersed through various Parts of the
Kingdom, especially in Seaports, and Towns contiguous to large Rivers, in
order to diffuse a knowledge of Means respecting Persons in such critical
Situations, and excite the Inhabitants to form similar Institutions.

The DIRECTORS have also voted a SILVER MEDAL to the MEDICAL ASSISTANTS, or any
other GENTLEMEN, who have been the happy Instruments of Restoration to Life, as
an Acknowledgment of their Skill and generous Assiduity.

The TREASURER pays the REWARDS of the SOCIETY in the following Manner: FOUR
GUINEAS, whenever LIFE has been RESTORED. TWO GUINEAS, in every UNSUCCESSFUL
ATTEMPT, provided the MODE of TREATMENT prescribed by the SOCIETY has been used
TWO HOURS. ONE GUINEA to PUBLICANS, etc. who receive the Bodies readily into
their Houses.


To such as are inclined to become Benefactors by Will the following Form of a
Legacy is recommended:

Item, I give and bequeath unto A. B. and C. D. the Sum of to be raised and
paid by and out of my personal Estate and Effects, which by Law I may or can
charge with the Payment thereof, upon Trust, and to the Intent, that they, or
either of them, do pay the same to the Treasurer (for the Time being) of a
Charity, called or known by the Name of THE HUMANE SOCIETY, instituted in the
Year 1774, which said Sum I desire may be applied toward carrying on the
beaevolent Designs of the said Charity.

N.B. Giving Land, or Money, or Stock, by Will, to be laid out in the Purchase
of any Estate for charitable Uses, will be void by the Statute of Mortmain; but
Money, or Stock may be given by Will, without being directed to be laid out.

SUBSCRIPTIONS FOR THE HUMANE DESIGN OF RECOVERING PERSONS APPARENTLY DEAD BY
DROWNING or SUFFOCATION, etc. are received by

JAMES HORSFALL, Esquire (Treasurer) Middle Temple,

Dr. COGAN, No. 11, Paternoster-Row,

Mr. HAWES, Apothecary, Palsgrave-Place, Strand.

Where the ADVERTISEMENTS mentioned may be had.

FIVE GUINEAS, or more, ONE PAYMENT, constitute a PERPETUAL DIRECTOR.

ONE GUINEA per Annum, constitutes an ANNUAL DIRECTOR.

THE END.

