I Have perused a Pamphlet entitled, Some Reasons why the Practice of
Inoculation ought to be introduced into the Town of Bury at Present, and have
been surprised to find this elaborate Piece so little in Substance, and so
little to the Purpose: Insomuch that at the first, I determined only to point
out, and expose the Mistakes of it in Conversation, being under a full
Persuasion and Conviction, that the Author would Triumph neither a Week nor a
Day, but that the Project would very soon end in Confusion. Being since
reminded of a warm Resolution made by me, to oppose any Efforts to revive a
Practice so justly exploded and condemned by all rational Men, I have changed
my Mind, and set Pen to Paper; but if a Promise to answer an Author before I
knew the weight and Strength of his Arguments, may be by some thought Rashness
and Prejudice, I hope an Abhorrence I have of a Practice so cruel, unsafe, and
uncertain to Mankind, an impartial Consideration and full Acquaintance of what
has been advanced pro and con, and a great Diffidence of the Author's Abilities
to support it, may to others clear me from the Imputation of Rashness and
Prepossession.

THIS barbarous and dangerous Invention was about 10 Years past imported at
London from Turkey; the Curiosity like many other foreign Monsters pleased at
first, but soon after grew ungovernable by it is own Masters, and when let
loose, made great Havoc and Slaughter. But after all the Difficulties and
Disappointments, it was endeavored to be buoyed up by able Hands which
undertook to prove that this Turkish Method of Inoculation, might safely and
securely be practiced in our Climate and upon our Constitutions, and that a
Circassian Impiety of bringing Diseases upon ourselves was reconcilable to a
Christian Conscience.

BUT in spite of all such Aids, and Supports, it daily sunk into disuse and
contempt, and of late has scarce been mentioned amongst Us, till our Author on
a reliance of his mathematical Skill, and a thorough Acquaintance with the
Doctrine of Chances, undertook to strike a new Light, to open our Eyes, and by
plain and easy Calculations, to evince the Reasonableness and Security of it,
even to a Demonstration.

VAIN Delusion! For if many have died in London, when the Incisions were made
by the most skillful Hands, and under the Care and Direction of the most
Eminent Regular Physicians What (may we suppose) will be the Consequence? What
a Tragic Scene shall we have? when this Practice shall be brought into the
Country, and committed to common Hands, Men of less Abilities and no
Experience; but from hence it appears, Providence has given some Persons Heads
to contrive, and Hands to execute any thing that will serve their own Advantage.

BUT to proceed to my Undertaking of an Answer, which I shall do by giving my
Opinion of the Tract in general, and then make some Remarks upon the
Observations, Calculations, and Arguments in particular.

IN the general View I observe three Things.

1. A specious Pretext of a tender Concern for the Detriment of all Trade, and
perhaps loss of Assizes, Sessions, Fairs, and other public Meetings, which is
a popular Argument to the Tradesmen of the Town. But here I must observe, that
this Practice was endeavored to be introduced, when only a Person or two had
the Small Pox when the variolous Matter was to be purchased at a dear Rate, and
all the Tradesmen were very active and vigilant, to prevent its spreading.
However 'twas very necessary that this artful Address to the Populace, should
appear glittering at the Top to engage their Attention, but unluckily
Self-serving pops up in the Middle, and Self-regard lurks and skulks at the
Bottom. But this is not the only Instance of his Fondness of being thought
Somebody, for the Reader must be acquainted with his Conversation with Dr.
Jurin at the Coffee-house, and his Correspondence with Dr. Nettleton when he
was at Newark.

2. HIS Submission of the Business of his Paper to the Clergy is respectful,
but designing, and perhaps the Gentlemen of that Order are very little obliged
to him for his Compliment, for I am very much mistaken if many of them are not
able to give more Reasons than are founded upon a Supposition that the Practice
does not promote our Lives, Healths, and Happiness, but in Casuistry are
convinced that the Practice is presumptious and sinful; but as to the Morality
of it, shall refer him to those Gentlemen he shall have the Honor to have
farther Converse with.

3. I OBSERVE his Arguments are old, stale, and borrowed, and that he has chose
some Reasons out of many, very injudiciously; for he has offered the Weakest
and left the most Enfor^ing. Does this ill Choice proceed from want of
Judgment? To presume that, by his Friends would be interpreted a Weakness of my
own; I will rather then imagine that he writes with great Cunning and Policy,
and has been taught by some military Man a stratagem in War, viz. To place
sometimes the weakest of his Forces in the Front, and spare his bravest Men to
do the most Execution, for which Reason, and under which Caution, I shall
reserve my Veterans till we come to a closer Engagement.

I NOW proceed to consider his Observations, Calculations, and Arguments in
particular.

ART. I.P. 3. If Inoculation was generally practiced -- we need not have it six
Months. IF this Limitation of the Small Pox to six Months be true it must be
so, because by an Elegancy of Style, the Author can persuade all the Timorous
to undergo an Operation they think dangerous, and by his Cas^istry can prevail
upon the Scrupulous to enter upon an Action they believe Sinful, and can be
secure upon Inoculation of producing any variolous Symptoms and Pustules, and
besides all this has by his irrefragable Arguments, proved a general
Inoculation an infallible Preservative against the Distemper in a natural Way.
Now if I could imagine this to be Fact, yet I would not dare to assert and fix
so exact a Time as of six Months for its Continuance. But I am fully assured he
has not removed the Apprehensions of the Fearful, or satisfied the Doubts of
the Conscientious, nor even promised to produce the Distemper by Inoculation in
every Case, nor given good Reasons of security against the Small Pox in a
natural Way after Inoculation; to say then we need not have it six Months, is
downright Arrogance and Presumption.

ART. II.P. 3. As the utmost Hazard of dying of the inoculated Small Pox
appears by the last authentic Accounts, to be no more than that of 1 in 50, and
by the same Accounts, that of dying of the Natural is shown to be that of 1 in
6. IN this Article our Author appears a Man of as great Figures, as in the
first of Eloquence, and those Gentlemen and Townsmen that have not been
persuaded into a good Opinion of Inoculation by 12 Lines of unanimated Oratory,
are to be overpowered by a Demonstration of Numbers. Let us then suppose that
there are 10,000 Persons in Bury, and but 3 of these have any Confidence in the
Practice, there will remain 9997 clearly unsatisfied in Inoculation upon this
Supposition. But since this Article is wrote to persuade the Wise, and deceive
the Simple, and is the Basis of all the rest, I may be thought unseasonably
Drolling, where I should be seriously Arguing.

THE strength and force of this Reason depends on the Truth of the Accounts,
and what I have to say to their Authenticness will be this; the Computations
from the Tables are arithmetically True and Just, but as many Facts have been
partially epresented, many material Circumstances, which made against the
Practice, were then suppressed; as the moving Declarations of the dying
Patients, and as some Miscarriages by Inoculation were never transmitted to the
Calculator, all which I think can be made evident beyond Contradiction, in such
Case the Accounts are so far from deserving an authentic Character, that they
are mere Impositions. I say not this to asperse the Author of those Accounts,
for if I understand who is meant, I honor his Learning and Judgment, and have
a great Opinion of his Integrity, and believe he used an honest Diligence to
state the Account right, but his Correspondents a disingenuous Industry to
deceive him. And here I must observe, that worthy Gentleman promised that he
would acquaint the Public with the Progress of this Practice from Year to Year,
till it should be firmly established or justly exploded. But whether from a
Discovery of the Suppressions on one side, or the Misrepresentations on the
other, he sound it impracticable to do it with impartiality; or from a general
Discredit the Method of Inoculation soon fell into, he found it useless, I am
not willing to determine, but know of none he has published for many Years past.

BUT for once I will suppose the Account authentic, and admit that every Fact
was truly, exactly, and faithfully represented, and every individual
Miscarriage was transmitted to the Calculator at the juncture of Time when the
Supputation was made; Yet surely our Author's Industry in getting fresh
Intelligence, or his Integrity in concealing what he received, or the little
Acquaintance he has with Men of our Profession must be called in Question;
because he takes no Notice of several unhappy Families, some of whose Branches
died miserable Sacrifices to this inhumane Practice, long since the Date of his
authentic Tables. To deny such Facts, so well attested is Fr^nt, and to call
them Forgeries is taking an unwarrantable Liberty with the Character of
Witnesses, for which reason I shall forbear laying before him some authentic
Original Papers on this Subject, transmitted to me by Persons of good Fashion,
and of undoubted and unquestionable Credit, till such time as the Author shall
creep out of his Ambuscade, and shall freely and openly declare upon what Issue
he will put this Dispute. I can easily believe Dr. Jurin gave our Author such a
cautious Answer to his Query, and encouraged the Practice by Inoculating his
own Child, and am as fully persuaded the Doctor was so Ingenuous as to tell
him, how Tragically the Practice ended in another Family about that Time, where
2 out of 2, died by Inoculation, which were under his Care.

BUT to proceed; As I am willing to make our Author all possible Concessions, I
will grant him that not only his Accounts are truly Authentic, but that they
have been carried down to the present Time, even to Yesterday, and that the
Calculation stands that only 1 in 50 have died by Inoculation. Happy those who
have by such a lucky Chance, met at once their Death and end of all their
Miseries* For are there not many lamentable Spectacles just alive who have been
Inoculated, many dreadful Images of Death, Monuments of Terror to any that are
capable of Fear? If this be the Case, I cannot but compassionate the Condition
of even those that have survived the Operation, and what the Inoculators call,
Recovered. But I shall consider this Point more hereafter, and now go on to the
Accounts of the Fatality of the natural Infection. And here though I could lay
down several Calculations made in different Parts, widely differing from our
Author's last Accounts, yet as I am sensible how ready some Persons are to
embrace all Opportunity of Cavil and Objection, and perhaps would insinuate
that such distant Supputation cannot be relied on; To put the Matter out of
Question, I have been at the Expense and Trouble to make a Local one, whereby
it appeared that Jan. 28, 1683 Persons had had the Small Pox, out of which
Number 124 died, but as it evidently appears to me that many may, and ought to
be deducted out of this Account of the deceased, I shall submit the following
Particulars to our Author's and the Reader's Perusal and Consideration.

Probably died for want of proper Physic, Attendance, Sustenance, and even
Clothing, notwithstanding the extraordinary Charity of some Gentlemen, and the
great Care of the Magistrates, and Officers. 35 Abortives supposed to have died
of the Small Pox, because the Mother had it. 6 Supposed to have died of the
Small Pox, without having any Eruption. 3 Men and Women died of the Small Pox
between 60 and 70. 5 Died of the natural Sort, such as the Inoculators would
not have practiced upon, as appears by their Cautions, which see hereafter in
Page 12. 30 In all 79
IF this Reduction be allowed me, then the Proportion will be considerably
altered, and that it may, and ought, is evident to any that will consider how
few have died in Families where there was tolerable Care taken, and proper
Medicines and Methods of Cure followed. I could indeed further convince our
Author of Mis-calculation, when he says 1 in 6 died, but it must be in a Way
most disagreeable to myself, for I should subject myself to the Imputation of
Ostentation, when I tell him that out of the great Numbers which I have
attended ab Origin, not 1 in 70 have died under my Care; but to make him
amends for such supposed Vanity, I will inform him, that, under Providence, the
Success lay in a previous Care, and such Rules of Management I gave to the
Persons, which in a general Infection I supposed probably might soon receive it.

BUT to return; and make our Author farther Allowances, and totally reject this
Reduction, yet after all 'twill not appear the Calculation stands good: but
shall leave and request him to consider the Proportion between 124 and 1683. To
this I am really at a loss to conceive what he will say, unless it be what he
Personally insinuated to me, that many Errors and Mistakes were made by the
Persons who took the Supputation, which put me to a second Trouble, to make a
Review and Re-examination of the Matter, which was compared with the Church
Books or Clerk's Accounts, and upon the Whole I sound the Differences very
immaterial; But to give our Author all possible Satisfaction, I will indulge
him what Numbers he thinks reasonable for Mistakes, though I am not acquainted
with one. Yet I cannot but observe that a very material Imposition was offered
me from the House where this mighty Project was laid and is ^aily carried on,
by a false Representation that Four had had it and Two died, whereas only One
had it who recovered; What Motives could induce a Man of no great Sagacity or
reach of Thought to give this Account, I shall not determine.

IT IS now high Time to dismiss this Article, I shall therefore only add, that
supposing the Accounts with regard to the inoculated and natural Sort to be
Authentic and True, yet our new Introducer of this Method lies under, in my
Opinion, two insuperable Difficulties.

1. THOUGH I grant him the Numbers given, yet be has not proved that this
artificial Eruption is a preservative against a natural One, so that some who
have submitted themselves to be practiced upon by these Schematists may fall a
Sacrifice to the providential Infection.

2. I WILL fairly suppose that some Persons will never have the Small Pox. Now
if the Inoculators should practice upon such a one, (and for ought they know
they may) and the Patient die, and it is Presumption to say he shall not. What
Name shall I give the Fact? What can be said to alleviate the Sorrows of the
surviving Relations? That the Inoculators are Principals of, and the Friends
Accessories to a horrid, wicked Act, is poor Consolation.

ART. II.P. 4. It is to be observed that the inoculated Small Pox has been
found to be as favorable to grown People as to Children. MONSTROUS is this
Observation! How many of the Inoculators shall I produce as Evidences to the
Contrary? To stumble at first setting out is certainly an ill Omen, and let him
be careful that he makes no more false steps, least he Tumble down.

Is it not well known that the Operators were so Diffident of Success, that
they chose Children as Objects of their Cruelty, and whenever they ventured
upon grown Persons, were they not curious in their Choice?

Is it not a secret Caution amongst 'em not to admit Women with Child. 2. Such
to whose Families the Small Pox used to be fatal. 3. Such as are extremcly
Fearful, Fanciful, Hysteric or Hypocondriac. 4. Such as are of choleric
Constitutions, are apt to Fevers, inflammatory Affections, Plearisy,
Erysipelas, etc. and such as have lately surfeited and overheated themselves
with Bacchus, or Venus, or great Labor. 5. Such as use to spit Blood or have
overmuch Catamenia. 6. Such as have a Phthisic, Consumption, Hectic-Fever,
etc. 7. Such as have the King's Evil, Gout: Or in Dr. Jurin's Words; To
Inoculate none but Persons of good Habit of Body, and free not only from any
Apparent, but as far as may be judged from any LATENT Disease?

How many then of both Sexes by these Exemptions are discharged from the
Danger, or not entitled to the Benefit of Inoculation, is an Inference obvious
to every Reader; I would therefore (in Mr. Howgrave's Words) ask these learned
Mimicks of a few Ignorant Greek Women two Questions. 1. Whether Inoculation is
not the most Gentle and safe Manner of having the Small Pox; and 2dly, Whether
a Person of a weak Constitution, or bad Habit of Body, be not as liable (if not
more) to receive the Small Pox by Insection, as the most Healthful can be? The
former Question they will answer in the Affirmative, and the Latter I am
consident they cannot deny. If this be the Case, and Ino^^lation be gentler and
safer, weak and disordered Persons ought of all others to be incoulated, as
less able to bear the more hazardous Effects of the natural Sort.

THE next Observation, P. 5. shows the Author has not recovered his first Trip,
but is still staggering on; for says he, it is also to be observed, all those
who have not had the Small Pox, and resolve to continue in the Town, must
almost certainly have it now. I would willingly understand what is meant by
that accurate Expression, All- must Almost certainly. Almost joined with must
have it now, breaks the Necessity of some having it at all, if connected with
certainly, weakens the Certitude of it. But I stand not upon this Criticism,
since as a Grammarian he may be right, yet that he is wrong in the Supputation
will appear by the Account here given.

THE 3d Article, P. 5. is introduced with an astonishing Violence to all the
Rules of Reason, and all the restraints of Truth, and closes with a single
Instance of an uncommon Slaughter that the Small Pox made at Uxbridge; For says
he, A favorable Sort, produces a favorable Sort, a Malignant, a malignant
One; and then the Author with a magisterial Air, lays down a notorious false
Assertion. This is certain in Inoculation. Surprising Confidence! It Is true
indeed, the first Inoculators did boast as much, yet the many Instances of the
malignant Sort from a distinct Sort, obliged them modestly to yield what they
could not maintain.

I HAVE always thought that a malignant or a favorable Sort proceeded from the
Disposition of the Blood and Temperament of the Person receiving the Contagion;
if this wants Proof, the different Sorts which have been produced in many
Families of this Town, shut up and excluded from the Commerce or Sight of any
of the infected, is a Demonstration: For ^aver it upon my own Experience, I
have observed, though sometimes the first of a Family that fell down of the
Distemper, had I will say, a malignant, confiuent Sort, the next the 2d, and
3d, who in all humane Probability received the poisonous Infection from this
Person, had the Favorable and Distinct; and in the same Family, the 4th or 5th
Patient should have the Malignant, and so vice versa, and therefore one Part of
this Assertion, [viz.] very highly probable is false.

LET us examine the other, which with great Boldness is pronounced certain in
Inoculation. Now I would ask this Author whether he thus roundly asserts this
upon his own experience in the Method of Inoculation; if he avers this, I am
not such an obstinate Enemy to this dangerous Method as to deny Fact: But if he
has not his own Experience to support it, I may be allowed to tell him that the
printed Vide The Case of Lord Bathurst's Servant, Mrs. Waller, Mr. Hugh's
Daughter, etc.
Relations of the unexspected Stubborness and Danger of this Distemper under
the Inoculators Hands, are Convictions that the Author tramples upon the Rules
of Modesty to support an ill Cause. If the famous Operators in this Method have
not always had the Charm to raise a kind Sort from a mild one, but have
frequently conjured up a malignant Sort which nothing but Death could bind. I
would gladly know if this Gentleman has been taught this unfound Certainty in
Inoculation by Inspiration, and has honestly conveyed all the Secret to his
Operators altogether unskilled and unacquainted in this Practice; If so; I am
not so hardy as to dispute (though we live in an Age not very sond of)
Inspiration. But I expect proper Credentials, and till he produces 'em, shall
call in Question his Veracity in the next Lines, as much as I disbelieve the
Certainty of his Assertion now. For here the Experience of old Nurses will
consute his Reasoning, and inform him that the Small Pox at its first coming
into a Town is not always favorable, and as it spreads grows more Malignant;
and indeed at this very Time, viz. Febr. 20. it is notoriously otherwise. For
they have Sense enough to know, though few at its first Invasion die of the
Distemper, and a great many die when it has continued long, this is owing not
to an increase of a malignant Sort, but to the Number of People taking the
Infection at one time greater than the other. And thus every old Woman by her
Remarks and Methods of telling by her Fingers, is ready to say the Author's
Arithmetic which comes next, amounts to o. o. o.

I MUST follow him then through the By-Roads he takes to Uxbridge near London,
where I stop to lament the Loss of so many People who died of the Small Pox in
a natural Way; and tell him that to draw an universal Inference from a
particular Instance, is very illogical, and unscholarlike.

ART. IV. P. 6. The last Reason, viz. the general Good of Mankind, must if well
supported, bring Inoculation into Repute and Practice, and be with great
Readiness embraced by those who have not divested themselves of all Humanity
and Benevolence. But our Author leaves the most Prevailing of his Reasons, if
true, to stand by, and shift for its self, for he gives it no enforcement;
unless Dr. Jurin's Calculation is a Support to it, but having already under the
second Reason shown the In-equality of that Supputation with our Own, I shall
add no more; but wish our Author had.

YET I would under this Article say, that if Inoculation was thought so great a
Preservative to Mankind, We of the Profession might in 10 or 12 Years, have
studied the safe practical Part of it, and brought it to a greater Perfection
then at present is appears in, and kept it up in greater Honor then it now
maintains amongst Us. But since there is such Uncertainty and Insecurity in,
and such a general Aversion of the People to the Operation, I am ready to
believe the Inhabitants of Bury will choose to resign themselves into the Hands
of Providence, rather than to submit to be practiced upon, in a dangerous,
painful Manner by inexpert Operators.

THAT the Bark, Opium, and Mercury have met with Opposition I own, but have
made their Way through the Indignation and Contempt of their Enemies, because
upon experience they have been proved useful Parts of the Materia Medica; these
without question in some Hands are very fase, and very effectual Medicines, but
by Mis-application have proved very dangerous and destructive Ones, and yet he
must be very Weak that Condemns the use of these and many other Medicaments,
because some Empiricks through Interest, Dishonesty, Ignorance or Folly, have
wittingly or designedly given them improperly. But the Practice of Inoculation
is justly condemned, because it is found to be unsuccessful, insecure, and not
to answer the Intention.

AND now I proceed to Objection the 1. P. 7.

WE are not certain that Inoculation is a Security from having the Distemper
again. But before I examine our Author's Solutions of this Objection to
Inoculation, give me leave to say, if I condemned his Judgment in the Choice of
his Reasons in Defense of the Practice; I will for once venture to commend his
Skill in picking out such Objections, which he imagined he could answer, and
passing over many more because he could not. For some Reasons I beg he would be
pleased to accept of some more Objections, I will not be unmerciful, but at
present lay before him only these. 1. Our Climate and our Blood not so proper
to an Operation invented and practiced in Greece and Asia. 2. No Criterion is
found to know the Disposition of the Blood, to receive most advantageously the
purulent Matter to be inoculated. 3. No Proportion of the contagious Matter is
agreed on by the Inoculators to do the Work safely. When these shall be
answered, I will ask him a Question, viz. What is the Consequence in that
Constitution, where Inoculation produces only an imperfect Sort, or (as they
artifully express it) has no Effect?

I WILL now consider his Answer. Several Persons who have been Inoculated, have
been made to converse with, to handle, nurse, lie in the same Bed with others
sick of the natural Pox, and no one ever had it again, as far as they that have
enquired can learn. To give Force to this Answer the Author slily supposes, the
inoculating Method has produced a true genuine Small Pox, and as a Proof of it,
says, all Patients by the Means of receiving the Infection he mentions, never
had it again, as far as they that have enquired can learn. I will not now enter
into a Dispute, whether a true Small Pox is ever brought out by Inoculation, or
lay before him well attested Histories of Persons Inoculated, and some Time
after, falling down of a natural Small Pox, since in his second Answer I find
all these must go for Forgeries. But will tell him a Performance of all these
kind Offices, which some Parents from an innate Affection to their Children
have undertaken, others from a Notion of catching a kind Sort have
Industriously ventured on, some from a Necessity of their Condition attending
the Sick in those Offices of Humanity, and escaping the Infection then, have
Years after received the contagious Distemper. There are some in this Town who
21 Years past, when it was visited with this Distemper stood clear of this
Discase, under such Trials, but have now had it. So that upon parity of Reason
this Part of his Answer is not sound, for though the inoculated Patients have for
some time stood the Test, yet they may hereafter fall, and for ought they know
very soon into the natural Small Pox. And I am not without a Rationale of this
Observation, which will further evidence the Weakness of our Author's Answer,
and confirm the Strength of mine. There is generally agreed to be an occult
Disposition or Seminium in the Blood to receive the Labes of this Disease,
which may be so entangled in its Sinus, and may be under such a singular
Combination of Texture, etc. as to resist the contagious Effluvia at one time,
and at another may be fusceptible of them. 2d Answer. Several Stories that have
been invented to persuade the World of the Contrary, have been detected, and
shown to be Forgeries. If my Reader is as hard of Belief, as our Author, in
Histories well supported, which both of them may meet with in those Tracts
wrote 1722, 1723, and in many more since, I must leave them entrenched in their
Infidelity and consider his 3d Answer. As the inoculated Small Pox is in EVERY
MINUTE Circumstance EXACTLY like the natural One. It would be very
extraordinary -- if it should not be like in this. This is an Assertion so
shocking, because egregiously false, that I have not Temper and Patience to
speak to it, but will venture to leave his own Practice, if he will allow
proper Judges, as he ought to confute it, and am Confident it is not only
Anomalous in some, but almost in every Circumstance. Under this Head he adds.
Whatever be the Reason why the Natural Small Pox preserves us from Infection,
it is inconceiveable that the Inoculated should not do the same, for the same
Reason. I will kindly offer him two or three Conjectures, which I lay no great
Weight upon. 1. That we take this Distemper in a natural Way is most generally
agreed, from infected Particles in the Air, and conveyed to the Lungs by
Inspiration; and then possibly the Vesiculae of the Lungs may undergo such a
Mutation and Alteration in their Contexture, as ever after to be unsusceptible
of the variolous Infection; but a Transfusion of this Venom into the Arms and
Legs, will not by its Fermentation be any Preservative at all. 2. If there be a
necessary Concurrence and Association of the Texture, Shape, Order, and
Magnitude of the Blood required to receive the Infection, this may in the
Course of Nature meet once and never again; But this Conjunction of
Circumstances being entirely unknown to us Mortals, must leave the Inoculators
in the Dark, and their Art insecute. 3. The Alteration made in the Skin by the
Small Pox, that is, the Distention of the miliary Glands and Pores, Dr. Drake
conceives to be the true Reason why that Distemper never comes a second Time;
And Dr. Pitcairne has observed, that those that have taken much Mercury which
dilates those Pores, are not so susceptible of a Fever, for though the same
feverish Disposition should, and may arise in the Instances of the Small Pox,
or after much Mercury taken, yet the Passages through the Skin being more free
and open, the Matter will never be so stopped as to raise the usual Symptoms in
either Case.

BUT that this cannot be the Case after Inoculation, is certain both in Reason
and Fact, for the very Practicers of it have been obliged to confess and
acknowledge that their Method has sometimes only produced an ingenuine or
imperfect Small Pox, and have express'dly granted (because several Instances
have proved) that such artificial Ingraftment was not preventive of of a second
natural Crop; and it is farther evident as Sir Richard Blackmore observes, that
the Seeds of the Disease are not always carried off with those Impurities,
which are discharged by Inoculation: but that those false Eruptions may be
wholly unmixt and unconcerned with the Principles of the Small Pox, since they
alike follow upon Inoculation, whether the Person has ever had, or had not that
Distemper before. I should now proceed to the 2d Objection, yet cannot but
first observe our Author's artful Insinuation, that it has been the Opinion of
some (I suppose he means old Women) that the natural Small Pox was not an
absolute Security against it a second Time, and then thank him that he owns
this so rarely happens as not to deserve Notice. A very pretty, modest
Confession! but let me tell him that I hereby call upon him to produce an
Instance or two of this, under some regular Physician's Hand within these
twelve Years, the Time Inoculation has been practiced amongst us, and in return
by way of Compliment, promise him for every such single Case well attested, to
give him several, where the natural Small Pox has came on, after the
Inoculators had roundly asserted all possible Security against it, and when I
have made good this Engagement and produced some plain Histories, I shall
humbly beg our Author to inform me how stands the Proportion.

I NOW proceed to the 2d Objection, which is, That the inoculated Small Pox
often leaves bad Consequences, as Consumptions, Boils, and Blotches, weak Eyes,
etc.

WHOEVER is acquainted with the Rules of Controversy (a State of Life, few that
have regard to themselves would be brought into, but many that have a concern
for others may) will own how unfair that Disputant is, who does not put the
Objections against him in the strongest Light, let the Event of the Dispute be
what it will. Had this Objection, now to be considered, been fairly proposed, I
am willing to believe, we might have recollected the Fable of the Viper and the
File, but rather than not answer all Difficulties, because some are insolvable,
many are to be stifled. In this manner our Inocularian cowardly suppresses a
Catalogue of Maladies which are the Consequences of Inoculation, but not of the
natural Small Pox, and undauntedly mentions those which are the Consequences of
both. However, I shall beg leave to enforce this Objection, by giving an
Explanation, and Interpretation of the Authors etc. and adding to what he has
mentioned, CONTRACTED LIMBS, HEMEPLEGIES, PERPETUAL CEPHELALGIES, PHRENSIES,
FATAL MORTIFICATIONS.

HAS the Power of Prepossession in favor of this Method barred up all the
Avenues to our Author's Mind, that Truth shall be hindered admittance? Or are
the Mistakes of this Answer owing to an excusable Ignorance, or unpardonable
Inadvertency? For to say that the natural Small Pox is apt to leave the same
sort of ill Consequences is a mistake I am positive, but under which sort to
place the Rise of it. I am really at a Loss, I had rather our Author should
choose. But if he will still insist on the same sort of ill Consequences, which
he acknowledges there are Methods which will for the most Part entirely prevent
or remedy, and always do it in some Degree. I must expect of him to point me
out some Cases from the natural Sort, so formidable and so stubborn, that the
Care and Skill of the most eminent Physicians and Surgeons, have been so far
baffled and proved ineffectual, that they have not in any Degree been
meliorated by Art; for with many of these I take upon me to charge Inoculation,
and at a proper Time will produce my Vouchers, and if so, the Force of the
Objection is beyond his reach of Refuting. I will grant indeed our Author that
the Disorders attending the natural Small Pox principally (but not altogether)
depend on a Resorbition of the putrid Matter into the Vessels upon the
Declension of the Disease; but in the unnatural Kind, the Case is quite
otherwise, for in this, all the dismal Train of Maladies, derive their source
and origin from Nature's Inability, to throw out the venomous, malignant
Matter, or in a proper Degree to depurate the Blood from the Poison which has
been implanted; and I am firmly of Opinion, that Mr. Howgrave's Observation is
just, that these Disorders are the Effects of the very Operators Preparations,
which are by Purging and Bleeding; for what is proposed by Purging, if the
Patient to be inoculated be not only free from any APPARENT but even any LATENT
Disease; and if these are the only Persons to be inoculated, which has been
shown, Where is the necessity of Physic or Physician? We know not when, or
where the Patient is afflicted but by Symptoms, and if none of these offer
themselves, we must conclude the Body is in a good State, and if any Person be
of such a Habit of Body as to require these Preparations, then by their own
Account, he is not a fit Subject for Inoculation. And as to Bleeding it is not
only not necessary, but MUST ALMOST CERTAINLY be prejudicial, especially when
the very cold Regimen is rigorously enjoined, because by these the Crasis of
the Blood may be so weakened, as to render it incapable of throwing off the
corrosive Matter, which Inoculation has forced into it. It Is true indeed, in
the natural Sort these and other preparative Methods, may, and frequently ought
to be advised, for in this Case there will be no Danger, but that Nature of
herself, or when properly assisted, will effectually reject whatever is
offensive to her. Notwithstanding what has been said, I will upon second
Thoughts grant our Author that Preparation before the Operation, Attendance of
a Physician, during the Distemper, and Care afterward, may be very proper --
if the Patient can pay well for it.

BUT to be serious and return to our Author who, as I before observed, has a
magisterial Way of laying down Positions unsupported, but must here remark a
Method more soft but not less affronting to his Reader, when he would smoothly
lead him into two Mistakes thus: One would naturally think therefore that where
the most corrupted Matter of the worst Kind is returned into the Blood, there
the Disorders succeeding the Small Pox should be most and worst. And again, P.
11. It is inconceivable how a Quantity of corrupted Matter falling into the
Body, should be the occasion of the Disorders succeeding the Small Pox, -- and
yet the inoculated Small Pox where there is less of the Matter, and of a more
kindly Nature be attended with worse Consequences. Here are two Things taken
for granted which I can by no means allow. 1. That a greater Quantity of the
infectious Matter is received Naturally. And 2dly, That it is of a more malign
Nature than what is received by Inoculation. Is there any Argument to make
either of these good? Is there any Reasoning to evince the Truth of 'em? No;
it is enough, Ipse Dixit, and we must submit to his superior Judgment, and
implicitly swallow down his Composition. But with his Leave let me consider the
Nature of the Malignity of the Infection. Is our Author unacquainted with some
Poisons which when communicated to the Blood immediately prove fatal, but when
received into the Stomach and so digested, are innocent and inoffensive? May
not the Virulence of the contagious Effluvia of the sick and infected Things be
newly modified by the Air, and many of the venomous Spicula, broke and blunted
in their Passage? Whereas the Acrimony of gross Matter from a Pustle is no ways
sheathed or obtunded by the Inocularian Conveyance. But when our Author
personates a Physician, I have never been surpised to find him talking very
erroneously concerning the Quality of Diseases and Remedies, but as a
Geometrican I really always expected to have him very exact in any
Consideration of Quantities and Divisibility of Matter. Let our Author then
meditate a little upon the Difference between GROSS MATTER and EFFLUVIA, and if
he be at a Loss after such Reflection, I would refer him to Mr. Boil, who will
inform him that several Bodies are sound to emit Effluvia for a great Number of
Years, as Magnets, Electrical Bodies, Ambers, diverse Odorous Bodies, the
Tenuity of whose emanant Corpuscles are so incredibly small that they
perceptibly lose neither Bulk or Weight. -- Or let him consult some Apothecary,
who will inform him how a Tun of Sack is poisoned and made an Emetick by a
small Quantity of Crocus Metallorum, or by the Antimonial Cup, without
dimunition of its Quantity or Quality: And if these will not give him
Satisfaction, I could tell him of a worthy Family in the Neighborhood which
has for many Years been possessed of an Indian Stone, which immerg'd in Water,
will make a generous Cordial, and in less than a Minutes Time; and this without
any apparent Abatement of Substance or Quality. Now if this be the Case, and
the Difference between gross Matter and Effluvia be so wide, one single Pustule
may contain Particles sufficient to insect 10000 Persons in the Natural Way.

I SHALL add no more, but conclude this Reply to our Author with informing him,
since he seems to have so little Acquaintance with Men of our Profession, that
so many Remarkable and Notorious Facts have supported the Force of this
Objection, that the most Learned and Judicious Practicers of Physic and
Surgery, both at Home and Abroad, have totally discredited and rejected this
Operation.

Obj. 3. P. 13. By Inoculation we may communicate other Distempers. Whether I
was in the right when I commended our Author's Skill in choosing Objections
against Inoculation, because he thought he could answer them, I know not, but
am certain this Objection is founded upon solid Reason; supported by
Experience, and is so formidable to the Practice, that if our Introducer of
this Mankind-Self-serving Project does not clearly answer it, I am fully
persuaded he will be disappointed of his first View injudiciously opened to his
Readers in his last Words, because it leaves them with Impressions unfavourable
to the Writer. If other Distempers may be communicated and the Small Pox may
not, as some Inoculators honestly own, that such a Miscarriage sometimes
arises; I question whether our Inoculator stands the Chance of being regarded
by 1 in 50, perhaps 60, 80, 100, 1000, or even more of the Inhabitants of Bury
for an Enterprise so hazardous to their Lives.

I shall therefore particularly examine how he answers in the way of his
Profession this stubborn Objection.

MOST chronical Distempers, says our exact NUMERIST, are chiefly owing to the
irregular make of the Vessels through which the Blood and Juices pass. Had he
said SOME FEW I had agreed with him. But since so many chronical Distempers
derive their Sources from the Viscidity, Fermentation, Raresaction, or
Condensation of the Juices and their constituent Parts, the Motion and
Circulation of which are often stopped and impeded, when they are not well
comminuted by Concoction: since many more are entirely owing to too great an
Increase of sharp and acrimonious Salts, which intermixing with the Fluids,
leave in them such a corrosive Quality, as instead of filtrating through the
Glands, break through, or wear them up. Since then so many chronical Distempers
take their Origin from other Causes, I cannot accede to our Author's
Assertion. Nay, he is so diffident and distrustful of the Truth of his own
Sentiments, that soon after he acknowledges there are several Distempers which
may be communicated by Methods no ways consistent with this Account. I shall
leave therefore the further Examination of this Assertion, which indeed has no
Force here, and had better have been omitted, since if our Calculator is wrong
in his Account as he most egregiously is, the Position betrays at the same Time
his want of Judgment, in the Nature and Cause of chronical Distempers, and the
Method of palliating or curing them. But this puts me in mind of an Observation
of the great Baglivi, who if I remember right somewhere says; "In my Judgment,
Mathematics, Rhetoric, Arithmetic, etc. are as serviceable to an accurate
History of Diseases, as the Art of Painting is to a Musician."

BUT to follow our Author who goes on thus: Now if this was the Case of all, it
would be as just to affirm, that Inoculation could communicate the Features of
another Man's Face, as communicate other Distempers. I must own this is to me
an unintelligible Consequence drawn from the Author's own Premises, but as
they are innocent, harmless Words, and communicate no force to his Answer, and
do no hurt to the Objection, I suffer them to stand in their Place, or to
CIRCULATE with the Milk through the Body of a Nurse. But I call myself off from
breaking such Bubbles, and plead in my Defense, it is none of my Fault, if some
Authors Write so Triflingly, that they are not to be solidly refuted.

YET since I said this Objection was built upon solid Reason, and supported by
Experience, I think myself obliged to prove the Possibility, Probability, and
Certainty of communicating of other Distempers by Inoculation of the Small Pox.

1. IT is generally allowed that the Stamina or Principles of some dangerous
Diseases, such as Madness, Leprosy, King's Evil, Consumptions, Lues Venerea,
etc. are by an hereditary Right entailed upon some Families for some Time.

2. These Principles compounded and sormed in the Constitutions of some
Persons, are of a size so exiguous, as to be imperceptible even to the most
Eagle-ey'd Surgeon, and of a Nature so quiet and dormant as not to enter
upon Action, unless by some adventitious Cause roused up.

3. A VARIOLOUS FEVER by a violent and extraordinary Fermentation of the whole
Mass of Blood, rouses these Seeds, and they mix with those of the Small Pox:
and a Pustule taken from such a Person, who has the Seeds of any of these
Diseases, may as well convey the Principles of such Diseases, as of the Small
Pox into another clear of them before.

4. WHEN thus conveyed they have a Power in the minutest Size to convert a
large Mass of Liquids into their noxious Nature, and by this Assimilation ruin
the Crasis of the Blood, and in progress of Time produce a homogeneous Disease.

THAT I am not singular in allowing such Semina and Agency of 'em to corrupt
the Blood and Humors, and by Degrees bring them into such a state of
Assimilation as may cause a Distemper of the same Family to break out, will be
clear to those who have read the mechanical Account of Poison, wrote by the
judicious and learned Dr. Mead, in which Treatise he several Times, and various
Ways confirms and establishes this Notion, Particularly p. 84. "What is thrown
out from Liquors in a Ferment is capable of inducing the like Motion in another
Liquor of the same Kind, when duly mixed with it". Again, "A Person thus
affected (viz. by a mad Dog) may be said in a Degree to have put on the canine
Nature, though his Reason be all this time untouched and entire, may Bite, Howl,
etc. because the like violent Agitation of the Blood in him as was in the Dog,
will present like Species, and consequently (so far as their different Natures
will allow) produce like Actions, etc".

I WILL only add another Quotation, from an Author who is as great an Ornament
of our Profession in the French Nation, as the Last is in our own, [viz.]
Helvetius, who expressly says in his Essay on the Animal Economy, P. 132.
"When the Blood abounds with Humors of different Qualities, which are likewise
dissolved along with the variolous Humors, the Disease in that Case cannot be
Simple, but must be complicated". From these Authorities it appears that the
Deposita of some bad Disease may incorporate with the purulent Matter of a
Pustule, and the Pustule being a Composition of variolous Poison and of these
Seeds, may possibly and probably communicate a Chaos of Diseases.

BUT Possibilities and Probabilities are Bugbears and may fright Children, but
not move a wise Man; For the infectious Matter (says our Author) according to
Experience appears to communicate nothing but what it was intended to
communicate, the Small Pox. Now this is another unsupported Assertion against
Fact, and must be tried by Experience, which shows a CERTAINTY of such
complicated Communication, and as a Proof shall at present only beg his Review
of the printed Relations, and particularly Miss Rolt's and Lord Percival's
Son's Case, both of which in a lingering Disease miserably lived and at last
died Victims to this barbarous Practice; but hereafter if our Author shall
think fit to undertake a general History of the Success of Inoculation (...)
^^^^n^iseto give him my Sentiments of the Performan^^, and wh^^ further
Sat^faction I can on this Subject.

I GO on with our Author who generally at the beginning of an Article seems to
triumph be it only for a Flourish in a line or two but at the Close supposes
all that has hitherto been advanced may be set aside, and is by my Consent. But
his forsorn Hope being cut off, we must depend upon Porters, Ploughmen, etc.
and here we have a moral Certainty, that these have sound and healthy
Constitutions. These indeed cannot be Leprous, Scabious, Scorbutic,
Rheumatick, etc. these cannot be subject to any LATENT Disease; so that from
these, all Gentlemen may be inoculated very safely without any Communication of
any other Distemper, and the Ladies have no reason to fear a Communication of
Features, because it would be as just to affirm that Inoculation could
communicate the Features of another Man's Face, as communicate other
Distempers. But I will farther add, and oblige our Author with another
necessary Caution in the Practice of Inoculation, which perhaps he never heard
of before, and tell him that it is the Opinion of some, that even the vicious
Inclination of a Nurse may by the Milk be communicated to her suckling Infant;
if so, methinks he should be very careful and inquisitive into the moral
Disposition of the Person from whom the Matter is taken, for otherwise he may
imprudently bring an Honest Man to the Gallows, and make a Modest Virgin a
Brazen Prostitute; but this perhaps will so rarely happen, as not to deserve
Notice.

I HAVE now given a short Answer to a Pamphlet, entitled, Some Reasons, etc.
If my Friends have expected it sooner, or wished for a Longer, I must tell a
plain and undisguised Truth, I had neither Inclination for the one, nor Time
for the other; and in those Hours I sat down to write, I have been so
frequently interrupted, that it is more my Wonder that I have finished so soon,
than that the Impatience of my Acquaintance should make them think I delayed
too long. But I hope I have said enough to discourage a Practice insecure of
its Intention, often pernicious in its Consequences, frequently fatal in its
Event, to those who voluntarily and freely submit to it; and surely neither
Persuasion or Compulsion should be used when Health and Life are the Stakes. It
must undoubtedly therefore lay all those who are by fine PROMISES drawn into
it, or by inhumane THREATS forced into it, under unrequitable Obligations to
the Projector.

IF OTHERS can calmly see a detestable Method discredited every where else,
introduced amongst their Friends and Acquaintance; I must own I could not be
Passive and Silent and with coolness of Temper see it; I could not even forsee
their Miseries without Horror, and thought myself obliged by the Ties of
Humanity and Friendship, to do my utmost to prevent them. This was the sole
Motive of my Writing this Answer, and if I am so happy as to stop a most
dangerous Scheme, the Pleasure of doing good is Reward great enough for me. And
since our Author in his last Line without any Hypocrisy owns an ambitious View
of being regarded, I without Envy wish he may meet with as much regard, as his
Modesty joined with his Merit may justly claim.

Bury, Feb. 27, 1732-33.
FINIS.
APPENDIX.
I Had determined not to Publish any Letters from my own private
Correspondents, or Re-print any from the Tracts at present, but to fill up an
empty Page, have subjoined the following Moving one from Mrs. Rolt, a Lady of
good Sense and Fashion.

A Letter from Mrs. Rolt. Dated September, 16, 1724.
WHEN I determined by my Friend's Persuasion to have my Daughter inoculated, I
sent for Mr. A -- d, he as'k but few questions about her, but I told him she
had the Jaundice about a Year before, and some Months after a small relapse
into it, that from that time she had been very well, till she had the Measles
about two Months before, and getting soon well of it, had been ever since with
a Relation at Epsome. He declared himself very well satisfied with her State of
Health, and though I proposed having a Physician to attend her, asked him whether
there was not to be some Preparation, and particularly mentioned, cutting off
her Hair; he said there was no occasion for any thing I had offered, that the
Child would be so well all the Course of the Disease, that she would play about
the Room the whole Time.

About five or six Days after the Inoculation, she was seized with great Pains
in all her Joints. The Small Pox came out about the 10th or 11th Day very
violently, and was what they call the flux Sort; upon which I proposed again a
Physician, Mr. A -- d upon it named one he had a mind, which I consented to,
soon after another was called, who he said understood Inoculation: soon after
their Bleeding her, there appeared a swelling upon one of her Elbows, upon
which I was very much flattered, that it was a mark she would do well, as I was
often in the course of her Illness. In nine Weeks after the Inoculation, and
after the most miserable Suffering, that ever poor Creature underwent, she died
worn to nothing but Skin and Bone. She had six and thirty running Sores (none
of them having ever been healed) when she died; and they were forced to roll up
her Joints in Past-board, least the Joints should fall out of their Places.

I am very sensible of the Reports which have been spread about her, [viz.]
that she was eat up of the King's Evil, that she had had the Black-Jaundice, and
that she was not well cured of that, nor of the Measles. The Contrary of which,
was affirmed to me by those who had the Care of her in those Illnesses, and as
to the King's Evil it never happened, either to Mr. Rolt's or my Family, nor
was it ever suspected by the Physicians who had treated her. And Mr. A -- d
himself as I said before, allowed her to be in a very good Condition, and fit
for the Operation even without the help, either of a Physician, or any
Preparation.

After this it is very extraordinary to have such Reports spread; and
particularly that any Man should talk in Print of the irregular Life of a Child
of nine Years old; for near two Years before the Measles, she had been at Mr.
Caverlas School, which is allowed to be one of the best governed in England.

I could say much more upon this Subject, but as every particular of this is
Fact, the World may see by it the Humanity of having such a Misfortune
aggravated, by the very People, who at least should show some Repentance, for
the Misery they brought upon an afflicted Mother.

ANNE ROLT.
As this Letter is wrote within the Confinements of Truth, and with the Accents
of Sorrow, I may leave it without any Reflection. Every Man of Sense from this
Case will observe a Communication of Diseases by Inoculation, POSSIBLE,
PROBABLE, and CERTAIN. And every affectionate fond Mother and tender Virgin may
from this doleful Instance see the Mercies of Inoculation are Cruel, and dread
a Practice of an Influence so malignant, as may render the Lives of them and
theirs miserable, and their Bodies an Hospital of putrid Sores, and incurable
Distempers.



ERRATA.
Page 16 l. 12, for wittingly, read unwittingly.

Advertisement.
ANY Person who has had an Opportunity of making any Observation of the ill
Consequences of Inoculation, is carnestly requested to communicate the Case
well circumstantiated to Dr. Warren, at Bury St. Edmund 's in Suffolk.


