ENTHUSIASM: A POEM. IN TWO PARTS. BY MR. JERNINGHAM.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. ROBSON AND W. CLARKE, BOOKSELLERS, NEW BOND-STREET.
M.DCC.LXXXIX.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IN endeavoring to display the good and bad effects occasioned by Enthusiasm,
I might have drawn many signal instances from that inexhaustible mine, the
Greek and Roman story; but it appeared to me more eligible to work upon
materials hewn from the modern quarry only: the subject, thus treated, I
conceived would come more home to the feelings of the reader. With regard to
the execution, that rests entirely on the judgment of the Public, into whose
presence I now enter, impressed with a mingled sensation of hope and
apprehension.

ENTHUSIASM.
PART THE FIRST.
BEYOND the exalted sun's meridian site,
Beyond the glimmering stars ethereal height,
A brighter realm immortal spring displays,
Mid the soft breathing of unclouded days:
Where sacred minds to virtue high allied,
Aerial beings, orient forms abide,
Seraphic people! ministers of grace,
Prompt to defend and cheer the human race:
The mighty mother earth who bears mankind,
Is to their care and guardian power consigned.
When clashing waves swell high, and angry Fate
Tosses the laboring vessel of the state,
The chosen Angel of the appointed realm
Hastes from his throne, and grasps the trembling helm:
To some the honored privilege is given
To waft the clay-divested soul to heaven,
Weed from the feeling heart the rising sigh,
And sweep with viewless hand the clouded eye:
Each in his turn descending from above,
Performs the generous ministry of love.
BEHOLD superior to the sun-rob'd quire
A female form to regal power aspire!
High on a throne, in brighter beams arrayed,
Reigns in full pomp the enthusiastic Maid!
Daughter of Energy, who boldly leads
The hallowed few to great and splendid deeds:
Who urges man the steep ascent to climb.
And lifts the soul to virtue's height sublime.
Thus when of late to famed Iberia's coast GIBRALTAR.

Sailed over the wondering main the unnumber'd host,
Swift from her seat the impatient Goddess sprung,
And over the spot with anxious bosom hung,
Till shedding on her sons, to fame consigned,
Some emanation of her dauntless mind,
She saw the valiant long-enduring band
(Whose fall confederated nations planned)
Achieve that deed which time shall still revere,
That British miracle to glory dear!
LONG had the Enthusiast held her rank supreme,
Beloved, adored, of every voice the theme;
At length the blast of satire dimmed the rays,
Whose soft effulgence played around her praise:
The throne encircling frequent murmurs flew,
And busy charges trimmed in motley hue:
Yet then confiding in her god-like plan,
Which warms, invigorates, and hallows man,
She dares her foes, she dares the hostile train
To shake the pillars of her steadfast reign:
Urged by her innate energy to meet
The gathering war, she quits her lofty seat,
At Reason's bar presents her holy form,
Provokes the thund'rers, and demands the storm.
A living crescent the bright powers display,
Rank above rank in terrible array:
While trembling silence breathes upon the train,
And expectation throbs in every vein,
Amid this scene the accusing Angel rose,
On his stern brow bold indignation glows;
Some troubling vision, with disaster fraught,
Employs, detains, alarms his wondering thought:
-- "What rising structure rushes on my sight,
Of bulk enormous, of aspiring height The ALEXANDRIAN LIBRARY, consisting of
four hundred thousand manuscripts, was burnt in the sixth century by the order
of OMAR, whose enthusiastic zeal for his religion forced from him this
memorable saying: "If the books contain only what is in the CORAN they are
useless, and dangerous if they contain any thing else."
?
The Enthusiast, hastening through the regal porch,
Waves in the eye of day a raging torch:
See (impious spectacle!) she fires the pile,
And hails the sparkles with a greedy smile:
Wide and more wide the imparted flame extends,
And now in dreadful victory ascends.
Not sumptuous palaces, not awful fanes,
Nor of old time the proud, august remains,
Not airy villas, nor majestic towers,
High massive bulwarks, nor gay pleasure's bowers,
But to the unhallowed blaze I see consigned
The splendid temple of the poet's mind.
Ah! loved TYRTAEUS TYRTAEUS reanimated the dejected minds of the SPARTANS with
the irresistible power of his poetry, accompanied by the harp.
, towering son of fame,
Thy pages shrivel at the insatiate flame:
The glorious workings of thy pregnant heart,
The sallies from the inmost breast that start,
Eloquent threats that lawless power control,
Thy bursts of rage, and vehemence of soul.
Unrivaled leader of the ecstatic train,
Farewell (for ever lost) thy forceful strain:
Farewell (for ever lost) the Spartan song,
Which roused to conquest the dejected throng:
Did not despondence, like a gathering shower,
Hang over thy countrymen in evil hour?
Say, did she not her fenny pinions spread,
And on each bosom chilling fear-drops shed?
Thou like the sun a cheerful radiance threw,
And from the soil the noxious vapor drew,
Till the fallen soul uprising from her death,
Inhales once more the invigorating breath.
Thy voice -- It Is honor's call on virtue's train:
Thy voice -- Yes, Sparta hears the inspiring strain;
To that vindictive with bold step she speeds,
And reaps the harvest of immortal deeds.
UNRIVALED leader of the ecstatic quire,
Peace to the manes of thy war-bred lyre,
If peace can be while with licentious power
The hungry fires thy last remains devour:
Methinks thy lucid, unsubstantial frame,
Now hovers over the wide destructive flame,
I see thee toss thine airy arms on high,
I hear at times thy shrill, despairing cry:
So the fond mother-bird, alarmed, distressed,
Indignant flutters round her peopled nest,
While (piteous sight!) a ruthless hand invades,
And bears away the music of the shades.
SEE to the dome (through many an age revered)
The star-illumin'd dome which science reared,
The fiery deluge rolls with threatening roar,
And sweeps away the long-collected store:
Alluring apologues addressed to youth,
Pure maxims molded in the breast of truth,
Which from the holy lips of sages breathed,
Rich moral legacies to man bequeathed:
Celestial thoughts, which (like the favoring gales
Whose gentle pressure swells the gladsome sails)
Waft the dejected mind, with toil o'erspent,
To the gay-winding harbor of content.
NOW History with a heartfelt sigh surveys
Her themes, her annals, midst the sounding blaze:
Fame smiles no more, but with an altered mien,
Stands trembling at destruction's growing scene:
And now methinks she views through fancy's eye,
Her burnished battlements that kissed the sky:
Her glittering pinnacles, her golden towers,
That vaunting dared old Time's devasting powers:
Ascending obelisks that point to heaven,
Triumphal arches to the conq'ror given:
She views these honors of her gorgeous state
Dismantled, torn, and bending to their fate;
Ah, now they yield, they fall with deaf'ning sound,
And in tumultuous havoc spread around!
At length, descending like a low-hung cloud,
Oblivion over the waste expands her shroud,
Beneath whose dark'ning canopy is cast
The fond remembrance of transactions past:
Of youthful warriors, who, by glory led,
Bold in the clamorous van of danger bled,
Who, midst the storms of state and home-born wars,
Gleam'd through the thick'ning shade like morning stars,
Till flung untimely from their radiant height,
Down, down they hurried to eternal night:
Of patriots, who, to honor close allied,
In times disastrous stood their country's pride!
How these sublime state-columns, tempest-proof,
Upheld, midst bursting clouds, the sacred roof,
Firm to their cause, and obstinately great,
No voice of mortal ever shall relate:
Nor shall the voice of mortal ever display,
Or annals usher to the eye of day,
The various orders of the female train
Diffused like flowerets over the smiling plain,
Who, like those flowerets in their beauty's glow,
Were harshly mangled by the scythe of woe.
HERE then, to keen reflection's crowded eye,
As in a deep sepulchral mansion lie,
In iron slumber wrapped and dread repose,
A train of human virtues, human woes:
This moral loss the world must now sustain,
Swells over the boundary of domestic pain,
Calls down the gushes of the bleeding mind,
And claims the expansive sorrow of mankind."
HE ceased. -- A Seraph, to his cause allied.
And firm to battle on the accusing side,
Resumed the theme! his arm exalted high,
A wild fire flashing from his pregnant eye --
"What numerous fugitives arrest my view Alluding to the revocation of the
Edict of NANTES, in consequence of which the HUGONOTS quitted the kingdom.
,
Their cheek discolored with dejection's hue?
What ruthless power the wanton act decreed?
What led the monarch to this desperate deed?
Behold -- the Enthusiast at the regal chair
Breathes her inflaming whispers on his ear:
Now, now she urges his reluctant hand
To ratify the terrible command:
O hapless, lost, exterminated race,
What can atone this unprovoked disgrace?
Ye venerable men with silver hair,
Galled by the heavy yoke of thornful care,
With dauntless soul, enshrined in feeble forms,
Ye meet the thunders of the rushing storms,
Prompt a bold war for virtue's sake to wage
Against the comforts of reposing age:
Friends, honors, kindred, country ye disclaim,
The smiles of patronage, the wreaths of fame,
Firm to endure the persecuting rod,
And in the abyss of grief to seek your God.
Ye too, ye fair, on virtue's list enrolled,
Whom Nature fashioned in her softer mould,
In pale adversity's rude science versed,
Your feeling soul with sorrow's dart transpierc'd,
I see you slowly move a lengthening train,
Far from the bounds of your domestic plain:
Imagination renovates the hour
Ye fell the victims of relentless power,
How still ye lingered on your native strand,
Enclosed by friendship's small but ardent band,
How as ye wept, caressing and caressed,
Your babes were ravished from your throbbing breast.
BUT now, intruding on my wondering sight,
My strong abhorrence other scenes excite.
Beneath the roof, where Death's chill banners spread,
An agonizing fair reclines her head:
Around the mournful couch of languor stand
(In hallowed vestment) a monastic band!
Yet not to act affection's sacred part,
With lenient hand to draw the rankling dart,
Through hope's gay perspective command to rise
A soothing prospect of the opening skies;
Ah! not for heavenly charity's best end
The gloomy fathers over the suff'rer bend,
But from the alarmed reluctant mind to wrest
The coy assentment to the hateful Test This relates to a penal law which
confiscated the estates of those who did not, at their deaths, renounce the
reformed religion. -- See SAURIN's SERMONS, vol. i. page 152.
.
AT this the mourner lifts her drooping head --
'While here I languish on affliction's bed,
Say, is it thus ye minister relief,
And whisper comfort to the soul of grief?
Disgraced, accursed with hearts untaught to feel,
O iron progeny of barbarous zeal!
When harrass'd nature with herself at strife,
The last gleam fading on the lamp of life,
When to the storm succeeds the welcome calm,
When angel hands reach out the victor's palm,
Must I that bliss, that heavenly prize forego,
And whelm my spirit in immortal woe?
Yet then my infants, by pale Famine led,
Must ask from Pity's hand the scanty bread;
Methinks I see them now exposed to scorn,
Their little bosoms pierced with sorrow's thorn:
O what an image to a mother's sight,
The view transports me into madd'ning fright;
I yield, I yield, unfold the fatal creed,
And Mercy from his thought efface the deed!'
AT these dread words, that closed the eventful scene,
Religion blushed and veiled her awful mien:
Yet on the crime, from tyrant edicts born,
By nature from the dying mother torn,
Wrung from the bosom, by distraction riv'n,
Forgiveness dropped the holy tear of Heaven.
NOW to my view, by terrors undismayed,
The glory of the priesthood stands displayed!
The virtuous Pastor JAMES SAURIN, the celebrated preacher at the HAGUE, where
he resided several years, and was at once the edification and comfort of his
exiled brethren.
of the suffering race,
Proud of his wrongs and patient of disgrace:
Him the unhappy fugitives enclose,
While thus he speaks -- 'Ye partners of my woes,
O Strenuous found in persecution's day,
Ye faithful, dear companions of my way,
I now behold you as the snow-wing'd dove,
Expelled the ancient mansions of her love,
Whose plumes, while clouds o'ercanopy her flight,
Assume the splendour of a purer white.
Here pause -- and, while we view the expanding main,
Salute the breeze that flies to freedom's plain;
Across the waves ere yet our course we steer.
One duteous moment let us linger here,
And, though rejected, (still to nature true)
Sigh to our parent-land the fond adieu:
Ah! far from us remove that breast of steel,
Whose rooted principle is not to feel,
Which, like the sapless oak's time-moulder'd form,
Nor heeds the vernal air or wintry storm.
On man bestowed, and to the brute denied,
The tear of nature sure is nature's pride.
Even He, the general victim of mankind,
Who each disgrace, each torture predesign'd,
Even He, when grief and agony drew near,
Felt on his cheek the self-compassion'd tear.
Does not dim obloquy attaint our birth?
Are not our temples levelled with the earth?
Are not our kindred, friends in fetters bound,
Plunged in the terrors of the cavern'd ground?
And we, meek victims, as we passed along,
Endured we not the loud upbraiding throng.
While the loose soldiery added to these woes
With jeering insults and degrading blows?
It seemed as nature marked us for disgrace,
The outcast offals of the human race.
O thou LEWIS XIV.
, by all these horrors unappall'd,
Whom with delight I royal master called,
Thou to remembrance now no longer dear,
Whom as the scourge of Heaven I still revere,
Farewell! -- Thou too, by partial fortune blessed,
All Nature's offerings breathing at thy breast,
Thrice happy FRANCE, farewell! -- these eyes no more
Shall view thy charms that spread from shore to shore:
Thy harvests waving with a stately pride,
Thy vintage blushing on the mountain's side.
Original and self-exuberant soil,
Refusing nothing to the hand of toil,
And where the Arts, a bright harmonious band,
Refine, exalt, and decorate the land,
Where Mirth, the native of thy social bowers,
Sheds on each lip his fascinating powers;
With thee may bliss still undiminish'd dwell,
Hail, O my country, and a last farewell!'
THE Pastor ceased. -- Then sorrow burst its bound,
With fervent lips some kissed their parent-ground,
Some with the same tormenting thought impressed
Tore the wild grass and flowerets from her breast,
To bear a relic of their natal plain
To scenes unknown, and realms beyond the main.
So firm, so powerful on the heart of man
(Above inconstancy's relenting plan)
Is fixed, enthroned by Nature's hallowed hand,
The glowing passion of his native land.
THESE are the evils (woe succeeding woe)
Which from the Enthusiast in long order flow:
Yet not for these does terror daunt her soul,
Mark that proud eye impatient of control,
See riding on that brow imperial will,
And tyranny the minister of ill.
Let then resentment fierce, terrific, loud,
Burst like the thunder from the rifted cloud:
The course of her devasting steps I Have run;
My journey's over, the mournful tale is done."
END OF THE FIRST PART.
PART THE SECOND.
NOW rose a Seraph, by affection led,
A wreathing glory hovers over his head,
His flowing accents spotless candor owned,
And on his brow sat energy enthroned:
He speaks -- "The vulture hastening to his prey,
With sounding pinions wins his distant way,
Regardless of the charms that Nature's hand
In gay profusion scatters over the land,
And, summoned by the pestilential gale,
Speeds to the carcass fest'ring in the vale:
So these accusers in their rav'ning mood
Appear to emulate the gory brood,
Unmindful of the virtues that surround
The spot on which their censures most abound.
NOW deeds long past like exhalations roll,
Now nearer move, now open on the soul:
I see the pale-ey'd citizens convene,
In Hist'ry's drama high-recorded scene EDWARD III. was so exasperated at the
long and gallant resistance he met with from the citizens of CALAIS, that he
threatened to put all the inhabitants to the sword: he desisted from this
atrocious design, on the condition that six persons should be sent to him for
the purpose of immediate execution. He required that they should approach his
presence barefooted, clothed in mourning, with ropes round their necks.
!
The dread resolve from EDWARD's bosom sprung,
Wild consternation over the city flung:
With chilling, blood-recoiling thoughts impressed,
Entrancing terror deadens every breast.
At length from out the silent depth emerg'd
An ardent chief, by glory's impulse urged:
The Enthusiast wraps him in her wak'ning fires,
And thus he utters what her soul inspires:
'Ye firm associates in the highest cause,
On whom posterity will shower applause,
Who, while calamity severely reigned,
Well the long labors of the siege sustained!
Deign to accept what my affections give,
And bid your kindred, friends, and children live:
This, this will cheer me in the trying hour,
When I shall bend at the stern tyrant's power,
And the doomed victim (as his rage decreed)
On the pure altar of my country bleed:
Ah! should my strong forebodings tell me true,
Pass one swift moment, these glad eyes shall view
The destined number of the victims rise,
To swell the rites of patriot sacrifice!' --
These words prophetic were not ardor's rant,
Five kindred bosoms warm for glory pant,
These youths the Enthusiast, fev'ring from the rest,
Informs, and breathes herself into their breast,
And now envelop'd in her active flame,
The daring chiefs the ponderous honor claim.
See, through the applauses of the grateful throng,
The self-devoted heroes move along.
To EUSTACE now advanced a beauteous maid,
In the rude garb of negligence arrayed,
Her auburn tresses ruffling to the wind,
Her eye expressive of her tortured mind:
'Say, desperate youth,' the wild'ring fair exclaimed,
'What dire conception has thy bosom framed?
O death-importing scenery! sight abhorred!
Whence this attire, this ignominious cord?
Impelled by frenzy whither do thou tend?
Relent, relent, thine impious steps suspend!' --
With a calm fortitude the chieftain said,
'The path that climbs to honor's height I tread:
These joyful loud acclaims that rend the air
Would thou convert to howlings of despair?
Even love commands -- with eager step I go
To shield JOANNA from impending woe.'
'What peace,' she answers, 'can I thence derive?
The lover murdered, say can joy survive?
While famine, sickness, terrors I endured,
Was this the future bliss that hope assured?
To lengthening care, to sorrow still allied,
Behold JOANNA stands Misfortune's bride:
What time her flushed expectancies drew near,
She meets her bridegroom on the hopeless bier.
Had Mercy, heav'n-descending Mercy stole
Her gentle radiance over the conq'ror's soul,
This day, escaped from wide affliction's wreck,
This day might I, reclining on thy neck,
Have uttered EDWARD's praise -- that thought is flown,
And each fond project of my heart overthrown.
When from thy wound I drew the British dart,
And with these lips embalmed the envenomed part,
Would that the poison like a subtle flame
Had scorched my entrails, and dissolved my frame!'
She ceased -- her eye emits a weaker glance,
While her dim reason fades into a trance:
The youth, as if indignant of delay,
Drops her pale hand, and turns abrupt away:
Then to the partners of his fate he cried,
'Ye willing victims, to my soul allied,
Forgive, if passion's all-subduing power
Dare to profane this high important hour;
Now, free of weakness, clear of love's control,
I lead the way that runs to virtue's goal.'
ARRIVED at EDWARD's tent, the dauntless youth
Resumed -- 'Invested in this garb uncouth,
If, at thy bidding, thus we meet thine eye,
For grace (the coward's hope) we heave no sigh:
Since acts of slaughter are thy soul's best food,
O gorge thy rav'ning appetite of blood!' --
Now with the glowing youths, of equal mind,
In one resolve, one hope, one peril joined,
He stands, unawed by death, sublimely great,
True to his cause, rejoicing in his fate.
BUT other scenes of high illustrious fame
Burst on my soul, impatient of their claim:
Behold! the Enthusiast, freedom to regain,
Leads her stern Barons over the sacred plain;
It Is glory's chase! how eagerly they speed
Over the famed ransom-ground of RUNNYMEDE!
To the proud Monarch daring they complain --
'Say, have thou not polluted ALBION's fane,
And plundered thence, with sacrilegious stealth,
The brightest gem, our pride, our better wealth.
Fair Freedom's heavenly form? Of her bereft,
Life is a burden, not an envied gift.
The bending seer, with sorrow's weight oppressed.
Who beats in his despair his withered breast,
Shall sooner from his tortured mind efface
The wretch who plunged his daughter in disgrace,
Who in his sight compelled her to his arms,
And rudely ravished her untasted charms,
Than we forgive thy violating power,
That wrested Freedom from her native bower:
Licentious Monarch, thy approaching hand
Profanes the ark, and desecrates the land!'
They spoke -- each battle-axe, now reared on high,
(Catching the splendour of the unclouded sky)
Cast on the illumined field a sudden light,
Whose rapid flash o'erpower'd the monarch's sight:
Upbraiding thoughts his wavering mind assailed,
And fear, the tyrant's curse, his aspect pal'd:
At length he seals, with mean, reluctant soul,
(To BRITAIN ever dear) the immortal scroll.
Hail, welcome instance of submitting power,
Hail, holy Freedom's sacramental hour,
In which that offspring of indulgent Heaven
Was with dread pomp to ENGLAND's sons regiv'n.
Now through disclosing skies the angelic train
Pour on the enraptured ear the choral strain,
'Be cheerful praise, be salutations paid,
'And hymns symphonious, to the godlike Maid,
'Whose energy resists the tyrant's plan:
'Joy be to Saints, and liberty to Man!' --
FROM Time's dark gulf, revolving back to light,
What newborn image rushes on my sight?
The bold COLUMBUS dedicates his sail
To the wild breathing of a stranger gale:
The Enthusiast bids his dauntless soul explore
Realms unreveal'd, and seas unplough'd before:
The hour now ripening in the womb of time,
The inspired adventurer reached the point sublime,
The long-obscuring veil for him was furled.
And on his vision burst another world!
Ecstatic Wonder heard the proud event,
And over the ocean the glad tidings sent:
Then Industry, as by electric stroke,
From her enduring sleep instinctive broke:
With brightest omens of her future reign,
This better VENUS rising from the main,
Saw from all harbors, rushing with the tide,
Unnumber'd vessels at her beck'ning glide:
Did it not seem as if the severed earth,
Like two fair sisters parted from their birth,
Acknowledging at length their kindred race,
Felt the warm transport of a first embrace?
NOW the same age a different scene presents,
And the bold vision labors with events:
Methinks I see, extending wide around,
A towering wood with crowding leaves imbrown'd;
Beneath whose vast display of deadly shade
Her listless length lethargic EUROPE laid:
There Superstition her deep plan designed
Against the awful sanctuary of the mind:
There the wan sorceress, haggard fiend of hell,
Midst her dim orgies muttered the dread spell.
The sun abhors to pour his radiant flood
Over the dumb horror of the slumbering wood;
Yet through the gloom of sacerdotal night
One peerless star reveals a cheerful light:
Ah! why in mystic strains eclipse his name?
Demand, O LUTHER, thine unbounded fame:
Advance, advance, thou elder son of Truth,
Sublime, all-daring, restless, ardent youth!
I now behold the enthusiastic Maid
Rushing impetuous to her fav'rite's aid:
She reaches to his lips a cup of fire,
Whose living drops the leaping pulse inspire,
Over each thrilled artery entracing roll,
And sublimate the high-aspiring soul.
Revealing now his mission from the skies,
He utters to the torpid world -- 'Arise!'
The sullen forest, wrapped in tenfold night,
Swift through a thousand vistas drinks the light:
The imprisoned tenants burst the mental tomb,
While from their eyes recedes the massive gloom:
The flaky clouds admit an orient ray,
And laughing morn unlocks the gates of day.
Prompt Apprehension sends her view around,
While her bold thoughts o'erleap their former bound,
And Joy proclaims throughout the applauding earth.
The hallowed festival of Reason's birth.
NOW the couched mind reveals its spotless eye,
Weak to sustain the splendour of the sky,
Till strengthening at the irradiating gleam,
It meets unblenching Truth's refulgent beam:
So when the keenly-glitt'ring darts of light
Pierce the loose film that dims the eaglet's sight,
First with an ignorant and coy survey
The dazzled bird admires the stranger day,
Then glancing on the sun with towering gaze,
Kindles his vision at the noontide blaze.
NOW Science hears a voice unknown before --
'Haste, pilot, pilot quit the drowsy shore;
The favoring winds thy destined hour proclaim,
Display thy sails, and launch into thy fame.'
MEEK Toleration, heav'n-descending maid,
A vernal rainbow glittering over her head,
Smooths the rough path destructive feet have traced,
Adorns and peoples Persecution's waste:
She, like the FLORA of the Pagan reign,
Sprinkles with roses the enameled plain,
Bids every flower of every clime arise,
And freely breathe its incense to the skies.
SEE Superstition, madd'ning at the alarm,
Extend in thunder clothed her threatening arm,
But withering at the heart she rues the hour
That harshly severs her diminished power:
Thus as the serpent, sleeping on the plain,
Feels the rude pressure of the loaded wain,
With apt revenge, and indignation stung,
She rears her crest, and darts her fiery tongue,
But impotent of rage, her trailing wound
She languishingly sweeps along the ground."
HERE closed the Seraph his illustrious theme,
Which on his audience flashed conviction's beam.
-- And now the Enthusiast, with her hand high-rear'd,
Expressed a look demanding to be heard:
The circling Hierarchy, with one acclaim,
Urge her to vindicate her injured fame;
She, to their judgment fearlessly consigned,
Thus poured the effusion of her glowing mind: --
"BOLD on a towering rock, with soul elate,
I saw BRITANNIA sit in regal state,
Around the globe she threw her vast survey,
And marked the realms devoted to her sway:
Her western clime, her oriental reign,
Her glory's theater the unbounded main:
I thus addressed her -- 'Hail, immortal dame,
Who high-exalted crowd'st the seat of fame,
Suspend the thoughts of thine imperial state.
And listen to the event that heaves with fate: --
A prosperous mother (so did Heaven ordain)
Blessed and ennobled by a numerous train,
Beheld (a stranger to affection's tie)
Her youngest born with a disclaiming eye,
And, breaking loose from every moral band,
Stretched over the innocuous babe an iron hand,
And hard'ning in her wrath, the helpless child
Was from her presence and her thought exiled:
This little outcast lately I surveyed,
As mid the flowerets of the wild he played
Artless and gay, himself the wilder flower,
Bare to the withering heat and quenching shower.'
BRITANNIA quick returned with loud acclaim,
'O piteous infant, O inhuman dame!
Where, where does she abide, that I may dart
The shaft of death into her wolfish heart?'
'TWAS then I added with indignant air --
'Dismiss thy threats, thy warm resentment spare,
Or droop thyself beneath a flood of shame,
Thine, thine the child, and thou the inhuman dame.'
I said -- and throwing back my flowing vest,
Disclosed the infant clinging at my breast:
'Behold,' I cried, ' this flow'ret of the wild,
This orphan nursling, this rejected child,
Mark how around his brow of virtue's mold,
The signs of greatness dare even now unfold;
How on the vigorous eye the morning ray
Preludes the splendour of meridian day:
Mavelous infant, doomed to act my plan,
AMERICANUS, hasten into man!
O doomed to act what Heaven's dread thought devised,
Thou at the font of Energy baptized,
Whose rigid waves thy conscious soul increased,
Myself at once the sponsor and the priest -- -- '"
'ENOUGH,' the abruptly-rising Quire exclaim,
'Aspire, Enthusiast, to thy wonted fame;
Thy virtues, claims, and eminence we own,
Resume thy dignities, ascend thy throne:
Still to frail man thy daring strength impart,
Still flame the incentive seraph of his heart;
And when the scenes of earth shall fade away,
And man shall need no more thy active ray,
Then, sacred object of our praiseful theme,
Bright emanation of the eternal beam,
Thou shall regain thy native, dread abode,
And glow for ever in the breast of GOD.'
THE END.

