KILKENNY: OR, THE OLD MAN'S WISH.

By W. R. CHETWOOD.

Though Rough the Lines, they speak the Heart,
Therefore excuse the want of Art.
DUBLIN: Printed for the AUTHOR, And Sold by G. FAULKNER, in Essex Street, G.
and A. EWING, and P. WILSON in Dame-street, and J. ESDALL, on Cork-hill, 1748.

KILKENNY: OR, THE Old Man's WISH.
SINCE Man is surely Born to Die,
And Rise to long Eternity;
Let Virtue guide his steps below,
That fearless, he may meet the Blow,
AS I am one of Human Race,
With Patience waiting heavenly Grace;
And Age has worn me fifty Years,
With tardy Hopes, and Swift-wing'd Fears,
I Would Wish the Lees of Life to wear
Without the weight of Wordly care.
HAD I my Wish, or choice to Dwell,
It should 'be some clean rural Cell,
Beneath the Shade of spreading Trees,
Whose murm'rings with a gentle Breeze,
Might Lull my Senses into Rest,
And sooth the Troubles of my Breast.
O! Dunmore! seat of earthly Bliss!
Where Pan, and Echo, sweetly Kiss! Pan, the God of Groves, Woods, Mountains,
and Shepherds, was beloved by Echo.

Whose lofty Woods, and Sylvan Scenes
Thy Dells, and Varigated Greens
Seem to surpass old Tempe's Grove, Tempe, the most delightful Situation in
Thessaly, a Vale surrounded with Woods, Groves, Rivers, etc.

That seat of joy, and springing Love!
Within thy Shade i would fix my Cell,
There Is none on Earth would please so well.
Through the vast Globe I Have wandered over
And touched at many a distant Shore;
Seen various Nations, Rude, and Mild,
Nature improved, and nature Wild:
Yet none have such Contentment given,
As thou, Dunmore, an earthly Heaven!
Yet when I view thy mouldering Walls,
Whose trembling Ruin daily Falls,
I must Lament thy Ancient Date
With him, that urged his luckless Fate!
A LITTLE Garden, formed for Food,
Self-cultur'd, to enlive my Blood:
IF Laboring in my Garden's bound,
Along hid Treasure should be found,
For Ages buried under Ground,
In during Marble, would I raise,
To you great Mr. Collis, the Inventor of the Marble Mills near Kilkenny.
COLLIS, endless Praise!
With Artful chissel should be shown
In Bust, a Figure, like thy own:
O! great Inventor! Native Son!
No Art can equal what thou'st done,
HIBERNIA, may with Pride declare,
Naught under Heaven is found so Rare.
MY Garden Borders, set with Flowers,
Bedewed with artificial Showers,
Should Nature, heated, cease to deign
Her Friendly Clouds and dropping Rain:
There would I scent the Damask Rose,
That in my vernal border grows;
And as it is sweetness meets Decay
I should Reflect, and sighing say,
Thus Life blooms up, and Fades away!
BENEATH my little Garden Wall,
A purling Stream should gently fall
Whose limpid murmurings might glide,
Unmixed, with any lustful Tide,
To violate her virtuous Bed,
And swell her Womb, with riseing dread;
Then leave her Stained to Weep and Mourn,
With various Mischiefs not her own,
As many a Wretch, has Woman done!
O! lovely Sex! your Virtue keep,
Let no ill Thoughts disturb your Sleep;
Take sage Advice, from him that knows
The strength, and Number of your Foes:
All sullied Arts, and Sighs despise,
Repel the Darts of guilty Eyes.
The glittering Gem the Orient yields,
(The Flowers that deck the Fragrant Fields)
The Silks enriched with burnished Gold
(For these poor Beauty often is sold)
All these true Virtue will outshine,
For Virtue's Robe is all Divine.
RAISED over the Brook, an ever-green,
The Vine, and Woodbine mixed between,
Whose tendrils should conjointly move,
To form a Sphaeral Arch above:
There woul'd I sit, to breath fresh Air,
And view the glorious Hemisphere.
With Contemplation fill my Soul!
Admire the Beauty of the whole,
Then Praise the great Almighty Hand,
Who formed the World at his Command!
What Reptile Heart, all these could see,
And yet that Wretch an Atheist be?
SEE, from this height the Castle rise,
Whose Turrets seem to brave the Skies:
Behold those Domes for Heaven designed,
To cure the Passions of the Mind:
There, mixing with the early Guest,
I Would Pray to gain eternal Rest:
Forgive, as I would be Forgiven,
And live in Hope to merit Heaven.
HOW I regret the want of Art,
To show the ardours of my Heart!
Had I great A. Phillips, Esquire
Phillip's honest skill,
Who in sweet Honey dipped his Quill:
Whose well-taught Numbers gently fall:
Not like lost Pope, who wrote in Gall!
Drawcansir like, at every blow,
He struck at ALL, both Friend, and Foe.
O! awful Phillips! could I be
By Inspiration Fired by thee!
How smooth my rugged Lines would flow?
With pleasing Raptures as they go,
A gentle, generous Flame impart,
To warm the Thought, and touch the Heart.
MY Habit, plain, devoid of Lace,
That Suits not an Autumnal Face:
A coarse dark Frize may fit my Age
That might the Northern blasts assuage.
WHEN Winters Snow, and petrid Hail,
Deform the riseing Hill, and Dale,
And hoary Frosts disguise the Woods,
And bind in Chains the rapid Floods,
Within my Cell, I would Retire,
And warm me with Kilkenny Fire.
A few well chosen Books I Would have,
Some to prepare me for the Grave:
The rest to pass my time away;
(Heaven asks not all my Hours to pray)
Religion ought to cheer the mind,
Form us Benevolent and kind;
No scowling looks, or sour grimace,
Should ere be seated on the Face,
But all diffused with smilling Grace.
SOME Friends select, like Books, I Would choose
For converse fit, or scan the Muse:
To read a Play, I think no crime,
Or any other decent Rhyme,
Yet, shun all those whom Vice approve,
Or give Success to Lawless Love.
Would Helsham deign to condescend Arthur Helsham, Esquire Recorder of Kilkenny.

To rank me as his meanest Friend:
Or Evans, thou just Magistrate, Alderman Evans, chose Mayor of the City, two
succeeding Years for his Justice and Integrity.

Whose double Honors speak thee Great,
The feathered Hours would smiling pass,
Although we chased the circ'ling Glass.
Good Wine, with moderation used
Revives the Sense, but drowns abused.
IF I should hear the early Horn,
With sprightly Notes awake the Morn,
Expelling Slumber from the Eyes,
Bidding the lazy Sluggard Rise,
(To mount the fiery mettled Steed,
Who champs, and foaming to be Freed,
With guided Rein, to scour the mead,
Or ore the breathing Mountain lead.)
My Blood would rouse me from my Cell
To view the Sport I loved so well:
Yet take Discretion for my Guide,
And Walk such Hills I used to Ride:
Then, when the pleasing Toil was over,
And Hounds, and Horns were heard no more
I Would to my quiet Cell repair
And Healthful feed on homely Fare:
High Sauces but corrupt the Blood,
Diffusing Poison with our Food.
A little, Nature will suffice,
An Epicure was never Wise.
WHEN Spring revives the flowery Field
And calls the Feathered Race to build;
When they begin to strain their Throats,
With various, and delightful Notes;
I should not judge it any Crime
To call back years of fletting time,
And, tho those Days are long since past,
(For pleasing Moments fly in Haste)
Yet, I may think upon the Fair,
Whose lovely Eyes dispel'd despair!
But then to lose a virtuous Wife,
That joy dispenser of my Life,
That social Balm to every Smart,
That Cordial to an aching Heart!
He that can feel by Simphathy,
Must lose his Wife, and love like me.
For Love in Age to Friendship turns,
And with a lasting ardour Burns.
Hale Youth, perhaps, may smilling seem
To taunt, and Ridicule this Theme,
But youngsters, I would have you know,
I once was young as well as you!
True Love was never thought a Crime
A pleasing Joy, a Bliss Sublime!
A beauteous Infant ever mild,
A Transport-touching tender Child!
When his chaste Bow, and thrilling Dart:
Fixes his Empire in the Heart,
But then, this lovely beauteous youth,
This Child of Innocence and Truth,
A Brother has so like in Face,
Adorned with all his smiling Grace:
The first, inspiring heavenly Love!
The last, to guilty Passions move!
Infects the Blood within the Veins,
And tortures with Infernal Pains!
O! shun his lewd detested Art,
You Will know him by his leaden Dart.
WHEN Phoebus, with enlivening Ray,
Improves the Glebe, and lengthens Day
Then to the Silver stream repair
(Breathing the wholesome Morning Air)
And e're Aurora shows her Face
Prepare to Trap the finny Race:
Great Nature there, we may behold.
Some tinged with Azure, some with Gold,
Some armed with Scales prepared for War,
The Innocent for Flight prepare
So Butchers, (if a Butcher's nigh)
When harmless Curs are passing by,
Hallo their Dogs to set them on,
And laugh to see them piecemeal torn.
Thus, in the Stream, the weak-ones fall,
But wily Man betrays them all.
THOU Dunmore Cave, I would once more Dunmore Cave in the Park.

(But not alone) thy Womb explore
Where Nature, Playfull, has designed
Such Works, as will surprise Mankind!
Ill omen'd Birds the Mouth Resort,
The Dwellers of this dreary Court:
Descending then by slow degrees,
Your Hands sustained by hanging Trees;
The Vault enlarges to your sight,
Displays to view, a gloomy Light;
There, as in new found Worlds, you see
Great Nature's vast variety
Where dropping Waters change to Stone
To form the Cylinder, and Cone,
There concav'd Organs, Pillars rise,
And Tubes that might deceive the Eyes.
But stay not long, for all beneath
Is noxious Air the Vitals breath.
The Caverns ending none can tell,
Old Fables say there Witches dwell,
And this the ready Road to Hell.
Miles have been traced the gloomy Way
Without the sight of chearing Day.
Yet, all the surface over head,
Is fertile Land, and grass-grown Mead,
Where Cattle graze, and Nightly Sleep,
And Shepherd's keep their harmless Sheep,
To watch their Lambs, to give Relief,
Or Guard them from the prouling Thief:
The Wolves, whom often their Flocks annoyed,
Long Ages past have been destroyed:
But Monsters of the Human Race,
Now Wolves are gone, usurp their place.
BEHOLD, where shallow Dinan flows, Dinan, a turbulant shallow River that
crosses the Park.

Noisy as Fops, or empty Beaux,
Till quite absorbed within the Nore, The Nore, the Barrow, and the Sure, are
called the three Sisters; they all meet near Waterford, and join the Sea.

Is silent, curbed beneath her Shore.
See how the noble Sister glides!
With lovely Borders on her Sides,
To meet the other Royal Pair,
As full as Beautiful and Fair,
Hibernia's Sisters, Graces three,
They Kiss, embrace, then meet the Sea.
THUS would I pass my Days and Nights,
In Social innocent Delights.
WHAT Hope, alas! have I to find,
Such sweet contentment for my Mind?
A Dream of transient Bliss too Great!
O! teach me Heaven! to bear my Fate:
I Have learnt too late in Sorrows School,
The easy Man's the Villians Tool!
Though Britain is my Mother Earth,
She proved a Step-dame from my Birth:
Therefore, if I my Wishes have,
This much-loved Soil shall be my Grave.
O! BLESSED IERNE! happy Isle!
Around thee, Heaven and Nature Smile!
No Murrain over thy Cattle Reigns
Nor War-drawn-blood imbrue thy Plains,
Replete with Plenty, Health and ease
In War, enjoying sweet-ey'd Peace!
Beholding Arts, that smilling Rise!
O! MADDEN! justly good and Wise
Thou art the Source from whence they flow,
From thee, next Heaven, they Spring and grow.
One Monarch may his People gain,
Succeeding Kings with Blessings Reign;
Yet these, when Death's cold slumbers call,
Are lost, and in Oblivion Fall:
But MADDEN, endless Praise will find,
Revered by long unborn Mankind!
HERE Harmony has chose her Seat,
Within this Halcion safe Retreat
Here Mathew's flying Fingers roll
To calm and thrill the raptured Soul.
Immortal Music formed the World,
That lay in dreary Chaos hurld,
The Sphaeres began their heavenly Strains,
To range the Vocal Hills and Plains;
All order came by sweet Degrees,
To bound the Rivers, Lakes and Seas,
Soft Ovid elegantly Sings
What energy from Music Springs
Appollo charmed Imperial Jove,
With all the Heavenly Court above.
All Hell was struck by Orpheus' Lute,
The tripple Cerberus was mute,
The Tortured rested from their Pains,
And softly shook their binding Chains.
Amphion with his artful skill,
Allured the Dolphin to his will:
Yet one prevailed to gain a Wife,
The last, to save precarious Life.
But none of these displaid their Art,
To ease the pineing Captives Heart,
That goodness is Ierne given
The copy of Aetherial Heaven!
Hail! Social Virtue! gift Divine,
How heavenly bright your Actions shine!
Your Souls unitedly agree,
To give the wretched Liberty.
AGAIN I must pursue my Theme
This Airy, Hopeless, empty Dream!
IF Neigh'bring Peasants round my Cell,
Should not in seemly concord dwell
I Would try to Heal their homebred Wars,
And with good council Cure their Jars.
WHEN e're the Rural Nymphs and Swains,
Prepare their Sports upon the Plains,
I Would mix, and leaning on my Staff
Partake their Joy, and join their Laugh.
Old Age with youth, might well agree,
Would they shake off Severity:
The Harp, harmoniously be strung,
If Age would think they once were young.
BUT if my End, with Giant' strides,
Comes roleing with impetuous Tides;
And all the Lumber of Disease,
Which Death alone, can only ease:
Grant Heaven! with Patience, I may bear,
The destined load of sickly care;
And when pale Death's unerring Dart,
(The Fate of King's) has pierced my Heart,
It Is this, and all I would have said --
Alas! the good old Man is DEAD!
FINIS.
Speedily will be PUBLISHED. (Subscription a British Shilling) THE IRISH
THEATER.
Illustrated with Notes, Moral, Historical, Poetical, Theatrical, Geographical,
Political, Ancient and Modern, Foreign and Domestic, Serious and Comical.

Collected and Digested by W. R. CHETWOOD.
Life's but a walking Shadow, a poor Player,
That struts, and frets his Hour upon the Stage,
And then is heard no more.
MACBETH.

