A LETTER TO THE PATENTEE, CONCERNING THE MEDICAL PROPERTIES OF THE FLEECY
HOSIERY.

BY WILLIAM BUCHAN, M. D. FELLOW OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS, EDINBURGH.

Then rigid Winter's Ice no more shall wound
The only naked Animal; but Man
With the soft Fleece shall every where be clothed.
DYER'S FLEECE. LONDON: FROM PETERBOROUGH-HOUSE PRESS, BY D. AND D. STUART,
MDCCXC.

TO MR. G. HOLLAND, NO. 99, HIGH-HOLBORN.
SIR,
I AM favored with yours of January 30th, enclosing some specimens of your
Fleecy Hosiery, and requesting my opinion concerning in medical properties, and
the diseases in which I think it is most likely to prove beneficial to mankind.

As you assure me that the first hint of the medical utility of your
manufacture was taken from my Domestic Medicine; and, that the favorable
opinion which I expressed of the small sample you showed to me some years ago,
had induced you to take out a Royal Patent for making it, I find myself called
upon to support my opinion; and I comply with your request the more readily, as
I am convinced that your discovery will prove of essential service to many of
my fellow creatures, laboring under the most excruciating maladies.

Every one who is at all conversant in these matters knows, that, in this
country, the most fruitful source of disease is obstructed perspiration. While
the secretion from the skin goes duly and uniformly on, few diseases affect
even the weak and delicate; but where this is obstructed the most robust cannot
long enjoy health.

The celebrated Sanctorius says, the insensible perspiration alone discharges
more than all the sensible evacuations together; and that the proportion of
this to all the other evacuations, is as five to three: though this proportion
varies in different ages, climates, and constitutions, yet it is of such
importance in all, that where it is in any considerable degree deficient, a
diseased state of the body will ensue.

Our insular situation renders the atmosphere of this country liable to great
and frequent changes, and as these changes are often very sudden, every one
ought, as far as lies in his power, to guard against their influence, by
adapting his clothing to the season of the year, and the state of the weather.
In doing this he only imitates nature, who never fails to fortify those animals
which are left to her care against the inclemency of the seasons, in those
countries where they are produced. Thus we find the foxes, bears, and other
animals, in cold climates, covered with a thick coat of fur, which keeps
continually varying with the seasons, and gradually becoming longer and
thicker, as the cold increases.

What nature does for the brute creation, art enables man to do for himself,
and he seldom errs in following her example. Care is no doubt necessary in
making these changes; but even here nature has not left us without a guide, she
effects this purpose by slow gradations, and never starts from one extreme to
another. Though man cannot exactly copy her, in this respect, yet it is in his
power to avoid all great and sudden transitions. Those who heap on loads of
clothes on the approach of winter, and are so imprudent as to throw them off on
the first appearance of spring, have themselves only to blame, if the
consequences prove hurtful.

There is indeed a great source of deception in our seasons; sometimes the
winter sets in with all its rigor before it is expected, at other times it
continues mild throughout, and there is occasion for very little additional
clothing, even to the delicate. But the most insidious season, in this country,
is spring. We have often in March, or April, a few days so warm as to make us
believe that summer is arrived, when all of a sudden it becomes more intensely
cold than in the middle of winter. Indeed December is sometimes mild
throughout, while every day of May is cold and wet.

This irregularity of our seasons, renders it very difficult to lay down
particular rules for regulating the clothing of invalids. It is their business,
therefore, to watch the changes of the weather, and, as far as they
conveniently can, to counteract their influence, by suiting their clothing to
the temperature of the air. The hardy and robust have indeed less to fear from
the changes of weather; but there is no person so strong as to be wholly
superior to their influence, and the foolhardy often lose their lives by
despising it.

The most proper clothing for counteracting the inclemency of our atmosphere,
is certainly that which affords the greatest warmth with the least weight.
There has not been hitherto, in the article of clothing, any thing invented
where these properties have been so happily combined, as in your Patent
Hosiery. I am informed that a single blanket can be made equal, in point of
warmth, to six of the common sort, while it does not exceed the weight of one.

This difference, in respect of weight, is of great importance to the invalid.
Hardly able to support his own weight, he can still less bear a load of
clothing; and even to those who are able to bear a load of clothes they prove
hurtful. They compress the vessels, and impede the free circulation of the
fluids, on which not only health, but even life itself depends; besides they
encumber the body, and render it less fit for active exertions.

The manner in which your Fleecy Hosiery is made, gives it a degree of
elasticity not possessed by cloth of any kind, from which many advantages are
derived. Thus it adapts itself more readily to the figure of the body, or of
any part to which it is applied; and, by acting like a perpetual spring, the
inner surface operates as a flesh-brush, by which means the discharge from the
skin is promoted, and at the same time carried off by the conducting power of
the wool.

In point of cleanliness, its preference to fur must be obvious to every one.
It is not only free from the unpleasant smell which accompanies skins of all
kinds; but it can, at any time, be washed with the greatest ease, and without
any considerable expense, or diminution of its properties; besides, it is
certainly less apt to harbor vermin, or communicate infection, than the skins
of animals.

But the most decided superiority of the Fleecy Hosiery, consists in the powers
which wool is found to possess, over all other articles of clothing, in
absorbing and conducting moisture. This appears from the experiments read
before the Royal Society by Sir Benjamin Thomson, which were made with a view
to ascertain the powers of different substances, in absorbing moisture from the
atmosphere.

These experiments were made with sheeps wool, beavers fur, eider down, cotton
wool, linen, and silk; and the result was, that wool possessed a greater power
of absorbing moisture than any of the others, and was likewise better
calculated for conducting or carrying off the superfluous moisture from the
body. Sir Benjamin's experiments are made with such accuracy, and the
conclusions drawn from them, tend so fully to establish the superiority of your
manufacture over every other species of clothing, that I shall take the liberty
of inserting the ingenious author's inductions in his own words.

"I was totally mistaken," says this candid writer, "in my conjectures relative
to the results of the experiments with the other substances. As linen is known
to attract water with so much avidity, and as, on the contrary, wool, hair,
feathers, and other like animal substances, are made wet with so much
difficulty, I had little doubt but that linen would be found to attract
moisture from the atmosphere with much greater force than any of these
substances, and that, under similar circumstances, it would be found to contain
far more water; and was much confirmed in this opinion, on recollecting the
great difference in the apparent dampness of linen and woollen clothes, when
they were both exposed to the same atmosphere. But these experiments have
convinced me, that all my speculations were founded on erroneous principles.

"It should seem those bodies which are the most easily wetted, or which
receive water, in its unelastic form, with the greatest ease, are not those
which in all cases attract the watery vapor dissolved in the air with the
greatest force.

"Perhaps the apparent dampness of linen, to the touch, arises more from the
ease with which that substance parts with the water it contains, than from the
quantity of water it actually holds; in the same manner as a body appears hot
to the touch, in consequence of its parting freely with its heat, while another
body, which is actually at the same temperature, but which holds its heat with
greater obstinacy, affects the sense of feeling much less violently.

"It is well known that woollen clothes, such as flannels, etc. worn next the
skin, greatly promote insensible perspiration. May not this arise principally
from the strong attraction which subsists between wool and the watery vapor
which is continually issuing from the human body? That it does not depend
entirely upon the warmth of that covering is clear; for the degree of warmth
produced by wearing more clothing of a different kind, does not produce the
same effect.

"The perspiration of the human body being absorbed by a covering of flannel,
is immediately distributed through the whole thickness of that substance, and
by that means exposed to a very large surface to be carried off by the
atmosphere; and the loss of this watery vapor which the flannel sustains on
the one side by evaporation, being immediately restored from the other, in
consequence of the strong attraction between the flannel and the vapor, the
pores of the skin are disencumbered, and they are continually surrounded by a
dry, warm, and salubrious atmosphere.

"I am astonished that the custom of wearing flannel next the skin, should not
have prevailed more universally. I am confident it would prevent a multitude of
diseases; and I know of no greater luxury than the comfortable sensation which
arises from wearing it, especially after one is a little accustomed to it.

"It is a mistaken notion that it is too warm a clothing for summer. I have
worn it in the hottest climates, and in all seasons of the year, and never
found the least inconveniency from it. It is the warm bath of a perspiration,
confined by a linen shirt wet with sweat, which renders the summer heats of
southern climates so insupportable; but flannel promotes perspiration, and
favors its evaporation; and it is well known that evaporation produces
positive cold.

"I first began to wear flannel, not from any knowledge that I had of its
properties, but merely on the recommendation of an able physician; and when I
began my experiments, I little thought of discovering the physical cause of the
good effects which I had experienced from it, nor had I the most distant idea
of mentioning the circumstance. I shall be happy, however, if what I have said,
or done upon the subject, should induce others to make a trial of what I have
so long experienced with the greatest advantage, and which I am confident they
will find to contribute greatly to health, and consequently to all the other
comforts and enjoyments of life."

Had Sir Benjamin known how far your Manufacture exceeds flannel, both in
agreeableness and use, he would have been still more lavish in its praise.
Indeed it is hardly possible to say too much in favor of a medicament of such
extensive powers, and which is so pleasant in the application. Many people, who
cannot bear the harsh feel of flannel, find the Fleecy Hosiery extremely
agreeable, and indeed the finest down cannot be more delicately soft than fine
wool spread on the surface of a texture similar to that of your manufacture.
That it is infinitely more pleasant to the wearer, I can attest from my own
experience.

On a review of those diseases in which flannel is known to act, either as a
preventive, or remedy, they will be found more numerous than all that are cured
by any one article of the Materia Medica; yet the powers of flannel, even in
its most improved state, fall greatly short of those possessed by the Fleecy
Hosiery. It is not only of a superior fabric, but its warmth can be increased
to almost any degree, which cannot be done with flannel without rendering it
too heavy for use.

Your invention is still in its infancy; but, from what has already been done,
we may venture to foretell, that it will become one of the most extensive
branches of manufacture, as well as one of the most useful remedies; and that
it will be of greater service to the afflicted than all the boasted nostrums of
the age, while it is entirely free from their dangerous qualities.

I shall now proceed to point out some of those diseases in which your Fleecy
Hosiery will be found the best application, not merely as a preventive but as a
remedy; and here I must study brevity, as the subject is by far too extensive
to be fully discussed in the compass of a letter.

The Fleecy Hosiery will, in general, be found an excellent medicine, both for
the prevention and cure of all diseases arising from obstructed perspiration.
These in our climate include a great variety of disorders; as colds and coughs,
catarrhal affections, fevers, fluxes, aches and pains, rheums, inflammations,
etc. To treat of all the diseases arising from this cause would require a
volume, I shall therefore only touch on such as occur the most frequently, and
in which I think your manufacture the most likely to prove useful.

COLDS AND COUGHS.
The physician who said that colds killed more than plagues, told a serious
truth. Had he taught us how to avoid them, he had been one of the greatest
benefactors to the human race that ever appeared. Though your manufacture may
not absolutely effect this great purpose; yet the proper use of it will go a
greater length, both in the prevention and cure of colds, than the application
of any other medicine with which I am acquainted. Most people place confidence
in drugs when they have caught a cold, which only destroy their appetite, while
the complaint might with ease and safety be removed by a proper addition to
their clothing; but it is in the nature of man to despise things that are plain
and obvious, and to hunt after secret medicines; he neglects what is in his own
power, while he has implicit faith in the boasted nostrum, merely because he is
ignorant of what it consists.

CATARRHAL AFFECTIONS.
Catarrhal affections are of the nature of colds, and arise from the same
cause, viz. an obstructed perspiration. An increased secretion from the glands
of the nose, fauces, and throat, accompanied with some degree of fever, mark
this disease, which, in cold and moist states of the atmosphere, proves often
so common as to constitute a true epidemic in this country. The only method of
avoiding such complaints is to counteract the influence of the weather, as far
as lies in our power. Your happy discovery has enabled us to do this more
effectually than any thing heretofore invented; without loading the body with
clothes, it may now be kept sufficiently warm, and the perspiration pretty
uniformly supported, even in the most unfavourable states of the atmosphere.

FEVERS.
That the simple inflammatory fever is generally occasioned by an obstructed
perspiration, admits of no doubt. The effect of cold is to augment the tone of
the system, by which means the action of the heart and arteries is increased,
and what is called the inflammatory diathesis induced. Indeed every symptom of
this disease shows a plethora, or too great fullness of the vessels, which is
the well-known effect of an obstructed perspiration. The way to prevent this
fever, of course, is to keep up a regular perspiration: and to restore it when
diminished, is the best method of cure.

INFLAMMATORY AFFECTIONS.
Local affections of the inflammatory kind, as Saint Anthony's fire, the acute
rheumatism, inflammation of the breast, bowels, etc. are likewise the genuine
offspring of obstructed perspiration. In countries where the perspiration goes
on uniformly, these diseases are hardly known; but every one knows their
frequency, and multitudes feel their direful effects, in this country. They are
still however more dreadful in colder climates, where, as we learn from Boyle's
History of Cold, the inhabitants often die of affections of the Bowels,
accompanied with the most excruciating torment. There can be no doubt but a
proper application of your manufacture might be of great use in preventing
these maladies.

DIARRHOEA.
The diarrhoea, and other affections of the bowels, are often occasioned by
obstructed perspiration; nor can any thing relieve these complaints more
effectually than restoring this necessary evacuation. I have often known an
obstinate looseness cured by the patient's wearing flannel next his skin; but
whatever can be done by flannel, more is surely to be expected from the use of
your manufacture; and I would advise all persons who have tender bowels, to
keep up a due perspiration, by wearing it of a proper thickness. This will be
found more agreeable, and likewise more safe than the use of astringent
medicines.

HYPOCHONDRIACAL AFFECTIONS.
All people of delicate nerves have tender bowels, and though they should not
wear it any where else, they would do well to keep the stomach and bowels
covered with a piece of your comfortable clothing, of a sufficient thickness.
Even this partial use of it will, in many cases, be of singular service. Those
who have weak lungs, will reap equal advantage from wearing a piece of it over
the breast.

INFLAMMATION OF THE THROAT.
Those who are subject to the common angina, or inflammation of the throat,
will find a piece of your Fleecy Hosiery, worn about the neck, the best
preventive, nor is it by any means an indifferent remedy. It is more
efficacious, and much more agreeable, than the common practice of applying a
dirty stocking round the neck.

GOUT.
Amongst the foremost in the list of those diseases, where the Fleecy Hosiery
is proper, stands the gout. Persons subject to this disorder ought to keep up
the perspiration at all times, especially in the extremities. This will be
found one of the safest and best preventives, and also the most agreeable that
can be employed. To keep the part easy, soft, and uniformly warm, is almost all
we can do, during a paroxysm or fit of the gout. For this purpose there is not
any thing better calculated than the Fleecy Hosiery. I have recommended wool in
the gout, for above thirty years, and have never found cause to change my
opinion of it. Your manufacture, however, is in many respects preserable to
wool, as it possesses all its properties without the incoveniences attending
the application of it.

RHEUMATISM.
The rheumatism is not only a more common, but also a more obstinate disorder
than the gout. That it admits of no remedy, save patience and flannel, is an
old adage. We can now, however, boast of a remedy far superior to the best
flannel. The advantages of the Fleecy Hosiery over flannel will appear on the
flightest inspection; but on trial it is still more obvious. I have often
recommended it in rheumatic affections, and have never been disappointed in my
expectations from it. In the chronic rheumatism, indeed, it requires time; yet
even here it will be found to perform a cure sooner than any other remedy.

ACHES AND PAINS.
In every part of this island, where I have been, the old people universally
complain of what they call pains in their limbs. This is evidently a species of
the rheumatism, and is peculiarly incident to women who live on poor diet, are
thinly clothed, and inhabit cold damp houses. It does not appear to me, that
any thing could be so beneficial to these people as to have their limbs clothed
in your comfortable woollen manufacture. This would certainly prove the best
preservative against those pains, which not only render these poor people very
miserable, but often a burden to society. They cannot indeed always purchase
it themselves, but the benevolent could not employ their charity better than in
supplying them with an article so necessary for health; and even those who have
the care of the poor ought, on principles of economy, to supply them with this
kind of clothing, to prevent their becoming totally unfit for labor, and
consequently a greater burden to the public.

DROPSY.
There is no disease the cure of which depends more on promoting perspiration
than the dropsy. In all patients laboring under this malady the secretion from
the skin is defective, and ought by all means to be promoted. This cannot be
done so agreeably, and I will add so effectually, as by wearing your
manufacture of a sufficient thickness. I am credibly informed that the dropsy
has been cured by the patient's wearing your Fleecy Hosiery, after the most
powerful medicines, accompanied with the use of flannel, had proved totally
ineffectual.

ASTHMA.
People afflicted with the asthma are always in danger, and often lose their
lives from a sudden check of perspiration. They ought carefully to watch the
changes of the weather, and to fortify themselves against them by adapting
their clothing to the temperature of the atmosphere. I would advise asthmatic
patients to beware of the cold, raw, easterly winds, which prevail in our
spring, and toward the setting in of winter, and to avail themselves of your
happy discovery for counteracting their influence.

APOPLEXY.
The apoplexy is now so frequent as to become truly alarming. It seldom,
however, attacks people till the decline of life, when the perspiration becomes
defective, and the skin grows dry and rigid. When the discharge from the skin
is obstructed to such a degree, that the superfluous moisture of the body
cannot be carried off by the other emunctories, or common outlets, a plethora,
or too great fullness of the vessels, must ensue. This will induce a
predisposition to apoplexy. To ward off the dreadful blow as long as possible,
the perspiration must be kept up; and I know not any thing more proper for this
purpose than your Fleecy Hosiery, prudently applied, and accompanied with a
sufficient degree of bodily exercise.

PALSY.
The apoplexy and palsy make their attack about the same time of life, and
often accompany each other, which renders it probable, that, in some measure,
they depend on the same cause. That your manufacture is calculated to prevent
the palsy, I will not take upon me to say; but I am certain that, in many
cases, it will be found a very proper remedy. The torpor of a paralytic limb
renders some warm and stimulating application necessary, and this intention is
more likely to be answered by your hosiery than flannel, as it not only
possesses a greater degree of warmth, but is, from its texture, better adapted
to act as a stimulus to the skin.

DEAFNESS.
Few things prove more troublesome to persons in the decline of life than
deafness. This is generally occasioned by cold in the head. I have often known
deafness cured by a warm nightcap; and would recommend it to all who are
afflicted with this malady, to wear caps of your manufacture. These caps will
not only remove deafness, but will be found likewise to obviate many other
complaints, as the toothache, headache, pains of the face, etc. In all cases
where the head is wet, either by bathing or violent exercise, these caps will
be found of the greatest service. This I am told has been frequently
experienced by sportsmen, who, by using them when heated in the chase, have
never caught cold. There are no people so careless as the inhabitants of this
country, with regard to the covering of their heads during the night; and this
neglect is the source of many disorders, besides those mentioned above.

SKIN DISEASES.
Cleanliness and warm clothing are the great preventives of skin diseases.
Where the skin is not sufficiently defended against the inclemency of the
weather, it becomes rigid, and consequently unfit for transmitting the
perspirable matter through its pores. The internal disorders, arising from this
cause, have already been taken notice of. The external are, scabby and scaly
eruptions, foul blotches, defedation of the skin, chilblains, and such like.
These are always found to prevail most among the poor, who go dirty and are ill
clothed. The chilblains, indeed, affect young people of all ranks, yet this
complaint might generally be prevented by keeping the feet and legs dry, and
sufficiently warm. For this purpose I know of no application equal to your
foot-socks and fleecy hose.

The Fleecy Hosiery is not only beneficial in many diseases, but in various
situations, where men are necessarily placed, it will be found the best
preservative of health. For example, in countries where agues prevail, and the
pallid inhabitants are shook, like the aspine leaf, for at least one half the
year, there is reason to believe, that a species of clothing so perfectly
adapted to defend the body against the moisture of the atmosphere, and keep up
an uniform degree of warmth, would be found superior, both in safety and
efficacy, to any internal medicine whatever. Indeed the internal medicines made
use of for this purpose, are generally of such a nature that, if they keep off
one disease, they induce others, which prove equally if not more fatal.

How pernicious that kind of clothing must be which retains the moisture, and
keeps it in continual contact with the body, to men who work in damp
situations, will appear from Sir Benjamin Thomson's experiments; and the
advantage of the Fleecy Hosiery, in conducting it off, will be no less obvious.
Spalden, the celebrated diver, told me that he could not live under water in
any dress but flannel. In other clothing he was chilled with cold, but, with a
sufficient quantity of flannel, he found himself pretty comfortable. Had he
known the superior advantages of your manufacture, he would no doubt have been
still more so.

To travelers, in cold countries, your manufacture must be of the greatest
use, particularly the fleecy gloves and foot baskets. The extremities always
suffer most from cold, and are in the greatest danger of mortification. I shall
not be surprised if your manufacture become the common clothing of the northern
nations. Where the inhabitants are obliged to have recourse to furs in winter,
the fleecy clothing will, I am convinced, be found to answer their purpose much
better, and will likewise prove far more agreeable to the wearer.

It will not, however, so readily occur, that the Fleecy Hosiery is the most
proper clothing for the inhabitants of hot climates; yet this is acknowledged
to be the case by all who have made the trial. It can certainly be made more
light than any other kind of clothing, and with so thin a sprinkling of wool,
as to act more as a cooler than a heater of the body, while it conducts off the
moisture from the skin much faster than any other kind of clothing.

There is no set of men to whom the Fleecy Hosiery is likely to prove more
beneficial, than those who have lived in hot climates; they universally
complain, that, even with the warmest flannel and thickest clothing, they are
not able to support the inclemency of our winters. Those, however, to whom I
have had an opportunity of recommending your manufacture, have all told me,
that, by wearing it next their skin, they have found themselves sufficiently
warm and comfortable, even in the coldest season.

All persons who sit to read, write, or work, especially in cold rooms, ought
to have their feet and legs clothed in your Fleecy Hosiery. In such people, the
circulation in the limbs is obstructed by sitting, and a chilly torpor brought
on the feet and legs, which paves the way to edematous swellings, paralytic
affections, and the like.

In cases of suspended animation, as it is called, where a person is to all
appearance dead, and where the great object is to recall the latent principle
of life, by restoring the genial warmth, and exciting the actions of the
system, it will be readily allowed that few things are likely to have a more
happy effect than wrapping the body in some of the thickest of your Fleecy
Hosiery, made as hot as possible. This will not only receive a much greater
degree of heat than a common blanket, but, retaining the heat longer, will be
found a much more suitable application than the other, while it is sooner and
more easily prepared than a warm bath.

I can imagine many situations where your manufacture would be of singular
service, both to sailors and soldiers. The former are often obliged to keep on
their wet clothes for whole days together, and the latter to continue in camp
during cold and wet seasons, or in a low damp country. I have been told by
several of the officers who lay in camp on Newcastle Moor, in winter 1745, that
half the army must have perished by cold, had it not been for the flannel
waistcoats given to the soldiers by these good people called Quakers. No one
who has seen it needs to be told, that your manufacture would prove more
beneficial than flannel to men in such situations.

In point of economy, few things will be found to equal your invention. It will
not only supersede the use of furs, but, in many cases, even of fuel; which, to
the inhabitants of cold countries, proves very expensive. Nor does the evil end
here. Persons who sit roasting themselves near a great fire injure their
health. They breathe a burnt, unwholesome air, and, after all, are but half
warmed. A person clothed in a fufficient thickness of your manufacture will
hardly find occasion for fire in any situation; and he will feel himself much
more comfortable than by the fireside, where he is burnt on on the one side,
and frozen on the other. In one word, your invention may truly be said to unite
economy, pleasure, and usefulness; which is more than most of our modern
discoveries can boast.

I shall conclude this letter, already too long, by recommending to you the
most active perseverance in the prosecution of your plan. You have not only
made a great improvement in the woollen manufacture, but also in medicine. Your
Fleecy Hosiery, judiciously applied, will not only in many cases preserve
health, but prove more beneficial to the afflicted than any thing that has been
discovered in the medical art for these many years: like other useful
disoveries, however, it will meet with opposition; but patience and
perseverance will overcome it all, and you will find, beside the brave defender
of Gibraltar The Right Honorable Lord Heathfield wrote a letter to the
patentee, setting forth the benefits he had received from the Fleecy Hosiery,
and promising to recommend it to his friends, both at home and abroad,
, many who will step forward to do justice to your useful invention

Wishing you all that success to which your merit is so justly entitled,

I am, SIR, Your most obedient servant, W. BUCHAN.
March 10, 1790.
POSTSCRIPT.
IF the sentiments contained in this letter wanted the sanction of authority,
it would be easy to adduce a number of eminent authors, both ancient and
modern, who have entertained the same ideas. The celebrated Boerhaave used to
say, that nobody suffered from cold, except beggars and fools: the former not
being able to purchase clothes, and the latter not having sense to use them.
This certainly shows, that, in the learned Doctor's opinion, the effects of
cold might be obviated by a proper attention to clothing.

It is said of the celebrated Mr. Boil, whose delicacy of constitution
rendered it necessary for him to adapt the warmth of his clothing to the state
of the weather, that he had a vesture suited to every season of the year; and
it is much in favor of his plan, that, although a valetudinarian, he died at
an advanced age.

But the author whose sentiments are most in point is the learned Sanctorius,
Professor of Physic at Padua, who first established the doctrine of insensible
perspiration on undeniable grounds, and showed its importance in the animal
economy, and its influence on health. Though the doctor lived in a more
temperate climate than ours, yet the following aphorisms, which are selected
from a great number, will show how much he thought health depended on the
insensible perspiration being duly and regularly kept up.

APH. XL. SECT. I.
Whenever nature is disturbed in the business of perspiration, she soon
begins to be defective in many more of the animal functions.

APH. LXVII.
The external causes which are wont to hinder perspiration are, the cold air,
and that which is damp and foggy; swimming in cold water, etc.

APH. LXXXVI.
Old age may truly be reckoned a distemper, but it may be long protracted if
the body perspires well.

APH. LXXXVIII.
The humors of gouty people, even the most thick, are carried off only by
perspiration.

APH. XCII.
A looseness may be removed by increasing the quantity which is to be
perspired, as often happens in warm bathing.

APH. CII.
Hypochondriacal persons are cured by promoting perspiration.

APH. CXIII.
In summer to be exposed to the open air will hinder perspiration.

APH. CXV.
In autumn the weight of the body increases, owing to the diminished
perspiration, which, if it be beyond a healthful standard, will produce
tertians and putrid fevers.

APH. XIV. SECT. II.
Swimming in cold water, after violent exercise, is very delightful, but fatal;
for nothing is more destructive than extremes.

APH. XXI.
A cool wind always hinders perspiration, and is hurtful.

Any draught of air has the same effect.

APH. XLVI.
There is no danger of the autumnal distempers, if the body be well guarded
against the increasing cold by warm garments.

APH. XLVII.
To be well covered with clothes, assists perspiration and lightens the body.

APH. L.
They who in spring throw off their winter garments too hastily, and are too
backward in putting them on again in the fall, in the summer are subject to
fevers, and in the winter to defluxions.

FINIS.

