FACTS, TENDING TO SHOW The Connection of the Stomach WITH Life, Disease, and
Recovery.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. MURRAY, FLEET STREET; W. GORDON, P. HILL, AND G. MUDIE,
EDINBURGH. 1793.

AS there is no medical theory, formed from induction, to enable us to detect
what is erroneous or false in the accounts of facts, or to direct us in the
treatment of new cases; the following attempt to connect with an important
organ many otherwise loose facts, may tend to facilitate the recollection and
application of them, and thus abridge the range of inquiry. The number
suggested by this view is so great, that there is less difficulty in the
collection than in the choice; their relation and order, familiar only to one's
own habit of association, may to others at first be obscure; and some of them
may be disputed; but the leading ones seem to show that the stomach is the seat
of life, disease, and recovery, and the main organ of a complicated system.
Many authors, as Vanhelmont, Rega, Bordeu, Lacaze, Barthez, Fouquet, and
particularly Mr. Hunter, lean, in their useful writings, to the opinion held in
this summary, which was meant as part of heads of lectures on Materia Medica,
read in Edinburgh several years ago. The farther application of the doctrine to
practice, will probably appear soon.

CHARLES WEBSTER.

By the same Author,
Medicinae Praxeos Systema, 3 tom. An Account of the Life and Writings of Dr.
A. Pitcairn.


Facts tending to show the Connection of the Stomach with Life, Disease, and
Remedy.
SUCH simply organized animals as have no visible brain, nerves, lungs, heart,
or blood vessels, and even vegetables, contract and re-act on impressions being
made on any part of them; and being cut in pieces, each becomes a living
individual. They separate the elements of dead matter which reunite within
them in various and specific proportions, and extend their fibers; they
propagate their kinds whose particles and fibers are arranged into specific
forms, as all consolidated fluids are; they have a preserving and resisting
power called vis conservatrix and medicatrix naturae; become deranged in their
functions and structure by excess, defect, or peculiarity of impression;
recover from various morbid states; regenerate lost substance; cease at length
to answer impressions, and spontaneously separate into their elements, which
form new combinations in nature.

In an animal, which, besides a stomach, the seat of the first assimilation and
simple life, has nerves and brain, the medium of sensation and thought, the
energy of which is increased by a heart and lungs; the assimilating, moving,
sentient, and thinking powers become parts of one whole, necessary to the
action and effect of one another, acting as it were in a circle, modifying and
improving the system, in which the smallest puncture producing contractility,
pain, and haemorrage, seems to show that life, mind, and heart exist in every
point.

Cold-blooded animals, whose circulation is languid, and respiration
occasional, live and move for several hours without brain, heart, or lungs: the
heart of a young hotblooded animal continues its motions for some time after
its connection with the brain is cut off Whytt.
; in phthisis pulmonalis there is sometimes scarcely a vestige of lungs left;
some persons have the power of suspending the action of the heart Gregory.
, and it is sometimes suspended without the will, while the other functions
continue entire Hunter.
.

After decollation, it is said, a viper traversed several walks in a garden; an
ostrich continued running in a circular course leading to an accustomed place
of refuge; and a cock impulsively continued its motion toward some grain that
had been just presented to it; a turtle, whose strength, considering its massy
shell, must be very great, lives for months without the head Redi.
: foetuses have been born alive without brain, cerebellum, or spinal marrow. In
dropsy of the head, nothing has been found but the membranes; some have lost a
considerable part of the brain and recovered; all the involuntary motions, and
even the use of the limbs, have continued a day or two after the spinal marrow
has been divided Dessault.
; the involuntary ones continue when the senses and brain are locked up in
sleep, lethargy, and apoplexy, and in the suspended action of the heart and
lungs in syncope. In mania the vigor is often increased and the sensibility
diminished, while the contrary is generally observed in indigestion, gout, and
nervous diseases, in which the intellect is often unimpaired. The contractility
lasts much longer if an animal be killed by destroying its brain than otherwise
Blane.
; death, occasioned by over-exertion of the muscles, by the electric, carbonic,
or azotic fluids, or by the poison of a viper, prevents the muscles from
becoming rigid, and disposes to a much quicker putrefaction; and the life in
vegetables, particularly in their seeds, in a chick before incubation, and in
the hibernating animals, as in the swallow, mountain-rat, and dormouse, resists
the tendency to putrefaction, and freezing. The brain of a man, in proportion
to the weight of his body, is above thirty times heavier than that of a large
quadruped, and still more so than that of an amphibious one, as the crocodile,
with proportionably less strength. The brain has a small proportion likewise,
in longnecked birds, fishes, and insects; and is singularly large in some small
animals, as small birds and rats. In the lower animals it is in general spent
in nerves on the senses, face, and jaws, as the spinal marrow is in those on
the trunk which are large in proportion; and in all animals the axillary and
sciatic nerves and blood vessels, as necessary to strong voluntary motion, are
the largest.

The pulp of the brain and nerves has very little contractility. Parts of
animals live and grow without nerves; a limb, after its nerve is cut, though it
loses its power of voluntary motion and sensation, and, after some time, begins
to waste, yet does not putrefy, but retains its contractility, temperature, and
circulation; and a wound or fracture in this case heals, though the nerve be
not regenerated Monro.
. A muscle, as the heart, whose nerves bear no proportion to its bulk and
action, cut off, retains its contractility. Palsied limbs void of sense or
motion, or of both, are sometimes extremely contractile, inflame, suppurate,
and heal, as in the case of a blister, which does not so readily happen in a
moribund patient; and an obstinate ulcer in the affected side has been known to
heal quickly on the attack of hemiplegia.

No animal can exist without a stomach; life has remained even in the perfect
animals independently of almost every other organ; the stomach is the only
organ which, as in the zoophytes, the hydatid, the oyster, the polypus, and
some other vermes, can be said to exist as an animal by itself; these animals
are capable of every muscular motion, and of every living power suited to their
mode of existence and the continuance of their kind. Placed in the middle, the
stomach is felt to be the center of every impression on any part of the body or
the mind, and the seat of muscular exertion and fatigue. A blow, or the wind of
a cannon-ball over the stomach, kills without leaving any mark Blane.
; if any of its nerves be cut or itself wounded, the aliment remains unchanged;
when healthy it resists, arrests, and reverses the stages of fermentation,
sweetens putrid meat, does not suffer from the syphilitic, variolous, viperine
or carbonic poisons, which injure only the bare surface or passages to the nose
and lungs. It is the receptacle of food, poison, and medicine, the effects of
which on itself are propagated to every other part; it is most subject to
disorder, most accessible to remedy, regulating, and regulated by, the motions
and sensations of the whole system, and so accommodating itself as to keep all
the parts in balance. Languido ventriculo omnia languent, vegeto vigent. In
most cases it is the first organ that feels, and the last that fails There is
generally a discharge of faeces after death.
Even the state of the mind or character seems connected with it, vigorous and
ferocious animals being generally carnivorous, with muscular vigor in
proportion to their voracity. It seems to be the center of power and motion
from which the vital principle, whatever it be, is determined into the
different parts, supporting the inherent power in the moving fibers, the
thinking power in the brain, sensation in the sentient extremities,
assimilation in the lymphatic From fishes living and growing in distilled water
and air Fordyce.
, from the instances of people living so long in disease and in health, without
nourishment by the mouth, and from the relief of thirst and even hunger, by the
application of water to the skin, water and air seem to be not only absorbed
and carried, but assimilated by the lymphatics.
, sanguiferous, and glandular vessels, and the fullness in every part of the
system.

When the gastric energy is diminished, parts seem to lose their motion and
sense as they are distant from the stomach; as the tips of the nose and ears,
the fingers and toes, and the vascular extremities. Like the senses, it has
specific sensations, as of hunger, thirst, satiety, longing, loathing,
sickness, peculiar pain, with a great variety of nameless states without
sensation, accompanied with corresponding changes, according to predisposition
in different parts of the system. A grain of a tasteless substance will affect
the stomach, and, through it, the other parts, or these only, while various
acrids, pungent aromatics, and spirits, can often be taken in large quantity,
without producing any remarkable effect whatever. Stones of considerable size
have been swallowed, and the stomach itself, though, from its organic
contractility, it is always full, can be in very different states of distension
and contraction, with even morbid tumor, without much inconvenience.
Leidenfrost mentions a case, in which the application of warm wine to the
villous coat of a wounded intestine excited great motion without any pain, even
on rubbing off the mucus so as to bring blood. There is often little or no pain
felt in the action of violent vomiting or purging, so that living motion does
not, even in the perfect animals, imply sensibility.

The alimentary canal, which, on opening a living animal, hardly seems to move,
shows, as soon as the other parts die, strongly increased motions, which, like
the contractility mentioned above, continue for hours Caldani and Fontana.
. In the case of violent death, as that of beheading, the same increased
motions, after some short space, with an impetuous spring of blood from the
vessels, are remarkable; which motions may, perhaps, independently of the
gastric liquor, sometimes occasion those perforations in the stomach observed
in such cases, particularly in infants even after natural death; and to some
similar state of bowel may be referred the In Scotland this is called earth or
yerd-hunger.
esuries and priapismus moribundorum. This resisting or reacting power or vis
conservatrix and medicatrix, in which the power of recovery seems to reside, is
evident in the case of other impressions on the stomach, the surface, and the
mind, as in the action of an emetic, the glow from the cold bath, and the red
suffusion produced by passion; and it is this which seems chiefly to enable a
healthy animal to bear changes and extremes of the ordinary ones, as those of
temperature, air, food and drink, motion, sensation, and thought, in a
remarkable degree. The powers acting on the system, as heat, air, exercise of
body and mind, diet, poison, medicine, and the fluids, tend to increase the
power of the stomach, but ultimately, or in excess, to destroy it; and are
called stimulants. When defective they tend to diminish it, and are called
sedative, which effect, if of a certain degree, is followed by the reaction or
resistance; and they are then called indirect stimulants. Hence the same
natural morbid and salutary impressions may, according to their degree, be
sedative or stimulant. Some impressions, both internal and external, affect it
peculiarly, and, through it, different parts of the system. In general, strong
impressions excite the resisting power, weak ones seem occasionally to sooth,
diminish, or tease it, specific ones produce specific states in it and in
different parts of the system, and on these fits of resistance, seem to depend
the states of periodical disease.

The stomach is the seat of the first assimilating power, in which the elements
of food and drink, of whatever kind and variety, separate, and then unite into
the only one combination fit for undergoing the other specific changes, for
making the specific impressions, for giving the due distension, and repairing
the continual waste; and its spontaneous effort or struggle with local injury,
seems to excite that symptomatic fever, or state of vessel which renders the
parts of the blood more separable, forming the buffy-coat, the inflammatory
exudation, the suppuration, and the callus or ossifying arteries, so as to
regenerate destroyed parts, fill cavities, and form skin. On its state seems to
depend that of the chyle, blood, secretions, every soft and hard fiber, every
organ and function of the system, and such is its importance, that it has been
emphatically called the animal, the conscience of the body, and even supposed
the seat of the soul Aristotle, Vanhelmont, Mandevelle, Hunter.


During ordinary hunger, its power over the muscles is diminished, which state
is called weakness; there is a diminished action of the heart and arteries,
particularly at their extremities, as appears from the weak and frequent pulse,
dryness, paleness, shrinking, and lankness of the surface and features;
diminished secretion, as appears from the dry mouth and from the flaccid
breasts of nurses, a less free respiration, yawning, hiccup, weak voice,
sensibility to cold, feebleness of mind and peevishness, with various other
symptoms in different individuals. This esurient state, like that of other
appetites and temporary states of disease, goes off, is apt to change into the
loathing or sick state, then returns, becoming irresistible, enabling the
stomach to dissolve leather and other indigestible matters; and producing
excessive thirst, delirium, and other symptoms.

On the sight of food, the mouth fills with water; and on taking some, the
esurient state with its symptoms is removed, the stomach feels comfortable, the
muscles and organs, particularly those most fatigued, recover their strength,
the circulation is promoted, the secretions flow, the respiration becomes free,
the countenance brightens up, serenity and vigor are imparted to body and
mind, and the heart opens in benevolence. During this sated state the new
impression, as if engrossing the power of the stomach, is apt to induce a
chilliness, drowsiness, heat, full pulse and perspiration, the phoenomena of
slight fever, and in some, formidable symptoms.

The effects of food, as of every thing else, being relative to the state of
the stomach, what is light to one is heavy to another; and a cordial in some
states occasions vomiting. A heavy meal oppresses the stomach, and depresses
its power over the other parts of the system, often inducing alarming symptoms,
which are frequently relieved by a puke, or by spirits or aromatics, increasing
the power of the stomach. Alcohol, opium, or carbonic acid tends like a meal,
to induce serenity and vigor of body and mind, but if in excess, brings on the
ebrious state of stomach, which deranges the functions of both. A trespass in
eating or drinking, or any thing which from temperament, taste, or association
of ideas, happens to disagree with the stomach, is apt instantly to occasion
various symptoms Thus a raw cucumber, turnip, or raddish, kernels of fruits,
mushrooms, bitters, honey, spirits, acids, eggs, shellfish, absorbent-earth,
nitre, any thing cold when the body is warm, are apt to occasion indigestion,
colic, diarrhoea, cholera, hypochondriasis, hysteria, gout, palpitation,
asthma, aphonia, syncope, apoplexy, palsy, epilepsy, tetanus, haemorrhage,
suppression of natural discharges, dropsy, eruption with fever, to renew and
exasperate a gleet, a sore, or the pain of a gouty or rheumatic limb.


What weakness, spasms, pains and aches, stitches, depravations and
deprivations of sense and motion, and uneasy feelings of body and mind, does
not a little air pent up occasion, and its expulsion instantly relieve? What
symptom has not been occasionally referred to indigestion, and what remedy does
not fall under the treatment of it and its effects? What disease is free from
some affection of the stomach or canal, and what fever does it not mark in its
beginning, its progress, remission, crisis, and cure? The diseases of children
are acknowledged to be mostly from the stomach and bowels, and they are known
to be cured of alarming symptoms by a puke, a glyster, or a purge. A person
feels weak, loses color and spirits, has headache, giddiness, and shivering,
and the predisposed suffer fits of their diseases, without suspecting, as there
is no sickness, want of appetite, costiveness, or affection of the stomach,
that they proceed from it, till a natural vomiting or looseness, an emetic or
cathartic relieve the complaints. Fits, as of asthma, chin-cough, hysteria, and
gout, are generally preceded by some affection of the canal, and diminish or go
off by the expulsion of air or other matter.

There does not seem to be one symptom or combination of symptoms, but may be
produced by something taken into the stomach, and, in the case of poisons, its
orifices have been found, on dissection, so constricted as to have prevented
the escape of any of the matter.

The effect of poison, like that of food and medicine, is relative to the kind
and state of stomach. Cows and hares eat hemlock, hares eat milk-thistle, hogs
fatten on henbane, quails on hellebore, and goats on euphorbium: a horse can
take more glass of antimony than would kill an hundred men, a dog more opium
than would kill an unaccustomed man, while an ordinary dose of jalap, of
nux-vomica, or a few bitter almonds, would convulse and kill him. Bitter
almonds kill different kinds of birds likewise, and parsley is poison to
parrots. Indeed every animal and vegetable poison is the food of some animal,
and notwithstanding this difference of effect, little or no difference of
structure in brain, muscle, membrane, and bone, which form the animal solids,
can be perceived.

That the stomach may be in a great variety of states, appears from the organs
of sense being capable of such variety in regard to sensation, from causes
external or internal. Each taste implies a specific state of organ. Alkaline,
acid, sweet, bitter, astringent, acrid, aromatic, and fetid matter excite their
respective tastes, which imply states of organ as numerous as the individuals
of these classes, with their various combinations.

Some kinds of matter affect different parts of the same organ, and the
sensation is propagated to a greater or less distance without any probability
of absorption. So an irritation in the lungs is often felt at the epiglottis;
in the liver, at the shoulder; in the kidney, at the testicle and thigh; in the
bladder, at the end of the glans penis; in the colon, at the navel; in every
part of the system at the stomach; and in the stomach, at every part of the
system.

An astringent, at the tip of the tongue, corrugates the whole mouth, and stops
sometimes a remote haemorrhage: a bit of alum dissolving in the mouth,
occasions a thrill over the body; sea salt is felt chiefly at the point of the
tongue, bitter apple at its middle, elaterium and mezereon at its root, and
jalap in the gullet. A disagreeable taste, smell, sight, sound, or touch, the
tickling of the throat, or coughing, are apt to occasion sickness and vomiting.
The mere chewing of tobacco or rhubarb, has occasioned vomiting and purging.
Tasteless warm water, an antimonial, or the berries of coriaria myrtifolia,
throw the stomach into convulsions.

Belladonna gives a dryness and stricture in the fauces; mercury or muriated
barytes produces salivation; arsenic sets the teeth on edge, produces
gastritis, thirst, black tongue, subsultus tendinum, and delirium, as in the
last stage of typhus, in which fever the stomach, on dissection, is generally
found morbidly red. A pin, a bit of cork, nutmeg, or other indigestible matter
in the stomach, as if in the lungs, has, till evacuated, occasioned a continual
coughing Hildanus, Saunders, Percival.
; and an habitual cough is often suspended during a meal or any sapid
impression. Cicuta produces giddiness; alcohol, opium, fixed air, lead, and,
when the stomach is in a particular state, other things produce intoxication.

Lead produces gastrodynia, peculiar colic, with constipation, yellow
countenance, palsy, chiefly of the supinators and extensors of the fingers, and
extensors of the legs, with heat and pain in the palms and soles. Copper
occasions delirium with leprous-like spots on the surface. Digitalis, after
remarkably diminishing the action of the heart and arteries, and promoting
absorption and a flow of urine, has been thrown up seemingly entire during the
deathful sickness it is apt to occasion. Cantharides occasion strangury and
priapism, and sometimes relieve nervous cases of the former; Carmichael Smyth.
rhododendron chrysanthemum occasions delirium; stramonium occasions itching,
inflammation, eruptions, swellings, tremors, fever, and delirium; secale
cornutum diseased (ergot) produces rhaphania; laurel-water kills every species
of animal, and in the quantity of six ounces generally without any previous
symptom; an ounce or so allows a reaction, which occasions inflammation,
haemorrhage, and convulsions.

Wepfer mentions a number of patients poisoned with water-hemlock, and affected
with pain at the stomach and in the bowels, grinding of the teeth, hiccup,
lockedjaw, difficult respiration, an aspect of horror, convulsions, with the
abolition of all the senses, haemorrhage from the ears, efforts to vomit, body
bent back like a bow, and death; after which the belly and head swelled, there
was a green foam at the mouth, the orifices of the stomach were found quite
closed, and the blood coagulated, as in every violent death, from an internal
cause, whereas, from an external one, it remains liquid. In some the symptoms
indicated ludicrous, and in others serious turns of mind. In general, the
appearance on dissection of animals killed by these or other poisons, or even
by external ones, is redness of the stomach, with livid or black spots in it,
in the intestines, particularly at the insertion of the ductus choledochus into
the duodenum, and in the mesentery. So much do impressions on the surface
affect the stomach, that Bonnet and others have found these appearances in
animals killed by the bite of the viper; and Fontana mentions dogs and cats
recovering from the bite, in proportion to the struggle and violence of
vomiting. Tobacco oil applied externally occasions vomiting; and if the surface
be bare, it kills. The stomach is found red in hydrophobia, and in other cases
connected with affections of that organ. Morgagni and Sproegel could find no
redness in rats poisoned by arsenic, or in rabbits that died on taking
corrosive sublimate; nor could the Florentine academicians find any change in
the solids or fluids of a bull killed by the bite of a viper. Hence poisons may
destroy life by diminishing the energy of the stomach beyond the power of
reaction.

Emetics.
An emetic induces, even in the strongest, affections of the natural, vital,
and animal functions, as a sense of languor, lassitude, weakness, tremors of
the limbs and lips; diminished action of the heart and its remotest vessels, as
appears from the small, weak, frequent, irregular pulse, paleness and shrinking
of the surface, the cutis anserina, and from their effect on haemorrhages and
other discharges; difficult respiration, vertigo, rigors, a sense of weariness,
weakness, or pain in the muscles of the back, partial sweating, anxiety at
stomach, constriction of the mouth and fauces, salivation, expectoration,
flowing of the bile, sickness, colic, vomiting; during which exertion the face
and eyes become red, the veins turgid, the pulse strong, the sweat general, and
the symptoms, which are those of intermittents and of all other stomachic, or
what are called constitutional diseases, are relieved. The effects of emetics
in incipient fever, phthisis, gout, inflamed testicle, certain dropsies,
manias, and other diseases show the influence of the stomach over every part of
the system.

Cathartics.
In the continued identical structure from the gullet to the rectum, the state
of one part is apt to affect that of another; so indigestion occasions
flatulence, spasms and pains in the intestines, which are often relieved by a
medicine on its reaching the stomach; a looseness occasionally relieves a
vomiting, and a vomiting relieves a looseness; chewing or smoking tobacco will
purge, and a tobacco-injection or glyster will produce all the symptoms of an
emetic. A cathartic, though returned by vomiting, often purges, and a drastic
has been known to purge severely, and to prove fatal, when, on dissection, the
stomach only was found to he inflamed. Hoffmann mentions a woman in a tertian,
who, having taken eight grains of glass of antimony, had violent vomiting and
purging during three successive fits, but not in the intervals, that she died
in the third fit, that, on dissection, the stomach and upper intestines were
found inflamed and covered with gangrenous spots, and that the antimony was
retained in the villous coat of the stomach.

Most cathartics, like other matters, are decomposed before they pass the
pylorus; those which pass seemingly unchanged, as sulphur, oxyd of mercury,
cassia, and rhubarb, are in general gentle in their operation. Scammony and
gamboge are apt to disorder the stomach peculiarly; hellebore occasions great
anxiety, with a sense of suffocation; colocynth and resinous purgatives, as
jalap, are apt to produce colic; aloes affects the rectum, and the effects of
elaterium and iris palustris are felt at the extremities of the arterial system.

Diuretics, Refrigerants, and Sudorifics.
Diuretics, and mere liquids, sometimes excite urine so suddenly, that the
ancients imagined a direct communication between the stomach and bladder. A
retrograde motion in the lymphatics has been supposed, and ingenioussly
supported Darwin.
; but the flow appears to be often analogous to the sudden one of milk from the
breasts of nurses, and other sudden secretions. Strangury is a constant symptom
of gastritis; and affections of the urinary organs constantly affect the
stomach. Digitalis, squill, tobacco, and most other diuretics are apt, like
other nauseants, to be expectorant or sudorific, and if they be so in a
considerable degree, or if they produce vomiting or purging early, they fail to
induce that state of stomach which seems necessary to their diuretic operation.
Two ounces of any neutral salt is apt to be emetic; an ounce or so, even of
alum, to be cathartic; two or three drams to be diuretic; a dram to be
refrigerant, and, in a warm temperature, sudorific.

Though our ideas of quantity be gross, yet it cannot be supposed that such
minute doses of refrigerants, sudorifics, or antispasmodics, of nitre, an
antimonial, ammonia, opium, In cholera a grain or two of opium often instantly
diminishes the bilious vomiting, purging, and secretion, the spasms and pains
over the body and the coldness of the extremities. It affects the mind in
various ways, occasionally producing and allaying delirium.
or ether, can operate by going to every point and pore of the body. Alcohol A
dram instantly steadies every fiber a tremulous drunkard.
and aromatics, as curry, heat in a cold temperature, and cool in a hot one.
Cold water is apt to produce heat and sweating, warm water to produce cold and
shivering. Ammonia, opium, aromatics, or alcohol induce heat in the cold fit,
and diminish it in the hot fit of fever; an emetic or bark prevents both, and
what are called refrigerants are apt to increase both.

Tonics.
Any nauseous matter, acid, or air in the stomach, or any disagreeable
impression, or the absence of an accustomed one, is apt to induce that state of
stomach in which its power over the muscles is diminished, and on which the
sense of weakness depends. Such impressions and states being remove, the
balance between the stomach and muscles is restored; which removal has been
called a tonic effect. Acids, astringents, bitters, aromatics, fetids, iron,
zinc, copper, or arsenic may remove this state, and consequently its symptoms,
as weakness palsy, tremors, spasm, fever, inflammation, ulcer, gangrene,
haemorrhage and serous discharge, and have been called tonic.

The faulty state of stomach is not always attended with impaired appetite,
which may be prurient, irregular, and even excessive; but that, in such cases,
the stomach is not in a natural state is evident from the deficient
assimilation in phthisis, bulimia, and some moribund cases; and from the morbid
one, in chlorosis, worms, and sea-scurvy, in which last the citric-acid taken
into the stomach, where it must be changed, seems to counteract the effect of
salt meat, cold and moisture on the surface, excess or defect of exercise, and
despondence, the usual causes of the disease. The sudden effects of small doses
of aromatics, fetids, ammonia, doses of aromatics, fetids, ammonia, alcohol,
ether, or opium, in allaying the sense of weakness, heat, cold sweating,
spasm, pain, and other symptoms all over the body, with depressions of mind;
and of the same medicines, and the bark in preventing and arresting ague-fits,
show that such symptoms depend on states of stomach, and that these medicines
act on the stomach, inducing changes in it, the effects of which are propagated
over the system. Tonics as exciting the power of the stomach over every part of
the body, and thus promoting life, are antiseptic. Life the great antiseptic in
nature, seems to preserve matters even in its neighborhood, as pus in abscess,
blood in aneurism, and water in dropsy; and that this does not depend on the
exclusion of air is evident, from putrefaction taking place within the body as
soon as life is gone.


If fever, inflammatory and haemorrhagic diseases, were affections merely of
the heart and blood vessels; nervous diseases of the brain and nerves; dropsy,
and scrophula of the lymphatics; scirrhus of the other glands; ulcers of the
skin; dyspnaea and cough of the lungs; rheumatism of the large joints, and gout
of the small; jaundice of the ducts of the liver, and diabetes of the kidneys,
these would oftener exist together; but being symptoms of states of stomach,
and as different states of the same organ cannot exist at the same time, the
system is thus not readily overpowered by a confluence of diseases; the same
causes induce different symptoms according to predisposition,; the same remedy
answers in various morbid states, and it seems thus that the balance of
secretions is established. How often, after death, are morbid states of brain,
lungs, and heart, in vain looked for, while the cause of all the symptoms is
either invisible or found in the stomach, which had not seemed previously to
suffer.

Narcotics.
Narcotics seem to induce a state of stomach, which tends to supply the want of
necessary impressions, or resist such as are apt to occasion pain or prevent
sleep, the natural relief and restorer of the sentient part. If a morbid
impression exist, as from acid in the stomach, sordes in the bowels, of fullness
in the vessels; or if it be of a mechanical or chemical nature in any other
part, it must be removed; or if it be from a lacerated nerve, this must be
divide, otherwise narcotics may not operate, or may even aggravate the
symptoms. It is the state produced by the impression, as the painful state of
nerve; muscular spasm; or local inflammation, as from bruises or wounds; ulcer;
or disposition to gangrene, as in the toes Pott.
, that narcotics and medicines used in such cases affect, and that only by
keeping the assimilating and resisting powers, and thereby the other functions
in a proper state, till the morbid impression lose its power, and the morbid
state, disposition, and habit cease.

While every part continues under the dominion of the stomach, no mechanical or
chemical change of a morbid nature can take place in the solids or fluids of
the system; and from the natural accommodation between the stomach and other
parts constantly tending to a level, and forming an equally, though sometimes
slenderly, balanced constitution, morbid impressions are often resisted, local
complaints arising in the course of disease become tolerable, and changes and
extremes of the ordinary impressions, which are all first felt at the stomach,
can be borne in a remarkable degree; but when the balance between the stomach
and other parts, by means of internal or external impressions, or evacuations,
is diminished or lost, as in an ill or broken constitution, a slight change in
ordinary, morbid, or salutary impressions, is felt.

The stomach may be put into a state more or less susceptible of a particular
impression. Mercury, whether administered internally or externally, seems to
render it more sensible to that of the bark in ague, of squill in dropsy, of
opium in syphilis, and of electricity in various diseases. In mania the stomach
and system are generally very insensible to impressions; but opium given an
hour or two before even an ordinary dose of an emetic, promotes its operation,
though in a combined specific effects are usually diminished. In mania, reason
is generally observed to return in proportion to this sensibility of the
stomach.

Impressions differ not only in kind, but in degree, and are powerful, being
less resisted, as they are sudden. Strong ones, as emetics, warm water, etc.
act chiefly on the stomach, while weak ones, such as do not even nauseate, and
have little sensible quality, as small doses of emetics, warm water,
absorbents, sarsaparilla, entire mustard seed, and oxyds, affect the remotest
parts, and are much used in indigestion, nervous diseases, passive discharges,
and ulcers. A remedy or dose to the unaccustomed, operates like an unexpected
blow or event, with proportional forece; a strong impression on the surface
affects the part chiefly, while tickling, a scratch, dentition, a transpolanted
tooth, and other seemingly weak but peculiar impressions, affect the stomach
and system considerably.

External Impressons.
Impressions on the senses affect the stomach. A disagreeable taste, smell,
sound, or touch, is apt to occasion sickness and shivering, to set the teeth on
edge, or to make the mouth water. The smell of spirits sickens and intoxicates
It is said that a little in the stomach prevents the intoxicating effect of the
smell.
; smells agreeable to some, make others sick, faint, and suffer abortion; while
fetid ones sometimes recover people from sickness, syncope, or hysteria.
Certain motions, as that of a swing, ship, or carriage; going backwards,
turning round, and, in cases of ill-health, the posture of standing, or even
sitting, occasions sickness, while that of lying prevents it and syncope.
Agreeable sensations often relieve sickness and promote digestion; but in
excess, injure the stomach exceedingly.

Emotions are felt at the stomach. The modifications of aversion, as fear,
anger, shame, and grief, instantly impair the keenest appetite, and are apt to
occasion sickness, tremors, paleness, flushings, weeping, various nervous
affections, looseness, and jaundice. One is sick at the thought of anything
disagreeable; and an injury is properly enough said to stick in the stomach;
which word itself in many languages implies anger and other states of mind. The
modifications of desire, as hope, complacence, and joy, improve the appetite
and promote digestion and strength. The thought of any thing agreeable does
one's heart good; which common phrase, like that of sick at heart, refers to
the stomach, as the word bowels does to the kindly affections. Agreeable
emotions in excess are apt to produce mania and other disorders, and have been
suddenly fatal. While the mind is much struck, or fixed, as in thought,
passion, affection, or mania, the sensibility is diminished to other
impressions, as that of spirits, medicines, contagion, and temperature; and
fits of various diseases are thus suspended.

There is a great analogy between the internal surface, from the mouth to the
anus, and the external one Monro, Jackson.
, both being continuous, pervious to fluids by vessels, quickly regenerating
lost substance, covered with mucous or sebaceous matter defending the tender
surfaces, liable to abrasion, inflammation, thickening, and probably the same
eruptive and other diseases, the state of the one affecting or alternating with
that of the other. Perhaps the growth of hair after death, shows some
continuance of life in the skin.

As a strong dose, it was observed, chiefly affects the stomach, so a strong
impression, as pinching, affects chiefly the part; tickling affects the whole
system, occasioning itching and laughter, and if continued, weakness, sickness,
vomiting, and convulsions. Gentle pinching and friction are prevailing eastern
customs, and exercise is universally so, for promoting digestion. A large
bleeding sickens, and small ones are commended in many cases; compression
allays vomiting and colic; a plaster, by giving support to the muscles of the
back, seems sometimes to steady the stomach and system; and the want of usual
compression, as that of a neck-cloth, stays, or garters, is apt to produce
sickness and other uneasy feelings.

Scrophulous-like tumors in the neck have been attributed to compression of the
inguinal glands by a truss; and various diseases to that of the feet and other
parts. Peculiar impressions, or slight impressions in peculiar states, produce
peculiar symptoms. A scratch produces in some, swelled glands; in others
tetanus This occurs particularly in warm climates, where there is little
disposition to inflammation. The application of a stimulant, as turpentine, to
the part exciting proper inflammation and suppuration, has been found to
prevent tetanus; and mercury is probably useful in it and some other cases, by
inducing that state of stomach and vessel which has been called phlogistic; in
which the parts of the blood are in that separable state, fit for forming a
proper suppuration.
, with a state of stomach attended with pain, and which has borne fifteen
hundred grains of good opium in six days, without sleep, or any affection of
the head or mind. An old and obstinate epilepsy, it is said, has ceased to
return after the extirpation of a wart from the surface. Dentition produces
vomiting, purging, eruptions, fever, and convulsions. A transplanted tooth has
produced appearances of syphilis or scrophula, cured both with and without
mercury. A wound gradually, according to its seat or extent, affects the
stomach, as appears from the indigestion, foul tongue, and fever, inducing, as
in pregnancy for the ftus, that state of vessel necessary to form the
buffycoat, and instead of blood, that suppuration, so remarkably under the
influence of diet; and during which the state of stomach is sometimes such,
that solid meat has suddenly produced great weakness, with dyspnaea, delirium,
and convulsions, ending in death; and the suppuratory or hectic state, if it
does not heal, teases, wastes, and destroys. In pregnancy the state of stomach
is peculiar, seemingly necessary to the retention of the foetus; and may be the
cause of its resisting contagion, and arresting the symptoms of phthisis. A
state of vessel that teases the stomach and system, is often taken off by a
spontaneous haemorrhage or inflammation effected by an effort of the stomach,
which a bleeding or a blister could not allay.

The elements of food and drink in forming chyle, blood, secretions, and solid
parts; and the base of vital air uniting with these by the lungs, and perhaps
by the surface, may give the blood its color, its temperature, its mobility,
its coagulability, its power of acting on the left ventricle with those
appearances of vitality ascribed to it by Mr. Hunter; and these condensations
going on less in a warm temperature, and more in a cold one, may by the
accommodating nature of the stomach with the other parts, preserve the
equilibrium of heat in the system.

That temperature on the surface affects the stomach, is evident from certain
applications of cold exciting vomiting and purging; from hot applications, or a
hot fit relieving those vomitings which occur in fever and the plague; and from
changes of temperature inducing or relieving various diseases, and fits of
disease of which the stomach is the feat Mr. Farquhar mentions a patient, who,
since the use of ice for burns, has continued free for a considerable time from
hysterical complaints of long standing.
. A warm fomentation relieves the sense of heat, handling snow occasions it, an
irritation as from a thorn produces it, and an irritation in the stomach
occasions alternations of heat and cold. Human heat is between 32 and 156, the
two coagulating points; and the agreeable is, exclusively of habit, between 32
and the human heat. In tropical and polar climates the appetite is keen, and
the stomach resists the power of intoxicating liquors and of contagion. Seeds,
eggs, imperfect and young animals and maniacs, being, as it were, all stomach,
bear the effects of heat and cold remarkably.

Certain degrees of heat and cold dispose to sleep; which, in the case of cold,
or of external and internal poison, subduing the power of the stomach, is apt
to prove fatal. From the long fasting that is borne in sleep, the slow
operation of a medicine, and the suspension of stools, the stomach seems less
sensible in that state; the temperature is two degrees less; and cold is easily
caught in sleep. If appetite or sleep pass its periods, the disposition ceases,
and its return is the first symptom of crisis in fever. Dyspeptics are apt to
start from sleep or the article of sleep, and then other nervous affections, as
asthma, palpitation, epilepsy, and gout, are apt to happen, probably from the
change in the state of the stomach. It seems to be only in occasional states of
stomach that fits from fixed causes, and other periodical diseases, occur.

Friction, fomentations, aromatics, fetids, acrids, spirits, ammonia, ether,
and opium allay vomiting and internal spasms, prove cathartic, or favor the
operation of one. In people with whose stomachs honey, unctuous matter, or eggs
disagree, any application of these or of wax to a sore, has been observed
likewise to disagree. Tartite or muriate of antimony applied externally, as if
taken into the stomach, excite vomiting, purging, and sweating. Lead, copper,
mercury, and other impressions, produce vomiting and purging. It is said that
bitters expel worms, that opium and tobacco produce ebriety, that bark cures
ague, and that opium applied to the bare surface has destroyed life without
being absorbed. Ammonia weakened with oil, so as to be applied to the surface,
frequently produces nausea and an universal sweat. Some sapids so applied, seem
to affect the sense of taste without reaching it. Arsenic, the bite of a viper,
or of a mad-dog, has produced death; and, on dissection, the stomach only has
been found inflamed.

The state of the tongue and mouth is always attended to as a mark of the state
of stomach, according to which the sensations of taste are various, and the
saliva and mucus vary in quantity, consistence, taste, smell, and color. Hence
wateriness, ptyalism, salivation, or foaming, is apt to occur on the sight of
grateful food in indigestion, pyrosis, pregnancy, hydrophobia, epilepsy,
scurvy, fever, and smallpox; the first symptom of which last is pain at
stomach, and the chief remedy cold to the surface. Lead, antimony, barytes
Crawford.
, fox-glove, opium, or the guatimala serpent, as well as mercury, excite
salivation, which is promoted by a nauseant or emetic, or by different degrees
of temperature. A grain or two of a mercurial in the stomach, or on the bare
skin, has had the effect; the salivation, like a gleet or mercurial sore, will
sometimes continue for months; and when suddenly stopped, is apt to be followed
by a violent affection of stomach, with vomiting, only to be allayed by mercury
Land. Med. Obs. and Inq. vol. iii. p. 246.
.

If infection be removed before the specific state of stomach and vessel be
induced, disease does not take place; and the morbid state itself may, in the
case of syphilis, be removed, for a time at least, by copper, or by a course of
corrosive sublimate, or by fever, while the disposition may remain, and break
out with or without virulence.

Such is the sensibility of the skin as well as stomach, that a cold or hot
body, or an astringent applied to either, is apt to produce a contraction over
all, and stop some haemorrhages. Fantonus mentions a man in a fever, in whom
blister-issues that had dried up, opened and discharged anew, after the
application of other blisters to distant parts. A plaster on some skins excites
an eruption in other parts. After a suppuration in the fore-arm, a swelling has
taken place successively in the arm-pit, the parotid, the leg, the knee, and
the groin. A swelled testicle is allowed to be merely from irritation. A
succession of tumors takes place in the conglobate glands from the mesentery to
the neck, and likewise from a compression of the inguinal glands; in the
inguinal and axillary from irritation at the toes and fingers, with or without
infection; and in the neck and behind the ears from a scratch, a blister, or
tinea capitis in the neighborhood. The pain of a wound, burn, or bruise, is
sometimes alleviated as pain begins in another part. Pain, spasm, inflammation,
and other states are apt to shift, as are ulcers, that is peculiar states of
vesssel with peculiar assimilation as the ichor of cancer, the cheesy-like
matter of scrofula, and the stony matter of gout.

Noxious matter seems either rejected by the absorbents at the surface, or
assimilated before it meet the chyle in the thoracic duct. A mild substance
like milk or mucilage injected into a vein, is apt to throw the system into
convulsions. The flesh of an animal killed by a poisonous bite or arrow,
affords wholesome food; during a course of chalybeates no superfluous iron is
detected in the chyle or blood; bile circulating in jaundice does not produce
giddiness, dimness of sight, etc. as when in the stomach; coloring and odorous
particles, as of madder, logwood, turpentine, garlic, or asparagus, circulate
without producing any effect; in syphilis the fluids, and even secondary ulcers
do not generally infect; and though a mercurial may lose, and sulphur acquire
oxygen in the system, yet it is not alleged that either is found there but in
its mild state.

A morbid state or a fever, attended with inflammation, eruption or ulcer,
often takes place suddenly, and runs its course without any infection, applied
or generated, or any cause or remedy which acts on the fluids; in the case of
infection the symptoms, as the variolous eruption, sometimes do not appear, and
sometimes continue to appear when the state or the fever is gone; and are
affected by external temperature, while the internal one continues the same;
some very infectious diseases, as the yaws, admit of cure from mere attention
to the general health; an infectious irritation, like others, takes time before
it affects the resisting and assimilating power, so as to produce the specific
state of vessel and specific matter; during the variolous and syphilitic state,
though there is nothing to prevent absorption, any new infection seems to have
no constitutional effect; in the case of smallpox, yaws, and some other
infections, the system becomes afterward insusceptible of their action, as it,
in some measure, does of that of accustomed ones, as spirits, opium, tobacco,
and even febrile contagion; and no satisfying account is given why the
absorption, multiplication, or assimilation, with the other effects of an
infectious particle are not more immediate, and in proportion to its quantity,
and why after absorption, it should in any case fail to assimilate.

Morbific matter does not seem to be a cause of gout or of other diseases,
called hereditary, as mania, epilepsy, or scrofula, which are not infectious,
and in which, as in all other cases, the state of the fluids must depend on
that of the solids. Gout often attacks persons in seemingly good health
preceded perhaps only by slight symptoms of some affection of the alimentary
canal, is subject to frequent, sudden, and distant translations, affecting the
joints with inflammation, but the stomach with a state so opposite, that highly
stimulating cordials are taken with relief; and no antidote to gouty matter
there, whether supposed acid or otherwise acrimonious, was ever thought of.

The remedies in syphilis tend to bring the stomach and consequently the
vessels from their syphilitic state, and to keep the functions in a proper
condition till the impression cease to operate, the morbid state be changed,
and the habit overcome. The remedies affect the assimilating organs, and except
perhaps the corrosive sublimate, improve them, as appears from the corpulence
to which they dispose. Infants have remarkably assimilating and resisting
powers, slaver a great deal, are not easily affected by syphilis, or easily
salivated by mercury, and are easily cured. Mercury, and opium when it
succeeds, seem to put the stomach in a peculiar state, somewhat, perhaps, like
that of infancy, and the salivation does not appear to be from absorption any
more than when it occurs from an emetic, pregnancy, or worms; or than giddiness
is when it arises from the use of hemlock.

Inflammation by mustard, etc. does not excite strangury, as cantharides are
apt to do. It often ceases the moment the blister is removed, the effect of the
impression is allayed by a poultice, or the stomach is soothed by a diluent, or
by camphorated oil applied to the surface. Cantharides internally relieve
paralytic strangury, and incontinence of urine; strangury frequently occurs
from affections of the stomach, as gastritis; and the uva ursi, alkali, or
supercarbonated alkali, whose effects seem chiefly confined to the stomach,
occasionally relieve even fits of the stone.

Contagions, whether marshy, human, or specific, are sometimes traced to
smells, as a cadaverous one, a heavy earthy one, that of the confluent
smallpox, dysenteric stools; or they may induce the febrile state, the only
steady character of which is weakness, though the impression do not just excite
the state of sensation. It may be in a way similar to what happens in
idiosyncrasies in regard to cheese, a cat, etc. or that of the insensible
action of various irritations, as of worms. A gentleman who cannot bear being
in a room where there is any cheese, though he does not see or smell it in the
least, instantly feels a sense of weakness, after some time, sickness with a
cold sweat, and faints if he endeavor to brave it. In this way contagion may,
through the organ of smell, affect the stomach and system. Inoculated, it
produces the specific state, inflammation and suppuration, and in the case of
smallpox without predisposition, the stomach does not yield too much, and its
energy is kept up by cold on the surface, so that a slight eruption happens
sometimes without fever. Heat on a part seems to increase the variolous state
of vessel. Cool air on the surface recovers persons from the state induced by
carbonic, azotic, and other noxious airs, the first symptom of which is
vomiting; from syncope, and from the still-born state, the first exertion from
which is seen to be about the region of the stomach; and the cold seems to
operate, as in discharges of blood, by exciting the stomach from its passive
state. Affections of the stomach, as observed, mark fever in its attack,
progress, remission, crisis, and cure; all its causes affect the stomach; it
has no symptom but what an immediate application to the stomach may produce and
its evacuation remove; and it is often prevented and cured by remedies
affecting only that organ. Its forms of intermittent, remittent, continual,
yellow, bilious, and dysenteric, seem all related, prevailing at the same time,
changing their types, and running into one another; and the late observations,
made in different climates, tend to show that the same treatment, properly
timed, answers equally with them all.

THE END.

