A SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY, etc. etc.

VOL. 1.

A SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY THROUGH FRANCE AND ITALY.

BY MR. YORICK.

VOL. 1.

LONDON: Printed for T. BECKET and P. A. DE HONDT, in the Strand. MDCCLXVIII.

Advertisement.
THE Author begs leave to acknowledge to his Subscribers, that they have a
further claim upon him for Two Volumes more than these delivered to them now,
and which nothing but ill health could have prevented him, from having ready
along with these.

The Work will be completed and delivered to the Subscribers early the next
Winter.

SUBSCRIBERS.
* Imperial Paper

A.
EARL of Abingdon * Lord Ancram * Rev. Mr. Arden * Lieutenant General Armiger
Mr. T. Atkison * Mr. Aubrey *
B.
Duke of Buccleugh Lord Viscount Bolingbroke * Mr. Beauclerc * Sir W. Boothby *
Mr. Boothby * Lord Belasyse * Lady Belasyse * Mr. Bonfoy Mr. Brand * Mr. Bourk
Mr. Hawkins Brown Lord Bathurst * Mr. Buller Lord Burgheartst * Mr. Bailey
Doctor Brook Mr. Blakeney Mr. T. Brown Mr. Big Honorable Mr. Belasyse Mr.
Barton * Mr. Barker Devonshire Mr. Bromley Mr. Joseph Brereton Mr. Baskerville
Earl of Berkeley Earl of Barrymore Mrs. Barry Rev. Mr. Thomas Bushe Mr. Amyas
Bushe Rev. Mr. Blake Mr. Jervais Busk Mr. Bonfoy Mr. Barker * Mr. Braithwait
C.
Mr. Crew, 20 sets * Mr. Cadogan * Mr. Crowl * Mr. Crawford * Mr. Chad Mr.
Crawley Mr. Caesar Rev. Mr. Cockayne Lord Charlemont Captain Crawford * Mr.
Cust Mr. Cane Lord Clanbrazel * Mr. Clavering Lord Frederick Cavendish * Lord
Cornwallis * Lord John Cavendish * Rev. Mr. Cleavor Mr. Cross Rev. Mr. Cayly,
Residentiary of York The Bishop of Cork * Mr. Colman Mrs. Chaloner
D.
Captain Digby * Mr. Dempster Hon. John Demer * Mr. J. Demer * Sir Charles
Davers Mrs. Draper, 3 sets * Mr. Dunbar * Mr. J. Dillon * Mr. Dillon * Mr. H.
Duncombe Mr. Dundas * Mr. Eleazer Davy Mr. Richard Davenport *
E.
Mr. G. Eddison Mr. Estwick Mr. Earl * Rev. Mr. Egerton
F.
Lord Farnbam * Lord Fauconberg * Mons. O'Flannagan, Col. an service de leurs
Majesty's Imp. J. Foley, Esquire * Mr. Furye Mr. Fennick Mr. Falkner Mr. Fitzhue
Mr. Fothergill Mr. Flood Mr. William Fowler The Hon. Mr. Fitzmorris * Mr. Friar
Mr. J. Fuller Mr. Fonnereau
G.
The Duke of Grafton * The Duchess of Grafton * Lord Galway Miss Godfrey * Mr.
Garrick * Sir Sampson Gideon * Mr. P. Gibbes * Lord William Gordon Mrs.
Goldsworthy Marquis of Granby Sir Alexander Gilmour * Mr. Griffith J. Garland,
Esquire * Mr. Garland * Miss Gore
H.
Mr. Heron * Charles Howard, Esquire * Mr. J. Z. Holwell Mr. C. Heart, Pall Mall Mr.
T. Hunt, 2 sels Mr. Jacob Houbler Mr. Hesselridge Hon. Captain Hervey Mr. Heber
* Mr. Hunter * Mr. Hill * Mr. C. Hanbury * Mr. O. Hanbury * Hon. N. Herbert *
Henry Herbert, Esquire Doctor G. Hay * Mrs. Hoan Captain D. Harvey Governor
Hamilton *
J.
Mr. James * Hon. Miss Ingram Mr. Thomas Jones M. Julius The Hon. John St. John
K.
Sir John Kay Doctor Knox Joseph Kuling, Esquire Doctor Kilvington
L.
Colonel Lee Mr. C. Ludwidge Sir Matthew Lamb * Mrs. Lamb Mr. J. Langlois Mr.
G. Litchfield Mr. John Low Lord G. Lenox * Earl of Lincoln * Mr. Peter
Lascelles Rev. Mr. Lascelles Mr. Edwin Lascelles Mr. Edward Lascelles Mr.
Daniel Lascelles Mr. Her. Langrisk Mr. Robert Lowther.
M.
Colonel Mackay * Sir George Macartney, 5 sets * Mr. Mannering Lord Milton *
Mrs. Mountague Mrs. Menyl The Duke of Montague * The Duchess of Montague * The
Marquis of Monthidmer * Sir William Musgrave Mr. Murray of Broughton * Lord
Mount Stewart * Lady Mount Stewart * Sir Francis Mollineux Mr. Minshin Mrs.
Minshin Mr. Sawray Morrit Rev. Mr. Marsden Mr. Thomas Mather Mr. Motteux Mr.
Maclean Mr. George Morland
N.
Lord Newnham Miss Anne Newnham * Miss Honoria Newnham * Mr. T. Newnham * Mr.
N. Newnham, 2 sets Mr. W. Newnham, 2 sets Mr. Richard Norton Hon. and Rev. Mr.
Nevill Mr. J. Norton
O.
Lord Ossory * Hon. Mr. Oglethorpe Mr. Hugh Owen Mr. Ogilby, 5 sets *
P.
Mr. W. Pocock Mr. Perrey Mr. H. Pelham Mr. Parker Mr. Phipps Mr. Pratt R.
Pigot, junior Miss Purling Monsieur Le Compte de Paar Lord Portmore Lord
Pembroke Lord Palmerston * Mr. Panchaude, 20 sets The Bishop of Peterborough *
Mr. Palmer Mr. Porter Mr. W. Price Doctor Petit
Q.
The Duke of Queensberry *
R.
The Duke of Rutland The Duchess of Richmond * The Duke of Roxburgh * Mr.
Ruspini Mr. Edward Rolf Mr. Joseph Russel Hon. F. Robinson Mr. John Ransby,
Lincoln's Inn Lady Robinson Marquis of Rockingham * Lady Rockingham *
S.
Mr. Robert Sparrow Mr. Frank Schutze Doctor Smalbrook * Lord Spencer * Mr. H.
Stanley * Mr. Stanley, Commissioner of the Customs * Lord Charles Spencer Mr.
John Sivale Hon. Mr. Shelly Mr. Sikes, Hull Lord Shelburne * Mr. Stewart Mr.
Bladen Swiney Mr. G. Selvin * Mr. Smith * Colonel Scot * Lord Strathmore * Lord
Strafford Doctor Swiney Mr. Robert Smith, 2 sets Mr. Sackville Mr. J. Shaftoe *
Sir F. Standish * Lady Standish * Mr. Salvadore Mr. Skrine Hon. Edward
Stratford Mr. T. Shadwell
T.
Lord Thanet * Mr. Thornhill * Mr G. Thornhill * Mr. Trent Lord Tyrone Mr. F.
Trotman Mr. Joseph Tullie Mr. Tankard Mr. C. Turner Mr. Tickle * Mr. Thorougton
Mr. C. Tomlins
V.
Honorable F. Vane Mr. R. Vincent Mr. Vane Mr. Vesey Lord Villars * Reverend
Dr. Vane Mr. Vernon *
W
Mr. John Wonen * Mr. Woodhouse, 2 sets * Sir Cecil Wray Sir Rowland Winn Mr.
Weddle Hon. Mr. Walsingham Mr. Whitehead Mr. Wanley Mr. Wastall Lord
Wandersford Mr. Whitwick Mr. Nathaniel Webb
Y.
The Archbishop of York * Mr. R. Young
A SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY, etc. etc.
-- THEY order, said I, this matter better in France --

-- You have been in France? said my gentleman, turning quick upon me with the
most civil triumph in the world. -- Strange! quoth I, debating the matter with
myself, That one and twenty miles sailing, for it is absolutely no further from
Dover to Calais, should give a man these rights -- I Will look into them: so
giving up the argument -- I went straight to my lodgings, put up half a dozen
shirts and a black pair of silk breeches -- " the coat I have on, said I,
looking at the sleeve, will do" -- took a place in the Dover stage; and the
packet sailing at nine the next morning -- by three I had got sat down to my
dinner upon a fricassee'd chicken so incontestably in France, that had I died
that night of an indigestion, the whole world could not have suspended the
effects of the All the effects of strangers (Swiss and Scotch excepted) dying
in France, are seized by virtue of this law, though the heir be upon the spot --
the profit of these contingencies being farmed, there is no redress.
Droits d'aubaine -- my shirts, and black pair of silk breeches -- portmanteau
and all must have gone to the King of France -- even the little picture which I
have so long worn, and so often have told thee, Eliza, I would carry with me
into my grave, would have been torn from my neck. -- Ungenerous! -- to seize
upon the wreck of an unwary passenger, whom your subjects had beckoned to their
coast -- by heaven! SIRE, it is not well done; and much does it grieve me, it is
the monarch of a people so civilized and courteous, and so renowned for
sentiment and fine feelings, that I have to reason with --

But I have scarce set foot in your dominions --

CALAIS.
WHEN I had finished my dinner, and drank the King of France's health, to
satisfy my mind that I bore him no spleen, but, on the contrary, high honor
for the humanity of his temper -- I rose up an inch taller for the
accommodation.

-- No -- said I -- the Bourbon is by no means a cruel race: they may be misled
like other people; but there is a mildness in their blood. As I acknowledged
this, I felt a suffusion of a finer kind upon my cheek -- more warm and
friendly to man, than what Burgundy (at least of two livres a bottle, which was
such as I had been drinking) could have produced.

-- Just God! said I, kicking my portmanteau aside, what is there in this
world's goods which should sharpen our spirits, and make so many kind-hearted
brethren of us, fall out so cruelly as we do by the way?

When man is at peace with man, how much lighter than a feather is the heaviest
of metals in his hand! he pulls out his purse, and holding it airily and
uncompress'd, looks round him, as if he sought for an object to share it with
-- In doing this, I felt every vessel in my frame dilate -- the arteries beat
all chearily together, and every power which sustained life, performed it with
so little friction, that 'twould have confounded the most physical precieuse in
France: with all her materialism, she could scarce have called me a machine --

I Am confident, said I to myself, I should have overset her creed.

The accession of that idea, carried nature, at that time, as high as she could
go -- I was at peace with the world before, and this finished the treaty with
myself --

-- Now, was I a King of France, cried I -- what a moment for an orphan to have
begged his father's portmanteau of me!

THE MONK.
CALAIS.
I HAD scarce uttered the words, when a poor monk of the order of St. Francis
came into the room to beg something for his convent. No man cares to have his
virtues the sport of contingencies -- or one man may be generous, as another
man is puissant -- sed non, quo ad hanc -- or be it as it may -- for there is
no regular reasoning upon the ebbs and flows of our humors; they may depend
upon the same causes, for ought I know, which influence the tides themselves --
'twould often be no discredit to us, to suppose it was so: I Am sure at least for
myself, that in many a case I should be more highly satisfied, to have it said
by the world, "I had had an affair with the moon, in which there was neither
sin nor shame," than have it pass altogether as my own act and deed, wherein
there was so much of both.

-- But be this as it may. The moment I cast my eyes upon him, I was
predetermined not to give him a single sous; and accordingly I put my purse
into my pocket -- buttoned it up -- set myself a little more upon my center,
and advanced up gravely to him: there was something, I fear, forbidding in my
look: I have his figure this moment before my eyes, and think there was that in
it which deserved better.

The monk, as I judged from the break in his tonsure, a few scattered white
hairs upon his temples, being all that remained of it, might be about seventy
-- but from his eyes, and that sort of fire which was in them, which seemed
more tempered by courtesy than years, could be no more than sixty -- Truth
might lie between -- He was certainly sixty-five; and the general air of his
countenance, notwithstanding something seemed to have been planting wrinkles in
it before their time, agreed to the account.

It was one of those heads, which Guido has often painted -- mild, pale --
penetrating, free from all commonplace ideas of fat contented ignorance
looking downwards upon the earth -- it looked forwards; but looked, as if it
looked at something beyond this world. How one of his order came by it, heaven
above, who let it fall upon a monk's shoulders, best knows: but it would have
suited a Bramin, and had I met it upon the plains of Indostan, I had reverenced
it.

The rest of his outline may be given in a few strokes; one might put it into
the hands of any one to design, for 'twas neither elegant or otherwise, but as
character and expression made it so: it was a thin, spare form, something above
the common size, if it lost not the distinction by a bend forwards in the
figure -- but it was the attitude of Entreaty; and as it now stands presented
to my imagination, it gained more than it lost by it.

When he had entered the room three paces, he stood still; and laying his left
hand upon his breast, (a slender white staff with which he journey'd being in
his right) -- when I had got close up to him, he introduced himself with the
little story of the wants of his convent, and the poverty of his order -- and
did it with so simple a grace -- and such an air of deprecation was there in
the whole cast of his look and figure -- I was bewitched not to have been
struck with it --

-- A better reason was, I had predetermined not to give him a single sous.

THE MONK.
CALAIS.
-- IT IS very true, said I, replying to a cast upwards with his eyes, with
which he had concluded his address -- it is very true -- and heaven be their
resource who have no other but the charity of the world, the stock of which, I
fear, is no way sufficient for the many great claims which are hourly made upon
it.

As I pronounced the words great claims, he gave a slight glance with his eye
downwards upon the sleeve of his tunick -- I felt the full force of the appeal
-- I acknowledge it, said I -- a coarse habit, and that but once in three
years, with meagre diet -- are no great matters; and the true point of pity is,
as they can be earned in the world with so little industry, that your order
should wish to procure them by pressing upon a fund which is the property of
the lame, the blind, the aged and the infirm -- the captive who lies down
counting over and over again the days of his afflictions, languishes also for
his share of it; and had you been of the order of mercy, instead of the order
of St. Francis, poor as I am, continued I, pointing at my portmanteau, full
cheerfully should it have been opened to you, for the ransom of the unfortunate
-- The monk made me a bow -- but of all others, resumed I, the unfortunate of
our own country, surely, have the first rights; and I have left thousands in
distress upon our own shore -- The monk gave a cordial wave with his head -- as
much as to say, No doubt, there is misery enough in every corner of the world,
as well as within our convent -- But we distinguish, said I, laying my hand
upon the sleeve of his tunick, in return for his appeal -- we distinguish, my
good Father! betwixt those who wish only to eat the bread of their own labor
-- and those who eat the bread of other people's, and have no other plan in
life, but to get through it in sloth and ignorance, for the love of God.

The poor Franciscan made no reply: a hectic of a moment passed across his
cheek, but could not tarry -- Nature seemed to have had done with her
resentments in him; he showed none -- but letting his staff fall within his
arm, he pressed both his hands with resignation upon his breast, and retired.

THE MONK.
CALAIS.
MY heart smote me the moment he shut the door -- Psha! said I with an air of
carelessness, three several times -- but it would not do: every ungracious
syllable I had uttered, crowded back into my imagination: I reflected, I had no
right over the poor Franciscan, but to deny him; and that the punishment of
that was enough to the disappointed without the addition of unkind language --
I considered his gray hairs -- his courteous figure seemed to reenter and
gently ask me what injury he had done me? -- and why I could use him thus -- I
would have given twenty livres for an advocate -- I have behaved very ill; said
I within myself; but I have only just set out upon my travels; and shall learn
better manners as I get along.

THE DESOBLIGEANT.
CALAIS.
WHEN a man is discontented with himself, it has one advantage however, that it
puts him into an excellent frame of mind for making a bargain. Now there being
no traveling through France and Italy without a chaise -- and nature generally
prompting us to the thing we are fittest for, I walked out into the coach yard
to buy or hire something of that kind to my purpose: an old A chaise, so called
in France, from its bolding but one person.
Desobligeant in the furthest corner of the court, hit my fancy at first sight,
so I instantly got into it, and finding it in tolerable harmony with my
feelings, I ordered the waiter to call Monsieur Dessein the master of the hotel
-- but Monsieur Dessein being gone to vespers, and not caring to face the
Franciscan whom I saw on the opposite side of the court, in conference with a
lady just arrived, at the inn -- I drew the taffeta curtain betwixt us, and
being determined to write my journey, I took out my pen and ink, and wrote the
preface to it in the Disobligeant.

PREFACE, IN THE DESOBLIGEANT.
IT must have been observed by many a peripatetic philosopher, That nature has
set up by her own unquestionable authority certain boundaries and fences to
circumscribe the discontent of man: she has effected her purpose in the
quietest and easiest manner by laying him under almost insuperable obligations
to work out his ease, and to sustain his sufferings at home. It is there only
that she has provided him with the most suitable objects to partake of his
happiness, and bear a part of that burden which in all countries and ages, has
ever been too heavy for one pair of shoulders. It Is true we are endued with an
imperfect power of spreading our happiness sometimes beyond her limits, but
it is so ordered, that from the want of languages, connections, and
dependencies, and from the difference in education, customs and habits, we lie
under so many impediments in communicating our sensations out of our own
sphere, as often amount to a total impossibility.

It will always follow from hence, that the balance of sentimental commerce is
always against the expatriated adventurer: he must buy what he has little
occasion for at their own price -- his conversation will seldom be taken in
exchange for theirs without a large discount -- and this, by the by, eternally
driving him into the hands of more equitable brokers for such conversation as
he can find, it requires no great spirit of divination to guess at his party --

This brings me to my point; and naturally leads me (if the see-saw of this
Desobligeant will but let me get on) into the efficient as well as the final
causes of traveling --

Your idle people that leave their native country and go abroad for some reason
or reasons which may be derived from one of these general causes -- Infirmity
of body, Imbecility of mind, or Inevitable necessity.
The first two include all those who travel by land or by water, laboring with
pride, curiosity, vanity or spleen, subdivided and combined in infinitum.

The third class includes the whole army of peregrine martyrs; more especially
those travelers who set out upon their travels with the benefit of the clergy,
either as delinquents traveling under the direction of governors recommended
by the magistrate -- or young gentlemen transported by the cruelty of parents
and guardians, and traveling under the direction of governors recommended by
Oxford, Aberdeen and Glasgow.

There is a fourth class, but their number is so small that they would not
deserve a distinction, was it not necessary in a work of this nature to observe
the greatest precision and nicety, to avoid a confusion of character. And these
men I speak of, are such as cross the seas and sojourn in a land of strangers
with a view of saving money for various reasons and upon various pretenses: but
as they might also save themselves and others a great deal of unnecessary
trouble by saving their money at home -- and as their reasons for traveling
are the least complex of any other species of emigrants, I shall distinguish
these gentlemen by the name of Simple Travelers.


Thus the whole circle of travelers may be reduced to the following Heads.
Idle Travelers, Inquisitive Travelers, Lying Travelers, Proud Travelers,
Vain Travelers, Splenetic Travelers.


Then follow the Travelers of Necessity. The delinquent and felonious
Traveller, The unfortunate and innocent Traveller, The simple Traveller,
And last of all (if you please) The Sentimental Traveller
(meaning thereby myself) who have traveled, and of which I am now sitting
down to give an account -- as much out of Necessity, and the besoin de Voyager,
as any one in the class.

I am well aware, at the same time, as both my travels and observations will be
altogether of a different cast from any of my forerunners; that I might have
insisted upon a whole nitch entirely to myself -- but I should break in upon
the confines of the Vain Traveller, in wishing to draw attention toward me,
till I have some better grounds for it, than the mere Novelty of my Vehicle.

It is sufficient for my reader, if he has been a traveller himself, that with
study and reflection hereupon he may be able to determine his own place and
rank in the catalogue -- it will be one step toward knowing himself; as it is
great odds, but he retains some tincture and resemblance, of what he imbibed or
carried out, to the present hour.

The man who first transplanted the grape of Burgundy to the Cape of Good Hope
(observe he was a Dutch man) never dreamt of drinking the same wine at the
Cape, that the same grape produced upon the French mountains -- he was too
phlegmatic for that -- but undoubtedly he expected to drink some sort of vinous
liquor; but whether good, bad, or indifferent -- he knew enough of this world
to know, that it did not depend upon his choice, but that what is generally
called chance was to decide his success: however, he hoped for the best; and in
these hopes, by an intemperate confidence in the fortitude of his head, and the
depth of his discretion, Mynheer might possibly overset both in his new
vineyard; and by discovering his nakedness, become a laughingstock to his
people.

Even so it fares with the poor Traveller, sailing and posting through the
politer kingdoms of the globe in pursuit of knowledge and improvements.

Knowledge and improvements are to be got by sailing and posting for that
purpose; but whether useful knowledge and real improvements, is all a lottery
-- and even where the adventurer is successful, the acquired stock must be used
with caution and sobriety to turn to any profit -- but as the chances run
prodigiously the other way both as to the acquisition and application, I am of
opinion, That a man would act as wisely, if he could prevail upon himself, to
live contented without foreign knowledge or foreign improvements, especially if
he lives in a country that has no absolute want of either -- and indeed, much
grief of heart has it often and many a time cost me, when I have observed how
many a foul step the inquisitive Traveller has measured to see sights and look
into discoveries; all which, as Sancho Panca said to Don Quixote, they might
have seen dry-shod at home. It is an age so full of light, that there is scarce
a country or corner of Europe whose beams are not crossed and interchanged with
others -- Knowledge in most of its branches, and in most affairs, is like music
in an Italian street, whereof those may partake, who pay nothing -- But there
is no nation under heaven -- and God is my record, (before whose tribunal I
must one day come and give an account of this work) -- that I do not speak it
vauntingly -- But there is no nation under heaven abounding with more variety
of learning -- where the sciences may be more fitly wooed, or more surely won
than here -- where art is encouraged, and will so soon rise high -- where
Nature (take her all together) has so little to answer for -- and, to close
all, where there is more wit and variety of character to feed the mind with --
Where then, my dear countrymen, are you going --

-- We are only looking at this chaise, said they -- Your most obedient
servant, said I, skipping out of it, and pulling off my hat -- We were
wondering, said one of them, who, I found, was an inquisitive traveller -- what
could occasion its motion. -- -- 'Twas the agitation, said I coolly, of writing
a preface -- I never heard, said the other, who was a simple traveller, of a
preface wrote in a Desobligeant. -- It would have been better, said I, in a Vis
a Vis.

-- As an English man does not travel to see English men, I retired to my room.

CALAIS.
I Perceived that something darkened the passage more than myself, as I stepped
along it to my room; it was effectually Mons. Dessein, the master of the hotel,
who had just returned from vespers, and, with his hat under his arm, was most
complaisantly following me, to put me in mind of my wants. I had wrote myself
pretty well out of conceit with the Desobligeant; and Mons. Dessein speaking of
it, with a shrug, as if it would no way suit me, it immediately struck my fancy
that it belonged to some innocent traveller, who, on his return home, had left
it to Mons. Dessein's honor to make the most of. Four months had elapsed since
it had finished its career of Europe in the corner of Mons. Dessein's
coachyard; and having sallied out from thence but a vampt-up business at the
first, though it had been twice taken to pieces on Mount Sennis, it had not
profited much by its adventures -- but by none so little as the standing so
many months unpitied in the corner of Mons. Dessein's coachyard. Much indeed
was not to be said for it -- but something might -- and when a few words will
rescue misery out of her distress, I hate the man who can be a churl of them.

-- Now was I the master of this hotel, said I, laying the point of my
forefinger on Mons. Dessein's breast, I would inevitably make a point of
getting rid of this unfortunate Desobligeant -- itstands swinging reproaches at
you every time you pass by it --

Mon Dieu! said Mons. Dessein -- I have no interest -- Except the interest,
said I, which men of a certain turn of mind take, Mons. Dessein, in their own
sensations -- I Am persuaded, to a man who feels for others as well as for
himself, every rainy night, disguise it as you will, must cast a damp upon your
spirits -- You suffer, Mons. Dessein, as much as the machine --

I have always observed, when there is as much sour as sweet in a compliment,
that an Englishman is eternally at a loss within himself, whether to take it,
or let it alone: a Frenchman never is: Mons. Dessein made me a bow.

C'est bien vrai, said he -- But in this case I should only exchange one
disquietude for another, and with loss: figure to yourself, my dear Sir, that
in giving you a chaise which would fall to pieces before you had got half way
to Paris -- figure to yourself how much I should suffer, in giving an ill
impression of myself to a man of honor, and lying at the mercy, as I must do,
d'un homme d'esprit.

The dose was made up exactly after my own prescription; so I could not help
taking it -- and returning Mons. Dessein his bow, without more casuistry we
walked together toward his Remise, to take a view of his magazine of chaises.

IN THE STREET.
CALAIS.
IT must needs be a hostile kind of a world, when the buyer (if it be but of a
sorry post-chaise) cannot go forth with the seller thereof into the street to
terminate the difference betwixt them, but he instantly falls into the same
frame of mind and views his conventionist with the same sort of eye, as if he
was going along with him to Hydepark corner to fight a duel. For my own part,
being but a poor sword'sman, and no way a match for Monsieur Dessein, I felt
the rotation of all the movements within me, to which the situation is incident
-- I looked at Monsieur Dessein through and through -- eyed him as he walked
along in profile -- then, en face -- thought he looked like a Jew -- then a
Turk -- disliked his wig -- cursed him by my gods -- wished him at the devil --

-- And is all this to be lighted up in the heart for a beggarly account of
three or four louisd'ors, which is the most I can be overreach'd in? -- Base
passion! said I, turning myself about, as a man naturally does upon a sudden
reverse of sentiment -- base, ungentle passion! thy hand is against every man,
and every man's hand against thee -- heaven forbid! said she, raising her hand
up to her forehead, for I had turned full in front upon the lady whom I had
seen in conference with the monk -- she had followed us unperceived -- Heaven
forbid indeed! said I, offering her my own -- she had a black pair of silk
gloves open only at the thumb and two forefingers, so accepted it without
reserve -- and I led her up to the door of the Remise.

Monsieur Dessein had diabled the key above fifty times before he found out he
had come with a wrong one in his hand: we were as impatient as himself to have
it opened; and so attentive to the obstacle, that I continued holding her hand
almost without knowing it; so that Monsieur Dessein left us together with her
hand in mine, and with our faces turned toward the door of the Remise, and
said he would be back in five minutes.

Now a colloquy of five minutes, in such a situation, is worth one of as many
ages, with your faces turned toward the street: in the latter case, it is drawn
from the objects and occurrences without -- when your eyes are fixed upon a
dead blank -- you draw purely from yourselves. A silence of a single moment
upon Monsieur Dessein's leaving us, had been fatal: to the situation -- she had
infallibly turned about -- so I begun the conversation instantly. --

-- But what were the temptations, (as I write not to apologize for the
weaknesses of my heart in this tour, -- but to give an account of them) --
shall be described with the same simplicity, with which I felt them.

THE REMISE DOOR.
CALAIS.
WHEN I told the reader that I did not care to get out of the Desobligeant,
because I saw the monk in close conference with a lady just arrived at the inn
-- I told him the truth; but I did not tell him the whole truth; for I was full
as much restrained by the appearance and figure of the lady he was talking to.
Suspicion crossed my brain, and said, he was telling her what had passed:
something jarred upon it within me -- I wished him at his convent.

When the heart flies out before the understanding, it saves the judgment a
world of pains -- I was certain she was of a better order of beings -- however,
I thought no more of her, but went on and wrote my preface.

The impression returned, upon my encounter with her in the street; a guarded
frankness with which she gave me her hand, showed, I thought, her good
education and her good sense; and as I led her on, I felt a pleasurable
ductility about her, which spread a calmness over all my spirits --

-- Good God! how a man might lead such a creature as this round the world with
him! --

I had not yet seen her face -- 'twas not material; for the drawing was
instantly set about, and long before we had got to the door of the Remise,
Fancy had finished the whole head, and pleased herself as much with its fitting
her goddess, as if she had dived into the TIBER for it -- but thou art a
seduced, and a seducing slut; and albeit thou cheatest us seven times a day
with thy pictures and images, yet with so many charms do thou do it, and thou
deckest out thy pictures in the shapes of so many angels of light, it is a shame
to break with thee.

When we had got to the door of the Remise, she withdrew her hand from across
her forehead, and let me see the original -- it was a face of about six and
twenty -- of a clear transparent brown, simply set off without rouge or powder
-- it was not critically handsome, but there was that in it, which in the frame
of mind I was in, which attached me much more to it -- it was interesting; I
fancied it wore the characters of a widowed look, and in that state of its
declension, which had passed the two first paroxysms of sorrow, and was quietly
beginning to reconcile itself to its loss -- but a thousand other distresses
might have traced the same lines; I wished to know what they had been -- and
was ready to enquire, (had the same bon ton of conversation permitted, as in
the days of Esdras) -- " What aileth thee? and why art thou disquieted? and why
is thy understanding troubled?" -- In a word, I felt benevolence for her; and
resolved some way or other to throw in my mite of courtesy -- if not of service.

Such were my temptations -- and in this disposition to give way to them, was I
left alone with the lady with her hand in mine, and with our faces both turned
closer to the door of the Remise than what was absolutely necessary.

THE REMISE DOOR.
CALAIS.
THIS certainly, fair lady! said I, raising her hand up a little lightly as I
began, must be one of Fortune's whimsical doings: to take two utter strangers
by their hands -- of different sexes, and perhaps from different corners of the
globe, and in one moment place them together in such a cordial situation, as
Friendship herself could scarce have achieved for them, had she projected it
for a month --

-- And your reflection upon it, shows how much, Monsieur, she has embarassed
you by the adventure. --

When the situation is, what we would wish, nothing is so ill-timed as to hint
at the circumstances which make it so: you thank Fortune, continued she -- you
had reason -- the heart knew it, and was satisfied; and who but an English
philosopher would have sent notices of it to the brain to reverse the judgment?

In saying this, she disengaged her hand with a look which I thought a
sufficient commentary upon the text.

It is a miserable picture which I am going to give of the weakness of my
heart, by owning, that it suffered a pain, which worthier occasions could not
have inflicted. -- I was mortified with the loss of her hand, and the manner in
which I had lost it carried neither oil nor wine to the wound: I never felt the
pain of a sheepish inferiority so miserably in my life.

The triumphs of a true feminine heart are short upon these discomfitures. In a
very few seconds she laid her hand upon the cuff of my coat, in order to finish
her reply; so some way or other, God knows how, I regained my situation.

-- She had nothing to add.

I forthwith began to model a different conversation for the lady, thinking
from the spirit as well as moral of this, that I had been mistaken in her
character; but upon turning her face toward me, the spirit which had animated
the reply was fled -- the muscles relaxed, and I beheld the same unprotected
look of distress which first won me to her interest -- melancholy! to see such
sprightliness the prey of sorrow. -- I pitied her from my soul; and though it
may seem ridiculous enough to a torpid heart, -- I could have taken her into my
arms, and cherished her, though it was in the open street, without blushing.

The pulsations of the arteries along my fingers pressing across hers, told her
what was passing within me: she looked down -- a silence of some moments
followed.

I fear, in this interval, I must have made some slight efforts toward a
closer compression of her hand, from a subtle sensation I felt in the palm of
my own -- not as if she was going to withdraw hers -- but, as if she thought
about it -- and I had infallibly lost it a second time, had not instinct more
than reason directed me to the last resource in these dangers -- to hold it
loosely, and in a manner as if I was every moment going to release it, of
myself; so she let it continue, till Monsieur Dessein returned with the key;
and in the mean time I set myself to consider how I should undo the ill
impressions which the poor monk's story, in case he had told it her, must have
planted in her breast against me.

THE SNUFF BOX.
CALAIS.
THE good old monk was within six paces of us, as the idea of him crossed my
mind; and was advancing toward us a little out of the line, as if uncertain
whether he should break in upon us or no. -- He stopped, however, as soon as he
came up to us, with a world of frankness; and having a horn snuff box in his
hand, he presented it open to me -- You shall taste mine -- said I, pulling out
my box (which was a small tortoise one) and putting it into his hand -- It Is
most excellent, said the monk; Then do me the favor, I replied, to accept of
the box and all, and when you take a pinch out of it, sometimes recollect it
was the peace offering of a man who once used you unkindly, but not from his
heart.

The poor monk blushed as red as scarlet. Mon Dieu! said he, pressing his hands
together -- you never used me unkindly. -- I should think, said the lady, he is
not likely. I blushed in my turn; but from what movements, I leave to the few
who feel to analyze -- Excuse me, Madame, replied I -- I treated him most
unkindly; and from no provocations -- It Is impossible, said the lady. -- My
God! cried the monk, with a warmth of asseveration which seemed not to belong
to him -- the fault was in me, and in the indiscretion of my zeal -- the lady
opposed it, and I joined with her in maintaining it was impossible, that a
spirit so regulated as his, could give offense to any.

I knew not that contention could be rendered so sweet and pleasurable a thing
to the nerves as I then felt it. -- We remained silent, without any sensation
of that foolish pain which takes place, when in such a circle you look for ten
minutes in one another's faces without saying a word. Whilst this lasted, the
monk rubbed his horn box upon the sleeve of his tunick; and as soon as it had
acquired a little air of brightness by the friction -- he made a low bow, and
said, 'twas too late to say whether it was the weakness or goodness of our
tempers which had involved us in this contest -- but be it as it would -- he
begged we might exchange boxes -- In saying this, he presented his to me with
one hand, as he took mine from me in the other; and having kissed it -- with a
stream of good nature in his eyes he put it into his bosom -- and took his
leave.

I guard this box, as I would the instrumental parts of my religion, to help my
mind on to something better: in truth, I seldom go abroad without it; and often
and many a time have I called up by it the courteous spirit of its owner to
regulate my own, in the justlings of the world; they had found full employment
for his, as I learnt from his story, till about the forty-fifth year of his
age, when upon some military services ill requited, and meeting at the same
time with a disappointment in the tenderest of passions, he abandoned the sword
and the sex together, and took sanctuary, not so much in his convent as in
himself.

I feel a damp upon my spirits, as I am going to add, that in my last return
through Calais, upon inquiring after Father Lorenzo, I heard he had been dead
near three months, and was buried, not in his convent, but, according to his
desire, in a little cimetiery belonging to it, about two leagues off: I had a
strong desire to see where they had laid him -- when, upon pulling out his
little horn box, as I sat by his grave, and plucking up a nettle or two at the
head of it, which had no business to grow there, they all struck together so
forcibly upon my affections, that I burst into a flood of tears -- but I am as
weak as a woman; and I beg the world not to smile, but pity me.

THE REMISE DOOR.
CALAIS.
I HAD never quitted the lady's hand all this time; and had held it so long,
that it would have been indecent to have let it go, without first pressing it
to my lips: the blood and spirits, which had suffered a revulsion from her,
crowded back to her, as I did it.

Now the two travelers who had spoke to me in the coach-yard, happening at
that crisis to be passing by, and observing our communications, naturally took
it into their heads that we must be man and wife at least; so stopping as soon
as they came up to the door of the Remise, the one of them, who was the
inquisitive traveller, asked us, if we set out for Paris the next morning? -- I
could only answer for myself, I said; and the lady added, she was for Amiens.
-- We dined there yesterday, said the simple traveller -- You go directly
through the town, added the other, in your road to Paris. I was going to return
a thousand thanks for the intelligence, that Amiens was in the road to Paris;
but, upon pulling out my poor monk's little horn box to take a pinch of snuff
-- I made them a quiet bow, and wishing them a good passage to Dover -- they
left us alone --

-- Now where would be the harm, said I to myself, if I was to beg of this
distressed lady to accept of half of my chaise? -- and what mighty mischief
could ensue?

Every dirty passion, and bad propensity in my nature, took the alarm, as I
stated the proposition -- It will oblige you to have a third horse, said
AVARICE, which will put twenty livres out of your pocket. -- You know not who
she is, said CAUTION -- or what scrapes the affair may draw you into, whispered
COWARDICE --

Depend upon it, Yorick! said DISCRETION, 'twill be said you went off with a
mistress, and came by assignation to Calais for that purpose --

-- You can never after, cried HYPOCRISY aloud, show your face in the world --
or rise, quoth MEANNESS, in the church -- or be any thing in it, said PRIDE,
but a lousy prebendary.

-- But it is a civil thing, said I -- and as I generally act from the first
impulse, and therefore seldom listen to these cabals, which serve no purpose,
that I know of, but to encompass the heart with adamant -- I turned instantly
about to the lady --

-- But she had glided off unperceived, as the cause was pleading, and had made
ten or a dozen paces down the street, by the time I had made the determination;
so I set off after her with a long stride, to make her the proposal with the
best address I was master of; but observing she walked with her cheek half
resting upon the palm of her hand -- with the slow, short-measur'd step of
thoughtfulness, and with her eyes, as she went step by step, fixed upon the
ground, it struck me, she was trying the same cause herself. -- God help her!
said I, she has some mother-in-law, or tartufish aunt, or nonsensical old
woman, to consult upon the occasion, as well as myself: so not caring to
interrupt the process, and deeming it more gallant to take her at discretion
than by surprise, I faced about, and took a short turn or two before the door
of the Remise, whilst she walked musing on one side.

IN THE STREET.
CALAIS.
HAVING, on first sight of the lady, settled the affair in my fancy, "that she
was of the better order of beings" -- and then laid it down as a second axiom,
as indisputable as the first, That she was a widow, and wore a character of
distress -- I went no further; I got ground enough for the situation which
pleased me -- and had she remained close beside my elbow till midnight, I
should have held true to my system, and considered her only under that general
idea.

She had scarce got twenty paces distant from me, ere something within me
called out for a more particular inquiry -- it brought on the idea of a further
separation -- I might possibly never see her more -- the heart is for saving
what it can; and I wanted the traces through which my wishes might find their way
to her, in case I should never rejoin her myself: in a word, I wished to know
her name -- her family's -- her condition; and as I knew the place to which she
was going, I wanted to know from whence she came: but there was no coming at
all this intelligence: a hundred little delicacies stood in the way. I formed a
score different plans -- There was no such thing as a man's asking her directly
-- the thing was impossible.

A little French debonaire captain, who came dancing down the street, showed
me, it was the easiest thing in the world; for popping in betwixt us, just as
the lady was returning back to the door of the Remise, he introduced himself to
my acquaintance, and before he had well got announced, begged I would do him
the honor to present him to the lady -- I had not been presented myself -- so
turning about to her, he did it just as well by asking her, if she had come
from Paris? -- No: she was going that rout, she said. -- Vous n'etez pas de
Londre? -- She was not, she replied.

-- Then Madame must have come through Flanders. -- Apparamment vous etez
Flammande? said the French captain. -- The lady answered, she was. -- Peutetre,
de Lisle? added he -- She said, she was not of Lisle. -- Nor Arras? -- nor
Cambray? -- nor Ghent? -- nor Brussels? She answered, she was of Brussels.

He had had the honor, he said, to be at the bombardment of it last war --
that it was finely situated, pour cela -- and full of noblesse when the
Imperialists were driven out by the French (the lady made a slight curtsy) --
so giving her an account of the affair, and of the share he had had in it -- he
begged the honor to know her name -- so made his bow.

-- Et Madame a son Mari? -- said he, looking back when he had made two steps
-- and without staying for an answer -- danced down the street.

Had I served seven years apprenticeship to good breeding, I could not have
done as much.

THE REMISE.
CALAIS.
AS the little French captain left us, Mons. Dessein came up with the key of
the Remise in his hand, and forthwith let us into his magazine of chaises.

The first object which caught my eye, as Mons. Dessein opened the door of the
Remise, was another old tattered Desobligeant: and notwithstanding it was the
exact picture of that which had hit my fancy so much in the coach-yard but an
hour before -- the very sight of it stirred up a disagreeable sensation within
me now; and I thought 'twas a churlish beast into whose heart the idea could
first enter, to construct such a machine; nor had I much more charity for the
man who could think of using it.

I observed the lady was as little taken with it as myself: so Mons. Dessein
led us on to a couple of chaises which stood abreast, telling us as he
recommended them, that they had been purchased by my Lord A. and B. to go the
grand tour, but had gone no further than Paris, so were in all respects as good
as new -- They were too good -- so I passed on to a third, which stood behind,
and forthwith began to chaffer for the price -- But 'twill scarce hold two,
said I, opening the door and getting in -- Have the goodness, Madam, said Mons.
Dessein, offering his arm, to step in -- The lady hesitated half a second, and
stepped in; and the waiter that moment beckoning to speak to Mons. Dessein, he
shut the door of the chaise upon us, and left us.

THE REMISE.
CALAIS.
C'EST bien comique, it is very droll, said the lady smiling, from the
reflection that this was the second time we had been left together by a parcel
of nonsensical contingencies -- c'est bien comique, said she --

-- There wants nothing, said I, to make it so, but the comic use which the
gallantry of a Frenchman would put it to -- to make love the first moment, and
an offer of his person the second.

It Is their fort: replied the lady.

It is supposed so at least -- and how it has come to pass, continued I, I know
not; but they have certainly got the credit of understanding more of love, and
making it better than any other nation upon earth: but for my own part I think
them errant bunglers, and in truth the worst set of marksmen that ever tried
Cupid's patience.

-- To think of making love by sentiments!

I should as soon think of making a genteel suit of clothes out of remnants: --
and to do it -- pop -- at first sight by declaration -- is submitting the offer
and themselves with it, to be sifted, with all their pours and contres, by an
unheated mind.

The lady attended as if she expected I should go on.

Consider then, madam, continued I, laying my hand upon hers --

That grave people hate Love for the name's sake --

That selfish people hate it for their own --

Hypocrites for heaven's --

And that all of us both old and young, being ten times worse frightened than
hurt by the very report -- What a want of knowledge in this branch of commerce
a man betrays, whoever lets the word come out of his lips, till an hour or two
at least after the time, that his silence upon it becomes tormenting. A course
of small, quiet attentions, not so pointed as to alarm -- nor so vague as to be
misunderstood, -- with now and then a look of kindness, and little or nothing
said upon it -- leaves Nature for your mistress, and she fashions it to her
mind. --

Then I solemnly declare, said the lady, blushing -- you have been making love
to me all this while.

THE REMISE.
CALAIS.
MONSIEUR Dessein came back to let us out of the chaise, and acquaint the lady,
the Count de L^ her brother was just arrived at the hotel. Though I had
infinite good will for the lady, I cannot say, that I rejoiced in my heart at
the event -- and could not help telling her so -- for it is fatal to a
proposal, Madam, said I, that I was going to make you --

-- You need not tell me what the proposal was, said she, laying her hand upon
both mine, as she interrupted me. -- A man, my good Sir, has seldom an offer of
kindness to make-to a woman, but she has a presentiment of it some moments
before --

Nature arms her with it, said I, for immediate preservation -- But I think,
said she, looking in my face, I had no evil to apprehend -- and to deal frankly
with you, had determined to accept it. -- If I had -- (she stopped a moment) --
I believe your good will would have drawn a story from me, which would have
made pity the only dangerous thing in the journey.

In saying this, she suffered me to kiss her hand twice, and with a look of
sensibility mixed with a concern she got out of the chaise -- and bid adieu.

IN THE STREET.
CALAIS.
I NEVER finished a twelve-guinea bargain so expeditiously in my life: my time
seemed heavy upon the loss of the lady, and knowing every moment of it would be
as two, till I put myself into motion -- I ordered post horses directly, and
walked toward the hotel.

Lord! said I, hearing the town clock strike four, and recollecting that I had
been little more than a single hour in Calais --

-- What a large volume of adventures may be grasped within this little span of
life by him who interests his heart in every thing, and who, having eyes to
see, what time and chance are perpetually holding out to him as he journeyeth
on his way, misses nothing he can fairly lay his hands on. --

-- If this will not turn out something -- another will -- no matter -- it is an
assay upon human nature -- I get my labor for my pains -- it is enough -- the
pleasure of the experiment has kept my senses, and the best part of my blood
awake, and laid the gross to sleep.

I pity the man who can travel from Dan to Beersheba, and cry, It Is all barren
-- and so it is; and so is all the world to him who will not cultivate the
fruits it offers. I declare, said I, clapping my hands chearily together, that
was I in a desert, I would find out wherewith in it to call forth my affections
-- If I could not do better, I would fasten them upon some sweet myrtle, or
seek some melancholy cypress to connect myself to -- I would court their shade,
and greet them kindly for their protection -- I would cut my name upon them,
and swear they were the loveliest trees throughout the desert: if their leaves
withered, I would teach myself to mourn, and when they rejoiced, I would
rejoice along with them.

The learned SMELFUNGUS traveled from Boulogne to Paris -- from Paris to Rome
-- and so on -- but he set out with the spleen and jaundice, and every object
he pafs'd by was discolored or distorted -- He wrote an account of them,
but'twas nothing but the account of his miserable feelings.

I met Smelfungus in the grand portico of the Pantheon -- he was just coming
out of it -- It Is nothing but a huge cockpit Vide S^'s Travels.
, said he -- I wish you had said nothing worse of the Venus of Medicis, replied
I -- for in passing through Florence, I had heard he had fallen foul upon the
goddess, and used her worse than a common strumpet, without the least
provocation in nature.

I popp'd upon Smelfungus again at Turin, in his return home; and a sad tale of
sorrowful adventures had he to tell, "wherein he spoke of moving accidents by
flood and field, and of the cannibals which each other eat: the Anthropophagi"
-- he had been flayed alive, and bedevil'd, and used worse than St.
Bartholomew, at every stage he had come at --

-- I Will tell it, cried Smelfungus, to the world. You had better tell it, said
I, to your physician.

Mundungus, with an immense fortune, made the whole tour; going on from Rome to
Naples -- from Naples to Venice -- from Venice to Vienna -- to Dresden, to
Berlin, without one generous connection or pleasurable anecdote to tell of; but
he had traveled straight on looking neither to his right hand or his left,
lest Love or Pity should seduce him out of his road.

Peace be to them! if it is to be found; but heaven itself, was it possible to
get there with such tempers, would want objects to give it -- every gentle
spirit would come flying upon the wings of Love to hail their arrival --
Nothing would the souls of Smelfungus and Mundungus hear of, but fresh anthems
of joy, fresh raptures of love, and fresh congratulations of their common
felicity -- I heartily pity them: they have brought up no faculties for this
work; and was the happiest mansion in heaven to be allotted to Smelfungus and
Mundungus, they would be so far from being happy, that the souls of Smelfungus
and Mundungus would do penance there to all eternity.

MONTRIUL.
I HAD once lost my portmanteau from behind my chaise, and twice got out in the
rain, and one of the times up to the knees in dirt, to help the postilion to
tie it on, without being able to find out what was wanting -- Nor was it till I
got to Montriul, upon the landlord's asking me if I wanted not a servant, that
it occurred to me, that that was the very thing.

A servant! That I do most sadly, quoth I -- Because, Monsieur, said the
landlord, there is a clever young fellow, who would be very proud of the honor
to serve an Englishman -- But why an English one, more than any other? -- They
are so generous, said the landlord -- I Will be shot if this is not a livre out
of my pocket, quoth I to myself, this very night -- But they have wherewithal
to be so, Monsieur, added he -- Set down one livre more for that, quoth I -- It
was but last night, said the landlord, qu'un my Lord Anglois presentoit un ecu
a la fille de chamber -- Tant pis, pour Madlle Janatone, said I.

Now Janatone being the landlord's daughter, and the landlord supposing I was
young in French, took the liberty to inform me, I should not have said tant pis
-- but, tant mieux. Tant mieux, toujours, Monsieur, said he, when there is any
thing to be got -- tant pis, when there is nothing. It comes to the same thing,
said I. Pardonnez moi, said the landlord.

I cannot take a fitter opportunity to observe once for all, that tant pis and
tant mieux being two of the great hinges in French conversation, a stranger
would do well to set himself right in the use of them, before he gets to Paris.

A prompt French Marquis at our ambassador's table demanded of Mr. H^, if he
was H^ the poet? No, said H^ mildly -- Tant pis, replied the Marquis.

It is H^ the historian, said another -- Tant mieux, said the Marquis. And Mr.
H^, who is a man of an excellent heart, returned thanks for both.

When the landlord had set me right in this matter, he called in La Fleur,
which was the name of the young man he had spoke of -- saying only first, That
as for his talents, he would presume to say nothing -- Monsieur was the best
judge what would suit him; but for the fidelity of La Fleur, he would stand
responsible in all he was worth.

The landlord delivered this in a manner which instantly set my mind to the
business I was upon -- and La Fleur, who stood waiting without, in that
breathless expectation which every son of nature of us have felt in our turns,
came in.

MONTRIUL.
I AM apt to be taken with all kinds of people at first sight; but never more
so, than when a poor devil comes to offer his service to so poor a devil as
myself; and as I know this weakness, I always suffer my judgment to draw back
something on that very account -- and this more or less, according to the mood
I am in, and the case -- and I may add the gender too, of the person I am to
govern.

When La Fleur entered the room, after every discount I could make for my soul,
the genuine look and air of the fellow determined the matter at once in his
favor; so I hired him first -- and then began to inquire what he could do: But
I shall find out his talents, quoth I, as I want them -- besides, a Frenchman
can do every thing.

Now poor La Fleur could do nothing in the world but beat a drum, and play a
march or two upon the fife. I was determined to make his talents do; and cannot
say my weakness was ever so insulted by my wisdom, as in the attempt.

La Fleur had set out early in life, as gallantly as most Frenchmen do, with
serving for a few years; at the end of which, having satisfied the sentiment,
and found moreover, That the honor of beating a drum was likely to be its own
reward, as it opened no further track of glory to him -- he retired a ses
terres, and lived comme il plaisoit a Dieu -- that is to say, upon nothing.

-- And so, quoth Wisdom, you have hired a drummer to attend you in this tour
of yours through France and Italy! Psha! said I, and do not one half of our
gentry go with a hum-drum compagnon du voyage the same round, and have the
piper and the devil and all to pay besides? When man can extricate himself with
an equivoque in such an unequal match -- he is not ill of -- But you can do
something else, La Fleur? said I -- O qu'oui! -- he could make spatterdashes,
and play a little upon the fiddle -- Bravo! said Wisdom -- Why, I play a bass
myself, said I -- we shall do very well. -- You can shave, and dress a wig a
little, La Fleur? -- He had all the dispositions in the world -- It is enough
for heaven! said I, interrupting him -- and ought to be enough for me -- So
supper coming in, and having a frisky English spaniel on one side of my chair,
and a French valet, with as much hilarity in his countenance as ever nature
painted in one, on the other -- I was satisfied to my heart's content with my
empire; and if monarchs knew what they would be at, they might be as satisfied
as I was.

MONTRIUL.
AS La Fleur went the whole tour of France and Italy with me, and will be often
upon the stage, I must interest the reader a little further in his behalf, by
saying, that I had never less reason to repent of the impulses which generally
do determine me, than in regard to this fellow -- he was a faithful,
affectionate, simple soul as ever trudged after the heels of a philosopher; and
notwithstanding his talents of drum-beating and spatterdash-making, which, though
very good in themselves, happened to be of no great service to me, yet was I
hourly recompensed by the festivity of his temper -- it supplied all defects --
I had a constant resource in his looks in all difficulties and distresses of my
own -- I was going to have added, of his too; but La Fleur was out of the reach
of every thing; for whether 'twas hunger or thirst; or cold or nakedness, or
watchings, or whatever stripes of ill luck La Fleur met with in our
journeyings, there was no index in his physiognomy to point them out by -- he
was eternally the same; so that if I am a piece of a philosopher, which Satan
now and then puts it into my head I am -- it always mortifies the pride of the
conceit, by reflecting how much I owe to the complexional philosophy of this
poor fellow, for shaming me into one of a better kind. With all this, La Fleur
had a small cast of the coxcomb -- but he seemed at first sight to be more a
coxcomb of nature than of art; and before I had been three days in Paris with
him -- he seemed to be no coxcomb at all.

MONTRIUL.
THE next morning La Fleur entering upon his employment, I delivered to him the
key of my portmanteau with an inventory of my half a dozen shirts and silk pair
of breeches; and bid him fasten all upon the chaise -- get the horses put to --
and desire the landlord to come in with his bill.

C'est un garcon de bonne fortune, said the landlord, pointing through the
window to half a dozen wenches who had got round about La Fleur, and were most
kindly taking their leave of him, as the postilion was leading out the horses.
La Fleur kissed all their hands round and round again, and thrice he wiped his
eyes, and thrice he promised he would bring them all pardons from Rome.

The young fellow, said the landlord, is beloved by all the town, and there is
scarce a corner in Montriul where the want of him will not be felt: he has but
one misfortune in the world, continued he, "He is always in love." -- I am
heartily glad of it, said I, -- 'twill save me the trouble every night of
putting my breeches under my head. In saying this, I was making not so much La
Fleur's eloge, as my own, having been in love with one princess or another
almost all my life, and I hope I shall go on so, till I die, being firmly
persuaded, that if ever I do a mean action, it must be in some interval betwixt
one passion and another: whilst this interregnum lasts, I always perceive my
heart locked up -- I can scarce find in it, to give Misery a sixpence; and
therefore I always get out of it as fast as I can, and the moment I am
rekindled, I am all generosity and good will again; and would do any thing in
the world either for, or with any one, if they will but satisfy me there is no
sin in it.

-- But in saying this -- surely I am commending the passion -- not myself.

A FRAGMENT.
-- THE town of Abdera, notwithstanding Democritus lived there trying all the
powers of irony and laughter to reclaim it, was the vilest and most profligate
town in all Thrace. What for poisons, conspiracies and assassinations --
libels, pasquinades and tumults, there was no going there by day -- 'twas worse
by night.

Now, when things were at the worst, it came to pass, that the Andromeda of
Euripides being represented at Abdera, the whole orchestra was delighted with
it: but of all the passages which delighted them, nothing operated more upon
their imaginations, than the tender strokes of nature which the poet had
wrought up in that pathetic speech of Perseus, O Cupid, prince of God and men,
etc. Every man almost spoke pure iambics the next day, and talked of nothing
but Perseus his pathetic address -- "O Cupid! prince of God and men" -- in
every street of Abdera, in every house -- "O Cupid! Cupid!" -- in every mouth,
like the natural notes of some sweet melody which drops from it whether it will
or no -- nothing but "Cupid! Cupid! prince of God and men" -- The fire caught
-- and the whole city, like the heart of one man, opened itself to Love.

No pharmacopolist could sell one grain of helebore -- not a single armourer
had a heart to forge one instrument of death -- Friendship and Virtue met
together, and kissed each other in the street -- the golden age returned, and
hung over the town of Abdera -- every Abderite took his oaten pipe, and every
Abderitish woman left her purple web, and chastely sat her down and listened to
the song --

'Twas only in the power, says the Fragment, of the God whose empire extends
from heaven to earth, and even to the depths of the sea, to have done this.

MONTRIUL.
WHEN all is ready, and every article is disputed and paid for in the inn,
unless you are a little sour'd by the adventure, there is always a matter to
compound at the door, before you can get into your chaise; and that is with the
sons and daughters of poverty, who surround you. Let no man say, "let them go
to the devil" -- it is a cruel journey to send a few miserables, and they have
had sufferings enough without it: I always think it better to take a few sous out
in my hand; and I would counsel every gentle traveller to do so likewise: he
need not be so exact in setting down his motives for giving them -- they will
be registered elsewhere.

For my own part, there is no man gives so little as I do; for few that I know
have so little to give: but as this was the first public act of my charity in
France, I took the more notice of it.

A well-a-way! said I. I have but eight sous in the world, showing them in my
hand, and there are eight poor men and eight poor women for 'em.

A poor tattered soul without a shirt on instantly withdrew his claim, by
retiring two steps out of the circle, and making a disqualifying bow on his
part. Had the whole parterre cried out, Place aux dames, with one voice, it
would not have conveyed the sentiment of a deference for the sex with half the
effect.

Just heaven! for what wise reasons have thou ordered it, that beggary and
urbanity, which are at such variance in other countries, should find a way to
be at unity in this?

-- I insisted upon presenting him with a single sous, merely for his politesse.

A poor little dwarfish brisk fellow, who stood over against me in the circle,
putting something first under his arm, which had once been a hat, took his
snuff box out of his pocket, and generously offered a pinch on both sides of
him: it was a gift of consequence, and modestly declined -- The poor little
fellow pressed it upon them with a nod of welcomeness -- Prenez en -- prenez,
said he, looking another way; so they each took a pinch -- Pity thy box should
ever want one! said I to myself; so I put a couple of sous into it -- taking a
small pinch out of his box, to enhance their value, as I did it -- He felt the
weight of the second obligation more than that of the first -- 'twas doing him
an honor -- the other was only doing him a charity -- and he made me a bow
down to the ground for it.

-- Here! said I to an old soldier with one hand, who had been campaign'd and
worn out to death in the service -- here is a couple of sous for thee -- Vive le
Roi! said the old soldier.

I had then but three sous left: so I gave one, simply pour l'amour de Dieu,
which was the footing on which it was begged -- The poor woman had a dislocated
hip; so it could not be well, upon any other motive.

Mon cher et tres charitable Monsieur -- There Is no opposing this, said I.

My Lord Anglois -- the very sound was worth the money -- so I gave my last
sous for it. But in the eagerness of giving, I had overlooked a pauvre honteux,
who had no one to ask a sous for him, and who, I believed, would have perished,
ere he could have asked one for himself: he stood by the chaise a little
without the circle, and wiped a tear from a face which I thought had seen
better days -- Good God! said I -- and I have not one single sous left to give
him -- But you have a thousand! cried all the powers of nature, stirring within
me -- so I gave him -- no matter what -- I am ashamed to say how much, now --
and was ashamed to think, how little, then: so if the reader can form any
conjecture of my disposition, as these two fixed points are given him, he may
judge within a livre or two what was the precise sum.

I could afford nothing for the rest, but, Dieu vous benisse -- Et le bon Dieu
vous benisse encore -- said the old soldier, the dwarf, etc. The pauvre honteux
could say nothing -- he pulled out a little handkerchief, and wiped his face as
he turned away -- and I thought he thanked me more than them all.

THE BIDET.
HAVING settled all these little matters, I got into my postchaise with more
ease than ever I got into a post-chaise in my life; and La Fleur having got one
large jackboot on the far side of a little bidet Post horse.
, and another on this (for I count nothing of his legs) -- he canter'd away
before me as happy and as perpendicular as a prince. --

-- But what is happiness! what is grandeur in this painted scene of life! A
dead ass, before we had got a league, put a sudden stop to La Fleur's career --
his bidet would not pass by it -- a contention arose betwixt them, and the poor
fellow was kicked out of his jack-boots the very first kick.

La Fleur bore his fall like a French christian, saying neither more or less
upon it, than, Diable! so presently got up and came to the charge again astride
his bidet, beating him up to it as he would have beat his drum.

The bidet flew from one side of the road to the other, then back again -- then
this way -- then that way, and in short every way but by the dead ass. -- La
Fleur insisted upon the thing -- and the bidet threw him.

What Is the matter, La Fleur, said I, with this bidet of thine? -- Monsieur,
said he, c'est un cheval le plus opiniatre du monde -- Nay, if he is a
conceited beast, he must go his own way, replied I -- so La Fleur got off him,
and giving him a good sound lash, the bidet took me at my word, and away he
scamper'd back to Montriul. -- Peste! said La Fleur.

It is not mal a propos to take notice here, that though La Fleur availed himself
but of two different terms of exclamation in this encounter -- namely, Diable!
and Peste! that there are nevertheless three, in the French language; like the
positive, comparative, and superlative, one or the other of which serve for
every unexpected throw of the dice in life.

Le Diable! which is the first, and positive degree, is generally used upon
ordinary emotions of the mind, where small things only fall out contrary to
your expectations -- such as -- the throwing once doublets -- La Fleur's being
kicked off his horse, and so forth -- cuckoldom, for the same reason, is always
-- Le Diable!

But in cases where the cast has something provoking in it, as in that of the
bidet's running away after, and leaving La Fleur aground in jack-boots -- it is
the second degree.

It Is then Peste!

And for the third --

-- But here my heart is wrung with pity and fellow-feeling, when I reflect
what miseries must have been their lot, and how bitterly so refined a people
must have smarted, to have forced them upon the use of it. --

Grant me, O ye powers which touch the tongue with eloquence in distress! --
whatever is my cast, Grant me but decent words to exclaim in, and I will give
my nature way.

-- But as these were not to be had in France, I resolved to take every evil
just as it befell me without any exclamation at all.

La Fleur, who had made no such covenant with himself, followed the bidet with
his eyes till it was got out of sight -- and then, you may imagine, if you
please, with what word he closed the whole affair.

As there was no hunting down a frightened horse in jack-boots, there remained
no alternative but taking La Fleur either behind the chaise, or into it. --

I preferred the latter, and in half an hour we got to the post house at
Nampont.

NAMPONT.
THE DEAD ASS.
-- AND this, said he, putting the remains of a crust into his wallet -- and
this, should have been thy portion, said he, had thou been alive to have
shared it with me. I thought by the accent, it had been an apostrophe to his
child; but 'twas to his ass, and to the very ass we had seen dead in the road,
which had occasioned La Fleur's misadventure. The man seemed to lament it much;
and it instantly brought into my mind Sancho's lamentation for his; but he did
it with more true touches of nature.

The mourner was sitting upon a stone bench at the door, with the ass's panel
and its bridle on one side, which he took up from time to time -- then laid
them down -- looked at them and shook his head. He then took his crust of bread
out of his wallet again, as if to eat it; held it some time in his hand -- then
laid it upon the bit of his ass's bridle -- looked wistfully at the little
arrangement he had made -- and then gave a sigh.

The simplicity of his grief drew numbers about him, and La Fleur amongst the
rest, whilst the horses were getting ready; as I continued sitting in the
post-chaise, I could see and hear over their heads.

-- He said he had come last from Spain, where he had been from the furthest
borders of Franconia; and had got so far on his return home, when his ass died.
Every one seemed desirous to know what business could have taken so old and
poor a man so far a journey from his own home.

It had pleased heaven, he said, to bless him with three sons, the finest lads
in all Germany; but having in one week lost two of the eldest of them by the
smallpox, and the youngest falling ill of the same distemper, he was afraid of
being bereft of them all; and made a vow, if Heaven would not take him from him
also, he would go in gratitude to St. Iago in Spain.

When the mourner got thus far on his story, he stopped to pay nature her
tribute -- and wept bitterly.

He said, Heaven had accepted the conditions; and that he had set out from his
cottage with this poor creature, who had been a patient partner of his journey
-- that it had eat the same bread with him all the way, and was unto him as a
friend.

Every body who stood about, heard the poor fellow with concern -- -- La Fleur
offered him money. -- The mourner said, he did not want it -- it was not the
value of the ass -- but the loss of him. -- The ass, he said, he was assured
loved him -- and upon this told them a long story of a mischance upon their
passage over the Pyrenean mountains which had separated them from each other
three days; during which time the ass had sought him as much as he had sought
the ass, and that they had neither scarce eat or drank till they met.

Thou have one comfort, friend, said I, at least in the loss of thy poor beast;
I Am sure thou have been a merciful master to him. -- Alas! said the mourner, I
thought so, when he was alive -- but now that he is dead I think otherwise. --
I fear the weight of myself and my afflictions together have been too much for
him -- they have shortened the poor creature's days, and I fear I have them to
answer for. -- Shame on the world! said I to myself -- Did we love each other,
as this poor soul but loved his ass -- 'twould be something. --

NAMPONT.
THE POSTILLION.
THE concern which the poor fellow's story threw me into, required some
attention: the postillion paid not the least to it, but set off upon the pave
in a full gallop.

The thirstiest soul in the most sandy desert of Arabia could not have wished
more for a cup of cold water, than mine did for grave and quiet movements; and
I should have had an high opinion of the postillion had he but stolen off with
me in something like a pensive pace. -- On the contrary, as the mourner
finished his lamentation, the fellow gave an unfeeling lash to each of his
beasts, and set off clattering like a thousand devils.

I called to him as loud as I could, for heaven's sake to go slower -- and the
louder I called the more unmercifully he galloped. -- The deuce take him and
his galloping too -- said I -- he will go on tearing my nerves to pieces till he
has worked me into a foolish passion, and then he will go slow, that I may enjoy
the sweets of it.

The postillion managed the point to a miracle: by the time he had got to the
foot of a steep hill about half a league from Nampont, -- he had put me out of
temper with him -- and then with myself, for being so.

My case then required a different treatment; and a good rattling gallop would
have been of real service to me. --

-- Then, prithee get on -- get on, my good lad, said I.

The postillion pointed to the hill -- I then tried to return back to the story
of the poor German and his ass -- but I had broke the clue -- and could no more
get into it again, than the postillion could into a trot. --

-- The deuce go, said I, with it all! Here am I sitting as heartily disposed
to make the best of the worst, as ever wight was, and all runs counter.

There is one sweet lenitive at least for evils, which nature holds out to us;
so I took it kindly at her hands, and fell asleep; and the first word which
roused me was Amiens.

-- Bless me! said I, rubbing my eyes -- this is the very town where my poor
lady is to come.

AMIENS.
THE words were scarce out of my mouth, when the Count de L***'s post-chaise,
with his sister in it, drove hastily by: she had just time to make me a bow of
recognition -- and of that particular kind of it, which told me she had not yet
done with me. She was as good as her look; for, before I had quite finished my
supper, her brother's servant came into the room with a billet, in which she
said, she had taken the liberty to charge me with a letter, which I was to
present myself to Madame R*** the first morning I had nothing to do at Paris.
There was only added, she was sorry, but from what penchant she had not
considered, that she had been prevented telling me her story -- that she still
owed it me; and if my rout should ever lay through Brussels, and I had not by
then forgot the name of Madame de L*** -- that Madame de L*** would be glad to
discharge her obligation.

Then I will meet thee, said I, fair spirit! at Brussels -- it is only returning
from Italy through Germany to Holland, by the rout of Flanders, home -- 'twill
scarce be ten posts out of my way; but were it ten thousand! with what a moral
delight will it crown my journey, in sharing in the sickening incidents of a
tale of misery told to me by such a sufferer? to see her weep! and though I
cannot dry up the fountain of her tears, what an exquisite sensation is there
still left, in wiping them away from off the cheeks of the first and fairest of
women, as I Am sitting with my handkerchief in my hand in silence the whole
night besides her.

There was nothing wrong in the sentiment; and yet I instantly reproached my
heart with it in the bitterest and most reprobate of expressions.

It had ever, as I told the reader, been one of the singular blessings of my
life, to be almost every hour of it miserably in love with some one; and my
last flame happening to be blown out by a whiff of jealousy on the sudden turn
of a corner, I had lighted it up afresh at the pure taper of Eliza but about
three months before -- swearing as I did it, that it should last me through the
whole journey -- Why should I dissemble the matter? I had sworn to her eternal
fidelity -- she had a right to my whole heart -- to divide my affections was to
lessen them -- to expose them, was to risk them: where there is risk, there may
be loss -- and what will thou have, Yorick! to answer to a heart so full of
trust and confidence -- so good, so gentle and unreproaching?

-- I will not go to Brussels, replied I, interrupting myself -- but my
imagination went on -- I recalled her looks at that crisis of our separation
when neither of us had power to say Adieu! I looked at the picture she had tied
in a black ribband about my neck -- and blushed as I looked at it -- I would
have given the world to have kissed it, -- but was ashamed -- And shall this
tender flower, said I, pressing it between my hands -- shall it be smitten to
its very root -- and smitten, Yorick! by thee, who have promised to shelter it
in thy breast?

Eternal fountain of happiness! said I, kneeling down upon the ground -- be
thou my witness -- and every pure spirit which tastes it, be my witness also,
That I would not travel to Brussels, unless Eliza went along with me, did the
road lead me toward heaven.

In transports of this kind, the heart, in spite of the understanding, will
always say too much.

THE LETTER.
AMIENS.
FORTUNE had not smiled upon La Fleur; for he had been unsuccessful in his
feats of chivalry -- and not one thing had offered to signalize his zeal for my
service from the time he had entered into it, which was almost four and twenty
hours. The poor soul burned with impatience; and the Count de L***'s servant's
coming with the letter, being the first practicable occasion which offered, La
Fleur had laid hold of it; and in order to do honor to his master, had taken
him into a back parlour in the Auberge, and treated him with a cup or two of
the best wine in Picardy; and the Count de L***'s servant in return, and not to
be behind hand in politeness with La Fleur, had taken him back with him to the
Count's hotel. La Fleur's prevenancy (for there was a passport in his very
looks) soon set every servant in the kitchen at ease with him; and as a
Frenchman, whatever be his talents, has no sort of prudery in showing them, La
Fleur, in less than five minutes, had pulled out his fife, and leading off the
dance himself with the first note, set the fille de chamber, the maitre
d'hotel, the cook, the scullion, and all the household, dogs and cats, besides
an old monkey, a dancing: I suppose there never was a merrier kitchen since the
flood.

Madame de L***, in passing from her brother's apartments to her own, hearing
so much jollity below stairs, rung up her fille de chamber to ask about it; and
hearing it was the English gentleman's servant who had set the whole house
merry with his pipe, she ordered him up.

As the poor fellow could not present himself empty, he had loaden'd himself in
going up stairs with a thousand compliments to Madame de L***, on the part of
his master -- added a long apocrypha of inquiries after Madame de L***'s health
-- told her, that Monsieur his master was au desespoire for her
re-establishment from the fatigues of her journey -- and, to close all, that
Monsieur had received the letter which Madame had done him the honor -- And he
has done me the honor, said Madame de L***, interrupting La Fleur, to send a
billet in return.

Madame de L*** had said this with such a tone of reliance upon the fact, that
La Fleur had not power to disappoint her expectations -- he trembled for my
honor -- and possibly might not altogether be unconcerned for his own, as a
man capable of being attached to a master who could be a wanting en egards vis
a vis d'une femme; so that when Madame de L*** asked La Fleur if he had brought
a letter -- O qu'oui, said La Fleur: so laying down his hat upon the ground,
and taking hold of the flap of his right side pocket with his left hand, he
began to search for the letter with his right -- then contrary-wise -- Diable!
-- then sought every pocket -- pocket by pocket, round, not forgetting his fob
-- Peste! -- then La Fleur emptied them upon the floor -- pulled out a dirty
cravat -- a handkerchief -- a comb -- a whip lash -- a nightcap -- then gave a
peep into his hat -- Quelle etourderie! He had left the letter upon the table
in the Auberge -- he would run for it, and be back with it in three minutes.

I had just finished my supper when La Fleur came in to give me an account of
his adventure: he told the whole story simply as it was; and only added, that
if Monsieur had forgot (par hazard) to answer Madame's letter, the arrangement
gave him an opportunity to recover the faux pas -- and if not, that things were
only as they were.

Now I was not altogether sure of my etiquette, whether I ought to have wrote
or no; but if I had -- a devil himself could not have been angry 'twas but the
officious zeal of a wellmeaning creature for my honor; and however he might
have mistook the road -- or embarrassed me in so doing -- his heart was in no
fault -- I was under no necessity to write -- and what weighed more than all --
he did not look as if he had done amiss.

-- It Is all very well, La Fleur, said I. -- 'Twas sufficient. La Fleur flew
out of the room like lightening, and returned with pen, ink, and paper, in his
hand; and coming up to the table, laid them close before me, with such a
delight in his countenance, that I could not help taking up the pen.

I begun and begun again; and though I had nothing to say, and that nothing
might have been expressed in half a dozen lines, I made half a dozen different
beginnings, and could no way please myself.

In short, I was in no mood to write.

La Fleur stepped out and brought a little water in a glass to dilute my ink --
then fetched sand and seal-wax -- It was all one: I wrote, and blotted, and
tore off, and burnt, and wrote again -- Le Diable l'emporte! said I half to
myself -- I cannot write this self-same letter; throwing the pen down
despairingly as I said it.

As soon as I had cast down the pen, La Fleur advanced with the most respectful
carriage up to the table, and making a thousand apologies for the liberty he
was going to take, told me he had a letter in his pocket wrote by a drummer in
his regiment to a corporal's wife, which, he durst say, would suit the occasion.

I had a mind to let the poor fellow have his humor -- Then prithee, said I,
let me see it.

La Fleur instantly pulled out a little dirty pocketbook crammed full of small
letters and billet-doux in a sad condition, and laying it upon the table, and
then untying the string which held them all together, run them over one by one,
till he came to the letter in question -- La voila! said he, clapping his
hands: so unfolding it first, he laid it before me, and retired three steps
from the table whilst I read it.

THE LETTER.
MADAME,
JE suis penetre de la douleur la plus vive, et reduit en meme temps an
desespoir par ce retour imprevu du Corporal qui rend notre entrevue de ce soir
la chose du monde la plus impossible.

Mais vive la joie! et toute la mienne sera de penser a vous.

L'amour n'est rien sans sentiment.

Et le sentiment est encore moins sans amor.

On dit qu'on ne doit jamais se desesperer.

On dit aussi que Monsieur le Corporal monte la guard Mecredi: alors ce sera
mon tour.

Chacun a son tour. En attendant -- Vive l'amour! et vive la bagatelle!

Je suis, MADAME,


It was but changing the Corporal into the Count -- and saying nothing about
mounting guard on Wednesday -- and the letter was neither right or wrong -- so
to gratify the poor fellow, who stood trembling for my honor, his own, and the
honor of his letter, -- I took the cream gently off it, and whipping it up in
my own way -- I sealed it up and sent him with it to Madame de L*** -- and the
next morning we pursued our journey to Paris.

PARIS.
WHEN a man can contest the point by dint of equipage, and carry all on
floundering before him with half a dozen lackies and a couple of cooks -- it is
very well in such a place as Paris -- he may drive in at which end of a street
he will.

A poor prince who is weak in cavalry, and whose whole infantry does not exceed
a single man, had best quit the field; and signalize himself in the cabinet, if
he can get up into it -- I say up into it -- for there is no descending
perpendicular amongst 'em with a " Me voici! mes enfans" -- here I am --
whatever many may think.

I own my first sensations, as soon as I was left solitary and alone in my own
chamber in the hotel, were far from being so flattering as I had prefigured
them. I walked up gravely to the window in my dusty black coat, and looking
through the glass saw all the world in yellow, blue, and green, running at the
ring of pleasure. -- The old with broken lances, and in helmets which had lost
their vizards -- the young in armor bright which shone like gold, beplumed
with each gay feather of the east -- all -- all tilting at it like fascinated
knights in tournaments of yore for fame and love. --

Alas, poor Yorick! cried I, what art thou doing here? On the very first onset
of all this glittering clatter, thou art reduced to an atom -- seek -- seek
some winding alley, with a tourniquet at the end of it, where chariot never
rolled or flambeau shot its rays -- there thou may solace thy soul in
converse sweet with some kind grisset of a barber's wife, and get into such
coteries! --

-- May I perish! if I do, said I, pulling out the letter which I had to
present to Madame de R***. -- I Will wait upon this lady, the very first thing I
do. So I called La Fleur to go seek me a barber directly -- and come back and
brush my coat.

THE WIG.
PARIS.
WHEN the barber came, he absolutely refused to have any thing to do with my
wig: 'twas either above or below his art: I had nothing to do, but to take one
ready made of his own recommendation.

-- But I fear, friend! said I, this buckle will not stand. -- You may immerge it,
replied he, into the ocean, and it will stand --

What a great scale is every thing upon in this city! thought I -- The utmost
stretch of an English periwigmaker's ideas could have gone no further than to
have "dipped it into a pail of water" -- What difference! it is like time to
eternity.

I confess I do hate all cold conceptions, as I do the puny ideas which
engender them; and am generally so struck with the great works of nature, that
for my own part, if I could help it, I never would make a comparison less than
a mountain at least. All that can be said against the French sublime in this
instance of it, is this -- that the grandeur is more in the word; and less in
the thing. No doubt the ocean fills the mind with vast ideas; but Paris being
so far inland, it was not likely I should run post a hundred miles out of it,
to try the experiment -- the Parisian barber meant nothing. --

The pail of water standing besides the great deep, makes certainly but a sorry
figure in speech -- but 'twill be said -- it has one advantage -- it is in the
next room, and the truth of the buckle may be tried in it without more ado, in
a single moment.

In honest truth, and upon a more candid revision of the matter, The French
expression professes more than it performs.

I think I can see the precise and distinguishing marks of national characters
more in these nonsensical minutiae, than in the most important matters of
state; where great men of all nations talk and stalk so much alike, that I
would not give ninepence to choose amongst them.

I was so long in getting from under my barber's hands, that it was too late of
thinking of going with my letter to Madame R*** that night: but when a man is
once dressed at all points for going out, his reflections turn to little
account, so taking down the name of the Hotel de Modene where I lodged, I
walked forth without any determination where to go -- I shall consider of that,
said I, as I walk along.

THE PULSE.
PARIS.
HAIL ye small sweet courtesies of life, for smooth do ye make the road of it!
like grace and beauty which beget inclinations to love at first sight; it is ye
who open this door and let the stranger in.

-- Pray, Madame, said I, have the goodness to tell me which way I must turn to
go to the Opera comique: -- Most willingly, Monsieur, said she, laying aside
her work --

I had given a cast with my eye into half a dozen shops as I came along in
search of a face not likely to be disordered by such an interruption; till at
last, this hitting my fancy, I had walked in.

She was working a pair of ruffles as she sat in a low chair on the far side of
the shop facing the door --

-- Tres volentieres; most willingly, said she, laying her work down upon a
chair next her, and rising up from the low chair she was sitting in, with so
cheerful a movement and so cheerful a look, that had I been laying out fifty
louis d'ors with her, I should have said -- "This woman is grateful."

You must turn, Monsieur, said she, going with me to the door of the shop, and
pointing the way down the street I was to take -- you must turn first to your
left hand -- mais prenez guarde -- there are two turns; and be so good as to
take the second -- then go down a little way and you will see a church, and when
you are past it, give yourself the trouble to turn directly to the right, and
that will lead you to the foot of the pont neuf, which you must cross -- and
there, any one will do himself the pleasure to show you --

She repeated her instructions three times over to me with the same good
natured patience the third time as the first; -- and if tones and manners have
a meaning, which certainly they have, unless to hearts which shut them out --
she seemed really interested, that I should not lose myself.

I will not suppose it was the woman's beauty, notwithstanding she was the
handsomest grisset, I think, I ever saw, which had much to do with the sense I
had of her courtesy; only I remember, when I told her how much I was obliged to
her, that I looked very full in her eyes, -- and that I repeated my thanks as
often as she had done her instructions.

I had not got ten paces from the door, before I found I had forgot every
tittle of what she had said -- so looking back, and seeing her still standing
in the door of the shop as if to look whether I went right or not -- I returned
back, to ask her whether the first turn was to my right or left -- for that I
had absolutely forgot. -- Is it possible! said she, half laughing. -- It Is very
possible, replied I, when a man is thinking more of a woman, than of her good
advice.

As this was the real truth -- she took it, as every woman takes a matter of
right, with a slight courtesy.

-- Attendez! said she, laying her hand upon my arm to detain me, whilst she
called a lad out of the back-shop to get ready a parcel of gloves. I am just
going to send him, said she, with a packet into that quarter, and if you will
have the complaisance to step in, it will be ready in a moment, and he shall
attend you to the place. -- So I walked in with her to the far side of the
shop, and taking up the ruffle in my hand which she laid upon the chair, as if
I had a mind to sit, she sat down herself in her low chair, and I instantly sat
myself down besides her.

-- He will be ready, Monsieur, said she, in a moment -- And in that moment,
replied I, most willingly would I say something very civil to you for all these
courtesies. Any one may do a casual act of good nature, but a continuation of
them shows it is a part of the temperature; and certainly, added I, if it is
the same blood which comes from the heart, which descends to the extremes
(touching her wrist) I am sure you must have one of the best pulses of any
woman in the world -- Feel it, said she, holding out her arm. So laying down my
hat, I took hold of her fingers in one hand, and applied the two fore-fingers
of my other to the artery --

-- Would to heaven! my dear Eugenius, thou had passed by, and beheld me
sitting in my black coat, and in my lack-a-day-sical manner, counting the
throbs of it, one by one, with as much true devotion as if I had been watching
the critical ebb or flow of her fever -- How would thou have laughed and
moralized upon my new profession? -- and thou should have laughed and
moralized on -- Trust me, my dear Eugenius, I should have said, "there are
worse occupations in this world than feeling a woman's pulse." -- But a
Grisset's! thou would have said -- and in an open shop! Yorick --

-- So much the better: for when my views are direct, Eugenius, I care not if
all the world saw me feel it.

THE HUSBAND.
PARIS.
I HAD counted twenty pulsations, and was going on fast toward the fortieth,
when her husband coming unexpected from a back parlour into the shop, put me a
little out in my reckoning -- 'Twas no body but her husband, she said -- so I
began a fresh score -- Monsieur is so good, quoth she, as he passed by us, as
to give himself the trouble of feeling my pulse -- The husband took off his
hat, and making me a bow, said, I did him too much honor -- and having said
that, he put on his hat and walked out.

Good God! said I to myself, as he went out -- and can this man be the husband
of this woman?

Let it not torment the few who know what must have been the grounds of this
exclamation, if I explain it to those who do not.

In London a shopkeeper and a shopkeeper's wife seem to be one bone and one
flesh: in the several endowments of mind and body, sometimes the one, sometimes
the other has it, so as in general to be upon a par, and to tally with each
other as nearly as man and wife need to do.

In Paris, there are scarce two orders of beings more different: for the
legislative and executive powers of the shop not resting in the husband, he
seldom comes there -- in some dark and dismal room behind, he sits commerceless
in his thrum nightcap, the same rough son of Nature that Nature left him.

The genius of a people where nothing but the monarchy is salique, having ceded
this department, with sundry others, totally to the women -- by a continual
higgling with customers of all ranks and sizes from morning to night, like so
many rough pebbles shook long together in a bag, by amicable collisions, they
have worn down their asperities and sharp angles, and not only become round and
smooth, but will receive, some of them, a polish like a brilliant -- Monsieur
le Mari is little better than the stone under your foot --

-- Surely -- surely man! it is not good for thee to sit alone -- thou wast
made for social intercourse and gentle greetings, and this improvement of our
natures from it, I appeal to, as my evidence.

-- And how does it beat, Monsieur? said she. -- With all the benignity, said
I, looking quietly in her eyes, that I expected -- She was going to say
something civil in return -- but the lad came into the shop with the gloves --
A propos, said I; I want a couple of pair myself.

THE GLOVES.
PARIS.
THE beautiful Grisset rose up when I said this, and going behind the counter,
reached down a parcel and untied it: I advanced to the side over against her:
they were all too large. The beautiful Grisset measured them one by one across
my hand -- It would not alter the dimensions -- She begged I would try a single
pair, which seemed to be the least -- She held it open -- my hand slipped into
it at once -- It will not do, said I, shaking my head a little -- No, said she,
doing the same thing.

There are certain combined looks of simple subtlety -- where whim, and sense,
and seriousness, and nonsense, are so blended, that all the languages of Babel
set loose together could not express them -- they are communicated and caught
so instantaneously, that you can scarce say which party is the infecter. I
leave it to your men of words to swell pages about it -- it is enough in the
present to say again, the gloves would not do; so folding our hands within our
arms, we both loll'd upon the counter -- it was narrow, and there was just room
for the parcel to lay between us.

The beautiful Grisset looked sometimes at the gloves, then side-ways to the
window, then at the gloves -- and then at me. I was not disposed to break
silence -- I followed her example: so I looked at the gloves, then to the
window, then at the gloves, and then at her -- and so on alternately.

I found I lost considerably in every attack -- she had a quick black eye, and
shot through two such long and silken eye-lashes with such penetration, that
she looked into my very heart and reins -- It may seem strange, but I could
actually feel she did --

-- It is no matter, said I, taking up a couple of the pairs next me, and
putting them into my pocket.

I was sensible the beautiful Grisset had not asked above a single livre above
the price -- I wished she had asked a livre more, and was puzzling my brains
how to bring the matter about -- Do you think, my dear Sir, said she, mistaking
my embarrassment, that I could ask a sous too much of a stranger -- and of a
stranger whose politeness, more than his want of gloves, has done me the honor
to lay himself at my mercy? -- Men croyez capable? -- Faith! not I, said I; and
if you were, you are welcome -- So counting the money into her hand, and with a
lower bow than one generally makes to a shopkeeper's wife, I went out, and her
lad with his parcel followed me.

THE TRANSLATION.
PARIS.
THERE was no body in the box I was let into but a kindly old French officer. I
love the character, not only because I honor the man whose manners are
softened by a profession which makes bad men worse; but that I once knew one --
for he is no more -- and why should I not rescue one page from violation by
writing his name in it, and telling the world it was Captain Tobias Shandy, the
dearest of my flock and friends, whose philanthropy I never think of at this
long distance from his death -- but my eyes gush out with tears. For his sake,
I have a predilection for the whole corpse of veterans; and so I strode over the
two back rows of benches, and placed myself beside him.

The old officer was reading attentively a small pamphlet, it might be the book
of the opera, with a large pair of spectacles. As soon as I sat down, he took
his spectacles off, and putting them into a shagreen case, returned them and
the book into his pocket together. I half rose up, and made him a bow.

Translate this into any civilized language in the world -- the sense is this:

"Here Is a poor stranger come in to the box -- he seems as if he knew no body;
and is never likely, was he to be seven years in Paris, if every man he comes
near keeps his spectacles upon his nose -- it is shutting the door of
conversation absolutely in his face -- and using him worse than a German."

The French officer might as well have said it all aloud; and if he had, I
should in course have put the bow I made him into French too, and told him, "I
was sensible of his attention, and returned him a thousand thanks for it."

There is not a secret so aiding to the progress of sociality, as to get master
of this short hand, and be quick in rendering the several turns of looks and
limbs, with all their inflections and delineations, into plain words. For my
own part, by long habitude, I do it so mechanically, that when I walk the
streets of London, I go translating all the way; and have more than once stood
behind in the circle, where not three words have been said, and have brought
off twenty different dialogues with me, which I could have fairly wrote down
and sworn to.

I was going one evening to Martini's concert at Milan, and was just entering
the door of the hall, when the Marquesina di F*** was coming out in a sort of a
hurry -- she was almost upon me before I saw her; so I gave a spring to one
side to let her pass -- She had done the same, and on the same side too; so we
ran our heads together: she instantly got to the other side to get out: I was
just as unfortunate as she had been; for I had sprung to that side, and opposed
her passage again -- We both flew together to the other side, and then back --
and so on -- it was ridiculous; we both blushed intolerably; so I did at last
the thing I should have done at first -- I stood stock still, and the
Marquesina had no more difficulty. I had no power to go into the room, till I
had made her so much reparation as to wait and follow her with my eye to the
end of the passage -- She looked back twice, and walked along it rather
side-ways, as if she would make room for any one coming up stairs to pass her
-- No, said I -- that is a vile translation: the Marquesina has a right to the
best apology I can make her; and that opening is left for me to do it in -- so
I ran and begged pardon for the embarrassment I had given her, saying it was my
intention to have made her way. She answered, she was guided by the same
intention toward me -- so we reciprocally thanked each other. She was at the
top of the stairs; and seeing no chichesbee near her, I begged to hand her to
her coach -- so we went down the stairs, stopping at every third step to talk
of the concert and the adventure -- Upon my word, Madame, said I when I had
handed her in, I made six different efforts to let you go out -- And I made six
efforts, replied she, to let you enter -- I wish to heaven you would make a
seventh, said I -- With all my heart, said she, making room -- Life is too
short to be long about the forms of it -- so I instantly stepped in, and she
carried me home with her -- And what became of the concert, St. Cecilia, who, I
suppose, was at it, knows more than I.

I will only add, that the connection which arose out of that translation, gave
me more pleasure than any one I had the honor to make in Italy.

THE DWARF.
PARIS.
I HAD never heard the remark made by any one in my life, except by one; and
who that was, will probably come out in this chapter; so that being pretty much
unprepossessed, there must have been grounds for what struck me the moment I
cast my eyes over the parterre -- and that was, the unaccountable sport of
nature in forming such numbers of dwarfs -- No doubt, she sports at certain
times in almost every corner of the world; but in Paris, there is no end to her
amusements -- The goddess seems almost as merry as she is wise.

As I carried my idea out of the opera comique with me, I measured every body I
saw walking in the streets by it -- Melancholy application! especially where
the size was extremely little -- the face extremely dark -- the eyes quick --
the nose long -- the teeth white -- the jaw prominent -- to see so many
miserables, by force of accidents driven out of their own proper class into the
very verge of another, which it gives me pain to write down -- every third man
a pigmy! -- some by ricketty heads and hump backs -- others by bandy legs -- a
third set arrested by the hand of Nature in the sixth and seventh years of
their growth -- a fourth, in their perfect and natural state, like dwarf
appletrees; from the first rudiments and stamina of their existence, never
meant to grow higher.

A medical traveller might say, it is owing to undue bandages -- a splenetic
one, to want of air -- and an inquisitive traveller, to fortify the system, may
measure the height of their houses -- the narrowness of their streets, and in
how few feet square in the sixth and seventh stories such numbers of the
Bourgoisie eat and sleep together; but I remember, Mr. Shandy the elder, who
accounted for nothing like any body else, in speaking one evening of these
matters, averred, that children, like other animals, might be increased almost
to any size, provided they came right into the world; but the misery was, the
citizens of Paris were so cooped up, that they had not actually room enough to
get them -- I do not call it getting any thing, said he -- it is getting nothing
-- Nay, continued he, rising in his argument, it is getting worse than nothing,
when all you have got, after twenty or five and twenty years of the tenderest
care and most nutritious aliment bestowed upon it, shall not at last be as high
as my leg. Now, Mr. Shandy being very short, there could be nothing more said
upon it.

As this is not a work of reasoning, I leave the solution as I found it, and
content myself with the truth only of the remark, which is verified in every
lane and by-lane of Paris. I was walking down that which leads from the
Carousal to the Palais Royal, and observing a little boy in some distress at
the side of the gutter, which ran down the middle of it, I took hold of his
hand, and helped him over. Upon turning up his face to look at him after, I
perceived he was about forty -- Never mind, said I; some good body will do as
much for me when I am ninety.

I feel some little principles within me, which incline me to be merciful
toward this poor blighted part of my species, who have neither size or
strength to get on in the world -- I cannot bear to see one of them trod upon;
and had scarce got seated beside my old French officer, ere the disgust was
exercised, by seeing the very thing happen under the box we sat in.

At the end of the orchestra, and betwixt that and the first side-box, there is
a small esplanade left, where, when the house is full, numbers of all ranks
take sanctuary. Though you stand, as in the parterre, you pay the same price as
in the orchestra. A poor defenseless being of this order had got thrust some
how or other into this luckless place -- the night was hot, and he was
surrounded by beings two feet and a half higher than himself. The dwarf
suffered inexpressibly on all sides; but the thing which incommoded him most,
was a tall corpulent German, near seven feet high, who stood directly betwixt
him and all possibility of his seeing either the stage or the actors. The poor
dwarf did all he could to get a peep at what was going forwards, by seeking for
some little opening betwixt the German's arm and his body, trying first one
side, then the other; but the German stood square in the most unaccommodating
posture that can be imagined -- the dwarf might as well have been placed at the
bottom of the deepest draw-well in Paris; so he civilly reached up his hand to
the German's sleeve, and told him his distress -- The German turned his head
back, looked down-upon him as Goliath did upon David -- and unfeelingly resumed
his posture.

I was just then taking a pinch of snuff out of my monk's little horn box --
And how would thy meek and courteous spirit, my dear monk! so tempered to bear
and forbear! -- how sweetly would it have lent an ear to this poor soul's
complaint!

The old French officer seeing me lift up my eyes with an emotion, as I made
the apostrophe, took the liberty to ask me what was the matter -- I told him
the story in three words; and added, how inhuman it was.

By this time the dwarf was driven to extremes, and in his first transports,
which are generally unreasonable, had told the German he would cut off his long
queue with his knife -- The German looked back coolly, and told him he was
welcome if he could reach it.

An injury sharpened by an insult, be it to who it will, makes every man of
sentiment a party: I could have leaped out of the box to have redressed it. --
The old French officer did it with much less confusion; for leaning a little
over, and nodding to a sentinel, and pointing at the same time with his finger
to the distress -- the sentinel made his way up to it. -- There was no occasion
to tell the grievance -- the thing told itself; so thrusting back the German
instantly with his musket -- he took the poor dwarf by the hand, and placed him
before him. -- This is noble! said I, clapping my hands together -- And yet you
would not permit this, said the old officer, in England.

-- In England, dear Sir, said I, we sit all at our ease.

The old French officer would have set me at unity with myself, in case I had
been at variance, -- by saying it was a bon mot -- and as a bon mot is always
worth something at Paris, he offered me a pinch of snuff.

THE ROSE.
PARIS.
IT was now my turn to ask the old French officer "What was the matter?" for a
cry of " Haussez les mains, Monsieur l'Abbe," reechoed from a dozen different
parts of the parterre, was as unintellgible to me, as my apostrophe to the monk
had been to him.

He told me, it was some poor Abbe in one of the upper loges, who he supposed
had got planted perdu behind a couple of grissets in order to see the opera,
and that the parterre espying him, were insisting upon his holding up both his
hands during the representation. -- And can it be supposed, said I, that an
ecclesiastic would pick the Griffer's pockets? The old French officer smiled,
and whispering in my car, opened a door of knowledge which I had no idea of --

Good God! said I, turning pale with astonishment -- is it possible, that a
people so smit with sentiment should at the same time be so unclean, and so
unlike themselves -- Quelle grossierte! added I.

The French officer told me, it was an illiberal sarcasm at the church, which
had begun in the theater about the time the Tartuffe was given in it, by
Moliere -- but, like other remains os Gothic manners, was declining -- Every
nation, continued he, have their refinements and grossiertes, in which they
take the lead, and lose it of one another by turns -- that he had been in most
countries, but never in one where he found not some delicacies, which others
seemed to want. Le POUR, et le CONTRE se trouvent en chaque nation; there is a
balance, said he, of good and bad every where; and nothing but the knowing it
is so can emancipate one half of the world from the prepossessions which it
holds against the other -- that the advantage of travel, as it regarded the
scavoir vivre, was by seeing a great deal both of men and manners; it taught us
mutual toleration; and mutual toleration, concluded he, making me a bow, taught
us mutual love.

The old French officer delivered this with an air of such candor and good
sense, as coincided with my first favorable impressions of his character -- I
thought I loved the man; but I fear I mistook the object -- 'twas my own way of
thinking -- the difference was, I could not have expressed it half so well.

It is alike troublesome to both the rider and his beast -- if the latter goes
pricking up his ears, and starting all the way at every object which he never
saw before -- I have as little torment of this kind as any creature alive; and
yet I honestly confess, that many a thing gave me pain, and that I blushed at
many a word the first month -- which I found inconsequent and perfectly
innocent the second.

Madame de Ramboulict, after an acquaintance of about six weeks with her, had
done me the honor to take me in her coach about two leagues out of town -- Of
all women, Madame de Rambouliet is the most correct; and I never wish to see
one of more virtues and purity of heart -- In our return back, Madame de
Rambouliet desired me to pull the cord -- I asked her if she wanted any thing
-- Rien que pisser, said Madame de Rambouliet --

Grieve not, gentle traveller, to let Madame de Rambouliet p -- ss on -- And,
ye fair mystic nymphs! go each one pluck your rose, and scatter them in your
path -- for Madame de Rambouliet did no more -- I handed Madame de Rambouliet
out of the coach; and had I been the priest of the chaste CASTALIA, I could not
have served at her fountain with a more respectful decorum.

END OF VOL. I.

