TWO SERMONS.

THE FIRST, ON Comparing spiritual Things with spiritual, PREACHED AT THE
PRIMARY VISITATION of the LORD BISHOP of WINCHESTER, At SOUTHAMPTON, JULY 15,
1788; AND PRINTED At the Request of the BISHOP, and CLERGY: THE SECOND, On the
Simplicity of the Gospel, PREACHED LIKEWISE At SOUTHAMPTON, AT THE VISITATION
of the CHANCELLOR of the Diocese, September 13, 1780; AND NOW PRINTED AT HIS
REQUEST;

By WILLIAM GILPIN, M. A. PREBENDARY OF SALISBURY; AND VICAR OF BOLDRE, IN
NEW-FOREST, NEAR LYMINGTON.

LONDON; PRINTED FOR R. BLAMIRE, STRAND. 1788.

TO THE HONORABLE, AND RIGHT REVEREND THE LORD BISHOP OF WINCHESTER, THIS
SERMON IS INSCRIBED BY HIS LORDSHIP'S MOST OBEDIENT, AND MOST RESPECTFUL,
HUMBLE SERVANT,

WILLIAM GILPIN.

SERMON I.
ON Comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

1 COR. ii. 13. Which things we speak, not in the words, which man's wisdom
teaches; but which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with
spiritual.
WHEN St. Paul planted the gospel at Corinth, he found his designs chiefly
opposed by two kinds of people.

The first were men of pleasure. Corinth lay commodiously for trade; and trade
produces riches; and it had been early observed, that it was difficult for rich
men to enter into the kingdom of heaven. They were more disposed to the
pleasures, which riches furnish; than to the comforts, which religion
administers: and even they, who had embraced christianity, found much work for
the apostle in keeping them pure from the contagion, that was spread abroad.

Besides the gay, and thoughtless, the apostle had another kind of people to
contend with. These were philosophers: and tho they were a more respectable set
of men, than the other; they were, at the same time, perhaps more intractable.
A state of learning is in itself no doubt, favorable to religion, at least in
a certain degree; and has ever been found so: but the philosopher himself has
sometimes too much wisdom to be taught. The Corinthian philosophers certainly
had; and were in general rather inclined to add something of their own to amend
the gospel; than to accept it in that simplicity, in which Paul preached it.

To the latter the text alludes. These philosophizing christians (many of whom
were probably teachers also) the apostle endeavors to recall to the simplicity
of the gospel. He sets before them his own example. He came not, he tells them,
with the excellency of speech, or the enticing words of man's wisdom. He knew
nothing among them, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified: adding, that he had
never preached the words, which man's wisdom teaches; but which the Holy Ghost
teaches; comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

In this passage the apostle gives us the only true rule of interpreting
scripture; which rule I shall endeavor to illustrate, by showing, How the
apostles were directed by it; and How it seems applicable to us. The text has,
I know, been applied by some interpreters to persons, rather than things: but,
I think, the whole context favors the sense, in which I take it,

In the first place, the apostle tells us, he avoided the words, which man's
wisdom teaches. -- In the apostle's days indeed man's wisdom had made only a
little progress in the affairs of religion. We read of Hymeneus, Philetus, and
a few others, who seemed desirous of being teachers, before they understood
what they affirmed. But their number was small.

Man's wisdom however was a kind of leaven, which made a rapid progress. We
need only cursorily examine ecclesiastical history to see it is mischievous
effects. There we find men running such lengths of folly, extravagance,
wildness, and I may add, of wickedness, that we may well suppose, it was in the
spirit of foresight, that the apostle puts us so-much on our guard against
man's wisdom. Man's wisdom has filled innumerable volumes: the purity of the
gospel is comprised in one.

In this ungrateful field we might wander long. The history of man's wisdom is
the history of his opinions; and of these there is no end. Zeal, and
indiscretion; pride, and vanity; bad meanings, and good meanings, have all
contributed to interpret what the Holy Ghost teaches by the words of man's
wisdom. Instead therefore of wandering in this wide wilderness, let us fix our
eyes on those great landmarks, which the apostle has set up to lead us safely
through it.

The apostles were immediately inspired. They taught, as the Holy Ghost
instructed. Immediate inspiration, brought all things to their remembrance,
whatever their blessed Lord had taught them.

At the same time, it should seem, that the inspiration of the apostles was
restricted to what was new in the religion they taught -- or if not wholly new,
yet so obscurely shadowed out in prophecies, and prophetic types, that it
needed certainly a full explanation. The great truths, with regard to the
redemption of the world -- the intercession of Christ -- the conditions of
acceptance -- the universality of the christian religion -- the motives it
holds out -- the purity it has introduced into morals -- the certainty of a
future state -- and of a last judgment -- were all, no doubt strongly impressed
on the minds of the apostles, and properly opened by immediate inspiration. In
any of these great truths mistakes were dangerous -- memory was frail -- and
there were yet no written records. -- At the same time such notices, as were
already on the records of inspiration -- those divine truths contained in the
books of the Old Testament -- wanted no farther illustration from the Holy
Ghost. Here nothing more seems to have been necessary, than the use of reason,
and common sense. And thus the apostle distinguishes between the things, which
God had revealed by the spirit; and the act of comparing spiritual things with
spiritual. The one he calls declaring the testimony of God: the other was
plainly the exertion only of reason. Nothing more than the exertion of reason
was necessary to prove the connection between the Old Testament and the New --
or to point out the completion of prophecies -- or to show, how the types of
the law were fulfilled. Of this mode of reasoning we find abundant instances
among the sacred writers -- in the epistle to the Hebrews especially.

Thus then inspiration seems to have been necessary to direct the apostles in
what was hitherto unknown: but human reason seemed sufficient to enable them to
apply what had been already inspired.

Let us then now see, how this rule, which guided the apostles, appears
applicable to us -- or in what way we are to speak what the Holy Ghost
teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

In the first place, I think, it plainly appears, that we have no reason to
expect immediate direction from what the Holy Ghost teaches. To wait for
desultory illapses of the spirit to lead us into truth, seems to have little
countenance from scripture; unless indeed we apply to ourselves such passages,
as by the fairest rules of interpretation can apply only to the apostles. And
surely the greatest caution is necessary in settling a point, which, if it be
an error, tends to confirm all other errors. When a man reasons himself into a
mistake, he may reason himself out of it again. But when a man discards reason,
and substitutes in it is room a divine instructor, every enthusiastic notion
becomes then immediately stamped with the character of divine truth. The
strange effects of such wildness we have often seen: and are sufficiently
guarded against it by the apostle's rule.

As far indeed as a holy life is concerned, we are assured every where in
scripture, that unless the endeavors of man are assisted by the Holy Spirit of
God, which dwells within him, and to whose divine admonitions he ought ever to
listen, he can do nothing. Here the divine aid is necessary. Man, as a moral
agent, with all the mischiefs of the fall about him, wanted support.

But the investigation of truth is a different affair. It was not so much his
understanding, that was disturbed; as his will and affections, that were
perverted. Wretched man, that he was, he knew what was right; but he could not
practice it. To rectify his knowledge, enough had been done: inspired truth was
on record; and he had a rule given him to understand it. Farther aid would have
rendered that rule unnecessary; and the expectation of any such aid,
enthusiastic.

It is true indeed the pious Christian will read his bible with the best
effect: and in this sense, no doubt, the Holy Spirit may be said to assist him
in understanding the truth of scripture: for he who does the will of God, will
know of the doctrine, whether it be of God. But this is still only the
application of scripture to the rectifying of his affections. To understand it
as a system of truth, the rule given us to compare spiritual things with
spiritual, seems abundantly sufficient. The New Testament is to us precisely in
the state, in which the Old Testament was to the apostles. It is inspiration
recorded. If farther inspiration be necessary, a written record is more than is
necessary. If God gave the greater, why should he give the less? -- It seems
therefore fully sufficient for the understanding of scripture, to take it into
our hands; and, in the spirit of sincerity, and piety, to compare one part with
another; or with a general view of the whole. This seems in the apostle's idea
the only key to the scriptures.

But now, it must be confessed, that a variety of causes have introduced
difficulties into these sacred records. Ancient customs not well understood --
ancient modes of speaking, not conformable to our own -- ancient errors,
generated in times of ignorance -- modern prejudices, and opinions, grafted on
texts of scripture misapplied -- have united with other causes in disfiguring
the plain, and simple truths of the gospel.

Why God suffered this blot, as some may call it, in the sacred record of his
truth, we know not. Yet humbly tracing the reason of it in the analogy of his
other works, we may refer it to the general law of a state of trial. Every
thing here bears the marks of the fall. In our moral pursuits we are exercised
with various difficulties: why not in the pursuit of religious truth? In both
we may be assisted, if we apply the proper means. In one, the spirit of God
will direct our endeavors: in the other, the great scriptural rule of
comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

The honest application of this rule, without doubt, would remove all the
material difficulties of scripture. But instead of solving them in this way, we
too often endeavor to adjust them by the words of man's wisdom. Hence arise
all the disputes, that have divided the church.

The opinions, which have occasioned them, however varied, run commonly in two
great channels -- that of enthusiasm, and that of libertinism. The enthusiast
reads his bible too literally: the libertine, (I use the word in it is less
offensive sense) too laxly. The one utterly discards reason: the other thinks
nonothing but reason worth attending to. The enthusiast loves a mystery,
because he does not understand it: the libertine allows nothing to be a
mystery; what he does not understand, he rejects. -- Let us in an instance or
two, apply our great scriptural rule to them both.

With regard to the jarring doctrine of faith, and works, it can never surely
be settled by the literal application of a few scattered passages of St. Paul:
but one should imagine it might easily be settled by comparing such passages
with other parts of scripture; and still more by an appeal to the whole scheme
of christianity. The very first book of the bible shows us, that the gospel was
meant to restore us to that purity of life, which we had originally lost. This
indeed seems to be the leading point of christianity; the word of God every
where exhorting us to cleanse our hearts -- to purify our affections -- and to
transform ourselves into new creatures.

Now it is certain, all this must be done by faith. Whoever comes to God
through Christ, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them, who
diligently seek him. So that in this sense we may be said to be justified by
faith; because without says, and it is accompanying virtues, no man can attain
that righteousness, which the gospel requires as a proper qualification for our
receiving the merits of Christ's death. All christians therefore lay a stress
on faith. The great difference is, the partial view makes it in itself an end
-- the comparative view makes it the means only of a purified heart, and a good
life.

With regard again to an awful doctrine, which we have lately heard disputed
with so much freedom; one should think, that a comparison of spiritual things
with spiritual might lead us here also to one point. The whole bible, Old
Testament and New, prophecies, and completion, seem so full both of the
humanity and divinity of Christ, that one should wonder, how any one, who
believes the scriptures, could separate the two ideas. If only human, how
inconsistent! Here is a human being, who engages in the arduous task of
redeeming his fellow creatures from sin. We must either therefore give up all
idea of redemption, of which the scripture is every where so full -- or we must
acknowledge the total disproportion of the work.

The idea of redemption indeed is sometimes given up: but still what
difficulties remain, unless we give up the scriptures also? This human being
showed every sign of a divine nature. He knew the thoughts of man; which is
always considered as one of the prerogatives of the Almighty. He could forgive
sin; tho we all know, that none can forgive sin, but God alone. This human
being also had the power -- not only of working miracles himself, which many
have possessed -- but of commissioning others also to work them, which no one
ever attempted before. This human being, tho cautious in the early part of his
ministry; yet as he approached the end of it, spoke so freely, that those
around him declared, he made himself equal with God; which was in fact the
case. This human being also was endowed with the strange, and wonderful power
of raising, not only others -- but himself also from the dead: and not only
professed in his lifetime, that he would send -- but after his ascension to
heaven, he actually did send, the Holy Ghost upon his faithful followers;
communicating to them powers, unheard of before, for the propagation of his
religion. In a word, when we take a comprehensive view of the scriptures, and
draw together the innumerable passages, in which this great truth seems so
plainly to be contained, it is a difficult matter to conceive how a denial of
it is consistent with a belief in what we read. Nor is this a matter to be
reasoned upon, like a point of mathematics, or natural philosophy: nor indeed
does there seem a necessity to adduce the opinions of this, or that father of
the church. The honest application of the rule before us, is all that seems
really necessary.

That we do not understand this great mystery is certain: how indeed should we?
but we understand as much of it, as we do of many other things -- of the union
of our souls and bodies particularly; in which we all believe.

There are some passages of scripture again, which have been thought more
refractory -- with regard, for instance, to the foreknowledge of God; and such
doctrines, as are supposed to be involved in it. For myself, I own, I find
little difficulty in bringing all these passages to the apostle's test of
comparison. But if any of them should be thought more unyielding; instead of
reasoning upon them, we might still content ourselves with comparing spiritual
things with spiritual. Tho we may not be able to obtain complete satisfaction
from a comparison with particular passages; we may surely obtain it from a
comparison with the whole scheme of the gospel. The gospel was intended for the
general good of man; and God's arbitrary will, can never run counter to his
revealed will.

We act thus in common life. Suppose we look into a medical book for the remedy
of some particular disorder; and should there find it prescribed, that we
should mix a certain quantity of some drug (a quantity which we know would
prove fatal) with other ingredients -- how should we receive such a
prescription? we know well, that the book is intended to administer to our
health: but here is a prescription, which would infallibly destroy us. We
should take it for granted therefore -- either that the drug in question was
put by mistake for some other drug -- or if the book were foreign, that it was
wrongly translated -- or that there was some mistake in the quantity perhaps --
or perhaps that we might not clearly understand the prescription -- at any
rate, we should certainly never swallow the potion; because it was very plain,
that the intention of the book, and the prescription must agree.

Thus the apostle's rule of comparing spiritual things with spiritual, will in
all cases direct us right. One part will generally explain another: but if any
part happen to be more unyielding, we cannot be far wrong, if we compare the
difficulty, whatever it is, with the general scheme and intention of the gospel.

But there is one difficulty still behind, which is the greatest of all -- and
that is, to bring our minds honestly to the application of this rule. The mind,
when we examine a difficulty of scripture, should be blank paper. Alas! how
often is it already scribbled over with the words of man's wisdom! Each of us
has his favorite system -- the pride of all his studious hours -- and in
nothing does self-deceit triumph more, than in giving these favorite systems
the gloss of scripture. It is the most difficult thing in the world to take the
eye from some favorite point, and give it a general cast. And yet without
this, no judgment can be formed.

In examining the works of man, as well as of God, we must judge from the
whole, or our judgment will be erroneous. In architecture, for instance, should
a man stand close to a column, and pronounce boldly, that it was too large, or
too small, we see at once how absurd a judgment he might pass. Whereas, if he
should step back a little -- take a proper stand, and view the whole in one
comprehensive view, he might perhaps find, that the part objected to, was in
exact proportion; and the defect not in the object, but in himself. -- It is
often thus in our scriptural inquiries: we take a doctrine from a text.

And here I cannot help lamenting the singular ill-usage, which the scriptures
have met with in being frittered into chapter, and verse, with so little
attention to the sense. It is astonishing that the unauthorised barbarism of a
printer Robert Stephens, who was printing a concordance, and a bible at the
same time, and took this method of adapting the one to the other.
(I cannot give it a softer name, tho he was certainly an able, and a learned
man), should be received so universally through christendom. The only
advantage, which this strange interruption of the sense of scripture can have,
might just have been answered as well by marginal references. In the mean time,
the mischief is glaring. The narrative, or the argument, instead of running on,
like other compositions, in a continued discourse, is broken into aphorisms. In
other books the paragraph ends, where the sense makes a pause. In the bible,
whatever the sense is, it ends at every third or fourth line. Passages, thus
insulated, receive an independent form. The sense in each little paragraph,
seems drawn to a point; and the unlettered reader at least is apt to pause.
Whereas, if he went on, and took all together, he would find, he must often
affix a very different meaning to the words.

I have frequently heard, for instance, a verse at the beginning of the 1st
epistle of St. Peter, Elect according to the foreknowledge of God, alleged as
an irrefragable argument in favor of predestination. But if this verse were
added to the preceding one, from which it is violently separated, it would
appear, that the whole people of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and
Bithynia, are all the elect according to the foreknowledge of God. Now it is
absurd in the last degree, to suppose, that the whole bulk of these several
nations were in a state of salvation: at the same time it is perfectly
evangelical, to conceive them all invited to partake of the privileges of the
gospel, according to the foreknowledge of God -- that is, according to the
predictions of the prophets That this is the sense to be affixed to the
foreknowledge of God, is evident from the tenth verse, in which we are told,
that the prophets prophesied of the grace that should come unto the Gentiles:
and if, after so many breaks, we may be allowed to bring the seventeenth verse
into the argument, we are there told plainly, that God without respect of
persons, judges according to every man's work.
.

Few judicious churchmen, I suppose, would wish for a new translation of the
bible. It could not soon acquire that general reverence, which is paid to the
old one. But many perhaps would desire to see the errors of the old one
corrected; tho with as little alteration as possible. The several late
collations of MSS. would render this, I should think, no very difficult work.
If however the wisdom of our superiors see any insuperable obstacle in going so
far, one should suppose, at least, there could be none in detaching chapters,
and verses into the margin. They are certainly unauthorised intruders.

Having thus considered the passage of scripture, I undertook to discourse on;
and touched, tho very slightly, a very important subject -- so important, and
so often transgressed, that frequent hints upon it, can never be out of season
-- I shall just add a few remarks on the difference between holding an error,
and teaching one.

Error is inseparable from the mind of man. Humanum est errare, was the honest
confession of nature; and a state of grace points out the melancholy truth with
still greater force. We humbly hope therefore, that as man, and error are so
closely united, God will pardon our innocent errors -- I mean such errors, as
have no connection with guilt.

But yet our errors, tho innocent, as far as we ourselves are concerned, may to
others be the source of great mischief. While they continue our own thoughts,
they affect nobody: but when we suffer them to get abroad, they become clothed
in words -- and perhaps in such words, as the text calls the words of man's
wisdom.

Thus many excellent men, I doubt not, may have carried the doctrine of faith
too high. Them it injured not; every christian virtue perhaps flowing from it.
In their minds therefore however erroneous the opinion, it may still be
innocent. -- But they may fall into a very egregious mistake, if they suppose
from their own pious feelings, that this doctrine has always the same effect on
others. It may create self-delusion. I should fear it might have a tendency to
it; and may make men satisfied with themselves. Faith is an easy substitute for
a good life. Faith, they are sure, they have; and as to works, they hear them
always spoken of as of no value; which it is possible they may be too apt to
apply in their own way: so all is well. It is certainly a very dangerous thing,
to speak slightly of works, lest we should give a handle to the natural pravity
of human nature.

Thus again, with regard to the other important subject, on which I touched, as
there are many passages of scripture relating to the humanity of Christ as well
as his divinity, I cannot persuade myself, (as some pious people have done)
that an exact faith on this head is necessary to salvation. Numbers, I have no
doubt, will be saved through the merits of Christ, who conceive him only as
their lawgiver, and conscientiously obey his laws; tho they may not have those
exalted ideas of his divine nature; to which our scriptural rule, I think, so
directly leads. If their holy lives have attained the principal end of a better
faith; they ought not surely to be branded with hard names, and considered
among those, who deny Christ before men.

We are sometimes told they ought; because without this exalted faith in the
divine nature of a Savior, the mind cannot attain those elevated heights of
love, which the gospel prescribes.

One should think so indeed: but before we pass these harsh censures on others,
let any of us, who do hold that doctrine, ask our own carnal hearts, whether it
purify them in this exalted manner?

At the same time, I think, we have good ground to censure those, who publicly
raise scruples. Why cannot they be satisfied with keeping their opinions at
home?

When a man holds a religious opinion with such conscientious firmness, that he
gives up his temporal interests for it is sake; tho the opinion may be
erroneous, the man is virtuous: his character respectable. -- But if, instead
of suffering manfully for his opinion, he should set it up as a banner, and
call people together under it; he should then, I think, look well to his
motives. There may be a touch of latent vanity -- there may be an overweening
of himself -- the pride of being at the head of a sect -- an oblique view to
self-interest perhaps -- or some other undue motive, which may insinuate
itself, without well looking after, into his religious views. To propagate any
error, is dangerous -- but on disputable motives, it is doubly so. A man is no
way put upon it: of course, he is answerable for the consequence. On a question
of philosophy indeed, where an air-pump, or a crucible is concerned, it matters
little: but where religion is the subject, it becomes a point of moment. To be
silent, is at least safe. There can be no harm -- and I think, no great share
of modesty -- in keeping an opinion to yourself, which has always been opposed
by a great majority, and some of the wisest, and best men, both laymen, and
churchmen, that ever lived.

But it is said, the examination of truth can do no harm.

None in the world to the truth itself. None to the candid, and able examiner
of it. But to the undistinguishing many it may often do great harm. Indeed I
know nothing of a more delicate nature, than the management of a polemical
controversy. To answer a bold charge, seems necessary. But to keep up the
spirit of a dispute by continually replying to an opponent, who is determined
never to yield, seems more than is necessary. It may unsettle the minds of
well-meaning people. It may lead them from things of more consequence. It may
be offensive to see churchmen continually wrangling about points of religion.
And tho these points may often be of little moment in themselves; yet they, who
know less, may think essentials concerned; and the gospel itself of an unstable
nature. -- Besides I should always fear, that what was gained in argument,
would be lost in piety -- in charity most undoubtedly. Holy wars have ever been
the worst of wars; and scriptural debates, the most intemperate. -- And what
end is gained? They rarely convince. People generally hold their own opinions;
and the matter ends, as it began Dr. Priestley very justly observes, that,
there is but little reason to expect, that any man, who has given the public
his opinion on any subject of importance, will ever retract it. See his
Disquisitions, page 206.
. And as to any concern for the souls of men, in pure charity, one should
think, they will not allege this. If we allow salvation to their faith, they
may surely be as condescending to ours.

After all, the world has had enough on these subjects. There is not one of
them, which has not been over, and over debated. We have only the old argument
dressed up anew. The skeptical inquirer cannot possibly mistake his way. The
road is tracked by many wheels; and needful guide-posts are every where set up.
From the knowledge abroad in the world, he may easily find abundance to satisfy
all his enquiries.

The great conclusion from the whole, is, that the ministers of religion cannot
be too cautious in avoiding the words, which man's wisdom teaches; nor too
careful in comparing spiritual things with spiritual. Polemical divinity, no
doubt has a tendency to lead us aside. The great point before us is very
different. Instead of employing our time on the difficult topics of the gospel,
which concern few; it would serve the cause of the gospel better, to endeavor
by every means, as we are best able, to inculcate the important truths of
religion, which so much concern us all -- the intention, and necessity of it --
it is graces, and high offers -- it is means of purifying our nature -- it is
conditions, and awful sanctions. These are truths which, tho well known,
require daily inculcating; and placing in various lights. On examining
therefore the whole intention, and tenor of the gospel -- on comparing
spiritual things with spiritual, we must be convinced, that the greatest
service we can do to religion -- and the best obedience we can show to the
gospel, consists in our uniting in a conscientious endeavor to draw a corrupt
age to the practice of godliness -- keeping that which is committed to our
trust, and avoiding profane, and vain babblings, and oppositions of science,
falsely so called; which too often spoil men through philosophy, and vain
deceit, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.

END OF THE FIRST SERMON.
SERMON II.

ON The Simplicity of the Gospel.

TO THE REVEREND DR. STURGES, CHANCELLOR OF THE DIOCESE OF WINCHESTER, THIS
SERMON IS INSCRIBED BY HIS MOST OBEDIENT, AND VERY HUMBLE SERVANT, WILLIAM
GILPIN.

2 COR. xi. 3. I fear, lest, by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through
his subtilty; so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity, that is in
Christ.
ONE of the first great objects of apostolical fear, in the matter of religious
corruption, was judaism. The earliest converts were Jews; and they could not at
once be brought to acknowledge the simplicity that is in Christ. Deep
prejudices had taken root: the authority of Moses -- their peculiar privileges
-- the grandeur of their temple -- and splendour of it is worship, had gotten
possession of their earliest conceptions; and had filled their minds with
ideas, which were not easily erased by the simplicity of the gospel.

But tho judaism was the primary object of the apostle's fear; the passage
before us leads us to suppose, his apprehensions had here taken another turn;
and were rather directed to the temptations of the world. -- We may consider it
indeed, if we please, as prophecy. It has certainly the most genuine mark of
prophecy -- it has been exactly fulfilled. The simplicity of the gospel, in
it is first age, could not be more corrupted by judaism; than it has been since
by a concurrence of other mischievous causes.

In the following discourse, I shall just touch upon a few of those causes,
pointed out by the apostle, which have corrupted the simplicity that is in
Christ; and I shall then inquire, what part the ministers of the gospel should
take in this matter. It is a subject neither new, nor curious. But if it be a
common subject; it is, at least, a very interesting one; and can neither be too
often reviewed, nor too deeply impressed.

In order to see how the simplicity that is in Christ, has been corrupted, it
may be necessary to inquire first, in what it consists. But the apostle has
not defined it; and therefore we may suppose, we are to gather a definition of
it for ourselves.

Whoever reads the holy scriptures with the meek spirit of a learner, will feel
the meaning of the expression better, than any logical distinctions can explain
it to him. He will feel the simplicity that is in Christ growing upon him more,
and more, as he becomes more intimately acquainted with the scriptures; and by
degrees taking possession of his understanding and affections -- he will feel a
disposition forming itself in his mind, free from the prejudices of any sect --
yet indulgent to the opinions of all -- open to conviction -- and above
disingenuous cavil -- zealous in searching for the truth -- but gentle in
maintaining it -- equally ready to correct an error; and to acknowledge it. He
will feel that the simplicity, which is in Christ will form his heart, as well
as his faith, and opinions. He will not allow the precepts of religion to be
refined by the glosses of the world -- nor accommodated to it is fashions -- nor
considered as speculative points. His faith will be a directing principle;
which raises him above the world -- above it is hopes -- above it is fears -- and
forms him into a cheerful passenger through this state of trial; animated only
by those holy hopes, which the gospel inspires.

That there are now, and have been in all ages, many individuals, who may, in a
certain degree, be thus characterized, we have no doubt. But where shall we
find the national character of a people under this description? In early days,
when christians were of one heart, and one soul, we may suppose, that heart,
and soul were truly christian. But it was at a time, when, we read, they had
all things in common. When the necessary distinctions of society began to take
place; then began also among christians, an opposition between the spirit of
the world, and the simplicity, that is in Christ. This simplicity was in a
degree tainted, even before the miraculous powers of the church ceased; and we
may be assured the mischievous spirit, which then appeared, has not been idle
through so long a tract of time; but has continued extending it is influence in
some countries more, in others less, according to the various circumstances of
each. The New Testament is the record of the simplicity of the gospel: and
modern history, but above all ecclesiastical history, is the record of it is
corruption.

The apostle of the text is writing to the converts of a trading, and opulent
town; not barbarous, and uninformed; but enlightened by all the philosophy, and
worldly wisdom at that time in esteem. He foresaw what temptations their
peculiar circumstances would draw them into. Worldly ideas of various kinds --
vanity, pride, and ambition -- avarice, profusion, and sensuality; in a word,
all the arts of raising a fortune; and all the arts of consuming one, he knew,
would be continually operating before their eyes: and how the simplicity of the
gospel might be able to oppose these fascinating delusions, was the object of
his fear.

Again, it might be in equal danger from the refinements of philosophy; and the
acute reasonings of learned men; who trying it is simple principles by canons of
human invention, and rules of logical exactness, would from these pronounce
boldly on it is inconsistences, and defects.

The simplicity of the gospel might be powerfully opposed too by the ridicule
of men of wit; who taking their topics of comparison from the fashions, and
practices of the world, might display the folly, and absurdity of such
doctrines, as they were inclined to discountenance.

All this was perfectly easy: for as christianity, and the world were at
variance; arguments drawn from the world, and addressed to the world, were sure
of being favorably heard.

That these were the motives of the apostle's apprehension, is very plain: for
he tells his converts, he fears, they should be corrupted, as the serpent had
beguiled Eve. To know therefore how that matter stood, we need only turn to the
record of the fatal deed. When the woman saw that the tree was good for food;
and that it was pleasant to the eye; and a tree to be desired to make one wise,
she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat.

Short as this account is, we find in it a combination of interest, pleasure,
vanity, and a false taste for knowledge, all cooperating, through the wiles of
the devil, to impose upon our first parent. With these delusions, she was
corrupted; and with these delusions we conclude the apostle feared his
Corinthian converts might be corrupted also.

How far our case may be similar to that of the Corinthian converts, I should
rather leave as matter of inference. All I wish to establish on this head, is,
that we are assured, on the authority of an apostle, that the simplicity, which
is in Christ, may be corrupted by such temptations, as certainly do abound
amongst us -- in our manners -- in our amusements -- in our literary pursuits;
and in our general modes of intercourse with each other.

Some theorists may amuse themselves with an opinion, that religion is in a
progressive state. It is at least a pleasing theory -- and in one sense, no
doubt, a very just one. If we believe in prophecy, we must believe, that the
gospel will not only spread over the face of the earth; but that it is present
state is a kind of preparation for that glorious state, of which we obtain a
general conception from the apocalypse of St. John; tho the lofty figures
employed in that description, leave the detail obscure.

But notwithstanding this general progress of the gospel, we may suppose it is
light to be sometimes obscured in particular countries -- or, in the apostle's
language, it is simplicity corrupted. On this head I fear the general prevailing
manners of our own country will not stand a scriptural test.

As the ministers of the gospel make a part of this tainted mass, we must not
flatter ourselves, that we are not, in a degree, corrupted also. We read, in
early days, of deceitful workers transforming themselves into the apostles of
Christ; and we cannot conceive, that these deceitful workers are more uncommon
now, or these transformations more rare. I mean not however at present to
pursue so ungrateful a theme; I should rather wish to inquire, how far we have
it in our power to counteract such corruption.

Even to oppose this torrent, with any success, no doubt, may be difficult
enough. To restore the simplicity of the gospel is a vain thought. For that
great event we must wait devoutly for those times, to which I have just
alluded, when all offense shall be done away.

Some things may be wrong, which the legislature only can rectify: and tho we
acknowledge the difficulty of moving these sacred foundations; yet favorable
opportunities may perhaps arise, in future time, when a few things, which are
now rather offensive, may be brought nearer the simplicity of the gospel. Many
of our ablest churchmen have freely expressed their wishes on this head; and as
these wishes become more general, they will of course, obtain more weight.
Establishments however, after all, necessary as they are, must necessarily
bring on their attendant evils; which serious men may bemoan -- and in part may
rectify; but, on the whole, they will ever have cause to lament, that the
nature of things, in this corrupt state, is mixed with evil -- and that the
nature of man, will turn even his blessings into mischief.

We have also greatly to lament, that the manners of the great, are, in
general, so far removed from the simplicity of the gospel; because the manners
of the great will ever be the principal source of national manners. It is a
happiness however, that in general these vitiated scenes are removed from the
eyes of the people: and yet enough sometimes gets abroad to astonish those, who
happily live at a distance from them. There is one day particularly, on which
the great, and little world are, in some degree, on a level; and one place, in
which they meet on an equal footing. We have it ever to lament, that so
pleasing a harmony -- an institution so delightfully calculated to insure
benevolence by united devotion through the whole mass of the people, should be
so generally disregarded. Even the very political use of this sacred
institution, if it had no other, were sufficient to enforce a general
observance of it on all, who have a love for public order. But the great should
consider farther, that if they have no need of instruction -- their inferiors
at least have; who are always ready, on this, and every occasion, to show their
betters, how much they approve, and value the bad examples they set them.

Let things however be wrong in what degree they will -- let the great and
little world unite in treating the simplicity, that is in Christ with what
contempt they please, it is still our part to do our best to preserve it; and
to keep the remains of religion, as far as we can, and as long as we can,
subsisting amongst us. Tho the whole head is sick, and the heart faint, and the
physician's best skill can only palliate; it is always something to go so far.

Our blessed Savior calls the ministers of the gospel the salt of the earth.
It is a most expressive figure. It shows not only that there will be great
corruption in the earth; but it shows farther, that the ministers of the gospel
are the means, which God has appointed to oppose this corruption. Tho our
influence cannot preserve the whole; yet still it may preserve a part. Tho we
may have no effect on the general bulk of mankind; yet there may be many an
individual, whose honest heart we may retain in the simplicity of the gospel.

We are not legislators; and things would not go on better, if we were. The
only means, which we have to employ in this matter, lie in two easy words, our
doctrine, and our manners; in both of which it should be our utmost endeavor
to attain, as far as we can, and to impress upon others, the simplicity that is
in Christ. The former, we must endeavor to preserve from the corruptions of
worldly wisdom; the latter from the corruptions of worldly fashions.

To explain the word of God, is certainly the most arduous business, in which
the reason of man can engage. Every explanation of the sacred text, is, in
fact, putting our own sense upon the words of scripture: and when we consider
the very supine ignorance of the generality of the common people, who take
their ideas of religion from what we tell them; it is certainly a very awful
thought, and should make us endeavor to keep as close as possible to the
simplicity, that is in Christ.

It is in vain to attempt this without a thorough acquaintance with scripture;
which will always suggest such passages to the memory, as, on a comparison with
the subject we are upon, may direct us to the true scriptural sense.

The lawyer is obliged to study with attention a number of books, and to
examine a variety of parallel cases, before he can be qualified to act in his
profession. The physician is under the same necessity. And is it not a
mortifying consideration, that, because the common people are obliged to take
our prescriptions, just as we please to prescribe, we should for that reason
prescribe carelessly; and without sufficiently consulting that book, which alone
will enable us to do it properly?

Some think the simplicity, that is in Christ, consists in clothing their
sentiments always in scripture phrase. I see no more reason for this, than for
going about, as the apostles did, in sandals, with a scrip, and a staff. Modes
of speech are just as much the fashion of times, and countries, as modes of
dress; and need be as little observed. The scriptural mode of speech is highly
figurative -- very different from any mode now in use; and requires
translation, as much as the original Greek. It is the scriptural idea, not the
scriptural mode of expression; for which I am contending: and this may be lost
in many ways. It may be narrowed to speak the opinions of a sect -- or, it may
be widened to speak the opinions of the world -- or it may be lost in morals;
when instead of preaching plainly, and simply on gospel-subjects, our
discourses, with scriptural mottoes affixed, are short immethodical essays; in
which the beginning can hardly be distinguished from the end -- nor indeed what
is aimed at, till the book is closed, just as the audience may suppose the
subject will open.

There is another thing also, which often occasions our erring from the
simplicity, which is in Christ. As the gospel is a covenant between God and
man, it touches, of course, on such things, as relate to both. As far as it
relates to God, it is, no doubt, a deep, mysterious subject; but as far as it
relates to man, nothing can be more simple, and easy. Hence it is, that our
religion, without any contradiction of terms, (peace be to all skeptical
cavils!) is sometimes called the mystery of godliness; and sometimes the
simplicity of the gospel. It is the mystery of godliness, as it relates to
God's part in this gracious plan; and the simplicity of the gospel, as it
relates to us. To the want of sufficient attention to this easy distinction
perhaps arise not only many of the disputes, and misconceptions, and infusions
of worldly wisdom, which have so often disgraced the gospel: but also much of
that strange, unaccountable confusion of ideas, that perplexes, and confounds
the understanding of the lower people. If the lost condition of man -- his
restoration, and redemption by Christ -- the necessity of a holy life -- the
tendency of the gospel to make him happy both here, and hereafter -- and other
plain points, had generally been the subjects of popular discourses, we should
not have had now that gross ignorance in matters of religion, and that variety
of strange notions, and prejudices to combat; which we find amongst the common
people, on all religious subjects; but especially on the sacrament of the
Lord's supper. As nothing is more difficult than to eradicate old prejudices;
nothing would have been more easy than to have prevented their getting ground
at first. The plain truths of the gospel might have descended just as easily as
misconception and error.

It should be our care then to accommodate our doctrine, as much as we can, to
the simplicity that is in Christ -- not to dwell upon it is mysterious parts --
not to enter into the inquiries, how? and why? -- nor to clog it with
difficult, or refined questions; against which the apostle to Timothy, long
ago, took abundant pains to guard us; but to preach it, as we are directed,
with plainness -- to lay the stress on it is obvious truths -- and when we have
occasion to mention a mysterious point, (one of those great points, which
relate to God's part in the covenant of grace, rather than to man's) to be very
careful of going too far -- to keep as close as possible to scripture, lest we
make a difficulty more difficult by endeavoring to explain, what cannot be
explained. The less, in general, that is said on such points, the better. --
One thing we should always remember; and that is to adapt our discourses to the
lower, rather than the higher parts of our audience; that we may, like good
ministers, dispense that gospel; whose peculiar characteristic it was, to be
preached to the poor.

I shall close this head, with the account, which an ancient heathen of the
fourth century gives of the mode of preaching the gospel in his day. The
christian philosophy, says he, is very simple. It Is principal concern is to
regulate the manners of men; and to infuse worthy notions of the Deity. Obscure
questions, and nice arguments, it avoids. Nor does it enter into the nature and
foundation of virtue: but exhorts, in a general way, to the practice of it;
which experience shows us is more effectual among the vulgar See Lardner's
Testimonies from Alexander of Lycopolis. Vol. IV. p. 11.
.

Tho this honest heathen had not a complete idea of christianity, he seems
however to have had so good a notion of it, that many christian pastors might
take a lesson from him.

Our manners should be as simple as our doctrine.

But you ask, what is simplicity of manners? It is a phrase of ambiguous
meaning.

Let us not here again, puzzle ourselves with definitions. They who seek for
close definitions on these subjects, I should fear, seek rather for evasion,
than information. The scriptures have little to do with definitions. On these
subjects, they speak to the heart, more than to the head. Whoever reads, with a
desire to learn, the instructions, which our Savior, and his apostles, give to
the ministers of the gospel, will soon feel -- unless indeed it be a point,
which he wishes to overlook -- not only in what the simplicity of our manners
should consist -- but also, that it should be our first, and most indispensible
care.

And the reason of the thing, as we are preachers of the gospel, is plain;
because the simplicity of our manners must give force to what we say. It is not
every body, with his best endeavor, who can get hold of the properest method
of communicating his ideas; or can practice that mode of application in his
discourses, either publicly, or privately, which may have the best effect upon
the people. But simplicity of manners is a mode of preaching, which makes up
many defects -- it is adapted to every capacity -- every body understands it;
and it adds a dignity, and consequence even to a discourse of less weight. Tho
the common people are no good reasoners, there is however one mode of
reasoning, at which they are very ready -- that of inferring doctrine from
manners: and they will not only make the latter a test of the former; but they
will in general pay more attention to it likewise.

When the city of Antioch was disposed to receive the gospel; and the apostle
Barnabas was sent from Jerusalem to promote the good work, which was there
carrying on, the people seem to have been particularly influenced by his holy
life; for he was a good man, says the apostolical historian, and full of the
Holy Ghost, and of faith -- and much people was added unto the Lord.

On the other hand, the purest doctrine will lose it is effect, among the common
people at least, in proportion as they see their minister pay less attention to
it himself. That apostolical apostrophe, Thou that preachest to others,
teach thou not thyself? will ever be the language of popular contempt.

There is another kind of contempt also, which every consistent man would
particularly wish to avoid -- and that is his own contempt of himself. What
must that man's feelings be, whose life is spent in a continued variance with
those truths, which he is obliged to preach? who must tell his hearers of
governing their undue affections; and yet lets his own loose in all the
vanities of a dissipated age? who must talk of the world as a pilgrimage: while
every action of his life shows it to be his carnal home? who is obliged to
preach the glories of a future state, and the joys of heaven: while his own
happiness is plainly centered in worldly ambition, and worldly attentions? --
Contempt abroad may be borne, if a man feel from the uprightness of his own
heart, that he does not deserve it: but there is no refuge from contempt within
-- unless a man is past feeling, and sets at defiance the remonstrances even of
common decency.

How far the minister of the gospel should keep at a distance from the world --
from it is ambitious views -- it is interests -- and it is party-contentions --
how far he should stand aloof from it is pleasures; and abstain from many
amusements, which tho perhaps innocent in themselves, may, (at least when
countenanced by him,) have a tendency to break down the fences of religion, are
questions -- not proper indeed for me to determine: but very proper for every
churchman to examine seriously in his own conscience. It is becoming surely
that the ministers of a religion, which so entirely disclaims the world, should
endeavor at least not to be much entangled in it. A morose character is not
the alternative. Cheerfulness is the natural companion of religion. Sourness is
an alien intruder. Amusements too are necessary: but I am not singular in
thinking those amusements should rather be of the retired kind; than sought for
amidst the noise, and bustle of the world. Riot, and excess generally attend
the amusements of a number of people assembled with a purpose of being joyous;
and what none would do alone, is not scrupled perhaps, where the impropriety
(which, by the way, deserves often a severer name) is divided among a
multitude. In scenes like these, the clerical habit is a blot: the clerical
character, a still greater. I would not be thought harsh: I would not be
thought uncomplying. The world, I know, is often shocked at hearing the
precepts of the gospel opposed, in all their plainness, to the elegant
fashions, which it adopts: and we are sometimes almost afraid, in our popular
discourses, of opening gospel truths so fully as we might; lest by saying more
than the times will bear, we should injure a cause, which we wish to advance.
Our blessed Lord himself was often obliged to speak in parables. But let the
world, if it please, be the deaf adder, which stops it is ears, there need be
no apology surely for recommending gospel truths in the plainest manner to the
ministers of the gospel.

But the clerical character may be a check upon improprieties.

I should fear, not much. As we have the example however of our blessed Lord,
who kept company with publicans, and sinners with a view to reform them;
nothing farther can be said, if this be the real motive: tho to me it appears
risking more, than the probability of advantage will insure.

After all, my brethren, it may be an easy matter, in an age of license, to
satisfy ourselves -- if we make the comparison only with others: but I hope
this is a kind of satisfaction, and a kind of comparison, in which none of us
would willingly acquiesce. We talk of sectaries, and novel teachers; and cry,
the people have itching ears. Would to God, no blame in this matter may rest
upon ourselves! To speak with truth and candor, there does not seem, in
general, to be so much simplicity, and propriety of manners amongst us, as
there appears to be amongst several of our dissenting brethren.

But propriety of manners is the dissenter's chief support. It is his worldly
engine: and therefore his motives may be as worldly as ours.

They may, or may not be, for any thing we know. We have nothing to do with any
motives but our own. It concerns us more to consider, whether certain truths
lie not nearer home? Whether the established churchman declines the heat of the
day, because his wages are double? Whether he spend his superfluity on the
vanities of life, because those wages are abundant? -- or, whether his manners
are more lax, because those wages are more certain? -- The harvest truly is
plenteous, but the laborers are few, was a complaint of great authority in
very early days -- Things are not mended I should suppose, now. It is
inconceivable how wrong the spiritual affairs of a parish get in a little time.
Habits of vice, and inattention to every thing serious, make a quick progress.
A few careless pastors, succeeding each other, leave a parish in a state of
heathenism; and it must be a work of time, and labor -- of length of time, of
accumulated labor, to recover it from it is supineness. A generation may be
lost; and no hope left but in a rising one -- Whereas, if the care of one
minister succeeded to that of another, each uniting simplicity of doctrine,
with simplicity of manners, in a few years a great change might be wrought.

Thus, my brethren, I have given you my thoughts on a subject -- not very
recondite indeed; but very interesting. It is a serious business -- a business
too, in which we have all voluntarily engaged. We have all put our hands to the
plough -- and we know the consequence of looking back. Let us then cheerfully
proceed; evermore uniting our prayers with our endeavors, that God would, of
his infinite mercy grant, we may both by our PREACHING, and LIVING, SET FORTH
his holy word, and SHOW it accordingly.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
End of page 18. Instead of but himself also, read but even himself.

End of page 23. Tho the first epistle of St. Peter must have been written to a
great body of people, dispersed, as they were, over so many countries
(consisting probably both of Jewish, and Gentile Christians; especially the
latter, as appears from the body of the epistle) yet it certainly was not
addressed to the whole people of these nations, as I have inadvertently
affirmed. The argument however is little affected. If among the twelve apostles
one was a devil -- if Ananias, and Sapphira could prevaricate so vilely even in
the face of the whole apostolic college -- we can hardly suppose, there were no
nominal Christians in so extensive, and dispersed a body.

Beginning of page 25. Instead of transgressed, read neglected.

End of page 27. Instead of look well to his motives, read look well, not only
to his opinions; but to his motives also.

By the same Author, and sold by R. BLAMIRE, in the Strand.
LIVES of several REFORMERS. LECTURES on the CATECHISM of the Church of
England. An ESSAY on PRINTS. PICTURESQUE REMARKS on several Parts of England.

