A WHIPPING FOR THE WELSH PARSON.

BEING A COMMENT ON THE REV. MR. EVAN LLOYD'S EPISTLE TO DAVID GARRICK, ESQUIRE. BY
SCRIBLERIUS FLAGELLARIUS.

TO WHICH IS SUPERADDED THE PARSON'S TEXT.

Vapula! Verbereum caput. PLAUT. Asin. et Per. LONDON: PRINTED FOR T. EVANS, IN
PATERNOSTER ROW.

M.DCC.LXXIII.

PREFACE.
IT is now full seven months since the following curious Epistle was advertised
in the public papers, and its speedy publication promised. We were then told
also, that the occasion of it was a late infamous attack on the character of
the Gentleman to whom it is addressed. See Morning Chronicle of July 25, 1772.
The length of time which has since elapsed, and that Gentleman's giving up his
own cause, naturally gave room to imagine that the delivery of a mountain, so
long in labor with a mouse, would be thought ridiculously superfluous. The
ingenious author, however, of "The Powers of the Pen -- The Curate -- Methodist
and Conversation, Price Two and Sixpence each." could not resist the powerful
temptation of adding another two-shilling sprig to his former bays. Hence,
after a truce declared, and the field of battle forsaken, steps forth this
reverend champion, to renew the fight, and slay the slain. Unhappily for him,
the disturbance he has thus given their ashes, seems to have provoked their
ghosts to seek an avenger in the person of that learned commentator Scriblerius
Flagellarius; who makes no other apology for the insignificancy of his Comment,
than the inanity of the Text; taking refuge under the old adage: Ex nihilo,
nihil fit. Some apology, indeed, may seem necessary for supperadding a copy of
the Parson's text whole and entire; and would be really so, were it the
property of the publisher. But, as we find the original is printed on the
author's own account, and he might suffer more in his reputation, by our
printing only mutilated extracts of his performance, than he would in his
pocket from our printing the whole, we thought ourselves bound in justice to
prefer his fame, as an author, to his profit, as a bookseller. At the same time
we held it incumbent on us, in justice to the public, to set a less price on
the Text and Comment together, than he has done on the Text alone: because,
admitting, as above, the inanity or nothingness of both, we know, as adepts in
Algebra, that negative quantities added together produce a sum so much the less
in value as the co-efficients increase in number. Modesty, however, having
induced us to value our Comment at but half the price of the Text, we have
stated the value of both together at a fourth less; agreeable to calculation;
for - 2 x added to - x is = to - 3 x = to eighteen-pence. Q. E. D

A WHIPPING FOR THE WELSH PARSON.
THE PARSON'S TEXT.
EPISTLE TO DAVID GARRICK, ESQUIRE.
WHEN from his dewy throne, and pensile bowers,
To the green ^^p of earth in genial showers,
Prolific Jov^ ^^scends, all germens spring,
Blythe are the mountains, and the valleys sing;
Benignant N^^^e smiles, and breathes perfume,
And all around (...) Paradise in bloom!
But it is on gen^^^l laws the God proceeds,
And, flowers first cherished, not forgets the Weeds,
While Sharon's roses purple over the land,
The barren thistle feels his fost'ring hand.
In these enlightened days, not less benign
The Sun of Learning deigns on all to shine;
With generous warmth it nourishes the root
Of Genius, ripening into classic fruit;
In wasteful bounty too its beams are spread
Over the dry region of a dunce's head.
Those summer rays that nectar'd grapes produce,
Concoct the hemlock's deleterious juice;
So that bright sun, prime nourisher of wit,
Which burns in Burke, in Littelton and Pit,
Obliquely glances on the leaden pate
Of every babbling blockhead of the state.
Many and great the evils which have slow'd
From b^essings thus promiscuously bestowed!
Often have we seen with grief the blushing rose
By poisonous neighbors mildew'd as it blows;
As often genius in its vernal bloom,
From envy's blight receives untimely doom.
Among proverbial saws by wisdom sealed,
Which by truth's oracles have been revealed,
Be this recorded -- for it is nature's law --
Fairness will foulness ever to it draw;
While lust or envy urge, with equal joy,
The fiend to ravish beauty, or destroy.
To find in this the depth of heaven's design,
For metaphysic heads be le^^ -- not mine.
Essences, causes, substance, entity,
Be theirs -- the beaten track of facts for me.
Let us, my ROSCIUS, freely let us rove
Through Flora's gay parterre, or through the grove
Where 'midst her mellow clusters brooding's seen,
Pomona, fruitful mother, Autumn's queen;
Wherever the garden's winding leads our feet,
Proofs of my text on every plant we meet.
Or should we range to city, court, or vale,
No spot we find, where new examples fail.
Upon the fairest fruit banditties throng
Of wasps, who sing and riot while they wrong,
The downy peach, the bloom-suffused plumb
Proclaim their wrongs with bleeding mouths though dumb;
The deep intrenchment on the luscious pear
Shows that some greedy spoiler has been there.
Attentive let us view this pearly rose
Its virgin beauties to the morn disclose;
Its clasping foilage opened to the light,
Green coated gnats, almost too small for sight,
Swarm myriads-thick, like motes in solar ray,
On embrio buds, and infant leaves to prey.
The world of letters more prepost'rous still,
Is but one scene of good pursued by ill.
Dunces, like owls, can only bear the night,
No crime so great with them, as being bright.
Genius and parts to dullness give offense,
And blockheads hunt them down in self-defence.
When Junius, bright with all Apollo's rays,
Beams on the town a more than common blaze,
All Grub-Street's up in arms! its reptile breed
Of worms that spell, and some that almost read,
Among the laurels crawl which round him twine,
And all their powers to canker them combine;
But chief the arch-critic caterpillar -- He
So famed for pride, long words, and pedantry!
A thousand feet to move his vast weight strive,
A thousand feet! and half of them alive!
But strive in vain! though on each foot the spur
Of Envy goads the unwieldly worm to stir;
Too little all to speed him on his way,
Though all his hairs have stomach for the prey.
A pension now her golden charms displays,
The Siren conquers, a^^ old Grub obeys.
A pension (and what cannot pensions do?)
Proclaimed for him who shall this foe subdue,
Draws the long reptile forth the war to meet,
A task too mighty for a thousand feet!
Onward he crawleth, like a gouty snail,
Cowards to fight, or felons to a jail.
"Vengeance is mine -- the Exchequer will repay, --
"And Vengeance shall be surfeited today --
" My troop of feet shall wade through Junius' blood,
"And N -- triumphant stem the crimson flood."
-- So vaunts old Grub -- but all his menaced harm
Ends in the nothing of a False Alarm.
The illustrious foe he slavers with his bile,
But acts, poor worm! the Viper and the File.
When in the brilliant circle of St. James,
Amelia's beauties set the court in flames;
The Macaroni butterflies beset
This flower so fair, and would without regret
Its whiteness blot, but Nature gave these things
No power to stain, except their mealy wings.
Say then, my ROSCIUS, while Apollo's hand
Around your temples twines a verdant band,
Would you excepted be from Nature's law,
Retain your honors, and no envy draw?
Would you the muses should your genius clasp,
And shine Parnassus' pride without a wasp?
Can you, I know you cannot, think it fair,
To be Melpomene's, Thalia's heir;
To revel in the favors of the nine,
And wear the wreathe, which they unite to twine,
From the coy maids be favored with a kiss,
Feel the warm raptures of Pierian bliss,
And yet forbid that Envy's snakes should hiss;
While on a sea of glory thus you swim,
And pleasure flows in tides that drown the brim,
Shall not the outcast floundering on the beach,
Malign those blessings which he cannot reach?
Conscience, good ROSCIUS, -- Nature must prevail,
And it is the Wretch's privilege to rail.
What is it to you, though spleen-struck bards prepare,
And for the worth that hurts them spread the snare?
Erom dungeons dark and deep their vipers call,
Warm at their heart and feed them with their gall;
Give the sweet creatures, like a foundling nurse,
Envy's panado, and the pap of curse,
Till with recruited venom strong they feel,
Then turn them loose at your mercurial heel,
What is it to you? -- You still may laugh and sing,
Despise the reptiles, and defy their sting.
What though upon the temple's sacred walls,
Brothel obscenity each miscreant scrawls,
Can such blaspheming documents of sin,
Pollute the altar's purity within?
While envy's fever burns, the raving bard
What or against whom he writes pays no regard,
With venomed heart he paints the vilest crime
In vilest words, and in the vilest rhyme;
Delirious runs about the crowded streets,
And turns to Pasquin's statue all he meets;
His glass inverts each object that he sees,
Tears from their carth-bound roots the firmest trees,
The top to base converting -- with a toss
St. Paul's it fixes on its golden cross;
Makes topsy-turvy tumblers upright tread,
Bishops and Judges walk upon their head:
Viewed through his glass, the eye of heaven's not bright,
But from the glow-worm's tail should borrow light;
And if we judge by his reversing rule,
A blockhead Lowth, and Shipley is a fool;
Shakespeare wants nature, learned The reader is desired to observe, that Dr.
Samuel Johnson is not meant here -- but Old Pen -- as the author would hold
himself inexcusable if he was capable of bringing the former into Shakespeare's
company, since the publication of his edition of that immortal bard.
Johnson art,
Brutus and Wilkes a patriotic heart:
A driv'ling stammerer, no better, Pit,
And you to cry fresh oysters scarcely fit --
-- At merit thus his giddy censures sly,
Till in the flame of truth, like moths, they die.
Among the various blessings mortals know,
A worthy friend we place, and worthless foe;
No key a character more truly shows,
Than rolls authentic both of friends and foes.
When with a pen that blunts the tooth of time,
And gives to merit everlasting prime,
Some future Plutarch, great high priest of fame,
In her eternal dome inscribes thy name,
And decks it with such plentitude of praise,
That thy shade almost bends beneath the bays,
Wou'd'st thou he should a nettle among them blend,
And damn thy same with -- Bavius was his friend?
But let not anger, hasty judge, decree
That all he did was done in enmity;
To candour's eye another look it wears,
Ill-blood perhaps, and not ill will he bears;
His verse may be the strangury of wit,
And when the rym'ster's in the burning fit,
It Is writhing, straining, grunting, groan, and grin,
Daemoniac symptoms of the fiend within;
Hard! after all his pangs and throes, to think
No drop of wit was voided in his ink!
Wit or no wit, he will satires write and write,
Although he spoils this pretty maxim by it,
"It Is proper power to hurt each creature feels,
"Bulls aim their horns, and asses lift their heels."
A simple truth in nature's earlier day,
And man, bird, beast, each proved it in his way;
Now the reverse may be as truly said,
Bavius the ass assails US with his head,
The length of ear that slouches from his skull,
For horns he takes, and butts like baited bull.
Though all his fancied terrors should be sped
With tenfold rage at thy devoted head,
Envy's career unheeded let him run --
-- A pigmy's breath cannot blow out the sun --
Among the thousand gifts on men bestowed
Though precious all, and worthy of a God,
Supremely gracious is the firm defense
Of CONSCIOUSNESS, assigned to INNOCENCE --
Secure in this impenetrable shield,
Against the world's malice virtue takes the field.
Legions of dev'ls, with Satan at their head,
Or his Lieutenant Mendax in his stead,
Their fiery darts may hurl with fruitless aim,
Upon her Aegis dies each pointed flame.
How firm this moral shield your bosom knew,
When slander's quiver was discharged at you.
If on a master-work of genius bent,
Nature her choicest qualities has lent,
'The body formed of elements so wrought
As almost give the faculty of thought,
The soul with every touch of every mind,
Impressed so true, HE is himself mankind:
When this accomplished legate's sent to teach
Our hearts to feel, what precept cannot reach,
While more distress than real sufferings show,
His feeling soul sustains from fabled woe,
Should peevish Fate, grown envious of his fame,
It Is arrows point or at his life or name,
Where shall a medicine so rare be found,
Of power to salve the rankling of the wound,
And soothe the heart, to bleed for others prone,
But bleeding now with sorrows of its own?
Doubly nectareous should the verse distill,
In streams melodious each poetic rill
Should numerous flow, to give Lethaean rest
To the perturbed spirit in his breast;
But guilt can never into peace be sung,
Though with Apollo's hair the lyre were strung --
While innocence not needs a balm like sin,
And you that conscious witness bear within!
Pleasant! to see how Envy's self-defeat
Turns into favor, what was done in hate!
The nettles which she plants convert to bays,
For Envy's slander is "a kind of praise."
The Grubstreet laureate brands each honored name
With yours, and thus reviles you into fame.
A fellow-feeling spares the dim and dark,
And shining merit's the devoted mark,
At which he levels his envenomed darts;
Show him but "men of choice and rarest parts,
"That each particular of duty know,"
That each particular of duty do;
Who pillars to their country daily prove,
And as they best deserve, enjoy its love:
If the whole poem was not execrably dull, and offensively dirty, the reader
would be desired to peruse the wretched lines, together with the injudicious
and illiberal notes, in Love in the Suds, on those eminent barristers John
Dunning and James Mansfield, Esqrs.
COMMENT ON THE NOTE.] To save the reader the trouble and mortification of
looking into a poem so execrably dull, we shall quote the very wretched lines
and illiberal notes in question.

By Zoilus, throws the wretch into the spleen;
His talent at mistaking good for evil
In this a fool, in that discerns a devilish.
Forgive the muse that labors to adorn
Your head with roses, if she add a thorn,
If with a gentle hand one fault she chide,
One giant fault, which friendship cannot hide!
Audacious Garrick! in these touchy times,
Where airy dreams against majesty are crimes;
What more than Cromwell's fire could thee impell,
Against FLEET-DITCH' jus stercoreum to rebel?
That ancient kingdom still maintains its sway,
And now is guarded by a covered way.
Its monarch, seated on a throne of mud,
Tribute receives from the polluted flood;
From scavengers, his treas'ry lords he takes
Custom of common sew'rs, and toll of jakes;
His claim to these his writings all declare,
And leave to Cloacine a second share.
When this beluted prince politely begs
Your kind acceptance of some rotten eggs,
Filth of all sorts, and to improve their sweets,
Adds the rich sweepings of Gomorrah's streets;
Shall thy fastidious spirit dare refuse,
And both the giver and the gift misuse?
His well-bred courtesy disdainful spurn,
And talk of pillory as the return?
-- Ungrateful Garrick! -- But it is time to breathe,
And ere more ink is shed, the quill to sheathe --
Soft ye -- the muse must now (her letter penned)
Like other ladies with a postscript end;
Like other ladies place the business there,
As stoutest soldiers fortify the rear.
POSTSCRIPT.
Once when the fire-ey'd regent of the day,
From Sirius shot to earth a fervid ray,
The puny fluttering insects of the shade,
Too weak to bear the radiant god displayed,
A joint remonstrance buzzed -- and to the sky
Sent their high wills by the Recorder-fly;
"Call forth thick clouds this fervor to abate,
"There Is no enduring such transcendent heat. --
The pert demand of the remonstrant sly,
Drew from the god a smile, and this reply --
" -- Flutter your hour when to the west I Am gone,
"But pray, great Sir, excuse my shining on. --
So thou, bright son of Merit and of Fame,
Wh^le thy meridian darts its wonted flame,
Scorching the eyes of literary gnats,
Theatric beetles, and be-doctor'd bats,
Let these obscene dim children of the night,
Their malice club to execrate thy light,
Regardless of the darklings, be it thine,
With undiminish'd luster still to shine.
FINIS.
COMMENT.
The Author not having given us the argument of his Epistle, we shall begin the
business of his Scholiast, by endeavoring to make it out as well as we can,
for the convenience of the prosaic reader.

ARGUMENT OF THE TEXT.
As in the physical or natural world the sun cherishes alike both weeds and
flowers, so in the world of letters the sun of learning shines alike, both on
the scholar and the dunce, on the genius and the blockhead. [From the beginning
to line 22.] Many and great are the evils which have followed this promiscuous
dispensation of natural and literary blessings. [l. 22 to 27.] According to the
wisdom of ages, and the laws of nature, it is a received maxim, that opposites
attract opposites; as FAIRNES; Foulness, and so forth. The depth of Heaven's
design in this is left to be sounded by the metaphysicians. [l. 27 -- 36.]
Facts alone are abided by, and the wasps, worms and flies, that prey upon our
peaches and pears, are shown to be a natural evil, and a vile blunder in the
system of Providence. [l. 36 -- 38.] The world of letters is still more
preposterous than that of nature; dunces and blockheads constantly hunting down
men of parts and genius. [l. 58 to 64.] Thus that old Grub and ministerial
pensioner, the author of the False Alarm [hight Dr. Sam. Johnson] endeavored
to hunt down the well-known JUNIUS. [l. 64 -- 100.] And thus must thou,
immortal Roscius, favored by all the nine, expect to be hunted up and down.
Nor can thou repine, while revelling in the embraces of the coy maids, at
being subject to the hissing of the snakes of Envy. [l. 100 -- 134.] While
Envy's fever burns, the raving bard, Bavius, with venomed heart, paints the
vilest crime, in vilest words, in the vilest rhyme; [that is the author of
Leap-Frog, hight -- Shirley, Esquire.] tosses up St. Paul's, and sets it
topsy-turvey on its golden cross. It is thus he turns every thing arsey-versey;
even putting the all-seeing eye of Heaven into the blind eye of a glow-worm's
tail. It is thus he makes Bishop Lowth a blockhead -- Dan Shakespeare unnatural
-- Orator Pit a stammerer, and thou, great Roscius, a toothess old
oyster-woman! [l. 134 -- 153.] Would thou be pleased that, when a future
Plutarch [probably meaning Parson W -- s, author of as curious a prose Epistle
to D. G. Esquire.] shall usher thee into the temple of Fame, he should damn thy
reputation, by placing Bavius [author of Leap-Frog] in the next niche, as thy
friend? [l. 153 -- 167.] And yet Candor will excuse even Bavius, upon coolly
reflecting on the present strange topsey-turvey state of nature; for, though
formerly bulls butted with their horns, and asses kicked with their heels; man,
bird and beast each following the dictates of nature; it is now quite
otherwise; Bavius, the ass, instead of lifting his heel, kicking us with his
head. [l. 167 -- 185.] Yet thou, immaculate Roscius, need'st fear nothing, not
even a legion of devils, with their Captain Satan, or their Lieutenant-Captain
Mendax, at their head, being possessed of conscious innocence and the
impenetrable shield of VIRTUE. [l. 185 -- 203.] Thou have nothing to do but to
listen to my numerous, melodious and nectareous verse; which flows to give
Lethaean rest to that perturbed spirit in thy breast; which, secured by virtue
and innocence, does nothing but laugh and sing; while guilt can never be lulled
to rest, though by a Welsh harp, strung with the harmonious locks of Apollo.
[l. 203 -- 227.] It is pleasant to see repulsed the feeble attacks of that
Grubstreet-laureate, Zoilus, author of Love-in-the-Suds [hight Dr. Kenrick]
monarch of Fleet-ditch, and Usurper of the throne of Cloacina; whose cleanly
revenues he receives, like another Roman Emperor, from the hands of scavengers.
[227 -- 275.]

POSTSCRIPT.
Thou art the sun, to whom the fly was once sent ambassador, from the insects,
who could not bear thy meridian glory. Thou scorchest the eyes of literary
gnats, theatric beetles and be-doctor'd bats; darklings, obscene, dim children
of the night, who club their malice to execrate thy light; being unable to
shine, till thou art retired behind the scenes, in "Thetis' lap to rest." [l.
275 ad ult.]



Line 20. The curiosa felicitas, or happy choice of words, and chastity of
metaphor, for which our reverend author is so eminently distinguished, begin
already to manifest themselves. So that bright sun, prime nourisher of wit,
Which burns in Burke, in Lyttelton and Pit.
This is the first time, we believe, that the flaming brightness or burning
heat of the sun, has been mistaken for that genial warmth by which it nourishes
either fruits or flowers.

It is with peculiar propriety also that our reverend bard has particularized
the great patriot Mr. Pit, as one of those on whom the sun of learning has so
beneficently shone. The profundity of this great patriot's erudition, indeed,
appears to singular advantage in his literary productions; which, to use the
just distinction of Lord Pomfret, are written in the liberal style of a
gentleman, and not with that grammatic propriety which betrays the vulgar pen
of a literary mechanic.

Line 24. What a pity! To be sure, it is a great evil that the sun shines alike
on the wise and the foolish; "on the just and the unjust." It is to be hoped
the next time our wise Parson gets into the pulpit, he will expunge this
blunder from the sacred text, and correct such a gross error in the laws of
nature.

Line 34. In what book of Proverbs, or by what law of nature, the bard has made
this discovery, we are at a loss to guess. Aristotle in his Ethics tells us,
Semper similem ducit deus ad similem; and again, to use his own words, (...).
In the proverbial sayings of all ages and countries, we shall find also, that "
like loves like." "Birds of a feather flock together," etc. Fairness and
Foulness therefore are repulsive and not attractive; things homogeneous only
attracting each other; agreeably to the true system of the Newtonian
philosophy. The truth of the matter seems to be this: the Parson had somewhere
read Envy will Merit as its shade pursue.
But then the poet adds It like a shadow proves the substance true.
Because there can be no shadow without a substance; but then our ingenious
Master of Arts forgot that the shadow bears a resemblance to the substance and
does not differ from it as foul does from fair; as this divine poet, or rather
poetical divine, has above so roundly asserted.

Line 42. What elegance of imagery do we find in this description of Pomona,
fruitful mother, Autumn's queen; represented here, as spreading her vegetable
petticoats, the vine or the fig-leaf, to preserve her mellow clusters, from the
depredation of those desperate banditti the wasps, whom he satirizes so wittily
and severely for their immoral and scandalous behavior in being beforehand
with him in the robbery of orchards.

Line 47. We should be glad to know, why our poet, on whom the sun of learning
has doubtless deigned to shine, as well as on Burke, Lyttelton and Pit, has
here added the plural close, common to English words, to that of Banditti, as
if its ending in s were necessary to make it plural. The singular of Banditti,
in English, is Bandit, from the French, or Banditto, from the Italian. Thus
Milton. No savage fierce Bandit, or mountaineer.
And Shakespeare, A Roman sworder, and Banditto slave.
But perhaps our learned Master of Arts might, by Banditties, mean a number of
different companies, or ruffian bands of Banditti: but a band and a Bandit are
different words. The author's ignorance, therefore, is obvious; the word
Banditti being never used as a noun of multitude in the singular number, and
therefore cannot be made plural, like band, or other English words, by the
usual termination in s. What a pretty Master of Arts! Really, friend Evan, you
should be sent to school again, to con your accidence.

Line 48. For "Wasps, who sing" -- we should certainly read "Wasps who sting. "
-- Of stinging wasps we have heard: but of singing wasps never. This we should
have thought an error of the press, but for the reason assigned in the next
note.

Line 50. Our author seems to entertain a violent resentment, if not a rooted
antipathy, against the whole ferae naturae. We should, however be glad to know
by whom, according to his system of religion and morals, they were laid under
any moral obligation, and to whom they are accountable. The downy peach, the
bloom-suffused plumb,
that bloom-suffused is a happy epithet! Proclaim their wrongs with bleeding
mouths, though dumb.
From a dumb mouth must certainly proceed a silent proclamation; which must, of
course, also, be just as curious as intelligible. Our poet seems, indeed, here
to be as good a naturalist as he is a moralist and divine: but as we,
Scriblerius Vapularius, are strangers to the physical sensation and moral
sentiment of vegetables, we are at a loss to guess at his meaning, either
religious, philosophical, or moral.

Line 60. What a happy discovery, and how worthy a protestant divine, that the
system of Providence is a preposterous system! It is no wonder, if he found
such absurdity prevail in the system of nature, that he should find more in a
system of art.

Line 62. This crime of being bright is certainly a very capital one, though it
is not likely our author will ever be found guilty of it.

Line 64. By this rhyme of offense and defense, it seems as if our poet had
entered into a league offensive and defensive against English versification.

Line 68. We have heard of book-worms, natural and metaphorical, but they are
such as devour books, instead of reading them. As to a spelling worm, we never
heard of such a reptile either in the natural or literary system. Our author's
spelling worm appears also to be, at the same time, a mere garden grub, who
cankers the laurels of the poet, while he is spelling his verses.

Line 72. The chief grub having, undergone its metamorphosis, is now become a
caterpillar. We find, however, that his transformation is but partial; he being
still famed for long words and pedantry. This is the first time we have known a
caterpillar reproached with the use of the sesquipedalia. Had our poet called
Dr. Johnson, the person here alluded to, a caterpillar or grub-worm critic, the
metaphor would have been preserved: but he cannot be at once a human hog and a
hog-horse.

Line 76. These thousand feet would be applicable enough to the critic,
considered as a millepedes, or wood-louse, instead of a worm, or caterpillar;
though it be whimsical to think an insect should carry spurs on its feet, to
goad itself. As the text stands, however, our Master of Arts seems so learned a
naturalist, as not to know a grub from an earwig.

Line 85. We shall leave the Doctors Cadogan, Hill, and Ingram, to decide
whether snails can be afflicted with the gout or not; and if not to some future
critic to discuss the propriety of this epithet. But we, must not omit to
observe that, for want of grammatical construction, in these two lines, Onward
he crawleth, like a gouty snail,
Cowards to fight, or felons to a jail,
The last is downright nonsense; unless the poet meant to make sense of half of
it, by saying he crawleth to fight cowards; for which, by the way, he does not
seem to have occasion for a thousand feet.

Line 95. We never heard that the Apostle, or any Saint of the name of James;
kept his court, or was surrounded with a brilliant circle at his levee. Our
poetical parson must certainly mean, therefore, the brilliant circle in the
drawing room or presence chamber, at St. James's; so that the above lines,
instead of running as above, should be corrected, and stand as under, When in
the brilliant circle of St. James's
Amelia's beauties set the court in flames's.


Line 100. Query, Does the poet mean that Nature has given butterflies power
only to stain their mealy wings? or to stain any thing else with, or by means
of, their mealy wings? If the former, he has written nonsense; if the latter,
false grammar.

Line 106. The muses clasping the genius of Roscius, and his shining Parnassus'
pride without a wasp, is something beautifully metaphorical, if it were but
intelligible. It is pity that clasp and wasp are not the best of rhimes. Rasp
or hasp would have mended the sound and could not have marred the sense.

Line 112. This revelling in the savor of the nine, must be attended also with
a singular kind of beatitude; especially if the maids are still so coy as to
confine their savours to a simple kiss. And yet this, perhaps, is as much as he
ought to wish for; since, though he might possibly be able to deflower, he
could never satisfactorily enjoy them.

Line 115, Of Roscius's swimming on a sea of glory, one may form some idea, by
seeing the buoy at the Nore ride over the waves, at all times of the tide; or
to adapt more properly my simile to the subject, by seeing the float of a
fishing-line dance upon the surface of the water, till some gudgeon bite at the
hook. But what is to be understood by the tides of pleasure drowning the brim
of the sea of glory, we must leave to the sagacity of happier scholiasts.

Line 119. We have frequently heard that losers have leave to rail; but why the
loser is to be called a wretch, because the winner is a rascal, we do not
comprehend. But perhaps the good Roscius can inform us why the author of Edward
the Black Prince has reason to rail. Did that conscientious manager ever pick
his pocket of five hundred pounds, in the same infamous manner as he did that
of the author of Falstaff's Wedding?

Line 129. It would indeed be a wiser way than to run to hireling pleaders and
pettifogging attorneys, to avenge his cause, by proceedings little better than
the subornation of perjury.

Line 135. The raving bard here pointed at, seems to be the author of a
scandalous copy of verses, entitled Leap-Frog, descriptive of that dirty game,
published in the Public Ledger; the rhimes of which were certainly bad enough,
and worse than any we have ever seen, except those of our author.

Line 153. These are admirable lines and the comparison of Roscius to an
oyster-woman, very applicable to the criticisms on that great actor's playing,
published in the Gazeteer, before it became a vehicle to the puffs of the
manager. The prosopopeia or personification of such censures is also very
beautiful: it might have been mended, however, had the poet represented them as
wasps, gnats, or hornets; unless by moths he meant to allude to their picking
holes in the manager's coat.

Line 167. By no means. Let him not mention Bavius, but Maevius: not the
irreverend author of the Black Prince, but the reverend author of the Powers of
the Pen. Qui Bavium odit amet tua carmina Maevi. The friendship of so great a
poet as our Maevius, must redound to the honor of Roscius to the latest
posterity.

Line 171. This distinction between ill-blood and ill will is another instance
of our author's wonderful discoveries in physics and morality; or rather of
his dexterous use of that rhetorical trope, the metaphor. That bad blood should
produce a strangury of wit, is a circumstance, we believe, only known to our
author; unless by wit he means humor, and thinks all kinds of humor alike; in
which case, to be sure, a cachectic habit, arising from the abuse of the
non-naturals, may preduce a strangury of wit; with which master Evan, if he
ever had any wit, seems to be unhappily affected. Facit indignatio versus is an
old adage, and seems applicable to the hasty and turbulent ebullitions of ill
blood. Our author's appear to be the effect of ill will; cold blooded verses,
that have neither the heat of anger, for their excuse on the one hand, nor the
warmth of good will, to recommend them on the other.

Line 177. The Powers of the pen are most happily exerted in this description
of a costive poet, who Strains from hard-bound brains a line a day.

His pangs and throes are also so feelingly expressed, that they
demonstratively prove the situation to be our author's own case; as indeed it
is confirmed by the seven months labor of the present production -- Instead of
no drop of wit, we should read no bit of wit, etc. for, supposing wit a fluid,
be it ever so brilliant and pellucid, it would mix and be undiscoverable in the
muddy medium of an author's ink-stand. Besides the bit and the wit are so pit
pat to our author's knack at alliteration, that nostro periculo, we will
venture to declare the printer must have made a blunder.

Line 185. What wonder, when every thing both in the natural and moral world is
confessedly turned topsy turvey! It is by no means more unnatural, or out of
character, than to see a reverend divine kiss the backside of a stage player!

Line 187. This butts like baited bull, is beautifully alliterative and
idiomatical. It is a pity it puts us so much in mind of Quince and Bully
Bottom; with the -- blade the bloody blameful blade
That bravely broached his boiling bloody breast.


Line 193. Bestowed and God make another curious rhyme. Indeed there is not a
page in the Parson's text without one or two equally curious; witness skull and
bull in the present; an excellent rhyme!

Line 197. Against the world's malice virtue takes the field! What a flowing,
numerous, melodious and nectareous line is this! It is to be equalled only by
the mellifluous and elegant ease of the following;

Legions of dev'ls, with Satan at their head. Line 203. True: for which reason
he flew, like the magnanimous Capt. Bobadil, to take satisfaction at law. The
impenetrable buckler of conscious innocence was not proof, till lined with the
tough parchment of the Crown Office. And yet conscious innocence did not choose
to trust its buff doublet, behind even this legal target, too far.

Line 209. That he, whoever he is, for the pronoun has no antecedent in the
context; we say, that he is of the human species, cannot be admitted; that he
has a soul, or that his soul is impressed with either the virtues or the vices
of humanity, WE deny. That, by his happy talent at mimickry, he takes them off
most admirably cannot be disputed; but we know that mimickry is characteristic
of an inferior kind of animals; so that we may justly say of this wonderful
imitator of mankind, that superior mortals Admire such mimicry in human shape,
And praise a Garrick as they praise an Ape.
That this animal has no soul, is notorious even to a proverb: and we hope our
parson is not, like Parson Horn, so great an infidel as to think mankind have
no souls.

Line 214. How is this! -- What does our protestant Parson believe in FATE? --
Peevish fate, dissatisfied with the choicest work of nature! -- We were too
precipitate in supposing him no atheist. The parson of Brentford is a novice to
him in pagan mythology. But perhaps he will quibble, and say a fatalist is no
atheist. Well, well, we will not dispute with him about words; let him no longer,
like his brother patriot, disgrace his profession, but throw off his parson's
gown, and we will set him down for a simple heathen.

Line 223. That is the perturbed spirit, which, secure behind the Aegis or
moral shield, of conscious innocence, could laugh and sing at the attack of
Bavius; and defy whole legions of devils with General Satan, or even his
Lieutenant (for he had seen Captains and Lieutenant Captains too) at their
head. What an admirable anti-climax has our poet borrowed from Tummas
Appletree and Coster Pearmain!

Line 225. This idea of a Welsh harp being strung with the carrotty locks of
Apollo, is apparently too a borrowed thought; for who does not see that this
device of Apollo's harmony lying in his hair, was suggested to him by Sampson's
strength lying in those curling locks; of which Dalilah so perfidiously
deprived him? Or, perhaps, our author, was thinking of his crowd, and the
harmony, which a little rosin rubs into the hair of a fiddle-stick!

Line 239. What a beautiful Epanalepsis is exhibited in these two lines! and
with what a happy Homoiteleuton do they close! The know and do are besides most
aptly allusive to the duty of the two barristers toward their old clients Do
and Roe; of whose names this lucky rhyme so naturally reminds us.

Line 241. The poet is not quite so happy here in the use of the metaphor. This
distinguished pair of learned counselors are represented as two pillars, the
daily support of their country, and at the same time enjoying its merited love.
The image is precisely that of a drunken patriot, tottering at the door of the
Hercules'-pillars or two blue-posts; which he hugs most cordially, for fear of
tumbling into the kennel. The satisfaction enjoyed by pillar or post, we leave
to be explained by the archetypes of such proper emblems.

Smooth-spoken Mansfield, Not the judge of that name, but the barrister, who is
by no means a judge.
with his vacant face,
In softening accents first shall open his case;
Which to defend, the want of Merlin's cunning
Shall be supplied by that of Grimbald Dunning. See King Arthur, lately revived
at Drury Lane Theater, and attend the pleadings in our courts of law and equity
at Westminster, Guildhall, and Lincoln's End.

It were difficult to exhibit a greater proof of stupidity than our Welsh bard
has done, in taking the above passages seriously. Is the one counselor a fool
because he is not a judge? Or the other a devil because he has got Grimbald's
unfortunate phyz? And yet when the one sets up for wisdom and the other for
beauty, a satirist need not be over and above splenetic, to call the one a
booby and the other a devilish ugly fellow.

As a farther specimen of the wretched Iines contained in the abovementioned
execrably dull poem, the reader will please to take the following, which its
author puts into the mouth of Roscius.

Curse on that K-NR-CK, soul of spleen and whim!
What are my puffs, and what my gains to him?
If poor and proud, can he of right complain
That wealthier men and wittier are as vain;
Why must he hint that I am past my prime,
To blast my fading laurels ere their time?
Death to my fame, and what, alas, is worse,
It Is death, damnation, to my craving purse;
Capacious purse! by PLUTUS formed to hold
(The God of wealth) the devil and all of gold.
Insatiate purse, that never yet ran over,
But swallows all, and gapes, like hell for more.
And yet, alas! how much the world will lie!
They call me miser; but no miser I;
He, brooding over his bags, delighted sits,
And laughs to scorn the jests of envious wits;
If fast his doors, he sets his heart at rest,
And dotes with rapture on his iron chest;
No galling paper-squibs his spirits teize,
But even the boys may hoot him if they please.
He scorns the whistling of an empty name,
While I am torn 'twixt avarice and fame;
While I, so tremblingly alive all over,
Still bleed and agonize at every pore;
At every hiss am harrowed up with fear,
And burst with choler at a critic's sneer.
Racked by the gout and stone, and struck with age,
Prudence and ease advise to quit the stage;
But Fame still prompts* and pride can feel no pain;
And Avarice bids me sell my soul for gain.
Line 246. And hard labor it is too, Heaven knows: and what is still worse, it
is likely, after all, to prove Labour-in-Vain!

Line 259. We shall not stand up for the cleanliness of Love in the Suds: the
washing-tub, though a necessary implement to cleanliness, is itself a dirty
subject, and we think the author did right, at any rate, to rid his hands of
it. Should we recur, however, to the news-paper altercation it gave rise to, we
shall find the Monarch of Drury Lane, even then, more deeply entrenched on his
throne of mud, than his antagonist, the Monarch of Fleet-ditch.

Since the abdication of the latter, also, the cleanly Roscius seems to have
succeeded to his rival, and at present to possess the throne of both kingdoms;
the publication before us being the third tributary pamphlet his mock majesty
has since received from his literary scavengers; who keep still throwing dirt
on the adversary, notwithstanding the proclamation of a peace. To preserve the
name of these stink-pots, would be doing too much honor to the wretches
employed in such dirty work; but lest their existence should be doubted, we
shall just mention their titles and authors. 1st, The Kenrickad, by that
literary trollop, Mrs. Brokes. 2d, The Recantation, etc. by that filthy Yahoo,
Paul Hiffernan. 3dly, Though last, not least of this goodly trio, the present
Epistle, by that forgiving and forgetting Christian Divine the Reverend Evan
Lloyd, Master of Arts.

We cannot help thinking that these repeated attacks on the enemy, after having
by agreement laid down his arms, would justify him in taking them up again. An
authentic account of the rise progress, and accommodation of the late dispute
between Dr. K. and Mr. G. seems indeed necessary for the justification of both.
For though the former has fully exculpated both himself and the latter,
respecting the odious insinuation, which various circumstances unluckily
contributed to cast on him, he has left it still extremely apparent, that a
manager of a theater may not be addicted to a particular vice, and yet be
notwithstanding a very great rascal.

Line 262. A beluted prince should rather seem one upon whom dirt is thrown,
than one accused of throwing, dirt.

Line 269. It was indeed but mere talk; his threats and vapouring being equally
impudent and impotent. So far, indeed, was the god of our parson's idolatry,
Mr. G. from choosing to proceed in his ridiculous prosesecution of the author of
Love-in-the-Suds: whose poetical attack on him was merely laughable and
ludicrous; that he thought proper to decline even the prosecution of the editor
of Leap Frog, in which he had been explicitly and directly charged with what
the former lampoon was mistakenly and falsely supposed to insinuate.

It is, on the whole, peculiarly modest in our Welsh Parson, to reproach the
author of Love-in-the-Suds for being a libeller; when he himself was not long
since convicted in the court of King's Bench, and committed to the prison of
that court, accordingly, for writing a libel; a libel too of the most
uncharitable and infamous kind, in a man of his sacred function; being levelled
at his neighbor, for exercising liberty of conscience in matters of religion
and morality. It was on this occasion he obtained from (...) Mansfield the
distinguishing appellation of THE WELSH PARSON.

Not that we mean, whatever his Lordship might do, to rouse the blood of
Cadwallader, by casting any ungentlemanlike reflection on the country of Welsh
bards. At the same time, nevertheless, we have not the vanity to think we shall
convict the present, of being the blockhead he really is, before a jury of his
own countrymen. The amor patriae, which burns in the breast of every ancient
Briton will effectually prevent it; as we are convinced by a story, once told
us by a Welsh judge; who, after summing up the evidence, against one of our
author's namesakes, accused of sheep-stealing, was answered pithily and
pertinently by the foreman of the jury, as follows: Your Lortship need not taak
so much trouple, as we shall find the prisoner not guilty; hur na^me is Lloyd,
and there never was a Lloyd hanged for sheep-taaking in our time, nor, py cot,
ever shall, so long as we are 'pon the chury!

Line 277. Candor obliges us to do justice to our author, in answer to the
impertinent censures of the Monthly and Critical reviews; the editors of which,
will next month proceed to take him to task in the manner following: What a
wise-acre is this Welsh bard, to suppose that the sun shoots its rays from
Sirius, i. e. the dog star, to the earth; when it is well known that Sirius is
27664 times farther from us than the sun, and that the fixed stars shine with
their own, and not a borrowed light. Our poetical divine, though born and bred
on the mountains of Wales, whence he might be supposed to have acquired a
nearer acquaintance with the heavens, shows himself to be very ignorant of the
science of astronomy. We would, therefore, recommend him to the perusal of
Ptolomy, Tycho Brahe, Kepler, Ricciolus, Cassini, De la Hire, and above all,
our learned countrymen Flamstead and Sir Isaac Newton.

With humble submission, however, to Goody Griffith and the Hodmandod, who may
have read all the above authors (that is, the names of them, in Tom Davies's
catalogue) our poet may know as much of astronomy as they do of criticism. It
is true that by Sc^ra, as it was called by the Arabs, (...) by the Greeks, and
Sirius among the Latins, is usually meant a star of the first magnitude in the
mouth of Canis major. It is of this star, as the scholiasts tell us, that
Virgil speaks, in the third book of his Aeneid, Steriles exurit Sirius agros;
and Lucan, Sirius exerit ignes rabidos. Again, nothing is more common with our
English poets, than to tell us, after the summer solstice, that Sirius the
dog star rages. But notwithstanding all this, our author seems to have the
advantage of the reviewers; for though the best authors mean by Sirius, the
dog star, some of the worst (as we are told by Hesychius the lexicographer, or
Hesychius the monk, for having neither, I cannot positively tell which)
sometimes means by Sirius the Sun. Now, though our author seems to have
betrayed a want of taste and discernment, in adopting the unclassical practice
of the corrupt ages of Latinity, yet we say he should not be censured for
reading bad Latin books, instead of good ones, by critics, who never were
capable of reading any at all, good, bad or indifferent.

Line 290. By literary gnats, our author is supposed to mean those troublesome
scribblers, that so constantly annoy his friend Roscius in the London and
Whitehall evening posts, together with those in the few morning papers which
are not under the management of the manager.

Line 291. By theatric beatles are supposed to be meant the proprietors and all
the players of Covent Garden theater; together with those even of Drury Lane,
who do not sacrifice to Moloch, and bow the knee to Baal. By be-doctor'd bats
are evidently meant those two ignorant and illiterate blockheads Doctor Samuel
Johnson and Doctor William Kenrick, not omitting perhaps even that mirror of
doctorship, Scriblerius Flagellarius ourself; inferior to neither Busbeius,
Bentleius, Budeus, Ruaeus, nor any other flagellator, ancient or modern. We
would therefore advise this truant divine to mend his manners, restrain his
petulance, and kiss the rod of our correction; lest he provoke a heavier
chastisement, and from hi present inanity, sink into still less than nothing,
beneath the weight of our castigation.

FINIS.

