THE TEARS OF AMARYLLIS FOR AMYNTAS. A PASTORAL. Lamenting the DEATH of The
late Lord Marquess of BLANFORD.

Inscribed to the Right Honorable the Lord GODOLPHIN, Lord High-Treasurer of
England.

By Mr. CONGREVE.

Qualis populea moerens Philomela sub umbra
Amissos queritur fetus --
-- miserabile Carmen
Integrat, and moestis late loca quaestibus implet.
Virg. Geor. 4. LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, within Gray's Inn Gate next
Gray's Inn Lane, 1703.

To the READER.
THESE Verses had been Printed soon after they were written, if they had not
been designed rather privately to Condole, than publicly to Lament; for it is
not pretended that they are in any kind equal to the Subject. But, by some
Accident, many Copies of 'em have been dispersed, and one, I was informed, had
been shown to a Bookseller. So that it was high time for me to prevent their
appearing with more Faults than their own, which might probably have met with
Increase, if not from the Malice or Ignorance, at least from the Carelessness
of an underhand Publisher.

I have particularly Reason at this time to apprehend the disingenuous
Proceeding of some such Person, having lately seen some Verses Printed, and
Entitled A Satyr against Love, Revised and Corrected by Mr. Congreve; who does
assure the Reader he never saw or heard of any such Verses before they were so
Printed, viz. without either the Name of the Author, Bookseller or Printer,
being Published after the manner of a Libel.

THE TEARS OF AMARYLLIS FOR AMYNTAS. A PASTORAL.
'TWAS at the Time, when new returning Light,
With welcome Rays begins to cheer the Sight;
When grateful Birds prepare their Thanks to pay,
And warble Hymns to hail the dawning Day;
When woolly Flocks their bleating Cries renew,
And from their fleecy Sides first shake the silver Dew.
'Twas then that Amaryllis, Heavenly Fair,
Wounded with Grief, and wild with her Despair,
Forsook her Myrtle Bower and Rosy Bed,
To tell the Winds her Woes, and mourn Amyntas dead.
Who had a Heart so hard, that heard her Cries
And did not weep? Who such relentless Eyes?
Tigers and Wolves their wonted Rage forego,
And dumb Distress and new Compassion show,
As taught by her to taste of Human Woe.
Nature her self attentive Silence kept,
And Motion seemed suspended while she wept;
The rising Sun restrained his fiery Course,
And rapid Rivers listened at their Source;
Even Echo feared to catch the flying Sound,
Lest Repetition should her Accents drown;
The very Morning Wind withheld his Breeze,
Nor fanned with fragrant Wings the noiseless Trees;
As if the gentle Zephyr had been dead,
And in the Grave with loved Amyntas laid.
No Voice, no whispering Sigh, no murmuring Groan,
Presumed to mingle with a Mother's Moan;
Her Cries alone her Anguish could express,
All other Mourning would have made it less.
Hear me, she cried, ye Nymphs and Silvan Gods,
Inhabitants of these once loved Abodes;
Hear my Distress, and lend a pitying Ear,
Hear my Complaint -- you would not hear my Prayer;
The Loss which you prevented not, deplore,
And mourn with me Amyntas now no more.
Have I not Cause, ye cruel Powers, to mourn?
Lives there like me another Wretch forlorn?
Tell me, thou Sun that round the World do shine,
Have thou beheld another Loss like mine?
Ye Winds, who on your Wings sad Accents bear,
And catch the Sounds of Sorrow and Despair,
Tell me if ever your tender Pinions bore
Such weight of Woe, such deadly Sighs before?
Tell me, thou Earth, on whose wide-spreading Base
The wretched Load is laid of Human Race,
Do thou not feel thy self with me oppressed?
Lie all the Dead so heavy on thy Breast?
When hoary Winter on thy shrinking Head
His lcy, Cold, depressing Hand has laid,
Have thou not felt less Chilness in thy Veins?
Do I not pierce thee with more freezing Pains;
But why to thee do I relate my Woe,
Thou cruel Earth, my most remorseless Foe?
Within whose darksome Womb the Grave is made,
Where all my Joys are with Amyntas laid.
What is it to me, though on thy naked Head
Eternal Winter should his Horror shed?
Though all thy Nerves were numm'd with endless Frost,
And all thy Hopes of future Spring were lost;
To me what Comfort can the Spring afford?
Can my Amyntas be with Spring restored?
Can all the Rains that fall from weeping Skies,
Unlock the Tomb where my Amyntas lies?
No, never! never! -- Say then, rigid Earth,
What is to me thy everlasting Dearth?
Though never Flower again its Head should rear,
Though never Tree again should Blossom bear;
Though never Grass should cloth the naked Ground,
Nor ever healing Plant or wholesome Herb be found.
None, none were found when I bewailed their Want;
Nor wholesome Herb was found, nor healing Plant,
To ease Amyntas of his cruel Pains;
In vain I searched the Valleys, Hills and Plains;
But withered Leaves alone appeared to view,
Or poisonous Weeds distilling deadly Dew.
And if some naked Stalk, not quite decayed,
To yield a fresh and friendly Bud essayed,
Soon as I reached to crop the tender Shoot,
A shrieking Mandrake killed it at the Root.
Witness to this, ye Fawns of every Wood,
Who at the Prodigy astonished stood.
Well I remember what sad Signs ye made,
What Showers of unavailing Tears ye shed;
How each ran fearful to his mossie Cave,
When the last Gasp the dear Amyntas gave.
For then the Air was filled with dreadful Cries,
And sudden Night overspread the darkened Skies;
Phantoms, and Fiends, and wandering Fires appeared,
And Skreams of ill-presaging Birds were heard.
The Forest shook, and flinty Rocks were cleft,
And frighted Streams their wonted Channels left;
With frantic Grief overflowing fruitful Ground,
Where many a Herd and harmeless Swain was drowned.
While I forlorn and desolate was left,
Of every Help, of every Hope bereft;
To every Element exposed I lay,
And to my Griefs a more defenseless Prey.
For thee, Amyntas, all these Pains were born,
For thee these Hands were wrung, these Hairs were torn;
For thee my Soul to sigh shall never leave,
These Eyes to weep, this throbbing Heart to heave.
To mourn thy Fall I Will fly the hated Light,
And hide my Head in Shades of endless Night:
For thou were Light, and Life, and Health to me;
The Sun but thankless shines that shows not thee.
Were thou not Lovely, Graceful, Good and Young?
The Joy of Sight, the Talk of every Tongue?
Did ever Branch so sweet a Blossom bear?
Or ever early Fruit appear so fair?
Did ever Youth so far his Years transcend?
Did ever Life so immaturely end!
For thee the tuneful Swains provided Lays,
And every Muse prepared thy future Praise.
For thee the busy Nymphs stripped every Grove,
And Myrtle Wreaths and Flowery Chaplets wove.
But now, ah dismal Change! the tuneful Throng
To loud Lamentings turn the cheerful Song.
Their pleasing Task the weeping Virgins leave,
And with unfinished Garlands strew thy Grave.
There let me fall, there, there lamenting lie,
There grieving grow to Earth, despair, and die.
This said, her loud Complaint of force she ceased,
Excess of Grief her faultring Speech suppressed.
Along the Ground her colder Limbs she laid,
Where late the Grave was for Amyntas made;
Then from her swimming Eyes began to pour,
Of softly falling Rain a Silver Shower;
Her loosely flowing Hair, all radiant bright,
O'er-spread the dewy Grass like Streams of Light.
As if the Sun had of his Beams been shorn,
And cast to Earth the Glories he had worn.
A Sight so lovely sad, such deep Distress
No Tongue can tell, no Pencil can express.
And now the Winds, which had so long been still,
Began the swelling Air with Sighs to fill;
The Water-Nymphs, who motionless remained,
Like Images of Ice, while she complained,
Now loosed their Streams; as when descending Rains
Roll the steep Torrents headlong over the Plains.
The prone Creation, who so long had gazed,
Charmed with her Cries, and at her Griefs amazed,
Began to roar and howl with horrid Yell,
Dismal to hear, and terrible to tell;
Nothing but Groans and Sighs were heard around,
And Echo multiplied each mournful Sound.
When all at once an universal Pause
Of Grief was made, as from some secret Cause.
The Balmy Air with fragrant Scents was filled,
As if each weeping Tree had Gums distilled.
Such, if not sweeter, was the rich Perfume
Which swift ascended from Amyntas's Tomb;
As if the Arabian Bird her Nest had fired,
And on the spicy Pile were new expired.
And now the Turf, which late was naked seen,
Was sudden spread with lively springing Green;
And Amaryllis saw, with wondering Eyes,
A flowery Bed, where she had wept, arise;
Thick as the pearly Drops the Fair had shed,
The blowing Buds advanced their Purple Head;
From every Tear that fell, a Violet grew,
And thence their Sweetness came, and thence their mournful Hew.
Remember this, ye Nymphs and gentle Maids,
When Solitude ye seek in gloomy Shades;
Or walk on Banks where silent Waters flow,
For there this lonely Flower will love to grow.
Think on Amyntas, often as ye shall stoop
To crop the Stalks and take 'em softly up.
When in your snowy Necks their Sweets you wear,
Give a soft Sigh, and drop a tender Tear:
To loved Amyntas pay the Tribute due,
And bless his peaceful Grave, where first they grew.
FINIS.

