ODES ON Several SUBJECTS.

PINDAPOS. PYSON EYONTAI, PEDION D'ETEPOI APEPANTON. ETO D'ASTOIS ADON, KAI
THONI GYIA KALYPSAI-', AINEON AINTA O-PHAN D'EPISPEIPON ALITPOIS.

LONDON: Printed for R. DODSLEY at Tully's Head in Pall Mall. And Sold by M.
COOPER in Paternoster Row. 1745.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following ODES were written at very distant intervals, and with a view to
very different manners of expression and versification. The author pretends
chiefly to the merit of endeavoring to be correct, and of carefully attending
to the best models. From what the ancients have left of this kind, perhaps the
ODE may be allowed the most amiable species of poetry; but certainly there is
none which in modern languages has been generally attempted with so little
success. For the perfection of lyric poetry depends, beyond that of any other,
on the beauty of words and the gracefulness of numbers; in both which respects
the ancients had infinite advantages above us. A consideration which will
alleviate the author's disappointment, if he too should be found to have
miscarried.

ODE I. Allusion to HORACE.
-- Ego, apis Matinae
More, modoque, etc.
Lib. iv. Od. ii.
AMID the garden's fragrance laid,
Where yonder limes behold their shade
Along the glassy stream,
With HORACE and his tuneful ease
I Will rest from crowds, and care's disease,
And summer's piercing beam.
Behold the busy, wandering BE!
From bloom to bloom, from tree to tree
She sweeps mellifluous dews;
For her the silken gems arise,
For her display their shining dies,
Their balmy breath diffuse.
Sweet murmurer! may no rude storm
This pleasurable scene deform
To check thy gladsome toils;
Still may the buds unsullied spring,
Still showers and sunshine court thy wing
To these ambrosial spoils.
Nor shall my Muse hereafter fail
Her fellow-lab'rer thus to hail,
And lucky be the strains!
For long ago did nature frame
Your seasons and your arts the same,
Your pleasures and your pains.
Like thee, in lowly, sylvan scenes,
And river-banks and fruitful greens
Delights my vagrant song;
Nor strives, by soaring high in air,
Though swans and eagles triumph there,
To draw the giddy throng.
Nor where the rayen, where the owl
By night their hateful orgies howl,
Will she her cares employ;
But flies from ruins and from graves,
Prom ghostly cells and monkish caves
To daylight and to joy.
Nor will she tempt the barren waste;
Nor' deigns the ungrateful stores to taste
Of any noxious thing;
But leaves with scorn to others' use
The bitter hemlock's baneful juice,
The nettles fordid sting.
From all which nature fairest knows,
The vernal blooms, the surnmer rose,
She draws her mingled wealth;
And when the lovely task is done,
She consecrates a double boon,
To pleasure and to health.
ODE II. On the WINTER-SOLSTICE, M.D.CC.XL.
THE radiant ruler of the year
At length his wintry goal attains,
Soon to reverse the long career,
And Northward bend his golden reins.
Prone on POTOSI's haughty brow
His fiery streams incessant flow,
Ripening the silver's ductile stores;
While, in the cavern's horrid shade,
The panting Indian hides his head,
And often the approach of eve explores.
But lo, on this deserted coast
How faint the light! how thick the air!
Lo armed with whirlwind, hail and frost,
Fierce winter desolates the year.
The fields resign their cheerful bloom;
No more the breezes waft persume,
No more the warbling waters roll:
Deserts of snow fatigue the eye,
Black storms involve the louring sky,
And gloomy damps oppress the soul.
Now through the town promiscuous throngs
Urge the warm bowl and ruddy fire;
Harmonious dances, festive songs,
To charm the midnight hours conspire.
While mute and shrinking with her fears,
Each blast the cottage-matron hears
As over the hearth she sits alone:
At morn her bridegroom went abroad,
The night is dark and deep the road;
She sighs and wishes him at home.
But thou, my lyre, awake, arise,
And hail the sun's remotest ray;
Now, now he climbs the Northern skies,
Tomorrow nearer than today.
Then louder howl the stormy waste,
Be land and ocean worse defaced,
Yet brighter hours are on the wing;
And fancy through the wintry glooms,
All fresh with dews and opening blooms,
Already hails the emerging spring.
O fountain of the golden day!
Could mortal vows but urge thy speed,
How soon before thy vernal ray
Should each unkindly damp recede!
How soon each hovering tempest fly,
That now fermenting loads the sky,
Prompt on our heads to burst amain,
To rend the forest from the sleep,
Or thundering over the Baltic deep
To whelm the merchant's hopes of gain!
But let not man's unequal views
Presume on nature and her laws;
It Is his with grateful joy to use
The indulgence of the sovereign cause;
Secure that health and beauty springs
Through this majestic frame of things
Beyond what he can reach to know,
And that heaven's all-subduing will,
With good the progeny of ill,
Attempers every state below.
How pleasing wears the wintry night,
Spent with the old illustrious dead!
While, by the taper's trembling light,
I seem those awful courts to tread
Where chiefs and legislators ly,
Whose triumphs move before my eye
With every laurel fresh-display'd;
While charmed I taste the Ionian song,
Or bend to PLATO'S godlike tongue
Resounding through the olive shade.
But if the gay, well-natur'd friend
Bids leave the studious page awhile,
Then easier joys the soul unbend
And teach the brow a softer smile;
Then while the genial glass is paid
By each to her, that fairest maid,
Whose radiant eyes his hopes obey,
What lucky vows his bosom warm!
While absence heightens every charm,
And love invokes returning MAY.
MAY! thou delight of heaven and earth,
When will thy happy morn arise?
When the dear place which gave her Birth
Restore LUCINDA to my eyes?
There while she walks the wonted grove,
The seat of music and of love,
Bright as the ONE primaeval fair,
Thither, ye silver sounding lyres,
Thither gay smiles and young desires,
Chaste hope and mutual faith repair.
And if believing love can read
The wonted softness in her eye,
Then shall my fears, O charming maid,
And every pain of absence die:
Then ofter to thy name attun'd,
And rising to diviner sound,
I Will wake the free HORATIAN song:
Old TYNE shall listen to my tale,
And ECHO, down the bord'ring vale,
The liquid melody prolong.
ODE III. Against SUSPICION.
O Fly! It Is dire SUSPICION'S mien;
And, meditating plagues unseen,
The sorc'ress hither bends:
Behold her torch in gall imbrued:
Behold -- her garments drop with blood
Of lovers and of friends.
Fly far! Already in your eyes
I see a pale suffusion rise;
And soon through every vein,
Soon will her secret venom spread,
And all your heart and all your head
Imbibe the potent stain.
Then come the hours of shame and fear;
Then hints of horror seize your ear;
While gleams of lost delight
Raise the deep discord of the brain,
As lightning shines along the main
Through whirlwinds and through night.
No more can faith or candor move;
But each ingenuous deed of love
Which once you would applaud,
Now, smiing over her dark distress,
Malignant fancy longs to dress
Like injury and fraud.
Farewell to virtue's peaceful times!
for soon you will stoop to act the crimes
You thus can stoop to fear:
When vice begins her ugly train
With wrongs of such unmanly stain,
What horrors form the rear!
It Is thus, to work her baleful power,
SUSPICION waits the sullen hour
Of fretfulness and strife,
When care the infirmer bosom wrings,
Or EURUS shakes his gloomy wings
To damp the seats of life.
But come, forsake the scene unblest,
Which first beheld your candid breast,
To groundless fears a prey;
Come, where with my prevailing lyre
The skies, the streams, the groves conspire
To charm your doubts away.
Throned in the sun's descending car,
What Power unseen diffuses far
This tenderness of mind?
What Genius smiles on every flood?
What GOD, in whispers from the wood,
Bids every heart be kind?
O thou, whatever thy awful name,
Whose breath awaked the immortal flame
That moves my active veins;
Thou, who by fair affection's ties
Have doubled all my future joys,
And half disarmed my pains;
Let universal CANDOR still,
Clear as yon heav'n-reflefting rill,
Preserve my open mind;
Nor THIS, nor THAT man's crooked views,
One mean or cruel doubt infuse
To injure human kind.
ODE IV. To a GENTLEMAN whose MISTRESS had married an old Man.
INDEED, my PHAEDRIA, if to find
That gold a female's vow can gain,
If this had ever disturbed your mind,
Or cost one serious moment's pain,
I should have said that all the rules
You learnt of moralists and schools,
Were very useless, very vain.
Yet I perhaps mistake the case;
And though with this heroic air,
Like one that holds a nobler chase,
You seem the lady's loss to bear,
Perhaps your heart belied your tongue,
And thinks my censure mighty wrong
To count it such a flight affair.
When HESPER gilds the shaded sky,
Slow wandering through the well-known grove,
Methinks I see you cast your eye
Back to the morning-scenes of love:
Her tender look, her graceful way,
The pretty things you heard her say,
Afresh your struggling fancy move.
Then tell me, is your soul entire?
Does wisdom calmly hold her throne?
Then can you question each desire,
Bid this remain, and that begone?
No tear half-starting from your eye?
No kindling blush you know not why?
No stealing sigh or stifled groan?
Away with this unmanly mood!
See where the hoary churl appears,
Whose hand has seized the favorite good
Which you reserved for happier years;
While side by side the blushing maid
Shrinks from his visage half-afraid,
Spite of the sickly joy she wears.
Ye guardian powers of love and fame,
This chaste, harmonious pair behold;
And thus reward the generous flame
Of all who barter vows for gold.
O bloom of youth and opening charms
Well-buried in a dotard's arms!
O worthy price of beauty sold!
Cease then to gaze, unthankful boy;
Let, let her go, the venal fair!
Unworthy she to give you joy;
Then wherefore should she give you care?
Lay, lay your myrtle garland down,
And let the willow's virgin-crown
With happier omens bind your hair.
O just escaped the faithless main,
Though driven unwilling on the land!
To guide your favored steps again,
Behold your better genius stand:
Where PLATO'S olive courts your eye,
Where HAMDEN'S laurel blooms on high,
He lists his heaven directed hand.
When these are blended on your brow,
The willow will be named no more;
Or if that love-deserted bough
The pitying, laughing girls deplore,
Yet still shall I most freely swear,
Your dress has much a better air
Than all that ever bridegroom wore.
ODE V. Hymn to CHEERFULNESS. The Author Sick.
HOW thick the shades of evening close!
How pale the sky with weight of snows!
Haste, light the tapers, urge the fire,
And bid the joyless day retire!
-- Alas, in vain I try within
To raise the dull, dejected scene,
While roused by grief these fiery pains
Tear the frail texture of my veins;
While winter's voice, that storms around,
And yon deep death-bell's groaning sound
Renew my mind's oppressive gloom,
'Till starting horror shakes the room!
Is there in nature no kind power
To sooth affliction's lonely hour?
To blunt the edge of dire disease,
And teach these wintry shades to please?
Come, CHEERFULNESS, triumphant fair,
Shine through the painful cloud of care;
O sweet of language, mild of mein,
O virtue's friend and pleasure's queen!
Assuage the flames that burn my breast,
Attune my jarring thoughts to rest;
And while thy gracious gifts I feel,
My song shall all thy praise reveal.
As once ('it was in ASTRAEA'S reign)
The vernal powers renewed their train,
It happened that immortal LOVE
Was ranging through the spheres above,
And downward hither cast his eye
The year's returning pomp to spy,
He saw the radiant God of day
Lead round the globe the rosy MAY;
The fragrant AIRS and genial HOURS
Were shedding round him dews and flowers;
Before his wheels AURORA past,
And HESPER'S golden lamp was last.
But, fairest of the blooming throng,
When HEALTH majestic moved along
All gay with smiles, to see below
The joys which from her presence flow,
While earth inliven'd hears her voice,
And fields, and flocks, and swains rejoice;
Then mighty LOVE her charms confessed,
And soon his vows inclined her breast,
And, known from that auspicious morn,
The pleasing CHEERFULNESS was born.
Thou CHEERFULNESS, by heaven designed
To rule the pulse, that moves the mind,
Whatever fretful passion springs,
Whatever chance or nature brings
To strain the tuneful poize within,
And disarrange the sweet machine,
Thou Goddess, with a master-hand
Do each attemper'd key command,
Refine the soft and swell the strong,
Till all is concord, all is song.
Fair guardian of domestic life,
Best banisher of homebred strife,
Nor sullen lip, nor taunting eye
Deform the scene where thou art by:
No sickening husband damns the hour
That bound his joys to female power;
No pining mother weeps the cares
That parents waste on hopeless heirs:
The officious daughters pleased attend;
The brother rises to the friend:
By thee their board with flowers is crowned,
By thee with songs their walks refound.
By thee their sprightly mornings shine,
And evening-hours in peace decline.
Behold the youth, whose trembling heart
Beats high with love's unpitied smart;
Though now he strays by rills and bowers,
And weeping wears the lonely hours,
Or, if the nymph her audience deign,
Shames the soft story of his pain
With flavish looks, discolored eyes,
And accents falt'ring into sighs;
Yet thou, auspicious power, with ease,
Cat'st yield him happier arts to please,
Exalt his mein to manlier charms,
Instruct his tongue with nobler arms,
With more commanding passion move,
And teach the dignity of love.
Friend to the Muse and all her train,
For thee I court the Muse again;
And may the votive lay disclose
How much to thy fair aid she owes!
See, when thy touch reveals her mine,
How pure the stores of fancy shine!
Hark, when thy breath her song impells,
How full the tuneful current swells!
Let melancholy's plaintive tongue
Instruct the nightly strains of Y^;
But thine was HOMER'S ancient might,
And thine victorious PINDAR'S flight:
Thy myrtles crowned the ALCAEUS and SAPPHO.
Lesbian meads;
Thy voice awaked THEOCRITUS.
Sicilian reeds;
Thy breath perfumes the ANACREON.
Teian rose,
And Tibur's vine spontaneous flows
While HORACE wantons in thy quire;
The gods and heroes of the lyre.
See where the pale, the sickening sage
(A prey perhaps to fortune's rage,
Perhaps by tender griefs oppressed,
Or glooms congenial to his breast)
Retires in desart-scenes to dwell,
And bids the joyless world farewell.
Alone he treads the autumnal shade,
Alone beneath the mountain laid,
He sees the nightly damps arise,
And gathering storms involve the skies;
He hears the neighboring surges roll,
And raging thunders shake the pole;
Then, struck by every object round,
And stunned by every horrid sound,
He pants to traverse nature's ways.
His evils haunt him through the maze:
He views ten thousand demons rise
To wield the empire of the skies,
And chance and fate assume the rod,
And malice blots the throne of GOD.
-- O thou, whose pleasing power I sing!
Thy lenient influence hither bring;
Compose the storm, dispel the gloom,
Till nature wear her wonted bloom,
Till fields and shades their sweets exhale,
And music swell each opening gale:
Then over his breast thy softness pour,
And let him learn the timely hour
To trace the world's benignant laws,
And judge of that presiding cause
Who founds in discord beauty's reign,
Converts to pleasure every pain,
Subdues the hostile forms ta rest,
And bids the universe be blessed.
O thou, whose pleasing power I sing!
If right I touch the votive string,
If equal praise I yield thy name,
Still govern thou thy poet's flame;
Still with the Muse my bosom share,
And sooth to peace corroding care.
But most exert thy genial power
On friendship's consecrated hour;
And while my AGIS leads the road
To fearless wisdom's high abode,
Or, warm in, freedom's sacred cause,
Pursues the light of Grecian laws,
Attend, and grace our generous toils
With all thy garlands all thy smiles.
But if, by fortune's stubborn sway,
From him and friendship torn away,
I court the muse's healing spell
For griefs that still with absence dwell,
Do thou conduct my fancy's dreams
To such indulgent, tender themes
As just the struggling breast may cheer,
And just suspend the starting tear,
Yet leave that charming sense of woe,
Which none but friends and lovers know.
ODE VI. On the Absence of the Poetic Inclination.
QUEEN of my songs, harmonious maid,
Why, why have thou withdrawn thy aid?
Why thus forsook my widowed breast,
With dark infeebling damps oppressed?
Where is the bold prophetic heat,
With which my bosom wont to beat?
Where all the bright mysterious dreams
Of haunted shades and tuneful streams,
That wooed my Genius to divinest themes?
Say, can the purple charms of wine,
Or young DIONE'S form divine,
Or flattering scenes of promised fame
Relume thy faint, thy dying flame?
Have soft, melodious airs the power,
To give one free, poetic hour?
Or from amid the Elysian train,
The soul of MILTON shall I gain,
To win the back with some celestial strain?
O mighty mind! O sacred flame!
My spirit kindles at his name;
Again my laboring bosom burns;
The Muse, the inspiring Muse returns!
Such on the banks of TYNE confessed,
I hailed the bright, ethereal guest,
When first She sealed me for her own,
Made all her blissful treasures known,
And bade me swear to follow HER alone.
ODE VII. To a FRIEND, on the hazard of falling in LOVE.
NO, foolish boy -- To virtuous fame
If now thy early hopes be vowed,
If true ambition's nobler flame
Command thy footsteps from the crowd,
Lean not to Love's enchanting snare;
His dances, his delights beware,
Nor mingle in the band of young and fair.
By thought, by dangers, and by toils,
The wreath of just renown is worn;
Nor will ambition's awful spoils
The flowery pomp of ease adorn:
But Love dissolves the nerve of thought;
By Love unmanly fears are taught;
And Love's reward with slothful arts is bought.
True, where the Muses, where the powers
Of softer wisdom, easier wit,
Assist the Graces and the Hours
To render beanty's praise complete,
The fair may then perhaps impart
Each finer sense, each winning art,
And more than schools adorn the manly heart.
If then, from Love's deceit secure,
Such bliss be all thy heart intends,
Go, where the white-wing'd evening-hour
On DELIA'S vernal walk descends:
Go, while the pleasing, peaceful scene
Becomes her voice, becomes her mien.
Sweet as her smiles, and as her brow serene.
Attend, while that harmonious tongue
Each bosom, each desire commands;
Apollo's lute by Hermes strung
And touched by chaste Minerva's hands.
Attend. I feel a force divine,
O DELIA, win my thoughts to thine,
That half thy graces seem already mine.
Yet conscious of the dangerous charm,
Soon would I turn my steps away;
Nor often provoke the lovely harm,
Nor once relax my reason's sway.
But thou, my friend -- What sudden sighs?
What means the blush that comes and flies?
Why stop? why silent? why avert thy eyes?
So soon again to meet the fair?
So pensive all this absent hour?
-- O yet, unlucky youth, beware,
While yet to think is in thy power
In vain with friendship's flattering name
Thy passion masks its inward shame;
Friendship, the treacherous fuel of thy flame!
Once, I remember, tired of Love,
I spurned his hard, tyrannic chain,
Yet won the haughty fair to prove
What sober joys in friendship reign.
No more I sighed, complained, or swore;
The nymph's coy arts appeared no more.
But each could laugh at what we felt before.
Well-pleased we passed the cheerful day,
To unreserv'd discourse resigned,
And I enchanted to survey
One generous woman's real mind:
But soon I wondered what possessed
Each wakeful night my anxious breast;
No other friendship ever had broke my rest!
Fool that I was -- And now, even now
While thus I preach the Stoic strain,
Unless I shun DIONE'S view,
An hour unsays it all again.
O friend! -- when Love directs her eyes
To pierce where every passion lies,
Where is the firm, the cautious, or the wise?
ODE VIII. On leaving HOLLAND.
ADIEU to LEYDEN'S lonely bound,
The BELGIAN muse's sober seat;
Where shedding frugal gifts around
On all the favorites at her feet,
She feeds the body's bulky frame
For passive, persevering toils;
And left, for some ambitious aim,
The daring mind should scorn her homely spoils,
She breathes maternal foggs to damp its restless flame.
Adieu the grave, pacific air,
Safe from the flitting mountain-breeze;
The marshy levels lank and bare,
Sacred from furrows hills or trees:
Adieu each mantling, fragrant flood,
Untaughto to murmur or to flow:
Adieu the The Frogs.
music of the mud,
That sooths at eve the patient lover's woe,
And wakes to sprightlier thoughts the painful poet's blood.
With looks so frosty, and with steps so tame,
Ye careful nymphs, ye household things, adieu;
Not once ye taught me love's or friendship's flame,
And where is he that ever taught it you?
And ye, the slow-ey'd fathers of the land,
With whom dominion lurks from hand to hand,
Unown'd, undignified by public choice,
I go where freedom in the streets is known,
And tells a monarch on his throne,
Tells him he reigns, he lives but by her voice.
O native ALBION, when to thee
Shall I return to part no more?
Far from this pale, discolored sea,
That sleeps upon the reedy shore,
When shall I plow thy azure tides,
And, as thy fleece-white hills aspire,
Bless the fair shade that on their sides
Imbow'rs the village and the sacred spire,
While the green hedge, below, the golden slope divides?
Ye nymphs that guard the pathless grove,
Ye blue-ey'd sisters of the streams,
With whom I wont at morn to rove,
With whom at noon I talked in dreams;
O take me to your haunts again,
The rocky spring, the greenwood glade;
To prompt my slumbers in the murmuring shade,
And sooth my vacant ear with many an airy strain.
And thou, my faithful harp, no longer mourn
Thy drooping master's unpropitious hand;
Now brighter skies and fresher gales return,
Now fairer maids thy melody demand.
Daughters of ALBION, guard your votive lyre!
O blooming god of Thespia's laurell'd quire,
Why sounds not mine harmonious as thy own,
When all the virgin-deities above
With Venus and with Juno move
In concert round thy list'ming father's throne?
Thee too, protectress of my lays,
Elate with whose majestic call
Above the soft Italian's praise,
Above the slavish wreaths of Gaul,
I dare from impious thrones reclaim,
And wanton sloth's luxurious charms,
The honors of a poet's name
To The Earl of SHAFTSBURY.
ASHLEY'S wisdom, or to HAMDEN'S arms.
Thee, freedom, I rejoin, and bless thy genuine flame.
Great citizen of Albion! Thee
Heroic Valor still attends,
And useful Science pleased to see
How Art her studious toil extends.
While Truth, diffusing from on high
A luster unconfined as day,
Fills and commands the public eye,
Till pierced and sinking by her pow'ful ray,
Tame Sloth and monkish Awe, like nightly Demons, fly.
Hence all the land the Patriot's ardour shares;
Hence dread Religion smiles with social joy;
Hence the free bosom's softest, loveliest cares,
Each graceful scene of private life employ.
O fair BRITANNIA, hail! -- With partial love
The tribes of men their native seats approve,
Unjust and hostile to a foreign fame;
But when from generous minds and manly laws
A nation holds her prime applause,
There public zeal defies the test of blame.
ODE IX. To SLEEP.
THOU silent power, whose balmy sway
Charms every anxious thought away;
In whose divine oblivion drowned,
Fatigue and toiling pain grow mild,
Love is with sweet success beguiled
And sad remorse forgets her secret wound;
O whither have thou flown, indulgent God?
God of kind shadows, and of healing dews,
Over whom do thou extend thy magic rod?
Around what peaceful couch thy opiate airs diffuse?
Lo, midnight from her starry reign
Looks awful down on earth and main.
The tuneful birds lie hushed in sleep,
With all that crop the verdant food,
With all that skim the crystal flood,
Or haunt the cayerns of the rocky steep.
No rushing winds disturb the tufted bowr's;
No wakeful sound the moonlight valley knows,
Save where the brook its liquid murmur pours,
And lulls the waving scene to more profound repose.
O let not me thus watch alone!
O hear my solitavy moan!
Descend, propitious, on my eyes;
Not from the couch that bears a crown,
Not from the statesman's thorny down,
Or where the miser and his treasure lies:
Bring not the shapes that break the murd'rer's rest;
Nor those the hireling soldier burns to see,
Nor those that haunt the tyrant's gloomy breast:
Far be their guilty nights, and far their dreams from me!
Nor yet those awful joys present,
For chiefs and heroes only meant:
The figured brass, the choral song,
The rescued people's glad applause,
The listening senate, and the laws
Bent on the dictates of After Timoleon had delivered Syracuse from the tyranny
of Dionysius, the people on every important deliberation sent for him into the
public assembly, asked his advice, and voted according to his decision.
PLUTARCH.
TIMOLEON'S tongue,
Are scenes too grand for fortune's private ways;
And though they shine to youth's ingenuous view,
The sober gainful arts of modern days,
To such romantic thoughts have bid a long adieu.
Blessed be my fate! I need not pray
That lovesick dreams be kept away:
No female charms, of fancy born,
Nor damask cheek, nor spaikling eye,
With me the bands of sleep untie,
Or steal by minutes half the sauntring morn.
Nor yet the courtier's hope, the giving smile,
(A lighter phantom and a baser chain)
Bids wealth and place the fever'd night beguile,
To gall my waking hours with more vexatious pain.
But, Morpheus, on thy dewy wing
Such fair auspicious visions bring,
As soothed great MILTON'S injured age,
When in prophetic dreams he saw
The tribes unborn with pious awe.
Imbibe each virtue from his heavenly page:
Or such as MEAD'S benignant fancy knows,
When health's kind treasures, by his art explored,
Have saved the infant from an orphan's woes,
Or to the trembling fire his age's hope restored.
ODE X. On LYRIC Poetry.
ONCE more I join the Thespian quire,
And taste the inspiring fount again:
O parent of the Grecian lyre,
Admit me to thy secret strain --
And lo! with ease my step invades
The pathless vale and opening shades,
Till now I spy her verdant seat,
And now at large I drink the sound,
While these her offspring, listening round,
By turns her melody repeat.
I see ANACREON smile and sing:
His silver tresses breathe persume;
His cheek displays a second spring
Of roses taught by wine to bloom.
Away, deceitful cares away!
And let me listen to his lay,
While flow'fy dreams my soul employ;
While turtle-wing'd the laughing hours
Lead hand in hand the festal powers,
Lead youth and love, and harmless joy.
Broke from the fetters of his native land,
Devoting shame and vengeance to her lords
With louder impulse and a threatening hand,
The ALCAEUS of Mitylene, the capital of Lesbos, who fled from his native city
to escape the oppression of those who had enslaved it, and wrote against them
in his exile those noble invectives which are so much applauded by the ancient
Critics.
Lesbian patriot smites the sounding chords:
Ye wretches, ye perfidions train,
Ye cursed of Gods and freeborn men,
Ye murd'rers of the laws,
Though now you glory in your lust,
Though now you tread the feeble neck in dust,
Yet Time and righteous JOVE will judge your dreadful cause.
But lo, to SAPPHO'S mournful airs
Descends the radiant Queen of love;
She smiles, and asks what fonder cares
Her suppliant's plaintive measures move.
Why is my faithful maid distressed?
Who, SAPPHO, wounds thy tender breast?
Say, flies he? -- Soon he shall pursue:
Shuns he thy gifts? -- HE too shall give:
Slights he thy sorrows? -- HE shall grieve,
And bend him to thy haughtiest vow.
But, O MELPOMENE, for whom
Awakes thy golden shell again?
What mortal breath shall ever presume
To echo that unbounded strain?
Majestic in the frown of years,
Behold, the PINDAR.
Man of Thebes appears:
For some there are, whose mighty frame
The hand of JOVE at birth endowed
With hopes that mock the gazing crowd;
As eagles drink the noontide flame,
While the dim raven beats his weary wings,
And clamours far below. -- Propitious Muse,
While I so late unlock thy hallowed springs,
And breathe whatever thy ancient airs infuse,
To polish Albion's warlike ear
This long-lost melody to hear,
Thy sweetest arts employ;
As when the winds from shore to shore,
Through Greece thy lyre's persuasive language bore,
Till towns and isles, and seas returned the vocal joy.
But often amid the Grecian throng,
The loose-rob'd forms of wild desire
With lawless notes intun'd thy song,
To shameful steps dissolved thy quire.
O fair, O chaste be still with me
From such profaner discord free:
While I frequent thy tuneful shade,
No frantic shouts of Thracian dames,
No Satyrs fierce with savage flames
Thy pleasing accents shall invade.
Queen of the lyre, in thy retreat
The fairest flowers of Pindus glow;
The vine aspires to crown thy seat,
And myrtles round thy laurel grow.
Thy strings attune their varied strain,
To every pleasure, every pain,
Which mortal tribes were born to prove,
And strait our passions rise or fall,
As at the wind's imperious call
The ocean swells the billows move.
When midnight listens over the slumbering earth,
Let me, O Muse, thy solemn whispers hear:
When morning sends her fragrant breezes forth,
With airy murmurs touch my opening ear.
And ever watchful at thy side,
Let Wisdom's awful suffrage guide
The tenor of thy lay:
To her of old by JOVE was given
To judge the various deeds of earth and heay'n;
'Twas thine by gentle arts to win us to her sway.
Often as from stricter hours resigned
I quit the maze where science toils,
Do thou refresh my yielding mind
With all thy gay, delusive spoils.
But, O indulgent, come not nigh
The busy steps, the jealous eye
Of gainful care and wealthy age,
Whose barren souls thy joys disdain,
And hold as foes to reason's reign
Whome'er thy lovely haunts engage.
With me, when mirth's consenting band
Around fair friendship's genial board
Invite thy heart-awakening hand,
With me salute the Teian chord,
Or if invoked at softer hours,
O seek with me the happy bowers.
That hear DIONE 'S gentle tongue;
To beauty linked with virtue's train,
To love devoid of jealous pain,
There let the Sapphic lute be strung.
But when from envy and from death to claim
A hero bleeding for his native land;
Or when to nourish freedom's vestal flame,
I hear my Genius utter his command.
Nor Theban voice, nor Lesbian lyre
From thee, O Muse, do I require,
While my prophetic mind,
Conscious of powers she never knew,
Astonished grasps at things beyond her view,
Nor by another's fate has felt her own confined.
FINIS.

