LETTERS OF THE LATE Rev. Mr. LAURENCE STERN, To his most intimate FRIENDS.

Entered in the Hall Book of the Company of Stationers, according to Act of
Parliament.

LYDIA STERN DE MEDALLE.
Painted by B. (...) Engraved by J. Caldwall

(...) August (...) 177^



LETTERS OF THE LATE Rev. Mr. LAURENCE STERN, To his most intimate FRIENDS.

WITH A FRAGMENT in the Manner of Rabelais.

To which are prefixed, Memoirs of his Life and Family. Written by HIMSELF. And
Published by his Daughter, Mrs. MEDALLE.

In THREE VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

LONDON: Printed for T. BECKET, the Corner of the Adelphi, in the Strand. 1775.

DEDICATION. To DAVID GARRICK, Esquire.
WHEN I was asked to whom I should dedicate these volumes, I carelessly
answered to no one -- Why not? (replied the person who put the question to me.)
Because most dedications look like begging a protection to the book. Perhaps a
worse interpretation may be given to it. No, no! already so much obliged, I
cannot, will not, put another tax upon the generosity of any friend of Mr.
Sterne's, or mine. I went home to my lodgings, and gratitude warmed my heart to
such a pitch, that I vowed they should be dedicated to the man my father so
much admired -- who, with an unprejudiced eye, read, and approved his works,
and moreover loved the man -- It Is to Mr. Garrick then, that I dedicate these
Genuine Letters.

Can I forget the sweet See Page 11.
Epitaph which proved Mr. Garrick's friendship, and opinion of him? 'Twas a
tribute to friendship -- and as a tribute of my gratitude I dedicate these
volumes to a man of understanding and feelings -- Receive this, as it is meant
-- May you, dear Sir, approve of these letters, as much as Mr. Stern admired
you -- but Mr. Garrick, with all his urbanity, can never carry the point half
so far, for Mr. Stern was an enthusiast, if it is possible to be one, in
favor of Mr. Garrick.

This may appear a very simple dedication, but Mr. Garrick will judge by his
own sensibility, that I can feel more than I can express, and I believe he will
give me credit for all my grateful acknowledgements.

I am, with every sentiment of gratitude, and esteem,

Dear Sir, Your obliged humble servant, Lydia Stern de Medalle.
London, June, 1775.
EPITAPH.
SHALL Pride a heap of sculptured marble raise,
Some worthless, un-mourn'd titled fool to praise;
And shall we not by one poor gravestone learn,
Where Genius, Wit, and Humor, sleep with Stern?
D. G.

PREFACE.
IN publishing these Letters the Editor does but comply with her mother's
request, which was, that if any letters were published under Mr. Sterne's name,
that those she had in her possession, (as well as those that her father's
friends would be kind enough to send to her) should be likewise published --
She depends much on the candor of the public for the favorable reception of
these, -- their being genuine (she thinks -- and hopes) will render them not
unacceptable -- She has already experienced much benevolence and generosity
from her late father's friends -- the rememberance of it will ever warm her
heart with gratitude!

In Memory of Mr. STERN, author of THE SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY.
WITH wit, and genuine humor, to dispel,
From the desponding bosom, gloomy care,
And bid the gushing tear, at the sad tale
Of hapless love or filial grief, to flow
From the full sympathising heart, were thine,
These powers, Oh Stern! but now thy fate demands
(No plumage nodding over the emblazon'd hearse
Proclaiming honor where no virtue shone)
But the sad tribute of a heartfelt sigh:
What though no taper cast its deadly ray,
Nor the full choir sing requiems over thy tomb,
The humbler grief of friendship is not mute;
And poor Maria, with her faithful kid,
Her auburn tresses carelessly entwined
With olive foliage, at the close of day,
Shall chaunt her plaintive vespers at thy grave.
Thy shade too, gentle Monk, mid aweful night,
Shall pour libations from its friendly eye;
For 'erst his sweet benevolence bestowed
Its generous pity, and bedewed with tears
The sod, which rested on thy aged breast.
A Character, and Eulogium of STERN, and his Writings; in a familiar Epistle
from a Gentleman in Ireland to his Friend. -- Written in the Year 1769.
WHAT trifle comes next? -- Spare the censure, my friend,
This letter's no more from beginning to end:
Yet, when you consider (your laughter, pray, stifle)
The advantage, the importance, the use, of a trifle --
When you think too beside -- and there is nothing more clear --
That pence compose millions, and moments the year,
You surely will grant me, nor think that I jest,
That life's but a series of trifles at best.
How wildly digressive! yet could I, O STERN The late reverend Laurence
Stern, A. M. etc. author of that truly original, humourous, heteroclite work,
called The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, of A Sentimental Journey
through France and Italy (which, alas! he did not live to finish) and of some
volumes of Sermons. Of his skill in delineating and supporting his characters,
those of the father of his hero, of his uncle Toby, and of corporal Trim (out
of numberless others) afford ample proof: To his power in the pathetic, whoever
shall read the stories of Le Fevre, Maria, the Monk, and the dead Ass, must, if
he has feelings, bear sufficient testimony: And his Sermons throughout (though
sometimes, perhaps, chargeable with a levity not entirely becoming the pulpit)
breathe the kindest spirit of Philanthropy, of good will toward man. For the
few exceptional parts of his works, those small blemishes Quas aut incuria
fudit,
Aut humana parum cavit natura --
suffer them, kind critic, to rest with his ashes!

The above eulogium will, I doubt not, appear to you (and perhaps also to many
others) much too high for the literary character of STERN; I have not at
present either leisure or inclination to enter into argument upon the question;
but, in truth I considered myself as largely his debtor for the tears and the
laughter he so frequently excited, and was desirous to leave behind me (for so
long at least as this trifle shall remain) some small memorial of my gratitude:
I will even add, that, although I regard the memory of Shakespeare with a
veneration little short of idolatry, I esteem the Monk's horn-box a relick "as
devoutly to be wished" as a pipe-stopper, a walking-stick, or even an inkstand
of the mulberry-tree.


,
Digress with thy skill, with thy freedom return!
The vain wish I repress -- Poor YORICK! no more
Shall thy mirth and thy jests "set the table on a roar;"
No more thy sad tale, with simplicity told,
Over each feeling breast its strong influence hold,
From the wise and the brave call forth sympathy's sigh,
Or swell with sweet anguish humanity's eye:
Here and there in the page if a blemish appear,
(And what page, or what life, from a blemish is clear?)
TRIM and TOBY with soft intercession attend;
LE FEVRE entreats you to pardon his friend;
MARIA too pleads, for her favorite distressed,
As you feel for her sorrows, O grant her request!
Should these advocates fail, I Have another to call,
One tear of his MONK shall obliterate all.
Favored pupil of Nature and Fancy, of yore,
Whom from Humour's embrace sweet Philanthropy bore,
While the Graces and Loves scatter flowers on thy urn,
And Wit weeps the blossom too hastily torn;
This meed too, kind spirit, unoffended receive
From a youth next to SHAKESPEARE's who honors thy grave!
MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE AND FAMILY OF THE LATE Rev. Mr. LAURENCE STERN.
ROGER STERN, (grandson to Archbishop Stern) Lieutenant in Hand aside's
regiment, was married to Agnes Hebert, widow of a captain of a good family: her
family name was (I believe) Nuttle -- though, upon recollection, that was the
name of her father-in-law, who was a noted sutler in Flanders, in Queen Ann's
wars, where my father married his wife's daughter (N. B. he was in debt to him)
which was in September 25, 1711, Old Style. -- This Nuttle had a son by my
grandmother -- a fine person of a man but a graceless whelp -- what became of
him I know not. -- The family (if any left), live now at Clomwel in the south
of Ireland, at which town I was born November 24th, 1713, a few days after my
mother arrived from Dunkirk. -- My birthday was ominous to my poor father, who
was, the day after our arrival, with many other brave officers broke, and sent
adrift into the wide world with a wife and two children -- the elder of which
was Mary; she was born in Lisle in French Flanders, July the tenth, one
thousand seven hundred and twelve, New Style. -- This child was most
unfortunate -- she married one Weemans in Dublin -- who used her most
unmercifully -- spent his substance, became a bankrupt, and left my poor sister
to shift for herself, -- which she was able to do but for a few months, for she
went to a friend's house in the country, and died of a broken heart. She was a
most beautiful woman -- of a fine figure, and deserved a better fate. -- The
regiment, in which my father served, being broke, he left Ireland as soon as I
was able to be carried, with the rest of his family, and came to the family
seat at Elvington, near York, where his mother lived. She was daughter to Sir
Roger Jaques, and an heiress. There we sojourned for about ten months, when the
regiment was established, and our household decamped with bag and baggage for
Dublin -- within a month of our arrival, my father left us, being ordered to
Exeter, where, in a sad winter, my mother and her two children followed him,
traveling from Liverpool by land to Plymouth. (Melancholy description of this
journey not necessary to be transmitted here). In twelve months we were all
sent back to Dublin. -- My mother, with three of us, (for she laid in at
Plymouth of a boy, Joram), took ship at Bristol, for Ireland, and had a narrow
escape from being cast away by a leak springing up in the vessel. -- At length,
after many perils, and struggles, we got to Dublin. -- There my father took a
large house, furnished it, and in a year and a half's time spent a great deal
of money. -- In the year one thousand seven hundred and nineteen, all unhinged
again; the regiment was ordered, with many others, to the Isle of Wight, in
order to embark for Spain in the Vigo expedition. We accompanied the regiment,
and was driven into Milford Haven, but landed at Bristol, from thence by land
to Plymouth again, and to the Isle of Wight -- where I remember we stayed
encamped some time before the embarkation of the troops -- (in this expedition
from Bristol to Hampshire we lost poor Joram -- a pretty boy, four years old,
of the smallpox), my mother, sister, and myself, remained at the Isle of Wight
during the Vigo Expedition, and until the regiment had got back to Wicklow in
Ireland, from whence my father sent for us. -- We had poor Joram's loss
supplied during our stay in the Isle of Wight, by the birth of a girl, Anne,
born September the twenty-third, one thousand seven hundred and nineteen. --
This pretty blossom fell at the age of three years, in the Barracks of Dublin
-- she was, as I well remember, of a fine delicate frame, not made to last
long, as were most of my father's babes. -- We embarked for Dublin, and had all
been cast away by a most violent storm; but through the intercessions of my
mother, the captain was prevailed upon to turn back into Wales, where we stayed
a month, and at length got into Dublin, and traveled by land to Wicklow, where
my father had for some Weeks given us over for lost. -- We lived in the
barracks at Wicklow, one year, (one thousand seven hundred and twenty) when
Devijeher (so called after Colonel Devijeher,) was born; from thence we
decamped to stay half a year with Mr. Fetherston, a clergyman, about seven
miles from Wicklow, who being a relation of my mother's, invited us to his
parsonage at Animo. -- It was in this parish, during our stay, that I had that
wonderful escape in falling through a mill-race whilst the mill was going, and
of being taken up unhurt -- the story is incredible, but known for truth in all
that part of Ireland -- where hundreds of the common people flocked to see me.
-- From hence we followed the regiment to Dublin, where we lay in the barracks
a year. -- In this year, one thousand seven hundred and twenty-one, I learned
to write, etc. -- The regiment, ordered in twenty-two, to Carrickfergus in the
north of Ireland; we all decamped, but got no further than Drogheda, thence
ordered to Mullengar, forty miles west, where by Providence we stumbled upon a
kind relation, a collateral descendant from Archbishop Stern, who took us all
to his castle and kindly entreated us for a year -- and sent us to the regiment
at Carrickfergus, loaded with kindnesses, etc. -- a most rueful and tedious
journey had we all, in March, to Carrickfergus, where we arrived in six or
seven days -- little Devijeher here died, he was three years old -- He had been
left behind at nurse at a farmhouse near Wicklow, but was fetched to us by my
father the summer after -- another child sent to fill his place, Susan; this
babe too left us behind in this weary journey -- The autumn of that year, or
the spring afterward, (I forget which) my father got leave of his colonel to
fix me at school -- which he did near Halifax, with an able master; with whom I
staid some time, 'till by God's care of me my cousin Stern, of Elvington,
became a father to me, and sent me to the university, etc. etc. To pursue the
thread of our story, my father's regiment was the year after ordered to
Londonderry, where another sister was brought forth, Catherine, still living,
but most unhappily estranged from me by my uncle's wickedness, and her own
folly -- from this station the regiment was sent to defend Gibraltar, at the
seige, where my father was run through the body by Captain Phillips, in a duel,
(the quarrel begun about a goose) with much difficulty he survived -- though with
an impaired constitution, which was not able to withstand the hardships it was
put to -- for he was sent to Jamaica, where he soon fell by the country fever,
which took away his senses first, and made a child of him, and then, in a month
or two, walking about continually without complaining, till the moment he sat
down in an arm chair, and breathed his last -- which was at Port Antonio, on
the north of the island. -- My father was a little smart man -- active to the
last degree, in all exercises -- most patient of fatigue and disappointments,
of which it pleased God to give him full measure -- he was in his temper
somewhat rapid, and hasty -- but of a kindly, sweet disposition, void of all
design; and so innocent in his own intentions, that he suspected no one; so
that you might have cheated him ten times in a day, if nine had not been
sufficient for your purpose -- my poor father died in March 1731 -- I remained
at Halifax 'till about the latter end of that year, and cannot omit mentioning
this anecdote of myself, and schoolmaster -- He had had the cieling of the
school-room new white-washed -- the ladder remained there -- I one unlucky day
mounted it, and wrote with a brush in large capital letters, LAU. STERN, for
which the usher severely whipped me. My master was very much hurt at this, and
said, before me, that never should that name be effaced, for I was a boy of
genius, and he was sure I should come to preferment -- this expression made me
forget the stripes I had received -- In the year thirty-two my cousin sent me
to the university, where I staid some time. 'Twas there that I commenced a
friendship with Mr. H... which has been most lasting on both sides -- I then
came to York, and my uncle got me the living of Sutton -- and at York I become
acquainted with your mother, and courted her for two years -- she owned she
liked me, but thought herself not rich enough, or me too poor, to be joined
together -- she went to her sister's in S --, and I wrote to her often -- I
believe then she was partly determined to have me, but would not say so -- at
her return she fell into a consumption -- and one evening that I was sitting by
her with an almost broken heart to see her so ill, she said, "my dear Lawrey, I
can never be yours, for I verily believe I have not long to live -- but I have
left you every shilling of my fortune;" -- upon that she showed me her will --
this generosity overpowered me. -- It pleased God that she recovered, and I
married her in the year 1741. My uncle and myself were then upon very good
terms, for he soon got me the Prebendary of York -- but he quarrelled with me
afterward, because I would not write paragraphs in the newspapers -- though he
was a partyman, I was not, and detested such dirty work: thinking it beneath me
-- from that period, he became my bitterest enemy. -- By my wife's means I got
the living of Stillington -- a friend of here is in the south had promised her,
that if she married a clergyman in Yorkshire, when the living became vacant, he
would make her a compliment of it. I remained near twenty years at Sutton,
doing duty at both places -- I had then very good health. -- Books, painting,
fiddling, and shooting were my amusements; as to the 'Squire of the parish, I
cannot say we were upon a very friendly footing -- but at Stillington, the
family of the C -- s showed us every kindness -- 'twas most truly agreeable to
be within a mile and a half of an amiable family, who were ever cordial friends
-- In the year 1760, I took a house at York for your mother and yourself, and
went up to London to publish my two first volumes of Shandy. In that year Lord
F -- presented me with the curacy of Coxwold -- a sweet retirement in
comparison of Sutton. In sixty-two I went to France before the peace was
concluded, and you both followed me. -- I left you both in France, and in two
years after I went to Italy for the recovery of my health -- and when I called
upon you, I tried to engage your mother to return to England, with me -- she
and yourself are at length come -- and I have had the inexpressible joy of
seeing my girl every thing I wished her.

I have set down these particulars relating to my family, and self, for my
Lydia, in case hereafter she might have a curiosity, or a kinder motive to know
them.
IN justice to Mr. Sterne's delicate feelings, I must here publish the
following letters to Mrs. Stern, before he married her, when she was in
Staffordshire -- A good heart breathes in every line of them.

LETTERS.
LETTER I. To Miss L --.
YES! I will steal from the world, and not a babbling tongue shall tell where I
am -- Echo shall not so much as whisper my hiding place -- suffer thy
imagination to paint it as a little sun-gilt cottage on the side of a romantic
hill -- do thou think I will leave love and friendship behind me? No! they
shall be my companions in solitude, for they will sit down, and rise up with me
in the amiable form of my L. -- we will be as merry, and as innocent as our
first parents in Paradise, before the arch fiend entered that undescribable
scene.

The kindest affections will have room to shoot and expand in our retirement,
and produce such fruit, as madness, and envy, and ambition have always killed
in the bud. -- Let the human tempest and hurricane rage at a distance, the
desolation is beyond the horizon of peace. -- My L. has seen a Polyanthus blow
in December -- some friendly wall has sheltered it from the biting wind. -- No
planetary influence shall reach us, but that which presides and cherishes the
sweetest flowers. -- God preserve us, how delightful this prospect in idea! We
will build, and we will plant, in our own way -- simplicity shall not be
tortured by art -- we will learn of nature how to live -- she shall be our
alchymist, to mingle all the good of life into one salubrious draught. -- The
gloomy family of care and distrust shall be banished from our dwelling, guarded
by thy kind and tutelar deity -- we will sing our choral songs of gratitude,
and rejoice to the end of our pilgrimage.

Adieu, my L. Return to one who languishes for thy society.

L. STERN.

LETTER II. To the same.
YOU bid me tell you, my dear L. how I bore your departure for S --, and
whether the valley where D'Estella stands retains still its looks -- or, if I
think the roses or jessamines smell as sweet, as when you left it -- Alas!
every thing has now lost its relish, and look! The hour you left D'Estella I
took to my bed. -- I was worn out with fevers of all kinds, but most by that
fever of the heart with which thou know well I have been wasting these two
years -- and shall continue wasting 'till you quit S --. The good Miss S --,
from the forebodings of the best of hearts, thinking I was ill, insisted upon
my going to her. -- What can be the cause, my dear L. that I never have been
able to see the face of this mutual friend, but I feel myself rent to pieces?
She made me stay an hour with her, and in that short space I burst into tears a
dozen different times -- and in such affectionate gusts of passion that she was
constrained to leave the room, and sympathize in her dressing room -- I have
been weeping for you both, said she, in a tone of the sweetest pity -- for poor
L's heart I have long known it -- her anguish is as sharp as yours -- her heart
as tender -- her constancy as great -- her virtues as heroic -- Heaven brought
you not together to be tormented. I could only answer her with a kind look, and
a heavy sigh -- and returned home to your lodgings (which I have hired 'till
your return) to resign myself to misery -- Fanny had prepared me a supper --
she is all attention to me -- but I sat over it with tears; a bitter sauce, my
L. but I could eat it with no other -- for the moment she began to spread my
little table, my heart fainted within me. -- One solitary plate, one knife, one
fork, one glass! -- I gave a thousand pensive, penetrating looks at the chair
thou had so often graced, in those quiet, and sentimental repasts -- then
laid down my knife, and fork, and took out my handkerchief, and clapped it
across my face, and wept like a child. -- I do so this very moment, my L. for
as I take up my pen my poor pulse quickens, my pale face glows, and tears are
trickling down upon the paper, as I trace the word L --. O thou! blessed in
thyself, and in thy virtues -- blessed to all that know thee -- to me most so,
because more do I know of thee than all thy sex. -- This is the philtre, my L.
by which thou have charmed me, and by which thou will hold me thine whilst
virtue and faith hold this world together. -- This, my friend, is the plain and
simple magic by which I told Miss -- I have won a place in that heart of
thine, on which I depend so satisfied, that time, or distance, or change of
every thing which might alarm the hearts of little men, create no uneasy
suspense in mine -- Wast thou to stay in S -- these seven years, thy friend,
though he would grieve, scorns to doubt, or to be doubted -- it is the only
exception where security is not the parent of danger. -- I told you poor Fanny
was all attention to me since your departure -- contrives every day bringing in
the name of L. She told me last night (upon giving me some hartshorn) she had
observed my illness began the very day of your departure for S --; that I had
never held up my head, had seldom, or scarce ever smiled, had fled from all
society -- that she verily believed I was brokenhearted, for she had never
entered the room, or passed by the door, but she heard me sigh heavily -- that
I neither eat, or slept, or took pleasure in any thing as before; -- judge
then, my L. can the valley look so well -- or the roses and jessamines smell so
sweet as heretofore? Ah me! -- But adieu -- the vesper bell calls me from thee
to my God!

L. STERN.

LETTER III. To the same.
BEFORE now my L. has lodged an indictment against me in the high court of
Friendship -- I plead guilty to the charge, and entirely submit to the mercy of
that amiable tribunal. -- Let this mitigate my punishment, if it will not
expiate my transgression -- do not say that I shall offend again in the same
manner, though a too easy pardon sometimes occasions a repetition of the same
fault. -- A miser says, though I do no good with my money today, tomorrow
shall be marked with some deed of beneficence. -- The Libertine says, let me
enjoy this week in forbidden and luxurious pleasures, and the next I will
dedicate to serious thought and reflection. -- The Gamester says, let me have
one more chance with the dice and I will never touch them more. -- The Knave of
every profession wishes to obtain but independency, and he will become an
honest man. -- The Female Coquette triumphs in tormenting her inamorato, for
fear, after marriage, he should not pity her.

Thy apparition of the fifth instant, (for letters may almost be called so)
proved more welcome as I did not expect it. Oh! my L --, thou art kind indeed
to make an apology for me, and thou never wilt assuredly repent of one act of
kindness -- for being thy debtor, I will pay thee with interest. -- Why does my
L. complain of the desertion of friends? -- Where does the human being live
that will not join in this complaint? -- It is a common observation, and
perhaps too true, that married people seldom extend their regards beyond their
own fireside. -- There is such a thing as parsimony in esteem, as well as money
-- yet as the one costs nothing, it might be bestowed with more liberality. --
We cannot gather grapes from thorns, so we must not expect kind attachments
from persons who are wholly folded up in selfish schemes. -- I do not know
whether I most despise, or pity such characters -- nature never made an unkind
creature -- ill usage, and bad habits, have deformed a fair and lovely creation.

My L! -- thou art surrounded by all the melancholy gloom of winter; were thou
alone, the retirement would be agreeable. -- Disappointed ambition might envy
such a retreat, and disappointed love would seek it out. -- Crowded towns, and
busy societies, may delight the unthinking, and the gay -- but solitude is the
best nurse of wisdom. -- Methinks I see my contemplative girl now in the
garden, watching the gradual approaches of spring. -- Do not thou mark with
delight the first vernal buds? the snow-drop, and primrose, these early and
welcome visitors, spring beneath thy feet. -- Flora and Pomona already consider
thee as their handmaid; and in a little time will load thee with their sweetest
blessing. -- The feathered race are all thy own, and with them, untaught
harmony will soon begin to cheer thy morning and evening walks. -- Sweet as
this may be, return -- return -- the birds of Yorkshire will tune their pipes,
and sing as melodiously as those of Staffordshire.

Adieu, my beloved L. thine too much for my peace,

L. STERN.

LETTER IV. To the same.
I HAVE offended her whom I so tenderly love! -- what could tempt me to it! but
if a beggar was to knock at thy gate, would thou not open the door and be
melted with compassion. -- I know thou would, for Pity has erected a temple
in thy bosom. -- Sweetest, and best of all human passions! let thy web of
tenderness cover the pensive form of affliction, and soften the darkest shades
of misery! I have re-considered this apology, and, alas! what will it
accomplish? Arguments, however finely spun, can never change the nature of
things -- very true -- so a truce with them.

I have lost a very valuable friend by a sad accident, and what is worse, he
has left a widow and five young children to lament this sudden stroke. -- If
real usefulness and integrity of heart, could have secured him from this, his
friends would not now be mourning his untimely fate. -- These dark and
seemingly cruel dispensations of Providence, often make the best of human
hearts complain. -- Who can paint the distress of an affectionate mother, made
a widow in a moment, weeping in bitterness over a numerous, helpless, and
fatherless offspring? -- God! these are thy chastisements, and require (hard
task!) a pious acquiescence.

Forgive me this digression, and allow me to drop a tear over a departed
friend; and what is more excellent, an honest man. My L! thou will feel all
that kindness can inspire in the death of -- The event was sudden, and thy
gentle spirit would be more alarmed on that account. -- But my L. thou have
less to lament, as old age was creeping on, and her period of doing good, and
being useful, was nearly over. -- At sixty years of age the tenement gets fast
out of repair, and the lodger with anxiety thinks of a discharge. -- In such a
situation the poet might well say "The soul uneasy, etc."

My L. talks of leaving the country -- may a kind angel guide thy steps hither.
-- Solitude at length grows tiresome. -- Thou say thou will quit the place
with regret -- I think so too. -- Does not something uneasy mingle with the
very reflection of leaving it? It is like parting with an old friend, whose
temper and company one has long been acquainted with. -- I think I see you
looking twenty times a day at the house -- almost counting every brick and pane
of glass, and telling them at the same time with a sigh, you are going to leave
them. -- Oh happy modification of matter! they will remain insensible of thy
loss. -- But how will thou be able to part with thy garden? -- The recollection
of so many pleasing walks must have endeared it to you. The trees, the shrubs,
the flowers, which thou reared with thy own hands -- will they not droop and
fade away sooner upon thy departure. -- Who will be the successor to nurse them
in thy absence. -- Thou will leave thy name upon the myrtletree. -- If trees,
and shrubs, and flowers, could compose an elegy, I should expect a very
plaintive one upon this subject.

Adieu, adieu. Believe me ever, ever thine,

L. STERN.

LETTER V. To S -- C --, Esquire.
London, Christmas Day. My Dear Friend,
I HAVE been in such a continual hurry since the moment I arrived here -- what
with my books, and what with visiters, and visitings, that it was not in my
power sooner to sit down and acknowledge the favor of your obliging letter;
and to thank you for the most friendly motives which led you to write it: I am
not much in pain upon what gives my kind friends at Stillington so much on the
chapter of Noses -- because, as the principal satire throughout that part is
levelled at those learned blockheads who, in all ages, have wasted their time
and much learning upon points as foolish -- it shifts off the idea of what you
fear, to another point -- and it is thought here very good -- 'twill pass muster
-- I mean not with all -- no -- no! I shall be attacked and pelted, either from
cellars or garrets, write what I will -- and besides, must expect to have a
party against me of many hundreds -- who either do not -- or will not laugh. --
It Is enough if I divide the world; -- at least I will rest contented with it.
-- I wish you was here to see what changes of looks and political reasoning,
have taken place in every company, and coffee-house since last year; we shall
be soon Prussians and Anti-Prussians, B -- 's and Anti-B -- s, and those
distinctions will just do as well as Whig and Tory -- and for aught I know
serve the same ends. -- The K. seems resolved to bring all things back to their
original principles, and to stop the torrent of corruption and laziness. -- He
rises every morning at six to do business -- rides out at eight to a minute,
returns at nine to give himself up to his people. -- By persisting, it is
thought he will oblige his M.......s and dependants, to dispatch affairs with
him many hours sooner than of late -- and it is much to be questioned whether
they will not be enabled to wait upon him sooner by being freed from long
levees of their own, and applications; which will in all likelihood be
transferred from them directly to himself -- the present system being to remove
that Phalanx of great people, which stood betwixt the throne and the subjects,
and suffer them to have immediate access without the intervention of a caball
-- (this is the language of others): however the K. gives every thing himself,
knows every thing, and weighs every thing maturely, and then is inflexible --
this puts old stagers off their game -- how it will end we are all in the dark.

It Is feared the war is quite over in Germany; never was known such havoc
amongst troops -- I was told yesterday by a Colonel, from Germany, that out of
two battalions of nine hundred men, to which he belonged, but seventy-one left!
-- P.... F... has sent word, it is said, that he must have forty-thousand men
directly sent to take the field -- and with provisions for them too, for he can
but subsist them for a fortnight -- I hope this will find you all got to York
-- I beg my compliments to the amiable Mrs. Croft, etc. etc.

Though I purposed going first to Golden-Square, yet fate has thus long disposed
of me -- so I have never been able to set a foot toward that quarter.

I am, dear Sir, Yours affectionately L. STERN.

LETTER VI. To the same.
My dear Sir,
I HAVE just time to acknowledge the favor of yours, but not to get the two
prints you mention -- which shall be sent you by next post -- I have bought
them, and lent them to Miss Gilbert, but will assuredly send for them and
enclose them to you: -- I will take care to get your pictures well copied, and
at a moderate price. And if I can be of further use, I beseech you to employ
me; and from time to time will send you an account of whatever may be worth
transmitting. -- The stream now sets in strong against the German war. Loud
complaints of -- -- -- making a trade of the war, etc. etc. much expected from
Ld. G -- 's evidence to these matters, who is expected every hour; -- the K.
wins every day upon the people, shows himself much at the play, (but at no
opera) rides out with his brothers every morning, half an hour after seven,
till nine -- returns with them -- spends an hour with them at breakfast, and
chat -- and then sits down to business. I never dined at home once since I
arrived -- am fourteen dinners deep engaged just now, and fear matters will be
worse with me in that point than better. -- As to the main points in view, at
which you hint -- all I can say is, that I see my way, and unless Old Nick
throws the dice -- shall, in due time, come off winner. -- Tristram will be out
the twentieth -- there is a great rout made about him before he enters the
stage -- whether this will be of use or no, I cannot say -- some wits of the
first magnitude here, both as to wit and station, engage me success -- time
will show -- Adieu, dear Sir! and with my compliments to Mrs. Croft, etc.

I am your affectionate, and obliged L. STERN.

LETTER VII. To the same.
Dear Sir,
I THIS moment received the favor of your kind letter. -- The letter in the
Ladies Magazine about me, was wrote by the noted Dr. H --, who wrote the
Inspector, and undertakes that magazine -- the people of York are very
uncharitable to suppose any man so gross a beast as to pen such a character of
himself. -- In this great town no soul ever suspected it, for a thousand
reasons -- could they suppose I should be such a fool as to fall foul upon Dr.
W -- n, my best friend, by representing him so weak a man -- or by telling such
a lie of him -- as his giving me a purse, to buy off his tutorship for
Tristram! -- or I should be fool enough to own I had taken his purse for that
purpose!

You must know there is a quarrel between Dr. H -- and Dr. M -- y, who was the
physician meant at Mr. C -- S -- 's, and Dr. H -- has changed the place on
purpose to give M -- y a lick. -- Now that conversation, (though perhaps true)
yet happened at another place, and with another physician; which I have
contradicted in this city for the honor of my friend M -- y, all which shows
the absurdity of York credulity, and nonsense. Besides the account is full of
falsehoods -- first with regard to the place of my birth, which was at C --, in
Ireland -- the story of a hundred pounds to Mrs. W --, not true, or of a
pension promised; the merit of which I disclaimed -- and indeed there are so
many other things so untrue, and unlikely to come from me, that the worst enemy
I have here never had a suspicion -- and to end all Dr. H -- owns the paper.

I shall be down before May is out -- I preach before the Judges on Sunday --
my sermons come out on Thursday after -- and I purpose the Monday at furthest
after that to set out for York -- I have bought a pair of horses for that
purpose -- my best respects to your Lady --

I am, Dear Sir, Your most obliged and faithful, L. STERN.
P.S. I beg pardon for this hasty scrawl, having just come from a Concert where
the D.. of Y... performed -- I have received great notice from him, and last
week had the honor of supping with him.



LETTER VIII. To the same.
Dear Sir,
SINCE I had the favor of your obliging letter, nothing has happened, or been
said one day, which has not been contradicted the next; so having little
certain to write, I have forbore writing at all, in hopes every day of
something worth filling up a letter. We had the greatest expectations yesterday
that ever were raised, of a pitched battle in the H -- of C --, wherein Mr. P
-- was to have entered and thrown down the gauntlet, in defense of the German
war. -- There never was so full a house -- the gallery full to the top -- I was
there all the day -- when, lo! a political fit of the gout seized the great
combattant -- he entered not the lists -- B... got up, and begged the house, as
he saw not his right honorable friend there, to put off the debate -- it could
not be done; so B... rose up, and made a most long, passionate, incoherent
speech, in defense of the Germanick war -- but very severe upon the unfrugal
manner it was carried on -- in which he addressed himself principally to the C
-- of the E --, and laid him on terribly. -- It seems the chancery of Hanover
had laid out 350,000 pounds, on account, and brought in our treasury debtor --
and the grand debate was, for an honest examination of the particulars of this
extravagant account, and for vouchers to authenticate it. -- L... answered B...
very rationally, and coolly -- Lord N. spoke long -- Sir F. D -- maintained the
German war was most pernicious -- Mr. C --, of Surry, spoke well against the
account, with some others -- L. B -- n at last got up, and spoke half an hour
with great plainness, and temper -- explained a great many hidden springs
relating to these accounts, in favor of the late K. -- and told two or three
conversations which had passed between the K. and himself, relative to these
expenses -- which cast great honor upon the K's character. This was with
regard to the money the K. had secretly furnished out of his pocket to lessen
the account of the Hanover-score brought us to discharge.

B -- d and B -- n abused all who sought for peace, and joined in the cry for
it; and B -- d added, that the reasons of wishing a peace now, were the same as
at the peace of Utretch -- that the people behind the curtain could not both
maintain the war and their places too, so were for making another sacrifice of
the nation, to their own interests. -- After all -- the cry for a peace is so
general, that it will certainly end in one. Now for myself. --

One half of the town abuse my book as bitterly, as the other half cry it up to
the skies -- the best is, they abuse and buy it, and at such a rate, that we
are going on with a second edition, as fast as possible.

I am going down for a day or two with Mr. Spencer, to Wimbleton; on Wednesday
there is to be a grand assembly at Lady N --. I have enquired every where about
Stephen's affair, and can hear nothing -- My friend, Mr. Charles T --, will be
now secretary of war -- he bid me wish him joy of it, though not in possession.
-- I will ask him -- and depend, my most worthy friend, that you shall not be
ignorant of what I learn from him -- believe me ever, ever,

Yours, L. S.

LETTER IX. To the same.
My dear Sir,
A STRAIN which I got in my wrist by a terrible fall, prevented my
acknowledging the favor of your obliging letter. I went yesterday morning to
breakfast with Mr. V --, who is a kind of right hand man to the secretary, on
purpose to enquire about the propriety, or feasibility, of doing what you wish
me -- and he has told me an anecdote which, had you been here, would, I think,
have made it wiser to have deferred speaking about the affair a month hence
than now; it is this -- You must know that the numbers of officers who have
left their regiments in Germany, for the pleasures of the town, have been a
long topic for merriment; as you see them in St. James's Coffee-house, and the
park, every hour, enquiring, open mouth, how things go on in Germany, and what
news? -- when they should have been there to have furnished news themselves --
but the worst part has been, that many of them have left their brother officers
on their duty, and in all the fatigues of it, and have come with no end but to
make friends, to be put unfairly over the heads of those who were left risking
their lives. -- In this attempt there have been some but too successful, which
has justly raised ill-blood and complaints from the officers who staid behind
-- the upshot has been, that they have every soul been ordered off, and woe be
to him ('it is said) who shall be found listening. Now just to mention our
friend's case whilst this cry is on foot, I think would be doing more hurt than
good, but if you think otherwise, I will go with all my heart and mention it to
Mr. T..., for to do more I am too inconsiderable a person to pretend to. You
made me and my friends here very merry with the accounts current at York, of my
being forbid the court -- but they do not consider what a considerable person
they make of me, when they suppose either my going, or my not going there, is a
point that ever enters the K's head -- and for those about him, I have the
honor either to stand so personally well known to them; or to be so well
represented by those of the first rank, as to fear no accident of that kind.

I thank God (B...'s excepted) I have never yet made a friend, or connection I
have forfeited, or done ought to forfeit -- but on the contrary, my true
character is better understood, and where I had one friend last year, who did
me honor, I have three now. -- If my enemies knew that by this rage of abuse,
and ill will, they were effectually serving the interests both of myself, and
works, they would be more quiet -- but it has been the fate of my betters, who
have found, that the way to fame, is like the way to heaven -- through much
tribulation -- and till I shall have the honor to be as much mal-treated as
Rabelais, and Swift were, I must continue humble; for I have not filled up the
measure of half their persecutions.

The court is turning topsy-turvy. Lord B..e, le premier -- Lord T..t to be
groom of the chambers in room of the D... of R....d -- Lord H...x to Ireland --
Sir F. D...d in T...'s place -- P..t seems unmoved -- a peace inevitable --
Stocks rise -- the peers this moment kissing hands, etc. etc. (this week may be
be christened the kiss-hands week) for a hundred changes will happen in
consequence of these. Pray present my compliments to Mrs. C... and all friends,
and believe me, with the greatest fidelity,

Your ever obliged, L. STERN.
P.S. Is it not strange that Lord T...t should have power to remove the Duke of
R...d.

Pray when you have read this, send the news to Mrs. Stern.



LETTER X. To the same.
Dear Sir,
I RETURN you ten thousand thanks for the favor of your letter -- and the
account you give me of my wife and girl. -- I saw Mr. Ch -- y tonight a
Ranelagh, who tells me you have inoculated my friend Bobby. -- I heartily wish
him well through, and hope in God all goes right.

On Monday we set out with a grand retinue of Lord Rockingham's (in whose suite
I move) for Windsor -- they have contracted for fourteen hundred pounds for the
dinner, to some general undertaker, of which the K. has bargained to pay one
third. Lord G -- S --, was last Saturday at the opera, some say with great
effrontery -- others with great dejection.

I have little news to add. -- There is a shilling pamphlet wrote against
Tristram. -- I wish they would write a hundred such.

Mrs. Stern says her purse is light; will you, dear Sir, be so good as to pay
her ten guineas, and I will reckon with you when I have the pleasure of meeting
you. -- My best compliments to Mrs. C. and all friends. -- Believe me, dear
Sir, your obliged and faithful

LAU. STERN.

LETTER XI. To Mrs. F --.
York, Tuesday, Nov. 19. Dear Madam,
YOUR kind enquiries after my health, deserve my best thanks. -- What can give
one more pleasure than the good wishes of those we value? -- I am sorry you
give so bad an account of your own health, but hope you will find benefit from
tar-water -- it has been of infinite service to me. -- I suppose, my good lady,
by what you say in your letter, "that I am busy writing an extraordinary book,"
that your intelligence comes from York -- the fountainhead of chit-chat news
-- and -- no matter. -- Now for your desire of knowing the reason of my turning
author? why truly I am tired of employing my brains for other people's
advantage. -- It Is a foolish sacrifice I have made for some years to an
ungrateful person. -- I depend much upon the candor of the public, but I
shall not pick out a jury to try the merit of my book amongst *******, and --
till you read my Tristram, do not, like some people, condemn it. -- Laugh I am
sure you will at some passages. -- I have hired a small house in the Minster
Yard for my wife, and daughter -- the latter is to begin dancing, etc. if I
cannot leave her a fortune, I will at least give her an education. -- As I
shall publish my works very soon, I shall be in town by March, and shall have
the pleasure of meeting with you. -- All your friends are well, and ever hold
you in the same estimation that your sincere friend does.

Adieu, dear lady, believe me, with every wish for your happiness, your most
faithful, etc.

LAURENCE STERN.

LETTER XII. To Dr. ******.
Jan. 30, 1760. Dear Sir,
-- DE mortuis nil nisi bonum, is a maxim which you have so often of late urged
in conversation, and in your letters, (but in your last especially) with such
seriousness, and severity against me, as the supposed transgressor of the rule;
-- that you have made me at length as serious and severe as yourself: -- but
that the humors you have stirred up might not work too potently within me, I
have waited four days to cool myself, before I would set pen to paper to answer
you, " de mortuis nil nisi bonum." I declare I have considered the wisdom, and
foundation of it over and over again, as dispassionately and charitably as a
good Christian can, and, after all, I can find nothing in it, or make more of
it, than a nonsensical lullaby of some nurse, put into Latin by some pedant, to
be chanted by some hypocrite to the end of the world, for the consolation of
departing lechers. -- It Is, I own, Latin; and I think that is all the weight it
has -- for, in plain English, it is a loose and futile position below a dispute
-- " you are not to speak any thing of the dead, but what is good." Why so? --
Who says so? -- neither reason or scripture. -- Inspired authors have done
otherwise -- and reason and common sense tell me, that if the characters of
past ages and men are to be drawn at all, they are to be drawn like themselves;
that is, with their excellencies, and with their foibles -- and it is as much a
piece of justice to the world, and to virtue too, to do the one, as the other.
-- The ruleing passion et les egarements du coeur, are the very things which
mark, and distinguish a man's character; -- in which I would as soon leave out
a man's head as his hobbyhorse. -- However, if like the poor devil of a
painter, we must conform to this pious canon, de mortuis, etc. which I own has
a spice of piety in the sound of it, and be obliged to paint both our angels
and our devils out of the same pot -- I then infer that our Sydenhams, and
Sangrados, our Lucretias, -- and Massalinas, our Summers, and our Bolingbrokes
-- are alike entitled to statues, and all the historians, or satirists who have
said otherwise since they departed this life, from Sallust, to S -- e, are
guilty of the crimes you charge me with, "cowardice and injustice."

But why cowardice? "because it is not courage to attack a dead man who cannot
defend himself." -- But why do you doctors of the faculty attack such a one
with your incision knife? Oh! for the good of the living. -- It Is my plea. --
But I have something more to say in my behalf -- and it is this -- I am not
guilty of the charge -- though defensible. I have not cut up Doctor Kunastrokius
at all -- I have just scratched him -- and that scarce skindeep. -- I do him
first all honor -- speak of Kunastrokius as a great man -- (be he who he will)
and then most distantly hint at a drole foible in his character -- and that not
first reported (to the few who can even understand the hint) by me -- but known
before by every chambermaid and footman within the bills of mortality -- but
Kunastrokius, you say, was a great man -- it is that very circumstance which
makes the pleasantry -- for I could name at this instant a score of honest
gentlemen who might have done the very thing which Kunastrokius did, and seen
no joke in it at all -- as to the failing of Kunstrokius, which you say can
only be imputed to his friends as a misfortune -- I see nothing like a
misfortune in it to any friend or relation of Kunastrokius -- that Kunastrokius
upon occasions should sit with ******* and ******* -- I have put these stars
not to hurt your worship's delicacy -- If Kunastrokius after all is too sacred
a charactter to be even smiled at, (which is all I have done) he has had better
luck than his betters: -- In the same page (without imputation of cowardice) I
have said as much of a man of twice his wisdom -- and that is Solomon, of whom
I have made the same remark "That they were both great men -- and like all
mortal men had each their ruling passion.

-- The consolation you give me, "That my book however will be read enough to
answer my design of raising a tax upon the public" -- is very unconsolatory --
to say nothing how very mortifying! by h -- n! an author is worse treated than
a common ***** at this rate -- " You will get a penny by your sins, and that is
enough." -- Upon this chapter let me comment. -- That I proposed laying the
world under contribution when I set pen to paper -- is what I own, and I
suppose I may be allowed to have that view in my head in common with every
other writer, to make my labor of advantage to myself.

Do not you do the same? but I beg I may add, that whatever views I had of that
kind, I had other views -- the first of which was, the hopes of doing the world
good by ridiculing what I thought deserving of it -- or of disservice to sound
learning, etc. -- how I have succeeded my book must show -- and this I leave
entirely to the world -- but not to that little world of your acquaintance,
whose opinion, and sentiments you call the general opinion of the best judges
without exception, who all affirm (you say) that my book cannot be put into the
hands of any woman of character. (I hope you except widows, doctor -- for they
are not all so squeamish -- but I am told they are all really of my party in
return for some good offices done their interests in the 176th page of my
second volume) But for the chaste married, and chaste unmarried part of the sex
-- they must not read my book! Heaven forbid the stock of chastity should be
lessened by the life and opinions of Tristram Shandy -- yes, his opinions -- it
would certainly debauch 'em! God take them under his protection in this fiery
trial, and send us plenty of Duenas to watch the workings of their humors,
'till they have safely got through the whole work. -- If this will not be
sufficient, may we have plenty of Sangrados to pour in plenty of cold water,
till this terrible fermentation is over -- as for the nummum in loculo, which
you mention to me a second time, I fear you think me very poor, or in debt -- I
thank God though I don't abound -- that I have enough for a clean shirt every day
-- and a mutton chop -- and my contentment with this, has thus far (and I hope
ever will) put me above stooping an inch for it, for -- estate. -- Curse on it,
I like it not to that degree, nor envy (you may be sure) any man who kneels in
the dirt for it -- so that howsoever I may fall short of the ends proposed in
commencing author -- I enter this protest, first that my end was honest, and
secondly, that I wrote not be fed, but to be famous. I am much obliged to Mr.
Garrick for his very favorable opinion -- but why, dear Sir, had he done
better in finding fault with it than in commending it? to humble me? an author
is not so soon humbled as you imagine -- no, but to make the book better by
castrations -- that is still sub judice, and I can assure you upon this
chapter, that the very passages, and descriptions you propose, that I should
sacrifice in my second edition, are what are best relished by men of wit, and
some others whom I esteem as sound critics -- so that upon the whole, I am
still kept up, if not above fear, at least above despair, and have seen enough
to show me the folly of an attempt of castrating my book to the prudish humors
of particulars. I believe the short cut would be to publish this letter at the
beginning of the third volume, as an apology for the first and second. I was
sorry to find a censure upon the insincerity of some of my friends -- I have no
reason myself to reproach any one man -- my friends have continued in the same
opinions of my books which they first gave me of it -- many indeed have thought
better of 'em, by considering them more; few worse.

I am, Sir, Your humble servant, LAURENCE STERN.

LETTER XIII. To the B -- of G --.
York, June 9, 1760. My Lord,
NOT knowing where to send two sets of my Sermons, I could think of no better
expedient, than to order them into Mr. Berrenger's hands, who has promised me
that he will wait upon your Lordship with them, the first moment he hears you
are in town. The truest and humblest thanks I return to your Lordship for the
generosity of your protection, and advice to me; by making a good use of the
one, I will hope to deserve the other; I wish your Lordship all the health and
happiness in this world, for I am

Your Lordship's Most obliged and Most grateful Servant, L. STERN.
P.S. I am just sitting down to go on with Tristram, etc. -- the scribblers use
me ill, but they have used my betters much worse, for which may God forgive
them.



LETTER XIV. To the Rev. Mr. STERN.
Prior-Park, June 15, 1760. Reverend Sir,
I HAVE your favor of the 9th Instant, and am glad to understand, you are got
safe home, and employed again in your proper studies and amusements. You have
it in your power to make that, which is an amusement to yourself and others,
useful to both: at least, you should above all things, beware of its becoming
hurtful to either, by any violations of decency and good manners; but I have
already taken such repeated liberties of advising you on that head, that to say
more would be needless, or perhaps unacceptable.

Whoever is, in any way, well received by the public, is sure to be annoyed by
that pest of the public, profligate scribblers. This is the common lot of
successful adventurers; but such have often a worse evil to struggle with, I
mean the over-officiousness of their indiscreet friends. There are two Odes, as
they are called, printed by Dodsley. Whoever was the author, he appears to be a
monster of impiety and lewdness -- yet such is the malignity of the scribblers,
some have given them to your friend Hall; and others, which is still more
impossible, to yourself; though the first Ode has the insolence to place you both
in a mean and a ridiculous light. But this might arise from a tale equally
groundless and maglignant, that you had shown them to your acquaintances in M.
S. before they were given to the public. Nor was their being printed by Dodsley
the likeliest means of discrediting the calumny.

About this time, another, under the mask of friendship, pretended to draw your
character, which was since published in a Female Magazine, (for dullness, who
often has as great a hand as the devil, in deforming God's works of the
creation, has made them, it seems, male and female) and from thence it was
transformed into a Chronicle. Pray have you read it, or do you know its author?

But of all these things, I dare say Mr. Garrick, whose prudence is equal to
his honesty or his talents, has remonstrated to you with the freedom of a
friend. He knows the inconstancy of what is called the Public, toward all,
even the best intentioned, of those who contribute to its pleasure, or
amusement. He (as every man of honor and discretion would) has availed himself
of the public favor, to regulate the taste, and, in his proper station, to
reform the manners of the fashionable world; while by a well judged economy,
he has provided against the temptations of a mean and servile dependency, on
the follies and vices of the great.

In a word, be assured, there is no one more sincerely wishes your welfare and
happiness, than,

Reverend Sir, W. G.

LETTER XIV. To my Witty Widow, Mrs. F --.
Coxwould, Aug. 3, 1760. Madam,
WHEN a man's brains are as dry as a squeezed Orange -- and he feels he has no
more conceit in him than a Mallet, it is in vain to think of sitting down, and
writing a letter to a lady of your wit, unless in the honest John-Trot-Stile
of, yours of the 15 th instant came safe to hand, etc. which, by the bye, looks
like a letter of business; and you know very well, from the first letter I had
the honor to write to you, I am a man of no business at all. This vile plight
I found my genius in, was the reason I have told Mr. --, I would not write to
you till the next post -- hopeing, by that time to get some small recruit, at
least of vivacity, if not wit, to set out with; -- but upon second thoughts,
thinking a bad letter in season -- to be better than a good one, out of it --
this scrawl is the consequence, which, if you will burn the moment you get it
-- I promise to send you a fine set essay in the style of your female
epistolizers, cut and trimmed at all points. -- God defend me from such, who
never yet knew what it was to say or write one premeditated word in my whole
life -- for this reason I send you with pleasure, because wrote with the
careless irregularity of an easy heart. -- Who told you Garrick wrote the
medley for Beard? -- 'Twas wrote in his house, however, and before I left town.
-- I deny it -- I was not lost two days before I left town. -- I was lost all
the time I was there, and never found till I got to this Shandy castle of mine.
-- Next winter I intend to sojourn amongst you with more decorum, and will
neither be lost or found any where.

Now I wish to God, I was at your elbow -- I have just finished one volume of
Shandy, and I want to read it to some one who I know can taste and relish
humor -- this by the way, is a little impudent in me -- for I take the thing
for granted, which their high mightinesses the world have yet to determine --
but I mean no such thing -- I could wish only to have your opinion -- shall I,
in truth, give you mine? -- I dare not -- but I will; provided you keep it to
yourself -- know then, that I think there is more laughable humor, -- with
equal degree of Cervantick satire -- if not more than in the last -- but we are
bad judges of the merit of our children.

I return you a thousand thanks for your friendly congratulations upon my
habitation -- and I will take care, you shall never wish me but well, for I am,
madam,

With great esteem and truth, Your most obliged L. STERN.
P.S. I have wrote this so vilely and so precipitately, I fear you must carry
it to a decypherer -- I beg you will do me the honor to write -- otherwise you
draw me in, instead of Mr. -- drawing you into a scrape -- for I should sorrow
to have a taste of so agreeable a correspondent -- and no more.

Adieu.


LETTER XV. To Lady --.
Coxwold, Sept, 21, 1761.
I RETURN to my new habitation, fully determined to write as hard as can be,
and thank you most cordially, my dear lady, for your letter of congratulation
upon my Lord Fauconberg's having presented me with the curacy of this place --
though your congratulation comes somewhat of the latest, as I have been
possessed of it some time. -- I hope I have been of some service to his
Lordship, and he has sufficiently requited me. -- It Is seventy guineas a year
in my pocket, though worth a hundred -- but it obliges me to have a curate to
officiate at Sutton and Stillington. -- It Is within a mile of his Lordship's
seat, and park. It Is a very agreeable ride out in the chaise, I purchased for
my wife. -- Lyd has a poney which she delights in. -- Whilst they take these
diversions, I am scribbling away at my Tristram. These two volumes are, I
think, the best. -- I shall write as long as I live, it is, in fact, my
hobbyhorse: and so much am I delighted with my uncle Toby's imaginary
character, that I am become an enthusiast. -- My Lydia helps to copy for me --
and my wife knits and listens as I read her chapters. -- The coronation of his
Majesty (whom God preserve!) has cost me the value of an Ox, which is to be
roasted whole in the middle of the town, and my parishioners will, I suppose,
be very merry upon the occasion. -- You will then be in town -- and feast your
eyes with a sight, which it is to be hoped will not be in either of our powers
to see again -- for in point of age we have about twenty years the start of his
Majesty. -- And now, my dear friend, I must finish this -- and with every wish
for your happiness conclude myself your most sincere well-wisher and friend,

L. STERN.

LETTER XVI. To J -- H -- S --, Esquire.
Coxwould, --, 1761. Dear H --,
I REJOICE you are in London -- rest you there in peace; here it is the devil.
-- You was a good prophet. -- I wish myself back again, as you told me I should
-- but not because a thin death-doing pestiferous north-east wind blows in a
line directly from crazy-castle turret full upon me in this cuckoldly retreat,
(for I value the north-east wind and all its powers not a straw) -- but the
transition from rapid motion to absolute rest was too violent. -- I should have
walked about the streets of York ten days, as a proper medium to have passed
through, before I entered upon my rest. -- I staid but a moment, and I have been
here but a few, to satisfy me I have not managed my miseries like a wise man --
and if God, for my consolation under them, had not poured forth the spirit of
Shandeism into me, which will not suffer me to think two moments upon any grave
subject, I would else, just now lay down and die -- die -- and yet, in half an
hour's time, I Will lay a guinea, I shall be as merry as a monkey -- and as
mischievous too, and forget it all -- so that this is but a copy of the present
train running cross my brain. -- And so you think this cursed stupid -- but
that, my dear H. depends much upon the quota hora of your shabby clock, if the
pointer of it is in any quarter between ten in the morning or four in the
afternoon -- I give it up -- or if the day is obscured by dark engendering
clouds of either wet or dry weather, I am still lost -- but who knows but it
may be five -- and the day as fine a day as ever shone upon the earth since the
destruction of Sodom -- and peradventure your honor may have got a good hearty
dinner today, and eat and drank your intellectuals into a placidulish and a
blandulish amalgama -- to bear nonsense, so much for that.

It Is as cold and churlish just now, as (if God had not pleased it to be so) it
ought to have been in bleak December, and therefore I am glad you are where you
are, and where (I repeat it again) I wish I was also -- Curse of poverty, and
absence from those we love! -- they are two great evils which embitter all
things -- and yet with the first I am not haunted much. -- As to matrimony, I
should be a beast to rail at it, for my wife is easy -- but the world is not --
and had I staid from her a second longer it would have been a burning shame --
else she declares herself happier without me -- but not in anger is this
declaration made -- but in pure sober good-sense, built on sound experience --
she hopes you will be able to strike a bargain for me before this time
twelvemonth, to lead a bear round Europe: and from this hopes from you, I
verily believe it is, that you are so high in her favor at present -- She
swears you are a fellow of wit, though humourous; a funny jolly soul, though
somewhat splenetic; and (bating the love of women) as honest as gold -- how do
you like the simile? -- Oh, Lord! now are you going to Ranelagh tonight, and I
am sitting, sorrowful as the prophet was when the voice cried out to him and
said, "What do thou here, Elijah?" -- It Is well the spirit does not make the
same at Coxwold -- for unless for the few sheep left me to take care of, in
this wilderness, I might as well, nay better, be at Mecca -- When we find we
can by a shifting of places, run away from ourselves, what think you of a jaunt
there, before we finally pay a visit to the vale of Jehosophat -- As ill a fame
as we have, I trust I shall one day or other see you face to face -- so tell
the two colonels, if they love good company, to live righteously and soberly as
you do, and then they will have no doubts or dangers within, or without them --
present my best and warmest wishes to them, and advise the eldest to prop up
his spirits, and get a rich dowager before the conclusion of the peace -- why
will not the advice suit both, par nobile fratrum?

Tomorrow morning, (if Heaven permit) I begin the fifth volume of Shandy -- I
care not a curse for the critics -- I Will load my vehicle with what goods he
sends me, and they may take 'em off my hands, or let them alone -- I am very
valourous -- and it is in proportion as we retire from the world and see it in
its true dimensions, that we despise it -- no bad rant! -- God above bless you!
You know I am

Your affectionate Cousin, LAURENCE STERN.
What few remain of the Demoniacs, greet -- and write me a letter, if you are
able, as foolish as this.



LETTER XVII. To D -- G --, Esquire.
Paris, Jan. 31, 1762. My dear Friend,
THINK not that because I have been a fortnight in this metropolis without
writing to you, that therefore I have not had you and Mrs. G. a hundred times
in my head and heart -- heart! yes, yes, say you -- but I must not waste paper
in badinage this post, whatever I do the next. Well! here I am, my friend, as
much improved in my health for the time, as ever your friendship could wish, or
at least your faith give credit to -- by the bye I am somewhat worse in my
intellectuals, for my head is turned round with what I see, and the unexpected
honors I have met with here. Tristram was almost as much known here as in
London, at least among your men of condition and learning, and has got me
introduced into so many circles ('it is comme a Londres.) I have just now a
fortnight's dinners and suppers upon my hands -- My application to the Count de
Choisuiel goes on swimmingly, for not only Mr. Pelletiere, (who, by the bye,
sends ten thousand civilities to you, and Mrs. G.) has undertaken my affair,
but the Count de Limbourgh -- the Baron d'Holbach, has offered any security for
the inoffensiveness of my behavior in France -- it is more, you rogue! than you
will do -- This Baron is one of the most learned noblemen here, the great
protector of wits, and the Scavans who are no wits -- keeps open house three
days a week -- his house, is now, as yours was to me, my own -- he lives at
great expense -- 'Twas an odd incident when I was introduced to the Count de
Bissie, which I was at his desire -- I found him reading Tristram -- this
grandee does me great honors, and gives me leave to go a private way through
his apartments into the palais royal, to view the Duke of Orleans' collections,
every day I have time -- I have been at the doctors of Sorbonne -- I hope in a
fortnight to break through, or rather from the delights of this place, which in
the scavoir vivre, exceed all the places, I believe, in this section of the
globe --

I am going, when this letter is wrote, with Mr. Fox, and Mr. Maccartny to
Versailles -- the next morning I wait upon Monsr. Titon, in company with Mr.
Maccartny, who is known to him, to deliver your commands. I have bought you the
pamphlet upon theatrical, or rather tragical declamation -- I have bought
another in verse, worth reading, and you will receive them, with what I can
pick up this week, by a servant of Mr. Hodges, who he is sending back to
England.

I was last night with Mr. Fox to see Madle. Clairon, in Iphigene -- she is
extremely great -- would to God you had one or two like her -- what a luxury,
to see you with one of such powers in the same interesting scene -- but it is
too much -- Ah! Preville! thou art Mercury himself -- By virtue of taking a
couple of boxes, we have bespoke this week the Frenchman in London, in which
Preville is to send us home to supper, all happy -- I mean about fifteen or
sixteen English of distinction, who are now here, and live well with each other.

I am under great obligations to Mr. Pit, who has behaved in every respect to
me like a man of good breeding, and good nature -- In a post or two I will
write again -- Foley is an honest soul -- I could write six volumes of what has
passed comically in this great scene, since these last fourteen days -- but
more of this hereafter -- We are all going into mourning; nor you, nor Mrs. G.
would know me, if you met me in my remise -- bless you both! Service to Mrs.
Denis. Adieu, adieu.

L. S.

LETTER XVIII. To Lady D --.
London, Feb. 1, 1762.
YOUR Ladyship's kind enquiries after my health is indeed kind, and of a piece
with the rest of your character. Indeed I am very ill, having broke a vessel in
my lungs -- hard writing in the summer, together with preaching, which I have
not strength for, is ever fatal to me -- but I cannot avoid the latter yet, and
the former is too pleasurable to be given up -- I believe I shall try if the
south of France will not be of service to me -- his G. of Y. has most humanely
given me the permission for a year of two -- I shall set off with great hopes
of its efficacy, and shall write to my wife and daughter to come and join me at
Paris, else my stay could not be so long -- "Le Fever's story has beguiled your
ladyship of your tears," and the thought of the accusing spirit flying up
heaven's chancery with the oath, you are kind enough to say is sublime -- my
friend, Mr. Garrick, thinks so too, and I am most vain of his approbation --
your ladyship's opinion adds not a little to my vanity.

I wish I had time to take a little excursion to Bath, were it only to thank
you for all the obliging things you say in your letter -- but it is impossible
-- accept at least my warmest thanks -- If I could tempt my friend, Mr. H. to
come to France, I should be truly happy -- If I can be of any service to you at
Paris, command him who is, and ever will be,

Your Ladyship's faithful, L. STERN.

LETTER XIX. To J -- H -- S --, Esquire.
Coxwould, July 28, 1761. Dear H --,
I SYMPATHIZED for, or with you, on the detail you give me of your late
agitations -- and would willingly have taken my horse, and trotted to the
oracle to have enquired into the etymology of all your sufferings, had I not
been assured, that all that evacuation of bilious matter, with all that
abdomical motion attending it (both which are equal to a month's purgation and
exercise) will have left you better than it found you -- Need one go to D -- to
be told that all kind of mild, (mark, I am going to talk more foolishly than
your apothecary) opening, saponacious, dirty-shirt, sud-washing liquors are
proper for you, and consequently all styptical potations, death and destruction
-- if you had not shut up your gall-ducts by these, the glauber salts could not
have hurt -- as it was, 'twas like a match to the gunpowder, by raising a fresh
combustion, as all physic does at first, so that you have been let off --
nitre, brimstone, and charcoal, (which is blackness itself) all at one blast --
'twas well the piece did not burst, for I think it underwent great violence,
and, as it is proof, will, I hope, do much service in this militating world --
Panty is mistaken, I quarrel with no one. -- There was that coxcomb of -- in
the house, who lost temper with me for no reason upon earth but that I could
not fall down and worship a brazen image of learning and eloquence, which he
set up to the persecution of all true believers -- I sat down upon his altar,
and whistled in the time of his divine service -- and broke down his carved
work, and kicked his incense pot to the D --, so he retreated, sed non sine
tell in cord suo. -- I have wrote a clerum, whether I shall take my doctor's
degrees or no -- I am much in doubt, but I trow not. -- I go on with Tristram
-- I have bought seven hundred books at a purchase dog cheap -- and many good
-- and I have been a week getting them set up in my best room here -- why do
not you transport yours to town, but I talk like a fool. -- This will just
catch you at your spaw -- I wish you incolumem apud Londinum -- do you go there
for good and all -- or ill? -- I am, dear cousin,

Yours affectionately, L. STERN.

LETTER XX. To D. G --, Esquire.
Paris, March 19, 1762. Dear G.
THIS will be put into your hands by Doctor Shippen, a physician, who has been
here some time with Miss Poyntz, and is this moment setting off for your
metropolis, so I snatch the opportunity of writing to you and my kind friend
Mrs. G. -- I see nothing like her here, and yet I have been introduced to one
half of their best Goddesses, and in a month more shall be admitted to the
shrines of the other half -- but I neither worship -- or fall (much) upon my
knees before them; but on the contrary, have converted many unto Shandeism --
for be it known I Shandy it away fifty times more than I was ever wont, talk
more nonsense than ever you heard me talk in your days -- and to all sorts of
people. Qui le diable est ce homme la -- said Choiseul, the other day -- ce
Chevalier Shandy -- You Will think me as vain as a devil, was I to tell you the
rest of the dialogue -- whether the bearer knows it or no, I know not -- 'Twill
serve up after supper, in Southampton-street, amongst other small dishes, after
the fatigues of Richard the IIId -- O God! they have nothing here, which gives
the nerves so smart a blow, as those great characters in the hands of G --! but
I forgot I am writing to the man himself -- The devil take (as he will) these
transports of enthusiasm! apropos -- the whole City of Paris is bewitched with
the comic opera, and if it was not for the affairs of the Jesuits, which takes
up one half of our talk, the comic opera would have it all -- It is a tragical
nuisance in all companies as it is, and was it not for some sudden starts and
dashes -- of Shandeism, which now and then either breaks the thread, or
entangles it so, that the devil himself would be puzzled in winding it off -- I
should die a martyr -- this by the way I never will --

I send you over some of these comic operas by the bearer, with the Sallon, a
satire -- The French comedy, I seldom visit it -- they act scarce any thing but
tragedies -- and the Clairon is great, and Madlle. Dumesnil, in some places,
still greater than her -- yet I cannot bear preaching -- I fancy I got a
surfeit of it in my younger days. -- There is a tragedy to be damned tonight --
peace be with it, and the gentle brain which made it! I have ten thousand
things to tell you, I cannot write -- I do a thousand things which cut no
figure, but in the doing -- and as in London, I have the honor of having done
and said a thousand things I never did or dreamed of -- and yet I dream
abundantly -- If the devil stood behind me in the shape of a courier, I could
not write faster than I do, having five letters more to dispatch by the same
Gentleman; he is going into another section of the globe, and when he has seen
you, he will depart in peace.

The Duke of Orleans has suffered my portrait to be added to the number of some
odd men in his collection; and a gentleman who lives with him has taken it most
expressively, at full length -- I purpose to obtain an etching of it, and to
send it you -- your prayer for me of rosy health, is heard -- If I stay here
for three or four months, I shall return more than reinstated. My love to Mrs.
G.

I am, my dear G. Your most humble Servant, L. STERN.

LETTER XXI. To the same.
Paris, April 10, 1762. My Dear G.
I SNATCH the occasion of Mr. Wilcox (the late Bishop of Rochester's son)
leaving this place for England, to write to you, and I enclose it to Hall, who
will put it into your hand, possibly behind the scenes. I hear no news of you,
or your empire, I would have said kingdom -- but here every thing is
hyperbolized -- and if a woman is but simply pleased -- it is Je suis charmee --
and if she is charmed it is nothing less, than that she is ravi-sh'd -- and when
ravi-sh'd, (which may happen) there is nothing left for her but to fly to the
other world for a metaphor, and swear, qu'elle etoit toute exiasiee -- which
mode of speaking, is, by the bye, here creeping into use, and there is scarce a
woman who understands the bon ton, but is seven times in a day in downright
ecstasy -- that is, the devil's in her -- by a small mistake of one world for
the other -- Now, where am I got?

I have been these two days reading a tragedy, given me by a lady of talents,
to read and conjecture if it would do for you -- It Is from the plan of Diderot,
and possibly half a translation of it -- The Natural Son, or, the Triumph
Virtue, in five acts -- It has too much sentiment in it, (at least for me) the
speeches too long, and savor too much of preaching -- this may be a second
reason, it is not to my taste -- It Is all love, love, love, throughout, without
much separation in the character; so I fear it would not do for your stage, and
perhaps for the very reason which recommend it to a French one. -- After a vile
suspension of three weeks -- we are beginning with our comedies and operas
again -- yours I hear never flourished more -- here the comic actors were never
so low -- the tragedians hold up their heads -- in all senses. I have known one
little man support the theatrical world, like a David Atlas, upon his
shoulders, but Preville cannot do half as much here, though Mad. Clairon stands
by him, and sets her back to his -- she is very great, however, and highly
improved since you saw her -- she also supports her dignity at table, and has
her public day every Thursday, when she gives to eat, (as they say here) to all
that are hungry and dry.

You are much talked of here, and much expected as soon as the peace will let
you -- these two last days you have happened to engross the whole conversation
at two great houses where I was at dinner -- It Is the greatest problem in
nature, in this meridian, that one and the same man should possess such tragic
and comic powers, and in such an equilibrio, as to divide the world for which
of the two nature intended him.

Crebillion has made a convention with me, which, if he is not too lazy, will
be no bad persiflage -- as soon as I get to Thoulouse he has agreed to write me
an expostulatry letter upon the indecorums of T. Shandy -- which is to be
answered by recrimination upon the liberties in his own works -- these are to
be printed together -- Crebillion against Stern -- Stern against Crebillion
-- the copy to be sold, and the money equally divided -- This is good
Swiss-policy.

I am recovered greatly, and if I could spend one whole winter at Toulouse, I
should be fortified, in my inner man, beyond all danger of relapsing. -- A sad
asthma my daughter has been martyred with these three winters, but mostly this
last, makes it, I fear, necessary she should try the last remedy of a warmer
and softer air, so I am going this week to Versailles, to wait upon Count
Choiseul to solicit passports for them -- If this system takes place, they join
me here -- and after a month's stay we all decamp for the south of France -- if
not, I shall see you in June next. Mr. Fox, and Mr. Macartny, having left
Paris, I live altogether in French families -- I laugh 'till I cry, and in the
same tender moments cry 'till I laugh. I Shandy it more than ever, and verily
do believe, that by mere Shandeism sublimated by a laughter-loving people, I
fence as much against infirmities, as I do by the benefit of air and climate.
Adieu, dear G. present ten thousand of my best respects and wishes to and for
my friend Mrs. G. -- had she been last night upon the Tulleries, she would have
annihilated a thousand French goddesses, in one single turn.

I am most truly, my dear friend, L. STERN.

LETTER XXII. To Mrs. S --, York.
Paris, -- 16th 1762. My Dear,
IT is a thousand to one that this reaches you before you have set out --
However I take the chance -- you will receive one wrote last night, the moment
you get to Mr. E. and to wish you joy of your arrival in town -- to that letter
which you will find in town, I have nothing to add that I can think on -- for I
have almost drained my brains dry upon the subject. -- For God sake rise early
and gallop away in the cool -- and always see that you have not forgot your
baggage in changing post-chaises -- You will find good tea upon the road from
York to Dover -- only bring a little to carry you from Calais to Paris -- give
the Custom-House officers what I told you -- at Calais give more, if you have
much Scotch snuff -- but as tobacco is good here, you had best bring a Scotch
mill and make it yourself, that is, order your valet to manufacture it --
'twill keep him out of mischief. -- I would advise you to take three days in
coming up, for fear of heating yourselves -- See that they do not give you a
bad vehicle, when a better is in the yard, but you will look sharp -- drink
small Rhenish to keep you cool, (that is if you like it.) Live well and deny
yourselves nothing your hearts wish. So God in heaven prosper and go along with
you -- kiss my Lydia, and believe me both affectionately,

Yours, L. STERN.

LETTER XXIII. To the same.
Paris, -- 31, 1762. My Dear,
THERE have no mails arrived here 'till this morning, for three posts, so I
expected with great impatience a letter from you and Lydia -- and lo! it is
arrived. You are as busy as Throp's wife, and by the time you receive this, you
will be busier still -- I have exhausted all my ideas about your journey -- and
what is needful for you to do before and during it -- so I write only to tell
you I am well -- Mr. Colebrooks, the minister of Swisserland's secretary, I got
this morning to write a letter for you to the governor of the
Custom-House-Office, at Calais -- it shall be sent you next post. -- You must
be cautious about Scotch snuff -- take half a pound in your pocket, and make
Lyd do the same. It Is well I bought you a chaise -- there is no getting one in
Paris now, but at an enormous price -- for they are all sent to the army, and
such a one as yours we have not been able to match for forty guineas; for a
friend of mine who is going from hence to Italy -- the weather was never known
to set in so hot, as it has done the latter end of this month, so he and his
party are to get into his chaises by four in the morning, and travel 'till nine
-- and not stir out again till six; but I hope this severe heat will abate by
the time you come here -- however I beg of you once more to take special care
of heating your blood in traveling and come tout doucement, when you find the
heat too much -- I shall look impatiently for intelligence from you, and hope
to hear all goes well; that you conquer all difficulties, that you have
received your passport, my picture, etc. Write and tell me something of every
thing. I long to see you both, you may be assured, my dear wife and child,
after so long a separation -- and write me a line directly, that I may have all
the notice you can give me, that I may have apartments ready and fit for you
when you arrive. -- For my own part I shall continue writing to you a fortnight
longer -- present my respects to all friends -- you have bid Mr. C. get my
visitations at P. done for me, etc. etc. If any offers are made about the
enclosure at Rascal, they must be enclosed to me -- nothing that is fairly
proposed shall stand still on my score. Do all for the best, as He who guides
all things, will I hope do for us -- so heaven preserve you both -- believe me

Your affectionate L. STERN.
Love to my Lydia -- I have bought her a gold watch to present to her when she
comes.



LETTER XXIV. To the same.
Paris, -- 1762. My Dear,
I KEEP my promise and write to you again -- I am sorry the bureau must be
opened for the deeds -- but you will see it done -- I imagine you are convinced
of the necessity of bringing three hundred pounds in your pocket -- if you
consider, Lydia must have two slight negligees -- you will want a new gown or
two -- as for painted linens buy them in town, they will be more admired
because English than French. -- Mrs. H. writes me word that I am mistaken about
buying silk cheaper at Toulouse, than Paris, that she advises you to buy what
you want here -- where they are very beautiful and cheap, as well as blonds,
gauzes, etc. -- these I say will all cost you sixty guineas -- and you must
have them -- for in this country nothing must be spared for the back -- and if
you dine on an onion, and lay in a garret seven stories high, you must not
betray it in your clothes, according to which you are well or ill looked on.
When we are got to Toulouse, we must begin to turn the penny, and we may, (if
you do not game much) live very cheap -- I think that expression will divert
you -- and now God knows I have not a wish but for your health, comfort, and
safe arrival here -- write to me every other post, that I may know how you go
on -- you will be in raptures with your chariot -- Mr. R. a gentleman of
fortune, who is going to Italy, and has seen it, has offered me thirty guineas
for my bargain. -- You will wonder all the way, how I am to find room in it for
a third -- to ease you of this wonder, it is by what the coach-makers here call
a cave, which is a second bottom added to that you set your feet upon which
lets the person (who sits over against you) down with his knees to your ancles,
and by which you have all more room -- and what is more, less heat -- because
his head does not intercept the sore-glass little or nothing -- Lyd and I will
enjoy this by turns; sometimes I shall take a bidet -- (a little post horse)
and scamper before -- at other times I shall sit in fresco upon the arm-chair
without doors, and one way or other will do very well. -- I am under infinite
obligations to Mr. Thornhil, for accommodating me thus, and so genteely, for
it is like making a present of it. -- Mr. T -- will send you an order to receive
it at Calais -- and now, my dear girls, have I forgot any thing?

Adieu, adieu! Yours most affectionately, L. STERN.
A week or ten days will enable you to see every thing -- and so long you must
stay to rest your bones.



LETTER XXV. To the same.
Paris, June 14, 1762. My dearest,
HAVING an opportunity of writing by a friend who is setting out this morning
for London, I write again, in case the two last letters I have wrote this week
to you should be be detained by contrary winds at Calais -- I have wrote to Mr.
E --, by the same hand, to thank him for his kindness to you in the handsomest
manner I could -- and have told him, his good heart, and his wife's, have made
them overlook the trouble of having you at his house, but that if he takes you
apartments near him they will have occasion still enough left to show their
friendship to us -- I have begged him to assist you, and stand by you as if he
was in my place with regard to the sale of the Shandys -- and then the
copy-right -- Mark to keep these things distinct in your head -- but Becket I
have ever found to be a man of probity, and I dare say you will have very
little trouble in finishing matters with him -- and I would rather wish you to
treat with him than with another man -- but whoever buys the fifth and sixth
volumes of Shandy's, must have the nay-say of the seventh and eighth. -- I
wish, when you come here, in case the weather is too hot to travel, you could
think it pleasant to go to the Spaw for four or six weeks, where we should live
for half the money we should spend at Paris -- after that we should take the
sweetest season of the vintage to go to the south of France -- but we will put
our heads together, and you shall just do as you please in this, and in every
thing which depends on me -- for I am a being perfectly contented, when others
are pleased -- to bear and forbear will ever be my maxim -- only I fear the
heats through a journey of five hundred miles for you, and my Lydia, more than
for myself. -- Do not forget the watch chains -- bring a couple for a
gentleman's watch likewise, we shall lie under great obligations to the Abbe M.
and must make him such a small acknowledgement; according to my way of
flourishing, 'twill be a present worth a kingdom to him -- They have bad pins,
and vile needles here -- bring for yourself, and some for presents -- as also a
strong bottle-skrew, for whatever Scrub we may hire as butler, coachman, etc.
to uncork us our Frontiniac -- You will find a letter for you at the Lion
D'Argent -- Send for your chaise into the courtyard, and see all is tight --
Buy a chain at Calais strong enough not to be cut off, and let your portmanteau
be tied on the forepart of your chaise for fear of a dog's trick -- so God
bless you both, and remember me to my Lydia,

I am yours affectionately, L. STERN.

LETTER XXVI. To the same.
Paris, June, 1762. My dearest,
PROBABLY you will receive another letter with this, by the same post, if so
read this the last -- It will be the last you can possibly receive at York, for
I hope it will catch you just as you are upon the wing -- if that should
happen, I suppose in course you have executed the contents of it, in all things
which relate to pecuniary matters, and when these are settled to your mind, you
will have got through your last difficulty -- every thing else will be a step of
pleasure, and by the time you have got half a dozen stages you will set up your
pipes and sing Te Deum together, as you whisk it along. -- Desire Mr. C -- to
send me a proper letter of attorney by you, he will receive it back by return
of post. You have done every thing well with regard to our Sutton and
Stillington affairs, and left things in the best channel -- if I was not sure
you must have long since got my picture, garnets, etc. I would write and scold
Mr. T -- abominably -- he put them in Becket's hands to be forwarded by the
stage coach to you as soon as he got to town. -- I long to hear from you, and
that all my letters and things are come safe to you, and then you will say that
I have not been a bad lad -- for you will find I have been writing continually
as I wished you to do -- Bring your silver coffee-pot, 'twill serve both to
give water, lemonade, and orjead -- to say nothing of coffee and chocolate,
which, by the bye, is both cheap and good at Toulouse, like other things -- I
had like to have forgot a most necessary thing, there are no copper tea-kettles
to be had in France, and we shall find such a thing the most comfortable
utensil in the house -- buy a good strong one, which will hold two quarts -- a
dish of tea will be of comfort to us in our journey south -- I have a bronze
tea-pot, which we will carry also, as China cannot be brought over from
England, we must make up a villainous party-colored tea equipage to regale
ourselves, and our English friends whilst we are at Toulouse -- I hope you have
got your bill from Becket. -- There is a good natured kind of a trader I have
just heard of, at Mr. Foley's, who they think will be coming off from England
to France, with horses, the latter end of June. He happened to come over with a
lady, who is sister to Mr. Foley's partner, and I have got her to write a
letter to him in London, this post, to beg he will seek you out at Mr. E -- 's,
and in case a cartel ship does not go off before he goes, to take you under his
care. He was infinitely friendly in the same office last year to the lady who
now writes to him, and nursed her on shipboard, and defended her by land with
great goodwill. -- Do not say I forget you, or whatever can be conducive to
your ease of mind, in this journey -- I wish I was with you to do these offices
myself, and to strew roses on your way -- but I shall have time and occasion to
show you I am not wanting -- Now, my dears, once more pluck up your spirits --
trust in God -- in me -- and in yourselves -- with this, was you put to it, you
would encounter all these difficulties ten times told -- Write instantly, and
tell me you triumph over all fears; tell me Lydia is better, and a helpmate to
you -- You say she grows like me -- let her show me she does so in her comtempt
of small dangers, and fighting against the apprehensions of them, which is
better still. As I will not have F.'s share of the books, you will inform him
so -- Give my love to Mr. Fothergill, and to those true friends which Envy has
spared me -- and for the rest, laisses passer -- You will find I speak French
tolerably -- but I only wish to be understood. -- You will soon speak better; a
month's play with a French Demoiselle will make Lyd chatter it like a magpye.
Mrs. -- understood not a word of it when she got here, and writes me word she
begins to prate a pace -- you will do the same in a fortnight -- Dear Bess, I
have a thousand wishes, but have a hope for every one of them -- You shall
chant the same jubilate, my dears, so God bless you. My duty to Lydia, which
implies my love too. Adieu, believe me

Your affectionate, L. STERN.
Memorandum: Bring watch-chains, tea-kettle, knives, cookery book, etc.

You will smile at this last article -- so adieu -- At Dover the Cross Keys, at
Calais at the Lion D'Argent -- the master a Turk in grain.



End of the First Volume.
Written by Mr. STERN.
I. The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman, 6 vol. 18s bound. II.
Sermons, 7 vol. 1l is bound. III. Sentimental Journey, 2 vol. 6s bound.
Printed for T. BECKET.

Of whom may be had, A Bust of Mr. Stern, an exceeding good Likeness, price 1l
7s bronzed.


