THE KING in the COUNTRY.

A DRAMATIC PIECE, In TWO ACTS.

Acted at the THEATRES-ROYAL, At RICHMOND and WINDSOR, 1788.

LONDON, Printed for the EDITOR, and Sold at No. 62, Great Wild-Street, near
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields; by Mess. EGERTON, Whitehall; Mess. COX and PHILLIPSON,
James-Street, Covent Garden; R. RYAN, No. 351, Oxford-Street; H. D. SYMONDS,
No. 20. Paternoster Row; and W. RICHARDSON, under the Royal Exchange. 1789.

[Entered at Stationers' Hall.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
The following Piece is taken from an underplot in The First Part of King
Edward the Fourth, written by Thomas Heywood; the dialogue has been altered a
little, to render it fit for modern representation; and a few passages have
been added for connection and conclusion.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Dramatic Piece of "The King in the Country," was compiled and performed
last summer, immediately on His Majesty's return from Cheltenham; when
Entertainments of various kinds were exhibited at the different Places of
Public Amusement, having relation to the Royal Excursion. The Calamity which,
to the grief of every good mind, has since befallen Our Beloved Sovereign, does
not, it is presumed, render the publication of this Drama improper; had the
Editor thought it so, it would certainly have been withheld: for, having been
honored with The Royal Authority to superintend Theatrical Entertainments
these ten years past (during which period it has been necessary for him to
adapt pieces of a local, or temporary nature, to Provincial Theaters), no one
can entertain a more proper sense of duty, respect, loyalty, and affection, to
Our most gracious King, whom God preserve and restore!

Written on the Bank of the Thames, opposite KEW, December 29, 1788.
By Winter's chilling breath now Silver Thames
Is ice-bound, and his gently-gliding stream,
That late conveyed each product of the land
To all who wanted, still diffusing good,
In torpid stupor lies! But oh! worse grief!
Benign and gracious GEORGE, whose every deed
Throughout his holy life was amiable,
Dispensing blessings ever over his realms,
Under the ALMIGHTY's visitation lies!
The stream of reason, and the spring of sense,
Fast bound! close locked!
Most merciful, just GOD!
As thou still sendest kindly, genial warmth,
To loose the bands of Winter in due time;
So may it please THEE shortly to restore
To reason, health, and happiness, OUR KING!
Dramatis Personae.
King Edward the Fourth. Lord Howard. Sir Thomas Sellenger. Sir Humphrey Bows.
Justice Aston. Lord Mayor. Recorder. Sheriffs. Huntsmen. John Hobbs, the Tanner
of Tamworth. Young Hobbs, his Son. Dudgeon, his Man. Hadland. Goodfellow.
Grudgen.
The Queen. The Duchess. Nell, the Tanner's Daughter.
PROLOGUE.
YOU lately read in each news-paper,
At morn, at noon, by evening-taper,
Of Cheltenham-water, wooden-house,
Now left to prowling rat or mouse;
With smart bon-mots, and anecdotes
Of Prince and Peasant, Crowns and Cotes;
And how, surprised, the rustics ran
To see the King was but a man;
Wondering that blue-coat and bob-wig
Were worn by one they thought so big,
Great Gog or Magog's coat of mail
To cover him would surely fail:
How stars and garters clowns did scare,
And make them at a distance stare;
With Mayors, most loyally addressing,
To beg of Majesty the blessing
Of one short visit to their city,
Which they, no doubt, had trimmed up pretty:
With This anomalous expression is not without a precedent; Man Mid- Wife, so
generally used, being authority for it.
female bell- man, squeaking out
"God save the King!" while rustics shout;
And gracious GEORGE, by chance being nigh her,
Most courteous adds, "God bless the crier!"
These, and a thousand suchlike matters,
By newspapers now worn to tatters,
May prove a theme for some Stage-Writer,
Some Laureat-Bard, or Song-Enditer.
Though choice the subject, yet, through fear
We might debase it, were it here
Attempted to be dramatized,
It being so far oversized
For our weak talents; we, instead,
Evoke the Spirits of the Dead!
And crave you to accept a Story
Of our Fourth EDWARD, England's glory!
And a blunt Tanner; long since writ
By Thomas Heywood, a Stage-Wit:
Antique the phrase, and coarse the manners,
Yet such as suited Kings and Tanners
Who lived three hundred years ago,
When few could to a goose say Bo!
And needy Kings would beg or borrow
What their poor subjects' toil and sorrow
Had scraped together: happier now!
We under no such bondage bow;
Nor King demands, nor subjects grieve,
Beneath our vines content we live!
And read with wonder of those times,
The simple theme of this night's Mimes.
If it afford some harmless mirth,
Nor show of humor quite a dearth;
Kindly o'erlook whate'er's amiss,
Nor pay our labors with a hiss:
And should it please you to commend,
We shall atchieve our wished for end;
For every thought, deed, and endeavor,
Is bent to gain that Prize, your Favor!
THE KING in the COUNTRY.
ACT I.
SCENE A Forest.
Enter Hobbs and Dudgeon. HOBBS. DUDGEON, do thou hear? look well to Brock,
my mare, drive Dun and her fair and softly down the hill, and take heed the
thorns tear not my cow-hides, as thou go near the hedges.


Dud. Master, the bull's hide is down.


Hobbs. Ha! what say thou knave? is the bull's hide down? why then hoist it
up again. I Will meet thee at the style, and help to set all strait. [ Exit
Dudgeon.] And yet, heaven help us, it is a crooked world, and an unthrifty; for
some that have never a shoe had rather go barefoot, than buy clout-leather to
mend the old, when they can get no new; well, heaven mend them, though they will
not mend their shoes. Let me see by my executor here, my leather pouch, what I
have taken, what I have spent, what I have gained, what I have lost, and what I
have laid out: My taking is more than my spending, for here is store left. I
have spent but a groat, a penny for my two jades, a penny to the poor, a penny
pot of ale, and a penny cake, for my man and me. -- A dicker of cow-hides cost
me -- 'snails, who comes here? Dame Ploughshare, or Mistress what do you call
her? put up, John Hobbs, money tempts beauty.


Enter the Queen and Duchess, in riding dresses, and Two Huntsmen, with bows,
etc. Dut. Well met, good fellow, saw thou not the heart?


Hobbs. My heart? heaven bless me from seeing my heart?


Queen. Thy heart? the deer, man, we demand the deer.


Hobbs. Do you demand what is dear? marry, corn and cow-hides. -- Mass! a good
smug lass. Well like my daughter Nell.


Dut. Came thou not down the wood?


Hobbs. Yes, mistress, that I did.


Queen. And saw thou not the deer imbost?


Hobbs. By the rood ye make me laugh, ha! ha! ha! what the dickens is it, love!
that makes ye prate to me so fondly?


1st. Hunts. Why how now, Hobbs, so saucy with the Duchess and the Queen?


Hobbs. *Much Duchess, and much Queen, I trow! these be but women; and one of
them is as like my wench as a raw hide is to one that is not tanned: I would
Nell had her clothes, I would give a load of hair and horns, and a fat of
leather, to match her to some Justice, by the meg-holly.


2nd. Hunts. Be silent, Tanner, and ask pardon of the Queen.


Hobbs. And ye be the Queen, I cry ye mercy, good Mistress Queen!


Queen. Madam, let us take our bows, and in the standing seek to get a shoot.


Dut. Come bend our bows, and bring the herd of deer.


Exeunt Queen, Duchess, and Huntsmen. Hobbs. Heaven send you good striking,
and fat flesh. -- See if all women, high or low, be not alike. I took the Queen
for Dame Ploughshare, as I am a true Tanner.


Enter Sellenger and Howard in hunting dresses. Hobbs. Soft, who comes here?
more knaves yet!


Sell. Ho! good fellow! saw thou not the king?


Hobbs. No, good fellow! I saw no King. -- Which King do thou ask for?


Much] Ben Jonson uses this word in the same ironical manner, " much wench, or
much son! -- Whalley's Edition, Vol. I. P. 102.
How. Why, King Edward, what King is there else?


Hobbs. There Is another King, and ye could hit on him; one Harry, one Harry!
and by our Lady they say he is the honester man of the two.


Sell. Sirrah, beware you speak not treason.


Hobbs. What if I do?


Sell. Then you will be hanged.


Hobbs. That Is a dog's death, I Will not meddle with it. But by my troth I know
not when I do speak treason, and when I don't; there is such halting betwixt two
Kings, that a man cannot go upright but he shall offend one of them: I would
heaven had them both for me.


How. Well, thou saw not the King?


Hobbs. No; is he in the Country?


How. He Is hunting here at Drayton-Basset. Mr. Urban, I should be obliged to
any of your topographical friends, to inform me, why so many towns in North
Wiltshire have the addition of Basset to their names, as Wotton Basset, Compton
Basset, Berwick Basset, etc. etc.? Every singularity of the kind should be
traced to its source; as it frequently produces exemplifications of ancient
customs, or leads imperceptibly to discussions of antiquity, that seldom fail
of rewarding us with some knowledge, that was before lost to all but the
incurious tenant of the soil. H. Gentleman's Magazine, 1788, Part 2, Page 885.
The several towns in North Wiltshire which have the addition of Basset to their
names, derive it from their owner Philip Basset, who had considerable property
in the county, and was a younger branch of the Bassets of Edendon there. See
Dugdale's Bar. l. 383, 385. P.P. Idem, P. 973.



Hobbs. The devil he is, God bless his mastership! I saw a woman here, that
they said was the Queen. She Is as like my daughter Nell as ever I see, but that
my daughter's fairer.


Sell. Farewell, fellow; speak well of the King.


Exeunt Sellenger and Howard. Hobbs. God make him an honest man, I hope that is
well spoken; for, by the mouse-foot, some give him hard words; whether he
'zerves um or not, let him look to that; I Will meddle of my cow-hides, and let
the world wag. [Enter the King in a riding dress.] The devil in a dung-cart!
how these roysters swarm in the country now the King is so near. 'deliver me
from this, for he looks more like a thief than a horse! but a man cannot tell
amongst these court-nols who is true.


King. Now I have let my mother and the Queen, and all our train go by, let me
awhile forget my Majesty; and, 'stead of royal Edward, as the King's attendant
have some sport with yonder rustic. Hollo! my friend! good fellow, prithee stay.


Hobbs. No such matter. I am in haste.


King. If thou be a good fellow, let me borrow a word.


Hobbs. My purse thou mean. -- I am no good fellow, and I pray heaven thou
be not one.


King. Why, do thou not love a good fellow.


Hobbs. No; it is a bye-word, good-fellows be thieves.


King. Do thou think I am one?


Hobbs. Thought is free, and thou art not my ghostly father


King. In faith, I mean thee no harm.


Hobbs. Who knows that but thyself? -- I pray heaven he spied not my purse!

aside.
King. On my troth I mean thee none.


Hobbs. Well, upon thy oath I Will stay. -- Now what say thou to me? speak
quickly, for my company stays for me beneath at the next style.


King. The King is hunting hereabouts; did thou see his Majesty?


Hobbs. His Majesty? what is that? his horse or his mare?


King. Tush, I mean his Grace.


Hobbs. Grace, quotha! pray heaven he have any. -- Which King does thou 'quire
for?


King. Why, for King Edward. -- Know thou any more Kings than one?


Hobbs. I know not so many, for I tell thee I know none. -- Marry, I hear of
King Edward.


King. Did thou see his highness?


Hobbs. Now, by my holydame, that is the best term thou gave him yet; he is
high enough, but he has put poor King Harry low enough.


King. How low has he put him?


Hobbs. Nay I cannot tell, but he has got the Crown from him, much good do him
with it!


King. Amen! I like thy talk so well, I would I knew thy name.


Hobbs. Do thou not know me?


King. No.


Hobbs. Then thou know nobody; did never hear of John Hobbs, the Tanner
of Tamworth?


King. Not till now, I promise thee; but now I do know thee, I like thee well.


Hobbs. So do not I thee. -- I doubt thou art some out-rider, that lives by
taking of purses, here on Basset-heath. -- But I fear thee not; for I have
wared all my money in cowhides, at Colesill market; and my man and my mare are
hard by at the hill-foot.


King. Is that thy gray mare, that is tied at the style, with the hides on her
back?


Hobbs. Ay, that is Brock, my mare; and there is Dun, my nag; and Dudgeon, my man.


King. There Is neither man, nor horse; but only the mare.


Hobbs. Od's blue bodkin! has the knave served me so? farewell. I may lose
hides, horns, mare, and all, by prating with thee.


King. Tarry, man, tarry! they will sooner take my bay gelding, than thy gray
mare; for I have tied mine by her.


Hobbs. That will I see before I take your word.


King. I Will bear thee company.


Hobbs. If you will, you must; but I had much rather go alone.

Exeunt.
The SCENE continues.
Enter the Two Huntsmen. 1st. Hunts. Now, by my troth, the Queen shoots passing
well.


2nd. Hunts. So did the Duchess, when she was as young.


1st. Hunts. Age shakes the hand, and shoots both wide and short.


2nd. Hunts. What have they given us?


1st. Hunts. Six rose-nobles just.


2nd. Hunts. The Queen gave four.


1st. Hunts. Right, and the Duchess two; had the King come, he would have
rained on us showers of gold.


2nd. Hunts. Why, he is hunting, somewhere hereabout. -- Let us first drink the
Queen and Dutchess' health, and then go seek him.


1st. Hunts. Agreed.

Exeunt.
Another part of the Forest, at the bottom of the hill. Enter the King and
Hobbs. King. How say thou, Tanner? will thou take my courser for thy mare?


Hobbs. Courser, call'st thou him? he is too fine for me! thy skittish jade will
neither carry my leather, horns, nor hides. But if I were so mad to change,
what would thou give me to boot?


King. Nay, boot that is boot-worthy -- I look for boot of thee.


Hobbs. Ha, ha, ha! that is a merry jig! why, man, Brock, my mare, knows ha and
ree; will stand when I cry ho, let me get up when I say hi, and down when I say
he.


King. Well, I Will give thee a noble if I like her pace; lay thy cow-hides on my
saddle, and let us jog toward Drayton.


Hobbs. It Is out of my way; but I begin to like thee well.


King. Thou will like me better ere we part. -- I pray thee tell me, what say
they of the King?


Hobbs. Of the Kings, thou mean. -- Art thou no blab if I do tell thee?


King. If the King knows not now, he shall never know it for me.


Hobbs. Mass, they say King Harry's a very advowtry man.


King. A devout man; and what is King Edward?


Hobbs. He Is a frank franion, a merry companion, and loves a wench well; they
say he has married a poor widow because she is fair.


King. Do thou like him the worse for that?


Hobbs. No, by my feckens, but the better; for though I be but a plain Tanner,
I love a fair lass myself.


King. Prithee, tell me, how love they King Edward?


Hobbs. Faith, as poor folks love holidays. -- Glad to have them now and then,
but to have them come too often would undo them; so to see the King now and
then is a comfort, but to behold him every day would beggar us; and I may say
to thee, under the rose, we fear we shall be troubled to lend him money, for we
doubt he is but needy.


King. Would thou not lend him money if he should need it?


Hobbs. Yes, by my holydame! he shall have half my purse, and I Will sell
sole-leather to help him to more.


King. In faith now, which love thou best, Harry or Edward?


Hobbs. Nay, that is a secret! and two may keep it, if one be away.


King. Shall I say my conscience? I think Harry is the true King.


Hobbs. Art advised of that? Harry's of the old house of Lancaster, and that
progenity do I love.


King. Then do thou hate the House of York?


Hobbs. Why, no; for I am just akin to Sutton windmill; I can grind which way
soever the wind blow: If it be Harry, I can say well fare Lancaster! if it be
Edward, I can sing, York, York for my money!


King. Thou art of my mind, for I say Harry is the lawful King; Edward is but a
usurper; fool and a coward.


Hobbs. Nay, there thou lie! he has wit enough, and courage enough; do thou
not speak treason?


King. Ay; but I know to whom I speak it.


Hobbs. Do thou? an I were constable, I should be forsworn if I set thee not
in the stocks for it.


King. Well, let it go no further; for I did serve King Harry, and I love him
best; though now I serve King Edward.


Hobbs. Thou art the arranter knave to speak ill of thy master. But, sirrah,
what is thy name? what office have thou? and what will the King do for thee?


King. My name is Ned; I am the King's butler, and he will do more for me than
for any nobleman in the court.


Hobbs. The devil he will! the more fool he, and so I Will tell him if ever I see
him; and I would I might see him in my poor house at Tamworth.


King. Go with me to the court, and I Will bring thee to the King; and what suit
soever thou have to him, I Will warrant thee to speed.


Hobbs. I have nothing to do at court; I Will home with my cow-hides; but if the
King will come to me, he shall be welcome.


King. Have thou no suit touching thy trade? to transport hides, or have the
sole selling of leather within a certain circuit; or about bark, or such like,
to have letters patent.


Hobbs. By the mass, I like not those patents! for, I think it is pity that only
one subject should have, what might do good to many throughout the land.


King. Say thou me so, Tanner? well, let us cast lots, whether thou shall go
with me to Drayton, or I go home with thee to Tamworth.


Hobbs. Lot me no lotting! I Will not go with thee; if thou will go with me,
'cause you are my Liege's man (and yet I think he has many honester) thou shall
be welcome to John Hobbs: thou shall be welcome to beef and bacon; and perhaps
a bag-pudding: and my daughter Nell shall make a posset for thee ere thou go
to bed.


King. Here Is my hand. -- I Will but go and see the King served, and be at home
as soon as thyself; ay, and, with thy leave and here is, kiss thy fair daughter
too.


Hobbs. That Is hereafter as it may be; but,
Do thou hear me Ned? if I shall be thy host,
Make haste, thou were best, for fear thou kiss the post.
Exit Hobbs.
King. Farewell, John Hobbs, the honest true Tanner! --
I see plain men, by observation
Of things that alter in the change of times,
Do gather knowledge; and the meanest life,
Portion'd with but content's sufficiency,
Is happier than the mighty state of Kings.
Enter Howard and Sellenger. How now? what news bring ye, Sirs?
Where Is the Queen?

Sell. Her highness and your mother, my dread Lord,
Are both invited by Sir Humphrey Bows,
Where they intend to feast and lodge to night,
And do expect your Grace's presence there.

King. Tom Sellenger, I have other business.
Astray from you and all my other train,
I met a Tanner; such a merry mate,
So frolic, and so full of good conceit,
That I have given my word to be his guest;
Because he knows me not to be the King:
Good cousin Howard grudge not at the jest,
But greet my mother and my wife for me;
Bid them be merry; I must have my humor;
Let them both sup and sleep when they see time;
Commend me kindly to Sir Humphrey Bows,
Tell him at breakfast I will visit him.
This night Tom Sellenger and I must feast
With Hobbs, the Tanner; there plain Ned and Tom,
The King and Sellenger awhile forgot.

Enter a Messenger, booted, with letters, and kneeling gives them to the King.
How. The Queen and Duchess will be discontent,
Because his Highness comes not to the feast.

Sell. Sir Humphrey Bows may take the most offense;
But there is no help; the King will have his pleasure.

King. Good news, my boys; Harry the sixth is dead.
Peruse this letter. Sirrah, drink you that,
gives his purse. And stay not, but post back again for life,
And thank my brother Gloucester for his news;
Commend me to him; I Will see him tomorrow night.
How like ye it, Sirs?
Exit Messenger.
Sell. O, passing well, my Liege;
You may be merry for this happy news.

King. The merrier with our host, the Tanner, Tom;
My Lord, take you that letter to the ladies;
Bid them be merry as good news can make them:
And if we see them not before we go,
Pray them to journey easily after us.
We'll post to London, so good night, my Lord.
Exit Lord Howard. And now set forward on thy frolic, Ned!
Come, Tom; the word's Fat Bacon and Brown Bread!
Exeunt King and Sellenger.
SCENE, Hobbs's House.
Enter Hobbs, and his daughter Nell. Hobbs. Come, Nell, come daughter, be your
hands and face washed?


Nell. Ay, forsooth, father.


Hobbs. Ye must be cleanly I can tell ye, for there comes a court-nol hither
tonight, the King's mastership's butler, Ned; a spruce youth; but beware ye be
not in love, nor overtaken by him, for Courtiers be slippery lads.


Nell. No, forsooth, father.


Hobbs. God's blessing on thee! that half-year's schooling at Liechfield, was
better to thee than house and land, it has put such manners into thee: Ay,
forsooth; and no forsooth, at every word. Is supper ready?


Nell. Ay, forsooth, father.


Hobbs. Have we a good barley bag-pudding, a piece of fat bacon, a good
cow-heel, a hard cheese, and a brown loaf?


Nell. All this, forsooth; and more, ye shall have a posset: but, indeed, the
rats have spoiled your hard cheese.


Hobbs. Now, the devil choke them! for they eat me a whole candle the other
night.


Dudgeon. (within) What, Master! Master!


Hobbs. How, now, Knave? what say thou, Dudgeon?


Dud. Here Is guests come. Where Is Ellen?


Enter Dudgeon. Hobbs. What guests be they?


Dud. A court-nol; one Ned, the King's butcher, he says; and his friend too.


Hobbs. Ned, the King's butcher? ha, ha, ha! -- the King's butler, thou
mean; take their horses, and walk them, and bid them come in doors. [Exit
Dudgeon.] Nell, lay the cloth, and supper of the board.

Exit Nell.
Enter King and Sellenger. Mass! here is Ned, indeed; and another misproud
ruffian. --
Welcome Ned! I like thy honesty, thou keep'st promise.
King. In Faith, honest Tanner, I Will ever keep promise with thee: -- prithee,
bid my friend welcome.


Hobbs. By my troth ye are both welcome to Tamworth! friend, I know not your
name.


Sell. My name is Tom Twist.


Hobbs. Tom Twist? belike then you are the King's tailor.


Sell. No, faith.


Hobbs. Ye are welcome both; and I like you well, but for one thing.


Sell. What Is that?


Hobbs. Nay, that I keep to myself. -- For I grieve to think that pride brings
many to extruction.


King. Prithee, tell us thy meaning.


Hobbs. Troth, I doubt ye never came truly by all these gay trappings. It Is not
your bare wages, and thin fees ye have of the King, can keep ye thus fine; but
either ye must rob the King privily, or his subjects openly, to maintain your
prodigality. -- But, come, let us to supper. -- What, Nell! what, Dudgeon! --
where be these folks?


Enter Nell and Dudgeon, with a table covered. Daughter, bid my friends welcome.
Nell. Ye are welcome, gentlemen, as I may say, forsooth.

The King and Sellenger kiss her.
Sell. I thank ye, fair maid.


King. A pretty wench, faith!


Hobbs. How like her, Ned?


King. I like her so well, I would ye would make me your son-in-law.


Hobbs. And I like thee so well, Ned; that, had thou an occupation, (for
service is no heritage, and a young courtier, an old beggar.) I could find in
my heart to cast her away upon thee; and, if thou will forsake the court, and
turn Tanner, here with me at Tamworth, or bind thyself to a Shoemaker, in
Liechfield, I Will give thee twenty nobles, ready money, with my Nell; and trust
thee with a dicker of leather to set up thy trade.


Sell. Ned, he offers ye fair, if ye have the grace to take it.


King. He does, indeed Tom; and hereafter I Will tell him more.


Hobbs. Come, sit down to supper. [They sit.] Go to, Nell! no more sheep's
eyes; ye may be caught, I tell you; these be licorish lads.


Nell. I warrant ye, father. Yet, in truth, Ned is a very proper man; and
to'ther may serve, but Ned's a pearl in mine eye.


Hobbs. Daughter, call Dudgeon and his fellows, we'll have a three-man-song, to
make our guests merry. Exit Nell. 'Nails! what court-nols are ve? ye'll neither
eat nor talk. What news at the court? do somewhat for your meat.


King. Heavy news there. King Henry is dead.


Hobbs. That Is light news and merry for your master, King Edward.


King. But how will the commons take it?


Hobbs. Troth, the commons will take it as a common thing, and say, Well! God
be with good King Henry! death's an honest man, for he spares not the King. --
As one comes, another's taken away,
And seldom comes a better, as a body may say.



King. Shrewdly spoken, Tanner, by my faith.


Enter Nell, Dudgeon, and others. Hobbs. Come, fill me a cup of mother
Whetstone's ale, that I may drink to my friends; Here Is to ye, Ned and Tom,
with all my heart! [drinks] and yet, I doubt, if I come to the court, you will
not know me.


King. Yes, faith! Tom shall be my surety, Tanner, I will know thee.


Sell. If thou do not, Ned, thou deserve that the King should not know thee.


King. Come, honest Tanner, I drink to thy fair daughter, Nell; my wife that
may be.


Sell. ^faith Ned, thou may live to make her a lady.


King. Tush, her father offers nothing, having no more children but her.


Hobbs. I would I had not, condition she had all; but I have a knave to my son,
just such an unthrift as one of you two; that spends all on gay clothes and new
fashions, and no work will go down with him, that I fear he will be hanged;
heaven bless you to a better fate! though, by my troth, I doubt it; but come,
let us drive away care with a good old song.

A Song here by Dudgeon, etc.
Sell. Well sung good fellows, I would the King heard you.


Hobbs. So would I; in faith, I should strain a note for him. Come, take away,
and let us to bed -- ye shall have clean sheets, Ned, though they be coarse; good
strong hemp, of my daughter's own spinning.


King. Thanks, honest Hobbs! but we'll not go to bed.


Hobbs. What then? let us have more ale.


King. No more, good friend; we'll mount our horses, and with speed to London,
for it is near day; and, honest Tanner! gramercy for our hearty cheer. If ever
it be thy chance to come to court, enquire for me, Ned, the King's Butler; or
Tom, of the King's Chamber, my companion, and see what welcome we will give the
there.


Hobbs. I have heard of courtiers have said as much as you, and when they have
been tried, would not so much as ask their friends to drink.


King. We are none such, believe me, honest Tanner. So now to horse, for we
must strait away; and so, with hearty thanks, friend Hobbs, farewell.


Hobbs. Fare ye well, both! commend me to the King, and tell him, I Would have been
glad to ha'seen his worship here;
But, come when he will, I promise him good cheer!


Exeunt.
ACT II.
SCENE, An Antique Hall.
Sir Humphrey Bows and Justice Aston, seated. Hobbs, Hadland, Grudgeon,
Goodfellow, etc. SIR HUMPHREY BOWS. Neighbors and friends, the cause why you
are called
Concerns the King's most excellent majesty,
Whose right, you know, by his progenitors,
Unto the crown and sovereignty of France,
Is wrongfully detained by the French.
Which to revenge and royally regain,
His highness means to put himself in arms,
And in his princely person to conduct
His warlike troops against the enemy.
But, for his coffers are unfurnished,
Through civil discord and intestine war,
For York and Lancaster's disputed claim,
(Whose bleeding scars our eyes may yet behold)
He prays his faithful, loving subjects' help
To further this his just great enterprise.

Hobbs. So, the drift and meaning, whereby as it were, of all your long
purgation, Sir Humphrey Bows, is no more in some respect, but that the King
wants money, and would have some of his commonality.


Sir H. Tanner, you rightly understand the matter.


J. Aston. Note this withal; where his dread majesty,
(Our lawful sovereign, and most royal King)
Might have exacted or imposed a tax,
Or borrowed greater sums than we can spare,
(For all we have is at his dread command)
He does not so; but mildly does entreat
Our kind benevolence, what we will give,
With willing minds toward this mighty charge.
Enter Lord Howard. Which to receive, his noble counselor,
And kinsman, the Lord Howard here is come.

How. Now good Sir Humphrey Bows, and Justice Aston,
Have ye declared the King's most gracious pleasure?

Sir H. We have, my lord.


How. His highness will not force,
As loan or tribute; but will take your gift
In grateful part, and recompense your loves.

Sir H. To show my love, though money now be scarce,
A hundred pounds I Will give his majesty.

How. It Is well, Sir Humphrey!


J. Aston. I a hundred marks.


How. Thanks, Justice Aston! you both show your love.
Now ask your neighbors what they will bestow?

Sir H. Come, master Hadland, your benevolence.


Had. O, good Sir Humphrey. do not rack my purse.
You know my state, I lately sold my land.

J Aston. Then you have money; let the King have part.


Hobbs. Ay, do, master Hadland, do; they say ye sold a foul deal of dirty land
for fair gold and silver; let the King have some, now, while ye have it; if ye
be forborne a while, all will be spent: for he who cannot keep land, that lies
fast, will have much ado to hold money: it is slippery ware! it is melting ware!


How. Gramercy, Tanner!


Sir H. Say, what shall we have?


Had. My forty shillings.


J. Aston. Robert Goodfellow,
I know you will be liberal to the King.

Goodf. O, Justice Aston, be content I pray ye;
You know my charge, my household very great,
And my housekeeping holds me very bare;
Threescore up-rising and down-lying, Sir,
Spend no small store of victuals in a year;
Two brace of greyhounds, twenty couple of hounds;
And then my horses eat a deal of corn;
My christmas cost, and friends that then do come,
Amounts to charge; I am Robin Good fellow,
That welcome all, and keep a frolic house;
But have no money, -- pray ye pardon me.

Hobbs. Why hear you, goodman Goodfellow! (though you are much miscalled) hear a
plain Tanner, who will teach you thrift; Keep fewer dogs and horses, and then
you may feed more men; yet feed no idle men, it is needless charge: but surely
you, that for hounds and hunting mates do spare for naught, will something
spare unto your king.


Goodf. My brace of angels, by my troth that is all.


Hobbs. Mass! and it is well the curs have left so much; I thought they would
have eaten up thy land ere this.


Sir H. Now, Harry Grudgen.


Grud. What would you have of me? money I have none, and I Will sell no stock;
here is old polling! -- subsidy, soldiers, and to the poor! and you might have
your will, you would soon shut me out of doors.


Hobbs. Now, by my holydame, neighbor Grudgen, you are but a grumbling,
grudging churl! thou have two ploughs going, and never a cradle rocking, with
many a peck of money; and wilt not spare a few pounds to the King.


Grud. Marry come up, goodman Tanner, are you so tart? your prolicateness has
brought your son to the gallows almost; you can be frank of another man's cost.


Hobbs. You Are no good man to twit me with my son; he may outlive thee yet: my
son's in jail; -- is he the first honest man's son that has been there? and
thou were a man as you are but a beast, I would have thee by the ears.


How. Friend, thou want nurture to upbraid a father
With a son's fault; we sit not here for this.
What Is thy benevolence to his Majesty?

Hobbs. His beneligence? hang him! he will not give a penny willingly.


Grud. I care not much to cast away forty pence.


How. Out, grudging peasant! base, ill-nurtur'd groom!
Is this the love thou bear unto the King?
Gentlemen, take notice of the slave,
And if he fault let him be soundly plagued.
Now, frolic Tanner, what will thou afford?

Hobbs. Twenty old angels, and a score of hides; if that be too little, take
twenty nobles more: while I have it my King shall never want.


How. The King shall know thy loving, liberal heart.


Hobbs. Shall he, i faith? I thank ye heartily! but, hear ye, gentlemen, come
ye from the court?


How. I do.


Hobbs. Lord, how does the King? and how does Ned, the King's butler? and Tom
of his chamber? I am sure ye know them.


How. I do, and they are well,


Hobbs. For want of better guests they were at my house one night.


How. I know they were.


Hobbs. They promised me a good turn for kissing my daughter, Nell; and now I
have cagion to try them; my son's in Caperdochia, as they call it, in Newgate
jail; for peeping into another man's purse: and outcept the King be miserable,
he is like to totter for lack of ground to stand on! can that same Ned, the
butler, do any thing with the King?


How. More than myself or any other Lord.


Hobbs. A halter he can! by my troth ye rejoice my heart to hear it.


How. Come to the court; I warrant thy son's life; Ned will save that, and do
thee greater good.


Hobbs. Then fare ye well, Sirs!
I Will wean my mare's foal, and come up to the King;
And you for your pains, two fat hens will I bring.
Exeunt.
SCENE, -- A Grand Apartment.
Enter King, Howard, Sellenger, etc. King. And have our country subjects been
so frank,
And bountiful in their benevolence,
Toward our present expedition?
Thanks, cousin Howard, for thy pains herein:
We will have letters sent to every shire,
Of thankful gratitude, that they may know
How highly we respect their gentleness.

How. One thing, my lord, I had well nigh forgot;
Your pleasant host, the Tanner of Tamworth --

King. What of him, coufin?


How. He was right liberal;
Twenty old angels and as many nobles,
With a score hides, he gave unto your grace;
And others, seeing him so bountiful,
Stretched further than they otherwise had done.

King. Trust me I must requite that honest Tanner.
O, had he kept his word, and come to court,
In faith we should have had good store of mirth.

How. That is not long, my lord, which haps at last;
He Is come to London on an earnest cause.
His son lies prisoner in Newgate-jail,
And is condemned for a robbery.
Your higness pardoning his son's default,
May yield the Tanner no mean recompense.

King. But who has seen him since he came to town?


Sell. My lord, in Holborn 'twas my hap to see him
Gazing about; I sent away my men,
And, clapping on one of their livery cloaks,
Accosted him; the Tanner knew me strait;
How now, Tom? and how does Ned? quoth he,
That honest, merry hangman, how does he?
I, knowing that your majesty intended
This day in person to come to the Tower,
There bade him meet me, where mad Ned and I
Would bring him to the presence of the King,
And there procure a pardon for his son.

King. Have then a care we be not seen of him,
Until we be provided for the purpose;
Because once more we'll have a little sport.
Tom Sellenger, let that care be yours.

Sell. I warrant you, my lord; I will not fail.


Enter Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, Recorder, etc. King. Welcome, Lord Mayor!
Recorder, Sheriffs, all!
Say, worthy friends, have you well signified
Our thankfulness unto our citizens,
For their late gathered benevolence?

Mayor. So, please your highness it has just been done;
Before the citizens in our guild hall,
Master Recorder made a long oration
Of thankful gratitude for their kind gifts;
Which they received with so great respect,
And love unto your royal majesty,
As it appeared to us they sorrowed
Their bounty to your highness was no more.

King. Lord Mayor, and Sirs, thanks to yourselves and them
And go ye with us now unto the Tower,
To see the order that we shall observe
In this so needful warlike preparation,
To gain our lawful right from haughty France;
The better may ye certify to them,
What need there was of their benevolence.
And, gentle Sheriffs, as we pass along,
A word in private about other matters.
While we to quell our foes abroad to roam,
Let Us not forget our subjects' bliss at home!
Exeunt.
SCENE, The Tower.
Enter King, Lord Mayor, Recorder, Howard, Sellenger, and the train. King.
Having awaked forth of their sleepy dens
Our drowsy cannon, which ere long shall charm
The watchful French, with Death's eternal sleep,
And all things else in readiness for France,
A while we will give truce unto our care.
There is a merry Tanner near at hand,
With whom we mean to have a little mirth;
Therefore, Lord Mayor, and you my other friends,
I must entreat you not to knowledge me;
No man stand bare, but as companions all:
So, Tanner, now come when you please; -- and see
Where, in good time, he comes. Go, Tom, and meet him.

Enter Hobbs. Sell. What, John Hobbs? welcome in faith, to court.


Hobbs. Gramercy, honest Tom! where is the hangman Ned? where is that mad
rascal? shall I not see him?


Sell. See, there he stands; that same is he.


Hobbs. What, Ned! a plague on thee, how do thou for a mad rogue? and how,
and how?

Shaking him by the Hand.
King. In health, John Hobbs, and very glad to see thee; But say, what wind
drove thee to London?


Hobbs. Ah. Ned! I was brought hither with a whirlwind, man; my son! my son!
did I not tell thee I had a knave to my son?


King. Yes, Tanner, what of him?


Hobbs. Faith, he is in Caperdochia, Ned; in Newgate-goal, for a robbery: and is
like to be hanged, outcept thou get the King to be more miserable to him.


King. If that be all, Tanner, I Will warrant him;
I will procure his pardon of the King.

Hobbs. Will thou, Ned? for those good words, see what my daughter Nell has
sent thee; a hankercher wrought with as good Coventry-blue "And she gave me a
shirt-collar, wrought over
With no counterfeit stuff.
What, was it gold?
Nay, 'twas better than gold.
What was it?
Right Coventry blue."
George A Green, The Pinner of Wakefield, 1599.

By this passage Coventry-blue appears to have been formerly held in great
estimation.


silk thread as ever thou saw.


King. And I, perhaps, may wear it for her sake,
In better presence than thou art aware of.

Hobbs. How, Ned; a better present? that can thou not have, for silk, cloth,
and workmanship; why Nell made it, man! -- But, Ned, is not the King in this
company? what is he in the white beard and red petticoat? By the mass, I
misdoubt, Ned, that is the King: I know it by my Lord What-ye-call-um's players.


King. How by them, Tanner?


Hobbs. Why, ever when they play an Enterlout, or a Commodity, at Tamworth, the
King is always in a white-beard, and a red-gown like him; therefore I 'spect
him to be the King.


King. No, trust me, Tanner, that is not the King; but thou shall see the King
before thou go, and have a pardon for thy son with thee.


Hobbs. Then what is he i'th'red-gown, and he i'th'black?


King. That is the Mayor, Lord Mayor of London; the other is the Recorder.


Hobbs. What nicknames these Court-nols have for one-another! Mare and Corder,
quotha! -- We have no such at Tamworth or Liechfield; there is the honest
bailiff and his brethren: such words 'gree best with us.


King. My Lord Mayor, and good Mr. Recorder, I pray ye, for my sake, to bid
this honest Tanner welcome.


Mayor. You are welcome, my honest friend!
In sign whereof, I pray you see my house,
And sup with me this night.

Record. And, if it please you, dine with me tomorrow.


Hobbs. I thank ye, goodman Mare! and Master Corder! but I care not for no
meat; my stomach is like to a sick swine's, that will neither eat nor drink,
'till she know what will become of her pig. -- Ned and Tom, ye promised me a
good turn when I came to Court; either do it now, and save my son from the
gallows, or go hang yourselves.


King. No sooner comes the King, but I will do it.


Sell. I warrant thee, Tanner; fear not thy son's life.


Hobbs. Nay, I fear not his life; it is his death I fear.


Enter the Sheriffs and Young Hobbs. They kneel. 1st. Sher. All health and
happiness attend my sovereign!


2d. Sher. Here is the young man, Hobbs, condemned to die.


Hobbs. Sovereign! and my son! O that ever I was born!


King. Look to the Tanner! chafe his temples, Sirs!
This unlooked meeting and discovery
Have overpowered his faculties.

Hobbs. Let me alone, -- I Am a dead man! --
Ah, my liege! that ye should deal so with a poor simple
Tanner! but its no matter, I can but die.

King. But when, Tanner? can thou tell?


Hobbs. Nay, even when ye please; for I have so defended ye, by calling ye
plain Ned, mad rogue, and rascal, that I know ye'll have me hanged. Therefore,
no more ado, but let my son and I even be trussed up together. -- And here is
another, as honest as yourself no doubt; ye made me call him plain Tom, and I
warrant his name is Thomas, and some man of worship too; therefore, let us to
our doom, even when and where ye will.


King. Tanner, attend! not only do we pardon thee
Thy plain and blunt, though honest, well-meant speech,
But in all princely kindness welcome thee!
And thy son's trespass do we pardon too;
Young Hobbs kneels. With this observance, that he sin no more
In suchlike sort, else shall he surely die!
For he who from his prince's clemency
Has once received a justly-forfeit life,
And brings it into jeopardy again,
Deserves not mercy, nor even pity merits.

Y. Hobbs. If I offend again, my gracious liege!
Let me not mercy, nor even pity find.

King. It Is well! Receive with kindness thy repentant son;
And in return for what thou freely gav'st
To aid our enterprise against haughty France,
We give to thee and thine in yearly fee
An hundred marks; now, Tanner, what do say?

Hobbs. Why, an'like your kingship, I can scarce say at all! but, I thank ye!
-- I thank ye for my son's life, I thank ye for not putting me to death; and
when I get back to Tamworth, my Nell shall work a scarf, and send ye; and I Will
not forget a skin of choice cordovan, of my own tanning, to make ye boots
against ye next go a hunting: when, if ye would but once more leave your
kingship behind ye, come to my poor hovel, and be plain hail-fellow Ned again,
we'd have such a rowse, as should make all the hair on my hides stand an end!
and so, farewell!

Heaven bless ye! still I Will say or sing,
Long live your Majesty! God save the King!

King. The Drama ended, EDWARD is no more!
But for his loss we little need deplore;
GEORGE, great and good! yet lives, and may he long!
Join, then, all loyal hearts in cheerful song;
Lift high your voices 'till the roof does ring,
In duteous homage to great GEORGE our KING!

Song and Chorus of "GOD SAVE THE KING!"

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 7, line 2, read from seeing my heart! Page 9, near the bottom, read Which
King do thou 'quire for? Page 12, ibid. read a fool and a coward. Page 17,
line 18, read and the other may serve. Idem, line 24, read Heavy news there. Page
18, near the bottom, read we will give thee there. Idem, Divide the last speech
but one into verse, e. g. We, etc. So now, etc And so, etc. The like may be
necessary in some other places overlooked.
Page 23, line 20, read Your highness pardoning, etc. Page 24, line 22, read
abroad do roam, etc. Correct also you into ye, wherever it may occur in HOBBS's
speeches.

