THE ACTOR. A POETICAL EPISTLE.

THE ACTOR. A POETICAL EPISTLE. TO BONNELL THORNTON, Esquire.

Quocunque animum auditoris agunto. HOR. LONDON, Printed for R. and J. DODSLEY,
in Pall Mall. MDCCLX.

THE ACTOR.
ACTING, dear Bonnell, it is Perfection draws
From no Observance of mechanic Laws.
No settled Maxims of a favorite Stage,
No Rules delivered down from Age to Age,
Let Players nicely mark them as they will,
Can ever entail hereditary Skill.
If amongst the humble Hearers of the Pit,
At some loved Play the old Man chance to sit,
Am I pleased more because 'twas acted so
By Booth and Cibber thirty Years ago?
The Mind recalls an Object held more dear,
And hates the Copy that it comes so near.
Why loved we Wilks's Air, Booth's nervous Tone?
In them 'twas natural, 'twas all their own.
A Garrick's Genius must our Wonder raise,
But gives his Mimic no reflected Praise.
Thrice happy Genius, whose unrivaled Name
Shall live for ever in the Voice of Fame!
It Is thine to lead with more than magic Skill,
The Train of captive Passions at thy Will;
To bid the bursting Tear spontaneous flow
In the sweet Sense of sympathetic Woe.
Through every Vein I feel a Chilness creep,
When Horrors such as thine have murdered Sleep.
And at the old Man's Look and frantic Stare
It Is Lear alarms me, for I see him there.
Nor yet confined to tragic Walks alone
The comic Muse too claims thee for her own.
With each delightful Requisite to please,
Taste, Spirit, Judgment, Elegance, and Ease,
Familiar Nature forms thy only Rule,
From Ranger's Rake to Drugger's vacant Fool.
With Powers so pliant, and so various blessed,
That what we see the last, we like the best.
Not idly pleased at Judgment's dear Expense
But burst ourageous with the laugh of Sense.
PERFECTION'S Top with weary Toil and Pain
It Is Genius only that can hope to gain.
The Play'r's Profession (though I hate the Phrase,
It Is so mechanic in these modern Days)
Lies not in Trick, or Attitude, or Start,
Nature's true Knowledge is his only Art.
The strong-felt Passion bolts into the Face,
The Mind untouched, what is it but Grimace?
To this one Standard make your just Appeal
Here lies the golden Secret; learn to FEEL.
Or Fool or Monarch, happy or distressed,
No Actor pleases that is not possessed.
ONCE on the Stage in Rome's declining Days,
When Christians were the Subject of their Plays,
Ere Persecution dropped her iron Rod,
And Mortals waged an impious War with God,
An Actor flourished of no vulgar Fame,
Nature's Disciple, and Genest his Name.
A noble Object for his Skill he chose,
A Martyr dying midst insulting Foes.
Resigned with Patience to Religion's Laws,
Yet braving Monarchs in his Savior's Cause.
Filled with the Idea of the sacred Part,
He felt a Zeal beyond the reach of Art,
While Look and Voice, and Gesture all expressed
A kindred Ardour in the Player's Breast,
Till as the Flame through all his Bosom ran,
He lost the Actor and commenced the Man:
Professed the Faith, his pagan Gods denied,
And what he acted then, he after died.
THE Player's Province they but vainly try,
Who want these powers Deportment, Voice, and Eye.
THE Critic Sight it is only Grace can please
No Figure charms us if it has not Ease.
There are who think the Stature all in all,
Nor like the Hero if he is not tall.
The feeling Sense all other Wants supplies,
I rate no Actor's Merit from his Size.
Superior Hight requires superior Grace,
And what is a Giant with a vacant Face?
THEATRIC Monarchs in their tragic Gait
Affect to mark the solemn Pace of State.
One Foot put forward in Position strong,
The other like its Vassal dragged along.
So grave each Motion, so exact and slow,
Like wooden Monarchs at a Puppet-Show.
The Mien delights us that has native Grace
But Affectation ill supplies its Place.
UNSKILFUL Actors, like your mimic Apes,
Will writhe their Bodies in a thousand Shapes;
However foreign from the Poet's Art,
No tragic Hero but admires a Start.
What though unfeeling of the nervous Line,
Who but allows his Attitude is fine?
While a whole Minute equipoiz'd he stands,
Till Praise dismiss him with her echoing Hands.
Resolved, though Nature hate the tedious Pause,
By Perseverance to extort Applause.
When Romeo sorrowing at his Juliet's Doom,
With eager Madness bursts the canvass Tomb,
The sudden Whirl, stretched Leg, and lifted Staff,
Which please the Vulgar, make the Critic laugh.
TO point the Passion's Force, and mark it well,
The proper Action Nature's Self will tell.
No pleasing Powers Distortions ever express,
And nicer Judgment always loathes Excess.
In Sock or Buskin who o'erleaps the Bounds,
Disgusts our Reason, and the Taste confounds.
OF all the Evils which the Stage molest
I hate your Fool who overacts his Jest.
Who murders what the Poet finely writ,
And like a Bungler haggles all his Wit,
With Shrug, and Grin, and Gesture out of Place,
And writes a foolish Comment with his Face.
Old Johnson once, though Cibber's perter Vein,
But meanly groupes him with a numerous Train,
With steady Face, and sober hum'rous Mien,
Filled the strong Outlines of the comic Scene.
What was writ down, with decent Utterance spoke,
Betrayed no Symptom of the conscious Joke;
The very Man in Look, in Voice, in Air,
And though upon the Stage, he seemed no Play'r.
The Word and Action should conjointly suit,
But acting Words is labor too minute.
Grimace will ever lead the Judgment wrong,
While sober Humor marks the Impression strong.
Her proper Traits the fixed Attention hit,
And bring me closer to the Poet's Wit;
With her delighted over each Scene I go,
Well-pleased, and not ashamed of being so.
IT IS not enough the Voice be sound and clear,
It Is Modulation that must charm the Ear.
When desperate Heroines grieve with tedious Moan,
And whine their Sorrows in a see-saw Tone;
The same soft Sounds of unimpassioned Woes
Can only make the yawning Hearers doze.
THE Voice all Modes of Passion can express,
That marks the proper Word with proper Stress.
But none emphatic can that Actor call,
Who lays an equal Emphasis on all.
SOME over the Tongue the labored Measures roll
Slow and delib'rate as the parting Toll,
Point every Stop, mark every Pause so strong,
Their Words, like Stage-Processions stalk along.
All Affectation but creates Disgust,
And even in speaking We may seem too just.
Nor proper, Thornton, can those Sounds appear,
Which bring not Numbers to thy nicer Ear;
For them in vain the pleasing Measure flows
Whose Recitation runs it all to Prose;
Repeating what the Poet sets not down,
The Verb disjointing from its friendly Noun.
While Pause, and Break, and Repetition join
To make a Discord in each tuneful Line.
SOME placid Natures fill the allotted Scene
With lifeless Drone, insipid and serene;
While others thunder every Couplet over,
And almost crack your Ears with Rant and Roar.
In so much Noise but little Sense is found,
As empty Barrels make the greatest Sound.
MORE Nature often and finer Strokes are shown,
In the low Whisper than tempestuous Tone.
And Hamlet's hollow Voice and fixed Amaze,
More powerful Terror to the Mind conveys,
Than he, who swol'n with big impetuous Rage,
Bullies the bulky Phantom off the Stage.
THE Modes of Grief are not included all
In the white Handkerchief and mournful Drawl;
A single Look more marks the internal Woe,
Than all the Windings of the lengthened Oh.
UP to the Face the quick Sensation flies,
And darts its meaning from the speaking Eyes;
Love, Transport, Madness, Anger, Scorn, Despair,
And all the Passions, all the Soul is there.
IN vain Ophelia gives her Flowrets round,
And with her Straws fantastic strews the Ground;
In vain now sings, now heaves the desperate Sigh,
If Phrenzy sit not in the troubled Eye.
In Cibber's Look commanding Sorrows speak,
And call the Tear fast trick'ling down my Cheek.
HE who in Earnest studies over his Part
Will find true Nature cling about his Heart.
All from their Eyes impulsive Thought reveal,
And none can want Expression, who can feel.
THERE is a Fault which stirs the Critic's Rage,
A Want of due Attention on the Stage.
There have been Actors, and admired ones too,
Whose tongues wound up set forward from their cue.
In their own Speech who whine, or roar away,
Yet unconcerned at what the rest may say.
Whose Eyes and Thoughts on different Objects roam
Until the Prompter's Voice recall them home.
DIVEST yourself of Hearers if you can,
And strive to speak, and be the very Man.
Why should the well-bred Actor wish to know
Who sits above Tonight, or who below.
So mid the harmonious Tones of Grief or Rage,
Italian Squallers often disgrace the Stage.
When with a simp'ring Leer, and Bow profound,
The squeaking Cyrus greets the Boxes round;
Or proud Mandane of imperial Race,
Familiar drops a Curtsie to her Grace.
TO suit the Dress demands the Actor's Art,
Yet there are those who over-dress the Part.
To some prescriptive Right gives settled Things,
Black Wigs to Murd'rers, feathered Hats to Kings.
But Michel Cassio might be drunk enough,
Though all his Features were not grim'd with Snuff.
Why should Pol Peachum shine in satin Clothes?
Why every Devil dance in scarlet Hose?
BUT in Stage-Customs what offends me most
Is the Slip-door, and slowly-rising Ghost.
Tell me, nor count the Question too severe,
Why need the dismal powdered Forms appear?
WHEN chilling Horrors shake the affrighted King,
And Guilt torments him with her Scorpion Sting;
When keenest Feelings at his Bosom pull,
And Fancy tells him that the Seat is full,
Why need the Ghost usurp the Monarch's Place,
To frighten Children with his mealy Face?
The King alone should form the Phantom there,
And talk and tremble at the vacant Chair.
IF Belvidera her loved Loss deplore,
Why for twin Specter bursts the yawning Floor?
When with disordered Starts, and horrid Cries,
She paints the murdered Forms before her Eyes,
And still pursues them with a frantic Stare:
It Is pregnant Madness brings the Visions there.
More instant Horror would enforce the Scene,
If all her Shuddrings were at Shapes unseen.
POET and Actor thus with blended Skill,
Mould all our Passions to their instant Will;
It Is thus, when feeling Garrick treads the Stage,
(The speaking Comment of his Shakespeare's Page.)
Often as I drink the Words with greedy Ears,
I shake with Horror, or dissolve with Tears.
O never may Folly seize the Throne of Taste,
Nor Dullness lay the Realms of Genius waste.
No bouncing Crackers ape the Thundrer's Fire,
No Tumbler float upon the bending Wire.
More natural Uses to the Stage belong,
Than Tumblers, Monsters, Pantomime, or Song.
For other Purpose was that Spot designed;
To purge the Passions and reform the Mind,
To give to Nature all the Force of Art,
And while it charms the Ear to mend the Heart.
Thornton, to Thee I dare with Truth commend,
The decent Stage as Virtue's natural Friend.
Though often debased with Scenes profane and loose,
No Reason weighs against it is proper Use.
Though the lewd Priest his sacred Function shame,
Religion's perfect Law is still the same.
Shall they who trace the Passions from their rise
Show Scorn her Features, her own Image Vice;
Who teach the Mind it is proper Force to scan,
And hold the faithful Mirror up to Man,
Shall their Profession ever provoke Disdain,
Who stand the foremost in the moral Train.
Who lend Reflection all the Grace of Art,
And strike the Precept home upon the Heart.
YET, hapless Artist, though thy Skill can raise
The bursting Peal of universal Praise,
Though at thy Beck, Applause delighted stands,
And lifts Briareus' like her hundred Hands.
Know Fame awards Thee but a partial Breath,
Not all thy Talents brave the Stroke of Death.
Poets to Ages yet unborn appeal,
And latest Times the eternal Nature feel.
Though blended here the Praise of Bard and Play'r,
While more than Half becomes the Actor's Share,
Relentless Death untwists the mingled Fame,
And sinks the Player in the Poet's Name.
THE pliant Muscles of the various Face,
The Mein that gave each Sentence Strength and Grace,
The tuneful Voice, the Eye that spoke the Mind,
Are gone, nor leave a single Trace behind.
FINIS.

