AN ACCOUNT OF A Surprising METEOR, Seen in the Air March 19. 1718/19. at NIGHT.

CONTAINING, I. A Description of this Meteor, from the Original Letters of
those who saw it in different Places. II. Some Historical Accounts of the like
METEORS before. III. A Demonstration that such METEORS are not COMETS. IV. That
such METEORS are not a Concourse of Vapors above our Atmosphere. V. That they
are prodigious Blasts of Thunder and Lightenings in the upper Regions of our
Air. VI. Observations from the whole.


By WILLIAM WHISTON, M.A. sometime Professor of the Mathematics in the
University of Cambridge.

LONDON: Printed for W. TAILOR, at the Ship in Paternoster Row. 1719.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Surprising METEOR Seen in the Air March 19. 1718/9.
IN order to afford the Reader what Light I can about this remarkable
Phenomenon, I shall I. Give him a faithful Relation of the Phenomenon it
self, and that from the original Accounts of some of the most intelligent of
those that saw it: (for I my self saw nothing of it:) and shall draw the proper
Inferences therefrom. II. I shall give him like faithful Accounts of other
Phenomenon of the same Nature, so far as they have hitherto come to my Hand.
III. I shall give some Account of Dr. Wallis's Hypothesis about such Meteors;
viz. That they are Comets; with my Reasons against that Hypothesis. IV. I shall
give a like Account of Dr. Halley's Hypothesis about them; viz. That they are a
sort of fortuitous Collection of Vapors in the vast Void about us, which by
Accident only sometimes fall into our Atmosphere, without any other relation
thereto; with my Reasons against that Hypothesis. V. I shall propose an
Hypothesis of my own, for the Solution of these Appearances; viz. That they are
no other than prodigious Storms or Blasts of Thunder and Lightening in the
upper Regions of our Air; with my Reasons for that Hypothesis. VI. I shall
conclude with a few Observations relating to these Meteors, and their
Consequences.


I. I shall give the Reader a faithful Relation of this surprising Phenomenon
it self, from the original Accounts of some of the most intelligent of those
that saw it; which Accounts do here follow.

Dear Sir,
A Surprising Phenomenon, was seen with us here in the Air, at Eight at Night,
on Thursday last, much like the Description of what was lately at Venice; a
sudden Appearance of a Globe of Fire, equal to the apparent Bigness and
Brightness of the Sun, illuminating the whole Region as at Noonday. After a
small Pause at its first breaking out (in the South-west, betwixt Orion's
Girdle, and the Great Dog, at about 20 Elev.) it shot horizontally with pretty
great Velocity into the South-east, leaving a Stream of Light in the Air, and
disappeared in about 6 from its first Appearance; but the Streams of Light were
continued for a quarter of an Hour, separated into two or three bended Figures,
of the Color of red mottled Fire, which also died away. I should be glad to
know whether any of this was seen at London, and in what Quarter, that we may
make some Judgment of its real Distance and Altitude.

Your most affectionate Friend, etc.
Yelvertoft, Northamptonshire, Mar. 21. 1718-19.

N.B. This utmost Altitude of about 20 Degrees at Yelvertoft, agrees well with
several Observations made at London, which seems to have been about the same
Distance from the Meteor with Yelvertoft: For here it never appeared
considerably above 20 Degrees high.

Dear Sir,
NOT knowing, whether or no, the following Account of the Appearance may be of
any use to you; I thought fit to send it, that you may use it, or not, as you
think fit. After the Appearance was over, there appeared a duskish red Streak
whence they said the Appearance came; it did not seem to change its Place at
all, but gradually vanished away in about a quarter, or half an Hour; if the
same was also observed at other Places, the Height and Distance of it might
easily be calculated. If my Globe be rightly made, it was between 14 or 15
Degrees high, and about 50 Degrees from the South, counting Westward. But when
I looked at the Appearance it self through the Window, it was got further
South-Eastward, and could not be above 10 Degrees high, and was between 37 and
42 Degrees from the South to the Westward.

I am, etc.
Lyndon, Rutland, Apr. 6. 1719.

Wednesday, Portsmouth, 24 March, 1718-9. Dear Sir,
ON Thursday Night I saw the shaking Meteor you make mention of. I was abroad
in the Yard, before our Commissioner's Door, and observed both the Beginning,
and almost the whole Continuance of it: which I take to be thus:

At 4 Minutes past 8 a Clock, due West from the Place I stood, about 40 Degrees
high, first appeared a round reddish Ball (as near as I could guess) 8 or 10
Diameter, which descended slowly downwards, a little inclining to the South,
and all the while increasing its Magnitude; when it came within 20 Degrees. of the
Horizon, it altered its Motion more aslant to the Southward, and increased its
Brightness and Magnitude prodigiously, till its least Diameter was about 26 to
28 Minutes; its Light and Brightness being equal to the Sun, but of a whiter
Color. (I take the Redness you mention to proceed from the smoaky Air you live
in.) The Air was clear, except two thin Clouds through which it passed, as if
the Clouds had been heated or set on Fire in that Part, and which continued
near half an Hour. Your Letter, and some other Accounts I have seen, say it
continued half a Minute, but indeed I guest by the Slowness of the Motion it
was near a Minute before it disappeared; and when it came within 7 or 8 Degrees. of
the Horizon my Sight was obstructed at a Tar-house that intercepted. Many
People affirm they heard a Noise sometime after it like to Thunder, or a hot
Iron quenched in Water: and I thought I heard such a Noise faintly, -- which
seemed to be about Yarmouth in the Isle of Wight -- I have seen and spoke with
some that were about 28 Miles farther Westward, who affirm they did hear such a
Noise very distinctly.


Ashton near Exon, March 20. 1718-9.
LAST Night, a few Minutes before eight a Clock, we had here the terriblest
Flash of Lightening that I believe was ever seen; it lasted about three
Minutes, as near as I can guess. It was so great that it quite obscured the
Light of the Moon, though it was a very bright Night. There appeared in the Sky a
Stream as it were of Fire for some Minutes after, and at some Distance as it
were a Cloud of Smoke. The Phenomenon was so very surprising, that I did not
at first well know what to make of it, till after gazing at it about three or
four Minutes, we heard a great Clap of Thunder, which at first resembled the
Noise of Canon, the most I ever heard in my Life.


Phillack, near St. Ives in Cornwall.
ON Thursday, March 19, between 8 and 9 in the Evening, there appeared in the
Firmament, first a red Star bigger than common, and did increase more and more,
till at last it burst out in a splendid Light, which did run from the North to
the South, and continued near a Minute so light as it was at Noonday. We were
all astonished to see such a splendid Appearance this time a Night.

March 28. 1719.

I Could give you a particular Account of the Phenomenon, which was seen the
19th Instant in the Evening; for the Explosion was heard here, and by observing
the Time, between seeing the Light and hearing the Sound. I have the Distance,
by which, with the Angle it made above the Horizon; by Trigonometry I calculate
its perpendicular Height to be near 40 Miles, and that it was Vertical about
Sheepwash or Torrington in Devonshire, and that it was seen in other Countries
besides England, by reason of its great Height. I suppose the Explosion was not
took Notice of at London, by reason it would not reach the Ear in less than 12
Minutes after the Light.

I am, etc.
Looe in Cornwall, March 27. 1719.

N.B. The same Author afterward gave a more particular Account of what he
observed about this Meteor; of which the Epitome follows. It broke out between
the two foremost Stars in the Square of the little Bear, but 2 or 3 Degrees to
the Eastward, at the Altitude of 46. It ran along by the Star in the bending of
the Dragons Tail, and through the great Bears Tail, a little below the middle
Star, and so away toward Cor Caroli, and past pretty near it; thence coming
round again it fell down into our Horizon, cutting it at S.S.E. half South
nearly; but if any thing to the Eastward, not coming nigh the Moon. The Sound
was certainly heard at Guernsey. The Course was from the South to the East. The
Sound makes its Altitude 50 Miles nearly.




N.B. That this Author's own natural Thoughts of the Meteor's Altitude, from
his Observations, was between 38 and 40 Miles; though in this Letter he seems
willing to extend it to about 50 Miles: And that another Auditor near Lempster
in Herefordshire, estimated the Interval between the Light and the Sound by a
Watch, and found it about 10 Minutes: Which gives about 40 Miles of Altitude
also.

From Exeter.
SITTING at the Fireside about Eight a Clock at Night, the Moon shining then
very bright, and the Sky clear, not the least Cloud to be seen, on the sudden
there appeared a very great Light far brighter than the Sun at Noonday,
accompanied with so great an Heat, that the Arm of mine which was next to the
Window burnt for many Hours as if it had been scalded. There was so great a
Smoke, that I thought, and so did many others, that all the Ground had been on
Fire; but we soon perceived that it was in the Sky. The Light came from the
North-East (which is the Situation of our Room) it seemed to go very swift over
our House, and so over the Church to the South-West. In a very short time it
returned back again (but not near so big) and as it appeared to us, broke just
over the Church, like a Sky-Rocket, but so large, and with so many Sparks of
Fire, that it left so great a Redness (seemingly to us just the breadth and
length of the Church) that it looked like all Blood, and gave the same
Reflection into the Rooms on the other side of the House. Some Minutes after
this (I should think at least seven or eight) we heard a Report like a great
Canon (much greater than ever I heard.) It shook the House and Windows very
much. About a Minute after, there went off to our thinking, about thirty, not
so big. They sounded just as the Tower-Guns did, when we were in Mincinglane,
but shook the House and Windows much more. After this, we heard smaller, with a
Sound like Drums and Trumpets, which lasted but a short Time. After the Light
went off, although the Moon seemed to shine bright; for about two Minutes, it
was so dark, that we could not see our Hands.


N.B. That Resemblance of the latter Sounds to a Drum, I have heard confirmed
by more than one Auditor besides.

-- I Should not trouble you any longer, but that we had a very extraordinary
Meteor last Thursday Night, the Nineteenth of this Instant. I was walking in
Stephen's Green, and saw it distinctly, about 20 after Seven, the Moon was
pretty bright, when on a sudden, it was in a Manner extinguished by a
prodigious Blaze, two or three Times bigger than its Orb, of very white clear
Light. It began about E.S.E. moved forward to the S. for about 20 Degrees
extremely swift, and then ended in a Point. It shot like a Cone, left a Train
of reddish Light, which soon vanished, for all was over in eight or nine
Seconds. The Appearances of Meteors are so sudden, and their Continuance so
short, that they are seldom observed, and hard to be described. It was seen at
Drogheda, but I have heard no Account of it further off.

Trinity-College, Dublin, 24. Mar. 1718.

London, 19 March, 1718-9.
COming Home this Evening, about 8 a Clock, through St. Paul's Churchyard, on
the North side, my Face being Westward, I discerned in the Sky a large Ball of
Fire, at about 20 or 25 height from the Horizon, and bearing about W. and by N.
or W.N.W. when I first saw it: It seemed to be as large as the Moon at Full,
with a pale bluish Light, and to have little Motion; but in a Moment it was
thrown into the Shape of a common Meteor, the Head diminishing 'till it was all
turned into a long Stream of Light, which extended to about 50 or 60 in the
Heavens toward S.W. and on an Angle of about 10 or 15 from a Parallel with the
Horizon, but the broadest part of this Stream was at least double to the
Diameter of its first Appearance, and made so strong a Light while it was in
its greatest Extent, that for a Moment the Moon, which was above a Day past the
first Quarter, and all the Stars, seemed to disappear by the Superiority of
this new Light; and at that Moment one might have read the smallest Print by
it. While it was throwing it self into this beautiful Stream, I thought I heard
a Noise of hissing, like what is made by the flying of a large Rocket in the
Air, but I heard no other Noise. The Light, though very strong, was very
agreeable to the Eye, and as it vanished it turned from a bright Pale to a
Yellowish Color. The Duration of the whole I do not think was above half a
Minute, and of the greatest Light not the tenth part of a Minute.


An Account of the late Meteor, as it appeared at Norwold in Norfolk, about
nine Mile North West of Thetford.
March the 19th, 1718-9.
ABout a quarter past eight in the Evening, the Sky being very clear, and the
Moon between a Day and two Days past the first Quarter, there appeared a bright
Star a little West of Orion, and somewhat higher than his Belt; at first it
stood still, but in a few Minutes began to glide slowly, and almost parallel to
the Horizon, and increased in Velocity and Bigness, till it came to be between
the Belt and Sword of Orion, by which time it was as big as the Moon in the
Horizon, and burst and fell down very swift with a Train of Light about the
Breadth of a Rainbow, which reached from Orion to the Horizon, and gradually
vanished in small Sparks like a Rocket. It was a Minute or more before they
were quite extinguished; the Light was so great as to extinguish that of the
Moon; the Color was very White and Blue, like the common Composition of Stars
in Rockets; and several Persons, both Abroad and in the House, were positive of
hearing distinctly a Noise, like a great Number of Rockets going off together.


diagram of path of meteor

Worcester, Mar. 28. 1719. SIR,
ON Thursday the 19th of March, 1718-9, at 8h 11 so estimated by a Pendulum
Clock, compared the next Day with an Horizontal Dial made at London; but
without allowing any thing for its deviating a little from the true North to
the Eastward. At that Time, I say, I was walking in my Chamber, with my Face
toward the Window, made of a clear Glass, from which I was at about three or
four Foot Distance, when I saw on a sudden, through it, at the South West, a
very great Flash of Fire, expressed in the Figure by A B. I opened instantly
the Window, from whence I had a clear Prospect of that Part of Heaven, except
about three or four Degrees next to the Horizon. The whole Space A B, was
filled up in an Instant, with a very bright Flame, which might last about four
Seconds of Time, and perhaps not above two or three Seconds, and so did
suddenly vanish, leaving in the very same Place A B, a small thin Cloud, of a
gray Color, somewhat reddish. At the same Time, a small Fire continued from B,
to run leisurely along the Line B E C, leaving all along behind it a gray
Stream, about 15 broad. The Line B E C, was very uniform, a little bending
toward Sirius; but the Edges or Sides of it were rough, and not uniform as the
Line it self, this Part being in some Places a very little broader or narrower
than in others. The whole Figure A B E C resembled exactly a Rod or Staff. The
Fire might be about five Seconds in describing the Line B E C, having its
handle about 1d broad in A B, in a direct continued Line with the rest. While
the Line B C was a forming, it looked exactly as if a Rocket, or a Bomb, had
been thrown in our Neighborhood. The visible Remains of this whole Phenomenon
continuing about a Quarter of an Hour, gave me an Opportunity of delineating it
immediately, with the Stars about it. But because of the Impossibility of
making a plain Figure, representing truly so great a Part of Heaven, unless it
be in the Nature of a Projection, I have reduced here my Figures to a
Planisphere, whereof the Zenith is the Center, the Eye being supposed in the
opposite Point, in the Surface of the Sphere. However, I have placed the Stars
only by Estimation, as my Figures directed me, without using any Table of the
Stars, etc. In my Draught, I supposed for a Foundation, that the higher-most
Star in Orion, was about 30d high, as I judged it to be by Estimation. The
Situations and Proportions are very near the Matter in the Figure, including in
it Procyon; at least they are so near the Matter, that from this Observation,
and any tolerable Observation beside, made in England, etc. from any Place fit
for that Purpose, it may be very safely determined how high this Phenomenon was
from the Surface of the Globe; what Places it was perpendicular upon; what was
its true Bigness and Figure, and real Swiftness in Burning; and how much it was
leaning at its Extremity C, either toward Worcester or from it; and lastly,
whether the Line A B E C, was really uniform in it self, and almost straight;
or, whether it only seemed so to me, as being at Worcester. As soon as we knew
that this Phenomenon had been seen at London, and that there, as they said, it
gave as great a Light as in the Day Time, I concluded that it had been seen in
Cornwall too. The printed Account, in a Letter from Plymouth, March the 20th,
though very general, and upon that Account imperfect; yet enables us to guess
very well at the Height and Bigness, and Situation of the bright Part A B, of
this Phenomenon; and that with so much the more Certainty, because the Part A B
was very near the Zenith at Plymouth.


N.B. That this curious Author's Computation of the middle Point of the larger
Part of the Meteor, or of it when it was bursting to Pieces in its Explosion,
is scarce 22 Miles. But then, that is only on the Supposition that that Point
was perpendicularly over Plymouth, as some imperfect Accounts at first said;
whereas the Observations by the Stars which are among the exactest I have heard
of, compared with others already set down, will prove, That that Point was not
then over Plymouth, but rather over the middle of Bretaign in France; which
greater Distance will by the same Method of Computation, afford us near forty
Miles Altitude, which agrees with the most accurate Observations of the
Interval, between the Sound and the Light, and with the rest of the
Observations by the Stars already set down; and indeed, with the Generality of
the Observations every where that I have met with; and may therefore, I think,
be entirely depended on by us.

NOW the proper Result of all these Accounts, and of many others that I have
seen and heard, is this; That this Meteor was composed of Nitro-sulphureous
Vapors, or Exhalations, collected first together in the upper Regions of the
Air, over Radnorshire in Wales, or the neighboring Counties: That it was at
first smaller, and to Appearance like a large Star only; that it gathered more
Fuel as it rolled along, and grew larger and larger all the Way; that its
Course was nearly Parallel to the Horizon, and its Direction nearly South, or a
very small matter toward the South-West: That by the time it came to be
Vertical, between Cardiff in Wales and, and Minehead in Somersetshire, over the
Severn Sea, it was become vastly large and bright, so as to exceed the Noonday
Sun in Splendour, near that Line along which it passed, and to equal its
apparent Magnitude also: That it proceeded in this manner quite over
Devonshire, but much nearer the Eastern Limits of it, than the Western: That it
past almost perpendicularly over the City of Exeter, and so over the British
Channel, till it came over Bretaign in France: That all this while its
Magnitude and Light were not impaired; that it made a hissing Noise like a
Rocket all the way, and spread a prodigious and continued Lightening, even to
the utmost Limits of the whole Horizon: That upon its coming near to Bretaign
in France, it began to burst to Pieces and dissolve, with a prodigious Noise,
which endured for some time, answering to the time of its bursting to Pieces,
all the while it was dissolving: That it left a large Smoke, or sort of Cloud
along all that Space where it burst, above 100 Miles in Length, over our
Channel and Bretaign, and perhaps somewhat further toward Bell-Isle: That the
Noise of this Explosionw as heard all along its Course, and 50 or 60 Miles at
least on both Sides of it; first like a vast Number of great Guns discharged
together; and then like the rattling or interrupted Noise of Drums; such as are
in both Cases usual in and after great Claps of Thunder: That this Meteor,
while it was dissolving, seems to have sent out lesser Streams of Light,
backwards toward Wales from the North-end; and backwards toward Exeter, from
the South-end, before it entirely vanished: After which, certain Traces or
Streams of the fiery Vapors continued sor a quarter of an Hour, as Marks where
it had passed: That this Meteor must have been about 38 or 40 Miles in
perpendicular Height from the Earth all along, though perhaps somewhat lower
toward its dissolution: That it went from Radnor in Wales, to the utmost Parts
of Bretaign in France, or about 300 Miles, in 7 or 8 of Time; or at the Rate of
above 2000 Miles in a Minute: That it must have been visible, wherever Clouds
did not interpose, within the Compass of an Oval, whose longer Axis, drawn
nearly through Radnor and Bell-Isle, must have been about 1400 Miles, and its
lesser at right Angles thereto about 1100 Miles, i. e. through all Great
Britain and Ireland; through Holland, Flanders, the Western Parts of Germany,
all France, and the North-East Parts of Spain, with Lombardy in Italy: And that
it was really about a Mile in Diameter: That therefore it was truly a Meteor,
or what properly, during its whole Course, was within the Limits of our
Atmosphere: As both the hissing Noise during its Passage, and the terrible
Thunder afterward, do plainly demonstrate. It being well known that no Sound
can be propagated, but through the elastical Medium of the Air. The remaining
Traces of this Meteor left in the same Air, and seen therein for a quarter of
an Hour after it was gone, are also evident Demonstrations of the same thing.

II. I shall now give the Reader faithful Accounts of other Phenomenon of the
like Nature with this Meteor before us, so far as they have hitherto come to my
Hand.

(1.) The first Meteor of this kind that I have met with as seen in this last
Age (for of the elder Ones we have generally such imperfect Accounts, and that
chiefly as Omens only, that little Light can be gathered from them, to any
sober Enquirer's Satisfaction) is that mentioned by Dr. Hook, in these Words.
Hook's Posthumous Works. p. 200.
A like Phenomenon to that in Italy 1676, says he, was some 10 Years before
observed, both here in England and in Holland. It was seen by Sir Rob. Murray,
if I mis-remember not, and by Mr. Shortgrave; and I think, also by Mons. Hugens
in Holland. It was as big as the Italian Meteor, and was judged to be of an
exceeding great Height in the Atmosphere; being seen at Places so far distant
at the same time. It appeared first about the North-East, and passed by the
North-West; not rising, as I remember, so high, as 10 Degrees above the Horizon.



(2.) The second Meteor of this kind, that I have met with was, in the Words of
the same Dr. Hook Ibid. p. 199.
A Fax, or Lampas volans, observed after Sunset, the 1 st of March 1676, at Fau
-- by Petrus de Lavina; at Rome, by Monsieur Auzout; at Florence, by Matthias
del Arpi; at Venice, by Jo. Jacob Hertz; and in several other Cities of Italy:
In all which it was seen also by very many others: And at the same time also,
was observed in the lower Parts of Germany; as at Triers, by the Jesuits there;
Places very far distant from one another; and yet the Time and Manner of the
Appearance in all was much the same. It seemed to rise out of the North-East,
and to pass by the Meridian to the South-West Parts of the Heavens, near the
same Tract that the Sun had gone that Day; and disappeared behind thick Clouds,
where, with a mighty Noise, it was supposed to be blown to pieces and
dispersed. It appeared about the Bigness of the Full Moon, and left behind it a
Tail about three Diameters, of a reddish Flame at first, but turning bluish
toward the last. It lasted about a Minute or two. Its Noise at last was like
the Noise of an Earthquake at a Distance, and made the Glass in the Windows
shake. From the comparing several Observations 'twas supposed about 90 Miles
high, and near a Mile in Diameter.

N.B. This must, in all Probability, be the very same Meteor which Montanari,
the great Mathematician at Bononia saw, and exactly measured; of which
presently. For it was seen in the same Year, in the same Month, at the same
time of the Night, in the same Countries, and passed along the very same
Course, and was of the same Bigness; as will appear immediately. How the Day of
the Month, March 1 for March 21, comes to be mistaken, I do not certainly know;
only if they were both meant of the same Style, it is very easily accounted for.

N.B. The real Altitude therefore of this Meteor was not 90 Mile, as it is here
in general stated; but about 38 Miles rather, as Montanari particularly
measured it; as we shall now see.

(2.) The Third, or rather the same Second Meteor of this kind I have met with,
is that on March 21. 1676, about an Hour and three quarters after Sunset,
exactly, to a few Minutes, within two Days of 43 Years before the last; which
was an eminent one indeed, and was particularly observed at Bononia, by that
great Mathematician Montanari. "It came over the Adriatic, says Dr. Halley in
his Extract from him, Philosophical Transact. No. 341.
"as from Dalmatia; crossed over Italy; and became nearly Vertical to Rimini and
Leghorn: Its perpendicular Altitude was, at least, 38 Miles; it made a hissing
Noise as it passed, which was heard near its Course: From Leghorn it went off
to Sea, toward Corsica: And at Leghorn it was heard to give a very great Blow,
beyond the Noise of a great Cannon; with a Rattling, which continued about a
Minute or two. Its Velocity was not less than 160 Miles in a Minute: It was of
an oval Shape: At 50 Miles Distance, its lesser Diameter was as large to the
Eye as the Moon's Diameter, and its larger above half as big again; so that its
real lesser Diameter was above half a Mile, and the other more than three
quarters of a Mile.

(3.) The next Meteor of this kind, was that mentioned by Dr. Wallis, Sept. 20.
1676. about 7 at Night, which he describes thus; Philosophical Transact. No.
135.
"There appeared a sudden Light, equal to that of Noonday, so that the smallest
Pin or Straw might be seen lying on the Ground; and above in the Air was seen,
(at no great Distance, as was supposed,) a long Appearance as of Fire; like a
long Arm, with a great Knob at the End; for so it was described to the Dr. (who
did not himself see it;) shooting along very swiftly: And at its disappearing
seemed to break into small Sparks or Parcels of Fire, like as Rockets, and such
artificial Fireworks in the Air are wont to do. 'Twas so surprising, and of so
short continuance, that it was scarce seen by any who did not then happen to be
abroad; and lasted only while one might tell 15 or 20 at most. It was seen in
most of the Southern Counties of England, at or near the same time. Nor could
the Dr. satisfy himself which way this Meteor went.

(4.) The next Meteor of this kind is that mentioned by Kirchius, as seen at
Leipsick, May 22. 1680. Philosophical Transact. No. 341.
"about three in the Morning, as descending in the North, and leaving behind it
a long white Streak. It was seen at several Places 160 English Miles distant
from Leipsick, but met with no good Observers: as it is no wonder at that time
of the Night.

(5.) The next Meteor of this kind, was seen by Kirchius himself at Leipsick,
July 9. 1686. Ibid.
"at half an Hour past One in the Morning: which moved but very little for half
a quarter of an Hour; its Diameter was about half as large as that of the Moon:
Its Light at first was such, you might read by it; but by degrees it vanished
away. It was seen in many Places at a considerable Distance from Leipsick; and
and was at least 30 English Miles high.

(6.) The next Meteor of this kind, that I have met with, was seen by Mons.
Feuillee, a curious Ir^^^ Observer in the South Sea, May 1^. 1708. about Nine
at Night. His Words are these: Feuillee's Journal. p 116.
We saw, s is be, a flying Fire, which being lighted all of a sudden perfectly
resembled the Planet Venus; it remain;d in the Place where it first appeared
for a Minute and a half. I took care to observe it, by comparing it with the
nearest of the fixed Stars. On a sudden it extended it self, and filled all the
Horizon with Light, in such a manner, that we might have discovered a Ship in
any Part of the Horizon. This Light thus spread, lasted but a short time.

(7.) The next Meteor of this kind, that I have met with, was seen by the same
Observer, a little above two Months after the former, in the same Voyage, July
17. 1708. His Words are these; Ibid. p. 199.
In the Night, I saw a Phenomenon very Particular, almost like another that I
had observed in the Northern Parts. As Astronomy has been always my chief
delight, I was looking up to the Heavens to observe the Stars that make all its
Beauty, and which compose the Southern Constellations. When I perceived on a
sudden a Star much greater than Jupiter and Venus, which continuing more than
two Minutes in the same bigness, and without losing any thing of its Light; I
began to think, from its duration, that it was a New Star. -- Whilst I was
employed in observing this New Phenomenon, it happened that this Luminary, as
I could properly call it at that time, took Fire all on a sudden; and, --
extending it self throughout all our Hemisphere, discovered it to us entirely,
and made us see to the furthest Limits of it, so that we might have seen a Ship
at a great distance; and, if I may venture to say it, even in any Part of the
Horizon; from whence, one may judge, how very great this Light must have been.

(8.) The next Meteor of this kind, was seen in England, July 31. 1708. between
9 and 10 a Clock at Night. Philosophical Transact. No. 341.
"It was between 40 and 50 Miles perpendicularly high; and that over Sheerness,
or the Buoy on the Nore. It was seen at London, and in Suffolk, [and no doubt
in the neighboring Parts of England.] It appeared at London to move
horizontally, from E. by N. to E. by S. and in Suffolk it appeared as sliding
obliquely downwards. It was very bright at its first Appearance, sufficient to
take up a Pin, and but a little inferior to the Light of the Moon; and it died
away at the End of its Course, leaving a pale whiteness in the Place, without
any Noise.

This is an Epitome of the several Histories of Meteors of this Nature, that I
have yet met with in the last Age.

(9.) Nor do I know of any the like Meteors seen since, till this before us;
Unless we reckon that mentioned in our Gazette, and Newspapers, as seen over
Venice, Feb. 22. last. But since it does not yet appear that this was seen at
any considerable Distance, perhaps it might be somewhat of another Nature, and
such a Meteor as is several times seen in our lower Air.

III. I shall now give some Account of Dr. Wallis's Hypothesis about such
Meteors; namely, that they are Comets: with my Reasons against that Hypothesis.

Now as to this Hypothesis, take it in the Doctor's own Account, Philos.
Transact. No. 135. as set down by Mr. Lowthorp, in his Abridgment of those
Transactions, "The Breadth of Ground, says he, where this Meteor, Sept. 20.
1676. was seen, was too much for any ordinary Meteor in our lower Region of the
Air to be seen in at once; which argues that either it was higher than it was
imagined to be, (though the Light of it reached the Earth,) or else that it had a
very swift Motion. This made me then conjecture, that it might be some small
Com t, whose linea trajectori^ passed very near our Earth, or upon it; and
might when farther distant from us, appear as a Comet And that Comet, which
has since appeared in Apri and May, confirms me in the same Opinion; which I
conjecture may be the very same which passed by us in September last. So far
Dr. Wallis. Now tho this Hypothesis might be tolerable when it was written,
before the true Theory and Motions of Comets were discovered by Sir Isaac
Newton, and when the Dr seems not to have been acquainted with any other
Appearance of the like Nature, yet will it now no way bear. The Reason is
obvious, viz. because these Meteors have no manner of Resemblance to Comets at
all either in their Bigness, which is usually about or under a Mile in
Diameter; while Comets are usually of the Bigness of Planets, or several
thousand Miles in Diameter: or in their Nature, which is that of Light or Fire;
while Comets are ever as dark or opake in themselves as the Planets; or in
their Trajectory, which in Comets is a Line descending to, and ascending from
the Sun, and nearly parabolical; while these Meteors still pass in a manner
parallel to the Earth's Horizon: or in their Velocity, which in these Meteors
is very different, but in Comets near the Earth is always the same; or in their
Atmospheres, of which these Meteors are still destitute; but which almost
always encompass the Bodies of Comets, and that to a vast Distance; or in their
Tails, of which we have no Signs in these Meteors, but which almost as
certainly accompany the Comets as do their Atmospheres themselves, as indeed
derived from them: or in their visible Duration, which in these Meteors is
seldom many Minutes, frequently not many Seconds, but in Comets is usually many
Days or Weeks, nay sometimes Months. To say nothing of the Impossibility there
is that the same Comet which was near the Earth in September should continue
near it, or approach again to it seven or eight Months afterward, as the Dr.
supposes; when the Earth was then not very far from the opposite Point of its
Orbit, or more than 100,000,000 Miles distant from its former Place. It Is
therefore certain that these Meteors cannot belong to the Species of Bodies we
call Comets.

IV. I shall now give a like Account of Dr. Halley's Hypothesis about these
Meteors; viz. That they are a sort of fortuitous Collection of such Vapors in
the vast Void about us, as by Accident only fall into our Atmosphere, at
certain times; without any other relation thereto; with my Reasons against that
Hypothesis.

Dr. Halley gives us his Hypothesis, Transact. No. 341. p. 162. in these Words,
"I have, says he, much considered this Appearance, and think it one of the
hardest things to account for that I have yet met with in the Phenomenon of
Meteors; and am induced to think that it must be some Collection of Matter
formed in the Ether, as it were by some fortuitous Concourse of Atoms; and
that the Earth met with it as it past along in its Orb, then but newly formed,
and before it had conceived any great Impetus of Descent toward the Sun. For
the direction of that over Italy was exactly opposite to that of the Earth,
that is, its Course was from W.S.W. to E.N.E. wherefore the Meteor seemed to
move the contrary way; and besides, falling into the Power of the Earth's
Gravity, and losing its Motion from the Opposition to the Medium, it seems that
it descended toward the Earth, and was extinguished in the Tyrrhene Sea, to
the West South West of Leghorn. The great Blow being heard upon its first
Immersion into the Water, and the rattling like the driving a Cart over Stones,
being what succeeded upon its quenching; something like which is always
observed upon quenching a very hot Iron in Water. Thus far Dr. Halley.

Now the plain Reasons why I can no way agree to this Hypothesis, are these:

(1.) It Is very evident, there neither is, nor can be any such Collection of
Vapors formed in the Ether, as it were by some fortuitous Concourse of Atoms,
and without Gravity, which the Dr. here supposes as the Foundation of his
Hypothesis. Such a Mass of Matter in an immense Vacuum, without any Gravitation
to the Sun, the Dr. well knows is a mere Chimaera, contradicting all the
certain Philosophy in the World. Nor can it be possibly supposed but by
immediate Creation out of nothing, or by it self emerging out of nothing,
without being created, before it could be thus collected together; neither of
which Notions, I imagine, will be justified by the Dr. himself, in his cool
Thoughts. But let us for once suppose such Masses of fiery Matter frequently
collected in the Ether, though we know they cannot possibly be so collected; yet
is it evident,

(2.) That if such Meteors as these were thence derived, they would appear at
all sorts of Distances, within the reach of their Light, or within the reach of
a thousand or two of Miles: For a Body so large, and a Light so nearly equal to
that of the Sun, as these have, would certainly be visible so far; whereas it
does not appear, that any of them have been yet seen so far as 50 Miles from
the Earth.

(3.) These Meteors would, on such an Hypothesis, be equally of all Magnitudes
whatsoever; such fortuitous Productions, if such there were, going for certain
by no Rule at all: Whereas those abovementioned seem never to have been of a
larger Size than this last, which was about a Mile in Diameter; and the rest of
no very great Variety therefrom.

(4.) They would and must all, upon this Hypothesis, as the Dr. allows, in
these Climates, go nearly with the same Velocity, and in the same Course, as to
our Sight, i. e. from East to West; because their Motion being only apparent,
must be derived from the Earth's Motions, Annual and Diurnal, which are from
West to East, both the same way, and of one tenor. Whereas these Meteors go
uncertainly, and without any regard to those Motions at all. Accordingly, this
last went almost directly South, and much faster than even the annual Motion it
self; entirely contrary to this Hypothesis.

(5.) If these Balls of Light or Fire were such Masses as did not belong to our
Atmosphere, but only passed through it accidentally, as Dr. Halley supposes;
why do we not see them before our Atmosphere reaches them? and after it leaves
them, whenever it does so, as well as while they pass through it? not to say,
that the first Collection, as well as last Dissolution of these Meteors, does,
by the Observations themselves appear, both to begin and end within the Limits
of that Atmosphere, and thereby show they properly belong to it, entirely
contrary to the Dr's. Hypothesis.

(6.) If this was the Origin of these Meteors, why do they seldom or never hit
against the Body of the Earth it self, or terraqueous Globe, but against the
Air? Or rather, why does the Body of the Earth or terraqueous Globe, seldom or
never hit against these Meteors, but only the Air, nay the upper Regions of the
Air? Why do these Meteors seldom or never destroy a City, or burn up a Fleet,
as well as pass over our Heads, without doing us any Damage? The Earth's
Diameter is near 8000 Miles; the Altitude of any sensible Atmosphere, as Dr.
Halley has fully proved, is not 50 Miles, and thence the Diameter of the whole,
not 8100 Miles. Now the Disk or biggest Circle of the larger Sphere will be to
the Disk or biggest Circle of the smaller here, as the Squares of those
Numbers, or nearly as 40 to 41, and the Difference of those Squares, or the
Hazard of such a Ball's hitting against the Earth, or the Atmosphere, will be
as the smaller Number to the Difference of those Numbers, or as 40 to 1. Nay,
since only the upper Regions of the Air, for in them alone these Meteors have
been seen, are to be compared with the Earth; it will appear on a like
Calculation, that the Hazard of such a Ball's hitting against the Earth, is to
that of its hitting against the upper Parts of the Atmosphere, at least as 100
to 1, or that, one with another, 100 of these terrible Meteors will hit against
the Earth it self, and destroy all before them, for one that hits against the
upper Regions of the Air; and above 100 will hit against either the Earth, or
lower Regions of the Air, for one that hits against those upper Regions; to
which yet we see Providence usually, if not always confines them. I say that
these Meteors seem seldom or never to hit against the terraqueous Globe it self.

It Is true, Dr. Halley imagines, that those which go off with a Report, as the
principal certainly, and all probably do, must fall into the Sea, and in
quenching make that Noise we hear after these Meteors, and that one of those
already mentioned descended toward the Earth, and was extinguished
particularly in the Tyrrhene Sea. But then, since that is a bare Hypothesis,
and without any Fact or History to support it, nay contrary to the known
Observations themselves, while Dr. Hook's Account, set down as above, assures
us, that the Italian Meteor which Dr. Halley supposed to fall into the Sea,
only set behind a Cloud, I shall not need to confute it any farther. In short,
this whole Hypothesis seems to me so very weak, that it can only be excused and
forgiven on account of the many other noble and truly excellent Performances of
its Author. Though I confess I think this Author should not easily forgive
himself in one thing, I mean that odd Insinuation here made, as if there might
be a formation of Meteors, at least, if not of other Bodies also, as it were by
some fortuitous Concourse of Atoms; which, I venture to say it, is, at this
time of Day especially, as little agreeable to sound Philosophy, as to all the
Notions we have of Providence and Religion.

V. I shall now propose a New Hypothesis of my own, for the Solution of these
Appearances, viz. That they are no other than prodigious Storms, or Blasts of
Thunder and Lightening in the upper Regions of our Air: With my Reasons for
that Hypothesis.

Having therefore now given my Reasons, why I cannot at all go into the Notions
of either Dr. Wallis, or Dr. Halley in this Matter; I come to my own
Hypothesis, or Conjecture; so I shall yet call it: Though I confess the Evidence
for it seems to me so strong, that, if the future Phenomenon of this kind do
confirm it, as much as I think those do which we are hitherto acquainted
withal, it may perhaps hereafter merit a higher Denomination.

My Opinion therefore concerning such Meteors, is plainly this, That they
properly deserve that Name of Meteors, as belonging directly to our Atmosphere;
and that they are no other than prodigious Storms or blasts of Thunder and
Lightening, of such Thunder and Lightening, as is proper and peculiar to those
more elevated Regions of our Air in which they appear. In order to the true
understanding of my meaning in which Hypothesis, the Reader must observe, that
the Air at 39 Miles high, is, by Dr. Halley's Calculation, agreed to now by
all, about 2000 times rarer and weaker than it is here with us; that a Storm or
Blast of this kind, even here below, seems to be a Collection of
nitro-sulphureous and fiery Vapors, into a sort of a rolling Globe, or
Whirlwind of Fire; that this is that Fulmen or pernicious Lightning, which is
so terrible in its Effects; that it is still accompanied with that Fulgur or
Flash, we call common Lightening, and with that Tonitru, that great rolling or
rattling Noise which we call Thunder; and that such Collections of
nitro-sulphureous or fiery Vapors may be vastly larger before they are limited
or determined by the external Air, which by rarefaction is excluded from
within, where it is so vastly rare, than the like Collections are with us: That
the prodigious Velocity of such Balls may also be better supposed in such a
rare and thin Medium, than in ours, so much denser and thicker; and that so
much the greater Quantity of nitro-sulphureous Vapors will be spent and
exhausted by one such Ball or Blast, than by one of ours here below, as it is
in Magnitude greater; which will also render such Phenomenon in the same
Proportion rarer and seldomer in any certain region there than here.

These things being supposed, which appear to me very reasonable; it will be a
natural Account of these Phaenomenona, if we esteem them direct Blasts of this
kind. For certainly these Fireballs, as we have showed, are still within the
Limits of our Air, the Place of such Meteors: They have all the three
Characters of such, and only of such Blasts; the Fulmen, the Ball or Whirlwind
of pernicious Lightening; the Fulgur, the Flash or common Lightening; and the
Tonitra, the Noise or Thunder. They go with a Swiftness which we have no
Examples of here in any Meteors, unless it be in such Thunder and Lightening.
So that I do not see room for much doubt in the Case. It Is true, the rareness
of the Air above, will, as in all like Cases, greatly deaden and damp the sound
of the Thunder; as no doubt it does; but this is no great difficulty here,
because the prodigious Vastness of the Blast, if it be at all so much more
violent as the Fire-ball is greater in Quantity, as it must naturally be, will
abundantly make up that Defect, and afford us a sufficient Sound
notwithstanding; as will appear presently by Calculation. I do not indeed know
any mechanical Power, that in such a fluid Medium as the Air, can cause so
sudden, and so prodigious a Collection of fiery Vapors, and carry them in one
particular horizontal Direction with such an immense Velocity as we here meet
with. But then, I am equally at a loss for the mechanical Cause of the strange
Effects of Gunpowder, and of the like Cause of the Velocity, Force, and
Direction of Thunder and Lightening, and indeed of many other Powers of Nature;
of whose Existence, yet, there is no manner of Question. So that if it appear,
that this Meteor is no other than a Blast of Thunder and Lightening, such as is
proper and peculiar to the higher Regions of the Air, as I hope it now does; we
ought not to object this Difficulty against the present Solution, which is
built on the known Properties of nitrosulphureous Vapors in all such
Explosions, whether of Gunpowder below, or of Thunder and Lightening a little
above.

And now, for a Conclusion, I shall Observe a few things which may, on this
Occasion, deserve the Attention of the Curious.

Note (1.) That such a Collection of nitrosulphureous Vapors as this, of a
Mile in Diameter, is to such a Collection of the like Vapors in the largest
Thunder-Storms here below, of scarce 20 Feet Diameter, as the Cubes of those
Diameters, or as 16,000,000 to 1. So that the Explosion or Force of such a Ball
of Fire as this would naturally, as to Light, Sound, and Strength, be in the
same Proportion also. Whence it is questionable, whether if all the Gunpowder
now in the World were laid together, and fired at once, it could make an
Explosion equal to this before us.

Note (2.) That therefore it is no Wonder that the Sound of this Explosion was
heard at the Distance of at least 80 or 100 Miles from the Explosion it self,
even through that upper Air, where it is about 2000 times rarer, and therefore
in the same Proportion weaker than it is here below.

Note (3.) That therefore if this Ball of Fire had been directed downward, and
come into our lower Air, and been there exploded, its Sound, at the same
Distances, would have been about 2000 times as great as it now was, So that
besides the sad Desolation that might arise from the Ball of Fire, which would
have been vastly sudden and terrible, the very Sound or Concussion of the Air
would it self have been exceeding dreadful, and very fatal also to all the
neighboring Animals, Trees, and Buildings whatsoever. Some of the smaller
Meteors of this kind afford no Sound at this Distance; but the larger sort, of
which the last was the Principal, did so always to a great Degree, as the
foregoing Histories inform us.

Note (4.) That therefore a smaller Meteor of this sort, or such as some of the
foregoing Histories describe, if it should descend to the Earth, would be
abundantly sufficient utterly to destroy a particular City; and such an one as
this, no small part of a County, and that in an instant, without giving the
least room for foreknowing, preventing, or escaping from the same.

Note (5.) That we know of no mechanical Causes that can prevent such a Descent
of these Meteors downwards: For as our common Thunder and Lightening certainly
do, and that not seldom, descend from the Clouds to the Earth, and make lesser
Destructions there, so do some of the best Observations incline us to allow
that even this, as well as others of these Meteors, have a little descended in
their Course also. Nor in case of the original Direction downwards, do I know
any sufficient Obstacle our lower Air, how dense soever, could lay in its way;
the Strength and Velocity of such a Meteor, vastly exceeding any such
inconsiderable Resistance. Yet it is to be noted,

(6.) That our late Histories of those Meteors of this kind, whose Heights have
been measured, never give less than 30 Miles Altitude to any of them. Whence it
appears, that the Great and Good Author of Nature has generally, in the Course
of his Providence, confined them to the upper Regions of our Air, and preserved
the lower Parts of it, with the Inhabitants of the Earth and Seas, from the
dismal Effects of them; though that Confinement and Preservation be provided for
by Causes which no way appear to us at present.

(7.) That we accordingly have no certain Accounts of any great Destruction
brought upon Mankind by such Meteors, excepting that amazing and divine
Judgment on Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, which the Sacred Scriptures
record, and to which all the Heathen Accounts also agree. The Scriptures
describe it thus: Genesis xix. 24, 25, 26.
Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah Brimstone and Fire, from the
Lord out of Heaven. And he overthrew those Cities, and all the Plain, and all
the Inhabitants of the Cities, and that which grew upon the Ground. But Lot's
Wife looked back from behind him, and she became a Pillar of Salt. -- v. 28.
And the Smoke of the Country went up as the Smoke of a Furnace. Which is
elsewhere alluded to also by Moses, in these Words; Deuteronomy. xxix. 23.
The whole Land thereof is Brimstone, and burning Salt; that it is not sown,
nor bears, nor any Grass grows therein; like the Overthrow of Sodom and
Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, which the Lord overthrew in his Anger, and in his
Wrath.

Diodorus Siculus says, that Places near this Asphaltites, or Lake of Bitumen,
Diodor. XIX.
are fiery, and of an ill Savor, and make the Bodies of the Inhabitants sickly,
and altogether short-lived.

Strabo says, Strabo XVI.
There are many Indications of a burning Soil here: -- which confirm the
Tradition of the Inhabitants adjoining, which say, There were therein of old
thirteen Cities, the Principal of which was Sodom; whose Circuit is still shown
of 60 Furlongs; and that the Lake arose from Earthquakes, with the Eruptions of
Fire, and of hot and brimstony Waters: whereby the Stones took Fire, while some
of the Cities were swallowed up, and others deserted by those who could get
away.

Tacitus says, that Tacit. V. vid. Plin. v. 16.
These Plains are related to have been anciently very fruitful, and with great
Cities in them: but that they were burnt by a Blast of Thunder and Lightening;
the Footsteps of which remain: That the Land looks burnt, and has lost its
Fertility: because all things that grew there, whether of their own Accord, or
by Culture of the Labourer, both the Herb and the Flower, when they seem nearly
ripe, become black and empty, and seem to vanish away into Ashes.

Solinus says, Solin. c. 36.
There is a large Bay, that opens itself a great way from Jerusalem, which was
stricken from Heaven, as a black Soil that turns into Ashes: There were there
two Cities, Sodom and Gomorrah by Name, the Apple of which Places, when it
seems to be ripe, cannot be chewed; for the paring on the outside, which is
thin, contains within nothing but Soot and Ashes; which when you press it never
so little with your Hand, sends out Smoke, and vanishes away into Dust
dispersed by the Wind.

Now how exactly these Descriptions agree to a Country destroyed by such a
terrible Meteor as this, I dare appeal to all sober and considerate
Naturalists: while the Rain of Fire and Brimstone, or of Brimstone on Fire,
with nitrous Salts intermixed, is here literally true: while the Smoke like the
Smoke of a Furnace, is also literally true: it being evident in Fact, that all
Vulcano's, great Guns, and such Meteors as these, directly leave a mighty Smoke
after their Explosion: while the Salt Lake itself would easily thence arise, by
the Penetration of such fierce and fiery Particles into the Bowels of a
Country, which was full of Slime-pits Genesis xiv. 10.
already, and so prepared to take Fire: while it would thus easily destroy
itself by a Subversion, an Overthrow, or an Earthquake, and thereupon admit the
Waters of the River Jordan, from the neighboring Sea of the Plain, and would
infect them with its nitrous and sulphurous Vapors, and so become one great
Salt, or Dead Sea, for all future Generations: while the Remains of all this
would naturally produce such a barren Soil, full of Smoke and Ashes, as we find
adjoining to the Salt Sea, by the foregoing Descriptions. This nitrosulphureous
Shower would also naturally fall on Lot's Wife, while she stayed a little
behind, looking back, as not fully believing God's threatening concerning this
terrible Destruction, and would not only kill her in an instant, but render her
Body immediately stiff and fixed, in the same Posture wherein she was when it
fell on her; which is no uncommon Circumstance with us, when any Persons have
been killed by Lightening; and which would render her a standing Pillar of
Salt, of Nitrous Salt, in a literal Sense; however, a Pillar of Salt for
Perpetuity, or a lasting Monument of this terrible Judgment for future
Generations. And so it proved, for it was still in Being several Years after
our Savior's Death, See Luke xvii 32.
as the Jewish Historian Josephus himself assures us, Joseph. Antiq. I. 12.
and whose Words seem to imply, that himself had seen it also.

Note (8.) That one great ordinary Intention and Use of these Meteors seems to
be the same with that of the Tides for the Sea; and of Storms, whether of Wind,
or of Thunder and Lightening, for the lower Air; I mean not only the agitating
the Air, but chiefly the purging and purifying of it, by spending and consuming
such noxious Steams and Exhalations, as otherwise might be pernicious to
Mankind, to the Bruit Animals, and to the other Inhabitants thereof, if such
there be. I say, this seems to me at least one of the Uses of Thunder and
Lightening, both here below, and there above; without presuming to deny that
there may be other Uses of the same, or that these, as well as other Meteors,
may be farther intended by Providence for Purposes which we have at present no
certain Means of discovering. It does not follow, that because the fixed Stars
are very useful to us in Astronomy, that therefore Providence only designed
them for that End. And the Case is the same in other Instances.

Note (9.) That there seem to have been of late more uncommon Meteors seen than
have been usual in the like Space of Time. Thus we have had at least Eight or
Nine of the Meteors of this kind taken Notice of in these Parts of the World,
within 53 Years; while we know not where to find so many in a much longer Space
in any elder Histories. Thus also there have been more frequent and remarkable
Aurorae Boreales, or Northern Lights, observed within somewhat more than three
Years last past, than appear in our Historians, in a much longer Space. To say
nothing of that pale Light like Twilight, which is chiefly seen between the
Horizon and the Pleiades, about the End of February, and Beginning of March,
which some have thought to be peculiar to the last 70 or 80 Years. Nor can it
well be said, that all this has happened only by the Negligence of the elder
Writers in transmitting such Things to us: Since, on the contrary, they have
generally been but over Superstitious in setting down such strange Appearances,
and of noting how ominous they thought them to Mankind.

Note (10.) That it no way appears that the frequenter Phenomenon of these
sorts, have yet had any ill Influence on the natural World. The Seasons, the
Air, with the Fruits of the Earth, and the living Creatures, seeming in general
to have received hitherto no Damage thereby. And certainly, if they tend to
purge the Air, as I imagine, they may have received no small Benefit from them.
Nay indeed, in case they should be derived from any considerable or general
Change in our Air of late, I should think it more probable that such Change was
for the Benefit and Advantage of the same, than the contrary.

Note (11.) That we have no reason to suppose that Comets, or Northern Lights,
or these Meteors before us, with the like more unusual Phenomenon of Nature,
are properly and generally ominous, or directly forebode any future Judgments
to the World, or to particular Nations, or Parties therein, as the Vulgar are
apt to imagine. They are indeed, with other celestial Phenomenon, naturally
Invitations to the abstracting our Minds from continually poring on things
below; they call on us to look upwards, to the Works of God that are above us;
to his superior Providence, and to a proper Dependence on him. They preach to
us this Doctrine, That God has it always in his Power to preserve or destroy
the World, and all the Creatures therein, as he pleases; and this without any
new Miracles. But they are, I think, of themselves, and generally speaking, no
proper Indications of impending Judgments, or of God's Will to punish or
destroy any Part of his Creatures. It may be indeed justly esteemed a great
Sign of the Guilt and conscious Wickedness of Mankind in general; that all such
extraordinary Phenomenon are still interpreted to the worse Sense, as
Forerunners of Wars, Famines, Plagues, etc. but they are not, I believe, any
Signs that God is really and particularly at such times bringing those or the
like Judgments upon them. However, I have so fully spoken my Mind of this
Matter, and of the Limitations and Restrictions thereto belonging, in my
Account of the former surprising Meteor, March 6. 1716. page 74-77. that I
shall not repeat it here, but refer the Reader thither, who desires farther
Satisfaction. I conclude with one more important Observation, which is this:

Note (12.) That we ought here to observe, and to acknowledge the good
Providence of God, the great Author of universal Nature, of the Air in
particular, with its surprising Wonders; and the great Disposer and Director of
them all, in usually confining the terrible Meteors of this kind to the upper
Regions of the Air, and not permitting them to descend low enough to hurt us
here below. And this deserves more particularly our regard, because we know of
no mechanical Causes that can hinder their Direction downward; and because we
know that ordinary Thunder-blasts are frequently so directed, and this
sometimes to the terrible Destruction of Buildings and Animals here below. Let
us but consider, what has been above shown, how certainly such a descending
Ball or Whirlwind of Fire and Brimstone as this, which was a full Mile in
Diameter, and moved at the rate of at least 2000 Miles in a Minute, might have
conquered all the Resistance of our lower Air; and in a moment, before it could
have been in the least foreseen, or provided against by any, might have
destroyed such a City as London it self. How inevitably, how immediately, such
a famous Emporium might then have been as Sodom, and like unto Gomorrah; Is. i.
9.
and not one Person might have escaped to tell the sad News to the rest of the
World? This would not seldom be the natural Result of such Blasts here below,
which are frequently seen above, did not the divine Providence, by some Means
unknown to us, restrain their Course, and six them their Bounds which they
cannot pass; Ps. civ. 9.
and say, hitherto shall ye come, and no further; and in such a Place above
shall your proud Waves, or Blasts be stayed. Job xxxviii. 11.
This is the rational, the religious Consequence; this is the just and the
pious Inference, which the Consideration of such surprising Meteors, such
wonderful Works of him that dwells in the Heavens naturally suggests to us. I
therefore end my Discourse on this, nearly as I did that on the former Meteor;
O ye Fire and Heat, O ye Lightenings and Clouds; O ye Children of Men, bless ye
the Lord; praise and exalt him above all for ever. Song of the three Children
v. 43, 50, 56.


POSTSCRIPT.
I Have just now got some good Observations of this Meteor from our famous
Observatory at Greenwich, and what Accounts were there received, viz. that to
us about London it arose from or but little under the Seven Stars, which were
then half a Point from the West to the North, at the Altitude of 22 or 23, that
it proceeded above 40 upon the Horizon, till it came under the Sword of Orion,
near the South West, and about the Altitude of 15; that the time of its
Appearance was nearly 11 after 8, and that it lasted about 6, making a hissing
Noise as it passed along. All which confirms what I have already advanced, and
particularly implies what I have noted above, That the Meteor had the greatest
Elevation at first, or was not much less than 50 Miles high, which is nearly
the utmost Limit of our Atmosphere; that it gradually descended lower till it
came over Devonshire, where it was about 39 Miles high; and that where it
brake, over the Sea, and over Bretaign in France, its Altitude could not be
very much above 30 Miles.

As to the Monastery burnt in France, it was the Day before the Appearance of
this Meteor, and so had no Relation to it. And the like is to be said of some
other Accidents elsewhere, none of which appear to have at all been occasioned
by it.

W.W.
May 25. 1719.
BOOKS writ by W. WHISTON, M.A.
I. THE Elements of Euclid, with select Theorems out of Archimedes. By the
Learned Andrew Tacquet. To which are added, Practical Corollaries, showing the
Uses of many of the Propositions. The whole abridg'd, and in this Third Edition
published in English. II. Astronomical Lectures read in the Public Schools at
Cambridge. Whereunto is added, a Collection of Astronomical Tables; being those
of Mr. Flamsteed, corrected; Dr. Halley; Monsieur Cassini; and Mr. Street. For
the Use of Young Students in the University. And now done into English. III. An
Account of a surprising Meteor seen in the Air, March the 16th, 1715-16. at
Night. Containing, 1. A Description of this Meteor, from the Author's own
Observations. 2. Some Historical Accounts of the like Meteors before; with
Extracts from such Letters and Accounts of this, as the Author has received. 3.
The principal Phenomenon of this Meteor. 4. Conjectures for their Solution. 5.
Reasons why our Solutions are so imperfect. 6. Inferences and Observations from
the Premises. The Second Edition. IV. An humble and serious Address to the
Princes and States of Europe, to Admit, or at least openly to Tolerate the
Christian Religion in their Dominions. V. Sir Isaac Newton's Mathematick
Philosophy more easily Demonstrated. VI. Astronomical Principles of Religion,
Natural and Revealed. VII. His Account of Dr. Sacheverell's Proceedings, in
order to Exclude him from St. Andrew's Church in Holborn. The Fourth Edition.
VIII. His Letter of Thanks to the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of London, for
his late Letter to his Clergy against the Use of New Forms of Doxology, etc.
IX. His Second Letter to the Lord Bishop of London on the same Subject. X. His
Scripture Politics; or, an impartial Account of the Origin and Measures of
Government Ecclesiastical and Civil, taken out of the Books of the Old and New
Testament. With a Postscript relating to the Report of the Committee of
Convocation about the Bishop of Bangor's Preservative, and Sermon before the
King. To which is subjoined the Supposal; or a New Scheme of Government. First
Published A.D. 1712. and now reprinted.
All Printed for J. SENEX, at the Globe in Salisbury-Court; and W. TAILOR, at
the Ship in Paternoster Row.


