A New and most Accurate THEORY OF THE Moon's Motion; Whereby all her
Irregularities may be solved, and her Place truly calculated to Two Minutes.

Written by That Incomparable Mathematician Mr. ISAAC NEWTON, And Published in
Latin by Mr. DAVID GREGORY in his Excellent Astronomy.

LONDON, Printed, and sold by A. Baldwin in Warwick Lane. 1702.

TO THE READER^
THE Irregularity of the Moon's Motion has been all along the just Complaint
of Astronomers; and indeed I have always looked upon it as a great Misfortune
that a Planet so near us as the Moon is, and which might be so wonderfully
useful to us by her Motion, as well as her Light and Attraction (by which our
Tides are chiefly occasioned) should have her Orbit so unaccountably various,
that it is in a manner vain to depend on any Calculation of an Eclipse, a
Transit, or an Appulse of her, tho never so accurately made. Whereas could her
Place be but truly calculated, the Longitudes of Places would be found every
where at Land with great Facility, and might be nearly guessed at Sea without
the help of a Telescope, which cannot there be used.

This Irregularity of the Moon's Motion depends (as is now well known, since
Mr. Newton has demonstrated the Law of Universal Gravitation) on the
Attraction of the Sun, which perturbs the Motion of the Moon (and of all other
Satellites or secondary Planets) and makes her move sometimes faster and
sometimes slower in her Orbit; and makes consequently an Alteration in the
Figure of that Orbit, as well as of its Inclination to the Plain of the
Ecliptic. But this being now to be accounted for, and reduced to a Rule; by
this Theory such Allowances are made for it, as that the Place of the Planet
shall be truly Equated.

This therefore being perfectly New, and what the Lovers of Astronomy have a
long while been put in hopes to receive from the Great Hand that has now
finished it; I thought it would be of good service to our Nation to give it an
English Dress, and publish it by it self: For as Dr. Gregory's Astronomy is a
large and scarce Book, it is neither every ones Money that can purchase it, nor
Acquaintance that can procure it; and besides I hope we have a great many
Persons in England that have Skill and Patience enough to calculate a Planet's
Place, who yet it may be don't well enough understand the Latin Tongue to make
themselves Masters of this Theory in the Author's own Words. At least I
persuade my self, that a Theory so easy and plain as this, which carries along
with it such a Pretense to Exactness, will encourage many Persons to employ
themselves in Astronomical Calculation, which before possibly they neglected,
because they judged there was but little Exactness to be attained in it. And
this would be a very useful way of spending their leisure Hours; and if they
would oblige us with the Publication of good Ephemerides, Tables, etc. they
would soon inflame others with a Desire of pursuing these kind of Studies.

The Famous Mr. Isaac Newton's THEORY OF THE MOON.
THIS Theory has been long expected by the Lovers of Art, and is now published
in Dr. Gregory's Astronomy, in Mr. Newton's own Words.

By this Theory, what by all Astronomers was thought most difficult and almost
impossible to be done, the Excellent Mr. Newton has now effected, viz. to
determine the Moon's Place even in her Quadratures, and all other Parts of her
Orbit, besides the Syzygys, so accurately by Calculation, that the Difference
between that and her true Place in the Heavens shall scarce be two Minutes, and
is usually so small, that it may well enough be reckoned only as a Defect in
the Observation. And this Mr. Newton experienced by comparing it with very many
Places of the Moon observed by Mr. Flamstead, and communicated to him.

The Royal Observatory at Greenwich is to the West of the Meridian of Paris 2.
19. Of Vraniburgh 12. 51. 30. And of Gedanum 18. 48.

The mean Motions of the Sun and Moon, accounted from the Vernal Equinox at the
Meridian of Greenwich, I make to be as follows. The last Day of December
1680. at Noon (Old Style) the mean Motion of the Sun was 9 Sign. 20. 34. 46. Of
the Sun's Apogaeum was 3 Sign. 7. 23. 30.

The mean Motion of the Moon at that time was 6 Sign. 1. 35. 45. And of her
Apogee 8 Sign. 4. 28. 5. Of the Ascending Node of the Moon's Orbit 5 Sign. 24.
14. 35.

And on the last Day of December 1700. at Noon, the mean Motion of the Sun was
9 Sign. 20. 43. 50. Of the Sun's Apogee 3 Sign. 7. 44. 30. The mean Motion of
the Moon was 10 Sign. 15. 19. 50. Of the Moon's Apogee 11 Sign. 8. 18. 20. And
of her ascending Node 4 Sign. 27. 24. 20. For in 20 Julian Years or 7305 Days,
the Sun's Motion is 20 Revolut. 0 Sign. 0. 9. 4. And the Motion of the Sun's
Apogee 21. 0.

The Motion of the Moon in the same Time is 247 Rev. 4 Sign. 13. 34. 5. And the
Motion of the Lunar Apogee is 2 Revol. 3 Sign. 3. 50. 15. And the Motion of her
Node 1 Revol. 0 Sign. 26. 50. 15.

All which Motions are accounted from the Vernal Equinox: Wherefore if from
them there be subtracted the Recession or Motion of the Equinoctial Point in
Antecedentia during that space, which is 16. 0. there will remain the Motions
in reference to the Fixed Stars in 20 Julian Years; viz. the Sun's 19 Revol. 11
Sign. 29. 52. 24. Of his Apogee 4. 20. And the Moon's 247 Revol. 4 Sign. 13.
17. 25. Of her Apogee 2 Revol. 3 Sign. 3. 33. 35. And of the Node of the Moon 1
Revol. 0 Sign. 27. 6. 55.

According to this Computation the Tropical Year is 365 Days. 5 Hours. 48. 57.
And the Sydereal Year is 365 Days. 6 Hours. 9. 14.

These mean Motions of the Luminaries are affected with various Inequalities:
Of which,

1. There are the Annual Equations of the aforesaid mean Motions of the Sun and
Moon, and of the Apogee and Node of the Moon.

The Annual Equation of the mean Motion of the Sun depends on the Eccentricity
of the Earth's Orbit round the Sun, which is 16 11/12 of such Parts, as that
the Earth's mean Distance from the Sun shall be 1000: Whence it is called the
Equation of the Center; and is when greatest 1. 56. 20.

The greatest Annual Equation of the Moon's mean Motion is 11. 49. of her
Apogee 20. and of her Node 9. 30.

And these four Annual Equations are always mutually proportional one to
another: Wherefore when any of them is at the greatest, the other three will
also be greatest; and when any one lessens, the other three will also be
diminished in the same Ratio.

The Annual Equation of the Sun's Center being given, the three other
corresponding Annual Equations will be also given; and therefore a Table of
that will serve for all. For if the Annual Equation of the Sun's Center be
taken from thence, for any Time, and be called P, and let 1/10 P = Q, Q + 1/60
Q = R, P= D, D + 1/30 D = E, and D- 1/60 D = 2 F; then shall the Annual
Equation of the Moon's mean Motion for that time be R, that of the Apogee of
the Moon will be E, and that of the Node F.

Only observe here, that if the Equation of the Sun's Center be required to be
added; then the Equation of the Moon's mean Motion must be subtracted, that of
her Apogee must be added, and that of the Node subducted. And on the contrary,
if the Equation of the Sun's Center were to be subducted, the Moon's Equation
must be added, the Equation of her Apogee subducted, and that of her Node added.

There is also an Equation of the Moon's mean Motion depending on the Situation
of her Apogee in respect of the Sun; which is greatest when the Moon's Apogee
is in an Octant with the Sun, and is nothing at all when it is in the
Quadratures or Syzygys. This Equation, when greatest, and the Sun in Perigaeo,
is 3. 56. But if the Sun be in Apogaeo, it will never be above 3. 34. At other
Distances of the Sun from the Earth, this Equation, when greatest, is
reciprocally as the Cube of such Distance. But when the Moon's Apogee is any
where but in the Octants, this Equation grows less, and is mostly at the same
distance between the Earth and Sun, as the Sine of the double Distance of the
Moon's Apogee from the next Quadrature or Syzygy, to the Radius.

This is to be added to the Moon's Motion, while her Apogee passes from a
Quadrature with the Sun to a Syzygy; but is to be subtracted from it, while the
Apogee moves from the Syzygy to the Quadrature.

There is moreover another Equation of the Moon's Motion, which depends on the
Aspect of the Nodes of the Moon's Orbit with the Sun: and this is greatest when
her Nodes are in Octants to the Sun, and vanishes quite, when they come to
their Quadratures or Syzygys. This Equation is proportional to the Sine of the
double Distance of the Node from the next Syzygy or Quadrature; and at greatest
is but 47. This must be added to the Moon's mean Motion, while the Nodes are
passing from their Syzygys with the Sun to their Quadratures with him; but
subtracted while they pass from the Quadratures to the Syzygys.

From the Sun's true Place take the equated mean Motion of the Lunar Apogee, as
was above showed, the Remainder will be the Annual Argument of the said Apogee.
From whence the Eccentricity of the Moon. and the second Equation of her Apogee
may be compared after the manner following (which takes place also in the
Computation of any other intermediate Equations.)



Let T represent the Earth, TS a Right Line joining the Earth and Sun, TACB a
Right Line drawn from the Earth to the middle or mean Place of the Moon's
Apogee, equated, as above: Let the Angle STA be the Annual Argument of the
aforesaid Apogee, TA the least Eccentricity of the Moon's Orbit, TB the
greatest. Bissect AB in C; and on the Center C with the Distance AC describe a
Circle AFB, and make the Angle BCF = to the double of the Annual Argument. Draw
the Right Line TF, that shall be the Eccentricity of the Moon's Orbit; and the
Angle BTF is the second Equation of the Moon's Apogee required.

In order to whose Determination let the mean Distance of the Earth from the
Moon, or the Semidiameter of the Moon's Orbit, be 1000000; then shall its
greatest Eccentricity TB be 66782 such Parts; and the least TA, 43319. So that
the greatest Equation of the Orbit, viz. when the Apogee is in the Syzygys,
will be 7. 39. 30. or perhaps 7. 40. (for I suspect there will be some
Alteration according to the Position of the Apogee in or in.) But when it is in
Quadrature to the Sun, the greatest Equation aforesaid will be 4. 57. 56. and
the greatest Equation of the Apogee 12. 15. 4.

Having from these Principles made a Table of the Equation of the Moon's
Apogee, and of the Eccentricitys of her Orbit to each degree of the Annual
Argument, from whence the Eccentricity TF, and the Angle BTF ( viz. the second
and principal Equation of the Apogee) may easily be had for any Time required;
let the Equation thus found be added, to the first Equated Place of the Moon's
Apogee, if the Annual Argument be less than 90, or greatear than 180, and less
than 270; otherwise it must be subducted from it: and the Sum or Difference
shall be the Place of the Lunar Apogee secondarily equated; which being taken
from the Moon's Place equated a third time, shall leave the mean Anomaly of the
Moon corresponding to any given Time. Moreover, from this mean Anomaly of the
Moon, and the before-found Eccentricity of her Orbit, may be found (by means of
a Table of Equations of the Moon's Center made to every degree of the mean
Anomaly, and some Eccentricitys, viz. 45000, 50000, 55000, 60000, and 65000)
the Prostaphaeresis or Equation of the Moon's Center, as in the common way: and
this being taken from the former Semicircle of the middle Anomaly, and added in
the latter to the Moon's Place thus thrice equated, will produce the Place of
the Moon a fourth time equated.

The greatest Variation of the Moon ( viz. that which happens when the Moon is
in an Octant with the Sun) is, nearly, reciprocally as the Cube of the Distance
of the Sun from the Earth. Let that be taken 37. 25. when the Sun is in
Perigaeo, and 33. 40. when he is in Apogaeo: And let the Differences of this
Variation in the Octants be made reciprocally as the Cubes of the Distances of
the Sun from the Earth; and so let a Table be made of the aforesaid Variation
of the Moon in her Octants (or its Logarithms) to every Tenth, Sixth, or Fifth
Degree of the mean Anomaly: And for the Variation out of the Octants, make, as
Radius to the Sine of the double Distance of the Moon from the next Syzygy or
Quadrature so let the aforefound Variation in the Octant be to the Variation
congruous to any other Aspect; and this added to the Moon's Place before found
in the first and third Quadrant (accounting from the Sun) or subducted from it
in the second and fourth, will give the Moon's Place equated a fifth time.

Again, as Radius to the Sine of the Sum of the Distances of the Moon from the
Sun, and of her Apogee from the Sun's Apogee (or the Sine of the Excess of that
Sum above 360.) so is 2. 10. to a sixth Equation of the Moon's Place, which
must be subtracted, if the aforesaid Sum or Excess be less than a Semicircle,
but added, if it be greater. Let it be made also, as Radius to the Sine of the
Moon's Distance from the Sun so 2. 20. to a seventh Equation: which, when the
Moon's Light is increasing, add, but when decreasing, subtract; and the Moon's
Place will be equated a seventh time, and this is her Place in her proper Orbit.

Note here, the Equation thus produced by the mean Quantity 2. 20. is not
always of the same Magnitude, but is increased and diminished according to the
Position of the Lunar Apogee. For if the Moon's Apogee be in Conjunction with
the Sun's, the aforesaid Equation is about 54. greater: but when the Apogees
are in opposition, it is about as much less; and it librates between its
greatest Quantity 3. 14. and its least 1. 26. And this is when the Lunar Apogee
is in Conjunction or Opposition with the Sun's: But in the Quadratures the
aforesaid Equation is to be lessened about 50. or one Minute, when the Apogees
of the Sun and Moon are in Conjunction; but if they are in Opposition, for want
of a sufficient number of Observations, I cannot determine whether it is to be
lessened or increased. And even as to the Argument or Decrement of the Equation
2. 20. above mentioned, I dare determine nothing certain, for the same Reason,
viz. the want of Observation accurately made.

If the sixth and seventh Equations are augmented or diminished in a reciprocal
Ratio of the Distance of the Moon from the Earth, i. e. in a direct Ratio of
the Moon's Horizontal Parallax; they will become more accurate: And this may
readily be done, if Tables are first made to each Minute of the said Parallax,
and to every sixth or fifth Degree of the Argumennt of the sixth Equation for
the Sixth, as of the Distance of the Moon from the Sun, for the Seventh
Equation.



From the Sun's Place take the mean Motion of the Moon's ascending Node,
equated as above; the Remainder shall be the Annual Argument of the Node,
whence its second Equation may be computed after the following manner in the
preceding Figure:

Let T as before represent the Earth, TS a Right Line conjoining the Earth and
Sun: Let also the Line TACB be drawn to the Place of the Ascending Node of the
Moon, as above equated; and let STA be the Annual Argument of the Node. Take TA
from a Scale, and let it be to AB as 56 to 3, or as 18 to 1. Then bissect BA in
C, and on C as a Center, with the Distance CA, describe a Circle as AFB, and
make the Angle BCF equal to double the Annual Argument of the Node before
found: So shall the Angle BTF be the second Equation of the Ascending Node:
which must be added when the Node is passing from a Quadrature to a Syzygy with
the Sun, and subducted when the Node moves from a Syzygy toward a Quadrature.
By which means the true Place of the Node of the Lunar Orbit will be gained:
whence from Tables made after the common way, the Moon's Latitude, and the
Reduction of her Orbit to the Ecliptic, may be computed, supposing the
Inclination of the Moon's Orbit to the Ecliptic to be 4. 59. 35. when the
Nodes are in Quadrature with the Sun; and 5. 17. 20. when they are in the
Syzygys.

And from the Longitude and Latitude thus found, and the given Obliquity of the
Ecliptic 23. 29. the Right Ascension and Declination of the Moon will be found.

The Horizontal Parallax of the Moon, when she is in the Syzygys at a mean
Distance from the Earth, I make to be 57. 30. and her Horary Motion 33. 32. 32.
and her apparent Diameter 31. 30. But in her Quadratures at a mean Distance
from the Earth, I make the Horizontal Parallax of the Moon to be 56. 40. her
Horary Motion 32. 12. 2. and her apparent Diameter 31. 3. The Moon in an Octant
to the Sun, and at a mean Distance, has her Center distant from the Center of
the Earth about 60 2/9. of the Earth's Semi-Diameters.

The Sun's Horizontal Parallax I make to be 10. and its apparent Diameter at a
mean Distance from the Earth, I make 32. 15.

The Atmosphere of the Earth, by dispersing and refracting the Sun's Light,
casts a Shadow as if it were an Opake Body, at least to the height of 40 or 50
Geographical Miles (by a Geographical Mile I mean the sixtieth Part of a Degree
of a great Circle, on the Earth's Surface) This Shadow falling upon the Moon in
a Lunar Eclipse, makes the Earth's Shadow be the larger or broader. And to each
Mile of the Earth's Atmosphere is correspondent a Second in the Moon's Disk, so
that the Semidiameter of the Earth's Shadow projected upon the Disk of the Moon
is to be increased about 50 Seconds: or which is all one, in a Lunar Eclipse,
the Horizontal Parallax of the Moon is to be increased in the Ratio of about 70
to 69.

Thus far the Theory of this Incomparable Mathematician. And if we had many
Places of the Moon accurately observed, especially about her Quadratures, and
these well compared with her Places at the same time calculated according to
this Theory; it would then appear whether there yet remain any other sensible
Equations, which when accounted for, might serve to improve and enlarge this
Theory.

Dr. Greg. Astr. Elem. Phys. and Geom. p. 336.

FINIS.

