CALVARY; OR THE DEATH OF CHRIST.

CALVARY; OR THE DEATH OF CHRIST. A POEM, IN EIGHT BOOKS.

BY RICHARD CUMBERLAND.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR C. DILLY, IN THE POULTRY. M.DCC.XCII.

CALVARY; OR THE DEATH OF CHRIST.

BOOK I.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE FIRST BOOK.
After a short introduction, which states the miraculous acts of Christ, and
serves to mark the period at which the Poem commences, Satan goes forth by
night into the wilderness, and finds himself in the very spot, where he had in
vain practiced his temptations upon Christ: Here he falls into meditation upon
that unsuccessful interview, and vents himself in soliloquy: Indignant under
disappointment and impatient to repair his defeat, he ascends to the summit of
the mountain, from whence he had exhibited the kingdoms of the earth, and calls
the Devils from all parts of the Heathen world: The whole host of Infernals
assemble at his summons: The chief leaders are enumerated, their persons and
attributes described: Satan addresses them, and proposes the subject matter for
their consultation, namely, By what means to counteract the power of Christ
upon earth: Baal delivers his sentiments by stating difficulties and objections
without any decided opinion unless for seduction in the general: Moloch angrily
resents what he considers as pointed at himself, and speaks disdainfully
against the proposal of seduction, as not only desperate but disgraceful:
Belial replies, and after much circumlocution suggests a temptation to be set
on foot by Mammon: He is interrupted by Satan, who reproves him for certain
digressions in his speech, but adopts his hint of employing Mammon, and calls
upon that evil Spirit to attempt the fidelity of Judas Iscariot, whom he points
out to him as the only one of the Disciples open to seduction: Mammon at first
affects to excuse himself from the undertaking, but in conclusion accepts it,
and taking wing in presence of the whole applauding host sets out upon his
embassy, directing his course to the city of Jerusalem.

CALVARY. BOOK I. THE ASSEMBLING OF THE DEVILS.
HAIL, awful CALVARY! forsaking now
Aonian haunts and the unhallowed Nine,
I visit thy sad mount, and thence invite
The mournful echoes to my deep-ton'd harp,
Hymning the whilst in solemn numbers praise
To God for mercies purchased by the death
Of that mysterious Being, virgin-born,
Savior of lost mankind, who on the cross,
Lord though he be of life and one with God,
In mortal pangs expired; there to atone
For a degenerate world, by his pure blood
To wash original corruption out,
And rising victor from the grave dispel
Sin and it is offspring Death, with all the train
Of idol gods, usurping earth and heaven.
Now had the wondrous acts by JESUS wrought
Spread wide his fame through all Judaea's realm;
The leper cleans'd, the blind to sight restored,
The sick to health and even the dead to life,
Though warned to silence, for his modest ear
Sought not the praise of men, so much the more
Published his mercies; Demons at his call
With horrid shrieks, that testified his power,
Came forth from men possessed and fled; his voice
Rebuked the seas and winds; vast was the throng
That followed where he led, and thousands found
In the waste wilderness mirac'lous food:
They saw, they marvel'd, and of force confessed
Messiah in his power, not so in form;
For there no comeliness, no outward grace,
No princely state appeared: Slow to renounce
Illusions long indulged, their wavering minds
'Twixt two opinions halted, while in place
Of these bright visions they beheld a man
Lowly and meek, a houseless wanderer,
That had not where on earth to lay his head: --
Such can our Israel's great Restorer be,
Such our Messiah? -- Thus their troubled thoughts
Like meeting currents clash'd; when as he spoke
Truth flowed resistless from his lips, his eyes
Beamed mercy, and his Father's glory shone
Effulgent in his face; then every tongue
Was hushed to silence, every doubt dispelled,
And every heart confessed him Lord and Christ.
'Twas night, when SATAN, prince of darkness called,
And fitly called, for evil hates the day,
Walked forth on hellish meditation bent,
Prowling the wilderness: Wherever he trod,
Earth quaked beneath his foot; before him rolled
Thick cloud and vapor, making night's dark shade
More black and terrible; the beasts of prey,
Every wild thing that roams the savage waste
And howling to the moon demands it is food,
Fled his approach; the lion and the pard
Scented the blast and slunk into their dens;
For whilst his breast with raging passions boiled,
Hatred, revenge and blasphemous despite,
The sighs he vented from the hell within
Breathed death into the air; his haggard eyes,
Which still in speechless agonies he rolled,
Out-glar'd the hyaena's; other fires than their's
To light his dismal path he needed none.
Now, having stretched athwart the sandy wild
Clear to its rocky verge, the Arch-fiend paused
And upward cast his eye, if happily there
Darkling he might discern what saucy mound
Dared to arrest his course; for yet there dwelt
Such vigor in his wing, nor depth, nor height,
Mountains nor seas might check his bold career,
Were he so purposed; neither would he deign
To ask one charitable star for light,
Thoughtful of former glory, when he soared
Son of the morning far above their spheres.
Whereat he 'gan put forth his plumed vans
From either shoulder stretched for flight, when soon
The fuel'd clouds to fierce encounter rushed,
Loud thunders bellowed, and the lightning's flash
Smote on the craggy cliff; at sight whereof
Conscious that now he pressed the fatal spot,
Where late he commun'd with the Son of God,
Who for the space of forty days and nights
Foiled every vain device, with shame abashed
And pondering in his mind his foul defeat,
Down, down at once his flagging pinions fell
Close cow'ring to his ribs: As some proud ship
Between the tropics over the Atlantic wave
Speeding amain to reach her destined port,
If chance the experienced mariner espies
The gathering hurricane, no stay, no stop,
Quick to the yard each swelling sail is furled,
The curled waves whitening as the torrent drives,
And soon her taunt and lofty topmast lowered
Strikes to the gale; so he his towering height,
That to angelic stature now had swelled,
Shrunk into human size, nor other seemed
Than pilgrim squalid and with years and toil
Bending decrepit, when from his full heart
Words intermixed with groans thus forced their way.
Yes, hateful wilderness, detested rocks,
Whom I would curse, had Nature left one blade
On your bare ribs, which cursing I might blast,
Full well I know you; deep, too deep engraved
On memory's tablet your rude horrors live.
And you, officious lightnings, hide your fires!
Come, Night, again; let central darkness shroud
Scenes, whose tormenting recollection stabs
My unavenged soul. Can I forget
This Son of Joseph? Son of God henceforth
Of force I must confess him, for what less
Than god-like constancy could have withstood
Temptations great and terrible as mine?
Something which man is not he needs must be,
Virtue, that angels boast not, he must have,
Else had my snares enclosed him, else the world,
Which then was mine to give, had been a bribe
Too glorious not to dazzle every eye
But his, who made those glories what they are.
Still I must doubt the Father's love sincere,
Though loudly vouched by his own voice from heaven:
Is this a father's love, is this his care,
Here to expose him to this desert wild
Forty long sleepless nights and fasting days,
No Angel guard about him, lost, forlorn,
Abandoned to the elements, to beasts
More fierce than this loud storm; nay, fiercer still,
To me than all more terrible, to me,
Foe of his life inveterate and avowed?
Rare sample of God's love! If here his CHRIST
Encountered aught of danger; and if none,
What else could prompt him to this vain display
Of voluntary penance, but the love
Of flattery and a despicable wish
To hear himself applauded? In this spot,
Beneath the jutting roof of this rude cliff,
I first surpised this wandering Son of God,
This Savior of the world: Fainting he seemed
With thirst and hunger, pale as death his cheek,
His hollow eyes deep sunk, and from his brow
Big drops of sweat distilled, as one o'erspent
And sinking to the earth there to expire:
A ready tale he had for pity's ear,
A melancholy list of wants and woes;
He had not tasted food, and fairly owned
That Nature's cravings were intense; when I,
Glad at the heart to find him thus besieged
With appetite so eager, stooping down,
From the dissever'd fragments, that here lie
About the base of this storm-beaten rock,
Chose out a few smooth stones, and tempting said,
If thou art hungry, eat; convert these stones,
If thou art God's own Son, to bread, and eat!
But he not so beguiled spurned them away,
And silenced me with text of holy writ:
A nobler appetite I next assailed,
Ambition; to the mountain's top we soared;
I spread the kingdoms of the earth in sight,
Fit sight to whet the hunger of the mind;
But mind and body he alike would starve,
Nor thank nor homage render back for food
Of my providing: One last hope remained;
Methought there was a godly pride about him,
Which with right holy flattery I might win:
Upon the temple's topmost pinnacle
I placed this scorner of an earthly crown,
And bade him be a God; Cast thyself down;
Behold, quoth I, the Angels are on wing
To bear thee up unhurt: With stern rebuke,
Get thee behind me SATAN! he replied;
Some power unseen controlled me, down I fell,
Down from the giddy eminence I plunged,
And left him to his Angels, whilst their hymns
And halelujahs echoed through the air
His triumphs and my second fall from heaven.
And now if dark despair shall reach this heart,
Which of hell's tetrarchs can arraign their king,
Or fix on me his share of public loss
And overthrow sustained in this attack?
None, for none dare. If I, till now supreme,
Great idol of the Gentile world, for whom
So many groves, so many altars blaze;
If I, to whom by various names adored
Thousands of temples rife, whilst one alone,
One solitary pile on Sion's hill
Echoes the praise of God, neglected else
Of all; if I, if SATAN must submit
To CHRIST, revenge to patience, war to peace,
And men must learn new maxims of forgiveness,
Maxims I neither practice nor instill,
Heroes and kings and conquerors, farewell!
Greater is he who serves than he who reigns:
To suffer, to submit, to turn the cheek
To the proud smiter, these are virtues now;
Hence with such virtues! If these rules obtain,
If this tame doctrine shall unman the world,
Altars and groves and temples all must sink;
Olympus and its synod, every Grace
And every Muse, all that the chissel wrought
In Greece or Rome, shall moulder into dust,
And CHRIST and Reason shall usurp the world.
He ceased, and now his swelling bosom heaved
With indignation like the laboring earth,
Which subterranean vapors undermine,
Pent in it is sulfurous entrails: Up he sprung
To that high mountain top whence he reviewed
The kingdoms of the earth, whilst at his side
CHRIST's humble virtue stood, on other realms,
Realms of immortal happiness, intent:
Here, as a vulture, on the craggy peak
Of Caucasus or Haemus left to watch,
Screams out his shrill alarm, at sound whereof
The carrion troop, upon the wing for prey,
Come flocking to the signal, SATAN thus
Stood eminent, and called his dark compeers;
So loud he called, that to the farthest bounds
Of Pagan isle or continent was heard
His voice re-echoing through the vault of heaven.
Heroes and demigods, Olympian powers,
Infernal princes of hell's dark abyss,
Heaven's exiles, spirits of air, water, fire,
Or whatsoever element confines
Your incorporeal effences, Oh hear!
Hear and assemble! it is your leader calls;
It is your champion's voice, in happier hours
Heard and obeyed, now in extremest need
Be present and assist our great divan.
No more, for soon was heard the distant sound
Of wings that beat the air; from every point
Of the four winds the gathering swarm came on;
From Great, from Cyprus and the Ionian coast,
From Egypt, Afric and the Ausonian shores,
Gods of all names, dimensions and degrees.
Great was their sovereign's triumph to behold
This prompt obedience to his high command;
For now descending on the desert heath
To martial music, the infernal host
In bands and columns, by their chiefs arrang'd,
Stood firm; if ever gleam of joy might reach
Heart so accursed, the Arch-fiend had felt it here,
As with a monarch's eye he now reviewed
His armies, covering all the swarthy plain.
Come, Muse, and to your suppliant's eyes impart
One ray of that pure light, which late you poured
On the dark orbs of your immortal Bard
Eclipsed by drop serene: Conduct me now,
Me from my better days of bold emprize
Far in decline, and with the hoary hand
Of Time hard stricken, yet adventuring forth
Over Nature's limits into worlds unseen,
Peopled with shadowy forms and phantoms dire:
Oh! bear me on your pinions in this void,
Where weary foot never rested; and behold!
All hell bursts forth: Support me, or I sink.
Now glimmering twilight streaked the Eastern sky,
For he, that on his forehead brings the morn,
Star-crowned PHOSPHORUS had heard the call,
And with the foremost stood. Beside him one
Of towering stature and majestic port,
Himself a host; his black and curling locks
Down his herculean shoulders copious flowed;
In glittering brass upon his shield he bore
A kingly eagle, ensign of command,
BAAL his name, second to none in state
Save only his great chieftain; worshipped long
In Babylon, till Daniel drove him thence
With all his gluttonous priests; exalted since
High above all the idol gods of Greece,
Throned on Olympus, and his impious hand
Armed with the thunder; yet he ru'd the zeal
Of furious Jehu, and that mournful day,
When he beheld his altars stream with blood,
His prophets and his priests by hundreds slain
Upon Mount Carmel. MOLOCH in the van,
Mail'd at all points for war, with spear and helm
And plumed crest and garments rolled in blood,
Flamed like a meteor: Him with horrid joy
SATAN awhile surveyed, then sighing cried,
Oh! worthy of command, had all like thee
So bravely fought, heaven never had been lost.
Thence as he glanced his eye, far other form
And much unfit for war he next espied,
CHEMOS, the sin of Moab; power obscene,
Emasculate and soft, in loose attire
A sensual deity; his glory 'twas
In arts of base seduction to excel,
And leagued with harlots to have turned the heart
Of that wise king, and drawn him from his God
To bend his aged knees at idol shrines.
Close at his side stood one, in whose soft eyes
Ensnaring smiles and beauteous ruin lurked;
Oh! that such grace should be allied to sin;
Zidonian goddess, ASHTORETH her name;
Heaven would not quite destroy so fair a work,
But wantonness usurped an angel face,
And with her innocence had changed her sex:
Yet let that sex beware, for in their souls,
When once she enters, peace no longer dwells;
Witness that Magdalen, whose frantic breast,
Till by CHRIST's mercy healed, sev'n demons rent,
All sin-begotten, all her brood accursed.
BUT SATAN, whose stern heart, stranger to love,
All weakness though in shape of sin disdained,
And only prized spirits more like himself,
Indignant turned aside, and bent his eye
Where DAGON, giant god, amidst the ranks,
Like Teneriff or Aetna, proudly tower'd:
DAGON of Gath and Askalon the boast
In that sad flight, when on Gilboa's mount
The shield of Saul was vilely thrown away,
And Israel's beauty perished: Him awhile
With scowling eye the infernal king surveyed,
Then taunting cried, O DAGON, vast in size,
In soul diminutive, had that huge mass
Valor proportionate, heaven had been our's;
But fitter thou, dull spirit, to people hell
Than re-assault God's throne: Where was thy pride,
When overthrown in Gaza by the strength
Of that uxorious Danite? Humbled now
I know thy nightly haunts, and how thou driv'st
Wretches possessed to hide themselves in tombs,
Whence I beheld thee 'midst the herd unclean
Scour down the steep and plunge into the sea.
But now a fairer form arrests the eye
Of hell's despotic lord; his radiant vest
Of Tyrian purple, studded thick with gems,
Flowed graceful; He for courts was formed, for feasts,
For ladies chambers and for amorous sports;
He loved not camps nor the rude toils of war;
BELIAL his name; around his temples twined
A wreath of roses, and, wherever he passed,
His garments fanned a breeze of rich perfume:
No ear had he for the shrill-toned trump,
Him the soft warble of the Lydian flute
Delighted rather, the love-soothing harp,
Sappho's loose song and the Aonian Maids
And zoneless Graces floating in the dance;
Yet from his lips sweet eloquence distilled,
As honey from the be, but still his voice
Never counseled aught but cunning and deceit,
Mean truce and base capitulating terms;
Therefore by SATAN held in slight account,
For devils affect a dignity in sin.
Last in the field, and from the rest apart,
Was MAMMON; cautious was his step and slow,
His eye still watchful to prevent surprise,
Squalid his vesture and his locks uncomb'd;
For gain and usury engrossed his soul,
Nor other care had he but to amass
Wealth unenjoy'd, and gloat upon his hoard:
Had there been only happiness in heaven
And gold in hell, MAMMON had spurned the bliss,
And hugged the treasure cheaply earned with pain.
His princes thus reviewed, from the hill top
SATAN swift-glancing flew, and in the midst
Rose like a meteor; whereat all the host
Sent up a general shout: he with his hand
Gave sign, and wheeled the Stygian phalanx round,
Horrible sight! A theater of fiends,
And each the foe of man; idols and imps,
Wizzards, familiars, sprites, phantasmas, dreams,
Sorrows and pains and deaths in every shape
Covered the blasted heath: The infernal king,
Though in his heart, by mutinous passions torn,
Thought clash'd with thought, and all was anarchy,
Yet with assumed composure beck'ning forth
His princes, whilst the inferior throng stood off,
And mute attention reigned, in few thus spoke:
Friends and confederates, welcome! for this proof
Of your affiance, thanks! On every call,
Whether we need your counsel or your arms,
Joyful I see your ready zeal displays
Virtues, which hell itself cannot corrupt.
I mean not to declame: The occasion told
Speaks its own import, and the time's dispatch
All waste of words forbids. God's Son on earth,
CHRIST, the revealed Messiah, how to oppose
Is now the question; by what force, or power --
Temptations have been tried, I name not them --
Or dark conspiracy, we may pull down
This sun of righteousness from his bright sphere
Declare, who can: I pause for a reply.
Silence ensued, whilst every eye was turned
Instinctively on BAAL; he of all
Hell's magi filled the seat of wisdom chief:
Experienced long in craft, and nothing apt
To give strait counsel, slow of speech he was;
To hint, propound, dilate, and so entice
Other opinions forth, them to refute,
And thereon build his own, was all his art.
After long pause and hesitation feigned,
Stale trick of orators, he thus began:
Why thus on me, as I were worthy, me,
Lost being like yourselves, as I alone
Could compass this high argument, on me,
Least in your sapient conclave, why you point
These scrutinizing looks, I muse; and awed
By this your expectation fain would shrink
From the great task to silence, had you not
Over these poor faculties such full control,
As to put by all pleas, and call them forth
In heaven or earth, or hell's profound abyss,
Yours in all uses, present at all hours.
Our kingly chief has told us we are met
To combat CHRIST on earth: Be It so! We yet
May try our fortune in another field;
Worse fortune than in heaven befell our arms,
Worse downfall than to hell, we cannot prove.
But with the scene our action too must change:
How? to what warfare? Circumvention, fraud,
Seduction; these are earthly weapons, these
As man to man opposes, so must we
To CHRIST incarnate. There be some, who cry,
Hence with such dastard arts! War, open war!
I honor such bold counselors, and yield
All that I can, my praise; till one be found,
One that may rival God's own Son in power,
And miracle to miracle oppose,
More than my praise I cannot, my assent
I will not give; 'twere madness: And how war
With God? what arms may we employ against him,
Whose very prophets can call down heaven's fires
Upon our priests and altars? For myself,
What powers I had I shall not soon forget;
What I have left I know, and for your use
Shall husband as I may, not vainly risque
Where they must surely fail. The Jews pretend
That CHRIST colludes with Beelzebub; the Jews
As far mistake my nature as my name:
The fallacy, O peers, confutes itself,
Forged to disparage CHRIST, not honor me:
Oh! that I had his wonder-working powers;
I Am not that fool to turn them on myself:
No, my brave friends, I Have yet too much to lose;
Though Babylon's proud shrines are laid in dust,
Rome's capitol survives, and through the world
Wherever her eagles fly, upon their wings
They bear my thunder and they spread my fame:
Therefore no more of Beelzebub and CHRIST;
No league, no compact can we hold together.
What then ensues? Despair? Perish the thought!
The brave renounce it, and the wise prevent;
You are both wise and brave. Our leader says
Temptations have been tried, and tried in vain,
Himself the tempter. Who will tread that ground,
Where he was foiled? For Adam a mere toy,
An apple served; CHRIST is not bribed by worlds:
So much the second Man exceeds the first
In strength and glory. But though CHRIST himself
Will not be tempted, those who hear him may:
Jews may be urged to envy, to revenge,
To murder; a rebellious race of old,
To kill a prophet or betray his God
What Jew was ever found to need the spur?
Wist ye not what a train this preacher has,
What followers, what disciples? These are men,
Mere men, frail sons of Adam, born in sin.
Here is our hope. I leave it to your thoughts.
He ceased, but neither murmur nor applause
Followed his speech, for MOLOCH, whose fell heart
Ill stomach'd this tame counsel, least of all
Taunts thinly covered under mask of praise,
Sprung forth impetuous, and with scowling brow
And accent acrimonious thus replied:
My thoughts it seems are known before I speak;
War, open war is all my note: I rise
To thank the prophet, who thus reads my heart,
Where honesty should wear it, in my face;
That face from danger I did never hide,
How then from him? Nor am I by his praise
More honored than by his dissenting voice:
For whilst he counsels circumvention, fraud,
Seduction, -- if my memory wrongs his words
I yield it to correction, -- we stand off
Wide as the poles apart. Much I had hoped
When the great Tempter failed and in your ears
Sung his own honor's dirge, we had heard the last
Of plots and mean temptations; mean I call them,
For great names cannot sanctify mean deeds:
SATAN himself knows I opposed the attempt,
Appealed, protested; my thrice-honor'd chief
Knows it full well and blushes for the event.
And are we now caballing how to outwit
A few poor harmless fishermen, for such
Are CHRIST's disciples; how to gull and cheat
Their simple hearts of honesty? Oh peers,
For shame, if not for pity, leave them that,
That beggar's virtue: And is this the theme,
The mighty theme, which now employs the thoughts
Of your immortal synod? Shame, Oh shame!
Princes, Dominions, Arch-angelic Thrones,
Imperial Lords! these were your titles once,
By these names ye were known above the stars,
Shame not your ancient dignities, nor sink
Beneath the vilest of the sons of men,
Whisperers, informers, spies. If CHRIST be God,
Fight, as becomes you to fight, with God:
If man, and sure his birth bespeaks no more,
Why all this preparation, this consult,
These mighty machinations and cabals?
Off with your foe at once, dismiss him hence
Where all his brother prophets have been sent;
Where his precursor John is gone before,
Whose voice still echoes through this wilderness: --
"Repent ye, for God's kingdom is at hand!
"Prepare ye the Lord's way!" -- It is prepared;
It leads to death, it marshals him the road
To that oblivious bourne, whence none return:
Herod yet lives; another royal feast,
Another wanton dance, and he, for whom
So many innocents were slain, shall fall.
Once vanquished, are we therefore to despair?
In heaven unequal battle we provoked;
Though vast our host, the million was with God:
On earth enquire of all the nations round
Whom they will serve, with one voice they reply,
We are their gods; they feed us with their blood,
Their sons and daughters they make pass through fire
To do us grace; if their own flesh they give,
Shall they withold to sacrifice a foe?
Twelve tribes were all Jehovah had on earth,
And ten are lost; of this small remnant few
And wretched are the friends that league with Heaven.
And where is now CHRIST's promised reign on earth?
When God's own servants rise against his Son,
And those, to whom the promises were given,
Revolt from their Messiah, can we wish
Greater revenge? What need have we to tempt
Them, who have hearts rebellious as our own,
As prompt to malice, no less prone to vex
God's righteous spirit? And let come what may,
It comes not to our loss, rather our gain.
Let God arise to vengeance; let him pour
Destruction on his temple, whose proud height
Our chief can witness, measured by his fall:
Let him not leave one stone upon another,
As his rash Son has menaced; let his wrath
Through all the inhospitable earth disperse
His scattered tribes; such ever be the fate
Of all his worshippers! May scorn, contempt,
Derision be their lot, and may their God
Never recall his curse! Are we, O peers,
To mourn for his Jerusalem? Our joy
Springs from confusion; enmity 'twixt God
And man is our best triumph: For myself,
War is my harvest, then my altars blaze
Brightest, when human victims feed the flame.
Breathless he paused, so rapid was the pulse
Of his high-beating heart he stood as one
Choked and convulsed with rage; when as he ceased,
He smote his mailed habergeon so loud,
Hell's armed legions heard, and shook their spears
Betok'ning war: Frowning he looked around,
Whilst from his fiery eyes such terror glanced,
It seemed as if his pride meant to abash
And silence all opposers: Yet not long
His triumph, for now BELIAL from the ranks
Graceful advanced, and as he put aside
His purple robe in act to speak, the throng,
Such was the dazzling beauty of his form,
Fell back a space; then stood all eyes and ears
In expectation mute as death: Though hell
Owned not a spirit more false, sensual and base,
Yet ever as he spoke such action graced
His words, so musically soft they flowed,
Who most despised the pleader praised the speech:
When thus with mild insinuating looks,
Masking his rancorous heart, the Fiend began.
After so many peaceful ages past
Since first emerging from hell's dark abyss,
Roused by our Arch-angelic Chief, we sprung
Up to this middle region, and here seized
On this terrestrial globe, created first
For man, our vassal now, where at full ease,
Lords of the elements and gods adored,
We reign and revel undisturbed of Heaven,
If God, whose jealousy be sure ill brooks
That this fair world should be so long possessed
Of us his exiled angels, and his name
Pent up in Palestine, should now arouse
His slumbering wrath, and his best strength put forth
To wrestle for lost empire, and our earth,
As we in evil hour his heaven, assail,
Who of this mighty synod but must own
The provocation warrants the retort?
If then the Maker of mankind has cause
To meditate their rescue, we no less
Have cause to oppose the attempt, and hold them fast
To their allegiance in despite of Heaven.
Much then we owe to our great Leader's care,
Which, ever watchful over the public weal,
Calls us to this full council, here to meet
In grave consult how best we may repair
Past disappointments, and repel the spite
Of this new Champion, levelled at our shrines.
Great is the trouble of my thoughts, O peers,
And much perplexed am I with doubts, what name,
Nature and office to ascribe to CHRIST;
In form the lowliest of the sons of men,
In miracles omnipotent as God;
Whose voice controuls the stoutest of our host,
Bids the graves open and their dead come forth;
Whose very touch is health; who with a glance
Pervades each heart, absolves it or condemns;
Whose virgin birth credulity scarce owns,
And Nature disavows. Praised to all time,
Immortal as himself be the renown
Of that wise spirit, who shall devise the means
By force or fraud to overthrow the power
Of this mysterious foe, what shall I say? --
Priest, Prophet, King, Messiah, Son of God.
Yet how God's unity, which well we know
Endures no second, should adopt a Son
And essence indivisible divide,
Baffles my weak conjecture: Let that pass!
To such hard doctrines I subscribe no faith:
I Will call him man inspired, and wait till death
Gives sentence of mortality upon him.
Meanwhile let circumspection on our part
Fill all the anxious interim; alarm
Rome's jealousy, stir up the captious spleen
Of the proud Pharisee, beset him round
With snares to catch him, urge the envious priests,
For envy still beneath the altar lurks,
And note the man he trusts. MAMMON could tell,
Though MAMMON boasts not of his own success,
How few of human mould have yet withstood
His glittering, golden lures. The sword can kill
Man's body, gold destroys his very soul:
Yet mark me well, I counsel not to tempt
The Master; poverty can do no more
Than his own mortifying penance does,
Hunger and thirst and obstinately starve,
When his mere wish could make the rock a spring
And its hard fragments bread: Yet sure I am
All are not CHRIST's in heart, who with their lips
Confess him; these are men, and therefore frail,
Frail and corruptible: And let none say,
Fear prompts this counsel; I disclaim all fear
But for the general cause: In every heart
Nature has built my altar; every sect,
Nation and language with one voice confess
Pleasure the sovereign good: The Stoic churl,
The dogged Cynic snarling in his tub,
And all the ragged moralizing crew
Are hypocrites; philosophy itself
Is but my votary beneath a cloak:
It harms not me, though every idol God
Were tumbled from his base; alike I scorn
Sampson's strong nerve and Daniel's flaming zeal:
And let CHRIST preach his mortifying rules,
Let him go forth through all the Gentile world,
And on the ruin of our fanes erect
His church triumphant over the gates of hell,
Still, still man's heart will draw the secret sigh
For pleasures unenjoy'd; the gloomy cell
And melancholy fast, the midnight prayer
And pale contrition weeping over her lamp
Are penances, from which the sense revolts,
Fines, that compounding superstition pays
For pleasures past, or bribes for more to come.
Enough of this vain boast, here SATAN cried;
More than enough of these voluptuous strains,
Which, though they lull the ear, disarm the soul
Of its best attribute: Not gaudy flowers
Are culled for medicine, but the humble weed;
True wisdom, ever frugal of her speech,
Gives sage advice in plain and homely words.
The sum of all our reasoning ends in this,
That nothing but the death of CHRIST can solve
The mystery of his nature; till he falls
Scarce can I say we stand: All voices then,
Though varying in the means, conspire his death;
Some cautiously as BAAL; some with zeal
Precipitate as MOLOCH, whose swift thought
Vaults over all impediments to seize
The goal of his ambition. But, O peers,
Our's is no trivial care; direct your sight
Along the ranks of that redeemed host;
On us hangs all their safety: Night and day
My anxious thoughts are laboring in their cause,
And whilst CHRIST walks the earth I take no rest,
A watchful spy for ever at his side,
Noting each word and deed; sometimes I mix
With the selected Twelve that page his steps;
Of these, though some have waver'd, none is false
Save one alone, ISCARIOT he by name;
The taint of avarice has touched his heart;
I Have marked him for my own. Hear, princes, hear!
This night the priests and elders will convene
Their secret conclave: I am in their hearts;
Burning with envy, malice and revenge,
Their only thought is how to tangle CHRIST,
In whom of force I own no guile is found,
But gentleness instead and perfect truth,
A lamb in nature without spot and pure,
Fit victim therefore for their Paschal rites,
Which now are near at hand; apt is the hour,
Apt are the instruments. What now remains
But to send forth a tempter to persuade
ISCARIOT to betray his Master's life,
And damn himself for gold? Speak, is there one,
One in this patriot circle, whom all eyes
Point out for this emprize? Most sure there is;
BELIAL has well predicted of our choice:
MAMMON, stand forth! On thee the election lights.
He spoke, and all approved, for choice so fit
None could oppose; when MAMMON thus replied.
Prince of this world! To whom these armies owe,
Lost but for thee in everlasting night,
The glorious prospect of yon rising sun,
It Is not to evade the labor, but prevent
The failure of your hopes, that I beseech
Your wisdom to correct it is choice, and lodge
This arduous embassy in abler hands:
Nathless if such your will, and my compeers
Adjudge me to this service, I submit:
In me is no repugnance, no delay;
For ever what these toiling hands could do,
Or patient thoughts devise, that I have done;
Whether in heaven ordained to undermine
God's adamantine throne, or doomed to dig
The solid sulphur of hell's burning soil,
Fearless I wrought, and, were there no tongues else
To vouch my services, these scars would speak.
How many daintier spirits do I see
Fair as in heaven and in fresh bloom of youth,
Whilst I, with shrivel'd sinews cramped and scorched
'Midst pestilential damps and fiery blasts,
Drag as you see a miserable load,
Age-struck without the last resource of death:
This for myself, no more. You're not to know
The snares which I employ are golden snares;
These are my arts, and like the crafty slave,
Who in Rome's Circus hurls the fatal net
Over his fierce pursuer, so often times
Have I entangled the proud hearts of men,
And made their courage stoop to shameful bribes,
Paid for dishonest deeds, perjuries and plots,
That draw them off from God, who else had filled
His courts ere now with guests and peopled heaven.
These weapons and these hands you still command;
So dear I hold the general cause at heart,
So disciplined am I in duty's school,
That reckless of all hazard I present
Myself your servant, or, if so fate wills,
Your sacrifice; for though from mortal man
Discomfiture I dread not, yet if CHRIST,
Whom the great Tempter foiled not, shall stand forth
The champion of his follower, witness for me,
You my brave peers and this angelic host,
I sought not this bold height, whence if I fall,
I do but fall where SATAN could not stand.
Go then, exclaimed the Arch-Enemy of man,
Go, brave adventurer, go where glory calls:
Auspicious thoughts engender in my breast,
And now prophetic visions burst upon me:
I see the traitor JUDAS with a band
Of midnight ruffians seize his peaceful Lord:
They drag him to the bar, accuse, condemn;
He bleeds, he dies! Darkness involves the rest.
Ascend the air, brave spirit, and 'midst the shout.
Of grateful myriads wing thy course to fame.
He said, and pointing to the sacred towers
Of God's high temple, waved his sceptred hand,
Whereat the infernal armies gave a shout
That shook the rocky desert to its base:
Meanwhile the fiend, ambassador of hell,
Exulting heard his high election crowned
With these applauding voices, and the call
Of his great Chieftain echoed to the skies:
Pride swelled his conscious breast; no longer now
Crouching with age and pain, but nerv'd anew,
As with a spell transformed, erect he stood
With towering stature tallest of the throng,
And looks of high supremacy and state.
And now from either shoulder he unfurled
His wide-stretch'd pinions, and uprising swift
Tower'd in mid-air; the host with loud acclaim
Hailed his ascent; he on the well-pois'd wing
Hoverd awhile, till from his cloudy height
Sweeping the wide horizon he descried
Far in the west the holy city, of God,
His destined port, then to the orient sun
Turned his broad vans, and plied their utmost speed.
END OF THE FIRST BOOK.
CALVARY; OR THE DEATH OF CHRIST.

BOOK II.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE SECOND BOOK.
Mammon, alighting on the Holy Mount, assumes the form and character of a
Levite, and under that appearance goes in search of Judas Iscariot. He meets
that disciple most opportunely for his purpose in a solitary place, and
entering into conversation with him, pretends a commission from the priests and
elders for engaging him in their service with the promise of a reward, and
urges many insidious arguments for detaching him from his Master: They separate
with a promise on the part of Judas to report his final answer to the priests
that evening. Christ is now brought to view sitting in the midst of his
disciples at his Last Supper: He addresses them in those solemn and affecting
terms recorded in the Gospel of Saint John, washes their feet, foretells his
death, and points out to them his betrayer in the person of Judas then present:
The traitor, perceiving himself discovered, hastily departs. Christ, pitying
the affliction of his disciples, tenderly consoles them with the promise of his
support under their future tribulations, and concludes with an aweful
invocation to the Father in their behalf: whereupon, warning them that his hour
is come, he goes forth to the garden. A reflection, naturally springing from
the subject, addressed to unbelievers, closes the book.

CALVARY. BOOK II. THE LAST SUPPER.
NOW on the consecrated Mount of God
MAMMON, invisible to mortal eye,
Stooping the wing from his aerial height
With feet unhallowed lands; a direful pest,
Farthest from heaven of all that outcast crew,
Who fell from bliss; fit messenger was he,
And fatal was their choice, who sent him forth
To work corruption's purpose in man's heart;
For in his power excelling he can take
The semblance of each virtue, shift each form,
And turn and turn new faces on the world,
Till he has snared a soul; then he appears
In nature as he is, loathsome, obscene,
Rapacious as those filthy monsters feigned
By fabling poets of amphibious breed,
Harpies, of earth and ocean the foul spawn,
Half brute, half human, with cadaverous face
Horribly pale, and hollow hungry eye,
Glaring aghast, with wings outstretch'd to chase
And talons crook'd to pounce their mangled prey.
And now by devilish spell transformed he seems
A reverend Levite, bearded to the waist;
Hypocrisy never wore a graver mask:
And still with wolf-like watch he prowls around,
If happily in those haunts he might surprise
Occasion to put forth his damning arts,
And from the flock of their good Shepherd cull
One tainted straggler, one, whose sordid soul
Avarice might tempt to take the price of blood,
And sacrifice the Son of God for gold:
Of CHRIST no care had he, but to elude
His vigilance, which still was all his dread;
Nor of the Twelve, save JUDAS, was there one
Whom to assail; on him alone, on him,
Son of perdition, rested all the hopes
Of SATAN and his legions. Now the fiend
With ineffectual search had coasted all
The sacred region round, and in the shade
Beneath the temple porch awhile reposed,
Listening the converse of the idle crowd,
The sun then high at noon; and much they talked
Of CHRIST and his great miracles, of some
Elias deemed, of some the Baptist John
Risen from the dead, but by all tongues confessed
A prophet mighty both in word and deed:
Silent the whilst in secret musings wrapped
The wizard spirit stood, when all at once
Loud voices strike his ear, and strait comes one
Leaping and bounding 'midst the shouting throng,
A cripple new restored; the very bed,
Which from his birth the palsied wretch had pressed,
Now in it is turn was carried, and to all
Triumphantly exposed: Behold, he cried,
The token of my cure; I am the man
Whom ye all knew, and this the doleful bed,
On which, fast bound in misery and pain,
Helpless before your charitable gates
I laid and begged for pity and relief:
Lo! I am free! Mark how these newfound limbs
Nimbly the health-restoring voice obey!
CHRIST gave the word; he spoke and I am whole.
This whilst he heard, conviction smote the fiend;
His conscious heart a sudden tremor seized
And off he slunk abashed: A winding path
Led down the mount, and here as he pursued
In gloomy thought his solitary way,
Behold by happy chance the man he sought,
ISCARIOT and alone: Joy flushed the cheek
Of the incarnate demon, thus to find
His labor in auspicious moment crowned.
Hail, son of Simon! peace be to thee, friend!
Fairly encountered art thou in good hour,
The priest-like Tempter cried; thy worth is known
To all our Levites, from whose tribe I come
With friendly greeting charged: This night they meet
In special conclave; our chief pontiff there
Will in the holy convocation move
Points of high import to our ancient law,
Questions it much imports thee to hear,
And well accepted shall thou be of all,
Who with large recompense and honors due
Will greet thee so complying: I have said.
Grave Sir, I know thee not, JUDAS replied;
Yet for thy greeting thanks, and peace for peace,
As holy men becomes. To him the fiend.
Unknown I well may be, who night and day
Serving God's altar rarely stir abroad,
And little commerce hold with this great world;
But thee I know one of that Teacher's train,
Who walks at large, nor shuns the haunts impure
Of sinners and of publicans: Alas!
That one of thy wise bearing should be seen
In such base fellowship, paging his steps,
Calling him Lord and Master, whom the world
In mere derision suffers to grow up
To full-blown vanity, at once to crush.
But good report is pregnant with thy name,
As one exempted from the general scorn;
And sure I am thou will not so abase
And lower thy nobler thoughts to one so mean,
Vile and mechanic; to the driv'ling crew
Of children and of women leave that task,
To Peter and his brethren of the net:
Fine reasoning we shall have, and well be schooled,
When fishermen turn preachers and instill
Doctrines and laws, which Moses never taught.
Woe to our scribes! Rare mockery of the world
And the world's wisdom, if these simple folk,
Lured from their daily drudgery, should set up
Fishers of men; the synagogue, to them
A barren element, will never yield
Such gainful earnings as the sea affords.
And what is CHRIST, that JUDAS so should court
His starving service? What so tempting lure
Has this deceiver to beguile thy hopes?
Not of this world my kingdom, he has said;
Yet of this world are we, in this alone
We live and move, here only we expect
Or pain or pleasure, all that lies beyond
In the unknown abyss is dark as death.
And wherefore carriest thou that bag about?
A beggar needs no treasurer, and thy Lord
Feeds but by miracle: Alas for him,
Who serves a master, that keeps Sabbath fasts
Forty long days in the bare wilderness,
Makes poverty his passport into heaven,
And bids us throw away life's present means
For doubtful chance of interest after life!
And art thou of all reason so bereft
As to account prosperity a crime,
Or think none blessed but him, whose every step
Through misery's thorny path is marked with blood?
O son of Simon, take thy last resolve;
Either resign thy body to the worm,
And die with CHRIST, or him renounce, and live
Rich, honored, prosperous, and enjoy the world.
The Fiend now paused, well pleased that he had gained
Audience so large; when JUDAS, in whose soul
The poisonous instillation 'gan to work,
Thus to corruption's advocate replied.
That CHRIST, rejected and despised of men,
Has in this world no part I freely grant;
Therefore if we his followers, who renounce
Things present, build our hopes upon a dream
Of what shall never come, we are of all
Most miserable; if we, who bid farewell
To all that Nature holds most dear to share
Sorrows and pains and poverty with CHRIST,
Find not those blissful mansions in the heaven
Which he has promised; if, when all is past
And this sad scene concludes, no reckoning comes,
No grateful compensation after death,
Hard is our fate, and much has he abused
Our weak credulity; but still these hopes
Of an expected glory, though with doubt
And darkness clouded, faint yet not extinct,
Yield not to words; words made them what they are,
CHRIST's words, and surely man never spoke like him;
Wherefore if these your doctors of the law
Invite me to their conclave but to hear
A railing accusation, I hold off
From their assembly, and to CHRIST adhere,
As to the better reas'ner; and though poor
The servant, equal is the Master's lot,
Poor as the poorest, houseless and forlorn,
A man of sorrows; nor can we complain,
Whilst he of all we suffer still partakes,
First in all labors, penances and pains.
You ask, and bid me take my last resolve,
If I will give this body to the worm
And die with CHRIST: To die is Nature's dread;
Instinctively she loathes the gloomy grave,
And turns a longing eye to light and life;
But fortune gives to all things their degrees;
To them, who bask in sunshine through the day,
Night comes with double sadness, whilst to me,
Who toil from morn to noon, from noon to eve,
Yet nothing but a dim horizon see
Lowering in clouds, darkness is nothing strange,
Nor death a terror: Wealth presents no dower
To wed me to the world; no pleasures cling
Around my heart; no soft affections woo
My longer stay on earth, there to prefer
Brief joys possessed to hope of future bliss.
Thus whilst he 'plain'd the subtle Tempter's ear
Caught the soft murmur that betrays the soul,
The sigh capitulating virtue breathes,
When from her last defenses she retreats;
Whereat a bolder tone he now assumed,
And thus the wavering false disciple plied.
All joys that gold can purchase wait your choice;
Rich to your heart's ambition you shall be,
Nor only rich, but rescued from a doom
So dreadful, had you all the wealth in store,
Which the sea covers or the earth contains,
'Twere well bestowed to purchase your redemption.
With CHRIST impending death, with me you meet
Life with encircling pleasures. Throw aside
That beggar's purse, your starving office spurn;
Serve God's high priest, whose treasury is full;
Cast those few mites away, the scanty dole
Of some contaminating leper's hand,
For which you bid God heal him and pass on;
Whilst he, good cred'lous soul, cries out amain,
As powerful fancy works, Lo! I am clean;
Behold a miracle! But gold performs
Greater and happier miracles than this:
Gold with a touch can heal the mind's disease,
Quicken the slow-paced blood, and make it dance
In tides of rapture through each thrilling vein;
Cast out that worst of demons, poverty,
And with a spell exorcise the sad heart,
Haunted with specter of despair and spleen.
If then this prize can tempt thee, if thy soul
Still thirsts for life, for riches, for repose,
If in thy breast there dwells that manly scorn,
Which slighted merit feels, when envious pride
Thrusts it aside to build the unworthy up,
Now, now assert it; from a Master turn,
Who turns from thee, who before thee exalts
Thy meaner brethren, Peter, James and John:
On them his partial smile for ever beams,
They have his love, his confidence, his heart;
Of them revolting he might well complain,
Of thee he cannot; thine were just revenge:
He is no traitor, who resents a wrong;
Who shares no confidence, can break no trust.
Bid conscience then be still, let no weak qualms
Damp thy reviving spirit; but when night
Wraps her dark curtain round this busy world,
Come thou to CAIAPHAS; there will be found
Our priests and scribes in council to attaint
And bring to judgment this presumptuous man,
Who boasts himself Messiah Son of God.
If thou, to whom his midnight haunts are known,
His secret incantations and his spells,
By which he does those feats that cheat our sight,
Wilt to those guilty haunts conduct our guard,
And render up his person to the law,
Much praise and large reward shall thou receive;
If thou will not -- But wherefore should I doubt?
I would persuade, not threaten: Know withal
It is not thou, it is justice gives the blow;
The law will have its victim. Think thou
That we, to whom the custody is given
Of God's prophetic oracles, ordained
To guard his worship and expound his laws,
Will let this innovating Teacher spurn
Our holy order, mock our ancient rites,
Profane our Sabbaths, and himself exalt
Coequal with Jehovah, to confound
His unity, and claim divided power?
No, let death arbitrate 'twixt him and us;
If he be very CHRIST, death shall not dare
To aim his dart at immortality;
His incorruption shall defy the grave:
If man, blaspheming man, he justly dies.
Living or dying thus his fate dispells
All mystery; truth starts of force to light,
And God is glorified in either case.
He ceased, and on the Traitor fixed a look,
Which, like the serpent's fascinating eye,
Gazed motion's power away; sullen he stood,
As with a spell entranced; the aweful sense
Of his great Master's virtue and the dread
Of an hereafter terrible to thought,
No longer served to hold the wizard fiend
And his fell arts at bay: The word of truth,
Sown on the surface of his stony heart,
Had perished without root; religion's lamp,
Faint and more faint as MAMMON's crafty breath
Blew up the storm of passion, now expired
In his benighted soul; there rankling pride,
Malicious envy, avarice and revenge,
Leagued with hell's minister and uncontrolled
Their impious orgies held. At length the wretch,
To calm deliberate treachery resigned,
With all the unrighteous Mammon in his heart
And vile prevarication on his lips,
Thus with consent in dubious phrase implied
The grand seducer of mankind dismissed.
Great is the peril of the attempt you urge,
For great the power of him you would destroy:
Therefore if I demand some pause for thought,
Deem it not much. Your offers shall be weighed;
But now no more: Occasions call me hence;
This night the Master has convok'd the Twelve
To keep the sacred feast, ordained of God
With bread unleavened and the Paschal lamb:
Thither, though last and in his favor leaft,
I go, a cited guest: There whilst I sit
Unnotic'd at his table's lowest foot,
My meditations shall recall your words,
And ponder them apart. Say to your priests,
Those conservators of our ancient law,
This night they may expect my last resolve.
And now behold the lengthening shadow marks
The evening hour, that warns me hence: Farewell!
This said, their conf'rence ended, they embrace
As friends, who plight their faith: Upon the touch,
So quick the infection ran, so dire the blight,
The poisonous ferment on the instant reached
ISCARIOT'S tainted heart, and now he burnt
With the fell lust of gold. Joy seized the Fiend;
For well he knew how mortal to the soul
That deadly aconite, the growth of hell.
Oh! wretch for ever lost, for ever cursed,
Whom Mammon thus embraces! Who shall wake
Thy conscience from its lethargy? Who now
Shall stop the courses of that baneful drug,
And stem the swift destruction? It Is too late:
Better for thee had thou never seen the light,
Or lost it ere this fatal hour had birth.
Thy doom is sealed; hell has its hour of joy,
Thou, traitor, an eternity of woe:
The meditation of thy heart shall hurl
Thee to perdition and thy Lord to death.
Now JUDAS down the mountain turned his steps;
Not so the Tempter; he from the high rock,
Exalted where he stood, his impious eye
Glanced over the city' of God full in his view
From East to West in moony crescent stretched.
Here yet JEHOVAH was adored, here reigned;
All else to SATAN and his idol gods
Through earth's wide range belonged; to their dire names
Each temple echoed, every knee was bowed:
How often, even here upon his holy hill,
Did Judah's kings with their polluted groves
Affront God's house, and pagan altars raise
To Chemos, Milcom, Ashtaroth and all
The host of heaven within his sacred courts!
Witness that impious king, who passed his son
Through fire to Moloch, homicidal God,
Which roused the Almighty's vengeance, and entailed
Mournful captivity on all his race.
Hither, as to the deluged world of old,
In promised time the dove of peace was sent;
Upon this Ararat, his sacred mount,
He rested; hence salvation dawned on man:
Him to destroy the Tempter now aspired,
Secure of his new convert firmly leagued
In his dire plot and to perdition sealed:
Nor rested on that mount the darkling Fiend,
Nor further need had he of priestly garb,
Than till he saw ISCARIOT join the train
Of CHRIST and his disciples; then at once
To his own airy properties dissolved
A spi'rit invisible, with eager speed
To hell's assembled chiefs he winged his flight.
The sun had sunk beneath the Western hills,
And now at evening hour the Jews prepare
To celebrate their Passover, ordained
TO eternize their deliverance, when God's wrath
Smote every firstborn male in Mizraim's coast,
Save where the blood of lamb piacular,
Sprinkling the consecrated door, was found
Of the destroying angel: To this feast,
Prelusive of his own pure sacrifice
And type of his bloodshedding, JESUS came:
The guests were present and the table spread;
With loins begirt, as men upon the march,
And staff in hand, they snatch a hasty meal:
This done, in pensive meditation rapt,
The Savior, conscious of impending death,
Sat in the midst; to his all-present mind
The treason and the traitor stood confessed.
Lowering, abashed and from the rest apart,
ISCARIOT at the table's lowest foot
Took post, where best he might escape that glance,
From whose intelligence no heart could hide
Its guilty meditations: All eyes else
Were centered on the Savior's face divine,
Which with the brightness of the Godhead mixed
Traces of human sorrow, and displayed
The workings of a mind, where mercy seemed
Struggling to reconcile some mortal wrong
To pardon and forbearance: Such a look
Made silence sacred, every tongue was mute;
Even PETER's zeal forbore the vent of words,
Or spent itself in murmurs half suppressed.
At length the meek REDEEMER raised his eyes,
Where gentle resignation, tempering grief,
Beamed grace ineffable on all around,
And with these words the awful silence broke.
Muse not if I am sad, nor stand aghast
As doubtful of my constancy; these pangs
And more which I must suffer were foreseen;
The hour now coming comes not by surprise,
It is the consummation of my charge,
And fills the measure of atonement up.
Shall I then say, Father, avert this hour,
And save me from these agonies? Not so.
With heart prepared to suffer and submit
I meet my doom forewarned: Yet ere we part
Take this last office from your Master's hands;
And when you see me stoop to wash your feet,
As soon as you shall, remember it is your Lord,
Your dying Lord this legacy bequeaths,
And edify by his humility.
This said, his seamless mantle he threw off,
And girt his tunic close about his waist;
And now with mute amazement they beheld
The Son of God in servant-like attire
Prepared to execute his menial task.
All gazed, all wondered, but no voice opposed;
None dared to pray forbearance of the deed,
Till he, whose heart was ever on his lips,
PETER, in warm expostulation cried:
Lord, do thou wash my feet, thy servant's feet,
Mean as the dust he treads on? Never, Lord,
Never shall thou do that for one so vile,
So all-unworthy: That be far from thee!
Such homage ill beseems thee to pay,
Me to receive. -- To him the Lord replied:
PETER, as yet thou know not what I do,
Hereafter thou shall know; therefore no more:
Cease to oppose, for if I wash thee not,
With me thou have no part. -- Struck to the soul
With horror at the thought, his eager words,
Winged with the flame of rhapsody, burst forth:
Oh! not my feet alone, my hands, my head,
Wash me all over, and sanctify each part.
There needs not this, the meek REDEEMER cried,
Enough is done; thus washed, though but in part,
Thou shall be clean throughout: Yet I Will not say
Ye are all clean: Spite of the Shepherd's care
The taint has touched his flock. Alas! for him
On whom the foul contamination lights;
Woe to that wretch that ever he was born!
And do ye need a comment to expound
This lesson of humility and lore?
Ye call me Lord and Master; well ye say,
For such in truth I am; if then your Lord
Be meek and lowly, will not ye renounce
Pride and contention? If the Master stoops
To wash his feet who serves, shall ye do less
To these your equal brethren? Learn of me,
And each with other deal, as I with you:
Write on your hearts my words; the time draws nigh
When I shall speak no more with you on earth:
Ye have all heard; how blessed if ye obey!
I speak not of you all: Whilst here ye sit
In seeming fellowship around my board,
Sharing this social meal, my last on earth,
Doubt not but I can search into your breasts,
And see whose hearts are loyal, whose is false;
And mark me well, I fall not by man's wiles,
Not unpredicted is the traitorous act,
And well I know the wretch, whose faithless hand
Dips with me in the dish, shall soon be died
With my devoted blood. Betrayed I am,
Deceived I cannot be. -- -- This when they heard,
Each with the other interchang'd a look
Of question and suspect; speechless they star'd,
Confounded and aghast: As men drawn forth
For decimation tremble to unfold
The lot of life or death, so these in doubt
On whom the word of prophecy might light,
Curious yet fearful to enquire of CHRIST,
Searched their own hearts in silence. All perceived
Omniscience, which to God alone belongs,
Familiar with their thoughts, and every soul,
Save that dire wretch whom conscience inly smote,
Trembled lest unpremeditated guilt
Might be denounced upon him, or the sin
Of one man, as of Korah, move the Lord
With the whole congregation to be wroth.
But PETER, in whose ever-anxious mind
These terrors undispell'd long could not dwell,
To the beloved Disciple, on the breast
Of CHRIST reclining, now gave sign to ask
The fearful question, in what traitor's heart
Plot so accursed could harbor. Thus besought,
Though much his humble nature feared offense,
In accent soft, with supplicating eye
Turned on the Master, the meek suitor said:
Lord, show thy true and faithful servants grace,
And let us know the traitor. -- He it is,
JESUS replied, on whom I shall bestow
This sop, when I have dipped it in my cup.
He said, and as he plunged the morsel in,
All eyes were fixed upon the fatal work,
Wondering on whom he would bestow the spell;
And soon with silent horror they beheld
The saturated sop to JUDAS given,
Pledge of perdition; he with greedy haste
Devoured it, by the fiend within him urged;
For MAMMON to the dark divan had told
The joyful tidings, and had posted back
Swift as the magic whirlwind conjured up
By all hell's wizard imps could drive him on,
And now sat nestling in the traitor's heart,
Brooding his filthy spawn: Great was the joy
Of the infernal tempter, thus to find
That guardian Power, whose providence he feared,
By these symbolic elements withdrawn,
And his apostate victim now cast out
From the Lord's Supper, alien from God's grace,
And soul-surrender'd to hell's gloomy realm.
Now, as the spell within him 'gan to work,
The traitor's visage, like the troubled sea
Uptorn and furrowed with tempestuous winds,
Shifted it is hues, now deadly pale, aghast
And horror-struck, now fiery red, deformed
With hellish rage, and from man's semblance changed
To very demon, terrible to sight.
Oh! what a fall from heaven to deeper hell
Than thought can fathom, horrors worse than heart
Of man, unless abandoned of his God,
Can suffer or conceive! Words do but fail
To paint that unreveal'd abyss, those depths
Of the immeasu'rable profound, where groans,
Wailings and woes and tossings amidst fires
Unquenchable await the wretch condemned!
Meanwhile in cloudless majesty and mild
The Savior's face divine on all around
Effulgent beamed; about his temples shone
A radiant glory: This when JUDAS saw,
Whom now the spi'rit of darkness had possessed,
And none such in the sphere of that pure light
Long could abide, he started from his couch
Prepared for flight, when thus in few the Lord --
Go then! and what thou have in hand to do,
Do quickly; so depart! -- The word of power,
Though gentle yet commanding, JUDAS heard,
And instantly the spirit took him thence;
Nor could he not obey, for so rebuked
The prince of hell, SATAN himself, had fled.
The faithful remnant sat in mute suspense,
Pondering what this dismission might import.
The Master with a glance discerned their thoughts;
He saw them in profound conjecture lost,
Humbled in heart and sad, their honor stained
By base defection, and their faith convulsed:
When thus, at once to strengthen and console
Their wavering minds, these healing words he spoke.
Let not your heart be troubled: Ye believe
In God, believe also in me his Son.
Doubt not but in the compass of the heavens
My Father will provide for all his Saints
Mansions of peace, seats of eternal bliss,
Where spi'rits made perfect after death shall dwell,
And rest from earthly toils: Thither I go
To seal your sure election, and prepare
For you my faithful servants an abode;
That, as in sorrow here, so there in bliss
With me your Lord, now dying for your sakes,
Ye may surmount the grave, and ever live
In heavenly communion undisturbed.
Lament not therefore if I now depart,
Your provident precursor, for ye know
Whither I go, and also know the way.
Lord, we are ignorant and dim-sighted men,
THOMAS replied, we see not what thou see;
And as it stands not in our reach to guess
Whither thou go, how should we know the way?
I am the way, the inspired Teacher cried,
I am the Truth, the Life: None can approach
The Father but by me; me had ye known,
This blindness had been done away, and now
Behold Him present! -- Where? still doubting cried
One of the astonished number; Oh! impart
That intellectual vision to discern
And see the Father; set Him in our view
In form demonstrative; we ask no more.
Say thou? resumed the Lord, and have I been
So long familiar yet so little known?
Will not the works, O PHILIP, I have done,
Done in thy sight, instruct thee whence I am,
And what my power? Does there need light for this?
'Midst the broad blaze of proofs that shines about thee
Can thou not see God's presence in his power?
Of this mortality which ye behold,
This fleshly self, I speak not; it is the Spirit,
The virtue of my Father, which is in me,
In act how visible, in voice how strong,
Clear and express! And can you see and hear
And yet withhold belief? Oh, slow of faith!
If words cannot persuade, let works convince:
If miracles, which only God can do,
Are done before your eyes, how say you then,
Show us the Father? Sanctify your hearts
From fear and terror; though the hour comes on,
When to the silent mansions of the dead
From this impeni'tent world I must withdraw,
Mourn not, but let your grief be turned to joy;
For as in me the Father, so in Him
I live and move; my Spirit, though unseen
Still present, shall protect and hover over you.
I will not leave you comfortless; my name
Shall be your tower of refuge; with my peace
Now dying I endow you; of that peace
The powers of this world never shall despoil you,
And in my Name whatever ye shall ask
Believing, ye shall have: By faith in me
Ye shall command the elements, uplift
The everlasting mountains by their roots,
And whelm them in the center of the sea:
This in my Name potential ye shall do,
And greater works than this: By faith in me*
Ye shall confront the oppressor; 'midst the shock
Of tribulations and the angry scorn
Of a malignant world, abhorred, despised,
Thrust from their synagogues, ye shall possess
Your souls in patience, glorying to endure
Like tribulation with your martyred Lord.
Despair nor therefore, for before that day
A Comforter shall come, whom I will send,
And he shall teach you all things. When ye stand
Before the judgment seat of impious men
Friendless, accused, environed with a throng
Of perjured witnesses athirst for blood,
Your Guardian Spirit shall provide a voice,
Action and eloquence, and prompt your lips
With untaught languages to sound my Name
With tongue miraculous through all the world.
Wars then and rumors and portentous signs,
Famine and earthquakes and disastrous plagues
Shall vex the nations; prophets shall arise
With lying divinations to confound
The weak, pervert the wavering and perplex
The very Saints themselves. Await the time;
These are but harbingers of mightier woes;
The day of terror is but in it is dawn:
The powers of earth and heaven must undergo
Direful convulsion; this majestic pile,
This temple, shall become so mere a wreck,
That not one stone shall rest upon another:
Then shall your hour of tribulation come;
Then to confess my Name shall be your crime
By torture and by death to be atoned:
The tyrants of the world shall then let loose
Their persecuting rage, and great shall be
The falling-off of many; rocks and caves
Shall be your hiding-places, yet from thence
Your sound shall echo to the farthest ends
Of the redeemed earth; from those dark cells
The beams of revelation shall break forth,
Maugre the powers of hell; and blessed is he,
Whose faith unshaken shall abide the time,
Till the great end and consummation comes
My peace and my salvation to ensure.
Few are the moments now and passing swift,
Which thus conversing we have yet in hand.
Servants no more, henceforth I call you friends;
Therefore, as friends and children, let your love
Each to the other knit your hearts together
In brotherly communion; this command,
New to the world, I give you: Let good will,
And peace and concord harmonize your souls,
And mark you as the followers of him,
Whose every act was charity, whose life
Was spent and closed expiring for your sakes:
And stronger proof of love what man can give,
Than to yield up his body to the grave,
And die, as shortly I shall, for his friends?
Time was that I have shadowed out my speech
In proverbs and allusions; time now is
To cast obscurity aside and show
The unveiled glories of the Father to you.
Henceforward ye shall ask of Him and have;
My Name for your petitions shall suffice;
My prayers ye need not, for the Father's love
Without an intercessor shall protect
Mine, as you love me, and prevent your wants.
From Him I came into this world, to Him,
This world now leaving, I again return.
This said, conviction smote their glowing hearts
With faith, and hope's bright image new inspired,
And scenes of future glory beaming on them:
When thus with voices joined in loud acclaim
CHRIST in the Godhead manifest they hailed.
Now, Lord, we hear and understand thy words,
Plain words and not in parables involved:
Now are we sure all knowledge is revealed,
All power committed to thee from above,
And without further question we believe
And henceforth know thou came forth from God.
Do ye at length believe? the Master cried;
Behold, the hour comes on, yea now is come,
When your strong faith shall stagger at the scene
Of these impending horrors, and shrink back
Confounded and appalled; to the four winds,
Wide as your fears can spread you, all shall fly,
And leave me struggling with a storm of woes
Unfriended and alone; what did I say?
Alone I cannot be, for in me dwells
The Father ever present: Let this thought
Arm you with constancy to meet the shock
Of tribulation, and withstand the powers
Of this brief world; for to your comfort know,
I have overcome the world. This said, he paused,
And sat, whilst all were hushed, as one entranced,
So fast the heavenly vision poured upon him:
Then with uplifted eyes and heaving breast,
Full of his God, this solemn prayer breathed forth.
O Father! give thy glory to the Son,
As he has glorified thy Name on earth,
And these, whom thou have given him, taught to know
Thee, the true God alone, and JESUS CHRIST
Thy messenger and advocate with thee
For lost mankind. Father! To me restore
That glory, which was mine before all time,
Or ever the world was made and man fell off
From his obedience, now at length redeemed
From sin by my atonement, and made heir
Of life eternal, purchased with my blood.
The act of mediation is complete;
Thy work is finished and thy Name gone forth
To these of thine election: Thine they were,
To me thou gav'st them, and they have received
And kept as faithful witnesses thy Word.
For them I pray: The world, which now I leave,
Has no more part in me; for them alone,
Not for the world, I pray; they must abide,
I shall depart and be at peace with Thee.
O holy Father! keep them in thy Name
Whole and entire, linked in the bond of faith,
Firm as I hold them. One alone is lost,
Son of perdition; him the prophets saw
In their prospective visions, and foretold
That so thy Son should suffer; but for these,
They are unstained, they stand not in the guilt
And condemnation of that wretch accursed.
I pray thee not to take them from the world,
Through which I send them forth as shining lights
To draw men's eyes and hearts, and guide their search
To the bright source, whence thy salvation beams.
These are my ministers, as I am thine:
Oh! sanctify them through thy truth! For them,
And all through them converted to thy word,
Father! I pray. Translate them in thy time
From this unquiet world to that high state
Of heavenly bliss, where they may dwell with me
And see my glory: So shall they receive
Thy love, through me transfused into their hearts,
And rest from all their sorrows in thy peace.
So spoke the Lord, and with these gracious words
His faithful remnant cheered, for soft they fell
As heaven's blessed dew upon the thirsty hills,
And sweet the healing balm, which they distilled
On sorrow-wounded souls. -- Now treacherous eve
Crept silent on, and threw her dusky veil
Over Nature's face, masking the deeds of men:
The Savior rose, for in his conscious breast
A warning voice had whispered, Up, arise,
Go forth to death! One solemn act remains,
One sacrifice; it is now God's wrath demands
Atonement, a whole world's redemption now
Hangs on the minute's point. Behold him then,
A voluntary victim, leading forth
His sad disciples to the fatal spot,
Where treason lurked in ambush for his life,
Where stood the prince of darkness and his powers
Armed with commissioned terrors to assail
Him single, him forsaken, him opposed
To myriads, whilst Heaven's angels soared aloof
Trembling spectators of the unequal strife.
Who now so comfortless as God's own Son?
His soul in woes unutterable whelmed,
All commerce with its native heaven denied,
Pressed down to earth; nor other strength had he,
Than in his human nature might be found,
To combat more than human agonies,
Accumulated pangs, which all the sins
Of all the world, from loss of Paradise
By man's first fall to the last damning page
Of heaven's black register, had pil'd upon him,
The mass of ages. Oh! what tongue can speak
The love of our REDEEMER? And yet man,
Ungrateful impious man, hourly reviles
His Benefactor's name, affects the style
Of sophistry and metaphysic pride
To quibble with salvation, and renounce
Those guides, that lead us by the hand to heaven.
This they call reason, this man's natural right
To question his Creator, and in pride
Of independent dignity reject
Salvation, rather than consent to own
God's privilege to save him by such means
As to God's wisdom best and meetest seemed.
Such monsters does this teeming earth produce:
Impious audacity! which dares to say --
I need no Mediator, I disclaim
CHRIST and his offered peace; 'twixt God and me
I want no advocate to plead my cause,
By my own rectitude I stand or fall:
The Evangelic Volumes I regard
As fabricated tales of juggling tricks,
Witnessed by none but partners in the craft:
Deep read in pagan story I confront
The sacred records with the silent page
Of those, who register no strange eclipse,
No noonday darkness, not one friendly groan
Of sympathising Nature to attest
CHRIST's dying hour. -- Shut, shut the Book of Life
Go to the Jews, the Pagans, for thy creed,
Go to the dust, blasphemer! In the ear
Of Death whisper thy doubts, and learn of him
Thy folly's confutation and thy doom
In those sad realms, to which he shall conduct
Thy trembling soul, when the Arch-angel's trump
Has summoned thee to judgment, and set open
The grave, thy rashness deemed for ever closed.
END OF THE SECOND BOOK.
CALVARY; OR THE DEATH OF CHRIST.

BOOK III.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE THIRD BOOK.
Iscariot, having separated himself from Christ, wanders through the streets of
the city in a disconsolate manner, and at length arrives at the brook Cedron
without the gates. Here he breaks forth into soliloquy, in which, after
reviewing his past situation, he affects to justify his present motives for
betraying his Master to the priests. Christ and his disciples, proceeding to
the Mount of Olives, are discovered by him as they are passing the brook in
their way thither, and Judas resolves upon availing himself of the opportunity
for delivering Christ into the hands of his enemies. In the mean time the
priests and elders assemble in the palace of Caiaphas, and there hold a council
upon the measures to be pursued for the apprehension of Christ: The high priest
harangues the assembly to this immediate purport: In the interim Judas is
announced, and being admitted makes his proposal to the council; this produces
some observations on the part of Caiaphas, and is objected to by Nicodemus, who
after delivering his opinion quits the assembly. Caiaphas then takes up the
matter afresh, controverts the sentiments of Nicodemus, and with the
approbation of all present closes with the proposals of Judas, and sends out a
company with that traitorous disciple to the Mount of Olives, there to
apprehend the person of Christ. The assembly breaks up, and the hall is no
sooner evacuated by the priests and elders, than their seats are filled by
Satan and his infernal spirits. Satan addresses to them a congratulatory speech
on the success of Mammon's temptation, on whom he bestows many high encomiums;
an ovation takes place in honor of that demon, when Chemos appears wounded by
the spear of Gabriel, whom he had encountered on the Mount of Olives, where he
had been posted as a spy upon the motions of Christ and his disciples. Satan,
enraged at the account, sallies forth with a resolution to revenge the attack
by punishing the temerity of Gabriel, arms himself for the occasion, and after
much proud vaunting of his superior prowess disappears, and the infernal
spirits disperse.

CALVARY. BOOK III. THE TREASON OF JUDAS.
DARK came the evening on, and the pale moon,
Now faintly glimmering through a wint'ry cloud,
Shed her dim horrors over the shadowy earth;
Whilst through the silent streets with step disturbed,
And heart by hellish meditations rent,
The Outcast of the Lord pursued his way,
ISCARIOT, name for evermore accursed.
Onward he went unquestioned, unobserved,
For all upon this solemn night kept house,
Nor stopped till forth the city gates he came
To Cedron's brook, whose bubbling current laves
The olive-crowned Mount, favored of CHRIST
For its umbrageous groves and silent haunts,
For prayer and contemplation fit retreat.
Here first, as one awakened to new thoughts,
Starting he checked his step, and with a groan,
That rent his laboring bosom, thus broke forth.
Oh, my torn heart! Oh, soul-tormenting scenes!
Can I forget the blissful hours I Have passed
Beneath your shades lift'ning the Master's words?
When as he spoke of heaven and heavenly joys,
Of righteousness and the blessed Spi'rits with God,
Such life in his description glowed, methought
All Paradise was present to my view
And courted me to enter. Heaven and earth!
Must I remember? Never man like him
Could with such magic eloquence entrance
The senses of his hearers, lift the soul
To heavenly contemplations and transport
To thoughts beyond itself; thence to look down
Upon this lower world and all it is cares,
It Is pains, it is persecutions with contempt:
Sometimes envelop'd in mysterious schemes
And parables he couched the moral truth,
Which painted on the memory left it is tints
Indelible: But when with tongue inspired
The fall of nations he foretold, and drew
The curtain of futurity aside;
When in the pomp of numbers he described
Jerusalem beleaguered with a host
Of Gentile foes and trodden down to dust,
Her matrons and her virgins whelmed in blood,
Or dragged to violation, shame and bondage
By ruffian spoilers; when his soaring flight,
Spurning the world's wide compass, scaled the skies,
And there amidst the empyrean fields,
As in his proper region, shook the spheres
Of sun, moon, stars, as with a master's hand,
And showed them falling in prophetic awe
Of his own glorious coming in a cloud
With power and state supernal, then our hearts
With sympathetic raptures burnt within us,
And we vain mortals saw, or thought we saw,
Our own vile bodies glorified to share
In his triumphant entry, and ourselves
To dignities and thrones and starry spheres
Exalted, loftiest in the realms of light.
But now these bright illusions are no more;
Vanished these glittering scenes, my claims on heaven
All cancelled, and my hopes a bankrupt's dream,
Mocking the haunted fancy with a pile
Of visionary wealth. Behold me shamed,
Banished his board, detected, and my thoughts
Turned outward to provoke my brethren's scorn,
And blazon forth his prescience: Let that pass!
Traitor pronounced, a traitor I will be;
That prophecy at least shall be fulfilled.
Though master of my will I could refute
And dash his bold prediction, yet my heart
Ponders revenge more suited to it is wrongs,
Greater than such slight triumph can bestow,
And not less terrible than death itself.
This night, the last that he shall walk at large,
This night shall be his triumph or his fall.
If these grave elders, who conspire his death,
These reverend priests revolt not from the deed,
That casts on them, their function and their tribe
The peril of his blood, why should my heart
Shrink from it is purpose? What have I to fear
In act subordinate, in cause supreme,
Traitor prejudged, of uncommitted crimes
Arraigned, and thrown upon the world condemned?
More he had said, but, like a serpent coil'd,
With sudden start he shrunk into himself,
And listening held his breath to catch the sound.
Of steps, that echoing over the flinty soil
Bespoke a company in near approach:
With these the Master's well-known voice he heard;
Whereat, like murderous Cain when called of God,
The cow'ring conscious outcast slunk aside,
And wrapped his russet cloak about his head,
Then darkling stood; the holy troop meanwhile
Forded the shallow brook and held their way
Strait to the Olive Mount, their wonted haunt.
Forth sprung the lurking caitiff from his watch:
The greedy Mammon rushed upon his heart,
Glorying that now he held them in his net,
Darkness conspiring with occasions apt
Of hour and place to make his vengeance sure.
Remorse was dead within him, every sense
Of virtue lost, yet in his coward breast
Such languor, dread and cold repugnance dwelt,
Scarce could the breath of hell's worst fiend suffice
To blow it into flame: Now sudden rage
Impelled him onward, now with palsied fear
Struck back, he reeled and shook in every joint.
This SATAN saw, and evermore at hand
To drive the wavering sinner to his doom,
Breathed all his spi'rit upon him; direr blast
Cocytus never vented, the full tide
Of aconite engendered with his blood,
His brain, set every fev'rish nerve in play,
And screwed his heated fancy to the pitch
Of daring and defiance; yet the wretch,
Not less a traitor to himself than CHRIST,
Or ever the acting of the dreadful deed
Thus strove by sophistry to gloss it over.
Why do I doubt? What horrors shake my mind?
Why should not my affronted honor stir
Me to betray, as their insulted law
Provokes our elders to destroy their foe?
For Moses they, I for myself oppose;
And where is the wrong, if he, who knows my heart
And all it is meditations, will not deign
To turn it from it is purpose, and divert
The danger he foreknows; nay rather helps
To lure the embryo treason into birth?
Either his own free will makes death it is choice,
And so becomes accomplice in the deed,
Or else, foredoom'd to die, he knows his hour,
And thus, not acting of ourselves but ruled
By strong necessity, we stand absolved,
Mere guiltless tools and instruments of fate.
What then? Why let the Scriptures be fulfilled,
Let prophecies, which are the voice of God,
Sound out his knell; we fight not against Heaven.
Let CHRIST, if glory waits him in the grave,
Descend into the dust and seek it there:
If his soul covets to make league with death,
And dwell in consort with corruption's worm,
What time more apt for death than this dark hour,
Image of death itself? And who so fit
As God's high priest, the temple's minister,
To put life's intervening veil aside,
And usher him to glory? I meanwhile,
His humble harbinger, will go before
TO announce his coming, and make clear the road
That leads to death, the goal of his ambition.
Yet how if all this tame indifference
Be but a feint to draw the world about him,
And then amaze them with some grand display
Of wonder-working power? And who can tell
How far his hand miraculous may stretch,
Who from the tomb plucked forth the fest'ring corpse
Of shrouded Lazarus, three days in earth,
And bade him live again? Stupendous act!
This we beheld and hailed him Lord of Life;
But still the unconverted Jews stood off,
And deemed us witnesses of slight account,
Weak cred'lous men, first dup'd and thence become
Associates in imposture. What remains
But instantly to put my thoughts in act,
And yield him up to those, who in the attempt
Succeeding vindicate their disbelief,
Failing abide the shame of their defeat?
In this or that opinion there must be
A dangerous error; to persist were fatal:
This night dispells all doubt: If he be CHRIST,
He lives confessed and triumphs over death;
If man, he falls unpitied and abjured.
Thus for foul deeds pretending fair excuse,
The caitiff wretch on traitorous errand bent,
Back through the city gates pursued his way,
And to his nightly assignation hied
Perched on the summit of the sacred Mount,
Should'ring God's temple, a proud palace stood:
There dwelt the sovereign pontiff, and this night
Held solemn convocation and consult,
Not for God's glory, other cares had they,
Cares nearer to their selfish hearts, concerns
Heaven had no part in, impious dire cabals
How to prevent the dayspring from on high,
Now by CHRIST's revelation and his acts
Miraculous just dawning on the world,
Aforetime wrapped in darkness black as death,
Best veil for their hypocrisy and craft.
In their great hall of council, there in ranks,
Precedencies and dignities disposed,
Doctors and long-rob'd pharisees and scribes
And bearded elders met; senate, to whom
For machinations, plots and secret wiles
Rome's purple conclave stoops. High over all
On throne pontifical in robes of state,
With sacred ephod girt of various hues,
And breast plate glittering bright with mystic gems,
Mitre-crown'd CAIAPHAS, the temple's chief,
Exalted sat: The sanhedrim was full.
All came, whom lust of power, or bigot zeal,
Or enmity to CHRIST roused to the call;
Mouth-worshippers of God, agents of hell
In heart, and hypocrites abhorred of CHRIST,
To public scorn held up and pictured out
As rebel husbandmen, who basely slew
Their Lord's commissioned Son. Scarce was there one,
Whose galled conscience had not felt the sting
Of some keen truth extorted from the lips
Of the else-humble JESUS, meek to all
But the proud Pharisee or cavi'lling Scribe,
To knaves, who thought by cunning to outwit
Wisdom itself, and snare him in his talk;
To hypocrites, who fasted often with sad
And woe-worn faces to be seen of men,
Or such as made long prayers for a display
Of righteousness, and vaunted their good deeds,
Mocking their conscience and insulting Heaven:
To these in all the majesty of truth
Frowning he spoke, nor spared he for rebuke
Severe, indignant; many a time and often
To their whole sect he had denounced woe,
Woe trebled on their heads: What wonder then,
If thus combined by interest to oppose
His spreading glories, their envenomed hearts
Rankled with envy, hatred and revenge?
Nor were there wanting to their great divan
Those, who can work unseen within the heart,
Dark ministers, who know to touch the springs
And cords, whose movements can convulse the soul
With furious passions, bursting from their mine,
Like sulfurous fires that tear the quaking earth:
SATAN himself was there, for at this hour
He and his host had furlough upon earth,
Demons of blood, ambition, envy, strife
Ranged the vexed world at large: Loud were their tongues,
And fiery hot their zeal against the Lord,
Whose miracles, resounding through the land,
Rung in their ears the downfall of their power,
Ill-omen'd knell. -- Brethren! it is time to rouse,
Cried CAIAPHAS, and started from his throne
Furious as Korah, when at his tent door
With his rebellious company he stood,
And waving high his censer called aloud
To mutiny against Moses: So now called
With voice as loud, and deeper plunged in crime
Than these who sunk outright, this second priest,
This worse revolter against God himself
In his own Son reflected; from his state,
High over their heads exalted, he looked down
On all beneath; then with uplifted eyes
And hands extended, as in act to rend
His robes pontifical -- Yes, sacred seers,
Again he cried, yes, venerable priests,
Elders, and reverend sages of our law,
It Is more than time to call your vengeance up;
Awake! ye sleep too long: For me, your slave,
Servant of servants, me, by how much more
In place exalted so much more in heart
Abas'd, as meritless of such high state,
I were content to cast these robes aside,
Pluck off this beard, and on this mitred head,
Unworthy of such honors, scatter dust
And ashes, might such penitence avert
The shame, that for my sins is falling on you,
And quell the mad'ning faction now afloat,
Since this bold Bethlemite has started up
To mock the church of God. Shall it be said,
That for my punishment these evils light
On you the righteous? that in my day rose
This innovator to conspire your fall,
To broach new doctrines and unhinge the faith
Of the still wavering multitude? If I,
If I am in the crime, if in your thoughts
My negligence has fostered this revolt,
Make me your sacrifice, thrust me from hence,
For this high place unfit; set up your cross,
And there exalt me: But if I am clear,
And this your looks encourage me to hope,
If CHRIST not CAIAPHAS deserves the death,
Why do ye pause? What terror holds you back?
Time-honor'd rabbi, elders, sages, guides
And masters of our Israel! ye, by whom
Our synagogues are taught, of God's own law
Interpreters ordained, which of your grave
And reverend council will at once unfold
To my yet faithless ears the mighty spell
By which this JESUS works? Who will expound
This prodigy, that sets the crowd agape,
This more than man, of whom the people bruit
These more than human doings? You are dumb;
None offers a reply; for none will say
This wisdom and these mighty works accord
With one so mean of birth, with Joseph's son,
A base mechanic: Fitter task for him
To use his father craft, and humbly ply
The workman's tools, than in the temple sit
Disputing with our doctors; or withdrawn,
As late the Baptist, to some desert mount,
There sit in sullen dignity enthroned,
And from his rocky theater declaim
To listening thousands. Here be some have heard
His doctrines, many have endured his taunts,
And though in wise and well-pois'd minds like yours
Such meteors breed no terror, yet they draw
The gazing vulgar, and so rank a taint
Runs through the infected fold, that much I doubt
If half the flock of Israel be not touched;
So diligent is he to spread the plague,
So careless we to stem it. If his word
Be suffered thus to overturn our law,
The monument of ages, then alas!
We Have seen the last of these solemnities:
Before this night returns there'll not be found
Or lamb to sacrifice, or priest to slay,
Or temple to receive our Paschal rites;
Rome, whose ambition grasps the conquered world,
Shall plant her eagles on our holy mount,
And Jupiter usurp JEHOVAH's shrine.
He paused, yet stood as one in act to speak,
Struggling for words, which furious passion choked
And stifled on his tongue; a stormy cloud
Hung on his brow, his visage ghastly pale,
Mad'ning with rage he stamped and shook his robe:
As when the Delphic prophetess, convulsed
And foaming on her tripod, sets aghast
The scar"d enthusiasts, who believe her filled
And fighting with the God oracular;
So through the hall of council silence reigned,
Whilst expectation turned all eyes and ears
On their rapt prophet; till the word being given,
That one of CHRIST's disciples stood without
And instant audience craved, that awful name
Their spell-bound faculties at once set free;
Instant loud murmurs filled the vaulted roof,
Like the deep roar of subterranean tides,
Whose eddies undermine the cavern'd shores
Of sea-girt Mona or Bermuda's isle:
This past, the senate's chief resumed his throne;
Whence from his state inclining he gave sign
For silence and commanded to admit
Their unexpected suitor; at the word
Wide flew the doors apart, and there behold
With cloak to' the knee tucked up and staff in hand
ISCARIOT, caitiff viler than the worst
That ever wore pilgrim's sanctimonious garb
In aftertimes, when fierce crusading zeal
Sent forth it is wandering eremites to put
The murderous sword in meek Religion's hand,
The cross, on which our patient Lord expired,
Their badge of victory, and signal made
For their destroying armies, lured to war
With pardons earnt in fields of carnage, fought
For God's pretended glory', as if, dire hope!
Rivers of blood could waft their souls to heaven.
Founder of these, and prototype of all,
Who died the cross with blood, ISCARIOT stood
Full of the fiend, and cast around on all
His haggard eyes, that augur'd vengeful ire
And fraud deep brooding in his treacherous heart:
When after pause now summoned to expound
His purpose, whether by his Master sent,
Or self-impell'd, thus MAMMON's convert spoke.
Fathers of Israel, patrons of our law,
And chiefly thou, great priest, vicar of God,
And faithful shepherd of the remnant saved
From Abraham's scattered flock! I muse not, lords,
That you are cast in wonder to behold
Me standing in this place, me, to your cause
Unfriendly deemed, and, which to all is known
Nor on my part denied, one of the Twelve,
And follower of JESUS. But, grave sirs,
I do adjure you by your love to truth,
No longer wear this jealous eye upon me,
Than to your patient ears I shall unfold,
Why hither I am come, not as a thief
To steal into your councils, spy them out
And after blazon them, but in fair faith
And plain sincerity with no double heart
To make confession sure, and give my life
A pledge into your hands. Stand not amazed,
As if it were a thing impossible
That CHRIST's disciple should not be his friend.
Mine has been toilsome husbandry, my lords,
And none but bitter fruits have I reaped from it,
Fruits of repentance: Weary days and nights
I Have minister'd to him without reward,
And weary miles full many traveled over,
Fainting and pinched with hunger; then at night,
When the wild creatures of the earth find rest
And covert in their holes, houseless have watched
Amidst the shock of elements, and braved
Storms, which the mail'd rhinoceros did not dare
Unshelter'd to abide: Sometimes on sea
Lashed by the surging waves I Have toiled for life,
Whilst he sat sleeping, reckless of the gale:
Rescued from these, for I of force confess
His power is absolute, and safe on shore,
My labors ceased not with the scene; new toils,
New tasks succeeded: Now to rocks and caves,
To sandy wilds, or wheresoever else
The Spirit led and desolation reigned,
His wandering steps I followed, yes, his steps,
But at what distance from his heart he held me,
Bear witness, memory! Others had his heart,
Peter and James and John, to them he breathed
The secrets of his soul, on them he shower'd
His promises; of these he made no thrift,
These he abounded in; to me he gave
What he had least in store, a barren purse,
And bade me bear it; no hard task I own,
For it was light as beggary could make it,
But office most ignoble. Here perchance
Your wisdom would demand of me a cause,
Why I endured these slights year after year,
And still toiled on in such a thankless service;
What fascination and what spell, you will ask,
Does this man work with, so to charm the mind
And lure it on through mortifying toils,
Sorrows and pains, and, worse than these, contempts,
Yet hold it still enchain'd slave to his will?
Most equal judges, I must here submit
My weakness to your censure, and refer
My cause to mercy, or in self-defence
Conjure you for a moment to descend
From your high state, and to my humble place
And peasant thoughts accord your own great minds:
My lords, I neither mean to varnish over
My own too feeble nature, nor to smooth
The rough sincerity of truth through fear
Or flattery of those, before whom I speak:
If JESUS works by spells, I know them not;
Prayers but not incantations I have heard;
If these be charms, they are no charms for devils,
Yet such he is charged withal: Neither by league
With Beelzebub, as some have gravely urged,
Nor art Samaritan, nor else by imp
Or genius, as the heathen loudly vouch
Of their famed Socrates, do I believe
His miracles are wrought: Alas, alas!
Which of hell's ministers will be suborned
To work his own confusion? No, they shriek,
They tremble, at his bidding they come forth
From men possessed, they vanish to the winds,
They sink into the pit from whence they sprung.
I am a man, my lords, not over-prone
To rash credulity, nor apt to veer
With every breath of doctrine, and I Have heard
A voice, that sways the elements, commands
The springs of health, making maimed nature whole,
Nay, life itself return into the trunk
Which it had left, and give a second pulse
To the cold heart of death: This to have seen,
And not to stand in reverence of the power
That wrought these miracles, were a degree
Of apathy above my nature's reach.
No more! cried CAIAPHAS, no more of this!
You much abuse our patience with this talk.
Here is no place to sound CHRIST's praises forth;
We are not met to recognize his power
And back his daring claims, but to chastise
Imposture, to assert our sacred law,
And vindicate the majesty of Heaven.
You tell us you are wearied with the tasks
Of a hard Master; quit him then and earn
A better service, earn a rich reward
By yielding him to justice. You well know
His haunts, his privacies, his darkling hours,
When without hazard of a public brawl
We may make lawful seizure for the state
Of his attainted person: On this point,
So you will order your discourse aright,
You may speak freely; of his praise no more.
To him the Apostate: If from my forced lips,
Unwilling witnesses although they be,
Truth wrings this praise, the last which they will utter,
Suffer thus far in candor, and let pass
These words in justice to a Master's fame,
Whom I renounce and with an oath devote
To wrath, to punishment, to death itself,
If death you doom. But oh! most reverend lords,
It is not as a false and juggling cheat,
A dealer with familiars I present him
To your just judgment: Wretches vile as these
Would but disgrace your wrath and my revenge.
But take him as a victim from my hands
Richer than hecatombs of vulgar blood,
A sacrifice for God's high priest to make,
Whilst all earth's sceptered monarchs stood around
To gaze upon the work. Be not deceived:
I know the jeopardy in which I stand,
Yet I will on; in me is no delay:
This night, this hour, this instant I am yours
To trace him to his haunts, to be your guide
And marshal you to vengeance. But beware!
Let them be chosen men you send, approved
And constant, though the heavens shall rain down fire,
And the earth rock beneath them: He, who called
The dead anatomy to life, can well
Make corpses of the living. -- Here the voice
Of one, who nearest to the throne had place,
Cut short the traitor's speech: Of high renown
Was he now rising, NICODEMUS, known
To after-ages as the nightly guest
Of JESUS, and his converse with our Lord
In holy writ recorded: Grave he was,
A Pharisee and ruler of the Jews,
Yet not of soul vindictive like the rest,
Nor aspect arrogant; when thus he spoke.
I call the time misspent, that is bestowed
On loud-tongu'd orators, whose art it is
To launch their hearers upon passion's tide,
And drive them on by gusts of windy words
A giddy desperate course to rocks and shoals,
Which steered by sage experience they had shunned.
Such shipwreck of our wisdom we might make,
Should we our better senses now permit
To take improv'ident counsel of our ears,
By this high-ton'd declaimer thus assailed.
I pray you, therefore, carry back your thoughts
To times foregone, when prophets have arose
And boasted mighty works, which, being done
Of man's device and cunning, came to naught:
So will it be with JESUS, if his spirit
Be not of God; time will overtake deceit,
If time be let to run; but cut it short
By death's rash stroke, you cover him with glory,
And from his ashes raise a mightier name,
Than living he had reached with all the aids
Of artifice to back him. Give me, Heaven!
That tolerating policy, which shows
No bitterness in speculative points:
Disdaining from my heart what this man says,
A traitor says, who comes to sell his Master,
My sentence never shall affect the life
Of this or any other man accused
On vague presumptions, nor will I say, Die!
Till I have that in proof, which merits death:
For if this JESUS vaunts himself to be
What he is not, God will confute his pride;
But if with power divine he acts and speaks,
Commissioned to some awful unseen end,
Shall man contend with God? Vain strife! shall we
Fall off from our great origin, the faith
Of our blessed father Abraham? Shall we,
Sore smitten for our trespasses, cut short
And wasted to a remnant, we, on whom
The guiltless blood of all the prophets rests,
Send this man up to heaven to cry against us,
And to a burden heavier than enough
Add more and weightier guilt than all the rest?
Heaven's grace forefend! You have my conscience, lords;
I leave it to your thoughts: I stand absolved.
He said, and conscious that his words were lost
Upon obdurate hearts, departed thence,
So warned of God, and from the gulf escaped
Of that night's dire perdition, wherein all
Save him alone were lost. So in the wreck
Of some great admiral, full fraught for war,
When his tall vessel splits, and the bold crew
Plunge quick into the abyss, Heaven sometimes deigns
By wondrous providence to snatch one life
From the devouring waves, and waft him home
A solitary relick, there to tell
God's mercies and his sad companions' fate.
Him thus departing the proud pontiff eyed
With look malign, and to these taunts gave vent.
Weak is that cause, whose advocate flies from it:
I pause to see if any here will follow.
None moves, none speaks, none seconds his appeal:
It Is well! One only convert to our foe,
One patron of his cause this senate held,
And holds no longer: Vanished, flown, escaped!
One heart, one mind, one voice now rules the whole.
For me, I nor opinion shift nor place,
Faithful I shrink from neither. You have heard
What this wise elder counsels; he has left
His conscience as a legacy behind him:
Let him, who loves the giver, take the gift;
I, for such part as to my share may fall,
Scorn to engraft that scyon on my heart,
Which, if admitted, might impart the seeds
Of treason and apostasy like his.
Till cold and hot agree, till selfish fear
And temporising maxims coalesce
With patriot zeal for Israel and firm faith
In God's revealed decrees, his thoughts and mine
Will never mix, and the attempt to join
Their jarring elements could only serve
To make this breast a field of mental war.
Mark, brethren, mark how this man contravenes
Your ancient just retaliating law.
Moses said -- Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth!
So is revenge a virtue: By this rule
JESUS must die; for who puts out the law,
Puts out the light of Israel, stabs the life,
And life for life is justice upon record.
This ordinance our absent elder spurns;
He holds at naught our ancient equity,
And sets new doctrines forth; tells us forsooth,
That we must wait the time, wait till the light
Of Israel be extinct, and leave redress
For those, who without eyes can spy it out:
Such councils would make cowards of us all,
Rebels to God, deserters from the faith,
Traitors to Israel. Can I wear these robes,
And wear a heart within so vile, so base?
Tear them away, uncover me to shame,
Make me the scorn of men, if, thus arrayed
And trickt in outside honors, I am found
False to that King, whose standard I support.
No, venerable sages, if your rule
Were short to teach us what our duty is,
The very heathen would inform us of it:
The Roman soldier, who deserts his post,
Or sleeping suffers a surprise, shall die;
But we, with God's own armies in our charge,
We, whose commander is the Lord of Hosts,
Should we be found thus criminal, what death,
What doom, more terrible than death itself,
Can recompense such treason? Forth then, lords!
Draw out an armed band and send them forth.
Behold a ready leader! Time yet serves;
This night no stir, no stragglers in our streets
To shake the city's peace: JESUS secured
And hither brought, a largess I decree
To all concerned; to JUDAS a reward
Befitting us to give, him to receive.
No more; loud acclamations shook the hall:
The assembly rose, the traitor bowed assent,
A band of ruffians armed with swords and staves
Forth issued with ISCARIOT at their head,
And to the Olive Mountain bent their course.
Oh, hour accursed! Oh, all ye stars of heaven!
And thou pale waining moon, etherial lights,
Firstborn of Nature, look not, ye chaste fires,
Upon this monster-breeding earth, but quench
Your conscious lamps and whelm this murderous crew
In darkness black as their own damning plot.
And thou, conductor of this Stygian band,
Vile hypocrite, what fiend inspired the thought
To hail thy Master with the kiss of peace,
And so betray him? Wretch, the time will come,
When racked with horror, and to all hope lost,
Thine agonizing soul shall rue this deed,
Curse its birth-hour, and whilst thy Master soars
To heaven, triumphant over death and sin,
Thou shall sink howling to the depths of hell.
Now break your synod up, ye envious priests,
Elders and scribes! prepare your hardened hearts
To judge the Lord of Life, convene your spies
To forge false witness, and make smooth the way
To man's redemption by the blood of CHRIST,
The very Paschal Lamb, whom by the type
Of this night's sacrifice ye shadowed forth,
Blind unbelieving prophets as ye are.
Fit hour ye chose, ye murd'rers, to embrue
Your cursed hands in that pure Victim's blood,
Peace Offering for the sins of lost mankind.
Hence to your homes! there meditate new plots;
The fiends shall be your helpers, to your thoughts
Present, though not to sight, they swarm around,
Now here, now there, now hovering over head,
Where, as your enmity to CHRIST breaks forth,
And your blaspheming voices fill the roof,
Like steaming vapors from sulphurous lakes,
Joyous they catch the welcome sounds, and fan
With clapping wings the pestilential air,
Applauding as they soar. Now clear the hall;
Yield up your seats, ye substituted fiends;
Hence, minor demons! give your masters place!
And hark! the King of Terrors speaks the word,
He calls his shadowy princes, they start forth,
Expand themselves to sight and throng the hall,
A synod of infernals: Forms more dire
Imagination shapes not, when the wretch,
Whom conscience haunts, in the dead hour of night,
Whilst all is dark and silent round his bed,
Sees hideous phantoms in his fev'rish dream,
That stare him into madness with fixed eyes
And threatening faces floating in his brain.
The ghostly monarch mounts the vacant throne;
Gives sign for order, the superiors sit,
Each as his stellar attribute gives rank
And place peculiar, the untitled stand
Circling their LUCIFER, their fallen sun:
He of his state more jealous, as in heart
Conscious of faded glory, in the midst
Now rising, after many a hard essay
To wreathe his war-worn face into a smile,
Semblance at least of joy, at length with voice
Screwed to the pitch of triumph vaunting cries.
Powers and Dominions, Lords by victory's right
Of earth and man, now from his Maker won
By overthrow of Heaven's last champion given
In God's own city, battle fairly gained
On hostile ground, his Sion's sacred mount,
Warriors, your king applauds you: Thanks, brave friends;
Now shall your temples with loud paeans ring,
Your vindicated altars and your groves
Exhale rich clouds of incense, steaming forth
From odorous gums; your statues gaily crowned
With garlands, every trophy, that the art
Of painting or of sculpture can bestow,
Shall be hung round to decorate your shrines;
Your oracles henceforth shall find a voice,
Which future CHRIST'S shall never put to silence,
And nations from your lips shall ask their fate:
This day to all posterity shall be
Sacred to games, processions, triumphs, feasts,
And laurel-crowned bards shall hymn your praise.
But sure no spirit of etherial mould,
For such of right ye are, will so forget
His native dignity as to repine,
Or gloat with envy, if I now demand
Your tribute of especial praise to him,
Whom your joint suffrages deputed first
To this important embassy; a spirit
Our subterranean empire cannot mate
For high authority and potent sway
Over man's subjected heart: MAMMON, stand forth!
Stand forth, thou prosperous, rich, persuasive power,
Worshipped of all, great idol of the world;
May fortune on thy patient labors smile,
Thou persevering deity! Pursue
Thy darling metal through earth's central veins,
Ransack her womb for mines, send forth thy slaves
To undiscovered realms and bid them sap
Potosi's glittering mountains for their ore;
Pull down her golden temples, strip her kings,
Rack them with tortures, wring their secrets out
By slow-consuming fires, lay Nature waste,
Let nothing mortal breathe upon the soil
That covers gold: All hell applauds thy zeal,
And all hell's engines shall assist thy search.
He said, and lo! from either side the throne
Upon the signal a seraphic choir
In equal bands came forth; the minstrels strike
Their golden harps; swift over the sounding strings
Their flying fingers sweep, whilst to the strain
Melodious voices, though to heavenly airs
Attun'd no longer, still in sweet accord
Echo the festive song, now full combined
Pouring the choral torrent on the ear,
In parts responsive now warbling by turns
Their sprightly quick divisions, swelling now
Through all the compass of their tuneful throats
Their varying cadences, as fancy prompts.
Whereat the Stygian herd, like them of old
Lulled by the Theban minstrel, stood at gaze
Mute and appeased, for music has a voice,
Which even the devils obey, and for a while
Sweet sounds shall lay their turbid hearts asleep,
Charmed into sweet oblivion and repose.
The praise of MAMMON the rapt seraphs sung
And Gold's almighty power; free flowed the verse;
No need to call the Muse, for all were there,
Apollo and the Heliconian Maids,
And all that pagan poet ever invoked
Were present to the song. Above the flight
Of bold Alcaeus, Tisias bard divine,
Or Pindar's strain Olympic, high it soared
In dithyrambic majesty sublime.
At the right hand of hell's terrific Lord
MAMMON exalted sat, and as the choir
Chanted their hymn, his swelling bosom throbb'd
In concert with the strain; pride flushed his cheek
Furrowed with care and toil, his eyes, now raised
From earth, their proper center, sparkling gleam'd
Malicious triumph, whilst ovations loud
And thundering plaudits shook the trembling roof.
The song was closed, and, order now resumed,
MAMMON stood forth to speak; when ere the words
From his slow lips found way, the infernal King,
With eager action starting from his throne,
Gave sign for silence and thus interposed.
Pause, worthy spi'rit, awhile! my mind forebodes
Cares more immediate, for amid the throng
I spy our faithful CHEMOS; well I know
It Is not on slight occasion he has left
The post assigned him; and behold! his looks
Augur important tidings. Fall back, friends,
And give our gallant sentinel access.
Obedient to the word the opening files
Fell back and let him pass; he to the throne
Low reverence made, and thus his chief addressed.
Imperial Lord of this seraphic host,
As I kept station on the faithless Mount,
Where once my altar blazed, revolted now
From it is allegiance and with olive crowned
In token of God's peace, I thence descried
By glimpse of the pale moon a vagrant train,
With JESUS at their head, fording the brook,
As thither bound: I couched upon the watch,
So bidd'n, and to their talk gave heedful ear.
A melancholy theme the Master chose:
Sadly he warns them of his own death's hour
Now near impending, and how all shall fly,
Like scattered sheep, and their lone Shepherd leave
Forlorn, abandoned: This the fiery zeal
Of PETER, to our chief well known, disclaims,
Who boldly vouches, though all else should swerve,
His own unshaken constancy; when CHRIST,
Severe though not with railing, him reproves,
And solemnly denounces triple breach
Of this vain boast, and instant, for this night,
Or ever the cock's shrill trumpet twice shall sound,
So CHRIST predicts, he shall be thrice denied
Of this self-vaunting man: All this I heard,
And held it for my duty to report;
What more ensued imperfectly I learn;
For now the Master takes three apart,
And much disturbed in soul and sore amazed
Wills them stand off and watch, whilst he retires
And vents his grief in prayer: I saw him fall
Prostrate to earth, and vent such heartfelt groans,
That were I other than I am, less wronged,
Less hostile to the tyranny of Heaven,
Whence I am exiled, I had then let fall
Weak pity's tear and been my nature's fool.
But, lords, I cannot so forget your cause,
Or my own wrongs, nor would I wear a heart
Made of such melting stuff. With noiseless tread
The kneeling Suppliant I approached, and marked
His agony of soul, whilst from his brow
I saw large drops and gouttes of bloody sweat
Incarnardine the dust, on which they fell.
Bear witness, my revenge, 'twas there, even there,
The very spot, on which he knelt and prayed,
Where now his blood, wrung out by agony
As in atonement, dropped, on which my shrine,
Reared by the wives of the uxorious king,
Decked out with blazing tapers proudly shone,
And front to front of God's own temple stood,
Till Asa's parricidal hand plucked up
Maacha's groves and burnt my shrine to dust.
Now hear the sequel: As I stood at gaze,
Noting his prayer, one of the heavenly band
And of the highest, GABRIEL, with his spear
Couched as for combat, started forth to view,
And frowning bade me take my flight with speed,
Nor trouble that just person: Valiant peers!
I am not one to back at his proud bidding,
Nor ever did I turn my face to flight
Save in our army's universal rout,
When all from heaven fell headlong to the gulf:
Such weapon as I had, this trenchant sword
Of adamantine proof, forthwith I drew;
But ere my arm could wield it, swift as thought
I felt his spear's sharp point with forceful thrust
Deep plunged into my side: Staggering, amazed,
I gave back so compelled; he still advanced
Armed for a second onset, when my strength
Foiled, though immortal, and my sight grown dim,
My wound the whilst sore rankling, I took wing
And hither came on painful pinions borne,
Your faithful servant, whether to attempt
Fresh battle, or my present loss repair.
This said, he put his azure tunic by,
And barred his wounded side, where GABRIEL's spear
Had lodged it is massy fluke, a ghastly-chasm
Trench'd by the force of arch-angelic arm,
And to aught else than deathless spirit death.
Fired at the sight with eyes that sparkling blazed
SATAN uprose, and thus infuriate spoke.
GABRIEL in arms! Hah! warriors, we are braved:
CHRIST has his guard about him and defies us.
If this immortal spirit could not stand,
What shall ISCARIOT do? Myself will forth;
We shall then see who wields the stronger lance,
SATAN or GABRIEL: In the fields of heaven,
In the mid-air, on earth, in deepest hell
He knows my might superior, and shall rue
His dastardly assault. Why not with me,
The sender rather than the sent, this strife?
So might he boast the contest, though subdued.
The scars by this sharp sword in battle dealt
Are the best honors GABRIEL has to vaunt;
The brightest laurels on his brow are those
I planted when in equal fight I deigned
To measure spears with such inferior foe.
Does GABRIEL think God's favor can reverse
Immutable pre-eminence, and raise
His menial sphere to that, in which I shone
Son of the morning? Does he vainly hope
Exiled from heaven we left our courage there,
Or lost it in our fall, or that hell's fires
Have parched and withered our shrunk sinews up?
Delusive hope! the warrior's nerve is strung
By exercise, by pain, by glorious toil:
The torrid clime of hell, it is burning rock,
It Is gulf of liquid flames, in which we rolled,
Have calcined our strong hearts, breathed their own fires
Into our veins, and forged those nerves to steel,
Which heaven's calm ether, her voluptuous skies
And frequent adorations well nigh smoothed
To the soft flexibility of slaves,
Till bold rebellion shook it is fetters off,
And with their clangor raised so brave a storm,
That God's eternal throne rocked to it is base.
Now break we up this council: Each disperse
Or to his post, his pleasure or pursuit;
Suffices for this task my single arm:
CHEMOS shall be revenged; the public zeal
Of MAMMON still shall be our theme of praise;
Nor shall ISCARIOT's nightly plot be foiled
By intervening angels, nor these priests,
Whose seats we fill and whose allies we are,
Fail of their victim, or find us remiss
To second them in this our common league
And joint emprize against the powers of Heaven.
'Twas said, the princes of the assembly rose
In reverence to his will; the legion round
Smote on their shields the signal of assent.
Towering he stood, the Majesty of Hell,
Dark over his brows thick clouds of vengeance rolled,
Thunder was in his voice, his eye shot fire,
And loud he called for buckler and for spear;
These bold AZAZEL bore, enormous weight,
For Atlantean spirit proper charge:
With eager grasp he seized the towering mast,
And shook it like a twig; then with a frown,
That awed the stoutest heart, gave sign for all
Strait to disperse, and vanished from their sight.
END OF THE THIRD BOOK.
CALVARY; OR THE DEATH OF CHRIST.

BOOK IV.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE FOURTH BOOK.
A general review of Christ's agony in the garden: His disciples, who are
ordered to watch, fall asleep; Christ prays apart; he wakens them, and warns
them to watch left they enter into temptation. Satan arrives, and takes post
near the spot where Christ is praying in his agony: He is discovered by
Gabriel, the supporting angel; their interview described: Christ approaches,
and reproving Satan, by the word of power casts him to the ground disabled and
in torments. Judas now advances with an armed company; betrays his Master with
a kiss; Christ is seized and carried away to the palace of the high priest.
Satan, unable to rise, laments over his disconsolate condition: He is
discovered by Mammon, who consoles him and assists in raising him from the
ground: Satan testifies to the power and divinity of Christ, feels a
presentiment of his impending doom, and having delivered his last injunctions
to Mammon, is lifted from the earth by a stormy gust and carried through the
air out fight of that evil spirit, who terrified by the fate of his chief turns
to flight and escapes.

CALVARY. BOOK IV. THE AGONY IN THE GARDEN.
O MOUNT of Agony! watered with tears
From my Redeemer's eyes, and by his knees,
Pressing thy turf, made sacred as the ground,
Where even the Chosen Shepherd might not stand
But with unsandal'd feet, Ah! where is now
That purifying Angel me to cleanse
From this vile world, that so I may approach,
Though but in thought, with a right spi'rit renewed,
Thy hallowed solitude? Lo! where the Lord
Sorrowing retires apart: Where are the Three
Station'd to guard his sacred privacy?
Stand they aloof, as their forefathers stood,
When from the midst of darkness, cloud and fire,
JEHOVAH thundered out of Sinai's mount?
Ah, no! within that olive grove they lie
Stretched on the ground, a drowsy slumbering guard.
And could ye not, ye sleepers, watch one hour
For such a Master? Oh! what heart could taste
Of rest or peace, whilst his was racked with pain?
Was it the sighs his suffering virtue breathed
Into the air of sad Gethsemane,
That so entranced your senses? Or was he,
The strengthening Angel, sent from Heaven to shield
The Savior's anguish from all human eyes,
And veil the mystery of that awful hour?
Then was that angry cup, full mixed and red
From God's right hand, presented to his lips:
The bitter essence of origi'nal sin,
With every life-destroying extract, drawn
From man's corruption since, were there infused,
Compounded and resolved into that draught,
Mixed by the hand of Death and drugg'd in hell.
The coward, shrinking under fortune's blows,
With desperate lip has oft-times drank and died;
It Is refuge, it is desertion from a post
He dare defend no longer, it is the hope,
False fruitless hope, of a perpetual sleep,
When he has bottomed that Lethaean cup:
But our Redeemer's potion was not such;
Horrors and heart-dissolving woes and pangs,
That mock imagination's scope, and stretch
The heart's strong cordage, till it bursts asunder
And leaves the mind a wreck, these were the drugs,
That brewed that cup of agony, which God
Now tendered as the wrath-atoning draught
For a revolted world! Mysterious act!
The Father sacrifice the Son beloved!
The just to spare the unjust lay the rod
Upon the guiltless head! Shall all offend,
And One atone for all? One Victim bear
The accumulated load of punishment,
The mass of vengeance, that amazing whole,
Which each particu'lar sin had pil'd in store,
And that devoted sacrifice a Lamb
Pure, without spot or blemish? O my soul!
Beware, nor to that tabernacle press,
Where clouds and darkness canopy thy God.
Lo! where the Savior kneels; he looks around
For some to succor, to support, some friend,
Whose sympathising eye might beam upon him,
And with a moment's glance of pity cheer
His desolated spirit. All around
Is vacant horror, solitary, dark;
The partners of his heart, the chosen few,
The friends, who should have watched, are wrapped in sleep,
Insensible, supine, oblivious sleep;
Woes multiplied by woe, and that the worst,
Ingratitude, the sharpest fang that gnaws
Man's bleeding bosom. In this sad extreme,
His soul revolting from the noisome draught,
With eyes to Heaven uplifted, and a sigh,
Which showed that human weakness then o'erpower'd
His soul's diviner part -- Abba! he cries,
Father, all things are possible to Thee,
Remove this cup! -- Then bows his patient head
And qualifies the prayer -- Yet not my will,
But Thine be done! -- No voice from Heaven replies:
All Nature sleeps in silence still as death,
As if the planets in their spheres had paused
To watch the trembling balance, on whose point
The fortunes of this globe suspended hung,
It Is ruin or redemption, death or life.
'Twas then the strengthening Angel dealt the blow,
That put the hovering spy of hell to flight,
Seen of our Lord in ambush where he lay.
And now the Mourner rises from the earth,
On which he knelt, and a few paces moves
Pensive and slow to find his station'd friends:
He finds them not as friends upon the watch,
Not as God's faithful soldiers should be found,
But at their length stretched out in lazy sleep
With folded arms supine. Roused by his voice
They stare, they start confounded and amazed.
Could ye not watch one hour? the Sufferer cries:
Watch, for the foe of man is near at hand;
Pray, lest ye fall into the Tempter's snare:
The spi'rit is ready, but the flesh is weak.
So warned, he leaves them with this mild rebuke:
A second time he seeks the dismal dell,
Again he prays remission of his woe,
And deprecates the agonizing cup:
Meanwhile his drowsy sentinels perceive
A languor, which their senses must obey,
And down they sink, their leaden eye balls closed
As in a death-like trance. Again he comes,
Again he calls, a second warning gives,
And so departs. -- Now SATAN on the wing
Swift as a fiery meteor rides the air,
With shield and spear armed at all points for war:
Then down at once with huge Titanian bulk,
Plumb down he lights upon the solid soil,
Hard by the angelic post: Earth felt the shock,
And trembling to her center inly groaned.
Nor did his haughty courage deign to crouch,
Or lurk with lion watch, but firm of foot
Erect and confident in arms he stood,
As one, whose prowess all advantage scorned.
And mean surprise of an unguarded foe:
Such arts to weaker spirits he resigned;
He of his former self felt no decay,
Or feeling scorned confession, for his pride
Still deemed that heaven, though lost, contained no peer
To mate with him in hardihood and proof,
Save only the Almighty; to such height
Of arrogance had power long time usurped
Over the Gentile nations, and the sight
Of God's own Son, now, as he falsely deemed,
Vanquished and prostrate, swelled his impious heart.
Our blessed Lord meanwhile having preferred
For the last time his interceding prayer,
Summoned his strength, and conscious that the hour
Was come, which finished or revoked the task
Of man's redemption from the powers of hell,
Whose representative hard by at hand
Stood eager to arrest the forfeit prize,
Put forth his hand, and as he took the cup,
SATAN, who stood spectator of the deed,
Started aghast; cold tremor shook his joints,
His threatening spear now drooped, and his broad shield,
So proudly borne aloft, weighed down his arm
Slack and unnerv'd; confusion seized his heart,
And his high courage quail'd. This GABRIEL saw,
Yet left he not his post till CHRIST had drained
The cup mysterious; to its lowest dregs
He drank it; now convulsion shook the fiend,
Death shrieked amain and through his hollow ribs
Drove his own ebon dart with desperate rage.
Bitter the draught and hateful to the taste,
But Immortality had crowned the cup,
And Light and Life on phoenix wings sprung forth
From the foul dregs in newborn glories bright.
GABRIEL, who knew that by this solemn act
Thus happily performed his charge expired,
Now turned away in search of that fierce spi'rit,
Whom through the darkling covert he had seen,
Whilst by the side of God's afflicted Son
Minist'ring he stood: Right well he knew the form
And towering port of hell's terrific King;
Nor had the dire confusion and dismay
Of that fell demon escaped the angelic glance.
Him now within a gloomy dell retired
To further distance, wrapped as it should seem
In pensive thought, the Guardian Seraph spied.
In the same moment SATAN's ghastly eye
Glanced on his foe: bright in caerulean arms
Heaven's champion shone, high over his crested helm
The arch-angelic plume triformed waved,
Ensign of throned state and high command.
The grifly monarch gnash'd his teeth with spite
To find himself encountered at such odds;
His foe fresh blooming in immortal youth,
Vigorous, in heav'nly-temper'd armor braced;
Himself at this ill hour surpised, his strength
As by enchantment blasted, and that voice,
Which in the ears of all hell's princes vouched
Such bold achievements, shrunk from it is high pitch
To feeble murmurs and weak whining sighs.
So when on Zama's plain the rival chiefs,
Rome's consul and the Punic captain, met
To parley in midway 'twixt either camp,
The war-worn veteran, blighted and defaced
By wint'ry marches over noisome fens
And snows on mountains pil'd, with envious eye,
Sole relick of his toil, surveyed the form
And blooming features of his youthful foe;
Then to his mind recalling glories past,
When his proud menace awed immortal Rome,
Sighed to reflect how far in the decline
From that bright morn his evening sun had sunk;
Then eyed the youth again, and in his face,
Shadowed by fate, saw Carthage doomed to fall,
And his own glories to a foe transferred
Less than his equal once, his conqu'ror now.
But 'twas not long that SATAN so endured,
For now the conscious sense of former deeds
Bold, though unblest, and high innate disdain
Of mean capitulation and demur
Roused his proud heart, like a hot courser spurred,
To chase and lash his languid courage up:
Red'ning he swelled, and gnawed his nether lip
For vengeance that it would not give him words
To hurl defiance on the advancing foe:
When GABRIEL, noting his disordered mien
And haggard aspect, strait bespoke the fiend.
Thus ever may the foe of CHRIST be found
Speechless, abashed, struck down of Heaven and quelled!
How long, malicious Spi'rit, will thou persist
To trouble this vexed earth? How long to haunt
This righteous person, whole strong virtue mocks
Thy faint attempts? Warned by this shame, avaunt!
Hence, baffled Tempter! roaming thus at large,
Thou do but show by melancholy proof,
That a tormented conscience never rests.
As the fierce panther, through the ribs transfixed,
Writhes round the bloody weapon in his side,
And tugs it to and fro with foamy teeth,
Mad'ning with pain and gnashing at his wound;
So against himself and foe alike enraged,
Hell's gloomy Lord, by this deserved taunt
Cut to the heart, with many a hard essay
Struggled for voice; at length collecting breath,
These words disdainful, though of their full tone
And energy abated, found their way.
GABRIEL, the brave in danger earn renown;
True valor spares the weak, but thou, more wise
Than valiant, studiest well the safer hour,
When to come forth and wage inglorious war
Against unprovided foes; if CHEMOS then,
Or some slight Cherub, cross thy wary path,
Woe to the straggler! if thy barbed spear
Can make safe tilt at his unweapon'd side.
But I, who day and night have paced this globe,
Found in all quarters, I, who never shunned,
Rather have sought, thy walk, am left to roam
Free and of thee unquestioned from the hour,
When on the confines of this new-made world
We parlied under Eden's shady fence,
To the instant now, when faint and ill at ease,
Unwarlike Angel, thou have found me here
Nerveless, and little more than match for thee.
To whom the indignant Virtue thus replied:
If SATAN here is found in evil plight,
He Is found of me unsought. Thine own dark wiles,
Degenerate Spi'rit, and Heaven's all-ruling hand
Have cast thee in my way. Must I turn off
From duty's road direct because forsooth
A wounded adder hisses in my path?
Why did thou press into this place of prayer,
This hallowed solitude, where CHRIST has breathed
A charm, that withers up thy blasted strength?
Could thou not learn, by late experience taught,
There is a sphere about the Son of God,
In which no spi'rit like thee accursed can draw
His breath blaspheming? At a word begone!
Though with my foot I could have spurned thee hence,
I tread not on the fallen; nor do I vaunt
Conquest of thee; that to a mightier arm,
Rebel to God, to God's own Son thou ow'st,
To CHRIST, not GABRIEL: Nor shall thou alone
Stoop to his name, but every idol God,
And every power of darkness with their prince,
And Sin hell-born, and thy soul offspring Death.
Whereto, by these prophetic words appalled,
SATAN with taunting argument replied.
Since this angelic form, from death exempt,
Sometimes shall yield to aches and transient pains
And natural ailments for awhile endured,
What wonder, if etherial spi'rit like me,
Pent in this atmosphere and fain to breathe
The lazy fogs of this unwholesome earth,
Pine for his native clime? What, if he droop,
Worn out with care and toil! Were thou as I
Driven to and fro, and by God's thunder hurled
From Heaven's high ramparts, would that silken form
Abide the tossing on hell's fiery lake?
Had thou like me traversed the vast profound
Of ancient Night, and beat the weary wing
Through stormy Chaos, voyage rude as this
Would ruffle those fine plumes. I Have kept my course
Through hurricanes, the least of which let loose
On this firm globe would winnow it to dust,
Snap like a weaver's thread the mighty chain,
That links it to heaven's adamantine floor,
And whirl it through the Infinite of Space.
And what have thou, soft Cherub, done the whilst?
What are thy labors? What have thou achieved?
Heaven knows no winter, there no tempests howl;
To breathe perpetual spring, to sleep supine
On flowery beds of amaranth and rose,
Voluptuous slavery, was GABRIEL's choice:
His bosom never drew the indignant sigh,
That rent my heart, when called to morning hymn
I paid compulsive homage at God's throne,
Warbling feigned hallelujahs to his praise.
Spirits of abject mould, and such art thou,
May call this easy service, for they love
Ignoble ease; to me the fulsome task
Was bitterest slavery, and though I fell,
I fell opposing; exiled both from heaven
Freedom and I shared the same glorious fall.
Go back then to thy drudgery of praise,
Practice new canticles and tune thy throat
To flattery's fawning pitch; leave me my groans,
Leave me to teach these echoes how to curse;
Here let me lie and make this rugged stone
My couch, my canopy this stormy cloud,
That rolls stern winter over my fenceless head;
It Is freedom's privilege, nor tribute owes,
Nor tribute pays to Heaven's despotic King.
Thus whilst he spoke, the Savior of mankind,
New risen from prayer, drew nigh; whereat the fiend,
Or ever the awful presence met his eye,
Shivering, as one by sudden fever seized,
Turned deadly pale; then fell to earth convulsed.
Dire were the yells he vented, fierce the throes
That writhed his toitur'd frame, whilst through the seams
And chinks, that in his jointed armor gaped,
Blue sulfurous flames in livid flashes burst,
So hot the hell within his fuel'd heart,
Which like a furnace sev'n times heated raged.
Meanwhile the winged Messenger of Heaven,
GABRIEL, with horror and amazement fixed,
Stood motionless behind his orbed shield:
Not so the Savior; he with look composed
And steadfast noting the disastrous plight
Of that tormented fiend, these words addressed.
SATAN, thou see the serpent's primal curse
At length falls heavy on thy bruised head;
When man lost Paradise, by thee betrayed,
This was thy doom, Deceiver; and although
Ages have rolled on ages since, yet God,
Who from eternal to eternal lives
Blessed for evermore, computes not time
As thou, whose misery makes short years seem long.
Yet was the interim thine, and thou, who first
Brought sin into the world, have reigned in sin:
Thou had the power of death, but I through death
Am destined to destroy that power and thee.
And now my hour is come, I go to death,
That all through me may live; therefore begone!
Get thee behind me! Thou have now no part
On earth, thy dwelling is prepared in hell:
There when we meet, expect to meet thy doom.
This said, the fiend replied not but with groans,
Nor staid the Angel longer than to turn
One last sad look upon his prostrate foe,
Then flew to heaven. The Savior bent his steps
In search of his disciples; them he found
Wrapped as before in sleep. -- Sleep on, he cried,
And henceforth take your rest: It is enough:
The hour is come. Behold! the Son of man
Into the hands of sinners is betrayed:
Rise, let us go! The traitor is at hand.
And lo! while yet he spoke a mingled crew
Armed and unarmed approach; before them all
JUDAS advancing thus bespeaks the throng:
Whom I shall kiss is He, the CHRIST; Him seize
And in safe keeping hold. -- Upon the word
He gives the traitorous greeting, and exclaims,
Hail, Master! -- When at once the swarming crowd
Rush in a space, then stand in circle round,
Like bloodhounds held at bay, their eager eyes
Fixed on his face, which to behold they rear
Their flaming torches, whilst the prospect round
Glares with the ruddy blaze; a ghastly troop,
Like that dread chorus, which the tragic bard
Poured on the scene, when the Athenian wives
Dropped their abortive burdens with affright,
To see their snaky locks and fiery brands
Kindled in Phlegethon's sulphurous waves:
So glares that haggard crew; in front they see
JESUS in conscious majesty unmoved,
Behind him to some little space withdrawn
PETER and JAMES and JOHN, the chosen Three,
Small band, but in their Leader's power a host
Invincible, against whom whole armies leagued
Were but as chaff before the whirlwind's blast,
Had he so willed; but now with accent firm,
Whom seek ye? he demands: They answer make,
JESUS of Nazareth. -- I am the man,
JESUS replies; He, whom ye seek, is found.
His air, his utterance and that voice divine,
Which could have armed Heaven's legions in his cause,
Or gulph'd them to the center at a word,
Swift as the vollied thunder smote their hearts,
And hurled them to the ground: Headlong they fell
With hideous crash, nor ever thence had risen,
Had not his gracious purpose so decreed
For man's redemption: Up they rise from earth,
And in like manner to the same demand
A second time make answer; he repeats --
I told you, and ye heard, that I am He:
If therefore me ye seek, let these depart.
Then burst the chidden zeal of PETER forth,
Armed with a sword he rushed upon the throng
And at the foremost aimed a random blow,
That gash'd the caitiff's head, but missed the life.
Put up thy sword, rash man! the Savior cries,
Did I want rescue, would I ask of thee,
With all my Father's Angels at command?
No! let me do His will and drink His cup:
And you, that here encompass me about,
As 'twere a felon ye came out to take,
With swords and staves, suffer thus far, behold!
The wound his weapon makes my touch shall heal:
It Is done! Know all, that they, who take the sword,
Shall perish by the sword. What needs this stir,
This midnight plotting and this traitor's kiss,
These staves, these torches and this armed array
To make one harmless peaceful man your prize?
You saw me daily in my public walks,
Freely we commun'd, for you harmed me not;
You heard me in the Temple; for I taught
In very zeal the simple way of truth,
Laboring full hard to turn your hearts to God:
If this were my offense, why not arrest
Your Preacher in the act, and drag to death
Him, who would fain have trained you in the road
To life eternal? Never on the poor
Turned I my back; I courted not the rich;
Were this my fault, in the broad face of day
Ye might have smitten me and earned the praise
Of the proud Pharisee and braggart Scribe:
I fed the hungry and I healed your sick,
I succored the tormented and possessed;
Are these the heinous acts for which I die?
In field, in city, in frequented ways
The wretched flocked around, if these be crimes,
Why is their punishment so long reserved
To this dark hour of night? The sun himself
Witnessed my doings, so might he my death.
But see! my followers are dispersed and fled,
And I stand in your peril here alone:
No need to fear him, who makes no defense;
Conduct me to my doom: God's will be done!
This said, their sacrilegious hands they laid
Upon his sacred person: He in' the midst
With meek composure and submitted look
Marched slowly onward, as they led the way
To the proud dome of CAIAPHAS, high priest
Of MOLOCH than of God more fitly called.
Oh! ye hard hearts, was this the Paschal Lamb,
Ye worse than pagan butchers, whom ye culled
Pure and unspotted for your bloody feast?
Well did your lawgiver decree this day
A record and memorial to be kept
Throughout your generations to all time;
A memorable day, a noted feast
Your stubborn incredulity has made it.
To you a day of darkness and disgrace;
To us Salvation's glorious dawn, to us
By our great Captain led, the Lord of Life,
Who through the darksome avenue of death
And depths mysterious of the mazy grave,
Holding the clue of prophecy in hand,
Unravelled all the ways of Providence
And to our view set open the golden gates
Of Paradise regained, whence light and life
And bliss eternal beam on all mankind;
For all, who with their lips confess the Lord,
And in their hearts believe that from the dead
God in his power has raised him, shall be saved.
Meanwhile the prince of hell, whom CHRIST had left
Rolling in torments on the stony rock,
Mad as leviathan, when tempest-wreck'd
Flound'ring he lies upon the shoaly beach,
Now to one last and desperate effort driven,
Straining each nerve with many a dolorous groan
Half his huge length had reared. His right hand grasped
His spear, the other on his buckler propp'd
Pillow'd his head, raging with pain and thoughts
Black as the night around him: To arise
And stand surpassed his power; in vain he spread
His feathery vans to raise him in the air;
About him all the ground with azure plumes
Beat from his shattered pinions was bestrewn:
Despair now seized him, now too late he rued
His blasphemies and bold rebellious taunts
Against Heaven's Omnipotent, his Judge incensed:
Hopeless of mercy now he cursed his doom
Of immortality, and as he rolled
His haggard eyes in night, hell's flaming gulf,
Terrific vision, seemed to burst upon him
With treble horrors charged; then with a sigh,
That strained his heaving cors'let, he breathed forth
In murmuring lamentations these sad words.
Ah! who will lift me from this iron bed,
On which Prometheus-like for ever linked
And rivetted by dire necessity
I Am doomed to lie, and wail the cruel boon
Of immortality, my baneful fate?
O earth, earth, earth! Cannot my groans pervade
Thy stony heart to' embowel me alive
Under this rock, before tomorrow's sun
Find me here weltering in the sordid dust,
A spectacle of scorn to all my host,
Wont to behold in me their kingly chief?
Will not some pitying earthquake gulf me down
To where the everlasting fountains sleep,
That in those watery caverns I might slake
These fires, that shrivel my parched sinews up?
Ah! whither shall I turn? who will unbrace
This scalding mail, that burns my tortured breast
Worse than the shirt of Nessus? Oh! for pity,
Grant me a moment's interval of ease,
Avenging, angry Deity! Draw back
Thy red right hand, that with the lightning armed
Thrust to my heart makes all my boiling blood
Hiss in my veins; or if thou will destroy
Whom thou have vanquished, terminate these feuds
'Twixt good and evil, thee and me, reduce
This incorruptible to mouldering dust,
Make Death a parricide, and so conclude
Me and my sufferings and my sins at once.
But 'twill not be. Happy I might have been,
Immortal I must be: God can create
Nothing but bliss; I made the pains I feel:
Sorrow had no existence, Death no name
'Till I lost heaven; to be was to be blessed,
And beings blessed could never cease to be.
This earth and man its habitant were good,
Till envy, pride, rebellion, in my heart
Engend'ring, marred God's perfect work with sin;
And but for sin the universe were heaven:
So am I author of the hell within me,
And these tormenting fires God cannot quench;
For that would be to turn from what he is,
Parent of good, and to become like me
Patron and friend of evil. Reasoning thus
I must renounce all hope of future peace,
And wage eternal enmity with God,
Whom longer to oppose I now despair,
And under whose strong hand weighed down to earth
Prostrate, confounded, I can rise no more.
Must I be ever thus? Must these fierce pangs,
Or worse, if worse can be, torment me ever?
Are there no means to make a truce with Heaven?
Submission, penitence, atonement, prayers
And intercessions -- Oh! fallacious, vain,
Impracticable terms! Can pride shed tears,
Falsehood keep faith, or perjury pass it is oath
Upon that Judge, to whom all hearts are known?
It cannot be. Ages of sin have rolled
'Twixt me and pardon, gulf impassable.
Man's loss of Paradise, a deluged world,
Sin paramount on earth, the nations turned
From God to idols, scarce a remnant left
Of this his chosen race, corruption spread
Even to' the heart of Judah', and from this Mount,
Sad witness of my overthrow and shame,
Scene of my triumphs once, his standard torn
And hell's proud banners flanting in it is place;
These and a countless multitude of wrongs
Cry in the catalogue so loud against me,
That should the thunder of God's vengeance sleep,
Mercy herself would seize the uplifted bolt
And speed the lingering blow. What is my hope,
If such the task to purchase peace for man,
Man so subordinate in sin to me,
The spring and fountainhead of that soul stream,
Which he at distance drank? If CHRIST must die
For man, if nothing less than God's own Son
Can stand betwixt the Father's wrath and man,
What mediator can be found for me?
None, and no wonder if his wrath, withdrawn
From man now pardoned, fall with worse recoil
On my devoted head: Even now it falls.
Me like an eagle in my towering flight,
From the proud zenith of the sun's bright sphere
Headlong he hurls to earth with shattered wing
And plumes dishevelled groveling in the dust:
Me, the sole mover of man's foul revolt,
He marks for tenfold vengeance; for if CHRIST,
The patient meek Redeemer, groans in pain,
What shall the Tempter feel? If on the rack
Of agony his guiltless brow sweats blood,
Well may this body' of sin burst out in flames,
A conflagration horrible to sight,
And blazing beacon to the astonished world.
And what is this vile JUDAS, who seduced
By wily MAMMON sells his Master's life?
What PETER's self, whom, had not JESUS prayed,
I Would sifted into chaff? These purblind priests,
Who with their half-shut eyes askance behold
Their own Messiah in his wondrous acts,
Yet give those wonders to the powers of hell,
And trembling for their craft complot his death,
What are they? Whence but from myself their lies?
It Is I in them, and not they of themselves,
That kill the Prince of Peace; his guiltless blood
Sprinkles their hands, but in a flood-gate tide
Redder than scarlet whelms my sinking soul.
He ceased, and in his mantle hid his face
For shame and sorrow to be thus surpised;
For MAMMON, ever on the foot by night,
Had spied him through the gloom, and thus began.
What ails thee, Prince of air, that here thou lie
On the dull earth, not resting it should seem
From victory, but vanquished and overthrown?
Vanquished, alas! and in the dust overthrown
By God's all-pow'rful Son, SATAN replied,
Too sure I am; and how it wrings this heart
So to be found of thee words cannot speak.
Yet thou of all the spirits heaven has lost
Art he, of whom my pride has least to fear;
For thou will not as others gall my spleen
With scorn and taunting: Thou, a friendly chief,
Have pity for the sorrows of a friend;
To thee my valor and deserts are known,
For thou were ever nearest where I fought
In front of danger on the battle's edge;
Thou know the hazard and the chance of war,
And with what malice fortune thwarts our best,
Our bravest efforts: Scarr'd thyself with wounds,
Thou from the wounded wilt not turn aside;
Therefore, O MAMMON, as my hand to thee
Were present, did thou need it, so to me,
Thy sovereign in distress, reach forth thine hand,
And, if thou can, upraise me from this fall;
If thou can not, let not my armies know
Their leader's fate, be mindful of my fame,
And bury this sad secret in thy breast.
He said, nor need had he of further suit,
For MAMMON now had put forth all his strength
To raise him from the ground; in his strong grasp
He seized his giant limbs in armor clad
Of adamant and gold, a ponderous wreck:
Earth trembled with the shock; dire were the groans
Hell's Monarch vented, horrible the pains,
That racked his stiffen'd joints; yet on he toiled
Till by Heaven's sufferance rather than by aid
Of arm angelic once again he reared
His huge Titanian stature to the skies,
And stood; yet not as late with look erect
And lofty mien: Ruin was in his face;
Sordid and soiled with ignominious dust
His robe imperial, and his azure wings
And glossy locks, that over his shoulders curled,
Dishevelled now, and in like tattered trim
With vessel tempest-torn or by the force
Of engines weighed from bottom of the deep,
Foundered in creek or harbor, where she lay
Gulph'd in the slimy ooze; when MAMMON thus.
Joy to our gallant Leader! Once again
With firm foot planted on the subject earth
We stand as spi'rits by our own strength redeemed
Erect and dauntless. Wherefore droops that eye,
As it would root itself into the soil,
From which with vigor new restored you rise
Antaeus-like indignant of defeat?
Often, when in search of gold or silver ore
In earth's metallic veins, I Have labored long
And hard, in damp and darksome caverns pent,
Mining the solid rock, at length to light
And the free air emerg'd, I Have found my limbs
Stiffen'd with cramps, or with cold ague numbed:
Yet never did my patient courage droop
Or slack it is gainful toil. I am not apt,
When wealth or glory can be bought with pain,
To stagger at the terms; and if it please
Heaven's Monarch in his vengeance to attach
To this eternal be'ing eternal pain,
Good hope, as poisons may be sheathed by use,
So long familiarity with pain
May draw it is sting, and habitude convert
It Is hostile property to friendly ease.
But thy great heart perhaps is rent with grief,
Of pain disdainful as of lesser ill:
And wherefore grieve? Our joys were lost with heaven,
Our passions all reversed, our natures changed,
Virtues to vices, amity to hate;
Deeds, that in heaven had been our shame, in hell
Become our glory'; and whilst the world endures,
Whilst evil is to good opposed, we keep
The fight at doubtful issue, oft-times win
The glorious field and triumph over God.
Why did I tempt ISCARIOT to betray
His guiltless Master? 'Twas not that I loved
The traitor, no, the treason was my joy;
I laugh at fools in their own folly caught:
The wretch I tempted, him I shall destroy,
And like a worn-out weapon cast him by;
He shall not live to see his Master's fall,
And for the sorry purchase of his sin
He shall but touch the adder's sting and die:
So much for JUDAS! Thus at once I slay
Two victims and refine upon revenge.
To whom with clouded brow and nothing cheered
By this discourse hell's gloomy Power replied.
MAMMON, you well describe the rueful change
Wrought in us by our overthrow from heaven,
And for such solace as in thought you find
Pondering the sad eternity of pain,
My argument shall never be employed
To make that little less; but when you vaunt
ISCARIOT's treason and the impending fall
Of that just Person, now before the bar
Of envious judges, who shall doom his death,
You vaunt a deed, which, though the' elect of hell
Jointly with me advised, brings on us all
Ruin with loss of empire, and all hope
So quenches, naught can stand us now in stead
But patience and your reconciling rules
To wont our natures to eternal pain.
My potency you know, and can you think
Less than the hand of God could hurl me down
To misery like this? It must be God,
Who speaks in CHRIST, the Father in the Son:
Though meek, Almighty he controuls the world
And me the world's late master; he destroys
Sin my begotten and Sin's offspring Death.
Oh! that I never had approached him more,
Foiled in my first temptation. Now, even now,
I feel a nature in me, not mine own,
That is my master and against my will
Enforces truths prophetic from my tongue,
Making me reverence whom in heart I hate:
I feel that now, though lifted from the ground,
I stand or move or speak but as he wills,
By influence not by freedom: I perceive
These exhalations, that the night breathes on me,
Are loaded with the vaporous steams of hell;
I scent them in the air, and well I know
The angel of destruction is abroad.
I cannot fly from fate; the man foredoom'd
To bruise my head is CHRIST, the time is come,
The prophecy is full; exiled from hence,
As first from heaven, my reign on earth is over,
And my last care is for those hapless friends,
The partners of my fall, when I am gone
Left like a headless trunk. Warn them to fly
Impending ruin; sure I am, when CHRIST
Breathes forth his sacred spi'rit into the air,
His dying gasp shall blow them like a spell
To the four winds of heaven: Let them be gone
In time and ply the wing; there is shelter yet
In this wide world for them: Though I must hence,
They may abide, and though their names be lost,
Their altars levelled and their idols maimed,
Yet shall their arts and offices endure,
Their influences still shall draw the hearts
Of many; sin shall not at once secede
From earth, nor darkness wholly yield to light.
To thee, auspicious spi'rit, whose potent arm
Has raised me from the ground, I can assure
A longer term of residence and power:
Thy empire in earth's inmost center roots,
Thy influence circulates through all her veins;
Nor earth alone, but ocean wafts to thee
Continual tribute; commerce hails thy name;
In thee war triumphs, thee fair peace adores
And gilds the feathers of her dove with gold
To dedicate to thee her worldly god,
Thee, the last foe whom CHRIST shall chase from earth.
So spoke the parting fiend in his last hour
Prophetic, father though he were of lies:
To him the inferior demon answer none
Attempted, but in ghastly silence stood
Gazing with horror on his chieftain's face,
That changed all hues by fits, as when the north,
With nitrous vapors charged, convulsive shoots
It Is fiery darts athwart the trembling pole,
Making heaven's vault a canopy of blood;
So over the visage of the exorcis'd fiend
Alternate gleams like meteors came and went;
And ever and anon he beat his breast,
That quick and short with laboring pulses heaved.
One piteous look he upward turned, one sigh
From his sad heart he fain had sent to heaven,
But ere the hopeless messenger could leave
His quivering lips, by sudden impulse seized
He finds himself uplifted from the earth;
His azure wings, to sooty black now changed,
In wide expanse from either shoulder stretch
For flight involuntary: Up he springs
Whirled in a fiery vortex round and round;
As when the Lybian wilderness caught up
In sandy pillar by the eddying winds
Moves horrible, the grave of man and beast;
Him thus ascending the fork'd lightning smites
With sidelong volley, whilst loud thunders rock
Heaven's echoing vault, when all at once, behold!
Caught in the stream of an impetuous gust
High in mid-air, swift on the level wing
Northward he shoots and like a comet leaves
Long fiery track behind, speeding his course
Strait to the realms of Chaos and old Night,
Hell-bound and to Tartarean darkness doomed.
His sad associate, left on earth, looked up
And with like conscious terror eyed his flight,
As when the merchant trembling for his freight
Looks seaward from some promontory's top,
And thence descries his gallant bark a wreck
Driving at mercy of the winds and waves
Full on the rocky shoal, her certain grave;
Then having bid farewell to all his hope
In this one bottom stored, now lost to sight,
Turns with a sigh aside, and over the strand
With heavy heart takes homeward his slow way.
So sighed the fiend, and for his own sad fate
Trembling yet fearful to attempt the wing,
Slunk cow'ring off veiled in the shades of night.
END OF THE FOURTH BOOK.
CALVARY; OR THE DEATH OF CHRIST.

BOOK V.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE FIFTH BOOK.
This Book, proposing to treat of the trial and condemnation of Christ, opens
with an invocation to the Evangelists, the sacred historians of that event. --
Christ, brought before the priests and elders in council, accused by the
witnesses, interrogated by Caiaphas, persists in keeping silence, till being
solemnly called upon to declare himself, he answers by an affirmation of the
truth. Instantly all voices are let loose upon him, accusing him of blasphemy
and pronouncing him worthy of death: He is delivered over to mockery and
insult. The Jews resolve to arraign him before Pilate on the following morning.
He turns and looks upon Peter, who according to prediction had three several
times denied him. The sorrow and contrition of that Disciple is described; he
retires apart to bewail his crime and supplicate forgiveness. His prayer and
confession in the temple-porch. The council of the Jews resort to Pilate next
morning and appeal against Christ. He informs them that by the Roman law no
judgment can be given till the accused is confronted with his accusers, and
heard in his defense. Now commences the trial of Christ before Pilate, who,
finding nothing worthy of death in that just person, refers him to Herod as
belonging to his jurisdiction. Herod, after mocking him, arrays him in a
gorgeous robe, and in that apparel sends him back to Pilate. He again appears
in the judgment hall before Pilate, who after many fruitless efforts to save
him, the Jews still urging him by their clamorous importunity to crucify him,
finding no other way to prevent a tumult of the people, after declaring himself
innocent of the blood of Jesus by the ceremony of washing his hands before the
multitude, delivers him to be crucified.

CALVARY. BOOK V. THE CONDEMNATION OF CHRIST.
YE sacred Guides, whose plain unvarnish'd page,
Penned by the hand of Truth, records the scene,
Where CHRIST before the bar of impious men,
Patient of all their scorn, arraigned, betrayed
And of his own abandoned, silent stands,
You I invoke; so from the same pure source,
Whence my faith flows, shall also flow my song,
Not idly babbling, like that shallow rill
Trickling at foot of the Parnassian Mount,
But deep, serene, to hallowed airs attun'd:
Aid me from Heaven, where now before God's throne
In evangelic attributes ye stand
Six-wing'd and thick bespangled over with eyes,
Ranging all points before you and behind,
Seraphic minstrels, chanting day and night
Your ceaseless hallelujahs to the name
Of Him, who was and is and is to come.
Led by your hand with trembling step I press
The sacred ground, which my Redeemer trod,
Now like a lamb to slaughter led, and now
Pendent, Oh horror! on the bloody tree;
And whilst to tell his sacrifice of love,
His soul-dissolving agonies I strive,
My heart melts into sorrows deep as those,
When the sad daughters of Jerusalem
Watered his passage to the cross with tears.
Musing my pious theme, as fits a bard
Far onward in the wint'ry track of age,
I shun the Muses haunts, nor dalliance hold
With fancy by the way, but travel on
My mournful road, a pilgrim gray with years;
One that finds little favor with the world,
Yet thankful for it is least benevolence
And patient of it is taunts; for never yet
Lured I the popu'lar ear with gibing tales,
Or sacrificed the modesty of song,
Harping lewd madrigals at drunken feasts
To make the vulgar sport and win their shout.
Me rather the still voice delights, the praise
Whispered, not published by fame's braying trump:
Be thou my herald, Nature! Let me please
The sacred few, let my remembrance live
Embosom'd by the virtuous and the wise;
Make me, O Heaven! by those, who love thee, loved:
So when the widow's and the children's tears
Shall sprinkle the cold dust, in which I sleep
Pompless and from a scornful world withdrawn,
The laurel, which it is malice rent, shall shoot
So watered into life, and mantling throw
It Is verdant honors over my grassy tomb.
Here in midway of my unfinished course,
Doubtful of future time whilst now I pause
To fetch new breath and trim my waining lamp,
Fountain of Life, if I have still adored
Thy mercy and remembered Thee with awe
Even in my mirth, in the gay prime of youth --
So conscience witnesses, the mental scribe,
That registers my errors, quits me here --
Propitious Power, support me! and if death,
Near at the farthest, meditates the blow
To cut me short in my prevented task,
Spare me a little, and put by the stroke,
Till I recount his overthrow and hail
Thy Son victorious rising from the grave.
Now to that dismal scene return, my thoughts!
Where CHRIST in midst of an irreverent crew,
Ushered by torches through the darkling streets,
And now at summit of the holy Mount
Arrived, before the pontiff's lofty gate,
Waiting the call of impious pride, attends.
The halls and lobbies vomit forth a swarm
Of saucy servitors with idiot stare
Gazing the wondrous Man, and venting loud
Their coward mockeries: He stands unmoved.
Great is the stir within, and on the post
Through all the palace runs the buzzing news
Of this great Prophet's capture, circling round
With ever new enlargement of strange sights
And fearful doings in the garden seen
Of those who took him. CAIAPHAS meanwhile
Summons the Temple-chiefs, elders and scribes,
A hasty Sanhedrim: No longer now
With stately step in measured pace they march;
Huddled together by their fears they flock,
They cluster in a throng, safest so deemed,
And fill the council seats. In speech abrupt
And brief their hierarch the cause expounds
Of their so sudden meeting -- CHRIST is seized,
The Prophet, whom they dreaded, is in hold,
Th'Enchanter, who by league with Beelzebub
Scared them with magic spells, is at their door;
Now is the time to put his art to proof,
Now is the moment to decide if thus
Their unreveal'd Messiah shall appear
After long promise in this abject state
A shackled prisoner, or a conquering king.
Admit him! with faint voice some two or three
Of the least timorous cry. -- Behold, he comes!
The rabble throng rush in, and at the bar
Of the immured divan present him bound
With cords, his raiment soiled with hands profane,
His head uncovered and his sacred locks
By the rude winds and ruder men despoiled
Of their propriety, dishevelled, spread
Like shattered fragments on the branching top
Of piny Lebanon after a storm.
Silence now reigned, the roar of tongues was hushed,
And expectation with suspended breath
Sat watchful when some sign or word of power
Should in a miracle break forth upon them.
None such that patient Sufferer vouchsafed,
Nor menace nor complaint his eye bespake,
But meek serene composure. Noting this,
As cowards out of danger loudest vaunt,
The council now took heart: Then soon were heard
The lying tongues of witnesses suborned
Various and loud; but these no order kept;
Falsehood with falsehood clash'd, and each to each
Irreconcilable, as all to truth:
Shame held the council mute, for vilest hearts,
Cloak'd in the robes of judgment, will affect
Some outward show of what they ought to be,
Then most malicious when most seeming just.
Confusion now ensued and perjury
In it is own labyrinth had lost itself,
When some of graver note within the pale
Of justice seated, but far thence removed
In conscience and in heart, started new charge,
Averring they had heard the Prisoner say --
I will destroy this temple made with hands,
And within three days will another build
Made without hands. -- The charge was gravely urged,
And, colored to the semblance of a plot,
Breathed sacrilegious menace to God's house,
Fit matter for descant pontifical:
When CAIAPHAS, as foremost in degree
So first to sound forth danger and affix
Solemnity to malice, from his state
With magisterial dignity arose,
And sternly fixing on the face divine
His eye inquisitorial, thus began.
Hear'st thou what these allege? The words in charge
Stand witnessed by these present: Face to face
The accusers they and thou the accused meet:
Justice is open. What is thy defense?
Answerest thou nothing? -- Nothing answered he,
But as a lamb before it is shearers mute
He opened not his mouth; the mystery couched
Under those words, prophetic of his death
And following resurrection, to expound
To their perverted minds beseem'd not him,
Searcher of hearts and Savior of mankind:
Silent not pertinacious he endured
Their scorn, nor did his meek demeanor show
More than the dignity of conscious truth,
Which knows itself prejudged and scorns a plea.
But CAIAPHAS, who brook'd not this repulse,
And still occasion sought from his own lips
By subtlety to' ensnare him, thus re-urg'd
Question with solemn adjuration backed.
Hear me, thou man accused, and answer make
I do adjure thee by the living God
To what I now demand. Art thou the CHRIST,
The very CHRIST, Son of the eternal God,
Or art thou not? Resolve us who thou art!
Then JESUS by this solemn adjuration urged,
Lifting his eyes to heaven in mute appeal,
Whilst all his Father's virtue in his face
Effulgent beamed, these glorious words pronounced;
Hear them, O heaven, and Oh! record them, earth,
Write them, ye mortals, on your hearts -- I am,
I am the CHRIST; all that you ask I am;
And ye shall see me coming in the clouds
Of heaven, enthroned at the right hand of Power.
As when on rapine bent a savage horde
Arab or Indian, in some sandy dell
Or by the sedgy lake in ambush lodged,
Upon the watchword by their leader given
Leap from their treacherous lair with sudden yell
And bloody weapons waving to surprise
And overpower the unguarded traveller,
Fatally trapp'd into their murderous snare;
So at the signal of their priestly chief
Uprose the dire divan with rushing sound,
Like roar of distant waters. Terror-struck,
Frantic as Bromius, with furious hands
The enthusiastic hierarch seized his robes,
And into tatters like a cancelled scroll
Tore them, exclaiming vehement and loud
That all might hear -- What need of further proof?
Ye' have heard his blasphemy. How think ye, sirs?
What may such crime deserve? -- The infuriate priests
Seized by like phrensy with one voice pronounce --
Death be his sentence! -- Death through all the hall
Rebounding echoes back the accursed decree.
Horrible sentence! Murder hatched in hell;
Libation for the fiends! Demons, on you
And on your generations to all time
His righteous blood shall rest. Now uproar wild
And horrid din succeeds: The scoffing crowd
Rush to the bar, so privileged, and there
With scurril taunts and blasphemies revile
The patient Son of God. Oh thought of horror!
The Savior of mankind reviled by man,
The Just by the unjust! Others more profane
Vent their vile rheum upon his sacred face,
Or smite him with their palms, then gibing cry --
Tell us who smote thee; prophesy, thou CHRIST!
Monsters, that CHRIST has prophesied, your doom
Already by that Prophet is pronounced,
The lips you strike have uttered it: Behold!
Jerusalem is fallen, her towers are dust,
Your city smokes in ruin: Lo! what piles
Of mangled carcases; what horrid scenes
Of violated matrons: Hark! what screams
Of infants butchered in their mothers arms;
And look! your temple blazes to the sky;
It Is beams of cedar overlaid with gold,
It Is fretted roof with carvings rich embossed,
And all it is glorious splendour feeds the flames
Insatiate; mark how high their serpent spires
Hissing ascend: God fans them in his ire:
Thither the wild beasts of the desert hie,
There carrion owls by midnight haunt, there dwells
The dragon, and the satyrs dance: It Is done!
That prophecy is sealed. There yet remains
An awful consummation unreveal'd,
Till God shall gather up your scattered race
Still vagrant over the inhospitable earth.
Ah! wretched people, broken and dispersed,
Did ye preserve the oracles of God
But to convict your own obduracy?
Sad nation, on whose neck the iron yoke
Of persecution hard, too hard, has lain,
And yet lies heavy, will ye not accept
A High Priest, holy, harmless, undefiled,
From sinners separate and exalted high
Above the heavens? And do ye not perceive
The word of JESUS in yourselves fulfilled?
Rue then the prophecy, which you provoked,
Of faithless fathers ye still faithless sons!
Whilst shuddering I recount the impious taunts
Of that blaspheming rout: But neither taunts
Nor violence could shake the Savior's peace;
He in his own pure spi'rit collected stood,
Nor of their base revilings took account.
'Twas now that CHRIST, knowing himself denied
Three times of PETER, turned and looked upon him.
He from the garden, where his Lord was seized,
Following at distance JUDAS and his band,
Had kept his eye upon their moving fires,
And up the sacred mount pursued their track,
Till at the palace-door he stood and sought
Admission with the crowd; when there behold!
A damsel at the portal scans him over
With scrutinizing eye and strait exclaims --
Thou too were in this Galilean's train;
Thou art of JESUS. -- Sudden to his heart
The coward tremor runs and there suggests
The fear-conceived lie; before them all
With confidence to falsehood ill applied --
I know not what thou say -- he strait avers,
And to the porch goes forth: There in his ear
The cock his first shrill warning gives and sings
The knell of constancy's predicted breach,
Of constancy, alas! too strongly vouched
By him in rash and overweening zeal,
Boasting like martyrdom with CHRIST himself,
Sole sacrifice appointed for mankind.
But he, though of presumption warned, by fear
Still haunted and the guilty dread of death,
Strait to a second questioner replies --
I do not know the man -- and to engage
Belief, binds down the falsehood with an oath.
Fatal appeal to Heaven! insult to God
And His all-righteous ears! Is this the man,
Who with such glowing ardor self-assur'd --
Though all shall be offended, I will not --
Proudly averred, and for that pride reproved --
Though I should die with thee, dauntless rejoined,
Yet will I not deny thee --? Man, weak man,
Pride was not made for thee. If PETER fell
Presuming, who shall say, Behold! I stand
In my own strength nor ask support of God?
And now, as if devoted to his shame,
Curious to pry, yet fearful to be seen,
He mixes with the throng that crowd the hall;
And there once more is challenged for his speech,
As savo'ring of the Galilean phrase;
Then with reiterated oaths abjures
His Master the third time; when hark! again
The cock's loud signal echoes back the lie
In his convicted ear; the prophet bird
Strains his recording throat, and up to heaven
Trumpets the trebled perjury and claps
His wings in triumph over presumption's fall.
Oh! fallen how low, is this thy promised faith,
Favored of CHRIST so highly? Know thou not,
Disciple, thine own Lord? or know him only
In safety, in prosperity, in power,
For thine own selfish ends, a summer guest,
Prone to desert him in the wint'ry hour
Of tribulation, poverty and woe?
Is thy frail memory of that slippery stuff,
That a friend's sorrow washes out all trace
Of a friend's features? Look upon his eyes!
Behold, they turn on thee: Them do thou know?
Their language can thou read and from them draw
The conscious reminiscence thou disown'st?
Mark, is their sweetness lost? Ah! no; they beam
Celestial grace, a sanctity of soul
So melting soft with pity, such a gleam
Of love divine attemp'ring mild reproof,
Where is the man, that to obtain that eye
Of mercy on his sins would not forego
Life's dearest comforts to embrace such hope?
O death, death! where would be thy sting, or where
These awful tremblings, which thy coming stirs
In my too conscious breast, might I aspire
To hope my Judge would greet me with that look?
Vaunt not yourselves, ye scorners, nor exult
In this recital of a good man's fall,
Faithful historian of his own offense:
But rather let it physic your proud spleen
To mark how mean, prevaricating, false
And despicable a vainglorious man.
PETER's denial, David's heinous sin,
And all the guilty lapses of man's heart,
Though summed together into one account,
Each spot and blemish malice can search out
To tarnish the fair luster of a name,
Stand but as lessons of humility,
Warnings of frailty to o'er-weening man;
And if our mournful page has now set forth
The fall of virtue, let it next record
It Is glorious resurrection: We have shown
The' offender in his shame, what now remains
But to display the penitent? Behold!
Abashed he stands bathed in remorseful tears:
One glance from his beloved Master's eye,
Like Nathan's parable, has roused from sleep
His drowsy conscience. Mark, where he retires
To weep in solitude and purge his heart
By sorrowful repentance of it is guilt.
O PETER, could my verse fit offering make,
That verse should be bestowed upon thy tears.
Now the assembled elders and their chief,
After short consultation had, resolve
With the next dawn of morning to arraign
Their Prisoner at the praetorian bar
Of PILATE, procurator for the state
Imperial of Rome and Caesar; he
Held judgment sovereign of life and death
In tributary Jewry, judge corrupt,
And like Rome's venal emissaries prone
To every sordid purpose; trained in blood
And for tribunal bloody therefore fit.
Meanwhile forth issuing from the fatal hall,
Scene of his shame, the sad Disciple took
His pensive way across the temple-court
Silent and solitary, seeking where
To' unbosom his full sorrows and give up
His soul to prayer, and pardon seek of God
For his revolt. Pale through night's curtain gleam'd
By fits the lunar intermittent ray,
That quivering served to light his lonely steps
To the fair gate called Beautiful, whose porch
High over-arch'd, on writhed columns propp'd
Of spiral brass convolv'd, was for it is shade
Of CHRIST and his Disciples much in quest.
Hither he came, and falling on his knees,
Like the' humble publican smote on his breast,
And this confession self-accusing made.
Here let me fall and in repentant tears
Weep out my soul upon these piti'less stones,
Made sacred by His steps, whose awful name
Thrice blasphemed, thrice abjured, I dare not speak,
Though in my supplication. Can I say,
Spare me, O God of mercy? Can I ask
Pardon of God, unpardoned of myself?
Oh! wretched recreant creature as I am,
What shall redeem me from this misery,
And reconcile my conscience to itself,
A perjured conscience? Never more can peace
Dwell in this bosom; never can my soul
Ascend out of the dust, or lift a thought
In hope toward heaven. With JUDAS let me dwell,
Colleague in treason; with his sin my sin
In the' execration of all time be linked.
Or shall I venture to look up and say,
O God, behold a wretch, who dares not sue
For mercy but for mitigated wrath,
For punishment proportioned to my bearing,
Protracted, not too sudden, lest it take
My senses from me and with them all power
Of meditation, penance and atonement?
Spare me a little to abhor myself;
And if the arrow, which my conscience drives
Into this guilty heart, draws not enough
Of it is vile blood to purify what is left,
Let the strong hand of justice force it home
And finish me at once. Was I not warned
Of my presumption, and a signal set
To number my denials, when I swore
Never to swerve but follow him to death?
Mine, like ISCARIOT's, was predicted sin:
I spared not him, I called his wilful guilt,
Obstinate malice; and can I now urge
Necessity my plea? All things are known
To CHRIST; the evil motions of my will
He saw, not overruled: I might have prayed
For grace, support, prevention; I prayed not,
But heedless of the prophecy and blind.
Rushed into sin prepense, self-willed, self-lost.
What fascination seized me to draw forth
The sword in rash defense of Him, whose word
Legions of Angels could have called from heaven?
And what prevaricating demon breathed
The lie into my lips, when the same night,
Nay, the same hour, that saw me prompt to' oppose
My life to danger, saw me meanly shrink
From what I courted, and behind a lie
Three times repeated like a coward sculk?
And did I not know CHRIST whom I denied?
Did I not know the Master whom I served,
Who called me to him, poured into my heart
His heavenly doctrines, raised my lowly thoughts
From the mean drudgery of a fisher's trade,
And taught me in the energy of faith
To walk upon that sea, in which ere-while
I dragged the net and toiled for daily bread?
O memory, once my glory, now my curse,
To what sad purpose do I call thee home,
Absent in danger, present in despair?
Is there a wonder done of CHRIST on earth
I have not witnessed? Did I not behold
Dead Lazarus revive at his command?
What shall I say to him, whom I saw die,
When living he arraigns me face to face?
What answer make to those, whom I have served
From one small wallet with the bread of thousands?
The very blind, ere they received their sight,
Saw more than I, and hailed him LORD and CHRIST.
Who shall believe when I renounce belief?
The very dev'ils own Him whom I denied.
Can I call these accursed, whose impious cry
Dooms him to death; who smite him with their palms
Blaspheming? Harder than their hands my heart.
Wretch, 'twas my false tongue trained them on to murder;
On me, me only all their sin rebounds:
I stand condemned, they free. Can I forget
How often my lips confessed him Son of God?
Perish that tongue, which could revoke it is faith,
Disown confession and belie my heart.
Denied of me on earth, when in the clouds
Of heaven he comes at the right hand of Power,
And sends his Angels with the trumpet's sound
To gather his elect from the four winds,
When, as a shepherd culling out his flock,
To separate all nations and divide
The good from evil he proceeds, Ah! then,
Then will he not retort the fatal words
First used of me, I know thee not! Depart,
Thou wicked servant, into outer darkness,
There weep and gnash thy teeth in fires prepared
For SATAN and his outcast crew accursed?
Thus he all night with deep remorse overwhelmed,
Mournfully kneeling at God's temple-gate,
Bewailed his crime and supplication made
For pardon; and let aftertimes attest
How full a portion of God's spi'rit abode
In this blessed Penitent, when with the sound
Of rushing mighty winds it was poured down
On him and on his fellows, thence installed
Apostles, and with gifted tongues inspired
To speak all languages and preach the Word
Of CHRIST throughout the whole converted world.
Here in this very spot, where now he kneels
Repentant, filled ere long with power divine,
He bade the cripple in the name of CHRIST
Rise up and walk: He at the word in sight
Of all the people rose and stood and walked
And in the temple gave loud praise to God.
Then let not his offense, pardoned of God,
By man but for example's sake be named,
And once more, hail, thou renovated Saint!
Made brighter by repentance: Enter thou
Into thy Master's joy once more; resume
Thine apostolic primacy, and feed,
Shepherd of CHRIST deputed, feed his flock.
Nor shall thy faith once faulter, nor thy zeal
Shrink from the test of martyrdom, reserved
To glorify thy Master on the cross.
Now morning from her cloudy barrier forth
Advancing crimsoned all the flecker'd East,
As blushing to lead on the guilty day.
With the first dawn the wakeful elders meet,
Short council hold, for little time sufficed
To take their voices, whose relentless minds
In the same bloody league were banded all;
And now unanimous with their high priest
In stately grave procession forth they march
To find their heathen judge, and at his bar
Arraign the Holy One. -- But check, my heart,
Thine indignation; let the verse proceed! --
Him in his seat of judgment high enthroned,
With axes and with lictors round embay'd
In martial state, with reverence they salute,
And lowly stoop their tributary heads
To his vicegerent majesty: With smile
Of condescending favor he accepts
Their abject greeting, and to his right hand
Their chief advances; others in their ranks
And orders he disposes; then with feigned
Solicitude, as if to seek the cause
Of this concerted meeting, he begins.
What cause so weighty brings JEHOVAH's priest
With these wise elders and time-honor'd scribes
Thus early to seek justice at my bar?
Appeal so reverend, with such leader graced
And by such followers witnessed, well demands
Of Caesar's servant his most equal ear.
Whereto the' high priest, second to none in craft,
With solemn accent and demeanor grave
Masking his base collusion, thus replies.
When he, whose hand the sword of justice sways,
Her balance also holds in equal poise
Over this realm provincial, we have cause
To thank the master of our liberties,
Who by such delegation of his power
Makes light that yoke, which else would gall our necks,
Though Caesar lays it on us: Then let praise
Be given to Caesar for the love we bear
To PONTIUS PILATE. Have I leave to say,
That we your servants, a peculiar race,
Pay worship to one God and hold at heart
As sacred that commandment handed down
From our forefathers, which for ever makes
His undivided Unity the creed
Of all our nation; and whoever blasphemes
His name and controverts our holy faith,
Dies by our law? This sentence we have passed,
But execution staid, so bound in duty,
Upon a certain Nazarite, by name
JESUS, obscure of birth, but of our peace
No slight disturber; for the common herd,
A monster as you know with many heads,
And every head with twice as many ears
Itching for novelties, have raised this man
To dangerous eminence; and for he cheats
Their gross credulity with juggling sleights,
Which they call miracles, have blown his pride
To such a monstrous bulk, he now scales heaven,
There seats himself -- Oh! where shall I find words
To speak his blasphemy? -- at God's right hand,
His Son, his equal, sharer of his throne,
Judge of the world, if this be not a crime
For death to expiate we are slaves indeed,
And every statute, ordinance and law
Rome leaves inviolate, JESUS shall break
Unpunished: Nor is this, dread sir, the whole
Of his presumption; mark, I pray, the height
To which his phrensy rages, mark his threat!
He will put down this temple in three days
And in like time with hands invisible
Erect another. -- Patron of our laws,
Fountain of justice! ought this man to live?
Such madness breathed into our peoples minds
Will spur them to the deed, break every band
That ties them down to order, and turn loose
Their fury not on us alone but Rome,
Not on our temple only but perhaps
On this tribunal, which Heaven guard! And now
Take the whole matter of our charge at once:
This JESUS has pronounced himself a king,
Our king, your master's rival: You best know
If your great empe'ror abdicates his right
To our allegiance, which we fain would hold,
Where we have vowed it, to imperial Caesar,
Not to this mean mechanic, Joseph's son.
This is our plea, O PONTIUS, why we claim
Justice against the prisoner, who now waits
Your sentence under guard and bound, as fits
Delinquent so atrocious: I have said.
To him the Roman -- Be it known to all,
The sentence, which you urge against the life
Of your now absent prisoner, cannot pass
By practice of our law, till face to face
With his accusers he shall stand at bar,
And license have to answer for himself
Touching the crime in charge; therefore these words,
Which you have largely spent, are spent in air,
Else might the ear of justice be forestalled
By the empleader's charge, and so perchance
Let fall the axe upon the guiltless head.
Much knowledge of your laws I cannot boast,
Nor with these learned scribes hold argument;
For so much therefore as to them pertains
I on the part of Caesar am no judge;
His tributes, his supremacy and rights
Disputed or opposed I shall uphold
Against all offenders. Let the accused appear!
This said, behold the blessed Son of God
Dragged to a pagan bar! There whilst he stood
A spectacle of pity, patient, meek,
Submitted to his fate, PILATE, who knew
Him innocent and his accusers false,
Envious and cruel, eyed him over and over,
And as he pondered in his mind how base
The sentence he was now required to give,
Some sparks of Roman virtue, not quite dead
Though faintly felt in his degene'rate breast,
Revolted from the deed: Soft was the touch,
Though ineffectual, which sweet pity gave
To his stern heart: He wished, yet knew not how,
To' unfold the gates of mercy, and through them
Let pass the rescued Innocent to life;
The son of Epicurus could no more.
Upon the Sufferer's brow serene he saw
Where innocence and sanctity enthroned
Sat visible and claimed his just award:
He turned him to the accusers and beheld
Such malice, as brought up to view a groupe
Of his own furies from their fabled hell;
Then with a frown he cries -- What law is yours,
Which makes this man a culprit ere he is tried?
Unmanacle his limbs! A Roman judge
Hears no man plead in shackles; he, who speaks
In life's defense has call for every aid
That Nature can bestow, free use of limbs,
Action and utterance to grace his cause,
And hold him up against the world's contempt:
I will not hear a man that pleads in bonds.
Cut those vile cords asunder: Set him loose!
And now our blessed Lord, his arms released
From the harsh thongs, which the malignant Jews
Had bound about them, 'gan to re-compose
His decent vesture and with calm survey
To note his persecutors, those dire priests
And cruel hypocrites that bay'd him round.
In every breast transparent to his eye
Malice and craft and envy he discerned:
In PILATE's face the shifting hues bespoke
Internal strife of passions all in arms,
Combat 'twixt good and evil: In his hand
He held a scroll, which with intentive eye
And thoughtful brow deep pondering he perused:
The writing well he knew, but the contents,
Thus worded, much perplexed his wavering thoughts.
"O Pilate, if thy wife was ever held
"In honor, love or trust, I do adjure thee
"This once take warning from her voice inspired
"To snatch thee from destruction. Oh! withhold
"Thine hand from that just person, harm not him,
"That holy JESUS, who now stands before thee;
"Touch not his sacred life, or on thine head
"A fearful judgment thou shall else pull down:
"A mighty Power protects him, what I know not,
"But mightier sure than all the Gods of Rome;
"For I have seen his glory in a dream,
"And dreams descend from heaven. Pilate, beware!"
Such was the warning scroll he now perused,
Even on the judgment seat, by timely hand
Sent for his rescue: Happy! had he turned
His heart so warned to justice, and obeyed
The visitation of the spi'rit vouchsafed:
But he, like Caesar, deemed his manhood pledged
To make slight 'count of a weak woman's dream:
Yet much confused, uncertain and perplexed
He looked around, and saw all eyes upon him:
The Jews impatient, JESUS at the bar
Prepared for trial: What shall he resolve?
Break up the court and judgment put aside
For a mere vapor, for no better plea
Than to indulge a woman's fond caprice,
And bid the law stand still and wait the time
" Till PILATE's wife shall meet with better dreams?" --
Such scorn he dared not to provoke, and now
Loud murmurs filled his ear: Compelled to rise,
Though uncollected and in mind disturbed,
He thus addressed the LORD. -- Art thou a king,
And of this nation, who accuse thee to me,
King of the Jews? -- Thou say it, JESUS cried:
But say thou of thyself this thing, or taught
Of others art thou prompted so to speak? --
Am I a Jew? the fault'ring judge replied;
Not I, but these, who if thou were a king
Were thine own subjects, elders, priests and scribes,
These have accused thee. Not of them am I;
Nor in this business covet further share,
Than on the part of justice to demand,
What have thou done? How answer'st thou their charge?
Of this world were my kingdom, said our LORD,
My servants would defend their King, and fight
To save me from my' oppressors: But I reign
Not on this earth, nor is my power from hence.
Art thou a king then? -- interposed the judge: --
Thou say, cried JESUS, that I am a king;
And truly to this purpose was I born,
And for this cause came I into the world,
That I should witness bear unto the Truth;
And all, that to the Truth belong, hear me. --
What is the Truth? said PILATE, but his voice
Now falter'd and his thoughts unsettled, wild
And driven at random like a wreck, could grasp
No helm of reason; only this he knew
There was no fault before him: This aloud
To all he published and pronounced him clear.
Whereat with rage and disappointment stung,
Furious as wolves defrauded of their prey,
Uprose the priests appellant, and afresh
Urge over and over their aggravating charge,
Forging new falsehoods and re-forging old:
The Preacher of forbearance, peace and love
Perverter of the nation now they call,
Fomenter of sedition, spreading wide
From Galilee, the cradle of his birth,
Throughout all Jewry to the capital;
Where now assuming to himself the name,
Prerogative and state of King and CHRIST,
He stirs up the people to revolt,
Forbidding them to pay their rightful dues
Of tribute to Rome's emperor, himself
Exalting above Caesar. This and more
In the like strain of virulence, with lips
In aspic venom steeped they now depose;
Nor had they brought their malice to a pause,
When PILATE, hoping he had now found plea
To shift the dreaded sentence from himself,
Thus interposing checked their clamorous spleen.
Break off, and let your tongues take rest awhile:
It is not at this bar you must emplead
This man, a Galilean as it seems;
Whom, being such, it is not mine to hear
But HEROD's: Let his special tetrarch judge
'Twixt him and you: Thither remit your suit.
This said, he rose preventing all reply,
Whilst they, though by procrastination galled,
Yet of their tetrarch confident, submit:
But nor with HEROD could their malice speed
To it is main purpose: Little care had he
For all their priestly clamor; in his thoughts
Religion had no interest, truth no weight:
For prophets and for prophecies no ear
Had he, alike regardless how CHRIST preached,
Or they complained; yet much he wished to see
Some splendid miracle of him performed,
Something to strike his senses with surprise
And satisfy a wanton curiosity,
Made eager by the fame of those great works,
Whereof he much had heard and nothing seen.
But when our LORD to all his questions mute
Nor word nor sign vouchsafed, to wrath impelled,
What by enticements he had failed to gain
By taunts he hoped to' extort; and now his spleen
To impious scorn and mockery gave the rein:
Forthwith his Prisoner in a gorgeous robe
Apparel'd as a king, to all his court
Held up for sport and laughter, he exposed.
Loud was the roar of blasphemy the whilst,
And wild the revels of the scoffing throng
As the lewd orgies of the frantic god,
Or clamor of that sacrilegious rout,
When their mad rage the Thracian minstrel tore,
Whose wonder-working harp could charm the ear
Of hell and call dead nature into life.
The priests looked on and grinn'd malicious joy;
Yet would not HEROD execution doom;
Or willing to appease the jealousy
Of PILATE, or content to mark his scorn
Of JESUS by this arrogant display
Of mercy, as not dreading whom he spared.
Now once again at PILATE's bar he stands,
Not as before like malefactor tied
And round begirt with cords, but overlaid
With a rich load of sumptuous mockery;
A lamb compelled to carry the proud spoils
And guilty trappings of the ty'rannous wolf.
Again the judge with slow unwilling step
To his tribunal mounts and thus he speaks.
You still persist to bring this man to me
As a perverter of your nation's faith
And loyalty: Your witnesses I Have heard,
Pondered their depositions and throughout
Examined every tittle of your charge:
Him too I Have questioned in the ears of all
Here present, and no shadow of offense
Can I discern to warrant your appeal
For execution, and pass judgment on him:
No, nor yet HEROD, for to him I sent
You and your prisoner, and behold him freed,
Nothing is done unto him worthy death:
I will chastise him therefore and release;
Yet this chastisement rather to allay
Your anger, than so merited of him,
I shall inflict. Remember this your feast
Has the long plea of custom to be marked
With pardon and forbearance: To reprieve
One culprit from his sentence I am bound
No less by inclination than by rule
And usage immemorial: Make your choice!
But let it fall on innocence not guilt.
Instant all voices echoed forth a cry --
Hence with this man! away with him to death!
Give us the murderer, set Barabbas free:
Let JESUS perish! -- Wherefore; for what crime?
PILATE exclaimed: What evil has he done?
No cause of death in JESUS can I find,
Be witness for me, justice, none in him;
But for that wretch, on whom ye would bestow
Pardon misplaced, so various are his crimes,
So black their quality, ye cannot name
A death more terrible than he deserves.
Take of the guiltless blood what stripes can draw
To satisfy your longing, but forbear
To take the life, if not for pity's sake,
In honor of yourselves, that ye may say,
There was one prophet, whom ye did not kill.
Loud as the winds that lash the raging seas
And all as deaf, redoubling now the roar,
The infuriate Jews rend their blaspheming throats,
Howling for blood; 'till deafen'd with the din
Of, Crucify him! crucify him! dreadful cry,
PILATE, who 'twixt their tumult and the death
Of that just Person saw no middle course,
By which to escape, one solemn act prepared,
By expiatory washing of his hands
In presence of the multitude, to purge
His soul, and thereof God alone is judge,
From the pure blood of that devoted Lamb.
Behold! he cries, I pour this water forth,
And therein make ablution of my soul
From all participation in your crime,
By washing of my hands from every stain
Of this inhuman sacrifice, each spot
And sprinkling of this guiltless Victim's blood.
Rest on your heads the murder! I am clean.
This said, he turned and fixed a pitying look
Upon the LORD; then sighed and gave the word:
Eager as hounds, when slipped upon their prey,
In rush the throng, and soon the hissing scourge
Whirled with impetuous swing aloud resounds
Gashing that sacred flesh, whose bleeding stripes
Healed our sin-wounded souls; upon his brow
A thorny crown they fix, whose tortu'ring spikes,
Thrust rudely in by sacrilegious hands,
Furrow his temples and with crimson streams
Cover his face divine: Him thus abused,
Mangled with stripes and all over bathed in blood,
In purple robe they scornfully array
And drag to public view. -- Behold the man! --
PILATE proclaimed with horror in his voice
And out-stretch'd arm, that pointed to a sight,
Which had to pity moved their steely hearts,
Had they not been of metal forged by fiends
And tempered in the sternest fires of hell.
Dry-ey'd, as rock of adamant unmoved,
Obdurate to his sorrows they looked on,
Nor from their crucifying clamor ceased,
Till PILATE, now all hope for JESUS lost,
Yielding to their tumultuous fury, cried.
Take him and do your bloody work yourselves:
Impose it not on me; I find no cause
Of death, no fault in JESUS. Take ye him
And crucify him! Of his guiltless blood
Lo! I am innocent; see ye to that!
On us and on our children be his blood! --
Then answered all the Jews. Tremendous words,
Tremendously fulfilled! And now afresh
They clamor for the cross; when thus the judge --
Would you that I should crucify your king? --
We have no king but Caesar, they rejoin,
Nor art thou Caesar's friend to spare this man. --
'Twas past; to that dread name the Roman bowed
Obedient, and from his sad heart sighed forth
The extorted doom -- Death to the LORD OF LIFE!
END OF THE FIFTH BOOK.
CALVARY; OR THE DEATH OF CHRIST.

BOOK VI.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE SIXTH BOOK.
Judas Iscariot seized with remorse returns the thirty pieces of silver to the
priests and departs: Mammon reassumes the habit of a Levite, and meeting Judas
after he had returned the money to the priests, instigates him to destroy
himself. That evil spirit now takes wing and repairs to the wilderness,
convenes the demons from all parts of Palestine, and informing them of Satan's
expulsion from earth, warns them by his command to betake themselves to flight
before the hour of Christ's crucifixion: This is no sooner announced than the
whole infernal host breaks up in disorder and disperses to various parts of the
world therein described. -- The subject of the Crucifixion is now brought
forward: The procession sets out for Mount Calvary; Christ bearing his cross is
bewailed by the spectators as he passes: He is seen by Gabriel and the angels
with him from the mount, on which they were stationed: He addresses himself to
the daughters of Jerusalem: The executioners nail his hands and feet to the
cross; the priests revile him and call upon him to come down; one of the
malefactors crucified with him casts the same in his teeth; he is reproved by
the other, whose penitence is rewarded by the promise of immediate salvation
and glory: Christ from the cross recommends his mother to John the beloved
disciple: Christ dies: The sun is darkened, the earth quakes, the rocks are
rent, and the bodies of the saints and prophets are raised from the dead and
appear upon earth: The priests and elders, alarmed by these prodigies, resort
to Pilate and demand a guard of Romans to defend the sepulcher, lest the
disciples should take away the body of Christ and pretend that he was risen:
Pilate replies, that they have a watch; bids them see to it themselves and
dismisses them.

CALVARY. BOOK VI. THE CRUCIFIXION.
"ON us and on our children be his blood!" --
Such was your imprecation, O ye Jews,
When in your sight the world's Redeemer stood
Gash'd over with wounds, and emptying every vein
For man's redemption; and behold! it flows,
It whelms upon you in a flood-gate tide;
Steeped to the lips ye are in all the blood
Of all the righteous shed upon the earth,
From blood of righteous Abel to the blood
Of Zechariah, whom your fathers stoned
Betwixt the altar and the house of God.
Ye have enough; the mark is on your race;
Ye have drawn down the judgment ye provoked,
It rests upon you: Yet for you no rest,
No station, no abiding-place is found;
Strangers and weary wand'rers upon earth,
If in the dust of your Jerusalem
With foot proscribed ye dare to tread, ye die;
A savage race usurps your sacred mount,
And Jordan echoes an unhallowed name;
Should ye but stop to shed a filial tear
Upon the soil where your forefathers sleep,
Woe to the circumcised that so is found!
Oh! slow of heart, when will ye understand,
That thus afflicted, scattered and dispersed
Through every clime and kingdom of the world
Ye are sent forth to publish, as ye pass,
How truly CHRIST predicted of your fate;
And though your lips deny, your sufferings prove
That prophet JESUS, whom your fathers slew,
Was Savior, Christ, Messiah, Son of God.
Amidst the throng that filled the judgment-hall
Stood JUDAS; he upon the watch to' avoid
The Master's eye with caution took his post;
Yet was his ear to all that JESUS spoke
Still present, and, though few the words, yet strong
And potent of those few the' impressive truth.
There was a magic sweetness in his voice,
A note that seemed to shiver every nerve
Entwined about his heart, though now corrupt,
Debased and hardened. Ill could he abide,
Murderer although he were, the dying tones
Of him, whom he had murdered: 'Twas the voice
As of a spirit in the air by night
Heard in the meditation of some crime,
Or sleep-created in the troubled ear
Of conscience, crying out, Beware! It smote
Upon the soul, for it was CHRIST who spoke,
Well then might JUDAS tremble; 'twas the traitor
Listening the plea of innocence betrayed,
Well might that plea awaken his remorse.
When the perverting witnesses deposed
To crimes, of which he knew his Master free,
The refutation quiver'd on his lips,
And hard he struggled to bring forth the words,
Yet could not, tongue-ty'd with despair and shame.
But if his hearing so alarmed his heart,
What were his feelings, when at times his eye
Glanced on the sacred person of his Lord,
Bound like a felon, his defenseless hands
In manacles confined behind his back,
His cheeks with blows sufflated, and his face,
Oh, piteous! with blaspheming slaver stained;
Then stripped, transformed, in purple stole arrayed,
Saluted with the insolent All-hail,
King of the Jews! a spectacle of sport
And merriment to all the scoffing crowd?
Could heart of man bear this, who had beheld
His miracles, his mercies; proved his love,
His patience, his forbearance; shared his cares,
His labors and his watchings; heard his voice,
When tempest-tost, rebuke the elements,
Though silent now amidst the roar of tongues?
'Twas all that priestly malice could inflict,
But more than MAMMON's convert could support.
Yet worse had these tormentors in reserve
To agonize his soul, another scene
To shift new horrors on that bloody stage:
The torturing scourge now sounded in his ears,
The mangled flesh flew off in tattered stripes,
The crimson stream ran down, the pavement drank
Libation of his immolated blood:
The hall rebellow'd with the echoing cry
Of monsters, who applauded every stroke,
Wolves, vultures, Oh, for words to speak them worse!
Men turned to demons. Traitor though he were,
Son of perdition, this was all too much.
Take hence, he cried, take back your bribe accursed,
Damned price of damning deed! Tell over your coin;
Count out your thirty pieces, for each piece
Is thirty thousand daggers to my heart:
Burdened too much already with my sins,
I should but into worse damnation sink
Under this mercenary load oppressed.
I have betrayed the innocent; too late
For pardon, I am past redemption lost;
Ye may redeem the time, if ye recall
Your fatal condemnation and atone
To that just person ye have doomed to death;
If not, ye crucify the Lord of Life.
This said, he threw the thirty pieces down
And strait departed; they to his retort
Short answer made remorseless and malign.
And now disburthen'd of his filthy bribe,
It seemed as though his conscience would permit
A momentary pause for one short gleam
Of hope to visit his benighted soul:
'Twas something like atonement, 'twas one step
Turned backward from the precipice of sin
And pointed toward repentance; 'twas the last
Faint effort that reluctant nature made
To struggle against self-murder; but how vain!
For MAMMON, once the tyrant of man's heart,
Ill brooks expulsion thence, from youth to age,
From age to life's extremest hour he holds
Absolute empire, nor does hell contain
Spirit so jealous of usurped command.
He in the bosoms of those impious priests
Held high pre-eminence, and them amidst,
Himself unseen, had noted all that passed;
And much indignant to be now abjured
Of that compunctious traitor, swift as thought,
Such was his power of motion, took the form
And habit of that Levite first assumed,
And him close following to the outward hall,
There with these taunting words assailed his ear.
A losing game, friend JUDAS, thou have played
To set thy soul upon a desperate cast,
And after pay the stake on either side.
What folly is it to be knave by halves!
Who would strike virtue in the face, and then
Ask pardon for the blow; fall off from truth,
Enlist with falsehood and take pay for treason,
Then by a paltry plea of restitution
Think to compound one trespass by another,
Desertion by desertion? Get thee hence,
Thou shame to manhood! wring out the sad dregs
Of thy detested life in hopeless tears,
For thou have thrown away both worlds at once;
All gain in this, all glory in the next.
And what art thou, cried JUDAS, so to gall
A wounded spirit, wounded by thy arts,
Tempter accursed? Human thou can not be,
Else thou would find some pity in thy heart
For wretch like me. Who but thyself seduced
My loyalty from CHRIST? Who sapp'd my faith?
Who fixed this adder to my breast but thou?
Thou, demon as thou art, have hurled me down
From my high hope to fathomless abyss
Of misery and despair, from heaven to hell.
Rail not on me, quoth MAMMON, but thyself
And thine own folly; there the charge were just.
Did thou not sell thy Master for a bribe?
My part was faithfully performed; the price
Conditioned for was paid. What would thou more?
I needed treason, and I sought out thee
As fittest for my purpose: Envious, proud,
Lustful of pelf, a villain ready-made
And ripe for mischief, such I marked thee down;
Nay, and yet better; for I thought thee whole
And perfect villain with no rotten part
Of penitence to mar thee; but, behold,
Thou have deceived me vilely, and have got
A blinking vice about thee, a perverse
And retrograde depravity of soul,
That makes thee hateful to my sight: Begone!
That thou art wicked put not me to blame;
Had thou been constant I had made thee rich,
And riches would have saved thee from contempt;
Now thou art poor and loathsome. Hence; avaunt!
One remedy I Will give thee for despair,
This cord, a remnant of thy Master's bonds;
A legacy most opportunely left
To heal thy cares and recompense thy love:
Take, and apply it to it is proper use;
It tied his limbs: Let it encase thy throat.
He said, and stooping, from the pavement took
The cord there left, and hurling it with scorn
To the desponding traitor disappeared:
Nor did that wretch the fatal gift reject,
But eager seized the instrument of death,
And soon within a darksome vault beneath
The judgment-hall fit solitude he found
And beam appropriate to his desperate use;
Whereto appendent he breathed out his soul,
Not daring to put up one prayer for peace
At his dark journey's end; but trembling, wild,
Confused, of reason as of hope bereft,
With heaving breast and ghastly staring eyes
There betwixt heaven and earth, of both renounced,
Hung terrible to sight, a bloated corpse.
Oh! how shall rash and ignorant man presume
To judge for God, and on his narrow scale
Think to mete out by limits and degrees
Immeasurable mercy? Who can tell
How high the sorrows of man's suffering heart
Ascend toward heaven, how swift contrition flies,
What words find passage to the throne of grace,
What in midway are lost, dispersed in air
And scattered to the winds? Oh! that my harp
Could sound that happy note, which stirs the string
Responsive, that kind Nature has entwined
About the human heart, and by whose clue
Repentance, heavenly monitress, reclaims
The youthful wanderer from his dangerous maze
To tread her peaceful paths and seek his God:
So could my fervent my effectual verse
Avail, posterity should then engrave
That verse upon my tomb to tell the world
I did not live in vain. But heedless man,
Deaf to the music of the moral song,
By Mammon or by Belial led from sin
To sin, runs onward in his mad career,
Nor once takes warning of his better guide,
Till at the barrier of life's little span
Arrived, he stops: Death opens to his view
A hideous gulf; in vain he looks around
For the lost seraph Hope; beside him stands
The tyrant fiend and urges to the brink;
Behind him black despair with threatening frown
And gorgon shield, whose interposed orb
Bars all retreat, and with it is shade involves
Life's brighter prospects in one hideous night.
So JUDAS fell; so like him every wretch,
By the same filthy Mammon lured, shall fall.
Meanwhile the vengeful demon unappeas'd,
Pond'ring the warning of his Stygian Lord
Late driven from earth, and mindful that the charge
And conduct of hell's host on him devolved
Now claimed his wariest thought, upon the wing
Sets forth full sail to summon his compeers,
As many' as in that quarter might be found,
And them apprize of their foul loss incurred
By their great captain's fall, and what dispatch
Behooves them now put forth timely to 'scape
Impending danger of their chief foreseen,
If CHRIST's death-hour should unawares surprise
Them idly station'd, or with curious gaze
Hovering about his cross. So forth he goes:
But first to spy the land he wheels his flight
Athwart Mount Calvary, and there on guard
A file of heavenly warriors he descries
Covering the sacred hill, and at their head
GABRIEL in golden panoply arrayed,
Armed at all points, commander of the band.
The fate of SATAN and the recent sight
Of CHEMOS' ghastly wound, with guilty fears
Haunting his coward fancy, warned him fly
Beyond the range of that strong spear, from which
Spirit more warlike than himself had fled.
As when a pirate galley on the scout,
Roving the seas of some strong-guarded coast,
In bay or inlet moored under the lea
Of headland promontory' at anchor spies
A warlike fleet, whose towering masts and sails
Unbent for sea bespeak their ready trim,
Down goes the helm at once, the felon crew
Bestir all hands and veer the vessel round
To seaward, then ply oars and sails for life:
So at the sight of that angelic band
The Stygian scout wheeled round and sped his flight
Sheer to the wilderness on swiftest wing.
There on the watch AZAZEL happily found
He bade sound forth the loud Satanic trump,
Heard through all Palestine, at call whereof
Spi'rits, to whatever element affixed,
In troops swift-posting on the charmed winds,
Came from all parts; from Sidon and from Tire
New risen amidst the waves; from Gaza's coast,
Meridian limit, to the snow-capt mounts
Hermon and Libanus, and them beyond
From Epidaphne on Orontes' stream,
Famed for it is grove prophetic; from the banks
Of Pharphar and Abana, Rimmon's haunts;
From Byblus, where Astarte's wanton train
Howl for the death of Thammuz, yearly lost
And found as often by the love-frantic dames.
These on the desert heath alighting stand
Obedient to the signal; all around
Expectant of their arch-angelic chief
They cast an anxious look, but look in vain:
Him in far other region they shall find
In chains fast bound amidst eternal fires,
His dismal dwelling, for them also' reserved
In God's appointed time. To whom the fiend.
I muse not, warriors, that ye stand amazed
To see yourselves in absence of our chief
Here summoned by his arch-angelic trump,
Which other breath than his before never filled;
But public danger urges this bold step,
In me presumptuous, had I not to plead
Your safety for my warrant, and withal
His last sad mandate earnestly bequeathed
At parting, when sole witness I beheld
His utter loss, discomfiture and flight.
Ah, friends! how sympathetic with my soul
Is that deep general groan, which now I hear!
Full cause, immortal mourners, have we all
To groan and beat our breasts, nor I the least,
Whose melancholy task it is to pour
These heavy tidings in your grieved ears.
But let us yet remember what we are,
And be not therefore heartless, though bereft
Of him, who was the head and brain of all.
Many and mighty are the chiefs yet left,
Though he prime chief no longer shall review
This widowed host. Of SATAN the return
Is desperate, such a whirlwind caught him up,
So strong a southern blast at CHRIST's command
Blew him beyond the stretch of angel ken
Right onward to the realm of ancient Night
Impetuous through the empyrean void
Sheer on the level wing. Of him the fate
Is worse than doubtful; of his Victor's power
And Godhead irresistible what proof
Greater than this sad downfall can we need,
Or after such example what provoke?
Behooves us now prepare for instant flight;
This our late chief, prophetic in his fall,
With his last words enjoined me to propound
To these our legions scattered over the coasts
Of Palestine, whom else the coming hour
Of CHRIST's mysterious passion shall involve
In like disgrace and ruin with your prince,
Who to his latest moment upon earth
Was studious of your safety. I have now
In words unworthy of my charge, yet such
As heart overwhelmed with sorrow can supply,
Surrendered to your ears my painful trust.
But whither to repair, whom to elect
As captain and conductor of this host,
Now headless, conscious that such high command
With none but with the worthiest should be lodged,
I, as becomes me, to your wiser thoughts
Submit, and with the general choice shall close.
No more, for now with sudden panic seized,
The Stygian host, no voice imperial heard
Nor rule nor order kept, uprose at once
Disbanded, lawless; dreadful was the yell
Of that infernal rout, a swarm as thick
As locusts, making horrid night beneath
Their wings, that with like clangor beat the air,
As of a flock of cormorants disturbed
From some lone island on the rocky coast
Of Chili, where they haunt; so they with cry
More hideous mount, there hover for a while,
Then to all points disperse, as chance falls out,
Or short consult prescribes. Some to the South
With Isis and Osiris at their head
To Memphis, Thin and Tamis take their flight;
There with the bestial deities to herd,
Birds, serpents, reptiles, monsters of the Nile,
Gods that would half unfurnish Noah's ark:
Some with Melcartus, demi-god of Tire,
Light short, and in his temple refuge take,
Where armed with massy club and lion hide
His huge athletic idol frowning stands:
Others with Rimmon eastward wing their way
To famed Damascus; there in bow'ring shades
By rilling fountains on the flowery turf
To doze away the soft oblivious hours,
A slumbering synod: Some the golden spires
Of Nineveh attract and Nisroc's fane,
Stained with Sennacherib's imperial blood,
There by the parricidal princes shed:
To Byblus and Belitus others speed,
Light feathery wantons by Astarte led
With loose love-ditties and soft smiles lured on
To page her pride and deck her amorous sports:
But of the rest far greater part repair
To high Olympus, where presides the power
Of thundering Baal; he that station keeps
Pre-eminent over all the idol gods,
And in his festive hall rich nectar quaffs
With purple lips, and midnight revels holds
Luxurious, sensual, lewd, in vice immersed:
Yet some there were and of no vulgar note,
Who, grief to tell! to the biforked mount
Flew off, and there with the Parnassian maids
Held shameful dalliance, from whose lewd embrace
Descended a whole family of bards
Corruptive, illegitimate and base;
A spurious breed of wickedness and wit;
A Muse's genius with a Daemon's heart:
MAMMON meanwhile, a solitary sprite,
Selfish, morose and even by dev'ils abhorred,
Hied him alone, on sordid thoughts intent,
To rummage in Pactolus' sands for gold;
None joined, nor sought he partner in his flight,
His sole ambition to engross and hoard.
Now came the awful consummation on,
The hour of promise, dimly shadowed out
By types and prophecies, when from the womb
Of mystery, long travailing in pains
And groanings, now in ripe time should spring forth
Her full formed revelation to dispel
The Obscure of ancient days and usher in
Twin birth of Immortality and Life.
Now God by the' offering of his only Son
The type of Abraham's sacrifice fulfilled,
Who, though unconscious of that type, by faith
Righteous, was of the promises made heir.
And now, as Moses in the wilderness
Lifted the serpent, so the Son of man
Exalted on the cross shall heal the world
Of sin, and expiate the wide-wasting plague.
Now the peace offering of the spotless Lamb
By one conclusive Passover shall rend
The law's symbolic veil, and all absolve,
Whose consciences are sprinkled with his blood,
From punishment entailed upon the world
By man's first disobedience. Forth He comes
From condemnation: Ye too from your tombs
Come forth, ye prophets! -- Son of Amoz, thou
Prepare for resurrection: Come and see,
Not darkly' as in a glass, but face to face,
The object of thy vision; Him, the man
Of sorrows; Him, who like a lamb is brought
To slaughter: Mark the travail of his soul;
Witness how he is stricken for our sins,
Witness how we are healed by his stripes,
And by the note and comment of his death
Construe thine own predictions. Forth he comes
From condemnation under Roman guard,
Bearing his cross: Upon his bleeding brow,
Ensign alike of royalty and woe,
A thorny crown; no friendly hand is found
To wipe away the tear mingled with blood,
That hangs upon his cheek: The soldiers cry,
Room for the criminal! and rest their pikes
To keep the crowd aloof; staggering beneath
The ponderous burden of his cross he faints
And sinks to earth o'erspent, till one is found,
A sturdy stranger of Cyrenean birth,
On whom to lay the venerable load.
Hail, SIMON! blessed above men were thou,
If faith in Him that suffered on that cross
Glowed in thy heart and furnished thee with zeal
To render this last service to thy Lord.
Without the city walls there was a mount
Called CALVARY: The common grave it was
Of malefactors; there to plant his cross
It was decreed: Long was the way to death,
And like the ascent to glory hard to climb.
Upon the summit stood the Angel troop
Of MAMMON seen, though to man's filmed eye
Invisible: Here GABRIEL from the height
Noting the sad procession, had espied
The suffering Son of God amidst the throng
Dragged slowly on by rude and ruffian hands
To shameful execution: Horror-struck,
Pierced to the heart the indignant Seraph shook
His threatening spear, and with the other hand
Smote on his thigh in agony of soul
For man's ingratitude; glist'ning with tears
His eyes, whence late celestial sweetness beamed,
Now shot a fiery glance on them below,
Then, raising them to heaven, he thus exclaimed.
Oh! that the Everlasting would permit
His Angels to chastise these impious men,
And from their hands his holy Son redeem,
Whom in the heaven of heavens we have beheld
Beloved of the Father, ever blessed,
At the right hand of Power in glory throned!
But this for purposes beyond our reach
God ever wise forbids, and who against
God's interdict shall stir? Therefore retire,
Stand off and wait the time! If CHRIST commands,
We are his ministers to do his will,
Be it to lift this mountain from it is base
And whelm it on his murderers; if not,
Patient spectators we must here abide
And let the sacrilegious work proceed;
Knowing that God has said, I will revenge:
Vengeance belongs to the Lord alone.
Now on the news of their great Prophet's fate
Each heart with fearfulness and trembling seized,
Through all Jerusalem the tumult ran;
Native or stranger, aged or infirm,
None in the Holy City now kept house:
Wherever the Savior passed his presence drew
Thousands to gaze; and many' an aching heart
Heaved silent the last tributary sigh
In memory of his mercies; zealous some
Rushed in the grateful blessing to bestow
For health or limbs or life itself restored:
But these the soldiers rudely thrust aside,
And some with brutal violence they smote,
Thick'ning their files to hem their Prisoner close,
As fearful of a rescue. Loud the cry
Of women, whose soft sex to pity prone
Melts at those scenes, which flinty-hearted man
Dry-ey'd contemplates: Mothers in their arms
Held up their infants, and with shrill acclaim
Begged a last blessing for those innocents,
Whose sweet simplicity so well he loved,
And ever as he met them laid his hands
Upon their harmless heads with gentle love
And gracious benediction, breathing heaven
Into their hearts. Oh! happy babes, so blessed!
Fenced in with shields and spears and compassed round
With Roman guards the persecuting priests,
Elders and scribes followed their Victim's steps
Amidst the scoffs and hissings of the crowd;
And still as CHRIST approached the fatal spot
Loud and more loud the sad lamentings grew,
Till at the foot of the funereal mount
Arrived he stopped, and, turning to the group
Of mourners, these prophetic words addressed.
Daughters of Solyma, weep not for me,
Weep rather for yourselves and for your babes;
For lo! the dawn of sorrows is at hand;
The dread prediction presses to the birth,
When through Jerusalem a voice shall cry --
Give thanks, ye childless matrons, and confess
A barren bed, your worst misfortune deemed,
Now your best blessing: Break forth into joy,
Ye, at whose breasts no infant ever hung,
For ye have none to mourn. Now to the clefts
And caverns of the mountains they shall say,
Fall on us, cover us, ye rocky vaults,
And hide us from this wrath! For if with us
Already it begins, what shall the end
Of the ungodly and the sinner be?
If the green tree cannot abide the storm,
How shall the dry escape? -- And now no more:
Upon the summit of Mount CALVARY
They rear his cross; conspicuous there it stands
An ensign of salvation to the world.
Kneel, all ye Christian nations! bow your hearts
And worship your Redeemer, in whose death
Ye live, and from whose issuing wounds flows life,
By his blood purchased; hope's best promise flows
Of joys immortal for the just reserved.
The soldiers, now by their centurion formed
In hollow orb around the cross, begin
Their horrid prelude to the murderous scene;
And first his vesture, their accustomed spoil
And perquisite, they part; but for his coat
From top to bottom woven without seam,
That they rend not, but on it cast their lots
Whose it shall be entire. Upon his cross
In Hebrew, Greek and Latin they inscribe,
So PILATE willed though by the priests opposed,
"JESUS OF NAZARETH, KING OF THE JEWS!"
This title, in three several tongues displayed,
Read all those crucifiers of their King
And murmured as they read; hard to the last,
Obdurate, unbelieving. Now began
The executioners to spread his arms
Upon the beam transverse, and through his palms,
Monsters of cruelty! and through his feet
They drove their spiked nails; whilst at the clang
Of those dire engines every feeling heart
Uttered a groan, that with the mingled shrieks
Of mothers and of children pierced the air.
The priests and elders gnash'd their teeth for rage
And rancorous spite to hear him so bewailed:
Women dropped down convulsed and on the spot
Let fall their burdens immature for birth.
Words fail to paint the horrors of that scene:
The very soldiers paused and stood aghast,
Musing what these lamentings might portend;
Scarce dared they to pursue the dreadful work
Awe-struck and gazing on the face divine
Of the suspended Savior. He, though stretched
Upon the rack of agony, to heaven
Raising his eyes -- Father of mercy, cried,
Forgive them, for they know not what they do!
O ruthless murderers! could ye hear these words
And yet persist? Blasphemers! can ye read
And not adore? The people stand at gaze:
The rulers eager to provoke anew
Their quailing resolution with one voice
Cry out amain -- Ah! thou, that on the cross
Now hangest, thou, that boastedst to destroy
Our temple and rebuild it in three days,
Where art thou? If thou be the very CHRIST,
The King of Israel, now come down, descend
And save thyself; this seeing, we will then
Confess thee and believe. But it is in vain;
He hears not, he replies not, he expires:
Others he saved; himself he cannot save.
Peace, peace, revilers! nor expect reply:
Think not that CHRIST, thus dying for mankind,
Will from his great commission turn aside
And stop the sacrifice and quit the cross,
On which his body offered up for sin
As on an altar lies. Your taunts he hears;
Yet will he not descend called down by you,
Nor at the door of death shrink back and leave
Short of perfection his all-glorious work.
But wait the time and greater sign than this
Ye shall behold, when rising from the dead
And incorruptible he shall return
On earth triumphant over the cross and death.
Yet, such is the perverseness of your hearts,
Him nor descending would ye now believe,
Nor re-ascending will ye then confess.
And now behold! on either side the cross
Of CHRIST a wretched malefactor hung
Groaning and writhing in the pangs of death:
When one of these, encouraged by the taunts
Of the reviling priests, scornful exclaims --
Hear'st thou not what they say? If thou be CHRIST,
Why art thou in this torture? Save thyself,
And us thy fellows from this cross redeem --
This when his penitent companion heard,
New horrors smote his heart, his fault'ring voice
He raised and thus the blasphemy rebuked.
Have thou no fear of God, expiring wretch?
Stretched as thou art upon the tree of death,
Have thou no terror for the wrath to come?
And truly we the merited reward
Of our ill deeds receive, but this just Man,
What has he done? In him no fault is found.
This said, the penitent with faith inspired
Upon the Savior turned his dying eyes,
And -- Lord! he cried with supplicating voice,
When to thy heavenly kingdom thou shall come,
Oh then remember me! -- To him the LORD --
I tell thee of a truth this very day
Thou shall be found in Paradise with me.
Oh! words of joy, that breathe into the ear
Of the expiring penitent the pledge
Of pardon and acceptance: Words, that waft
The soul yet hovering on the lips of faith
Into the heaven of heavens, with grateful heart
We hail the glorious promise, which unfolds
The gates of bliss and present entrance gives
To the repentant sinner. Now no more
Conjecture ponders on the life to come;
Our dying Savior draws aside the veil,
Through which dim reason caught a doubtful glimpse
Of shadowy realms, that stretched beyond the grave,
Elysian scenes in clouds and mist involved.
Yet with this comfort take the caution too;
For who shall say what penitence was his,
That earned this promise? Fatally he errs,
Whose hope fore-runs repentance, who presumes
That God will pardon when he is tired of sin
And like a stale companion casts it off.
Oh! arrogant, delusive, impious thought,
To meditate commodious truce with Heaven,
When death's swift arrow smites him unprepared,
And that protracted moment never comes,
Or comes too late: Turn then, presumptuous man,
Turn to the other sinner on the cross,
Who died reviling, there behold thy doom!
Thou too, the Virgin Mother of our Lord,
By the angelic salutation hailed
Blessed above women, thou amidst the group
Of sympathising mourners at that hour
Wast present, when the incarnate Virtue, born
Of thine immac'ulate womb, impregn'd of Heaven,
Hung on the cross expiring: He from thence
On thee disconsolate a dying look
Of tenderest pity cast, and at thy side
Noting the meek disciple whom he loved,
Thus both addressed -- Woman, behold thy son;
Son, look upon thy mother! -- Sacred charge,
And piously fulfilled. -- Now darkness fell
On all the region round; the shrouded sun
From the impen'itent earth withdrew his light:
I thirst! -- the Savior cried, and lifting up
His eyes in agony -- My God, my God!
Ah! why have thou forsaken me? -- exclaimed.
Yet deem him not forsaken of his God:
Beware that error: 'Twas the mortal part
Of his compounded nature breathing forth
It Is last sad agony, that so complained:
Doubt not that veil of sorrow was withdrawn,
And heavenly comfort to his soul vouchsafed,
Ere thus he cried -- Father! into thy hands
My spirit I commend: -- Then bowed his head
And died. Now GABRIEL and his heavenly choir
Of minist'ring angels hovering over the cross
Received his spi'rit, at length from mortal pangs
And fleshly pris'on set free, and bore it thence
Upon their wings rejoicing. Then behold
A prodigy, that to the world announc'd
A new religion and dissolved the old:
The temple's sacred vail was rent in twain
From top to bottom 'midst the attesting shocks
Of earthquake and the rending up of graves:
Now those mysterious symbols, heretofore
Curtain'd from vulgar eyes and holiest deemed
Of holies, were displayed to public view:
The mercy-seat with its cherubic wings
O'ershadow'd and the golden ark beneath
Covering the testimony now through the rent
Of that dissever'd vail first saw the light.
A world redeemed had now no further need
Of types and emblems, dimly shadowing forth
An angry Deity withdrawn from sight
And canopied in clouds: Him face to face
Now in full light revealed the dying breath
Of his dear Son appeased, and purchased peace
And reconcilement for offending man.
Thus the partition wall, by Moses built,
By CHRIST was levelled, and the Gentile world
Entered the breach by their great Captain led
Up to the throne of grace, opening himself
Through his own flesh a new and living way.
Then were the oracles of God made known
To all the nations, sprinkled by the blood
Of JESUS and baptized into his death;
So was the birthright of the elder-born,
Heirs of the promise, forfeited; whilst they,
Whom sin had erst in bondage held, made free
From sin and servants of the living God,
Now gained the gift of God, eternal life.
Soon as these signs and prodigies were seen
Of those who watched the cross, conviction smote
Their fear-struck hearts: The sun at noonday dark,
The earth convulsive underneath their feet,
And the firm rocks in shivered fragments rent
Roused them at once to tremble and believe.
Then was our Lord by heathen lips confessed,
When the centurion cried -- In very truth
This righteous person was the Son of God --
The rest in heart assenting stood abashed,
Watching in silence the tremendous scene:
The recollection of his gracious acts,
His dying prayers and their own impious taunts
Now rose in sad review; too late they wished
The deed undone and sighing smote their breasts.
Strait from God's presence went that Angel forth,
Whose trumpet shall call up the sleeping dead
At the last day, and bade the Saints arise
And come on earth to hail this promised hour,
The dayspring of Salvation. Forth they came
From their dark tenements, their shadowy forms
Made visible as in their fleshly state,
And through the Holy City here and there
Frequent they gleam'd, by night, by day with fear
And wonder seen of many: Holy seers,
Prophets and martyrs from the grave set free,
And the first fruits of the redeemed dead.
They, who with CHRIST transfigur'd on the mount
Were seen of his disciples in a cloud
Of dazzling glory, now in form distinct
Mingling amidst the public haunts of men,
Struck terror to all hearts: Ezekiel there,
The captive seer, to whom on Chebar's banks
The heavens were opened and the fatal roll
Held forth with dire denunciations filled
Of lamentation, mourning and of woe,
Now falling fast on Israel's wretched race:
He too was there, Hilkiah's holy son,
With loins close girt and glowing lips of fire
By God's own finger touched: There might be seen
The youthful prophet, Belteshazzar named
Of the Chaldees, interpreter of dreams,
Knowledge of God bestowed, in visions skilled
And fair and learned and wise: The Baptist here
Girt in his hairy mantle frowning stalked,
And, pointing to his ghastly wound, exclaimed --
Ye vipers! whom my warning could not move
Timely to flee from the impending wrath,
Now fallen on your heads; whom I indeed
With water, CHRIST has now with fire baptized:
Barren ye were of fruits, which I prescribed
Meet for repentance, and behold! the axe
Is laid to the unprofitable root
Of every sapless tree, hewn down, condemned
And cast into the fire. Lo! these are they,
These shadowy forms now floating in your sight,
These are the harbingers of ancient days,
Who witnessed the Messiah and announc'd
His coming upon earth. Mark with what scorn
Silent they pass you by: Them had ye heard,
Them had ye noted with a patient mind,
Ye had not crucified the LORD OF LIFE:
He of these stones to Abraham shall raise up
Children, than you more worthy of his stock;
And now his winnowing fan is in his hand,
With which he will purge his floor, and having stored
The precious grain in garners, will consume
With fire unquenchable the refuse chaff.
Thus the terrific Vision in the ears
Of the astonished multitude declaimed
With threatening voice, and wrung their conscious hearts;
Whilst the blaspheming priests, who in their scorn
Triumphant saw the Savior of the world
Expiring on the cross and deemed him lost,
Now by the resurrection of the saints,
Ushered on earth with prodigies and signs,
Confounded and amazed, began to doubt
If yet the sepulcher had power to keep
It Is crucified Possessor safe in hold,
And with these thoughts perplexed, masking their fears
Under pretense of caution, they repair
To PILATE and demand a Roman guard
To watch the tomb of CHRIST, and then they add --
For we remember that Deceiver said,
Whilst he was yet alive, after three days
I will again arise; therefore we pray
Command the sepulcher to be made sure
Till the third day, lest his disciples come
By night and craftily remove him thence;
So the last error shall outgo the first.
But PILATE, whose unrighteous judgment still
Sat heavy on his heart, had little care
For what might them befall, and to their suit
Briefly replied -- Why do ye ask of me
That custody, which in yourselves ye have?
Take your own watch and to their charge commit
The safeguard of that body, which, though dead,
Keeps yet alive your fears: It Is your own cause,
As such I leave it with you; so begone!
He said and turned aside, nor did they tempt
Further discourse, but murmuring went their way.
END OF THE SIXTH BOOK.
CALVARY; OR THE DEATH OF CHRIST.

BOOK VII.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE SEVENTH BOOK.
This Book opens with the scene of Mount Calvary at the coming on of evening;
Christ still hanging dead upon the cross, the disciples standing apart and the
holy women watching, amongst whom is the Blessed Virgin supported by St. John,
Christ having bequeathed her to his care: His address to her on this subject,
and her reply. The soldiers come and break the legs of the two malefactors, but
finding Christ already dead, they pierce his heart with a spear and blood and
water issues from the wound: They take him down from the cross and lay him in
the sepulcher. His spirit in the meanwhile is conveyed by the angels into the
region of Death; that region described, and the distant prospect of the
bottomless pit, where the souls of the wicked are in torment: Christ points out
these scenes to Gabriel and instructs him as to the future objects of his
descent into this gloomy region. Satan expelled from earth falls prostrate at
the foot of the throne of Death: He makes suit to that power for protection:
Death rejects his intercessions: The person and palace of the King of Terrors
described: The triumphant entry of Christ: Satan is hurled into the bottomless
pit and there bound by the strong angel; the horrors of that dreadful abode are
represented: Death humbles himself before the Redeemer of mankind, and
conscious that his power is overthrown, tenders his crown to Christ as to his
conqueror: He lays the key at his feet, which sets free the souls of the
Saints, who are destined to be partakers of the first resurrection: This key is
given to Gabriel with instructions for their release: Christ in his reply to
Death forewarns him of his doom, but signifies to him that the dissolution of
his power will not be immediate. The approach of the Saints concludes the Book.

CALVARY. BOOK VII. THE DESCENT INTO HELL.
NOW Hesperus renewed his evening lamp
And hung it forth amid the turbid sky
To mark the close of this portentous day:
The laboring sun, in his mid-course eclipsed,
Darkling at length had reached his western goal;
And now it seemed as if all Nature slept
O'erspent and wearied with convulsive throes.
Upon his cross the martyred Savior hung;
Pale through the twilight gleam'd his breathless corpse
And silvery white, as when the moon-beam plays
On the smooth surface of the glassy lake;
His thorn-crown'd head upon his breast reclined;
His arms were wide out-spread, as if in act
To' embrace and welcome the converted world:
So were they late expanded, when he cried --
Come all ye heavy laden, come to me,
And I will give you rest! Death had not dared
To rob those features of one heavenly grace,
Nor had the worm authority to taint
That incorruptible and hallowed shrine,
Wherein his purity had deigned to dwell.
The living saints here mingling with the dead
Stood round in pensive meditation rapt,
Silent spectators of the awful scene:
There his disciples in a group apart,
Like frighted sheep that cluster in a storm,
Thronged each on other interchanging looks
Of sorrow and despair; no voice was heard,
No utterance but of sighs; though all had need
Of comfort, none had comfort to bestow.
But PETER, in whose self-accusing breast
Grief rolled in tempests, had the whilst chos'n out
A solitary spot, where at his length
Outstretch'd with face incumbent on the ground
He lay like one, whom fortune had cast off,
Of all hope 'reft, most wretched and forlorn.
There too the holy Mother might be seen,
Like Rizpah, watching over her murdered son,
Rooted in earth, a monument of woe.
Beside her, bathed in sympathising tears,
First in his Master's love, as meek of soul,
Stood JOHN, adopted by his dying Lord
Son and supporter of that mournful Saint.
At length with reverend love he turned his eyes
Upon the Virgin Mother and thus spoke.
Oh thou! participant with God himself
In his incarnate Offspring, if I claim
The glorious title, which my dying Lord
On me, thy servant ever, now thy son,
Gracious bequeathed, let not my words offend.
High honor and a trust than life more dear
Has CHRIST by this adoption deigned to cast
On me unmeriting; yet well I heard
Those sacred words -- Mother, behold thy son;
Son, look upon thy mother! -- Yes, I heard,
And treasuring in my heart the rich bequest,
Bowed and obeyed: Even then my zeal had spoke
The dictates of devotion, had I dared
To break the awful silence of that hour,
Or sacrilegiously divert the ear
Of mute attention, whilst those lips divine,
Those living oracles, had breath to move;
Now mute, alas! for He is now no more,
Who had the words of life: Our hope is quenched,
Our glory vanished. See! the deed is done:
Those murderers have killed the Prince of Peace,
Cold on the cross and stiff'ning in the wind
To the rude elements his corpse is left;
Nor is there found, who shall provide a grave
For the sad relics of the Son of God.
But lo! the heavens, that three long hours have mourned
In darkness, now throw off their sable shroud:
The earth no longer quakes beneath our feet,
The shattered rocks subside; Nature is calm,
The sun unmasks and through disparted clouds
With ruddy twilight streaks the western sky.
And may not we, since God has now withdrawn
His terrors and asswag'd the wrathful sky,
May not we hope, that as his light revives
At the third hour, so of his blessed Son
The promised resurrection to new life
At the third day shall also come to pass?
When, as the sun emerging from eclipse
Darkness dispells, so CHRIST from out the grave
Arising shall dispell our dark despair?
To him the holy Mother thus replied:
Thou meek Disciple, in thy Master's love
Pre-eminently blessed, since He, whose will
Should govern, so decrees it, from this hour
Henceforth I lodge thee in a mother's heart
And hold thee as my son; for I perceive
CHRIST from his human nature is withdrawn,
And to mortality has rendered back
All that from me a mortal he received:
His Incorruptible now lives with God,
And in that glory I no part must claim;
Flesh cannot share with spirit. Henceforth thou,
Thou art my son adopted in the place
Of that incarnate Virtue, of whose birth
Miraculous the eastern star gave sign,
And Angels witnessed him the Son of God.
And now behold! what wonders mark his death:
Whence are these prodigies? What but the hand
Of God can shake the pillars of the earth,
Seal up the sun and rend these rocks in twain,
Turn day to night, tear down the temple vail,
Break up the graves and bid the saints come forth?
Lo, where they pass as sensible to sight
As in broad day substantial man to man.
And can we ask if He be very CHRIST,
Whom stars and Angels ushered into birth?
Can we doubt Him on whom the Spi'rit of God
Dove-like descended? Can we stop our ears
Against a voice from heaven? Are we so blind,
Dull and insensible not to behold
That sun emergent and these moving shapes,
That to revisit earth have left their graves,
Awakened as from sleep? If these can rise,
If these, whose bones are moulder'd into dust,
On whom the worm has fed for ages, men
As mortal as ourselves can re-ascend
Out of the pit, do not these signs bespeak
His second coming, who is LORD and CHRIST?
He shall, He shall return upon the earth
Victorious over death, and we, though now
Humbled in heart and for a season sad,
Yet wavering not in faith and holding fast
The anchor of our hope, shall yet again
Behold his glory, and as now his death
Turns day to night, his resurrection then
Shall into joy convert our present gloom.
But see, where PETER prostrate on the earth
Is lost in sorrow: Haste and bid him rise;
Tell him the day's at hand when he must work.
Has he not heard the servant shall not sleep
In his Lord's absence? Strengthen thou his heart!
So spoke these Saints, and each to other gave
Alternate solace; faith inspiring hope,
And hope asswaging woe. At PETER's side
Behold the meek disciple -- Up! he cries,
Awake and put on strength: The Virgin Saint,
The Mother of our Lord, bids thee awake.
Unprofitable grief avails naught,
But godly sorrow is approved in works
Meet for repentance. Up! for CHRIST, though dead,
Yet speaks, and shall come again on earth:
Woe to that servant therefore, whom his Lord
Shall find thus sleeping; great shall be his wrath.
This said, he reached his hand and raised him up:
He stood and spoke -- Servant, of CHRIST approved,
Thee and thy blessed Sender I obey:
Yet does my heart, by deep remorse subdued,
Press downward to the dust. A wretch I am,
Who has denied his Lord: What can I do,
A miserable man? O righteous JOHN,
When thou shall spread abroad, as sure thou will,
The direful doings of this fatal day,
And publish to mankind the wondrous love
Of CHRIST thus dying for them, I conjure thee
Be faithful to the truth, screen not my crime,
Foul though it be, but let the nations know
PETER, who vaunted of himself, was false,
So shall they reap instruction from my shame,
And by despising me correct themselves.
Thus spoke the contrite Saint, when now the priests,
Whose custom was upon this solemn eve
To purge their Golgotha from human blood,
Send forth their guard official to remove
CHRIST and the slaves convict before the dawn
Of that great day, too hallowed to permit
Their bodies fest'ring on the ill-omen'd cross.
And lo! the soldiers so encharg'd arrive,
Survey the victims and begin the work:
But first the ponderous sledge with horrid crash
Descending breaks the knees and ankle joints
Of these two criminals; for stubborn life
Still hovered on their lips, and now and then
Their heaving bosoms fetched a deep-drawn sigh,
Like the slow swell of seas without a wind.
But when the Savior's body they approached
And saw there needed not a second blow
To make his death secure, the word of God
Prophetic moved their else obdurate hearts
To break no limb; yet one, so destined, thrust
His spear into his side and forthwith flowed
Water and blood from the heart-piercing wound:
So deep the stab, that to life's citadel,
Had life remained, the mortal point had reached
And there had finished it. Meanwhile behold!
JOSEPH arrives; a counselor was he,
But not for death, and rich and just withal;
In Ramoth born, where Samuel first drew breath,
And as his heart in righteousness and faith
Stood firm with CHRIST whilst living, so his zeal
An honour'able interment to bestow
On his dead Master prompted him to make
Bold suit to PILATE for the lifeless corpse,
Nor failed he of his suit; therefore he came,
So favored, to receive the precious charge
Of those dear relics and with decent rites
Commit them to the grave: Spear'd to the heart,
And death with double diligence ensur'd,
The body they take down; the hands and feet
Pierced through with nails and all besmeared with blood,
O piteous spectacle! which to behold
Bathes every angel face in heaven with tears!
Accursed Deicides! the time comes on,
When every mark your sacrilegious hands
Have printed on that corpse shall be a seal
To testify against you, every gash
Unclos'd shall with it is living lips proclaim
CHRIST in his human attributes renewed,
Corporeal yet immortal: Then the hand
Of him who doubts shall probe those gaping wounds,
And by the evidence of sense compel
The faithless and reluctant to believe.
And now they place the body on the bier,
Cleans'd of the blood and wrapped in seemly cloths:
Then under guard convey it to the vault
Hewn in the rock, where never corpse was laid,
And there consign it to it is dark abode,
Rolling a massy fragment to the door,
Unwieldy, vast; and having sealed the stone,
They post their sentinels, and so depart.
Meanwhile the' unhoused spirit of CHRIST, set free
From gross communion with his earthly clay,
Borne with the meteor's speed upon the wings
Of mightiest Cherubim had now approached
The dark confines of Death's engulph'd domain:
Here at the barrier of that vast profound
On the firm adamant, from whence uprose
The towering structure of hell's ebon gate,
The heavenly Visitant descending bade
His cherub bearers stoop their wings, on which
As in a plumey chariot he rode;
And now alighted on the dreadful brink
The Savior paused and downward cast his eye
Over that immeasurable blank, the grave
Of universal Nature, founded then
And charter'd to the gloomy powers of Sin
And Death Sin-born, when the primaeval pair
Lost immortality and fell from God.
The starry lamps of heaven here lost their light,
No sunbeam ever reached this dismal realm:
Yet in CHRIST's spi'rit divine that living light,
Which from the Father of creation flowed
Before all time, inherently supplied
Self-furnish'd vision to explore the bounds
Of that oblivious pit, in whose dark womb
Myriads of unredeemed souls were plunged;
All who of human birth had passed that gate
From righteous Abel, the first-fruit of death,
To him, whose heart had newly ceased to beat,
Were in that gulf immersed. At farthest end
Of that Obscure a pillary cloud arose
Of sulfurous smoke, that from hell's crater steam'd;
Whence here and there by intermittent gleams
Blue flashing fires burst forth, that sparkling blazed
Up to the iron roof, whose echoing vault
Resounded ever with the dolorous groans
Of the sad crew beneath: Thence might be heard
The wailing suicide's remorseful plaint;
The murd'rer's yelling scream, and the loud cry
Of tyrants in that fiery furnace hurled,
Vain cry* the unmitigated furies urge
Their ruthless task and to the cauldron's edge
With ceaseless toil huge blocks of sulphur roll,
Pil'd mountains high to feed the greedy flames:
All these, the accursed brood of Sin, were once
The guilty pleasures, the false joys, that lured
Their sensual vota'rists to the infernal pit:
Them their fell mother, watchful over the work,
With eye that sleep never closed and snaky scourge
Still waving over their heads, for ever plies
To keep the fiery deluge at it is height;
And stops her ears against the clamorous din
Of those tormented, who for mercy call
Age after age implored and still denied.
These when the all-present Spirit of CHRIST descried
At distance tossing in the sulfurous lake,
And heard their dismal groans, the conscious sense
Of human weakness by experience earned
In his own mortal body now put off,
And recollection that Himself of late
In his sublunar pilgrimage had proved
Temptations like to their's, drew from his soul.
A sigh of natural pity, as from man
To man although in merited distress:
But when his human sympathy gave place
To judgment better weighed and riper thoughts
Congenial with the Godhead reassumed,
The justice of their doom, the abhorrence due
To their vile deeds by voluntary act
Of will, left free, committed in despite
Of conscience moving them to better thoughts,
Turned him indignant from the loathed sight
Of these impenitents; when, after pause,
To GABRIEL, chief of the cherubic host
And late his strengthening angel, thus he spoke.
GABRIEL, or ever from this high steep we launch
With prone descent into this gloomy vast,
This shadowy dark inane, the realm of Death,
After so swift a race through all the spheres
From earth to this hell's portal, it behooves
Thee and thy plumed cohort to recruit
The vigor of your wings; for sure I am
That in this subterranean we shall find
No breeze from heaven's pure ether to give aid
To motion, or uphold in steady poise
Your feath'ry vans outstretch'd; nor may we look
For star or planet or one straggling ray
From circumlucent sun to guide our course
Through this obscure domain of Night and Death.
Nor less behooves thee, gentle as thou art,
Friendliest to man of all heaven's angel host
And for each task of mercy and of love
First in the choice of God, to arm thy heart
For the sad spectacles, the dismal scenes,
Which we must needs encounter in this gulf
Of human misery, this world of woes,
Fit residence for SATAN and his crew
Of outcast angels; sad reverse to thee
Inhabitant of heaven: And now, behold!
Where hell's infernal pit with horrid glare
Flames through the dismal gloom, there, but that God
In mercy films thine arch-angelic eye,
Such myriads in that ever-burning lake
Of souls tormented thou would else discern,
As would appal thy nature; but these scenes
From thee, a spi'rit so loving to mankind,
So melting soft to pity, are withheld:
No mercy can I meditate far them
Impenitent, no embassy of peace
Have I in charge, no respite, till the trump
Of general resurrection calls them up
At the last day of judgment, then to hear
Their crimes rehearsed, their blasphemies exposed,
Their envyings, frauds, revilings, treach'ries, plots*
And every secret of their hearts unmasked
By an all-righteous Judge, who shall pronounce
Their final condemnation and decree
Their present pains perpetual. We meanwhile
To other regions shall divert our course
From them and from their torments far apart,
Regions of night and silence, where the souls
Of righteous men in their oblivious caves
Sleep out the time till their Deliverer comes
To wake them from their trance, dissolve the spell
Of their enchanter Death and set them free
To range the fields of Paradise, where flows,
As from a fountain by God's presence fed,
Beatitude surpassing human thought,
Pleasures unseen, unnumber'd, unconceiv'd.
This said, from those high battlements the Dove
Of Peace upon Redemption's errand sent,
Borne on the wings of his cherubic choir,
Descended swift, and through the drowsy void
To Death's terrific palace steered his flight.
Here the Arch-foe of man, from earth expelled
By man's Redeemer, newly had arrived,
But fear-struck and in like disastrous trim
With war-worn Sisera, when in his flight
From the victorious Naphthalite he came
To ask protection at falfe Jael's tent,
And ruin found instead. The whirlwind's blast
Had shattered his proud form; now scorched by fires,
Now driven to regions of perpetual frost
Beyond extremest Saturn's wint'ry sphere,
No middle course kept he, nor had his feet
From their aerial journey once found rest,
Till at the threshold of Death's gloomy throne
Down on the solid adamant he fell
Precipitate at once, and lay entranced
Of arch-angelic majesty the wreck.
Scared at the hideous crash and all aghast
Death scream'd amain, then wrapped himself in clouds,
And in his dark pavilion trembling sat
Mantled in night. And now the prostrate fiend
Reared his terrific head with lightnings scorched
And furrowed deep with scars of livid hue;
Then stood erect and rolled his blood-shot eyes
To find the ghastly vision of grim Death,
Who at the sudden downfall of his fire
Startled, and of his own destruction warned,
Had shrunk from sight, and to a misty cloud
Dissolved hung lowering over his shrouded throne.
When SATAN, whose last hope was now at stake,
Impatient for the interview exclaimed.
Where art thou, Death? Why hide thyself from him,
Of whom thou art? Come forth, thou grisly king;
And though to suitor of immortal mould
Thy refuge be denied, yet at my call,
Thy father's call, come forth and comfort me,
Thou gaunt anatomy, with one short glimpse
Of those dry bones, in which alone is peace
And that oblivious sleep, for which I sigh.
He said, and now a deep and hollow groan,
Like roar of distant thunders, shook the hall,
And from before the cloud-envelop'd throne
The adamantine pavement burst in twain
With hideous crash self-open'd, and displayed
A subterranean chasm, whose yawning vault,
Deep as the pit of Acheron, forbade
All nearer access to the shado'wy king.
Whereat the imprisoned winds, that in it is womb
Were cavern'd, 'gan to heave their yeasty waves
In bubbling exhalations, till at once
Their eddying vapors working upwards burst
From the broad vent enfranchised, when, behold!
The cloud that late around the throne had poured
More than Egyptian darkness, now began
To lift it is fleecy skirts, till through the mist
The imperial Phantom gleam'd; monster deformed;
Enormous, terrible, from heel to scalp
One dire anatomy; his giant bones
Star'd through the shrivelled skin, that loosely hung
On his sepulchral carcass; round his brows
A cypress wreath tiara-like he wore
With nightshade and cold hemlock intertwin'd;
Behind him hung his quiver'd store of darts
Winged with the raven's plume; his fatal bow
Of deadly yew, tall as Goliah's spear,
Propp'd his unerring arm; about his throne,
If throne it might be called, which was composed
Of human bones, as in a charnel pil'd,
A hideous group of dire diseases stood,
Sorrows and pains and agonizing plagues,
His ghastly satellites, and, even than these
More terrible, ambition's slaught'ring sons,
Heroes and conquerors styled on earth, but here
Doomed to ignoble drudgery, employed
To do his errands in the loathsome vault,
And tend corruption's never-dying worm,
To haunt the catacombs and ransack graves,
Where some late popu'lous city is laid waste
By the destroying pestilence, or stormed
By murdering Russ or Tartar blood-besmear'd
And furious in the desperate breach to plant
His eagle or his crescent on the piles
Of mangled multitudes and flout the sky
With his victorious banners. Now a troop
Of shrouded ghosts upon a signal given
By their terrific Monarch start to sight,
Each with a torch funereal in his grasp,
That over the hall diffused a dying light,
Than darkness' self more horrible: The walls
Of that vast cenotaph, hung round with spears,
Falchions and pole-axes and plumed helms,
Showed like the arm'ory of some warlike state:
There every mortal weapon might be seen,
Each implement of old or new device,
Which savage nature or inventive art
Furnished to arm the ruffian hand of war
And deal to man the life-destroying stroke:
And them betwixt at intervals were placed
The crowned skeletons of mighty kings,
Caesar's and Caliphs and barbarian Chiefs,
Monsters, whose swords had made creation shrink
And frighted peace and science from the earth.
Pondering the scene in mute amazement rapt
The lost Archangel stood, when soon the voice
Of Death as from the tombs low-murmuring thus
Bespoke attention -- What uncivil cause,
Prince of the air, provokes thee to offend
Against the peaceful charter of these realms
By voice thus rude and clamo'rous? Know thou not
I reign by privilege, though son not slave
Of thee heav'n-exil'd? Here no place have thou,
For here is peace; no part in this domain
To thee and to thy rebel host belongs:
They in the flames of Tartarus, but we
Dwell with the silent worm: The power we have
Over man's corruptible and mortal part
Ends with the body; here the bones may sleep,
For these anatomies disturb us not:
But for the spark unquenchable, the soul
Immortal, which survives the fleeting breath,
Of that we take no charge; that must abide
In other regions it is appointed lot
Of misery or bliss. What then has Death
To do with SATAN? Can the son, who drew
Existence from the father, quench that spi'rit,
Which God decreed eternal? Will those fires
Cease at my word? Hell will not hear my voice,
Nor can the howlings of the infernal pit
Enter my ears. Ask not repose of me,
Tormented fiend: There is no grave for sin,
No sleep for SATAN; fallen from heaven thou art,
There thou have no abode; fallen now from earth,
Where is thy lodging? Where, but in those flames?
Pass on then in thy course, nor loiter here,
For hell expects thee: Were thou here to stay,
Death in destroying thee himself destroys.
Whereto the unwelcome visitant replied --
Inhospitable Power! and is it thus
Thou greet'st a father in his extreme need
Suppliant for leave to draw a moment's breath
In thy pale presence, till this furious blast,
That followed me from earth, shall spend it is rage
And cease to howl through the profound of hell?
If in thy heartless trunk no mem'ory dwells
Of what I was, Oh! teach me to forget
What now I am and make my senses dull
To pain, as thine to gratitude are lost:
But if thy mind be present to record
My fall from bliss, will it not also serve
To put thee in remembrance how that fall
Bestowed on thee a station and a name?
Had I not fallen from heaven man had not lost
The joys of Paradise, immortal joys
Till I destroyed them; who then but myself,
Exiled from God, brought Death into the world,
Gave thee the sepulcher for thy domain,
And every mortal body for thy prey?
Whose hand but SATAN's, thankless as thou art,
Placed that victorious wreath upon thy brow,
Armed thee for war and bade thee be a king?
And what does SATAN now demand of Death?
What, but a moment's respite, the small boon
Of hospitable shelter, where to lay
My aching head and rest my weary wing?
This to the father can the son refuse?
I ask no more. If CHRIST, from whom I fly,
Pursues me to this pit, and into hell
Descending shall repass her gloomy gates
Guarded by Sin, that barrier lost, farewell
To all thy greatness! Where shall be thy sting,
O Death, and where thy victory, O Grave?
Then to have harbor'd SATAN shall not add
One feather to the balance of thy fate:
All must be lost together; I to flames
Consigned, thou, Phantom, into air dissolved.
No more of this vain arguing, Death replied;
My peace and my repose I can but deal
As God decrees, and as he wills withhold:
Thus wrangling to the latest hour of time
Nothing, O SATAN, could thou wring from me
But the same answer and the same despair:
I with mortality alone confer,
Thou art a deathless spirit: If my power
Cannot annihilate the soul of man,
How then of angel? Guilty thou have been,
Conscious must ever be, and therefore cursed.
Of me complaining thou condemn'st thyself,
The righteous ever are at peace with Death;
Thou art not of their number. Spi'rit unblest,
Author of man's revolt and all things ill,
The hell which thou have peopled, is thine own.
Earth thou have made a ruin, men by thee
Perverted turn to monsters, Heaven itself,
Disturbed by thy rebellion, for a while
Suffered convulsion, and her thrones besieged
Echoed the din of battle; the fair bloom
Of Paradise was blasted by thy spells,
And man driven forth to till the unthankful earth
And toil and sweat for a precarious meal,
Degraded from his origin, at length
To me and to corruption was consigned.
These were thy doings, this was my descent,
And my inheritance the loathsome worm,
The throne funereal and this yawning gulf
Impassable, which I am yet to thank
For that it holds thee at a distance from me:
This is thy bounty. Look upon these bones,
Survey this dread anatomy, and say
If son so fashioned owes his father thanks:
Proportioned to thy goodness I accord
My gratitude by bidding thee avaunt;
Hence from my sight, intruder! Thrust from earth
As heretofore from heaven, and tempest-torn
With bruised head and shattered flagging wing
Hither thou come a fugitive from Him,
Whom in the wilderness for forty days
Tempting thou did annoy: Dull, doting spirit!
Blind to thine own destruction, not to see
God's power in CHRIST, nor understand that He,
Who foiled thy cunning, might defy thy strength:
But neither strength nor cunning shall prevail
To draw me forth upon a losing side,
And set this empire on a desperate cast:
I lack presumption to oppose that Power,
Which puts hell's monarch to inglorious flight.
What shelter can thou find behind a shade,
An airy phantom? Such thou say I am,
Such let me be! That phantom will not tempt
The furious blast of God's avenging breath,
Nor moved to pity by thy treacherous plaints
Tender oblivion's boon to soul accursed:
Such favor when thou would extort from Death,
That phantom will be adamant to thee.
Now learn a truth: CHRIST in the flesh is dead;
Yet long I cannot hold him in the grave;
His body interdicted to the worm
For some mysterious purpose is reserved
From all corruption free, and sure I am
He will not leave his enemy at large
In this obscure domain, where sleep the souls
Of righteous men; fly then, whilst yet the hour
Serves thee for flight -- And hark! the angel trump
Sounds his approach. Now tremble, thou accursed!
No more; encanopied beneath the wings
Of mighty Cherubim with sounding trump
And joyful chaunt the LORD OF LIFE came on --
Lift up your heads, the heavenly chorus sung,
Lift up your heads, ye everlasting gates,
And CHRIST the King of Glory shall come in --
Bright as the sun his presence; darkness fled
Down to the center; SATAN on the earth
Fell motionless; Death trembled on his throne,
And called his shadowy guards, they with loud shrieks
Vanished in air, whilst from the gulf profound
Blue lightnings flashed and deep-mouthed thunders roared;
When CHRIST with eye severe on SATAN turned
Bade the storm cease and thus addressed the fiend.
Well art thou found, thou serpent, on the brink
Of thy last home, this horrible abyss,
For thee and for thine impious crew prepared.
Man from his God by thy corruption turned
Is by my death received into the peace
Of his offended Maker, and if faith
Opens his way to heaven in righteousness
And true conversion, Death cannot retain
His soul in darkness, nor thy crafty wiles
Puzzle his path and damp his glowing zeal;
But thou presumptuous, who have had the world
To range at will, and from God's altars plucked
Their consecrated honors, falsely viewed
Those spoils, by sufferance yielded, as the prize
Of thine own proper victory. Behold!
These are thy triumphs; in this pit receive
Thy folly's confutation and the doom
Of woe eternal on thy sin denounced.
He said, nor other answer SATAN gave
Than one deep groan rent from his laboring breast.
The strong vindictive Angel, to whose charge
The key of that infernal pit belonged,
Now seized him in his grasp and from the ground
Lifting his ponderous bulk, such vigor dwelt
In arm celestial, headlong down at once
Down hurled him to the bottom of the gulf,
Then followed on the wing: His yelling cries
Death heard, whilst terror shivered every bone:
Not so the choir cherubic; they with joy
Beheld Redemption's triumph in the fall
Of that Great Dragon, enemy of man,
That ancient Serpent, now with bruised head
And sting-bereft hurled down into the pit:
Whereat in heavenly concert they begin
To raise their tuneful voices and sing forth
Praise to the Lamb of God, and joyful strain
Of gratulation to the Saints redeemed --
Now is salvation come and strength and power,
The kingdom of our God and of his CHRIST:
Now is that railing and malignant foe
Cast down into the pit, which day and night
Accused our righteous brethren to their God:
Now are they made victorious by the blood
Of the Redeeming Lamb, and in the word
Of Truth, their fearless witness, through the world
Go forth against the anarchy of Sin
A host of martyrs faithful unto death;
Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye of earth
Inhabitants, awake to joy and hail
The dayspring of Salvation from on high.
SATAN meanwhile ten thousand fathoms deep
At bottom of the pit, a mangled mass
With shattered brain and broken limbs outspread,
Lay groaning on the adamantine rock:
Him the strong Angel with ethereal touch
Made whole in form, but not to strength restored,
Rather to pain and the acuter sense
Of shame and torment; hideous was the glare
Of his blood-streaming eyes and loud he yell'd
For very agony, whilst on his limbs
The massy fetters, such as hell alone
Could forge in hottest sulphur, were infix'd
And rivetted in the perpetual stone:
Upon his back he lay extended, huge,
A hideous ruin; not a word vouchsafed
That vengeful Angel, but with quick dispatch
Plied his commissioned task, then stretched the wing
And upward flew; for now the infernal cave
Through all it is vast circumference had given
The dreadful warning, and began to close
It Is rocky ribs upon the imprisoned fiend:
Fierce and more fierce as it approached became
The flaming concave; thus comprest, the vault
Red as metallic furnace glowed intense
With heat, that had the hideous den been less
Than adamant it had become a flood,
Or SATAN other than he was in sin
And arch-angelic strength pre-eminent,
He neither could have suffered nor deserved:
Panting he rolled in streams of scalding sweat,
Parched with intolerable thirst, one drop
Of water then to cool his raging tongue
Had been a boon worth all his golden shrines:
Vain wish! for now the pit had closed it is mouth,
Nor other light remained than what the glare
Of those reverberating fires bestowed
Then all the dungeon round was thick beset
With horrid faces, threatening as they glar'd
Their haggard eyes upon him; from hell's lake
Flocking they came, whole legions of the damned,
His worshippers on earth, sensual, profane,
Abominable in their lives, monsters of vice,
Blood-stained murderers, apostate kings,
And crowned tyrants some, tormented now
For their past crimes and into furies turned,
Accusing their betrayer: Curses dire,
Hissings and tauntings now from every side
Assailed his ear, on him, on him alone,
From Cain first murderer to ISCARIOT all,
All with loud voices charged on him their sins,
Their agonies, with imprecations urged
For treble vengeance on his head accursed,
Founder of hell, sole author of their woe,
And enemy avowed of all mankind.
Now when the King of Terrors had perceived
The power of his new Visitant and saw
SATAN engulph'd and the devouring pit,
Best barrier of his throne, for ever closed,
Descending from his state with heart abashed,
Conscious that pride would ill befriend him now
In presence of his Conqueror, at the feet
Of CHRIST with low obeisance he put off
The trophies of his brow, and on the knee,
Stooping his vassal head, low homage paid,
And suppliant thus his humble suit preferred.
Immortal King! all glorious and all good,
At whose great name befits that every knee
In heaven or earth or in these realms beneath
Should bend adoring, let thy will prevail
Here, as wherever else! And sure I am
It Is not my power but thine own wondrous love,
Consenting to the deed, has brought thee here
In pity to mankind to taste the cup
Of agony and visit these sad shades,
Though deathless; thence to re-ascend, as soon
Thou shall, victorious to the realms of light.
I know thee for the CHRIST the Son of God,
Messiah of the prophets long foreseen,
Yet of the unbelieving Jews despised,
Rejected, for thou came not in the pomp
Of tempo'ral majesty and only great
In patience, in humility, in love
And miracles of mercy. At thy feet
This head uncrown'd thus stooping, I resign
All empire; not on me let fall thy wrath
As on that bruised Serpent. What am I?
What is the sword, what is the pestilence,
And all my host of mortal ministers,
But servants of thy providence, a scourge
And rod of vengeance, wherewith to chastise
Presumptuous, guilty pride? Whose hand but mine
Strikes terror to the atheist's hardened heart?
Who plucks the tyrant from his bloody car
And rolls him in the dust? or at a blow
Strangles the curse in the blasphemer's throat?
If on the martyr's head my axe descends,
The same hand plants a crown of glory there;
And if in my dark caves the righteous sleep,
Peaceful they sleep; I break not their repose,
For silence dwells with me and night and rest.
Behold the key inviolate that guards
Their hallowed slumbers; never did I yield,
Though often solicited, this sacred pledge
To SATAN or his sin-defiled crew;
Faithful I Have kept it ever, faithful now
To thee their Savior I resign my charge.
This said, the golden badge of his command,
Rich and of heavenly workmanship with gems
Of azure, green and purple thick embossed,
Humbly he laid at the REDEEMER's feet:
He to the zeal of GABRIEL strait consigned
The enlargement of those spi'rits to bliss preferred,
Fit minister for office so benign:
Whereat he bade sound forth the signal trump
Of the First Resurrection, heard of none
Save of those holy Saints elect of God,
Martyrs and prophets, called to live with CHRIST
In antecedent glory till the day
Of general Resurrection shall awaken
And summon into judgment all mankind.
Swift hied that friendly Angel on the wing,
Swifter, for that, on gracious errand sent,
Joy urged him to put forth his utmost speed;
Meanwhile the heavenly Visitant of Death
Upon that ghastly Vision turned his eyes,
And thus in accent mild addressed the Shade.
That I came down from heaven and am the CHRIST,
Rightly, O Death, thou have pronounced; yet here
I come not to destroy thy power at once,
But to set free the Saints thou hold'st in thrall,
And call them to my peace; but even of these
Part till my second coming must abide:
Of thee and all things of corruption bred
The term is fixed; God must be all in all:
But time, as man computes, has yet to roll
Through numerous ages ere the final trump
Shall sound thy knell. I brought not upon earth
Peace, but the sword; the gospel I have preached
Man will corrupt, misconstrue and pervert;
Nor shall my Church be only drenched with blood
Of it is own martyrs, zealots shall arise
Aliens to my humility and peace,
With more than pagan enmity enflamed
Each against other; then shall ruthless war
And persecution and fierce civil rage
Ravage the Christian world; intole'rant pride,
Usurping power infallible, shall send
It Is heralds forth with cursing in their mouths
And fetters for man's conscience in their hands;
They in the battle's front shall plant the Cross
And bid the unconverted nations kneel
Under their conquering standard and adopt
The creed of murderers, who, in the place
Of the pure bond of charity, present
A forged scroll blurred and defaced with lies,
And impiously inscribe it with my Name.
These are religion's traitors, and from them
An ample harvest shall thou reap, O Death;
Suffice it thee to know that for a while
Thou shall be spared: And now no more; Behold!
GABRIEL leads on the congregated Saints.
Vanish, pale Phantom! Give the ransomed place.
END OF THE SEVENTH BOOK.
CALVARY; OR THE DEATH OF CHRIST.

BOOK VIII.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE EIGHTH BOOK.
Christ, having closed his interview with Death, prepares to receive the Saints
of the First Resurrection now approaching under the conduct of the angel
Gabriel, and having ascended a mount in the midst of the congregation appears
to them in glory: They pay homage to their Redeemer in a hymn of praise and
thanksgiving: He addresses them in reply, and assures them of the blessings of
immortal life bestowed upon them by the Father as the reward of righteousness:
The patriarch Abraham enters into conference with Christ, in the conclusion of
which the Savior of the world shows him the glorious vision of the heavenly
Jerusalem, the holy city, as described in the Apocalypse: When this beatific
vision is passed away, Christ reascends to earth in view of the whole assembly
of Saints: The angel Gabriel, who is left behind, addresses them from the mount
and expounds the purposes of the Savior's resurrection from the dead and return
to earth: Moses recapitulates the events of his life, instances the frequent
rebellions of the Lord's unfaithful people, and laments their future
impenitence and incredulity: Gabriel replies, and from the nature of man's free
will explains the origin and necessity of evil, from which he deduces the
benefits of Christ's death and redemption: And now the Spirit of God descending
on the hearts of the righteous, inspires them with all understanding and
knowledge, fitted to their happy condition: A Paradise arises within the
regions of Death; Gabriel addresses them for the last time, and upon his
departure the Poem concludes.

CALVARY. BOOK VIII. THE RESURRECTION FROM THE DEAD.
NOW had the Savior by the word of power
Wafted the magic Phantom into air,
And all the horrors of the scene dispelled:
Swift as the stroke of his own winged dart,
Or flitting shadows by the moon-beam chased,
Death on the instant vanished: What had seemed
A citadel of proud and martial port
With bastions fenced and towers impregnable
Of adamant composed and lofty dome,
Covering the throne imperial, now was air;
And, far as eye could reach, a level plain,
In the intermin'able horizon lost,
Unfolded it is vast champain to the view.
Darkness twin-born with Death had fled; the rays,
That from the Savior's sun-crown'd temples beamed,
With dazzling luster brightened all the scene.
There just emerging to the distant view,
And glittering white, a multitude appeared,
Stretched east and west in orderly array,
Swift marching underneath the mighty wings
Of the protecting Angel, who in air
Soared imminent, and with the broad expanse
From flank to flank envelop'd all the host:
He with the blast of the awak'ning trump
Gave note of their advance. In the mid-plain
There was a mount; thither the Savior hied
With his cherubic guard, and there in view
Of the assembled myriads stood sublime.
The Saints in order formed themselves around,
Orb within orb, each in his proper sphere
Instinctively arrang'd; then all at once,
As by one soul inspired, with bended knee
And forehead prostrate on the earth they paid
Joint homage and adored. Oh! who shall dare
With bold conjecture to compute the list
Of that blessed multitude, or say, who first,
Who last, received the glorious All-hail,
Ye blessed of my Father? Yet perchance,
So warranted by scripture and so taught
By moral sage experience, we may doubt
If many rich, if many great or learned
Were of that righteous company; be sure
The lover of this world had there no place,
He bartered it for gold, he passed it off
To Belial for a perishable toy,
He sold it to a wanton: There the proud
Were brought down, and the meek and lowly raised:
The conque'ror not of others but himself
There found pre-eminence: All joy to him,
Who reared the orphan, dried the widow's tears,
And sought affliction, in her secret haunts,
Not for the praise of men; and may not we,
Born in an age when mild philanthropy
Has taught a better lesson to the heart,
May not we foster a kind hope that some
Of pagan name were called, who through the maze
Of dark idolatry took Reason's clue,
And found a mental avenue to God?
Here with the Father of the Faithful stood
A host of patriarchs, prophets, judges, saints:
Noah, who perfect in the time of wrath
And righteous found, was left unto the earth
A remnant, when the waters fell from heaven,
And was in covenant with the Most High
That man no more should perish by the flood:
Moses, the faithful servant of the Lord,
Meekest, though mightiest, of the sons of men
And glorious in the sight of dreadful kings:
Joshua, the avenger of the Elect of God,
Whose voice upon mount Gibeon staid the sun
In the mid-heav'n, and bade the moon stand still
In Ajalon's dark vale, till Israel ceased
From slaughter and the conquering sword was sheathed:
Here Samuel in his linen ephod girt,
Thrice called of God, amid the foremost stood:
He, who with Baal's priests contending reared
His rival altars and brought fire from heaven
To vindicate his God: The Psalmist King,
And he, at whose sick prayer the sun went back,
And he, surnamed the Good: Daniel the feer,
And they, who in the furnace walked unhurt;
All in the sacred page recorded just
And faithful servants of the living God:
For who can doubt the holy word of truth
Attesting their salvation? Yet there is
One, who, by promise sacredly assured
Of bliss immediate, heard the glorious call,
Whilst hanging on the cross, by penitence
And faith obtained from the all-gracious lips
Of God's own Son expiring at his side.
Hail, holy congregation, elder-born
Of righteousness and first fruits of the grave,
Elect unto salvation! Hail, blessed Saints,
Now clothed in white robes, as in your lives
With purity, sound forth your praise to God
And to the Lamb, in whose blood ye are washed;
Wave high your branches of victorious palm,
Hymning the strain, which He in Patmos heard,
What time the glorious vision was revealed.
Hail, First and Last! the immortal chorus sung,
Of all things the beginning and the end;
For thou art he, who lives and wast dead,
And lo! thou art alive for evermore,
And hold'st in hand of hell and death the keys.
Salvation to our God and to the Lamb
At his right hand, who sits on the throne;
Blessing and glory, wisdom, honor, power,
Might and thanksgiving evermore to God
And to his CHRIST! Father, we give thee thanks,
Lord God, which wast and art and art to come,
For this thy mighty power in us fulfilled.
Now are the kingdoms, of this world become
The kingdoms of our Lord and of his CHRIST,
And he shall reign for ever; now thy wrath
On the rebellious nations is let loose;
Now is the first call of the sleeping saints,
And all thy servants faithful unto death
Thou have rewarded with eternal bliss.
Henceforth for ever blessed are the dead,
Thus dying in the Lord, for they shall rest
From labor, and their good works are not lost!
Their hymn performed, the whole redeemed host,
With hands uplifted and all eyes direct
Upon the glorious Presence, bent the knee
Silent, whilst thus the LORD OF MERCY spoke.
Ye blessed of my Father, prophets, saints
And martyrs; ye of Abraham's faithful stock,
And ye, though wild by nature, grafted in
Upon the parent tree and bearing fruits
To life eternal, welcome to my peace!
Now are your watchings and your labors past,
Your tribulations, self-denials, pains
And mournings recompensed; never again
Shall ye know thirst or hunger, nor the sun
Scorch you by day, nor yet by night the moon;
For ye shall dwell before the throne of God,
And I will feed you; I will lead you forth
To living founts and wipe away all tears.
Come, enter ye into your Master's joy,
Come, for the throne awaits you, take the crown
Of glory, take the kingdom from all time
For you prepared, possess your happy rights,
The earnings of your charity and love:
For I was hungered and ye gave me meat,
Thirsty I was and ye asswag'd my thirst,
I was a stranger and ye took me in,
Naked ye clothed me, sick ye visited,
I was in prison and ye came unto me.
When Lord, the righteous humbly interposed,
When were these charities by us performed?
How have we merited this praise of thee,
Whom in the flesh we knew not? Tell us, Lord,
When saw we thee an-hungred and gave food?
When thirsty and gave drink? a stranger when
And took thee in, naked and clothed thee;
When saw we thee in sickness or in prison
And came unto thee? When did thou endure
These hard necessities, or we relieve?
Whereto the LORD replied: Truly ye say
Me in the flesh ye knew not, yet in spi'rit
Ye knew me, for my law was in your hearts;
And what to these my brethren ye have done,
Or to the least of these, ye did to me,
Patron of mercy and the friend of man.
To every one, but not to all alike,
Some talent is in trust, the loan of Heaven,
To husband as he may, and he who spares
From his imparted fund wherewith to help
His neighbor's scantier dole, improves the loan
And makes his Lord his debtor. First and last,
Ere Abraham was I am. Open your ears!
Hear, mark and understand: The world by sin
Original had fallen off from God;
Man was become corrupt, idolatrous,
Abominable; SATAN reigned on earth.
Ye are of various ages; all have slept,
And some from earliest times or ever the flood
Swallowed the nations, yet with one accord
All in your several periods have bewailed
Degenerated man: Noah can tell
How all the earth with violence was filled,
Or ever the fountains of the vasty deep
Were broken up: Moses can well declare
How hard and to rebellion prone the hearts
Of those, whom he led forth: Samuel beheld
A stiff-neck'd generation spurn the yoke
And kick against their God; but vain his voice,
Vain all the prophets voices, which foretold
My coming, without whom the world were lost.
Now is salvation come; I Have drank the cup
Of bitterness and died the death for man:
My peace I Have left on earth; the living world,
They have the word of truth and by that word
Through faith they shall be saved; from them I came
To visit these dark regions and redeem
The saints who slept; behold! ye are alive:
Death has no more dominion; SATAN, chained
For ages, shall abide his time to come:
Meanwhile in glory ye shall dwell with me;
By resurrection purchased with my blood
Ye are the first fruits of immortal life.
Now ABRAHAM, father of the faithful band
And first in station nearest to the mount,
His eyes uplifted to the face divine
Of the effulgent Virtue, and thus spoke.
Yet once more, as aforetime in the days
Of Sodom, suffer me to plead for man,
And ask of thee his Savior if these few,
Few not in numbers, yet for heaven too few
And for heaven's mercy, seeing there are past
So many many ages of the world,
Are all that shall be saved: Alas, for man!
If this be the whole remnant, all the stock
Culled from so many myriads for God's fold.
Where are the nations vanished? Where the hosts,
That sea, earth, flood and fire have swallowed up?
Can hell contain them? Can devouring Death
Find stomach for them all? Did God make man
For death and hell, or thou endure the cross
Only for us? Are all the righteous shrunk
To this small measure? And, if these be all,
Are they not yet enough to save the rest,
If heavenly mercy listen to our prayer?
May not our righteousness so save a world
From wrath, as once the righteousness of five
Had saved a guilty city from it is fate?
To him the LORD OF MERCY: I have said
Ye are the first fruits by my blood obtained,
The earnest of redemption: I have bruised,
Not crushed, the Serpent's head; he shall arise
Out of the pit once more to vex the earth.
Death the last enemy is not destroyed,
Yet is his scepter shortened, and the key,
That opens into life, now in those hands,
Where mercy best can place it for man's good:
Thus of all power though Death is not bereft,
Yet I have shook his throne, with inroad deep
Pierced his dark realm, and, you redeeming thence,
Made tenantless your graves, his strongest holds.
With you when from this depth I reascend,
And through heaven's golden portal lead my host
Of Saints high-waving these victorious palms,
Your white robes glittering in God's starry courts,
Great sure will be the triumph, loud the acclaim,
When all my Father's Angels shall sound forth
Their joyful halelujahs round his throne.
Enough for victory has been achieved,
Destruction is reserved to that great day,
When the compelling Angel shall go forth
To gather every atom of man's dust,
Which the seas cover or the earth contains:
Then shall all souls be judged; if Abraham then,
When of all hearts the secrets shall be known,
Then if the Friend of God has aught to urge
In mitigation of man's guilt, be sure,
Ere justice strike, mercy will hear the plea.
Of this no more: The seasons and the times
Are with the Father; the dread hour draws on:
But I must first revisit those on earth,
Whom I have left in sorrow; for their sakes
I must again submit me to the flesh,
And by the evidence of sense confirm
My promised resurrection; this performed
And immortality revealed to man,
By faith made sure, my gospel shall go forth:
My office then the Comforter will take;
The weak he shall make strong, the foolish wise,
And by the mouths of sucklings and of babes
He shall confound the wisdom of the world,
And over the gates of hell erect my Church.
When thus the Patriarch, glowing still with zeal
For man's salvation, further question urged.
Lord, will not then the faithless world believe,
When thou return'st with glory? From the dead
When they behold thee visible on earth
And thence to heaven ascending, can they doubt?
Such revelation can their eyes resist,
Their ears such truth recorded? Shall there then
Be left a Gentile idol upon earth
To rival Israel's God? Shall there not be
One Shepherd and one fold for all mankind,
One faith, one baptism, one LORD and CHRIST?
But I perhaps too bold offend thine ear
With my rude converse; Lord, if so, command
My tongue to silence; yet not in thy wrath,
Not in thy wrath, O Lord, reprove my zeal.
Whereto the Savior mildly thus replied.
O Abraham, in whose soul compassion glows
And love, that burns with zeal for all thy sons,
Nor for thy sons alone, but the whole world,
Whose advocate thou art, think not the tongue,
That speaks for mercy, can offend my ear:
Yet what thy zeal anticipates in time
Is distant far; ages must roll betwixt
Thy hope and its completion; threatening clouds
Lour on the glorious prospect; seas of blood
Must first be passed; long pilgrimage and sad
My martyrs have to make through valleys dark,
Where ignorance shades the sun, through frightful haunts,
Where superstition pictures out the scene
In monstrous forms, and worships what it dreads:
Painful their march and round beset with snares;
Here treach'ry lurks, there persecution flames,
Before them infidelity, behind
Reproach and slander and the roar of tongues
Contentious, urging them to turn from God
And waste their nobler zeal in vain dispute.
Thus step by step in righteousness and faith
Armed at all points my servants militant
Shall win their way, and what they earn enjoy.
Lowly and meek I came into the world,
And meek and lowly I shall now return,
Not with that glory rising from the grave,
Which for my second coming is reserved,
But in that mortal body, which they pierced,
Showing my wounds, not with the proud display
Of one, who courts the voice of public fame,
But communing apart with those I left
To be my witnesses, that so through them
Men may be taught by reason to discern
Not what they must, but what they should, believe;
Not by the evidence of sense to feel,
But by the mind's conviction to perceive
Truth in it is argument, not act, and build
On reason, not necessity, their faith,
And on their faith and their good works their hope.
God will not always struggle with mankind,
Heap proof on proof till incredulity
Though blind must see, though deaf of force must hear;
He will not bring his heaven upon the earth,
Rather will lead man's heart from earthly things
To reach at heavenly; the railing Jews,
Who fixed me to the cross, bade me come down
And with the sign of power dispel their doubts:
So had I frustrated all faith at once,
And with all faith all virtue: I was dumb,
I opened not my mouth to their reproach,
I stirred not from the cross, I died the death,
Nor to my rescue brought one Angel down,
Though legions waited to obey my call:
And now none other sign will I vouchsafe
But of the prophet Jonas, for as he
From out the belly of the whale emerg'd
On the third day, so I from out the tomb
In the same body will come forth on earth
With the third morning's dawn; thus shall the word
Of prophecy by my disciples heard,
Not understood, be perfected in me,
And I will breathe my spi'rit into their hearts
To comprehend all scriptures, and to preach
Me crucified; nor shall there be a dearth
Of witnesses to publish and attest
My resurrection; hundreds shall behold
My substance in the flesh, and he that doubts
Shall touch me and believe. More to expound
There needs not; this in all your ears aloud
I now promulgate, that when I am gone
Ye may abide the interim in peace,
By terror or impatience undisturbed:
And now not many are the days to pass,
Ere to the heaven of heavens I shall ascend,
And there in blessed communion with my Saints,
Made perfect after death, for ever dwell
At the right hand of Power; meanwhile the seed,
Which I have sown, though of all grains the least,
Yet watered by the Comforter shall grow
Of herbs the greatest, and become a tree,
Within whose branches all the birds of air
Shall come and lodge, so shall my kingdom rise
From mean beginning into mighty growth,
A still small current, spreading as it goes;
For in the arm of man I place no strength,
Nor in the battle's thunder can be heard
His voice that preaches peace; to storm the ear,
Like those loud heathen orators, who shake
The forum with their eloquence, ill suits
The servants of a Master little versed
In this world's wisdom and not vain of speech:
In love, in calm persuasion and in peace
My gospel I have planted: Woe to them,
Who in the place of these sweet fruits provoke
The baneful growth of persecution, strife
And discord in my Church, opening my wounds
Unheal'd and crucifying me afresh.
To him the Patriarch: Lord, we give thee thanks
For that thou have imparted to thy saints
These tidings of great joy, though distant far
And through such clouds of sorrow dimly seen;
And sure we are thy gospel shall prevail,
Yet much do we lament for what thy saints
And martyrs have to suffer upon earth,
Foiled by that first Deceiver of mankind,
Who, though now bruised and for awhile enchain'd,
Shall yet come forth to vex thy holy Church,
To conjure up false prophets and pervert
Thy follo'wers, who are taught to live in peace
And charity with all men: But we know
God did not build this goodly frame of things
For SATAN to destroy, and he and Death
Shall have an end: Heaven is man's natural home
And righteousness the impulse of his heart;
Nor will God fail his promise, that in me
And in my seed the whole world shall be blessed:
Ah! when shall I behold that promised day?
When shall I see the warring world at peace?
When shall my Israel, scattered over the earth
And straggling wide, hear their good Shepherd's call
And come into his fold? Sure that blessed voice,
That glorious vision would be heaven itself.
That vision thou shall see, the LORD replied
And smiled all-gracious on the enraptured Saint,
From this prospective mount with purged eye,
That through the lengthening tract of time discerns
Futurity remote, thou shall behold
The Apocalypse, which to no living eye,
Save of my servant John, I shall disclose:
But know ere this blessed period shall arrive
The elements must melt with fervent heat,
And earth and sea and heaven must pass away,
Darkness and sin and death shall be no more,
And a new world shine forth. Ascend the mount,
And eastward turning tell me what thou see.
I see, the Patriarch cried, an heaven and earth,
Earth without sea and heaven without a cloud,
All bright and glist'ning from the Maker's hands:
I see descending from the throne of God
Jerusalem the Holy City, new,
Decked like a bride for her celestial spouse:
Order and grace and symmetry conspire
In all her parts, and with the rich display
Of vivid gems make glorious her attire:
To the four points of heaven in equal span
She stretches out her many-colour'd walls,
Celestial masonry, whose meanest stone,
More rare and precious than the brightest gem
Of earthly diadems, transparent flames,
From the foundations to the topmost cope
Of mural battlement one dazzling blaze
Of glorious jewelry, and them amidst
On every flank quadrangular three gates,
Each of an orient pearl, to our twelve tribes
By number and by name appropriate,
Stand open, guarded by Cherubic watch;
Through whose unfolded portals I descry
A city all of purest gold and clear
As the unclouded crystal, on whose towers
God's all-sufficient glory sheds a flood
Of radiance brighter than the borrowed beam
Of shadowy moon or sun often wrapped in clouds,
Making alternate night and day on earth:
But night is here unknown; day needs not
To rest in darkness, nor the eye in sleep;
Nor temple here for worship may be found,
The ever-present Deity demands
No house of prayer; in every heart is built
His altar, every voice records his praise,
And every saint his minister and priest.
Through the mid-street a crystal river flows
Pellucid, welling from the throne of God,
It Is living source, upon whose border springs
The tree of life, bearing ambrosial fruits
Monthly renewed and varied through the year,
Food for immortals, in whose balmy gum
And leaves medicinal a virtue dwells
So general and potential, that no pain
Or ailment but here finds it is ready cure:
No tear shall wet this consecrated soil,
Nor feud nor clamor nor unholy curse
Disturb these peaceful echoes, here the saints
In sweet harmonious brotherhood shall dwell
Serene and perfect in the sight of God.
And hark! I hear seraphic voices chaunt
To their melodious harps the bridal hymn --
Now is our God espoused to his Church,
And from their heavenly union are gone forth
Blessing and peace and joy to all mankind:
Now shall his saints eternal Sabbath keep
From death and pain and wailing and complaint:
All is made new, the old is passed away,
Time draws aside the faded scene of things
And Nature in immortal freshness blooms:
Now to the waters of the fount of life,
Perpetual waters, every soul may come,
And he that is athirst may freely drink:
But fire and brimstone in the burning lake
Shall be their portion, who revolt from God;
There with the Beast in torments they shall dwell,
Sealed in their foreheads with his mark and drink
The cup of indignation to the dregs
Wrung out in anger, whilst their ceaseless cry
Shall with the smoke of the infernal pit
Day after day for evermore ascend.
No more; for now the heavenly vision closed;
Awakened from his trance the Patriarch turned
With grateful reverence to address the LORD
And giver of these new-discover'd joys,
When lo! ascending from the mount he saw
CHRIST in a cloud of glory on the wings
Of mighty Cherubim upborne in air
High-soaring, to this orb terraqueous bound,
Seen over-head diminished to a point
Dim and opake amid the blue serene:
His raiment, whiter than the newborn light
Struck out of chaos by the Maker's hand
In earnest of creation, sparkling blazed
In it is swift motion and with fiery track
Marked his ascent to earth; the host of Saints
With joyful loud hosannas filled the air:
Glory to God on high, was all their strain,
On the earth peace, good will to all mankind!
Meanwhile the Archangel GABRIEL, who yet kept
His tutelary station on the mount,
So bidd'n of CHRIST, with arm outstretch'd and voice
Commanding silence, thus the Saints bespake.
Now is your resurrection sure, your joy,
Your glory and your triumph over Death
And hell made perfect; for behold where CHRIST
Your first-fruit is aris'n, and waves on high
The ensign of redemption; now he soars
Up to yon pendent world, that darkling speck,
Which in the boundless empyrean floats
Poised on it is whirling axle; there he lived
And took your mortal body, there he died
And for your sakes endured the painful cross,
Giving his blood a ransom for your sins;
Thither he goes to reassume his flesh;
There, when his angel ministers have opened
The sealed sepulcher, he shall come forth
And show himself resurgent from the grave
To those whom he has sanctified and called
To be his witnesses in all the world,
And of his resurrection after death
Their faithful evidence to seal with blood
Of martyrs and apostles, warning men
With their last breath to be baptized and live;
So shall the seed be watered and increase,
Till all the Gentile nations shall come in
And dwell beneath it is branches evermore.
Now are the gates of everlasting life
Set open to mankind, and when the LORD,
Captain of their salvation, shall have lived
His promised term on earth, and thence to heaven
Ascending seat himself at God's right hand,
Then shall the Holy Ghost the Comforter
Rush like a mighty wind upon the hearts
Of his inspired apostles; tongues of fire
And languages untaught they shall receive
To speak with boldness the revealed Word,
Enduring all things for the gospel's sake;
Troubled on every side yet not distressed,
Perplexed but not surrendered to despair,
Afflicted not forsaken they shall be,
Cast down but not destroyed, knowing that God,
Who raised the LORD JESUS from the dead,
Them also into life through him will raise,
And that the light affliction of this world,
Which is but for a moment, soon shall be
O'erpaid by a far more exceeding weight
Of glory' eternal in the life to come.
He ceased, and all were silent, wrapped in awe
Of the late glorious vision, yet in heart
Troubled for what the Angel had revealed
Of sorrows still to come and pains and deaths
To be encountered by the Saints on earth;
When now that Shepherd, who on Sinai's mount
Commun'd with God and heard creation's plan
Expounded by it is Architect, thus spoke.
Oh thou, whom through the fiery cloud I saw
On Horeb's hill, when tending Jethro's flock,
What time I heard my name twice called of God
In thunder from amidst the flaming bush,
Bidding me strait go forth to loose his sheep
From Egypt's captive fold, I do perceive
That I have penned the Word of God aright,
And now in CHRIST behold the woman's seed
Bruising that Serpent's head, who wrought the fall
Of our first parents. Forty days and nights
On Sinai's top 'midst thund'rings, clouds and fire
Fasting I stood, and whilst the hallowed ground
Trembled beneath my bare unsandal'd feet,
I heard an awful voice, that bade me write
The glorious record of his six days work.
Aghast, confounded, dazzled with the blaze
Of glory, still my faithful pen obeyed
The sacred dictates of an unseen God:
I wrote, and to an unbelieving world
Published the wondrous Code; age after age
Libelled the transcript: With the rod of power
I smote the seas asunder; Israel passed
Through watery battlements; forty long years
In the waste howling wilderness I fed
Their murmuring tribes with food miraculous;
They fed but murmured still: I brought them laws
With God's own finger graven; I came down
Bearing Jehovah's statutes in my hand
On both sides written; impious noisy shouts,
Lewd triumphs and vile revels smote mine ear;
The people danced around a molten calf,
Monstrous idolatry! Raging with shame
I dashed the stony tablets on the ground,
And shivered them to fragments; God was mocked;
A stiff-neck'd and a stubborn race they were,
Who from the rock of their salvation turned
And sacrificed to devils; and behold!
Their sons have crucified the LORD OF LIFE;
Therefore his resurrection, which shall be
Light and redemption to the Gentile world,
To them is darkness and the shadow' of death;
For they have slain the very Paschal Lamb;
That bloody symbol of their ancient law,
Which I made sacred, they have now made void,
And cancelled my legation: I perceive
A new commandment is gone forth; I see
The temple's vail is rent; for the old law,
A carnal shadow of things spiritual,
Sufficed not for perfection and the power
Of an eternal life: CHRIST is become
That King of Salem, that immortal Priest
Of God most high, whose ministry supreme,
Before all time from heaven itself derived
And not from right Levitical, removes
All title from that consecrated tribe,
Where I had fixed it. God, who sending me,
Sent but his servant, now has given his Son
More worthy of his glory; without sin
And spotless He, the great High Priest, has passed
Into the heavens victorious over Death;
But I, whose trespasses at Meribah,
Frail sinful man, provoked the Lord to wrath,
Saw but the skirts of Dan from Pisgah's top,
Unworthy deemed to enter that fair land,
And died upon mount Nebo. But when CHRIST,
Who has awakened us from sleep, shall rise
And in his mortal flesh a second time
Visit his Saints on earth, who then shall say
There is no resurrection of the dead?
Faintly I shadowed forth a future life;
I spoke not to men's senses, as CHRIST speaks;
God gave me no commission to reveal
The secrets of the grave; corruption's worm
Spared not my flesh, nor came my spirit back
From Death's dark citadel to give mankind
Conviction ocular of his defeat;
I left him in his power till CHRIST should come
To break that scepter, which had awed the world.
Much then it moves my wonder, much I grieve
That darkness shall not yet be drawn aside
From Israel, and that those, who would not hear
Me and the prophets, shall not yet believe
CHRIST their Messiah rising from the dead.
To whom the Archangel answered heavenly mild:
Well may thou muse that reasoning man should doubt,
And cause we have to grieve, when he neglects
So great salvation; but when CHRIST has shown
What is the good and true and perfect way,
Reason must do the rest: When all are free
Some must be faithless, wilful and perverse.
God could have made his creatures void of sin,
For he can put a master in their hearts,
And govern them by instinct; but to man
He gave a nobler faculty, a will,
A spark of immortality, a soul,
Reason to counsel that immortal soul,
And conscience to restrain licentious will.
Grace shall assist the humble and devout;
A proud man has no friend in heaven or earth,
Renounced of angels and by men abhorred:
Truth must be sought, it will not be imposed:
What were that revelation, which should leave
No exercise to faith? All men must work
With fear and trembling their salvation out.
God does not give free will to take away
What he has given; if man will sin, he must:
Nor do we call them good, who cannot err,
Else brutes would claim a virtue. None is good
Save God alone; impute we not to God
The evil which man does, nor him arraign
For not preventing ills which he foreknows:
Angels have sinned and some are fallen from bliss;
All had their days of error, their degrees
Of good and ill, else why have we degrees
Ranks and precedencies of bliss in heaven?
Call your own lives to mind; ye have been men,
Your failings many, yet your virtues more;
Why are ye now rewarded by your God?
Why but because those virtues were your own?
Ye made them what they were, ye reared their growth,
Reason reformed the wild luxuriant soil,
Plucked up the weeds and nursed the glorious fruit.
Is there amongst you one that has to boast
Human perfection? There is none that will.
A free yet faultless creature would be more
Than man, than angel; nor can God create
An equal to himself, a rival God.
In Eden's happy groves when man was placed,
One interdicted baneful plant there was,
Tempting and rich in fruit; all else was good,
Fair to the eye and wholesome to the taste;
Yet of that fruit man plucked and eat and died;
Tempted he was, but not compelled to take;
Warned to abstain, no angel stopped his hand,
No thundering voice deterred him from the deed,
For man was free; so could he not have been,
Had God's foreknowledge overruled his will.
Thus Sin had origin and Death began
His occupation with the human race,
More terrible for that he came with pangs,
Horrors and doubts on sin-oppressed man,
When conscience wrung him in the parting hour:
But still the inextinguishable soul
Mocked at Death's dart, the body was his own
From the beginning; of the earth 'twas made,
The earth it tilled and from the earth it fed;
A tenement of dust was never formed
Fox immortality; and now, behold,
Adam the earthy man, in whom all die,
Is buried to the world; redemption brings
The dayspring of Salvation from on high,
CHRIST in his glory comes, the LORD from heaven,
And who in him have faith, in him have life.
He ceased, when now the assembly of the Saints,
Who whilst he spoke stood in their orbs unmoved
Circling the mount, 'gan feel the Spi'rit of God
Descending on their hearts, and, like a sea
By secret currents from it is bottom stirred,
Waved to and fro their undulating files
Wide and more wide, as with a mighty wind
The heavenly inspiration on them rushed:
This GABRIEL heard and from the mount came down,
Which quaked beneath his feet, whilst over-head
Loud thunderings announc'd the coming God:
And now a fire, that covered all the mount,
Bespoke him present; all the air respir'd
Ambrosial odours, amaranth and rose,
For Nature felt her God, and every flower
And every fragrant shrub, whose honied breath
Perfumes the courts of heaven, had burst to life
Blooming, and, in a thousand colors died,
Threw their gay mantle over the naked heath:
Now glowed the living landscape; hill and dale
Rose on the flat, or sunk as Nature shaped
Her loveliest forms and swelled her wavey line,
Leaving unrein'd variety to run
Her wild career amid the sportive scene:
Nor were there wanting trees of every growth,
Umbrageous some, making a verdant tent
Under their spreading branches, some of shaft
Majestic, towering over the subject groves:
Blossoms and fruits and aromatic gums
Scented the breeze, that fanned their rustling leaves;
And them betwixt a crystal river flowed
Over golden sands, meand'ring in it is course
Through amaranthine banks with lulling sound
Of dulcet murmurs breathing soft repose.
Thus at the sight of God spontaneous rose
A Paradise within the realm of Death,
Where that blessed congregation might abide
Their LORD's return now visitant on earth:
And now the Eternal having breathed his joy
Into their hearts and given them to discern
All knowledge, that befitted souls so blessed,
Withdrew his presence from the flaming mount;
Whereat the min'istring Angel, who beheld
Salvation's work complete, thus parting spoke.
God, in whose presence pleasure ever dwells,
Has for your dear Redeemer's sake bestowed
These joys, and now his presence is withdrawn;
Yet has he left his spirit in your hearts
To teach you all that is and is to be:
Behold, the cloud that veiled your mortal eyes
Is drawn aside, and what as in a glass
Darkling ye saw now face to face is seen:
Ye now discern the ways of God how just,
How true, how wise, how perfect in design,
And well ye know that man, presumptuous man,
In a vain shadow walks; ye perceive
His boasted mind sufficient for the things,
That to his own salvation appertain;
Yet when it scans the mysteries of heaven,
How false, how weak, how daringly absurd!
Firm faith, warm charity and humble hope,
These are the Christian graces, these the guides,
That lead to life eternal; thoughts perverse,
Pert quibbling follies, published in the pride
Of false philosophy, are devilish arts,
That damn the instrument, who thus attempts
To hide the light of revelation's beam
From weaker eyes, and turn the world from God;
These verily shall have their just reward:
And now no more; this Paradise ye see
Is but your passage to a brighter scene,
A resting place till CHRIST shall re-ascend
To the right hand of God and call you hence
To share his glory in the heaven of heavens.
He said, and swifter than the meteor's glance,
Sprung on the wing to seek his native sphere:
The Saints looked up, then sung with joint acclaim --
Glory to God and praises to his CHRIST,
Judge and Redeemer of the quick and dead!
END OF THE POEM.

