BILL of HEALTH.
"A MAN," says Celsus, "who is blessed with good health, should confine himself
to no particular rules, either with respect to regimen or medicine. He ought
frequently to diversify his manner of living; to be sometimes in town,
sometimes in the country; to hunt, sail, indulge himself in rest, but more
frequently to use exercise. He ought to refuse no kind of food that is commonly
used, but sometimes to eat more, and sometimes less; sometimes to make one at
an entertainment, and sometimes to forbear it; to make rather two meals than
one, and always to eat heartily, provided he can digest it. He ought neither
too eagerly to pursue, nor too scrupulously to avoid intercourse with the fair
sex: Pleasures of this kind, rarely indulged, render the body alert and active,
but, when too frequently repeated, weak and languid. He should be careful, in
time of health, not to destroy, by excesses of any kind, that vigor of
constitution which should support him under sickness."

Keep constant to a plain diet. Those enjoy most health, and live longest, that
avoid curiosity and variety of meats and drinks. Aged and decrepid persons
ought to eat often, and but little at a time, of moist and liquid food, as such
food nourishes soonest, and digests easiest. The less a sick person eats, the
sooner he will recover; for it is a true saying, The more you fill foul bodies
the more you hurt them.

The most unhealthy are found among those who feed high upon the most delicious
dainties, and drink strong and spiritous liquors; whereas others, who want such
delicate fare, are seldom sick, unless they have such unsatiable appetites as
to eat too much. Experience teaches men, that, after they have indulged their
appetites to excess, they find themselves heavy and dull, and often sleepy,
which sufficiently shows that those meals are prejudicial to the welfare of the
body; whereas, in the morning before they have eaten, they are light and
pleasantly easy. To sup sparingly is most healthful, because the stomach being
not over burdened, the sleep is more pleasant; and from sparing-suppers, the
breeding of those humors is prevented, which cause defluxions, rheumatisms,
gouts, dropsies, giddiness, and corruption in the mouth from the scurvy. From
fasting, or a very spare diet, many indispositions may be cured. And to
preserve health, one meal should not be eaten till the former has passed clean
out of the stomach (which is known when hunger calls for another supply) by
means of which constant practice, the food will be converted to good chyle, and
from good chyle, which is a milk-like substance, good blood will be bred, and
from good blood generous spirits will be produced, on which a healthy
constitution and liberal mind will ensue; but on the contrary, when too great a
quantity of food is taken (for the pleasure of taste) which the stomach cannot
well digest, the chyle will become raw and corrupt, foul the blood, effect the
passions, and render the body disordered and unhealthy. Misers, who eat and
drink but little, live long. Two meals a day are said to be sufficient for weak
people, and all persons after fifty years of age, as the omitting of suppers
conduces much to their health.

Every intention in the cure of disorders may be answered by diet alone; but
the food must be wholesome, and taken regular, or the consequences will be bad.
The poor are generally the first who suffer by unwholesome food, which often
causes infection, and reaches people in every station. There are many ways by
which provisions may be rendered unwholesome. Acts of Providence we must submit
to. Bad seasons may either prevent the ripening of grain, or damage it
afterward; but no punishment can be too severe for those who suffer provisions
to spoil, by hoarding them, in order to raise the price. All animal substances
have a constant tendency to putrefaction; and the soundest grain, if kept too
long, becomes unfit for use. No animal can be wholesome which does not take
sufficient exercise. Most of our stalled cattle, swine, etc. are crammed with
gross food, but not allowed exercise nor free air, by which means they indeed
grow fat, but their humors, not being properly prepared, remain crude, and
occasion indigestions, gross humors, and oppression of the spirits, in those
who feed upon them.

Good tea, taken in moderation, not too strong nor too hot, nor drunk upon an
empty stomach, will seldom do harm; but if it be bad, or substituted in place
of solid food, it must be prejudicial.

All high-seasoning, pickles, etc. are only incentives to luxury, and never
fail to hurt the stomach. Plain roasting or boiling is all that the stomach
requires. Were fermented liquors faithfully prepared, kept to a proper age, and
used in moderation, they would prove real blessings; but while they are ill
prepared, and various ways adultered, since preparing and vending of them have
become the most coveted and lucrative branches of business, their quality
should be strictly examined. Families ought to brew and bake for their own use;
as the grand object of the venders is to render the liquors intoxicating, and
the bread to please the eye, rather than to consult the health of the consumers.

Diet ought to be suited to the manner of life. A sedentary or studious person
should live more sparingly than one who labors hard without doors. Many kinds
of food will nourish a peasant very well, which would be almost indigestible to
a citizen; and the latter will live upon a diet on which the former would
starve.

It is the opinion of an eminent Physician that fasting, rest, and drinking
water, will cure most diseases; for fasting gives time to the stomach to unload
itself of the cause of distempers, the cause of all diseases being begun in
that bowel only; to the cleansing of which, drinking plentifully of water will
much contribute.

With the assistance of fresh air, and the above means, the following case was
effected: "A neighbor of mine became very feverish, and his wife persuaded him
to go to bed. I heard of it soon after, and gave him a visit, where I found the
windows close shut, the curtains of the bed drawn, and the room very hot, for
it was in the month of July: he was burning hot, and complained for want of
breath. I drew open the curtains, covered him warm, and then opened the
windows, and the wind blew into the room; upon which he soon told me his
shortness of breath had left him. I persuaded him to drink some water, which he
found did much refresh him; and, after I had taken my leave of him, he called
for more water; and, while he had the cup in his hand, the apothecary came in,
whom his wife had sent for, who, finding him about to drink the water, told him
if he did do it he was a dead man; but, instead of forbearing, he drank it up
in his presence: upon which the apothecary took his leave, and told him he
would say no more to him. However, before night, the person got up, went
abroad, and was cured of his fever.

That there is a possibility of curing diseases by a diet only that is
temperate and cooling, such as milk, and the roots and seeds of vegetables,
viz. potatoes, turnips, wheat, rice, barley, oatmeal, and full-ripe fruit, let
the following remarkable instance, testified by Dr. Cheyne, evince: A physician
that lived at Croyden, who had long been afflicted with the falling-evil, by
slow observation, found, that the lighter his meals were, the lighter were his
fits. At last he also cast off all liquids but water, and found his fits
weaker, and the intervals longer; and finding his disease mend, as its fuel
was withdrawn, he took to vegetable food, and water only, which put an entire
period to his fits, without any relapse; but finding that food windy to him, he
took to milk, of which he eat a pint for a breakfast, a quart at dinner, and a
pint for supper, without fish, flesh, bread, or any strong or spiritous liquor,
or any drink but water, with which he lived afterward for a number of years,
without the least interruption in his health, strength, or vigor.

Temperance or spare diet, void of dainties, never was injurious to the
strongest constitution, and, without it, such as are weak and sickly, cannot
long exist; for the more such persons eat and drink, the more weak and
disordered they will still find themselves to be. It is custom only that makes
men hanker after gluttony and drunkenness, and a contrary custom will make men
abhor it as much.

Temperance will enable the rich to live more at ease, and enjoy their wealth
the longer, being the surest way to prolong life, though it has not the power
to make those young who are aged; but it will make the aged more free from
decrepidness, and die with more case, if the deathbed has been well prepared
for by a good life.

FINIS.
Printed for A. CUNNINGHAM, Southampton, and J. FOWLER, Salisbury. Price 1d.


