ROMAN PORTRAITS, A POEM.

ROBERT JEPHSON ESQUIRE.
portrait of Robert Jephson

ROMAN PORTRAITS, A POEM, IN HEROIC VERSE; WITH HISTORICAL REMARKS AND
ILLUSTRATIONS: BY ROBERT JEPHSON, ESQUIRE.

(...). DION. HAL. SEMPER AD EVENTUM FESTINAT, ET IN MEDIAS RES,
NON SECUS AC NOTAS, AUDITOREM RAPIT; ET QUAE
DESPERATE TRACTATA NITESCERE POSSE, RELINQUIT.
HOR. LONDON: PRINTED BY HENRY BALDWIN, FOR G. G. AND J. ROBINSON, IN
PATERNOSTER ROW. M DCC XCIV.

TO EDMOND MALONE, ESQUIRE.
MY DEAR SIR,
THIS short address to you is not intended as a formal Dedication; but having
long wished for some fair opportunity of doing myself credit by publicly
subscribing myself your friend, none seems likely to occur more favorable than
the present.

From our school-days to this hour, we have lived in a state of uninterrupted
intimacy and kindness: natives of the same country, educated under the same
masters, and pursuing similar studies, though we have not taken exactly the
same path, both have been zealous in the cause of letters. Your labors have
furnished instruction to the readers, and mine perhaps in a small degree may
contribute to their entertainment; nor can I be insensible to the honor you
have done me, when I reflect, that the best commentator on our greatest poet
has condescended more than once to be my editor. Without your kind care and
encouragement the following Work would not probably have been made public; to
your protection therefore it is inscribed, with every assurance of esteem and
cordiality, by

Your obliged and faithful friend, ROBERT JEPHSON.
DUBLIN CASTLE, May 26, 1794.
PREFACE.
BY various accidental causes, particularly the residence of the author and
editor in different kingdoms, the appearance of this work has been delayed much
longer than was at first intended; but as time always affords opportunity for
correction and improvement, I find upon the whole no reason to regret that the
expedition of the press did not keep pace with my wish to see the task which I
had undertaken more speedily completed. By this delay I had also the advantage
of several judicious observations suggested by the vigilant sagacity of my
editor; which produced at least considerable additions to the matter contained
in the text and annotations. His patience, indeed, I have always found
unwearied, like his friendship; and it gives me sincere pleasure to think,
that, being now disengaged from any further kind attention to my fame, he will
have more uninterrupted leisure to pursue other subjects, in which the public
may be much more interested.

Whatever deficiency may be found in the execution of the following poem, some
small merit may perhaps be allowed to the novelty of the design; to which I
know nothing similar in our language, unless the ingenious and learned Mr.
Hayley's History of Historians, in verse, may be considered in some sort as its
precursor.

It would have been no very difficult task to have swelled the size of this
volume to a much larger bulk, by multiplying citations from the ancient authors
where the original materials of which it is composed may be found; but though
some were necessary, I thought too many might be tedious, and of no utility.
Such as are inserted, were chosen rather for their brevity, than for any other
reason of preference.

In some modern productions it has been the fashion to make new discoveries in
the ancient history of Rome, and to assign new motives and qualities to several
of the principal agents; but the present seems to me to be too late a period
for such investigations: they contribute less perhaps to establish right
opinions, than to shake the credit of all history, and to leave the mind
suspended between assent and incredulity. In every material point, (the story
of the sufferings of Regulus excepted, for which Polybius must be consulted,) I
find all the best writers concur; and I could not presume to advance any bold
paradoxes, when I was convinced that I should want authorities, or sufficient
ingenuity, to support them. A French writer of the present century, M. de St.
Foix, in his account of the streets of Paris, asserts roundly, that our kings,
Edward the third and Henry the fifth, were cowards; and I think, adds, were
defeated at Cressy and Agincourt. He meant no doubt by a violation of truth to
flatter the vanity of one nation, and to mortify that of another; but I could
not be induced by the love of novelty to affirm that Sylla was not cruel, or
that Julius Caesar was unmerciful.

I cannot forbear to flatter myself, that the reader will not be disappointed,
should he not find in this book what the author never intended it should
contain. It does not come within the province of poetry to attempt deep
political disquisitions, or the adjustment of points which have frustrated the
conjectures of the critic, and the antiquary's persevering researches. As to
the policy of the Romans, the penetration of Montesquieu has left little for
future investigation; and there are even in our own language details of the
events sufficiently copious and satisfactory. But to understand the history of
Rome, it is not enough to read her historians; we must also acquaint ourselves
with their characters: otherwise we may pay the same deference to the
misrepresentations of Dion, and the prodigies of Plutarch, as to the
authenticity of Sallust, Tully, and Tacitus.

What is to be found here, is not intended for the master, but the student; it
is meant rather to incite, than to satisfy. My purpose will be answered, and my
ambition gratified, should it awaken in the young mind a laudable desire of
more knowledge, and revive not unpleasingly in the breast of more mature
scholars the recollection of those admirable writers, and illustrious
characters, who claimed their attention in their early studies; the reverence
for whom seems to increase, like the magnitude of mountains, in proportion to
our distance from them. A great object approached too nearly can be but
partially examined; at a due removal from it we discover all its sublimity.

I may presume it will not be necessary to make any apology for opinions
expressed in several notes, where modern politics and recent events are
assimilated with ancient. Mine have been dictated by real admiration of, and
reverence for, the most excellent constitution, and the happiest form of
government, that ever regulated human affections and conduct. During the short
prevalence of French superiority, Nov. 1792.
which was attended with the dispersion of the most noxious and abominable
principles, it seemed to me next to a tacit approbation, not to endeavor to
expose them. To hazard the demolition of the august fabric of the British
Constitution, in attempting to remove some trifling abuses which may adhere to
its surface, would be like the wisdom of pulling down St. Paul's or Westminster
Abbey, because a few swallows happened to plaster up their nests against the
corners of the windows. Minute inspection is requisite to discover them; and
how pitiful must be the genius which can overlook the grandeur of the whole, to
dwell upon such blemishes!

A superficial similitude between the Roman republic and France in her
revolutionary disorder, occurred so frequently, that not to perceive it would
have been blindness, and not to have sometimes expatiated upon it,
pusillanimity.

There is one remark not made in the notes to this poem, which ought to have a
place somewhere. The infidels of France, when exalted into the seats of
legislation, began with a policy directly opposite to the practice of every
other state pre-existent to them. They commenced by taking off from human
appetites all restraint from religion; and of course they dissolved with the
ancient form of government, every bond upon conscience, and every obligation to
virtue. The consequences have been correspondent. Let me not be suspected to be
a favourer or friend of the old constitution of France, for I think nothing
could make it appear tolerable, but the anarchy by which it was succeeded; yet
even this they attempt impudently to varnish over by false names, and perverted
examples. Alas, good Brutus! we have heard thy virtuous spirit, thy mild
genius, appealed to, for the sanctification of every crime which can stain the
black catalogue of human villainy. France has made thee the patron, the
tutelary God of atheists and regicides; and thy fair name is invoked to
reconcile the world to oppression and cruelty, to robbery, parricide,
treachery, and massacre. Caesar would have fallen by some other hand, could
thou but have foreseen that such disgrace was reserved for thy memory.

In June, 1793, look at the picture of French democracy, as displayed in the
masterly coloring of Mr. Pit, before the House of Commons of England:

What (says that great statesman) could be the effect of any negotiation for
peace in the present moment? It is not merely to the character of Marat, with
whom we have to treat, that I object; it is not to the horror of those crimes
which have stained their legislators, crimes in every stage rising above each
other in point of enormity; but I object to the consequence of that character,
to the effect of those crimes. They are such as render negotiation useless, and
must entirely deprive of stability any peace which could be concluded under
such circumstances. Where is our security for the performance of a treaty,
where we have neither the good faith of a nation, nor the responsibility of a
monarch? The moment that the mob of Paris becomes under the influence of a new
leader, the most mature deliberations are reversed, the most solemn engagements
are retracted, or free will is altogether controuled. In every one of the
stages of their repeated revolutions we have said, 'now we have seen the worst,
the measure of iniquity is full, we shall no longer be shocked or astonished by
the contemplation of added crimes, and increasing enormities:' the next mail
convinced us of our credulity, and by presenting us with fresh crimes, and
enormities still more dreadful, excited impressions of new astonishment and
accumulated horror. All the crimes which disgrace history, have occurred in
one country in a space so short, and with circumstances so highly aggravated,
as to outrun thought, and exceed imagination. Should we treat with Marat,
before we had finished the negotiation, he might again be descended to the
dregs of the people from whence he sprung, and have given place to a still more
desperate villain. A band of leaders has swayed the mob in constant succession,
all resembling in guilt, but rising above one another in point of enormity,
each striving to improve upon the crimes of his predecessor, and swell the
black catalogue with new modes and higher gradations of wickedness: Aetas
parentum pejor avis tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
Lord Mornington's speech in the same assembly, on the 21st of January, 1794,
will always remain as a monument of that nobleman's great abilities and
eloquence, and as a faithful report of GOD's dreadful visitation of a vast
kingdom, which has repeatedly dared to blaspheme his name, and abjure his
worship. Our countrymen may there see the rebellious subjects of the late most
christian king crowding into a period of less than one short lustrum, more
impiety, oppression, cruelty, rapine and massacre, than can be found in the
aggregated enormities of all the rest of Europe for a series of centuries.
Cedite Romani scriptores, cedite Graii! Your Dionysius, your Pisander,
Tiberius, Nero, Caligula, Domitian, Caracalla, and Commodus, must retire to the
back-ground of the picture, and yield an abominable pre-eminence to our more
flagitious neighbors. The crimes of these tyrants were chiefly the offspring
of frenzy, the guilt of the Gauls is deliberation and system.

France has been for four years with little intermission deluged with such
torrents of native blood, that in some measure they have diverted our attention
from concerns less affecting; and the pernicious effects of her guilt and
frenzy spreading to every country in Europe, we have not even the melancholy
consolation to reflect that the consequences of her wickedness are confined to
its authors: yet what friend to genius but must read with affliction the tardy
measure of the Convention decreeing, for the first time, in 1793, an
imprisonment of two years against the future despoilers of the monuments of the
arts dependant on the national property? What devastation must not have
preceded it! We have seen their churches defaced, the noblest statues and
monuments of their kings and heroes pounded in pieces, and the GOD of the
universe proscribed from their constitution, by acts of state and decrees of
their legislators. Not even the grave has been sacred. Like the Pyrennean
wolves described by Thomson, On churchyards drear (inhuman to relate!)
The disappointed prowlers fall, and dig
The shrouded body from the grave; over which,
Mixed with foul shades and frighted ghosts, they howl.


They want no Huns or Visigoths, no Scythians, or Saracens, to cast them back
to the ages of darkness and barbarity; for they renew upon themselves the
ancient fury of the Atillas, the Gensericks, and the Omars. To the accumulated
horrors of their condition is superadded the internal war of religion against
atheism, while men who sight for their faith, freedom, and property, by these
monsters, audacious in their language as their actions, are called villains,
enthusiasts, and madmen. How long the Ruler of all things may be pleased to
suffer them to insult his providence, and to afflict his creatures, we cannot
presume to conjecture; but of this we may be certain; though divine vengeance
may wink, it will not sleep for ever: the bolt is but held back, to come down
with double wrath, when it descends to crush them.

As to the merit of this work, I am too well acquainted with the
disqualifications an author lies under, to presume at offering any leading
sentiment to the judgment which the public may be pleased to form upon it. I
will only venture to affirm, that it was no very easy matter to give an air of
discrimination to so many different characters of men, who, being of the same
country, living under the same laws and customs, and mostly educated in the
same manner, must have among them some strong and common features of
resemblance. Without departing from the authority of ancient historians and
biographers, who seem to me to be the best, if not the only guides on such
subjects, I have endeavored to produce this variety; but with what success the
reader must determine. We often find indeed much discrepancy of opinion in the
accounts given by contemporary writers of the great statesmen and generals who
lived at the same time; but by discovering to what party each writer adhered,
or what principles he espoused, we generally have sufficient grounds for
abatement of praise or censure. In this manner we must endeavor to reconcile
Tully's adulation of CAESAR in the Senate, and the private sentiments which he
expressed of him in the closet. As Cicero always speaks from reflection, he
frequently writes from feeling; so that we can sometimes form a better judgment
of the state of his mind at the moment, than of the subject on which his
familiar pen is employed.

Tacitus with his usual brevity asserts his impartiality sufficiently, when he
tells us that he writes of men "nec beneficio, nec injuria cognitos;" and after
all, this is the best security for truth: through the mists of resentment or
interest, she is always seen obscurely.

There will be found in the following poem a few rhymes which modern custom,
more perhaps than reason, has brought into a sort of disuse; I mean, where the
terminating word of one line in a couplet chimes only with the last sound of a
polysyllable in the next; as are and similar, etc. but I must acquaint the
critic, that this is not the effect of necessity, but choice. We have not
improved upon the rich and various versification of Dryden; and to produce
authorities from his practice would be to transcribe little less than a third
part of his poetry. Pope, who is supposed to be rather more exact, is somewhat
more sparing; but he frequently indulges himself in this practice, and always,
if I am not mistaken, with evident satisfaction. It recurs perhaps too often in
the elder poet, and more judiciously in his admirer; for a mode of versifying
adopted for variety loses its effect by too much repetition. Rhymes strictly
correct are perhaps indispensable in very short compositions, or in such as Mr.
Addison in his preface to the Georgicks calls, with simplicity enough, "a copy
of verses;" but not even in these should I wish to see a vigorous expression
weakened, or a thought maimed, for any compensation the ear could receive from
the most exact consonance. Licentia sumpta pudenter can never appear
objectionable; and this a good taste only can regulate. Rhymes, which almost
constitute the essence of French poetry, in ours are but an adjunct; and yet to
what shifts, what poor expedients, to what identity of sounds and terminations,
are not the best versifiers of France often reduced? Take the piece in disorder
from the frame, and the poetical texture will be no more discernible: we shall
not find, as in Ennius, disjecti membra poetae.

One short argument upon this point appears to me to be irrefragable. He is
always considered as a good reciter of rhymes, who in his recitation hardly
suffers the hearer to perceive them. Why it should be requisite for the poet to
produce what it is a merit in the reader to conceal, I know not. It is
something almost superfluous; like the present fashion in dress, of wearing
fine lace-ruffles under the sleeve of a coat which very nearly covers them. The
late Mr. Quin, whom I have heard recite, though not upon the stage, and
Garrick, who was consummate in the science of enunciation, would have turned
away with disgust or pity from the repeater of verses who let them know that
they were such, by the mere rattling of the metrical faggot. He faggotted his
notions, as they fell,
And if they rhym'd and rattled, all was well.
DRYDEN.


If this license be not in a certain degree allowable, I may at least observe
that it is mostly reprehended by the fastidious, and best admitted by more
liberal scholars. Swift, who was a poet as he was a parson, rather from
resolution than choice, is particularly rigid about rhymes, and sometimes
remonstrates with Pope upon his negligence; but much as the latter feared or
respected him, I do not recollect that the nightingale paid much attention to
the admonitions of the raven. A great wit sometimes makes but a subordinate
poet. Swift, I think, was both.

This mode of arguing, I am sensible, might be pushed much beyond my meaning,
to the entire suppression of rhymes, and to the preference of the blank song
upon every occasion. But not so; I acknowledge that they give a great grace to
every species of poetical composition, except the Dramatick, Epick, and mock
Heroic, in which last the effect is much heightened by misplaced pomp, and
ludicrous dignity. All I mean to contend for is this; that very precise rhyme
being not always easily found, the judicious critic will not endeavor to make
that more hard which is in itself sufficiently difficult, and will suffer any
other beauty in a couplet to atone for some deficiency in the exactness of
consonance. Let it be a pilaster, but not the prop of the building.

What may be the reception of this poem, however anxious I may be concerning
it, I cannot foresee. Every purchaser of a book buys at the same time his right
to judge of and to censure it; praise too in general comes but unwillingly, and
not to be pleased is considered by many as a mark of superior discernment. If
however it meets with half the approbation from the public, which it received
in the manuscript, I shall have reason to be contented. It would still be a
higher gratification to me, if I could flatter myself that the form of the
present work might suggest an idea to some author of better endowments than I
possess, and with more inclination, to produce to the world the prominent
events and distinguished characters of England, with superior splendor. How
abundant are the materials! How important the revolutions! How diversified the
characters! How many sovereigns eminent for great virtues, vices, and
achievements! What changes in religion and government! What wars and factions!
Many of her statesmen and poets may vie with the outspread names which adorn
the annals, and consecrate the muses, of Greece and Italy. I should not wish to
see such a work brought lower than the accession of the House of Hanover;
because, though I think that auspicious event established the felicity and
freedom of Great Britain, and that her ascendency never appeared more
conspicuously than at the present period, I apprehend it to be very difficult,
if not almost impossible, in the display of transactions and characters so
recent, to preserve candor and total exemption from party prejudice. We have
seen controversy spring up, and not without acrimony, even from the ashes of
queens Elizabeth and Mary.

In my childhood, I remember well, the first impressions which I received with
any permanency of parts of the English history, were from the historical plays
of Shakspeare. There is no young mind so unmusical, as not to be sensible to
the harmony of numbers; and there is little doubt but that such a summary as is
here recommended, if executed with brilliancy, would not only be the best
vehicle to communicate early knowledge, but to rouse young faculties to the
further pursuit of such subjects: Os tenerum pueri balbumque pocta figurat.
Even verses merely descriptive, which are certainly the most fugitive, dwell
long upon the recollection; when facts, character, and coloring, are all
blended in the same piece, the picture never vanishes. Old age seldom forgets
the songs of its youth. There is a sort of mechanical reason for this, which
though palpable enough when mentioned, may not perhaps occur immediately: in
retaining a sentiment or proposition conveyed in verse, especially rhymes, we
have a double advantage; the memory is assisted by the ear, and the ear by the
memory. We know the thought must be contained within a certain number of
metrical feet; and if we are at a loss to recover the one, by pondering a
little upon the other, we become masters of both with accuracy. It is not the
superior merit of the poetry which preserves so many of our ancient popular
ballads, but the tune and the jingle.

As to myself, the shades of night are closing too fast around me, to allow of
my attempting a theme so arduous; but I may hope to retain for a considerable
time faculties sufficient to make me sensible of, and pleased with, the
successful labors of my contemporaries.

It may be remarked, nor do I wish to shelter myself from the observation, that
whatever little credit may be conferred by my approbation, has not been
withheld in the notes to this poem from those of my countrymen of Ireland, who
occurred to me as having distinguished themselves by works of genius or the
cultivation of letters. Well would it be, if a spirit of this kind were more
prevalent among us: much talent, which now lies smothered under the despondency
of neglect, might by such encouragement be roused into exertion. The gentlemen
of Ireland are jealous of the national honor, and abundantly ready at the
hazard of their lives to assert it. For such a purpose, the pen is a better
weapon than the sword or the pistol. One book of merit would produce more
deference from the neighboring nations than twenty combats It appears hardly
credible, yet is true, that Dr. Edward Ryan, author of "The History of the
Effects of Religion on Mankind," (a work abounding with erudition,
entertainment, and instruction,) was obliged lately to publish it in London,
the booksellers of Dublin not being willing to hazard the expense, where they
knew there would be so few readers or purchasers of a book which required some
little time and attention in the perusal. His ALMA MATTER, indeed, honorably
distinguished him; but his fame and his patron came from another country.

During the administration of lord Townshend in Ireland, the printer of the
well-known poem addressed to Mr. G. E. Howard, with Notes by Alderman Faulkner,
being asked by Mr. Courtenay, whether there was not a great demand for that
publication, Nothing, sir, in the memory of man (answered with pure simplicity
the worthy printer) ever sold like it, except WATSON's ALMANAC.

Mr. Monck Mason is known and respected among his countrymen as a member of
parliament, a commissioner of the revenue, and a privy counselor; but it is
doubtful whether he is known in Ireland even by one in twenty of his
acquaintance as one of the learned and ingenious band who have illustrated
Shakspeare; yet by that distinction is his name more likely to be transmitted
to posterity.


. That Scotland should have to boast of at least ten eminent writers for one
who appears among us, (when too the course of study and the discipline in our
University are excellent,) must be ascribed to the truly patriotick attention
with which the gentlemen of North Britain cherish and expand every bud of
genius which puts forth its promise in their native region. This local
partiality may be, and sometimes is, carried rather too far; but the principle
generates a great increase of excellent publications, much improvement in
science, and fresh incitement to those distinguished authors, whose works,
while they reflect honor on their country, contribute to the entertainment and
instruction of mankind.

It is lamentable to find in such a nation as this, in many apparent respects
so adapted to the encouragement of true politeness, how much its great mistress
and teacher, Literature, is neglected. There are indeed in our capital some
well-chosen and ample libraries; but they are very few, and very private. The
collection of books is generally the least costly article in the household
inventory. The contents of the cellar are often more valuable than the (...)
for the whole family. In Great Britain, the gentry, however dissipated, seldom
entirely neglect those studies in which they have been initiated in their early
years; and no conversation engages or interests them more than the discussion
of works of genius, whether of their own day, or of antiquity. A person
distinguished by any publication of merit ranks among them in the first class
of society, and there is an emulation to protect, encourage, and produce him.
"For my own part, (says lord Chesterfield in a letter to his son,) I used to
think myself in company as much above me, when I was with Mr. Addison and Mr.
Pope, as if I had been with all the princes in Europe." This judicious
sentiment is very general among the nobility of England. But there seems to be
in this kingdom (though with very considerable exceptions) too much of a kind
of Vandalish pride in disowning scholarship. A gentleman here who knows much
more of a new book than the title, (pamphlet and novel excepted,) may sometimes
as well conceal his knowledge; for his communication will be drowned in claret,
which has a better relish than such dry aliment; or he will leave an impression
with his company that he is a pedant or a coxcomb. Yet it is but justice to
those very persons to acknowledge, that in their collective capacity they show
great liberality of sentiment. Though as stewards of the public purse, they
jealously examine all grants of public money, there is no instance of an
objection being offered in either house of parliament to provisions made for
writers of merit, nay even for their families, when they are left without other
support than the bounty of the nation.

The general neglect of letters is not however a hopeless deficiency; for no
people have naturally brighter intellects than the Irish, nor better
dispositions. It proceeds not from dullness or insensibility, but from
inattention. If study could be made more the fashion, we should see the
generality of our countrymen not less polished in their understandings, than
they are well formed in their persons, and sociable in their tempers. Many of
our ladies at this time, without pedantry or the affectation of science, would
make a distinguished figure in the first literary circles. Ireland has not lost
all female talent with Mrs. Greville. That there is no want of native genius
and science at this hour, we can produce some bright examples. We have the
unrivalled and all-accomplished Burke; the learned and excellent editor of
Shakspeare; the author of the best comedy produced in this century; and the
best translator of a great Roman historian, who, till the appearance of Mr.
Murphy's version, seemed to set our language at defiance: but alas! they have
migrated to a more congenial region. When books become more our occupation, or
amusement, all that is wanted will follow. The face of most things among us is
daily altering, and improving; the mind in its turn will become undoubtedly the
principal object of cultivation.

CONTENTS.
INVOCATION. Page 1. GENERAL CHARACTER OF THE ROMANS. Page 6. NUMA POMPILIUS.
Page 10. LUCIUS JUNIUS BRUTUS. Page 16. TRIBUNES. CORIOLANUS. Page 19.
DECEMVIRS. ROMAN LAWS. GLADIATORS. Page 25. ROMAN SOLDIERS, STIPENDIARIES AT
VEII. Page 32. PLEBEIANS ADMITTED TO THE CONSULSHIP. Page 34. ROMAN LEGION.
Page 40. HANNIBAL. Page 43. P. C. SCIPIO AFRICANUS, THE ELDER. Page 47. CHANGE
OF ROMAN MANNERS AFTER THE DESTRUCTION OF CARTHAGE. Page 50. C. MARIUS. Page
55. L. C. SYLLA. Page 63. MITHRIDATES. Page 72. CATILINE. Page 77. CICERO. Page
85. POMPEY. Page 97. BATTLE OF PHARSALIA. Page 104. M. CATO, THE YOUNGER. Page
123. C. JULIUS CAESAR. Page 131. PRODIGIES AFTER THE DEATH OF CAESAR. Page 146.
STATE OF ROME AFTER CAESAR'S DEATH. Page 148. M. AE. LEPIDUS. Page 152. ANTONY
AND CLEOPATRA. Page 156. OCTAVIA. Page 163. AUGUSTUS. Page 169. VIRGIL. Page
194. TIBULLUS. Page 205. HORACE. Page 210. OVID. Page 216. THE AUGUSTAN AGE.
Page 222. ADDITIONAL NOTES. Page 253.
LIST OF THE ENGRAVINGS, AND DIRECTIONS FOR PLACING THEM.
1. THE Author's Portrait, engraved by J. Singleton, from a drawing by --
Stoker; to face the title page. 2. THE VOTIVE SHIELD, commemorating the
CONTINENCE of P. C. SCIPIO AFRICANUS, THE ELDER, in restoring a beautiful
female captive to ALLUCIUS, a prince of Celtiberia, to whom she was betrothed:
found by some fishermen in the Rhone, near Avignon, in the year 1656, and not
long since in the cabinet of the late King of France, but now probably battered
to pieces by his Murderers. -- Engraved by F. Bartolozzi, R. A. To face p. 47.
3. TWO BUSTS, found in the tomb of the Scipio family, discovered at Rome near
Porta Capena, (now the gate of St. Sebastian,) in 1780; supposed to be the
Busts of SCIPIO AFRICANUS THE ELDER, and Q. ENNIUS. Engraved by E. Harding,
Jun. from a drawing by Carlo Labruzzi. p. 48. 4. C. MARIUS, from an ancient
basso relievo. Engraved by W. Evans. p. 55. 5. L. C. SYLLA, from an ancient
basso relievo. Engraved by W. Evans. p. 63. 6. CICERO, from a painting by
Rubens, done at Rome, from an ancient statue, in 1638. Engraved by E. Harding,
Jun. p. 85. 7. POMPEY, from Rossi's Ancient Statues. Engraved by E. Harding,
Jun. p. 97. 8. JULIUS CAESAR, from a painting by Rubens, done at Rome, from an
ancient statue, in 1638. Engraved by E. Harding, Jun. p. 131. 9. MARCUS BRUTUS,
from a coin in Dr. Hunter's Museum. Engraved by R. Clamp. p. 144. 10. M. AE.
LEPIDUS, from a coin in Dr. Hunter's Museum. Engraved by R. Clamp. p. 152. 11.
M. ANTONY, from an ancient gem. Engraved by R. Clamp. p. 156. 12. CLEOPATRA;
the face from an ancient gem, the head-dress, etc. from a coin in Dr. Hunter's
Museum. Engraved by E. Harding, Jun. p. 158. 13. OCTAVIA, from Museum
Florentinum. Engraved by E. Harding, Jun. p. 163. 14. AUGUSTUS, from a coin in
Dr. Hunter's Museum. Engraved by R. Clamp. p. 169. 15. M. AGRIPPA, from Museum
Florentinum. Engraved by E. Harding, Jun. p. 177. 16. VIRGIL, from Museum
Capitolinum The engraved portrait of VIRGIL, which is given in Heyne's
excellent edition of that author, published at Leipsick, in 1788, and is said
to be taken from the same archetype, is not faithful to the original.
. Engraved by E. Harding, Jun. p. 194. 17. HORACE, from Veterum Poetarum, etc.
Imagines, a. I. P. Bellorio. Engraved by E. Harding, Jun. p. 210. 18. OVID,
from the same work. Engraved by R. Clamp. p. 216. 19. AUGUSTUS, attended by his
Courtiers, and giving a crown to some person, whose figure is wanting; from an
Ancient Painting in fresco, of the same size, found in 1737, among the ruins of
Augustus's palace on the Palatine Mount, (now Orti Farnesiani,) and formerly in
the possession of Dr. Mead. Engraved by R. Clamp, from a drawing by Camillo
Paderni. p. 222. 20. MAECENAS, from a gem in the collection of Philip Baron de
Stosch. Engraved by E. Harding, Jun. p. 235.
The portraits of CATO THE YOUNGER, TIBULLUS, CATILINE, etc. are necessarily
omitted, no genuine ancient representation of those persons having been
hitherto discovered.

ERRATA.
Page 5. n. 6. r. -- cum nulla. Page 16. ver. 226. for stroke, r. shock.8 Page
40. n. 6. l. 11. after intrigues, a comma, instead of a colon. Page 47. ver.
665. add this note: Tibi quoque inter multa egregia non in ultimis laudum hoc
fuerit. Annibalem, cui tot de Romany ducibus victoriam dii dedissent, tibi
cessisse. LIVE. l. xxx. c. 30. Ibid. ver. 673. His foes revered him, etc. Add
this note: Nihilo minor fama apud hosts Scipionis erat, quam apud cives
sociosque. Live. l. xxvi. c. 20. Page 48. ver. 682. So his soft manners, etc.
Add this note: Fuit enim Scipio veris non tantum virtutibus mirabilis, sed art
quoque quadan ab juventa in ostentationem earum compositus. Live. l. xxvi. c.
19. Page 50. l. 5. for 621. r. 609. Page 61. ver. 870. for the, r. Rome's. Page
72. n. 4. for Hannibal, r. Annibal. Page 96. n. 4. After Note, r. [A] Page 110.
ver. 1554. for ages, r. sages. Page 115. n. 5. for Epist. r. de Brevit. Vit. c.
xiv. Page 129. n. 7. for Epist. r. de Consol. ad Mare. c. xx. Page 157. n. 5.
l. 3. for (...), r. (...). -- l. 4. for (...), r. (...). -- l. 5. for 33, r.
34. Page 201. ver. 2441, for green, r. fresh. Page 215. ver. 2551, for sucked,
r. culled. Page 256. l. 7. from the bottom, for ingenious, r. ingenuous. Page
258. l. 9. from the bottom, for THE universe, r. THEIR universe.
ROMAN PORTRAITS.
BRIGHT source of life, intelligence, and song,
Rolling unseen the harmonious worlds along,
By thy benignant will to man was given
To rule his earth, and hope thy future heaven:
Unlike the camp-born tyrant, Versiculi, imperante mox eo [Caligula],
divulgati, apud hybernas legiones procreatum indicant: In castris natus,
patriis nutritus in armis,
Jam designati principis omen erat.
SUET. in Call. c. 8.
who on high
Hung his vile law to snare the straining eye, -- flagitante populo Romano
proposuit quidem legem; sed et minutissimis literis, et angustissimo loco: uti
ne cui describere liceret. SUET. in Call. c. 41.

Thou by renewed examples, broad and clear,
As empires rise, decline, and disappear,
Show to the creatures of thy breath below
What thou permit'st, and they were formed to know.
And since the social system was begun,
Whether the many ruled, the few, or one,
Though mighty names, though many a towering state
Conspicuous far, at length have bowed to fate,
None yet from time's immeasurable womb
Has sprung more great than all-subduing Rome.
Kings, consuls, tribunes, and dictators past,
In abject slavery she sunk at last.
Long ere the Goth had sacked her strong-bas'd towers,
And dullness roosted in Ausonian bowers,
Wisdom's grieved eye foresaw her empire doomed,
When her own walls her ancient worth entombed.
Sons of proud Albion, studious mark her course;
Wind with the gradual deluge to its source;
See ere the modest boundaries were passed,
By virtue reverenced, as by judgment traced,
How, by her native springs alone supplied,
Flowed through the land her power's majestic tide.
Ere vile Orontes to old Tyber's wave Jampridem Syrus in Tiberim defluxit
Orontes. Juv. Sat. iii.

Conveyed the supple parasite and slave,
And Ind's and Asia's reeking streams by turns
Poured on th'unebbing sea their gorgeous urns,
No shore with rank fertility was crowned,
Unwater'd none, nor by wild torrents drowned.
Think not, though tawdry superstition reigns,
Where bold idolatry once awed the plains;
Though the pale semivir's ambiguous throat
Now pipes where Maro raised the immortal note;
And heaven's pure light, by bigot monks explored,
Shines less divine than pagan Tully's word; Cicero's villa near Arpinum is now
possessed by a convent of monks, and called the villa of St. Dominick; upon
which Dr. Middleton makes the following spirited observation: "What a pleasure
must it give to these Dominican inquisitors, to trample on the ruins of a man,
whose writings, by spreading the light of reason and liberty through the world,
have been one great instrument of obstructing their unwearied pains to enslave
it." Life of Cicero.

Though all her prouder monuments are gone,
Vanished her triumphs, and her gods overthrown,
The warning Muse for unimportant ends
To youth a useless retrospect commends.
While the keen eye each latent spring detects,
And sees like causes generate like effects,
In fair array the instructive lessons rise:
So taught, it is easy virtue to be wise.
In your own fame Rome's glories you may see;
To shun her fall, detest her luxury.
And thou, loved isle, where first in careless youth
I plucked crude berries from the stem of truth,
Which yet not quite dispersed by vagrant wind,
Left one fair seed to enrich the opening mind, --
Since, by thine own internal vigor freed,
Honor and wealth to bonds and sloth succeed;
Thy patriots, soldiers for the public good, The spirit and alacrity with
which the volunteers of Ireland took up arms in the year 1778, are unexampled,
but by the wisdom and moderation with which they laid them down after the
constitution and commerce of their country were secured.

And civil arms unstained with civil blood;
Since now thy fulgent orb, no more depressed,
Vies with thy sister's beam, and gilds the west;
Nor ambient Neptune with upbraiding roar
Unfurls his billows round thy useless shore;
While mild Favonius wafts thy swelling sails,
And jocund Ceres loves thy plenteous vales;
At least suspend ambition's anxious toil,
To greet the muses in their favorite soil:
Fame's full meridian is but half attained,
Till science grace what native virtue gained.
Vain were the attempt in reason's sober verse
The cloudy Roman origin to pierce,
Or midst discordant fictions to decree
Which wanders least from probability:
No petty states of Greece or Rome, but trace
Their first great sounder from celestial race; Nulla gens tam vilis
reperiatur, quae sui generis auctorem non faciat Deum, aut Deo editum. QUINT.
CURT. l. 1.

And earth's worst dregs (says vanity) arise
From fond commixture with the unconscious skies.
Enough for us, that, spread through every clime,
In prose expanded, or adorned by rhyme,
Theme and delight of each succeeding age
To us descends the eventful Latian page:
A copious mine, where lettered avarice gains
New hoards of knowledge from exhaustless veins.
GENERAL CHARACTER OF THE ROMANS.
Far from the native bed where first it rose,
With the tinged stream the blended mineral flows;
So in the current of Rome's distant race
The founder in the progeny we trace.
Behold how like the kindred features are,
Habits, and faults, and virtues, similar:
The same proud spirit to subdue the strong,
To yield no right, and to endure no wrong; In the whole Roman story, except in
their early wars with the Gauls, there is not perhaps a single instance in
which the Romans were not the aggressors. They not only, without the shadow of
right, deprived kings and states of their revenues and territories, but their
triumphs were additional insults of the most unfeeling barbarity. A queen led
in chains was a favorite embellishment in these ostentatious processions. The
consideration of their insolence and inhumanity while a republic, abates much
of our commiseration for the calamities they endured under the despotism of the
emperors. They but suffered under them what they had before inflicted upon the
rest of mankind. "I know not (says Dr. Johnson) why any but a schoolboy in his
declamation should whine over the commonwealth of Rome, which grew great only
by the misery of the rest of mankind." Boswell's Life of Johnson.

The same ambition's unremitting care,
Temperance in peace, and fortitude in war;
To let no people but themselves be free,
And guard, like life, their own loved liberty; Il fuit plus que la mort la
honte d'etre esclave. CINNA, par Corneille.

As if the common boon of equal heaven,
For all designed, to them alone was given!
To bring all duties to one center home, --
Unbounded fondness for their parent Rome.
Each wild excess which nature shrinks to hear,
Assumed too often a patriot character; C'est gloire de passer pour un coeur
abattu,
Quand la brutalite fait la haute virtue.
HORACE, par Corneille.

Disguised beneath that all-atoning name,
Revenge was justice, and oppression fame.
Within its precincts every virtue lies,
And swells to vice beyond its boundaries.
So, in a Christian state the worst of men,
Had been at Rome the worthiest citizen.
Remus, who mocked his brother's new-trac'd town,
His ruffian fury to the dust struck down;
Cemented thus with parricidal blood,
Behold the first rude walls of humble mud;
Thus, in the infant settlement was given
Earnest of violence, against man and heaven.
At length, the towering fabric pierced the skies,
And with the grandeur, see the guilt arise;
Her bold aggression stretched to every clime,
And each new conquest was an added crime. It is hardly necessary perhaps to
point out to the reader the exact similarity between the conduct, language, and
policy, of the Roman commonwealth, and the audacious ambition and hypocrisy of
the present French republic. The former indeed had established her superiority
better than France has yet done, before she presumed to offer what she
miscalled liberty to foreign malcontents, or a new form of government to
nations not desirous of her interference. -- There will probably be ere long
another resemblance: the tyranny of atheistical clubs will terminate in the
dominion of a military despot; the harrassed people flying from the oppression
of a mob of taskmasters to the iron shelter of some uncontrollable usurper.
Kingdoms now go to war with France on the same principle that individuals
endeavor to destroy highwaymen and house-breakers; not from the hope of
acquiring any thing, but to prevent the mischief which such villains meditate.
That desperate people have already avowed hostilities against all religion,
principle, morality, and order, indeed against human nature at large; and
virtue, no less than good policy, must put arms into the hands of all civilized
nations to oppose them.

The waste she caused, the woes which never ceased,
With specious names she varnished and increased;
Rome's ruthless sword, and her fallacious tongue,
Inflicts the ruin, and imputes the wrong;
While plundered nations, supplicant in vain,
Bore every evil, and heard Rome complain.
Sententious, yet never innocently great,
The dread and scourge of every harmless state,
When her long triumphs her own Caesar's closed,
And on her neck their iron yoke imposed,
Alone she mourned her once unrivaled weal,
Nor claimed the pity she could never feel.
What were the virtues of the Roman school?
Deep systems to oppress, destroy, and rule;
Ambition, pride, and tyranny, combined,
To raise themselves, and plunder all mankind. This is no morose character of
the Romans considered as a people. Sallust says, "Mihi multa agitanti,
constabat, paucorum civium egregiam virtutem cuncta patravisse." It is true of
such men as Cincinnatus, Camillus, Fabricius, the Decii, the Scipios, and some
others. The victories of Pompey too added territories and glory to Rome.
Marius, Sylla, and Caesar, conquered for themselves, and brought inexpressible
miseries upon their country. Let the reader consult Montesquieu's admirable
volume, particularly the sixth chapter: he will there see the Roman policy in
its true colors; a system, profound, invariable, and completely iniquitous.

NUMA POMPILIUS.
No objects Numa to the muse supplies,
But temples, priests, and pious mysteries.
He checked Bellona's rage; and dove-ey'd peace
Saw superstition rise, and slaughter cease.
For sacred ends, was sacred truth forgot,
And hence the fiction of the Egerian grot; -- simulat sibi cum dea Egeria
congressus nocturnos esse. Live. l. i. c. xix.

That Numa's holy visions might persuade,
To the meek king descends the inspiring maid: Omnium primum, rem ad
multitudinem imperitam, et illis seculis rudem, efficacissimam, deorum metum
injiciendum ratus est. Live. ut sup.

None, to believe or to obey, repine,
When human wisdom speaks by aid divine.
Credulity, an easy yielding soil,
Brought up new plants of faith with slender toil;
A tale once told, the weak inquired no more,
But fools believed what craft imposed before.
The pagan creed, with motley legends full,
Amused the enlightened, and amazed the dull;
A monstrous fable clumsily devised,
Procession, pageants, pomp, and noise disguised;
While sound and show the pleased attention kept,
The senses only waked, and reason slept.
Wisdom with joy the kind delusion saw,
And turned the vulgar blindness into awe;
So, by an engine which herself disdained,
Dominion over the public mind she gained:
As served her cause she played the mummery over,
And left the crowd to wonder and adore.
Salian and Fecial Flamens thus began,
And Vestals, sacred from the embrace of man; -- virginesque Vestae legit; --
virginitate aliisque ceremoniis venerabiles ac sanctas fecit. Live. l. i. c. xx.

Their task to quench the flame of love's desire,
And unextinguish'd keep pale Vesta's fire.
Sad institution! which austerely draws
The female heart from nature's genial laws;
Strangles heaven's bounty, and converts to woe
The plenteous source whence joy and life should flow:
As if the tree, whose pregnant boughs might yield
The richest honors of Pomona's field,
Should turn, perverted by the spoiler's hand,
To the vile office of a smoky brand.
Inhuman law! where reason must confess
The sanction, not the breach, was wickedness. That a state of celibacy should
be acceptable to the abundant Giver of all things, seems to be one of the most
unaccountable notions that ever proceeded from the visions of enthusiasm; and
the horrible penalties annexed to a violation of chastity in the persons of
those unhappy females set apart for certain purposes of religion, show very
strongly both the absurdity and wickedness of the institution. A Vestal's being
buried alive for a breach of her vows or a neglect of her duty, is frequently
mentioned by Livy and other ancient writers, with the indifference of any
ordinary ceremony. The bigotry of modern Rome, called Christian, adopted this
Order from the heathen superstition of the ancients; and both must have been
conscious (though perhaps frail Nuns are not literally buried alive) that such
ordinances were directly repugnant to the most general and irresistible impulse
of human nature, and in itself innocent, else they would not have attempted to
counteract it by restraints so unnatural.

The maid, thus torn from the best joys of life,
Denied to charm, a mistress, or a wife,
To bless the sweetness of her infant's smile,
Or the fond clasps which matron cares beguile,
If mutual passion fired her to impart
The illicit rapture of her glowing heart,
Grim death, and priests more grim, with Stygian gloom
Plunged the warm breathing creature in the tomb.
By such preposterous punishment they strove
To avert the wrath her crime provoked above.
Had thunder crushed the holy murderers round,
Had earthquakes swallowed the devoted ground,
The righteous doom true sanctity had pleased;
So truth had been revealed, and heaven appeased.
Go on, insensate lawmakers! proceed;
Frame statutes worse than the transgressor's deed;
Wrest from Jove's hand the slow-avenging rod,
And doubly die the sanguinary code;
Ordain, coerce, prohibit at your will;
Nature shall brave them all, and triumph still.
Though no fierce combat on the ensanguin'd plain,
Or added soil distinguished Numa's reign,
A fairer palm his bloodless annals boast;
Rome gained in virtue what in fame she lost.
Not viol tuned, or melting song, so finds
The magic way to fierce untutored minds,
Not on the thirsty glebe ambrosial rain
So opes its bosom for the teeming grain,
As sweet religion's heaven-descended dews
Their mild effects over social life diffuse;
Then holier shrines in mortal breasts are reared,
And truth is sacred when a God's revered.
Let hope and fear compact the moral chain,
A stronger power than man may man restrain;
These are the springs invisible above,
The human will to good or ill to move:
All virtue else in the tempestuous mind,
Is weak, as Bibulus to Caesar joined:
Who, without these the passions would command,
But holds a tiger in a flowery band. Bibulus was Caesar's colleague in the
consulship, and at first made some attempts to control him, but was soon
obliged to desist, and to pass in entire insignificance the remainder of his
nominal magistracy. This year of Rome was called the consulship of Julius and
Caesar.

LUCIUS JUNIUS BRUTUS.
Man's love of life beyond even life extends,
Begins with breath, nor leaves him when it ends:
Pleased with renewed existence, he believes
A second being in his heirs revives.
Yet see relentless Brutus, placed on high,
Devote his sons to death, and view them die.
Their youth, their conscious shame for the offense,
Turn advocates more strong than innocence;
And soft compassion had their doom delayed,
But oh! the inexorable father swayed.
Not instantaneous were the sufferers' pains; Exuit patrem ut consulem ageret,
orbusque vivere quam publicae vindictae deesse maluit. Val. Max. l. v. c. viii.

The lictor's scourge first tore their spouting veins;
Then stooping mangled to the bloody block,
Their forfeit necks received the severing stroke. -- (...). Dion. Hal. l. v.

Unmoved he sat; (...). DION. HAL. l. v.
while tears and groans confessed
The heaving pangs of every other breast.
O heart of triple brass! can love of fame
Extinguish nature, to exalt a name?
Serenely could thine eye a sight behold,
Which chills the stranger's vital tide, when told?
What praise, alas! can fortitude receive,
Which none would imitate, nor all believe?
Take then, inhuman! thy ambition's lot;
Thy pride's remembered, and their crime forgot.
Amazement filled the throng; -- the general ire
Was lost in horror at the obdurate sire;
While justice, pausing, trembled to divide
The patriot's title with the parricide.
Preposterous scene! Consul revered and cursed;
Faithful to Rome, to nature's laws unjust!
Posterity the dread award repeals;
More for the traitors than the judge she feels;
Averts with shuddering awe th'astonish'd gaze,
And gives, at best, but wonder for thy praise.
Had any voice but thine pronounced their doom,
No pitying sigh had graced their guilty tomb:
Had other eyes at their sad fate looked on,
The tears of Rome had fallen for thee alone;
But in thy children's vital blood arrayed, --
Stern justice turns a monster, so displayed.
Virtues o'erstrain'd, like strings in music, fly,
Or, jarring, spoil sweet nature's harmony;
And actions, where humanity must frown,
Excite but horror, not deserve renown. We find from Virgil, that even the
hard-hearted Romans were divided in their opinion upon this most extraordinary
transaction: " -- utcunque ferent ea facta minores, -- " Virg. Aen. vi.
Manlius, however, presents another example of still more extravagant and
unnatural rigor, when he condemns his son, a gallant young conqueror, to
death, for a slight deviation from discipline. This barbarian, after exhorting
the young man in an unfeeling declamation to bear his fate with magnanimity,
ordered his head to be struck off, and looked on at the execution of the
sentence. It is reasonable to suppose that the power of life and death given by
the Roman laws to parents over their children, might, in some degree, have
weakened the ties of natural affection, and substituted in their place ideas of
severity, which led to excesses otherwise unaccountable. Parents had it in
their option either to bring up a newborn child, or to suffer it to perish:
thus, what would among us be considered as the most extreme proof of
inhumanity, was then looked upon as a matter of indifference. The whole youth
of Rome were in a state of actual slavery; with this difference only, that
their masters were their fathers. Among Catiline's conspirators was A. Fulvius,
"senatoris filius; quem retractum ex itinere parens necari jussit." This
parental order is mentioned by Sallust, whose words I have just now quoted.
This is the state, from which declaimers are fond of taking their images of
liberty.

TRIBUNES. CORIOLANUS.
Ere time's slow current in his gradual course
Had purged the foulness of Rome's natal source,
Who could expect in her young state to see
High birth assumed, and pride of family?
To see the outlaw's, ruffian's, robber's brood,
Puffed with pre-eminence of noble blood?
Yet, with the names of different orders known,
Were the first seeds of fierce dissension sown.
Soon was the mean original forgot,
The clay-built city, and the straw-roof'd cot:
The new patrician now surveyed with scorn
The poor plebeian, as his vassal born;
With ostentatious pageantry displayed
The saucy ensigns of his proud parade.
Thus, in the world's great garden, still we see,
The weed of quickest growth is vanity.
But yet more hateful, by a baser vice,
To this he joined insatiate avarice;
And made the power which wealth bestows to bless,
To poverty the source of wretchedness.
Not long the spark of discord smothered lay, Civitas secum ipsa discors
intestino inter patres plebemque flagrabat odio, maxim propter nexos ob aes
alienum. Live. l. ii. c. 23.

Fiery and fierce it flamed to open day;
The outrag'd sullen peasant soon began
To poize his strength, and feel himself a man;
His well-brac'd arm and massy club denied
The vain distinctions of usurping pride;
Till in the pompous magistrate he saw
The insult only, and forgot the awe.
Power which to full maturity would grow,
To save the substance, should conceal the show.
They met, as hostile elements, to jar,
With all the rancour of intestine war;
Petition and respect no more were heard,
The tribune's veto made the people feared; Agi deinde de concordia caeptum,
concessumque in conditiones, ut plebi sui magistratus essent sacrosancti,
quibus auxilii latio adversus consules esset; neve cui patrum capere eum
magistratum liceret. Live. l. ii. c. 33. (...) DION. HAL. l. vi.

Sacred his person too, with every fence
Stern law could frame, to shield his insolence:
So, with that sturdy magistrate to lead,
Bold innovation raised its towering head, -- (...) Ibid.

Till liberty's high spirit, in excess,
Foamed with the dregs of foul licentiousness:
Like Scylla, by her barking offspring torn,
Rome felt their rage, and felt it but to mourn.
Chased by the rabble from the factious town,
Nor sheltered by his name's deserved renown,
See Coriolanus to his foes repair,
Excite their fury, and conduct the war. Damnatus absens in Volscos abiit,
minitans patriae, hostilesque jam rum spiritus gerens. Live. l. ii. c. 35.

Dire as a comet in th'eventful hour,
Over his black brow the frowns of Ate lour;
The suppliant deputations sent from home,
Return unheeded, or rebuked, to Rome:
For abject now, as insolent before,
The people's boasted triumph soon was over;
But breathing vengeance in his ireful mood,
Deaf to their prayers the surly exile stood.
At length, the matron train his mother leads;
Nature's soft murmur in his bosom pleads:
His weeping wife, in all her modest charms,
An infant child, with helpless outstretch'd arms,
Touched every spring where social pity lay,
And bade the husband, sire, and son, obey:
Overcome by these, the Volscian host retires,
While he, a victim to their rage, expires. (...) DION. HAL. l. viii.

Thus ever, when opposing duties meet,
And adverse interests make one breast their seat,
By both distracted, and to neither true,
Passion precedes, and ruin must ensue.
Never had Rome a braver soldier bred;
Her martial files to victory he led;
And thrice his brows the oaken garland wore,
While many an honest scar his bosom bore:
But much unskilful in the arts of peace,
His merits with the shouts of battle cease;
He scorned the forum, (fraud and strife's abode,)
War his delight, and Mars his favorite God.
Sincere and dauntless, his aspiring soul
Formed to command, but ill endured control;
Rash, angry thoughts, which prudence should conceal,
His pride would dictate, and his tongue reveal;
This knew his crafty foes, who watched to raise
The kindling spark, and fanned it to a blaze;
Then all their lurking malice could desire,
Burst out impetuous from his boundless ire.
So falls the unsuspecting lion, led
Where first with art the treacherous toils lie spread.
All virtues but discretion he possessed;
Yet wanting that, in vain he owned the rest:
That cautious humble guide experience finds
Scorned or neglected by heroic minds;
And yet no safer pilot can be near,
Through life's rough tide man's dangerous course to steer.
DECEMVIRS. ROMAN LAWS. GLADIATORS.
Rome's wars or treaties with each petty state
Were dull to read, and tedious to relate;
But as the wily fowler with his nets,
Brood after brood, the feathery game besets,
Or as th'encroaching gradual tide flows on,
One region first, and then the next to drown,
So, by her arts, or arms, at last obtained,
The sovereign rule over every power she gained. The books of Maccabees, though
treating of times much subsequent to this period, express very well the
estimation in which the Romans were held by all nations. See the eighth chapter
of the first book.

Matchless in war, and by examples great,
Laws still were wanting to confirm the state.
By no established, well-known rule confined,
Decision varied with the judge's mind;
Wisdom and weakness in their turns appeared,
And Themis was obeyed, but not revered.
But now with ancient written science fraught,
More certain codes from polished Greece were sought: Allatas a Graecia leges
december principes iecti, jubente populo, conscripserant: ordinataque erat in
duodecim tabulis tota justitia. FLOR. l. i. c. 24.

On this pretense, the fierce Decemvir's hand,
Three years supreme, oppressed the groaning land,
Till with a ravisher's polluting arms
His lustful fury seized Virginia's charms. Appius eo insolentiae elatus est,
ut ingenuam virginem stupro destinaret. FLOR. ut sup.

To bid her name in spotless honor rest,
See the sad sire transfix his daughter's breast.
"Appius! (he cries) by the dear blood thus shed,
"To sure destruction I devote thy head. Pectus deinde puellae transfigit,
respectansque ad tribunal, "te (inquit) Appi, tuumque caput sanguine hoc
consecro." LIVE. l. iii c. 48.

"To thee and thy posterity remain
"The crime and danger, though to me the pain:
"Around her grave unfading wreaths shall bloom;
"Thine be the father's curse, and murderer's doom!
"Vein of my heart! with this unwilling wound,
"I send thee, yet unspotted, to the ground."
Wildly, aloft the reeking knife he bears,
Hot vengeance burning up his furious tears.
Oh, piteous spectacle! the sweetest maid
Of all the virgin train, in death thus laid!
No matron eye that saw her, but approved;
No youthful, manly heart, but sighed, and loved.
Pale her soft cheek, and closed her beamy eyes,
On the cold ground a welt'ring corse she lies.
A soul more formed, all joys to share, and give,
Earth could not lose, nor opening heaven receive.
Fired at the sight, the outrageous people rise,
Till the crushed tyrant for the virgin dies.
Thus Rome again preserved, again might date
Her second freedom from a woman's fate.
Ingloriously the shameful period passed,
While abject slavery the soul debased;
No enterprise of gallant note begun,
No ally succored, and no field was won:
Like an ungenial frost, the tyrant's power
Had blighted every virtue's opening flower.
Though less unpolished than the nations round,
What barbarous license in her code is found?
The sire, absolved from nature's tenderest tie,
Might doom to death his helpless progeny; Jus autem potestatis quod in liberos
habemus proprium est civium Romanorum; nulli enim alii sunt homines, qui talem
in liberos habent potestatem, qualem nos habemus. JUSTIN. Inst. l. i. Quidquid
peperisset, decreverunt tollere. TER. Andr. Act. I. sc. iii. Quo defunctus est
die, [Germanicus,] lapidata sunt templa, -- partus conjugum expositi. SUET. in
Calig. 5. Numerum liberorum finire, aut quenquam ex agnatis necare, [apud
Germanos] flagitium habetur. TAC. GERM. xix.

And rights more cruel over the prostrate slave
To each hard master the prescription gave:
Torture and stripes, for every slight offense,
Or unprovoked, the tyrant might dispense;
And, if a deed of blacker die was done, Ceterum cum, vetere ex more, familiam
omnem quae sub eodem tecto mansitaverat, ad supplicium agi oporteret, concursu
plebis quae tot innoxios protegebat, usque ad seditionem ventum est. TAC.
ANNAL. l. xiv. c. 42.

They slaughtered hundreds, for the crime of one. So late as the time of the
emperor Adrian, the following restrictions with regard to slaves were
considered as innovations:

Servos a dominis occidi vetuit, eosque jussit damnari per judices, si digni
essent.

Si dominus in domo interemptus esset, non de omnibus servis quaestionem
haberi, sed de his qui per vicinitatem poterant sentire, praecepit.

AEL. SPART. ADR. CAES.

Yet mark how gravely Livy's page assents Primum ultimumque illud [Metii
Suffetii] supplicium apud Romanos exempli parum memoris legum humanarum fuit.
In aliis gloriari licet nulli gentium mitiores placuisse poenas. LIVE. l. i. c.
28.

To the mild tenor of Rome's punishments:
Reversing thus the purpose laws should seek,
The strong they strengthened, and oppressed the weak.
Inhuman too their sports. Their eyes were fed
With grim delight, when gladiators bled;
The mangled wretches learned with grace to die,
So to enhance the unnatural luxury.
As gluttons praise the hospitable lord,
When costly viands heap his plenteous board,
Who then most multiplied the dreadful sight,
Was most esteemed the people's favorite:
So wolves and pards, endowed with human sense,
Might better show their savage preference.
And near five cent'ries was Rome's vigor grown
Ere yet these sanguinary sights were known. Barbari moris auctores M. et D.
Junii Bruti, nescio qua pietate defuncti patris cineres honoraturi,
gladiatorium munus ediderunt, magno favore civitatis. A. U. C. 490. Frein. Sup.
LIVE. l. xvi. c. 42.

Thus closely linked the strange advance we see
Of new refinement, and new cruelty:
Some gaudy show, a rustic daubed with lees,
And Thespis' cart, in earlier times could please;
No more delight the unlettered Roman sought
Than wonder, or vacuity of thought:
And better so, than with new sense to drain
Preposterous pleasure from the source of pain.
Conscious themselves how deep impressions lie,
From shows repeated to the gazing eye,
Nor willing to pervert the female mould,
From soft to fierce, from innocent to bold,
Augustus bade the women not appear
At sights within the ghastly theater. -- edixeritque mulieres ante horam
quintam venirent in theatrum, non placere. SUET. in Aug. 44. Jungendus est his
P. Sempronius sophus, qui conjugem repudii nota affecit, nihil aliud quam se
ignorante ludos ausam spectare. VAL. MAX. l. vi. c. 3.
--
Familiar thus with spectacles of blood,
Their hearts were dauntless, but were seldom good; (...) DION CASS. l. lx. 13.

Proud, warlike, and inflexibly severe,
No note of pity touched their callous ear;
But still disposed new pleasure to receive
From pains which nature prompts us to relieve,
The clarion's martial sound their bosom warms,
Responsive only to the din of arms.
Rome, like Achilles as a maid disguised,
All ornament, but shining steel, despised.
In such a state we wonder not to find
A Nero and Domitian waste mankind.
ROMAN SOLDIERS First received pay at the siege of Veii.
Aspiring Rome bold Veii harrass'd most,
And many a field was won, and many lost;
Till patient of a ten years' siege she fell, Veientium quanta res fuerit,
indicat decennis obsidio. FLOR. l. i. c. 12.

Nor left even walls, where once she tower'd to tell. Rapti funditus deletique
Veientes. Ibid.

Ere this, unpaid but by the hopes of spoil,
The Roman warrior bore the battle's toil;
But while abroad the conquering sword he wields,
Untilled and barren lay his little fields;
Hence, one sharp conflict over, he left the plain,
And rich with plunder, sought his home again:
No long continued object was pursued
With patient, persevering fortitude.
But now the Senate, wiser grown, require
A general tax to pay the soldier's hire; Tunc primum hiematum sub pellibus,
taxata stipendio hiberna. FLOR. l. i. c. 12.

Who, unrepining thus, consents to bear
The lengthened service of the varying year.
And but for this, her conquests had not reached
Beyond where fertile Italy lay stretched;
Carthage unrivaled had usurped the main,
And Eastern Kings enjoyed their gorgeous reign;
The German in his wilds untamed had strayed,
Nor Britain tribute to bold Julius paid:
But imp'd by this, her eagle's wing could soar
To nobler heights, and stoop at every shore;
Mountains and seas were then securely passed,
When space and seasons were by gold effaced.
PLEBEIANS ADMITTED TO THE CONSULSHIP. For the beginning of this transaction
see LIVY, l. vi. c. 34. The whole passage is too long to be inserted.

As often great fires from sparks minute begin,
So, great events from a slight origin. Parva (ut plerumque solet) rem ingentem
moliundi causa intervenit. LIVE. ut sup.

What object to grave wisdom's eye appears
More unimportant, than a woman's tears?
The favorite type of many a sportive bard;
How often to April's transient showers compared?
Yet these soft arms resistless have been found
By breasts, which keener weapons failed to wound:
To souls repulsive of assault and force
Silent and sure they steal their melting course;
Their subtle progress noiselessly begin,
And scarce perceived without, till felt within.
Against swords or darts, prepared with shields we fight;
Against beauty's tears, our safety is our flight.
The robes of honor by plebeians worn,
From Rome's reluctant lords by force were torn;
Commotion ever followed the demand,
And civil discord rent the jarring land:
Resolved to keep, and eager to acquire,
These strongly guard what fiercely those desire;
When with the Great their proud pretensions failed,
Then clamor, menace, and revolt prevailed;
Illustrious ancestry one Order pleads;
The other, right, from more illustrious deeds.
Sacred the consul's toga still remained,
As yet by the inferior tribes unstained;
But by a woman's tears at last was gained. Enfin les larmes d'une femme
emporterent ce que l'eloquence, les brigues, et les cabales des tribuns
n'avoient pu obtenir. Vertot. REV. ROMANS l. vii.

Two daughters sprung from Fabius, Hymen led,
Pleased, to a noble, and plebeian bed;
The elder shared Sulpicius' lofty state,
And wealthy Stolo was the younger's mate:
The warrior-tribune's ensigns graced the one; Military tribunes, more in
number (which fluctuated) than the consuls, had among them the same power.

By no distinction was the other known,
But riches, and obscurity of worth,
Unblazon'd by high titles or high birth.
It chanced, the humbler wife, as yet content,
To visit her proud sister's mansion went;
There, while her thrifty hands the loom employs,
Alarmed, she hears an unaccustomed noise;
The rattling rods, which on the tribune wait,
Proclaimed his pompous entrance at the gate.
Her simple mind some danger near believed,
Not by her conscious sister unperceived.
"Fabia, (she cried) these sounds are new to thee,
"By custom long familiariz'd to me;
"These are my husband's train, who walk before,
"And wait the tribune's entrance at his door.
"Such sounds your quiet dwelling never molest,
"More humble doubtless, though perhaps more blessed:
"Some discontent must every station share,
"Nor is our dignity exempt from care.
"But come, dismiss this low, plebeian fear,
"My lord's rude lictors never enter here;
"In the same house I keep a separate home,
"Where, uninvited, not even he may come."
Deep sinks the taunt. -- Nor joy, nor wonted rest,
Find harbor in the insulted Fabia's breast.
To her scorned home, dejected, she returns;
Now pines with envy, now with anger burns;
Health's vermeil hue her fading cheeks forsook,
And Niobe seemed pictured in her look.
Her sire, and doting husband, long in vain
Tried to explore the secret source of pain;
Each grasps her hand, repeats his tender fears,
Entreats to know: -- she answers but with tears.
With streaming eyes at last the cause she tells,
And her patrician sister's scorn reveals:
"But never shall this bosom comfort know,
"Never these ceaseless streams forbear to flow,
"Till Rome's proud lords hear shouting Rome proclaim
"Your right, like their's, to every rank the same;
"And that ennobled dame be forced to see
"Her spirit quelled, and state surpassed by me."
Thus spoke she weeping. By her grief impressed,
The ambitious project swelled her husband's breast:
Invoking every sacred Power, he swears
The insult to avenge, and dry her tears.
To aid the purpose laboring in his mind
With his own strength confederate force he joined.
Old Fabius too, by gray experience wise,
Maturer counsels to their youth supplies;
One common interest all their hopes inspired,
One vow engaged them, and one ardour fired.
Besides, the scent of mischief lured along
(The scum of towns) a numerous noisy throng;
Bellowers, unfit to govern or obey,
Who little heed the cause, but love the fray;
Wholesome restraint they call the chain of slaves,
Their reason in their roar, and rhet'rick in their staves.
In vain to check their rage the nobles tried;
"Let us be consuls," still the people cried.
Increasing zeal increasing numbers found;
The forum rent, returned no second sound.
At length, the weary chiefs, o'erpower'd, retreat,
Desert their tower, and own the full defeat.
Of like success though like endeavors failed,
In pride's contention female pride prevailed:
Fabia retorts her scoffing sister's scorn,
And, smiling, sees her humbled in her turn.
Years after years had eloquence, in vain,
And art and force this honor toiled to gain;
But Fortune, still averse, reserved the prize
To prove the matchless power of woman's eyes. I have willingly adopted this
sisterly quarrel, as the cause of an important change in the internal policy of
Rome; first, because it has a complexion peculiarly suited to familiar poetry,
and therefore mixing agreeably with other subjects of a darker hue; and next,
because I am pleased to have any opportunity of paying every possible tribute
to the importance of that sex, to whose sweetness and unostentatious virtues
men are obliged for all that can soften the cares of life, or perhaps make them
supportable; but I believe, at the same time, that the event was only hastened,
and not produced, by the occurrence which I have related. The cause lay deeper:
the general diffusion of wealth, from which importance is inseparable,
sufficiently accounts for it. Though the French author I have quoted above,
with the quondam gallantry of his countrymen, gives more weight to the tears of
a lady than to state intrigues: Livy, with more circumspection, only says, this
female pique was among the causes which opened the consulship to plebeians:
"parva causa intervenit," is his expression.

ROMAN LEGION.
Some God, propitious to the Roman name,
(Vegetius cries) inspired the legion's frame. Non tantum humano consilio, sed
etiam Divinitatis instinctu legiones a Romany arbitror constitutas. VEGET. de
Re Mil. l. ii. c. 21.

More ponderous arms than other soldiers wore,
With ease, from custom, the main body bore.
Light nimble troops were posted on the flanks,
With horse to charge the foes' disordered ranks: Nel' assalir son pronti, e
nel ritrarsi;
E combatton fuggendo erranti e sparsi.
TASSO, can. i.

Slingers and archers too, who sent from far
Their lead and arrows to provoke the war.
Machines for every siege were in its train,
With tools to encamp, and fortify the plain.
Thus in each separate legion's form we see
Comprised an army's just epitome. Universa quae in quoque belli genere
necessaria esse creduntur, secum legio debet ubique portare, ut in quovis loco
fixerit castra, armatam faciet civitatem. VEGET. de Re Mil. l. ii. c. 25.

Not Macedon's firm phalanx could compare
With this proud boast and master-work of war:
Thence were Rome's thunders on the nations hurled;
With this strong engine she subdued the world. (...). POLYB. l. ii.

But when by this the subject earth was spoiled,
The faithless engine on herself recoiled;
Not long employed to serve the parent state,
It humbled her, to make her tyrants great; When Marius and Sylla, Caesar,
Anthony, Augustus and all the subsequent emperors, enslaved Rome, by having the
legions at their devotion.

A sad exchange was all her pride could boast,
Mankind subdued, and her own freedom lost.
It Is vain to talk of liberty in states,
Where the fierce soldier's arm predominates;
Prompt to obey the stern commander's word,
He finds the law's sole comment in his sword;
With floods and fire his character accords,
The best of servants, but the worst of lords.
HANNIBAL. A. U. C. 534.
Thus far, wherever assailing or assailed,
The event was certain, and Rome's arms prevailed.
But see at last great Hannibal appear;
See her proud genius taught at last to fear.
Thy towers, Saguntum, by his skill overthrown, Saguntum faederatam civitatem
vi expugnavit. COR. NEP. in Han. -- (...) POLYB. l. iii.

Had filled the admiring world with his renown:
A dreadful prelude thy sad ruins yield
Of Thrasimene, and Cannae's direr field.
While yet a child, led by his warlike sire, Pater Amilcar (inquit Annibal)
Antioche, parvum admodum me, cum sacrificaret, altaribus admotum jurejurando
adegit, nunquam amicum fore populi Romani. LIVE. l. xxxv. c. 19.

Against Rome the infant's lips denounced his ire;
His little hands outstretch'd, the altar bore
Eternal record of the oath he swore;
And, deeply crimsoned with Patrician blood, Documenta cladis, cruentus
aliquandiu Aufidus. FLOR. l. ii. c. 6.

The promise of his tongue his sword made good.
No dangers his intrepid soul could daunt; Plurimunn audaciae ad pericula
capessenda, plurimum consilii inter ipsa pericula erat. Nullo labor aut corpus
fatigari, aut animus vinci poterat. Caloris et frigoris patientia par: cibi
potionisque, desiderio naturali, non voluptate, modus finitus: vigiliarum
somnique nec die nec nocte discriminata tempora, etc. LIVE. l. xxi. c. 4.

Sagacious, hardy, cool, and vigilant.
Mankind in wonder of his daring lost,
He poured on Italy a mingled host.
On the huge peak, whose giant ribs command Praegressus signa Annibal, in
promontorio quodam, unde long ac late prospectus erat, consistere jussis
militibus Italiam ostentat, etc. Live. 1. xxi. c. 35. -- (...) POLYB. l. iii.

The teeming soil of soft Ausonia's land,
He stops well pleased, to scent the sharpened breeze
From fuming rills, and undulating trees,
Whose fruits not yet were warm in infant down,
In rugged rinds, or husks of cruder brown.
The vacant steer he views, with wicker'd food
Well pent and plenteous, by no toil renewed;
Neat hamlets, sheds, small fanes of rustic mould,
And gaudier shrines, but built with hostile gold.
With grim delight his cruel eyes survey
The sturdy hinds, his battle's future prey;
Now health's cold gale contented they respire,
And hope an early sun, the poor man's fire.
The gay light tenants of the snow-top'd groves
Flit by unmarked, to cheer their drooping loves:
Not so the raven's croak, the eagle's scream;
Soft to his iron sense their bodings seem.
"My birds, (he cries) your friends, your feeders know;
"Behold my laboring Africans below:
"To Jove if prostrate Italy be dear,
"Let one perpetual winter chill the year;
"For, lo, I come, and as I come prepare
"Havoc, and waste, and all the woes of war." Quamdiu in Italia fuit, nemo ei
in acie restitit, nemo adversus eum post Cannensem pugnam in campo castra
posuit. COR. NEP. in Han.

Rome still resists, like her own Alpine oak,
Shorn by the axe, or lightning's sulfurous stroke;
Still the proud top unbending meets the skies,
And still the earth-bound root the storm defies.
How often, alas! his course of glory run,
Do clouds obscure the hero's setting sun!
His means, his strength, all but his courage drained,
And hate, immortal hate, which still remained;
Driven out by base ingratitude from home, Bona ejus publicarunt, domum a
fundamentis disjecerunt, ipsum exulem judicarunt. COR. NEP. in Han.

And hunted by the ungenerous fears of Rome;
The matchless chief, with age and care declined,
No shelter in Bythinia's court could find;
There, dauntless as he lived, the envenomed bowl
Freed from her bonds of flesh his struggling soul;
And unpropitious even in death to Rome,
His dust upbraids her from the silent tomb. Liberemus (inquit) diuturna cura
populum Romanum, quando mortem senis expectare longum censent. Nec magnam nec
memorabilem lem ex inermi proditoque Flaminius victoriam feret. Mores quidem
populi Romani quantum mutaverint, vel hic dies argumento erit. Horum patres
Pyrrho regi hosti armato, exercitum in Italia habenti, ut a veneno caveret,
praedixerunt. Hi legatum consularem qui auctor esset Prusiae per scelus
occidendi hospitis, miserunt. LIVE. l. xxxix. c. 51.

CLYPEUS VOTIVUS
A^^iquus (...) pur^^ponde librarum XX^ diametri 2 ped, cum 2 un^, rep^rtus in
Rh^d^^o p^^p^ Av^ni^nem anno 1656: ^^hibens S^ipionis Africani ^^p^^i^ris
memorand^m actionem, qua captam in expugnatione Carthaginis n^v^ (...) fo^^^^
^^^^inem Allu^ie C^llib^r^rum principi, cui desponsata ^rat ^inta^t^m gr^tis
reddidi^. Polyb. x 19. LIVE. XXV^. ^0. A Ge^^. VI. 8. Dion. Fragm. Peirese.
LVIII.

P. C. SCIPIO AFRICANUS. A. U. C. 544.
Young Scipio most by grateful Rome was prized,
By vanquished Hannibal immortalized.
Her armies by the African overthrown,
Her means exhausted, and her pride beat down,
From woes on woes despondency ensued,
His gallant spirit only unsubdued:
His ardour breathed an animating strain,
Till up she sprung, and grasped her arms again.
Of every virtue, every art possessed, Scipio Africanus superior, quem dii
immortales nasci voluerunt, ut esset in quo se virtus per omnes numeros
hominibus efficaciter ostenderet, --. VAL. MAX. l. vi. c. 9.

His foes revered him, and his country blessed:
An eagle with the mildness of the dove,
His valor claimed esteem, his goodness love;
And manly beauty, beaming from his face,
To inborn dignity gave outward grace.
Nor blazed his glory in the field alone,
A harder conquest over himself he won:
In the wild hour of passion's lawless reign,
Rejecting joys bought by another's pain,
Fond of the fair, Scipio's well-known continence, in the instance here alluded
to, at the age of seven and twenty, was the more meritorious, as Polybius, his
contemporary, informs us that he was naturally extremely amorous: " -- (...),
--." POLYB. x. 19.
in blooming beauty's pride
To her true lord he gave the captive bride.
If some smooth lawn its verdant mantle spreads,
Nigh to where mountains lift their craggy heads,
There the pleased eye directs its willing ray,
Fatigued too long by nature's rude display:
So his soft manners our regards engage,
Midst the stern heroes of that warlike age.
Nor think, the Great from their high place descend,
Who choose the Muse's favorite for a friend,
When mighty Scipio, Rome well pleased could see,
With Ennius joined, in kindest amity; Prior Africanus Q. Ennii statuam
sepulchro imponi suo jussit; clarumque illud nomen, immo vero spolium ex tertia
orbis part raptum, in cinere supremo cum poetae titulo legi. PLIN. Hist. Not.
l. vii. c. 30. L'intime liaison de Scipion avec le poet Ennius, avec qui il
voulut avoir un tombeau commun, fait juger qu'il ne manquoit pas de gout pour
les belles lettres. HIST. ROMANS par Rollin. vol. vii.

TWO BUSTS, seund in the Tomb of the Family of Scipie, diseevered at Rome, near
Perla Capena, in 1780; supposed to be the Busts of P. C. SCEPIO AFRICANUS, THE
ELDER, and Q. ENNIUS.

Romae extra pertam Capenam in Scipienum menumento tres statuae sunt; quarum
duae P. et L. Seipienum dicuntur esse, tertia poetae Q Ennii. Live. XXXVIII. 56.



Could hear him wish their friendship might survive,
When fate's last mandate bade them cease to live;
That not even death their union might overcome,
But blend their ashes in one common tomb. Ennius emeruit, Calabris in montibus
ortus,
Contiguus poni, Scipio magne, tibi.
OVID. de Art Aman. l. iii.

A hundred conquerors the world have torn;
Where were two Homers, or two Maros born? Voltaire says, and he says truly,
that the superiority of one nation over another may be better estimated by the
superiority of its authors, particularly poets, than by its conquests, or
extent of territory. Invention, wit, wisdom, and learning, are certainly
preferable to bodily strength, constitutional courage, and the science of
destruction. How would the glory of kingdoms fade, and their reputation wither,
were they to remain with the fame of their military achievements, and to be
deprived of their writers? Were the names of Homer and Demosthenes blotted out
from the nativities of Greece; Virgil, Ovid, Cicero, and Livy, from those of
Rome; Ariosto and Tasso from Italy; take from Spain her Lopez de Vega,
Calderon, and Cervantes; Corneille, Racine, Moliere, and Boileau, from France;
and -- my pen shrinks while I write it -- dismantle England of her Shakspeare,
Milton, Dryden, and Pope, and what a mournful chasm would be left in the
intellectual world! How would our present veneration for the countries which
produced these immortal names subside in a moment! They are the true luminaries
of the world, and mental darkness in proportion would be the consequence of
their extinction. The Goths and Tartars were as great destroyers of mankind as
the Romans, but they owe the celebrity of their conquests to the genius of
other nations.

There is no advantage upon which Ireland ought to value herself so much as her
having given birth to such men as Southern, Steel, Swift, Berkeley,
Goldsmith, Burke, and Sheridan. -- The barrenness of Scotland is covered by the
fertile eloquence of her historians and moralists.



Genius is formed from Nature's choicest clay,
While warriors are the ware of every day.
CHANGE OF ROMAN MANNERS AFTER THE DESTRUCTION OF CARTHAGE. A. U. C. 621.
Now other maxims, different spirits rise,
Gold's sordid thirst, and factious jealousies.
As watchful sentinels alert are found,
Who fear the strict centurion's nightly round, --
While Hannibal the commonwealth oppressed,
No latent power lay slumbering in the breast;
No hour in sloth or luxury was lost,
And every virtue roused up to its post:
But with that mighty rival overthrown,
Rome's awful monitor, the foe, was gone;
When, proudly eminent, no more she feared,
Then vigilance with danger disappeared:
As if too long buoyed up, the public mind
Sunk to the languid level of mankind;
All the forced qualities by habit taught,
Gave way to appetites which Nature brought. Potentiae Romanorum prior Scipio
viam aperuerat, luxuriae posterior aperuit. Quippe remoto Carthaginis metu,
sublataque imperii emula, non gradu, sed praecipti cursu, a virtute descitum,
ad vitia transcursum; vetus disciplina deserta, nova inducta, in somnum a
vigiliis, ab armis ad voluptates, a negotiis in otium conversa civitas. VEL.
PAT. l. ii. c. 1.

From pain, and peril, and unceasing toil,
The springs of life spontaneously recoil;
And man, soft man, from strong constraint set free,
Seeks of himself his own felicity.
Too long had Rome rolled up the cumb'rous stone:
It touched the top, and tumbled headlong down:
As if her spirit in her armor lay,
Fatigued, at once she cast them both away.
Plain dress, plain roofs, plain fare no more could please,
And down, not labor, gave their slumbers ease;
Asiatick looms the Latian web depose,
And the rough virtues by which first they rose.
Now flowery chaplets shed their fragrant store
Round the tanned brow the helmet crushed before;
Relaxing baths, and precious ointments, lave
The languid limbs once braced in Tyber's wave;
For beechen bowls waxed bright for homely use,
From gold engraved they quaff'd the racy juice: (...), --. THEOC. Idyl. i.

Fastidious of rich wine, and high-sauc'd meat, Non auro, tectisve modus;
mensasque priores
Aspernata fames.
LUCAN, l. i.

Music and dance prolonged the varying treat;
All rare and exquisite alone was good,
While earth and sea were ransacked for their food:
In each refinement of profusion skilled,
Ears, eyes, and appetite, at once were filled.
Then Ostentation sought the admiring guest,
Not to partake, but to extol the feast;
Deceit, and Fraud, and Vanity stood by,
Wiles in each word, in every look a lie.
No coarse-clad merit at that gaudy board
Found glad admittance from its selfish lord;
For though like Tully the plain Roman talked,
What ear would listen? -- for the Roman walked:
But if a chariot rolled him over the road,
Or sweating slaves conveyed the living load,
O then, what eloquence in all he said!
What wisdom even in silence he displayed!
The host himself on his proud entrance waits,
And reconducts him through his sculptured gates;
Or while his viands cram the glutton's throat,
Secures his cost, and claims the venal vote.
Thus changed the great, -- while each inferior tribe
With hand outstretch'd expects the welcome bribe;
Keen as the noiseless glider through the brook
Devours the morsel on the tempting hook.
Noxious, like sultry Aethiopia's blast,
Through every rank the dire contagion passed;
Then wildly grasping with Briarean hands
The rich dominion of remoter lands,
For hard-fought combats, and a scanty prize,
Lo, feeble foes, and gaudy victories.
The hardy few, who saw and mourned the cause
Of pride's increase, and violated laws,
By mockery silenced, or in tumult slain,
Confirmed the vices they opposed in vain.
Rome's boasted virtues blazoned high by fame,
And still supposed by children who declaim,
(Though sometimes graver senators will join
To call the example glorious and divine,)
It Is owned, if truth her sage historians tell,
With Carthage fallen these ancient virtues fell.
Some manly qualities remained, it is true,
Extolled by many, but possessed by few;
MARIUS.


In council wise, and skilful in the field,
Pride and ambition to the last she held;
But temperance, justice, faith, and candor lost,
To conquer without right was all her boast;
Turning each new acquirement to a curse,
While all that should improve but made her worse.
If still prescription pleads the world's esteem,
Her greatness, not her morals, be the theme.
C. MARIUS. A. U. C. 649.
See, nursed by Furies, and for havoc bred,
Where frowning Marius lifts his rugged head;
His stature tall, with giant strength endued,
Cruel by nature, and of manners rude;
To these were joined, as if for terror meant,
A thundering voice, and visage truculent.
A living column seemed he in the wars,
Hewn from a quarry by the sword of Mars;
Though at Arpinum a Plebeian born, Is natus, et omnem pueritiam Arpini altus,
--. SAL. Bell. Jug.

By him seven times the consul's robe was worn.
Through every function of the camp he passed,
Till merit raised him to command at last.
Conscious of mean descent, he feigned to scorn Contemnunt novitatem meam, ego
illorum ignaviam. Quanquam ego naturam unam, et communem omnium existumo, sed
fortissimum quemque generosissimum. SAL. Bell. Jug.

The lazy greatness of the nobly born,
Who doze, and yawn, and retrospective see
Their sloth excused by vigorous ancestry.
While these, proud symbols in their halls displayed,
His cottage kindred showed the plough or spade:
For still he deemed it true substantial fame,
Not to inherit, but create a name;
Disdained the borrowed splendour could be shed
By glory beaming from another's head:
As well his health or beauty might he claim,
To prop a weak, or grace a homely frame.
"What men were once, (he cries) I little care;
"What Is passed, is passed; I value what they are.
"The dwarf, from Hector or Alcides sprung,
"Must still be feeble, though his sire was strong;
"And Helen's daughter, with a Gorgon's face,
"Would charm no hero by her mother's grace."
Yet all his toil the nobles to deride, At Marius, antea jam infescus
nobilitati, tum vero multus atque ferox instare: singulos modo, modo universos
laedere. SAL. Bell. Jug. Notwithstanding his mean birth, coarse education,
military life, and ferocious nature, Marius is always described by the Roman
writers, particularly by Tully, as a person of consummate art, great pride, and
unbounded ambition. On many occasions he owed his success at home as much to
the dexterity of his management as to the splendor of his name and the fame of
his achievements. In his speeches, or those ascribed to him by Sallust, may be
found the substance of almost all those arguments and reflections which have
been ever since so frequently employed to raise the consequence of the people,
and to depreciate the nobility.

Though persons of slender pretensions to ancestry are most frequently apt to
boast of it, yet we sometimes find instances of the same weakness in men of
high birth and unquestionable understanding. It was well said by Lord
Chesterfield of Lionel Duke of Dorset, that his grace was as proud of his
family as if his grandfather had been a blacksmith.



Sprung less from principle than envious pride;
For though weak mortals should not boast of aught,
What good man ever his ancestors forgot?
If bright the track their actions leave behind,
Fair emulation fires the offspring's mind;
But if foul deeds and shame their course disgrace,
He quits the path, and runs a nobler race.
High birth, like riches, men too much may prize,
But those alone who have it not, despise.
Foremost in fight for ever was he found,
Shared the coarse soldier's fare, his bed the ground,
And loved the battle's shock, and the shrill trumpet's sound.
Great his achievements, his ambition great,
He saved, adorned, and then destroyed the state.
Damned in Rome's annals to eternal fame,
Her genius trembled at his dreadful name;
In ill unrivaled, had not Sylla stood
More hideous and defiled with native blood. Nihil illa victoria fuisset
crudelius, nisi mox Sullana esset secuta. VEL. PAT. l. ii. c. 22.

Alternate Fortune over his life displayed
Her brightest sunshine, and her gloomiest shade:
The inconstant's minion him awhile we see,
Then plunged as low in hopeless misery.
As the struck bull who strives in vain to shake
The ill-aim'd hatchet from his bleeding neck, Quales mugitus, fugit cum
saucius aram
Taurus, et incertam excussit cervice securim.
VIRG. Aen. ii.
--
Not knowing where to hide his forfeit head,
Bellowing with rage and shame, proscribed, he fled:
Thus chased from Rome by conquering Sylla's sway, Marius post sextum
consulatum, annoque septuagessimo, nudus ac limo obrutus, oculis tantummodo ac
naribus eminentibus, extractus arundineto circa paludem Maricae, in quam se,
fugiens consectantes Sullae equites, abdiderat, injecto in collum loro, in
carcerem Minturnensium perductus est. etc. VEL. PAT. l. ii. c. 19.

All night in cold Minturnum's marsh he lay;
'Till naked, hungry, from the quagmire's mud
Defiled he crept, to search for needful food;
Then rudely seized, and with a halter bound,
A dungeon's straw received him on the ground.
To end the warrior's sufferings with the sword,
A Cimbrian slave the dreary cell explored;
Scared by his thundering voice, and dreadful look,
The assassin's grasp the murderous steel forsook:
An omen thence conceived, his life was spared,
And for his flight a friendly bark prepared;
At Sicily he touched; -- beat back by force,
Vagrant he steered toward Africa his course;
There his tired frame the hideous region found,
Where ruined Carthage strewn the steril ground. -- inopemque vitam in tugurio
ruinarum Carthaginensium toleravit. VEL. PAT. ut sup.

He, midst the dust of all that once was great,
Like Desolation's Anarch took his seat;
Presenting thus to Contemplation's eye
A twofold image of calamity;
The double work of persecuting fate,
An exiled statesman, and a perished state.
Yet even that sad asylum was denied;
Again disturbed he sought the uncertain tide.
His son, escaped from false Numidia's snares,
To his stern father's hovering sail repairs;
Then cheered with hopes from Cinna's arms at home,
The indignant outcast turned his prow toward Rome.
To direr pestilence as famine leads, Mox Caius Marius pestifero civibus suis
reditu intravit maenia. VEL. PAT. l. ii. c. 22.

So Cinna's havoc his revenge succeeds.
Fate in his nod, the gaunt destroyer walks
Through the thinn'd streets, and death before him stalks:
Age pleads in vain, in vain the Flamen's prayer;
How can Revenge and Rage be taught to spare?
As over Parthenope Vesuvius stands,
The boast and terror of surrounding lands, --
Ere first to surge his waves of fire begin,
The mineral deluge boiling burns within;
Thick smoke, in many a dark and aweful wreath,
Rolling above, dismays the realm beneath;
Black with the brooding storm of vengeful pride,
So tower'd, so frowned, the obdurate homicide.
The famished dogs of death, restrained no more,
Carouse and riot in Rome's richest gore.
Yet midst the horror of these frantic times,
Chaos of ruin, massacre, and crimes,
With these, the faithful Muse still bears along
The tuneful errors of Lucretius' song; Nam simul ac ratio tua caepit
vociferari,
Naturam rerum haud divina mente coortam,
Diffugiunt animi terrores; etc.
LUCRET. l. iii.

As if soft Philomel should build her bower
Where vultures gorge, and screaming kites devour.
What charms of verse! what energy of thought!
With what delusion, what false science fraught!
So from the tomb the worthless carcass comes,
Preserved in precious spice, and odorous gums.
Genius must mourn such powers displayed in vain,
Reject the teacher, yet admire the strain.
Champion of false philosophy he stands,
And the wide region impiously commands:
(...).


Against all the glittering weapons he can wield,
Reason scarce deigns to lift her sevenfold shield;
Their shining impotence at once disclosed,
The reeds fall shivered, ere their point's opposed.
O had a worthier theme his flight sustained,
What wreaths unfading had his numbers gained!
How critic skill had smoothed the vigorous lays,
Cast back on blood-stained men, and iron days!
Even in his robe of vain illusive die,
Sage Maro views him with a reverent eye;
And well might own, with Rome's consenting voice,
Himself but greatest by his subject's choice.
L. C. SYLLA. A. U. C. 665.
Whether caprice or reason swayed his mind,
Sylla at once the sovereign power resigned;
In all things singular. His deeds were such
Fame could not praise him, or degrade too much. -- quem neque laudare neque
vituperare quisquam satis digne potest. VAL. MAX. l. ix. c. 2.

His youth shone out with no conspicuous worth, -- eum honorem [consulatum]
undequinquagesimo aetatis suae anno assecutus est. [A. U. C. 665.] VEL. PAT. l.
ii. c. 17.

Till public favor brought his talents forth:
That, like the golden sun's enlivening ray,
Matur'd his genius to its full display;
Then serpent-like, by kindly warmth improved,
More bright and dangerous at once he moved.
Pleasure he loved, yet the cool statesman's eye -- animo ingenti, cupidus
voluptatum, sed gloriae cupidior: otio luxurioso esse; tamen ab negotiis
nunquam voluptas remorata. SAL. Bell. Jug.

Let not one serious care unmarked go by;
Nor could the wanton song, -- ut L. Sulla, vir tanti nominis, optime cantasse
dicatur. MACROB. l. ii. c. 10.
or circling bowl,
Dissolve the native hardness of his soul;
Cold as the stone beneath the flowery shade,
The impenetrable inmate was o'erlaid:
In the flushed midnight hour's licentious glee
He hatched deep crimes, and drowned their memory. Montesquieu says, "Dans
toute la vie de Sylla, au milieu de ses violences, on voit un esprit
republicain." Though I think the greatest deference is due to the opinions of
this enlightened writer in all matters connected with Roman policy, I am at a
loss to discover where this republican spirit is discernible in the government
of Sylla. He declared himself perpetual Dictator, that is, absolute master, by
his own authority. By the same power he abrogated all former laws, the
existence of which he found to be inconsistent with his tyranny; he made at his
pleasure new laws, without suffering them to be disputed, or even canvassed by
the people; he gave away to his creatures all the elective offices of the
state, without permitting any election. Lucretius Offella, who persevered in
petitioning for the consulship, without having all the qualifications required
by one of his regulations, he ordered to be put to death upon the spot by his
executioners, who constantly attended him. He proscribed the persons, and
confiscated the property, of the citizens who had not espoused his cause in the
contest with Marius. He did not indeed abolish the tides of the magistracies,
but he nominated the persons. The names subsisted even in the time of the
Emperors; and there were Consuls, Praetors, and Tribunes, under Tiberius and
Nero, as under the Dictator Sylla.

His wisdom, like his cruelty, sedate,
Over his rash rivals made him fortunate.
Whenever to sooth or terrify intent,
His craft or valor won the accomplishment;
For with a graced address his sinuous tongue
Could vindicate the right, and gild the wrong;
While by his side a keen, experienced sword
Hung, the stern voucher for each flattering word.
Awhile, indeed, he fairly earned applause,
When mad sedition bowed to rescued laws;
When Marius, and his ravening vultures, fed
With noble carnage, from his eagles fled;
Then had his curtain dropped, the woes of Rome
Had left no curse on his devoted tomb.
Thou, who thy harmless thoughts secure would keep
From haggard shapes that ride the midnight sleep;
Whose dreams the page perused by day may clog,
Avert the eye; -- it is Ate's catalogue.
With pious horror mangled Rome records
The ruthless ravage of his ruffians' swords; Ces murs, don't le destin fut
autrefois si beau,
N'en sont que la prison, ou plutot le tombeau.
SERTOR. de Corneille.

Promiscuous death for all alike prepared,
No age, no sex, Adversus mulieres quoque gladios distrinxit. VAL. MAX. l. ix.
c. 2.
no sanctity was spared.
Engine of wrath, to scourge the human race,
And all black crimes by blacker to efface,
His rage to extinguish every virtuous sense, He ordained by a public edict
that those who saved or harbored any of the proscribed, should suffer in their
place. GOLDSMITH's Roman History.

Gives him in hell the abhorred pre-eminence.
In his dire laws astonished nations see
Fines laid on tears, and soft humanity. -- novus punitor miserecordiae, apud
quem iniquo animo scelus intueri, scelus admittere fuit. VAL. MAX. ut sup.

His harpy edicts, past their object reached;
To innocence unborn their claws were stretched; Proscriptorum liberis jus
petendorum honorum eripuit, et bona little vendidit; ex quibus plurima primo
rapuit. LIVE. Epit.

Before Lucina's, lo, his pains advance,
And mulcts, ere life, made man's inheritance.
Each generous passion, chained to earth by fear,
Weak, and indignant, saw their foes draw near:
Rapine, Revenge, and Perfidy, and Hate,
Like famished kites, scream'd round the tyrant's state:
He, raised aloft amidst the infernal brood,
Cheered the fierce cry, and gorged their maws with blood.
Thy demon, Marius! swill'd with human gore,
Near this blotch'd tiger's gives the contest over. Abscissa miserorum capita,
modo non vultum ac spiritum retinentia, in conspectum suum afferri voluit, ut
oculis illa, quia ore nefas erat, mandaret. Quam porro crudeliter se in Marco
Mario praetore gessit! quem non prius vita privavit, quam oculos infelicis
erueret, et singulas corporis parts confringeret. VAL. MAX. ut sup. Sulla tunc
erat violentissimus, cum faciem sanguis invaserat. SEN. Epistol.

Rocked in Bellona's cradle, foe to peace,
And crowned with laurels for deserved success,
From thy first swath to arms and toil enured,
And hardened by the wrongs thyself endured;
Disease besides, and age, and pain, combined, Marius, whose life was become
burdensome to him from a complication of diseases, is supposed by some to have
put a period to his own existence, in the seventieth year of his age, A. U. C.
666. Sylla and he suffered even in this world some retribution for their
abominable cruelties.

And exile had inflamed thy furious mind;
Stung by them all, thy mercy was effaced;
But Sylla mangled, when the offense was passed.
Heaven's strong examples these fierce rivals seem Per questo Mario, e Sylla
pose al mondo,
E duo Neroni, e Caio furibondo.
ARIOST. c. xvii.

Of man's worst passions, in their worst extreme.
Pernicious and invincible he stood,
Alike the terror of the vile and good;
Able alike all semblances to wear,
Remorseless, deep, unsway'd by love or fear,
And most consistent, when most insincere.
He left behind, more fatal than his crimes, The change of Roman manners
certainly took place after the second Punick war; the change of the
constitution may be dated from the time of Sylla's usurpation. The whole of his
Dictatorship was a complete tyranny, and the model with little variation upon
which was founded the despotism of the emperors. The old government raised its
head again feebly at intervals, till it was finally annihilated by Julius
Caesar and his successors.

His dire example to succeeding times;
To lawless power his usurpation showed
The conqueror's sword could cut the speediest road;
And Rome enslaved by her own arms, declares, So many states have lost their
liberty by the sword, and so many are still held in subjection by it, that we
naturally look with complacency and admiration to that wise and happy
constitution, where this formidable engine has no edge but for the natural
enemies of the country, and the foes of freedom.

Powerful as is the military force of Great Britain, it is so peculiarly
constituted as to owe its very subsistence to the will of the people; who
maintain it, not like other nations to be oppressed by it, but protected. In
Great Britain it may truly be called the Profession of Honor. The discipline
of no army is more strict, and the pay is moderate, yet mutiny is unheard of;
and the British soldier is always ready to embark with cheerfulness and spirit
for climates the most distant, and the most perilous services. He never loses
entirely his original tincture of a freeborn citizen. It can never be
forgotten, that the generous shouts of a British army at Hounslow struck the
first panick to the bigoted soul of James, who vainly imagined he could make
them tools to extirpate the religion and liberty they were levied to defend.



Her future Caesar's were but Sylla's heirs. From the time of Marius and Sylla,
the Roman legions were at the devotion of their particular leaders, and could
not properly be said to belong to the republic. They fought for their general,
Marius or Sylla, Caesar or Pompey, Octavius or Anthony; and thus the government
of Rome became military, the conqueror only being able to reward the courage
and fidelity of his soldiers.

To close the scene of cruelty and pride,
Hear, shuddering nature! how the tyrant died.
His morbid trunk one universal sore,
Myriads of vermin crawled from every pore; Morbus pedicularis.

Swept from their prey by cleansing care in vain,
The living plague soon peopled him again.
In loathsome anguish lingering long he lay,
Then groaned at last his savage soul away;
And thus expired, with pestilential breath,
The proudest tyrant by the vilest death. A. U. C. 675. He resigned his
dictatorship the preceding year, after having destroyed above 100,000 Roman
citizens, and proscribed ninety senators, and two thousand six hundred knights.

Of all the tyrants who domineered over the Romans, (Tiberius excepted) Sylla
appears to have been the most detestable. In the atrocious depravity of several
of the emperors, there seems to be a mixture of madness and folly, which though
not less pernicious to mankind in their consequences, render the persons
somewhat less accountable; but Sylla was deliberate and circumspect, and all
his horrible cruelties may be referred to some motive of pride, revenge,
malignity, or self-interest. He besides set the first example of systematick
oppression and inhumanity. Extirpation appeared to him to be the most
compendious, and, therefore, the most eligible mode of establishing his usurped
authority; had there been any other more brief and sanguinary, he would have
preferred it: and as he was uncommonly brave, he had not even the despicable
plea of fear and cowardice to palliate his barbarities.



MITHRIDATES. A. U. C. 680.
Too often, it is true, the historian's record shows,
Fortune with Rome, and justice with her foes;
Too often, alas! the impartial eye must find
Conquest with guilt in all her wreaths entwined:
But cruel Mithridates urged his fate, Nam quid atrocius uno ejus edicto, quum
omnes, qui in Asia forent, Romanae civitatis homines interfici jussit? FLOR. l.
iii. c. 5.

And fell unpitied, though unfortunate.
Resolved to be destroyed, or to overcome,
His hate surpassed even Hannibal's to Rome. Mithridates -- odio in Romanos
Hannibal, --. VEL. PAT. l. ii. c. 18.

More fierce and not less brave, nor forced, like him, Mithridates was a prince
of great courage and capacity. His animosity to the Romans surpassed, if
possible, that of Hannibal. He made head against their ablest generals for a
period of more than forty years; and his resources being very great, had the
discipline or courage of his troops equalled that of the Romans, it seems
doubtful whether they would ever have been able entirely to subdue him. Finding
it next to impossible to destroy him completely in the field, they resorted to
their usual policy of raising internal divisions in his dominions, and of
drawing off or intimidating his allies. His cruel and tyrannous government made
this no very difficult undertaking; for he ruled entirely by fear, and was more
hated by his subjects than his enemies.

To hang for succors on a faction's whim;
Like him, to court a senate, far removed
From dangers they decried, and he had proved;
A sordid, sanguine, false, inconstant herd,
(The soldier's plague,) at once despised and feared;
Cold hearts, and boiling veins, and clamorous tongues,
Cause and proclaimers of the people's wrongs;
Just perched like birds of baleful note on high,
To feed and scream, while famished veterans die.
Not so the Pontus' king; a despot born,
He heard of laws, and heard them but to scorn.
Fatal alike in all his fierce designs,
To subjects, children, wives, and concubines: Amant avec transport, mais
jaloux sans retour,
Sa haine va toujours plu^ loin que son amor.
RACINE. Mith.

While in his furious temper love became
Pernicious as revenge, or hatred's flame;
All in their turn were victims sure to prove,
His enmity less dreadful than his love;
And his last gift to her who charmed his soul,
The deadly poniard, or envenomed bowl:
Composed of contrasts; -- though suspicious, bold;
Barbarous, though learned; Mithridates, Ponti rex inclutus, quinque et viginti
gentium, quas sub ditione habuit, linguas percalluit. A. GELL. Noc. At.
and amorous, though old.
No friend he trusted, no engagement kept;
'Midst aconite and antidotes he slept;
Till on himself his poisons vainly tried, Praelio victus, venena violentissima
festinandae necis gratra frustra expertus, suo se ipse gladio transegit. A.
GELL. Noc. At.

He cursed the science that was once his pride;
And found at length his self-destroying sword
The last, best, servant of its desperate lord. No fact has been more
frequently repeated by the ancient writers, or seems to have been received more
indisputably, than that Mithridates had so fortified his constitution by
antidotes against poison as not to be able to destroy himself by it; (See Dion
Cassius, lib. xxxvii. p. 119, edit. Reimari: "(...)") but I believe there is
some reason not to admit the certainty of this notion. He might perhaps have
been skilful enough in the nature of antidotes to know by their application how
to expel the strongest poison soon after it was administered; but by using
remedies so efficacious as to keep the anatomy in a constant state of
resistance to it, he must have destroyed the vessels capable of admitting
infection: so that the means to prevent mortality would have been as mortal as
any which could have been employed to produce it. He put himself to death by
the sword, probably because at the time he had no poison within his reach; or
he might have thought that manner of dying more expeditious and less painful.
Upon this point physicians must be the best judges.

Mithridates put an end to his life, A. U. C. 690, the year in which Augustus
Caesar was born.



Where the vast ridge of Caucasus lies stretched,
The wild dominions of this monarch reached;
With savage people filled, who owned his sway,
Sequacious still where slaughter led the way:
Thence by the sea of Pontus was his reign,
His vessels covering all that subject main;
Fresh Scythian armies by his gold were gained,
A race exhaustless, though for ever drained.
Asia, the eternal seat of war's alarms,
Defenseless lay to his invading arms;
While his rich cities on the Euxine tide,
From thriving commerce stores of wealth supplied.
No hasty, transient war he meant to wage, Ille per quadraginta annos restitit.
FLOR. l. iii. c. 5.

But felt and breathed interminable rage:
As the chafed lion, galled by distant wounds,
With ire redoubled, on his hunters bounds;
So the proud king, defeated, not subdued,
Still with new fury his revenge pursued. -- ut major clario^que in restaurando
bello resurgeret, damnisque suis terribilior redderetur. JUST. l. xxxvii. c. 1.

Lucullus chased him first from Asia far,
Repulsed, and seam'd with many a deep-trench'd scar;
And Pompey drove the outcast to despair.
CATILINE. A. U. C. 690.
But while new empires thus to Rome were joined,
Her deep destruction was at home designed.
Flagitious Catiline, his country's pest,
Hatched the huge mischief in his daring breast.
Unmoved his adamantine frame could bear
Hunger's keen fang, and all the extremes of air;
Pursuing aught his furious soul desired,
No fear deterred him, and no labor tired.
With fluent words his tongue was well endu'd,
But wisdom thinly over those words was strewn;
And small respect could eloquence produce,
For projects wild, on wealth's or power's abuse;
When his dire schemes each evil to efface,
Brought tenfold guilt and ruin in us place:
A fierce empirick, whose relentless steel
Would lop the limb a gentler hand might heal:
It Is time to doubt the doctor's skill, or truth,
Who cuts the throat, -- to cure an aching tooth.
Though for his crimes expelled from every station,
Still roared he for redress and reformation:
But sober reason saw the ill-hid snare,
And of REFORMING VILLAINS bade beware.
This certain test her steady rule affords;
She trusts men's lives, and reprobates their words:
For knaves, whose deeds and doctrines disagree,
Were never formed to mend society.
Their murderous arts misguiding beacons rear,
To light a course, where rocks alone are near;
Lurking insidious on the faithless coast,
They strip the vessel, by their treachery lost.
O nations blessed, and by experience wise,
Preserve your ancient tried securities!
For some small faults, by prying mischief found,
Pull not a noble fabric to the ground:
Examine well; -- if such indeed there are,
Patient endure them, -- or correct with care;
Nor from the hasty innovator's word,
Fly to new ills, and dangers unexplor'd.
The pile ascends with labor and delay,
The work of ruin asks but one short day;
Science and skill must join to build with grace,
But every fool or madman can deface:
Though virtue's mask disguise the dark design,
Too sure beneath it lurks -- a Catiline.
All moods he could assume, all feelings feign,
Weep without anguish, and wear smiles in pain;
Alike for avarice and profusion known,
To covet others' wealth, and waste his own.
To win a haughty strumpet to his bed,
With aconite his only son he sped; Captus amore Aureliae Orestillae, cujus,
praeter formam nihil unquam bonus laudavit; quod ea nubere illi dubitabat,
timens privignum adultum aetate, necato filio, pro certo creditur vacuam domum
scelestis auptiis fecisse. SAL. in Cat.

Their fulsome Hymen then with trembling hand
Lit at the funeral pile their nuptial brand.
Yet nature, even in his atrocious heart,
Forgot not quite to vindicate her part;
Though wanting power to stop the shuddering deed,
In black array her vengeful pangs succeed.
Short was the trance of joy; his color flies;
Foul sleepless mists overwhelm his care-worn eyes;
Pale horror sits on his distracted brow,
And sudden starts the stings within avow;
He runs, he stops, he hears in every wind
Fierce furies, and his gasping son behind. Namque animus impurus, diis
hominibusque infestus, neque vigiliis, neque quietibus sedari poterat: ita
conscientia mentem excitam vexabat. Igitur color ejus exsanguis, foedi oculi;
citus modo, modo tardus incessus: prorsus in facie vultuque vecordia inerat.
SAL. in Cat.

Could not repentance shed her healing balm?
No! public woe his private griefs must calm;
To sooth his care one way remained alone,
In Rome's expiring groans to drown his own.
Glaring dismay to every breast he meets,
Like a grim beast unchain'd, he prowls the streets;
While in chilled silence each pale passer by
Shrunk from the terror of his deadly eye.
All modes of waste consumed, his birth disgraced,
His name from honor's record quite effaced;
Restless and wretched, in the eternal strife
To live with splendor, or escape from life;
Conscience, thy fiends his nightly visions haunt,
His joys by day, pale luxury and want.
Each shameful sin fastidious lust devised,
His frequent orgies had familiariz'd;
Yet, to consummate all the former ill,
One comprehensive act was wanting still;
For never could his appetites and pride
To their full guilty gorge be gratified.
Round him, like hemlock round the noxious yew,
All infant crimes found shelter as they grew; Catilina -- omnium flagitiosorum
atque facinorosorum circum se, tanquam stipatorum, catervas habebat. SAL. in
Cat. Catiline seems to be almost the only traitor meditating the destruction of
his country, who did not make the dregs of the people, or the mob, one of his
chief instruments: his accomplices were mostly taken from the senatorial and
equestrian orders. This circumstance shows the great depravity of the Roman
gentry at that time, to whom the cruel and bloody tyranny of Sylla had made all
crimes familiar.



Till fat with poison, near his baleful sides
Rome's petty villains swelled to parricides.
These bold abettors of his desperate cause Muretus has shown from ancient
documents that there were forty persons of noble families engaged in this
conspiracy.

It is well known that Caesar and Crassus were suspected of secretly supporting
this gang of desperadoes; but they managed with such caution, that no
accusation could be brought home against them. Tully with great prudence
discouraged every attempt to involve them in the conspiracy, well knowing that
nothing would be so likely to give it additional strength as their supposed
cooperation.



Had often escaped, and now defied the laws;
Remorse was banished from their dire abodes;
Murder their priest, and furies were their gods.
If any dared to hesitate at wrong,
He lashed the puny impulse with his tongue;
Bade them from vulgar, mean restraints be free,
And scoffed and shamed them into infamy.
For spoil, on him and havoc they rely,
Confederate vice their bond of amity.
Remorseless as they were, combined with hell,
Scarce can we trust what ancient records tell: Fuere ea tempestate, qui
dicerint, Catilinam oratione habita, quum ad jusjurandum populares sceleris sui
adigeret, humani corporis sanguinem vino permistum in pateris circumtulisse;
inde quum post execrationem omnes degustavissent, sicuti in solemnibus sacris
fieri consuevit, aperuisse consilium suum. SAL. in Cat. Dio mentions this
horrible ceremony in another manner: -- (...) DION CASS l. xxxvii. c. 30.



Ere yet his chart of ruin was disclosed,
Himself the pledge of secresy proposed;
Stabbed in their sight he bade a slave expire,
Then, fit libation for a league so dire,
The blood distilling from the victim's wound
He swill'd, and sent the dreadful bev'rage round. A neighboring nation, once
holding itself out as the most polite in Europe, has in our time furnished such
repeated examples of sanguinary and savage cruelty, as not to leave this
atrocity without a parallel.

Defenseless Italy (her legions far In Italia nullus exercitus: Cn. Pompeius in
extremis terris bellum gerebat. SAL. in Cat.

Led off by Pompey to the eastern war,)
Extended seemed to their devouring eyes,
A tempting, rich, and unresisting prize.
Already their exulting hope surveys
The senate's bleeding throats, the city's blaze; It is a melancholy
consideration, that as the Romans advanced in learning and knowledge, they
became in proportion more vicious and profligate. It shows, that human wisdom,
without the aid of a pure and holy religion, is not sufficient to make men
virtuous and happy.

Themselves dispersed for slaughter through the land,
And lords of all the ruin he had planned.
But cords and dungeons on their crimes await;
On him attends a less ignoble fate:
Abhorring all good men, by all abhorred,
Fighting he perished by his country's sword;
Stretched over slaughtered foes, his visage bore
The same grim aspect which in life it wore.
CICERO.


M. T. CICERO. A. U. C. 690.
The crimes these desperate parricides concealed,
A woman's tongue to Tully's ear revealed. At Fulvia, -- tale periculum
reipublicae haud occultum habuit; sed sublato auctore, de Catilinae
conjuratione quae quo modo audierat, compluribus narravit. SALL. in Cat. Such
as are fond of contemplating the many instances in which great events have
originated from slight accidents, may, I think, add to the number the manner in
which the conspiracy of Catiline was first discovered. -- Fulvia, a beautiful
and mercenary courtesan of Rome, had, among a number of other gallants,
admitted Curious, one of the conspirators; who, like most of them, was
profligate, extravagant, and needy. As from his poverty he was now no longer
able to furnish means for her profusion, she began to treat him with neglect
and coldness. Being sensible from whence this change in her conduct toward him
proceeded, he threw out hints that he should soon be able to gratify all her
desires, however unbounded. From the frequent repetition of such intimations,
she began to suspect that they sprung from something more than the mere levity
of her lover. She set herself artfully to sift him, and, by degrees drew from
him the whole secret, which she immediately communicated to the consul Cicero.
It should be remembered to her credit, that when she divulged the conspiracy,
she took care to conceal the name of her informer. She showed conscience in her
communication, and honor in her taciturnity.



Favorite of science, and by Athens schooled,
Rome's forum long the accomplished sage had ruled;
Nor ancestors, nor riches made him known; -- M. Cicero, qui omnia incrementa
sua sibi debuit; vir novitatis nobilissimae, et ut vita clarus, ita ingenio
maximus. VEL. PAT. l. ii. c. 34. Cicero was born A. U. C. 647; he was therefore
of the same age with Pompey, and seven years elder than Julius Caesar. He was
descended from a very respectable family, though not noble. In all the offices
which he held, and which he acquired by his own merit, his conduct was not only
without reproach, but highly laudable and exemplary. He was Quaestor, Curule
Aedile, Praetor, Consul, and Governor of Cilicia. In this last post had he
proceeded with the usual rapacity of Roman governors, he might safely have
plundered the province of about half a million; but he contented himself with
his salary, and a few fair perquisites, to the amount in the whole of about
twenty thousand pounds of our money: a rare instance of moderation in times of
such unbounded peculation.



His honors well acquired, were all his own.
Nature, a liberal mother, unconfined,
With all her choicest gifts had stored his mind;
With brightest fancy, with profoundest sense;
And sirens tuned his tongue to eloquence. Disertissime Romuli Nepotum
Quot sunt, quotque fuere, Marce Tulli!
Quotque pose aliis erunt in annis; --.
CATUL. xlvi.

Nor wore he always wisdom's graver cloak,
But loved to laugh, and edge the poignant joke; Atque ego, ni longum esset,
referrem, in quibus causis cum nocentissimos reos tueretur, victoriam jocis
adeptus sir. MAC. l. ii. c. 2.

Convinced that often when sober reason fails,
The well-tim'd lighter pleasantry prevails.
As man's distinction too, some sages place
That gay convulsion of the enlivened face:
Tears fall from brutes; -- by human kind alone
Is mirth's expression by a laugh made known.
Greece, prone to flatter, as debased by fear,
Gave to his praise one honest envious tear:
"By him (she cried) I see our arts overcome,
"And our once matchless palm a plant of Rome."
Though none with him for inborn gifts could vie,
He studied with Boeotian industry.
Formed to adorn at once, and save the state,
Who can decide in what he rose most great? Professing a religion which
abounded with false gods and superstition, in an age and country bewildered in
omens, prodigies, and visions, observe how the enlightened mind of Tully soars
above such weaknesses: Haec scilicet in imbecillo remissoque animo multa
omnibus confusa et variata versantur, maximeque reliquiae earum rerum moventur
in animo et agitantur, de quibus vigilantes aut cogitavimus aut egimus. -- An
tu censes ullam anum tarn deliram futuram fuisse, ut somniis crederet, nisi
ista casu nonnunquam forte temere concurrerent? -- Ut mihi mirum videatur, cum
mendaci homini ne verum quidem dicenti credere soleamus, quomodo isti, si
somnium ver^m evasit aliquod, non ex multis potius uni fidem derogant, quam ex
uno innumerabilia confirmant. DE DIVIN. l. ii. c. 67, 71.



Round all he touched such dazzling rays combine,
His inspiration proves the source divine.
As transient clouds in summer skies appear,
So shades of weakness dimmed his character.
With more than Plato's skill to instruct and please,
He wants thy heart, unshaken Socrates!
Books, science, study, Athens, could not give
What man from nature only can receive.
Still anxious for himself, and insincere, In general, the strongest
testimonies to the disadvantage of a man's character are furnished by himself.
Had not Cicero's Letters come down to posterity, we should have been ignorant
of many of his weaknesses.

The contrariety of Tully's language in particular, when speaking to Caesar,
and when speaking of him, is very remarkable. In his two celebrated Orations
for Marcellus and Ligarius he has carried the encomiastick strain as far as it
could well go: for his real sentiments look at numberless passages in his
letters to Atticus.



His restless foresight sprung too often from fear;
And often thus his timorous bark was run,
Full on the quicksands which he steered to shun; O magnam stultitiam timoris,
id ipsam quod verearis ita cavere, ut cum vitate fortasse potueris, ultro
arcessas, et attrahas. BRUT. Epist. ad At.

For bold state-pilots safer tracks explore,
Who plow the deep, nor trust the treacherous shore:
Destructive ever is the coward's course,
He shuns one peril, but encounters worse;
With shame, contempt, and terror at his heels,
Pangs sharp as death, even in escape, he feels,
See Tully, more than mortal, wise and great,
Sunk by base fear beneath a woman's state;
Though fond of virtue, more he loved the fame, Laudis avidissimi semper
fuimus. CIC. Epist. ad At. l. i. c. 15. Itaque te plane etiam atque etiam
rogo, ut et ornes ea vehementius etiam quam fortasse sentis, et in eo leges
historiae negligas, amorique nostro plusculum etiam quam concedet veritas,
largiare.

Illa nos cupiditas incendit, de qua. initio scripsi, festinationis, quod
alacres animo sumus: ut et caeteri viventibus nobis ex litteris tuis nos
cognoscant, et nosmetipsi vivi gloriola. nostra perfruamur.

CIC. Ep. ad Lucium Lucceium. l. v. ep. 12.

And sometimes lost the prize, to prove the claim.
Fame, first of merit's voluntary dues,
Who often demands thee, but demands to lose;
All but the vanity mankind forget;
They give the bounty, but refuse the debt:
Great actions paint themselves, and bright shines forth
The tongueless dignity of modest worth;
And gold, that precious mineral, the wise
Less for its splendor than its value prize.
When big with self the copious boaster pleads,
Great Pompey, and the Scipios, vail their heads;
Like glimmering stars their beams no more are seen,
While heaven's blue vault receives night's peerless queen.
"Romans! (he cries,) your savior would you see,
"Behold me first, me last, and only me: Me Quintus Catulus, princeps hujus
ordinis, et auctor publici consilii, frequentissimo senatu parentem patriae
nominavit.

Mihi togato Senatus, non ut multis, been gestae, sed ut nemini, conservatae
reipublicae, singulari genere supplicationis, deorum immortalium templa
patefecit.

-- sine ulla dubitatione juravi, rempublicam atque hanc urbem mea unius opera
esse salvam.

Cic. Orat. in L. Pisonem.

"Warriors surpassed, their laurels must lay down,
"Or own them withered by my peaceful gown: "Cedant arma togae," -- a well
known saying of Cicero's, after Catiline's conspiracy; for the presumption of
which he was much ridiculed, particularly by L. Piso and Anthony.

"Conquest and spoils to them their country owes;
"On me a father's title she bestows:
"O sound for ever heard! for ever dear!
"Rome from her Tully dates her natal year! O fortunatam natam, me consule,
Romam! JUVEN. Sat. x. 122. Thus happily translated by Dryden: Fortune fortuned
the dying notes of Rome,
Till I her consul sole consol'd her dome.


Cicero's being unanimously chosen Consul, when there was suspicion entertained
of Catiline's designs against his country, is a strong proof that the Romans
did not, like Montesquieu, consider him as less qualified than Cato to sustain
a first part in the state on a great emergency.



"On grateful marble be the inscription traced,
"Nor ever from the public mind effaced;
"From age to age the memory shall succeed,
"And patriots bless me, while they hear and read."
Such praises on himself would he confer,
And violate the Roman's modest ear.
But time should throw a veil over every fault,
Hide how he erred, and reverence what he taught;
And own the vigor of his mighty mind,
Who prop'd his country, and improved mankind, -- omnium triumphorum lauream
adepte majorem, quanto plus est ingenii Romani terminos in tantum promovisse,
quam imperii. PLIN. His. Not. vii. 30.

Excellent Tully! by a ruffian braved, -- qui civem, quem senatus, quem
populus, quem omnes gentes, urbis ac vitae civium conservatorem judicabant,
servorum armis exterminavit. CIC. pro Milone. Me patria expulerat, bona
diripuerat, domum incenderat, liberos, conjugem meam vexaverat. Ibid.

He left the ungrateful city he had saved;
With tears the sorrowing senate saw him sent
(Their best defender) to cold banishment: It seems difficult to reconcile the
frequency of massacres at Rome with the severity of the Roman laws against
homicide, and the reluctance they always discovered to condemn any citizen
judicially to capital punishment. Clodius procured the banishment of Cicero on
pretense of his having put to death, without legal conviction, a few
conspirators, of whose guilt not the smallest doubt was entertained; and in the
course of the prosecution this ruffian himself had occasioned the assassination
of hundreds, about whom there seems to have been no enquiry. Though he had a
hired mob, a desperate banditti at his heels, he was not like Marius, Sylla, or
Caesar, at the head of a victorious army.

They heard that voice, never heard in vain before,
The exile it could not avert, deplore;
With him the genius of the state disgraced,
Faction triumphant, and his dwellings razed. Cicero had no less than eighteen
houses and villas in Rome and different parts of Italy. See Middleton.

But called with honor home, the exulting throngs
Shout from his mind the memory of passed wrongs:
His houses at the public charge restored,
His name resounded, and the favorite word,
Vain now, as abject in distress before,
He thought affliction could return no more.
Alas! when tyrants over the laws prevail,
Man's best possessions are an idle tale;
The whirlwind sweeps them all in one fell blast,
And the last wretch is he who lives the last:
Still, still remained, from fate's malignant power,
A sad reverse, for his concluding hour.
Nor eloquence divine, nor reverend age, Nihil tam indignum illo tempore fuit,
quam quod aut Caesar aliquem proscribere coactus est, aut ab ullo Cicero
proscriptus est; abscissaque scelere Antonii vox publica est, cum ejus salutem
nemo defendisset, qui per tot annos et publicam civitatis, et privatam civium,
defenderet. VEL. PAT. l. ii, c. 66.

Could save great Tully from the assassin's rage.
Behold! (sad sight!) infuriate Fulvia seize -- (...). DION. CASS. l. xlvii.

The severed head, and fix it on her knees;
From the cold jaws she forced that silent tongue,
On whose sweet sounds the once-charm'd senate hung;
Hear the she-fiend with taunts exulting cry,
As thrice she pierced, "This for my Anthony:"
The grisly spoil thus brutally defaced, Civitas lacrymas tenere non potuit,
quum recisum Ciceronis caput in ^llis suis rostris videretur. -- Haec scelera
in Antonii Lepidique tabulis. FLOR. l. iv. c. 6.

With the lopped hands, was over the rostrum placed;
From thence in hideous mockery to glare,
And freeze each future patriot to despair.
Minions of fortune, who, possessed of power,
Indulge unawed the transitory hour,
Make science ever your peculiar care;
The world reveres her, of the world beware!
A little while ere nature claimed his breath,
The dagger closed sage Tully's eyes in death;
But grateful ages still preserve his fame,
And endless infamy his murderer's shame. -- omnisque posteritas illius in te
scripta mirabitur, tuum in eum factum execrabitur. VEL. PAT. ut sup. The
abhorrence so strongly expressed of a monarchical government in most part of
Cicero's writings, is assigned by Middleton, with great appearance of
well-founded conjecture, as the reason why the two excellent but courtly poets,
Virgil and Horace, have never mentioned him. It must be observed at the same
time, that Tully's conception of a monarchy was only of an absolute monarchy;
of a government by conquest, and maintained by the power of the sword. Of such
a constitution as the English, none of the ancients had any imagination, except
Tacitus, who seems to have had some glimmering of it before him, as through a
twilight.

Cicero's having been intimately connected with the conspirators who deprived
Julius Caesar of his life, (as Dryden has observed,) must also have contributed
to render his name extremely unpopular in the court of Augustus.



Soon as his fate the wings of Rumor gains,
Curdling the tide of genius in men's veins,
The bold, in loud reproach, abhorrence vent,
The timorous droop, and murmur discontent;
While ruffian Anthony but turns to find
The general curse and horror of mankind. See Note at the end.

POMPEY


POMPEY. A. U. C. 700.
But all the grandeur palmy Rome displayed,
Rich Crassus, I venture to recommend to the reader the perusal of the life, or
rather the death, of Crassus, by Plutarch, as one of the most interesting
pieces in that author's whole collection.

The opulence of some individuals at Rome is astonishing. An estimate of the
wealth of Crassus may be formed, when we know what Pompey possessed, who was
not supposed to be nearly so rich. In order to remove Sextus, the son of Cnaeus
Pompey, from Spain, M. Anthony and Lepidus agreed to a composition with him for
the property which had been confiscated, and plundered from the father, after
the battle of Pharsalia. They allowed him, after a reasonable valuation, to the
amount of five millions of our money; his books, plate, and furniture not being
included in the estimate.


Pompey, and great Caesar swayed:
The first, by wealth distinguished from the crowd;
The next, of passed exploits and triumphs proud;
A name by Rome exalted to the skies,
And spangled thick with fortune's flatteries.
The people's idol long, he loved to hear
His own applause, in his own theater; -- plausuque sui gaudere theatri. LUCAN.

And, not aware that life's best scenes were over,
He saw what he had been, and saw no more. -- -- -- multumque priori
Credere fortunae. Stat magni nominis umbra.
Ibid.

No dignities his thirst of power could sat,
But, once possessed, the use was moderate.
To each achievement of assured renown
The partial public pushed their favorite on: Quae in omnibus nova post
hominum memoriam constituta sunt, ea tam multa non sunt, quam haec, quae in hoc
uno homine vidimus. CIC. pro lege Manil.

But sometimes, when he quelled a foe to Rome,
He raised a jealous enemy at home.
Thus to the rout of Spartacus he came,
Crassus deserved, and he enjoyed the fame; Hujus patrati gloria penes M.
Crassum fuit. VEL. PAT. l. ii. c. 30.

And harrass'd Mithridates, feeble grown,
By Sylla and Lucullus half overthrown, Lucullus, Mithridatem multis locis
fuderat. VEL. PAT. l. ii. c. 33.

Run down to life's last dregs, -- could just afford
Another facile garland to his sword.
Over the huge height of Taurus next he passed, Is primus omnium Romanorum in
Tauro iter fecit. EUTROP. l. vi. c. 6. Dio says, Lucullus was the first. (...)
-- (...). DION. CASS l. xxxv. 16 p. 85, edit. Reimari.

And proudly laid defenseless nations waste:
Media, and Syria, to his mercy yield,
And Parthia's king, Pharnaces, left the field;
Arabia saw his long-extended force
Obliquely toward famed Jordan wind their course;
Stopped at Jerusalem, the siege he formed, Romanorum primus Cn. Pompeius
Judaeos domuit, templumque jure victoriae ingressus est. Inde vulgatum, nulla
intus Deum effigy, vacuam sedem, et inania arcana. TACIT. His. l. v. c. 9.

And in three months the sacred Temple stormed. Hierosolymam, caput gentis,
tertio mense cepit. EUTROP. l. vi. c. 14.

Riches unknown before, within he found,
Yet trod with reverent feet on hallowed ground.
Then first were those mysterious symbols shown,
To sacerdotal view revealed alone.
Stupendous grandeur filled his wondering eye,
Columns, and palms, and gold's pure majesty; -- et vidit illud grande impiae
gentis arcanum patens, sub aureo uti coelo. FLOR. l. iii. c. 5.

Gales, such as breathe from Sharon's spicy thorn,
Through lofty domes from fragrant woods were borne.
Amazed, no idol image could he find, (...) DION. CASS. l. xxxvii. 17.

Yet the vast void dilates the heathen's mind:
From his chafed brow the nodding helm he steals,
His knee involuntary reverence feels;
And while with awe the sanctuary's explored,
Nature's true Deity was half adored. The strict adherence of the Jews to the
sanctity of their Sabbaths, during which no kind of work was permitted, greatly
facilitated Pompey's conquest. On these days he continued his attack, while
they remained totally inactive. The Temple would not have been forced so soon,
had its defenders known this wise precept of our Savior: -- "The Sabbath was
made for man, not man for the Sabbath."

The God pervading thus his humbled breast,
Unspoil'd he bade the holy treasure rest. At Cn. Pompeius, captis
Hierosolymis, victor ex illo fano nihil attigit. CIC. pro L. Flacco.

Success and continence increased his fame,
And Jews with heathens joined to extol his name.
At length, with captive monarchs in his train,
He turned his stately march toward Rome again. Tum victor omnium, quas
adierat, gentium, Pompeius, -- revertit in Italiam. VEL. PAT. l. ii. c. 40.

To praise accustomed from his beardless youth,
The glare of flattery seemed the ray of truth:
In every gracious action formed to excel,
And from weak foes conceived invincible; Caesar is known to have expressed
great contempt of military reputation acquired by the conquest of Asiaticks.
The facility of his own victories taught him to despise such feeble enemies,
formidable only by their numbers, without bodily strength, discipline, or
courage.

While moved by others, still his pride believed
He gave the impulse which himself received;
And with the show of power too vainly pleased, Il recherchoit moins dans les
dignites qu'il briguoit, la puissance qui en est inseparable, que les honneurs
et l'eclat, don't else etoient environnees. VERTOT. Rev. Romans

His wiser rivals on the substance seized.
From public care by public praise relieved,
His age looked back at what his youth achieved;
A partial memory of himself he kept,
And in the shade of his own laurels slept;
Unwilling to be roused again to strife,
Or quit the enjoyment for the toils of life.
Too soon elated, and too soon depressed, Cnaeus autem noster (o rem miseram et
incredibilem!) ut totus jacet! non animus est, non consilium, non copiae, non
diligentia. CIC. Epist. ad Attic.

No standard settled in his own weak breast,
He lived to learn, fresh fame required fresh deeds;
For glory which advances not, recedes.
Great was his name in arms, but envious fate
Opposed him to a rival still more great, Nec coiere pares; alter vergentibus
annis
In senium, longoque togae tranquillior usu
Dedidicit jam pace ducem: --.
LUCAN. l. i.

More wise, more young, more bold, and fortunate. The superiority of Caesar's
personal character over Pompey's, appears in several instances; in none,
perhaps, more conspicuously than in their different conduct with respect to
Labienus. He had been one of Caesar's favorite lieutenants, and always
victorious when fighting under his auspices: however, he left his old general,
and passed over to the camp of Pompey. Caesar heard the account of his
desertion with his usual magnanimity, and generously sent after him all his
money, equipage, and whatever besides he had left behind him. Pompey, on the
contrary, received him as an acquisition of the highest value, and listened
with avidity to his flattering intelligence of the weak condition of the enemy,
till he was at last mournfully convinced of his mistaken credulity, by his
total overthrow. Lucan makes Caesar thus speak of Labienus: -- -- -- fortis in
armis
Caesareis Labienus erat; nunc transfuga vilis
Cum duce praelato terras atque aequora lustrat.
LUC. l. v. 345.

Upon considering the whole of Pompey's character and conduct, I am persuaded,
that as he had more vanity than Caesar, so was he not less ambitious. What his
admirers were pleased to dignify with the name of patriotism, and love of the
constitution, or, in other words, his being more willing than Caesar to allow
the senate sufficient authority, resulted less from his own disposition, than
from sentiments which had been instilled into him by such men as Cato, Tully,
and Brutus. These excellent persons seem not only to have directed his conduct,
but to have formed his political mind. They had so often assisted him in the
attainment of his objects, and had extolled him so much for his moderation,
that he must have been divested of all feeling, could he have forgot his
obligations to them; or had he been eager to undeserve, if I may be allowed the
expression, the high opinion they had so publicly declared of him. He found it
less hazardous, and more reputable, to be the first of several great men, than
to be the only great man: besides, he loved approbation and good will, which,
he knew, had he avowed a passion for governing singly, would have been
immediately converted into flattery and hatred. That this, however, was his
object, is clear from a circumstance mentioned by Plutarch in his life of the
younger Cato, whom he would not trust with the command of the fleet (though he
had already promised to invest him with it) lest he should be enabled by this
means to compel him to lay down his arms, as soon as Caesar was vanquished: and
Cato himself thought, that, whether Pompey or Caesar should be victorious, the
event would be equally fatal to the liberty of the common wealth.

The constitution of Rome was as much subverted during the triumvirate of
Pompey, Crassus, and Caesar, as when the last ruled alone; but Cicero complains
less, because Pompey made a part of it. The orator knew he had little chance of
managing a man of such high views and such great capacity as Caesar. Brutus, in
his letters, probes him to the quick, when he seems willing to disguise to
himself, and to the world, his real motives for abetting Octavius; the chief of
which seems to have been, the assurance given him by that young dissembler,
that he would be principally governed by his advice and experience.



BATTLE OF PHARSALIA. A. U. C. 706.
NOw Pompey to rude clamor forced to yield, -- -- cum mixto murmr turba
Castrorum fremuit, fatisque trahentibus orbem
Signa petit pugnae: miseri pars maxima vulgi
Non totum visura diem, --.
LUCAN. l. vii. 45.

Draws forth his legions in Pharsalia's field.
The impatient youth deride his cold delays,
While he condemns the ardour he obeys;
Tired of their taunts, and less convinced, than stung
By buzzing wits, and keener Tally's tongue. Addidit invalidae robur facundia
causae. Ibid. Middleton asserts, that Cicero endeavored to dissuade Pompey
from hazarding the fortune of the republic on the event of a battle, and
produces passages from his letters to that purpose; but how is this to be
reconciled with his for ever complaining of Pompey's dilatoriness and
inactivity? He seems to have been full of apprehensions, and to have
disapproved of every thing. A man is sometimes apt to mistake his fears for his
foresight. Pompey is known to have said of him, "Cupio ad hosts Cicero
transeat, ut nos timeat." If he wished him not to risk a battle, what objection
could he have to his inactivity? I think, but am not certain, that Cicero does
not say he was against fighting, till after the unfortunate event of the battle
of Pharsalia was known. However, I mean no attempt to diminish any credit due
to the letters of Cicero, which certainly contain the very best materials for
the most interesting period of the whole Roman story. It would have been more
candid, perhaps, to have lamented his advice, than to have denied having given
it; or had he confined his complaints to Pompey's conduct after his defeat,
they would have been reasonable.

No age, perhaps, has produced together men of such genius and capacity as
flourished in Rome at this period. This is the consideration which makes the
history of these times so interesting. The magnitude of the object of
contention is in some degree lost in the greatness of the contenders'
characters. What a proficiency in morals and in science might not have been
expected, had Caesar, Pompey, Cicero, Cato, and Brutus, united as strenuously
to improve the world, as they struggled to govern it!



The vulgar, too, in many a factious band,
Approving, censuring, and confounding stand;
Folly and fear distract the ignoble crowd,
Like cymbals ever, hollow, light, and loud;
Like cymbals too, raised by the master's hand,
And dumb or sounding but by his command.
Woe to the chief, whose fluctuating mind
Veers, like the vane, with every whistling wind;
For he who each new counselor will hear, (...) EURIP. Iphigen. in Aul.

Must often the latest to the best prefer.
His battle's strength his cavalry he deemed;
Numerous and proud, invincible they seemed:
Elate already with success, they feel
Sol's orient luster dazzling from their steel;
Trim glittering bands, who in their splendor see
Not valiant deeds alone, but victory.
Alas! before those sunbeams gild the west,
Devouring vultures on their limbs shall feast; Morti erano infiniti, e
derelitti
Al lupo, al corvo, a l'aquila grifagna.
ARIOST. can. xiv.

And pride be taught, that, to secure success,
Vain show gains little, and presumption less.
Sagacious Caesar views his lines of horse,
And posts against them a reserve of force. -- ex tertia acie singulas cohortes
detraxit, atque ex his quartam instituit, equitatuique opposuit. CAES. de Bell.
Civ. l. iii.

Fortune confers what long he sought in vain,
To try the combat in the open plain; Caesar had one great advantage over
Pompey, he could act entirely from himself; while the latter was distracted by
a multitude of advisers, with whom his camp is known to have swarmed.

Nor can their numbers, twice his own, control
The glowing presage of his dauntless soul.
Domitius leads his center to the fight, Sinistro cornu Antonium, media acie
Cn. Domitium praeposuerat. CAES. de Bell. Civ. ut sup.

The left Antonius, and himself the right,
To Pompey full opposed. Ipse contra Pompeium consistit. Ibid.
Ere they advance,
He bids his hardy veterans push the lance
Strait at the faces of the gaudy host, Voces quoque obequitantis exceptae:
altera cruenta, sed docta, et ad victoriam efficax, "Miles, faciem feri." FLOR.
l. iv. c. 2.

Who more their beauty than their prowess boast.
Since the firm earth's foundations, never was fought
A combat, with such mighty import fraught: It is extraordinary, that Plutarch,
Appian, and Caesar himself, give different and contradictory accounts of the
order and disposition of the troops in the battle of Pharsalia, nor do they
agree as to the numbers. It would be an insult to the discernment of any reader
to question to whose authority he will give the preference. Plutarch must have
read Caesar's account of the battle, as he mentions particularly an observation
made by him upon Pompey's forbidding his men to shout or rush forward; a
practice approved of by Caesar.

How poor must towns and provinces appear,
The common objects of men's hope or fear,
When, with comparing view, is scanned the extent
Of all depending on this huge event?
The mistress of mankind, high-seated Rome,
From this great day expects her final doom;
To see her rights, her liberty, her all,
Confirmed for ever, or for ever fall.
And next, the matchless agents fill our eyes,
The world's best leaders, and the world the prize.
Onward they rush; but, ere the battle bleeds,
A pause, a dreadful interval, succeeds; Ad medium fere spatium consisterunt.
CAES. ut sup.

Then, like dark clouds swelled from the surly north,
And big with storms, their gathered rage bursts forth.
Black, ebon black, the hour to Pompey's fame, When a civil war became
inevitable, Caesar published a declaration, that he should consider all Romans
as friends who did not appear in arms against him; Pompey, on the contrary,
that he should treat all who did not join with him as enemies. This was, in
fact, had the latter been victorious, to lay the foundation for massacre and
confiscation, and a repetition of all the horrors of Sylla's proscription.
Tully, with his usual humanity and wisdom, condemned it both as cruel and
impolitick, though it seems greatly to have influenced him to show himself in
the camp of Pompey. He wished well to his cause; but, had it been consistent
with prudence, would have preferred the appearance of neutrality.

His cohorts routed, and disgraced his name;
That star, long laboring to meridian height,
Shoots down at once to never-ending night:
All the bright threads by fortune's fingers spun,
The toil of years, unravelled, backward run.
The fire-scath'd oak, with votive garlands crowned,
Thus mourns its honors withering on the ground:
Alone, exposed it stands, its trunk stripped bare,
The herd pass by, and find no shelter there;
Trembling, the way-worn pilgrim speeds his pace,
Nor dares abide near the devoted place.
Life's varying seasons by degrees decay,
But Pompey's summer closes with a day.
Where are the crowds that hailed his noontide blaze?
The senate's homage, and the people's praise?
Attendant kings that graced his glittering train?
Where all the obliged, the obsequious, and the vain?
Far, far aloof, they fly; Se poi si cangia in tristo il lieto stato,
Volta la turba adulatrice il piede.
ARIOST. xix. 6.
as birds disperse
When raging storms their dusky columns pierce.
Adversity, thy bitter blasts declare
What slaves to chance instable mortals are.
Ask for great Pompey now; lo, in his tent,
With visage wan, his robe of battle rent;
Where his sad eye Emathia's valley views,
His scattered legions fly, the foe pursues;
Even in his camp he sees the hostile spear,
And Caesar's conquering name appalls his ear.
The sumptuous banquet in his tents displayed,
The goblets crowned, the purple carpets laid;
The heat excluded by the shadowing tree,
And in a field the city's luxury;
By their fallacious pomp too plain express,
How vainly pride anticipates success; In castris Pompeii videre licuit
triclinia strata, magnum argenti pondus expositum, recentibus cespitibus
tabernacula constrata, L. etiam Lentuli et nonnullorum tabernacula protecta
hedera; multaque preterea, quae nimiam luxuriam et victoriae fiduciam
designarent. CAES. de Bell. Civ.. l. iii. 96.

Too plainly prove, to double every curse,
Minds unprepared for fortune's sad reverse.
Unthought-of ill assails with twofold weight,
And finds no guard against the storms of fate.
With grief and shame his quivering cheeks are flushed,
And every function of his soul lies crushed;
Courage at first forsakes his humbled breast,
Then hope, the bosom's latest, lingering guest.
In sable sorrow's comfortless array,
Through Tempe's shades he takes his lonely way; Superstes dignitatis suae
vixit, ut cum majore dedecore per Thessalica Tempe equo fugeret, et ut una
navicula Lesbon applicaretur. FLOR. l. iv. c. 2.

Pondering the uncertain base of mortal pride,
While winding Peneus murmurs by his side: Littora contigerat, per quae Peneius
amnis
Emathia jam clade rubens exibat in aequor.
LUCAN. l. viii. 33.

There, in the mazes of the silent grove,
His streaming eyes upbraid inconstant Jove;
Then, parched with thirst, along the river's brink
He stoops, cold comfort from the wave to drink.
Dismayed he stops, or panting looks behind,
And hears the imagined foe in every wind.
All ills his rage had on the vanquished shed,
Pale fear inflicts on his own forfeit head;
Himself the mournful pageant of the war,
And Caesar high in his triumphal car.
Like a poor bark, her sails and rudder lost,
In vain he hopes some hospitable coast;
For chance, not choice, must now the vessel steer,
While rocks all round, and faithless shelves are near.
Where can he turn? What port will now receive
The dangerous freight, a vanquished fugitive?
To Lesbos, where his soul's best treasure bides, Cedendum est bellis, quorum
tibi tuta latebra
Lesbos erit: --.
LUCAN. l. v. 743.

His course, at length, the harrass'd warrior guides.
As sometimes, though black clouds obscure the day.
The laboring sun emits a transient ray;
So, in his breast, one gleam of joy revives,
Reflecting, that his dear Cornelia lives:
Though interest's servile train forsake his side,
Receding with his fortune's ebbing tide,
No chance or change her constant faith can move, Ma quel, che di cuor ama,
riman forte,
Ed ama il suo signor dopo la morte.
ARIOS. c. xix.

And woe's best balm is soft connubial love;
That cordial drop, which in life's chalice quaff'd,
Pervades and sweetens all the bitter draught.
But in what Lethe can he fancy steep?
On what kind down will restless memory sleep?
When her too faithful, busy pencil draws
What now, alas! he is, and what he was.
O, how unprescient of this dire disgrace, O quantum caliginis mentibus humanis
objicit magna felicitas. SEN. Epist.

Was the gay tumult of their last embrace!
When weaving garlands for her lord's return,
Smiling she talked of ruined Caesar's urn;
Nor in the proud delusion could foresee,
That hope is scarce the shade of certainty.
Laurels and myrtles deck the conqueror now,
While the sad cypress fades on Pompey's brow.
O vain-disposing man! a scornful Jove
Sits mocking thy presumption, from above; Enimvero Di nos, quasi pilas,
homines habent. PLAUT. Cap. in prol.

Views the fond structures of the exulting mind,
Then puffs the empty bubbles to the wind;
Till sage experience owns this truth at last,
That naught on earth is certain but the past.
Long doubtful to what region he might trust,
And many bad. declined, he chose the worst.
Vile strumpet, Fortune! who would trust thy smile? There are few particulars
in the Roman story less easily accounted for than the wonderful popularity of
Pompey: it commenced with his setting out in life, and accompanied him to the
close of it. It will appear the more extraordinary, that he should have been
such an early favorite, when we consider that his father was as much detested
as the son was beloved and admired; and hereditary impressions are not, in
general, effaced speedily. He certainly had a very distinguished military
genius, and performed several signal services for his country; but we know, at
the same time, that his enemies were often feeble, and the troops he commanded
the best in the world. Sertorius in Spain showed himself greatly his superior
in the art of war; after much boasting and equal supineness he fled shamefully
from Rome at the approach of Caesar, whom he affected to despise; and upon the
rout of his cavalry early in the engagement at Pharsalia, he made no effort to
retrieve the fortune of the day, but retired from the field with the most
pusillanimous dejection. His popularity must have been greatly acquired by his
personal advantages, by the dignity of his deportment, affable manners, and a
life of unsullied decorum. Though Rome would not have been more free, had he
been victorious, and he would have been a much more cruel conqueror than
Caesar, when we reflect upon his former fortune it is impossible not to be
deeply affected at his lamentable catastrophe.

Thy blandishments allure, but to beguile.
The master late of all Rome's naval pride,
Whose brazen prows oppressed the foaming tide,
All but his wife and faithful freedman lost,
With one poor bark now seeks the Egyptian coast.
Not Egypt's shore the vanquished chief could save:
He sought a refuge, and he found a grave.
Fated to fall, the soft Etesian gale
To false Canopus wafts his luckless sail.
Dull as the banks where Lethe's poppies sleep,
Where torpid weeds their slimy chambers keep,
Lies the flat shore. No choral nautick sound,
To charm the heaving anchor from the ground;
No shepherd's pipe, nor feathered songsters, there,
Pierce the thick either, and revive the air;
But over rank swamps on tainted vapors borne,
The buzzing insect winds his peevish horn.
Along the wharf, with languid loit'ring pace,
Strolls an enervate, worthless, sun-bak'd race;
To virtue's livelier emanations dead,
And sodden as the soil on which they tread:
No balmy gales, or varying clouds they know,
But brazen skies above, and burning sands below.
Yet, what the withering vault of heaven denies,
Redundant Nile from his moist lap supplies;
Sweeping through seven broad mouths the flood comes down,
His secret source often sought, and long unknown:
Ammon's great son the spring in vain explored,
In vain Cambyses, and the Memphian lord; Sesostris, Cambyses, and Alexander,
endeavored in vain to discover the source of the Nile.

Yet one brave Briton's Mr. Bruce. See his Travels.
happier toil has won
What baffled Eastern kings, and Ammon's son.
Unlike all deluges his tide he leads;
Plenty, not ruin, the overflow succeeds;
As a kind monarch who his subjects loves,
Not wasting, but enriching, where he moves.
Over the drenched soil his watery pinions spread,
He broods abundance, then forsakes his bed.
This wonder ancient ages saw or heard,
Profoundly reasoned, and profoundly erred.
But most the wise in Nature's laws admire
His punctual times to visit and retire:
High swells the surge when sultry Syrius burns,
And Libra poises over his shrinking urns.
Here the swarth husbandman's promiscuous grain
Is sown on lazy mud, and reaped again;
And while no toil the willing harvest needs,
Unearn'd he sees it rise, and thankless feeds;
Sol's glowing beams mature the bursting ear,
And toads and asps 'midst waving corn appear.
The land's fertility with plagues is cursed; Fertilis in mortes, --. LUCAN, l.
ix. 619.

But of all plagues, her treacherous sons the worst.
One sullen skiff alone is seen to attend;
They beckon to the hero to descend.
With sighs suppressed, and sad presaging heart
Cornelia sees the slender pomp depart.
High on the lonely deck the matron stands, -- prima pendet tamen anxia puppe.
LUCAN, l. viii. 590.

Eyes the small boat, and lifts to heaven her hands; There cannot perhaps be
imagined a finer subject for a painter than Pompey's passage from his ship, in
the small boat, to the shore of Egypt. The dejected composure and resolution in
the countenance of the hero himself, the tenderness and anxiety of Cornelia,
and the sullen, yet exulting confidence displayed in the visages of the
assassins, might surely produce the most interesting effects in a picture. I
would prefer this view to the moment of his murder.

Then deeper darkness seemed to obsure the pole,
Nor distant thunder, muttering ceased to roll.
Scarce did his foot the treacherous margin find,
When stabbed, he falls, by ruffians' swords behind; -- ut denique in Pelusiaco
littore, imperio vilissimi regis, consiliis spadonum, et ne quid malis desit,
Septimii desertoris sui gladio trucidatus, sub oculis uxoris suae liberorumque
moreretur. FLOR. l. iv. c. 2.

Yet mindful ever of a hero's pride,
Great to the last, without a groan he died. -- nullo gemitu consensit ad
ictum. LUCAN. l. viii. 619.

Cornelia's piercing shrieks distract the air,
While life prolonged but lengthens her despair;
With all her sails outspread, and every oar,
The hurrying vessel flies the hated shore. --
Proud of their shame, the inglorious court they seek,
And bear his head fresh severed from the neck:
Athwart a bench the body rudely thrown, Collaque in oblique ponit languentia
transtro.
Tunc nervos, venasque secat, nodosaque frangit
Ossa diu.
Ibid. 671.

That head august was hackled through the bone;
While, base Septimius, vile Egyptians see,
Hang over the tedious bungling butchery.
O sad reverse of false-deluding chance!
O mournful lesson for man's arrogance!
A little earth, scraped by his freedman's nails,
Preserves the sacred trunk from tainting gales;
One oozy plank, dragged from the stagnant Nile,
Is all the honors of his funeral pile.
You humbly born! consigned to fates obscure,
And kindly destined to be safe and poor, (...) EURIP. Hippol.

Survey the headless ruin as it lies,
And for your fortune thank the indulgent skies. Felix media quisquis turbae
Sort quietus.
SEN. Agam.

M. CATO.
Lost liberty indignant to survive, After Pompey's defeat at Pharsalia, Cato is
said never to have indulged himself at his meals in a recumbent posture. To
sit, eating, was among the Romans a ceremony of mourning, and was practiced in
times of great affliction or calamity. After the unfortunate defeat at Cannae,
Terentius Varro always sat at his meals. It denoted an intentional
mortification; but we cannot well judge what degree of inconvenience might have
been suffered from this kind of voluntary penance, further than that the change
of any habit to which men have been long accustomed, is for a time irksome.
Without this consideration, it only seems to have been a resolution to
discontinue swallowing horizontally, a sort of distress with which a modern
does not well know how to sympathise.

At Utica good Cato ceased to live;
With his own sword he sought the peaceful shore, -- accepta partium clade
nihil cunctatus, ut sapiente dignum er at, mortem etiam laetus accivit. Nam
postquam filium comitesque ab amplexu dimisit, in nocte lecto ad lucernam
Platonis libro, qui immortalitatem animae docet, paululum quievit. Tum circa
primam vigiliam stricto gladio revelatum manu pectus semel iterumque percussit.
[A. U. C. 708.] FLOR. iv. c. 2.

Where prosperous tyrants could command no more.
Driven to extremes, too often the unhappy brave
Found their sad refuge in a self-made grave;
Securing boldly thus the passed renown,
They scorned to drain life's loathsome chalice down;
Not shivering on the verge of fate they stood,
But plunged spontaneous in the eternal flood;
Nor loiter'd on this mortal stage, to see
Their last sad scene conclude with infamy:
When hope's false meteor could delude no more,
They dropped the curtain, and the piece was over;
And more to consecrate the daring deed,
Applause and admiration were the meed.
No Heaven-taught precept then restrained the blow,
And, born to suffer, bade them bear their woe;
Not hurl back rashly on the giver's hand,
What the wise giver only might demand.
Cato's great conqueror repining heard,
That death to his proud mercy he preferred;
And shunned to see the splendor of his name
Obscured at length by that dark cloud of shame;
But, taught by Plato, the bright sphere explored,
Beyond a Caesar's pity or his sword.
A soul sublime, with ancient maxims fraught, Finxit enim te ipsa natura ad
honestatem, gravitatem, temperantiam, magnitudinem animi, justitiam, ad omnes
denique virtutes, magnum hominem et excelsum. CIC. [de Caton.] pro Muraena.

His practice stricter even than Stoics taught;
While all their high-strain'd principles professed,
The clear example of his life expressed. The whole conduct of Cato's life
shows him a greater Stoic than the most rigid professors of that sect; or,
however they might equal him in knowledge, it is certain he shamed them in
practice. Kennet's ANTIQ.

Virtues, inherent in his honored race,
To him descended with a milder grace;
Though some rude particles were smoothed away,
The gem's true luster suffered no allay;
Yet, in his garb uncouth, and frequent frown,
The rigid Censor's lineage still was known. Plutarch informs us, in his life
of Cato the Younger, that when he was Praetor, he often came to the court
without his shoes, and sat upon the bench without his gown; and that in this
habit he gave judgment in capital causes on persons of the best quality. -- si
quis vultu torvo ferus, et pede nudo,
Exiguaeque togae simulet textore Catonem,
Virtutemne repraesentet, moresque Catonis?
HOR. Epist. l. i. 19.



But different shades of mind in each appear,
The first was cruel, and the last severe.
To root out guilt, the elder too intent,
Felt savage pleasure in its punishment;
Ardent like him, the younger lashed the age,
But pity tempered his humaner rage:
The fierce-eyed Censor, Rome with terror saw;
His sage descendent with unwilling awe.
Their dates of life reversed, fair truth might find
More difference in the times, than in the mind.
When honor's cause his glowing rhet'rick warmed,
The worthless felt abashed, though not reformed;
And half-subdu'd by his reproving tongue,
Acknowledged what was right, though acting wrong;
Yet no amendment from conviction took,
But hated less the crime than the rebuke.
Corruption all sound principle had min'd,
Nor left one frown of early Rome behind,
Save that, which unconforming Cato wont
To wear habitual on his lowering front.
Virtue's cold frost-work vanished clear away,
Too weak for luxury's dissolving ray;
Her simple elements perverted quite,
Not Cancer to the Goat more opposite:
Rome once was artless, sturdy, plain, and brave;
Now, smiling, soft, perfidious, and a slave.
In seasons rank with every mortal vice,
(Pride, lust, ambition, fraud, and avarice,)
Himself unstained, he wondered to behold
A venal people bartering truth for gold;
And talked of rigorous laws, and pristine days;
Fond themes of his unfashionable praise.
The useless text repeated lost its force;
His morals changed not, but the times grew worse;
By manners like their own, mankind beguiled,
Yawn'd while he preached, or laughed if Caesar smiled.
When rattling tempests sweep the angry skies,
The strong-bas'd rock their furious blast defies;
While humbler battlements, like slaves, conform,
Nod their indented crests, and own the storm:
So Cato's soul by tyrant power unbow'd,
Opposing stood, and scorned the servile crowd;
By interest never, or ambition moved,
Strict justice, for herself, he served and loved; Ecce parens verus patriae,
dignissimus aris,
Roma, tuis, per quem nunquam jurare pudebit; --.
LUCAN. l. ix. 601.

And Heaven, which saw the secrets of his breast,
Saw the true temple where a God might rest.
Astraea, long the hireling judge's sport,
Fixed in his mind her solitary court.
Not more to others than himself severe, -- cui [sc. Catoni] ut videtis, etiam
cantare non serii hominis videtur. MACROB. l. ii. c. 10. Accessit his tot
doctrina non moderata nec mitis, sed, ut mihi videtur, paulo asperior et durior
quam aut veritas aut natura patiatur. CIC. pro Muraen.

By love unbiased, and uncheck'd by fear,
Ill deeds, however varnished, he despised;
The heart's applause, and not the world's, he pris'd. Cato with the highest
reputation for virtue, and constantly employed in public affairs, never
attained to the consular dignity. This circumstance not only shows the great
corruption of the Romans in his time, but proves also that he either despised
the arts of popularity, or did not know how to practice them. Catiline was
audacious enough to appear as a candidate for the consulship.

Yet no extremes deformed his temperate mind,
The friend was lenient, and the father kind;
And not content with speculative good,
Firm in the pass where danger frowned, he stood.
All trembling but himself, his host he led,
Where living poisons the burnt soil overspread;
While his scorchd brows sustained the Lybian heat,
A thousand deaths writhed hissing at his feet;
Seps, dipsa, asp, and all the snaky brood,
Whose mortal stings polute the vital flood:
Region of terrors! where Medusas reign
Affrights and desolates the pestful plain;
A zenith sun the venomed rage sublimes,
With dreadful bane, unknown to shadowy climes.
Bad men, who feared not heaven, his anger feared, -- neminem ausurum coram
Catone peccare. SEN. Epist.

Yet none would imitate what all revered:
Rome felt with him the self-inflicted wound,
And Liberty's last tear bedewed the ground. Neque enim Cato post libertatem
vixit, nec libertas post Catonem. SEN. Epist. The most injurious character of
Cato I have met with, and drawn with some appearance of truth, is contained in
the following words of the learned Abbe Mongault.

C'etoit un homme qui avoit plus de droiture que de prudence, qui nuisoit plus
au bon parti par son humeur austere et inflexible, qu'il ne le servoit par son
zele ardent, mais peu regle. Il s'etoit fait des principes don't il ne se
relachoit jamais, meme en favor des meilleurs citoyens, comme etoit Pontinius.
Il ne scavoit pas menager a la Republique le peu de gens qui s'interessoient
encore pour sa liberte. Il vouloit rappeller dans le siecle le plus corrumpu,
comme le plus poli, la virtu rigide et farouche des tems les plus grossiers. Il
s'oppos oit a tout sans discernement, souvent sans appui, presque toujours sans
succes; il usoit ainsi son credit, et perdoit en vains efforts une autorite,
qu'il faloit menager pour des occasions plus importantes.

It is to be observed that the above are strictures upon the temper and
judgment of Cato, not upon his morals and virtue.

The reader may now peruse the opposite sentiments of another distinguished
Frenchman on the same subject.

Je crois (says Montesquieu) que si Caton s'etoit reserve pour la republique,
il auroit done aux chooses tout un autre tour. Ciceron avec des parties
admiraoles pour un second role, etoit incapable du premier: il avoit un beau
genie, mais une ame souvent commune: l'accessoire chez Ciceron c'etoit la
virtue, chez Caton c'etoit la gloire: Ciceron se voyoit tonjours le premier,
Caton s'oublioit toujours: celui-ci vouloit sauver la republique pour
elle-meme, celui-la pour s'en vanter. Quand Caton prevoyoit, Ciceron craignoit;
la ou Caton esperoit, Ciceron se confioit; le premier voyoit toujours les
chooses de sang froid, l'autre au travers de cent petites passions.

This last note on the character of Cato contains almost the whole substance of
all the satires extant against Cicero.

Cicero's being unanimously chosen consul, when there was a suspicion
entertained of Catiline's designs against his country, is a very strong proof
that the Romans did not, like Montesquieu, consider him as less qualified than
Cato to sustain a first part in the state on a great emergency.



JULIUS CAESAR.


C. JULIUS CAESAR. A. U. C. 706.
The lambent flame of Caesar's fire-touch'd soul
No fears could damp, nor principle control. Lucan's Pharsalia is
unquestionably a very noble poem; but young readers should be cautioned against
taking their impressions of Caesar's personal character from this author.
Whether he is in earnest, or only affects zeal for the republic, he takes a
decided interest against that great man, and enters into the contest with all
the virulence of a party-writer. To Caesar he allows no one good quality,
except courage, and imputes to him vices and foibles, which, so far from being
in his nature, were repugnant to it. He represents him as a vain-boaster,
cruel, and insolent. Caesar was too proud and too wise to be vain; and of all
conquerors he was the most merciful and generous. His insolence, if a bold
spirit of enterprise attended with constant success can properly be called so,
appears but little in his writings, and in the accounts we have of his
discourse. A great poet may put what words he pleases into the mouth of a hero,
and comment upon them afterward, for imagination and ingenuity are not to be
restricted within common boundaries; yet experience will not be misled by them.
We consider a man as insolent, who treats others with a contempt which they do
not deserve, and imagines he can accomplish things beyond his means or
capacity. How far this description is applicable to Julius Caesar, the learned
may determine.

At manhood's dawning of his sire bereft, -- annum agens sextum decimum, patrem
amisit. SUET. in J. Caes.

To form his mind was to Aurelia left;
And nature's lavish gifts, that mother's love
With care unceasing failed not to improve.
All that wise schools, or wiser seers could teach,
What study could acquire, or talents reach,
His youth attained; nor could instruction give
More than his rare endowments could receive.
Round the sharp goal to whirl the rapid car,
To lance the javelin whistling through the air,
To give new spirit to the bounding horse, -- armorum et equitandi
peritissimus. Idem, ut supra.

And stem the headlong torrent in its course, -- si flumina morarentur, nando
trajiciens, vel innixus inflatis utribus, ut persaepe nuntios de se
praevenerit. Idem, ut supra.

None knew like him: thus manly toil supplied
What daintier nature to his frame denied.
While yet a youth, his dauntless brow alone
With equal menace met proud Sylla's frown;
Till with prophetic voice the tyrant cried,
He many Marii in that boy espied. -- Caesari multos Marios inesse. Idem, ut
supra.

Graceful his mien, with eloquence to charm, Hanc quum habeat praecipuam laudem
in communibus, non video cui debeat cedere: splendidam quamdam minimeque
veteratoriam rationem dicendi tenet, voce, motu; forma etiam magnifica, et
generosa quodam modo. CIC. in Brut. Quid? Oratorum quem huic antepones eorum
qui nihil aliud egerunt? Quis sententiis aut acutior, aut crebrior? Quis verbis
aut ornatior aut elegantior? CIC. Epist. ad Corn. Nep. Tanta in eo vis est, id
acumen, ea concitatio, ut illum eodem animo dixisse, quo bellavit, appareat.
Exornat tamen haec omnia mira sermonis, cujus proprie studiosus fuit,
elegantia. QUINTIL. l. x. c. 1. Pronuntiasse dicitur voce acuta, ardente motu,
gestuque, non sine venustate. SUET. ut sup.

In peace prevailing, as in fight his arm;
Nor Tully only would have ruled the bar,
Had not ambition fired his soul for war.
When his bright orb ascends the Hesperian sky,
Rome's lesser stars fade from the galaxy; Haud secus ac tacitum luna regnante
per Arcton,
Sidereae cedunt acies.
CLAUDIAN.

The splendor of their former rays is gone,
Or all concentered shine in him alone. The following summary of Caesar's
character by Paterculus is worthy of being inserted:

Forma omnium civium excellentissimus, vigore animi acerrimus, munificentiae
effusissimus, animo super humanam et naturam et fidem evectus; magnitudine
cogitationum, celeritate bellandi, patientia periculorum, magno illi Alexandro,
sed sobrio, neque iracundo simillimus; qui denique semper et somno et cibo in
vitam non in voluptatem uteretur. l. ii. c. 41.



Whatever age had seen great Julius rise,
Wherever his birth beneath the extended skies,
So vast, so various were his powers of mind,
He must have been supreme, and ruled mankind. Thou art the ruins of the
noblest man,
That ever lived in the tide of times.
SHAKSPEARE. J. Caesar. On parle beaucoup de la fortune de Caesar; mais cet
homme extraordinaire avoit rant de grandes qualites sans pas un defaut,
quoiqu'il eut hien des vices, qu'il eut ete bien difficile que quelque armee
qu'il eut commandee, il n'eut ete vainqueur, et qu'en quelque Republique qu'il
fut ne il ne l'eut gouvernee. MONTESQUIEU, de la Grandeur des Romans, c. xi.

No serpent, under Africk's solstice bred,
Rolling over fiery sands, by sunbeams fed,
With fiercer thirst ever sought the quenching stream,
Than his hot bosom burned to rule supreme.
As down the o'er-seeth'd cauldron's brazen sides
At length the watery distillation glides,
So, while the tale of Ammon's son he read,
To envy's flame, see copious tears succeed.
"Thou, happy Greek, (he cried) the world had won,
"In earlier youth than Caesar's name was known."
O godlike envy, yet o dire presage
Of woes too sure from his maturer age!
On sovereign domination long intent, Multos annos regnare meditatus, magno
labor, multis periculis, quod cogitarat, effecerat. CIC. Phil. 2. (...) HOM.
a. 287. Ipse autem socer [J. Caesar] in ore semper Graecos versus de Phoenisis
habebat, quos dicam ut potero, non condite fortasse, sed tamen ut res possit
intelligi: Nam si violandum est jus, regnandi gratia
Violandum est: aliis rebus pietatem colas.
CIC. de Off. l. iii.

To gods and kings he traced his high descent;
And in the forum, from his listening slaves,
By the proud vaunt, their future homage craves.
For this, the factious populace he roused,
The cause of Marius he for this espoused;
Boldly for this, he bade the people see
His statues decked with wreaths of victory;
Assured, that when the seeds of strife were sown,
The future harvest must be all his own.
Against the senate still his force he bent,
Scorning their babbling gownish government.
To letters, talents, every muse a friend; Mihicrede, etiam is qui omnia tenet,
favet ingeniis. CIC. Ep. ad Marcel. -- propter eximium ingenium, summamque
eruditionem; cui, mehercules, hic cujus in potestate sumus, multum tribuit.

-- mirifice ingeniis excellentibus -- delectatur.

CIC. Epist. ad Caecin.

Liberal to all; yet could he condescend,
When factions, like wild tempests, shook the realm,
(In hopes the boldest hand might seize the helm,)
Against Tully and good Cato to combine, In the juxtaposition of Cato and
Caesar by Sallust, the historian gives the preference to neither. One cannot
well conceive two characters more strongly contrasted; for except that both
were well descended, brave, and eloquent, there is between them no other
feature of resemblance. Cato was as much superior to Caesar in the practice of
every severe virtue, as he was his inferior in judgment, talents, and capacity.
Whatsoever was Caesar's purpose, he generally embraced the most effectual and
certain means of accomplishing it, while Cato had but one way of attempting
every thing; so that the former was commonly successful, and the latter as
frequently miscarried. He entered into many an action, as he did into the
theater, only to get out of it. Caesar, by the sweetness of his temper, and the
affability of his manners, could throw a sort of grace even over bad actions,
while Cato was distinguished by his abhorrence of them. Without giving our
approbation to Caesar, it is difficult not to love, and impossible not to
admire him. We approve of and respect Cato, but he is seldom amiable.
Notwithstanding the loose morality of the Dictator, his soul was capable of an
elevation which the strict stoicism and rigid principles of his antagonist
could never attain to; and it should be remembered to the advantage of the
conqueror of the world, that in an age and country so shamefully addicted to
bloodshed and debauchery, he was always merciful and temperate.

With desperate Clodius, and fell Catiline.
Beyond the Alps he ran his bold career;
Rome was for him too small a theater:
Satiate of her inglorious brawls, he hies
To distant scenes of hardy enterprise.
But first, by bribes, by all that art could move,
He reigned unrivaled in the people's love.
Low at the bottom of the peaceful deep,
In silent caves the seaborn monsters sleep;
But when fierce winds vexed Ocean's bosom tear,
To day's broad eye their horrid forms appear:
So, in the depths of his capacious breast
Ambition's brood in grim repose could rest,
The destined hour of tumult but to wait, --
Then rise revealed, and awe the prostrate state.
Gauls, Germans, Britain, by his arms overcome,
Confirmed his sway, and fixed his chains on Rome.
In dalliance once by Cleopatra held, Cleopatra regis soror, affusa Caesaris
genibus, partem regni reposcebat. Aderat puellae forma, etc. FLOR. l. iv. c. 2.
Caesar never displayed his great military skill and wonderful presence of mind
more conspicuously than in extricating himself from all the dangers with which
he was environed in the Alexandrian war. He was involved in this by his amor
with Cleopatra, and it seems to have been the only instance in which he
suffered his passions to get the ascendancy over his wisdom.



Awhile he left the labors of the field;
She tried her varying poignancy of charms,
To fold him long in her voluptuous arms;
From balmy lips breathed forth the endearing vow,
And smoothed the furrows on his care-worn brow:
But when the trumpet's notes his trance molest,
He plucked the sting of pleasure from his breast;
Refulgent beamed again in glittering arms,
To shake the coward land with war's alarms; Ab eisdem percussoribus Pompeii
obsessus in regia, quamvis exigua manu, ingentis exercitus molem mira virtute
sustinuit. FLOR. l. iv. c. 2.

Then Ptolemy he tumbled from his throne,
And bade the Royal Harlot rule alone.
Yet skill consummate in the soldier's art
Had formed no callous crusting round his heart; There is an unaccountable
proneness in several modern writers, to ascribe the well known clemency of
Caesar toward his vanquished enemies either to policy, or to his contempt of
them, and not to his natural disposition. It is directly contrary to all the
testimonies of his contemporaries, and of the subsequent ancient authors. It is
of no service to the cause of morality, to inquire too strictly into the
motives of men's actions, when their effects are beneficial to society; and we
may be content to leave Caesar in possession of his title to a virtue, which
his enemies in his own time did not deny him.

Though from ambition often he stretched the sword,
Unnecessary blood his soul abhorred.
No brooding hate his fearless bosom kept; Nemo unquam te placavit inimicus,
qui illas resedisse in te simultatis reliquias senserit. CIC. pro Reg. Deiotar.

Soon as the steel was sheathed, his vengeance slept. Solus inquam es, C.
Caesar, cujus in victoria ceciderit nemo nisi armatus. Ibid.

For two great ends alone he seemed to live,
To conquer all mankind, and to forgive. Simultates contra nullas tam graves
excepit unquam, ut non occasion oblata, libens deponeret, et in ulciscendo
natura lenissimus. SUET. in J. Caes. 73.

Even for a foe his kindly tears were shed;
He wept at sight of Pompey's severed head, Ut enim id Caesar adspexit, oblitus
hostis, soceri vultum induit, ac Pompeio tum proprias, tum etiam filiae suae
lacrymas reddidit. Val. Max. l. v. c. i. (...) DION. CASS. l. xlii.

Forgot the rival's hate, and mourned the hero dead.
Not youthful Ammon's envied, early wreath,
Not the black tides of fell proscriptive death,
Tides, that had washed from many a social mind
All the sweet charities of good and kind,
In Caesar's feeling breast could quite destroy
Pity's mild springs, and friendship's generous joy. We find so few social
virtues among the ancient Romans, their hospitality excepted, that wherever we
can discover a humane propensity, we should, I think, cherish and applaud it.

His tongue, for ever ready to defend,
His hand, the willing bounty to extend, O clementiam admirabilem, atque omni
laud, praedicatione, literis, monumentisque decorandam! CIC. Pro Ligar. Caesar
dando, sublevando, ignoscendo, -- gloriam adeptus est. SAL. in Bell. Catil. Tuum
est, Caesar, qui pro multis saepe dixisti, --. CIC. Pro Reg. Deiotar. The two
celebrated speeches of Caesar and Cato upon the sentence to be pronounced
against the Catilinarian conspirators, preserved, as it is called, by Sallust,
seem to me no very satisfactory specimens of the manner of those eminent
orators. He has doubtless preserved their different opinions upon the question,
and probably the arguments by which they were supported; but there is nothing
discriminating or characteristick in either, and they are plainly the author's
composition: that is, the style, manner, and construction of the periods, are
Sallust's. They not only do not differ in these particular from each other, but
they exactly resemble his diction every where. It may be observed perhaps of
all the ancient historians who pretend to record the orations of particular
men, that they make them all eloquent, and all equally so. Thucidydes and Livy
abound with examples. We should consider them rather as ingenious expedients
used by the historian to enliven and diversify his narrative, by not always
appearing in his own person, than as faithful transcripts of orations delivered
at the time by the speakers to whom he ascribes them. Let the reader compare
the two following passages from the speeches of Caesar and Cato, not only with
the rest of the respective speeches, but with the whole structure of Sallust's
diction.

CAESAR. Plerique eorum, qui ante me sententias dixerunt, composite atque
magnifice casum reipublicae miserati sunt: quae belli saevitia esset, quae
victis acciderent, enumeravere; rapi virgins, pueros; divelli liberos a
parentum complexu; matres familiarum pati quae victoribus collibuissent; fana
atque domos exspoliari; caedem, incendia fieri: postremo, armis, cadaveribus,
cruore atque luctu omnia compleri.

CATO. Been et composite C. Caesar paulo ante in hoc ordine de vita et morte
disseruit, credo falsa existumans ea, quae de inferis memorantur; diverso
itinere malos a bonis luca tetra, inculta, faeda atque formidolosa habere, etc.

The speech which was really spoken by Cato, on this occasion, was taken down
in shorthand by Cicero's order, and was extant in the time of Plutarch. See
his Life of Cato, the Younger.



No wonder, spite of wild ambition's pride,
He lived endearing, and lamented died.
A soul so soft in every social part,
The unwilling tongue calls tyrant, not the heart.
For these celestial qualities, when time
With dust shall mould my perished form and rhyme,
His murder told, the sympathetick tear
He knew to shed, shall grace his funeral bier;
Nor, liberty, thy loudest shouts prevail,
To drown soft sorrow at the mournful tale.
O, were the devastation of mankind
The noblest triumph for a hero's mind;
Or had his milder genius been employed
To save but half the wasteful sword destroyed;
No rival on the guiltless rolls of fame
Had vied with all-accomplish'd Caesar's name. Fuit in illo ingenium, ratio,
memoria, literae, cura, cogitatio, diligentia. CIC. Phil. ii. Two finer
compliments were perhaps never expressed in so few words as in this short
apostrophe of Tully to Caesar: -- Spero etiam te, qui oblivisci nihil soles,
nisi injurias, --. CIC. Pro Ligar

While projects boundless in his bosom rolled,
Scarce by the distant poles of heaven controlled,
At home, devoted to an earlier fate,
Unconscious in the shade of death he sat;
Victim to liberty decreed to fall,
Streaming with blood, at Pompey's pedestal. For some observations on the death
and character of Caesar, (too long for this place) see note (B) at the end of
this volume.

The stoic Brutus led the daring deed;
By him he loved was Caesar doomed to bleed. If then that friend demand, why
Brutus rose against Caesar, this is my answer, -- not that I loved Caesar less,
but that I loved Rome more. SHAKSP. Jul. Caes. (...) PLUT. in Brut.

If this one action stain not Brutus' fame,
Rome's annals boast not any purer name; This was the noblest Roman of them all:
All the conspirators, save only he,
Did that they did in envy of great Caesar;
He, only, in a general honest thought,
And common good to all, made one of them.
This sentiment of Anthony with respect to Brutus, is taken from the old
translation of Plutarch. See SHAKSP. J. Caesar, Malone's edit. vol. vii. p. 416.

For still men doubt, in this impartial time,
To admire the virtue, or abhor the crime.
A thousand tender thoughts restrained his arm,
A thousand nobler thoughts his bosom warm;
MARCUS BRUT^^.


Impelled, repelled, and in the conflict tossed,
More than the deed, the struggle was his boast. Cette faveur si pleine, et si
mal reconnue,
Par un mortel reproach a tous momens le tue.
CINNA, par Corneille.

He sought no more from slaughtered Caesar's grave,
Than nature, justice, and his country gave;
Revenge or jealousy inflamed the rest,
To aim their daggers at the conqueror's breast;
By principle alone was Brutus moved, -- Semper amavi, ut scis, M. Brutum,
propter ejus summum ingenium, suavissimos mores, singularem probitatem, atque
constantiam. CIC. Epist. ad Famil. ix. 14.

He slew the tyrant, but the man he loved. In order to enhance the merit of
Brutus in killing Caesar, some have adopted the idea of his having been his son
by Servilia, with whom Caesar was known to have intrigued; but I acknowledge
myself so poor a casuist as not to be able to imagine any situation in which it
can be meritorious, or even justifiable, in a man to kill his father. To add to
the interest of a tragedy in which Brutus is the hero, Voltaire has brought
forward the circumstance of the filiation; Shakspeare, more judiciously in my
mind, has passed it over without notice. The admirers of Brutus may, I think,
be content to let the matter rest as it is. It is possible he might have been
the son of Caesar, but very far from a certainty.

PRODIGIES AFTER THE DEATH OF CAESAR. See note C, at the end.
A. U. C. 710.
Creation's frame seemed passion'd by the event,
Convulsed and torn through every element.
From Aetna's dread abyss, the affrighted world
Saw rocks of fire with bellowing thunder hurled; -- Quoties cyclopum effervere
in agros
Vidimus undantem ruptis fornicabus Aetnam,
Flammarumque globos, liquefactaque volvere saxa!
VIRG. Georg. i. 471.

Saw the vast concave, once benignly clear,
Like Jove's whole armament of wrath appear.
Then too, the tainting east, the churlish north,
On wasteful errands sent their tempests forth;
Nor Caurus then, nor Auster lagg'd behind;
Fierce to destroy rode every willing wind:
Rain, hail, and arrowy sleet, and lightnings blue,
Athwart the expanse with sullen vengeance flew;
Huge promontories bowed; nor ceased to glare
Streaming above, a comet's endless hair; Non alias coelo ceciderunt plura
sereno
Fulgura; nec diri toties arsere cometae.
VIRG. Georg. i. 487.

Portentous, dismal blaze! through Alpine woods
Bursting in tenfold storm, with ocean's floods,
(Woe to each prostrate field, and peopled town,)
Eridanus, the horny king, came down; Proluit insano contorquens vortice silvas,
Fluviorum rex Eridanus, --.
Idem. Georg. i. 481.

Ausonia felt through every trembling shore
His furious tide, and unrelenting roar.
Ashes, no longer pent up in the urn,
Resuming forms of life, to earth return;
Ghastly, and grim, and terrible, they glare,
The pallid murderer, as he stalks, to scare.
Fat blood in drops from rubent clouds fell down,
And shed their deep pollution on the town;
While indistinctly dreadful, through the air,
Battle's wild din bade Rome for war prepare.
The sun himself, by lurid mists o'er-spread,
In dim suffusion veiled his mournful head;
Through twelve revolving signs, a sickly gleam
From his chilled orb, with faint ungenial beam,
Scarce warming earth's cold lap, dismayed the swains,
Who drooped desponding, and forsook their plains.
O fair Hesperia! O delightful land!
Too often, alas, by impious man profaned!
Over thy smooth rivers, and thy murmuring rills,
Thy fertile pastures, lawns, and pine-clad hills,
No tutelary power maintained his charge,
But giant devastation stalked at large.
STATE OF ROME AFTER CAESAR's DEATH.
No scheme beyond the hero's fall arrang'd, Quod scribis te nescire quid
nostris faciendum sit, jam pridem me illa (...) solicitat. Itaque stulta jam
Iduum Martiarum est consolatio. Animis enim usi sumus virilibus, consiliis,
mihi creed, puerilibus. CIC. Epist. ad Attic. xv. 4.

The state of Rome was not improved, but changed;
That bold achievement the whole mind possessed,
Nor left one thought to methodize the rest:
While some perhaps, who strained to look so far,
Thought all beyond it little worth the care;
And others, stung by envy, pride, or hate,
Quenched these bad passions in their conqueror's fate.
To the same act, by different motives led,
In one man's death alone were all agreed;
That mountain once removed, the level plain,
Where all might pass, would bless their sight again:
Vain hope! the opening prospect but disclosed,
How still beyond it loftier Alps opposed.
Nor all who to the work of slaughter pressed,
Glowed with the generous ardour they professed;
Their worthless tale at last too plainly shows,
They less were virtue's friends, than Caesar's foes;
But all, exalted by their leader's name,
Braved the same danger, and partook his fame;
Yet truth, that weighs ere she confers applause,
Not always blends the agents with the cause:
Round the same banners ranged, too often she sees
The people's guardians, and the people's lees;
And heaven-born freedom's glittering flag unfurled,
Wave over the chiefs and miscreants of the world.
By wild distraction were Rome's councils rent,
And anarchy succeeded government; Fraenumque solvit pristinum licentia. PHAED.
Fab. ii. This must always happen, when any form of government is demolished,
before some other plan to replace it is arranged and settled. We cannot expect
to find a palace magnificent and commodious in all its parts rise up at once
without materials or workmen, merely because we see the removal of a building
which before occupied the same place. In Great Britain, where the people live
under the mildest government, and the most admirable constitution in the world,
all measures for the security of liberty have been examined with great
precaution, and have been ratified gradually: they are therefore likely to be
firm and permanent. The lamentable condition of a neighboring kingdom
furnishes a living example how much easier it is to destroy, than to establish.
That state has passed suddenly from an absolute monarchy to a kind of
government which comes under no known denomination, but most nearly approaches
to anarchy. There, the revolution was sudden, and the execution violent. Time
only can discover whether it will ever come to any sober settlement, and
sagacity finds it difficult to predict what that settlement may be: Whatever
structure may rise out of the present ruins, will be cemented with the blood of
the natives. Arbitrary commitments to a fortified state-prison were undoubtedly
a great grievance; they have given place to sentence and execution without
trial or commitment; and which alternative is preferable? All we know with
certainty is, that the grievances complained of before, are now multiplied in
tenfold proportion, under the name and pretense of reformation.



As if, herself unwilling to be free,
She felt no tyrant, yet no liberty. Vivit tyrannis, tyrannus occidit! CIC.
Epist. ad Attic. xiv. 9.

Effect appeared the cause. Alas! the crime
Was less in him, than the corrupted time;
Nor was ambition to one breast confined,
Where hundreds more were Caesar's in their mind.
Then what availed to pull one tyrant down,
When liberty and virtue both were gone?
When men like Cato, and firm Brutus, stood
More wondered at, than loved, for being good;
Where venal honors were not merit's meed,
But gold or favor bade the claim succeed;
Where once-priz'd honest poverty was shame,
And public spirit a derided name.
Thus in the palsied frame how often we see
The form remain, but lost the energy!
Reason abhors society's disgrace,
That last of rules, -- a lawless populace.
Where each base upstart, busy, blind, and rude,
Disdains the noble, and insults the good;
Where two concurring wills are rarely found,
But ignorance and discord harsh abound.
The hapless state which mourns her vigor gone,
And her best laws by her worst sons o'er-thrown,
Will find at last she must submit to one;
Some head must govern, some compulsion bind
The jarring passions of perplexed mankind;
And states have seen, as states will ever see,
The extreme of license end in tyranny.
M. AE. LEPIDUS. A. U. C. 711.
Ten years the last triumvirs held their rule;
But shallow Lepidus, ambition's fool,
Though small the power the pageant ever possessed, In Shakspeare's Julius
Caesar, Lepidus is well compared to an ass loaded with ingots.

The mightier two of that small power divest.
LEPID^^


By sufferance alone with them he reigned;
The tool they wanted, but the man disdained.
Determined to deserve the people's hate,
Each felt it less, while three sustained the weight.
On his dull head the load of wrongs they heap,
The little merit to themselves they keep;
Sheltering their crimes behind his ready name,
They shared the spoil, and he endured the blame:
But when their height beyond his reach was grown,
Then to contempt and scorn they hurled him down.
So with the building does the scaffold rise,
Which once completed, in the dust it lies:
So the loose garb that bears the winter sky,
In kindlier warmth is cast neglected by.
Private and poor they left him, to lament
The irksome memory of a life ill spent;
Whence no past act new comfort can afford,
But keen reflection turns a bosomed sword.
Sad state! and such the worthless only feel;
In their own breasts anticipated hell:
And when cold eve in dusky pall draws near,
The shades, then lengthened, of their crimes appear;
Forms, which the day-time's fury could control,
Embodying conscience wakes, to haunt the soul;
Each casual voice croaks, like the raven hoarse,
THE PRESENT WRETCHED, AND THE FUTURE WORSE:
Reproaches in the stagnant calm they hear,
And in each bush a vengeful minister.
One hour his statue in Rome's fanes we see, -- eique [sc. Lepido] statuam
equestrem inauratam -- ex hujus ordinis sententia statui placere. CIC. Philip.
v.

The next proclaims him Rome's worst enemy; Lepidus -- sententiis omnibus
hostis a senatu judicatus est. CIC. Epist. ad Famil. l. xii. ep. 10. Lepidus
was not ruined by the vote of the senate, which demolished his statue, and
declared him a public enemy, but, as may be seen below, by his presuming to
think he could control Augustus, who was too wise and too powerful to fear him.



And in these poised discordant acts appear
Distracted counsels, and the senate's fear.
The threats by furious Antony sent forth,
Gave even to Lepidus a moment's worth.
As chance had raised him to the triple throne,
His fall involved no ruin but his own.
Great deity of fools! to thee should rise
More frequent fumes from grateful sacrifice,
Would man, vain man, thy dispensations see,
Nor give to merit what is due to thee.
Obsequious ever to great Caesar's will,
The legions which he led, obeyed him still;
And with the confidence of strength elate,
His pride provoked, and they allowed his fate. Post Pompeii fugam, collegarum
alterum M. Lepidum, quem ex Africa in auxilium evocarat, superbientem xx
legionum fiducia, summasque sibi parts terrore ac minis vindicantem, spoliavit
exercitu, supplicemque, concessa vita, Circeios in perpetuum religavit. [A. U.
C. 718.] SUET. in Aug 16. Lepidus died in obscurity, A. 741.



In the first conflicts of the doubtful field,
His wavering hand awhile the balance held;
So from conjuncture, not from worth or sense,
Arose his transitory consequence.
Sure to forsake the friends he chose at first,
With all he tampered, but espoused the worst;
False to the senate, of their foes afraid,
He flattered both alike, and both betrayed:
Unfit for power, this wonder filled the throng,
Not how he lost it, but preserved so long.
The weak man often to fortune greatness owes,
But sense alone can keep what chance bestows.
Who without wisdom fortune would command,
Writes but on water, or erects on sand.
ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA. A. U. C. 717.
But not content with half the world's domain,
Caesar and Antony alone would reign:
The first, a steady scepter born to wield,
Over all his acts extends the public shield; Qui n'agit que pour soi,
feignant d'agir pour Rome. CINNA, par Corneille.

The last, abhorrent from the toils of state,
Rots on the Nile, a hoary profligate:
M. ANTONY.


While subtle Caesar sapp'd his eastern throne,
He clasped his world in Cleopatra's zone. Quippe post Parthos, nuum exosus
arma in otio ageret, captus amore Cleopatrae, quasi been gestis rebus, in regio
se sinu reficiebat. FLOR lib. iv. c. xi. Antony first became acquainted with
Cleopatra, A. U. C. 713, soon after the battle of Philippi. She was then in her
twenty-eighth year. After the death of his third wife, Fulvia, in 714, he
married Octavia, who was then pregnant by her former husband, C. Marcellus; and
after she had borne him two daughters, deserted her in 717.



Not she, for whom Dardanian Troy was lost,
The pride of nature, and her country's boast,
Nor she, who bade the Macedonian's hand
Hurl at Persepolis the blazing brand, Thais et ipsa temulenta, maxim am apud
omnes Graecos initurum gratiam affirmat, si regiam Persarum jussisset incendi.
-- Primus rex [Alexander] ignem regiae injecit; turn convivae, et ministri,
pellicesque. Multa cedro aedificata erat regia, quae celeriter igne concepto,
late fudit incendium. QUINT. CURT. l. v. c. 7.

Nor Phaedra, nor Ariadne still more fair,
Could with the sorceress of Nile compare: (...) DION. CASS. l. xlii. c. 33.

In her, not face and shape alone could please,
(Though with unrivaled grace she charmed by these,)
But the whole store of Cytherea's wiles,
Sighs, gentlest blandishments, and ambush'd smiles;
The ready tear, the blush of well-feign'd truth,
And the ripe woman, fresh as new-sprung youth.
Beneath her roseate palms the lute compressed,
Chased thought and trouble from the anxious breast;
In dulcet bonds the imprisoned soul she held,
While the sweet chords her warbling voice excelled.
A thousand forms the siren could put on,
And seem as many mistresses in one;
Serious or sportive, as the mood required,
No whim grew irksome, and no frolic tired.
Enough of coyness to provoke desire,
Of warmth enough to share the amorous fire,
All, her delighted lovers could receive,
Seemed but fond earnests she had more to give;
Nor with possession was the promise over;
Love's fruit and flower at once her bosom bore:
CLEOPATRA


No languid pause of bliss near her was known,
But, with new joys, new hours came laughing on.
By arts like these was wiser Julius won,
And Antony, more fond, was more undone.
His soul enamored to the wanton clung,
Glowed at her eyes, or melted from her tongue;
Lulled in the dear Elysium of her arms,
Nor interest moves him, nor ambition warms:
Sometimes with short remorse he looked within,
But kept at once the conscience and the sin:
In vain he saw the yawning ruin nigh;
Content with her, he bade the world go by;
He sought no covert of the friendly shade,
'Twas half the zest to have his shame displayed.
He deemed it still his best exchange through life,
A melting mistress for a railing wife.
Perpetual orgies unabash'd they keep,
Wine fires their veins, and revels banish sleep:
Timbrels, and songs, and feasts of deaf'ning joy,
By arts till then unknown, forbore to cloy.
See for one banquet a whole kingdom sink,
And gems dissolved impearl her luscious drink. Tunc arridens regina phialam
poposcit, cui aceti nonnihil acris infundit, atque illuc unionem demptum ex
aure altera festinabunda demisit; eumque mature dissolutum, -- absorbuit.
MACROB. l. ii. c. 13.

Pleasure was hunted through each impious mode;
An Isis she, and he the vine-crown'd God. -- tum redimitis hederis, coronaque
velatus aurea, et thyrsum tenens, cothurnisque succinctus, [Antonius] curru,
velut Liber pater, vectus esset Alexandriae. VEL. PAT. l. ii. c. 87.

Old Nile, astonished, on his bosom bore
Monsters more strange than ever deformed his shore;
For what so monstrous sight beneath the skies,
As self-created human deities? --
But heaven, for vengeful retribution, means, Though the less enlightened
heathens seem to have had no clear conception of a future state of rewards and
punishments, the minds of all, except the followers of Epicurus, were strongly
impressed with the idea of the interference of a Providence with respect to the
temporal consequences of human actions and conduct.

The sword and asp should close these frantic scenes. Antonius seipse nun
segniter interemit. VEL. PAT. l. ii. c. 87. (...) DION. CASS. l. li. c. 13.

Spectators mute, the sorrowing captains stand,
While empire moulders from his palsied hand:
But roused at length, unwilling, to the fight,
His star at Actium sunk in endless night.
With equal pomp, as when down Cydnus' stream
Her burnished prow struck back the sun's bright beam,
The enchantress bade her bloated train prepare,
To meet the horrors of the naval war;
But the first shouts her trembling spirits quail;
She flies, and he pursues her shameful sail:
His heart strings to the harlot's rudder tied,
What lust began, his dotage ratified:
In Alexandria's towers he veiled his head,
Where, self-expell'd, the vital spirit fled.
He tried all vices, and surpassed in all,
Luxurious, cruel, wild, and prodigal; The character of Mark Antony has in our
country acquired a degree of favor with several very young, and with some
fair, readers, to which he is by no means entitled. They judge of him, not from
history, but from the coloring under which he is exhibited to view in two well
known and popular tragedies. In Shakspeare's Julius Caesar, we see him only as
the grateful and affectionate friend of his benefactor Caesar, as the gallant
avenger of his death, and as a powerful orator possessed of all the arts of
persuasion. In Dryden's All for Love, he appears to still greater advantage.
The murder of Cicero, had he committed no other great crime, is sufficient to
transmit him to posterity as a ruffian not less insensible to the claims of
genius, than shamefully indifferent to the censure or approbation of mankind in
general. What opinion too severe can be formed of his disposition, who could
deliberately wade through the slaughter of a most cruel and bloody
proscription, to get at the throat of a helpless old man, whom by his own
insolence he had provoked to be his enemy? To estimate the whole of a character
from its exhibition in a play, is somewhat like forming an idea of a man's
whole figure from seeing his head and shoulders in a portrait: his countenance
may be very engaging, and the rest of his person very deformed. Whoever
remembers the late Earl of Bath, will not want a strong confirmation of the
truth of this remark.

Lavish of hours, of character, and gold,
But warlike, hardy, and in dangers bold;
His mind was suited to the boisterous times,
A soldier's virtues, and a tyrant's crimes. The following anecdote, not so
well known as the murder of Cicero, furnishes another shocking example of the
cruel ferocity of Antony's disposition. Three of Julius Caesar's legions,
returning from Macedonia, refused to follow him. He ascribed this defection to
the influence of their centurions; and to revenge it, he ordered them, to the
number of three hundred, to be butchered in his presence; his wife Fulvia, who
was then with him, with great composure looking on at the massacre. This
execrable woman had in reality all the diabolical qualities which the
imagination of our Shakspeare has combined in the character of Lady Macbeth. --
Cum ejus promissis legiones fortissimae reclamassent, domum ad se venire jussit
centuriones, quos been de republica sentire cognoverat, eosque ante pedes suos,
uxorisque suae, quam secum gravis imperator ad exercitum duxerat, jugulari
coegit. CIC. Philip.

OCTAVIA


OCTAVIA.
Come, decent Venus! come, each modest grace!
Assist the muse to draw a matron's face;
To paint the chaste Octavia's matchless form,
Fresh Hebe's cheek with blushing softness warm;
The pure carnation in whose color shown,
By genial nature's balmiest breath was blown;
Unsullied lips suffus'd with roseate dew,
Whence Hybla sounds the charmed attention drew;
Juno's high stature, and majestic mien,
Her smiles improved with dignity serene;
For no repulsive arrogating air
Proclaimed her own proud conscience she was fair;
But turning from the fond admirer's gaze,
She felt the homage, but declined the praise.
So, while by Rome's enamored youth besieged,
But one she favored, and yet all obliged.
Her form, her manners such; and nature joined
Each sweet attraction of the female mind:
Not heaven's clear azure than her breast more pure,
Which winds disturb not, nor dark clouds obscure;
Yet not in stagnant apathy to sleep,
Or like the reed-chok'd stream through life to creep;
When virtue's breath her kind affections moved,
She felt with energy, with ardour loved.
Grief shook the glass, ere half its sand was run,
And sunk her sorrowing for her darling son;
No Paean could a medicine impart,
To pluck that shaft from her too tender heart.
Dove-like, the intended pledge of peace she came,
Yet, hapless, but increased dissention's flame.
To avert the horrors of domestic war,
Young Caesar gave her to his rival's care;
Reluctant sent her from a brother's side,
His house's ornament, and country's pride;
Hoping, while she the sweet enticement stood,
To expel the evil passion by the good.
Vainly he hoped. Some inauspicious power
Gloomy prepared her hymeneal bower;
There fading short-lived roses thinly grew,
But cypress much, and melancholy yew:
For Antony, unworthy of the bliss,
Scarce sealed their union with a nuptial kiss;
A few slight decencies observed with pain,
Soon to his sensual sty he turned again.
A flagrant Cupid fired his lustful heart,
Opprobrious pleasures, and a strumpet's art;
Strange drugs were mixed in her Circean bowl,
First to inflame, and then unman the soul. It is related of Cleopatra that
several of her admirers purchased the enjoyment of her favors for a single
night, by an agreement to lose their heads next morning; which this queen, not
less cruel than voluptuous and inconstant, never failed to have fulfilled
literally.

Haec [Cleopatra] tantae libidinis erar, ut saepe prostiterit; tantae
pulchritudinis, ut multi noctem illius morte emerint. AUR. VICTOR. The generals
of the French Republic seem to share the favors of the Convention pretty much
in the same manner: they are raised from the ranks to the head of armies, and
very speedily afterward conducted to the scaffold.



Steeped in the cistern of Egyptian spells,
Against lawful charms the Roman's breast rebels.
The wily queen played her delusions over,
And more disgracing, but attached him more;
Expert in feigning what her heart never felt,
A smile could warm him, as a tear could melt:
His pliant dotage served but to proclaim
Her vicious triumph, and his hoary shame.
With inward pangs his slighted consort mourned
Her fond solicitude so ill returned:
But no reproachful taunts assailed his ear;
Her grief was silent, secret, and sincere.
From her perfidious libertine retired,
Even he respected her, and all admired.
Love's bond once broke, upbraiding comes too late,
And often sours indifference into hate;
The tart remonstrance of a shrewish tongue,
Foe to itself, but justifies the wrong;
For female rage admits of no pretense;
She who begins to rail, begins the offense.
Firm to her vows, to every duty true,
Tried to the last, submissive she withdrew:
But grown more desperate in his furious course,
He sealed her sufferings by a rude divorce. Antony's infatuated attachment to
Cleopatra was no way abated by his marriage with Octavia, though he had by this
most amiable woman two children. The gentle patience with which she endured
repeated provocations and insults from her libertine husband, her maternal care
of his children by his former termagant wife Fulvia, her admirable beauty
joined to every female virtue and excellence of the mind, could not secure her
from the most outrageous ill treatment. Intending to affront Caesar, who
tenderly loved his sister, and to gratify Cleopatra, who hated her, Antony not
only sent her a divorce, but a prohibition to reside in any of his houses, or
on any of his estates. Her sense of this brutal ingratitude with her immoderate
grief for the loss of her darling son Marcellus, broke her constitution, and
she expired without arriving at old age, to the infinite regret of Augustus,
and with the esteem and admiration of all who knew her. Her munificent present
to Virgil for his beautiful lines to the memory of the Marcelli, has been often
recorded. While the poet was reciting the latter part of the sixth Aeneid
before the emperor and his sister, at the words, "TU MARCELLUS ERIS," Octavia
fainted. Nor is it extraordinary; for nothing can be more pathetick and
interesting than the whole preparation for this master-stroke of panegyric,
which even at this moment excites considerable emotion. The lamented virtues of
her son, who really deserved the encomium, thus unexpectedly brought to her
remembrance, impressed still more by the recitation of Virgil, who was
remarkable for reading his own verses with harmonious energy, may naturally be
supposed to have had such an effect on the tender and affectionate heart of
Octavia. -- How different is the picture of Augustus in this scene from that
which he exhibited as a triumvir, seated between Antony and Lepidus, and
marking down for the knife of his butchers the most respectable and virtuous of
his countrymen!

In drawing the character of Octavia, beside the concurrent testimony of the
ancient writers who mention her, I was assisted by having before my eyes a
living example in a lady with whom I have long had the happiness of being well
acquainted. The likeness, without my being more explicit, will be recognized by
every one, except herself, -- she so strikingly resembles the Roman lady, in
every thing but her misfortunes. In these happily there is no similitude; for
she is tenderly beloved by an excellent husband, and has enjoyed a
distinguished state of prosperity, with the cordial esteem and affection of her
friends, and the grateful blessings of all who happen to be placed as objects
of her protection.



By the mad act was Caesar's friendship lost;
Yet she complained the least, though outrag'd most.
See her forsake the interdicted plain,
And his good genius drooping in her train.
Go, wronged Octavia! go, insulted wife!
Feel the soft comforts of sequestered life;
Let these thy tyrant's injuries redeem,
Blessed in mankind's, and thine own heart's esteem.
But ah, what peace to that sad heart can come,
While pale Marcellus points thee to the tomb?
AUGUSTUS


There, ever present to her streaming eyes,
In death's cold clasp the blooming hero lies:
Twelve annual suns rolled over her head in vain,
To witness, but not mitigate her pain;
Nature's grim spoiler, by her tears implored,
At length the mourner to her son restored.
AUGUSTUS. A. U. C. 725.
In life's soft down, removed from peril far,
By an adopting parent's early care,
Like the small bird beneath the eagle's wing,
Octavius heard the civil tempest sing. (...) DION. CASS. l. xlv. c. 2.
Eloquentiam studiaque liberalia ab aetate prima et cupide et laborio^issime
exercuit. Mutinensi bello in tanta mole rerum ec legisse et scripsisse et
declamasse quotidie traditur. SUET. in Aug. 84.

Him mighty Julius for his heir designed,
Pleased with his manners, and enlightened mind; (...) DION. CASS. l. xlv. c. 1.

His winning air, his feeble health when young, Coxendice, et femore, et crure
sinistro, non perinde valebat, ut saepe etiam inde claudicaret: sed remedio
harenarum atque harundinum confirmabatur. Dextrae quoque manus digitum
salutarem tam imbecillum interdum sentiebat, ut torpentem contractumque
frigore, vix cornei circuli supplemento scripturae admoveret. -- neque frigora,
neque aestus facile tolerabat. SUET. in Aug. 80, 81.

Made the soft tie of natural love more strong:
Nor to the dauntless uncle were revealed
The faults his youth, or artifice, concealed;
For in the smoothness of the smiling boy,
There lurked a future Sylla, to destroy.
Thus Zara's tiger, tamed by human care,
May for a while his inborn rage forbear,
Sequacious seek the haunts where men resort,
And with mild gambols make his keepers sport;
But if warm vital blood distain his jaws,
No longer he contracts his dreadful claws;
His nostrils swell, each fang is sharp with death,
In smothered volumes rolls his fiery breath;
No blandishments his fury can restrain,
And all the native savage glares again.
No towering stature gave his form its grace, Forma fuit eximia, et per omnes
aetatis' gradus venustissima. -- Staturam habuit brevem, sed quae commoditate
et aequitate membrorum occuleretur. SUET. in Aug. 79.

But fine proportion, and Hyperion's face;
With eyes to irradiate his imposing mien,
Divinely bright, yet awfully serene: Vultu erat, vel in sermon, vel tacitus,
adeo tranquillo serenoque, ut quidam e primoribus Galliarum confessus sit inter
suos, eo se inhibitum ac remollitum, quo minus, ut destinarat, in transitu
Alpium per simulationem colloquii proprius admissus, in praecipitium
propelleret. Oculos habuit claros ac nitidos: quibus etiam existimari volebat
inesse quiddam divini vigoris. SUET. ubi supr.

So strong their luster, a fierce Gaul declared
It frustrated the blow his arm prepared:
Struck by their beams, he gazed his rage away,
And almost worshipped whom he meant to slay.
Yet nature these fallacious orbs designed
But as bright vizors to a hideous mind:
Fair to the sight the exterior fabric rose,
But who could wish the inside to disclose?
In him combined the extremes of sense and vice,
Consummate art, and cruel cowardice. In splendidissimum quemque captivum, non
sine verborum contumelia, saeviit. Ut quidem umi suppli^^ter sepulturam
precanti respondisse dicatur, jam istam in volucrum fore potestatem; alios,
patrem et filium, pro vita roganteis, sortiri vel dimicare jussisse, ut
alterutri concederetur: ac spectasse utrumque morientem, cum patre, qui se
obtulerat, occiso, filius quoque voluntaria occubuisset nece. SUET. in Aug. 13.
Pinarium equitem R. cum concionante se admissa turba paganorum apud milites
subscribere quaedam animadvertisset, curiosum ac speculatorem ratus, coram
confodi imperavit. Idem. ubi supr. 27. Thallo a manu, quod pro epistola prodita
denarios quinquentos accepisset, crura effregit. Idem, ubi supr. 67. Et Q.
Gallium Praetorem, in officio salutationis, tabulas duplices vest tectas
tenentem, suspicatus gladium occulere, nec quidquam statim, ne aliud
inveniretur, ausus inquirere, paulo post per centuriones et milites raptum e
tribunali, servilem in modum torsit: ac fatentem nihil jussit occidi, pruis
oculis ejus sua manu effossis. Idem. ubi supr. 27. (...) DION. CASS. l. lv. c.
7. On the general subject of Roman cruelty, see note (D) at the end of this
volume.



That craft, which others by experience earned,
His callow youth intuitively learned;
Whether he wrote, or spoke, or frowned, or smiled,
In every mood, to prosper, he beguiled.
Even Tully was his dupe; at once he saw
Through all its varying rays, that diamond's flaw:
Feigning at first by his advice to rise,
He plied him with insidious flatteries;
And thus secured that never-failing voice,
To dignify the adopting tyrant's choice:
Led by his hand, and growing to his side,
He called him father, counselor, and guide; Licet ergo patrem appellet
Octavius Ciceronem, referat omnia, laudet, gratias agat; tamen illud apparebit,
verba rebus esse contraria. BRUT. Epist. ad Attic.

Yet little could these tender titles plead,
When furious Antony proscribed his head. (...) PLUT. in Anton. We are told by
Appian, (p. 601.) that Popilius Laenas, who had solicited to be employed in the
assassination of his protector and benefactor, (Val. Max. l. v. c. 3.) showed
Antony from a distance, while sitting in the court of judicature, the head and
hand of Cicero, ludicrously moving them backwards and forwards, and that he was
so delighted with this hideous spectacle, that he immediately ordered Laenas to
be crowned, and rewarded him with two hundred and fifty thousand drachmas, (807
2l. 18s. 4d.) paying the other cutthroats employed in the proscription only
the tenth part of that sum.

If any thing could have been more atrocious than Antony's assassination of
Cicero, it was the baseness and ingratitude of Octavius in suffering it. We are
told by Suetonius that he for some time resisted the proscription, but that
when he had once acceded to it, and it was begun, he carried it on with more
severity than either of his colleagues.

Restitit quidem aliquandiu collegis, ne qua fieret proscriptio, sed incoeptam
utroque acerbius exercuit. Namque illis in multorum saepe personam per gratiam
et preces exorabilibus, solus magnopere contendit ne cui parceretur;
proscripsitque etiam C. Toranium tutorem suum, eundemque collegam patris sui
Octavii in aedilitate. SUET. in Aug. 27.

Such are the virtues which on tyrants wait,
And such the hollow friendships of the great:
Thus by the pupil was the tutor schooled, Utinam tam facile eum [sc. Octavium]
florentem et honoribus et gratia regere ac tenere possimus, quam facile adhuc
tenuimus! CIC Epist. ad Brut.

While the gray statesman the green stripling ruled.
O base improvidence of manly fame!
Foul deed consigned to everlasting shame!
Thy tame assent, which bade that blood be spilt,
Pollutes thee deeper than the assassin's guilt:
Still shall the black ingratitude remain,
Nor "all great Neptune's ocean" cleanse the stain. Macbeth.

His measures with his character conformed;
He sapp'd the liberty, which Julius stormed. Posito triumviri nomine, consulem
se ferens, et ad tuendam plebem tribunicio jure contentum; ubi militem donis,
populum anona, cunctos dulcedine otii pellexit, insurgere PAULLATIM, munia
senatus, magistratuum, legum in se trahere, nullo adversante; cum ferocissimi
per acies aut proscriptione cecidissent: caeteri nobilium, quanto quis servitio
promptior, opibus et honoribus extollerentur; ac novis ex rebus aucti, tuta et
praesentia quam vetera et periculosa mallent. -- Domi res tranquillae; EADEM
MAGISTRATUUM VOCABULA. Juniores post Actiacam victoriam, etiam senes plerique
inter bella civium, nati. Quotusquisque reliquus, qui rempublicam vidisset?
Igitur verso civitatis statu, nihil usquam prisci et integri moris: omnis exuta
equalitate jussa principis aspectare. TACIT. Annal. l. i.

As the smooth stream, which, glist'ning through the grove,
Glides on, and gliding mines its banks above,
So every rampart freedom could provide,
Silent sunk in, to swell the imperial tide.
Interest and fear, his principles innate,
Made him admire the brave, not emulate:
Unfit for arms, he war'd against his will,
Deeming even conquest but a splendid ill.
And sure 'twas strange, in the same mind to see,
Such vast ambition, with timidity; History does not entirely justify the
charging Octavius with notorious deficiency of personal spirit, as a soldier.
Antony's accusation, dictated less by truth than spleen and enmity, cannot be
admitted as decisive evidence. He uttered whatever he thought most likely to
affront or injure the man whom he hated. On some occasions, particularly on a
Dalmatian expedition, he led on his troops with persevering gallantry, and was
grievously wounded. His courage was not always equal and steady, or like that
of Julius, when necessary, ardent; nor fierce like Antony's, who hardly
possessed any other great quality; but he did not shamefully decline danger,
when by encountering it his reputation or interest could be materially
promoted. With his great understanding, (inconsistent as it may appear,) he was
superstitious; a believer in dreams, signs, and omens. How often are the
weaknesses of the silliest of mankind countenanced by similar folly in the
wisest! A servant who carried a torch before him, having been struck dead by
lightning, he ever after hid himself under ground when it thundered. Had Julius
been witness to such an accident, he would have been more confirmed in his
indifference to the future danger; reasoning from the improbability that
lightning should strike twice so near the same person. The precautions of
Octavius for his personal security at home, though they might have been
suggested to him by his friends, certainly denote a timorous disposition; and
some of his detestable cruelties can be fairly imputed to no better motive than
natural cowardice, which he concealed or subdued in the field, and at the head
of an army.

M. AGRIPPA


Strange, two strong passions in one breast should meet,
Where each seemed formed the other to defeat;
For fear's tame pinion seldom soars a flight
To the proud region of an empire's height:
Life's humble vale, where safety dwells, she loves,
And flits from palaces to sheltering groves.
Agrippa's valor won his arms renown, (...) DION. CASS. l. li. c. 3. Julius
Caesar, except in one instance, was always successful, when he commanded in
person; Augustus conquered by his lieutenants.

To the great ministers, Agrippa and Maecenas, was Octavius chiefly obliged,
not only for the security of his reign, but for the change of his disposition;
for the art of governing mildly, for the adoration of his name and memory, and
for his just title to the cognomen of AUGUSTUS, conferred upon him with the
approbation of the Roman people. Agrippa was a consummate statesman and
soldier, and never known to miscarry in any military enterprise. The empire
might almost be called his gift to Octavius.



And soft Maecenas decked his civick crown. Caesaris et famae vestigia juncta
tenebis:
Maecenatis erunt vera trophaea fides.
PROPERT. l. iii. el. 9. Arts and mankind, not arms, were the study of
Maecenas. Humane and discerning, though apparently voluptuous and effeminate,
he understood perfectly every weakness and vice of his master's heart and
temper, and the whole extent of his capacity. Availing himself of this
knowledge, he turned one of the young Caesar's most obvious defects, his
natural timidity, into the means of his preservation, and finally of his glory.
He convinced him that while he ruled only by severity, no vigilance could
secure him from danger, but that by setting the example in his own person of
encouraging arts, sciences, and literature in all its branches, he might by
degrees soften the ferocity of the descendents of Romulus, and excite among
them a competition new and harmless, which would leave to him the unmolested
and unenvied possession of his supreme domination. Here he appears like the
good genius of his master, employing the ministration of learned and ingenious
men, poets in particular, to humanize a heart, which, left to itself, would
have become daily more indurated and sanguinary. To shelter himself from any
jealousy which his own great delegated power and popularity might raise in the
suspicious bosom of the emperor, Maecenas gave into every kind of delicate
pleasure and luxurious indulgence, even beyond the bent of his natural
inclination. Thus he preserved his credit, and the power he delighted in, of
encouraging and rewarding men of talents and merit.

Much praise is due to Augustus for choosing such able and excellent ministers,
who while they consulted his true interest, endeared him to his people, and
were not deterred from the freedom of expostulation by the fear of incurring
his momentary displeasure. When Seneca attempts to disparage the memory of
Maecenas, by calling him "mollem, non mitem," he sacrifices truth to the
prettiness of alliteration. He was the liberal patron of genius; enriched
particularly Virgil and Horace, and lived loving and beloved by them on terms
of equal and manly friendship. How amiable is the picture of their society, as
presented by Horace in the few following words of his ninth satire!

-- Non isto vivimus illic
Quo tu rere modo; domus hac nec purior ulla est,
Nec magis his aliena malis.


Wherever the poet flattering incense burned,
Its grateful odor on the prince he turned;
For well the imperial dastard's soul was known,
And adulation kept its terrors down.
Yet with Maecenas this renown he shared Quod Flacco, Varioque fuit, summoque
Maroni,
Maecenas, atavis regibus ortus eques,
Gentibus et populis hoc te mihi, Prisce Terenti,
Fama fuisse loquax, chartaque dicet anus.
Martial. l. xii. epigr. 4. -- minimum vati munus Alexis erat.

Idem. l. v. epigr. 16.
,
True genius to discern, and to reward; Ingenia seculi sui omnibus modis fovit.
Recitantes et benign et patienter audivit; nec tantum carmina et historias,
sed et orationes, et dialogos. SUET. in Aug. 89.

The charms of song his inmost soul could pierce, Plane poematum quoque non
imperitus, delectabatur etiam comedia veteri, et saepe eam exhibuit publicis
spectaculis. SUET. in Aug. 89. -- quum esset in urbe, et propter suas infinitas
occupationes minus saepe, quam vellet, Attico frueretur, nullus dies tamen
temere intercessit, quo non ad eum scriberet, quo non aliquid de antiquitate ab
eo requireret; modo aliquam ei questionem poeticam proponeret. CORN. NEP. in
Attic.

For danger lurks not in harmonious verse:
Enraptured with the Mantuan would he sit, -- ille tuae felix Aeneidos auctor,
--. OVID. ad Aug. Trist. l. ii. 533. In amicos fidus exstitit; quorum praecipui
erant ob taciturnitatem Maecenas, ob patientiam laboris, modestiamque, Agrippa.
Diligebat praeterea Virgilium. AUR. VICTOR. epitom.

Loved easy Horace, An vereris ne apud posteros infame tibi sit, quod videaris
familiaris nobis esse? AUG. Epist. ad Hor. apud SUET.
and loose Ovid's wit; Esse quidem memini mitissima sedibus illis Numina. OVID.
Trist. l. i. el. 1.

Nor unprovoked, nor willingly, he sent
That ill-star'd libertine to banishment;
And lettered Gallus, who so ill returned
His sovereign bounty, guilty fell, yet mourned. Gallo ad necem compulso, vicem
suam conquestas est, quod sibi soli non liceret amicis quatenus vellet irasci.
SUET. in Aug. 66. Cornelius Gallus was by Augustus appointed Prefect of Egypt,
a peculiar kind of government, the power and insignia of which were almost
kingly. He forgot his obligations to his master, and took so many indiscreet
liberties with his name and character, that he lost his government, and was
forbid the Court. An infamous informer afterward accused him of being engaged
in a sort of conspiracy against the emperor, of which the prone and servile
senators taking cognizance, they sentenced him to banishment and confiscation.
He put an end to his own life. Augustus either was or affected to be much
grieved at his catastrophe, and displeased at the senate's rigor. Gallus, to
whom Virgil has inscribed his tenth pastoral, was a distinguished patron of
learning, and the restorer of the Alexandrian Library, which, to the great
regret of Julius Caesar, had been consumed by fire while he was in Egypt. DION.
CASS. l. lii. 17. l. liii. 23. SUET. in Aug 66.

Twice to be weary of his power he feigned, De reddenda republica bis
cogitavit. SUET. in Aug. 28. See also DION CASS. l. lii. pr. Caesar's second
proposal of restoring the Commonwealth was made in the senate house, and the
business on his part conducted with refined artifice. Knowing that the sense of
the majority would be in consonance with his own, for his retaining the supreme
direction of affairs, he declared he would not take upon himself the whole
weight of government, but share the provinces with the senate and people. He
expressed himself content to take the direction of such as were most liable to
seditions and disturbances, and of the frontiers, exposed to incursions from
foreign enemies; leaving to the senate those where they might enjoy the sweets
of peaceful command without danger and alarm. Under this pretense, at once
obliging and subdolous, he left the senate without troops, and reserved to
himself the command of all the forces of the empire.



Yet still the burden to the last retained;
His conscious council read his thoughts aright,
Dispelled his doubts, and soothed the hypocrite.
The closest echo to the prince's mind,
Will with the prince the best acceptance find:
Not truly to relinquish he desired
What so much labor and such crimes acquired.
Yet fear, corroder of the human breast,
Allowed him sometimes joy, but seldom rest:
Beneath his robe a plaited mail he wore,
A jealous guard secured his audience-door:
Entering, each senator was forced to feel
The ruffian's palm, who searched for secret steel: (...) DION. CASS. l. live.
c. 12. -- quo tempore existimatur lorica sub vest munitus, ferroque cinctus
praesdisse, december valentissimis senatorii ordinis amicis sellam suam
circumstantibus. Cordus Cremutius scribit ne admissum quidem tune quemquam
senatorum, nisi solum, et praetentato sinu. SUET. in Aug. 35. How despicable
does the timorous precaution of Augustus for the safety of his person appear,
when compared with the gallant negligence of Julius, who declared it was better
to die at once, than to live in perpetual apprehension of mortality!



Thus despots pay the forfeit of their wrong,
Suspicion in their hearts, and flattery on the tongue.
If this be greatness, greatness sure was given
In wrath, not bounty, by consenting heaven.
Be wiser, mortals! nor let vows aspire,
That Jove may curse you by your own desire.
O hard-earn'd tyranny! the innoxious knows
No dread like this, but sleeps in safe repose;
Leaves thee thy pomp and power, so dearly bought,
And is the happy thing, thou would be thought.
If ever since man was born, were known to rest
Two adverse natures in one mortal breast,
One heart by vice, and one by virtue swayed, (...) HESIOD.

Supreme in him that union was displayed.
Or did remorse his former rage control?
Or good Maecenas mollify his soul?
The friend, no doubt, and tardy conscience joined,
To humanize at length a savage mind:
While laboring to the sovereign rule to rise,
Deceit, and fear, and monstrous cruelties,
Deformed his life; that object once attained,
Wise, just, and good, and merciful he reigned.
Fear was his source of crimes; -- cuncta ferit, dum cuncta timet; desaevit in
omnes. CLAUD.
but when he rose
Above his rivals, and secure from foes, -- cuncta discordiis civilibus fessa,
nomine principis, sub imperium accepit. TACIT. Annal. l. 1.

When none were left, whom caution could mistrust,
His wisdom sound it safest to be just.
Intent for ever on one great design,
By nature cruel, and by art benign,
Soon as his power supreme unquestioned stood, Cum tot sustineas, et tanta
negotia SOLUS, --. HOR.

For thirst of praise he changed his thirst of blood.
While liberty or law was but a word, -- Quand par le fer les chooses sont
vuidees,
La justice et le droit sont de veins idees.
La mort de Pompee par Corneille. Silent leges inter arma.

CIC.

And all submitted to the conquering sword,
The wavering legions only seemed to share
His kind indulgence, and deserve his care;
Rome's wretched citizens, like worthless slaves
Were crushed by fines, or swept to sudden graves:
A vase, a villa, or well-featur'd wife,
Once his fond boast, now snared the owner's life:
Blood, guiltless blood, streamed over the reeking plain,
And Sylla's murderous spirit ranged again.
But when the harrass'd empire breathed in peace,
He bade the soldiers dangerous license cease;
And sternly charged the leaders to confine
Their future rage, by rigid discipline. Disciplinam severissime rexit. SUET.
in Aug. 24.

Restoring thus the civil rights of men,
He curbed the soldier, by the citizen;
To the neglected toga then returned
The ravished honors it so long had mourned;
While each the other poised, himself supreme
Observed the balance, and sustained the beam.
Wrench'd from its frame the mighty engine see,
Once moved by fortitude and liberty, What form of government is best, has long
been an undecided question; but it does not seem difficult to determine that
the worst is Democracy, especially, when occasioned by a revolution, in states
where the people have been little considered, and long accustomed to
subjection: not that nature has made any difference between the Nobleman and
the Peasant, but education and habit have made a great deal. We should be
surprised to find an excellent artist in any mechanical business, who was
ignorant of the rudiments of the art, and had served no apprenticeship; then
why should we expect that illiterate men, whose minds have been engaged in the
meanest occupations, should be qualified at once to exercise the most difficult
and sublime of all arts, that of governing? To their ignorance must be added
another natural cause or impediment, the spirit of revenge arising from a sense
of the indignities to which they had been accustomed; always engendering
cruelty, and the desire of retaliation.

The first cause of dissensions and tumults among the Romans was not so much
the existence of distinctions between Patricians and Plebeians, as that such
distinctions were made too apparent, by the appropriation of honors and
offices in one order, and exclusion in the other. To encroach upon this line of
separation was the continual endeavor of the Plebeians, while the Patricians
labored as strenuously to prevent the encroachment. Till these distinctions
were removed, Rome was a perpetual theater of secessions, feuds, and
insurrection. It is remarkable, that, when the Plebeians were first allowed to
be eligible and to elect to the great offices of the state, they did not choose
a single magistrate from their own order; no doubt from consciousness of their
deficiency. In time they turned their attention to the science of government,
and became masters of it. -- The way to honors and emoluments is open to all
ranks of men in Great Britain.

In note (E) at the end of this volume, will be found some additional remarks
on the Democracy of Athens.



Now rolling all its wheels but at the nod
Of one great Magus, with the imperial rod. (...) DION. CASS. l. liii. c. 28.
Not content with absolving him from existing laws, the Senatenabled him to make
new laws at his pleasure: (...). Ibid. l. live. c. 10.



Yet with dissimulation deep he tried,
And specious veils, his o'er-grown power to hide;
Conspicuous alone in public care,
Plain was his habit, frugal was his fare; Instrumenti ejus et supellectilis
parsimonia apparet etiam nunc, residuis lectis atque mensis, quorum pleraque
vix privatae elegantiae sunt.

Vest non temere alia quam domestica. usus est, ab uxore, et sorore, et filia,
neptibusque confecta.

Caenam trinis ferculis, aut, cum abundantissime senis, praebebat.

SUET. in Aug. 73, 74.

His modest dwelling, simple to the sight,
Provoked no envy by its towering height;
Nor decked with lavish splendor, to make less
The shrinking senate's humbled littleness.
The Ides of March too fatally made known,
That daggers sometimes lurk beneath the gown;
And murdered Caius taught him to beware,
And deem it prudence to be popular.
No open force, no secret foe can move
A throne established in the people's love. Caritate et benevolentia civium
septum oportet esse, non armis. Cic. Phil. ii.

Formed to enjoy what bolder Julius won,
Serene, and clear, went down his evening sun:
While its meridian luster chased away
The clouds of blood that dimmed its rising ray. Who that is acquainted with
the life and actions of the second Caesar, would expect to find Bacon, the
learned, the discriminating Bacon, "the wisest, greatest of mankind,"
pronouncing the following deliberate judgment upon this blood-bolter'd emperor?
"Augusto Caesari, si cui mortalium, magnitudo animi inerat inturbida, serena,
et ordinata." To every term of this encomium exists a huge contradiction in his
unmanly and outrageous affliction for the loss of the legions under Q. Varo in
Germany: "Adeo namque consternatum ferunt, (says his biographer, Suetonius,) ut
per continuos menses barba capilloque summisso, caput interdum foribus
illideret, vociferans, Quinctili Vare, legiones read!" There is not much of
the undisturbed and serene greatness of soul in this dejection and
vociferation, even after he had assumed the name of Augustus. We may excuse his
hurting himself, but we discover still less of the well regulated temper, when
for a mere cowardly suspicion he tore out with his own hands the eyes of a
Roman Praetor.

Never was power by baser means obtained,
Never was power more nobly used, when gained.
Time and his genius wore out every fault;
Octavius in Augustus was forgot;
And with himself compared, the people cried,
O, would he never had lived, or never had died!
A monster next exalted to the throne, Tiberius, of all the execrable Caesar's
the most execrable. -- The olidus senex is thus described in Paradise Regained:
"This emperor has no son, and now is old,
"Old and lascivious, and from Rome retired
"To Capreae, an island small but strong
"On the Campanian shore; with purpose there
"His horrid lusts in private to enjoy;
"Committing to a wicked favorite
"All public care, and yet of him suspicious, --
"Hated by all, and hating." --


His sapient sway with double luster shone.
To quit the sole dictatorship he feigned, Dictaturam magna vi offerente
populo, genu nixus dejecta ab humeris toga, nudo pectore deprecatus est. SUET.
in Aug.

But with the prince's name the helm retained;
Anxiously fond to his concluding hour,
By lawful names to sanction lawless power. Every increase of his new
authority, every surrender to him of a public right, every encroachment upon
the old constitution, Augustus was careful to have legalized, and formally
confirmed by a decree of the senate. While he governed wisely and equitably,
nothing seemed to be lost; but the same power passing into the hands of a
series of demons rather than men, made the wretched riveters of their own
chains groan over them afterward in despicable and unpitied anguish.

And could felicity at Rome be known,
Freedom's bright ray for ever sunk and gone,
So wise, so gentle, was the Augustan reign,
Bondage might smile, and almost hug the chain.
But not his power, nor gorgeous Titan's beams,
Orient and sinking over Rome's subject streams;
Not all the trophies of the Julian sword,
His endless Tribuneship, Tribunitiam potestatem perpetuam recepit. SUET. in
Aug. 27. -- ad tuendam plebem, tribunitio jure contentus. TACIT. Annal. l. i.
The personal inviolability annexed to the office of Tribune, induced Augustus
to invest himself with it in perpetuity. A singular perversion! which strongly
shows the efficacy of names, the emperor sheltering himself under the title of
the most popular Roman magistrate, in order more securely to deprive the people
entirely of their influence and liberty. It may remind us of Choraebus in the
second book of Virgil, wearing a Grecian helmet and shield, and killing the
Greeks with their own weapons, of which he had despoiled them: -- Sic fatus,
deinde comantem
Androgei galeam, clypeique insigne decorum
Induitur: laterique Argivum accommodat ensem.



and name adored;
Not that his spacious theaters could stow
A nation for spectators at a show, Spectaculorum et assiduitate et varietate
atque magnificentia omnes antecessit. SUET. in Aug. 43.

Where tawny lions from hot Lybia's sand
With bloody fragments strewn th'impurpled strand; The following lines, Sur
les Arenes de Nismes, are to be found in a RECUEIL AMUSANT DE VOYAGES, and are,
I think, in so good a style, that a reader who has not met with them before,
will be pleased to see them here: Quoi! dis-je, c'est ici, sur cette meme pierre
Qu'ont epargne les ans, la vengeance, et la guerre,
Que ce sex si cher au rest des mortels,
Ornement adore de ces jeux criminels,
Venoit, d'un front serrein, et de meurtres avide,
Savourer a loisir un spectacle homicide!
C'est dans ce triste lieu qu'un jeune beauty,
Ne respirant ailleurs qu'amour et volupte,
Par le geste fatal de sa main renversee
Declaroit sans pity sa barbare pensee,
Et conduisoit de l'oeil le poignard suspendu
Dans le flanc du captif a ses pieds etendu!


The public spectacles at Rome were calculated to amuse the prince and people,
and to render them insensible to the feelings of humanity. How different from
the genius of the intellectual theater! Lewis the fourteenth, after having been
present at the representation of Corneille's Cinna, or the Clemency of
Augustus, was heard to declare, that had he then been asked to pardon the
Chevalier de Rohan, he would have consented. This anecdote deserves the notice
of some singularists, who affect to think that the stage is prejudicial to
morals. Comedy has been sometimes licentious; but next to the Divinity which
presides over the eloquence of the pulpit, the Tragic Muse has been the chief
priestess of virtue. "I never thought those ugly beetles had any feeling, (says
a child to its mother,) till I heard the pretty lady in MEASURE FOR MEASURE say
so." The moral of the Greek stage is perhaps too much confined to prudential
precept, and reverence for absurd superstition. The French drama, till its late
perversion, was perfect purity. Even the Operas of Metastatio abound with the
noblest sentiments; and a very small number of our own tragedies excepted,
where can the vicious heart, the sullen temper, or the perverted understanding,
find such efficacious pharmacy as on the stage of England? Were a deaf man to
enter the theater before "a well graced actor leaves the stage," he would soon
discover what sentiment was prevalent, from the sympathy of the audience. He
would see indignant scorn at succesful villainy, the kind bosom heaving for
distress, or the countenance expanded and exulting at the triumph of integrity
and honor. The seeds of goodness are almost in every mind, and a little
culture may prevent their degenerating.



Not that his domes in statelier order rise, Urbem neque pro majestate imperii
ornatam, et inundationibus incendiisque obnoxiam, excoluit adeo, ut jure sit
gloriatus, marmoream se relinquere quam lateritiam accepisset. SUET. in Aug.
29. Some private Romans erected at their own expense public edifices costly
enough to exhaust the revenues of a Bedford or a Marlborough.



Proud arches bend, and columns pierce the skies;
Not ALL, such luster over his reign diffuse,
As the bright record of the immortal Muse.
VIRGIL. From the indifferent success which has attended the several attempts
to translate Virgil into our language, one would be at first led to imagine
that it is next to impossible to transfuse the spirit of Roman poetry into
English, and to cast the blame on our tongue, not on our translators; did not
Rowe's admirable version of Lucan refute such an opinion. Whatever may be the
reason, no great ancient poet is less indebted to translators than Virgil; nor
without acquaintance with him in his native language can any adequate idea be
formed of his peculiar genius and excellence.

Dryden, himself a great poet, is often unfaithful, diffuse, licentious, or
negligent. I have never met with any person who recollected twenty lines
together of his translation, while hundreds not only remember, but cannot
forget, almost whole books of the original. The version of Pit is less
licentious, in particular passages more brilliant, but upon the whole languid:
while Trap, as Doctor Johnson observes, is now only a clandestine refuge for
the laziness of schoolboys. A translation of Ariosto is extant, which like
Trap's of Virgil, retains every word of the meaning without one spark of the
spirit of the author: these versions may remind us of an experiment which has
been attempted, of turning brandy into water. Such is the common inferiority of
translation.

With respect to Virgil, the difficulty consists perhaps in this. One of the
principal charms of his poetry lies in the admirable choice of his terms, the
most significant and sonorous in which his images can be expressed; another, in
the harmonious dignity and majestic stream of his numbers. Like his own
Clitumnus, the course is smooth, but the picture is diversified with enlivening
and splendid objects. He has, however, a style and composition peculiar to
himself. An imitator may have many beauties, without having the beauties of
Virgil. Let the English poet, for a poet he should be who attempts to resemble
him, first form to himself a style, choice, rich, and glowing as his language
can furnish; and giving this all the variety of modulation of which it is
capable, adhere to it from the beginning, for Virgil is never unequal; and
after he has completed an excellent poem, which can stand by itself with all
the air of an original, he may then assure himself that he has done some
justice to Maro. Pope has effected this with the Iliad. If it is not like
Homer, as some are pleased to affirm, it must at least be allowed to stand
alone unimitated and inimitable.

Row, in my opinion, would have translated Virgil better than Dryden; for
though he had not equal scope and fire of genius, his taste was more correct,
he was less careless, and more pathetick; and I imagine, had more literature,
or had better improved the care employed in his education. It may be doubted
whether a very good taste be not more requisite to make a good translator, than
great genius. I do not however mean to insinuate that Pope did not possess both
most eminently; though I have lived to hear (heu nefas!) the coarse couplets of
the occasional Churchill preferred to his immortal labors.

Happening lately to cast my eye over a page or two of Dryden's version of the
Georgicks, it really appeared to me like burlesque; more contemptibly ludicrous
than the avowed travesty of Cotton; with no more resemblance to the beautiful
original, than subsists beween the mask of an ape and the countenance of
Antinous. -- Let the reader who has curiosity, and a little time to mispend,
turn to the technical storm in the first Aeneid, full of the language of the
dock-yard, and to other disfigured passages; he will not hesitate to pronounce
this great poet convicted either of most vicious taste, or of elaborate
affectation. When I reflect, in particular, how he has contrived to degrade
that eminently beautiful passage just mentioned, I can hardly forbear crying
out with Angelo, -- Having waste ground enough,
Shall we desire to raze the sanctuary,
And pitch our evils there? O, fie, fie, fie!


The inequalities of Shakspeare are not more frequent, or so unaccountable, as
those of the literate John Dryden. There is indeed as much difference between
Virgil in his Roman toga, and his English doublet, as between a forest tree in
June and January, or as between the right and the wrong side of Gobelin
tapestry.

Who that has read the late Mr. Mickle's version of the Lusiad, but must wish
he had turned his thoughts to the Aeneid? He would probably have had the same
success with Virgil as with Camoens. -- Cervantes in the sixth chapter of the
first book of Don Quixote, speaking of poetical translations, determines
against them thus: " -- y lo mesmo haran todos aquellos que los libros de verso
quisieren volver en otra lengua; que, por mucho cuydado que pongan, y habilidad
que muestren, jamas llegeran al punto que ellos tienen en su primer
nacimiento." The Lusiad of Mickle is a shining exception.

Would the painter of the BOTANICK GARDEN condescend to become a translator of
Virgil, we should see the English Georgicks illuminated with the brightest
radiance of poetical genius, and, like the clouds round a fulgent setting sun
in autumn, glowing with all the richness of gold and purple. His profusion of
fancy and luxuriance of diction would not suffer much injury from the little
restraint of conformity to a model so excellent.


A. U. C. 684 -- 735.
Hushed be each ruder breath, and clamorous tongue!
Apollo listens to the Mantuan's song.
(...)


You chief, who own bright inspiration's flame,
With mighty Homer's palm divide his claim. Whoever wishes to see the numerous
instances in which Virgil has borrowed from Homer, or imitated him, may find
them enumerated by Macrobius. The ancients seem not to have considered the
borrowing whole passages from an author who wrote in a different language, as
plagiarism.

Favorite with me of all the harmonious quire,
A child I felt him, and a man admire:
If grief or care my anxious mind engage,
Secure of ease, I search great Maro's page;
For deep and rankling, sure, must be the wounds,
That find no balm in his enchanting sounds.
As Jesse's son Readiness frenzy could compose, And it came to pass, when the evil
spirit from GOD was upon Saul, that David took an harp, and played with his
hand: so Saul was refreshed, and was weil, and the evil spirit departed from
him. 1 SAMUEL, xvi. 23.

The madness sinking, as the music rose;
As oil, diffused with philosophic skill,
At once the agitated wave can still;
His tuneful magic over my senses glides,
The charm prevails, and all my pain subsides.
In the wild conflict of Eliza's breast,
Ill-fated fair, what wondrous skill's expressed! The fourth book of Virgil is
completely dramatick, with strict preservation of character, the most affecting
pathos, and the most tragic catastrophe. In this book he has penetrated into
the recesses of the female heart with an intuition like Shakspeare's. In his
Dido is displayed a knowledge of nature, and of the passion of love, which is
only equalled by our immortal poet in the most transcendent of all his pieces,
Othello. The conflict in her distracted bosom, her sense of reputation, of
royal dignity, and of matron honor, all borne down by the storm of one
irresistible passion, engage all our feelings in favor of this unfortunate
woman; insomuch that the pious Aeneas, who is equally frail, and coolly
perfidious, becomes the object of contempt or detestation, while he and his
gods, who greatly embellish the Dramatis Personae, excite a more tender
interest for their deluded and unsuspecting victim. This episode, as it is
called, appears to me almost the masterpiece of Virgil. A considerable part of
the fourth book consists of Dido's speeches, and there is not a single line of
declamation in any of her dialogues or soliloquies. The purity of Virgil's
taste is not less conspicuous on all occasions, than his other unrivalled
excellencies.

For thee, Sidonian queen, Hic templum Junoni ingens Sidonia Dido
Condebat, --.
Aen. i. 450.
ensnared, betrayed, --
Like thy fond Anna, Quid primum deserta querar? comitemne sororem
Sprevisti moriens? eadem me ad fata vocasses,
Idem ambas ferro dolor, atque eadem hora tulisset.
Aen. iv. 677.
mourns each gentle maid;
Turns with disdain from Jove's profaned abodes,
The obdurate Trojan, and conspiring gods. Egregiam vero laudem, et spolia
ampla refertis,
Tuque, puerque tuus; magnum et memorabile nomen;
Una dolo Divum si foemina victa duorum est. --
Aen. iv. 93. -- sed nullis ille movetur
Fletibus, aut voces ullas tractabilis audit. --
Ibid. 438.

A royal wretch, by love, by shame pursued!
Censure, by milder pity sinks subdued:
Her woman's frame in such a whirlwind tossed,
The venial frailty in the feeling's lost:
We join the tempest of her frantic tongue,
And cry -- Rocks, storms, and juster gods, revenge the wrong!
Poets, who meditate the lofty theme, --
To win the crowded theatre's esteem,
At this perennial fount the secret seek,
To bid the passions, not the fancy, speak:
No languid apathy, in pomp of phrase,
Here lulls the anguish tragic woe should raise;
His clew the mazy labor can control,
And wind through all the labyrinth of the soul.
In other strains than his, who could endure
The rugged plough described, the field's manure;
The humbler duties of the shepherd's toil,
And the coarse cares that tame a stubborn soil? See the Georgicks, passim.

As hardest blocks the Phidian chissels choose,
The rudest subjects charm by Maro's muse:
He, like the lord of all th'extended land,
Superior, and unstained, alone can stand.
Beneath the master's eye the wain moves on,
The hinds appear to sweat, the steer to groan;
Brisk Dryades, light fawns, and satyrs lead,
While swarthy Pan inspires the jocund reed;
Abundant Ceres smiles, the vales rejoice,
And every rural god obeys his voice.
While not unseen the playful heifer feeds Pascitur in magna silva formosa
juvenca:
Illi alternantes multa vi proelia miscent
Vulneribus crebris; --.
Geor. iii. 219.

On the green herbage of the flowery meads,
Then nature's sting the lordly bull constrains
To drive his bellowing rival over the plains:
The green-ey'd monster brutal breasts can move,
To rage, like Shakspeare's Moor, with jealous love.
Hark! how the neighboring caves are heard to moan
With the deep thunder of his smothered groan!
Behold his spurning heel, his chest's broad size,
Like stars with blood bedimm'd, his glowing eyes!
We share the sturdy combat from afar,
And own the terrors of the horny war.
With dewlaps gored, and lacerated sides,
Remote, his shame the vanquished champion hides;
Yet one last look, indignant casts around,
To view the mistress lost, and hateful ground;
Then, stern receding from the hard-fought plain,
Threatens fierce strife, with mightier force again.
Or, when the mute prone creatures of the soil,
By plagues subdued, resign their useful toil,
His plaintive lays their secret woes reveal,
And what they cannot speak, our breasts must feel.
Majestic bard! as golden skies bestow
A mellow tinge on humble vales below,
Warmed by thy lyre, wherever its rays descend,
Richness and radiance on the themes attend:
From Tityrus, beneath the beech reclined,
To Turnus shrinking from the death designed,
Some kindred muse breathes in each tuneful line,
And the verse glows with all the assisting nine. How exquisite must have been
the taste of the poet, who could order the Aeneid to be destroyed after his
death, as thinking it too imperfect to do him honor! -- One of the greatest
obligations posterity owes to the memory of Augustus, is his not suffering the
suppression of that divine poem.

Virgil is supposed to have employed seven years in the composition of his
Georgicks, the most perfect poem in the opinion of many very eminent critics
extant in any language. The whole work divided into four books, consists of
little more than two thousand lines; but so many beauties were perhaps never
before or since comprised within so small a compass.

To a mere English reader, the SEASONS of Thomson, though a work clearly
original, will convey a better idea of the Georgicks, than any translation I
have met with. Thomson, in this most beautiful poem, (one of the greatest
ornaments of his country,) dips his pencil in the same glowing colors with
which the Mantuan has painted the face of rural nature. We can perceive that he
often casts his eye upon the Roman poet; not with the servile timidity of an
imitator, but like a master, able to think for himself, to select, combine, and
create by the vigor of his own genius.

In the style of these two Raffaelles of description, there is very perceptible
difference. Thomson, though not more rich, is more luxuriant than Virgil; more
sententious, diffusive, and abounding much more in epithets. The Bricon perhaps
might not have turned his thoughts to the Seasons, had not the Georgicks
preceded; yet even allowing to the latter the advantage of the Latin language,
it is not easy to decide which production deserves the preference: for my own
part, I am commonly inclined to give it to that which I have read latest.
Thomson has sometimes weak expletive lines, Virgil never. Transposition of
words now and then, though but rarely, constitutes poetry in the Seasons; the
structure of Virgil's verse cannot be altered without injuring the harmony or
the image. Thomson's episodes are very justly commended; yet the Pastor
Aristaeus in the fourth Georgick is superior to any of them.

The declamatory style which loads Thomson's tragedies, mixes well in a poem of
such length and expansion as the Seasons. The mind, tranquilized by the scenes
his muse has raised, allows him to assume the dignity of an instructor, and to
indulge in whatever mood happens to have the ascendency. We may find perhaps
upon the whole more eloquence in the modern, and in the ancient more energy.



Now, near two thousand years since Virgil's birth,
The sun, grown older, has illumined earth,
And brightly his inspiring beams has shed
Over genius living, and the illustrious dead,
Yet still supreme, unequalled, and alone,
Sits the threat Mantuan on the epick throne. The author does not mean that as
an epick poet Virgil was superior to Homer, who wrote so many ages before him;
but that he is superior to such as have appeared since his nativity. The number
is not considerable, and of these our Milton is unquestionably the greatest.
Among many other slanders, Voltaire describes him as "celui qui a gate l'enfer
et le diable du Tasse, etc." The Frenchman understood Milton but little better
than he did Shakspeare. It is remarkable that in the fastidious censures of his
noble Venetian Pococurante in Candide, he praises only the three episodical
books of Virgil, the second, fourth, and sixth, where there is more of relation
than action; because he has himself attempted to follow these models in his
Henriade: wishing always to persuade his countrymen that it is the most
finished epick poem the wit of man ever produced, in any language.

There is certainly more bustle, and less interest, in the last half of the
Aeneid than the first; and perhaps the episode in the ninth book is the most
beautiful part of any of the last six. Wherever there is room for pathos, he is
inimitable. The death of the stag in the seventh book, Nisus and Euryalus in
the ninth, Pallas and Lausus, and the lamentations over them, must touch every
heart not utterly divested of sensibility. He has many sublime descriptions and
passages in every book, and the constant majesty of his numbers has never been
equalled.



TIBULLUS. The tender suavity of Tibullus, and his plaintive simplicity, cannot
be too much admired; yet it has been said that his pattern was Parthenius, upon
the authority, I think, of Macrobius. Of the writings of Parthenius little has
been preserved. Too much indulgence has been given to the humor of preferring
works which are lost to those which remain; and of regretting the want of those
originals, upon which we are to suppose the excellent, though inferior, poems
which we have in our hands, were formed. In this manner we must conceive
Lucillius to have been superior to Horace, Varus to Virgil, and Parthenius to
Tibullus. No better consequence can result from this fruitless repining after
unknown and perished perfection, than to diminish the satisfaction of our
actual enjoyment, by the mixture of another sentiment not so pleasing. But in
our own experience we may find the true consolation. There is little doubt,
that had we now only a few lucky fragments of Chaucer and Done, some of our
critics would prefer them to Dryden and Pope; for Dryden himself in order to
recommend his beautiful tale of Palamon and Arcite, modernized from Chaucer,
and infinitely improved, spends several pages of the preface to his Fables, to
raise the rugged old English bard to a competition with Ovid; nay, in his
dedicatory verses to the Duchess of Ormond, he boldly sets him above Homer and
Virgil: He matched their beauties, where they most excel,
Of love sung better, and of arms as well.
So sings Dryden; but poetry without harmony is to my sense no better than a
violin without strings, or a cracked trumpet.

The only ancient prodigy of England is Shakspeare. His numbers are often not
less sweet, than his conceptions are sublime and original. Had only a few of
his best scenes and dramas descended to us, well might the modern exclaim that
the loss of the rest was irreparable. Yet even in this mighty genius something
is to be forgiven, and something to be rejected. Where he possesses his true
inspiration, he never was, nor ever will be, equalled. "Nature (as Pope says)
speaks through him."

Neither are the praises lavished by contemporary writers on each other a sure
standard at all times to ascertain their real value. Horace, the most
discerning of critics, though superior to envy, now and then pays a courtly
compliment to the productions of a Roman pen, when in the hand of a great
statesman or magistrate, which their intrinsic merit probably would not have
extorted from him. Lord Halifax, the Bufo of Great Britain, has left his verses
behind him to give the lie to his flatterers; to reach us to appreciate for
ourselves, and not to depend upon the panegyric even of an Addison, when the
scribbler and the minister happen to be united in the same person.

In Tibullus the charms of elegy may be found in genuine perfection. He has
been well imitated, and better translated, by the English Hammond. Lord
Chesterfield in a short preface to the Love Elegies, seems aware that his
friend may be considered only in the character of a translator; and says
artfully enough, that "he chose Tibullus rather than Ovid as his model." It is
somewhat extraordinary that Dr. Johnson in his account of this English poet,
when he very justly condemns him for introducing Roman imagery and heathen
mythology into verses supposed to be the effusions of amorous passion, does not
seem to recollect that in all these passages and many more, Hammond is only the
literal translator of Tibullus. Had this circumstance been fairly acknowledged
by himself or his noble editor, he would have escaped the severity of Johnson's
censure. To the best of my recollection there are scarcely one hundred original
lines in Hammond's Love Elegies.

Since the foregoing remark was written, it has been suggested to me by a
friend, that the same observation was made soon after the appearance of the
biographical work above referred to: "Dr. Johnson, in his late admirable LIVES
OF THE ENGLISH POETS, speaking of Mr. Hammond, observes, that 'his elegies have
neither pathos, nature, or manners.' They certainly have neither of the latter;
and whatever of the former they contain is the passion of a Roman, not of an
Englishman. It is surprising that the cause of this defect escaped this most
judicious critic. In short, these elegies are almost all, if not translations,
very close imitations, of Tibullus. In the whole number there are but four
original. Of this any one may be convinced, who will take the trouble to
compare these poems with those of the Roman Knight. For the satisfaction of the
classical reader, I will subjoin a list of those elegies which Hammond has
copied: HAMMOND. TIBULLUS. El. 1 l. ii. el. iv. 1 -- 38. 2 ii. el. vi. 3 ii.
el. iv. 39 -- 50. 4 iii. el. v. 5 i. el. ii. 6 ii. el. vii. 7 ii. el. iii. 8
iii. el. iii. 9 iii. el. ii. 11 i. el. xi. i. el. i. 45 -- 52. 12 iii. el. vii.
13 i. el. i. i. el. v. 31 -- 34.

By the foregoing table the reader will observe, that of Hammond's elegies, the
tenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth, alone appear to have been
unborrowed. It is, however, but just to add, that this unfortunate and amiable
poet, though he has no pretensions to the title of an original writer, must be
acknowledged to have been a very harmonious and elegant versifier. Gentleman's
Magazine, for 1781, Vol. 51. p. 369.
A. U. C. 691 -- 734.
To learn, pale Elegy, thy genuine strain,
Let soft Tibullus move thee to complain:
A pensive maid, whose bosom's deep distress
Her sober steps and heartfelt sighs confess;
With eyes of blue, that languishingly swim,
Unconscious of the tears that swell their brim.
Her stole of violet tinge, with flowing grace,
Improves her mournful dignity of pace;
Cyprus, sad emblem of disastrous love,
(A weeping Cupid kissed it as he wove,)
And flowers of dusky hue, entwined appear,
To form the wreath, that binds her auburn hair:
Over her white breast her folded arms are laid,
And solitude she seeks, and noiseless shade.
If feigned the passion, and the pang unfelt,
What heart so hard his numbers could not melt?
The sympathizing soul his notes involve;
Like snows they fall, and as they fall, dissolve.
No turns, no points, for admiration call,
But all is simple, plain, and natural;
For love's true language, void of dress and art,
Neglects the fancy, and secures the heart. --
When piping winds, and thick-descending rain, Quam juvat immites ventos audire
cubantem,
Et dominam tenero continuisse sinu;
Aut, gelidas hybernus aquas quum fuderit auster,
Securum somnos, imbre juvante, sequi! --
Tibul. l. i. el. i.

Assail the shelter of his roof in vain,
His tender mind the inclement hour improves,
Till rest turns rapture with the maid he loves.
HORACE. The genius and writings of Horace will probably for ever supply
abundant matter for criticism and panegyric. He has a claim to the latter, for
a species of excellence which perhaps has not been sufficiently noticed; the
great variety of subjects to which he has tuned his lyre. To have produced
above a hundred odes, with little resemblance between any two of them, all
finished and beautiful, and some of them sublime, shows a very surprising
playfulness and fertility of fancy. He calls them operosa carmina, but we see
nothing but the felicity.

Considering his admiration of Pindar, whom he praises chiefly for his
sublimity, we might, I think, have expected more frequent emulation of the
Theban's loftiness. His most distinguished performance in that style is the ode
in the fourth book, beginning with "Qualem ministrum," yet surely this ought
not to be preferred to Dryden's St. Cecilia, and is greatly surpassed by THE
BARD of Gray. Dryden's ode is perfect, but the latin is disgraced by the
following passage, if indeed it be genuine, flatly prosaick, and damping at
once all the glowing ardour of the strain, by its unexpected chilness: -- --
quibus
Mos unde deductus per omne
Tempus Amazonia securi
Dextras obarmet, quaerere distuli;
Nec scire fas est omnia.


A slight compression of the same thought, with another cast of expression,
would have made it unexceptionable. As it is, the Polyhymnia of Cibber might be
ashamed of it. Very rarely indeed does Horace degrade a sentiment by clothing
it improperly.

Mr. Mason's superiority as a Lyrick Poet seems in some degree to be overlooked
in the admiration of his two dramas with which his odes are interwoven; yet
what taste can be insensible to the charms of those beautiful compositions in
Elfrida? That upon death in Caractacus breathes the genuine spirit of Homer's
terrifick grandeur and sublimity.

No species of poetical composition is so difficult as the grave Ode. It
demands not only peculiar endowment from nature, but also talents exercised in
the practice. An indifferent serious ode, though constructed with the most
exact conformity to critical rules, was never read twice willingly by any
person, except the author. Even the incomparable Pope, accustomed so much to
couplets and heroic measure, fails in the attempt, almost shamefully. His St.
Cecilia is the mere effort of labor, without inspiration; a sedulous endeavor
at perfection, without attainment. I can conceive Dryden, when employed on this
subject, looking up to the sky, while the spirit of the musical saint he
celebrates was descending upon him; and Pope, in vain discomposing his velvet
nightcap, biting his pen, dashing it on the table, and retiring to bed, tired,
disturbed, and unsatisfied. Such is the difference between imitation and genius.

When the subject of an ode is of an exalted nature, it requires all the united
powers of conception, expression, and harmony, to prevent the mind from being
vacant, instead of being roused and sustained by the poetry. Upon light,
ludicrous, or satirical topics, many have been successful; no one perhaps more
eminently so, than Sir Charles Hanbury Williams.


A. U. C. 689 -- 746.
Persuasive Horace! how his varying lay
Can dash bold vice, or with light foibles play!
HORACE.


The task of reformation he beguiles,
Alike instructing, if he frowns or smiles; Omne vafer vitium ridenti Flaccus
amico
Tangit, et admissus circum praecordia, ludit,
Callidus excusso populum suspendere naso.
PERS. sat. i.

Till by his easy precepts wiser grown,
Men pardon others' faults, and mend their own:
They find fierce passions by calm sense withstood,
And small the labor to be just and good.
No frowning virtue in his strain appears,
To wring the heart, or stain the cheek with tears;
But gently soothing, of benign address,
And still more blessed, as most employed to bless.
Bold daring crimes avenging law pursues,
Leaving man's foibles to the sportive muse;
And deep they feel, who sin against reason's rule,
The pains and penalties of ridicule: The pains penalties of idleness. POPE.

But injudicious satire in a storm,
Drives to despair the wretch it should reform;
With brazen front he stalks, abashed no more,
And braves the shame he tried to shun before.
The black misdeeds of execrable men,
Let cords or axes punish, not the pen:
When fetters clank, and dungeons yawn in vain,
Adieu the physic of the iambick strain!
What novice now would waste his muse and time,
To tame a modern Frenchman by a rhyme?
Can the soft lute, or silver-sounding lyre,
Arrest the roaring of the tiger's ire?
Even full-tongu'd Juvenal's imperial rage
Would fly the nation, and abjure the age.
Be true to virtue, bards, in all you write,
But never strive, to wash an Ethiop white;
Observe the buds of folly as they grow,
And sage, like Horace, nip them ere they blow.
When crowned with roses in Anacreon's bower,
The Paphian queen and Bacchus own the hour. O Venus, regina Cnidi, Paphique,
--. HOR. l. i. ode xxx.

What surly cynick can the feast reprove,
Or dare profane the joys of wine and love?
But if in Pindar's tone he pours along,
The flood he paints rolls thundering through his song; Monte decurrens velut
amnis, imbres
Quem super notas aluere ripas,
Fervet, immensusque ruit profundo
Pindarus ore.
HOR. l. iv. ode ii.

The Theban's genius all his soul inspires,
And lifts above the example he admires.
Let youthful poets own the critick's skill, HOR. de Art Poetica.

And climb with him the steep Parnassian hill,
Where crags, and thorns, and bitter springs abound, Quod superest arvi, tamen
id natura sua vi
Sentibus obducat, --.
LUCR. l. v. 207.

With scarce one flowery spot of pregnant ground;
So worn and harrow'd by the ancients' toil,
The tardy modern hardly gleans the soil;
But finds, too late, the imagined fragrant store
Borne off by bees, who sucked its sweets before:
Yet guiding Flaccus still his hope may raise;
The path he knows, and points it to true praise.
Pleased with what heaven will grant or disallow,
Eternal sunshine gilds his cheerful brow;
In idle murmurs no vain hour he will waste,
But clasps the present joy, nor mourns the past. -- carpe diem, quam minimum
credula postero. HOR. l. i. ode xi.

Blessed moralist! whose winning manners gained
The ease of freedom, where a despot reigned;
Wise sensualist! who scorned superfluous wealth, Nollem onus, haud unquam
solitus, portare molestum. HOR. Sat. l. i. s. vi.

And found true luxury in peace and health.
OVID. It is singular enough that Ovid should have collected such a number of
fabulous transformations and impossibilities, and have given them to his
countrymen with such an air of gravity and devotion, without having himself the
least faith in any of them; for a man of sense who examined them so much as he
must have done, was of all men the least likely to believe them. His
Metamorphoses may be considered as the great magazine and repository of pagan
fiction and mythology.

He is supposed to have been greatly addicted to gallantry, and a very
distinguished favorite among the Roman ladies, to whom he recommended himself
more by his learning, talents, and poetry, than by the gracefulness of his
figure, and his other personal accomplishments. He had besides reduced the
mystery of female seduction to a system. There are few women of any natural
delicacy of sentiment, however little they may happen to be indebted for the
improvement of their minds to education, who can be insensible to the
distinction which literature gives to the other sex. Nothing is less uncommon,
than to find a woman's principles seduced by her understanding.

The late Earl of Chesterfield's morality with respect to women, is rather more
lax than Ovid's. In his Art of Love, the Roman says, Tuta frequensque via est,
per amicum fallere nomen.
Tuta frequensque licet sit via; crimen habet.


The English Chiron, like the pirate who erased the eighth commandment from his
decalogue. seems to have adopted the convenience of the couplet, leaving out
the assertion contained in the final words. By what casuistry a man of
unblemished reputation in his public character, and of strict honor in
private, as his lordship certainly was, could confound the same principles, by
the mere distinction of sexes, I am unable to discover. It is surely to be
lamented, that a few exceptionable passages in his system, which cannot be
perused without severe reprehension, should have so tarnished the whole, that
no publication extant has been treated with so little candor. It abounds
however with good sense, and contains many excellent rules and maxims to form
the manners and regulate the conduct of youth, conceived with great temper and
judgment, and communicated with the utmost perspicuity, elegance, and purity of
language. Though his letters are addressed to a young man of a particular
character, and destined to a particular walk in life, they cannot fail of being
generally instructive and useful. The characters by Lord Chesterfield, of a few
of his contemporaries, are written in the spirit of Sallust, without his
partialities; terse, comprehensive, and appropriate, and equal, if not
superior, to any of those drawn by our best historians, from Lord Clarendon to
this hour.


A. U. C. 711 -- 771.
'Midst many a nameless son of vulgar earth,
Sulmo could boast she gave her Ovid birth. Sulmo mihi patria est, gelidis
uberrimus undis. OVID. Trist. l. iv. el. 10.

OVID.


Together twined, his learned brow displays
The lover's myrtle and the poet's bays.
Though each fair science stored his fertile mind,
Still roved his copious fancy unconfined.
To fix his thoughts on Themis' crabbed book,
What fruitless pains his anxious father took!
While softer Cytherea smiling cried,
"To learn my laws, be all thy care applied."
As sudden corruscations quick and bright,
His wit surprises with a dazzling light;
Whatever the subject, barren, rude, or mean,
That fire emits its rays, and gilds the scene:
On Pontus' dreary shore his breast it warms,
Nor loses even in banishment its charms.
In vain thy plaintive numbers were addressed,
To soften one unmitigable breast;
But be thy crime what malice may believe,
Worse was his crime, who knew not to forgive. Few points have been left in
more doubt and obscurity by the Ancients than the cause of Ovid's banishment.
It has been commonly ascribed to his having been discovered in an intrigue with
the emperor's daughter, Julia; but his own reference to his misfortune, in one
of his poems, does not countenance that supposition; nor was the licentiousness
of his writings, as some have imagined, likely to give offense to Augustus, who
expresses his own affection for Horace in terms of the most gross obscenity.

Led from his boyhood through the Cyprian school,
In love's soft mysteries he instructs by rule;
Master of wiles that lure the amorous heart,
Nature's first impulse feels the chains of art. Si quis in hoc artem populo
non novit amandi,
Me legate; et lecto carmine doctus amet.
OVID. de Art. Amator.

Avoid the dangerous teacher, maids, avoid!
Pleasing too much, you please to be destroyed:
But, melting virgins, most decline the song,
Lest she who reads should be no virgin long:
Timely forewarned, from the smooth verse refrain!
It Is honied poison, it is delicious bane.
The lover's eye, your breasts when passions swell,
The unprompted secret of themselves will tell.
Fair nymphs, whom truth, and genuine blushes arm,
Disdain a taught sophisticating charm!
In adamantine links THIS charm will bind, --
A graceful outside, with a cultured mind;
And half your care, the former to improve,
Turned to the heart, secures the soul of love.
Rapture's a hasty transient flame at best,
But warm esteem an ever-biding guest:
Rapture, a meteor, at its birth expires,
Esteem new vigor with its age acquires:
She who the first prefers, prefers amiss;
A moment's transport, to a life of bliss.
Why rolls in vain, the ever-rolling eye?
Why fails the smile rehearsed, the obedient sigh?
Think you, can flaming cinnaber outspeak
The true suffusion of the ingenuous cheek?
Or could the wise CREATING POWER intend
His daintiest work for minerals to mend?
A mien, composed with all an artist's care,
Invites not, but exclaims aloud, BEWARE!
Behold the fruitless preparation lost:
She least inspires a flame, who feigns it most.
Beauty's false friends, avaunt! or scorned, repair
Where riot roars, and orgied torches glare!
Mark, how the flowery tribes preserve unmixed
The tints, wise nature on their birth has fixed:
No garish die the blue-vein'd violet shows,
Nor vies the bashful snow-drop with the rose.
To no one color various beauty's bound;
What different charms in different hues are found!
Fire to the eye let ruddy cheeks impart;
But pale mild languor melts into the heart.
Enough to charm, the modest ear may choose,
In the chaste labors of gay Ovid's muse.
When themes sublime more lofty strains demand,
The swelling chords confess a statelier hand:
In floods of day, see Sol's bright palace rise;
See his rash son hurled flaming down the skies:
How Pindus, Athos, hot Olympus glow!
How hisses Rhodope through piles of snow! Et tandem Rhodope nivibus caritura,
--. METAMORPH. l. ii.

See, the great sire of gods and men alarmed,
And against combustion, with combustion armed. -- et saevis compescuit ignibus
ignes. Ibid.
--
His sounding pinion holds a temperate flight,
Skims not the ground, nor soars beyond the sight;
More skilled to paint the passions, than to move,
Youth will admire him, wiser age approve.
THE AUGUSTAN AGE.
Rivals to these, in more instructive prose,
Historians, orators, and critics rose;
With fancy's rays the power of truth combined,
Poured rich effulgence on the enlightened mind.
Why teemed the Augustan age beyond the rest,
With prodigality of genius blessed?
Was man a different compound from before?
No; -- war, and civil discord, were no more;
The iron gates of double Janus closed, Immane bellicae civitatis argumentum,
quod semel sub regibus, iterum Tito Manlio consule, tertio, Augusto Principe,
certae pacis argumentum Janus Geminus clausus dedic.

VEL. PAT. l. ii. c. 38. That the Roman legions should have been the best
disciplined and the most irresistible troops in the world, will not seem
extraordinary, when we consider that from the building of the city to the reign
of Augustus, a period of above seven hundred years, the gates of the temple of
Janus were but three times closed: once by Numa, the second king; again, after
the first Punick war, A. U. C. 529; and lastly by Augustus, A. U. C. 725. One
would imagine that the Romans in time of peace must have felt like foxhunters
in frost, listless and uncomfortable for want of their usual exercise. --
Aususque tandem Caesar Augustus septingentesimo [vicesimo quinto] ab urbe
condita anno, Janum Geminum cludere, bis ante se clusum, sub Numa rege, et
victa primum Carthagine.

FLOR. l. iv. c. 12.

The mind grew active, and the arm reposed;
Fragmentum picturae veteris in pariete factae, Romae anno MDCCXXXVII inter
palatii Caesaris Augusti rudera, ubi nunc sunt horti Farnesiani, in m^nte
Palatino repertum, in qu^ s^^ figurae art exquisita et nitidis coloribus sunt
expressae^quarum una exhibetur Augustus ipse sedens, et coronam alieui, cujus
imag^ est abrupta, pr^t^ndens; Phraati, ut quidam non (...) augurant, fl^xis
genibus, de quo Horatius -- ^^s imperiumque Phraates
Caesaris accepit genibus minor.)
(...) adst^ntes, inter qu^s Ma^^nas toga (...) indutus (...) M. Agrippa (...)
dextr^m (...) imaginum cum (...) ^orum ^^^^isque similitud^ ^s^^ndit. (...)
argumento, et sua ipsius description^ ducti (...) Horatium inter sui patronos
et (...) ex^^ber^ volunt, extrema nemp^illa, corperis exigu^, figura (...)
daud^^^^.

Ex museo viri illustris R Mead. M D.



Long-banish'd peace, and all her gentle train,
Returned to tranquil Italy again:
Then, all was verse, felicity, and love,
Sportive each vale, and vocal every grove.
The useless veteran, sour, and unemploy'd,
Cursed the fair paradise he never enjoyed;
Or told in accents hoarse to suburb swains,
Of martial Julius, and the Gaul campaigns;
And lost the memory of his scars and crimes,
In stern revision of more warlike times.
The Nile, Euphrates, Rhene, and Danaw, own
On Tyber's banks the world's great master's throne;
There the rich produce of their regions meet,
To pour their tribute at the Roman's feet;
Choice stuffs, strange beasts, rare gems, barbarick gold,
Their wonders to admiring eyes unfold:
But admiration, most THIS wonder craves,
Thy sons, Quirinus, sycophants and slaves.
Lest in grave talk too deeply might be weighed,
Why one man ruled, and all the rest obeyed,
The crafty prince, in human passions wise,
Bids new delight from harmless sources rise:
Invited poets to his feasts' resort,
And verse becomes the fashion of the court;
Where liberal wit, from jaundic'd envy free,
Felt emulation without jealousy.
No dangerous topic waked dissension there,
Of factious tribunes for the approaching year;
What Praetor next should plunder Syria's land;
Who from broad Ister drive the Dacian band;
But for mild converse, milder themes they choose,
The sculptor's art, the pencil, and the muse:
"Why polished Rome so long in vain has sought
"To emulate the wonders Glycon wrought;
"Why her rough chissel scarce a form can give,
"While Corinth's models almost breathe and live;
"Why feasts the eye on bold Apelles' line,
"And, warm Parrhasius, owns thy touch divine: --
"Blessed art, that bids the vanished features rise,
"To feed the dear delusion of the eyes!
"By thee, the garb, shape, smile, and look, remain,
"While absence baffled loses half its pain:
"Thy magic aid by lovers most is sought,
"Who lend the passive image words and thought;
"Who sometimes prompt the tablet, and suggest
"Wishes more fond than warmed the breathing breast;
"And for the unreal rapture would resign
"Treasures less prized, which gem the unfathomed mine:
"Thus the whole maid, no longer mourned, maylive;
"Part picture's boon, the rest can fancy give. --
"Rome learned, mature, in opulence and ease,
"Buys, not produces, miracles like these: Though the opulent Romans were great
admirers of the works of the Grecian artists, and purchased them at immense
prices, the contemplation of such admirable models did not raise any native
rival school in Italy. Poetry had no sister art among the Romans.

Innumerable volumes in different languages are extant upon sculpture and
painting; like many others I have much relish for both these enchanting arts,
yet cannot pretend to the least degree of science in either; but nothing I have
ever read upon the latter, captivated my mind so much, as an excellent dialogue
by Mr. Daniel Webb, a gentleman whose birth does honor to Ireland. The style
and coloring glow with all the warmth and genius of the productions which he
celebrates. -- It is difficult to say, whether the Public has most to lament
in losing the pencil or the pen of the late accomplished President of the Royal
Academy. As I knew and admired him, it would give me pleasure to expatiate upon
his character as a scholar, an artist, and a companion; but I am restrained by
recollecting that the care of his memory and writings is reserved for a friend
every way qualified to do them entire justice.



"How savage, on destruction only bent,
"Least to excel in what is most excellent! --
"If best the tuneful Mantuan's matchless strain
"Adorns the hero, or describes the swain;
"If Terence with Menander can compare;
"What youth's most constant, or which nymph most fair; -- Dicat Opuntiae
Frater Megillae, quo beatus
Vulnere, qua pereat sagitta.
HOR. l. i. ode 27. The ancients had a custom of drinking a glass for every
letter in the name of the lady they toasted. Unless their glasses were very
small, it was well that they reposed on a triclinium. Naevia sex cyathis,
septem Justina bibatur. MARTIAL. It is fortunate for some jovial heads and
amorous hearts among us, that the rigor of this custom does not prevail where
some ladies have three or four Christian names, with not less than six or seven
letters in each of them.



"What sums 'twould ask to gild Apollo's fane;
"To cut that Isthmus, or yon lake to drain:" --
Then, all for sports and lengthened shows prepare,
And bloodless battles were the emperor's care;
The tale of ancient Troy, besieged again, -- hinc maxima porro
Accepit Roma, et patrium servavit honorem;
Trojaque nunc, pueri, Trojanum dicitur agmen.
AEN. V. 600. Sed et Trojae ludum edidit frequentissime, majorum minorumve
puerorum delectu; prisci decorique moris existimans clarae stirpis indolem sic
notescere. SUET. in Aug. 43.

By Latian boys was acted on the plain:
The sight of war's grim picture all would share,
But death, war's grimmest feature, was not there;
Parental eyes with joy the youth beheld,
Bright in safe arms, and glittering over the field.
Meantime the brick-built city disappears,
And a new front in polished marble rears;
Rome's deities forsake their mean abodes,
To rest in splendid shrines, and fit for gods.
Intent, he varied every art to please,
And lure the softened mind from toil to ease:
Thus, by degrees, perturbed thought subsides,
The torrent foams nor, but the current glides;
Passion's tempestuous gusts forget to rise,
Till in the calm at last ambition dies.
The plumy rover caught, with idle rage
First pines or flutters round his wiry cage;
The ruffled feathers, the desponding wing,
Proclaim his soul too sorrowful to sing;
Sullen and sad the astonished mourner sits,
Or shrills a captive's fretful note by fits;
His faithful mate, the well-known downy nest,
Impress their fond remembrance on his breast:
But soon the thraldom he forgets to feel,
Contented sips, and pecks his little meal;
Music and joy inspire his gurgling throat,
Till the dome echoes with his rapturous note;
Familiariz'd at length, the abode he loves,
Nor, freed again, would seek his native groves.
Even the fierce falcon, and Jove's royal bird,
From their high cliffs by rustic cunning lured,
Though in the blaze of either once they soared,
And dauntless the sun's quenching eye explored,
Hood-winked, or gyv'd, forego their trackless flight,
To perch, and cow'r, in their proud master's sight:
Lions in bonds will crouch, the tiger fawn,
Tame as the fleecy nibbler of the lawn:
So second nature, habitude, we find,
Asserts like empire over the human mind.
The wise too owned, revolving each event,
(Rome's manners changed,) which changed her government, For a general revision
of the Roman history and government, see note (F) at the end of this volume.

"That sad experience taught them to expect
"From fatal causes like, a like effect.
"What for the public weal, alas, was gained,
"While some new tyrant in succession reigned?
"Good Cato, Tully, Brutus, lived no more;
"Their names, like wrecks, bestrew'd the ill-omen'd "shore:
"No Palinurus waking, sure, would court
"A stormy sea, with certain death the port;
"Cooped in a crazy bark, where naught was found
"But faithless mariners, and planks unsound.
"Bondage to shun, and civil war endure,
"Less dire the evil, than the desperate cure;
"The hapless land to that sad refuge driven,
"Feels the last vengeful scourge of angry heaven.
"Stern Marius drained the nobles' vital flood;
"Proud Sylla waded through Plebeian blood;
"Pompey by arms maintained his dangerous sway,
"Waved his bright blade, and trembling law gave way;
"All-conqu'ring Julius, more audacious grown,
"Bade his grim veterans frown the senate down;
"The fell Triumvirs the same track explored,
"While their fierce eagles over the rostrum soared:
"Freedom, the stale pretense, for ever failed,
"And freedom's deadliest foe, the sword, prevailed.
"Where such examples wanted power to strike,
"The infant and the sage were wise alike." --
Rome, by repeated scenes of horror cloyed,
Sought gentler arts, to fill the mental void.
The genial sky, a soft luxuriant soil,
Kind to the poet's vein, and tiller's toil;
Stupendous Alps, to raise the soaring thought,
And hills and vales in gay confusion wrought;
Seas, on whose margin busy towns were built, An mare quod supra memorem;
quodque alluit infra? VIRG. Geor. ii. The Adriatic and the Tyrrhene or Tuscan
sea.



With towers ennobled, and by sunbeams gilt;
Lakes, with these seas in vastness to compare,
The foamy Benacus, and copious Lar; Anne lacus tantos? te Lari maxim, teque
Fluctibus et fremitu assurgens, Benace, marino?
VIRG. ut supr.

And thou, mol'd Lucrine, where tall ships might brave
The harmless roaring of the Tuscan wave;
Rivers, rolled down with deep majestic tide,
While argent streams in gentler murmurs glide;
Tumultuous Nar, and smooth Clitumnus' course, Hinc albi, Clitumne, greges, et
maxima taurus
Victima, saepe tuo purfusi flumine sacro, --.
VIRG. Geor. ii. 146. Qua formosa suo Clitumnus flumina luco
Integit, et niveos abluit unda boves.
PROPERT. l. ii. el. xix. 25.

Gay with the spurning steer, and snow-white horse;
Eridanus, whose floods like ocean rise,
To spout his lofty urn through half the skies;
Slumbers supine beneath umbrageous trees,
Alive with warbling birds, and fan'd by Maia's breeze;
No chilling fear, those slumbers to prolong,
Of forky death from the coil'd serpent's tongue;
(From man's approach the noxious reptile glides,
And close in brakes his swelter'd venom hides;
Not here beheld, as where of monstrous birth
His spires amaze the sky, and hiss consumes the earth: Nec rapit immensos
orbs per humum, neque tanto
Squameus in spiram tractu se colligit anguis.
VIRG. Geor. ii. 153. Virgil seems particularly to delight in painting the
serpent kind. In the Georgicks and Aeneid he has many descriptions of them, all
highly finished, and with considerable diversity.



Such as on Bagrada's polluted banks A serpent of the enormous length of one
hundred and twenty feet is said to have disputed the use of the river Bagrada
in Africa with the whole Roman army under the command of the consul Regulus.
The account is given, from Tubero, by Aulus Gellius:

"Tubero in historiis scriptum reliquit, bello primo Punico Attilium Regulum
consulem in Africa, castris apud Bagradam flumen positis, praelium grande atque
acre fecisse adversus unum serpentem illie stabulantem, inusitatae immanitatis;
eumque, magna totius exercitus conflictione, ballistis atque catapultis diu
oppugnatum: ejusque interfecti corium longum pedes centum ac viginti Romam
misisse." NOCT. AT. l. vi. c. 3. This monstrous creature was at length killed
by a huge stone cast from an engine, which broke the spine of his back. Pliny
says, (Hist. Not. viii. 14.) that his skin was to be seen at Rome, usque ad
bellum Numantinum. A. U. C. 620.



Fought for the stream, and thinn'd a consul's ranks;
With rams and warlike enginery obliged
To assail the Python, like a town besieged:
Brazen his scales, as comets flamed his eyes,
And huge like Ossa the unmeasured size:)
Nor dread of poison's vegetable powers,
Fallacious hid in cups of dew-dropp'd flowers;
No pard, or darting tiger, to invade
The safe retirement of the guileless shade,
Where Damon and his Thestylis repair,
To breathe Arcadian vows in cooler air;
Temples, arcs, theaters, huge works of art,
Their dumb majestic influence to impart;
Piles, that with awe the astonished eye pursues,
The soul expanding, as the gazer views;
No field, no stream, but in its precinct bears
Some glorious record of departed years;
Themes prompting still the simple rustick's tongue,
Sung by some bard, or worthy to be sung;
A year twice fruitful, all Pomona's store, Bis gravidae pecudes, bis pomis
utilis arbos. VIRG. Geo. ii. 150.

Spread in profusion over the fragrant shore;
Flowers of all hues, and nymphs as kind as fair,
With Hybla humming through the vocal air;
Pan, with the dancing Graces in his train,
And fabled gods believed on every plain; --
MAECENAS.


SCENES SUCH AS THESE to rapture fire the mind,
And ALL, blessed Italy! in thee combined.
O redolence of joy, enough to raise
Each shepherd's reed to rival Maro's lays!
Thence fanes innumerous, such large bounties given,
Proclaimed, they thought, a multifarious heaven:
So, from devotion, each new blessing sent,
Impaired the worship of the Omnipotent;
For then the glimmering heathen's twilight soul
Saw not ONE CAUSE, great author of the whole.
But chief, to wise Maecenas should belong Habuit enim ingenium et grande et
virile, nisi illud secum discinxisset.

Maxima laus illi tribuitur mansuetudinis: pepercit gladio, sanguine abstinuit.

SENEC. Epis. 92. 114. Urbis custodiis praepositus Caius Maecenas, equestri sed
splendido genere natus, vir, ubi res vigiliam exigeret, sane exsomnis,
providens, atque agendi sciens. VEL. PAT. l. ii. c. 88.

Mankind's just tribute for the poet's song.
His soul could feel the muse, and loved the bard,
Liberal the love, and boundless the reward;
He knew the immortal stamp which letters give;
(For unrecorded deeds but once can live;) (...). THEOC. Idyl. xvi. 58.

That Peleus son had slept in dust unknown, Vixere fortes ante Agamemnona
Multi; sed omnes illacrymabiles
Urgentur, ignotique longa
Nocte, carent quia vate sacro.
HOR. l. iv. ode ix. Quam multos scriptores rerum suarum magnus ille Alexander
secum habuisse dicitur! Atque is tamen cum in Sigaeo ad Achillis tumulum
adstitisset, O fortunate, inquit, adolescens, qui tuae virtutis Homerum
praeconem inveneris! Et vere; nam nisi ILIAS illa exstitisset, idem tumulus qui
corpus ejus contexerat, nomen etiam obruisset. CIC. pro Archia Poeta.

Till Homer made the future world his own.
"Heroes (he cries) thus brave the power of death,
"Nor dies fair virtue with the expiring breath;
"Posterity's joint-heirs to endless time,
"They still endure, and every zone's their clime:
"The patriot's tomb may moulder into dust,
"The picture fade, or lightning strike the bust;
"But not his acts, and wide-expanded name,
"Borne on the wings of incorporeal fame."
Mark, by his kindling breath how taught to aspire,
Shines bright revealed the intellectual fire!
No more to shades the inglorious muses fly,
But all Parnassus fills the public eye;
A wreath to him the grateful sisters give,
Virent so long, and blooming still to live.
Like a full river, whose exhaustless source
Through flowery meadows winds its sinuous course,
His bounty's stream still fertilizing flowed,
Nor shrunk at all the abundance it bestowed.
Such once was Wri'thesly For an account of Henry Wriothesly, earl of
Southampton, see Memoirs of that nobleman, prefixed to the tenth volume of
Shakspeare's Works, published by Mr. Malone; whose name cannot be mentioned
without great respect by every friend to English literature. His indefatigable
industry has left nothing discoverable unexplored, his sagacity nothing
unnoticed, which can contribute to gratify the numerous admirers of our
greatest poet.

The family name of lord Southampton, as he observes to me, was formerly
pronounced Wresely, the first vowel being sounded like the French i.

See Strype's ANNALS, vol. ii. App. L.
, dear distinguished name!
Congenial studies, and their souls the same:
Britain's great bard his kindred taste adored,
And Essex honored his unvenal sword.
First from his eyry near tame Avon's side,
His wing our intellectual eagle tried;
Unmarked the towering flight by vulgar eyes, --
But keen Southampton saw it cleave the skies;
Bade him soar on, with trackless pinions bold,
And imp'd the wide-spread vans with strengthening gold.
By emulation of his generous fire,
Let Albion's lords to fame like his aspire;
The drooping muse a monarch's care engage,
And bid revive a new Augustan age:
Then may new Congreves, Garths, and Swifts, be known;
Another Pope perhaps, and Addison.
In kindly climes as glowing suns produce
From mellow fruits their rich nectareous juice,
So may the beams of royal grace dispense
Over genius their benignest influence;
To every art, be every honor shown,
And wit adorn, as virtue guards, the throne!
But what avails the humble poet's prayer,
A monarch^s virtues, or the senate's care,
If fell Erinnys, from a neighboring shore,
Drown reason's sober voice in frenzy's roar?
(A shore devouring Lestrygons would shun,
"Where furies' torches blaze beyond the sun;)
If ruin, ghastly death, and rapine's rage,
Britain's mild sons in their fierce strife engage?
Avert them, all that is wise and just in men!
Confine them, Heaven, to their own Gallick den!
If such detested days indeed must rise,
Giver of light, O, close thy suppliant's eyes! Hesiod, as Mr. Malone suggests
to me, has expressed the same wish in his introductory verses to the
description of the IRON AGE. The whole passage, though written near three
thousand years ago, is so perfectly applicable to the present barbarous state
of France, that the classical reader will, I am confident, not be displeased at
its being brought to his remembrance: (...)



Over him, and all he loves, kind darkness, come,
To hide them in the accelerated tomb! --
See over pale Java's desolated plains
In solitary state dread Upas reigns; In the last note to Dr. Darwin's LOVES OF
THE PLANTS, or second volume of THE BOTANICK GARDEN, see a description of the
Upas or Poison Tree, transcribed from the account of N. P. Foersch, a Dutch
surgeon; published in the London Magazine for 1784. This tremendous and
astonishing tree of Java stands in a stony waste covered with the bones of
animals; and to the distance of three or four leagues round it desolates all
life and vegetation. Birds caught by its effluvia fall down dead in their
passage over it. Criminals sent to collect the poison, notwithstanding many
preparations against it, perish in vast numbers. The points of warlike
instruments are dipped in it, and it is said to produce some revenue to the
emperor. The account is almost as wonderful, and little less incredible than
any invention in the Arabian Nights; yet it is authenticated sufficiently. I
know but one way to account for its being a fiction; by supposing that the
Dutch devised it for better securing the monopoly of their spices. Some persons
perhaps may think a Dutch flight of invention little less wonderful than the
properties of this extraordinary tree.

Dr. Darwin in the third canto of his second volume has painted the Upas tree
in bolder figures than I could venture to use, or perhaps could command for the
same purpose.



No pulmonary valves can bear her breath,
Shooting in poisonous mists convulsive death;
To her, as to the lion's murderous den -- me vestigia terrent
Omnia te adversum spectantia, nulla retrorsum.
HOR. Epist. l. i. ep. 1.
,
The foot may go, but never return again:
High over her top the full-wing'd eagle's sped,
And white with bleaching bones her flinty bed;
Carnage alone in hideous piles rests there,
While hissing hydras blast the lurid air:
Where the least gasp of Orcus' spouse pervades,
Wide spreads the abortive waste, creation fades;
Whole leagues remote the human form is driven,
Far from this foe to man, and scourge of heaven:
So, the fell demon of Lutetia lowers,
Shrieking from dungeons drear, and gore-drench'd towers. --
Britons by France instructed to esteem
Their precious birthright! madness how extreme!
It Is Borgia's sword, Caesar Borgia, natural son of the well-known Pontifical
Monster Alexander the sixth, and the worthy offspring of such a father. He
murdered his brother the Duke of Gandia, and every other person within his
reach, whom he supposed likely to obstruct the views of his ambition. He had a
mind of such comprehensive wickedness, not without great boldness, and some
capacity, that had he been reserved to be a Frenchman of the present age, he
would probably have been the rival of the late Danton, in the favor of the
Convention at Paris.
to humble papal pride;
It Is Nero, preaching against parricide.
Counts the deep inborn enmity for naught?
Are the repeated perfidies forgot?
Unlike their genius, manners, forms, are seen,
While surging rolls a roaring sea between;
Coast frowns on coast, by nature's hand disjoined;
Gods, fates, opposed, but more the adverse mind.
No, -- rather sink your islands in the main,
Or, let primaeval darkness reign again;
With binding incantations charm the shade,
Where Edward sleeps, and Monmouth's dust is laid;
Lest, with burst cearments, their pale ghosts appear,
To shake at England the destroying spear:
Drive the sharp plough-share over each charter'd spot,
Where kings acceded, and stern barons fought;
Of your wise laws disjoint the social frame,
Clear from your rolls expunge great Nassau's name;
All that experience, learning, wisdom gave,
Be plunged at once in blank oblivion's grave!
Shall sacred liberty, so long enjoyed,
By her own champions blindly be destroyed?
For her, now numbered with the illustrious dead,
A Summers pleaded, and a Hamden bled;
Fired by her flame, more dear than vital breath,
Sons braved their sires in marshalled fields of death;
In sea-girt Albion, goddess, was thy throne,
Where every generous virtue was thine own;
Thine, hard-earn'd rights no tyrant could debase;
Thine, the glad smile on every honest face:
And still some ancient worth our isle can boast, --
Shade of great Chatham, in thy offspring most:
Full of his sire the vigorous counsels flow,
Scorning alike the faction and the foe;
Whose false pretense, insidiously to save,
Would turn the womb of freedom to her grave;
Nor shall she recreant fly her native plains,
For he can guard them, and a Brunswick reigns.
While hoary ocean, over his caverns spread,
Heaves the deep gulf of his capacious bed,
While glittering planets circle in their sphere,
And spring renews, and winter chills the year,
May the hot brand of unextinguish'd shame
Sear, ruthless Gauls, with infamy your name!
By no one virtue from despair redeemed,
Your sovereign's murdered, and your GOD blasphemed.
O, for a hotter Aetna, to roll down
His fiery deluge on the Stygian town!
Where twice the fiends of France exulting stood,
To view the scaffold, smeared with royal blood; This poem had long been out of
the author's hands, and considerably advanced at the press, before accounts
arrived of the horrible murder of the late unfortunate queen of France;
exhibiting such a scene of complicated and deliberate barbarity, as makes us
almost impatient, as she seemed to be herself, for the last fatal stroke which
alone could deliver her from the fangs of those merciless hell hounds by whom
she had been persecuted.

Here follows the simple and unexaggerated detail of her sufferings after the
butchery of the king her husband.

A considerable time before the sixteenth of October 1793, the day of her
murder, she was torn from her children and sister-in-law in the Temple, her
former prison, and committed to the Conciergerie, one of the most filthy
dungeons in Paris.

Behold this daughter of an empress, this sister of emperors, the wife of the
once most powerful sovereign on the continent of Europe, in the very flower of
her age, beautiful, calumniated, and innocent, plunged into a narrow cavern,
four feet under ground, aired and lighted toward the top by one small
iron-grated window, fetid, damp, and loathsome; four ruffians all day and night
pent up with her in the same abyss, to witness every shocking humiliation of
female delicacy: fed with the worse sustenance doled out to the vilest
criminals, her bed a miserable pallet, with scanty bed-clothes not sufficient
to cover her, foul and tattered; hurried from this gulf of desolation to a
mock trial before savages predetermined on her condemnation; accused of
impossible crimes, at the very name of which human nature shudders; a nominal
advocate assigned to her, not to defend, but to inveigle and betray her:
sentence of ignominious death, in defiance of evidence and conviction,
pronounced upon her. In a few hours afterward her hair cut off, her hands tied
behind her back, to prevent her holding a book of prayer or a crucifix; (an
indignity offered only to her;) dragged in this manner with her back to the
horses' tails upon a dungcart to the scaffold; attended by an impious miscreant
dressed up like a constitutional priest, not to console her last moments, but
to insult and embitter them; her head severed from her body, and her poor
remains thrown into a hole to be consumed with quicklime before the eyes of
her inhuman subjects, who stood round wallowing in delight at the bloody
spectacle: without a bosom on which she could drop a tear; no ear to which she
could impart a dying wish; no hand to which she could confide a lock of hair,
or one last pledge of affection for her wretched children and sister-in-law. --
She sustained it all to the last with heroic fortitude.

Thus perished the beautiful, the generous, the benevolent queen of France,
furnishing the most singular example in human records of a life so dignified by
birth, rank, and splendor, closed by such a flood of unmerited and
overwhelming calamity. She indeed drained the chalice of affliction to its last
and foulest dregs.

Whatever boundless conceptions good men may form of heavenly mercy, they will
hardly imagine it can be extended to such inconceivable wickedness!



Rich, guiltless, sacred blood; whose steams shall rise
To pull the avenging thunder from the skies.
Deeds which might blot the sun, -- their horror lost,
By alchymy of hell become your boast.
Go, true Lycaons! execrable race!
Remain no more humanity's disgrace;
But, howling in your forests, bide the storm,
And, with the hearts of wolves, assume the form! Fit lupus, et veteris servat
vestigia formae;
Canities eadem est, eadem violentia vultu;
Idem oculi lucent; eadem feritatis imago.
OVID. METAMOR. l. i.

O thou SUPREME, whose majesty unseen
Directs the movements of this vast machine,
By thee, man, heaven, and earth, and air, and sea,
Formed and sustained alone, all bend to thee;
Let flaming comets in the skies appear,
Let earthquakes rock the globe, or tempests tear;
Each loosened orb forget its station'd seat;
All nature's germins in confusion meet;
But O this pity to our sons afford,
Preserve their reverence for thy sacred word!
Parent of life and sense, ETERNAL POWER,
Ruling the final, as the natal hour,
In the last terrors of thine awful day,
Peace to the just, who walked thy righteous way!
But for the audacious progeny of pride,
What pines can cover them, what mountains hide?
Since frantic Gauls thy holy law despise,
And hideous crimes with specious names disguise;
Call human rights, each fiend's demoniack will,
And liberty, the unpunished power to kill;
Waving aloft a parricidal sword,
Red in the art'ries of their saint-like lord;
If force, not justice, must prevail with man,
And arms conclude what anarchy began, --
Though on themselves they turn their scorpion sting,
And while they curse, revenge their murdered king, --
Hurl all thy bolts on the Titanian brood,
Confound the impious, but protect the good!
In virtue's cause, though righteous drops be spilt,
Avert the worse pollution of their guilt!
Great LORD of all, keep worthy of thy smiles,
The pure devotion of these menaced isles! In this sketch of the time of
Augustus, I have omitted to mention the most interesting and awful of all
events to the universe; the birth of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST; not
from irreverence, but from absolute despair of being able to satisfy my own
mind, or the reader's, by announcing it with any suitable elevation of diction
and sentiment. It is a theme too great for rhymes. The powers of the human mind
sink under it. Even the mighty genius of Milton seems at times to be depressed
by its grandeur and simplicity. A God of peace, propitiation, and mercy, may be
contemplated with silent devotion and gratitude; or the ways and end of his
Providence may be inculcated in pious discourses; but to be a proper subject
for poetry, the Messiah must be represented in wrath and in action, with the
attributes of Homer's Jupiter, "grasping ten thousand thunders," and hurling
from the battlements of heaven the prince of darkness, and his host of
perverted angels.

ADDITIONAL NOTES.
NOTE [A.] p. 96.
Middleton's Life of Cicero is supposed after its appearance to have
disappointed the previous expectations of the reverend author's admirers. As it
is impossible to fix limits to expectation, it is equally so to determine
whether the fault be in the work itself, or in the unreasonableness of those
who profess to have been disappointed. Some without doubt would rather concur
in this sort of indistinct censure, than take the trouble of examining into the
grounds of it, and to such I imagine the following remarks may not be
unacceptable.

It is certainly a very useful and learned work. The author shows great
knowledge of ancient historians, and of Roman antiquities; and is perfectly
acquainted with all the different writings of Cicero, of which his account is
always distinct, candid, and satisfactory. They contain in themselves no
inconsiderable body of Pagan erudition. About a third part of the work consists
of quotations and translations from Cicero himself; which last (he says in his
Preface) he found not the least troublesome part of his undertaking. He
acknowledges that the History of Fabricius, prefixed to several editions of
Cicero's works, (which is no more than a bare detail of his acts and writings,
digested into exact chronological order,) together with the Annals of Pighius,
which he always consulted, saved him much unentertaining investigation, which
otherwise would have been necessary. The very curious work of Bellendenus de
Tribus Luminibus Romanorum, (as Dr. Warton has observed) was also probably of
much use to him, though he has not mentioned it.

He makes an observation, well worth remembering, upon several sentiments and
opinions, which have been erroneously imputed to Tully; accounting for the
mistake in this manner: -- Many of Tully's treatises are thrown into the form
of dialogues, and different parts in them assigned to different speakers, often
with no other intention than that they should advance certain notions, in order
to have them discussed and refuted. Careless readers, finding such opinions
contained in writings under the name of Cicero, are apt to look no further, but
to consider them as his; whereas they are produced for a purpose exactly
opposite. Tully's sentiments are too wise not to make us wish to have them
genuine.

Middleton's defect is his too great partiality for, and indiscriminate
approbation of, Cicero; not of his genius and capacity, for it is impossible to
estimate these too highly, but he hardly admits that his favorite had any
human frailties or foibles; and in general he admires his conduct as much as
his talents. It would be no less trice to expatiate on Tully's vanity, than
fruitless to endeavor to acquit him of it. It is not easy to find any page
where Cicero mentions himself, without being obliged to agree with Lord
Bolingbroke, that his own eulogium is the topic upon which he always dwells
with the greatest complacency. But though he was fond of receiving praise, we
must allow, at the same time, that he was always ready to confer it as
liberally. His copiousness of panegyric and invective seems to be equally
inexhaustible.

He certainly loved virtue; and was a true friend to the Aristocracy of Rome,
or the government of the Senate. He showed great attachment to them, when with
a strong persuasion in his mind that Caesar would be successful, he went over
to the camp of Pompey. In daring to undertake the defense of Roscius against
the interest of Sylla, the most implacable and cruel of all tyrants, he
displayed the genuine spirit of an advocate and a Roman. How vigorous was his
conduct in his consulship, and how dignified in all his transactions with
Antony! He met his death too from the executioner of that butcher with
magnanimity.

But he was not always clear from imputation in pecuniary matters: he often
flatters the man he hates, and vilifies him at one time with no less acrimony,
than at another he had extravagantly extolled him. His nature seems to have
been formed only for prosperity: the waves of adversity overwhelmed his spirit
as much as his fortune. He bore his banishment with most piteous dejection of
mind; and he sinks so under every domestic calamity, that in the condolance of
his friends even a kind of disdain for his unmanly want of fortitude is
discernible. His extreme sensibility induced him to think that his misfortunes
were peculiarly distinguished from those of other men; and that neither himself
nor the world could deplore them sufficiently. He was, notwithstanding, the
most learned person of all antiquity, whose works have reached us; and had,
perhaps, the most enlightened mind, the most versatile and universal capacity,
that any Roman (if Julius Caesar is not to be excepted) was ever endowed with.
His most elegant translator is his most rigid censurer; and I should think him
most likely to form a correct judgment of Cicero, who tempers the severity of
Melmoth with the panegyric of Middleton.

NOTE [B.] p. 144.
No character of antiquity having been more canvassed, and represented under
colors more opposite, than Julius Caesar, while some of the best masters have
exhibited him in the darkest, I hope to be pardoned for employing a few lines
to vindicate the rather favorable delineation which I have attempted of him in
the verses under his title.

Most unworthy would be the endeavor to recommend his example as a pattern for
the imitation of any subject who has the happiness to live under a free
government; nor should he be suspected of harboring such an intention, who
declares it to be clearly his opinion that Caesar was highly criminal, not only
for conceiving the design of enslaving his country, but still more for the
means he employed to accomplish his pernicious project.

Rome, it is true, gained nothing but increase of calamities by his death, or
by the resolution of that great patriot and truly virtuous Roman who conspired
against him, and who was constrained by the fatality of the times to resort to
a mode of removing him, most adverse to his humane and generous disposition.
This action of Brutus has been almost as variously represented as Caesar's
character.

His eloquence, the gracefulness of his person, his genius and taste for
letters, the engaging manners, placability of disposition, dauntless courage
unmixed with rashness, and consummate capacity for affairs of every kind,
particularly for war, so conspicuous on all occasions in this daring usurper,
have been universally acknowledged.

His contemporary Tully always addresses him in the most elaborate strain of
elegant encomium, and writes of him with inveterate malignity. Sallust, being
his creature, describes him accordingly. In Florus, (a very beautiful writer,)
we find a brief recital of some of his great achievements, but with little
comment upon them. The courtly Paterculus varnishes like a Caesarean. Wherever
Caesar is concerned, the fiery Lucan (a perfect party-writer in verse, as has
been remarked in a former note) observes no moderation. Suetonius, whose
tendency seems to be vituperative, admits all his great qualifications and
endowments, and rather unwillingly allows him to have possessed some good
dispositions. We find in the ingenious Plutarch, removed from any personal
interest in the subject, the good and the bad, as they had been transmitted to
him. Dion Cassius and Appian are branded for the effrontery of their
misrepresentations; and all that can be picked up from ancient miscellaneous
fragments relating to this extraordinary man, is so evidently tinctured with
the gall of prejudice, that it serves rather to show how the writers contradict
each other, than to assist our judgment.

Among the French, Montesquieu, who thinks with most depth, and writes with
most solidity, upon Roman policy, from the nature of his plan has not many
opportunities of detailing Caesar's actions, or entering much into his personal
character; but from what may be gathered, he imputes the subversion of the
Republic to several other causes beside the dictator's ambition; and, as may
be seen in a former quotation, (p. 135, n. 9.) he is of opinion, that from the
superiority of his genius, let Julius have appeared when and where it might be,
he must have been the ruler.

In our own language we have many Roman Histories, Essays, etc. Four
Dissertations, in the form of lectures, by the learned Dr. Michael Kearney,
formerly senior fellow of Dublin College, are deservedly in high estimation;
but nothing I have yet seen appears to me comparable to the northern
Blackwell's MEMOIRS OF THE COURT OF AUGUSTUS. With the fire of Lucan, however,
this able Author seems to inherit his partiality to Pompey, and inveteracy
against his rival. He frankly puts him down as ready for every intended
massacre; the fomenter of every sedition; and as being fully convicted of
taking the lead in every plot and conspiracy against his country; where the
proofs are suspicious, or at most only presumptive. -- It is not necessary to
go beyond notoriety to convict Caesar of gross immorality.

Though my notions of the Roman government, of their early republican virtues,
and of the unexampled depravity of Caesar, happen not to coincide exactly with
the opinions of this discerning writer, yet my respect for his learning and
talents is in nowise abated by that selfish consideration; for I think his
volumes a most animated and interesting performance, abounding with information
as to the matter, full of nerve and ardour in the diction, and placing every
period he treats of before the reader's view, with a masterly command of his
subject. The Scoticisms, as they are called, which may be found now and then in
the style, and which have given offense, real or affected, to some of our
Priscians, are in my eyes maculae too small to obscure the luster of so bright
a production. Yet determined as he is to find nothing but purity and excellence
among the early Romans, the fratricide of Remus and the rape of the Sabine
women give him no umbrage in the character of Romulus; he is not startled at
the first Brutus, or the more unnatural Manlius, ordering and superintending
the execution of their own children; nor at the cruelty of money-lenders to
their insolvent debtors; their barbarity to their slaves, the bloody pastimes
in the theater, and other enormities, from which I flatter myself it is no
affectation of singularity in me to turn with disgust and abhorrence. A general
taken from the plough-tail to conquer his country's enemies, and returning to
it after his triumph, -- a statesman planting his own turnips, and feeding upon
them as his favorite fare, -- present no very flattering picture of society
and manners. This is what Shakspeare calls emphatically, "to make man's life as
cheap as beasts."

In the early Romans we see a very fierce and warlike people, frugal in
poverty, and cased round with some stony virtues, while they had no access to
the means of corruption or luxury; but when these were within their reach,
indulging in them to excess. When there was temptation, they were tempted. They
were sanguine, inconstant, and cruel; frequently persecuting their best
citizens and benefactors; under false names and specious pretenses subjugating
mankind, and trying to extend their unjust dominion to the utmost boundaries of
the universe. The dugs of the wolf were not confined to the suckling of Romulus
and Remus. With all this we find among them prodigies of valor, of public
spirit, and of private virtue.

After many pages of violent invective, Dr. Blackwell calls Julius Caesar "the
most ambitious profligate" the nativities of Rome ever registered, and this at
a time when with his usual animation he is depicting the proscriptions of the
last bloody Triumvirs; when surely he had before his eyes THREE Romans not less
ambitious, and much more profligate; the whole transaction conducted with
iniquity so deliberate and radical, with such a spirit of inexorable cruelty,
as, like the adjudications of the present French tribunals, almost benumbs the
hearers' faculties into incredulous astonishment.

In the second Punick war, Roman virtue was at its meridian; from which, though
the ascent to it had been tardy, the decline was rapid. Caesar found his
countrymen soaked and sodden in corruption, but he did not introduce it. The
worst part of his conduct was during his consulship. Here he laid the
foundation of that wicked greatness, the superstructure of which he hardly
lived to finish. Even the execrable Sylla showed some regard to the prosperity
of his country, by four excellent regulations: first, as the constitution stood
originally, that no reference should be made to the people, and no matter
debated in their assembly, which had not been first canvassed and decreed by
the Senate: secondly, by prohibiting the division and voting by tribes; next by
the abolition of the tribune's negative, his power of convening the Senate, or
entering into any business which did not relate to a Plebeian; and lastly, by
the disqualification of all but Patricians from being eligible as judges in any
cause public or private. But though the wisdom of these measures is
unquestionable, yet we are justified by our knowledge of Sylla's character in
ascribing them to a much less laudable motive than regard for his country's
welfare. The edicts by which he abolished the turbulent tribunitial power, were
dictated chiefly by his enmity to Marius, and abhorrence of his faction. Every
body of men, every principle, which had been favorable to the rival whom he
detested, were naturally the objects of his persecution. While he was indulging
his revengeful spirit, which otherwise than by the ruin of his enemy's
partisans he could not indulge, he made many regulations beneficial to
patricians; but these could have no confirmed operation till after he chose to
abdicate; for during his dictatorship he never suffered his will to be
disputed. His principal mental gratification was the devising of new modes of
afflicting and tormenting the unhappy people who could be supposed to retain
any attachment to the interest of Marius. This is a more consistent way of
accounting for Sylla's acts as a statesman, than the esprit republicain to
which Montesquieu is pleased to ascribe them.

With keen alacrity Caesar exerted himself to overturn these salutary
ordinances. All his proceedings having the same seditious tendency, Q. Catulus,
the Prince of the Senate, declared aloud not long afterward, that Caesar was
not undermining the constitution, but storming it with a battering ram.

But indefensible as is all this, how can we forget that he was at this time in
strict junction with Pompey, who, if he did not suggest the measures, certainly
connived at, nay sometimes openly abetted, them? To support an Agrarian law,
and alienate the public revenue, this moral citizen threatened to bring his
sword as well as buckler, if necessary. To say he was deceived or managed by
his associate, is at best a poor palliative for his principles, at the expense
of his understanding; an apology with which, above all others, that great, but
vain, man would have been least satisfied. Pompey had many obligations to
Cicero, Caesar had none; but they both let loose at him that monster Clodius,
who seems to have lapped the blood of the Centaur, Nessus. To make this Roman
Danton a more fatal implement of mischief, they agreed to metamorphose him into
a Plebeian. In devising this expedient, or consenting to it, the infamy of
Pompey exceeds Caesar's; the latter only intended to worry an enemy, Pompey was
base and ungrateful to a friend and benefactor. Had Tully been without any
other claim to his protection, the oration for the Manilian law deserved a
different requital.

It is perhaps no great credit to think erroneously of Caesar with some of his
admirers, with Dion Cassius, Paterculus, or St. Evremond; but if he was the
worst man in the world, some of the best have taken pains to mislead our
judgment; for who can rise from the perusal of Tully's orations for Ligarius,
for Marcellus, nay from the Philippicks, with an impression on his mind that
all this incense was offered at the shrine of virtue existing only in the
imagination of the orator? Had the heart of Julius been impenetrable to mercy,
Cicero would not have chosen that quality which "droppeth like the gentle dew
from heaven," as the subject of so much beautiful panegyric.

He had great vices, and great virtues. He was intrepid and humane,
considerate, friendly, and bountiful; "natura ulciscendo lenissimus," says the
severe Suetonius; and he never remembered an offense or an injury when an
overture was made toward a reconciliation. Before he ordered the pirates to be
crucified, a fate with which he had often threatened them while their prisoner,
he took care to have them first dispatched expeditiously; and perhaps he was
the only gentleman of Rome, who would have listened to any dictate of humanity
in the punishment of such villains.

For his own preservation he was in some measure forced into the civil war; and
he was certainly ill-treated by the senate, which was rash enough to
exasperate, without having strength enough to resist him.

It is not true that he exulted in shedding the blood of his countrymen. Lucan,
who says it often in very fine verse, is no authority, though Blackwell seems
to have repeated it from him: at Pharsalia, he ordered his veterans to fall
upon the allies, and spare the Romans; and "miles, faciem feri!" which Florus
calls "vox ad victoriam efficax," was perfectly allowable. The slaughter of his
victory filled his bosom with deep regret: "They would have it thus," was an
expression wrung from the sincere anguish of his heart, and will admit of no
perversion.

Had Caesar never lived, Rome would have lost her liberty. Manners were so
utterly changed, her dominions so extended, that the unwieldy empire could not
have continued much longer under the form of a republic.

When his incomparable abilities, the lenity of his disposition, his
temperance, and conciliating manners, come to be fairly estimated, it is
reasonable to conclude that had he lived at a later era, had the diadem
descended to him by succession, he would probably have been the most wise and
excellent sovereign that ever governed the empire. He was too sagacious to be
perplexed by suspicion, and too intrepid to admit fear, that mean infirmity,
that nidus in the bosom of despots, where so many base vices are for ever
hatching, to crawl out for the plague and persecution of the subject.

The populace, and the army, were the stilts upon which Julius raised himself
above the laws of his country. How cruelly they tyrannise in a neighboring
kingdom, the seat of injustice, rapine, desolation, and carnage, every day
furnishes us with fresh examples. From the modification and noble spirit of the
British troops, were their numbers trebled, nothing is to be apprehended, but
by the enemy. The dregs of mankind, or the mob, are pretty much the same in all
nations, ignorant, precipitate, venal, and sanguinary; and any appearance of
their aiming at, or obtaining the supremacy, should be jealously watched, and
vigourously put down, by every friend to good order and the existence of civil
society. Every historical page of ancient Greece and Rome holds out a warning,
every murderous record of modern France speaks to us on this subject, with
"most miraculous organ."

There is no danger from a Caesar, for who has his means, his boldness, and
capacity? nor from such instruments as he employed, for we have a wise and
vigilant government; but it is always a valuable occupation of leisure to
examine the first seeds of revolutions, and to prevent the growth of those
noxious weeds which seldom fail to spring up from them.

Such are the notions which I have been able to form of Caesar's character: if
they are entirely ill founded, I know not where to discover fresh materials for
better information.

NOTE [C.] p. 146.
Prodigy is a fanciful province, from which the descriptive Muse does not wish
to retire speedily. The portents which are said to have been observed about the
time of Caesar's assassination offered a favorable occasion to the poetical
courtiers of Augustus, to indulge their vein, and flatter the Emperor. Virgil
and Ovid have accordingly described them with great force and majesty. When
they both write on the same subject, it is not necessary to say which is most
excellent. Some persons of acknowledged taste have been known to prefer Virgil
to Homer, but I believe Ovid was never preferred to Virgil. Yet admirable as
are the verses toward the conclusion of the first Georgick, they are perhaps
surpassed by Shakspeare's sublimity on the same topic in the tragedy of Hamlet.

The lines are in the part of Horatio, which being seldom filled by an eminent
actor, I have never happened to hear them recited on the stage; and as they may
possibly have escaped general notice, no apology is necessary for transcribing
them. Mr. Malone (doubtless for the best reasons) does not exhibit the fifth
line as it is found in other modern editions; but though I think there can be
no appeal from his authority, rather than produce the passage imperfectly, I
will give it as it stands in the copy which happens to be next to me: In the
most high and palmy state of Rome,
A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;
Stars shone with trains of fire, dews of blood sell;
Disasters dimmed the sun; and the moist star,
Upon whose influence Neptune's empire hangs,
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
There is something wonderfully striking in the awful but obscure imagery here
raised up to the imagination. Such beauties cannot be reached by the pencil.

As to Caesar's death being the cause of these phenomena, I think like Hotspur,
"so would they have been, if his mother's cat had kittened." Some of the
Caesarean writers wish to impress a persuasion that divine justice pursued the
conspirators against Julius; most of them having fallen by violent deaths, and
some by the very daggers which they had plunged into his body. That Providence
should interpose in punishing the death of an usurper, and upon men, some of
whom were of much better morals undoubtedly than he whom they destroyed, will
not be easily reconciled to the faith of Christians; who can account better for
the fate of these conspirators, by observing, that the leaders in bold and
perilous enterprises are of course exposed in dangerous situations.

We cannot however affect the same incredulity with respect to a recent and
striking example in the fate which has attended so many of the murderers of the
late innocent and excellent King of France. Maxims, principles, and practices,
of their own introducing, and a tribunal erected in iniquity and blood, have
turned the edge of destruction upon its inventors. Such of them as have not
fallen by their own weapons, (one regicide, and the deified assassin, Marat,
excepted,) have left their heads upon their own revolutionary scaffold, after a
trial, which, like that of their sovereign, exhibits the most shameless
violation of every principle of justice, reason, and equity. "Shall I not visit
for these things? says the Lord." -- From what we have already seen, and see
daily, it would hardly be a rash prediction, that in the same miserable manner
every man of them will perish.

The state of Rome under Tiberius bears so precise a similitude to the present
wretched condition of France, that the following words of Tacitus seem like a
prophetic anticipation of what exists at this moment: Nos saeva jussa,
continuas accusationes, fallaces amicitias, perniciem innocentium, et easdem
exitu causas conjungimus obvia rerum similitudine et satietate. We have nothing
before us but acts of despotism, continual accusations, the treachery of
friends, the ruin of innocence, and trial after trial ending always in the same
tragic catastrophe. -- Of this single passage I have transcribed the
translation from Mr. Murphy's excellent work, lately published. These volumes
deserve the attentive perusal of every English reader, as he will there find
the true meaning and spirit of the Roman historian, without the affected
quaintness of expression, and distorted position of sentence, which disfigure
former versions; and still more, because he may discover, in almost every
section, the surprising resemblance between the most hideous despotism avowed,
and the present chaotick French Republic, which with a throat of brass dares
to call all the sovereigns of Europe, TYRANTS, the king of Great Britain being
included in the number.

NOTE [D.] p. 172.
Of all vices incident to human nature Cruelty is the worst, and at the same
time the most unaccountable: envy, revenge, avarice, and other bad passions,
rise in the mind from objects proper to excite them, and a certain degree of
instinctive sense impells men to seek their gratification; but how is it
consistent with the least shadow of reflection, with the elements of a frame
endued with sensibility and feeling, to find delight in devising, inflicting,
and superintending the infliction of the most exquisite and ingenious torments?
Yet this was the abomination to which the Romans were most addicted. It did not
begin with, nor was it confined to, the Emperors, but long before had
contaminated the lives of too many of their most illustrious citizens. A
propensity so general must have had some cause as general.

We must consider that the Romans were more constantly than any other nation
engaged in wars either foreign or domestic. Battles were not decided then, as
since the discovery of gunpowder, by weapons which sent destruction at a
distance; but every Roman saw the wounds and death which he inflicted on every
enemy. The carnage to which they were accustomed lost its horror, and
indifference to bloodshed soon grew to be interwoven with their nature. To this
must be added the savage cast of their recreations. Their pleasure resulted
from seeing hundreds of the most furious wild beasts tearing one another to
pieces, and devouring before their eyes human bodies thrown to them alive in
the arena; and from the combats of Gladiators, who were instructed to give and
receive wounds with grace and agility, and to expire before them in attitudes
proper for the imitation of the statuary and painter. The Romans in short,
after spilling human blood in the field as their profession, went to the
theater to see it shed for their amusement. Forgiveness of injuries, besides,
made no part of their religion; that benevolent precept was reserved for a
divine founder. In this manner they were trained up and enticed to be wicked,
and they became as cruel as butchers, from similar habits, and for the same
reason. Had equal care been employed to cultivate in their breasts the seeds of
benignity and compassion, it would have been equally efficacious. The state
pretense for indulging the people in these barbarous exhibitions was, that by
thus familiarizing them with the sight of pain and death they became more
fearless, and braver soldiers; but it only served to make them more inhuman.
The emperors most infamous for cruelty, and a passion for these bloody
spectacles, were at the same time not less notorious for cowardice. -- Though
boxing is not a science with the French as with the English, the French are
certainly a more cruel people; and perhaps it may be ascribed to the frequency
of the tortures inflicted on criminals at their public executions, which were
always more numerously attended in proportion to their severity and duration.
Considerable sums were given by French ladies to secure a commodious seat to
see the horrible execution of Damien. The abolition of the rack, mitigation of
the penal code, and a more equitable mode of proceeding in criminal
prosecutions, were the only substantial advantages held out to France by the
promoters of her boasted revolution: of these the first is the only one which
she has actually obtained; and it is well known that this humane abolition
originated with his late Majesty.

NOTE [E.] p. 187.
The government of Athens was democratical, and she stands out in the history
of mankind stained with the foulest injustice and iniquity; inconstant, weak,
suspicious, ungrateful, and sanguinary, perpetually defiled with the blood of
her deliverers and most deserving citizens. See them enumerated by Lucian in
his dialogue against giving too hasty an assent to calumny. Socrates, Phocion,
Miltiades, Themistocles, Aristides, Cimon, Timotheus, Alcibiades, and other
illustrious characters, whose very names excite reverence and admiration, as a
reward for their virtues and glorious achievements, were condemned by their
inhuman countrymen to fines, imprisonment, exile, or death; so that every
Athenian who distinguished himself in the service of his country, seemed to be
warned by the catastrophe of his predecessors, that he was but accelerating his
own perdition. When the excellent Phocion was led to an ignominious death, to
which he had been unjustly doomed by the people of Athens, he declared that he
expected no better, for such had been the fate of almost every illustrious
Athenian.

The great exploits of the Athenians furnish no proof of the energy of a
democratick constitution, for these were always performed when the people were
led and governed by some eminent person, upon whom at the time were devolved
the whole powers of the state; so that in fact the democracy was then
suspended. It signifies little what a government may be called, when it acts on
principles in nowise analogous to its denomination. At Athens it was easily
known when the people took the helm again into their own hands; for weakness,
confusion, and cruelty, immediately succeeded. The first display of their power
was commonly the disgrace or death of those very persons to whom they owed
their renown and security. The treatment of Hannibal by the people of Carthage,
of Coriolanus, Camillus, the Scipios, Tully, and other great men, by the
demagogues of Rome, and the consequences, are well known. Repentance makes but
poor atonement for ruin. During the vigorous usurpation of Cromwell, England
was called a Commonwealth, and was much respected; but what sovereign was ever
more absolute, or acted under less control, than the Protector? A nation
entirely governed by one man is an absolute monarchy, not a republic. The
common people, who are afraid of tyrants, mistake; they are in no danger from
them; indigence and obscurity excite neither their apprehensions nor their
envy: the wise, the virtuous, and the opulent, are as naturally the defenders
of the people, as they are the terror and the prey of the tyrant.

The insolence of Mark Antony, and the excesses of which he was so often
guilty, made Tully wish that Brutus had not killed Caesar; in like manner, the
friends of liberty in France, consider the Bastile as comparatively a less evil
than the capricious and bloody tyranny of the people who destroyed it. Whoever
expresses his disapprobation of a democracy is exposed to the calumny of
furious zealots, who immediately hold him out as an indirect advocate for
despotism: but, the good subjects of Great Britain glory in its constitution,
because they know it enjoys the most perfect rational freedom that ever existed
since the first institution of civil society. If every kingdom in the world
were to struggle for such a constitution as the English, nay, to encounter for
it the worst of all calamities, a civil war, it would not be surprising; but,
that men should be found in the very bosom of that enviable country, absurd or
desperate enough to disseminate notions which tend to its subversion; that
societies should be formed, to hold up the bloody tablature of France, under
the false title of Liberty and Equality, as an object to excite the emulation
of rational creatures, is a manifestation of human effrontery unexampled
before, and hardly to be credited even by those who witness it. Could all the
injustice, cruelty, and oppression of French despotism, since the reign of that
obdurate bigot, Louis XI. with his hangman, Tristan, be collected together, and
put into one scale of iniquity; and the atrocities of a single day in France,
since the rabble have been rulers, thrown into the other, they would
preponderate against it. It is, in short, a species of government which is
always exerted to do wrong, and which can be operative only for mischief.

Men may as well go out of the world as they came into it, without observation
or memory, as when the same effects are constantly produced by the same causes,
to discern the last, and not to prevent the former.

The necessity the Romans were under of creating a dictator, or a magistrate
without control, on every great exigency of affairs, either domestic or
foreign, shows their consciousness of the defect in a divided executive: they
detested the name of King, but they could not exist without his functions. It
is computed that there are now in the city of Paris above ten thousand
dictators, without parts, property, principles, or experience; and by these the
public business is conducted. Events are in the hands of God, and the sagacity
of mortals is always fallible; but if ever the grounds were laid which
threatened the duration of calamity in any state, when it was easy to foresee
and not presumptuous to prophecy, the actual condition of ill-fated France
seems to invite the most melancholy predictions.

NOTE [F.] p. 229.
Upon a general revision of the Roman history to the time of Augustus, it will
be found to contain a series of obstinate and bloody wars, either foreign or
civil, with a few short intervals of peace, and these constantly disturbed by
seditions, feuds, and tumults; insomuch that the common expedient for securing
the public tranquillity was, to direct the fierce passions of the people
against some unfortunate country, the conquest and plunder of which might for a
time at least appease their restless ambition and insatiable avarice.

The internal commotions which commonly originated at Rome in some pretense for
the people's advantage, though they produced nominal extension of their
privileges, seldom ended in any material improvement of their condition; nor
had the revolutions in the state much other effect than to aggrandize the
leaders, and give additional authority to the few.

By the abolition of Royalty they gained nothing; a power over their lives
beyond what had ever been claimed by Kings, undefined and without limitation,
passed into the hands of dictators, consuls, and other magistrates, who
exercised it always with rigor, and often wantonly. That short but frequent
formula -- NE QUID RESPUBLICA DETREMENTI CAPERET, delivered over at once the
lives and liberties of the citizens to the magistrate's disposal.

Whoever will take the trouble to examine the Roman annals from the first
institution of the consulship to the entire subversion of the republic, will
perhaps be surprised to find how frequently during that period the government
was under different dictators, that is, under the dominion of a single chief
magistrate, invested by the law, the constitution, and usage, with
uncontrollable authority, and after the expiration of his despotick office, not
accountable to the people, or to any tribunal, for the manner in which he had
exercised it. Who had the nomination of this arbitrary magistrate? Not the
people, but another magistrate. The object always was to keep down the people.
In the second Punick war, Livy says, they named Q. Fabius Maximus prodictator,
the consul being absent; but he takes care to have it known, that it was the
single instance, -- quod nunquam ante eum diem factum erat; nor probably would
this innovation have been thought of or permitted, but at such a calamitous
season as the invasion of Hannibal.

There were, I think, about sixteen dictators at different times in less than
two centuries; so that the Roman republic was sixteen times suspended, and
under a domination not less arbitrary than that of Louis the Fourteenth over
France, or of the emperor of Morocco over his barbarians. Had we no other
information more direct upon the subject to evince the aristocracy of the Roman
government, its policy profound and invariable as it was unjust and oppressive,
especially with respect to foreign states, sufficiently demonstrates, that such
a system could not have been devised and prosecuted by the multitude; but that
it was the work of enlightened statesmen, who discerned its effects by their
experience, and transmitted it to their successors in a clear collection of
principles and maxims, which could never be departed from without hazarding the
whole by any partial relaxation. At the intervals when the people presumed to
take the reins into their own hands, the machine either stood still or went
backwards; and when the chiefs of the senate resumed their functions, their
vigor and wisdom were doubly exerted to restore it again to its original
capacity of progression.

The TRIBUNE, that great popular officer who hung like a dead weight upon the
neck of the law, was chiefly formidable by factious opposition to the Senate.
When he put forth his power to do mischief, democracy, that is, confusion, was
triumphant; but many tribunes being intelligent and temperate, their wisdom was
shown in acquiescence; not in thwarting the measures of their country's most
respectable assembly. Besides, it must be remembered, that these disturbers had
no jurisdiction beyond the walls of the city; and as the dissent of one of them
rendered the proceedings of the rest a nullity, it was no very difficult matter
for the senate to secure that one in their interest, so to re-act upon them
all, and to impede the impeders. The first measure of these demagogues was to
instigate the many-headed monster to banish Rome's bravest commander, the
patrician Coriolanus: which drove him to take refuge with the enemy, to march
back in the van of a Volscian army, laying all waste before him with sword and
fire to the very walls of the city; which, but for the intercession of his
noble mother, he would have depopulated and reduced to ashes. No defense is
here implied of his vindictive resentment.

Tully the warmest and most eloquent advocate for the senatorial bench, at last
declares himself of opinion, that the institution of the tribune, supposed for
a time to be so fatal to good government, preserved Rome from unutterable
confusion and anarchy; because, the extravagant views and jarring disposition
of the multitude being in some measure compressed and rendered intelligible
through the organ of their officer, it became practicable either to defeat
their opposition or to reconcile them, by the management of him in whom they
confided as their orator and representative.

Spurius Cassius Viscellinus, the first propounder of an Agrarian law, which he
expiated from the Tarpeian rock, Spurius Maelius, who fell by the sword of
Ahala, Manlius, (another Cassius in his ambition, and his catastrophe,) the
Gracchi, Marius, Clodius, Caesar, all were tyrants, or attempted to be so, not
by undue influence in the senate, but by corrupting and inflaming the most
numerous, the most despicable, and most dangerous part of the community. No man
can love the rabble for themselves; he may indeed value them as the engineer
does gunpowder, for the destructive use which may be made of it.

The simplicity of names imposed much upon the generality of Romans, as it
seems to have done upon too many modern writers. Though there was the greatest
difference as to power, there was little distinction of titles. Caius Caesar,
and Cneius Pompey, at the time Rome was completely under their subjection, were
the appellations by which those great men were best known. Republican pride was
not wounded on the surface, and the ear at least was little accustomed to
humiliation.

To the king of Great Britain, as the palladium of British liberty, the law has
taken care to give every decoration which epithets can add for his personal
inviolability and magisterial honor; yet titles which flow from him (those
annexed to professional peerages excepted) are sometimes veils for
insignificance, mere gilded pent-houses for inefficient vanity. When they are
ancient and hereditary, unless disgraced by the possessors, we pay to them an
involuntary respect, because they are always accompanied with some idea of
superiority. A person of mean endowments, ennobled even in the most modern
times, is commonly possessed at least of considerable property; and the world
seems to acknowledge, that wealth gives one sufficient claim to importance. But
this man of importance, with his title and his riches, can infringe no law of
England with impunity, while the ancient Roman republican, like the modern
French anarchist without either, we see violating all the natural and municipal
rights of his fellow-citizens with the most undisguised effrontery.

There is no subject upon which more erroneous notions have been formed, or
more ill-considered dissertations published, than the Roman Constitution while
under the name of a republic; but especial care must be taken not to confound
two terms, Populus Romanus, and Plebes, as if they were of the same import. The
former comprises the senators, patricians, knights, and gentry; the latter
means, the idle, the indigent, and worthless; or what we understand by the
monosyllabical denomition, MOB.

The real government was in the senate, or rather in a few chiefs of the
senate. Whoever was observed to court the favor of the populace, and to
neglect the conscript fathers, was immediately suspected of harboring designs
subversive of the constitution. The criterion was infallible. It instantly
produced unanimity in the senate; they knew that the faeces populi Romani could
be cajoled or stimulated only to create confusion, and to make the demagogue
their tyrant.

With respect to the interference of the lowest order in the business of
legislation, the sentiments of Cato, (that self-devoted martyr to Roman
liberty,) though he was sometimes reluctantly compelled to submit to it, were
little different from those of Coriolanus, or of the proudest patrician who
reprobated the idea with disdain and indignation. They were often employed as
instruments to disturb, but seldom to regulate, and their consequence
terminated with the close of an election, or the suppression of a tumult,
unless a succession of shameless tribunes chose to keep them in a state of
permanent insurrection. The senate were averse to, and afraid of, monarchy, not
the populace. The latter loved even the emperors; the former flattered them,
knowing their danger, and trying to shelter themselves from it: the herd were
safe, and therefore indifferent. Nero was not unpopular at Rome, till after he
had set it on fire; nor was Henry the Eighth in England. But even military
despotism is less intolerable than anarchy, because some subordination may be
expected in the one, and caprice and cruelty are for ever to be apprehended in
the other.

I would not be understood to assert, that the people at Rome had not regularly
considerable power; where many great offices were elective, and the people
electors, it could not be otherwise; nay where their general sense could be
collected in favor of any measure not utterly unreasonable, it was generally
prevalent: but they did not constitute the preponderating weight in the
government; and at all times, when they got more than their proper share of
subordinate influence, they as constantly made a very bad use of it. In
England, where the government is nominally monarchical, in what instance has
not the sense of the majority been respected? but the clamor of a multitude is
not to be mistaken for the sense of a nation.

Were I to fix upon the period of Roman history in which the lowest class had
legitimately the most power, I should not hesitate to pronounce (however
singular it may appear) that it was for not much less than one hundred and
forty years, from the time of Romulus to the collecting the suffrages by
centuries under the sixth king Servius Tullius. The young Horatius condemned to
death by the Duumviri for killing his sister, auctore Tullo (REGE) was absolved
in consequence of an appeal to the people. The king declined trying the cause,
and referred it to two judges, to avoid the censure of too much severity on one
side, and the inconvenience of unpopularity on the other; and so suggested an
appeal from the judicial sentence: which shows the consideration in which the
people were then held. Servius, the sixth king, certainly thought they were
likely to prevail too much, and depressed them by changing the mode of
collecting the suffrages. As to acts of violence by hired mobs, composed at
Rome as every where else of the dregs of mankind, it only proves, that they
were not the government. Not only the chief power of the state, but all real
freedom of action seemed to reside in the Senate, and in the persons of a few
magistrates during their continuance in office. Did the statute-books or the
common law of Great Britain secure liberty only to members of parliament, to
the board of treasury, the lord mayor, and a few other magistrates, what
reasonable man would affirm that REFORM was, at present, a speculation idle,
unnecessary, or factious?

The consuls were ANNUAL KINGS, invested under another name with more authority
than is allowed to limited royalty. Why the democratick ascendency has been
sometimes asserted, may perhaps be thus easily accounted for. Writers have
taken up the subject by parts, without a fair examination of the whole. Having
some favorite system to support, or theory to illustrate, (at once flattering
to ingenuity, and irreconcilable to experience,) they find a particular
occurrence, or some detached passages of an ancient author, which may be
accommodated to their purpose; and they build upon them some crude and hasty
dogma, which afterward is not to be relinquished. Their partiality will not
allow them to discern their error at the time, nor will their want of candor
upon better information suffer the retraction. To every passage which can be
found countenancing the supremacy of the populace at large, it is not too much
to affirm, that at least half a dozen may be opposed of a contrary tendency.
Exaggeration and high coloring must be expected in orations; they consitute
the grace, not the substance of history, and often are the work of the
historian's invention; but we see the speeches of Demagogues abounding in
general with complaints of the degradation and abject state of Plebeians, and
with bitter reprehensions of the overweening ambition and jealous tyranny of
the Nobles.

But allowing this point to remain undecided, we may turn our view to another,
where there is no room for misrepresentation, theory, or the fertility of
conjectural inference. Behold then -- "This nurse of heroes, this delight of
gods," under a dictator, as described already, with a numerous army by sea and
land, scourged or cudgeled by the centurion, and decimated by the general;
wives exposed to divorce from the avarice, disgust, or capricious inconstancy
of their husbands; usurious creditors permitted by the law to imprison, lash,
and torture the persons of their insolvent debtors; the whole youth of Rome
holding their lives at the pleasure of their fathers, who might have cast them
out at their birth to perish by cold or famine; with slaves abounding in every
family, less in estimation than the cattle of their owners; and where can be
found a picture of more complete subjection and inequality? for equality beyond
that of protection from just laws, is but a word which knaves utter, and their
dupes swallow. Yet the commonwealth of Rome, and Roman liberty, are sounds for
ever in the mouth of hypocrites or visionaries.

For the preposterous doctrine of equality in its most preposterous latitude,
the example of Rome has been produced repeatedly, whether for the sake of
mischief or from ignorance, I know not: but the contest there was for the
partition of distinctions, not for their abolition; not that there should be no
offices of great power and emolument, but that all orders should have a right
of admission to them. That plebeians should be eligible to the consulship, that
they should have lictors and fasces, was the demand of the people; not that
there should be no consulship, and no insignia.

But we cannot be deceived; the veil of imposition is too transparent not to be
seen through. Declaimers among us mean to divert the attention of their hearers
from the blessings which they enjoy, to contemplate imaginary and impracticable
perfection which never existed, and to transfer the worship of freedom's true
divinity at home, to the grim and deformed idol in ancient Rome, or modern
France, which assumes her name, but has not one of her attributes.

After we have looked to antiquity, or to the nations which surround us, after
we have examined the states which have been, and are extinguished, after we
have scrutinized unreal republics, sketched in the lucubrations of a Grecian
philosopher or a British theorist, the judgment returns homeward to repose on
the unrivalled constitution of our own country; where a long succession of
mature experiments has ended in the establishment of a system, in which the
best faculties have been directed to two great objects, the ascertaining human
rights, and securing social felicity.

When we contemplate the means of happiness which Providence has been pleased
to distribute so abundantly over the universe, we must acknowledge that the
grandeur and superiority of the Romans were very dearly purchased. To be
engaged in war, or in civil commotions, for a period of above seven hundred
years, and to sink into the most abject slavery afterward, was the fate of
this extolled and envied people. What a state for social creatures! as if men
were sent into the world for no better purpose than to worry and drive others
out of it.

Were glory the most desirable end of human pursuits and actions, Rome must
certainly be considered as the first country in the universe; but if virtue and
contentment are preferable, perhaps it was the last.

THE END.

