ANIMADVERSIONS On a Late PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, The New Arian Reproved.
SInce there is a Pamphlet entitled the New Arian Reproved just Published,
before my Four Volumes come out, I shall make a few though very short
Animadversions thereon. Accordingly, omitting several injudicious and unfair
Passages, I Observe. (1) That if I, as an Heretic, have written too
insolently, my Antagonists as Orthodox, should do better; and thereby show how
Athanasianism disposes Men to Christian Meekness and Humility more than
Arianism. Which yet I dare say neither this Author, nor Mr. Mattair, and least
of all Dr. Edwards of Oxford have done. p. 7.
(2) That my plainness and boldness in reproving the dangerous Errors remaining
in our Church is interpreted an high Affront: Whereas I take it to be the
greatest Kindness I can do her. I hope this Author does not suppose he affronts
his Auditors every time he plainly and boldly rebukes them. p. 8, etc.
(3) I shall willingly allow this Author several whole Years to collect the
Tenth part of the Testimonies for Orthodoxy in the Two first Centuries, that I
did in a few Months, for Arianism* Nor am I at all unwilling to join Issue with
him in the very same proportion for the Third Century also; provided he will
not produce those Testimonies that solely depend on Athanasius, or a few of his
followers, without, nay against all the other and better Evidence about them.
(4) What is here said about Dr. Grabes Essay, p 13, etc.
and my New Theory I shall not repeat, but only desire the impartial Readers
careful perusal of my Remarks on that Essay; and my Second Edition of that
Theory, before such Reflections have any Weight with him. And I must declare
how reproachful soever this Author esteems it in me, yet that I ever resolve to
own and correct all my mistakes as soon as ever they appear to be such, in all
my Writings; and by that means do hope to render those Writings at last much
more Correct and Undeniable; while the opposite vain Affectation in controversy
Writers of justifying every Expression and Conjecture, even after plain
Evidence is produced to the contrary, hinders their own Improvement, and makes
them still propagate Error among Mankind. (5) Sure those Learned Men who mainly
recommend the three first Centuries, as the Standard of ancient Christianity, p
17.18.
cannot properly include the Council of Nice belonging to the fourth. p. 18, etc
(6) We have here a mighty Stir about this Council of Nice, and how much it is
to be preferred to other Councils. As if there was no Passion, nor Heat, nor
worldly Concern, nor Court Management at that Council at all; but the whole was
peaceably debated, and all guided by the good Spirit of God. Which if this
Author can believe he may do as he pleases; while I am sure the Histories
thereof, how partial soever on its side, give us very different Accounts. And
whatever that Council determined, we are to believe no more of it than what is
proved by the Sacred and Primitive Writers; and what is proved by them we are
to believe without regard to its Determination. So that it is not of great
Weight what this or any other such warm Councils determined, to those I mean
who with me desire to follow the proper Authority of Christ by his Holy
Apostles in sacred matters. Our Author here seems to believe all the partial
Athanasian Accounts on the side of Athanasius, as firmly as if the whole
Christian World had owned the Truth of them. Whereas one that stands so stiffly
for the Authority of Councils and Synods ought certainly to have some regard to
the contrary Opinion of at least 3 successive Councils in that Case (7) After
all that is here produced there appears little or no debating at the Council of
Nice at all, p. 26, etc.
more than what Eusebius obliged them to; and which might well be all at one
time. So that their Creed, as far as I see, might be signed the same day they
met, as Monfaucon observes: though I do not doubt but there was private
Intrigues, and subtle Management beforehand; as there is, I believe, still in
all such Assemblies to this day* If this Author can show that the (...) was
here fully debated, and proved to have all the way been delivered down from the
Apostles, he will say something; otherwise all the political Management and
Arts previous to the final Determination will be of no consequence in this
Case. And I desire to know if the Council of Nice did so unanimously, and upon
such undeniable Authority establish this, as the undoubted perpetual Faith of
Christians: How a more numerous Council, that of Jerusalem; to say nothing of
those of Tire and Constantinople, could in ten years time quite lose the
Notion, and settle the Church upon a Foundation without it: as if they never
knew of any such ancient Tradition or Doctrine among Christians at all? This is
certainly a Question to be well weighed by those that depend so entirely on the
Council of Nice. (8) I have fully, in more places than one, p 31, etc
declared how far I am an Arian. Nor can any one doubt from all I have said
that in my uncertain philosophic Conjectures, I incline more to the Followers
of Arius himself than of Athanasius: but in my certain Faith I keep strictly to
the original Doctrine and Expressions alone; with an utter Abhorrence of all
Novel and rash Arian, as well as Athanasian Additions and Language in such
matters; as I think it is the plain Duty of every Christian to do. I take
Eunomius to have been a much more Learned, Judicious, Wise, and Good Man, than
Arius: and so I may well speak with great Respect of the one, while I have no
great Esteem for the other; although Custom may call Eunomius a most complete
Arian, in a general Acceptance, as distinguished from other Parties then
contending in the Church. And the Apologetick of this Eunomius, which I am
going to publish^ (...) certainly show what a great Man he was. I have read
nothing of the Orthodox in this Century, for Piety, Judgment, and close
Adherence to the ancient Faith and Language of Christians to be compared to it.
p. 36, etc.
(9) To prove that the Athanasians did not own that Solomon Prove. 8.22. said
that God Created our Savior, while they forbad that Expression under the
Penalty of Heresy, this Author says that is not the meaning of the Hebrew Word
in this place. If this be Logic I own I have none. For my Argument depended
not on the real Sense of the Hebrew, but on the confessed Language and Sense of
the Greek, which the Church used; and I think none called in question till
after the Council of Nice. So that all that is here said is entirely remote
from the point. For the Ancient Testimonies they are soon to be laid before the
Reader, and he is himself to judge whether they are only some unguarded
Expressions, or whether they do not contain the direct and plain Doctrine of
the two first Centuries of Christianity. I believe our Author will find it
hard, to set them in a clear irresistible Light, on the side of Orthodoxy, as
he here speaks. (10) As to the Constitutions, p. 39, etc.
with their Interpolations, and Doxologies, I refer this Author to my Essay
upon them, which is now to be Published; and am not afraid still to assert,
notwithstanding all this Authors Exclamations, that they are the most Sacred of
the Canonical Books of the New Testament. p. 43, etc.
(11) To prove that my Lord of Worcester is Angry with me for transposing some
Parts of the former Thirteen Chapters of St. Matthew, he alleges that his
Lordship differs from me about the Day of Christ's Death, and some Circumstances
belonging to his Passion in the Twenty Sixth and Twenty Seventh Chapters. If
our Reflecter goes on in this way of reasoning he will soon become
Unanswerable. p. 49, 50
I believe Monsieur Toinards is an excellent Harmony, by what small sight I
have had of it; but sure I may venture to differ from him, or omit his large
Book in a small Catalogue, without any great Imputation of Ignorance;
especially while there were so few Copies of it in England when I wrote that
Catalogue. p. 50, 51
As to the Eighty Fifth Canon I did certainly discover its being Apostolical
long before I found the rest to be so: Let this Author say what he pleases. And
as to Dr. Grabes proper denial of any thing I have related of him, I can hardly
find it: p. 52, 53
For as to the general Charge of Misrepresentation, so common in all such
Cases, he rather intimates he will make it good hereafter, than has yet done
it. So that all our Authors Flourishes here are upon very little Foundation. p.
54, etc.
Nor does he seem to differ much from me at last about the meaning of the
Scripture Phrases usually interpreted of a proper Eternity; notwithstanding his
show of still confuting and reproaching me thereupon. And for the Citations
from Ignatius, p. 56
sure the Quotations in those Fathers he means are of later Writers, or Writers
much later than Ignatius; and in no other Sense did I use those Words; For I
did not then, nor do yet remember of what particular Antiquity the Citations he
refers to were supposed to be. (12) The Preface to the Arabic Doctrine is that
which I alone Published, and mainly depended on, p. 57
as I still do; and till its Authority be disproved, which I believe cannot be
done, it certainly goes a great way to put an End to the Dispute about the
Constitutions for ever. (13) This Author is to prove Mr. Emlin once a Socinian,
even notwithstanding several Passages in his Writings entirely disagree
thereto. p. 57, etc.
Now sure this Author might have supposed that I knew an Intimate Friends
Opinions both former and later better than a mere Stranger could do: And that I
would not notoriously falsify in such a plain case. And I still assure him I
spoke the direct Truth. And that he may learn to examine better before he Writes
any more about Mr. Emlin's Opinions, I shall tell him what I know of them, both
from his Writings, and from his own Month, viz. that when formerly he examined
that matter, he found that our Savior Pre-existed, and mos^ probably made the
World, as the Fathers Instrument: And so he was not a Socinian. Nay h^ inclined
most to the Arians. But observing how he was called a Man, and not knowing what
powers even Human Nature, in a Pre-existing State, might be capable of deriving
from God, when he pleased to inhabit in it, or intimately unite himself in it,
he cared not to enter deep into the Dispute between the Socinians and Arians;
but asserted, what he was more fully satisfied in, that Christ was not the same
Being with, or equal to the supreme God: and that the subordinate Worship
required to be paid him did not imply any such Things. That these were his real
Thoughts, Humble Enquiry p. 2.
his own Words in the Pages here cited do show, which are these. So that it
should seem, that Nature which did pre-exist did not possess the supreme Will.
-- Though he be allowed to be a Man, approved of God by Signs and mighty Wonders,
p. 21,
which God did by him, and by whom God made the World as the Instrument. This
is also more plain by his entire little Treatise in Vindication of the Bishop
of Gloucesters Pre-existence of the Soul of Christ also. But how a Passage from
Bishop Williams, who seems to have known no more than our Author, what Mr.
Emlins Opinions were, is a proof that he was a Socinian, I by no means
understand. p. 59
So miserably do such Writers of Controversy argue when they pretend, without
proper evidence, to affix odious Opinions and Imputations upon their
Adversaries: for which this Author, among the rest, must give an Account
another day, notwithstanding his strange way of Writing here, so little
agreeing with Truth or with Christianity. Nor does he reason better, when from
the Verdict of a Jury of Tradesmen, He concludes the same Mr. Emlin really
guilty of Blasphemy; and accordingly treats him, as well as my self, as
Blasphemers. p. 65 66:
Yet it is to me prodigiously strange that the Subordination of Christ to the
Father should be exact Orthodoxy, while his Inferiority borders on no less a
Crime than Blasphemy. I hope it will in a little time be hard to make Mankind
believe any such extravagant Assertions, let them be delivered with never so
great an Air of Magisterial Authority. Nor will this Authors Repetition of the
Athanasian Reading of Act. 20.28. purchased by the Blood of God, p 67.
have, I hope, any other effect on the honest and impartial than to make them
look into Dr. Mills's various Readings, and at once to see and abhor such
Heretical Forgeries and Interpolations in the very Books of the New Testament.
The Quotation of which interpolated Text is the more strange here, since by his
Silence, he seems to desert the other more certain and gross Orthodox
Interpolation, p. 26.
1 John v. 7. Of which he had made so great a noise in his former Reflections.
This is all that I think necessary to say at present to this Author, because my
four Volumes are ready to be published; which will supersede, I hope, all
occasions for such Pamphlets hereafter, and put Men upon deeper and more
serious Enquiries. However, so far I venture to Animadvert on my once more kind
and candid Friends Vindication, without the least ill will to him or any body
living: Heartily Praying that he and all who are so deeply engaged in
supporting the Athanasian Heresy, may quickly come to Repentance, 2 Timothy 11.25.
and the Acknowledgment of the Truth, as it is in Christ Jesus.

W. Whiston
November. 6. 1711.

