ADVERTISEMENT.

THE Passages between inverted Commas, are necessarily omitted in
Representation. The third Song in the third Act is written by a Friend of the
Author's, and two others have before appeared in Print.

Appearance is against Them. A FARCE, IN TWO ACTS, AS IT IS ACTED AT THE
THEATER ROYAL, COVENT GARDEN.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR G. G. J. AND J. ROBINSON, PATERNOSTER ROW, 1785.

Entered at Stationers Hall.

PROLOGUE.
BEFORE this court our Authoress you will allow,
Must feel -- a simile shall tell you how --
And doing what good squires would do of course,
Compare we thus our Lady to a horse.
Suppose some pony then, of make and blood,
In jockey phrase, a little bit but good;
Who, beating all competitors in pace,
Had won the whip of many a country race;
Urged by its master, or the love of gain,
Should this our poney seek Newmarket's plain.
How soon might all its little honors fade,
Sunk on "The Flats," or sticking in "Choak-jade."
Fancy Newmarket then the scene you see,
You are "the knowing ones" the pony she --
Has she not then well-founded cause to dread --
Speak, would ye bet the odds upon her head.
But, simile apart, the fact is this,
The day has been she has not done amiss;
But praise has made her timorous more than vain,
And late success augments the present pain.
A woman -- there is indulgence in the name --
A widow too -- that gives a stronger claim.
If she should fall, she falls as women do,
"Like stars," successful she may rise anew.
The Ladies, sure, will not their aid withdraw,
Whose smile is triumph, and whose looks are law.
The Beaux -- if wits there are among such men --
May gladly claim acquaintance with her pen.
Some Bard, perhaps, who thrives by opposition,
Might form a kind of scribbling coalition.
Her aid, in odes, probationary cite,
-- Those odes, which Poets-laureat never write;
Whose soft court small-talk flows in numbers bland*
And greatly sports at question and command --
Here law, with open hand and ready mouth,
There Scotch, that never reached beyond the South.
Great Indian names, that mock articulation,
And Irish wit, of English fabrication.
If Wit and Beauty then for us write,
Who will deny their powerful aid tonight. --
Will you, gay Gods, refuse your broad-brim'd smile,
From painted skies, and stars of patent oil;
Or you, who boast below a snugger birth,
Ye midway Deities 'twixt heaven and earth --
I see you're kind -- our thanks are due for that;
I find you have not forgot -- "I Will tell you what."
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Mr. Walmsley, Mr. QUICK: Lord Lighthead, Mr. PALMER. Clownly, Mr. KENNEDY.
Thompson, Mr. THOMPSON. Servant to Lord Lighthead, Mr. SWORDS. Servant to Lady
Mary, Mr. LEDGER. Humphry, Mr. EDWIN.
Lady Mary Magpie, Mrs. WEBB. Lady Loveall, Mrs. BATES. Miss Angle, Mrs.
MORTON. Miss Audley, Miss STEWART. Betty, Mrs. DAVENETT. Fish, Mrs. WILSON.
Appearance is against Them.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Miss ANGLE and FISH discovered. Miss ANGLE. There Is somebody at the door, Fish
-- it is Lady Mary Magpie -- let her in -- even her ridiculous vanity is more
supportable than the reflection on my own.


FISH. Lady Mary, ma'am. (Opens the door.)


Enter Lady MARY. Miss ANGLE. Good Morrow, dear Lady Mary.


Lady MARY. Nay, sit still -- and, Mrs. Fish, do you stay. -- I have brought
something to show your mistress, and you may see it too, if she will give you
leave.


Miss ANGLE. Certainly. -- Fish, you may stay.


Lady MARY. There! (Opening a shawl.) What do you think of that? -- A present
from Mr. Walmsley -- a shawl, worth at a moderate valuation, no less than a
hundred and fifty guineas. -- He gave it me this minute -- it came over but
last night from India -- has been on the seas seven months -- was in that
terrible storm of October last. -- Little did I think, when I heard of those
dreadful wrecks, and the many souls that perished, that I had a shawl at sea:
if I had, I should have suffered a martyrdom! -- Now is not it pretty? --
Beautiful? -- He assures me, his correspondent writes him word, "There is but
one more such in all India." -- And I Am to wear it the first time on my
wedding day.


Miss ANGLE. It is very beautiful indeed.


Lady MARY. An't you well, my dear? -- You don't seem to understand it is value.
-- What do you say to it, Mrs. Fish?


FISH. Oh madam! -- I like it of all things! --


Lady MARY. I dare say you do. -- But come, my dear Miss Angle, what is the
matter with you? Since you first came to town, you are the most altered
creature I ever saw! --


FISH. Your Ladyship does not think my mistress has lost any of her beauty, I
hope? --


Lady MARY. As for that, Mrs. Fish, I dare say your Lady has made observation
enough to know, that beauty is of little weight here; -- of no signification at
all! -- Beauty in London is so cheap, and consequently so common to the men of
fashion, (who are prodigiously fond of novelty) that they absolutely begin to
fall in love with the ugly women, by way of change. --


FISH. And does your Ladyship think old women will ever come into fashion? --


Lady MARY. They are in fashion -- they have been in fashion some time. --
Girls, and young women, have made themselves so cheap, they are quite out. --


Miss ANGLE. I believe so. -- (Aside.)


Lady MARY. As soon as the vulgar lay hold of any thing, the people of ton
leave it off. -- Such is the case with young women. -- The vulgar have laid
hold of them, and they are quite out. --


FISH. Oh dear me! --


Lady MARY. But come, my dear Angle, pluck up your spirits, against you know
when -- you are to be one of my bridemaids you know -- Oh how I long to be away
from lodgings, and in a house of my own -- Mr. Walmsley says, he shall invite
you to stay a day or two with us. -- He likes you (stranger as you are to us
both) very much I assure you. -- He is a great admirer of virtue, in us
females; and, notwithstanding his little oddities, would do any thing for a
woman of character; and your refusing that vile Lord's odious addresses (which
I informed him of) has interested him for you exceedingly. Well, heaven bless
you -- I cannot stay -- he will be quite impatient. (Going) I may tell him you
like the shawl I suppose?


Miss ANGLE. Beautiful, beyond measure!


Lady MARY. And you, Mrs. Fish?


FISH. Charming, ma'am.


Lady MARY. Did I tell you there was but one more such in all India? (Coming
back.)


Miss ANGLE. You did.


Lady MARY. Only think of it is being in that storm! (Exit.)


Miss ANGLE. Would I had been in the storm, and had fallen it is victim! --


FISH. Dear madam! --


Miss ANGLE. Oh Fish, that woman's nonsense, at which you laughed, was graced
with sentiments of the strictest truth! -- Young women are no longer thought of
here. -- How rashly did I give credit to our foolish country people! -- They
told me, that, "Though only admired by them, in London I should be adored -- that
beauty here was rare -- that virtue" --


FISH. Well, madam, and that is rare, every body knows!


Miss ANGLE. But is it valued? -- No. -- As soon as I gave Lord Lighthead
proofs of my possessing it, what was the consequence? -- I have neither seen
nor heard of him since. --


FISH. That Is very odd! -- For my part I thought him so much in love! -- And
sometimes I thought you looked a little. --


Miss ANGLE. That I felt a warmth -- a something like tenderness for him, I
own; but that it was the effect of love I will not pretend to say -- It was
perhaps the effect of hope -- Pride too, had a great share in the agitation of
my heart -- and gratitude might have confirmed the whole sensation love. --
But, in the moment gratitude should have been inspired, resentment,
indignation, took possession -- and I am now left solely to shame and
disappointment.


FISH. Well! -- it is very odd that a man should give himself so much trouble to
come here after you, so many times as he did, and then all of a sudden never to
come near you for a whole month. -- I should not mind losing him, neither, if
some duke or other great man would come instead of him; or even that strange
young man we met on the road, as we came to town, and that was so kind to us
when our chaise broke down.


Miss ANGLE. Honest creature!


FISH. Well, as sure as ever I was in love in my life, that young man and his
servant were both as deep in love --


Miss ANGLE. With me?


FISH. No: the master with you, and the man with me. -- But we, I thought, were
coming to town to make our fortune, and so I was above making it on the road.
-- For notwithstanding that young man looked so countrified, and had hardly a
word to say for himself, he is worth thousands! -- And poor Humphry, his
servant, persuaded me to give him our direction; that his master and he might
come after us to London -- And yet, to see the fickleness of man! we have heard
nor seen nothing of them. -- But, dear madam, his Lordship runs most in my head
-- Perhaps he is sick?


Miss ANGLE. No -- he visits the drawingroom, constantly; as we read in the
papers. -- I wonder what he would say if he was accidentally to meet me? --


FISH. He Would fall in love with you as much as ever. -- Suppose, madam, you was
to write to him? --


Miss ANGLE. For shame!


FISH. Dear madam, I know a few lines from you would cheer his heart, and he
would be as dying for you as ever! -- Oh! when I have given him a letter from
you, how he has jumped for joy! how he has kissed it! and how he has kissed me!
--


Miss ANGLE. Could I write to him with any appearance of prudence -- for
instance; upon any business -- I should have no objection: it would at least
remind him of me, and bring matters to a decision.


FISH. Then do, madam, contrive to write to him about some business.


Miss ANGLE. What business can I pretend?


FISH. Dear madam! if you had a handsome piece of silk for a gown, or a diamond
pin, or something of that kind, you might return it him back again. --


Miss ANGLE. Return it him again! What do you mean?


FISH. Why, madam, you might send it him back -- as if you had received the
present from a person unknown: and concluding that it must come from his
Lordship, you had thought proper to return it -- and so you might send him,
with it, a fine long virtuous letter, that "you would not receive a present
from a king, that had evil designs upon you," and so on -- and so on -- and so
on. -- This, I am sure would make him ten times fonder of you than ever -- for
he would think some rival had been sending you the present in that anonymous
manner, which had made you think it was him -- and I know he would --


Miss ANGLE. I protest there is something in that scheme which pleases me.


FISH. Do it, madam -- do it.


Miss ANGLE. But how can I? -- I have nothing of value -- nothing that I could
suppose he would send for a present, and which I could think of consequence
enough to return.


FISH. What Is your watch, madam?


Miss ANGLE. An old fashioned thing!


FISH. Lord! I have thought of something! The finest thing! --


Miss ANGLE. What? --


FISH. Lady Mary Magpie's shawl -- You known ma'am, it is the finest thing in
the world -- There is but one more such in all the universe.


Miss ANGLE. But the shawl is not mine!


FISH. No ma'am -- but I dare say I know where her ladyship has laid it, and I
can get it.

(Going to the door.)
Miss ANGLE. For shame!


FISH. Dear madam, do you think I Would steal it -- It could do it no harm to be a
few hours at his Lordship's -- He Would send it back directly: you may depend upon
that -- And then such a fine thing? -- It would make him think that some great
man indeed had taken a fancy to you -- and he would be so afraid of losing you. --


Miss ANGLE. Well! -- I protest -- if I thought --


FISH. I can get it, ma'am, with all the ease in the world -- I dare say. (Runs
out.)


Miss ANGLE. What will become of me? -- Where will my folly end?


Enter FISH. FISH. Yes -- yes -- ma'am, I can get it -- her Ladyship has spread
it on the bed in the blue chamber, and is gone out for the whole evening; and
will sleep at her cousin's, Lady Beach's -- her maid told me so in the morning.


Miss ANGLE. But suppose his Lordship should not return it?


FISH. Laud ma'am! do you think his Lordship will keep it, when he will know he
did not send it you? -- His Lordship is not a thief, I suppose -- You Will have
it back, ma'am, I Will answer for it in an hour or two, and himself with it. --
The person shall not leave it ma'am, if his Lordship is not at home; and then
you will be sure to have it in an hour or two -- I Will go steal it -- I Will go
steal it. (Going.)


Miss ANGLE. Steal it! --


FISH. Take it, ma'am -- not steal it. (Exit.)


Miss ANGLE. This scheme will at least renew our acquaintance -- and that is
all I want -- for if, on the renewal, he appears cold, I will leave London
instantly -- if, on the contrary, he is as much in love as ever --


Enter FISH with the Shawl. FISH. I have got it -- I have got it -- here it is.
-- Now, madam, come into your bed chamber and write a very affecting letter,
while I do it up, and send for a porter.


Miss ANGLE. I protest I am frightened -- though we take it but to return again.


FISH. Dear madam! I am sure it is not in half the danger as when it was in the
great storm! (Pulling her off.) (Exeunt.


SCENE II.
A Chamber at Lord LIGHTHEAD's. Enter Miss AUDLEY and THOMPSON. Miss AUDLEY.
What! -- his Lordship is gone to see Lady Loveall, thus early, I suppose? or
rather has staid with her thus late!


THOMPSON. You are just like her Ladyship, ma'am, for she is ever accusing my
Lord of being with you -- But I assure you, ma'am, his Lordship slept at home
-- (a loud rap) There he is, madam. (Exit.)


Miss AUDLEY. Yes -- I have heard of her Ladyship's jealousy -- and that she
sometimes searches this whole house to find me.


Re-enter THOMPSON. THOMPSON. Dear madam, I hear Mr. Walmsley's voice -- my
Lord's uncle, madam! -- they are coming here -- what shall we do, madam? My
master will murder me if his uncle should see you! -- a cross old man, madam --
knocks every body down that he does not like -- and he has a great dislike to a
fine lady -- and, if he should see you here, such a life my Lord will have of
it!


Miss AUDLEY. Oh! you need tell me no more. -- I know Mr. Walmsley's character
well. -- Where can I go? I would sooner jump out of the window than meet him --
a cruel, unfeeling -- piece of ice!


THOMPSON. Here, madam, step into my Lord's bedchamber.


Miss ANGLE. His bedchamber! Well, the creature will not stay long?


THOMPSON. Not above ten minutes, I dare say, ma'am. (She goes into the
chamber.) Exit. Serve.


Enter Mr. WALMSLEY and Lord LIGHTHEAD. WALMSLEY. Don't tell me, my Lord -- you
are a bad man -- a very bad man -- you say in excuse for your vices, they are
fashionable -- but I, being out of the fashion, can call 'em only wicked.


Lord LIGHTH. What vices, Sir?


WALMSLEY. Why, you are a fellow that falls in love with every face you see;
and yet admire your own more than any one of them. -- You are a man whose purse
is open to every gambler and courtezan, and is never shut, but to objects of
real distress.


Lord LIGHTH. But how are you informed of this?


WALMSLEY. Hear it! -- told of it by every body! -- Do you think any thing but
conviction would have forced me to the rash step I have taken? -- Would any
thing but a certainty that you were unworthy to be my heir, have forced me to
the desperate resolution of marrying, notwithstanding my natural aversion to
opposition?


Lord LIGHTH. I hope, Sir, when you marry --


WALMSLEY. Hope! Pshaw! -- I know well enough what marriage is -- It Is a poesy
of thorns -- nobody knows where to lay hold of it -- It Is a stormy sea, where
nothing is to be expected but squalls, tempests and shipwrecks! -- One cries,
"Help" -- another, "Lord have mercy upon us" -- a third, "'It Is all over with
us" -- and souse they all go into the ocean of calamity.


Lord LIGHTH. Then, for heaven's sake, Sir, if this is your opinion, decline
your intention of marrying.


WALMSLEY. I cannot -- it is too late -- my word is passed -- Your indiscretions
put me in a passion, and I took a rash step! -- a step I never intended to
take. -- I offered a lady to marry her, in the heat of anger, and she took me
at my word, before I had time to grow cool and recant.


Lord LIGHTH. How unfortunate!


WALMSLEY. I was not aware she would be so sudden! -- but I was in such a
violent passion; -- all against you for your follies -- I was devilish hot! I
don't remember that I was ever in such a heat in my life! I strutted -- and
fretted -- and walked -- and talked -- all in anger against you; which she took
for love to her, and so was overcome in less than ten minutes.


Lord LIGHTH. Dear Sir, had I been present --


WALMSLEY. Why, then, I should have broken every bone in your skin! -- But as
it was -- I vented my rage -- in kissing the lady; and won her heart without
farther trouble. -- It Is impossible I could have won her so soon, but by my
being in that violent rage; for she is a particular, prudent, discreet,
reserved, middle-aged woman; and nothing but my great violence could have had
that effect upon her.


Lord LIGHTH. But, Sir, is it possible that you should pay attention to a rash
promise in a moment of anger?


WALMSLEY. My word! -- My word is as dear to me as my honor -- It is my honor
-- and I cannot keep one without keeping both.


Lord LIGHTH. But now you are cool, Sir.


WALMSLEY. Yes, I am cool -- but now the lady is in a passion -- and I must
keep my word with her, though I am afraid she will never find me warm on the
subject again.


Lord LIGHTH. Dear Sir? And all this to revenge yourself on me? A man whose
greatest faults arise merely from the report of malicious enemies.


WALMSLEY. Enemies! -- Pshaw! -- That Is always your excuse! -- But have not I
enemies as well as you? And yet, I dare say, you never heard of my being caught
gallanting my neighbor's wife? -- Or walking arm-in-arm with a a milliner? Or
following fine ladies home to their lodgings? -- Nor did you ever hear me
accused of destroying a beautiful young woman's peace of mind -- Did you?


Lord LIGHTH. I cannot say I ever did, Sir.


WALMSLEY. Then don't pretend to deny the reports I have heard of you. -- Don't
I know that you were caught with Lady Loveall and --


Lord LIGHTH. I own, Sir, I have been very unfortunate as to Appearances --
Appearances, and those alone, have been the ruin of my reputation; -- accidents
so strange, that no human wisdom could prevent or avoid them -- I have been
found, for instance, with a female, whom I never had the smallest familiarity
with, in the most suspicious situations; and only by mere accident. --


WALMSEY. And pray was that an accident when I caught you kissing my
house-keeper's daughter, as if you would devour her?


Lord LIGHTH. Yes, upon my word, Sir, that was an accident -- entirely an
accident -- My servant had just lost me a favorite spaniel, and, had the rascal
been in the way, I should have broken every bone in his skin; but, happening to
meet with this poor girl, I vented my rage on her.


WALMSLEY. Then, I have only to say, you have lost my estate by your accidents.

(Enter Servant.)
SERVE. Lady Loveall, Sir, is in the parlour.


WALMSLEY. Is that an accident?


Lord LIGHTH. (To the Serve.) Blundering --

(Aside.)
SERVE. I did not see Mr. Walmsley, Sir! -- A fine life I shall have for this!
(Aside, and Exit.)


WALMSLEY. This is another accident! -- How dares that imprudent woman visit
you? -- My blood runs cold at the thought of her -- for she was the cause of
this rash step I have taken! -- It was hearing of your intrigue with her that
hurried me to the rash step of marrying. -- Let me get out of the house --
she is poison to me; and she knows it too, and speaks to me, wherever I meet
her, on purpose to insult me. -- Let me get away. -- (Goes to the door) Zounds
she is coming here! -- I will not see her! -- I shall be in one of my passion's if
I do! -- Where shall I go? -- Put me somewhere.


Lord LIGHTH. Here, Sir, -- step into my bedchamber -- I Will take her Ladyship
to another room immediately -- and you may avoid her.


WALMSLEY. Oh, damn your accidents! -- But, thank heaven, you are no heir of
mine -- you are out of my will. -- (He goes into the bedchamber.)


Lord LIGHTH. And therefore may now offend you without fear. (Enter Thompson.)


THOMPSON. Where Is Mr. Walmsley, Sir?


Lord LIGHTH. In my bedchamber. -- What did you want with him?


THOMPSON. Oh, dear Sir! Oh dear! -- Miss Susan Audley is there, Sir! -- I
crammed her in, when I heard your Lordship and Mr. Walmsley on the stairs, for
fear he should see her. --


Lord LIGHTH. Zounds! -- but no matter! -- I Am struck out of his will, and may
defy him. -- But I don't hear him -- (listening) he cannot have seen her?


THOMPSON. Perhaps, Sir, she is crept under the bed?


Lord LIGHTH. Very likely -- for I know she would rather meet a tiger. What Is
become of Lady Loveall?


THOMPSON. William is trying to prevent her coming up, Sir: -- for she says, it
is not your uncle that you have with you, but a lady; and she will see her.
(Enter Lady Loveall.)


Lady LOVEALL. So, my Lord. -- What Is the reason I am not to be admitted? --
You Have no company, neither! -- Oh, you have been hiding, I percieve!


Lord LIGHTH. This way -- come this way -- I Will tell you who it is. Don't speak
so loud.


Lady LOVEALL. None of your arts, my Lord. I will see who you have hid in your
bedchamber.


Lord LIGHTH. I assure you it is my Uncle. -- Hush! -- Come this way. (Leading
her off.)


Lady LOVEALL. My Lord, you will pardon me -- but I cannot. --


Lord LIGHTH. Hush! Hush! (Exeunt, forcing her off.)


SCENE III.
A Bedchamber, WALMSLEY discovered listening at the door. WALMSLEY. Now I Will
steal out -- No -- she is coming again.


Lady LOVEALL. (Without) I will see who you have in your bedchamber -- my
curiosity shall be satisfied.


WALMSLEY. Shall it! -- Then there must be neither closet nor cupboard in the
room. -- (Goes to the closet.) The devil take it, it is locked.


Lady LOVEALL. (Without) I will see who you have here.


WALMSLEY. You will not. -- I Will get under the bed first. -- Hold, I cannot stoop
-- no matter -- I Will hide myself under the counterpane -- and madam shall be
disappointed. -- (He gets in and pulls the clothes over his head.) Now find me
if you can! -- I believe you will be bit.


Enter Lady LOVEALL and Lord LIGHTHEAD. Lady LOVEALL. Why here is no one here!


Lord LIGHTH. Now, I hope you are satisfied. -- Where the devil is my Uncle?
(Aside.)


Lady LOVEALL. Did not you tell me your Uncle was here?


Lord LIGHTH. Yes -- but you expected to find somebody else.


Lady LOVEALL. And there is somebody else -- (Goes to the curtain and discovers
Miss Audley) A Lady! Oh you deceitful! -- (Sits down on Mr. Walmsley, shrieks,
and runs across, while Walmsley rises up in the bed.) -- Ah! Ah! Ah!
(shrieking) I shall never recover the shock.


WALMSLEY. Why! -- Why! -- What is all this! -- What a strange accident! --


Lady LOVEALL. I say accident, indeed! --


Lord LIGHTH. Accident! Uncle!


Lady LOVEALL. The severe, putitanical Mr. Walmsley!


Lord LIGHTH. Upon my word, Uncle, such a thing in my house --


Lady LOVEALL. Oh! Oh! Oh!


WALMSLEY. Oh! Oh! Oh! -- Deuce take your Oh's. -- My Lord, you used to have
faith in accidents. --


Lord LIGHTH. But you convinced me there were no such things. -- And indeed,
Uncle, though you may think lightly of this affair, I am very much concerned at
it. -- My reputation, as well as yours, is at stake -- Such a thing to happen
in my house. -- Rat me, if I would have had it happened for the world! --


WALMSLEY. What has happened? -- Nothing has happened! (To Miss Audley.)


Lady LOVEALL. Oh heavens! -- My Lord, I ask your pardon for all my former
suspicions of you and this Lady.


Miss AUDLEY. I must cry for vexation -- for it is in vain to attempt to clear
myself. (Goes up the stage.)


Lady LOVEALL. See the Lady in tears, Mr. Walmsley! -- Oh! what a treat to
teize him.

(Aside.)
Lord LIGHTH. I beg that every means may be taken to put a stop to this affair
getting abroad. -- For my part, I declare never to breathe the circumstance to
a mortal -- and I dare say we may so far prevail on Lady Loveall. --


Lady LOVEALL. No, indeed -- I am bound to no secrecy. -- Mr. Walmsley has
never been sparing of my reputation, nor will I of his -- the world shall know
it.


WALMSLEY. Why then, Nephew, upon my soul! -- I wish I may die! -- I wish I may
never speak again! -- I wish --


Lady LOVEALL. Wish! -- you used to pretend you had no wishes.


WALMSLEY. I don't speak to you -- (To Miss Audley.) Pray, madam, be so good as
to tell me how you came into that bed?


Miss AUDLEY. It Is in vain to say -- nobody will credit me. (Exit Miss Audley.)


Lady LOVEALL. Well, Mr. Walmsley, I Will bid you good morning -- and, though I
know you to be no friend of mine, yet permit a poor weak woman to give you this
counsel -- that now you are about to enter into the married state, you will not
suffer these depraved inclinations, (even in youth a reproach) to ruffle that
tranquillity which ought ever to attend on the honorable marriage bed. (Exit.)


WALMSLEY. Zounds! I have not patience! -- Honorable marriage bed! Why her
calling it honorable, would alone, have made me shudder at it, if I had not
before. -- That woman is the worst of all human --


Lord LIGHTH. Dear Sir! --


WALMSLEY. Why you know, my Lord, if it had not been for her, you would have
owned that -- that gipsey was put there to meet you -- but this woman is my
bane wherever I go -- or whatever I do. -- Oh! that I could but once be
revenged of her. -- But I dare say I shall!


Lord LIGHTH. No more on this subject, Sir -- I hope the Lady you are going to
marry, may prove of a more amiable disposition -- and that you will like her.


WALMSLEY. Why since I found I must have her, I Have been trying night and day to
like her -- but I cannot say I make much progress. -- However, I Am tolerably
civil, and give her a vast number of presents, as a cover for my want of
affection. -- She Is expecting me now to go a shopping with her; so good morning
-- you will come to the wedding? (Sighing.)


Lord LIGHTH. Certainly! -- when is the happy day, Sir?


WALMSLEY. How dare you call it the "happy day?" -- You just heard me say it
was the most wretched, miserable affair I ever had to do with in all my life,
and now you are calling ^t the "happy day." --


Lord LIGHTH. The day then, Sir -- when is the day?


WALMSLEY. Thursday (sighing) -- the day after tomorrow -- the 21st of
December. (Lord Lighthead bows.) Oh! damme, the shortest day and the longest
night. (Exit.)


Enter SERVANT. SERVE. Sir, this parcel was left about half an ^our ago, to be
delivered into your Lordship's own hands, as soon as you were at leisure.


Lord LIGHTH. What is it? -- Is that the ^ill?


SERVE. This is a letter, Sir. (Exit.)


Lord LIGHTH. A letter! -- (Reads) -- "My Lord, although your Lordship has had
the delicacy not to avow yourself the presenter of this valuable gift, yet,
something whispers me, it can be none but your Lordship to whom I am indebted
for so generous an intention. -- But, my Lord, the intention only -- permit me
to remain obliged to you for. -- The gift itself -- honor, delicacy, and a
thousand struggling sensations force me to return -- and to add, that my
residence in London has not yet so entirely eradicated those principles imbibed
in the country, as to render a gaudy bait, even an allurement; except in its
being a proof, that your Lordship sometimes honors with a thought, the humble,
but contented, LOUISA ANGLE."


Lord LIGHTH. Angle! Angle! -- Which is that? The girl at St. James's, or the
girl at Westminster? -- Oh! the girl at St. James's! -- I don't remember
sending her a present! -- but I suppose I did, while I was mad for her -- and
now I have recovered my senses, I have forgot it. -- What is it? (Opens the
parcel) Zounds! but it is very handsome! and the very thing to present to Lady
Loveall. -- It will reconcile her to me immediately -- for I am afraid she
suspects me, notwithstanding her behavior before my Uncle. -- How came I to be
such an extravagant puppy, as to send that little gipsey such a present, and
she to return it, now she finds I have given over my pursuit? -- Faith, I Am
very glad she did. -- Richard -- (Enter Servant.) Bring me pen, ink, and paper.
(Exit Servant.) I certainly ordered some of my people to send this thing, but
it has slipped my memory. -- (The servant brings in the pen and ink -- his
Lordship writes and gives him the letter.


Lord LIGHTH. Here -- do up that parcel, and take it, with this letter, to Lady
Loveall, directly.


SERVE. Yes, Sir. (Exit.)


Lord LIGHTH. Egad, it came back at a very lucky time! -- Her Ladyship doats
upon a present! and such a present as that! -- Such a shawl! -- Oh yes -- the
shawl will make her friends with me at once. (Exit.)


SCENE IV.
An Inn. CLOWNLY discovered. CLOWNLY. What a journey have I and poor Humphry
taken! and all perhaps for nothing! for if he should even find her, she may not
be glad to see me. -- (Enter Humphry.) Why, Humphry, I thought you were lost?


HUMPH. Ay, master, and you may think yourself well off I was not.


CLOWNLY. Well -- but have you found where Miss Angle lives?


HUMPH. Yes -- I have found her out -- but such a time I was about it! -- Why,
Sir, she lives up by St, James's, or St. Giles's, I forget which! -- but it is
all the same. -- And such a thing happened to me as I went along! --


CLOWNLY. What?


HUMPH. Why just as I got to what they call the P. H'es, (a pretty place) --
just as I got under cover, three or four, or five or six, (or egad, there might
be a dozen) fine ladies met me; and one of them did give me such a slap in the
face; the water came into my eyes again. --


CLOWNLY. What did she do that for?


HUMPH. I cannot tell for the life of me! -- For I pulled off my hat, and made
them a civil bow -- but faith, as soon as I felt the blow, I forgot my manners,
for after madam I ran, and gave her such a shake --


CLOWNLY. You did not?


HUMPH. But I did -- and that was not the worst of it neither. -- I made a sad
mistake -- for when I came to look, the lady had got a blue gown on, and she
that gave me the blow was in red!


CLOWNLY. How could you make such a blunder?


HUMPH. Why, though their gowns were different, their faces were exactly the same
color.


CLOWNLY. But about Miss Angle -- have you seen her, or her maid?


HUMPH. Yes -- I have seen Mrs. Fish; and she says, that her Lady has done
nothing but talk of you ever since you left her on the road -- and she desires
you will go and see her Lady directly. -- And she says too, that she will get us
a lodging in the same house before night; but that is to be kept a secret from
her mistress.


CLOWNLY. I am very much obliged to Mrs. Fish for her contrivance; and I shall
give her a very handsome present to satisfy her.


HUMPH. Lord, Sir, there is no occasion for that -- I shall kiss her now and
then, and I dare say that will be quite satisfaction enough. But come, Sir, we
must go directly.


CLOWNLY. Do you know, Humphry, that my heart misgives me.


HUMPH. What! now you are so near seeing the Lady! Come, come, master, be merry.


CLOWNLY. Ah! Humphry; if I had continued poor -- if I had never been your
master, I might have been merry.


HUMPH. "Never been my master" -- How can you talk so? Why, there are people in
the world would give any money to be my master. -- Why now, there is my wife --
she would give every farthing she has to be my master; but I tell her, No -- No
Jane, says I, you shall never be my master.


CLOWNLY. Oh, if I thought I should get Miss Angle --


HUMPH. I Will forfeit my head if you don't. -- Have you not every thing to get
her with? -- Fine clothes, in your box there, and plenty of money. -- I never
heard of a woman that could not be got with fine clothes and plenty of money;
nay, often, without either money or clothes.


CLOWNLY. But, I tell you, that will not do with her -- there is something more
required. -- I cannot talk to her -- I am at a loss for words. --


HUMPH. You cannot be at a loss for words, while you are courting! -- Women will
always give you two for your one. -- I know my wife did -- and egad, though we
have left off courting, so she does now.


CLOWNLY. Come -- I Will set off. -- Call a coach. (Exit.)


HUMPH. Ay, Sir, and I Will ride behind it, for fear I should get struck again.
-- It Is very odd that any lady should wish to strike me.

(Exeunt.)
END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
Miss ANGLE's Apartments. Enter Miss ANGLE and FISH. FISH. DEAR Madam, let me
persuade you to put on your other gown, for now his Lordship has kept it thus
long, I dare say he will bring it home himself.


Miss ANGLE. I begin to be uneasy. -- Did the porter say, he was sure his
Lordship was at home?


FISH. Quite sure, Ma'am -- so we may expect him every minute; for he would
certainly have sent it back before now, if he had not intended to have brought
it himself. -- Do, Madam, change that ugly gown. -- And what do you think of
your other cap? -- Your becoming cap? -- Hark! -- No -- that is only a single
rap. -- The deuce take him, he has sent it home by a porter, perhaps?


Miss ANGLE. I don't care how, so I get it again -- for I begin to be alarmed,
lest by some accident -- (Fish looks out of the window.)


Miss ANGLE. Is it that?


FISH. No, Ma'am, it is the milk-woman. -- Perhaps, Ma'am, his Lordship may not
call with it 'till the morning.


Miss ANGLE. Well, thank heaven, her Ladyship sleeps from home, you say; so she
cannot miss it tonight; and then, if we have heard nothing from him, you shall
go after it, Fish -- for as soon as her Ladyship comes home in the morning --


FISH. And the worst of it is -- I am not sure she is to stay out all night! --


Miss ANGLE. You told me she was.


FISH. I did it for your good. -- I knew you would not have sent it to his
Lordship, if I had not said so.


Miss ANGLE. Ridiculous! -- And I still worse to listen to you.


FISH. Dear Ma'am, don't fret about it, -- but think of Mr. Clownly. -- I am
sure he looks very beautiful; and so does his man, Humphry! And pray, ma'am,
did not you see, by his master's looks, that he is in love with you?


Miss ANGLE. Pshaw! --


FISH. Nay, madam, you need not sneer at him; for if his Lordship should never
send back the shawl --


Miss ANGLE. Heavens!


FISH. We shall stand in need of a rich friend to make it up with Lady Mary. (A
loud rap.) There Is his Lordship! -- That Is his rap! -- I know it so well; I
could swear to it at any time. -- Now, madam, how do you look? -- vastly well,
I declare! -- Lord, how well I know his rap! -- (Goes to the door.) I wish I
may die if it is not Lady Mary! --


Miss ANGLE. Oh! I shall faint!


FISH. The first thing she does, will be to look at her shawl.


Miss ANGLE. Run, fly -- take a coach, and sly to Lord Lighthead's, with my
compliments -- I made a mistake -- he did not send it -- but another person --
who now has claimed it -- and I must return it immediately.


FISH. Well, ma'am, -- I Will do all I can.


Enter Lady MARY. Lady MARY. Oh! Mrs. Fish! -- Where are you going in such a
hurry?


FISH. A little way, my Lady, -- on -- a little business. (Exit. Fish.)


Lady MARY. My dear Angle! I have been shopping. -- (Sits.) Well, marriage is
an expensive thing. -- It Is well it comes but once in one's life.


Miss ANGLE. With some people, Ma'am, it comes oftener.


Lady MARY. And with some, not at all -- Now that was very near the case with
me, 'till I struck Mr. Walmsley! -- By the bye, he grows more and more
attentive. -- He has been taking me to the jeweller's -- and see there! -- All
these are his presents.


Miss ANGLE. How profuse! --


Lady MARY. But, my dear, you know all this is nothing to the shawl! -- That,
to be sure is the genteelest -- most elegant present -- as I live, here is the
generous donor!


Enter WALMSLEY. WALMSLEY. Ladies, I presume, I don't intrude? -- Miss Angle,
how do you do? -- I beg pardon for not having called on you lately -- I should
-- but I don't know -- one is always happening of one accident or another, to
prevent one's designs. --


Lady MARY. Very true.


WALMSLEY. Has your Ladyship been showing Miss Angle any of your purchases? --


Lady MARY. Yes -- and she is quite in love with your generosity!


WALMSLEY. Pshaw! -- Pshaw! -- No generosity at all. -- Have you seen the
shawl, Miss? --


Miss ANGLE. Yes, Sir.


Lady MARY. Yes -- yes -- I told you, you know, how much she admired it. -- And
even poor Fish seemed to know its value.


WALMSLY. Why, that shawl --


Lady MARY. I Will go fetch it.


Miss ANGLE. (Holding her.) Dear Madam, don't trouble yourself. --


Lady MARY. What, would not you wish to see it again?


Miss ANGLE. Yes -- Indeed, I would. -- But --


WALMSLEY. Are you sure you have seen it? --


Miss ANGLE. Yes, Sir, -- very sure. --


WALMSLEY. (To Lady Mary.) Why then sit still.


Lady MARY. No, Mr. Walmsley, the tea is waiting. -- Miss Angle, you must come
and drink tea with Mr. Walmsley and me. -- We came on purpose to fetch you.


WALMSLEY. Your Ladyship will excuse my stepping to a friend's in the next
street. -- I Will be back instantly.


Lady MARY. Certainly. -- Come, Miss Angle --


Miss ANGLE. I Will wait on your Ladyship in a moment.


WALMSLEY. (Sighing.) Will your Ladyship honor me with your hand?


Lady MARY. (Curtsies and smiles) The honor is done to me, Mr. Walmsley.


WALMSLEY. So I think. (Aside.) Heigh ho! Heigh ho! (Leads her off.)


Miss ANGLE. Their civility distracts me! -- How impatient I am for the return
of Fish?


Enter FISH, out of Breath. Miss ANGLE. You have not been!


FISH. Dear Madam, I met with his Lordship in the street, going out with a heap
of noblemen. -- Oh! Madam, we are undone. (Begins to cry.)


Miss ANGLE. How? What? Don't keep me in suspense.


FISH. Why, Madam, I called his Lordship on one side; and do you know he had
the impudence to say, he did give you the shawl -- and he was much obliged to
you for returning it. --


Miss ANGLE. Oh heavens!


FISH. And then when I cried, and took on -- he offered to pay me for it -- and
what do you think he offered me? --


Miss ANGLE. I don't know! --


FISH. Five guineas. -- He said, he had no more about him -- so I thought I
should get nothing else -- and so I had better take that. -- (Showing the
money.)


Miss ANGLE. You did not? --


FISH. Yes, ma'am -- for I thought it might help to hire counsel to plead for
us at the bar; for we shall certainly be taken up. (Cries.)


Miss ANGLE. Heavens! -- Conceal your uneasiness. -- I must go to Lady Mary
directly -- she expects me to tea.


FISH. Oh! How shall I ever look Lady Mary in the face?


Miss ANGLE. What distress --


FISH. Now, Ma'am -- now for it (Listening at the door.) I hear her in her
chamber, and now she will miss it.


Miss ANGLE. Stay with me, Fish, or I shall faint!


FISH. Dear Ma'am, don't look so frightened! -- If you do, indeed I shall go
into fits! -- indeed I shall! -- For I know Mr. Walmsley is such a cruel man,
he will hang us both, notwithstanding we are two such poor, little, innocent
lambs.


Miss ANGLE. Be more on your guard. --


FISH. Ay, madam, we must put a good face on it, for if we don't she will suspect
us. -- I will not cry any more I am determined.


Enter Lady MARY. Lady MARY. My dear Angle, and my dear dear Fish, I am
terrified out of my life! do you know I laid my shawl on the bed -- spread it
on with my own hands -- turned and looked at it again as I went out of the
room, and saw it safe -- and now it is gone -- nor can I find it high nor low.


Miss ANGLE. Your Ladyship does not think it is lost?


FISH. Lost, ma'am! -- that is likely indeed? -- We have no thieves in this
house, I am sure. -- You, (To Miss Angle.) I suppose ma'am, would not steal it?
-- And I don't know what a poor servant, like me, should do with a shawl. -- I
could not wear it if I had it. -- Besides, my character --


Miss ANGLE. Hush, Fish! --


Lady MARY. I suspect no one, Mrs. Fish. -- Heaven forbid I should -- but the
thing is gone.


FISH. Dear me, what a pity! --


Miss ANGLE. Is your Ladyship sure you laid it on the bed?


Lady MARY. Sure -- just as I told you.


FISH. How my Lady was it? -- The long ways on the bed, or the cross ways? --
Thus! (Folding her handkerchief.)


Miss ANGLE. Has your Ladyship enquired below?


Lady MARY. Of every creature. -- But no one comes into my Apartments, but my
own servant, and she is just stepped out.


FISH. Then she knows where it is I dare say, ma'am.


Lady MARY. If she does not, I don't know what I shall do -- I believe I shall
lose my senses! (Sitting down.)


Miss ANGLE. Dear madam! although it was certainly a most valuable thing! yet
consider --


FISH. Ay, madam, consider it was saved from the storm as it came over. -- You
ought to bless yourself you got it at all -- though to be sure you have not had
it long.


Lady MARY. Oh! if I had never seen it, I had been happy! -- I should not then
have known my loss.


Miss ANGLE. But, madam, you are not certain you have lost it -- stay till you
see your woman.


Lady MARY. I know she has not removed it. -- I charged her not to touch it. --
Oh! it is gone! it is gone! it is gone! (Rising.)


FISH. (In the same tone.) Oh! that I did but know who had got it!


Lady MARY. Come hither Betty -- (Enter Betty) you never saw your poor Lady in
such distress in your life. -- Did you touch my shawl?


BETTY. No, my Lady -- I never touch any thing.


Lady MARY. I told you so. -- And did you let nobody into my bedchamber?


BETTY. No, my Lady -- but I saw Mrs. Fish come out there this morning.


FISH. Oh! Oh! Oh!


BETTY. Indeed, Mrs. Fish, I did.


FISH. Oh dear! Oh dear! Oh dear!


Lady MARY. What do you cry for, child? If you took it, confess, and I Will
forgive you.


FISH. I took it, ma'am? -- no ma'am -- that is not what I cry for. -- It Is
because I am sure I shall not live long. -- For if she saw me come out of your
Ladyship's room, it was my apparition; and you never live long after your
apparition has been seen to walk.


Miss ANGLE. But were you there? -- Do you know any thing of it?


FISH. No more than you do, ma'am.

(Exit Betty.)
Lady MARY. Well! I pity poor Mr. Walmsley. -- It is a hard thing to say -- for
it will be a great disappointment to him -- but I don't think I Will marry if I
have lost it. -- No, if I have lost it I will not be married --


Enter Mr. WALMSLEY. WALMSLEY. Ladies, I come to tell you --


Lady MARY. (Walking in a rage.) Don't teize me -- don't argue with me -- don't
attempt to shake my resolution. -- I will not marry you.


WALMSLEY. Did I hear right? -- Or did my ears deceive me? -- You will not marry
me?


Lady MARY. No. --


WALMSLEY. The bells shall ring, notwithstanding. -- The poor ringers shall not
lose their fee! -- And I Will give a dinner too -- a very good dinner! -- a
better dinner than I intended.


Lady MARY. Sir!


WALMSLEY. Here Is an accident! -- Why, it will make me more than amends for
that unlucky one in the morning! (Aside.)


Lady MARY. What does he say?


WALMSLEY. I was saying, I must give a very elegant entertainment on Thursday,
notwithstanding the match is broken off. -- And I believe I shall write to my
tenants and have a bullock roasted.


Lady MARY. There! -- Do you hear him!


Miss ANGLE. Dear Mr. Walmsley, her Ladyship has been only in joke.


WALMSLEY. And it is the best joke I ever heard. -- Miss Angle, I never asked
her to have me but once. -- I happened to be in a violent passion, and I did
ask her once.


Lady MARY. There! -- He owns his violent passion.


WALMSLEY. But it was not for you. -- However, I was in a passion, and she
snap'd me up. -- You took me at my word, and now I take you at yours; and we
have done with each other.


Lady MARY. Cruel savage! -- I dare say he has stolen the shawl himself, on
purpose to break off the match.


WALMSLEY. What shawl?


FISH. Why, Sir, the fine grand one you were so good as to give her Ladyship:
some wicked wretch has been making free with.


Lady MARY. Yes -- it is lost -- it is gone. -- Don't you pity me?


WALMSLEY. No. -- I am vastly glad.


Lady Mary. Oh! Heavens! -- This is the man that is to be soon my husband --
The partner of all my joys! and all my sorrows!


WALMSLEY. No. -- Your Ladyship's sorrows are too violent -- and if your joys
had proved the same, egad, I don't know which would have been the most
insupportable.


Miss ANGLE. Dear Sir, her Ladyship was so much agitated merely because it was
a present from you.


WALMSLEY. Well, Miss -- but where the deuce is it? -- Who has been in the
house?


Miss ANGLE and Lady MARY. No creature.


FISH. The Rats carried away one of my shoes last night, and eat a great hole
in my apron.


WALMSLEY. I will find out what Rat has got it -- I Will go to Bow-street
directly. -- You are sure nobody has been here today? -- Who was that
countryman I met on the stairs this morning?


FISH. A Mr. Clownly, Sir. -- A gentleman that called to see my mistress,
because we all happened to be fellow travelers on the road -- Laud! sure he
did not take it?


WALMSLEY. I Will be damned if he did not!


Miss ANGLE. Dear Sir!


WALMSLEY. Write me down his name, Mrs. Fish, (or at least the name he goes by)
and where he is to be found, if you know.


FISH. Oh yes, Sir.


Miss ANGLE. Heavens! Dear Sir, you judge wrong. -- I am sure he did not take
it.


FISH. Now I have some little reason to think he did -- Here Is his direction,
Sir.


Lady MARY. The country gentleman you told me of -- Do you suspect him, Miss
Angle?


Miss ANGLE. No, ma'am -- no. -- (Aside.) What can I do? I dare not confess. --
Lord Lighthead may justly say I sold it him. -- What will become of me?


WALMSLEY. Well, Miss Angle, I can do this gentleman no harm in having him
taken up, and hearing what he has to say for himself -- and I Will about it
directly. -- Her Ladyship has had one loss already, in losing me, and I don't
think it is right she should have another. -- Besides, I have now a value for
the thing. -- Who would have thought that little shawl would have turned out of
such consequence? Providence preserved it from the storm at sea, to save me
from a worse storm on land. (Exit.)


Lady MARY. I Will be as gentle as Zephyrs. -- Plead for me, speak for me, dear
Miss Angle.


Miss ANGLE. I will, Madam. -- It is my duty. -- Depend upon it I will
reconcile you.


Enter BETTY. BETTY. Dear my Lady, as Mr. Walmsley went out, he bid me observe
if I should see the country gentleman, or his man, who were here this morning;
for that he believed they were both no better than two highwaymen; and so,
Madam, the servant is just come up to the back door; -- and so I Am come to let
your Ladyship know.


Lady MARY. I Am sorry Mr. Walmsley is gone.


BETTY. Shall I go for a constable, Ma'am?


Lady MARY. No -- we'll proceed by fair means first. -- Fish, you know the
servant, go you and call him in; and I Will question him.


FISH. Dear, my Lady! A poor ignorant creature! -- He knows nothing! -- You
will not understand him, nor make him understand you.


Lady MARY. Oh, that ignorance may be pretended -- put on for the time. Call
him in. -- Why don't you go?


FISH. (Going.) What can I say to him? If she should call him a thief, he will
perhaps serve her as he did the woman in the Piazza. (Exit.)


Miss ANGLE. These harmless creatures are no thieves.


Lady MARY. Dear Miss Angle, I wish to do them no injury -- for if I could but
secure Mr. Walmsley once more, I did not care if every thief in London was set
at liberty. -- Here the man comes. -- What a hanging look he has? -- I hope he
has not got pistols about him. -- Let us draw this way. (They retire.)


Enter FISH and HUMPHRY. FISH. Lady Mary, my mistress's particular
acquaintance, wants to ask you a few questions. -- What shall I say to him?
(Aside.) She is a comical kind of a woman! -- You must know she has been out to
dinner -- and whenever that is the case* she always -- you understand me --
(Putting her hand up to her mouth as if she were drinking.) and then she comes
home in such an ill temper, there is no peace or quietness for her.


HUMPH. That is so like my wife!


FISH. She Will ask you a heap of foolish questions, but don't you mind her --
only say, Yes; and No; and so on.


HUMPH. Ay, that just suits me. -- I can say Yes; and No; and am never at a
loss. -- But, hark ye, she don't fight in her cups, I hope; I Have had one blow
already you know.


Lady MARY. (Coming forward) So Mr. Humphry. What shall I say to him? (Aside.)
Your name is Humphry, I think?


HUMPH. Yes, Madam -- I Am much obliged to you.


Miss ANGLE. This is insupportable. (Exit.)


Lady MARY. And pray, how do you like London?


HUMPH. Very well, I thank you, Madam; pray how do you like it?


Lady MARY. This folly is put on. (Aside.) Pray, Mr. Humphry, have you any
acquaintance in town?


HUMPH. None: except your honor. -- I have no acquaintance to give me a drop
of any thing to drink. -- And, you know, your Honor, that is a sad thing.


Lady MARY. I do know it -- and you shall not want for something to drink. --
Better prevail on him by kindness, and he may discover all. (Aside.) Here is
something for you to drink. (Gives him money.)


HUMPH. Thank your Honor. -- Well, I declare your staunch drinker's have more
generosity than any people in the world! (Aside.)


Lady MARY. I am at a loss how to accuse this man, though I am sure either he or
his master is guilty. (Aside.) Mr. Humphry, I am very sorry --


HUMPH. Your Honor! --


Lady MARY. I say, I am very sorry -- very sorry, indeed --


HUMPH. Oh! Madam, never be sorry about it. -- For my part, I should hardly
have found it out, if I had not been told of it. -- Besides, nobody has any
thing to do with it, but yourself; -- and if they had, you are such a good
companion (Looking at his money) nobody can be angry with you.


Lady MARY. What do you mean? -- No cross-purposes -- but answer me directly.
-- Do you know any thing of my shawl?


HUMPH. Your what, Ma'am? -- Your shawl? Ha, ha, ha, ha! -- Oh! you will have a
fine headache for this tomorrow morning.


Lady MARY, What?


HUMPH. I would not be so ill as you will be for five guineas.


Lady MARY. The fellow is laughing at me! -- Fish, call a constable; I Will have
him taken up.


HUMPH. Take me up! -- Lord, Ma'am, do you lie down -- only for half an hour --
only just for half an hour -- you cannot think how refreshed you will be. -- It
will clear all this away; (Pointing to his head) and you will be quite another
woman.


Lady MARY. What do you mean?


HUMPH. Nay, I know a nap is of vast consequence to me, at these times --
especially when my liquor makes me ill-tempered.


Lady MARY. The man's mad -- I Will have him secured directly. -- Call a
constable.


HUMPH. Do, your Honor, let me persuade you to take a basin of camomile tea.
--


Enter Miss ANGLE. Lady MARY. Miss Angle, come hither. -- Did you ever hear
such an insult? -- Fish -- Fish -- Call all the people of the house. -- Who Is
there? Come and secure this robber. -- My anger is roused, and I Will be
revenged. --


HUMPH. How like my wife!


Miss ANGLE. Dear Madam --


Enter CLOWNLY. CLOWNLY. What Is the matter?


Miss ANGLE. Mr. Clownly, I rejoice to see you! -- Lady Mary has had some
altercation with your servant, but I believe he has not been to blame.


HUMPH. How her poor head will ach for this! (Exit. taking off Fish.)


CLOWNLY. (To Lady Mary.) Dear Madam, have the goodness --


Enter WALMSLEY. WALMSLEY. I have done the job. -- The thief is taken -- and
who do you think it is? -- The very person in the world! -- By Jupiter! I would
not have lost the pleasure of taking her up for fifty times the value of the
thing. -- I caught her just as she was going into Covent Garden theater, with
the goods upon her. -- So with the help of one of the playhouse constables, I
handed her (in spite of her squalling) into a coach, and have brought her here
that she may be properly exposed.


Lady MARY and Miss ANGLE. What can this mean?


WALMSLEY. (Speaking loud.) Desire the constable to bring up the woman in
custody. -- Sir, (To Clownly.) whoever you are, I beg your pardon -- you are
not a thief, that I know of -- if you are, that is best known to yourself. --
I Am a little busy, Sir, at present -- you will excuse me! -- Constable, bring up
the prisoner! -- Why don't you come? -- Surely there never was such an accident!


Enter CONSTABLE with Lady LOVEALL. WALMSLEY. There! -- You see the goods are
upon her!


Lady LOVEALL. Insupportable! -- Have not I affirmed, that it was presented to
me by Lord Lighthead?


Miss ANGLE. I am tortured! (Aside.)


Lady LOVEALL. It is not to be borne? -- Sir, you know it is mine. -- This is
only a scheme, on purpose to distress me, in revenge for what I discovered this
morning!


WALMSLEY. Ay, you were vastly pleased at that. -- And now it is only evening,
and I have discovered something that pleases me.


Lady LOVEALL. Very well -- go on. -- But I have sent my servant to Lord
Lighthead, to inform him of this affair, and I am certain the moment he has
found him, his Lordship will come and clear me!


WALMSLEY. There wants no clearing! -- Every thing is clear enough!


Enter Lord LIGHTHEAD. Lord LIGHTH. Dear Uncle! -- Dear Lady Loveall! What Is
the matter? -- Just as I was stepping into my coach, a summons came to me, to
attend you upon life and death. -- What Is the matter?


WALMSLEY. No, -- no death in the case. -- I believe nothing more than hard
labor on the Thames.


Lord LIGHTH. Sir, although you are my Uncle, this insult to a Lady with whom I
have the honor to be acquainted, is not to be suffered. -- I presented the
Lady with that shawl. -- It was sent to me by this Lady, (Pointing to Miss
Angle) and a few hours after she sent it, her servant received five guineas for
it.


Miss ANGLE. It Is true. -- I confess it. -- Guilt and shame overpower me!


WALMSLEY. (To Miss Angle.) Why the devil did you confess? Nobody would have
seen it in your face! -- Besides, you have robbed me of the pleasure of
conducting her Ladyship to a prison; and damn me, if I ever met with so great a
disappointment.


Miss ANGLE. Conduct me, Sir -- I am ready to attend you.


Lady MARY. She has destroyed my peace -- and I shall see her go to prison
without a sigh.


CLOWNLY. But I would not, without losing my life. -- Madam, I Will satisfy you
for whatever loss you may have sustained by this Lady.


Lady MARY. You cannot satisfy me. -- I Have lost Mr. Walmsley.


WALMSLEY. Ay, now ask her, what she demands for me.


Lady MARY. I shall take nothing less than the gentleman himself.


WALMSLEY. Well -- I like her for that -- she does not undervalue me.


Miss ANGLE. Mr. Clownly, while you imagine you are giving your protection to a
thief only -- you are protecting a more despicable character. -- Had poverty
seduced me to the crime of which I am accused, less would have been my remorse,
less ought to have been the censure incurred -- But vanity -- folly -- a
mistaken confidence in that gentleman's honor, and my own attractions,
prompted me to avail myself of a contemptible scheme, in order to regain his
acquaintance, which (admitting what he professed to me real) he himself would
have rejoiced at. -- But the event has proved and discovered both our hearts --
nor can I reproach him with the cruelty of his, while I experience the most
poignant reproofs of an inward monitor for the guilty folly of my own.


Lady LOVEALL. And so this was only a scheme for the Lady to procure a husband.
-- Here, Lady Mary, is your beloved shawl. -- Take it, and take care --


WALMSLEY. Yes, do you take care of that, and I Will take care of myself. -- Yet,
I don't know, perhaps I may have her; but if I may judge by appearance --


Lord LIGTH. On that witness, who in company has not, throughout the adventures
of this day, appeared culpable?


WALMSLEY. Very true. -- Even I myself at one time made no very innocent
figure. -- These adventures shall then be a warning to us, never to judge with
severity, while the parties have only appearances against them.


FINIS.

