THE BATTLE of HASTINGS, A TRAGEDY. By RICHARD CUMBERLAND, Esquire AS IT IS ACTED
AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE.

LONDON. PRINTED FOR EDWARD AND CHARLES DILLY, IN THE POULTRY. MDCCLXXVIII.
[PRICE ONE SHILLING AND SIXPENCE.]

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
HAROLD, King of England, Mr. BENSLEY. EDGAR ATHELING, Mr. HENDERSON. EARL
EDWIN, Mr. PALMER. EARL WALTHEOF, Mr. BRERETON. EARL of MERCIA, Brother to
Harold, Mr. NORRIS. EARL of NORTHUMBERLAND, Mr. AICKIN. SIFFRIC, Mr. FARREN.
REGINALD, Mr. CHAPLIN. RAYMOND, Mr. HURST. DUNCAN, a Scottish Seer, Mr.
CHAMBERS.
WOMEN.
MATILDA, Daughter to Harold, Miss YOUNG. EDWINA, Mrs. YATES. SABINA, Mrs.
COLLES.
Attendants on MATILDA, Guards, Foresters, Wardens, and various Attendants.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by MR. HENDERSON. TO holy land in superstition's day,
When bare foot pilgrims trod their weary way,
By mother church's unremitting law
Scourged into grace, with shoulders red and raw;
Kneeling demure before the sacred shrine,
On the hard flint they begged the boon divine;
Pardon for what offending flesh had done,
And pity for the long long course they would run,
Fines, pains and penalties, securely past,
Slow paced forgiveness met their prayer at last,
Full absolution from conceeding Rome,
Cancelled all sin, past, present and to come.
Your Poet thus profanely led aside
To range over Tragic land without a guide,
To pick perhaps, with no invidious aim,
A few cast fallings from the tree of fame.
Damned, though untried, by the despotic rule
Of the stern Doctors in detraction's school;
Lashed down each column of a public page,
And driven over burning ploughshares to the stage,
Be rhim'd, be ridiculed with doggrel wit,
Sues out a pardon from his Pope -- the Pit.
Pensive he stands in penitential weeds,
With a huge rosary of untold beads;
Sentenced for past offenses to rehearse,
Ave Apollo's to the God of verse;
And sure there is no one but an Author knows
The Penance, which an Author undergoes.
If then your worships a few stripes award
Let not your beadles lay them on too hard;
For in the world there is not a thing so thin,
So full of feeling, as your Poet's skin:
What if, perchance, he snatched a playful kiss
From that free hearted romp the Comic Miss;
That frolick's past, he is turned to years of grace,
And a young sinner now supplies his place.
Sure you will not grudge a little sober chat
With this demure old tabby Tragic cat;
No charge lies here of conversation crim
He hopes you will think her fame, no worse for him.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by MISS YOUNG. FROM ancient Thespis to the present age
The world has often been termed a public stage,
A threadbare metaphor, which in its time
Has patched much prose and heel-piec'd many a rhyme;
Even the grave pulpit sometimes deigns to use
The emphatic terms of the proscribed Muse,
Calls birth our entry, death our exit calls,
And at life's close exclaims -- the curtain falls;
And so concludes upon the drama's plan
That fretting, strutting, short-hour actor, man.
Are we all actors then? -- yes, all from Adam,
And actresses? -- I apprehend so Madam.
Some fill their cast with grace, others with none,
Some are should off the stage, and some should on;
Some good, some bad, still we all act a part,
Whilst we disguise the language of the heart;
Nature's plain taste provides a simple treat,
But art, the Cook, steps in and mars the meat;
The comic blade makes ridicule his test,
And on his tomb proclaims that life's a jest,
The swaggering braggart, in true tragic cast,
Bellows blank verse and daggers to the last;
Whilst clubs of neutral petit-maitres boast
A kind of opera company at most,
Whose dress, air, action, all is imitation,
A poor, insipid, servile, French translation;
Whose tame dull scene glides uniform along,
In comi -- farei -- pastoral -- sing -- song --
'Till all awakened by the rattling die
Club wits, and make -- a modern tragedy;
A tragedy alas! good friends, look round,
What have we left to tread but tragic ground?
Four authors leagued to shake the human soul,
Unsheath the dagger, and infuse the bowl,
At length descending to the least, and last,
We hope the terror of the time is past,
Full sated now with battle, blood, and murder,
England is conquered -- fate can reach no further,
Bid then the weeping Pleiads dry their eyes,
And turn to happier scenes and brighter skies.
THE BATTLE of HASTINGS, A TRAGEDY.
ACT I. SCENE I.
The Outside of a stately ancient Castle. The Gate closed, and the Bugle in the
Slings. Time before Break of Day. (Earl EDWIN enters.) EDWIN. WHETHER it is now
the secret witching hour,
When the smart imps work their malignant spells
Unfriendly to man's health, or that Heaven sends
These warnings, these misgivings to forerun
And harbinger some strange calamity,
I know not; but there is something passing here
Beyond the mind's conjecture ominous.

(RAYMOND speaks from the Walls.) RAYMOND. Stand! Who goes there?

EDWIN. A friend.

RAYMOND. May none but friends
Approach these gates? what wakeful man art thou,
Whom busy care provokes thus early forth,
Ere the gray twilight glimmers in the east?

EDWIN. Know thou not me; and needs there light for that?
Sounds not this voice familiar to thine ear,
Or have the darkling wizzards of the night
Confounded thy clear organs? Thee I know;
Raymond, descend and open to thy Lord.

RAYMOND. My Lord, my Master! --

He disappears. EDWIN alone. Venerable pile,
Whose plain rough features show like honesty*
Cradle of loyalty from earliest time;
Ye antique towers, courts, banner-bearing halls,
Trophies and tombs of my renowned forefathers;
And you, surrounding oaks, fathers and sons,
And old old grandsires, chroniclers of time,
By which the forest woodman marks his tale,
If fate will doom you to a Norman master,
Farewell, ye perish in your country's fall.

Raymond comes out from the castle. RAYMOND. See, Lord, your castle opens wide
it is arms,
Your porters, warders, foresters shall rouse:
Herald, provoke the bugle: spread the joy.

Herald goes to sound the bugle. EDWIN. What joy? forbear: there is no joy for
Edwin.

RAYMOND. Are we then lost; is Normandy victorious?

EDWIN. No: in the swollen and pregnant womb of fate
Lies the yet unborn hour. -- Dismiss the herald,
And gently close the gate. --
Raymond closes the gate. Ye, who have bosoms,
Unscarr'd by sharp vexation's thorny scourge,
Sleep while you may. It Is well; come hither, Raymond;
Nay, I account thee as a friend -- be nearer:
Passed all things quiet on thy watch this night?

RAYMOND. All things were quiet.

EDWIN. Far, as well as near;
Wide as thine ear could carry? no rude straggler
Scowring the night? no neighing at the gate?
No trampling heard? no talking, as of parties
Met by assignment?

RAYMOND. Hah! in very truth
To all these questions, no.

EDWIN. I must believe thee;
The more I Am lost in wonder: but confess,
At my last question wherefore did thou start,
And arch thy brow significantly? speak;
Thou may reveal thy thoughts.

RAYMOND. Nay, good my Lord,
My thoughts are little worth.

EDWIN, I see you are cautious,
So let it pass -- How fares our sister? blooms
The rose of health fresh on Edwina's cheek,
As it was wont?

RAYMOND. It brightens, as it blows.

EDWIN. Yes, Raymond, she is fair; Heaven for the sins
Of this offending country made her fair;
Oh, I had treasured up such thoughts! -- But mark,
Edmund; the youth whom I have fathered, he,
Who in the beating surge of black despair,
But for my saving arm, had sunk outright
And perished fathoms deep, last night in the camp,
Soon as the guard had gone it is stated round,
Vaulted the trench like Perseus on his steed,
Then fled, as if he would overtake the wind,
Whither heaven knows.

RAYMOND. Fled; death to honor, fled!

EDWIN. Fled at this glorious crisis. Oh, it cuts
My heart's best hope asunder!

RAYMOND. Heavenly vengeance
Overtake and strike him --!

EDWIN. Peace! -- You must not curse him.

RAYMOND. Hah! wherefore not?

EDWIN. Because -- expect a wonder --
Because he is thy king.

RAYMOND. Uphold me, heaven!

EDWIN. Mine and thy king; of Alfred's line a king;
Edgar, called Atheling; the rightful lord
Of this ungrateful realm, which Kentish Harold
Audaciously usurps --

RAYMOND. What do I hear?
Alas I thought him poor, an orphan youth
The child of hard misfortune.

EDWIN. Think so still,
Or keep these thoughts untold.

RAYMOND. Had I known this,
I would have served him hourly on my knees:
O noble sir, direct me where to seek him,
How to restore him to these peaceful shades.

EDWIN. Not for the world; no, if we meet again,
Back to the English camp he shall repair;
The scene of all his hopes: Oh such a form
Of majesty with youthful beauty graced,
He was the soldier's idol; such a spirit
Beamed from his eyes, his presence like the sun
Gladden'd beholders hearts.

RAYMOND. I have a mistress,
A young and beauteous lady --

EDWIN. Name her not,
The source of all my shame: Shall it be said
That Edwin raised his sovereign to the throne,
Only to place a sister at his side?
Perish the thought! Now learn a mighty secret --
Matilda loves him; Harold's matchless daughter
Loves Edgar Atheling; her dower a kingdom:
Therefore no talk of Edmund and Edwina,
They meet no more. Now, Raymond, had I lodged
My secret in a light and leaky bosom,
Better my sword should rip it up at once
And take it back again -- But thou art honest.

RAYMOND. You were not wont to doubt me.

EDWIN. Nay, I will not.
Hah! what is this? who bade this music forth?

Clarinets at a distance. RAYMOND. My lord, I know not.

EDWIN. Whence proceeds it? Mark.

RAYMOND. If my ear fail not, from the beachen grove,
West of king Alfred's tower.

EDWIN. Lead to the place.

Exeunt. Edgar enters with foresters bearing clarinets. EDGAR. Now breathe a
strain, if your rude stops will let you,
Soft as a lover's sigh -- Nay, you're too loud --
Mark, where you have roused the gentle sleeping deer.
Fellows, begone; away! -- Edwina!

Edwina appears at a window. EDWINA. Edmund!
Oh, I have suffered a long age of absence.

EDGAR. Come then and make these few short moments blessed.

EDWINA. How shall I come? Tear down these iron bars
And leap into thine arms? What shall I do?

EDGAR. Goes to the castle gate and discovers it to be open. By all my hopes,
the castle gate is open;
Descend; be swift!

EDWINA. As thine own thoughts.

She disappears. EDGAR. (alone.) O Love,
Small elf, who by the glow-worm's twinkling light,
Fine fairy-finger'd child, can slip the bolt,
While the crammed warden snores, this is thy doing.
Lo, where she comes, so breaks the morning forth,
Blushing and breathing odours --
(Edwina appears) O thou trembler,
Rest on my faithful bosom; fairest, tell me,
Still do thou love? speak, is thine Edmund welcome?

EDWINA. Is the sun welcome to the wakeful eyes
Of the wreckt mariner, when over the waves
The long-expected dayspring of his hope,
Mounts in the worshipped east -- But why comes Edmund
Thus wrapped in darkness at this secret hour
As to a guilty meeting?

EDGAR. It Is the hour
Sacred to love and me, ere noisy labor
Wakens the sun, while yet the fairy elves
Dance in their dewy rounds; the silent hour
Before the lark her shrill-ton'd matins sings,
Or morning issues from the nuptial east,
And to the bosoms of the nursing hours
The newborn day commits: It is the hour
When every flying minute should be wafted
Back to the skies on downy wings of love.

EDWINA. Away, your words affright me; you consort
With mad ambition, Edmund, and your love
So gentle once, is like the wars you follow,
Fiery and fierce.

EDGAR. Instruct me in thy wishes;
Tell me what love should be.

EDWINA. Love should be pure,
Harmless as pilgrims kisses on the shrines
Of virgin martyrs; holy as the thoughts
Of dying saints, when angels hover over them;
Harmonious, gentle, soft; such love should be,
The zephyr, not the whirlwind, of the soul.

EDGAR. Yes, but my love, like never-ending time,
Will neither be determined, nor described.
The poet by the magic of his song
Can charm the listening moon, ascend the spheres,
And in his airy and extravagant flight
Belt wide creation's round; yet can he never
Invent that form of words to speak my passion.

EDWINA. If such your passion, why this secret meeting;
Why talk of silent hours? Let earth and heaven
Look on and witness to your love! so truth,
So nature speaks; I know no other language.

EDGAR. Oh, that the throne of this proud realm were mine,
That I might say before the applauding world,
Ascend, my lovely bride, and be a queen.

EDWINA. A queen! what idle dreams perplex thy fancy?
Are there no blessings for the poor and humble?

EDGAR. Yes, but a brother's curse --

EDWINA. A brother's curse!
Does he not love thee, wait upon thee hourly,
Talk of thee ever, bend down his proud spirit
Even to a vassal's homage? Nay, by heaven,
With an idolatry of soul he loves thee;
And shall he not applaud me for my choice?

EDGAR. He will renounce thee, hate thee for thy choice.

EDWINA. Away, I Will not believe it: hate, renounce!
It cannot be; hence with this dark reserve,
If thou know'staught, which honor should unfold,
I do conjure thee, speak; though late, confess.

EDGAR. By heaven, thy brother --

( EDWIN enters hastily.) EDWIN. Are you found, young sir?
O shame, shame, shame! Is this the friend, the hero?
Have I deserved this from you?

EDGAR. If to love
The best, the fairest of her sex is base,
Vile and ungrateful; if it be a sin
Morning and eve to name her in my prayers,
I am of all most guilty.

EDWIN. You abuse
The weakness of a fond unguarded orphan,
Parlying in secret by the moon's pale beam:
The tenderest flower that withers at the breeze,
Or, if the amorous sun but steal a kiss,
Drops its soft head and dies, is not more frail
Than maiden reputation; it is a mirror
Which the first sigh defiles.

EDGAR. Look at that form;
With all thy cold philosophy survey it,
And wonder, if thou can, why I adore.

EDWIN. Away, nor vex my too, too patient spirit
With this fond rhapsody: Hence, and to horse!
Buckle afresh your glittering armor on;
For England, not Edwina, now demands you,
By your thrice-plighted oath I do conjure you,
By all the world calls honest, by your hopes,
Come to the camp; if you return not with me,
The sun, which rises yonder in the East,
Goes not more surely to his evening grave
Than I to mine.

EDGAR. Lo, I obey your summons,
Fierce flinty warrior! in yond beachen grove
Stands my caparison'd and ready steed;
There on the trunk, whose living bark records
My loved Edwina's name, hangs up my sword,
My mailed corslet and my plumed crest,
With all the proud apparel of the war:
When I am furnished, I shall court admittance
To this fair presence and implore a smile,
As my last parting boon, which if obtained,
Nor spells, nor talismans shall be so potent
To shield my bosom in the bleeding field,
As the sweet magic of Edwina's eyes.

EDWINA. If thou have love or pity in thy soul,
Return, and tell the rest.

EDGAR. O death, to part!

(Exit.) EDWINA. Now, stern admonisher, I see my fate,
And I will bear it with what grace I can;
Not lightly, as philosophers prescribe
To others, when themselves are well at ease,
But deeply, feelingly, as one should do,
Whose heart by nature and by love made soft;
With sorrow and unkindness now is rent.

EDWIN. You love and you avow it -- righteous heaven!
What is there in the scope of human means,
Which my providing foresight has not summoned
To fence off this destruction? Lost Edwina;
Has not thy brother, like a faithful pilot,
Sounded this dangerous coast, where rocks and shallows
Wait for the wreck of honor's costly freight?
Have I not pointed to the baneful quarter,
Whence cold and blasting disappointment blows
Withering thy beauty's bloom?

EDWINA. Thou have, my brother,
Thou have done all that man could do to save me,
But heaven is over all.

EDWIN. When last we parted,
Thou helpless orphan, what was then my caution?

EDWINA. You cautioned me against unwary love;
You warned me how I listened, how I looked,
'Twas a vain warning; I had looked and listened,
And whilst I opened my weak heart to pity,
I let in love withal.

EDWIN. You let in madness.

EDWINA. Did you not pity? I have seen your eyes,
Unused to weep, turn fountains as they gazed!
Did you not love? Your very soul was Edmund's;
I know you will call it friendship; so did I,
But find too late 'twas love.

EDWIN. Call it despair,
For hope it must be never; call it death.
Sure some malignant planet ruled thy birth,
And thou art doomed to nothing but disaster;
Three nights and days thy widowed mother travailed
With fruitless pangs, the fourth succeeding morn
She blessed her newborn murderer and expired;
Then, as it is said, my father's shade did walk;
Then on the western tower the ominous owl
Scream'd at midday, the faithless misletoe
From its maternal oak untwin'd its arms,
And dropped without a blast.

EDWINA. No more; but strike;
Mine is the crime to be beloved by Edmund:
Draw forth thy sword and strike it to my heart,
That rebel heart, which will not be commanded,
But, spite of death and Edwin, dares to love.
Why do thou pause?

EDWIN. Strike to thy heart! O horror!
Not if an angel visibly descended,
And bade me give the blow.

EDWINA. Will thou not kill me?

EDWIN. By heaven, I would not harm thee to be Lord
Of sea and earth.

EDWINA. Then take me to thine arms,
For still thou love me; still thou art my brother.

Embracing. EDWIN. I am thy brother still; and hold thy love
Dearer than relics of departed saints,
Richer than hoarded piles of worshipped gold;
Come then and seek content in some calm dwelling,
Some silent convent from the world withdrawn,
Where prayer and penance make atonement sure,
Where meditation communing with heaven
Shall sooth the rebel passions into peace,
Refine the soul and conquer love itself.

EDWINA. Talk not of cells and convents; I am Edmund's.

EDWIN. Thou must forget the very name of Edmund.

EDWINA. His very name! why, for what cause? declare.

EDWIN. There is a cause, a cause approved by heaven,
And crowned with deathless glory: Search no further;
This hour he parts; return thou to thy rest --
When next ^e meet, thou shall applaud and thank me.
Go, go, Edwina -- nay -- It must be so.

Exit. EDWINA. (alone) Why then it shall be so: Let him to battle;
Tear us asunder -- I can only die;
When I am gone, his fame shall be immortal.
So when the bleak and wintry tempest rends
The mantling ivy from the worshipped sides
Of some aspiring tower, where late it hung;
The stately mass, as with a sullen scorn,
From its proud height looks down upon the wreck,
And disencumber'd from its feeble guest,
Bares its broad bosom and defies the storm.

EDGAR enters armed as for battle. EDGAR. Alone! O happy chance! at thy fond
bidding
Obedient I return.

EDWINA. Hah! what art thou?

EDGAR. Do thou not know me? Am I not thine Edmund?

EDWINA. Away! it is lost -- I must forget that name.

EDGAR. Coin what new name thou will: Let me be any thing,
So it is but what you love, I shall be happy.

EDWINA. Are these the soft habiliments of love?
This high proud plumage, these blood-stained arms?
Go to the mistress whom you serve, Ambition;
And talk no more of love.

EDGAR. By heaven I love thee
More than the sunburned earth loves softening showers,
More than new-ransom'd captives love the day,
Or dying martyrs, breathing forth their souls,
The acclamations of whole hosts of angels.

EDWINA. Why then leaves Edmund what so well he loves?

EDGAR. But to return more worthy of that love;
Can I, oh tell me, can thine Edmund sleep
In these calm haunts, whilst war's insulting shout
Fills the wide cope of heaven, and every blast,
That through this solitary forest howls,
Wafts to my ear my country's dying groans?

EDWINA. If groans can move thee, why so deaf to mine?
Mysterious youth, or now at once resolve me,
Or now for ever go; Who and what art thou?
Why does my brother wrest thee from my sight?
And why with that stern brow am I commanded
(Vain fruitless mandate) to forget my Edmund,
Forget thy very name and that dear hour,
When first he brought thee to these happy scenes?
What tender charges did he then impose!
How did his tongue run over in thy praise,
'Till, honoring Edmund for a brother's sake,
I soon perceived I loved him for his own.

EDGAR. Oh, there is such persuasion in thy looks,
I shall forget myself and tell thee all.

EDWINA. 'Twas then that Edwin told us thou wast sprung
From the best blood which England's Isle could boast;
He said that thou wast Edgar's nearest friend,
That with his crown thy fortunes had been lost;
Bade us revere thee, love thee as the king,
For that so close an union knit your souls,
Edgar and thou were one.

EDGAR. And truth he told,
For I am Edgar; I am England's king.

EDWINA. King! thou the king!

EDGAR. Be constant. -- I am Edgar.

EDWINA. After a pause, she sinks slowly on her knees. The heavens confirm your
right, and build your fortune
To its deserved greatness; on my knees
I beg a blessing on you, but for pity
Mock me no more, it is not noble in you,
And tortures my poor heart.

EDGAR. Hear me, Edwina. --

EDWINA. Fly me, disown me, leave me to my fate.

EDGAR. No, by this fond embrace I swear to live
For thee alone; when I forsake Edwina,
Let me chronicled to latest ages
For vile and false. -- Remembered in thy prayers,
As with impenetrable armor fenced,
Fearless I part; fairest, and best, farewell!
May each good spirit of the night and day
Watch round thee hourly! -- England and Edwina!

End of the First Act.
ACT II. SCENE I.
The English Camp. The royal Tent with the Banners of Harold unfurled. EDGAR
and EDWIN. EDWIN. EDMUND, your steed is feather-footed, light
As gossamour, and you, methinks, did ride,
As you would overtake the couriers of the sky,
Horsed on the sightless winds: The camp yet sleeps;
We have outstript the hour.

EDGAR. Mark, Edwin, mark,
How lovingly the strumpet winds salute
These slanting banners of the Earl of Kent:
Teach me some patience -- O ye ministering storms,
Where did you sleep, while usurpation grew
To this proud height?

EDWIN. No more: remember, Sir,
You are a subject here.

EDGAR. King Edmund's heir,
Can he be subject to Earl Goodwyn's son?
If thou would teach that lesson, sluice these veins
And let out Alfred's blood.

EDWIN. You are too loud:
Here comes Northumberland, a fiery spirit,
Which fourscore winters have not yet extinguished:
I pray you, though he be your house's foe,
Bear yourself gently toward him, 'twill be wisdom.

Enter NORTHUMBERLAND, SIFFRIC, WALTHEOF, and others. NORTHUMBERLAND. The king
not forth yet! Oh, it is the soul
Of discipline to harness with the sun:
Can thou not, Siffric, call to mind the day
When with a handful of Northumbrian kerns
I foiled the king of Scots on Tweda's brink?

SIFFRIC. 'Twas on Saint Jude betimes.

NORTHUMBERLAND. The grey-ey'd morn
Laughed to behold the vaunting sluggard fly,
As we did hollow him with hunter's cries
Back to his native wilds. Soft, who are these?
The faction of young Edgar: Said you not
These men had fled the camp -- But see where comes
Mercia, the princely brother of our king.

Earl of MERCIA with attendants. MERCIA. Warriors, well met: health and a happy
morn!
And may the sun, which dances on your plumes,
Still with new glories gild your conquering brows!
The king not yet abroad! still on his knees
For his dear people's sake. -- How wears the day?

NORTHUMBERLAND. Prince, till our royal leader shall come forth
There is no day: Let him once found to battle,
On piles of Norman slain we'll build him altars
High as Olympus; in the battle's shout
We'll chant our morning oraisons so loud,
That heavens high vault shall echoe with the peal.

EDGAR. How valiant-tongu'd we are! heavens favor guard us,
And keep off the old adage!

EDWIN. Be more patient,
And let his humor pass.

EDGAR. Hang him, vain dotard,
I sicken at his folly.

EDWIN. See! the King.

The curtain of the tent is suddenly drawn off, and King Harold appears: He
comes forward. KING. Nobles, all hail. O sight of joyful hope
For suffering England; patriot band of worthies
Confederate by the holiest league on earth
To the best dearest cause: How say you, friends,
Stand your hearts with us for immediate battle;
Do they all beat to the same martial measure,
And shall we forth at once?

NORTHUMBERLAND. Forth! Strike the drums;
Seize your bright spears, my gallant countrymen,
And let us drive these hungry wolves before us
Home to their howling forests.

KING. Valiant chiefs,
You hear Northumberland renowned in arms:
Is there amongst us one who would incline
To measures of more caution?

SIFFRIC. My dread Liege,
Well has Northumberland advised for battle;
Of friends, of fame abandoned be the man,
Who checks the warrior's ardour and imposes
Vile coward fears beneath the mask of caution.

EDWIN. I must confess my reason is not caught
By empty sounds, nor can I give my voice
For rash, intemperate and immediate battle:
The foe, dread Sir, is sixty thousand strong,
By hardy warriors led and trained in arms:
Snatch your bright spears; cries bold Northumberland,
And chase these wolves -- Alas, these wolves have fangs,
And will not fly for words.

NORTHUMBERLAND. Now by my life,
Edwin, thy heart is not with England's cause.

EDGAR. Not with his country's cause! Northumberland*
Were thou as great as pagan Hercules,
And I no better than thyself, old man,
Even such a withered palsied thing as thou art,
Yet would I tell thee to thy teeth it is false;
As wide as lowest hell stands off from heaven,
So do thy words from truth.

SIFFRIC. Who talks of truth?
Where was your truth last night, when, like a spy,
Darkling, alone, and as you hoped unseen,
You leapt the trench and fled?

EDGAR. Set out the lists,
Life against life, then see if I can fly,
Thou dastardly reviler.

KING. Peace! and hear me:
Why have thou left our camp; where and with whom
Did thou consume the night?

EDGAR. Are there no hours
Amidst a soldier's life sacred to love,
To friendship, to repose? I am no traitor,
Nor this my noble friend; let it suffice
I come a voluntary friend to claim
The privilege of my progenitors,
And die for England.

NORTHUMBERLAND. Perish he who would not!
This is the friend, my liege, of outlawed Edgar,
Of whom report prevails that he now harbors
Somewhere within this realm; let him be questioned.

KING. Not for another empire. O Northumberland,
By gentle habits let us draw men's hearts,
And bind them to us not enforcedly,
But lovingly and freely -- Hark, our trumpet!
Welcome, brave Reginald, what says the Norman
To our defiance?

REGINALD enters. REGINALD. Thus he bids me say,
Tomorrow with the sun he will expect you
Army against army on the plains of Hastings.

KING. Hear ye this, lords? Oh turn upon the foe
Those eyes that interchange their angry fires.
Shall it be so, brave friends? What says Lord Edmund?

EDGAR. There is my gage: Tomorrow be our witness,
Who ventures fairest in his country's cause,
Edmund or Siffric.

EDWIN. When we are called to arms
For England's safety, private feuds should cease,
And every son unite in her defense.

KING. Oh, let us bring one heart to this great cause;
Thus banded, who shall break us? To your posts
As friends and soldiers; let dissension die,
Learn silence of the foe, and keep good watch.
So farewell all? -- Edmund.

Exeunt lords. EDGAR. What wills the King?

KING. Stand at my side: Would thou could love me, Edmund,
As well as thou love Edgar: Why do eye me
As thou would measure me from heel to head?
I never did thee wrong: If thou have sorrows,
Give them to me; I Am loaded hard with cares,
For I Am a King; thine is a private lot,
Thou may be free and happy. Gallant Earl,
Will thou commit thy noble charge to me?
I would be private with him.

EDWIN. Royal sir,
The interest I have in him is thine:
Edmund, remember --

KING. Follow me.

EDWIN. Beware!

Exeunt King and Edgar. As EDWIN is going out, Lord WALTHEOF, who had waited in
the back scene, calls to him. WALTHEOF. Turn, noble Edwin; look upon a friend.

EDWIN. A friend, Lord Waltheof?

WALTHEOF. Have you then forgot
How often in early youth on Avon's banks
We waked the echoes with our rural sports?
Have you forgot our mutual binding oath
To royal Edgar's cause? Even now my heart
True to its former fires expanded swells
And labors with a second birth of love.

EDWIN. Where was your oath on that lamented day,
When Severn's stream ran purple with the blood
Of Edgar's murdered friends? Where was your love,
When at the side of stern Northumberland
You frowned defiance at me? Art thou not
The veriest courtier that ere pag'd the heels
Of pride-swoln majesty?

WALTHEOF. Were I the wretch,
So supple to ambition's sordid use,
So abject as thou make me, what forbids
But I should seize the lucky instant, fly
To the abused ear of the king and tell him --

EDWIN. What wou'd'st thou tell him?

WALTHEOF. What! that Edmund is --
But for the world's worth I Will not damn my honor:
Live Edgar but till Waltheof shall betray him,
And he must be immortal.

EDWIN. Art thou faithful;
May I believe thee? Oh, if thou betray'st him
Hell has not torments dire enough to plague thee.

WALTHEOF. Come I am in thy bosom -- Learn a truth;
This young Minerva, whom our English Jove
Leads to his wars -- Matilda -- shall be Edgar's.

EDWIN. Come to my heart; I do believe thee loyal
And noble as I Have known thee.

WALTHEOF. Why she loves him
To fascination.

EDWIN. Art thou sure of that?

WALTHEOF. Have I sight, hearing, do I live and wake?
Her very soul is Edmund's.

EDWIN. Grant she loves,
Can we be sure that he returns her love?

WALTHEOF. Does the sun warm the bosom that he shines on?
So must her beauty Edgar: Mark my project --
The king to superstition much inclines;
Peering in musty prophecies and fables;
Consulting with astrologers and seers,
Diviners and interpreters of dreams,
Omens and prodigies.

EDWIN. It Is ever thus
When the mind's ill at ease.

WALTHEOF. There is at hand
An ancient soothsayer of Scottish birth,
Duncan his name; even such a man, so white
And reverend with age, as might impose
Credulity upon the wariest; him,
By the enthusiastic monarch deemed
Oracular, will I dispose to speak
Of Edgar and his right --

EDWIN. Break off; behold
The princess comes.

WALTHEOF. Look, Edwin, what a form
Of pensive majesty: Marked you that sigh;
Those eyes, love's oracles? Poor stricken deer,
The shaft is in thy heart.

EDWIN. Let us withdraw.

Exeunt. MATILDA with her Attendants. A Guard. MATILDA. Soldier, retire; your
charge extends no further.
Sabina!

The Guard goes off. SABINA. What commands my gracious lady?

MATILDA. You told me on the way you had a suit;
What can my faithful handmaids ask in vain?

SABINA. It Is for a stranger, not ourselves, we ask;
A virgin suitor of no vulgar mein,
But fair in speech and feature; one who bears
The port and semblance of illustrious birth,
Though sorrow-struck and waining with despair.

MATILDA. Have you denied her aught? ah, if you have*
Or but demurred, me and yourselves you have wronged
And forfeited heaven's love: What is her suit?

SABINA. In these rude times protection and admission
Into our happy number.

MATILDA. Bring her to us.
Exeunt all but Sabina. Sabina, stay; there is pity in thine eyes,
If this poor stranger can provoke these drops,
My griefs will drown thee quite.

SABINA. Alas, what would thou?

MATILDA. What would I? be the poorest thing on earth,
Poorer than her whose miseries you weep for,
Be any thing, so I were free withal:
Then might I see him, wait upon him, watch
And pay him hourly worship. On our way
As I did meet the king, and bent my knee,
As is my morning custom, why, Sabina,
When I discovered standing at his side
Young Edmund's bright and blooming form before me,
Why did my heart, as with a sudden leap,
Spring to my trembling lips and stop my tongue,
That would have begged a blessing? Every sense
Revolted from its office; my rapt soul
Fled at my eyes; I fainted, sunk and fell.

SABINA. Ah fatal chance, that ever you should see him!

MATILDA. Deeper and deeper sinks the mortal shaft;
My bosom's peace is lost. Once I was happy;
Clear and serene my life's calm current ran,
While scarce a breezy wish provoked its tide;
Down the smooth flood the tuneful passions fell
In easy lapse and slumber'd as they passed.
Now what a change is wrought! O love, in age
Thou art indeed a child, in power a God.
How now, What stranger's this?

EDWINA enters, introduced by the Ladies of MATILDA's train. SABINA. You have
forgot,
The maid we spoke of.

MATILDA. Pray you pardon me --
Stranger, approach and fear not. I can see
Thou art not used to ask, and yet thy looks
Plead most enforcingly: If thou do need
Such shelter as these humble coverings give,
Here in the rear of danger thou may dwell,
And join thy prayers to our's.

EDWINA. Thanks, noble lady.
In yon fair vale, while peace was there, I dwelt:
One only brother cheered my orphan state,
And rich in flocks and herds serene we lived:
Him, the support and solace of my life,
Stern duty's iron hand has wrested from me,
And somewhere in this mighty camp he wars.
What was for me deserted and forlorn?
With one old faithful servant forth I came,
Led slowly on through unfrequented paths
To her, whose fame is bruited through the land,
Whose gentleness and pity climb heaven's court,
Like an accepted sacrifice.

MATILDA. No more.
Praise undeserved, what is it but reproach?
(This maid would seem less noble than she is)
Aside. How must I call thee, stranger?

EDWINA. Athelina.
(O heavenly god of truth, be not extreme
With thine offending creature, but accept
Necessity my plea.)
Aside.
MATILDA. Fair Athelina,
Such welcome as these angry times allow,
Freely thou have: Ours is no life of ease;
We must awake before the morning dawn,
Or look to have our slumbers broke tomorrow,
When these vast armies which thou fee'st shall join,
Rending heaven's concave with their rival shouts
In terrible confliction.

EDWINA. Power supreme!
Whose word can bid the gathering clouds disperse,
Smooth the vexed bosom of the furrowed sea,
And chain the stubborn and contentious winds,
When they unseat the everlasting rocks
And cast them to the sky, will thou permit
Thy creature man thus to deface thy works?
Or is he stronger and in less control
Than these fierce elements?

MATILDA. Banish complaint,
Take hope into thy heart, and every thought
Drive far away, that can infect the mind
With fear's unnerved ague. It Is the cause,
The cause, which sanctifies the warrior's zeal;
It is our country's just maternal claim
On all her sons to fight in her defense.

EDWINA. I will not whisper to the babbling winds
My ill-timed fears, but hush them in my breast,
And smile on sorrow, though my sad heart break.

MATILDA. Ah, am not I a woman like thyself?
Does thy heart tremble for a brother's life,
And shall a father's plant no cares in mine?
What have thou more at stake, unless perchance
Thy flocks and herds in yon sequestered vale,
Thy peaceful calm content outweighs a crown.

EDWINA. Ah, Edmund, Edmund, why did thou forsake me?

MATILDA. Whom do thou name?

EDWINA. I pray you pardon me,
The sad remembrance of an absent friend
Drew after it a short unheeded sigh,
The last which I will utter.

MATILDA. Much I fear
Thou have untold afflictions, secret griefs,
Which swell that bosom and provoke those sighs.
But, come, thy tender frame demands repose,
And these kind friends will lead thee to their tents.
Tomorrow, virgins, we must teach our throats
A loftier strain, and to the sounding harp
With songs of victory hail the rising morn.

End of the Second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Scene as before. EDWIN and WALTHEOF. WALTHEOF. LO, he has dropped the curtain
of his tent,
Which tokens privacy: Duncan is there;
I have armed the fiery zealot for the charge
With all the stars of heaven at his command,
To rouse the sleeping conscience of the king:
That done, my turn succeeds to mount the breach
Where superstition entered, whelm his soul
With Edgar's wrongs, and then 'twixt hope and fear
Fix this fair project.

EDWIN. Oh beware, Lord Waltheof,
In Edgar's veins runs the last hallowed stream
Of royal Alfred's blood.

WALTHEOF. What can defeat us?
Matilda's passion makes our purpose sure;
And for the King -- but hark, he is coming forth --

Exeunt. DUNCAN comes hastily out of the tent, followed by the King. KING.
Stay, Duncan, stay!

DUNCAN. Let me come forth.

KING. Oh, speak,
Oh answer me this once, prophetic Seer,
Shall we go forth and conquer?

DUNCAN. Man of sin,
Conquer thyself, take arms against ambition,
Drive that invader from thy heart, then talk
Of setting England free.

KING. What is my sin?

DUNCAN. And do thou ask? was it a trivial thing
From this fair vineyard to thrust out the heir,
And rule by spoil and rapine?

KING. I have sinned;
Yet I Have not slain him; still young Edgar lives.

DUNCAN. Lives he and do thou reign? Though thou should bribe
Legions of holy men to weary Heaven
Early and late with never-ceasing prayers,
Vain were their suit. Now mark me -- All night long
From setting to the rising sun I watched,
And on my aged knees put up loud prayers
And frequent for this hapless country's sake --

HAROLD. Heaven grant thy prayers! say, what declare the signs?

DUNCAN. Even in that moment when the midnight sphere
Central was poised, and yesterday expired,
On the left shoulder of the northern bear
Thy natal star arose! rayless and dim
And watery pale the horoscope appeared,
While from the threatening East the hostile Moon
Pushed thee with adverse horns, red-mailed Mars
Flamed in his planetary house, and scoul'd
With stellar rage askaunt.

KING. Disastrous signs!
What shall I do?

DUNCAN. Repent!

KING. With heart abashed
And low as to the dust I bow my head
To heaven's rebuke and thine -- What more? Oh speak!

DUNCAN. "Fight not till Edgar's found" --

KING. Till Edgar's found?
But when and where? proceed.

DUNCAN. "Thou have a daughter" --
I can no more: Who follows shall expound;
What he shall counsel, that pursue and prosper!

Exit Duncan. KING alone. Fight not till Edgar's found! -- So much is perfect:
Thou have a daughter -- there the prophet ceased;
Who follows shall expound -- Thus I am left.
This is thy fruit, Ambition; thus it seems
Possessions by ill deeds obtained, by worse
Must be upheld or lost; such league and concord
T^^ngs vicious hold, that trespassing in one,
We must offend in all; woe then to him,
Who from his neighbor's heap purloins a grain,
Yea but one grain; with such swift consequence
Crime follows crime, that none shall dare to say,
This and no more!

WALTHEOF enters unobserved by HAROLD. WALTHEOF. Thus Israel's monarch stood,
With eyes so wedded to the pensive earth,
When at the fable's close his conscience smote him,
While the stern messenger of God pronounced,
Thou art the man!

KING. Waltheof!

WALTHEOF. What would my liege?

KING. Approach! in truth you are welcome. I have seen
The old divining hermit, whom we met
Upon the eve of Standford's bloody day,
When Halfager with his Norwegian bands,
And traitrous Tosti fell beneath our swords.

WALTHEOF. And gives he victory still?

KING. Atonement now
Is all his theme, and penitence for wrongs
To Edgar done.

WALTHEOF. Hence with such idle dreamers!
What are the visions of the cloistered monk,
The hermit's phrensy, or the coward calls
Of backning Conscience to ambition's charms?

KING. Ambition's charms! Accursed be the hour
When first they caught my weak unwary heart!
Full in my view the stately phantom stood,
Her stature charmed me and the dazzling height
Fired my young blood! I sprung to her embrace;
The distance vanished and the steep ascent
Sunk at the touch; she with dissembling smiles
And meretricious glances met my joys;
Upon my head she placed a kingly crown;
But in the moment drew a poniard forth,
And plunged it in my heart.

WALTHEOF. Ah, who shall envy
Another's greatness; call another blessed,
When thus a king complains?

KING. I tell thee, Waltheof,
Had I the world at will, I Would yield it up
To be at peace with heaven.

WALTHEOF. Alas, my liege,
Are there no gentler terms of peace with heaven?
Methinks -- but I offend perhaps and press
On too high matters --

KING. I conjure thee speak:
My doom is on thy lips; it is thou alone
That can expound my fate.

WALTHEOF. Would thou atone
For wrongs to Edgar done, and purge thy soul
From it is contracted guilt, Thou have --

KING. Proceed --
Nor rack me with suspense.

WALTHEOF. Thou have a daughter --

KING. What follows? there the prophet ceased -- proceed.

WALTHEOF. And need I add the rest? Edgar -- Matilda --
How those soft names unite! there is music in them,
Might make the angriest star in heaven propitious.

KING. Join them; espouse them! -- is it thus you counsel?

WALTHEOF. If thus it please thee; think it else a sound,
Which dies and is forgot.

KING. Come to my bosom;
Thy voice to me is as the voice of heaven:
It shall be so; Edgar shall wed Matilda;
My darling child sure will obey and bless me.
Men's hearts shall be mine own; these factious lords
Will all come in --

WALTHEOF. Duncan shall chide no more --

KING. My country shall be saved -- but where is Edgar?
Now by the virgin mother of our Lord,
A bow shall not be bent against the foe,
Nor a stone vollied from the slinger's arm
'Till Edgar shall be found.

WALTHEOF. Then, ere the star
Of evening shall arise, expect him here.

KING. May I believe thee?

WALTHEOF. If I bring him not,
Let my head answer.

KING. I am whole again:
Now I have divination on my side;
Fight not, the prophet cried, 'till Edgar's found.
Lo! he is found, I may both fight and conquer.
O Waltheof, I do surely think that God
To wise and holy men sometimes reveals
A portion of his councils: Here we part --
I to Matilda; you in search of Edgar;
Whom if you bring, I live but to reward you.

Exit. WALTHEOF alone. Thus do I ever make all men mine own,
And still conforming to these changeful times,
Like ancient Janus double-fac'd, at once
Follow the setting, meet the rising sun.

Earl EDWIN enters. Welcome, brave lord, raised by the fairest hand
In England's Isle your prince ascends the throne:
Harold by Duncan's holy arts prepared
With greedy joy adopts the royal youth.

EDWIN. Thanks, powerful superstition, this atones
For all the mischief thou have wrought on earth!

WALTHEOF. Now in this awful interim, whilst dread
And trembling expectation hangs on all,
Oh let us bring the light of England forth!
So shines the day star out, after rude storms
Have shook the palsied night, and high in air
Hangs forth his glittering lamp to cheer the world;
At sight whereof the guilty waves subside,
And the vexed spirits of the deep disperse.

EDWIN. Would thou disclose the prince?

WALTHEOF. Else all is lost;
Vain is our hope, our reconcilement void,
The battle's lost, and England is no more.

EDWIN. Let me reflect -- Suppose that I revealed
His passion for Edwina --
Aside.
WALTHEOF. Doubt not, Edwin,
Nor for an empty scruple cast away
This sacred moment, upon which depends
All that is dear, our king's, our country's fate,
Fame, virtue, freedom, all that we esteem
Beneath the skies, all we expect above.

EDWIN. Go! to thy charge, O Waltheof, I commit
The fate of Edgar and of England; Go!
Yet stay -- resolve me, have thou weighed the danger?
Have thou with wary eye looked through the heart
Of this ambitious man? Art thou right, sure
There Is no dissimulation lurking there?
Swear to me this, as thou have hope in heaven,
And I will yield the prince.

WALTHEOF. So heaven to me
Its loving mercy deal, as I believe
In very truth there is not on earth that thing
Of Harold so desired, as this alliance.

EDWIN. Go then ere I recall the word, begone!
Tell the usurper -- but thy own discretion
Will tutor thee more wisely. -- Hence! it is past.

Exit Waltheof. EDGAR enters hastily. EDGAR. Edwin, thou'st been conferring
with lord Waltheof;
That man has eyes which penetrate the heart;
And he of all our English nobles here
Knows me for Edgar; make him then thine own;
Print on his lips the seal of holy faith,
And keep my name sacred as heaven's own records
Locked in thy breast.

EDWIN. Prince, do thou love thy country?
Wou'd'st thou preserve her matrons from dishonor,
Her youth from slavish bonds and chase these spoilers
From her affrighted shore?

EDGAR. Would I? just heaven
Thou know what I have done, and thou can tell
What more that spirit thou have given would do.

EDWIN. Nay, it is no irksome task. No toil, no danger,
But joy and love and glory crown the deed.

EDGAR. No more, but to the point.

EDWIN. In one plain word
Thus then I open all thy fate -- Matilda! --
Nay start not, Sir -- thy tried and loving servant,
Edwin, thy ever faithful creature tells thee
That thou must wed Matilda.

EDGAR. Hah! must wed!
What if I love her not?

EDWIN. All men must love her.

EDGAR. Must wed, must love! Away! Did the great master
Put in thy hand those fine and secret springs,
Which guide the various movements of the soul?
Rouse it to hate, or melt it into love?
No, there is that in every human breast,
Which heaven made free and tyrants cannot reach.

EDWIN. Will thou not meet the hand that lifts thee up
From low despair and seats thee on a throne?

EDGAR. Perish ambition! perish every hope
Rather than this should be!

EDWIN. Go then, ye sons
Of freedom, go! your sacred birthright fell
To Norman masters; hence, like scattered sheep
Without a shepherd, for there is none to watch
But hirelings; he, the master of the flock,
Shrinks from his duty and forsakes the fold.

EDGAR. Edwin, this patriot rage becomes thee well,
But let me glory in my choice, the crown,
Nay, was it mine, the world would be Edwina's:
And know, I Would rather be the roving kern,
That prints Arabia's sands with burning feet,
And send my heart amidst the tawny tribes
To fix where love should point, than be a king
To wed as sordid policy prescribes.

Exit. EDWIN alone. Death to my hopes, he has no soul for empire.
Heavens! that a man born for a nation's glory,
Can sell his birthright at so vile a price,
For such a toy as beauty! -- O Edwina,
(And must I call thee sister?) fatal siren,
Thou have done this: If Waltheof sees the King
Edgar is lost; that, that must be prevented
With my best speed, for oh! I love him still,
Still my heart tells me I would die to save him.

Exit. MATILDA and EDWINA. MATILDA. A little further yet -- I see you wonder
Why I have brought you to this place apart:
It is because a sympathy of soul
Draws and unites me to you; it is because
There sits a weeping cherub in your eyes,
That silently demands why I am sad,
And I must speak to it: The worldly-wise,
Who slowly climb by cold degrees to friendship,
Such are my scorn; at sight of Athelina
Affection from my breast sprung forth at once
Mature as Pallas from the brain of Jove.

EDWINA. Your bounty, like the sun, warms where it shines.
And what it feels, inspires.

MATILDA. O Athelina,
I am ordained to misery, soul-enslav'd
And sentenced sore against the heart's protest
To wed and be a wretch.

EDWINA. And who compels
Matilda! victim-like what tyrant drags thee
As to a pagan altar, there to offer
Constrained obeisance, and put on the vow
As slaves do fetters with an aching heart?

MATILDA. So wills my father; never till this hour
Did I behold him so possessed with passion,
So terrible in wrath.

EDWINA. O shame to nature!
And what is he amongst Europe's kings so great,
That you of force must wed?

MATILDA. Nor great is he,
Nor numbered amongst Europe's kings, but one,
Of whose inheritance there is not left,
Save the free air he breathes, and one faint spark
Of sickly hope, that visits his sad heart
To rack it with recollection of lost right.

EDWINA. What do I hear?

MATILDA. Nay thou can never guess him;
The last, the lowest in thy thoughts --

EDWINA. Indeed!

MATILDA. To sum up my afflictions in a word,
It Is Edgar Atheling.

EDWINA. Heavens grace forbid it!
Have they discovered him?

MATILDA. Who; What Is discovered?

EDWINA. Perish the meddling politic contriver,
Who set this mischief going! -- Oh if Edgar --

MATILDA. Who talks, who thinks of Edgar? You Are possessed.

EDWINA. Who can be patient and yet hear such things?
The king commands! what then? will he command
The soul and it is affections? Dearest lady,
Your father though he be, is he so great
As to give law to nature?

MATILDA. I am fixed:
Therefore be patient; had he asked my life,
I would obey and grant it, but my heart
That is another's; I cannot bestow
What I do not possess.

EDWINA. Then you will not wed --

MATILDA. To Edgar never, be assured of that.

EDWINA. Oh it is a deed will chronicle your name
In fame's eternal records; you disdain
To make a lying contract with your lips
And swerve with your affections; you are fixed;
You love another: Oh, may he you love,
(Kneeling I make it my most ardent prayer)
Be your reward and glory; live for you,
And you alone; and may you meet delights,
Pure as your virtue, lasting as your truth!

MATILDA. Kind Athelina, thanks? bear with my weakness,
And let me tell thee all my love's fond story
From the first hour I met him; the bright sun,
Smote on his helm, which shot a fiery gleam,
That dazzled all the plain; before his troop,
Armed at all points, upon a snow-white steed
Graceful he rode; invention never yoked
A fairer courser to Apollo's car,
When with the zephyrs and the rosy hours
Through heaven's bright portal he ascends the east,
And on his beamy forehead brings the morn.

EDWINA. A snow-white steed! New terrors strike my soul.
Aside.
MATILDA. At sight of me he stopped, and from his steed
Active and feathery-light he leapt to earth.

EDWINA. Give me your pardon; serves he in this camp?

MATILDA. Yes, but report prevails, he left the camp
Last night of the sudden; and this morn, it is sad,
Being returned, in presence of the King,
Some proud high-stomach'd lords did sharply urge
And whet him to much rage; him and his friend
Earl Edwin. --

EDWINA. Hah! it is he.
Aside.
MATILDA. Alas, what shakes you?
You start and tremble, and your up-cast eyes
Cling to heaven's throne: Know you the youth I speak of?

EDWINA. As yet you have not told his name.

MATILLA. It Is Edmund.

EDWINA. I had a friend and Edmund was his name,
But now that name's no more.

MATILDA. You had a friend --
I knew it, Athelina; yes I saw,
I saw your sorrows and I loved you for them;
Your friend is now no more -- Alas! Tomorrow
May lay my Edmund low as yours; but I,
I shall not live, as thou have lived, to tell it.
Oh, were he Edgar, had he Edgar's birth,
My young, unknown, untitled, blooming rustic,
Did his blood flow -- but what of that? My father
Reigns though a subject born, and so shall Edmund,
If virtue has an interest in heaven,
And England's throne outstands tomorrow's storm.

EDWINA. Indeed!

MATILDA. No power can stir me.

EDWINA. What if Edmund,
What if the youth you love perchance has made
Some humbler fair his choice --

MATILDA. Perish the thought,
It brings distraction with it: I command you
Not to suppose he can prefer another;
I took you for my comforter, and lo
You fix a scorpion to my breast.

EDWINA. A scorpion!
I pray you be not angry; I would kneel
And beg a blessing for you; but alas,
Leaden affliction lies so heavy on me,
Imagination cannot stretch a wing
To raise me from the dust.

MATILDA. Nay, now you melt me;
Prithee go in, good maid, I am right sorry
I spoke so harshly to you: Do not weep,
For my sake do not -- yet it is ever thus,
When the fond thought of some departed friend
Bursts unawares from memory's gushing fount,
And in a flood of sorrow whelms the soul.

Exeunt, End of the Third Act.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
EDWIN and WALTHEOF. EDWIN. LORD Waltheof, if thou have not yet disclosed
The royal youth, forbear, I do revoke
The word I gave thee. --

WALTHEOF. Why, on what pretense?

EDWIN. Edgar commands it; he disclaims ambition
And will not wed Matilda.

WALTHEOF. Will not wed?
Edgar, the most forlorn lost thing on earth,
Not wed Matilda? Strengthen my belief,
Some wonder-working power! It cannot be.

EDWIN. By heaven that knows my heart, I have assailed him
With words, tears, menaces, entreaties, prayers;
But all all fruitless: he is fixed.

WALTHEOF. For shame!
Some little groveling passion lurks about him,
Some vulgar village wench, whose ruddy health
And rustic manners fit his narrow soul,
And kindle something he mistakes for love.

EDWIN. Restrain yourself, my lord; your rage transports you,
And yet to show I scorn a mean disguise,
I own, in bitterness of soul I own it,
Your charge in part is true; there is a maid,
But not of low degree, whom Edgar loves,
Fatally loves, but not of rustic manners
Or name ignoble.

WALTHEOF. Whosoe'er she be,
Evil betide her beauty! she has poisoned
The dearest hopes of a most blessed creature;
Accursed as she is, she has undone
The happiness of one, with whom compared
She were an aethiop.

EDWIN. Peace, unholy railer,
You know not whom you curse -- she is my sister.

WALTHEOF. Thy sister! Ah, is this well done, my lord?
Thus am I used? thus like your basest lacquey,
Called and recalled and fooled at pleasure? death!
I stand for Harold; him I serve; if Edgar
Fondly prefers thy sister to the crown
Of England and Matilda, be it so;
Let Edgar so declare it to the king,
I shall fulfill my promise.

EDWIN. How, betrayer!
You pass no more this way but through my guard.
You stand for Harold, you; for Justice I,
Draws his sword. For suffering innocence, for truth and Edgar.

WALTHEOF. No more; put up your sword; the king advances:
Thus to be found were death to both.

Exit. EDWIN. Away!
It is my cause that conquers, not my sword.

Exit. The KING enters followed by EDGAR. KING. Now if indeed thou art that
loving friend
Of Edgar Atheling, which fame reports thee,
Lend me thy patient ear. You Are not to learn,
How, when his grandsire good king Edmund died,
Our English nobles put him from his right;
And me a subject born, earl Goodwyn's son,
Called to the vacant throne; so called, of force
Obeyed I them, and by a king's best title,
My subjects free election, took the crown.

EDGAR. And took you peace withal and fair content
And conscious rectitude? You took the crown!
So would not I, though it had brought dominion
Wide as the world. Have you sweet sleep at nights?
Do no ill-omen'd visions haunt your couch,
And smile the eyelids of the morn upon you,
When you salute the light?

KING. Urge me no further:
I see you are noble, and that manly plainness,
Which some would shrink from, knits me closer to thee:
Nay I will own thou have called up a thought,
Which like unweildy armor weighs me down.
I do perceive shame and remorse are handmaids,
That wait on guilt, as darkness on the night.

EDGAR. Methinks there needs no oracle for this;
To tell me man is cruel, false, ambitious,
Full of gross appetency and unjust,
Is to say man is man, a general truth,
To which your meanest sentinel shall witness
As amply as myself: call in your camp,
Our conference needs no privacy; you say
Heaven goads the guilty breast, and well you say,
For goad it shall, or heaven must not be heaven.

KING. Give me thy patience: what thou yet have heard,
Think but the prelude to more weighty matter.
I have a daughter -- need I call her fair,
Virtuous and full of grace? -- my realm's sole heiress:
Her, in respect of his descended right,
Though fortune-wreckt and bankrupt even in hope,
Edgar shall wed.

EDGAR. Shall wed?

KING. Hah! do thou pause?

EDGAR. No, if affection moves at thy command,
And love must follow where ambition points,
Edgar shall wed Matilda.

KING. This to me?

EDGAR. But if love owns no law but of the heart;
And if perchance some humbler maid has drawn
Such vows from Edgar's lips, as honor frames
And fond believing innocence admits,
Then --

KING. What then?

EDGAR. Not upon the peopled earth,
No, nor above the clouds resides that power,
Can wrench the conscious witness from his heart,
And say to Edgar he shall wed Matilda.

KING. What, shall a needy outlaw talk of love?
A beggar plead affections and reject
Her, to whom Europe's kings have knelt in vain?

EDGAR. Yes, for since beggars have aspired to crowns,
Kings have declined to beggars.

KING. Hence, audacious,
Nor feign for Edgar, what were Edgar present
And known he dare not for his life avow.

EDGAR. Know then it is Edgar speaks, it is Atheling
Rejects your offered terms, with scorn rejects them.

KING. Thou Edgar!

EDGAR. I am Edgar.

KING. Guards! arrest him.
Guards advance. Yet stay; a moment's pause: Let me be calm;
Collect thy scattered thoughts; we yet are friends.

EDGAR. No, when I league with guilt and yield to fear
What honor should withhold, heaven shall meet hell,
Things the most fierce and opposite in nature
Shall start from their extremes and band together.
Fly to thy guards, defenseless and embay'd,
With only truth and justice on my side,
Both naked, both unarmed, I do defy thee.

KING. Do thou defy me? take back thy defiance,
With death to better it.

As Harold is giving the signal to the guard for arresting Edgar, Matilda
enters hastily. MATILDA. Health to my father!
Why dart thine eyes such angry lightnings forth?
Why stand these guards like hounds upon the slip?
Is this their victim? ah! can he offend?
Never looked guilt like him; he errs perhaps
And with too bold a speech affronts the ear
Of majesty; a stranger is not bound
To all a subject's forms: Let me prevail;
Send him aside and hear thy daughter speak.

KING. My daughter shall be heard; is there a thing
I ever yet denied thee? Lead him off,
And wait our pleasure. -- Hah! that look has language.
As the guard lead off Edgar, Matilda looks tenderly at him. Matilda, know
thou him thou do survey
With such fond scrutiny?

MATILDA. You bade me know him,
Protect and cherish; by his youthful graces
Conquered yourself, you turned them upon me:
And now what cause alas! provokes this change?

KING. Thou art the cause; it is for thy sake he dies.

MATILDA. Die for my sake? Not if his death could add
Myriads of years to my extended life,
And every year bring myriads of delights.

KING. These are empassion'd words: Alas, my child,
If thou do love this youth --

MATILDA. Thou will destroy him;
It is the savage policy of kings.

KING. Thou love him then -- confess.

MATILDA. To desperation,
To death.

KING. Then heaven cannot afflict thee deeper.

MATILDA. I know it, but your daughter, Sir, can die:
I speak for nature; mine is not a heart,
That can transfer affection; tear him hence,
You tear life too, there is no room for Edgar.

KING. Say thou for Edgar? He, that youth is Edgar.

MATILDA. Harold catches her, as she is falling, in his arms. After a pause she
proceeds. Save me, support me! -- O my much-loved father,
If he, that youth be Edgar, would thou kill
Him that shall be my husband.

KING. What but killing
Merits that monster, who rejects Matilda?

MATILDA. Rejects Matilda? Am I then rejected?
Oh that some friend had plunged a dagger here,
Ere I had met this moment!

KING. Nay, be patient.

MATILDA. Let me behold him and I will be patient.
Was thine ear faithful? did no wrongs provoke him?
I found thee high in wrath, he too was angry,
He was, he was and spoke he knew not what.

KING. Grant heaven he did! I am no practiced suitor,
And undeserved misfortune makes men proud.
Hoa, guards! -- produce the youth you have in charge.
May he who armed thine eyes, inspire thy lips!
See where he comes --

Exit King. EDGAR enters guarded. Prince, (so I now must call you)
If, while it pleased you to assume the name
And simple style of a plain Scottish knight,
Friendship for Edmund caused me to omit
What Edgar's high pretensions might have claimed,
I shall expect your pardon.

EDGAR. Take my thanks,
For they are much thy due.

MATILDA. Nay I am told
You are too proud to be Matilda's debtor,
Crowns, by her hand presented, you reject
And scorn the encumbered boon: Vindictive Edgar,
Is it your sport to steal away our hearts,
Like heathen Jove, beneath a borrowed form,
Then reassume the god, ascend your skies,
And leave the slighted maid to die with weeping?

EDGAR. What shall I say? that I disclaim ambition?
That long estranged and exiled from my realm,
My heart forgets its home and draws no sighs,
Which point to England and my native right?
Or with an eye of cold philosophy
Shall I affect to view that radiant form,
And not confess its charms? I feel their power,
But cannot give that heart which is another's.

MATILDA. Another's! where, in what proud realm is found
She, from whose sight diminished rivals shrink,
And leave the choice of all mankind to her?

EDGAR. In rural silence dwells the maid I love,
With her in some lone corner of your isle,
Far from ambition's walk, let me reside,
Nor shake the quiet of Matilda's soul.

MATILDA. Sure of all forms, which cruelty assumes,
Humility can most insult mankind:
Away, nor cheat me with these fairy scenes;
There is no beauty in our isle for Edgar,
No soft sequestered maid, no truth, no love,
Save what this fond rejected heart contains.

EDGAR. Thus urged, it were meanness to withhold the truth:
In Hackley's shades a Sylvan goddess holds
Her lonely haunts; Edwina is her name;
Earl Edwin's sister --

MATILDA. Take her, and be still
That abject thing thou art; take Edwin's sister,
A subject beauty fits a subject's choice.
Go to my father, tell him thou have pierced
His daughter's heart, and give him stab for stab:
Away, away! thou have thy full revenge.

EDGAR. Revenge! my heart disclaims it: O Matilda!
My prayers -- I can no more -- farewell for ever!

Exit. As EDGAR is parting from MATILDA, EDWINA enters. EDWINA. It Is Edgar! --
Hah, he parts and sees me not.

MATILDA. Stay, Athelina, turn, beloved maid,
Turn from that monster thine abhorrent eyes;
Approach and save me!

EDWINA. What afflicts Matilda?

MATILDA. And is there need of words? break, break, my heart!
Open thou prisonhouse of the soul, dissolve
And give a wretched captive it is release!

EDWINA. Be calm.

MATILDA. As death. Why looked you on that youth?

EDWINA. I looked not on his face.

MATILDA. Ah if thou had,
If thou had looked, thou would have loved like me,
And like me been a wretch.

EDWINA. Alas, I pity thee.

MATILDA. Then thou have loved, for love will teach thee pity.
Coud'st thou believe it, he, (O heaven!) that Edmund,
Whose very name's a lie; that Edgar Atheling
For Edwin's sister slights, rejects Matilda;
A princess for a clown; me for Edwina.
Strike her smooth form all over with lep'rous blanes,
Ye sprites, whom magic incantations charm!
Shake her with palsied ugliness, ye demons,
And so present her to her lover's arms
To kill him with the touch. -- O Athelina,
If thou do love me join and aid the curse!

EDWINA. Shall I curse her, who never has offended?

MATILDA. Turn then on him thy deepest direst curse;
Call up the damned, and darken heaven with spells.

EDWINA. Mercy forbid!

MATILDA. No mercy, but revenge:
Give me revenge. He dies.

EDWINA. Ah take my life:
Lo, at thy feet a wretched virgin kneels
And prays for mercy.

MATILDA. Hence! you will anger me.

EDWINA. I would I could: Turn thy revenge on me;
But spare my Edgar's life.

MATILDA. Thy Edgar say thou?
Who and what art thou? Speak.

EDWINA. I am Edwina.

MATILDA. What do I hear? thou art --

EDWINA. I am Edwina:
Here is that bosom thou would plant with sores
And spotted leprosy, that fatal form,
Which thou would rouse the demons up from hell,
To strike with palsied ugliness; behold! --
I am the wretch whom thou did call to aid
Thy curse on Edgar: Mark how I will curse him.
O all ye saints and angels, every spirit
Kneeling. Who wing'st this nether air with pinions dipped
In heaven's etherial dew, make him your care,
And, gathering over his head your plumed band,
Form a celestial canopy above him
To fence off this destroyer!

MATILDA. Peace, deceiver:
Thy prayers are vain; he dies this moment. --

She is going. EDWINA. Stay!
Though not in pity, yet in honor hear me:
I ask no mercy; prayers indeed are vain;
Edwina pleads not even for Edgar's life:
For if when I, the fatal cause of all,
Lie at thy feet a bloody breathless corse,
Thy rage should still demand his guiltless life,
Who shall oppose it? All that I shall do,
All that I can, is thus -- to die for Edgar.

Offers to kill herself, but is prevented by Matilda. MATILDA. Stop thy rash
hand; thou shall not die: This courage
Dazzles my rage; I stiffen with surprise;
Thy presence, like the fascinating eye
Of the fixed basilisk, takes motion from me
And roots me in the earth --

EDWINA. What shall I say?
I own thee wretched and myself the cause:
But do not let remorseless fury rend
The god from out thine heart, which nature's hand
Set up, as in a shrine of human kindness,
That misery like mine might find a shelter.

MATILDA. No more; I once had pity; the poor bird,
Which kills herself to feed her gaping brood,
Was not more pitiful; but it is past;
The wolf has slain the lamb; bloody revenge
Has thrust out all remorse -- I must have vengeance.

EDWINA. Take it; it is in thine hand -- Take full revenge:
Thou have a dagger, strike to Edgar's heart;
Lay his loved form a breathless corse before thee,
And sat thy thirst for vengeance -- Hah! it is past --
Heaven opens in thine eyes.

MATILDA. It Is in my heart:
I feel its breath, like dew, descend upon me;
Amidst the whirl of passion Mercy sits,
And whispers patience in a voice so charming,
To hear is to obey -- Thy Edgar lives.

EDWINA. Lives he? May angels waft the word to heaven,
And bring a blessing thence!

MATILDA. Stay not to thank me,
Bear from my sight that too-engaging form:
Leave me to my afflictions, they will stay with me,
And be my close companions -- Fare thee well!

EDWINA. Farewell, thou suffering virtue! Oh, remember,
Remember Edgar --

Exit Edwina. MATILDA. Whither was I sinking,
When this bright deed restored me? So the wretch
With felon steps, on murderous act intent,
Steals on the sleeping night; when if at once
Launched from sulphurous clouds the vollied fires
Quick-glancing burst upon his ruffian head
With dazzling bright suffusion, horror-seiz'd,
Trembling, aghast he starts, lets fall the knife
Even at the victim's throat and flies -- as I do.

Exeunt severally. End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
Harold is discovered in his Tent before break of Day; the Guards in various
Attitudes resting on their Arms: He rises from his Couch and advances. KING.
WHEN will this night have end? arise, break forth;
I Am weary of invoking thee, O sun!
Lo, in yon red'ning cloud I see thee mount;
Not as you are wont with odour-breathing gales,
Serene and marshalled by the dancing hours
Up to the laughing East; but warrior-like
With rattling quiver and loud stormy march
And bloody ensigns, by the furies reared
Aloft and floating in the flecker'd sky:
So shall the day be suited to its deeds.
A trumpet. Stand to your arms there, soldiers! Up, awake!

The guards rise. Earl of MERCIA enters. MERCIA. Hail to my king and brother!
on my knee
I beg a boon.

KING. What is it, gallant Mercia?

MERCIA. The leading of the Kentishmen.

KING. It Is thine:
Draw the firm phalanx forth; it is thine to guide
The thunder of the war: There be thy post.
Farewell! The word is victory or death.
Exit Mercia. He speaks to one of the Guard. Come hither, Soldier! haste thou
to lord Reginald,
Bid him to plant his bowmen in the copse,
Which flanks the Norman camp, he knows the place;
Thence as our foes advance with level front
And regulated files, he may perplex
And gall their battle -- Take this ensign, Soldier,
In Standford's fight I saw thee bravely win it,
Defend it now as bravely.

SOLDIER. With my life.

Exit Soldier. WALTHEOF enters. WALTHEOF. Health and a happy morn to England's
king!
Would heaven, that all our warriors like their chief
Had thus outstript the sun!

KING. Where is the promise,
With which so high you fed my pampered hope?
Edgar rejects my suit: no power can move him.

WALTHEOF. Alas, you are too mild.

KING. He Is deaf to reason.

WALTHEOF. Be deaf to him, O Heaven, when he does kneel
And cry for mercy! Put your terrors forth,
My life upon it he yields.

KING. Set him before us.

Exit Waltheof. EDGAR enters guarded. EDGAR. Your messenger convened me to your
tent;
Lo, I expect your pleasure.

KING. Mark me then,
While to thy free election I hold up
Two different mirrors; in the one you see
The fair presentment of a kingly crown,
Where love and beauty weave the nuptial knot,
That binds it to thy brow; in plainer terms,
My daughter and my empire wait thy choice.

EDGAR. I have a vow noted in heaven's own volume,
Where saints have witnessed it.

KING. Oh seize the moment!
If you espouse my daughter I go forth
To certain conquest; from my soul I think
That England's fate now hangs on thy resolve.
Heal then the breaches of the land, my son,
And make us all one heart. Come then, ye nations,
And shroud old Ocean with your hostile sails;
By her own sons defended and beloved
England shall stand unshaken and secure,
And only fall, when time itself expires.

EDGAR. Bid me go forth; conduct me to the charge:
Plant me upon the last forlornest hope,
Where the fight burns, where the mad furies toss
Their flaming torches, and wide-wasting death
Up to the ribs in blood, with giant stroke
Widows the nations: thither let me go
To fight, to fall; but never dare to hope
Though you would a Seraph's eloquence to tempt,
A Seraph's truth to vouch for your prediction,
That I would yield my bosom to disgrace,
Cancel the vow which I have given Edwina,
And save my country at my soul's expense.

KING. Then know, obdurate --

EDGAR. What?

KING. My country calls;
Trumpets sound a charge. It Is her last awful invocation; hark!
The altar burns; a royal lady waits,
And this her bridal dower: receive it, prince;
He tenders the crown to Edgar. What can a king give more? What has a father
More dear to offer than his only child?

EDGAR. Forbear; it is mockery when the soul is fixed.

KING. Then thou art lost -- Oh yet preserve thy country!

EDGAR. My honor and my oath --

KING. Thy life --

EDGAR. My love.

KING. Die then! What hoa! my guards. Strike off his head.

MATILDA enters hastily and interposes herself between EDGAR and the Guards, as
they are advancing to seize him MATILDA. Strike off his head! By him who made
the heavens,
Whose great primaeval interdiction cries
Through all creation's round, thou shall not kill,
I do adjure you stop! The guards fall back.

KING. What phrensy moves thee?

MATILDA. Or spare him, or expect to see me fall
And dash my desperate brains. -- Upon my knees,
Father, I do beseech thee, grant him life.

NORTHUMBERLAND, SIFFRIC, and other Chiefs enter. NORTHUMBERLAND. To horse,
dread sir; brace on your beaver strait,
Caparison with speed, and meet the sun,
Who throned and beaming on the upland edge,
Stands in his fiery wane with glowing wheels
And panting coursers to behold a scene,
Worth his diurnal round.

KING. Warriors, lead on!
Though hell assume her thousand hideous shapes,
Phantoms and fiends and fierce anatomies
To shake me from my course; though Duncan cross me
With auguries and spells, though this proud youth
Bid sharp vexation with its wolfish fangs
Harrow my heart, in me is no delay.
For thee, my child, whose intercession turns
Yet once again from this devoted head
The uplifted hand of death, take, since thou will,
The thankless life, thou make so much thy care;
And now farewell!
Embracing Matilda.
MATILDA. The god of battle guide thee!
I will not shame thee with a tear; Farewell!

KING. Come forth, bright sword; hence, nature, from my heart:
Now take me, England; I am all thine own.

Exit with his train. MATILDA. Go, ye brave English; go, as ye are wont,
To glorious conquest: Oh remember, friends,
Ye strike for us, for freedom, for your country.
Angels of victory surround your host
And fight upon your side. Transporting sounds!
A distant shout. With joyful shoutings they salute their king,
And strike their shields in token of applause.
Edgar!

Turning from the side scene to Edgar. EDGAR. Matilda! Arm me with a sword;
Or, like the Decii, self-devoted thus
I Will rush upon the foe.

MATILDA. Yet e're the shock
Of battle severs us perchance for ever,
Resolve me, had it been my lot to meet thee,
With free affections and a vacant heart,
Cou'd'st thou have deigned to cast away a thought
On lost Matilda? Ah, Could thou have loved her?

EDGAR. Born to each grace, with every virtue blessed,
How can Matilda ask of Edgar this?
Sure I were lost to every manly feeling,
If honored thus, I should forbear to hold,
Whilst memory lives, thy image present here,
And cherish it with gratitude, with love.

MATILDA. It is enough: Hear, angels, and record it!
Now take this sword; if in yon bleeding ranks
You meet the King, or fainting with his wounds,
Or pressed with numbers, think he had a daughter,
And save her father, as she rescued thee.

Matilda is going. EDGAR. Even to the teeth of death I will obey thee.
Yet stay! one word -- It Is to exact from virtue
More than frail nature warrants; yet thy soul
Is large; Oh say, will thou protect Edwina?

MATILDA. Whilst I have life.

EDGAR. Then thou art truly great.

MATILDA. What, know thou not Edwina is my guest?

EDGAR. Edwina here! thy guest!

MATILDA. One tent contains us:
Beneath a borrowed name (Oh let the truth
Henceforth be sacred!) she besought protection;
I took her, laid her nearest to my heart,
And fed her with its best, its dearest hopes --
But hark! the battle joins -- Farewell for ever.

Exit. A general charge. EDGAR. Live, live and save Edwina! Hark, they shout!
There Is victory in the sound. O day and night!
They stop, they turn. Behold, the Normans fly;
I see bright glory flaming in the van;
Tiptoe she stands in skiey-tinctur'd stole,
Her head high-rear'd and pointing to the skies,
With pinions bent for flight: Stay, godlike vision,
And let me fly to snatch -- Edwina!

EDWINA enters. As he is hastening out, EDWINA meets him. EDWINA. Edgar!
And do we live to meet? Oh, snatch the moment,
And save thyself and me. Whence this impatience?
Why that disordered rolling of thine eye?
What ails thee, prince?

EDGAR. And can thou ask? -- Behold!

EDWINA. O horrible! a scene of death --

EDGAR. Of glory;
Of fame immortal, of triumphant rapture --
And would thou hold me here?

She takes hold of his hand. EDWINA. Will thou forsake me?

EDGAR. Let go my hand: if you persist, Edwina,
To hold me thus, a thousand, thousand furies,
And each more horrible than death shall haunt me,
'Till phrensy-struck, with mine own hand I seize
This recreant heart and pluck it from my breast.

EDWIN enters hastily. EDWIN. Thus art thou found? Through deluges of blood,
Launched from the noblest veins in all this Isle,
Fighting I sought thee: Fly, ill-fated prince --

EDGAR. What do I hear? Is it not victory?

EDWIN. Curse on the strumpet Fortune, she revolts
And sides with Normandy, their seeming flight
Was but a feint; upon the word they halted,
Checked in their mid career; then wheeling swift
With thick-clos'd files charged our disordered ranks,
That reeled upon the shock: A faithless band
Led by Earl Waltheof, that still veering traitor,
Went over to the foe.

EDGAR. Lives Harold yet?

EDWIN. From helmet to the heel all red with blood,
And gash'd with glorious wounds, he called me to him,
And bade me say, that with his dying breath
To thee and to Matilda he bequeathes
All that is left of England.

EDGAR. Lead me to him.

EDWINA. To death as soon.

EDWIN. Retire to safer ground.

EDGAR. Retire! shall Edgar fly, whilst Harold fights?
Off, let me go.

EDWINA. Nay, if my arms cannot hold thee --

EDGAR. O thou soft Siren! take her noble Edwin,
Take my soul's better part before I sink
To infamy -- Oh, take her from my heart.

Exit. EDWINA. If thou have love or pity in thy bosom,
Haste and preserve him!
Exit. Edwin. Oh, this rives my heart.
Earth, earth, receive a wretch.

She falls on the ground. MATILDA enters with attendants, having discovered
EDWINA on the ground, she advances hastily to her. MATILDA. She faints; she
falls!
Look up, Edwina! Is it death's resemblance,
Or death itself? she lives. Help me to raise her.

They raise her. EDWINA. Matilda!

MATILDA. Start not! I am yet thy friend.

EDWINA. Fly then and save -- O heaven!

MATILDA. Thy Edgar -- No.
I saw your hero dart into the fight
As the trained swimmer springs into the flood.

EDWINA. Art thou a woman?

MATILDA. Would to heaven I were not!
Then had I grappled to your warrior's side
And struck for England, for my father -- Oh!
I looked but now, and saw a storm of blood,
A raging ocean scattered over with wrecks:
Fired at the sight I snatched a javelin up
Some warrior's haste had dropped -- the feeble weapon
Fell from my woman's hand: Again I looked,
No English banner floated in the air,
Save where my father fought; revolting nature
Shrunk from the scene, and soon a scalding flood
Of tears burst forth that quenched these orbs of sight.

EDWINA. Where shall I turn?

MATILDA. To death.

EDWINA. Dreadful resort!

MATILDA. And yet when Hope, our last kind nursing friend,
Forsakes her patient's couch and dark despair
Puts out that light, which like a nightly beacon
Points to the harbor, where the foundering bark
Of misery may steer, Ah whither then
Shall life's benighted passenger resort,
But to oblivion and the all-covering grave?

EDWINA. Why then, when death had armed my uplifted hand,
Did thou prevent the blow and bid me live?

MATILDA. Live but till Edgar falls, then rear the blow,
I Will not prevent it -- Hah, what bleeding man!

NORTHUMBERLAND enters, supported by Soldiers. NORTHUMBERLAND. A little onward
yet -- Enough, enough!
Good fellow, hold thy kerchief to my side.
Run one of you and bring me speedy word,
What troops those are, which wilfully maintain
A dying kind of combat; if there is hope,
Make signal with your hand and shout -- staunch, staunch my wound --
My curse upon that Norman boar Fitz Hugh,
His tusk has ripped my heart strings; yet I cleft him,
Did I not, soldier? -- Soft, for mercy's sake,
Jesu Maria, what a pang was that!
Look out; no sign of hope? -- None, none; all is lost --
He smites his breast with anguish. Hence, stand off,
He breaks from the soldiers who support him. Wide as the grave I rend this
bleeding breach.
He tears open his wound. Fall England! fall Northumberland -- It Is past.

He falls into his soldiers arms and expires. MATILDA. Farewell, stout heart!
how better thus to fall
By death hewn down, than to outlive the leaf,
And drop a sapless ruin! let me view thee:
Is death no more than this? Why thou, Edwina,
Or I, or any one may do as much.
Life, like a worn-out garment, is cast off
And there is an end: I thank thee for the lesson,
'Twill stand me much in use -- bear him away.

The soldiers take off the body. EDGAR enters with EDWIN and Soldiers. EDWIN.
He lives, he comes! hence to the winds, my fears;
There Is blood upon thy scarf.

EDGAR. Then it was struck
From Norman veins.

MATILDA. Where is my father?

EDGAR. Hah!
Edwin!

EDWIN. My lord.

EDGAR. The foe suspends pursuit,
And calls his conquering legions back from slaughter;
Run, Edwin, run and take this ensign with thee;
Here on the craggy summit of the cliff
Wave it aloft, and call the stragglers up
To form upon the heights; these still are ours.

Exit Edwin. MATILDA. Where is my father? Where are all the heroes,
Whom I have seen return triumphant home,
With victory eagle-wing'd upon their helms?

EDGAR. All lost with thousands upon thousands sunk
And swallowed up in death?

MATILDA. Death, say thou?

EDGAR. Hearken!
The hireling troops had fled; one native phalanx
Fatally brave yet stood; there deep-engulph'd
Within the Norman host I found thy father,
Mounted like Mars upon a pile of slain:
Frowning he fought, and wore his helmet up,
His battered harness at each ghastly sluice
Streaming with blood; life gushed at every vein;
Yet lived he, as in proud despite of nature,
His mighty soul unwilling to forsake
Its princely dwelling; swift as thought I flew;
And as a sturdy churl his pole-axe aimed
Full at the hero's crest, I sprung upon him
And sheathed my rapier in the caitiff's throat.

MATILDA. Did thou? then thou art faithful. Open wide
And shower your blessings on his head, ye heavens!

EDGAR. A while the fainting hero we upheld,
(For Edwin now had joined me) but as well
We might have driven the mountain cataract
Back to its source, as stemmed the battle's tide.
I saw the imperial Duke, and with loud insults
Provoked him to the combat, but in vain;
The pursey braggart now secure of conquest
Rein'd in his steed, and winged his squadron round
To cut us from retreat; cold death had stopped
Thy father's heart; even hope itself had died:
'Midst showers of darts we bore him from the field,
And now, supported on his soldiers pikes,
The venerable ruin comes. Behold!

The body of Harold is brought in. MATILDA. Soldiers for this last mournful
office thanks!
Bear him within the tent, upon the couch
Lay ye the body, spread his mantle over him,
And all depart: For this I thank you, Nature,
That when you sent calamity on earth,
And bade it walk over all this vale of tears,
You sent deliverance also, and with death,
And with a landmark, bounded its domain,
As opened an asylum in the grave.

The body is carried into the tent, Matilda follows. Exit Matilda. EDWINA. Lo,
where she follows her dead father's body,
She has a soul that will not bend to grief
And disappointment.

EDGAR. Haste, beloved maid,
And force her from the body --

Exit Edwina. Earl SIFFRIC enters. SIFFRIC. And do thou live, brave youth;
do thou survive
Those miracles of valor which I saw,
And blushing saw? for Oh, too sure I wronged thee;
Give me thy pardon; thou have more than conquered.

EDGAR. Siffric, enough! It is not now a time.
For English hands to strike at English hearts,
Else -- but it is past. Where Is old Northumberland;
Where valiant Mercia? Ah! is it so with both?
Earl Siffric makes signal of their death. EDWIN returns with soldiers.
Welcome, brave Edwin! thou bring'st hope for England.

EDWINA comes out of the Tent. EDWINA. Horror on horror! when will death have
end?
Some fiery dog star reigns and deadly madness
Strikes all below the moon. Scarce had they set
Their mournful burden down, when ^ollowing quick
She rushed into the tent, and raising up
Her father's mantle, snatched one eager look;
Then with uplifted eyes and heaving sighs
Seizing his sword with strong determined grasp
Plunged it into her breast. Behold, she comes!

MATILDA enters supported. MATILDA. It Is done! the faithful point has reached
my life,
And spoke it is errand fairly: Now, my soul,
Now spread thy wings, and fly.

EDWINA. O killing sight!

EDGAR. O deed of horror!

MATILDA. Hush, no more of that.
Think thou the Almighty's mercy shall not reach
To take affliction in? look well at me;
Of friends, crown, country, kinsmen, father rest,
Love-lorn, of reason more than half beguiled,
Heart-broke and struck from out the book of hope,
What could I do but die?

EDGAR. Heaven's joys receive thee!

MATILDA. Amen! the voice is Edgar's, but my eyes
Grow dim, alas, it is hard I cannot see thee:
Give me the crown; quick, reach it to my hand.
They bring the crown and present it to Matilda. Ay, now I have it, shorn of
power indeed,
But light'ned of it is cares; Edgar, over thee
This radient circle like a cloud may pass,
But thy posterity to latest time
Shall bind it on their brows. Receive it, prince,
And noble as thou art, Oh, spare the dead
Nor stir my father's ashes with thy curse.

Edgar receives the crown. EDGAR. Peace to his shade, so heaven my sins forgive
As I thy father.

MATILDA. It Is enough: farewell!
Life's storm is past; wave after wave subsides,
The turbid passions sink and all is peace:
Ambition, jealousy, nay love itself,
Last, lingering, drops into the grave and dies.

She sinks into the arms of her attendants and expires. EDGAR. There fled a
mighty soul -- Angels, receive it,
And waft it to the mansions of the blessed!
And art thou mine? -- To the Crown.
Friends, soldiers, subjects now,
Lord Edwin, Siffric, England's brave remains,
I, Edgar Atheling, king Edmund's heir,
Now take this mournful relic of my right.
If you are with me, warriors, strike your sheilds.
Thanks, gallant countrymen!

They strike. EDWIN. Lo, on his knee
Edwin salutes thee; king of England, hail!

EDGAR. Come to my heart, my friend, my more than father!

To Edwin. SIFFRIC. Siffric, the convert of thy valor, kneels
And every faculty of head, heart, hand,
To thy free service dedicates.

EDGAR. Arise!
And take, ('it is all your king can give) my thanks.
And now, my fair betrothed, reach forth thine hand,
And touch this golden symbol, whilst I swear,
Here standing in the awful eye of heaven,
To share it with Edwina.

EDWINA. On my knees
I yield thee thanks, whilst before heaven I swear,
Though thou had nothing to bestow but chains
And beggary and want and torturing stripes
And dungeon darkness, still thy poor Edwina
For thee alone shall live, with thee shall die.

EDGAR. Now, warriors, how resolve you? View that field;
The Norman, like a lion, swill'd with slaughter,
Sleeps over his bloody mess; our scattered troops
Collect and form around.

SIFFRIC. We live in Edgar;
Save the last hope of England and retreat.

EDGAR. Retreat! shall English warriors hear that word
And from an English king! No, Siffric, never.
Unfurl the Saxon standard! See, my lords,
Twice taken in the fight and twice recovered,
The hereditary glory lives with Edgar.
Beneath that banner godlike Alfred conquered;
Beneath that banner, drenched in Danish blood,
My grandsire Iron-sided Edmund fought;
Wrench'd from my infant grasp, a bold usurper
Seized it, possessed it, died in it is defense:
And shall I, in the tame respect of life,
With close-furl'd ensigns, trailing in the dust,
Halt in the rear of fame? No, gallant English,
Turn not, but as the galled panther turns,
To lick his wounds, and with recruited fury
Spring to the fight afresh: So turn; so stand!
And from this height, ennobled by your valor
Hurl bold defiance to the foe beneath.

Drums, etc. THE END.

