NEXT DOOR NEIGHBORS; A COMEDY.

NEXT DOOR NEIGHBORS; A COMEDY; IN THREE ACTS. FROM THE French Dramas
L'Indigent and Le Dissp^^^. AS PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL, HAY-MARKET.

BY MRS. INCHBALD.

DUBLIN: PRINTED FOR MESSRS. P. BYRNE, W. SLEATER, J. MOORE, J. RICE, J.
HALPEN, A. GRUEBER, J. JONES, J. ME^AIN, R M BUTLER, W. JONES, R. WHITE, R.
M'ALLISTER, AND A. PORTER. M,DCC,XCI.

PROLOGUE,
By T. VAUGHAN, ESQUIRE.
Spoken by MR. BANNISTER JUN.
To PUFF, or not to Puff -- that is the Question --
Puff by all means, say I, it helps digestion.
To prove my maxim true, pray read the Papers --
From Quacks of State, to those who cure the Vapors.
You Will find them, one and all, puff high their skill,
Though nine in ten, are oft'ner found to kill. --
Yet Puff's the word, which gives at least a name,
And oftener gains the undeserving Fame:
Or wherefore read we of Lord Fanny's Taste,
Of me -- an Actor -- wonderfully chaste!
And yet so squeamish is our Lady elf,
She Would rather di^ -- than paragraph herself;
So fixed on me -- the Prologue speaking Hack,
To stop, with Puff direct, the Critic Pack,
Who yelp, and foaming, bark from morn to night,
And when run hard -- turn tail -- then snap and bite;
Putting the timid Hare-like-Bard to flight.
To such, the best and only Puff to hit,
Is that which honest CANDOR must admit,
A Female Scribbler is an harmless Wit;
And who so harmless as our present Bard,
Claiming no greater or distinct reward,
Than what from free Translation is her due,
Which here in fullest trust she leaves to you:
With this remark -- Who own their Debts with pride,
Are well entitled to the Credit Side.
And as for those with whom she makes so free
They Will never complain of English Liberty;
But glory to behold their Tinsel shine,
Through the rich Bullion of the English Line.
Fear then avaunt! Trust to a BRITISH JURY --
With them, an honest Verdict I Will ensure you:
Let Echo catch the sound -- It Is PRATT Vide, Earl CAMDEN's celebrated and
Constitutional Speech and Opinion on the subject of Libela.
enacts,
You're Judges of the Law, as well as Facts.
On this she rests her Cause, and hopes to find,
As Friends, and Next Door Neighbors, you will be kind;
At least, this only punishment-ensure,
A Frown -- and that is severe enough, from you.
Thus puffed -- I freely to the Court commit her,
Not doubting, as a Woman, you will acquit her --
And now join issue, Sirs, without delay --
Judging from written Evidence our Play,
And -- send her a good Diliverance, I pray.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Sir George Splendorville Mr. PALMER. Mr. Manly Mr. KEMBLE. Mr. Blackman Mr.
BADDELEY. Mr. Lucre MR. R. PALMER. Lord Hazard Mr. EVATT. Willford Mr. ALCKIN.
Henry Mr. PALMER, Jun. Bluntly Mr. BANNISTER, Jun.
WOMEN.
Lady Caroline Seymour Mrs. BROOKS. Lady Bridget Squander Mrs. HEARD. Evans
Mrs. EDWARDS. Eleanor Mrs. KEMBLE.
Other Ladies, Gentlemen, Servants, etc.

SCENE -- LONDON.

NEXT DOOR NEIGHBORS. A COMEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE I. An Antichamber at Sir GEORGE SPLENDORVILLE's, adjoining a Ball room.
Enter BLUNTLY, meeting a Servant in Livery. Bluntly. COME, come, is not every
thing ready? Is not the ball-room prepared yet? It is past ten o'Clock.


Servant. We have only to fix up the new chandedelier.


Bluntly I Will have no new chandelier.


Servant. My master said the last ball he gave, the company were in the dark.


Bluntly. And if you blind them with too much light, they will be in the dark
still.


Servant. The musicians, sir, wish for some wine.


Blunty. What, before the ball begins? No, tell them if they are tipsy at the
end of if, it will be quite soon enough.


Servant. You are always so cross, Mr. Blunty, when my master is going to have
company.


Bluntly. Have not I a right to be cross? For while the whole house is in good
humor, if there was not one person cross enough to take a little care, every
thing would be wasted and ruined through extreme good temper. A man crosses the
stage. Here, you -- Mister -- Pray are you the person who was sent with the
chandelier?


Shopman. Yes, sir.


Bluntly. Then please to take it back again -- We don't want it.


Shopman. What is your objection to it, sir?


Bluntly. It will cost too much.


Shopman. Mr. Bluntly, all the trades people are more frightened at you than at
your master. -- Sir George, Heaven bless him! never cares how much a thing
costs.


Bluntly. That is, because he never cares whether he pays for it or not -- but
if he did, depend upon it he would be very particular. Tradesmen all wish to be
paid for their ware, don't they?


Shopman. Certainly, sir.


Bluntly. Then why will they force so many unnecessary things, and make so many
extravagant charges as to put all power of payment out of the question?


Enter EVANS: -- The Tradesman goes off at the opposite Door. Bluntly. How do
you do, Mrs. Evans? Suddenly.


Evans. What makes you sigh, Mr. Bluntly?


Bluntly. What makes you smile?


Evans. To see all the grand preparations for the ball this evening. I
anticipate the joy my lady will take here, and I smile for her.


Bluntly. And I sigh for my master. -- I foresee all the bills that will be
brought in, for this evening's expense, and I anticipate the sorrow it will one
day be to him.


Evans But consider, Mr. Bluntly, your master has my lady's fortune to take.


Bluntly. Yes, but I consider he has your lady to take along with it; and I
prophecy one will sick by him some time after the other is gone.


Evans. For shame. -- My lady, I have no doubt, will soon cure Sir George of
his extravagance.


Bluntly. It will then be by taking away the means. -- Why, Lady Caroline is as
extravagant as himself.


Evans. You are mistaken. -- She never gives routs, masquerades, balls, or
entertainments of any kind.


Bluntly. But she constantly goes to them whenever she is invited.


Evans. That, I call but a slight imprudence -- She has no wasteful
indiscretions like Sir George. For instance, she never makes a lavish present.


Bluntly. No, but she takes a lavish present, as readily as if she did?


Evans. And surely you cannot call that imprudence


Bluntly. No, I call it something worse.


Evans. Then, although she loves gaming to distraction, and plays deep, yet she
never loses.


Bluntly. No, but she always wins -- and that I call something worse.


A loud rapping at the street door. Evans. Here Is the company. Will you permit
me, Mr. Bluntly, to stand in one corner, and have a peep at them?


Bluntly. If you please. Rapping again. What spirit there is in that, Rat, tat,
tat, tat. -- And what life, frolic, and joy, the whole house is going to
experience except myself. As for me, I am ready to cry at the thoughts of it
all. Exit.


Enter LADY CAROLINE. L. Caroline Here, the first of the company. I am sorry
for it. EVANS comes forward. Evans, what has brought you hither?


Evans. I came, my lady, to see the preparations making on your account -- for
it is upon your account alone, that Sir George gives this grand fe^e.


L. Caroline. Why, I do flatter myself it is. -- But where is he? What is it
o'clock? -- It was impossible to stay at the stupid opera. -- How do I look? I
once did intend to wear those set of diamonds Sir George presented me with the
other morning -- but then, I reflected again, that if --


Evans. Ah, my lady, what a charming thing to have such a lover -- Sir George
prevents every wish -- he must make the best of husbands.


L. Caroline. And yet my father wishes to break off the marriage -- he talks of
his prodigality -- and, certainly, Sir George lives above his income.


Evans. But then, Madam, so does every body else.


L. Caroline But Sir George ought undoubtedly to change his conduct, and not be
thus continually giving balls and entertainments -- and inviting to his table
acquaintance, that not only come to devour his dinners and suppers, but him.


Evans And there are people malicious enough to call your ladyship one of his
devourers too.


L Caroline. As a treaty of marriage is so nearly concluded between us, I
think, Mrs Evans, I am at liberty to visit Sir George, or to receive his
presents, without having my character, or my delicacy called in question. A
loud rapping The company are coming: is it not strange he is not here to
receive them. Exit EVANS.


Enter two Ladies and a Gentleman, who curtsy and bow to LADY CAROLINE. -- SIR
GEORGE enters at the opposite door, magnificently dressed. Sir George. Ladies,
I entreat your pardon; dear Lady Caroline excuse me. I have been in the country
all the morning, and have had scarce time to return to town and dress for your
reception.


Another rapping. Enter MR. LUCRE, LORD HAZARD, LADY BRIDGET SQANDER, etc. Sir
George. Dear Lucre, I am glad to see you.


Mr. Lucre. My dear Sir George, I had above ten engagements this evening, but
they all gave place to your invitation.


Sir George. Thank you. -- My dear Lady Bridget --


L Bridget. It is impossible to resist an invitation from the most polished man
alive. Sir GEORGE bows What a superb dress! in his hearing, as he turns away
and what an elegant deportment.


Mr. Lucre. After speaking apart with SIR GEORGE. No, I am not in a state to
take any part at Pharo -- I am ruined. -- Would you believe it Sir George, I am
not worth a farthing in the world.


Sir George. Yes, I believed it long ago.


Mr. Lucre. Now we are on that subject -- could you lend me a hundred pounds?


Sir George. Taking out his pocketbook. I have about me, only this bill for
two hundred.


Mr. Lucre, That will do as well -- I am not circumstantial. Takes it. And my
dear Sir George command my purse at any time -- all it contains, will ever be
at your service.


Sir George. I thank you.


Mr. Lucre. Nay, though I have no money of my own, yet you know I can always
raise friends -- and by heaven! my dear Sir George, I often wish to see you
reduced to my circumstances, merely to prove how much I could, and would, do to
serve you.


Sir George. I sincerely thank you.


Mr. Lucre. And one can better ask a favor for one's friend than for
one's-self, you know: for when one wants to borrow money on one's own account,
there are so many little delicacies to get the better of -- such as I felt just
now. -- I was as pale as death, I dare say, when I asked you for this money --
did not you perceive I was?


Sir George. I cannot say I did.


Mr. Lucre. But you must have observed I hesitated, and looked very foolish.


Sir George. I thought for my part, that I looked as foolish. -- But I hope I
did not hesitate.


Mr. Lucre. Nor ever will, when a friend applys to you, I Will answer for it --
Nor ever shall a friend hesitate when you apply.


Lord Hazard. Taking SIR GEORGE aside. The obligations I am under to you for
extricating me from that dangerous business --


Sir George. Never name it.


Lord Hazard. Not only name it, Sir George, but shortly I hope to return the
kindness; and, if I do but live --


Sir George. To the company. Permit me to conduct you to the next apartment.


Lady Caroline. Most willingly, Sir George. I was the first who arrived; which
proves my eagerness to dance.


Sir George. Aside to her. But let me hope, passion for dancing was not the
only one, that caused your impatience.


As the company move toward the ball-room, Mr. LUCRE and LORD HAZARD come
forward. Mr. Lucre. Oh! there never was such a man in the world as the master
of this house; there never was such a friendly, generous, noble heart; he has
the best heart in the world, and the best taste in dress.


The company exeunt, and the music is heard to begin. SCENE II. An Apartment,
which denotes the Poverty of the Inhabitants. HENRY and ELEANOR discovered.
Eleanor. It is very late and very cold too, brother; and yet we have neither
of us heart to bid each other good night.


Henry. No -- beds were made for rest.


Eleanor. And that noise of carriages and link-boys at Sir George
Splendorville's, next door, would keep us awake, if our sorrows did not.


Henry. The poor have still more to complain of, when chance throws them thus
near the rich, -- it forces upon their minds a comparison might drive them to
despair, if --


Eleanor. -- If they should not have good sense enough to reflect, that all
this bustle and show of pleasure, may fall very short of happiness; as all the
distress we feel, has not yet, thank Heaven, reached to misery.


Henry. What do you call it then?


Eleanor. A trial; sent to make us patient.


Henry. It may make you so, but cannot me. Good morning to you. Going.


Eleanor. Nay, it is night yet. Where are you going?


Henry. I don't know. -- To take a walk. -- The streets are not more
uncomfortable than this place, and scarcely colder.


Eleanor. Oh, my dear brother! I cannot express half the uneasiness I feel when
you part from me, though but for the shortest space.


Henry. Why?


Eleanor. Because I know your temper; you are impatient under adversity; you
rashly think providence is unkind; and you would snatch those favors, which
are only valuable when bestowed.


Henry. What do you mean?


Eleanor. Nay, do not be angry; but every time you go out into this tempting
town, where superfluous riches continually meet the eye of the poor, I tremble
lest you should forfeit your honesty for that, which Heaven decreed should not
belong to you.


Henry. And if I did, you would despise and desert me?


Eleanor. No: not desert you; for I am convinced you would only take, to bring
to me; but this is to assure you, I do not want for any thing.


Henry. Not want? -- Nor does my father?


Eleanor. Scarcely, while we visit him. Every time he sees us we make him
happy; but he would never behold us again if we behaved unworthy of him.


Henry. What! banish us from a prison?


Eleanor. And although it is a prison, you could not be happy under such a
restriction.


Henry. Happy! -- When was I happy last?


Eleanor. Yesterday, when your father thanked you for your kindness to him. Did
we not all three weep with affection for each other? and was not that happiness?


Henry. It was -- nor will I give up such satisfaction for any enticement that
can offer. -- Be contented Eleanor, -- for your sake and my father's, I will be
honest -- Nay, more. -- I will be scrupulously proud -- and that line of
conduct which my own honor could not force me to follow, my love so you and
him, shall compel me to. -- When, through necessity, I am tempted to plunder,
your blushes and my father's anguish shall hold my hand. -- And when I am urged
through impatience, to take away my own life, your lingering death and his,
shall check the horrid suggestion, and I will live for you.


Eleanor. Then do not ever trust yourself away, at least from one of us.


Henry. Dear sister! do you imagine that your power is less when separated from
me? Do you suppose I think less frequently on my father and his dismal prison,
because we are not always together? Oh! no! he comes even more forcibly to my
thoughts in his absence -- and then, more bitterly do I feel his misery, than
while the patient old man, before my eyes, talks to me of his consolations; hi^
in e^^al comforts from a conscience pure, a mind without malice, and a heart,
where every virtue occupy a place. -- Therefore, do not fear that I should
forget either him or you, though I might possibly forget myself.


Exit. Eleanor. If before him I am cheerful, yet to myself I must complain.
Weeps And that sound of festivity at the house adjoining is insupportable!
especially when I reflect that a very small portion of what will be wasted
there only this one night, would be sufficient to give my dear father liberty.


A rapping at the door of her chamber, on the opposite entrance. Eleanor. Who Is
there?


Mr. Blackman. Open the door. without.


Eleanor. The voice of our landlord. Goes to the door. Is it you, Mr. Blackman?


Blackman. Yes, open the door. Rapping louder.


She opens it: -- BLACKMAN enters, followed by BLUNTLY. Blackman. What a time
have you made me wait I -- And in the name of wonder, why do you lock your
door? Have you any thing to lose? Have not you already sold all the furniture
you brought hither? And are you afraid of being stolen yourself?


ELEANOR retires to the back of the stage. Bluntly. Is this the chamber?


Blackman. Yes, Sir, yes, Mr. Bluntly, this is it.


BLACKMAN assumes a very different tone of voice in speaking to BLUNTLY and
ELEANOR; to the one be is all submissive humility, to the other all harshness.
Bluntly. This! Contemptuously.


Blackman. Why yes, sir, -- this is the only place I have left in my own house,
since your master has been pleased to occupy that next door, while his own
magnificent one has been repairing. -- Lock yourself up, indeed! Looking at
ELEANOR. -- You have been continually asking me for more rooms, Mr. Bluntly,
and have not I made near half a dozen doors already from one house to the
other, on purpose to accommodate your good family. -- Upon my hanour, I have
not now a single chamber but what I have let to these lodgers, and what I have
absolute occasion for myself.


Bluntly. And if you do put yourself to a little inconvenience, Mr. Blackman,
surely my master --


Blackman. Your master, Mr. Bluntly, is a very good man -- a very generous man
-- and I hope at least he has found me a very lucky one; for good luck is all
the recommendation which I, in my humble station, aspire to -- and since I have
been Sir George's attorney, I have gained him no less than two lawsuits.


Bluntly. I know it. I know also that you have lost him four.


Blackman. We'll drop the subject. -- And in regard to this room, sir, it does
not suit, you say?


Bluntly. No, for I feel the cold wind blow through every crevice.


Blackman. But suppose I was to have it put a little into repair? That window,
for instance, shall have a pane or two of glass put in; the cracks of the door
shall be stopped up; and then every thing will have a very different appearance.


Bluntly. And why has not this been done before?


Blackman. Would you have me be laying out my money, while I only let the place
at a paltry price, to people who I am obliged to threaten to turn into the
streets every quarter, before I can get my rent from them?


Bluntly. Is that the situation of your lodgers at present?


Blackman. Yes. -- But they made a better appearance when they first came, or I
bad not taken such persons to live thus near to your master.


Bluntly. That girl looking at ELEANOR seems very pretty -- and I dare say my
master would not care if he was nearer to her.


Blackman. Pshaw, pshaw -- she is a poor creature -- she is in great distress.
She is misery itself.


Bluntly. I feel quite charmed with misery. -- Who belongs to her?


Blackman. A young man who says he is her brother -- very likely he is not --
but that I should not enquire about, if they could pay my rent. If people will
pay me, I don't care what they are. Addressing himself to ELEANOR I desire you
will tell your brother when he comes in, that I have occasion for the money
which will be due to me tomorrow -- and if I don't receive it before tomorrow
night, he must seek some other habitation.


Bluntly. Hush, Mr. Blackman -- if you speak so loud, you will have our company
in the next house hear you.


Blackman. And if they did, do you think it would spoil their dancing? No, Mr.
Bluntly. -- And in that respect, I am a person of fashion. -- I never suffer
any distress to interfere with my enjoyments.


Eleanor. Coming to him. Dear sir, have but patience a little while longer. --
Indeed, I hope you will lose nothing.


Blackman. I will not lose any thing.


Going. Eleanor. Following him. Sir, I would speak a single word to you, if you
will be so good as to hear me?


Bluntly. Ay, stay and hear her.


Eleanor. Looking at BLUNTLY. But I wish to speak to him by ourselves.


Bluntly. Then I Will withdraw.


Blackman. What have you to say? In anger.


Bluntly. Hear her, Mr. Blackman -- or may none of her sex ever listen to you.
Exit.


Blackman. If it is only to entreat me to let you continue here, I am gone in
an instant. -- Come, speak quickly, for I have no time to lose -- Come, speak,
speak.


Eleanor. But are you resolved to have no pity? You know in what a helpless
situation we are -- and the deplorable state of my poor father.


Weeping. Blackman. Ay, I thought what you had to say -- farew^l, farewell.


Eleanor. Lying hold of him. Oh! do not plunge us into more distress than we
can bear; but open your heart to compassion.


Blackman. I cannot -- it is a thing I never did in my life.


Going, he meets BLUNTLY, who stops him. Bluntly. Well, have you granted her
request?


Blackman. I would do a great deal to oblige you, Mr. Bluntly -- and if you
will only give your word for the trifle of rent owing, why, I am not so
hard-hearted but I will suffer her to stay.


Bluntly. Well, well, -- I will give my word.


Blackman. But remember, it is not to be put down to your master's account, but
to your own. -- I am not to give credit.


Eleanor. Not am I to lay my brother under an obligation of this nature. To
BLUNTLY I thank you for your offer, sir, but I cannot accept it.


Blackman. In extreme anger. What do you mean by that?


Bluntly. Perhaps she is right.


Eleanor. My brother would resent my acceptance of a favor from a stranger.


Blackman. Your brother resent! A poor man resent! Did you ever hear of any
body's regarding a poor man's resentment?


Eleanor. No -- nor a poor woman's prayers.


Blackman. Yes, I will regard your prayers, if you will suffer this gentleman
to be your friend.


Eleanor. Any acquaintance of yours, Mr. Blackman, I must distrust.


Blackman. Do you hear with what contempt she treats us both?


Bluntly. But perhaps she is right -- at least, in treating one of us so, I am
sure she is -- and I will forgive her wronging the one, for the sake of her
doing justice to the other.


Enter HENRY: he starts at seeing BLACKMAN and BLUNTLY. Henry. Who are these?


Blackman. "Who are these?" Did you ever hear such impertinence? Going up to
him Pray who are you, sir?


Henry. I am a man.


Blackman. Yes -- but I am a lawyer.


Henry. Whatever you are, this apartment is mine, not yours -- and I desire
you to leave it.


Blackman. But tomorrow it will be mine, and then I shall desire you to leave
it, and force you to leave it.


Henry. Eleanor, retire to the other chamber; am I sorry I left you.


Leads her off. Blackman. And I am sorry that I and my friend should come here
to be affronted.


Bluntly. Mr. Blackman, I will not be called names.


Blackman. Names, sir! What names did I call you?


Bluntly. Did not you call me your friend? I assure you, sir, I am not used to
be called names. I am but a servant whose character is every thing -- and I Will
let you know that I am not your friend.


Blackman. Why, you blockhead, does not your master call himself my friend?


Bluntly. Yes, my master is a great man, and he can get a place without a
character, -- but if I lose mine, I am ruined; therefore take care how you
miscal me for the future, for I assure you I will not bear it. I am not your
friend, and you shall find I am not.


Exit in great anger, BLACKMAN following. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. An Apartment at SIR GEORGE SPLENDORVILLE'S.
Enter SIR GEORGE followed by BLUNTLY. Sir George. What Is o'clock? Rubbing his
eyes.


Bluntly. Just noon, sir.


Sir George. Why was I waked so early?


Bluntly. You were not waked, sir, -- You rung.


Sir George. Then it was in my sleep -- and could not you suppose so? -- After
going to bed at five, to make me rise at noon! in a violent passion What am I
to do with myself, sir, till it is time to go out for the evening?


Bluntly. You have company to dinner you know, sir.


Sir George. No, it is to supper -- and what am I to do with myself till that
time?


Bluntly. Company again to supper, Sir?


Sir George. Yes, and the self-same company I had last night -- I invited them
upon Lady Caroline's account -- to give her an opportunity of revenge, for the
money she lost here yesterday evening -- and I am all weariness -- I am all
lassitude and fretfulness till the time arrives. -- But now I call to mind, I
have an affair that may engage my attention a few hours, You were giving me an
account, Bluntly, of that beautiful girl I saw enter at Blackman's?


Bluntly. Yes, sir, I saw her late last night in Mr. Blackman's house -- she
lodges there.


Sir George. Indeed? In Blackman's house? I am glad to hear it.


Bluntly. And he has assured me, sir, that she and her family are in the
greatest poverty imaginable.


Sir George. I am glad to hear it.


Bluntly. They have been it seems above a twelvemonth in London, in search of
some rich relations: but instead of meeting with them, the father was seen and
remembered by an old creditor who has thrown him into prison.


Sir George. I am very glad to hear it.


Bluntly. But the young woman, Sir, has been so short a time in town, she has,
seemingly a great deal of modesty and virtue.


Sir George. And I am very glad to hear of that too -- I like her the better --
you know I do -- for I am weary of that ready compliance I meet with from the
sex


Bluntly. But if I might presume to advise, sir, -- as you are so soon to be
married to her ladyship, whom you love with sincere affection, you should give
up this pursuit.


Sir George. And I shall give it up, Bluntly, before my marriage takes place --
for, short as that time may be, I expect this passion will be over and
forgotten, long before the interval has passed away. -- But that brother you
were mentioning --


Bluntly. I have some reason to think, that with all his poverty, he has a
notion of honor.


Sir George. Laughing Oh! I have often tried the effect of a purse of gold with
people of honor. -- Have you desired them to be sent for as I ordered.


Bluntly. I have, Sir.


Sir George. See if they are come. Exit BLUNTLY Ah! my dear Lady Caroline, it
is you, and only you, whom I love with a sincere passion! but in waiting this
long expected event of our marriage, permit me to indulge some less exalted
wishes.


Enter BLUNTLY. Sir Gorge. Are they come?


Bluntly. The young man is in the antichamber, sir, but his sister is not with
him. Speaking to HENRY who is without Please to walk this way -- my master
desires to see you,


Sir George. No, no, no -- I do not desire to see him, if his sister is not
there. -- Zounds you scoundrel what did you call him in for?


Enter HENRY, and bows. SIR GEORGE looks at him with a careless familiarity --
BLUNTLY leaves the room. Sir George. Young man, I am told you are very poor --
you may have heard that I am very rich -- and I suppose you are acquainted with
the extensive meaning of the word -- generosity.


Henry. After an hesitation. Perhaps not, sir.


Sir George. The meaning of it, as I comprehend, is, for the rich to give to
the poor. -- Have you any thing to ask of me in which I can serve you?


Henry. Your proposal is so general, I am at a loss what to answer -- but you
are no doubt acquainted with the extensive meaning of the word, pride, -- and
that will apologize for the seeming indifference with which I receive your
offer.


Sir George. Your pride seems extensive indeed -- I heard your father was in
prison, and I pitied him.


Henry. Did you, Sir? -- Did you pity my father: -- I beg your pardon -- if I
have said any thing to offend you pray forgive it -- nor let my rudeness turn
your compassion away from him, to any other object.


Sir George. Would a small sum release him from confinement? Would about a
hundred pounds --


Henry. I have no doubt but it would.


Sir George. Then take that note. -- Be not surprised -- I mean to dispose of a
thousand guineas this way, instead of fitting up a theater in my own house. --
That giving him the note is a mere trifle; my box at the opera, or my dinner; I
mean to dine alone tomorrow, instead of inviting company.


Henry Sir George, I spoke so rudely to you at first, that I know no other way
to show my humility, than to accept your present without reluctance -- I do
therefore, as the gift of benevolence, not as the insult of better for une.


Sir George. You have a brother, have not you?


Henry. No, Sir -- and only one sister.


Sir George. A sister is it? well, let me see your father and your brother --
your sister I mean -- did not you say? -- you said a sister, did not you?


Henry. Yes, Sir.


Sir George. We Will, let me see your father and her; they will rejoice at their
good fortune I imagine, and I wish to be a witness of their joy.


Henry. I will this moment go to our lawyer, extricate my father, and we will
all return and make you the spectator of the happiness you have bestowed.

Forgive my eagerness to disclose your bounty, sir, if, before I have said half
I feel, I fly to reveal it to my father; to whom I can more powerfully express
my sensations -- than in your presence. Exit.


Sir George. That bait has taken -- and now, if the sister will only be as
grateful.


Enter BLUNTLY. Bluntly. Dear sir, what can you have said to the young man? I
never saw a person so much affected!


Sir George. In what manner?


Bluntly. The tears ran down his cheeks as he passed along, and he held
something in his Land which he pressed to his lips, and then to his heart, as
if it was a treasure.


Sir George. It is a treasure, Bluntly -- a hundred Guineas.


Bluntly. But for which, I believe, you expect a greater treasure in return.


Sir George. Do think so Bluntly? -- do think the girl is worth a hundred
pounds?


Bluntly. If she refuses, she is worth a thousand -- but if the complies, you
have thrown away your money.


Sir George. Just the reverse.


Bluntly. But I hope, sir, you do not mean to throw away any more thus -- for
although this sum, by way of charity, may be well applied, yet indeed, sir* I
know some of your creditors as much in want as this poor family.


Sir George. How! -- You are in pay by some of my creditors I suppose?


Bluntly. No, Sir, you must pay them, before they can pay any body.


Sir George. You are impertinent -- leave the room instantly, and go in search
of this sister; now, while the son is gone to release his father. -- Tell her,
her brother is here, and bring her hither immediately.


Bluntly But, sir, if you will only give me leave to speak one word --


Sir George. Do, speak; Goes to the chimney piece and takes down a pistol only
speak a single syllable, and I Will send a ball instantly through your head.

Bluntly I am dumb, Sir, -- I don't speak indeed, Sir -- upon my life I don't.
I wish I may die if I speak a word.


Sir George. Go on the errand I told you; and if you dare to return without the
girl this is your fate.


Holding up the pistol. Bluntly. Yes, Sir. Exit.


Sir George. Laying the pistol on the table. Impertinent puppy; to ruffle the
temper of a man of fashion with hints of prudence and morality, and paying his
debts -- all this from a servant too. The insolent, chattering --


Enter BLUNTLY. Bluntly. May I speak now, sir?


Sir George. What have you to say?


Bluntly. Mr. Blackman, sir.


Sir George. Bid him come in.


Enter BLACKMAN. Exit. BLUNTLY. Sir. George. Good morning, Mr. Blackman; come,
sit down.


Blackman. Bowing respectfully. I am glad Sir George, I have found you alone,
for I come to speak to you on important business.


Sir George. Business! -- no -- not now if you please.


Blackman. But I must, sir -- I have been here ten times before, and have been
put off; but now you must hear what I have to say.


Sir George. Don't be long then -- don't be tedious, Mr. Blackman -- for I
expect a, a -- in short, I expect a pretty woman.


Blackman. When she comes, I will go.


Sir George. Very well, speak quickly then. What have you to say?


Blackman. I come to speak upon the subject of your father's will; by which you
know, you run the hazard of losing great part of what he left behind.


Sir George. But what am I to do?


Blackman. There is no time to be lost. Consider, that Mr. Manly, the lawyer,
whom your father employed, is a man who pretends to a great deal of morality;
and it was he who, when your father found himself dying, alarmed his
conscience, and persuaded him to make this Will in favor of a second person.
Now, I think that you and I both together, ought to have a meeting with this
conscientious lawyer.


Sir George. But I should imagine, Mr. Blackman, that if he is really a
conscientious man, you and he will not be upon good terms.


Blackman. Oh! people of our avocation differ in respect to conscience. Puzzle,
confound, and abuse each other, and yet are upon good terms.


Sir. George. But I fear --


Blackman. Fear nothing -- There are a vast number o^ resources in our art. --
It is so spacious, and yet so confined -- so sublime, and yet so profound -- so
d^stinct, and yet so complicated -- that if ever this person with whom your
fortune is divided should be found, I know how to envelope her in a labyrinth,
where she shall be lost again in a hurry, -- But your father's lawyer being a
very honest -- I mean a very p^rticular man in his profession, -- I have reason
to fear we cannot gain him over to our purpose. -- If, therefore, --


Enter BLUNTLY. Sir George. My visitor is come, as I told you.


Blackman. Rising. And I am gone, as I told you. Going.


Enter ELEANOR. Blackman. Aside. My lodger! ah! ah! To her in a whisper You may
stay another quarter.


Exit. Sir George. To Eleanor I am glad to see you. -- Bluntly -- Makes a sig^
to him to leave the room.


Bluntly. Sir?


SIR GEORGE waves his hand and nods his head a second time. Bluntly. S^r? --


Sti^l affecting not to understand him. Sir George. I ^id you go. Angrily.


Bluntly. You bid me go, sir? -- Oh yes, sir. -- Very well, sir. -- But indeed,
sir, I did not hear you before, sir. -- Indeed I did not.


Bows, and exit with reluctance, which ELEANOR observes. Eleanor. Pardon me,
sir. -- I understood my brother was here, but I find he is not.


Sir George. He is but this instant gone, and will return immediately. -- Stay
then with me till he comes. Takes her hand. Surely you cannot refuse to remain
with me a few moments; especially as I hive a great deal to say to you that may
tend to your advantage.

Why do you c^st your eyes with such impatience on that do? Goes and locks it
There, now you may look at it in vain.


Eleanor. For heaven sake, why am I locked in?


Sir George. Because you should not escape.


Eleanor. That makes me resolve I will -- Open the door, sir. Going to it.


Sir George. Nay, listen to me Your sentiments, I make no doubt, are formed
from books.


Eleanor. No, from misfortunes -- yet more instructive.


Sir George You shall never know misfortune more you, nor your relations. --
But this moment I presented your brother with a sum of money, and he left me
with professions of the deepest gratitude.


Eleanor. My brother! -- Has he received money from you? Ah! he promised me
he would not disgrace his family.


Sir George. How! Family, indeed!


Eleanor. I cannot remain here a moment longer. Open the door, sir -- open it
immediately.


Raising her voice. Bluntly. Without. Sir, sir, sir, -- open the door, if you
please -- you are wanted, sir.


Sir George. God's Death! who can want me in such haste? Opens the door, and
appears confounded.


Enter Bluntly. Sir George. Well, sir!


Bluntly. -- Did you call, sir?


Sir George. It was you who called, sir.


Bluntly. Who, I, sir?


Sir George. Yes, sir, you -- Who wants me?


Bluntly. Looking at ELEANOR. Perhaps it was you that called, Ma'am.


Eleanor. It was I that called: and pray be so kind as to conduct me to my own
lodgings.


BLUNTLY offers her his hand. Sir George. Dare not touch her -- or to stay
another moment in the room. -- Begone.


BLUNTLY looks at ELEANOR aside, and points to the pistol; then bows humbly,
and retires. Sir George. And now my fair Lucretia --


He is going to seize her -- she takes up the pistol and presents it. Eleanor.
No, it is not myself I Will kill -- It Is you.


Sir George. Starting. Nay, nay, nay, lay it down. -- Lay that foolish thing
down; I beg you will. Trembling. It is charged -- it may go off.


Eleanor. I mean it to go off.


Sir George. But no jesting -- I never liked jesting in my life.


Eleanor. Nor I -- but am always serious. -- Dare not, therefore, insult me
again, but let me go to my wretched apartments,


Passes by him, presenting the Pistol. Sir George. Go to the --


She turns short at the door, and presents it again. Sir George. What would you
do? -- Here Bluntly! Bluntly! Exit ELEANOR.


Enter BLUNTLY. Bluntly. Did you call or no, sir?


Sir George. Yes, sir, I did call now. In a threatening accent. Don't you think
you have behaved very well this morning?


Bluntly. Yes, sir, I think I have.


Sir George. I am not joking.


Bluntly. Nor am I, sir.


Sir George. And do not you think I should behave very well, if I was to
discharge you my service?


Bluntly. As well as can be expected, sir,


Sir George. Why did you break in upon me just now? Did you think I was going
to murder the girl?


Bluntly. No, sir, I suspected neither love nor murder.


Sir George. What then did you suspect?


Bluntly. Why, sir, if I may make bold to speak -- I was afraid the poor girl
might be robbed: and of all she is worth in the world.


Sir George. Blockhead! I suppose you mean her virtue? Smiling with contempt.


Bluntly. Why, to say the truth, sir, virtue is a currency that grows scarce in
the world nowadays -- and some men are so much in need of it, that they think
nothing of stopping a harmless female passenger in her road through life, and
plundering her or it without remorse, though its loss, embitters every hour she
must afterward pass in her journey.


Enter HENRY. Henry. Sir George, my father, liberated from prison by your
bounty, is come gratefully to offer --


Enter WILFORD and ELEANOR. Eleanor. Holding her father by the hand, to prevent
his going forward. Oh, my father! whither are you going? Turn back -- turn back.


Henry. To his father. This is your benefactor the man whose benevolence has
put an end to your sufferings.


ELEANOR burst into tears and retires up the stage. Wilford. How, sir, can I
ever repay what I owe to you? -- or how describe those emotions, which your
goodness at this moment makes me feel?


Sir George. In confusion Very well -- very well -- his all very well Aside I
wish it was. -- To him I am glad I have been of service to you.


Wilford. You have been like mercy to us all. My daughter's gratitude overflows
in tears. -- But why, my child, do you keep apart from us? Can you be too timid
to confess your obligation?


Sir George. Let her alone -- let her indulge her humor.


Wilford. Speak, Eleanor.


Sir George. No, I had rather she would be silent.


Wilford. You offend me by this obstinacy.


Eleanor. Going to WILFORD and taking his hand Oh, my father! -- Oh! I cannot
-- I cannot speak.


Wilford. Wherefore? -- Explain this moment, what agitates you thus.


Eleanor. You must return to confinement again.


Wilford. How?


Eleanor. The money that has set you free, was given for the basest purposes --
and by a man as far beneath you in principle, as you are beneath him in
fortune. Disdain the obligation -- and come my father, return to prison.


Wilford. Yes. -- And with more joy than I left it. To SIR GEORGE Joy, in my
daughter's virtuous contempt of thee. To his children Leave the house instantly.


Exit HENRY and ELEANOR. Wilford. Addressing himself to SIR GEORGE. Your
present is but deposited in a lawyer's hands, whose word gained my liberty --
he shall immediately return it to you, while I return to imprisonment,


Sir George. If the money is in a lawyer's hands, my good friend, it may be
some time before you get it returned. Going.


Wilford. Stay, Sir George -- he returns And look me in the face while you
insult me. SIR GEORGE looks on the floor. You cannot. -- I therefore triumph,
while you stand before me abashed like a culprit. -- Yet be assured,
unthinking, dissipated man, that with all your insolence and cruelty toward me
and mine, I have still the charity to rejoice, even for your sake, at seeing
you thus confounded. This shame is at least one trait in your favor; and while
it revenges my wrongs, gives me joy to find, you are not a hardened libertine.
Exeunt.


END Of THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
The apartment at SIR GEORGE SPLENDORVILLE's where the night has been passed at
play -- Several card tables with company playing -- SIR GEORGE and LADY
CAROLINE at the same table. SIR GEORGE rises furiously. Sir George. NEVER was
the whole train of misfortunes so united to undo a man, as this night to ruin
me. The most o^^^^^ate round of ill ^uck --


Mr. Lucre. Waking from a sleep. What is all that? You have lost a great deal
of money, I suppose?


Sir George Every guinea I had about me, and fifteen thousand besides, for
which I have given my word.


Mr. Lucre. Fifteen thousand guineas! and I have not won one of them. -- Oh,
confusion upon every thing that has prevented me.


Sir George. Taking LADY CAROLINA aside. Lady Caroline, you are the sole person
who has profited by my loss. -- Prove to me that your design was not to ruin
me; to sink me into the abyss of misfortune, -- prove to me, you love me in
return for all my tender love to you. And taking up the cards give me my
revenge in one single cut.


Lady Caroline. If this is the proof you require, I consent.


Sir George. Thank you. -- And it is for double or quit. -- Thank you. She
shuffles and cuts.


Sir George. Ay, it will be mine -- thank you. -- I shall be the winner --
thank you. He cuts -- then tears the cards and throws them on the floor.
Destraction! -- Furies of the blackest kind conspire against me, and all their
serpents are in my heart. -- Cruel, yet beloved woman! Could you thus abuse and
take advantage of the madness of my situation?


Lady Caroline. Your misfortunes, my dear Sir George -- make you blind.


Sir George. Taking her again aside. No, they have rather opened my eyes, and
have shown me what you are. -- Still an object I adore; but I now perceive you
are one to my ruin devoted. -- If any other intention had directed you, would
you have thus decoyed me to my folly? -- You know my proneness to play, your
own likelihood of success, and have palpably allured me to my destruction.
Ungrateful woman, you never loved me, but taught me to believe so, in order to
partake of my prodigality. -- Do not be suspicious, madam; the debt shall be
discharged within a week.


Lady Caroline. With the utmost indifference. That will do, sir -- I depend
upon your word; and that will do. Exit curtsying.


Sir George. Ungrateful -- cruel -- she is gone without giving me one hope. --
She even insults -- despises me.


Mr. Lucre. Coming forward Indeed, my dear friend, I compassionate your ill
luck most feelingly; and yet I am nearly as great an object of compassion on
this occasion as yourself; for I have not won a single guinea of all your
losses: if I had, why I could have borne your misfortune with some sort of
patience.


Lady Bridget. My dear Sir George, your situation affects me so extremely, I
cannot stay a moment longer in your presence. Goes to the door and returns. But
you may depend upon my prayers.


Exit. Lord Hazard. Sir George, if I had any consolation to offer, it should be
at your service -- but you know -- you are convinced -- I have merely a
sufficiency of consolation -- that is, of friends and of money to support
myself in the rank of life I hold in the world. For without that -- without
that rank -- I sincerely wish you a good morning.


Exit LORD HAZARD. Sir George. Good morning.


The company by degrees all steal out of the room, except Mr. LUCRE. Sir
George. Looking around. Where are all my guests? -- the greatest part gone
without a word in condolence, and the rest torturing me with insulting wishes.
Here! behold! here is the sole reliance which I have prepared for the hour of
misfortune; and what is it? -- words -- compliments -- desertion -- and from
those, whose ingratitude makes their neglect still more poignant. Turns and
perceives Mr. LUCRE. Lucre, my dear Lucre, are not you amazed at what you see?


Mr. Lucre. No, not at all -- it is the way of the world -- we caress our
acquaintances whilst they are happy and in power, but if they fall into
misfortune, we think we do enough if we have the good nature to pity them.


Sir George. And are you one of these friends?


Mr. Lucre. I am like the rest of the world. -- I was in the number of your
flatterers; but at present you have none -- for you may already perceive, we
are grown sincere.


Sir George. But have not you a thousand times desired me, in any distress, to
prove you?


Mr. Lucre. And you do prove me now, do you not? -- Heaven bles^ you. Shaking
hands with him. I shall always have a regard for you -- but for any thing
farther -- I scorn professions which I do not mean to keep. Going.


Sir George. Nay, but Lucre! consider the anguish in which you leave me! --
consider, that to be forsaken by my friends is more affecting than the loss of
all my fortune. Though you have nothing else to give me, yet give me your
company.


Mr. Lucre. My dear friend I cannot. Reflect that I am under obligations to you
-- so many indeed that I am ashamed to see you -- I am naturally bashful; and
do not be surprised if I should never have the confidence to look you in the
face again. Exit.


Sir George. This is the world, such as I have heard it described, but not such
as I could ever believe it to be. -- But I forgive -- I forget all the world
except Lady Caroline -- here ingratitude fastens to my heart and drives me to
despair. She, on whom I have squandered so much -- she, whom I loved -- and
whom I still love, spite of her perfidy!

Enter BLUNTLY. Well, Bluntly -- behold the friendship of the friends I loved!
This morning I was in prosperity and had many -- this night I am ruined, and I
have not one.


Bluntly. Ruined, sir?


Sir George. Totally: and shall be forced to part with every thing I possess to
pay the sum I owe. -- Of course, I shall part with all my servants -- and do
you endeavor to find some other place.


Bluntly. But first, sir, -- permit me to ask a favor of you?


Sir George. A favor of me? I have no favors now to grant.


Bluntly. I beg your pardon, sir -- you have one -- and I entreat it on my
knees.


Sir George. What would you ask of me?


Bluntly. To remain along with you still. -- I will never quit you; but serve
you for nothing, to the last moment of my life.


Sir George. I have then one friend left. Embracing him And never will I forget
to acknowledge the obligation.


Enter BLACKMAN. Blackman. Pardon me -- sir -- I beg ten thousand pardons --
pray excuse me* In the most servile manner, for entering before I sent to know
if you were at leisure -- but your attendants are all ^^st asleep on the chairs
of your antichamber. -- I could not wake a soul -- and I imagined you yourself
were not yet up.


Sir George. On the contrary, I have not yet been in bed. And when I do go
there, I wi^h never to rise from it again.


Blackman. Has any thing unexpected happened*


Sir George. Yes. -- That I am ruined -- inevitably ruined -- Behold Showing
the cards the only wreck of my fortune.


Blackman. Starting Lost all your fortune?


Sir George. All I am worth -- and as much more as I am worth.


BLACKMAN draws a chair, sits dawn with great familiarity, and stares SIR
GEORGE rudely in the face. Blackman. Lost all you are worth? He, he, he, he!
Laughs maliciously. Pretty news, truly! Why then I suppose I have lost great
part of what I am worth? all which you are indebted to me? -- However there is
a way yet to retrieve you. But -- please to desire your servant to leave the
room.


Sir George. Bluntly, leave us a moment. Exit BLUNTLY. Well, Mr. Blackman, what
is this grand secret?


Blackman. Why, in the state to which you have reduced yourself, there is
certainly no one hope for you, but in that portion, that half of your fortune,
which the will of your father keeps you out of.


Sir George. But how am I to obtain it? The lawyer in whose hands it is placed,
will not give it up, without being insured from any future demand by some
certain proofs.


Blackman. And suppose I should search, and find proofs? Suppose I have them
already by me? -- But upon this occasion, you must not only rely implicitly on
what I say, but it is necessary you should say the same yourself.


Sir George. If you advance no falsehood, I cannot have any objection.


Blackman. Falsehood! -- falsehood -- I apprehend, Sir George, you do not
consider, that there is a particular construction put upon words and phrases in
the practice of the law, which the rest of the world, out of that study, are
not clearly acquainted with. For instance, falsehood with us, is not exactly
what it is with other people.


Sir George. How! Is truth, immutable truth, to be corrupted and confounded by
men of the law?


Blackman. I was not speaking of truth -- that, we have nothing to do with.


Sir George. I, must not say so, however, sir. -- And in this crisis of my
sufferings, it is the only comfort, the only consolatory reflection left me,
that truth and I, will never separate.


Blackman. Stick to your truth -- but confide in me as usual. -- You will go
with me, then, to Mr. Manly, your father's lawyer, and corroborate all that I
shall say?


Sir George. Tell me, but what you intend to say?


Blackman. I cannot do that. In the practice of the law, we never know what we
intend to say -- and therefore our blunders, when we make them, are in some
measure excusable -- and if I should chance to make a blunder or two, I mean
any trivial mistake, when we come before this lawyer, you must promise not to
interfere, or in any shape contradict me.


Sir George. A mere lapse of memory, I have nothing to do with.


Blackman. And my memory grows very bad; therefore you must not disconcert me.


Sir George. Come, let us begone -- I am ready to go with you this moment.


Blackman. I must first go home, and prepare a few writings.


Sir George. But call to mind that I rely upon your honor.


Blackman. Do you think Bluntly, your servant, is an honest man?


Sir George. I am sure he is.


Blackman. Then, to quiet your fears, I will take him along with us; and you
will depend on what he shall say, I make no doubt?


Sir George. I would stake my being upon his veracity.


Blackman. Call him in, then, and bid him do as I command him.


Sir George. Here, Bluntly. Enter BLUNTLY. Mr. Blackman has some business with
you -- listen to him with attention, and follow his directions.


Exit. Blackman. You know, I suppose, the perilous situation of your master?


BLUNTLY shakes his head, and wipes his eyes. Blackman. Good fellow! good
fellow! -- and you would, I dare say, do any thing to rescue him from the
misery with which he is surrounded?


Bluntly. I would lay down my life.


Blackman. You can do it for less. Only put on a black coat, and the business
is done.


Bluntly. What Is that all? Oh! if I can save him by putting on a black coat,
I Will go buy mourning, and wear it all my life.


Bla^kman. There Is a good fellow. I sincerely thank you for this attachment to
your master.


Shaking him by the hand. Bluntly. My dear Blackman, I beg your pardon for what
I am going to say; but as you behave thus friendly on this unfortunate
occasion, I must confess to you -- that till now I always hated you -- I could
not bear the sight of you. -- For I thought you (I wish I may die if I did not)
one of the greatest rogues in the world. I fancied you only waited on, and
advised my master to make your market of him. -- But now your attention to him
in his distress, when all his friends have forsaken him, is so kind -- Heaven
bless you -- Heaven bless you -- I Will go buy a black coat.


Going. Blackman. I have something more to say to you. -- When you have put on
this coat, you must meet your master and meat Mr Manley's, the lawyer; and when
we are all there, you must mind and say, exactly what I say.


Bluntly. And what will that be?


Blackman. Oh! something.


Bluntly. I have no objection to say something -- but I hope you will not make me
say any thing.


Blackman. You seem to doubt me once more, sir?


Bluntly. No, I am doubling you now for the first time; for I always thought I
was certain before.


Blackman. And will you not venture to say yes, and no, to what I shall advance?


Bluntly. Why -- I think I may venture to say yes to your no, and no to your
yes, with a safe conscience.


Blackman. If you do not instantly follow me and do all that I shall propose,
your master is ruined. -- Would you see him dragged to prison?


Bluntly. No, I would sooner go myself.


Blackman. Then why do you stand talking about a safe conscience. Half my
clients would have been ruined if I had shown my zeal as you do. Conscience
indeed! Why, this is a matter of law, to serve your master in his necessity.


Bluntly. I have heard necessity has no law -- but if it has no conscience, it
is a much worse thing than I took it for. -- No matter for that -- come along.
-- Oh my poor master! -- I would even tell a lie to save him. Exeunt.


SCENE II. A lawyer's study.
MR. MANLY discovered at his writing-desk -- a Servant attending. Manly. Who do
you say wants to speak with me?


Servant. Mr. Lucre, sir.


Manly. And who else?


Servant. A person who says his name is Wilford, he looks as if he came from
the country, and seems in mean circumstances.


Manly. Show him to me directly. And take Mr. Lucre, or any other person of
fashion that may call, to my clerks. Exit Servant. But for the poor, let them
be under my protection.


Enter WILFORD and ELEANOR. Manly. Come in -- walk in, and let me know what I
can do to serve you.


Wilford. I deposited, sir, in your clerk's hands, a sum of money to set me
free from confinement for debt. -- On his word, I was discharged -- he owns he
has not yet paid away this money, still he refuses to restore it to me, though
in return I again render up my person.


Manly And why would you do this?


Wilford. Because my honor -- I mean my conscience -- for that is the poor
man's honor -- is concerned.


Manly. Explain yourself.


Wilford. A son of mine, received this sum I speak of, and thought it given
him; while it was only meant as a purchase -- a purchase of what we had no
right to sell -- and therefore it must be restored to the owner.


Manly. And who is he?


Wilford Sir George Splendorville -- I suppose you have heard of him?


Manly. He, you mean, who by the desire of his father's will, lately changed
his name from Blandford?


Wilford. Sir!


Manly. The name, which some part of the family, while reduced, had taken.


Wilford. Good Heaven! Is there such a circumstance in his story?


Manly. Why do you ask with such emotion?


Wilford Because he is the man, in search of whom I left my habitation in the
country, to present before him a destitute young woman, a near relation.


Manly. What relation? -- Be particular in your answer.


Wilford. A sister.


Manly. I thank you for your intelligence. You have named a person who for
those three years past, I have in vain endeavored to find. -- But did you say
she was in poverty?


Wilford. I did.


Manly. I give you joy then -- for I have in my possession a deed which conveys
to a lost daughter of Sir George's father, the other half of the fortune he
bequeathed his son -- but as yet, all my endeavors have been in vain to find
where she, and an uncle, to whose care she was entrusted in her infancy, are
retired.


Wilford. Tu^ning to ELEANOR. Now, Eleanor, arm yourself with fortitude -- with
fortitude to bear not the frowns, but the smiles of fortune. Be humble,
collected, and the same you have ever been, while I for the first time inform
you -- you are not my daughter. -- And from this gentleman's intelligence add,
you are rich -- you are the deceased Blandford's child, and Splendorville's
sister.


Eleanor. Oh! Heavens! Do I lose a father such as you, to gain a brother such
as he is?


Manly. To WILFORD. There can be no mistake on this occasion -- And you, if I
am not deceived, are the brother of the late Mr. Blandford. Your looks, your
person, your very voice confirms it.


Wilford. I have writings in my care, shall prove it beyond a doubt; with the
whole narrative of our separation when he with his son, then a youth, embarked
for India; where I suppose, riches, soon succeeded poverty.


Enter SERVANT. Servant. Lady Caroline Seymour, sir, is at the door in her
carriage, and will not be denied admittance. She says she must see you upon
some very urgent business.


Manly. To WILFORD and ELEANOR. Will you do me the favor to step for a moment
into this room? Lady Caroline will not stay long. I Will not detain you. Exit
WILFORD and ELEANOR.


Enter LADY CAROLINE. Lady Caroline. Dear Mr. Manly, I haven a thousand
apologies to make -- And yet I am sure you will excuse the subject of my visit,
when you consider --


Manly. Your ladyship will please to sit down.


He draws chairs and they sit. Lady Caroline. You cannot be ignorant, Mr. Manly
-- you must know, the terms of acquaintance on which Sir George Splendorville
and I have been, for some time past? -- you were his father's agent; his chief
solicitor; and although you are not employed by Sir George, yet the state of
his affairs cannot not be concealed from you -- Has he, or has he not, any
inheritance yet to come?


Manly. Pardon me, madam -- though not entrusted by Sir George, I will,
nevertheless, keep his secrets.


Lady Caroline. That is plainly telling me he is worth nothing.


Manly. By no means -- Sir George, in spite of his profusion, must still be
rich. He has preserved his large estate in Wales; and as to money, I do not
doubt but he has a considerable sum.


Lady Caroline. Not a guinea. I won it all from him last night.


Manly. You? You, who are to become his wife?


Lady Caroline. I might, had I not -- been thus fortunate. But why should I
marry him, when his riches are mine, without that ceremony.


Manly. Inconsiderate man! -- what will be the end of his imprudence! Yet,
Heaven be praised! he has still that fine estate, I just now mentioned.


Lady Caroline. Indeed he has not -- that has belonged to me these three months.


Manly. To you!


Lady Caroline. Yes -- Bought for me under another name by agents; and for half
its value.


Manly. Madman! -- Yet your ladyship must excuse me. I know your income
stinted, and all the death of the Earl, your father, where could you raise
sufficient to make even half the purchase?


Lady Caroline. From Splendorville's own prodigality -- from lavish presents
made to me by him.


Enter SERVANT. Servant. Sir George Splendorville, sir, desires to speak with
you -- he is at the door with Mr. Blackman.


Lady Caroline. Oh Heavens! do not let him see me here. She is hastening to the
room where WILLFORD and his daughter are.


Manly I have company there -- walk in here, if you please. Shows her another
door and she enters.


Manly. To the servant. Desire Sir George to walk in.


Enter Sir GEORGE and BLACKMAN. Manly. Sir George, do me the favor to sit down.


He looks coolly on BLACKMAN, and pointing to a chair says Good morning. They
sit. Sir George. Mr. Manly, my attorney will let you know the business on which
I am come.


Blackman. Why yes, Mr. Manly, it is extremely hard that Sir George has for so
long a time been kept out of a very large part of his fortune; particularly, as
he has had occasion for it.


Sir George. I have had occasion for it I assure you Mr. Manly; and I have
occasion for it at this very time.


Mr. Manly. But so may the person, sir, from whom you would take it. In a word,
Sir George, neither your lawyer nor you, shall prevail on me to give up the
trust reposed in me by your father, without certain evidence, that your sister
will never come to make her claim.


Blackman. You are not afraid of ghosts, are you?


Manly No, nor of robbers either: -- you cannot frighten me, Mr. Blackman.


Blackman. Then depend upon it, the sister of Sir George can never appear in
any other manner than as a spirit. For, here, sir, taking from his pocket a
parcel of papers here are authentic letters to prove her death. SIR GEORGE
looks confused


Manly. Her death!


Blackman. Yes, her death. Here is a certificate from the curate of the parish
in which she was buried.


Manly. Buried too!


Blackman. Yes, sir, buried. Here is also an affidavit from the sexton of the
said village, signed bys the overseer and churchwardens, testifying the fame.
-- You see, showing him the paper, and reading at the same time "Died Anno
Domini, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-nine, the seventeenth of June --


Mr. MANLY takes the paper, and while he is reading, SIR GEORGE says apart --
Sir George. How near to the brink of infamy has my imprudence led me! And
god's death, my confusion takes from me the power to explain, and expose the
scoundrel.

Mr. Manly, I will leave you for the present; but you shall hear from me
shortly, -- when this matter shall be accounted for clearly -- perfectly to
your satisfaction, you may depend upon it. -- Going.


Manly. Stay, Sir George, and --


Blackman. Aye, Sir George, stay and see Mr. Manly's ^^jections wholly removed.
He seems to doubt the evidence of paper; I must, therefore, beg leave to
produce a living witness -- the gentleman whom I appointed to meet me here.


Manly. And who is he?


Blackman. The apothecary, who attended Sir George's sister in her dying
illness.


Sir GEORGE starts. Manly. Desire him to walk in by all means. What is the
matter, Sir George, you look discomposed?


Blackman. Sir George is something nervous, Mr. Manly; and you know the very
name of a medical gentleman, will affect the nerves of some people.


BLACKMAN goes to the door, and leads on BLUNTLY, dressed in mourning. Sir
George. Aside Bluntly! -- But I will see the end of this.


Manly. Bowing to him You are an apothecary, I think, sir?


BLUNTLY looks at BLACKMAN Blackman. Yes, sir.


Bluntly. After seeming inclined to say, No. Yes, sir.


Manly. Pray sir, what disorder took the young lady, on whose account you have
been brought hither, out of the world?


BLUNTLY looks at BLACKMAN Blackman. Oh! the old disorder, I suppose.


Bluntly. The old disorder.


Manly. And pray wh^t may that be, sir? BLACKMAN offers to reply Mr. Blackman,
please to let this gentleman speak for himself. -- What is it you mean, pray
sir, by the old disorder?


Bluntly. I -- I -- mean -- Love, sir,


Manly. You will not pretend to say, that love, was the cause of her death?


Bluntly. Confused and hesitating That -- and a few ^its of the gout


Manly. I fear, sir, you are not in perfect health yourself -- you tremble and
look very pale.


Blackman. That is because the subject affects him.


Manly. Do you then never mention the young lady without being affected?


Bluntly. Never, sir -- for had you seen her as I did -- um -- Had you seen her
-- She was in very great danger from the first; but after I attended her, she
was in greater danger still. -- I advised a physician to be called in; on which
she grew worse. -- We had next a consultation of physicians; and then it was
all over with her.


Sir George. Rising from his chair Blackman, this is too much -- all my
calamities are inferior to this -- Desist, therefore, or --


Blackman. To Bluntly Desist -- He cannot bear to hear the pathetic
description. Consider the lady was his sister -- and though he had not the
pleasure of knowing her -- yet, poor thing -- affecting to weep -- poor young
woman! he cannot help lamenting her lose.


Bluntly. No more can I -- for though she was not my relation -- yet she was my
Patient. pretending to weep also.


Sir George. I can bear no more. -- Mr. Manly, you are imposed upon. But think
not, however appearances may be against me, that I came here as the tool of so
infamous a deceit. -- Thoughtlessness, Mr. Manly, has embarrassed my
circumstances; and thoughtlessness alone, has made me employ a villain to
retrieve them.


Blackman. Mighty fine!


Sir George. I have no authority, sir, to affirm, that my sister is not alive;
and I am confident the account you have just now heard, of her death, is but an
artifice. My indiscretions have reduced me nearly to beggary; but I will perish
in confinement -- cheerfully perish -- rather than owe my affluence to one
dishonorable action.


Blackman. Grief has turned his brain.


Manly. Sir George, I honor your feelings; and as for the feelings of these
gentlemen, I am extremely happy, that it is in my power to dry up their tears,
and calm all their sorrows.


Sir George. Sir!


Blackman. How? In what way?


Manly. Going to the door where WILFORD and his niece are Come forth, young
lady, to the arms of a brother, and relieve the anguish of these mourners, who
are lamenting your decase. ELEANOR and WILLFORD enter -- Yes, Sir George, here
is that sister, whom those gentlemen assure us, is dead; -- and this is the
brother of your father. -- These are proofs, as convincing, I hope, as any Mr.
Blackman can produce.


Sir George. She, my sister! Her pretended father my uncle too! Aside Blackman,
you would have plunged me into an anguish I never knew before; you would have
plunged me into shame.


Bluntly. And so you have me.


Blackman. Pshaw. -- Mr. Manly, notwithstanding you are these people's voucher,
this appears but a scheme. -- These persons are but adventurers, and may
possibly have about them forgeries, such as an honest man, like myself, would
shudder at.


Manly. Going to the door. Who Is there? Enter Servant. Show that -- that Mr.
Blackman, out of my house instantly; and take care you never admit him again.


Blackman. Sir George, will you suffer this?


Sir George. Aye, and a great deal more.


Bluntly. Look'ee Blackman. -- If you don't fall down upon your knees, and beg
my pardon at the street door, for the trick you have put upon me, in assuring
me my master's sister was really dead, and that I could do her no injury, by
doing him a service -- if you don't beg my pardon for this, I Will give you such
an assault and battery as you never had to do with in your life.


Blackman. Beat me -- do, beat me -- I Will thank you for beating me -- I Would be
beat every hour of the day, to recover damages. Exit with BLUNTLY.


Sir George. My sister -- with the sincerest joy I call you by that name -- and
while I thus embrace you, offer you a heart, that beats with all the pure and
tender affection, which our kindred to each other claims -- In you embracing
his uncle I behold my father; and experience an awful fear, mingled with my
regard.


Wilford. Continue still that regard, and even that fear -- these filial
sentiments may prove important; and they shall ever be repaid with my paternal
watchings, friendship, and love.


Eleanor. My brother --


Sir George. I have been unworthy of you -- I will be so no more, but imitate
your excellence. Yet when I reflect --


LADY CAROLINE comes softly from the inner apartment, and attends to the
discourse. Eleanor. My brother, do not imagine --


Sir George. Leave me, leave me to all the agonies of my misconduct -- Where is
my fortune? Now all irrecoverably gone -- My last, my only resource is now to
be paid to another -- I have lost every thing.


Lady Caroline. Coming forward. No, Sir George, nothing -- since I possess all
that was yours.


Sir George. How!


Lady Caroline. Behold a friend in your necessities -- a mistress whom your
misfortunes cannot drive away -- but who, experiencing much of your unkindness,
still loves you; and knowing your every folly, will still submit to honor, and
obey you.

I received your lavish presents, but to hoard them for you -- made myself
mistress of your fortune, but to return it to you -- and with it, all my own.


Sir George. Can this be real? Can I be raised in one moment, from the depths
of misery to unbounded happiness?


Enter SERVANT. Servant. A young man, who says he is Mr. Willford's son, is
called to enquire for him.


Manly. Show him in.


SIR GEORGE and LADY CAROLINE retire to the back part of the stage. Enter
HENRY. Wilford. Come, Henry, and take leave of your sister for ever.


Henry. How so, sir? -- What do you mean? To be parted from her, would be the
utmost rigor of fortune.


Manly. The affection with which you speak, young gentleman, seems to convey
something beyond mere brotherly love.


Wilford. I some years since revealed to him she was not his sister.


Eleanor. And he, some years since, implied it to me. Yet, in such doubtful
terms, I knew not which of us had the sorrow not to be your child. -- I now
find it is myself -- and I aver it to be a sorrow, for which, all the fortune I
am going to possess will not repay me.


Sir George. Then, my dearest sister, indulge the hope you may yet be his
daughter. This young man's merit deserves a reward, and in time he may learn to
love you by a still nearer tie than that, you have so long known to exist
between you; nay, even by a nearer tie than that of brother.


Henry. I am in doubt or what I hear -- Eleanor, since our short separation,
there cannot surely have been any important discovery --


Manly. Be not surprised -- great discoveries, which we labor in vain for
years to make, are frequently brought about in one lucky moment, without any
labor at all.


Sir George. True -- for till this day arose, I had passed every hour since my
birth, without making one discovery to my advantage -- while this short, but
propitious morning, has discovered to me -- how to be in future happy.


THE END.
EPILOGUE,
BY T. VAUGHAN, ESQUIRE.
SPOKEN BY MRS. KEMBLE.
"LONG before the beginng of this Play,"
I heard some DEEP ones in the Green Room, say,
They had their fears and doubts -- whilst some did quake --
And others wished it bedtime for her sake.
Do you, our best Physicians, ever kind,
Prescribe our true Cephalic for the Mind,
Of these our Neighbors, and kind Friends -- behind,
And with it, give a cordial of the best,
To one, with deepest Gratitude impressed.
For some there are -- I have them in my eye --
Will sicken and turn pale with jealousy,
Whenever we scribbling Women wield the Pen,
Or dare invade the Rights of scribbling Men;
And fired with zeal, in dread array appear --
With Tenets from the learned Hemisphere;
Thence cry (kind Souls) "Invention is the only Art,
"And mere Translation but a second Part;
"Besides -- we Men of Taste -- can never withstand
"Even Nature's GARRICK thus at second Hand!
"Then why do Comic Writers live on Theft,
"When such Ragouts and Dainties still are le^t?
"Not richer were, in CONGREVE's day^ (...) BEHN,
"For now, the Males are Females -- Women, Men --
"Nay some so manly, and so orthodox,
"Will drive you four in Hand -- or h^ld the Box;
"And if perchance the fatal Die is thrown,
"Will storm and swear, like any Lord in Town."
But might I whisper in this Censor's ear,
I Would prove his observations too severe --
And urge -- "Translation to hit off with skill,
"Is not the province of each common Quill;
"But by improving what was writ before,
"Though Genius may be less, our Judgment's more;
"And whilst we paint with energy from Life,
"The gallant Husband, or more gallant Wife,
"With Tints from living Portraits from the Spot,
"It matters not by whom related -- or begot;
"And thus, much surer shall we reach the Heart,
"Than all the lifeless pomp of boasted Art."
As such, deny her not -- at least the merit
Of giving Gallic Froth -- true BRITISH SPIRIT.
And as for you, ye Fair, how blooms the Cheek,
How sweet the Temper which those eyes bespeak?
No Midnight Oil has ever destroyed a Grace,
Or Gaming's Horrors found with you a place;
But Cupid lent you all those winning Arts,
Which at a glance -- can warm the coldest Hearts.
Check then with me these Censors as unjust,
Who form their judgments -- as they live -- on Trust.
Nor ever credit what they dare to say,
Unless with you they join, and like our Play.
Use for a signal then -- your Magic Fan,
And all the House will follow to a Man;
Or should there be a disaffected few --
A Counter Revolution -- rests with you.


