THE ASSOCIATION: OR, LIBERTY and LOYALTY.

VERSES occasioned by The present Unnatural REBELION.

By THEOPHILUS CIBBER.

-- coorta est
Seditio, Saevitque animis ignobile vulgus. VIRG.
-- ne tanta animis assuescite Bella;
Neu Patriae Validas in vicera vertite vires. VIRG.
Kind Patrons take this Poem in good Part,
And spare bad Numbers for an honest Heart. ROW.
LONDON: Printed for W. BICKERTON, in the Temple Exchange, opposite St.
Dunstan's Church, Fleet Street. M.D.CC.XLV.

A Speech of Lord Hastings, in ROWE'S JANE SHORE.
"REMEMBER him, the Villain, righteous Heaven,
"In thy great Day of Vengeance: Blast the Traitor
"And his pernicious Councels; who for Wealth,
"For Power, the Pride of Greatness, or Revenge,
"Would plunge his native Land in Civil Wars.
"Have we so soon forgot those Days of Ruin,
"When York and Lancaster drew forth their Battles!
"When, like a Matron, butchered by her Sons,
"And cast beside some common Way a Spectacle
"Of Horror and Affright to Passers by,
"Our groaning Country bled at every Vein,
"When Murders, Rapes, and Massacrees prevailed;
"When Churches, Palaces and Cities blas'd;
"When Insolence and Barbarism triumphed,
"And swept away Distinction; Peasants trod
"Upon the Necks of Nobles; low were laid
"The reverend Crosier, and the holy Mitre,
"And Desolation covered all the Land:
"Who can remember this, and not, like me,
"Here vow to sheath a Dagger in his Heart,
"Whose damned Ambition would renew those Horrors,
"And set, once more, that Scene of Blood before us?
To the Candid Reader.
AFTER a Series of Misfortunes, and meeting with the most ungenerous Treatment,
from some whom I least suspected, and least deserved it from, I feel the
additional Grievance of being a Prisoner in the Fleet; though I have assigned Two
Thirds of my future Salary for the Payment of my Debts, if my Creditors will be
so good to allow me Liberty to work for them, as well as myself: While I seem
to complain of Want of Lenity in some, Gratitude obliges me to acknowledge the
Favor shown me by others; as Several, whose Demands on me are largest, have
not only the Humanity to come into this Proposal themselves, but have
endeavored to instill the same generous Sentiments into the rest. Yet a few are
unkind enough to have continued me (for these five Months past) in a Place,
where I am incapable of geting Bread, either for myself or Children. The Mind
may be free, though the Body's confined; as a Proof of which, I employed a little
of my Leisure in the few following Lines: If they in any Degree prove
acceptable to the Public, I am over paid.

My Impatience to attest my Loyalty and Affection to the Person of his Majesty
and the present Establishment, may, perhaps, make me too quick in the
Publication of what I have thus loosely thrown on Paper, and the Consciousness
of my Inability to perfect the Task I have undertaken, require some Apology; --
Let the Honesty of the Intention plead my Excuse: If I am found to be a good
Subject, I Will not repine at being thought an indifferent Poet. I think, at this
Juncture, it becomes not an Englishman to be totally silent, unwatchful, or
inactive; Neutrality, at this Crisis, is a Crime: And may we not reasonably
suspect those Gentry are not quite sound of Heart, who, like their politic
Friend Scrub in the Stratagem, resolve "to say nothing till they are sure of a
Peace?"

THE ASSOCIATION: OR, LIBERTY and LOYALTY.
WRONGS to redress, and Justice to maintain,
Has been the Business of our Sovereign's Reign;
The Injured from Oppression's Sword to save,
To punish Vice, and to reward the Brave;
His Subjects from Invasions to defend,
And his Allies, in their Distress, befriend;
Unbiased to assert the general Good,
For Europe's Safety to expend his Blood:
To fix the Balance of her Power his View;
That golden Point unerring to pursue,
Was the first End that Providence designed,
When for Benificence she formed his Mind.
Well this appeared, when Gallic Arms, of late,
Joined with Bavarian, threatened Europe's Fate;
Hungaria's Princess desolate remained,
Her Legions slaughtered, and her Treasures drained;
When her Allies fraternal were afraid,
To send that Queen her stipulated Aid,
Touched with Compassion, generous Brunswick came,
And poised the Balance steady on the Beam.
Thousands of Gauls lay stretched along the Plain,
Thousands were drowned repassing through the Main;
And while those Gauls precipitately ran,
They hoped more Mercy from the Deep than Man:
So, when a Priest-rid Tyrant heretofore,
The Papal Power attempted to restore,
Soon as he saw brave Nassau's Troops advance,
He fled for Refuge to the Arms of France.
O, may our Monarch still, by Deeds the same,
Protect this Kingdom, gain a deathless Name,
And with immortal William, share immortal Fame.
While England's Safety George's Thoughts control,
(The favorite in felt Impulse of his Soul)
That Trade may flourish, Peace may be restored,
HE, to the Empire gives a Sovereign Lord;
Nor Toil, nor Treasure spares: Yet, strange to tell!
A ranc'rous Rebel Rabble Rout, from Hell,
Flattered by Rome, cajoled by treacherous France,
Our fertile Fields to waste, with hasty Strides advance;
A medley, mischief-making, motley Crew,
Un-hos'd, un-breech'd, -- some shod; -- but, those, how few!
Begot by Rapes, by Rapine fed, they prove,
Without Wit wicked, Lustful without Love;
Of mongrel French and Scotch, a Mixture bad,
Half-blooded, and cross-bred, from Sires run mad;
Trained in Hypocrisy, that impious Evil!
They God affront, yet meanly fear the Devil!
Lawless Banditti, who, abandoned, dare
Miscall base Robbery, and foul Murder, War;
Tyrants at heart, ungenerously brave,
They fight not to protect, but to enslave;
Should they succeed (which Heaven avert!) their Fate
Now mark, how just! which they will repent too late;
Frantic, foolhardy, bigot-blinded Elves,
The Snares, for others laid, entrap themselves:
To glut the Malice, and the Pride, they come,
Of Paris, Madrid, and insatiate Rome.
Now, all their papal Puppet-shews displayed,
That tinsel'd Trump'ry which supports their Trade;
Monks teach deluded Mortals to believe,
They merit Heaven, who Heretics deceive:
"Again religious Fires prepare to shine,
"And Inquisitions plead their Right Divine."
England, provoked, now feels, one generous Soul
Inspires each honest Heart, to loyalize the Whole;
From northern Tweed, far as the eastmost Thames,
A Patriot-Passion every Breast inflames:
The healthy Hunters, whose high mettled Blood
Late swept the Vale, or beat the neighboring Wood,
To chase the wily Fox, quick catch the Alarm;
Themselves, their Tenants, and their Huntsmen arm:
In full Career, their Coursers scour the Plain,
To seek a more pernicious savage Train.
The Farmer, strait, unyokes the generous Steed,
Who, from his tramel'd Harness, being freed,
Snuffs up the Air, and jocund, neighs aloud,
Of his new Trappings and armed Master proud;
Both find their Bosoms with new Spirit filled,
And march to guard the Lands they lately tilled:
Divines and Nobles, Gentry, Merchants, All,
Cheerful associate at their Country's Call;
Without Distinction, dauntless issue forth,
To dare the Desparadoes of the North.
O thou, great God of Battles, stretch thy Hand,
All powerful, to preserve this threatened Land;
All Hearts, all Hands unite; support the Cause
Of Loyalty, Religion, Freedom, Laws!
Over our courageous Chiefs, may thou preside,
Our Councils thy unerring Wisdom guide;
Nor let dire Faction, more, this happy Realm divide!
FINIS.

