ARTHUR and EMMELINE. A Dramatic Entertainment.

[Price ONE SHILLING.]

ARTHUR and EMMELINE.

A DRAMATIC ENTERTAINMENT, IN TWO ACTS, TAKEN FROM THE MASQUE OF KING ARTHUR,
BY DRYDEN. And now performed at The THEATER ROYAL in DRURY LANE, With VARIETY
of SCENES and MACHINERY.

The MUSIC by PURCEL, and Dr. ARNE.

LONDON: PRINTED AND SOLD BY J. JARVIS, No. 283, STRAND.

M.DCC.LXXXIV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Names of Dryden and Purcel have made the following Performance hitherto
regarded as one the best calculated to show the Effects of Poetry, Action, and
Music. Yet the want of a Plot sufficiently interesting and varied, has
prevented it keeping its Rank on the Stage, as a first Piece. This it is hoped
will excuse the present alteration, by which, the whole of the Story, with the
most approved Parts of the Music and Machinery are compressed into two Acts,
leaving the beautiful Scenes of Emmeline almost wholly untouched.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Arthur, King of Britain, Mr. KEMBLE. Oswald, King of Kent, a Saxon, Mr.
BRERETON. Conon, Duke of Cornwall, Friend to Arthur, Mr. PACKER. Aurelius, a
British Courtier, Mr. R. PALMER. Guillamar, a Saxon Officer, Mr. SPENCER.
Merlin, the British Prophet, Mr. AICKIN. Osmond, a Saxon Magician, Mr.
STAUNTON.
WOMEN.
Emmeline, Daughter to Conon, Miss FARREN. Matilda, her Attendant, Miss BARNES.
DEITIES, SPIRITS, etc. etc.
Venus, Miss PHILLIPS. Spirit of Light, Miss GEORGE. Honor, Mr. WILLIAMES.
Philidel, an airy Spirit, Miss FIELD. Grimbald, a Fiend, Mr. BANNISTER. etc.
etc.
ARTHUR and EMMELINE.
ACT I.
SCENE I. Represents a Gothic Temple, being a Place of Heathen Worship; the
three Saxon Gods, Woden, Thor, and Freya, placed on Pedestals.
Enter OSWALD and OSMOND. OSWALD. FATHER of gods and men, great Woden, hear:
Give conquest to the Saxon race, and me.

Osm. Thor, Freya, Woden, hear, and spell your Saxons,
With sacred Runic rhymes, from death in battle;
Edge their bright swords, and blunt the Britons darts.
Grimbald, a fierce earthly spirit, arises. No more, great Prince, for see my
trusty fiend,
Who all the night has winged the dusky air.
What ^ews, my Grimbald?

Grim. I have played my part;
For I have steeled the fools that are to die;
Six fools, so prodigal of life and soul,
That, for their country, they devote their lives
A sacrifice to mother Earth, and Woden.

Osm. Say, where is thy fellow servants, Philidel?
Why comes not he?

Grim. For he is a puling sprite -- but half a devil!
Why did thou choose a tender airy form,
Unequal to the mighty work of mischief?
For when with sure success he might have sped
His baneful errand against the Christian camp,
He spied the red-cross banners of their host,
And said he durst not add to his damnation.

Osm. I Will punish him at leisure.
Call in the victims to propitiate hell.

Grim. That Is my kind master, I shall breakfast on 'em. [Exit Grim.

Osw. Ambitious fools we are,
And yet ambition is a godlike fault;
Or rather, it is no fault in souls born great,
Who dare extend their glory by their deeds.

Grimbald reenters with six Saxons in white, with swords in their hands,
priests and singers. SACRIFICE SONG.
RECITATIVE I.
Mr. DANBY.
Woden, first to thee,
A milk-white steed, in battle won,
We have sacrificed.
Chor. We have sacrificed.
RECIT. II.
Mr. WILLIAMES.
Let our next oblation be
To Thor, thy thundering son,
Of such another.
Chor. We have sacrificed.
RECIT. III.
Mr. DANBY.
A third (of Friezeland breed was he)
To Woden's wife, and to Thor's mother:
And now we have atoned all three.
We have sacrificed.
Chor. We have sacrificed.
CHORUS.
Brave souls to be renowned in story,
Honor prizing,
Death despising,
Fame acquiring,
By expiring,
Die and reap the fruit of glory.
[All retire, and the scene closes upon them. SCENE II. A Landscape.
Enter AURELIUS and CONON. Con. Then this is the deciding day, to fix
Great Britain's scepter in great Arthur's hand.

Aur. Or put it in the bold invader's gripe.
Oswald is valiant --

Con. It was the character he then maintained,
When in my Court he sought my daughter's love;
My fair, blind Emmeline.

Aur. For that defeat in love he raised this war.
For royal Arthur reigned within her heart,
'Ere Oswald moved the suit.

Con. Arthur is all that is excellent in Oswald;
And void of all his faults: in battle brave,
But still serene in all the stormy war,
Like heaven above the clouds; and after fight,
As merciful and kind to vanquished foes,
As a forgiving God. But see, he is here,
And praise is dumb before him.

Enter King ARTHUR, reading a letter, with Attendants. Arth. [reading.]" Go o^,
auspicious Prince, the stars are kind.
" Unfold thy banners to the willing wind;
" While I, with airy legions, help thy arms;
" Confronting art with art, and charms with charms."
So Merlin writes; nor can we doubt the event, [To Con,
With heaven and you, our friends. Oh! noble Conon,
You taught my tender hands the trade of war:
And now again you helm your hoary head,
And under double weight of age and arms,
Assert your country's freedom and my crown.

Con. No more, my son.

Arth. Most happy in that name!
Your Emmeline, to Oswald's vows refused,
You made my plighted bride:
Your charming daughter, who like love, born blind,
Un-aiming hits, with surest archery,
And innocently kills.

Con. Remember, son,
You are a General; orther wars require you,
For see the Saxon gross begins to move.

Arth. By heaven it is beauteous horror!
The noble Oswald has provoked my envy.
Enter EMMELINE, led by MATILDA. Ha! now my beauteous Emmeline appears,
A new, but Oh! a softer flame inspires me:
Even Rage and Vengeance slumber at her sight.

Con. Haste your farewell; I Will cheer my troops, and wait ye. [Exit Conon.

Em. O father! father! I am sure you're here;
Because I see your voice.

Arth. No, thou mistak'st thy hearing for thy sight:
He Is gone, my Emmeline;
And I but stay to gaze on those fair eyes,
Which cannot view the conquest they have made.
Oh! starlight night, dark only to thy self,
But full of glory, as those lamps of heaven,
That see not, when they shine.

Em. What is this heaven, and stars, and night, and day,
To which you thus compare my eyes and me?
I understand you, when you say you love:
For, when my father clasps my hand in his,
That Is cold, and I can feel it hard and wrinkled;
But when you grasp it, then I sigh, and pant,
And something presses to my heart.

Arth. Oh artless love! where the soul move the tongue,
And only Nature speaks what Nature thinks!
Had she but eyes!

Em. Just now you said I had.

Arth. But neither see.

Em. I Am sure they hear you then:
What can your eyes do more?

Arth. They view your beauties.

Em. Do not I see? you have a face like mine.

Arth. It is not sight, but touching with your hands.

Em. Then it is my hand that sees, and that is all one:
For is not seeing, touching with your eyes?

Arth. No, for I see at a distance, where I touch not.

Em. If you can see so fat, and yet not touch,
I fear you see my naked legs and feet
Quite through my clothes; pray do not see so well.

Arth. Fear not, sweet innocence;
I view the lovely features of your face;
Your lips carnation, your dark-shaded eye brows,
Black eyes, and snow-white forehead; all the colors
That make your beauty, and produce my love.

Em Nay, then, you do not love on equal terms;
I love you dearly, without all these helps:
I cannot see your lip's carnation,
Nor your shaded eyebrows, nor your milk-white eyes.

Arth. Alas! it is vain to instruct your innocence.
You have no notion of light or colors [Trumpet sounds within.

Em. Why, is not that a trumpet?

Arth. Yes.

Em. I knew it.
And I can tell you how the sound on it looks;
It looks as if it had an angry fighting face.

Arth. It Is now indeed a sharp unpleasant sound,
Because it calls me hence, from her I love,
To meet ten thousand foes.

Em. How does so many men ever come to meet?
This devil trumpet vexes 'em, and then
They feel about for one another's faces;
And so they meet and kill.

Arth. I Will tell ye all, when we have gained the field;
One kiss of your fair hand, the pledge of conquest.
And so short a farewell. [Kisses her hand, and exit with Aurel. and attendants.

Em. My heart and vows go with him to the fight;
May every foe be that, which they call blind,
And none of all their swords have eyes to find him.
But lead me nearer to the trumpet's face;
For that brave sound upholds my fainting heart;
And while I hear, methinks I fight my part. [Exit led by Matilda.

SCENE III. A Camp, Drums, Trumpets, and military Shouts.
MARTIAL SONG, sung by Mr. WILLIAMS.
Come if you dare, our trumpets sound;
Come if you dare, the foes rebound:
We come, we come, we come, we come,
Says the double, double, double beat of the thundering drum.
Now they charge on amain,
Now they rally again:
The gods from above the mad labor behold,
And pity mankind that will perish for gold.

Cho. Now they charge, etc.



[Exeunt drums and trumpet, a march. SCENE IV. A general Engagement between the
Britons and Saxons, in which the Britons are Conquerors.


SCENE V. A Rural Prospect.
Enter Philidel. Phil. Alas, for pity, of this bloody field!
Piteous it needs must be, when I, spirit,
Can have so soft a sense of human woes!

SCENE VI. Draws and discovers Merlin's Cave.
He comes forward. Mer. What art thou, spirit? of what name or order?
(For I have viewed thee in my magic glass)
Making thy moan among the midnight wolves,
That bay the silent moon: speak, I conjure thee.
It Is Merlin bids thee.

Phil. An airy shape, the tenderest of my kind,
The last seduced, and least deformed of hell;
Half white, and shuffl'd in the crowd, I fell,
Desirous to repent, and loath to sin:
My name is Philidel.

Mer. Thy business here?

Phil. To shun the Saxon wizard's dire commands.
Osmond, the awfull'st name next thine below.
'Cause I refuse to hurl a noisome fog
On christened heads, the hue-and-cry of hell
Is raised against me.

Mer. Osmond shall know, a greater power protects thee:
Now mark me, Philidel,
I will employ thee for thy future good:
Thou know, in spite of valiant Oswald's arms,
Or Osmond's powerful spells, the field is ours --

Phil. Oh master! Grimbald is at hand,
I snuff his earthy scent:
The conquering Britons he misleads to rivers,
Or dreadful downfalls of unheeded rocks;

Mer. Be that thy care,
Warn off the bold pursuers from the chase:
But lest fierce Grimbald's ponderous bulk oppress
Thy tender flitting air, I Will leave my band
Of spirits with united strength to aid thee,
[Exeunt Merlin and Philidel into the cave.
SCENE, A Wood.
Enter GRIMBALD and his followers disguised like shepherds, leading King
ARTHUR, CONON, AURELIUS, and attendants. Grim. Thus wrapped in Shepherd's weeds,
I, and my fellow fiends,
The sottish Britons choose us for their guides:
Here, this way, Britons, follow Oswald's flight.

Arth. I thank thee, shepherd;
Expect reward, lead on, we follow thee.
[As Arthur is going off, enter Philidel and his followers.
SONG. Sung by Philidel.
Hither this way, this way bend,
Trust not that malicious fiend:
Those are false deluding lights,
Wafted far and near by sprites,
Trust 'em not, for they will deceive ye;
And in bogs and marshes leave you.

Chor. of Phil. Spirits. Hither this way, this way bend.

Chor. of Grimb. Spirits. This way, this way bend.

Phil. sings. If you step, no danger thinking,
Down you fall, a furlong sinking:
It Is a fiend who has annoyed ye;
Name but Heaven, and he will avoid ye.

Chor. of Phil. Spirits. Hither this way, this way bend.

Chor. of Grimb. Spirits. This way, this way bend.

Philidel's Spirits. Trust not that malicious fiend.

Grimbald's Spirits. Trust me, I am no malicious fiend.

Philidel's Spirits. Hither this way, etc.



Grimb. By Hell she s^gs them back, in my despite.
I had a voice in Heaven, ^re sulfurous steams
Had damped it to a hoarseness: try it now.
SONG. -- Grimbald.
Let not a moon-born elf mislead ye
From your prey, and from your glory.
Too far, alas! he has betrayed ye:
Follow the flames, that wave before ye:
Sometimes sev'n, and sometimes one;
Hurry, hurry, hurry, hurry on.
II.
See, see, the footsteps plain appearing,
That way Oswald chose for flying:
Firm is the turf, and fit for bearing,
Where yonder pearly dews are lying,
Far he cannot hence be gone;
Hurry, hurry, hurry, hurry on.

Arth. It Is true, he says; the footsteps yet are fresh
Upon the sod, no falling dew-drops have
Disturbed the print.
[All are going to follow Grimbald.
Phil. sings. Hither this way.

Chorus of Phil. Spirits. Hither this way, this way bend.

Chorus of Grimb. Spirits. This way, this way bend.

Philidel's Spirits. Trust not that malicious fiend.

Grimb. Spirits. Trust me, I am no malicious fiend.

Philidel's Spirits. Hither this way, etc.

[They all incline to Philidel.

Grim. speaks. Curse on his voice, I must my prey forego;
Thou Philidel, shall answer this below.
[Grimbald sinks in a flash of fire.
Arth. At last the cheat is plain;
The cloven-footed fiend is vanished from us;
Good angels be our guides, and bring us back.

Phil. singing. Come follow, follow, follow me.

Chor. Come follow, etc.
And me. And me. And me.

Verse. 2 Voc. And green-sward all your way shall be.

Chor. Come follow, etc.

Verse. No goblin or elf shall dare to offend ye.

Chor. No, no, no, etc.
No goblin or elf shall dare to offend ye.

Verse. 3 Voc. We brethren of air,
Your heroes will bear
To the kind and the fair that attend ye.

Chor. We brethren, etc.

[Philidel, and the spirits go off singing, with King Arthur, and the rest in
the middle of them.

SCENE VIII. A Camp, and Emmeline's Pavilion, with a bank. Moonlight.
Enter EMMELINE led by MATILDA. Em. No news of my dear love, or of my father?

Mat. None, madam, since the gaining of the battle:

Em. If Arthur's slain,
I mean to die: but there is a greater doubt;
Since I never saw him here,
How shall I meet him in another world?

Mat. Indeed I know not.

Em. I should find him,
Among a thousand Angels in the sky.

Mat. But what a kind of man do you suppose him?

Em. He must be made of the most precious things,
And I believe his mouth, and eyes, and cheeks,
And nose, and all his face, are made of gold.

Mat. Heaven bless us, Madam, what a face you make him!

Em. Yet I must know him better: of all colors,
Tell me which is the purest, and the softest.

Mat. They say it is black.

Em. Why then, since gold is hard, and yet is precious,
His face must all be made of soft black gold.

Mat. But, Madam --

Em. No more; I have learned enough for once.

Enter, on the other side of the Stage, OSWALD and GUILLAMAR. Osw. The night
has wilder'd us; and we are fallen
Among their foremost tents.

Guil. Ha! what are these!
They seem of more than vulgar quality.

Em. What sounds are those? they cannot far be distant;
Where are we now, Matilda?

Mat. Just before your tent.
Fear not, they must be friends, and they approach.

Em. My Arthur, speak my love, are you returned
To bless your Emmeline?

Osw. [to Guillamar] I know that face:
It Is the ungrateful fair, who, scorning mine,
Accepts my rival's love: heaven, you are bounteous,
Thou ow'st me nothing now.

Mat. Fear grows upon me:
Speak what you are; speak, or I call for help.

Osw. We are your guards.

Mat. Ah me! we are betrayed; it is Oswald's voice.

Em. Let them not see our voices, and then they cannot find us.

Osw. Passions in men oppressed are doubly strong,
I take her from King Arthur; there is revenge.
Fear nothing, ladies, you shall be safe.
[Oswald and Guillamar seize Emmeline and Matilda.
Em. and Mat. Help! help!

Osw. By heaven ye injure me! though force is used,
Your honor shall be sacred.

Em. Help! help! Oh Britons! help!

Osw. Your Britons cannot help you;
This arm, through all their troops, shall force my way;
Yet neither quit my honor nor my prey.
[Exeunt; the women still crying. [An alarm within; and a cry of Follow!
follow! follow!
SCENE IX. Of Rocks and Water.
Enter AURELIUS and SOLDIERS. Aur. Furl up our colors, and unbrace our drums;
Dislodge betimes, we must give up this fatal post,
The imbattl'd legions of fire, air, and earth,
Are banded for our foes. But who are these?
Stand! -- Conon, what is the alarm?

Enter CONON, Captain of GUARDS, and SOLDIERS. Con. Our victory is marred,
And we are outwitted by the Saxons,
My Emmeline, my daughter's stolen!

Aur. Mischance indeed! -- and here
Some more than mortal power assails our guards.
How fares it with great Arthur?

Con. As when the lover with the King is mixed,
He puts the gain of Britain in one scale,
Which weighing with the loss of Emmeline,
He thinks he is scarce a saver.
He comes, with Merlin, whose strong aid we hope.

Enter MERLIN and ARTHUR. Mer. Wait Heaven's time, the attempt's too dangerous;
There Is not a tree in that enchanted grove,
But's numbered out, and given by tale to fiends.

Arth. Had thou been here, (for what can thwart thy skill?)
Nor Emmeline had been the boast of Oswald;
Nor I, forewarned, been wanting to her guard.

Con. Her darkened eyes had seen the light of Heaven;
That was thy promise too, and this the time.

Mer. Nor has my aid been absent, though unseen;
I have employed a subtle airy sprite
TO explore the passage, and prepare thy way.
Myself, mean time, will view the magic wood,
To learn whereon depends its force.

Con. But Emmeline --

Mer. Fear not: her sight ere long shall be restored.

Arth. Oh might I hope (and what is impossible
To Merlin's art?) to be myself the bearer,
That with the light of Heaven she may discern
Her lover first.

Mer. It Is wondrous hazardous;
Yet I foresee the event, it is fortunate.
I Will bear ye safe, and bring you back unharm'd:
Then lose not precious time, but follow me.
[Exeunt omnes, Merlin leading Arthur.
SCENE X. A Wood, with the Sun.
Enter PHILIDEL. Phil. I left all safe behind:
At every walk I passed, I drew a spell;
So that if any fiend, abhorring Heaven,
There sets his foot, it roots him to the ground.
Now could I but discover Emmeline,
My task was fairly done.

GRIMBALD rushes out: he seizes Philidel, and binds him in a Chain. Grim. O
rebel! have I caught thee?

Phil. Ah me! what hard mishap!

Grim. What just revenge!
Thou miscreant elf, thou renegado scout!
So clean, so furbish'd, so renewed in white,
The livery of our foes; I see thee through:
What make thou here? Thou trim apostate, speak.

Phil. Ah! mighty Grimbald,
Who would not fear, when seized in thy strong gripe!
I Am fled from Merlin, free as air that bore me,
T'unfold to Osmond all his deep designs.

Grim. I believe nothing: oh, thou fond impostor,
But since thou say thy errand was to Osmond,
To Osmond shall thou go: March, know thy driver.

Phil. [kneeling] O spare me, Grimbald, and I Will be thy slave:
Tempt hermits for thee in their holy cells,
And virgins in their dreams.

Grim. Can thou, a devil, hope to cheat a devil?
A spy! why that is a name abhorred in hell.
Haste, forward, forward, or I Will goad thee on
With iron spurs.

Phil. But use me kindly then:
Pull not so hard, to hurt my airy limbs;
I Will follow thee unforced: Look, there is thy way.

Grim. Ay, there is thy way indeed; but for more surety
I Will keep an eye behind: Not one word more,
But follow decently.
[Grim. goes out, dragging Phil.
Phil. So catch him, spell. [Aside.

Grim. [within.] O help me! help me Philidel!

Phil. Why, what is the matter?

Grim. Oh, I am ensnared;
Heaven's birdlime wraps me round, and glues my wings.
Loose me, and I will free thee:
Do, and I Will be thy slave.

Phil. What, to a spy, a name abhorred in hell?

Grim. Do not insult. Oh! oh! I grow to ground;
The fiery net draws closer on my limbs. Oh! oh! oh!

Phil. Thou shall not have the ease to curse in torments:
Be dumb for one half hour: so long my charm
Can keep thee silent, and there lie
Till Osmond breaks thy chain.
[Philadel unbinds his own fetters.
Enter to him Merlin. Mer. Well have thou wrought thy safety with thy wit,
My Philidel; go meritorious one:
Me other work requires, to view the wood,
And learn to make the dire enchantments void;
Meantime thy fellows summon, and call forth
The precious drops I taught thee to compound,
And to the spirit of light his task assign;
Then may thou show King Arthur to his love,
Though short must be their interview.
[Exit.
Phil. Pleased I obey, and haste the mystic charm,
That gives fair Emmeline to light and love.

SONG and CHORUS.
Phil. Come away,
From shades and cool fountains,
Bright spirits of day,
Who gild the high mountains.

Chorus. We come, we obey,
With delight we attend thee.

Phil. To fair Emmeline bear
Your heaven born treasure,

Chorus. Come away, we obey!

Phil. With fair Emmeline share
Your pure light, love, and pleasure.

Chorus. Lead on, point the way,
With delight we attend thee,
Lead on, point the way,
Love to light shall befriend thee.
[Exeunt.


END OF ACT FIRST.
ACT II.
SCENE I. A Landscape.
Enter PHILIDEL. RECITATIVE. SPIRIT of light, attend -- the charm's complete.
[Spirit of light descends.

Phil. Thou gentle spirit of etherial light,
By Merlin's will the grateful task is thine,
T'unveil the beauteous eyes of Emmeline.

Spirit. Delighted, I fulfill his generous purpose.

SONG.
Spirit. Oh sight, the mother of desires,
What charming objects do thou yield!
It Is sweet when tedious night expires.
To see the rosy morning gild
The mountain tops, and paint the field!
But when sweet Emm'line comes in sight,
She makes the summer's day more bright,
And when she goes away it is night.
It Is sweet the blushing morn to view;
And plains adorned with pearly dew.
But such cheap delights to see,
Heaven and nature
Give each creature;
They have eyes as well as we;
This is the joy, all joys above,
To see, to see,
That only she
Whose eyes can light with love.



Phil. Now see where Emmeline approaches,
I leave her to thy art, and haste to guide
Impatient Arthur to her newborn sight.
[Exit.
Enter EMMELINE and MATILDA. Mat. This way, Madam, and we are shaded.
[Spirit approaches Emmeline, sprinkling some of the water over her eyes out of
the vial.]
Spirit. Thus, thus I infuse
These sovereign dews.
Fly back, ye films, that cloud her sight:
And you, ye crystal humors bright,
Your noxious vapors purged away,
Recover and admit the day.
Now cast your eyes abroad, and see
All but me.
[Exit.


Em. Ha! What was that? Who spoke?

Mat. I heard the voice; it is one of Osmond's fiends.

Em. Some blessed angel sure; I feel my eyes
Unsealed, they walk abroad, and a new world
Comes rushing on, and stands all gay before me.

Mat. Oh heavens! oh joy of joy she has her sight!

Em. I am newborn; I shall run man for pleasure. [Staring on Mat.
Are women such as thou? Such glorious creatures?

Enter ARTHUR and PHILIDEL. Arth. [aside] Oh! how I envy her, to be first seen!

Phil. Approach not yet.

Em. Stand farther; let me take my fill of sight. [Looking up.
What Is that above that weakens my new eyes,
Makes me not see, by seeing?

Mat. It Is the sun.

Em. The sun! it is sure a God, if that be Heaven:
Oh! if thou art a creature, best and fairest,
How have thou lightened even my very soul,
And let in knowledge by another sense!
Art thou not pleased, Matilda? Why, like me,
Do thou not look and wonder?

Mat. For these sights
Are to my eyes familiar.

Em. That Is my joy,
Not to have seen before: for nature now
Comes all at once, confounding my delight.
But ah! what thing am I? Fain would I know;
Or am I blind, or do I see but half?
With all my care, and looking round about,
I cannot view my face.

Mat. None see themselves
But by reflection; in this glass you may. [Gives her a glass.

Em. [looking in the glass] What Is this?
It holds a face within it: O sweet face!
It draws the mouth, and smiles, and looks upon me;
And talks, but yet I cannot hear it speak;
The pretty thing is dumb.

Mat. The pretty thing
You see within the glass, is You.

Em. What, am I two? Is this another me?
Indeed it wears my clothes, had hands like mine,
And mocks whatever I do; but that I Am sure
It cannot be, I Would swear it were my child. [Matilda looks.
Look, my Matilda; we both are in the glass.
Oh, now I know it plain; they are our names,
That peep upon us there.

Mat. Our shadows, Madam.

Em. Mine is the prettier shadow far, than thine.
I love it; let me kiss my the other self. [Kissing the glass.
Alas! I Have kissed it dead; the fine thing's gone;
Indeed it kissed so cold as if'twere dying. [Arthur comes forward softly;
showing himself behind her.
It Is here again.
Oh no, this face is neither mine nor thine:
I think the glass has borne another child. [She turns and sees Arthur.
Ha! What art thou, with a new kind of face,
And other clothes, a noble creature too,
But taller, bigger, fiercer in thy look;
Of a controuling eye, majestic make?

Mat. Do you not know him, Madam?

Em. Is It a man?

Arth. Yes, and the most unhappy of my kind,
If you have changed your love.

Em. My dearest Lord!
Was my soul blind; and could not that look out,
To know you, ere you spoke? Oh counterpart
Of our soft sex! Well are you made our Lords:
So bold, so great, so godlike are you formed.
How can you love such silly things as women?

Arth. Beauty like yours commands; and man was made
But a more boisterous, and a stronger slave
To you, the best delights of human kind.

Em. But are ye mine? Is there an end of war?
Are all those trumpets dead themselves, at last,
That used to kill men with their thundering sounds?

Arth. The sum of war is undecided yet;
And many a breathing body must be cold,
Ere you are free.

Em. How came you hither then?

Arth. By Merlin's art, to snatch a short-lived bliss;
To feed my famished love upon your eyes,
One moment, and depart.

Em. Oh moment! worth
Whole ages past, and all that are to come!
Let lovesick Oswald now unpitied mourn;
Let Osmond mutter charms to sprites in vain,
To make me love him; all shall not change my soul.

Arth. Ha! Does the enchanter practice hell upon you?
Is he my rival too?

Em. Yes, but I hate him;
For when he spoke, through my shut eyes I saw him;
His voice looked ugly, and breathed brimstone on me:
And then I first was glad that I was blind,
Not to behold perdition.

Enter MERLIN. Merl. My Sovereign, we have hazarded too far;
But love excuses you, and prescience me.
Make haste; for Osmond is even now alarmed,
And greedy of revenge is hasting home.

Arth. Oh take my love with us, or leave me here.

Merl. I cannot, for she is held by charms too strong,
Which, with the enchanted grove, must be destroyed:
Till when, my art is vain: but fear not, Emmeline;
The enchanter has no power on innocence.

Em. [to Arth.] Farewell, since we must part: When you are gone,
I Will look into my glass, just where you looked,
To find your face again;
If'tis not there, I Will think on you so long,
My heart shall make your picture for my eyes.

Arth. Where ever I go, my soul shall stay with thee:
It Is but my shadow that I take away:
True love is never happy but by halves;
An April sunshine, that by fits appears,
It smiles by moments, but it mourns by years.

Em. May all good Angels spread their wings,
And shield my love from harm. [Ex. Arth. and Mer.
Now my Arthur's gone, the loveliest object
To my newborn sight, I Will look round and round
Upon the lesser beauties of creation.

Enter OSMOND at the other Door, who gazes on Emmeline, and she on him. Em. Ha!
I Am deceived; save me from this ugly thing,
This foe to sight! speak; do thou know him?

Mat. Too well; it is Oswald's friend, the great magician.

Em. It cannot be a man, he is so unlike the man I love.

Osm. [Aside.] Death to my eyes, she sees!

Em. I wish I could not; but I Will close my sight,
And shut out all I can -- It wo'not be;
Winking, I see thee still, thy odious image
Stares full into my soul; and there infects the room
My Arthur should possess.

Osm. [Aside.] I find too late,
That Merlin and her lover have been here.

Em. I pr'ythee, dreadful thing, tell me thy business here;
And, if thou can, reform that odious face;
Look not so grim upon me.

Osm. My name is Osmond; and my business, love.

Em. Thou have a grizly look forbidding what thou ask'st,
If I durst tell thee so.

Osm. My pent-house eyebrows, and my shaggy beard,
Offend your sight, but these are manly signs:
Faint white and red abuse your expectations;
Be woman; know your sex, and love full pleasures.

Em. Love from a monster, fiend?

Osm. Come, you must love; or you must suffer love;
No coyness, none, for I am master here.

Em. And when did Oswald give away his power?

Osm. O'er-labour'd with the fight, oppressed with thirst,
That Oswald, whom you mentioned, called for drink.
I mixed a sleepy potion in his bowl,
Which he quaffd greedily.
The happy dose wrought the desired effect;
Then to a dungeon's depth I sent him bound;
Now know you are my slave. No coying therefore
But make me happy.

Em. From my sight,
Thou, all thy devils in one, thou dare not force me.

Osm. You teach me well;
I Will give you that excuse your sex desire.
[He seizes her, and she struggles.
Grim. [within] O master, master!

Osm. Who Is that? my Grimbald!

Enter GRIMBALD hastily. Grim. O master! danger threatens thee:
There Is a black cloud descending from above,
Full of Heaven's venom, bursting over thy head.

Osm. Malicious fiend, thou lie; for I am fenced
By millions of thy fellows, in my grove.
I bade thee, when I freed thee from the charm,
Run scouting through the wood, from tree to tree,
And look if all my devils were on duty.

Grim. When did a devil fail in diligence?
Poor mortal, thou thyself art overseen;
I have been there, and thence I bring this news.
Thy fatal foe, great Arthur, is at hand:
Merlin has taken his time, while thou were absent,
To counterwork thy spells.

Osm. Perdition seize on Merlin!
I Will cast 'em all anew, and instantly,
All of another mould; be thou at hand.
Their composition was, before, of horror;
Now they shall be of blandishment, and love;
On my return, proud fair,
Resolve to meet my love;
But if you will not fairly be enjoyed,
A little honest force is well employed.
[Exeunt Osm. and Grimb.
Em. Heaven! ever present to the suppliant's aid,
Protect and pity innocence betrayed.
[Exeunt.
SCENE II. A Wood, with a large Oak in the front.
Enter ARTHUR, and MERLIN on the other side. Merl. Thus far it is permitted me
to go;
But all beyond this spot is fenced with charms;
I may no more, but only with advice.

Arth. My sword shall do the rest.

Merl. Remember well, that all is but illusion.

Arth. Doubt me not.

Merl. Yet in prevention
Of what may come, I Will leave my Philidel
To watch thy steps, and with him leave my wand:
Farewell, and prosper.
[Exit Merlin.
Arth. [walking.] No danger yet, I see no walls of fire,
No city of the fiends, with forms obscene,
To grin from far on flaming battlements.
This is indeed the grove I should destroy;
But where is the horror? sure the prophet erred.
Hark! music, and the warbling notes of birds; [Singing of birds, within.
More wonders yet; yet all delightful too.
The Scene opens and discovers a pleasant River, shaded with Trees, a golden
Bridge over it. A silver current here forbids my passage,
And yet t'invite me, stands a golden bridge;
Perhaps a trap for my unwary feet,
To sink and whelm me underneath the waves.
With fire or water let him wage his war,
Or all the elements at once, I Will on. [As he is going forward, Nymphs and
Sylvans come out from behind the Trees.

SONG. Miss STAGELDOIR.
How happy the lover!
How easy his chain,
How pleasing his pain,
How sweet to discover
He sighs not in vain.
For love every creature
Is formed by his nature;
No joys are above
The pleasures of love.
Arth. And what are these fantastic fairy joys,
To love like mine? False joys, false welcomes all.
Be gone, ye sylvan trippers of the green,
Fly after night, and overtake the moon. [Singers vanish.
This goodly tree seems queen of all the grove.
The ringlets round her trunk declare her guilty
Of many midnight sabbaths revell'd here.
Her will I first attempt. [Arthur strikes at the Tree, and cuts it; blood
spouts out of it, a groan follows, then a shrick.
Good heaven, what monstrous prodigies are these!
Blood follows from my blow; the wounded rind
Spouts on my sword, and sanguine dies the plain. [He strikes again: a voice of
Emmeline from behind.

Em. [from behind.] Forbear, if thou have pity, ah, forbear!
These groans proceed not from a senseless plant,
No spouts of blood run welling from a tree.

Arth. Speak what thou art; I charge thee speak thy being. [Emmeline breaks out
of the tree, showing her arm bloody.

Em. Whom thou have hurt, unkind and cruel, see.

Arth. It Is she: amazement roots me to the ground!

Em. By cruel charms, dragged from my peaceful bower,
Fierce Osmond closed me in this bleeding bark;
So that whatever sword, or sounding axe,
Shall violate this plant, must pierce my flesh,
And, when that falls I die. --

Arth. If this be true,
O never, never to be ended charm,
At least by me! Yet all may be illusion.
Break up, ye thick'ning fogs, and filmy mists,
All that belly my sight, and cheat my sense;
For reason still pronounces, it is not she,
And thus resolved -- [Lifts up his sword, as going to strike.

Em. Do, strike, barbarian, strike;
And strew my mangled limbs, with every stroke.
Wound me, and doubly kill me, with unkindness,
That, by thy hand I fell.

Arth. O love! O Merlin! whom should I believe?

Em. Believe thyself, thy youth, thy love, and me;
Disarm thy hand, that mine may meet it bare.

Arth. If falling for the first created fair
Was Adam's fault, great grandsire, I forgive thee;
Eden was lost, as all thy sons would lose it. [Going toward Emmeline, and
pulling off his gaunt^^^

Enter PHILIDEL running. Phil. Hold, poor deluded mortal, hold thy hand;
Which, if thou giv'st, is plighted to a fiend.
For proof, behold the virtue of this wand; [Strikes Emmeline with a wand, who
straight descends: Grimbald appears in her place.
Now see to whose embraces thou were falling.
Behold the maiden modesty of Grimbald!

Arth. Horror seizes me,
To think what headlong ruin I have tempted.

Phil. Haste to thy work; a noble stroke or two
Ends all the charms, and disenchants the grove.
I Will hold thy mistress bound. [Chains Grimbald.

Arth. Then here is for earnest; [Strikes twice or thrice, the tree sinks amidst
thunder and lightning, and the bridge breaks down.
It Is finished, and the dusk, that yet remains,
Is but the native horror of the wood.
On yon proud towers, before this day be done,
My glittering banners shall be waved against the setting sun. [Exit Arthur.

Phil. Come on, my surly slave; come stalk along,
And drag thy chain.

Grim. I Will champ and foam upon it, till the blue venom.
Work upwards to thy hands, and loose their hold.

Phil. Know thou this powerful wand? it is lifted up;
A second stroke would send thee to the center,
Benumbed and dead, as far as souls can die.

Grim. I would thou wou'd'st, to rid me of my sense.

SONG. PHILIDEL.
Iopeans fill the skies,
The monster is in chains;
Beneath my feet he lies,
Virtue triumphant reigns!
CHORUS.
Victory! Victory! Vice is in chains;
Victory! Victory! Virtue reigns.
[Exeunt. SCENE III. A Camp.
Enter OSMOND, as affrighted. Osm. Grimbald made prisoner, and my grove
destroyed!
Now what can save me -- Hark the drums and trumpets! [Drums and trumpets
within.
Arthur is marching onward to the fort.
I have but one recourse, and that is to Oswald;
But will he fight for me, whom I have injured?
No, not for me, but for himself he must;
I Will urge him with the last necessity:
Better give up my mistress than my life.
And freed I Will help him with my utmost art,
And try t'unravel fate. [Exit Osmond.

Enter ARTHUR, CONON, AURELIUS, and SOLDIERS. Con. Now there remains but this
one labor more;
And if we have the hearts of true-born Britons,
The forcing of that castle crowns the day.

Aur. The works are weak, the garrison but thin,

Arth. Then, where you see them clust'ring most, (...) motion,
And staggering in their ranks, there press 'em home;
For that is a coward's heap -- How Is this, a sally?
Enter OSWALD, GUILLAMAR, and SOLDIERS, on the other side. Beyond my hopes to
meet 'em on the square.

Osw. Brave Britons, hold; and thou their famous chief, [Advancing.
Attend what Saxon Oswald will propose.
He owns your victory; but whether owing
To valor, or to fortune, that he doubts.
If Arthur dares ascribe it to the first,
And singled from a crowd, will tempt a conquest,
This Oswald offers, let our troops retire,
And hand to hand let us decide our strife:
This if refused, bear witness earth and heaven,
Thou steal'st a crown and mistress undeserved.

Arth. I Will not usurp thy title of a robber,
Nor will upbraid thee, that before I proffered
This single combat, which thou did avoid;
So glad I am, on any terms to meet thee,
And not discourage thy repenting shame.
As once Aeneas, my famed Ancestor,
Betwixt the Trojan and Rutilian bands,
Fought for a crown, and bright Lavinia's bed;
So will I meet thee, hand to hand opposed:
My auguting mind assures the same success.
[To his men.] Hence out of view; if I am slain or yield,
Renounce me, Britons, for a recreant knight;
And let the Saxon peacefully enjoy
His former footing in our famous isle.
To ratify these terms, I swear --

Osw. You need not;
Your honor is of force, without your oath.
I only add, that if I fall, or yield,
Yours be the crown, and Emmeline.

Arth. That Is two crowns.
No more; we keep the looking heaven and sun
Too long in expectation of our arms. [both armies go off the stage.
[Arthur and Oswald fight. Oswald retreats. Enter Osmond from among the trees,
and with his wand strikes Arthur's sword out of his hand, and exit. Oswald
pursues Arthur. Merlin enters, and gives Arthur his sword, and exit. They
close, and Arthur in the fall disarms Oswald.]
Arth. Confess thyself overcome, and ask thy life.

Osw. It Is not worth asking, when it is in thy power.

Arth. Then take it as my gift.

Osw. A wretched gift,
With loss of empire, liberty, and love.
[A concert of trumpets within, proclaiming Arthur's victory; while they sound,
Arthur and Oswald seem to confer. It Is too much bounty to a vanquished foe;
Yet not enough to make me fortunate.

Arth. Thy life, thy liberty, thy honor safe,
Lead back thy Saxons to their ancient Elb:
I would restore thee fruitful Kent, the gift
Of Vortigern for Hengist's ill-bought aid,
But that my Britons brook no foreign power,
To lord it in a land, sacred to freedom,
And of its rights tenacious to the last.

Osw. Nor more than thou have offered would I take;
I would refuse all Britain held in homage;
And own no other masters but the gods.
Enter on one side, Merlin, Emmeline, and Matilda, Conon, Aurelius, with
British soldiers, bearing King Arthur's standard displayed. On the other side,
Guillam^ and Osmond, with Saxon soldiers, dragging their colors on the ground.
[Arth. going to Emme, and embracing her.
Arth. At length, at length, I have thee in my arms.

Em. We are so fitted for each other's hearts,
That heaven had erred, in making of a third,
To get betwixt, and intercept our loves.

Osw. Were there but this, this only sight to see,
The price of Britain should not buy my stay.

Mer. Take hence that monster of ingratitude,
And in that loathsome dungeon plunge him deep,
Where he plunged noble Oswald.

Osm. That indeed is fittest for me,
For there I shall be near my kindred fiends,
And spare my Grimbald's pains to bear me to 'em. [Is carried off.

Mer. [to Arth.] Arthur, thou have acquired immortal fame,
And of three Christian worthies, art the first:
And now at once to treat thy sight and soul,
Behold what rolling ages shall produce:
The wealth, the loves, the glories, of our isle.
Nor thou, brave Saxon Prince, [to Oswald] disdain our triumph:
Britons and Saxons shall be once one people;
One common tongue, one common faith, shall bind
Our jarring bands, in a perpetual peace.

Merlin waves his wand; the scene changes, and discovers the British ocean in a
storm. Aeolus in a cloud above. Enter NEPTUNE. Ye blustering brethren of the
skies,
Whose breath has ruffl'd all the watery plain,
Retire and let Britannia rise,
In triumph over the main.
Serene and calm, and void of fear,
The queen of islands must appear.
[Aeolus ascends, and the four winds fly off; Britannia rises from the sea.
Enter VENUS and CUPID. SONG. -- Miss PHILLIPS.
Fairest isle, all isles excelling,
Seat of pleasures and of loves;
Venus here will choose her dwelling,
And for sake her Cyprian groves.
Cupid, from his favorite nation,
Care and Envy will remove;
Jealousy, that poisons passion,
And Despair that dies for love.
Gentle murmurs, sweet complaining,
Sighs that blow the fire of love;
Soft repulses, kind disdaining,
Shall be all the pains you prove.
Every swain shall pay his duty,
Grateful every nymph shall prove;
And as these excel in beauty,
Those shall be renowned for love.
Mer. Those who next enter are our valiant Britons,
Who shall by sea and land repel our foes,
[A march, while the British sailors and grenadiers come to the front of the
stage. Now look above, and in Heaven's high abyss,
Behold what fame attends those future heroes.
[The Order of the Garter descends.
SONG. -- By Mr. WILLIAMES.
I.
St. George, the patron of our isle.
A soldier, and a saint,
On that auspicious Order smile,
Which love and arms will plant.
II.
Our natives not alone appear
To court this martial prize;
But foreign Kings adopted here,
Their crowns at home despise.
III.
Our Sovereign high, in awful state,
His honors shall bestow;
And see his sceptered subjects wait
On his commands below.
FINIS.

