A TREATISE ON THE HOOPING COUGH.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE TUSSIS CONVULSIVA, OR, HOOPING COUGH, AS READ AT THE
Lyceum Medicum Londinense.

WHEREIN THE NATURE, CAUSE, AND CURE OF THIS DISEASE ARE ENDEAVORED TO BE
DEMONSTRATED, AND THE PRACTICE OF EXHIBITING EMETICS, SHOWN TO BE PERNICIOUS
AND USELESS.

By JOHN GALE JONES.

STAT SUA CUIQUE DIES; BREVE ET IRREPABILE TEMPUS OMNIBUS EST VITAE; SED FAMAM
EXTENDERE FACTIS HOC VIRTUTIS OPUS --

AENEID X. 467. LONDON: PRINTED FOR ALLEN AND WEST, No 15, PATERNOSTER-ROW.

[PRICE ONE SHILLING.]

TO THE PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF THE Lyceum Medicum Londinense.
GENTLEMEN,
PERMIT me to dedicate to you, and to present for your Acceptance, the
following little Treatise on the Hooping Cough. I regret that both in its
Composition and its intrinsic Merit it is so little worthy of your Attention,
and so little capable of affording either Amusement or Information. You will
readily perceive that it is the Work of a young, and perhaps of an
inexperienced Man, but you will also acknowledge, that the interesting Nature
of the Subject, and its being a first Performance, entitle it to a candid and
liberal Allowance. As a Member of the Lyceum Medicum Londinense, I feel myself
interested in its Welfare and Prosperity, and as a medical Practitioner, I am
anxious to contribute my feeble Efforts toward the Advancement and Promotion
of so valuable a Science. I have to lament that my present Embarrassments and
the surrounding Situation of Affairs, have for a while diverted my Attention
toward those Subjects, which though not less useful are generally considered
as improper to be pursued by those who are educated in the medical Profession.
How far the Observation may be just, or the Censure merited, can be decided
only, by an Investigation of present Circumstances, and an impartial Enquiry
into the Probability of future Events. I can only add, that should the present
little Trifle be so fortunate as to experience a favorable Reception; I trust
it will be received but as an Earnest of future Exertions, and that I shall be
readily believed when I assert, that my most sincere and anxious Desire is to
pursue those Labors and those Studies which are found from Experience to be
the most useful and beneficial to all Mankind.

I remain, Gentlemen, Your obedient and humble Servant, JOHN GALE JONES.

INTRODUCTORY PREFACE.
THE following little Essay was first written somewhat more than a Twelvemonth
ago, and read as a Paper at the Lyceum Medicum Londinense. It professes to be,
rather a few practical Observations than a complete and regular Treatise. Its
having occupied the Attention of the Society for twelve successive Weeks,
during which, it underwent a long and critical Examination, although it afford
no demonstrative Proof of its possessing any Share of Merit, will furnish at
least, an Apology for its Publication.

The Author is neither unwilling nor ashamed to confess, that he has
established his Mode of Reasoning upon the fundamental Principles of the
Brunonian System; nor to take this Opportunity to declare that he entertains
the most profound Veneration and Esteem for its celebrated Author; and that it
is his Intention, should his future Leisure and Avocations permit, and no
material Obstacles intervene, to present before an impartial and discerning
Public, a Commentary and Defense of this truly valuable though much persecuted
Doctrine.

A TREATISE ON THE TUSSIS CONVULSIVA.
BEING called upon by this Society rather sooner than I expected, to furnish a
paper for their discussion; and anxious to comply with their requisition,
although not sufficiently prepared, I have endeavored to bring forward to
their notice, a Treatise on the Tussis Convulsiva; or, as it is more frequently
denominated, the Hooping Cough: and this, not with a view, presumptuously to
advance any positive or decided Opinion, but from a sincere desire to excite
the attention, and provoke the discussion of those, whose abilities and
experience, while they entitle them to superior respect, afford them also, the
means of superior information!

The Tussis Convulsiva, is a disease, which, although well known, has been
seldom described; few authors having given us any regular description of it,
or, till lately, recommended any peculiar plan of treatment: nor do they seem
to have discriminated it from any other cough, excepting only by that
distinguishing symptom, which has given it the name of Hooping Cough.
Specifics, indeed, have been proposed, and cicuta, by some practitioners, has
been highly extolled: Opium, also, has been esteemed of superior efficacy, and
Emetics have been almost universally employed.

As the express purpose of my introducing this subject to the Society, was to
combat some prevailing opinions, and to endeavor to controvert some peculiar
prejudices, which I conceive to have been adopted; it will unavoidably happen,
that I may seem to deliver my sentiments too freely, and to be guilty of great
temerity in venturing to oppose the solitary testimony of the youthful
practitioner, to the respectable authority of the experienced Physician!

But it will, I hope, be remembered, that although a just deference should
certainly be paid to the researches of Antiquity, and to the observations of
Experience; yet it is, surely, a very dangerous experiment, to desist from
enquiry, and grow weary of investigation: the discovery of truth has seldom or
never been completely effected by the labors of one, but by the collective and
united industry of many: what, therefore, has escaped the wisdom of the former,
may happily have been granted to the perseverance of the latter; and of the
republic of letters, at least, it may be said, that the only Road to
improvement, is through the Path of Innovation!

If, however, in what I have to offer, I should seem essentially to differ in
opinion and practice from the majority of this Society, I entreat them to
acquit me of any imputation of obstinate presumption, or affected singularity;
and I solemnly assure them that it is from a full conviction of the truth of
what I shall assert, and from a sense of the duty I owe to this Society in
particular, as a member, and to the public in general as a medical
practitioner, that I bring forward to their notice the consideration of a
disease, frequent in occurrence, always hazardous, and often fatal: in the
progress of which, conscious of the Inaccuracies and sensible of the Defects,
but too visible in this composition; I feel it necessary, while I solicit their
attention, to claim also, their usual Indulgence.

I was, insensibly, led to this digression, because, upon mature deliberation,
I cannot but entertain very different notions of the nature and properties of
the Cause and Cure of this Disease, and have been induced, consequently, to
adopt a very different treatment. I shall endeavor to give the Society, as far
as I am enabled, my opinion of the disease itself, show what are its usual
causes and effects, and by relating to them some remarkable Cases,
demonstratively prove, what plan of treatment I have found to be successful.

The Tussis Convulsiva is that disease, which, together with the symptoms,
usually attendant upon pulmonary affections, is accompanied with a Contagion of
a peculiar and malignant nature; hence it has also obtained the name of Tussis
Ferina. I shall not hesitate here, to define it to be, a disease of clear and
evident debility; and one which never takes place, but in those who have either
been previously weakened by some other disease, or who from some unknown or
unforeseen cause are predisposed to this state.

The persons most liable to it are those who possess a weak, lax fiber; who use
little exercise; and in fine, those who, from whatever cause, have a deficient
perspiration. Hence Children from 4 months to 12 years, are in a remarkable
manner affected by it: and indeed, I have seen but one instance of its taking
place in any one of riper years; and this was in a young Lady of a very
delicate habit, who might be about nineteen years of age.

Its primary cause is contagion, which, whether it be sui generis, or of the
same nature with that, whereby all infectious diseases are produced, and which,
differing only in modification, or degree, occasions sometimes Small Pox, or
Measles, sometimes Typhus, or Hooping Cough, is at present suggested, I
confess, as conjecture only; yet perhaps not unreasonably, since in a family
where the Measles have prevailed, the Hooping Cough has frequently followed;
and in the same child, I have experienced both diseases to be at one and the
same time present, causing however no essential difference in the treatment.

The proximate causes will be found to be all such as tend to induce debility:
hence at a moist season, and in a damp situation, it is found to rage with the
utmost violence: frequently indeed, no other cause than this can be traced, as
I lately experienced in attending three children, whose parents had just
removed to a new and damp habitation: together with this, a relaxed habit,
where the pores being more patulous, are most liable to the impression of
Contagion, Pulmonary Affections in general, and in fine, any cause capable of
inducing a languid state of the system.

Its immediate seat is in the exhalant and mucous arteries: the secreted Fluids
of which, being inspissated by stagnation in the Bronchia, form the matter of
Expectoration. In this, as in any other Cough, it is the serous and mucous
Fluids, that chiefly flow to the Bronchia, which continue to bear their
pressure for a while, till distended by the load, they can bear it no longer:
the unpleasant sensation of the stimulus, excites a commotion in the vitality
of the laboring part, and rouzes the whole excitement; a Cough arises and
throws off its cause, the collected humors El. Med.
.

At this time, and during a fit of Coughing, the air is violently expelled; and
as an animal cannot exist, for any considerable interval without the admission
of air, as soon as possible, it instinctively makes an effort of inspiration;
when the air suddenly rushing as it were into a vacuum, causes that remarkable
found, which from its supposed resemblance to the articulation of the word
Hoop, has given it the name of Hooping Cough.

Hence it is easy to account for the effects produced by this disease. They are
indeed, of a very formidable nature, and are frequently of a most alarming and
fatal tendency: sometimes after a violent fit of Coughing, the Patient is
seized with convulsions and instantly expires. This may happen from two causes;
first from the continued action of the Lungs urged by the Irritation of the
Cough, preventing Inspiration, and thus inducing strangulation; or secondly,
from the lungs, being unable to recover their tone, yielding to the impulse of
the external atmosphere, and being overwhelmed by its sudden intromission. An
instance of which I knew in a beautiful Child of about three years of age whose
Mother had not the least apprehension of her child's being in any danger.
Sometimes, on account of the continued obstruction of the circulation, the
lungs being violently distended, yield to the impetus of the shock, a Blood
Vessel bursts, and the patient is cut off. If, however, the patient have the
good fortune to escape these dangers, the disease by gaining ground, and the
cough returning more frequently, continue to weary and exhaust, till he
gradually sink under its pressure.

In tracing the rise and progress of this disease, it will not, I hope, be
deemed foreign to the subject, to say a few words respecting contagion, more
espicially, as I think it will tend to illustrate what I have hitherto
constantly kept in view, viz. the being guided in the treatment of a disease,
more by the general state of the patient than by any particular symptom or set
of symptoms.

Contagion is a certain subtle, imperceptible matter, of an unknown nature,
resembling most natural phenomena, which are only in any measure open to our
enquiry by their evident effects. Taken from the body of one affected with it,
or from gross substance (such as clothes, or furniture, where it happens to
have been lurking) and received into a healthy body; it ferments without any
change of the solids or fluids, fills all the vessels, and is gradually ejected
by the pores; passing out more copiously or scantily, in proportion as the
perspiration is more free or impeded El. Med.
.

As the issue of the matter is here promoted, by inducing a free perspiration,
so whatever part of it be obstructed, and detained below the cuticle, acquires
by this delay, a certain acrimony producing little inflammations, and
conducting them when produced to suppuration. Upon this principle, are the
small pox, measles, and other exanthematous diseases to be accounted for.

As contagion however requires a certain time for its transmission; it follows,
that the most favorable state for this purpose, will be that where the
different secretions are most perfectly performed, and where, consequently, the
system comes the nearest to the healthy state: for it is very evident from
daily experience, that in weakened or vitiated habits, where the functions are
ill performed, and where perspiration is deficient, it is capable, by its
detention, of infecting peculiar fluids, and converting them into a matter,
similar to itself.

Yet as contagion, by its subtle and peculiar nature, is found to be imbibed by
all habits (perfect health perhaps alone excepted) I am unwilling to allow,
that it possesses any share in producing general diathesis; but that it kindles
up only a symptomatic pyrexia, strictly entitled to the appellation of local
disease, and, by its entrance into a healthy, or unhealthy constitution,
produces those different effects, which are seen to proceed from it.

And this imperceptibly leads me to the consideration of specifics. A medicine
is denominated specific, when it is applied for the cure of any peculiar
disease, and is supposed to be the only medicine, possessed of the power of
removing or eradicating that disease.

As poisons applied, or admitted into the system, were found to produce certain
mechanical effects, and seemed in some degree, to act in an uniform manner; the
restless spirit of curiosity and active ingenuity of mankind, prompted them to
researches after some antidote which might be peculiarly adapted to it, and
prove efficacious in its dispersion: hence Mercury, by proving successful in
the cure of lues venerea, has been denominated its specific, and some
Practitioners have not hesitated to declare cicuta to be, a certain specific
for the Hooping Cough. Yet I conceive it will readily be granted, that for a
medicine to be fairly entitled to the denomination of a specific, it is
necessary that it should be uniform in its operation and certain in its
success: now beside the great difficulty of actually proving the existence of a
specific in nature, several cases are upon record of lues venerea resisting the
most vigorous applications of mercury, in all its forms and varieties, and
yielding to medicines of a very different nature. With respect to cicuta Dr. W
-- B -- will, I trust, excuse me for this observation; he has long since
pronounced me a confirmed heretic, he cannot, therefore, be surprised at my
want of faith.
so warmly praised by some and recommended by others, I must frankly confess
that it becomes me to speak of it with doubt and hesitation, having partly
through fear, and partly through incredulity, seldom or never employed it.

This disease then originating from contagion, will be found like all others of
that class to produce in its incipient state no material change or alteration.
A cough is the first symptom, which differs very little from any common cough
or cold. The appetite is not in general impaired; the countenance remains in
its usual state; nor is it sometimes known, that this disease is present,
except by a knowledge of its having prevailed at any place, whence it might be
supposed to be imbibed. As it proceeds, however, it becomes more clearly
marked; the excretory vessels of the lungs, being crammed with a colluvies of
fluids, create a sense of tightness in the sternum, and great difficulty of
breathing; the stomach begins to reject its contents, and together with these,
great quantities of viscid phlegm are either vomited or coughed up. The
countenance grows pale, alternate heats and chills with other hectic symptoms
take place, and the sound resembling the word hoop is now distinctly observed.

In the last stage, the symptoms become more urgent and distressing: putrid
symptoms, the usual consequence of contagion, manifestly appear; foul breath,
crude dark colored feces or violent diarrhoea; spasmodic twitches of the
tendons, but particularly a convulsive motion of the nostrils; great anxiety,
with high and laborious respiration, all but too clearly foretell the approach
of death; and every day's experience brings with it some sad monument of the
tyranny of this dreadful disease.

To apply a suitable remedy in the treatment of a disease, nothing more seems
to be necessary than to possess a competent knowledge of its cause: since if
the cause be exactly ascertained, the effects resulting from it will be better
understood: and as identity of known cause always produces identity of known
effect, if the cause be uniform, the effect will be uniform also.

Unfortunately, however, in treating the diseases incident to humanity, we are
too apt to lose sight of this general and fundamental principle, and depart
from the guidance of reason: confiding in hidden powers, which have no
existence, and relying on miracles which cannot take place, we sometimes expect
from a random and contradictory treatment, the most complete and unequivocal
success.

Hence while Hooping Cough has been generally admitted to be a disease of
debility, the practice of vomiting has been warmly recommended and followed;
and the evacuation of an already exhausted system has been, by some, esteemed
the most infallible method of restoring health and vigor!

An emetic, if it act according to its intention, operates by a discharge of
the contents of the stomach and of some of the mucous fluids; and this it does,
either by some mechanical power which it possesses, of acting on the nervous
sensibility of its inner surface, or by that relaxant property, of rendering
the stomach unable to retain its contents.

Yet as the immediate seat of this disease is in the mucous vessels of the
lungs, and as the stomach is already in a relaxed and weakened state; a
particular medicine applied solely to that organ, and one whose professed
object is to evacuate, must surely be pernicious and useless. For although by
its local effect, and by the exertion of straining, expectoration may be
promoted, and a temporary relief be obtained; yet the cause being increased
which gave rise to this collection, and a rude shock being given to an already
weakened system; the exhibition of an emetic, however it may seem at first to
relieve, must eventually tend to exasperate the disease.

The cause of the collection which takes place in the vessels of the lungs, is,
as we have already stated, a deficient perspiration, wherein the system is
unable to throw off its redundant fluids: by stagnation they inspissate and
form mucus; and by occupying more space than is natural create a difficulty of
breathing. Now if deficient perspiration be the effect of debility, debility
will be the original cause; and any medicine capable of producing that effect,
will be capable also of increasing the cause.

An emetic by depriving the stomach of its contents, deprives it of that which
might enable it to resist the disease. It exhausts and weakens an organ which
requires support and nourishment, and increases that debility which was already
too prevalent: mucus or phlegm as it is termed, it is true, is during the
action of vomiting discharged; but in trifling proportion, and with
considerable disadvantage, the thinner parts alone being rejected and the
denser retained.

But if any one should take occasion to say, "we admit the truth of what you
have asserted, that this is a disease of debility, and that emetics though they
afford a temporary relief, ultimately debilitate; yet as these fluids are
already collected, and as the patient is in a state of fuffocation by their
retention; what remedy can be found to supply the place of an emetic, and
succeed so well in discharging them from the system?" To this I immediately
answer; strengthen the system and the fluids will be dispersed; increase the
perspiration and they will be resolved; prescribe cordials and they will be
expelled.

This disease then being admitted to be a disease of debility, any medicine
capable of invigorating the whole system will be found to be beneficial; and it
is upon this principle and no other that bark, opium, cicuta, and other
remedies have proved successful. That they frequently fail, arises perhaps from
this cause, that they are depended upon singly, and considered as specifics;
but as I have already endeavored to show the nonexistence of a specific in
nature, if my position be granted, it will be easy to prove that where the
principle is false, the success must be uncertain.

It has been observed by the late Dr. Johnson, that nothing has ever been well
done by a receipt; and I must confess that I have attended patients with the
Hooping Cough, where neither bark, opium, nor cicuta have been employed, and
where notwithstanding the recovery was complete.

It is not from any one particular form or system that diseases are to be
eradicated and health established; yet as example is at all times more
efficacious than precept, a few authentic Cases, while they demonstrate a plan
of treatment, may serve to explain the principles upon which that treatment was
founded.

And as I have ever deemed it to be the indispensible duty of a Practitioner to
give a faithful relation of facts though they may include events of an
unpleasant nature; so have I always thought that the relation of unsuccessful
cases is more than ever requisite, when any consideration of importance or
means of improvement are to be deduced from them.

CASE I.
On the 26th of August 1793, I was desired to send an emetic to a child of
about four years of age, who was troubled with the Hooping Cough; as I never
before had an opportunity of seeing a complete case of this disease, and as I
had some doubts respecting the propriety of emetics, I considered this as a
favorable opportunity of watching the progress and event; and as I attended in
the Family, profited by the occasion. The child possessing a tolerable share of
health, and with the exception of the cough having no other particular symptom
of disease, had rendered any previous attendance unnecessary. Upon calling the
next day I was informed that the emetic had been given, and as usual, had
brought up a considerable quantity of phlegm; the cough, however, was more
troublesome, and the patient very restless. The following medicine was
immediately prescribed.

I.
. Conf. Arom. Gr. xv.
Sir. Croc.
Sp. N. M. a^ j.
Aq. Men. Pip. iss..
Coch. Med. statim et 4it is horis capiend.
On the 28th the child was something better.

On the 29th Measles began to appear, and as he seemed somewhat feverish the
following was prescribed.

II.
. Aq. Ammon. acet. ij
Sir. Croc.
Sp. N. M. a^ j
Aq. Men. Sat. iss.
. Ut ante capiend.
On the evening of this day the child's breathing being much obstructed, the
mother procured a leech and applied it to his breast. The ill consequence of
this, was but too soon visible^; at night I was sent for, and found the patient
in a very alarming and dangerous situation; the leech had caused a profuse
Hemorrage, and round the orifice was a livid circle. The breathing was become
high and laborious; the countenance pale, and the convulsive motion of the
nostrils was very evident; together with these formidable symptoms, a violent
Diarrhoea came on, and it seemed to be the general opinion that the patient
could not survive. The following medicines were immediately prescribed.

III.
Emp. Cantharid. Stern.
. Conf. Arom. j.
Sir. Croc.
Sp. N. M. a^ j.
Tra Lav. C. Gutt. x.
-- Opii. Gutt. xx.
Aq. Men. Pip. iss.
Coch. med. stat. and 2nd quaq. hor. capiend.
A clyster of mutton broth was directed to be given warm; a pap-spoonful of red
port between each dose of the mixture; and the feet to be put into warm water.

On the 30th the symptoms much the same.

IV.
. Mist. Camp. iss.
Tra Card. Comp.
Sir. Simp. a^ j.
Tra Lav. Comp. ss.
-- Opii. Gutt. xx.
M. Coch. Med. 2nd quaq. hor. capiend.
Diet ordered to be strong beef tea, sago, with wine, etc. etc.

31st. Slight alteration for the better, but diarrhoea very violent.

Contin. Miss. Card. ij.
1st of September the breathing very difficult and the diarrhoea still
continues.

V.
. Conf. Arom. j.
Sir. Croc.
Sp. N. M. a^ j.
Tra Lav. C. j.
-- Gentian. C. ss.
-- Opii. Gutt. xx.
Aq. Men. Pip. iss.
Coch. Med. 2nd quaq. hor. capiend.
2nd. The Patient considerably better, the purging less violent, the
countenance more lively, and he began for the first time to speak and call for
various things.

VI.
. Conf. Arom. j.
Sir. Croc.
Tinct. Cinnam. a^ j.
-- Lav. C. Gutt. xx.
-- Opii. Gutt. x.
Aq. Men. Pip. iss.
. Coch. Med. dum. alv. deject. contin. capiend.
On the 3d still mending.

And on the 4th so much better that I judged it expedient for him to take his
medicine at greater intervals.

On the 6th he took his medicines, with the Omission of Tr Opii. and

On the 7th discontinued them; and being sent into a neighboring village for a
short time, for the benefit of a change of air, has since returned and is at
this time in perfect health.

CASE II.
On the 20th of September, I was called to a child of about 8 months old with
the Hooping Cough. He was of a weak puny habit from the birth, and had a severe
illness some time before.

VII.
. Conf. Arom. Gr. xv.
Sir. Croc.
Sp. N. M. a^ j.
Tra Lav. C. Gutt. x.
Aq. Men. Pip. j.
. Coch. min. stat. et 2nd quaq. hor. capiend.
21st. The cough very troublesome.

VIII.
. Conf. Arom. Gr. xv.
Sir. Croc.
Sp. N. M. a^ j.
Tinct. Opii. Gutt. x.
-- Lav. C. Gutt. v.
Aq. Men. Pip. j..
Coch. Min. urg. Tuss. capiend.
22nd. Being better the medicine was neglected.

23d. Breathing difficult and cough bad.

IX.
. Tra Card. C.
Sir. Croc. a^ j.
Tra Lav. C. Gutt. xx.
-- Opii. Camp. Gutt. x.
Aq. Men. Pip. j.. ut ante capiend.
24th. Cough still continues.

X.
. Conf. Arom. Gr. xv.
Sir. Croc.
Sp. N. M. a^ j
Tra Gentian. C. Gutt. xx.
-- Lav. C. Gutt. x.
-- Opii. Gutt. v.
Aq. Men. Pip. j.
Coch. min. 2nd quaq. hor. capiend.
On the 25th the breathing being very laborious,

Emp. Cantharid. Ventrical.
26th. Contin. Miss. Card.

27th. A little better.

Contin. Miss. Card. j
a^ Tr Opii. Gutt. xv.
28th. A clyster of mutton broth directed to be given.

29th. The child considerably better, but on the

30th, a relapse. Breathing very laborious, and countenance pale with
diarrhoea: weather very rainy.

XI.
Emp. Cantharid. Stern.
. Mist. Camp. iss.
Tra Card. C.
Sir. Simp. a^ j.
Tra Asae. Foetid. Gutt. xx.
-- Opii. Gutt. x.. Coch. Min.
Omni. hor. capiend.
Contin. Enem.
1st October. A little better.

Contin. Miss. Card.
a^ Tr Opii. Gutt. xx.
3d. Much better, begins to suck, which he had before been unable to do; and to
conclude, in the course of about a fortnight at farthest, by a continuance of
cordial medicines with small doses of P. Rhab. the Patient completely
recovered, and has been well ever since.

I have particularized this case, not because I think that there was any thing
very remarkable in it, but because it was confidently asserted that the child
could not recover; the mother and nurse had at one time given it up as
hopeless, and but for my persuasion would have left it to its fate, and because
no emetic had been given from the commencement to the conclusion of the disease.

On the 3d of October I was called to a Family where four children had the
Hooping Cough; but as I think it would be needless to enter into a particular
detail of the medicines which were given, it will be sufficient to say, that
with the assistance of temperate cordials, light and nourishing diet, gentle
exercise, and clear air, they all completely recovered.

I have since attended several children, who by the same treatment, and with
the exclusion of emetics, have all recovered; but I must pass them over to come
to a Case which proved unsuccessful.

On the 1st of December, I visited a child about four years old with this
disease: he was very restless and rather costive.

XII.
. Conf. Arom. Gr. xv.
P. Rhab. Gr. v.
Sir. Croc.
Sp. N. M. a^ j.
Aq. Men. Pip. iss.. Coch. Med.
4it is horis capiend.
2nd. The cough being troublesome, I was solicited for an emetic, but gave an
evasive answer, expressing my doubt of its efficacy. The medicine was
continued; but on the

3d. As the patient seemed to be very much oppressed in his breathing, and
choked with phlegm, I yielded to solicitation, and an emetic was sent. From
that time the patient gradually drooped, and notwithstanding the utmost
vigilance and attention, and the most vigorous application of medicines of the
most powerful kind, on the 7th in the evening died.

I am so well convinced in this case of the emetic's proving pernicious, that I
shall never consent to hazard the experiment a second time; and if any one
should assert that he has given an emetic for a cough, and experienced its
efficacy, I shall answer, "It is possible you may have cured a cough by
emetics, but I do not believe that cough was the Hooping Cough."

The last case which I shall offer is that of an infant of something more than
three months old; who from being in a very imminent state of danger, was
happily recovered in less than a fortnight's time.

The medicines were of the cordial kind; clysters were given; nutritive broths
with a moderate quantity of wine: and I can here with truth and confidence
assert, that (excepting the one I have mentioned) I have never had a case of
Hooping Cough which did not yield to this plan of treatment.

As I have rather exceeded the limits of a paper, I must hasten to a
conclusion. To those who may think that I have been presumptuous in my opinions
and confident in my assertions, I shall beg leave to oppose the authority of a
celebrated Physician. "In Hooping Cough," says he, "change of climate is an
idle tale, and the practice of vomiting death."

I have said that this disease is rapid in its progress and fatal in its
effects; and I cannot bring a better instance than that of a child who going to
a baker's, in whose family it prevailed, to purchase a roll, caught it,
returned home, and being seized with a fit of coughing, burst a blood-vessel
and instantly expired: and that of a mother who was bereft of two children,
both of whom were cut off in somewhat less than eight and forty hours, without
having received any treatment: and no other medicine than that abominable
custom, which cannot be too strongly reprobated, and which is so prevalent
among the Poor especially, viz. of giving their children repeated doses of Vin.
Antim. or Tart. Emet. without either knowledge to assist, or judgment to direct
them: so bigoted indeed are they to these medicines, that they think them
universal nostrums; and I am acquainted with a family where Vin. Antim. is
regularly administered to the children once or twice a week; by way, as it is
termed, of clearing the bile from their stomachs! Good God! are there not
already sufficient calamities for suffering humanity, that we should so
studiously endeavor to create diseases, where none previously existed, and
thus dig pitfalls for our own destruction!

It is not with medicine, as with other arts and sciences, where a mistake may
be rectified, and an amendment adopted: alas! dear-bought experience frequently
comes too late, and the nature and cause of a complaint may be discovered when
the occasion for it is past.

I call therefore upon this Society, in their individual as well as in their
collective capacity, to discountenance and check the imprudent exhibitions of
em^tics. I have brought forward proofs of their in^^^^^acy and ill effects: I
have shown the success of a different plan of treatment: and I conjure them, by
all that is valuable and sacred, to let not these testimonies be brought in
vain.


