ANTIDOTARIA; OR, A Collection of ANTIDOTES AGAINST THE PLAGUE, AND OTHER
Malignant Diseases.

TOGETHER, With some Decent and Useful Remarks, on the late Pharmacopeia
Londinensis, in a Letter to the President and College of PHYSICIANS; showing
the Necessity of a farther Reformation of their new LONDON DISPENSATORY.

By JOSEPH BROWN, L.L.M.D.

LONDON: Printed for J. WILCOX, at the Green-Dragon in Little-Britain; and sold
by J. ROBERTS, in Warwick Lane. 1721.

TO The most Eminently Learned, the President and Community of the ROYAL
COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS, LONDON.
Gentlemen,
THE Intention of the following Pages, with Difference to your illustrious
Body, is with all submission laid at your Feet, carrying no other Views along
with it, than to promote, the further Knowledge of medicine, the exact and
artful Composition of which is so highly Necessary, and conducive to the
Welfare of Mankind, and the Utility of the Public.

I REST assured of a candid Reception from the Nature of the Design, which I
have the vanity to think you will favor, because it is only levelled at a
Reformation some of the Errors in Composition that have crept into former, and
are still retained in your last Edition of the London Dispensatory, and a
further Recommendation of the many excellent Prescriptions, which you have with
Justice to the Profession, continued and published to the World, all which I
shall endeavor to support by Authority, Reason and Experience; hence, I
flatter myself with every thing that can be expected from a Society so
distinguished for universal Literature, as well as their particular Knowledge
in Medicine.

THIS is a mere Trifle which I offer, only as an Essay to what I have ready for
the Press, and to which I doubt not of your generous Approbation; for as 'the
Study of your Lives is devoted to do Good, so you will certainly promote every
Thing that tends to that great End; and what is of more Importance than to
preserve Life, and restore to Man that valuable Blessing of Health?

THIS Collection of Antidotes, although, no Epidemical Disease should happen
(which God in his Mercy avert) is of universal Tendency, and speaks for itself:
The Authors were all Physicians of great Experience, some of whom lived through
five or six Plagues, in which they had been singularly successful; and after
that devouring Flame was Extinguished, they had in all their succeeding
Practice, still a mighty Esteem for such Antidotes and Alexipharmicks as had
been Serviceable to them, when they stood so much in need of their Assistance,
on which Occasion they invented and introduced a whole Set or Collection of
'em, into Practice among which you have the various Prescriptions of Sir Walter
Rawleigh's great Cordial, that of Sir Kenelm Digby's Diaphoretick, Gascoyne
Powder, with the Goa-Stone, and a great Variety of the Lapis Contrayerva, with
many others; all which are very valuable in their Kinds, and consequently, I
doubt not but the Publication of this will meet with a Reception equal to the
Merits of those learned Gentlemen, who were the Compilers of the several
Recipe's and Prescriptions therein contained, which were certainly Studied and
found Useful for the public Service.

NOW, let, me beg leave of your learned Society to make some decent and modest
Remarks upon your last Edition, of your Pharmacopeia that from the Justness of
those Observations, you yourselves may Judge of the Necessity there is for a
Reformation of the same, and from the Specimens I shall give, make the World
sensible of the Usefulness of such an Undertaking, which, with the last Regards
due to your venerable Body, I submit to impartial Judgment. And in the first
Place, I shall not wast Time, either upon the Method, or Materials you have
made Choice of in the Simples conducive to your Dispensatory, whether Roots,
Barks, Woods, Herbs, Flowers, Fruits, Seeds or the like, but do think it would
have been a Justice due to the Public, as well as an Advantage to the
Profession to have informed them, which of those Simples most constantly are in
Use, which are seldom used, and which are never used at all; which Things are
very Material, that Time and Money may not be thrown away upon what is
perfectly Useless; as the Roots of Anthorae an Exotic, called the
Counter-poison to Monkshood, not Traffick'd in, and of no Virtues that are
recommended by the Experience of the Faculty. 2dly. Arundinis Saccharina; the
common Reed and Sugar-Cane Roots of no Medicinal use. The Roots of Kings Spear
or Asphodel, Male and Female, not Used or even Sold in the Druggist, or
Apothecaries Shops, and many more.

THE next are those which, are seldom, or very rarely used, such as the
Hermodactyls, Woad, Fullers Thistle, Hog-Fennel, Stinking Gladon, and an
hundred others mentioned to little or no Purpose, which had been better left
out, both for the ease of the Apothecary, and the Prescriber, who is at first
embarrass'd in so large a Field of Materials, loaded by some Authors with great
Encocomiums of the Feats they have done in Physic, which are too apt to
flatter and disappoint the Presumptions of a young Practitioner.

I SHALL pass by the rest of the Simples in this short Account, and leave 'em
to a stricter Enquiry, when I come to publish the Pharmacopeia Reformata, and
so proceed to some more material Observations, among which, I shall first take
Notice of, the Oxymel scilliticum, which you have Prescribed just in the same
manner as formerly, viz. Three Pounds of Clarified Honey, to two Pounds of
Vinegar of Squills; whereas in Justness to the Operation, and Effects of this
Medicine, here should be three Pounds of Vinegar of Squills, to two Pounds of
Honey, otherwise the Medecin is so clogged with the Honey, that the Efficacy
thereof is lost, and the Acetum has not power to assist the Digestion, cut the
viscous Phlegm, discharge Wind and sour Belchings from the Stomach, and
strengthen the Appetite; for which it is a noble Remedy, was it not so very
Nauseous; but it may be excellently adapted by a skillful and judicious
Physician, who by mixing equal parts of the Acetum scilliticum and Oxymel will
gain his Intentions.

I CANNOT be surpised that you have overlooked this among so many other
Compositions, which are so Faulty, that they are not capable of being made up
or if they could, would be of no Use, since you are pleased to persist in your
daily Practice to prescribe Galbanum along with Ammoniacum, in order to be
dissolved, in black Cherry-water, or other the like Vehicle, and are angry with
the Apothecary, when he tells you plain, that he knows not how to dissolve
Galbanum in an aqueous Body, though Ammoniacum will familiarly do it; if this
Point had been cleared up in your last Edition, of the London Dispensatory, and
new Rules given to the Apothecary, how to make his Dissolution of Galbanum,
this would have been a great Improvement, and given a New turn to the
Dispensations of Medicines, but till then, we shall believe it was not so
artfully Corrected, as we had Reason to expect from Persons so well qualified;
otherwise the Spiritus Lavendulae compositus would hardly have remained in the
Condition it stands, considering it is such a Farrago of inconsistences
unskilfully blended, the Produce of which, is nothing at all; when at the same
time the simple Spirit of Lavender, is so excellently useful, and may be
enriched at the Physician's pleasure, with all the Volatile Aromaticks, etc.
according to the Nature of the Case, becoming by this Means a Spiritus
Lavendulae Extemporaneo Compositus.

YOUR Aqua Paeoniae Composita, or Peony-water Compound, is an excellent
Prescription, but wants much of what it was from Langius, who calls it his
Epileptick Water, which Receipt I shall give you (as it was Originally) in the
Pharmacopeia Reformata; in the interim it is high time to expunge Gilbert's
Water, least some evil minded People should deceive themselves, and others, in
putting their Trust therein.

As to the Treacle of Audromachus, and Mithridate, of which I can find no
Reformation made in your last Edition; it is one grand Medley of a multitude of
Simples jumbl'd together without Order or Design; the greatest Part of which
are either useless, or ineffectual. I shall satisfy my own Opinion only to
declare that as generally used, and applied, they are both dangerous Medicines
ill prepared, very Hot and of disagreeable Qualities to the Intentions they are
administered. The grand Reason that has induced all Sorts of People to the Use
of them, have been drawn from the Authority and Experience of the Ancients;
Galen says they, has spoken in Praise of Treacle in two Pieces of his,
directed to Piso, and Pamphilianus. To which I answer, that the Authority
cited, is of no force, because they do not appear to be Galen's Writings, but
falsely attributed to him, which is the more Evident from the Style and Manner
of Writing, which is foreign from that of Galen's, besides there are several
Terms, and Words made Use of not elsewhere to be found in the said Author's
Works, according to the learned Mercurialis, who says, in eo plurima verba a
Galeno nusquam usurpata, fabulosae aliqua and stylus totus pene diversus
reperiuntur. The same Author says, there ought not to be the least Fault in any
of the Simples, that enter that Composition, speaking of Treacle Vitium enim
unius Medicamenti totum Compositionem evertit.

EVERY Body knows the great Abuse in the Choice of Vipers, and that of the
Malabathrum, which not one in an hundred makes a right Use of; besides this,
the Myrrh we use, setting aside the smell, is nothing like that described by
Dioscorides, but rather Bdelliams, whereas the Troglotick is the fame, and we
have no Opo-Balsamum, true Costus, Schaenanth, Dictamny of Crete, or Falernian
Wine. The generality of the Opium used at this Day, is nothing near so fine, or
good as Mathiolus relates, and scarce seems to be like what Dioscorides
describes: For it is a perfect Meconium at this Day, as may be evidently Proved,

THE Mithridate commonly met with in the Shops, is in the same Condition,
having the same Faults and Imperfections, and therefore ought to be rejected,
being too hot and acrid for the Intentions it is generally Prescribed,
consequently it wants a considerable Reformation, or else ought to be expunged
the Dispensatory.

THE Confection of Alkermes, although very prudently divested of its Perfumes now
adays, is a Composition very unartfully Invented and Described by the
Arabians, and very little Reformed and Amended by the Moderns, who still
closely pursue the Errors of the Arabian Physicians: Indeed the Lapis Laruli
has been long since thrown out, and there remains little behind in this
Medicine, which bears a high Name, but what we may expect from the Juice or
Syrup of the Chermes-Berry with better Success; for as to the Aloes Wood, we
know little or nothing of it, and the Leaf-Gold therein, is a mere Amusement to
Deceive the Credulous. Rondeletius instead of speaking in its Praise gives a
severe Caution against the Use of it, which is Backed by Mr. Ferrier, a
Physician of Toulouse, who blames Physicians for the too plentiful Prescribing
thereof: See the Annotations and Observations of Mr. Guillemeau. The Confect of
Hyacinth bears a great Resemblance to this, only that the last seems to be
endowed with no Cordial Virtue at all: Notwithanding the great Boasts made of
it, from the Fragments of Precious-Stones, that enter the Composition, by the
splendid show of which, together, with the Leaf-Gold, many are induced to
believe it is capable of performing Wonders.

AS I was treating of Mithridate, I must take the Liberty to return to the
Subject, to show that when Pompey found the Receipt thereof written in
Mithridates own Hand, after the Defeat of that Prince, which he esteemed as a
vaulable Secret; it was Compounded but of very few Simples, and those very
common ones according to the following Distick.

Antidotus vero multis Mithridatica fertur
Consociata Modis, sed magnus scrinia Regis
Cum rapperet Victor, vilem deprendit in illis
Synthesim, and vulgata satis Medicamina risit:
Bis denum rutae folium, salis and brevegranum
Juglandasque duas, totidem cum corpore ficus:
Naecortente die pauco conspersa Lyaeo
Sumebat metuens, dederatque pocula tutor.
THIS Composition then consisted, only of two Walnuts, two Figs, Twenty leaves
of Rue stamped together, with a little Salt; and this was reckoned a sovereign
Antidote against any maglignant Air for 24 Hours together, it being sufficient
for three or four Morning Doses, drinking after it a Glass of white Wine

THE next thing to be inquired into, is to know the Reason, why you still admit
Leaf-Gold into several Preparations, since you very well know it is neither
Cordial, Corroborative, Alterative, or does it any wise contribute to the
Nutrition of the Parts according to Galen, in his Commentary on the first Book
of Hippocrates, de ratione Victus in Acutis. It can by no Means be called an
Alterative, in that the natural Disposition of the Body cannot be affected by
Reason of the Solidity of its Parts, so that it can neither heat or cool, dry
or moisten the solid, or fluid Parts, and how it becomes Purgative I cannot
imagine; all which makes good what Julius Caesar Scaliger, says in his
Exercitations against Cardan Exerc. 272. There ought to be some Resemblance,
some likeness in Configuration of Parts; between what gives the Nutriment, and
the Body that receives it. Metals are proper to unite with, and feed Metals,
but are imcompatible, and foreign to the subsistence and increase of Animals.
If Gold is good in any Disease, it must certainly be so in the Hypochondriack,
Melancholy, especially when it is administered, not as the Arabians, in Pills or
Powders, or as the Chemists in Potions like their Aurum Potabile, but
plentifully in Specie, or Golden Showers; nay, if the Physician could but
prescribe Bank Bills, his prescriptions would infallibly Cure all the Vapors
in Town. This is a Specific, even against South Sea Headache, which, is
otherwise an incurable Disease.

AND here I cannot forbear to hint at the present use of Ivory, that is still
continued, and recommended in many good Medicines, when every Body knows, and
is thoroughly persuaded that Hartshorn, has an hundred times the Virtue, since
the other neither discovers Smell or Taste, or any Quality to recommend it for
an efficacious Medicine; several Physicians have long since exploded it, as
Durel Hantin, Mercurialis, Baccius, Sylvaticus Erastus, Albertus, Sebizius, and
others; but Ambrose Parey, by dint of Reason and Experience refutes, all the
pretended and imaginary Qualities assigned to this useless and insignificant
Drug.

THEREFORE it becomes more my Admiration, that Gentlemen who have consulted,
and weighed all these things together in the Balance of Reason, should still
continue the Use of many useless, and extravagant Drugs, which are now directed
in the several Compositions of your Dispensatory, many of which are rarely, or
not to be got at all, and others at a very dear Rate, and good for little or
nothing; the first of which I mean is, the Bone of a Stags Heart, the others
are Ambergreese, Musk, and Bezoar so frequently prescribed on all Occasions, in
the last of which there are so many vile Cheats practiced, that it is a pity it
should lie in the power of avaritious, and designing Men to Cozen and Deceive
the World, with such vile Frauds.

TWO Parts in three of the Bezoar, of which is sold and made Use of in the
Shops is, Factitious, and the other that is Natural, is only fit to Deceive
such as are willing to be Deceived, and take a Pleasure to be carried down with
the Stream of popular Errors. As to the Factitious, it is generally made up of
Gall-Stones, found in the Gall-Bladders of Oxen, etc. and Lemnian Earth findly
ground with a little Ambergreese, and so formed into Stones of various Sizes
and Figures; and thus the subtle Artist cheats the Apothecary with his
Counterfeit Stone, and the Physician comes into the Confederacy, by prescribing
his Bezoartick Bolus, or Powder to pick the Patient's Pocket: This fallacy upon
the credulous Sick, will in a little time become as despicable, as the vain
Pretentions of the Alchymists, with their Aurum Potatabile, their Sulphur of
Metals, and Powder of Projection, with which they Bubble the Ignorant, and
blind the Eyes of the more discerning part of Mankind.

I HOPE to God, that you Gentlemen, who have both Honor, Justice and Judgment,
will put a stop to these Deceits whereby the People are Cheated with false
Medicines, which under the pompous Pretensions of curing more Effectually, are
made a Handle of, to extract Gold and Silver from the Patients Purse: A
Reformation of these things would be a great Advantage to all Parties, and who
can we expect it from, but your learned Body, who by your Example, and
Authority have Power to Reform, and at the same time inform the World what your
Opinions are in relation to such costly Drugs, as Bezoar, and whether the good
Effects and Virtues thereof are answerable to the Physicians Expectation, and
that of the Patient; if not, that you would ingeniously declare this Stone
naturally, as brought from India, and unsophistieated has no more Virtue than
some of our Foreign Earths, or Domestic Chalks.

IT is pretended by the Advocates for this Stone, that it is a most noble
Alexipharmick, and is both Cordial and Sudorifick, though it does not appear from
the Composition of its Parts, being Gross and Earthy, how it can increase or
otherwise alter the Motion of the Blood, or exhilerate the Spirits, which it
seems not to have power to fortify, and support. If this be so then, let us
submit to the force of Truth, which we find published in the Writings of some
of the best Physicians of Europe, which Mr. Guybert has accurately quoted; let
us submit Opinion, I say to Truth, which is one and the same throughout the
World. Nic Boccangelinus Physician to the Empress, and a very knowing Spaniard,
in a Treatise of Malignant and Pestilential Fevers. Chap. 17. Condemn's the Use
of Bezoar, thus; some make up Cordial Powders with Bezoar, Pearl, Coral, etc.
which strangely Deceive them, for, all these things increase the Obstructions,
which encourage the Fever, the Materials being gross, earthy, and Unactive,
foul the Stomach, clog the Lacterals, and stop the Mesaraick Vessels, so that
the Blood which is Contaminated with the malignant Vapors, has not power
hereby to refine itself. Hieron: Ruleus, a learned Physician of Ravenna, in his
Commentaries on the 7th Chap. of the 3d Book of Celsus exposes the Cheat after
this manner; I own, says he, having often prescribed the Bezoar Stone, in
Malignant, and other Fevers to several Persons of Quality, from 8 to 16 Grains,
I never could observe any good Effect from it, by any sensible Operation, or
Amendment in the Patient; but this we commonly Prescribe to the Rich and Great,
by way of Complement, it being very dear: Besides let me Caution you, says he,
for there are a great many Counterfeit, or false Stones, which I found by
Experience in the last Sickness of Pope Clement the 8th, so that out of forty,
which were brought me, I could scarce meet with one good one.

MARTIANUS a Roman Physician in his Commentaries upon Hippocrates, says, that
the Bezoar Stone is nothing else, but a mere Name and Opinion without any
Virtue, which he knows to be true upon repeated Trials; Rodericus a Fonseca, a
celebrated Professor at Padua, in a Tract of his on Malignant Fevers,
ingenuously owns, that he never saw any laudable Effect from it, though he had
frequently used it: Johannes Colle a learned Italian, and Physician to the D.
of Urbino, in a Book of his called Cosmitor Medicans, or a large Treatise of
the Bezoar Stone, makes severe Remarks on those, who boast of the Virtues of
Bezoar, without any Reason, and on those who use it in all Diseases, like a
Stall for all Horses. Theodorus Angelutius speaking of the Cure of Malignant
Fevers, condemns it in these Words; I advise all Physicians, says he, against
the use of this Stone, since it is a Drug that is good for nothing at the best;
and all Men of sincerity, who are most worthy of Credit confess it, and I
myself solemnly protest, that I never could find the Sick relieved thereby, how
easy it is, then for every one to Judge of the Danger there is in Confiding in
so uncertain and frivolous a Medicine, when the Patient labors under a
Malignant Fever, instead of a better approved, and more successful Remedy.
Thomas Minadous, in his Book of Fevers, says thus; I cannot so much, as admit,
or have ever met with any occult Quality in this Bezoar Stone, by which means
it could prove serviceable in any Kind of Fevers; and therefore believe they
are all fabulous Accounts, and old Women's Tales, that have been told either by
the Arabians, or the Moderns; for I have tried it several Times in several
Diseases, without finding any Relief or Advantage from it. Aloisius Mundella,
in his Experiments on simple Medicines, confirms what all the rest have said,
whom I have quoted before.

PERMIT me, most excellent and learned Colleagues, to say a Word or two about
the Drug Sena, which enters so many of your well chosen Compositions, and which
I have the Vanity to think you have not all met with in the common Treatises of
simple Medicines, though the Subject fell in my way, when I consulted all the
Authors I could then come at in compiling my History of Drugs, from Pomet,
Lemery Tournefort, etc. The Sena, which Mesue from the Persians, calls
Abalzemer, is a Plant or Shrub, the Leaves whereof Resemble those of Liquorice,
it shoots up and spreads with many small Branches, which are very pliant, the
Flowers are yellow, with certain Threads or red Streaks underneath, after which
shoot forth certain Follicula or Buds closely folded, which hang upon the
Plant, by a slender Tail, which is very fine, and naturally flat; these Buds
when Ripe easily fall by the force of the Wind, and contain in them a Seed
which is of a greenish black Color, and so like the Stone of a Raisin, that it
is hard to know the difference; Serapion in his Book of Simples says, these
Buds are longish, and in form of a Cross, in which the Seed is lodged. They are
much Deceived, who think that the Tree which Theophrastus calls Colutea to be
our Sena; because the Colutea which the French call Baguenaudier bears large
Follicules or Buds, which the Shepherds and Pesants gather to feed their Cattle
with, besides, there is a vast difference, in that the Sena is an Herb or Plant
that lasts but a few Months, and the Bagnenaudier is a Tree that continues many
Years; notwithstanding which the same Virtues have been ascribed to the last,
as to that of Sena, and the Merchant imposed upon as well as the Druggist in
buying the one for the other. Mesue says, that the Sena has much more Virtue
and Efficacy in the Bud than the Leaf, especially if of the Dark green Color a
little bitterish, stiptick and astringent in Taste, and gathered when fresh, for
otherwise the Virtue is lost. The white Buds are good for nothing, the green
Leaves, better than the white, and the thick ones than the thin, but the Stalks
of no Use at all; and this agrees very well with what Matthiolus writes in his
learned Commentaries on Dioscorides, he says indeed, there are two Sorts of
these Buds, the one of which is gathered when dry and fallen from the Plant,
which have no Virtue in them, and the other is gathered upon the Plant before
it is dry and withered, and these are thick Leaves, and full of Sap, being
afterward skillfully dried in the Shade.

Manardus, a Physician of Ferrara maintains, that the Leaves of the Sena have a
greater Purgative Quality than the Buds, but then he takes 'em for such as
dropped from the Tree ready dried; but Fernelius who was undoubtedly a more
knowing Judge of Medicine, follows Mesue and Matthiolus in preferring the Buds
to the Leaves, and Sylvius subscribes to the same Opinion, in his Commentaries
upon Mesue, Whoever has a Mind to Use the Buds, must observe this Description,
but such as like the Leaves better, must choose those of the brightest Color,
large and fresh, and free from all Smell, rejecting the pale and dead Colored
as useless. Our Druggists are often very negligent in mixing all together,
without Choice or Distinction. With submission to the more learned, I think we
generally under Dose this Medicine in our Compositions, and Preseriptions.
Serapion orders from a Dram, to two Drams in Powder, and half an Ounce to five
Drams in Decoction, Actuarius only one Dram, and in Decoction half an Ounce;
Fernelius directs two Drams in Powder, and six in Decoction, but half an Ounce
in the Infusion. Your London Dispensatory prescribes only a Scruple of Sena in
Powder, and half a Scruple of Rhubarb and Polypody in seven Drams of
Electuarium Catholicum, and two Drams only in the Decoction of Gereon, and in
the Lenitive Electuary, to one Ounce a Dram of Sena, with a Scruple of that and
Polypody in Decoction, in the larger compound Powder of Sena, half a Dram, and
in the less 24 Grains. The Magisterial Syrup of Apples has a Dram of Sena to
an Ounce, but the Purging Syrup only a Scruple infused to six Drams. Syrup of
Roses with Sena has indeed a Dram to six Drams of the Syrup. I shall conclude
this Head, with the form of a Purging Potion of Sena, from an eminent Physician
of our own, who Practiced upwards of sixty Years.

TAKE of fine Sena, cut small six Drams, Salt of Tartar two Drams, Juice of
Lemons one Ounce, white Wine four Ounces, infuse six or seven Hours, in a Glass
Vessel, then strain, and infuse therein all Night Electuary of Carthamum three
Drams, the Juice of Apples one Ounce: In the Morning clarify this with the
white of an Egg, and to the strained Liquor, add Syrup of Roses, with Agarick
six Drams, Cinamon-Water two Drams, the zest of half an Orange Peel.
Notwithstanding the large Quantity of Sena; this is a Medicine of a nice and
delicate Operation, without giving Gripes or Colic, and yet moves Ten or
Twelve times.

IN order to introduce our Antidotaria, it may not be amiss to give a Specimen
of the Reformation of two grand Prescriptions, which I have already hinted at
to be faulty, in the Pharmacopeia Londinensis, viz. The Confect of Alkermes,
and that of Hyacinth.

The Confection of Alkermes Reformed.
TAKE the Juice of Kermes, sweet Apples, and Raspberries, of each strained
lbij, Sugar of Roses lbij, mix and by a gentle Fire boil to the Consistence of
Honey. The Aperitive Saffron, or Crocus Martis iij, red Rose Buds reduced to a
Powder, after having been first steeped in Juice of Lemons vi, Pearl, Coral,
Crabs Eyes and burnt Hart's-Horn laevigated with Oil of Tartar per Delique of
each five Drams, Citron Sanders and Bezoar, or Contrayerva Stone, of each ss,
Musk and Ambergreese may be added, at the Discretion of the Physician, but it
is Judged much better to be left out. This Composition is preferable to that of
the Shops, for the Intentions aimed at, being more Cordial and Specifical to
drive away Melancholy and the Malignity of the Bilous Juices, besides it is
better appropriated to stop Fluxes, and to restore Strength.

The Confection of Hyacinth Reformed.
TAKE of the Seeds of Hyacinth and Viper's Bugloss, of each ss, of the Roots of
Tormentil, Bistort, Contrayerva, Scorzonera, Dictamny, of each iij, Citron and
Orange-Peel dried of each iss, Betony and red Rose Flowers, of each i, Sorrel
and Purslane Seed, of each ij; burnt Hart's Horn, yellow Sanders, and white
Amber, of each ij, Magistery of Pearl and Coral, and Crab's-eyes prepared, of
each vi Bole, Lemnian and Silesian Earths, of each ij, Saffron iv, Camphore i,
Tincture of Kermes-Berries, extracted in Juice of Lemon, and reduced to the
Consistence of Honey ij; all these being rightly mixed, and brought to a
Powder, may be made into a Mass or Electuary, with Syrup of Lemons, Mulberries,
etc.

N. B. In this Composition, instead of the Fragments of Precious Stones, or the
Hyacinth, our Author has made Choice of the Seed which Dioscorides, thus
described, Book 4. Chap. 58. The Seed of the Hyacinth, says he, is Astringent,
and Proper for the Compotision of Treacles, Myrrh is omitted, because of its
ungrateful Taste, and as to the Perfumers of Musk and Ambergreese, they may be
added at the Discretion of the Prescriber. But this Electuary seems better
adapted, than that of the Shops, being more Cordial and Restorative, and may be
used with good Effect in Malignant Disentery's and profuse Diarrhaea's, as also
Pestilential Fevers, Smallpox, etc.

ANTIDOTARIA; Or, a Collection of Antidotes, etc.
I Designed to have given you Sir Walter Rawleigh's great Cordial from the
original Manuscript, which you have taken into your Dispensatory from Bates,
but the Variations are so great, and the Articles so Numerous, I refer 'em to a
larger Work, and shall give you Sir Walter Rawleigh's grand Diaphoretick, taken
from Holten, who lived with him, and also Sir Kenelm Digby's two sudorifick
Waters, Vegetable and Mineral, appropriated to all burning Malignant Fevers and
Pestilential Diseases.

Rawleigh's DIAPHORETICK.
TAKE Mercury sublimate lbj. Crude Antimony, or rather the Regulus lbij, Grind
them well on a Marble, till a Fume begin to arise, then put the Mixture into a
Bolt-Head or Mattress, place this in a Cellar, and let it stand 15 or 20 Hours,
till it runds into Butter, put that into a Glass Alembick, and distill till
nothing will come over; increase the Fire till a certain white Matter appears
sublimed on the Upper part, or Head of the Alembick; then cease till the
Vessels are cold, and keep the white Sublimate a part, or separate, but the
Residence remaining in the bottom is to be divided into two equal Parts, of
which take one half, and all the Sublimate gained before, to this pour the
Water which ascended in the first Distillation: Drive this till nothing further
will Distill, and the Vessel being cool, the Magma, or Caput Mortum, with what
is Sublimed must be Ground together in a Glass Mortar, and Water put in
therewith to the Alembick: Drive this over again, and Repeat it 7 or 8 times,
but give a large degree of Fire to the last, that the Sublimation may be
exactly Regular: The Glasses being cold Collect your Sublimate, then Grind it
again on a Marble, and in a small sublimating Furnace, sublime it Thirty or
Forty times, Grinding it fine, every time, theoftener the better; the last time
it must be reduced to an impalpable Powder, and put it into a Silver or Gold
Vessel, to which pour the best Spirit of Wine, and burn it, reiterating this
Work Seven or Eight times, at last you will have a perfect dry Powder, to be
given from 6 to 12 Grains; this was a kind of Panacea to Ralegh, and given in
Rheumatisms, Smallpox, Plague, Malignant Fevers, and all cutaneous Diseases.
It moves powerfully to Sweat.

Sir Kenelm Digby's Sudorifick Cordial-Water.
Take of the Roots of Scorzonera, Gentian, Elicampane, Cinquefoil, Tormentil,
Cyprus, Aristolochius of both Kinds, of each iv. Zedoary iij, the Husks of
green Walnuts lbi, of the Leaves of the Orange and Lemon-Tree, Bay, Basil and
Scordium, of each M. iv, the outward Rind of Lemons and Oranges, of each x,
Juniper Berries viij, Ivy-Berries xij, clarified Juice of Valerian, Mead sweet,
Scabious, Marygold, and Carduus, of each lbiij Rhenish Wine, and Rain Water, of
each five Quarts, white Wine Vinegar lbv; bruise and mix all these together,
and set 'em in Horse-Dung a Week, then Distill in Sand to the Consumption of
half, and strain the Residue, making a strong Expression of the Magma, which
Calcine, to white Ashes: The expressed Liquor is to be strained through a
triple Filter, Distilled again, till the Cordial Extract remains, which is to
be kept by itself, the Salt of the Magma being added thereto, for the better
preservation and increase of its Virtue: Take of this Cordial now described
lbij. Salt of Tartar lbss, mix and rectify together, and to the rectified
Water, add Antimony Diaphoretick ij, burnt Hartshorn iv; Mix and Digest in
Sand eight Days, then Filter. The Dose is i, to vi, by itself, or in
Treacle-water in Malignant Fevers, you may add to this, Juice of Sorrel, or
Lemons, and little a Sugar, with half a Dram of Contrayerva.

The Mineral Sudorifick Water of Sir Kenelm Digby.
TAKE of Crude Antimony, ground to a subtle Powder i, Salt of Tartar vi, mix
well, and put them together for some Days, in a moist Place, shake often, and
at last they will dry; Repeat this two or three times, at last Grind this
finely, put it into a Philosophical Egg, bury it in a Sand heat, or rather a
Reverberatory, six or seven Days, at last give a Fire of the fourth degree of
Heat, so that obscure Clouds may arise, the Matter will be of a red Color,
which take out, Grind afresh, and put it into a stronger Glass, pour on Spirit
of Wine, and Extract, till the Spirit is tinged of a ruby Dye: Dose is from x
to xx Drops in any convenient Liquor, as Wine, Treacle or Carduus-Water; it is
a powerful and noble Sudorifick.

Chalybeate Pills, first invented in the Plague time, for strengthening the
Stomach, opening Obstructions of the Spleen, and dissipating all the
Melancholy and malignant Vapors. This Prescription seems to carry along with
it the Perfection of the Art of Composition.

TAKE of the Species Hiera Picra ss, Aloes rosat. ij, ij, mix, and of this take
only iij, i, of pure Vitriol of Iron v, red Coral, Crab-Eyes, Mastick,
Contrayerva Stone, Lapis Lazuli prepared finely, Salt of Wormwood, of each ij.
ss, Balsam of Peru, as much as will make them into a Mass of Pills for ten
Doses.

Every Dose of which will contain i, in these Proportions. Of Hiera Piera, and
Aloes i, Vitriol of Iron ss, Red, Coral and Crab's-eyes. Mastick, Contrayerva
Lap. Lazuli, and Salt of Wormwood.
of each gr. v.

Another Composition of Steel Pills, to the same Effect.
TAKE of Mastick ij, Benjamin, natural Balsam, Gum Guajacum, red Coral, Pearl,
Crab's-eyes, burnt Hartshorn, Ultramarine, Salt of Wormwood, of each i, Hiera
Picra ss, Aloes Rosat. ij, Salt of Steel, or Vitriol of Iron iss, with Balsam
of Peru, make a Mass. The Dose is i, taken every Day.

A History of the several Compositions that make the Contrayerva-Stone, which
is the Grand Antidotarium.
THE Contrayerva, or Drake Root, is an Indian Plant, which some Judge to be of
the Nature of Tormentil. This was first introduced into France, in 1602, and
much prescribed by the Physicians at Paris, in the PIAGUE there at that Time,
when it proved of excellent Service. The Root is tuberose and knotty, shooting
forth many Hairs or Fibers of a yellowish, or rather brown Color, which when
chewed gives an Aromatic flavor, and leaves an heat upon the Tongue, though no
bitterness, or stipticity is observable. This grows in both the Indies, but
most plentifully in the West, in the Kingdom of Peru, and that Part called
Ciarche and Tonsuglar. The Indians Use it for Sallet; they much covet the Root,
which they cut in Pieces, and put under the Soles of their Feet in Winter time:
The Goats from eating of this Plant, are said to generate the Bezoar Stone, for
the Indians observe those Goats, of which there are several Kinds, of which one
is called Bicuqua, and those which do not feed upon this Plant, never generate
any of these Stones; so that according to this Notion, their Bezoar seems to be
a Concretion of Tartar, or the faeculent Part of the Aliment, formed from the
Digestion of the Contrayerva Plant.

THE Stone in India is made from the Juice of the Root, and the whole Plant
together, this is Reduced into Paste, and so formed into Stones of various
Sizes. The Root is given from a Dram to two, and has had the Power to throw
out Boils, Blains and Carbuncles, with great Success, in the Plague Time, which
Encouraged the Physicians to invent several Compositions there from

The General Materials for the Contrayerva Stone.
Contrayerva Root, white Amber, Rock Crystal, Snake-Root, Zedoary, Tormentil,
Bistort, Angelica, red Coral, Camphore, Saffron, Crabs-Claws, Crab's-eyes, burnt
Hartshorn, Vipers, Carline Thistle, Butter-Bur, Elecampane, Valerian, Pearl,
Mastick, Cochineal, Isinglass, Lemnian, and Silesia Earth, Cerusse of
Antimony-Flowers of, Mosch and Amberbergreese to form it into a Mass, the Jelly
of Vipers Skins, Isinglass, Hartshorn, or an Extract of Scordium; or
Scorzonera, with the white of an Egg may be necessary.

Various Forms of the Contrayerva Stone, each of which contain a Dose, which
may be multiplied at Discretion.
TAKE Antimony Diaphoretick i, Contrayerv. Bezoar Animal, Crabs-Claws, of each
gr. x; make a Bole with Jelly of Hartshorn, qs.

OR Take Diaphoretick Magisterial Contrayerv. and oriental Bezoar, of each gr.
vi. Hartshorn, Pearl, Coral and Crab's-eyes prepared, of each gr. v. white
Amber, Lemnian and Silesia Earth, of each gr. iv. Ambergreese gr. ij, make a
Bole as before.

3dly, TAKE Ceruse of Antimony, Magistery of Coral, Pearl and Crab's-eyes, of
each ss, Saffron and Contrayerva Root, of each gr. iv, make a Bole with Jelly
of Hartshorn, or Mucilage of Quince Seed.

4thly, TAKE Snake Root, Valerian and Contrayerva, of each ss, Cochineal and
Camphere, of each gr. iv. Bol-Arm. gr. vi, mix and make a fine Powder for one
Dose, or a Bole, with Confect of Alkermes.

Bezoar Animal prepared from Hartshorn.
TAKE the freshest and youngest Tips of Hartshorn, Calcine to a perfect
whiteness, Grind this to a Powder, and make it into Troches, with Syrup of
Betony or Citron, first acuated with some Drops of Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur by
the Bell.

The first Notion of the Bezoardick Bole.
TAKE of the Contrayerva Stone i. Oriental Bezoar ss, Bezoar Animal iv,
Magistery of Coral, Pearl and Crab's-eyes, of each iiss, Crabs-Claws iv, white
Amber ij, Lemnian and Silesia Earth vi, Rock Crystal Calcined into an
impalpable Powder x, Musk ss, with Jelly of Hartshorn, made from a Tincture of
Saffron; make this into a Paste, from whence Stones may be formed. Take of the
said Stone, gr. xx. Crollius Diaphoretick gr. x, for a Dose, and to raise the
Alixipharmick power greater to the whole Composition of the Stone, add the
Liver and Heart of Vipers ij; the Vipers Flesh and Bones dried according to Art
iv, to which put of the Roots of Angelica, Tormentil, Contrayerva, Zedoary,
Scorzonera, Scordium, Rue and Orange-Water, of each i, made into a Mass, with
Jelly of Vipers Skins.

Another COMPOSITION.
TAKE of Cerusse of Antimony or Flowers of the same, whether red or white v,
Hartshorn prepared with Syrup of Angelica and Oil of Sulphur ij, Roots of
Tormentil, Scorzoner ij, Butter-Bur, both the Valerians, Bunnian Seed, and
Galangal, an ss, Crabs-Claws, Crab's-eyes, red Coral, Silesia-Earth, Cochineal,
of each i, Salt of Carduus, Mead sweet, Angelica, Tartar Vitriolated, sal
Prunelle, of each ij, mix for a Paste, with Jelly of Hartshorn, made up with
Musk or Saffron, to this may be added, Vol. Salt of Vipers i. Aur. Fulminans.

The Solar Bezoardick Bole.
TAKE Crollius Diophoretick of gr. xij, Bezoar oriental gr. viij, Bezoar
Animal, Magistery of Coral and Crab's-eyes, an. gr. vij, Cochineal gr. vi, Aurum
Fulminans gr. iv, Ambergreese gr. ij, mix for a Dose.

N. B. If the foregoing Magisteries are made with Spirit of Vitriol, Oil of
Sulphur, etc. the Medicine will be the more Effectual, and better resist the
Putrefaction of the Malignity.

The Northern Bezoartick-Stone.
TAKE Hartman's Diaphoretick Antimony, Magistery of Gold, red Coral an. vi,
common Antimony Diaphoretick, Hartshorn Calcined, Crab's-eyes prepared an i,
Crabs-Claws in Powder ij, Ambergreese i, Musk i, make this into Paste with
Jelly of Isinglass, in Rose Water.

The Southern Bezoartick-Stone.
TAKE of the Magisterial Diaphoretick i, Cerusse of iij, burnt Hartshorn,
Crab's-eyes, of Vipers Flesh, Cochineal an. iss, Magistery of Pearl, and Coral
an. vi, Silesian-Earth i, yellow Sanders, Orange-Peel an. ss, Roots of
Valerian, Butter-Bur, Scorzonera, Contrayerva, Seeds of Angelica an. vi,
Ambergreese, Musk an ss, make a Powder, and then a Paste with Jelly of
Hart's-Horn, the Dose from a i, ij,

In the Year 1628, the following Prescriptions of the Contrayerva-Stone were
directed.

TAKE Contrayerva Root, ij, Hart's-Horn prepared and Lemnian-Earth, of each i,
Cochineal ss, Margarit iv, Snake-Roct ss, with Isinglass and Juice of Kermes,
make a Mass; whereof take ss, in any Cordial-Water.

OR, TAKE Contrayerva, Snake-Root, of each i, Pearl and Crab's-eyes an. ss,
Saffron ij, Cochineal ij, mix and give ss, to i, in any appropriated Vehicle.

In the Year 1636, when the PLAGUE Raged in London, these Forms were Prescribed.

TAKE Crabs-Claws in Powder, Bezoar Animal, Syrup of Betony, Kermes and Citron
an. iv, Contrayerva, and Snake-Root an. v, Seed of Angelica an. i, Antimony,
Diaphoretick vi, Ambergreese ij, mix. The Dose is i, to ss. Take Contrayerva,
and Snake-Root, with Crabs-Claws powdered an ij, Pearl, and Coral an. iij,
Crollius, Diaphoretick of Antimony i. The Dose i.

The TREACLE-STONE.
TAKE the whole Viper reduced to Powder i, Crab's-eyes iv, Hartman's
Diaphoretick, or Flowers of, fixed by the Fire ij, Mother of Pearl, Cochineal,
and white Amber an. iss, Roots of Tormentil, Bistort, Scorzonera an. ij, Kermes
Berry, Orange-Peel and Angelica an. ss, Saffron with Venice-Treacle, qs. make a
Mass. Dose to i.

A Composition very Successful in the Smallpox, Measles, Milliary-Fever, etc.
TAKE Hartman's Diaphoretick gr. x, Contrayerva-Stone, and Bezoar an. gr. viij,
Hart's-Horn prepared with Oil of Vitriol, Coral, Crab's-eyes, of each gr. vi,
Silesian, Lemnian Earth, and Cochineal an gr. v, mix for a Dose in
Treacle-Water.

The white Contrayerva-Stone.
TAKE of the Contrayerva-Root i, Hart's-Horn, and Crabs-Claws, laevigated on a
Marble, with Carduus-Water an. i, Magistery of Pearl and Coral an. ss; make
this up with Jelly of Hart's-Horn and Isinglass; the Dose ss, to Children i.

The red Contrayerva-Stone.
TAKE of the Contrayerva-Root iss, Antimony Diaphoretick, Crab's-eyes an. x,
Chochineal iss, Bezoar Mineral ss, Grind these together, and they will be of an
excellent red Color; the Dose from i, to ss, in the Confluent Smallpox and
Purple-Fevers.

Confect of Vipers, or the Grand Antidote against all Sorts of Poison.
TAKE Vipers in the Spring, Cut their Heads off, and cleanse them well in white
Wine; dry them, and reduce them with their Hearts and Livers to Powder, of this
so prepared, take iv, Roots of Contrayerva ij, Tormentil, Scorzonera an. iss,
Roots of Avens, Vervain, Carline, Bastard, Saffron, Fraxinel, Cinquefoil,
Elecampane, the outward Rind of the Lemon and Orange an. i; Roots of Swallow
wort, both the the Valerians, Burdock, Butter-Bur, Gentitian, Zedoary an. vi,
Angelica-Roots ss, Leaves of Scordium, Rue, Malabathrum, Paul's Betony,
Sanicle, Winter-green an vi, Flowers of Self-heal, Spanish Broom, Betony,
Mary-gold, Mead sweet Oranges an. v, Seeds of Rue, Scabious, Burdock, Vipers
Bugloss, Vervain, Sorrel, Purslane, Carduus, St. John's-Wort, Mary-golds, Broom
an. iij, Citron Sanders, Rhodium, Sassafrass, Costus, Schaenath, Calamus
Aromaticus, Hartshorn and the Rasping of Human Sculls, Lemnian Earth, Gum
Guajacum, Myrrh, Mastick, Sandarac, Olibanum an. ss, white Amber, Pearl and
Coral prepared; Hartman's Diaphoretick of Antimony ij, Mace, Cloves, Cinnamon,
Infused in Juice of Lemon an. vi, all these well power'd separately, may be
afterward mixed together in the following Electuary. Take of fresh
Juniper Berries lbiv, the Parings of Apples and Quinces an. lbss, Roots of
Sorrel and Succory an. iv, Scabious, Mary-gold, Wood Sorrel, Borage, the whole
Plants an. M. ij, Flowers of Sage, Rosemary, red Roses, Germander, Broom and
Mugwort an. Pug. iij, Kermes Berries, Citron Seeds an. ij, Orange-Peel and
Rhodium Rasped an. iss; Boil all in Spanish Wine and Carduus-Water, of each
equal Parts, to which add Juice of Strawberries, Raspberries, Cherries or
Quinces lbij, strain this and Boil the Expressed Liquor to the Consistence of
Honey: Of which take two Parts to one of the Spices, or Powder before
Prescribed, adding thereto upon Occasion, to every Dose of Antimony
Diaphoretick i, Aurum Fulminans ss, Oil of Sulphur gr. iv; Dose ss, to iv.

The Imperial Cordial Water in Pestilential-Fevers.
TAKE of the dried Roots of Swallowwort, Angelica, Masterwort, Gentian,
Elecampane ij, Roots of Carline Thistle, Burdock, Birthworth, Bistort,
Tormentil, Galingal, Scorzonera, Contrayerva an. iij, Leaves of Hyssop,
Majoram, Rue, Bay, Mint, Balm, Mead sweet, Wormwood an. lbiij, Flowers of
Centaury, Broom, St. John's Wort, Mary-gold, Sage, Lavender and Orange an. i,
Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Zedoary, Galangal, Calamus an. x,
Juniper Berries, Rhodium and Citron Sanders an. iij, Orange-Peel vi,
Strong-Wine, or Brandy lbxij, Infuse for 8 or 10 Days, then Distill, afterward
sweeten with Loaf-Sugar, to which add a few Drops of Oil of Cinnamon, Burgamot,
or Essence of Ambergreese.

The Golden Elixir of LIFE.
THE Aurm Potabile of Blanc was made of the best Spirit of Wine, Circulated
with Honey, Musk and Ambergreese, according to the Description of Gabel
Rhoverus, in the second Part of his Antidotarium, page 383. This is one of the
most potent Liquors, yet still more Penetrating, and Efficacious, according to
the following Composition; of this Aurum Potabile, Extracted without Fire lbvi,
Aurum Fulminans, precipiated by Oil of Tartar, which is better, the Chrystals
of Gold, as taught hereafter to prepare ij, Choice Pearl iv, Sugar Candy lbiv,
Ambergreese ij, Musk ss. Saffron iv, Spirit of Salt, doubly-Extracted lbi,
Spirit of Wine dephlegmated lbiv, pour this upon the Ambergreese, Musk and
Saffron to Extract a Tincture by a gentle Heat; then dissolve the Sugar in
Spirit of Honey; the Gold and Pearl will come to an Easy Dissolution in Spirit
of Salt; so that in eight Days time you will have each of them distinctly
prepared in order for a Mixture, which you are to make in a double Cucurbit,
well luted in the Junctures, and buried in a Sand Furnace, for forty Days,
during which time a regular Circulation is to be performed, at last Decant from
thence a clear limpid Liquor, which keep in Glass Viols close stopped. The Dose
is from two Drops to a Dram; this is the most powerful Corroborative in the
Plague, in Hysteric Suffocations, Faintings, Vertigo's and Flatulent Disorders
of the Stomach and Bowels.

CHRYSTALS of Gold are made thus. Take of Leaf Gold, what you please, pour
thereon a double or triple Part of pure Spirit of Salt rectified, make a
Dissolution, and Cohobate six or eight times in an Alembick, with an Hole quite
through the Head of it, at last force the matter over by a strong Fire, and the
Chrystals will ascend to the Neck of the Vessel, these Chrystals are
dissolvable in almost any Liquor, and to be separated again by Spirit of Salt,
and reduced to their pristine Form.

THUS Gentlemen, I have given you a a short Specimen of my designed Reformation
of your London Dispensatory, and Hope as it will be Useful to the Public, so
it will meet with a Candid Reception, and hearty Approbation from your learned
Society, which is the utmost Ambition, of Gentlemen, with all

Die 4is xiij, Ap. 1721. Duty and Respect, Your most Humble, most Devoted and
most Obedient Servant, J. BROWN.

FINIS.

