CATO. A TRAGEDY.

CATO. A TRAGEDY. As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL in Drury Lane, BY Her
MAJESTY's Servants.

By Mr. ADDISON.

Ecce Spectaculum dignum, ad quod respiciat, intentus operi suo, Deus! Ecce par
Deo dignum, vir fortis cum mala fortuna compositus! Non video, inquam, quid
habeat in terris Jupiter pulchrius, si convertere animum velit, quam ut spectet
Catonem, jam partibus non semel fractis, nihilominus inter ruinas publicas
erectum. Sen. de Divin. Prove.

LONDON: Printed for J. TONSON, at Shakespeare's Head (...) against
Catherine-Street in the Strand. MDCCXIII.

PROLOGUE,
By Mr. POPE.
Spoken by Mr. Wilks.
TO wake the Soul by tender Strokes of Art,
To raise the Genius, and to mend the Heart,
To make Mankind in conscious Virtue bold,
Live over each Scene, and Be what they behold:
For this the Tragic-Muse first trod the Stage,
Commanding Tears to stream through every Age;
Tyrants no more their Savage Nature kept,
And Foes to Virtue wondered how they wept.
Our Author shuns by vulgar Springs to move
The Hero's Glory, or the Virgin's Love;
In pitying Love we but our Weakness show,
And wild Ambition well deserves its Woe.
Here Tears shall slow from a more generous Cause,
Such Tears as Patriots shed for dying Laws:
He bids your Breasts with Ancient Ardor rise,
And calls forth Roman Drops from British Eyes.
Virtue confessed in human Shape he draws,
What Plato Thought, and God-like Cato Was:
No common Object to your Sight displays,
But what with Pleasure Heaven it self surveys;
A brave Man struggling in the Storms of Fate,
And greatly falling with a falling State!
While Cato gives his little Senate Laws,
What Bosom beats not in his Country's Cause?
Who sees him act, but envies every Deed?
Who hears him groan, and does not wish to bleed?
Even when proud Caesar 'midst triumphal Cars,
The Spoils of Nations, and the Pomp of Wars,
Ignobly Vain, and impotently Great,
Showed Rome her Cato's Figure drawn in State;
As her dead Father's reverend Image past,
The Pomp was darkened, and the Day overcast,
The Triumph ceased -- Tears gushed from every Eye;
The World's great Victor past unheeded by;
Her Last good Man dejected Rome adored,
And honored Caesar's less than Cato's Sword.
Britains attend: Be Worth like this approved,
And show you have the Virtue to be moved.
With honest Scorn the first famed Cato viewed
Rome learning Arts from Greece, whom she subdued;
Our Scene precariously subsists too long
On French Translation, and Italian Song.
Dare to have Sense your selves; Assert the Stage,
Be justly warmed with your own Native Rage.
Such Plays alone should please a British Ear,
As Cato's self had not disdained to hear.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
CATO. Mr. Booth. Lueius, a Senator. Mr. Keen. Sempronius, a Senator. Mr.
Mills. Juba, Prince of Numidia. Mr. Wilks. Syphax, General of the Numidians.
Mr. Cibber. Sons of Cato. Portius, Mr. Powell. Marcus, Mr. Ryan.
Decius, Ambassador from Caesar. Mr. Bowman. Mutineers, Guards, etc.
WOMEN.
Marcia, Daughter to Cato. Mrs. Oldfield. Lucia, Daughter to Lucius. Mrs.
Porter.
SCENE a large Hall in the Governor's Palace of Utica. CATO.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Portius, Marcus. Por. THE Dawn is over-cast, the Morning low'rs,
And heavily in Clouds brings on the Day,
The great, the important Day; big with the Fate
Of Cato and of Rome. -- Our Father's Death
Would fill up all the Guilt of Civil War,
And close the Scene of Blood. Already Caesar
Has ravaged more than half the Globe, and sees
Mankind grown thin by his destructive Sword:
Should he go further, Numbers would be wanting
To form new Battles, and support his Crimes.
Ye Gods, what Havoc does Ambition make
Among your Works!

Marc. Thy steady Temper, Portius,
Can look on Guilt, Rebellion, Fraud, and Caesar,
In the calm Lights of mild Philosophy;
I Am tortured, even to Madness, when I think
On the proud Victor: every time he is named
Pharsalia rises to my View -- I see
The Insulting Tyrant prancing over the Field
Strow'd with Rome's Citizens, and drenched in Slaughter,
His Horse's Hoofs wet with Patrician Blood.
Oh Portius, is there not some chosen Curse,
Some hidden Thunder in the Stores of Heaven,
Red with uncommon Wrath, to blast the Man
Who owes his Greatness to his Country's Ruin?

Por. Believe me, Marcus, it is an impious Greatness,
And mixed with too much Horror to be envied:
How does the Luster of our Father's Actions,
Through the dark Cloud of IIIs that cover him,
Break out, and burn with more triumphant Brightness!
His Sufferings shine, and spread a Glory round him;
Greatly unfortunate, he fights the Cause
Of Honor, Virtue, Liberty, and Rome.
His Sword never fell but on the Guilty Head;
Oppression, Tyranny, and Power usurped,
Draw all the Vengeance of his Arm upon 'em.

Marc. Who knows not this? But what can Cato do
Against a World, a base degenerate World,
That court's the Yoke, and bows the Neck to Caesar?
Pent up in Utica he vainly forms
A poor Epitome of Roman Greatness,
And, covered with Numidian Guards, directs
A feeble Army, and an empty Senate,
Remnants of mighty Battles fought in vain.
By Heavens, such Virtues, joined with such Success,
Distract my very Soul: Our Father's Fortune
Would almost tempt us to renounce his Precepts.

Por. Remember what our Father often has told us:
The Ways of Heaven are dark and intricate,
Puzzled in Mazes, and perplexed with Errors;
Our Understanding traces 'em in vain,
Lost and bewildered in the fruitless Search;
Nor sees with how much Art the Windings run,
Nor where the regular Confusion ends.

Marc. These are Suggestions of a Mind at Ease:
Oh Portius, did thou taste but half the Griess
That wring my Soul, thou could not talk thus calmly.
Passion unpitied, and successless Love,
Plant Daggers in my Heart, and aggravate
My other Griefs. Were but my Lucia kind! --

Por. Thou see not that thy Brother is thy Rival:
But I must hide it, for I know thy Temper. [Aside.
Now, Marcus, now, thy Virtue's on the Proof:
Put forth thy utmost Strength, work every Nerve,
And call up all thy Father in thy Soul:
To quell the Tyrant Love, and guard thy Heart
On this weak Side, where most our Nature fails,
Would be a Conquest worthy Cato's Son.

Marc. Portius, the Council which I cannot take,
Instead of healing, but upbraids my Weakness.
Bid me for Honor plunge into a War
Of thickest Foes, and rush on certain Death,
Then shall thou see that Marcus is not slow
To follow Glory, and confess his Father.
Love is not to be reasoned down, or lost
In high Ambition, and a Thirst of Greatness;
It Is second Life, it grows into the Soul,
Warms every Vein, and beats in every Pulse,
I feel it here: My Resolution melts --

Por. Behold young Juba, the Numidian Prince!
With how much Care he forms himself to Glory,
And breaks the Fierceness of his Native Temper
To copy out our Father's bright Example.
He loves our Sister Marcia, greatly loves her,
His Eyes, his Looks, his Actions all betray it:
But still the smothered Fondness burns within him.
When most it swells and labors for a Vent,
Then Sense of Honor and Desire of Fame
Drive the big Passion back into his Heart.
What! shall an African, shall Juba's Heir
Reproach great Cato's Son, and show the World
A Virtue wanting in a Roman Soul?

Marc. Portius, no more! your Words leave Stings behind 'em.
When-e're did Juba, or did Portius, show
A Virtue that has cast me at a Distance,
And thrown me out in the Pursuits of Honor?

Por. Marcus, I know thy generous Temper well;
Fling but the Appearance of Dishonor on it,
It strait takes Fire, and mounts into a Blaze.

Marc. A Brother's Sufferings claim a Brother's Pity.

Por. Heaven knows I pity thee: Behold my Eyes
Even whilst I speak. -- Do they not swim in Tears?
Were but my Heart as naked to thy View,
Marcus would see it bleed in his Behalf.

Marc. Why then do treat me with Rebukes, instead
Of kind condoling Cares and friendly Sorrow?

Por. O Marcus, did I know the Way to ease
Thy troubled Heart, and mitigate thy Pains,
Marcus, believe me, I could die to do it.

Marc. Thou best of Brothers, and thou best of Friends!
Pardon a weak distempered Soul, that swells
With sudden Gusts, and sinks as soon in Calms,
The Sport of Passions -- But Sempronius comes:
He must not find this Softness hanging on me. [Exit.

SCENE II.
Sempronius solus. Conspiracies no sooner should be formed
Than executed. What means Portius here?
I like not that cold Youth. I must dissemble,
And speak a Language foreign to my Heart.

Sempronius, Portius. Semp. Good Morrow Portius! let us once embrace,
Once more embrace; whilst yet we both are free.
Tomorrow should we thus express our Friendship,
Each might receive a Slave into his Arms:
This Sun perhaps, this Morning Sun's the last
That e're shall rise on Roman Liberty.

Por. My Father has this Morning called together
To this poor Hall his little Roman Senate,
(The Leavings of Pharsalia) to consult
If yet he can oppose the mighty Torrent
That bears down Rome, and all her Gods, before it,
Or must at length give up the World to Caesar.

Semp. Not all the Pomp and Majesty of Rome
Can raise her Senate more than Cato's Presence.
His Virtues render our Assembly awful,
They strike with something like religious Fear,
And make even Caesar tremble at the Head
Of Armies flushed with Conquest: O my Portius,
Could I but call that wondrous Man my Father,
Would but thy Sister Marcia be propitious
To thy Friend's Vows: I might be blessed indeed!

Por. Alas! Sempronius, would thou talk of Love
To Marcia, whilst her Father's Life's in Danger?
Thou might as well court the pale trembling Vestal,
When she beholds the holy Flame expiring.

Semp. The more I see the Wonders of thy Race,
The more I Am charmed. Thou must take heed, my Portius!
The World has all its Eyes on Cato's Son.
Thy Father's Merit sets thee up to View,
And shows thee in the fairest point of Light,
To make thy Virtues or thy Faults conspicuous.

Por. Well do thou seem to check my Lingering here
On this important Hour -- I Will strait away,
And while the Fathers of the Senate meet
In close Debate, to weigh the Events of War,
I Will animate the Soldier's drooping Courage,
With Love of Freedom, and Contempt of Life.
I Will thunder in their Ears their Country's Cause,
And try to rouse up all that is Roman in 'em.
It Is not in Mortals to command Success,
But we'll do more, Sempronius; we'll deserve it. [Exit.

Sempronius solus. Curse on the Stripling! how he Ape's his Sire?
Ambitiously sententious! -- But I wonder
Old Syphax comes not; his Numidian Genius
Is well disposed to Mischief, were he prompt
And eager on it; but he must be spurred,
And every Moment quickened to the Course.
Cato has used me Ill: He has refused
His Daughter Marcia to my ardent Vows.
Besides, his baffled Arms and ruined Cause
Are Bars to my Ambition. Caesar's Favor,
That showers down Greatness on his Friends, will raise me
To Rome's first Honors. If I give up Cato,
I claim in my Reward his Captive Daughter.
But Syphax comes! --

SCENE III.
Syphax, Sempronius. Syph. -- Sempronius, all is ready,
I Have sounded my Numidians, Man by Man,
And find 'em ripe for a Revolt: They all
Complain aloud of Cato's Discipline,
And wait but the Command to change their Master.

Semp. Believe me, Syphax, there is no Time to waste;
Even whilst we speak, our Conqueror comes on,
And gathers Ground upon us every Moment.
Alas! thou know not Caesar's active Soul,
With what a dreadful Course he rushes on
From War to War: In vain has Nature formed
Mountains and Oceans to oppose his Passage;
He bound's over all, victorious in his March,
The Alps and Pyreneans sink before him;
Through Winds, and Waves, and Storms, he works his way,
Impatient for the Battle: One Day more
Will set the Victor thundering at our Gates.
But tell me, have thou yet drawn over young Juba?
That still would recommend thee more to Caesar,
And challenge better Terms --

Syph. -- Alas! he is lost,
He Is lost, Sempronius; all his Thoughts are full
Of Cato's Virtues -- But I Will try once more
(For every Instant I expect him here)
If yet I can subdue those stubborn Principles
Of Faith, of Honor, and I know not what,
That have corrupted his Numidian Temper,
And struck the Infection into all his Soul.

Semp. Be sure to press upon him every Motive.
Juba's Surrender, since his Father's Death,
Would give up Africa into Caesar's Hands,
And make him Lord of half the burning Zone.

Syph. But is it true, Sempronius, that your Senate
Is called together? Gods! Thou must be cautious!
Cato has piercing Eyes, and will discern
Our Frauds, unless they are covered thick with Art.

Semp. Let me alone, good Syphax, I Will conceal
My Thoughts in Passion ('it is the surest way;)
I Will bellow out for Rome and for my Country,
And mouth at Caesar till I shake the Senate.
Your cold Hypocrisie's a stale Device,
A worn-out Trick: Would thou be thought in Earnest?
Cloth thy feigned Zeal in Rage, in Fire, in Fury!

Syph. In troth, you are able to instruct Grey-hairs,
And teach the wily African Deceit!

Semp. Once more, be sure to try thy Skill on Juba.
Mean while I Will hasten to my Roman Soldiers,
Inflame the Mutiny, and underhand
Blow up their Discontents, till they break out
Unlooked for, and discharge themselves on Cato.
Remember, Syphax, we must work in Haste:
O think what anxious Moments pass between
The Birth of Plots, and their last fatal Periods.
Oh! it is a dreadful Interval of Time,
Filled up with Horror all, and big with Death!
Destruction hangs on every Word we speak,
On every Thought, 'till the concluding Stroke
Determines all, and closes our Design. [Exit.

Syphax solus. I Will try if yet I can reduce to Reason
This headstrong Youth, and make him spurn at Cato.
The Time is short, Caesar comes rushing on us --
But hold! young Juba sees me, and approaches.

SCENE IV.
Juba, Syphax. Jub. Syphax, I joy to meet thee thus alone.
I have observed of late thy Looks are fallen,
Overcast with gloomy Cares, and Discontent;
Then tell me, Syphax, I conjure thee, tell me,
What are the Thoughts that knit thy Brow in Frowns,
And turn thine Eye thus coldly on thy Prince?

Syph. It Is not my Talent to conceal my Thoughts,
Nor carry Smiles and Sunshine in my Face,
When Discontent sits heavy at my Heart.
I have not yet so much the Roman in me.

Jub. Why do thou cast out such ungen'rous Terms
Against the Lords and Sov'reigns of the World?
Do thou not see Mankind fall down before 'em,
And own the Force of their Superior Virtue?
Is there a Nation in the Wilds of Africa,
Amidst our barren Rocks and burning Sands,
That does not tremble at the Roman Name?

Syph. Gods! where is the Worth that sets this People up
Above your own Numidia's tawny Sons!
Do they with tougher Sinews bend the Bow?
Or flies the Javelin swifter to its Mark,
Launched from the Vigor of a Roman Arm?
Who like our active African instructs
The fiery Steed, and trains him to his Hand?
Or guide's in Troops the embattled Elephant,
Laden with War? These, these are Arts, my Prince,
In which your Zama does not stoop to Rome.

Jub. These all are Virtues of a meaner Rank,
Perfections that are placed in Bones and Nerves.
A Roman Soul is bent on higher Views:
To civilize the rude unpolished World,
And lay it under the Restraint of Laws;
To make Man mild and sociable to Man;
To cultivate the wild licentious Savage
With Wisdom, Discipline, and liberal Arts;
The Embellishments of Life: Virtues like these,
Make Human Nature shine, reform the Soul,
And break our fierce Barbarians into Men.

Syph. Patience kind Heavens! -- Excuse an old Man's warmth.
What are these wondrous civilizing Arts,
This Roman Polish, and this smooth Behavior,
That render Man thus tractable and tame?
Are they not only to disguise our Passions,
To set our Looks at variance with our Thoughts,
To check the Starts and Sallies of the Soul,
And break off all its Commerce with the Tongue;
In short, to change us into other Creatures
Than what our Nature and the Gods designed us?

Jub. To strike thee Dumb: Turn up thy Eyes to Cato!
There may thou see to what a Godlike Height
The Roman Virtues lift up mortal Man.
While good, and just, and anxious for his Friends,
He Is still severely bent against himself;
Renouncing Sleep, and Rest, and Food, and Ease,
He strives with Thirst and Hunger, Toil and Heat;
And when his Fortune sets before him all
The Pomps and Pleasures that his Soul can wish,
His rigid Virtue will accept of none.

Syph. Believe me, Prince, there is not an African
That traverses our vast Numidian Deserts
In quest of Prey, and lives upon his Bow,
But better practices these boasted Virtues.
Coarse are his Meals, the Fortune of the Chase,
Amidst the running Stream he slakes his Thirst,
Toil's all the Day, and at the approach of Night
On the first friendly Bank he throws him down,
Or rests his Head upon a Rock 'till Morn:
Then rises fresh, pursues his wonted Game,
And if the following Day he chance to find
A new Repast, or an untasted Spring,
Blesses his Stars, and thinks it Luxury.

Jub. Thy Prejudices, Syphax, will not discern
What Virtues grow from Ignorance and Choice,
Nor how the Hero differs from the Brute.
But grant that others could with equal Glory
Look down on Pleasures and the Baits of Sense;
Where shall we find the Man that bears Affliction,
Great and Majestic in his Griefs, like Cato?
Heavens, with what Strength, what Steadiness of Mind,
He Triumphs in the midst of all his Sufferings!
How does he rise against a Load of Woes,
And thank the Gods that throw the Weight upon him!

Syph. It Is Pride, rank Pride, and Haughtiness of Soul:
I think the Romans call it Stoicism.
Had not your Royal Father thought so highly
Of Roman Virtue, and of Cato's Cause,
He had not fallen by a Slave's Hand inglorious:
Nor would his slaughtered Army now have lain
On Africk's Sands, disfigut'd with their Wounds,
To gorge the Wolves and Vultures of Numidia

Jub. Why do thou call my Sorrows up afresh?
My Father's Name brings Tears into my Eyes.

Syph. Oh, that you would profit by your Father's ills!

Jub. What would thou have me do?

Syph. Abandon Cato.

Jub. Syphax, I should be more than twice an Orphan
By such a Loss.

Syph. Ay, there is the Tie that binds you!
You long to call him Father. Marcia's Charms
Work in your Heart unseen, and plead for Cato.
No wonder you are deaf to all I say.

Jub. Syphax, your Zeal becomes importunate;
I Have hitherto permitted it to rave,
And talk at large; but learn to keep it in,
Least it should take more Freedom than I Will give it.

Syph. Sir, your great Father never used me thus.
Alas, he is Dead! But can you ever forget
The tender Sorrows, and the Pangs of Nature,
The fond Embraces, and repeated Blessings;
Which you drew from him in your last Farewell?
Still must I cherish the dear sad Remembrance,
At once to torture and to please my Soul.
The good old King, at parting, wrung my Hand,
(His Eyes brim-full of Tears) then sighing cried,
Prithee be careful of my Son! -- his Grief
Swelled up so high he could not utter more.

Jub. Alas, thy Story melts away my Soul.
That best of Fathers! how shall I discharge
The Gratitude and Duty, which I owe him!

Syph. By laying up his Councils in your Heart.

Jub. His Councils bade me yield to thy Directions:
Then, Syphax, chide me in severest Terms,
Vent all thy Passion, and I Will stand its shock,
Calm and unruffled as a Summer-Sea,
When not a Breath of Wind flic's over its Surface.

Syph. Alas, my Prince, I Would guide you to your Safety:

Jub. I do believe thou would; but tell me how?

Syph. Fly from the Fate that follows Caesar's Foes.

Jub. My Father scorned to do it.

Syph. And therefore died.

Jub. Better to die ten thousand thousand Deaths,
Than wound my Honor.

Syph. Rather say your Love.

Jub. Syphax, I Have promised to preserve my Temper.
Why will thou urge me to confess a Flame,
I long have stifled, and would fain conceal?

Syph Believe me, Prince, it is hard to conquer Love,
But easy to divert and break its Force:
Absence might cure it, or a second Mistress
Light up another Flame, and put out this.
The glowing Dames of Zama's Royal Court
Have Faces flusht with more exalted Charms.
The Sun, that rolls his Chariot over their Heads,
Works up more Fire and Color in their Cheeks:
Were you with these, my Prince, you would soon forget
The pale unripen'd Beauties of the North.

Jub. It Is not a Set of Features, or Complexion,
The Tincture of a Skin, that I admire.
Beauty soon grows familiar to the Lover,
Fades in his Eye, and palls upon the Sense.
The virtuous Marcia towers above her Sex:
True, she is fair, (Oh, how divinely fair!)
But still the lovely Maid improves her Charms
With inward Greatness, unaffected Wisdom,
And Sanctity of Manners. Cato's Soul
Shines out in every thing she acts or speaks.
While winning Mildness and attractive Smiles
Dwell in her Looks, and with becoming Grace
Soften the Rigor of her Father's Virtues.

Syph. How does your Tongue grow wanton in her Praise!
But on my Knees I beg you would consider --

Enter Marcia and Lucia. Jub. Hah! Syphax, is it not she! -- She moves this Way:
And with her Lucia, Lucius's fair Daughter,
My Heart beats thick -- I prithee Syphax leave me.

Syph. Ten thousand Curses fasten on 'em both!
Now will this Woman with a single Glance
Undo, what I Have been laboring all this while. [Exit.

Juba, Marcia, Lucia. Jub. Hail charming Maid, how does thy Beauty smooth
The Face of War, and make even Horror smile!
At Sight of thee my Heart shakes off its Sorrows;
I feel a Dawn of Joy break in upon me,
And for a while forget the Approach of Caesar.

Mac. I should be grieved, young Prince, to think my Presence
Unbent your Thoughts, and slackened 'em to Arms,
While, warm with Slaughter, our victorious Foe,
Threatens aloud, and calls you to the Field.

Jub. O Marcia, let me hope thy kind Concerns
And gentle Wishes follow me to Battle!
The Thought will give new Vigor to my Arm,
Add Strength and Weight to my descending Sword,
And drive it in a Tempest on the Foe.

Marc. My Prayers and Wishes always shall attend
The Friends of Rome, the glorious Cause of Virtue,
And Men approved of by the Gods and Cato.

Jub. That Juba may deserve thy pious Cares,
I Will gaze for ever on thy Godlike Father,
Transplanting, one by one, into my Life
His bright Perfections, 'till I shine like him.

Marc. My Father never at a Time like this
Would lay out his great Soul in Words, and waste
Such precious Moments.

Jub. Thy Reproofs are just,
Thou virtuous Maid; I Will hasten to my Troops,
And fire their languid Souls with Cato's Virtue;
If e're I lead them to the Field, when all
The War shall stand ranged in its just Array,
And dreadful Pomp: Then will I think on thee!
O lovely Maid, Then will I think on Thee!
And, in the shock of charging Hosts, remember
What glorious Deeds should grace the Man, who hopes
For Marcia's Love. [Exit.

Luc. Marcia, you're too severe:
How could you chide the young good-natured Prince,
And drive him from you with so stern an Air,
A Prince that loves and dotes on you to Death?

Mar. It Is therefore, Lucia, that I chide him from me.
His Air, his Voice, his Looks, and honest Soul
Speak all so movingly in his Behalf,
I dare not trust my self to hear him talk.

Luc. Why will you fight against so sweet a Passion,
And steel your Heart to such a World of Charms?

Mar. How, Lucia, would thou have me sink away
In pleasing Dreams, and lose my self in Love,
When every moment Cato's Life's at Stake?
Caesar comes armed with Terror and Revenge,
And aims his Thunder at my Father's Head:
Should not the sad Occasion swallow up
My other Cares, and draw them all into it?

Luc. Why have not I this Constancy of Mind,
Who have so many Griefs to try its Force?
Sure, Nature formed me of her softest Mould,
Enfeebled all my Soul with tender Passions,
And sunk me even below my own weak Sex:
Pity and Love, by turns, oppress my Heart.

Mar. Lucia, disburthen all thy Cares on me,
And let me share thy most retired Distress;
Tell me who raises up this Conflict in thee?

Luc. I need not blush to name them, when I tell thee
They Are Marcia's Brothers, and the Sons of Cato.

Mar. They both behold thee with their Sister's Eyes:
And often have revealed their Passion to me.
But tell me, whose Address thou favour'st most?
I long to know, and yet I dread to hear it.

Luc. Which is it Marcia wishes for?

Mar. For neither --
And yet for both -- The Youths have equal Share
In Marcia's Wishes, and divide their Sister:
But tell me which of them is Lucia's Choice?

Luc. Marcia, they both are high in my Esteem,
But in my Love -- Why will thou make me name him?
Thou know it is a blind and foolish Passion,
Pleased and disgusted with it knows not what.

Mar. O Lucia, I Am perplexed, O tell me which
I must hereafter call my happy Brother?

Luc. Suppose 'twere Portius, could you blame my Choice?
O Portius, thou have stolen away my Soul!
With what a graceful Tenderness he loves!
And breath's the softest, the sincerest Vows!
Complacency, and Truth, and manly Sweetness
Dwell ever on his Tongue, and smooth his Thoughts.
Marcus is over-warm, his fond Complaints
Have so much Earnestness and Passion in them,
I hear him with a secret kind of Dread,
And tremble at his Vehemence of Temper.

Mar. Alas poor Youth! how can thou throw him from thee?
Lucia, thou know not half the Love he bears thee;
Whenever he speaks of thee, his Heart's in Flames,
He sends out all his Soul in every Word,
And thinks, and talks, and looks like one transported.
Unhappy Youth! how will thy Coldness raise
Tempests and Storms in his afflicted Bosom!
I dread the Consequence --

Luc. You seem to plead
Against your Brother Portius --

Mar. Heaven forbid!
Had Portius been the unsuccessful Lover,
The same Compassion would have fallen on him.

Luc. Was ever Virgin Love distressed like mine!
Portius himself often falls in Tears before me,
As if he mourned his Rival's ill Success,
Then bids me hide the Motions of my Heart,
Nor show which Way it turns. So much he fears
The sad Effects, that it would have on Marcus.

Mar. He knows too well how easily he is fired,
And would not plunge his Brother in Despair,
But waits for happier Times, and kinder Moments.

Luc. Alas, too late I find my self involved
In endless Griefs and Labyrinths of Woe,
Born to afflict my Marcia's Family,
And sow Dissension in the Hearts of Brothers.
Tormenting Thought! it cuts into my Soul.

Mar. Let us not, Lucia, aggravate our Sorrows,
But to the Gods permit the Event of Things.
Our Lives, discolored with our present Woes,
May still grow bright, and smile with happier Hours.
So the pure limpid Stream, when foul with Stains
Of rushing Torrents, and descending Rains,
Work's it self clear, and as it runs, refines;
'Till by Degrees, the floating Mirror shines,
Reflects each Flower that on the Border grows,
And a new Heaven in its fair Bosom shows.
[Exeunt.
End of the First Act.
ACT II. SCENE I.
The Senate. Sem. ROME still survives in this assembled Senate!
Let us remember we are Cato's Friends,
And act like Men who claim that glorious Title.

Luc. Cato will soon be here, and open to us
The Occasion of our Meeting. Hark! he comes! [A Sound of Trumpets.
May all the Guardian Gods of Rome direct him!

Enter Cato. Cato. Fathers, we once again are met in Council.
Caesar's Approach has summoned us together,
And Rome attends her Fate from our Resolves:
How shall we treat this bold aspiring Man?
Success still follows him, and backs his Crimes:
Pharsalia gave him Rome, Egypt has since
Received his Yoke, and the whole Nile is Caesar's.
Why should I mention Juba's Overthrow,
And Scipio's Death? Numidia's burning Sands
Still smoke with Blood. It Is time we should decree
What Course to take. Our Foe advances on us,
And envies us even Libya's sultry Deserts.
Fathers, pronounce your Thoughts, are they still fixed
To hold it out, and fight it to the last?
Or are your Hearts subdued at length, and wrought
By Time and ill Success to a Submission?
Sempronius speak.

Semp. My Voice is still for War.
Gods, can a Roman Senate long debate
Which of the two to choose, Slavery or Death!
No, let us rise at once, gird on our Swords,
And, at the Head of our remaining Troops,
Attack the Foe, break through the thick Array
Of his thronged Legions, and charge home upon him.
Perhaps some Arm, more lucky than the rest,
May reach his Heart, and free the World from Bondage.
Rise, Fathers, rise; it is Rome demands your Help;
Rise, and revenge her slaughtered Citizens,
Or share their Fate: The Corpse of half her Senate
Manure the Fields of Thessaly, while we
Sit here, delib'rating in cold Debates,
If we should sacrifice our Lives to Honor,
Or wear them out in Servitude and Chains.
Rouse up for Shame! our Brothers of Pharsalia
Point at their Wounds, and cry aloud -- To Battle!
Great Pompey's Shade complain's that we are slow,
And Scipio's Ghost walk's unrevenged amongst us.

Cato. Let not a Torrent of impetuous Zeal
Transport thee thus beyond the Bounds of Reason:
True Fortitude is seen in great Exploits
That Justice warrant's, and that Wisdom guide's,
All else is towering Frenzy and Distraction.
Are not the Lives of those, who draw the Sword
In Rome's Defense, entrusted to our Care?
Should we thus lead them to a Field of Slaughter,
Might not the impartial World with Reason say
We lavisht at our Deaths the Blood of Thousands
To grace our Fall, and make our Ruin glorious?
Lucius, we next would know what is your Opinion.

Luc. My Thoughts, I must confess, are turned on Peace.
Already have our Quarrels filled the World
With Widows and with Orphans: Seythia mourn's
Our guilty Wars, and Earth's remotest Regions
Lie half unpeopled by the Feuds of Rome:
It Is time to sheath the Sword, and spare Mankind.
It is not Caesar, but the Gods, my Fathers,
The Gods declare against us, and repel
Our vain Attempts. To urge the Foe to Battle,
(Prompted by blind Revenge and wild Despair)
Were to refuse the Awards of Providence,
And not to rest in Heavens Determination.
Already have we shown our Love to Rome,
Now let us show Submission to the Gods.
We took up Arms, not to revenge our selves,
But free the Commonwealth; when this End fail's,
Arms have no further Use: Our Country's Cause,
That drew our Swords, now wrests 'em from our Hands,
And bid's us not delight in Roman Blood,
Unprofitably shed; what Men could do
Is done already: Heaven and Earth will witness,
If Rome must fall, that we are innocent.

Semp. This smooth Discourse and mild Behavior often
Conceal a Traitor -- Something whispers me
All is not right -- Cato, beware of Lucius. [Aside to Cato.

Cato. Let us appear nor Rash nor Diffident:
Immod'rate Valor swell's into a Fault,
And Fear, admitted into public Councils,
Betray's like Treason. Let us shun 'em both.
Fathers, I cannot see that our Affairs,
Are grown thus desperate. We have Bulwarks round us;
Within our Walls are Troops enured to Toil
In Africk's Heats, and seasoned to the Sun;
Numidia's spacious Kingdom lie's behind us,
Ready to rise at its young Prince's Call.
While there is Hope, do not distrust the Gods;
But wait at least till Caesar's near Approach
Force us to yield. 'Twill never be too late
To sue for Chains, and own a Conqucror.
Why should Rome fall a Moment ere her time?
No, let us draw her Term of Freedom out
In its full Length, and spin it to the last.
So shall we gain still one Day's Liberty;
And let me perish, but, in Cato's Judgment,
A Day, an Hour of virtuous Liberty,
Is worth a whole Eternity in Bondage.

Enter Marcus. Marc. Fathers, this Moment as I watched the Gates,
Lodged on my Post, a Herald is arrived
From Caesar's Camp, and with him comes old Decius,
The Roman Knight; he carry's in his Looks
Impatience, and demands to speak with Cato.

Cato. By your Permission, Fathers, bid him enter. [Exit Marcus.
Decius was once my Friend, but other Prospects
Have loosed those Ties, and bound him fast to Caesar.
His Message may determine our Resolves.

Enter Decius. Dec. Caesar sends Health to Cato --

Cato. Could he send it
To Cato's slaughtered Friends, it would be welcome.
Are not your Orders to address the Senate?

Dec. My Business is with Cato: Caesar see's
The Streights to which you're driven; and as he know's
Cato's high Worth, is anxious for his Life.

Cato. My Life is grafted on the Fate of Rome:
Would he save Cato? Bid him spare his Country.
Tell your Dictator this, and tell him Cato
Disdain's a Life, which he has Power to offer.

Dec. Rome and Her Senators submit to Caesar;
Her Generals and her Consuls are no more,
Who checked his Conquests, and denied his Triumphs.
Why will not Cato be this Caesar's Friend?

Cato. Those very Reasons, thou have urged, forbid it.

Dec. Cato, I Have Orders to expostulate,
And reason with you as from Friend to Friend:
Think on the Storm that gather's over your Head,
And threaten's every Hour to burst upon it;
Still may you stand high in your Country's Honors,
Do but comply, and make your Peace with Caesar.
Rome will rejoice, and cast its Eyes on Cato,
As on the Second of Mankind.

Cato. No more!
I must not think of Life on such Conditions.

Dec. Caesar is well acquainted with your Virtues,
And therefore sets this Value on your Life:
Let him but know the Price of Cato's Friendship,
And name your Terms.

Cato. Bid him disband his Legions,
Restore the Commonwealth to Liberty,
Submit his Actions to the Public Censure,
And stand the Judgment of a Roman Senate.
Bid him do this, and Cato is his Friend.

Dec. Cato, the World talk's loudly of your Wisdom --

Cato. Nay more, though Cato's Voice was never employed
To clear the Guilty, and to varnish Crimes,
My self will mount the Rostrum in his Favor,
And strive to gain his Pardon from the People.

Dec. A Style like this become's a Conqueror.

Cato. Decius, a Style like this become's a Roman.

Dec. What is a Roman, that is Caesar's Foe?

Cato. Greater than Caesar, he is a Friend to Virtue.

Dec. Consider, Cato, you're in Utica;
And at the Head of your own little Senate;
You don't now thunder in the Capitol,
With all the Mouths of Rome to second you.

Cato. Let him consider That 'who drives us hither:
It Is Caesar's Sword has made Rome's Senate little,
And thinn'd its Ranks. Alas, thy dazzled Eye
Behold's this Man in a false glaring Light,
Which Conquest and Success have thrown upon him;
Did thou but view him right, thou would see him black
With Murder, Treason, Sacrilege, and Crimes,
That strike my Soul with Horror but to name 'em.
I know thou look on me, as on a Wretch
Beset with Ills, and covered with Misfortunes;
But, by the Gods I sweat, Millions of Worlds
Should never buy me to be like that Caesar.

Dec. Does Cato send this Answer back to Caesar,
For all his generous Cares, and proffered Friendship?

Cato. His Cares for me are insolent and vain:
Presumptuous Man! The Gods take Care of Cato.
Would Caesar show the Greatness of his Soul,
Bid him employ his Care for these my Friends,
And make good use of his ill-gotten Power,
By sheltring Men much better than himself.

Dec. Your high unconquered Heart make's you forget
That you're a Man. You rush on your Destruction.
But I have done. When I relate hereafter
The Tale of this unhappy Embassy
All Rome will be in Tears. [Exit Decius.

Semp. Cato, we thank thee.
The mighty Genius of Immortal Rome
Speak's in thy Voice, thy Soul breath's Liberty:
Caesar will shrink to hear the Words thou utter'st,
And shudder in the midst of all his Conquests.

Luc. The Senate own's its Gratitude to Cato,
Who with so great a Soul consult's its Safety,
And guard's our Lives, while he neglect's his own.

Semp. Sempronius give's no Thanks on this Account.
Lucius seems fond of Life; but what is Life?
It Is not to stalk about, and draw fresh Air
From time to time, or gaze upon the Sun;
It Is to be free. When Liberty is gone,
Life grow's insipid, and has lost its Relish.
O could my dying Hand but lodge a Sword
In Caesar's Bosom, and revenge my Country,
By Heavens I could enjoy the Pangs of Death,
And Smile in Agony.

Luc. Others perhaps
May serve their Country with as warm a Zeal,
Though it is not kindled into so much Rage.

Semp. This sober Conduct is a mighty Virtue
In lukewarm Patriots.

Cato. Come! no more, Sempronius,
All here are Friends to Rome, and to each other.
Let us not weaken still the weaker Side,
By our Divisions.

Semp. Cato, my Resentments
Are sacrificed to Rome -- I stand reproved.

Cato. Fathers, it is time you come to a Resolve.

Luc. Cato, we all go into your Opinion.
Caesar's Behavior has convinced the Senate
We ought to hold it out till Terms arrive.

Semp. We ought to hold it out till Death; but, Cato,
My private Voice is drowned amid the Senate's.

Cato. Then let us rise, my Friends, and strive to fill
This little Interval, this Pause of Life,
(While yet our Liberty and Fates are doubtful)
With Resolution, Friendship, Roman Brav'ry,
And all the Virtues we can crowd into it;
That Heaven may say, it ought to be prolonged.
Fathers, farewell -- The young Numidian Prince
Comes forward, and expects to know our Councils. [Ex. Senators.

Enter Juba. Cato. Juba, the Roman Senate has resolved,
Till Time give better Prospects, still to keep
The Sword unsheathed, and turn its Edge on Caesar.

Jub. The Resolution fit's a Roman Senate.
But, Cato, lend me for a while thy Patience,
And condescend to hear a young Man speak.
My Father, when some Days before his Death
He ordered me to march for Utica
(Alas, I thought not then his Death so near!)
Wep't over me, pressed me in his aged Arms,
And, as his Griefs gave way, My Son, said he,
Whatever Fortune shall befall thy Father,
Be Cato's Friend; he will train thee up to Great
And Virtuous Deeds: Do but observe him well,
Thou Wilt shun Misfortunes, or thou wilt learn to bear 'em.

Cato. Juba, thy Father was a worthy Prince,
And merited, alas! a better Fate;
But Heaven thought otherwise.

Juba. My Father's Fate,
In spite of all the Fortitude, that shine's
Before my Face, in Cato's great Example,
Subdue's my Soul, and fill's my Eyes with Tears.

Cato. It is an honest Sorrow, and becomes thee.

Juba. My Father drew Respect from foreign Climes:
The Kings of Africa sought him for their Friend;
Kings far remote, that rule, as Fame report's,
Behind the hidden Sources of the Nile,
In distant Worlds, on the other side the Sun:
Often have their black Ambassadors appeared,
Laden with Gifts, and filled the Courts of Zama.

Cato. I am no Stranger to thy Father's Greatness.

Juba. I would not boast the Greatness of my Father,
But point out new Alliances to Cato.
Had we not better leave this Utica,
To arm Numidia in our Cause, and court
The Assistance of my Father's powerful Friends?
Did they know Cato, our remotest Kings
Would pour embattled Multitudes about him;
Their swarthy Hosts would darken all our Plains,
Doubling the native Horror of the War,
And making Death more grim.

Cato. And can thou think
Cato will fly before the Sword of Caesar?
Reduced, like Hannibal, to seek Relief
From Court to Court, and wander up and down,
A Vagabond in Africa!

Jub. Cato, perhaps
I Am too officious, but my forward Cares
Would fain preserve a Life of so much Value.
My Heart is wounded, when I so such Virtue
Afflicted by the Weight of such Misfortunes.

Cato. Thy Nobleness of Soul obliges me.
But know, young Prince, that Valor soar's above
What the World calls Misfortune and Affliction.
These are not Ills; else would they never fall
On Heavens first Favorites, and the best of Men:
The Gods, in Bounty, work up Storms about us,
That give Mankind Occasion to exert
Their hidden Strength, and throw out into Practice
Virtues, that shun the Day, and lie concealed
In the smooth Seasons, and the Calms of Life.

Jub. I Am charmed when ever thou talk! I pant for Virtue!
And all my Soul endeavors at Perfection.

Cato. Do thou love Watchings, Abstinence, and Toil,
Laborious Virtues all? Learn them from Cato:
Success and Fortune must thou learn from Caesar.

Jub. The best good Fortune that can fall on Juba,
The whole Success, at which my Heart aspires,
Depends on Cato.

Cato. What does Juba say?
Thy Words confound me.

Jub. I would fain retract them.
Give 'em me back again. They aimed at nothing.

Cato. Tell me thy Wish, young Prince; make not my Ear
A Stranger to thy Thoughts.

Jub. Oh, they are extravagant;
Still let me hide them.

Cato. What can Juba ask
That Cato will refuse!

Jub. I fear to name it.
Marcia -- inherits all her Father's Virtues.

Cato. What would thou say?

Jub. Cato, thou have a Daughter.

Cato. Adieu, young Prince: I would not hear a Word
Should lessen thee in my Esteem: Remember
The Hand of Fate is over us, and Heaven
Exact's Severity from all our Thoughts:
It is not now a Time to talk of aught
But Chains, or Conquest; Liberty, or Death. [Exit.

Enter Syphax. Syph. How Is this, my Prince! What, covered with Confusion?
You look as if you stern Philosopher
Had just now chid you.

Jub. Syphax, I Am undone!

Syph. I know it well.

Jub. Cato thinks meanly of me.

Syph. And so will all Mankind.

Jub. I Have opened to him
The Weakness of my Soul, my Love for Marcia.

Syph. Cato's a proper Person to entrust
A Love-Tale with.

Jub. Oh, I could pierce my Heart,
My foolish Heart! Was ever Wretch like Juba?

Syph. Alas, my Prince how are you changed of late!
I Have known young Juba rise, before the Sun,
To beat the Thicket where the Tiger slept,
Or seek the Lion in his dreadful Haunts:
How did the Color mount into your Cheeks,
When first you roused him to the Chase! I Have seen you
Even in the Lybian Dog Days hunt him down,
Then charge him close, provoke him to the Rage
Of Fangs and Claws, and stooping from your Horse
Rivet the panting Savage to the Ground.

Jub. Prithee, no more!

Syph. How would the old King smile
To see you weigh the Paws, when tipp'd with Gold,
And throw the shaggy Spoils about your Shoulders!

Jub. Syphax, this old Man's Talk (though Honey flowed
In every Word) would now lose all its Sweetness.
Cato's displeased, and Marcia lost for ever!

Syph. Young Prince, I yet could give you good Advice.
Marcia might still be yours.

Jub. What say thou, Syphax?
By Heavens, thou turn'st me all into Attention.

Syph. Marcia might still be yours.

Jub. As how, Dear Syphax?

Syph. Juba command's Numidia's hardy Troops,
Mounted on Steeds, unused to the Restraint
Of Curbs or Bits, and fleeter than the Winds:
Give but the Word, we'll snatch this Damsel up,
And bear her off.

Jub. Can such dishonest Thoughts
Rise up in Man! would thou seduce my Youth
To do an Act that would destroy my Honor?

Syph. Gods, I could tear my Beard to hear you talk!
Honor's a fine imaginary Notion,
That draws in raw and unexperienced Men
To real Mischiefs, while they hunt a Shadow.

Jub. Would thou degrade thy Prince into a Russian?

Syph. The boasted Ancestors of these great Men,
Whose Virtues you admire, were all such Ruffians.
This Dread of Nations, this Almighty Rome,
That comprehends in her wide Empire's Bounds
All under Heaven, was founded on a Rape.
Your Scipios', Caesar's, Pompey's, and your Cato's,
(These Gods on Earth) are all the spurious Brood
Of violated Maids, of ravished Sabines.

Jub. Syphax, I fear that hoary Head of thine
Abound's too much in our Numidian Wiles.

Syph. Indeed my Prince, you want to know the World,
You have not read Mankind, your Youth admire's
The Throws and Swellings of a Roman Soul,
Cato's bold Flights, the Extravagance of Virtue.

Jub. If Knowledge of the World makes Man perfidious,
May Juba ever live in Ignorance!

Syph. Go, go, you're young.

Jub. Gods, must I tamely bear
This Arrogance unanswered! You Are a Traitor,
A false old Traitor.

Syph. I have gone too far. [Aside.

Jub. Cato shall know the Baseness of thy Soul.

Syph. I must appease this Storm, or perish in it. [Aside.
Young Prince, behold these Locks, that are grown white
Beneath a Helmet in your Father's Battles.

Jub. Those Locks shall never protect thy Insolence.

Syph. Must one rash Word, the Infirmity of Age,
Throw down the Merit of my better Years?
This the Reward of a whole Life of Service!
Curse on the Boy! How steadily he hears me! [Aside.

Jub. Is it because the Throne of my Forefathers
Still stands unfill'd, and that Numidia's Crown
Hangs doubtful yet, whose Head it shall enclose,
Thou thus presumest to treat thy Prince with Scorn?

Syph. Why will you rive my Heart with such Expressions?
Does not old Syphax follow you to War?
What are his Aims? Why does he load with Darts
His trembling Hand, and crush beneath a Cask
His wrinkled Brows? What is it he aspires to?
Is it not this? to shed the slow Remains,
His last poor Ebb of Blood in your Defense?

Jub. Syphax, no more! I would not hear you talk.

Syph. Not hear me talk! What, when my Faith to Juba,
My royal Master's Son, is called in question?
My Prince may strike me dead, and I Will be dumb:
But whilst I live I must not hold my Tongue,
And languish out old Age in his Displeasure.

Jub. Thou know the Way too well into my Heart,
I do believe thee loyal to thy Prince.

Syph. What greater Instance can I give? I Have offered
To do an Action which my Soul abhor's,
And gain you whom you love at any Price.

Jub. Was this thy Motive? I have been too hasty.

Syph. And it is for this my Prince has called me Traitor.

Jub. Sure thou mistakest; I did not call thee so.

Syph. You did indeed, my Prince, you called me Traitor:
Nay, further, threatened you would complain to Cato.
Of what, my Prince, would you complain to Cato?
That Syphax loves you, and would sacrifice
His Life, nay more, his Honor in your Service.

Jub. Syphax, I know thou love me, but indeed
Thy Zeal for Juba carried thee too far.
Honor's a sacred Tie, the Law of Kings,
The noble Mind's distinguishing Perfection,
That aid's and strengthens Virtue, where it meets her,
And imitates her Actions, where she is not:
It ought not to be sported with.

Syph. By Heavens
I Am ravished when you talk thus, though you chide me.
Alas, I Have hitherto been used to think
A blind officious Zeal to serve my King
The ruling Principle, that ought to burn
And quench all others in a Subject's Heart.
Happy the People who preserve their Honor
By the same Duties that oblige their Prince!

Jub. Syphax, thou now begin'st to speak thy self.
Numidia's grown a Scorn among the Nations
For Breach of public Vows. Our Punick Faith
Is infamous, and branded to a Proverb.
Syphax, we'll join our Cares, to purge away
Our Country's Crimes, and clear her Reputation.

Syph. Believe me, Prince, you make old Syphax weep
To hear you talk -- but it is with Tears of Joy.
If e're your Father's Crown adorn your Brows,
Numidia will be blessed by Cato's Lectures.

Jub. Syphax, thy Hand! we'll mutually forget
The Warmth of Youth, and Frowardness of Age:
Thy Prince esteems thy Worth, and loves thy Person.
If e're the Scepter comes into my Hand,
Syphax shall stand the second in my Kingdom.

Syph. Why will you overwhelm my Age with Kindness?
My Joy grows burdensome, I sha'n't support it.

Jub. Syphax, farewell. I Will hence, and try to find
Some blessed Occasion that may set me right
In Cato's Thoughts. I Would rather have that Man
Approve my Deeds, than Worlds for my Admirers. [Exit.

Syphax solus. Young Men soon give, and soon forget Affronts;
Old Age is slow in both -- A false old Traitor!
Those Words, rash Boy, may chance to cost thee dear:
My Heart had still some foolish Fondness for thee:
But hence! it is gone: I give it to the Winds: --
Caesar, I Am wholly thine --

Enter Sempronius. Syph. All hail, Sempronius!
Well, Cato's Senate is resolved to wait
The Fury of a Siege, before it yields.

Semp. Syphax, we both were on the Verge of Fate:
Lucius declared for Peace, and Terms were offered
To Cato by a Messenger from Caesar.
Should they submit, ere our Designs are ripe,
We both must perish in the common Wreck,
Lost in a general undistinguisht Ruin.

Syph. But how stands Cato?

Semp. Thou have seen Mount Atlas:
While Storms and Tempests thunder on its Brows,
And Oceans break their Billows at its Feet,
It stands unmoved, and glorie's in its Height.
Such is that haughty Man; his towering Soul,
'Midst all the Shocks and Injuries of Fortune,
Rises superior, and looks down on Caesar.

Syph. But what is this Messenger?

Semp. I Have practiced with him,
And found a Means to let the Victor know
That Syphax and Sempronius are his Friends.
But let me now examine in my Turn:
Is Juba fixed?

Syph. Yes, but it is to Cato.
I Have tried the Force of every Reason on him,
Soothed and carress'd, been angry, soothed again,
Laid Safety, Life, and Interest in his Sight,
But all are vain, he scorns them all for Cato.

Semp. Come, it is no Matter, we shall do without him.
He Will make a pretty Figure in a Triumph,
And serve to trip before the Victor's Chariot.
Syphax, I now may hope thou have forsook
Thy Juba's Cause, and wishest Marcia mine.

Syph. May she be thine as fast as thou would have her!

Semp. Syphax, I love that Woman; though I curse
Her and my self, yet spite of me, I love her.

Syph. Make Cato sure, and give up Utica,
Caesar will never refuse thee such a Trifle.
But are thy Troops prepared for a Revolt?
Does the Sedition catch from Man to Man,
And run among their Ranks?

Semp. All, all is ready.
The factious Leaders are our Friends, that spread
Murmurs and Discontents among the Soldiers.
They count their toilsome Marches, long Fatigues,
Unusual Fastings, and will bear no more
This Medly of Philosophy and War.
Within an Hour they will storm the Senate House.

Syph. Mean while I Will draw up my Numidian Troops
Within the Square, to exercise their Arms,
And, as I see Occasion, favor thee.
I laugh to think how your unshaken Cato
Will look aghast, while unforeseen Destruction
Pou'rs in upon him thus from every Side.
So, where our wide Numidian Wastes extend,
Sudden, the impetuous Hurricanes descend,
Wheel through the Air, in circling Eddies play,
Tear up the Sands, and sweep whole Plains away.
The helpless Traveller, with wild Surprise,
Sees the dry Desert all around him rise,
And, smothered in the dusty Whirlwind Dies.
[Exeunt.
End of the Second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Marcus and Portius. Marc. THanks to my Stars, I have not ranged about
The Wilds of Life, 'ere I could find a Friend;
Nature first pointed out my Portius to me,
And early taught me, by her secret Force,
To love thy Person, 'ere I knew thy Merit;
Till, what was Instinct, grew up into Friendship.

Port. Marcus, the Friendships of the World are often
Confed'racies in Vice, or Leagues of Pleasure;
Ours has severest Virtue for its Basis,
And such a Friendship end's not but with Life.

Marc. Portius, thou know my Soul in all its Weakness;
Then prithee spare me on its tender Side,
Indulge me but in Love, my other Passions
Shall rise and fall by Virtue's nicest Rules.

Port. When Love's well timed, it is not a Fault to love.
The Strong, the Brave, the Virtuous, and the Wise,
Sink in the soft Captivity together.
I would not urge thee to dismiss thy Passion,
(I know 'twere vain) but to suppress its Force,
Till better Times may make it look more graceful.

Marc. Alas! thou talk like one who never felt
The impatient Throbbs and Longings of a Soul,
That pant's, and reache's after distant Good.
A Lover does not live by vulgar Time:
Believe me, Portius, in my Lucia's Absence
Life hang's upon me, and become's a Burden;
And yet when I behold the charming Maid
I Am ten-times more undone; while Hope, and Fear,
And Grief, and Rage, and Love, rise up at once,
And with Variety of Pain distract me.

Port. What can thy Portius do to give thee Help?

Marc. Portius, thou often enjoy'st the Fair One's Presence:
Then undertake my Cause, and plead it to her
With all the Strength and Heats of Eloquence
Fraternal Love and Friendship can inspire.
Tell her thy Brother languishe's to Death,
And fade's away, and wither's in his Bloom;
That he forgets his Sleep, and loath's his Food,
That Youth, and Health, and War are joyless to him:
Describe his anxious Days, and restless Nights,
And all the Torments that thou see me suffer.

Port. Marcus, I beg thee give me not an Office
That suits with me so ill. Thou know my Temper.

Marc. Will thou behold me sinking in my Woes?
And will thou not reach out a friendly Arm,
To raise me from amidst this Plunge of Sorrows?

Port. Marcus, thou can not ask what I Would refuse.
But here believe me I Have a thousand Reasons --

Marc. I know thou wilt say my Passion's out of Season,
That Cato's great Example and Misfortunes
Should both conspire to drive it from my Thoughts.
But what is all this to one who loves like me!
Oh Portius, Portius, from my Soul I wish
Thou did but know thy self what it is to love!
Then would thou pity and assist thy Brother.

Port. What should I do! If I disclose my Passion
Our Friendship's at an end: If I conceal it,
The World will call me false to a Friend and Brother. [Aside.

Marc. But see where Lucia at her wonted Hour,
Amid the cool of yon high Marble Arch,
Enjoys the Noonday Breeze! Observe her, Portius!
That Face, that Shape, those Eyes, that Heaven of Beauty!
Observe her well, and blame me if thou can.

Port. She sees us, and advances --

Marc. I Will withdraw,
And leave you for a while. Remember, Portius,
Thy Brother's Life depends upon thy Tongue. [Exit.

Enter Lucia. Luc. Did not I see your Brother Marcus here?
Why did he fly the Place, and shun my Presence?

Port. Oh, Lucia, Language is too faint to show
His Rage of Love; it prey's upon his Life;
He pines, he sickens, he despairs, he dies:
His Passions and his Virtues lie confused,
And mixed together in so wild a Tumult,
That the whole Man is quite disfigured in him.
Heavens! would one think 'twere possible for Love
To make such Ravage in a noble Soul!
Oh, Lucia, I Am distressed! my Heart bleeds for him;
Even now, while thus I stand blessed in thy Presence,
A secret Damp of Grief comes over my Thoughts,
And I Am unhappy, though thou smilest upon me.

Luc. How will thou guard thy Honor, in the Shock
Of Love and Friendship! think betimes, my Portius,
Think how the Nuptial Tie, that might ensure
Our mutual Bliss, would raise to such a Height
Thy Brother's Griefs, as might perhaps destroy him.

Port. Alas, poor Youth! what do thou think, my Lucia?
His generous, open, undesigning Heart
Has begged his Rival to solicit for him.
Then do not strike him dead with a Denial,
But hold him up in Life, and cheer his Soul
With the faint glimmering of a doubtful Hope:
Perhaps, when we have passed these gloomy Hours,
And weathered out the Storm that beats upon us --

Luc. No, Portius, no! I see thy Sister's Tears,
Thy Father's Anguish, and thy Brother's Death,
In the Pursuit of our ill-fated Loves.
And, Portius, here I swear, to Heaven I swear,
To Heaven, and all the Powers that judge Mankind,
Never to mix my plighted Hands with thine,
While such a Cloud of Mischiefs hang's about us.
But to forget our Loves, and drive thee out
From all my Thoughts, as far -- as I am able

Port. What have thou said! I Am thunderstruck! -- Recall
Those hasty Words, or I am lost for ever.

Luc. Has not the Vow already passed my Lips?
The Gods have heard it, and it is sealed in Heaven.
May all the Vengeance, that was ever poured
On perjured Heads, overwhelm me, if I break it!
[After a Pause,
Port. Fixed in Astonishment, I gaze upon thee;
Like one just blasted by a Stroke from Heaven,
Who pant's for Breath, and stiffen's, yet alive,
In dreadful Looks: A Monument of Wrath!

Luc. At length I Have acted my severest Part,
I feel the Woman breaking in upon me,
And melt about my Heart! my Tears will flow.
But oh I Will think no more! the Hand of Fate
Has torn thee from me, and I must forget thee.

Port. Hard-hearted, cruel Maid!

Luc. Oh stop those Sounds,
Those killing Sounds! Why do thou frown upon me?
My Blood run's cold, my Heart forget's to heave,
And Life its self goe's out at thy Displeasure.
The Gods forbid us to indulge our Loves,
But oh! I cannot bear thy Hate and live!

Port. Talk not of Love, thou never knew'st its Force.
I Have been deluded, led into a Dream
Of fancied Bliss. O Lucia, cruel Maid!
Thy dreadful Vow, laden with Death, still sound's
In my stunned Ears. What shall I say or do?
Quick, let us part! Perdition's in thy Presence,
And Horror dwells about thee! -- Hah, she faints!
Wretch that I am! what has my Rashness done!
Lucia, thou injured Innocence! thou best
And lovely'st of thy Sex! awake, my Lucia,
Or Portius rushe's on his Sword to join thee.
-- Her Imprecations reach not to the Tomb,
They shut not out Society in Death. --
But Hah! She moves! Life wander's up and down
Through all her Face, and light's up every Charm.

Luc. O Portius, was this well! -- to frown on her
That lives upon thy Smiles! to call in Doubt
The Faith of one expiring at thy Feet,
That love's thee more than ever Woman loved!
-- What do I say? My half-recover'd Sense
Forget's the Vow in which my Soul is bound.
Destruction stand's betwixt us! We must part.

Port. Name not the Word, my frighted Thoughts run back,
And startle into Madness at the Sound.

Luc. What would thou have me do? Consider well
The Train of Ills our Love would draw behind it.
Think, Portius, think, thou see thy dying Brother
Stabbed at his Heart, and all besmeared with Blood,
Storming at Heaven and thee! Thy awful Sire
Sternly demand's the Cause, the accursed Cause,
That robb's him of his Son! poor Marcia tremble's,
Then tears her Hair, and frantic in her Griefs
Call's out on Lucia! What could Lucia answer?
Or how stand up in such a Scene of Sorrow!

Port. To my Confusion, and Eternal Grief,
I must approve the Sentence that destroys me.
The Mist that hung about my Mind clear's up;
And now, athwart the Terrors that thy Vow
Has planted round thee, thou appear'st more fair,
More amiable, and risest in thy Charms.
Lovly'st of Women! Heaven is in thy Soul,
Beauty and Virtue shine for ever round thee,
Bright'ning each other! Thou art all Divine!

Luc. Portius, no more! thy Words shoot through my Heart,
Melt my Resolves, and turn me all to Love.
Why are those Tears of Fondness in they Eyes?
Why heaves thy Heart? Why (...) thy Soul with Sorrow?
It softens me too much -- Farewell, my Portius,
Farewell, though Death is in the Word, For-ever!

Port. Stay, Lucia, stay! What do thou say? For-ever!

Luc. Have I not sworn? If, Portius, thy Success
Must throw thy Brother on his Fate, Farewell,
Oh, how shall I repeat the Word! For-ever!

Port. Thus over the dying Lamp the unsteady Flame
Hang's quivering on a Point, leap's off by Fits,
And falls again, as loath to quit its Hold
-- Thou must not go, my Soul still hover's over thee
And cannot get loose.

Luc. If the firm Portius shake
To hear of Parting, think what Lucia suffer's!

Port. It Is true; unruffled and serene I Have met
The common Accidents of Life, but here
Such an unlooked for Storm of Ills falls on me,
It beat's down all my Strength. I cannot bear it.
We must not part.

Luc. What do thou say? Not part?
Have thou forgot the Vow that I have made?
Are there not Heavens and Gods and Thunder over us!
-- But see thy Brother Marcus bend's this way!
I sicken at the Sight. Once more, Farewell,
Farewell, and know thou wrong'st me, if thou think
Ever was Love, or ever Grief, like mine. [Exit.

Enter Marcus, Marc. Portius, what Hopes? how stands She? Am I doomed
To Life or Death?

Port. What would thou have me say?

Marc. What mean's this pensive Posture? thou appear'st
Like one amazed and terrified.

Port. I Have Reason.

Marc. Thy down-cast Looks, and thy disordered Thoughts
Tell me my Fate. I ask not the Success
My Cause has found.

Port. I Am grieved I undertook it.

Mar. What? does the barbarous Maid insult my Heart,
My akeing Heart! and triumph in my Pains?
That I could cast her from my Thoughts for ever!

Port. Away! you're too suspicious in your Griefs;
Lucia, though sworn never to think of Love,
Compassionate's your Pains, and pitie's you.

Marc. Compassionate's my Pains, and pitie's me!
What is Compassion when it is void of Love!
Fool that I was to choose so cold a Friend
To urge my Cause! Compassionate's my Pains!
Prithee what Art, what Rhet'rick did thou use
To gain this mighty Boon? She pitie's me!
To one that ask's the warm Returns of Love,
Compassion's Cruelty, it is Scorn, it is Death --

Port. Marcus, no more! have I deserved this Treatment?

Marc. What have I said! O Portius, O forgive me!
A Soul exasp'rated in Ills falls out
With every thing, its Friend, its self -- But hah!
What means that Shout, big with the Sounds of War?
What new Alarm?

Port. A second, louder yet,
Swells in the Winds, and comes more full upon us.

Marc. Oh, for some glorious Cause to fall in Battle!
Lucia, thou have undone me! thy Disdain
Has broke my Heart: it is Death must give me Ease.

Port. Quick, let us hence, who knows if Cato's Life
Stand sure? O Marcus, I am warmed, my Heart
Leaps at the Trumpet's Voice, and burns for Glory.
[Exeunt.
Enter Sempronius with the Leaders of the Mutiny. Semp. At length the Winds are
raised, the Storm blow's high,
Be it your Care, my Friends, to keep it up
In it is full Fury, and direct it right;
'Till it has spent it self on Cato's Head.
Mean while I Will herd among his Friends, and seem
One (...) the Number, that whatever arrive,
My Friends and Fellow Soldiers may be safe.

1 Lead. We all are safe, Sempronius is our Friend,
Sempronius is as brave a Man as Cato.
But hark! he Enters. Bear up boldly to him;
Be sure you beat him down, and bind him fast:
This Day will end our Toils, and give us Rest;
Fear nothing, for Sempronius is our Friend.

Enter Cato, Sempronius, Lucius, Portius, and Marcus. Cato. Where are these
bold intrepid Sons of War,
That greatly turn their Backs upon the Foe,
And to their General send a brave Defiance?

Semp. Curse on their Dastard Souls, they stand astonished! [Aside.

Cato. Perfidious Men! and will you thus dishonor
Your past Exploits, and fully all your Wars?
Do you confess 'twas not a Zeal for Rome,
Nor Love of Liberty, nor Thirst of Honor,
Drew you thus far; but hopes to share the Spoil
Of conquered Towns, and plundered Provinces?
Fired with such Motives you do well to join
With Cato's Foes, and follow Caesar's Banners.
Why did I'scape the envenomed Aspic's Rage,
And all the fiery Monsters of the Desert,
To see this Day? Why could not Cato fall
Without your Guilt? Behold, ungrateful Men,
Behold my Bosom naked to your Swords,
And let the Man that is injured strike the Blow.
Which of you all suspect's that he is wronged,
Or think's he suffer's greater Ills than Cato?
Am I distinguished from you but by Toils,
Superior Toils, and heavier Weight of Cares!
Painful Pre-eminence!

Semp. By Heavens they droop!
Confusion to the Villains! All is lost. [Aside.

Cato. Have you forgotten Lybia's burning Wast,
Its barren Rocks, parched Earth, and Hills of Sand,
Its tainted Air, and all its Broods of Poison?
Who was the first to explore the untrodden Path,
When Life was hazarded in every Step?
Or, fainting in the long laborious March,
When on the Banks of an unlook'd-for Stream
You sunk the River with repeated Draughts,
Who was the last in all your Host that thirsted?

Semp. If some penurious Source by chance appeared,
Scanty of Waters, when you scoop'd it dry,
And offered the full Helmet up to Cato,
Did not he dash the untasted Moisture from him?
Did not he lead you through the Midday Sun,
And Clouds of Dust? Did not his Temples glow
In the same sultry Winds, and scorching Heats?

Cato. Hence worthless Men! Hence! and complain to Caesar
You could not undergo the Toils of War,
Nor bear the Hardships that your Leader bore.

Luc. See, Cato, see the unhappy Men! they weep!
Fear, and Remorse, and Sorrow for their Crime,
Appear in every Look, and plead for Mercy.

Cato. Learn to be honest Men, give up your Leaders,
And Pardon shall descend on all the rest.

Semp. Cato, commit these Wretches to my Care.
First let 'em each be broken on the Rack,
Then, with what Life remain's, impaled, and left
To writhe at leisure round the bloody Stake.
There let 'em hang, and taint the Southern Wind.
The Partners of their Crime will learn Obedience,
When they look up and see their Fellow-Traitors
Stuck on a Fork, and black'ning in the Sun.

Luc. Sempronius, why, why will thou urge the Fate
Of wretched Men?

Semp. How! would thou clear Rebellion!
Lucius, (good Man) pitie's the poor Offenders
That would imbrue their Hands in Cato's Blood.

Cato. Forbear, Sempronius! -- See they suffer Death,
But in their Deaths remember they are Men.
Strain not the Laws to make their Tortures grievous.
Lucius, the base degenerate Age requires
Severity and Justice in its Rigor;
This awes an impious, bold, offending World,
Command's Obedience, and give's Force to Laws.
When by just Vengeance guilty Mortals perish,
The Gods behold their Punishment with Pleasure,
And lay the uplifted Thunderbolt aside.

Semp. Cato, I execute thy Will with Pleasure.

Cato. Meanwhile we'll sacrifice to Liberty.
Remember, O my Friends, the Laws, the Rights,
The generous Plan of Power delivered down,
From Age to Age, by your renowned Forefathers,
(So dearly bought, the Price of so much Blood)
O let it never perish in your Hands!
But piously transmit it to your Children.
Do thou, great Liberty, inspire our Souls,
And make our Lives in thy Possession happy,
Or our Deaths glorious in thy just Defense.
Exe. Cato, etc.
Sempronius and the Leaders of the Mutiny. 1 Lead. Sempronius, you have acted
like your Self,
One would have thought you had been half in Earnest.

Semp. Villain, stand off! base groveling worthless Wretches,
Mongrils in Faction, poor faint-hearted Traitors!

2 Lead. Nay, now you carry it too far, Sempronius:
Throw off the Mask, there are none here but Friends.

Semp. Know, Villains, when such paltry Slaves presume
To mix in Treason, if the Plot succeed's,
They Are thrown neglected by: But if it fail's,
They Are sure to die like Dogs, as you shall do.
Here, take these factious Monsters, dragg 'em forth
To sudden Death.

Enter Guards. 1 Lead. Nay, since it comes to this --

Semp. Dispatch 'em quick, but first pluck out their Tongues,
Least with their dying Breath they sow Sedition.
[Exeunt Guards with the Leaders.
Enter Syphax. Syph. Our first Design, my Friend, has proved abortive;
Still there remains an After-game to play:
My Troops are mounted; their Numidian Steeds
Snuff up the Wind, and long to scow'r the Desert:
Let but Sempronius head us in our Flight,
We'll force the Gate where Marcus keeps his Guard,
And hew down all that would oppose our Passage.
A Day will bring us into Caesar's Camp.

Semp. Confusion! I have failed of half my Purpose.
Marcia, the charming Marcia's left behind!

Syph. How? will Sempronius turn a Woman's Slave!

Semp. Think not thy Friend can ever feel the soft
Unmanly Warmth, and Tenderness of Love.
Syphax, I long to clasp that haughty Maid,
And bend her stubborn Virtue to my Passion:
When I have gone thus far, I Would cast her off.

Syph. Well said! that is spoken like thy self, Sempronius.
What hinder's then, but that thou find her out,
And hurry her away by manly Force?

Semp. But how to gain Admission? for Access
Is given to none but Juba, and her Brothers.

Syph. Thou shal't have Juba's Dress, and Juba's Guards:
The Doors will open, when Numidia's Prince
Seems to appear before the Slaves, that watch them.

Semp. Heavens, what a Thought is there! Marcia's my own!
How will my Bosom swell with anxious Joy,
When I behold her struggling in my Arms,
With glowing Beauty, and disordered Charms,
While Fear and Anger, with alternate Grace,
Pant in her Breast, and vary in her Face!
So Pluto, seized of Proserpine, conveyed
To Hell's tremendous Gloom the affrighted Maid,
There grimly smiled, pleased with the beauteous Prize,
Nor envied Jove his Sunshine and his Skies.

End of the Third Act.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Lucia and Marcia. Luc. NOW tell me, Marcia, tell me from thy Soul,
If thou believ'st it possible for Woman
To suffer greater Ills than Lucia suffers?

Marc. O Lucia, Lucia, might my big swollen Heart
Vent all its Griefs, and give a Loose to Sorrow:
Marcia could answer thee in Sighs, keep Pace
With all thy Woes, and count out Tear for Tear.

Luc. I know you are doomed alike, to be beloved
By Juba, and thy Father's Friend Sempronius;
But which of these has Power to charm like Portius!

Marc. Still must I beg thee not to name Sempronius?
Lucia, I like not that loud boisterous Man:
Juba to all the Brav'ry of a Hero
Adds softest Love, and more than Female Sweetness;
Juba might make the proudest of our Sex,
Any of Womankind, but Marcia, happy.

Luc. And why not Marcia? Come, you strive in vain
To hide your Thoughts from one, who know's too well
The inward Glowings of a Heart in Love.

Marc. While Cato live's, his Daughter has no Right
To love or hate, but as his Choice directs.

Luc. But should this Father give you to Sempronius?

Marc. I dare not think he will: but if he should --
Why will thou add to all the Griefs I suffer
Imaginary Ills, and fancied Tortures?
I hear the Sound of Feet! they march this Way!
Let us retire, and try if we can drown
Each softer Thought in Sense of present Danger.
When Love once plead's Admission to our Hearts
(In spite of all the Virtue we can boast)
The Woman that Deliberates is lost.
[Exeunt.
Enter Sempronius, dressed like Juba, with Numidian Guards. Semp. The Deer is
lodged. I Have trackt her to her Covert.
Be sure you mind the Word, and when I give it,
Rush in at once, and seize upon your Prey.
Let not her Cries or Tears have Force to move you.
-- How will the young Numidian rave, to see
His Mistress lost? If aught could glad my Soul,
Beyond the Enjoyment of so bright a Prize,
'T would be to torture that young, gay, Barbarian.
-- But hark, what Noise! Death to my Hopes! it is he,
It Is Juba's self! there is but one Way left --
He must be murdered, and a Passage cut
Through those his Guards. -- Hah, Dastards, do you tremble!
Or act like Men, or by yon azure Heaven --

Enter Juba. Jub. What do I see? Who Is this that dares usurp
The Guards and Habits of Numidia's Prince?

Semp. One that was born to scourge thy Arrogance,
Presumptuous Youth!

Jub. What can this mean? Sempronius!

Semp. My Sword shall answer thee. Have at thy Heart.

Jub. Nay, then beware thy own, proud, barbrous Man!
[ Semp. falls. His Guards surrender.
Semp. Curse on my Stars! Am I then doomed to fall
By a Boy's Hand? disfigured in a vile
Numidian Dress, and for a worthless Woman?
Gods, I Am Distracted! This my Gloss of Life!
O for a Peal of Thunder that would make
Earth, Sea, and Air, and Heaven, and Cato tremble! [Dies.

Juba. With what a Spring his surious Soul broke loose,
And left the Limbs still quivering on the Ground!
Hence let us carry off those Slaves to Cato,
That we may there at length unravel all
This dark Design, this Mystery of Fate.
[Exit Juba with Prisoners, etc.
Enter Lucia and Marcia. Luc. Sure 'twas the Clash of Swords; my troubled Heart
Is so cast down, and sunk amidst its Sorrows,
It throb's with Fear, and ake's at every Sound.
O Marcia, should thy Brothers for my Sake! --
I die away with Horror at the Thought.

Marc. See, Lucia, see! here is Blood! here is Blood and Murder!
Hah! a Numidian! Heavens preserve the Prince:
The Face lie's muffled up within the Garment.
But hah! Death to my Sight! a Diadem,
And Purple Robes! O Gods! it is he, it is he,
Juba, the loveliest Youth that ever warmed
A Virgin's Heart, Juba lie's dead before us!

Luc. Now Marcia, now call up to thy Assistance
Thy wonted Strength, and Constancy of Mind;
Thou can not put it to a greater Trial.

Marc. Lucia, look there, and wonder at my Patience.
Have I not cause to rave, and beat my Breast,
To rend my Heart with Grief, and run distracted!

Luc. What can I think or say to give thee Comfort?

Mar. Talk not of Comfort, it is for lighter Ills:
Behold a Sight, that strike's all Comfort dead.
Enter Juba listening. I will indulge my Sorrows, and give way
To all the Pangs and Fury of Despair,
That Man, that best of Men, deserved it from me.

Juba. What do I hear? and was the false Sempronius
That best of Men? O had I fallen like him,
And could have thus been mourned, I had been happy!

Luc. Here will I stand, Companion in thy Woes,
And help thee with my Tears; when I behold
A Loss like thine, I half forget my own.

Marc. It Is not in Fate to ease my tortured Breast.
This empty World, to me a joyless Desert,
Has nothing left to make poor Marcia happy.

Juba. I Am on the Rack! Was he so near her Heart?

Marc. Oh he was all made up of Love and Charms,
Whatever Maid could wish, or Man admire:
Delight of every Eye! When he appeared,
A secret Pleasure gladned all that saw him;
But when he talked, the proudest Roman blushed
To hear his Virtues, and old Age grew wise.

Juba. I shall run Mad --

Marc. O Juba! Juba! Juba!

Juba. What means that Voice? did she not call on Juba?

Marc. Why do I think on what he was! he is dead!
He Is dead, and never knew how much I loved him.
Lucia, who know's but his poor bleeding Heart
Amidst its Agonies, remembered Marcia,
And the last Words he uttered called me Cruel!
Alas, he knew not, hapless Youth, he knew not
Marcia's whole Soul was full of Love and Juba!

Juba. Where am I! do I live! or am indeed
What Marcia think's! all is Elisium round me!

Marc. Ye dear Remains of the most loved of Men!
Nor Modesty nor Virtue here forbid
A last Embrace, while thus --

Juba. See, Marcia, see,
The happy Juba live's! he live's to catch
That dear Embrace, and to return it too
With mutual Warmth and Eagerness of Love.

Marc. With Pleasure and Amaze, I stand transported!
Sure it is a Dream! Dead and Alive at oncel
If thou art Juba, who lies there?

Jub. A Wretch,
Disguised like Juba on a cursed Design.
The Tale is long, nor have I heard it out,
Thy Father know's it all. I could not bear
To leave thee in the Neighborhood of Death,
But flew, in all the haste of Love, to find thee.
I found thee weeping, and confess this once,
Am wrapped with Joy to see my Marcia's Tears.

Marc. I Have been surprised in an unguarded Hour,
But must not now go back: The Love, that lay
Half smothered in my Breast, has broke through all
Its weak Restraints, and burn's in its full Luster,
I cannot, if I would, conceal it from thee.

Jub. I Am lost in Ecstasy! and do thou love,
Thou charming Maid?

Marc. And do thou live to ask it?

Jub. This, this is Life indeed! Life worth preserving!
Such Life as Juba never felt till now!

Marc. Believe me, Prince, before I thought thee dead,
I did not know my self how much I loved thee.

Jub. O fortunate Mistake!

Marc. O happy Marcia!

Jub. My Joy! my best Beloved! my only Wish!
How shall I speak the Transport of my Soul!

Marc. Lucia, thy Arm! Oh let me rest upon it! --
The Vital Blood, that had forsook my Heart,
Return's again in such tumultuous Tides,
It quite o'ercomes me. Lead to my Apartment.
O Prince! I blush to think what I have said,
But Fate has wrested the Confession from me;
Go on, and prosper in the Paths of Honor,
Thy Virtue will excuse my Passion for thee,
And make the Gods propitious to our Love.
[Ex. Marc. and Luc.
Jub. I am so blessed, I fear it is all a Dream.
Fortune, thou now have made amends for all
Thy past Unkindness. I absolve my Stars.
What though Numidia add her conquered Towns
And Provinces to swell the Victor's Triumph?
Juba will never at his Fate repine,
Let Caesar have the World, if Marcia's mine. [Exit.

A March at a Distance. Enter Cato and Lucius. Luc. I stand astonished! What,
the bold Sempronius!
That still broke foremost through the Crowd of Patriots,
As with a Hurricane of Zeal transported,
And virtuous even to Madness --

Cato. Trust me, Lucius,
Our civil Discords have produced such Crimes,
Such monstrous Crimes, I am surprised at nothing.
-- O Lucius, I am sick of this bad World!
The Daylight and the Sun grow painful to me.

Enter Portius. But see where Portius come's! What mean's this Haste?
Why are thy Looks thus changed?
Port. My Heart is grieved.
I bring such News as will afflict my Father.

Cato. Has Caesar shed more Roman Blood?

Port. Not so.
The Traitor Syphax, as within the Square
He exercised his Troops, the Signal given,
Flew off at once with his Numidian Horse
To the South Gate, where Marcus holds the Watch.
I saw, and called to stop him, but in vain,
He tossed his Arm aloft, and proudly told me,
He would not stay and perish like Sempronius.

Cato. Perfidious Men! But haste my Son, and see
Thy Brother Marcus act's a Roman's Part. [Exit Portius.
-- Lucius, the Torrent bears too hard upon me:
Justice give's Way to Force: the conquered World
Is Caesar's: Cato has no Business in it.

Luc. While Pride, Oppression, and Injustice reign,
The World will still demand her Cato's Presence.
In Pity to Mankind, submit to Caesar,
And reconcile thy Mighty Soul to Life.

Cato. Would Lucius have me live to swell the Number
Of Caesar's Slaves, or by a base Submission
Give up the Cause of Rome, and own a Tyrant?

Luc. The Victor never will impose on Cato
Ungen'rous Terms. His Enemies confess
The Virtues of Humanity are Caesar's.

Cato. Curse on his Virtues! They Have undone his Country.
Such Popular Humanity is Treason --
But see young Juba! the good Youth appears
Full of the Guilt of his perfidious Subjects.

Luc. Alas, poor Prince! his Fate deserves Compassion.

Enter Juba. Jub. I blush, and am consounded to appear
Before thy Presence, Cato.

Cato. What Is thy Crime?

Jub. I Am a Numidian.

Cato. And a brave one too,
Thou have a Roman Soul.

Jub. Have thou not heard
Of my false Countrymen?

Cato. Alas, young Prince,
Falsehood and Fraud shoot up in every Soil,
The Product of all Climes -- Rome has its Caesar's.

Jub. It Is generous thus to comfort the Distressed.

Cato. It Is just to give Applause where it is deserved;
Thy Virtue, Prince, has stood the Test of Fortune,
Like purest Gold, that, tortured in the Furnace,
Comes out more bright, and brings forth all its Weight.

Juba. What shall I answer thee? my ravished Heart
Overflows with secret Joy: I Would rather gain
Thy Praise, O Cato, than Numidia's Empire.

Enter Portius hastily. Port. Misfortune on Misfortune! Grief on Grief!
My Brother Marcus --

Cato. Hah! what has he done?
Has he forsook his Post? has he given way?
Did he look tamely on, and let 'em pass?

Port. Scarce had I left my Father, but I met him
Born on the Shields of his surviving Soldiers,
Breathless and pale, and covered over with Wounds.
Long, at the Head of his few faithful Friends,
He stood the Shock of a whole Host of Foes,
Till obstinately Brave, and bent on Death,
Oppressed with Multitudes, he greatly fell.

Cato. I Am satisfied.

Port. Nor did he fall before
His Sword had pierced through the false Heart of Syphax:
Yonder he lie's. I saw the hoary Traitor
Grin in the Pangs of Death, and bite the Ground.

Cato. Thanks to the Gods! my Boy has done his Duty.
-- Portius, when I am dead, besure thou place
His Urne near mine.

Port. Long may they keep asunder!

Luc. O Cato, arm thy Soul with all its Patience;
See where the Corpse of thy dead Son approaches!
The Citizens and Senators, alarmed,
Have gathered round it, and attend it weeping.

Cato meeting the Corpse. Cato. Welcome my Son! Here lay him down, my Friends,
Full in my Sight, that I may view at leisure
The bloody Coarse, and count those glorious Wounds.
How beautiful is Death, when earned by Virtue!
Who would not be that Youth? what Pity is it
That we can die but once to serve our Country!
Why sit's this Sadness on your Brows, my Friends?
I should have blushed if Cato's House had stood
Secure, and flourished in a Civil War.
-- Portius, behold thy Brother, and remember
Thy Life is not thy own, when Rome demands it.

Juba. Was ever Man like this! [Aside.

Cato. Alas my Friends!
Why mourn you thus? Let not a private Loss
Afflict your Hearts. It Is Rome requires our Tears.
The Mistress of the World, the Seat of Empire,
The Nurse of Heroes, the Delight of Gods,
That humbled the proud Tyrants of the Earth,
And set the Nations free, Rome is no more.
O Liberty! O Virtue! O my Country!

Juba. Behold that upright Man! Rome fills his Eyes
With Tears, that slow'd not over his own dead Son. [Aside.

Cato. Whatever the Roman Virtue has subdued,
The Sun's whole Course, the Day and Year, are Caesar's.
For him the self-devoted Decii died,
The Fabii fell, and the great Scipio's conquered:
Even Pompey fought for Caesar. Oh my Friends!
How is the Toil of Fate, the Work of Ages,
The Roman Empire fallen! O cursed Ambition!
Fallen into Caesar's Hands! Our great Forefathers
Had left him naught to Conquer but his Country.

Juba. While Cato lives, Caesar will blush to see
Mankind enslaved, and be ashamed of Empire.

Cato. Caesar ashamed! Has not he seen 'Pharsalia!

Luc. Cato, it is Time thou save thy self and us.

Cato. Lose not a Thought on me. I Am out of Danger.
Heaven will not leave me in the Victor's Hand.
Caesar shall never say l've conquered Cato.
But oh! my Friends, your Safety fills my Heart
With anxious Thoughts: A thousand secret Terrors,
Rise in my Soul: How shall I save my Friends!
It Is now, O Caesar, I begin to fear thee.

Luc. Caesar has Mercy, if we ask it of him.

Cato. Then ask it, I conjure you! let him know
Whatever was done against him, Cato did it.
Add, if you please, that I request it of him,
That I my self, with Tears, request it of him,
The Virtue of my Friends may pass unpunished.
Juba, my Heart is troubled for thy Sake.
Should I advise thee to regain Numidia,
Or seek the Conqueror? --

Jub. If I forsake thee
Whilst I have Life, may Heaven abandon Juba!

Cato. Thy Virtues, Prince, if I foresee aright,
Will one Day make thee Great; at Rome, hereafter,
'Twill be no Crime to have been Cato's Friend.
Portius, draw near! My Son, thou often have seen
Thy Sire engaged in a corrupted State,
Wrestling with Vice and Faction: Now thou see me
Spent, overpow'r'd, despairing of Success;
Let me advise thee to retreat betimes
To thy Paternal Seat, the Sabine Field,
Where the great Censor toiled with his own Hands,
And all our frugal Ancestors were blessed
In humble Virtues, and a Rural Life.
There live retired, pray for the Peace of Rome,
Content thy self to be Obscurely good.
When Vice prevails, and impious Men bear Sway,
The Post of Honor is a private Station.

Port. I hope, my Father does not recommend
A Life to Portius, that he scorns himself.

Cato. Farewell, my Friends! if there be any of you
That dares not trust the Victor's Clemency,
Know there are Ships prepared by my Command,
(Their Sails already opening to the Winds)
That shall convey you to the wisht-for Port.
Is there aught else, my Friends, I can do for you?
The Conqueror draws near. Once more Farewell!
If ever we meet hereafter, we shall meet
In happier Climes, and on a safer Shore,
Where Caesar never shall approach us more.
There the brave Youth, with Love of Virtue fired, [Pointing to the Body of his
dead Son.
Who greatly in his Country's Cause expired,
Shall know he Conquered. The firm Patriot there
(Who made the Welfare of Mankind his Care)
Though still, by Faction, Vice, and Fortune, crossed,
Shall find the generous Labor was not lost.

End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Cato solus, sitting in a thoughtful Posture: In his Hand Plato's Book on the
Immortality of the Soul. A drawn Sword on the Table by him. IT must be so --
Plato, thou reason'st well! --
Else whence this pleasing Hope, this fond Desire,
This Longing after Immortality?
Or whence this secret Dread, and inward Horror,
Of falling into Naught? Why shrinks the Soul
Back on her self, and startles at Destruction?
It Is the Divinity that stir's within us;
It Is Heaven its self, that point's out an Hereafter,
And intimate's Eternity to Man.
Eternity! thou pleasing, dreadful, Thought!
Through what Variety of untried Being,
Through what new Scenes and Changes must we pass!
The wide, the unbounded Prospect, lie's before me;
But Shadows, Clouds, and Darkness, rest upon it.
Here will I hold. If there is a Power above us,
(And that there is all Nature cries aloud
Through all her Works) He must delight in Virtue;
And that which he delights in must be happy.
But when! or where! -- This World was made for Caesar.
I Am weary of Conjectures -- This must end 'em. [Laying his Hand on his Sword.
Thus am I doubly armed: my Death and Life,
My Bane and Antidote are both before me:
This in a Moment brings me to an End:
But this inform's me I shall never die.
The Soul, secured in her Existence, smile's
At the drawn Dagger, and defie's its Point.
The Stars shall fade away, the Sun himself
Grow dim with Age, and Nature sink in Years;
But thou shall flourish in immortal Youth,
Unhurt amidst the War of Elements,
The Wrecks of Matter, and the Crush of Worlds.
What means this Heaviness that hangs upon me?
This Lethargy that creeps through all my Senses?
Nature oppressed, and harrass'd out with Care,
Sinks down to Rest. This once I Will favor her.
That my awakened Soul may take her Flight,
Renewed in all her Strength, and fresh with Life,
An Offering fit for Heaven. Let Guilt or Fear
Disturb Man's Rest: Cato knows neither of 'em,
Indiff'rent in his Choice to sleep or die.
Enter Portius. But hah! how is this, my Son? Why this Intrusion?
Were not my Orders that I would be private?
Why am I disobeyed?

Port. Alas, my Father!
What means this Sword? this Instrument of Death?
Let me convey it hence!

Cato. Rash Youth, forbear!

Port. O let the Prayers, the Entreaties of your Friends,
Their Tears, their common Danger wrest it from you.

Cato. Wou'd'st thou betray me? Wou'd'st thou give me up
A Slave, a Captive, into Caesar's Hands?
Retire, and learn Obedience to a Father,
Or know, young Man! --

Port. O Sir, forgive your Son,
Whose Grief hangs heavy on him! O my Father!
How am I sure it is not the last Time
I ever shall call you so! Be not displeased,
O be not angry with me whilst I weep,
And, in the Anguish of my Heart, beseech you
To quit the dreadful Purpose of your Soul.

Cato. Thou have been ever good and dutiful. [Embracing him.
Weep not, my Son. All will be well again.
The righteous Gods, whom I have sought to please,
Will succor Cato, and preserve his Children.

Port. Your Words give Comfort to my drooping Heart.

Cato. Portius, thou may rely upon my Conduct.
Thy Father will not act what misbecome's him.
But go, my Son, and see if aught be wanting
Among thy Father's Friends, see them embarked;
And tell me if the Winds and Seas befriend them.
My Soul is quite weighed down with Care, and asks
The soft Refreshment of a Moment's Sleep. [Exit.

Port. My Thoughts are more at Ease, my Heart revives.
Enter Marcia. O Marcia, O my Sister, still there is Hope!
Our Father will not cast away a Life
So needful to us all, and to his Country.
He is retired to Rest, and seems to cherish
Thoughts full of Peace. He has dispatched me hence
With Orders, that bespeak a Mind composed,
And studious for the Safety of his Friends.
Marcia, take care that none disturb his Slumbers. [Exit.

Marc. O ye immortal Powers, that guard the Good,
Watch round his Couch, and soften his Repose,
Banish his Sorrows, and becalm his Soul
With easy Dreams; remember all his Virtues!
And show Mankind that Goodness is your Care.

Enter Lucia. Luc. Where is your Father, Marcia, where is Cato?

Marc. Lucia, speak low, he is retired to Rest.
Lucia, I feel a gently-dawning Hope
Rise in my Soul. We shall be happy still.

Luc. Alas, I tremble when I think on Cato,
In every View, in every Thought I tremble!
Cato is stern, and awful as a God,
He knows not how to wink at humne Frailty,
Or pardon Weakness, that he never felt.

Marc. Though stern and awful to the Foes of Rome,
He is all Goodness, Lucia, always mild,
Compassionate, and gentle to his Friends.
Filled with Domestic Tenderness, the best,
The kindest Father! I have ever found him
Easy, and good, and bounteous to my Wishes.

Luc. It Is his Consent alone can make us blessed.
Marcia, we both are equally involved
In the same intricate, perplexed, Distress.
The cruel Hand of Fate, that has destroyed
Thy Brother Marcus, whom we both lament --

Marc. And ever shall lament, unhappy Youth!

Luc. Has set my Soul at large, and now I stand
Loose of my Vow. But who knows Cato's Thoughts?
Who know's how yet he may dispose of Portius,
Or how he has determined of thy self?

Marc. Let him but live! commit the rest to Heaven.

Enter Lucius. Luc. Sweet are the Slumbers of the virtuous Man!
O Marcia, I have seen thy Godlike Father:
Some Power invisible support's his Soul,
And bear's it up in all its wonted Greatness.
A kind refreshing Sleep is fallen upon him:
I saw him stretched at Ease, his Fancy lost
In pleasing Dreams; as I drew near his Couch,
He smiled, and cried, Caesar thou can not hurt me.

Marc. His Mind still labor's with some dreadful Thought.

Luc. Lucia, why all this Grief, these Floods of Sorrow?
Dry up thy Tears, my Child, we all are safe
While Cato lives -- His Presence will protect us.

Enter Juba. Juba. Lucius, the Horsemen are returned from viewing
The Number, Strength, and Posture of our Foes,
Who now encamp within a short Hour's March.
On the high Point of yon bright Western Tower
We kenn them from afar, the setting Sun
Plays on their shining Arms and burnished Helmets,
And cover's all the Field with Gleams of Fire.

Luc. Marcia, it is time we should awake thy Father.
Caesar is still disposed to give us Terms,
And waits at Distance 'till he hears from Cato.
Enter Portius. Portius, thy Looks speak somewhat of Importance.
What Tidings do thou bring? methinks I see
Unusual Gladness sparkling in thy Eyes.

Port. As I was hasting to the Port, where now
My Father's Friends, impatient for a Passage,
Accuse the lingering Winds, a Sail arrived
From Pompey's Son, who through the Realms of Spain
Call's out for Vengeance on his Father's Death,
And rouse's the whole Nation up to Arms.
Were Cato at their Head, once more might Rome
Assert her Rights, and claim her Liberty.
But hark! What mean's that Groan! O give me way,
And let me fly into my Father's Presence.

Luc. Cato, amidst his Slumbers, thinks on Rome,
And in the wild Disorder of his Soul
Mourn's over his Country; Hah! a second Groan! --
Heaven guard us all --

Marc. Alas, it is not the Voice
Of one who sleep's! it is agonizing Pain,
It Is Death is in that Sound --

Re-enter Portius. Port. O Sight of Woe!
O Marcia, what we feared is come to pass!
Cato is fallen upon his Sword --

Luc. O Portius,
Hide all the Horrors of thy mournful Tale,
And let us guess the rest

Port. I Have raised him up,
And placed him in his Chair, where pale, and faint,
He gasp's for Breath, and, as his Life flow's from him,
Demand's to see his Friends.
His weeping Servants,
Obsequious to his Orders, bear him hither.
[The Back Scene opens, and discovers Cato.
Marc. O Heaven assist me in this dreadful Hour
To pay the last sad Duties to my Father.

Juba. These are thy Triumphs, thy Exploits, O Caesar!

Luc. Now is Rome fallen indeed! --
[ Cato brought forward in his Chair.
Cato. Here set me down --
Portius come near me -- are my Friends embarked?
Can any thing be thought of for their Service?
Whilst I yet live, let me not live in vain.
-- O Lucius, art thou here? -- Thou art too good! --
Let this our Friendship live between our Children;
Make Portius happy in thy Daughter Lucia.
Alas poor Man, he weeps! -- Marcia, my Daughter --
-- O bend me forward! -- Juba loves thee, Marcia.
A Senator of Rome, while Rome survived,
Would not have matched his Daughter with a King,
But Caesar's Arms have thrown down all Distinction;
Whoever is Brave and Virtuous, is a Roman --
-- I Am sick to Death -- O when shall I get loose
From this vain World, the Abode of Guilt and Sorrow! --
-- And yet methinks a Beam of Light breaks in
On my departing Soul. Alas, I fear
I Have been too hasty. O ye Powers, that search
The Heart of Man, and weigh his inmost Thoughts,
If I have done amiss, impute it not! --
The best may Err, but you are Good, and -- oh! [Dies.

Luc. There fled the greatest Soul that ever warmed
A Roman Breast. O Cato! O my Friend!
Thy Will shall be religiously observed.
But let us bear this awful Corpse to Caesar,
And lay it in his Sight, that it may stand
A Fence betwixt us and the Victor's Wrath;
Cato, though dead, shall still protect his Friends.
From hence, let fierce contending Nations know
What dire Effects from Civil Discord flow.
It Is this that shakes our Country with Alarms,
And gives up Rome a Prey to Roman Arms,
Produces Fraud, and Cruelty, and Strife,
And robb's the Guilty World of Cato's Life.
[Exeunt Omnes.
End of the Fifth Act.
EPILOGUE,
By Dr. GARTH.
Spoken by Mrs. Porter.
WHAT odd fantastic Things we Women do!
Who would not listen when young Lovers woo?
But die a Maid, yet have the Choice of Two!
Ladies are often cruel to their Cost;
To give you Pain, themselves they punish most.
Vows of Virginity should well be weighed;
Too often they are cancelled, though in Convents made.
Would you revenge such rash Resolves -- you may:
Be spightful -- and believe the thing we say,
We hate you when you're easily said Nay.
How needless, if you knew us, were your Fears?
Let Love have Eyes, and Beauty will have Ears.
Our Hearts are formed, as you your selves would choose,
Too proud to ask, too humble to refuse:
We give to Merit, and to Wealth we sell;
He sighs with most Success that settles well.
The Woes of Wedlock with the Joys we mix;
It Is best repenting in a Coach and six.
Blame not our Conduct, since we but pursue
Those lively Lessons we have learned from you:
Your Breasts no more the Fire of Beauty warms,
But wicked Wealth usurps the Power of Charms;
What Pains to get the Gaudy Thing you hate,
To swell in Show, and be a Wretch in State!
At Plays you ogle, at the Ring you bow;
Even Churches are no Sanctuaries now.
There, golden Idols all your Vows receive;
She is no Goddess that has naught to give.
Oh, may once more the happy Age appear,
When Words were artless, and the Thoughts sincere;
When Gold and Grandeur were unenvied Things,
And Courts less coveted than Groves and Springs.
Love then shall only mourn when Truth complains,
And Constancy feel Transport in its Chains.
Sighs with Success their own soft Anguish tell,
And Eyes shall utter what the Lips conceal:
Virtue again to its bright Station climb,
And Beauty fear no Enemy but Time.
The Fair shall listen to Desert alone,
And every Lucia find a Cato's Son.
FINIS.

