THE NATURAL HISTORY OF BRITISH SHELLS, INCLUDING FIGURES AND DESCRIPTIONS OF
ALL THE SPECIES HITHERTO DISCOVERED IN GREAT BRITAIN, SYSTEMATICALLY ARRANGED
IN THE LINNEAN MANNER, WITH SCIENTIFIC AND GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON EACH.

VOL. IV.

BY E. DONOVAN, F.L.S. AUTHOR OF THE NATURAL HISTORIES OF BRITISH BIRDS,
INSECTS, etc. etc.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, AND FOR F. AND C. RIVINGTON, No 62, ST. PAUL'S
CHURCHYARD; BY BYE AND LAW, ST. JOHN'S SQUARE, CLERKENWILL.

1802.


THE NATURAL HISTORY OF BRITISH SHELLS.
PLATE CIX. MUREX CARINATUS. CARINATED MUREX.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Spiral, rough. The aperture ending in a strait, and
somewhat produced gutter or canaliculation.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Tail patulous: Shell oblong, of six spires,
with two smooth spiral ridges; first spire ventricose. Aperture semi-circular.

MUREX CARINATUS: testa patulo-subcaudata oblonga: anfractibus sex laevibus
bicarinatis; primo ventricoso, apertura semicirculari. Murex carinatus,
angulated. With five or six spires, the body ventricose: the spires rising into
angulated ridges. The aperture semicircular. Length near four inches. From the
Portland Cabinet. Penn. Br. Zool. T. 4. p. 123. sp. 96.
The shell figured in the annexed Plate is unique; it formerly belonged to the
late Duchess of Portland, by whose permission Mr. Pennant described it in the
British Zoology. This author has given two figures of it, one in Plate 77, and
the other in the Frontispiece of the fourth volume.

The existence of this species being only proved by a solitary specimen,
various conjectures have arisen amongst Conchologists respecting it. Some have
been inclined to admit it as an undoubted species, and others as a mere
accidental variety of growth of the Linnaean Murex Antiquus. How far we may be
authorized to abide by the former opinion must rest with the critical
Naturalist.

To argue that it cannot be a distinct species, because only one shell of the
kind has been hitherto found, is absurd; since the existence of many other
species has been asserted upon the evidence of a single specimen only, and its
relation to Murex antiquus is not so obvious as might he at first imagined. It
certainly approaches it in the general outline, but the tidges of Murex
Antiquus is most completely raised into tubercules, whereas those of Carinatus
are perfectly smooth and even, nor is there that strict correspondence in the
angulations of the contour in general that should induce us to consider it a
variety of Murex Carinatus.

In deciding a question of some moment to the English Conchologist, it has been
thought advisable to give an additional Plate of Murex Antiquus, by which the
difference between the two shells may be more easily discriminated. We must
however observe, that the latter is not absolutely known as a British shell; it
is a native of the North Seas, and has been supposed to inhabit some of the
remote northern islands of the British dominions. The Murex Antiquus of Pennant
is a very different shell, and by no means allied to that of Linnaeus, whose
name it bears.

It is now uncertain from what part of our coast the Duchess of Portland
received this shell; Pennant is silent in this respect, but we cannot dispute
that her Grace received it as a British shell, since it was inserted upon her
authority in the British Zoology.


PLATE CX. SOLEN MARGINATUS. MARGINATED RAZOR SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Bivalve, with equal valves, oblong, open at both ends. At
the hinge a subulated tooth turned back, often double; not inserted in the
opposite shell. Animal an ascidia.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell straight, of equal depth, a single
tooth in each valve.

SOLEN MARGINATUS: testa lineari recta marginata, valvulis undentatis. Solen
Vagina, Sheath, Penn. Br. Zool. p. 83. No. 21.
Some Conchologists imagine that Da Costa has confounded this species with his
Solen Siliqua, but it is more probable that he had never met with it, or the
character of the teeth at the hinge could not have escaped his notice. In its
general appearance it is not unlike Solen Siliqua, but has one end marginated,
and only a single tooth in each valve; on the contrary Solen Siliqua has two
teeth in one valve, and one in the other; the single one being inserted between
the two others when the shell is shut.

This is very scarce. Pennant says it inhabits Red Wharf, Anglesea, -- This is
not Solen Vagina of Linnaeus, as Pennant describes it.


PLATE CXI. TROCHUS TERRESTRIS. LAND TOP SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal a slug. Shell conic, aperture nearly triangular.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Rather conic, whitish, with a spiral brown streak along
the middle of the wreaths.

TROCHUS TERRESTRIS: testa subconica albida anfractibus linca media fusca.
Trochus Terrestris, Land. Penn. Brit. Zool. No. 108. tab. 80. fig. 108. Trochus
Terrestris tertius. Da Costa Br. Conch. p. 36. C.
Pennant describes this new British species of Land Trochus upon the authority
of Mr. Hudson, who discovered it upon the Mountains of Cumberland. Da Costa
therefore places it as a distinct species, but expresses some doubt whether it
may not be the same Land Trochus as Dr. Lister found in the moss at the roots
of the large trees in Burwell woods, in Lincolnshire, and to which the shell
found by Mr. Morton, in Morsley wood, Northamptonshire, bears great affinity.
Dr. Lister's shell had six or seven wreaths, and Mr. Morton's only five. Mort.
Northampt. chapter 7. p. 415.


PLATE CXII. TURBO DUPLICATUS. TWO RIDGED SCREW SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax. Univalve, spiral, or of a taper form.
Aperture somewhat compressed, orbicular, entire.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell slender, with two sharp prominent
spiral ridges.

TURBO DUPLICATUS: spirae anfractibus carinis duabus acutis. Gmel. Linn. Syst.
p. 3607. sp. 79. Buccinum crassum, duobus acutis, and inaequaliter altis striis
in singulis duodecim minimum spiris donatum. An. Buccinum striatum (...) Fab.
Columnae? List H. An. Angl. p. 160. tit. 7. tab. 3. fig. 7. Turbo duplicatus,
doubled. Penn. Br. Zool. No. 112. tab. 81. fig. 112. Strombiformis major rubro
lutescens aut pullus: anfractibus duabus carinis sive striis acutis insignitis.
Bicarinatus. s. Torcular. Da Costa. Br. Conch. p. 110. 44. -- Tab. 6. fig. 3.
This species is admitted as a British shell upon the authority of Dr. Lister,
who says he had purchased them of the Scarborough fishermen. Dr. Lister had not
seen any of them alive, and concludes it must be a pelagian shell, or one of
those which live far from the shores.

As Pennant had inserted this species in his British Zoology, upon this
authority, Da Costa was unwilling to omit it in his British Conchology, yet he
observes, that it is not improbable Dr. Lister was imposed upon by the
fishermen, for the shell is generally believed to be a native of the East
Indies; some consider it as a West-Indian, and others as an European species.


PLATE CXIII. MYTILUS ANATINUS. SMALL HORSE MUSCLE.
GENERIC CHARACTER. The hinge toothless, and consists of a longitudinal furrow.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell oval, rather compressed, brittle,
margin membranaceous, beaks decorticated.

MYTILUS ANATINUS: testa ovali compressiuscula fragilissima margin membranceo,
natibus decorticatis. Gmel. Linn. Syst. Not. p. 3355. sp. 16. Musculus latus,
testa admodum tenui, ex fusco viridescens, interdum rufescens, etc. List. II.
An. Angl. p. 146. til. 29. tab. 2. fig. 29. Musculus tenuis minor latiusculus.
App. II. An. Angl. p. 10. til. 30. tab. 1. fig. 2. -- App. II. An. Angl. in
Goed. p. 13. tit. 30. tab. 1. fig. 2. Mytuli majores a nostratibus. Horse
muscles. Merret. Pin. p. 193. Mytilus anatinus Duck. Penn. Br. Zool. No. 79.
tab. 68. fig. 79. Mytilus fluviatilis minor. Anatinus, Da Costa Br. Conch. p
215. sp. 47. tab. 15. fig. 2.
This species bears much resemblance to Mytilus Cygneus, but differs in being
only about half the size, is more compressed and oblong, of a clearer green
color, and the cartilage side extending in a straight line to an acute angle,
like a fin, and thence continuing in an oblique line toward the bottom, where
it is rounded. -- Extremely common in rivers and stagnant waters.

Pennant's shell is much broader in proportion than our specimens.


PLATE CXIV. SOLEN ANTIQUATUS. ANTIQUATED SOLEN, OR RAZOR SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Bivalve, with equal valves, oblong; open at both ends. At
the hinge a subulated tooth turned back, often double; not inserted in the
opposite shell. Animal an Ascidia.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Oval oblong, semipellucid, lower margin
sinuous in the middle.

SOLEN CHAMA-SOLEN: testa ovali-oblonga subpellucida, sinuosa. Da Costa. Br.
Conch. p. 238. sp. 62. Chama angustior, ex altera part sinuosa. List. H.
Conch. tab. 421. fig. 265. Solen Cultellus, Kidney. Penn. Brit. Zool. No. 25.
tab. 46. fig. 25.
This is perhaps the rarest species of the Solen genus found upon the British
coasts, and as Pennant observes, seems to connect the Solen with the Mya
genera. It borders on the Chama of Da Costa, who therefore calls it Solen
Chama-Solen. Pennant notes it from Weymouth, and Da Costa received it from the
shores of Dorsetshire and Hampshire.

Pennant has mistaken this for a very distinct shell, described by Linnaeus,
under the name of Solen Cultellus.


PLATE CXV. VENUS CANCELLATA. MEMBRANACEOUS VENUS.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Bivalve. Hinge furnished with three teeth; two near each
other, the third divergent from the beaks.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Somewhat heart shaped with remote transverse
membranaceous ridges; a cordiform depression on the slope under the beaks.

VENUS CANCELLATA: testae striis transversis membranaceis remotis, Ano cordato.
Gmel. Linn. Syst. p. 3270. sp. 8. Pectunculus strigis transversis remotis,
acutis, membranaceis, donatus Membranaceous. Da Costa Br. Conch. p. 193. sp.
29. tab. 13. fig. 4. right hand.
Da Costa described this shell from a specimen in the collection of the late
Dr. Fothergill. It is from the Western coast.

The shell figured by Pennant, No. 48. A. Pl. 48, as a Worn shell of Venus
Erycina, is probably of this species; for it seems entirely destitute of the
longitudinal undulations that decussate the transverse ridges in Venus Erycina.


PLATE CXVI. OSTREA LINEATA. LINEATED SCALLOP.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal a Tethys. Shell bivalve, unequal. The hinge without
a tooth, having a small oval cavity.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Valves nearly equal, thin: one white, the
other marked with a single purple line down each rib.

OSTREA LINEATA: testa subaequivalvi tenui, valva una alba, alterius singulis
costis linea purpurascenti. Pectunculus, mediocris, fere aequivalvis, tenuis,
valva una alba, altera vero cum linea purpurascente in summitate unaquaeque
costae. Lineatus. Da Costa Br. Conch. p. 147. sp. 4. Tab. 10. fig. 8.
This elegant shell seems to be described only by Da Costa; he says he was
informed it had been fished up about Weymouth, in Dorsetshire, but had only
seen it from Cornwall. We have it from the coast of Devonshire also, from which
it appears an inhabitant of the western coast in general, though it is very
rarely met with.


PLATE CXVII. PHOLAS STRIATA. STRIATED PIDDOCK.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal ascidia. Shell bivalve, opening wide at each end,
with several lesser valves at the hinge. The hinges folded back and connected
by a cartilage.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell ovate, with numerous striae.

PHOLAS STRIATA: testa ovata multifarium striata. Gmel. Linn. Syst. p. 3215.
sp. 3. PHOLAS STRIATA: Act. Angl. 55. t. 1. f. 1, 2, 3, 4. PHOLAS STRIATA:
Gualt. Test. t. 105. F.
Extremely rare as a British species, and not noticed by either Pennant or Da
Costa. In the collection of the Rev. T. Rackett.


PLATE CXVIII. PHOLAS DACTYLUS. PRICKLY PADDOCK.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal ascidia. Shell bivalve, opening wide at each end,
with several lesser valves at the hinge. The hinges folded back and connected
by a cartilage.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell oblong, striated transversely, and
reticulated on the upper part with little spines.

PHOLAS DACTYLUS: testa oblonga hinc reticulato-striata. Gmel. Linn. Syst. p.
3214. Pholas rostratus major diepensis vulgo Gallice Piteau dictus. App. H. An.
Angl. in Goed. p. 37. tab. 2. fig. 3. -- Pholas striatus, sinuatus ex altera
part. Hist. Conch. tab. 433. fig. 276. -- Pholas alte striatus, ex altera
part sinuatus, eadem mucronatus, Hist. nost. Conch. Anglice Piddocks, Gallicae
Pitau; earumque piscatories pitau quieres. Exercit. Anat. 3. p. 88. tab. 7.
fig. 1, 2. Pholas angustius; oblong Pierce stone or Pholade. Petiv. Gaz. tab.
79. fig. 10. -- Piddocks. Dale Harw. p. 389. Pholas Dactylus, Dactyle. Penn.
Br. Zool. p. 76. sp. 10. Pholas angustius striatus and veluti aculeatus.
Muricatus. Da Costa Br. Conch. p. 244. sp. 65. tab. 16. fig. 2. 2.
This species burrows or pierces into rocks, where it forms large cylindrical
cavities. It is not uncommon on many of our coasts, and is sometimes eaten; it
is in season in the Spring.


PLATE CXIX. MUREX ANTIQUUS. ANTIQUATED MUREX.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Spiral, rough. The aperture ending in a strait, and
somewhat produced gutter or canaliculation.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Tail patulous: Shell oblong, of eight spires: spiral
ridges tuberculated.

MUREX ANTIQUUS: testa patulo-caudata oblonga: anfractibus octo teretibus.
Faun. Succ. 2165. -- Gmel. T. 1, fig. 6. p. 3546.

In the description of Plate CIX. our reason for considering this and Murex
Carinatus as two distinct species, are briefly stated; and the difference, it
is presumed, will be farther apparent on comparing the two shells figured in
that, and the annexed Plate.

Reversed shells of this species have been sometimes found. It is an inhabitant
of the northern parts of Europe.


PLATE CXX.
FIG. I. BULLA APERTA. OPEN BULLA OR BUBBLE.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Shell suboval, Aperture oblong, very patulous, and smooth
or even. One end convoluted.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell almost entirely open, subrotund,
pellucid, and faintly striated transversely.

BULLA APERTA: testa subrotunda pellucida transversim substriata tota hiante.
Gmel. Linn. Syst. Not. T. 1. p. 6. sp. 3424. sp. 8. Bulla pellucida,
fragilissima, tota hians, s. apertura amplissima. Da Costa. Brit. Conch. p. 30.
sp. 16.
Da Costa says, all the shells of this species he knew, were fished up near
Weymouth in Dorsetshire, and not any where else on the British coast; they are
even not frequent there; so that it seems a rare as well as curious shell. --
To this we may add, that they are rare only because they are local: in one part
of the sandy bay of Caermarthen, below Tenby, we found them in abundance.

It is called "the Bubble" by this writer; who observes that it exactly
resembles a bubble or bladder of water. The aperture is so extremely large that
the whole shell lies open to view. The contour is somewhat oval, and slightly
involuted; and the shell is not umbilicated.

This is certainly not Bulla patula of Pennant (Brit. Zool. No. 85. A.) as Da
Costa and Gmelin imagine. The figures in that work are sometimes calculated to
mislead the most attentive; but as we are in possession of the shell Pennant
describes, we can venture to say the two former writers are mistaken. The
species Aperta was unknown to Pennant, and the shell he figured from the
Portland Cabinet, under the specific name of Patula, is extremely rare.

FIG. II. BULLA CYLINDRICA. NARROW BULLA.
SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell cylindric, smooth, white, and thin.

BULLA CYLINDRICA: testa cylindrica laevi alba tenuissima. Gmel. T. 1. p. 6. p.
3433. sp. 38.

This is a very scarce species on our coasts, and approaches so nearly to Bulla
pallida of Da Costa (Voluta pallida. Linn.) described and figured in Plate
LXVI. of this Work, that it may easily be confounded with it, unless the two
shells be compared. Bulla Cylindrica differs in being rather more compressed,
and has the pillarlip perfectly smooth; while on the contrary the other has
plaits or wrinkles upon this part as before observed: a circumstance that
constitutes one character of the Voluta genus in the system of Linnaeus.

In the description of the Voluta pallida we were led to think with Da Costa,
that the shell figured by Pennant in the British Zoology, No. 85. A. might be
of the same species. Since that time we have been favored with the specimen
figured in the annexed Plate; and as it seems to correspond more clearly with
Pennant's shell than the other, there can be no impropriety in removing the
reference from the former to the present species. Gmelin takes not the
slightest notice of this figure of Pennant; so that we must remain ignorant of
his opinion respecting it. And it is certain the shell before us was altogether
unknown to Da Costa.


PLATE CXXI. VENUS UNDATA. WAVED VENUS.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Bivalve. Hinge furnished with three teeth; two near each
other, the third divergent from the beaks.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell orbiculated, unequal, thin, transversely
marked with very fine striae, and waved at the margin.

VENUS UNDATA: testa orbiculata convexa tenui transversim subtilissime striata
margin undata. VENUS UNDATA, waved. -- With thin, unequal, orbiculated shells,
of a white color, tinged with yellow, and marked with thin concentric striae;
waved at the edges. Penn. Brit. Zool. 4. sp. 51.
There can be no doubt that the shell figured and described by Pennant in the
fourth volume of his British Zoology, No. 51, is of the same species as our
shell. That author says it is the size of a hazel nut, from which it appears
the specimen he saw was a young Shell; the largest of our specimens being of
the size represented in the annexed Plate.

This is Venus lactea of some cabinets, a name sufficiently expressive of its
color, but having been before called Undata by Pennant, we thought it best to
retain the name he had given it.


PLATE CXXII. MYA OVATA. OVATE MYA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal an ascidia. Shell bivalve, gaping at one end. The
hinge for the most part furnished with a thick, strong, and broad tooth, not
inserted in the opposite valve.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell oblong-ovate; posterior part roundish, and very
slightly gaping; first tooth at the hinge crenulated.

MYA OVATA: testa oblonge-ovata, postice rotundata vix hiante, cardinis dente
primario crenulato.

This is the Shell alluded to in the description of Plate 101, under the name
of Mya ovata. The difference between it and Mya depressa, as before observed,
seems to consist in the present being more ovate, and not depressed across the
middle: nor is the gaping at the broadest end so considerable as in the other.

These, we have already remarked, inhabit the same waters as Mya depressa, viz.
in the New River, near London, and the Froome in Somersetshire. It is a thick,
strong and heavy Shell, of a greenish color, and radiated. -- The smallest
figure in the annexed plate is a brown colored specimen of Mya depressa.


PLATE CXXIII. TELLINA INAEQUISTRIATA. UNEQUALLY-STRIATED TELLEN.
GENERIC CHARACTER. The hinge usually furnished with three teeth. Shell
generally sloping on one side.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell ovate, compressed and rather flattish, rosy, very
finely striated transversely; the striae fewer and larger at the anterior end.

TELLINA INAEQUISTRIATA: testa ovata compresso-planiuscula rosea subtilissime
transversim striata: striis anterius paucioribus majoribusque.

A very rare species of Tellina communicated to Da Costa after his Conchology
was published, and therefore not noticed in that work. It has been found by the
late Dr. Pulteney we believe on the coast of Dorsetshire.


PLATE CXXIV.
FIG. I. ARDIUM EDULE. COMMON COCKLE.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Two teeth near the beak; and another remote one, on each
side of the shell.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell antiquated: about twenty-six grooves,
with obsolete recurved scales.

CARDIUM EDULE: testa antiquata; sulcis viginti sex obsolete recurvato
imbricatis. Linn. -- Gmel. T. 1. p. 6. p. 3252. sp. 20. PECTUNCULUS VULGARIS,
albidus, subrotundus, circiter viginti-sex striis majusculis at planioribus
donatus. Da Costa, Brit. Conch. p. 180. sp. 19. Cardium Edule, Edible Cockle.
Penn. Brit. Zool. No. 41. tab. 50. fig. 41.
The Common Cockle is abundant on all sandy shores: they lurk in the sand, and
their hiding place is known by a little round depressed spot upon the surface.
Cockles are in season from autumn till spring: they are a wholesome and
palatable food; and those from Selsea, near Chichester, are esteemed the most
delicious in England.

These Shells vary a little both in shape and color: the two specimens figured
on the annexed Plate differ, one being more orbicular than the other. They are
generally whitish, sometimes they have a blueish, and sometimes a yellowish
tint.

FIG. II. CARDIUM RUSTICUM?
SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell antiquated, with about twenty remote grooves: the
interstices rugged.

CARDIUM RUSTICUM: testa antiquata: sulcis viginti remotis; interstitiis
rugosis. Gmelin, T. 1. p. 6. p. 3252. sp. 23?

Notwithstanding the endless variations to which the shells of the common
Cockle are liable, this appears too remote to be admitted as one of them. It
passes for Cardium rusticum with some conchologists, and though it may not
strictly agree with that specific description of Gmelin, it approaches nearer
to it than to edule. That author notices the affinity rusticum bears to the
other species; but observes that the grooves are deeper and the ribs fewer, and
more unequal in rusticum: he remarks also that the latter has a ridge on the
anterior margin when the valves are closed, and a narrow depressure behind the
beaks, "ano evidente, sed angusto," which is not in the other. The grooves in
our Shell are not so deep as "sulcis profundioribus" implies, but they are both
deeper and wider than in the common sort; the ribs are rather more unequal also,
fewer in number, and rugged, as Gmelin describes it. -- The color exactly
corresponds: he says it is sometimes ferruginous, with livid bands and
sometimes white, with the anterior part fuscous: another variety of it is
white, fasciated with a ferruginous yellowish or blueish color.


PLATE CXXV. MACTRA GLAUCA. GLAUCOUS MACTRA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal a Tethys, Bivalve, sides unequal. Middle tooth
complicated, with a little groove on each side; lateral teeth remote.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell ovate, sordid white with brown (or
glaucous) rays: very finely striated transversely, and wrinkled on the anterior
end.

MACTRA GLAUCA: testa ovata sordide alba glauco radiata subtilissime
transversim striata anterius rugosa. Gmel. T. 1. p. 6. p. 3260. sp. 20. Chemn.
Conch. 6. t. 23. f. 232, 233.
This is a new species as a British shell; and the conchologist is indebted to
Miss Pocock for the discovery of it on our coast. The attention with which this
lady has honored the science has not been rewarded by this new species only:
we have been favored with several others, besides many rare kinds that have
been found by her on different parts of the seacoast, and especially on that
of Cornwall, as will appear hereafter. A few shells of the species before us
were met with by her in the summer of 1801, on Hale sands under Lelant in that
county, and it is said by the country people they are at times found on that
coast in some plenty.

Though hitherto unknown as a British shell, it has been before discovered in
the Mediterranean sea; for there can be no hesitation in admitting it to be the
shell figured by Chemnitz, as above quoted. Gmelin refers to the two figures in
that Work, No. 232, and 233, for his species glauca; and the description
corresponds in general with them, though not exactly in the color of the rays.
-- Gmelin has another species of Mactra, grandis, which we at first suspected
to be the same as our shell. It agrees precisely in the color of the rays, but
from the figure in Chemnitz's work, quoted by Gmelin for that species, these
rays, it appears, are far more minute, than in our shell, and are also
decussated by others in a concentric direction; -- the outline of the latter is
also different.


PLATE CXXVI. MACTRA SUBTRUNCTA. SUBTRUNCATED MACTRA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal a Tethys. Bivalve, sides unequal. Middle
tooth-complicated, with a little groove on each side: lateral teeth remote.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell somewhat triangular, whitish, smooth,
subtruncated on each side.

MACTRA SUBTRUNCATA: testa subtriangularis, albescens, laevi^ lateribus
subtruncatis. Trigonella albescens laevis, lateribus subtruncatis. Subtruncata.
Da Costa. Brit. Conch. p. 198. No. 34.
A thick, strong, and heavy shell, of a somewhat triangular shape, and much
flattened on each side, obliquely from the beaks: the valves rather unequal, the
beaks pointed strong, and turned inwards.

The color is pale or whitish, and it is externally marked with numerous fine
concentric striae.

Received from Hampshire and Devonshire; but not common, Found in a fossil
state in the sand pits at Woolwich.


PLATE CXXVII. TROCHUS PAPILLOSUS. SHAGREENED TOP SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal a slug. Shell conic. Aperture nearly triangular.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Pyramidal, umbilicated, red; whorls with several rows of
minute granulations.

TROCHUS PAPILLOSUS: pyramidalis umbilicatus ruber, series papillarum donatus.
Da Costa. Brit. Conch. p. 38. No. 20. Cul de lamp a flammes longitudinales,
alternatives blanches et rouges, a stries granuleuses et umbilique: et cul de
lamp marbre de blanc et de rouge, a stries circulaires granuleuses et
tuberculeuses. D' Avila, cab. 1. p. 127, 128.
Da Costa acquaints us that he received "some few of these shells from Cornwall
(in a great quantity of others, natives of that coast) by an intelligent
gentleman of veracity and curiosity; but" adds that writer, "must own I have
never met with this species since on any other British coasts." We have since
seen it among parcels of shells from the Mediterranean, and also find that it
has been discovered by the late Dr. Pultney, on the North shore, Poole; and at
Weymouth.

The specific character of the Gmelinian Trochus Granatum, seems to accord very
nearly with our shell Testa pyramidali alba coccineo varia basi subconvexa;
spirae anfractibus convexis; ^ingulis granorum moniformibus, primis duobus
maximis. Gmel. 3584. sp. 108.
, but it is about twice the size, and inhabits the Southern Ocean; and it is
certainly more probable, as some conchologists have suggested, that it is the
variety of Trochus Zizyphinus, described by Linnaeus in the Mus. Reginae, as
being "tota pallida, anfractibus basi gibbis, striatis, subtitissime punctis
papilloris." It differs from Zizyphinus in having the anfractus a little
rounded, and the wreaths being encircled with granulated spiral ridges. The
name Da Costa has already given it, is very applicable; and as it has
undoubtedly escaped the notice of Gmelin, there can be no impropriety in
retaining it. -- It is evidently one of the rarest British species of the
Trochus genus.


PLATE CXXVIII.
FIG. I.I. MYTILUS EDULIS. COMMON MUSCLE.
GENERIC CHARACTER. The hinge toothless, and consists of a longitudinal furrow.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell smoothish, violet: valves slightly
carinated in front, retuse behind: beaks pointed.

MYTILUS EDULIS: testa laeviuscula violacea: valvis anterius sub. carinatis
posterius retusis, natibus acuminatis. Fn. Seuc. 2156. Gmel. Linn. Syst. Not.
T. I. p. 6. p. 3353. Sp. 11. Mytilus vulgaris, Musculus vulgaris sublaevis ex
caeruleo niger. COMMON MUSCLE. Da Costa Brit. Conch. p. 216. sp. 48. MYTILUS
EDULIS, Edible. Penn. Brit. Zool. T. 4. p. 110. sp. 73.
Few species of the shell tribe are more generally diffused throughout the
European and Indian seas than the Mytilus edulis; and few indeed exhibit such
an infinite number of varieties, differing in size, in form, and color; but
which the critical Conchologist will yet perceive cannot with propriety be
assigned to any other species.

On the Plate annexed to this description, one shell of the shape more
uniformly prevalent is figured in its natural state, and another, which, having
been divested of the epidermis, displays a beautiful variety of irregular
purple stripes: an appearance very common in the uncoated shells, and in some
sorts observable even when the epidermis is upon them. The upper and lower
figures are of two shells, which, we are inclined to think, differ too widely
from the common kind to be considered as a variety: the outline appears at the
first sight obviously dissimilar; and the characters in general seem to mark
most decidedly another species. They are both worn shells, but which we have
compared with perfect specimens of Mytilus ungulatus, and apprehend there can
be no doubt that they belong to that species.

Within the tropics, the common Muscle is known to attain a much larger size
than in northern climates. They are found in immense beds, and adhere to other
substances, or to one another, by means of a beard of a strong and silky
texture, which the fish throws out. The Muscle affords a rich and palatable
food; though they are not deemed wholesome by many people, who after eating
them are sometimes afflicted with great swellings and convulsive motions, with
eruptive blotches, shortness of breath, and even with delirium. These dreadful
effects are usually attributed to some malignant poison in the little pea crab
which is occasionally found in the Muscle, and may be accidentally eaten with
it: others think it is in consequence of swallowing the silky byssus, or beard;
and again many deem the Muscle itself poisonous. It is, however, pretty
generally agreed, that they affect some constitutions more than others, and
that much depends on the state of the body at the time of eating them. The
disorder may be cured, or at least its malignity mitigated, by administering to
the affected person a spoonful of vinegar: some recommend sweet oil, or salt
and water. Da Costa observes that sudorifics, vomits, oils, etc. are the usual
remedies; and the Dutch give two spoon's-full of oil, and one of lemon-juice;
or, in defect of that, a little more vinegar, well shaken together, and
swallowed immediately.

The Muscle is the prey of many kinds of fishes, and other creatures that
inhabit the sea. On the coast of Greenland, Fabricius tell us, they are so
abundant, that the dogs and ravens commonly feed on them; as do also the white
game, (Ptarmigan) Eider Duck, and many others.

The seed-pearls found in the shell of the Muscle was formerly in some esteem,
for medicinal purposes: these, it is well known, are the effects of a disease
in the fish, unalogous to the stone in the human body.

Mr. Pennant informs us, that the finest Muscles on the English coasts (where
they are found in great abundance) are those called Hambleton Hookers, from a
village in the county of Lancashire. They are taken out of the sea, and placed
in the river Wier, within reach of the tide, where they grow very fat and
delicious.

FIG. II. II. MYTILUS UNGULATUS. CLAWED MUSCLE.
SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell smooth, somewhat curved: posterior
margin inflected: hinge terminal, bidentated.

MYTILUS UNGULATUS: testa laevi subcurvata: margin posteriori inflexo, cardine
terminali bidentato. Linn. -- Gmel. Syst. Not. T. I. p. 6. p. 3354. Sp. 12.

Several shells of this kind were picked up by Miss Pocock, on the coast of
Cornwall. It was before known as an inhabitant of the Mediterranean, but not as
a British species.

FIG. II. II. -- Upper and lower Figures.


PLATE CXXIX. PATELLA ALBIDA. WHITISH CHAMBERED PAP-SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal a Limax: shell univalve, sub-conic without spire.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell fragile, entire, subrotund, whitish; vertex somewhat
central, and slightly pointed; lip within lateral.

PATELLA ALBIDA: testa fragilis integerrima subrotunda albida vertice
subcentrali submucronato, labio interio laterali.

This rare and nondescript species of Patella was found on the coast of
Cornwall, and communicated by the lady who favored us with Mactra glauca, and
Mytilus ungulatus. It differs from any of the described British shells of this
genus, in having an inner lip or chamber, such as is observed in several of the
exotic kinds, belonging to the first section of the genus in Gmelin's
arrangement; "Labiatae s. labio interno instructae, testa integra."

It is an exquisitely delicate shell, and remarkably brittle: there is a
specimen of this shell in the collection of William Pilkington, Esquire Whitehall.


PLATE CXXX. VENUS BOREALIS. NORTHERN VENUS.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Hinge furnished with three teeth; two near each other, the
third divergent from the beaks.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER, AND SYNONYMS. Shell lentiform, with very remote
transverse, erect, membranaceous striae.

VENUS BOREALIS: testa lentiformi: striis transversis membranaceis erectis
remotissimis. Gmel. Linn. Syst. Not. T. 1. p. 6. p. 3285. sp. 77.

This is a scarce, or very local shell on the British coasts, and seems to
agree with the description of the Linnaean Venus borealis. The species was
unknown to Da Costa, and is different from that which Mr. Penant describes
under the same name.

We first discovered it on the coast of South Wales; and since that time have
received it from Miss Pocock, by whom it was found on the coasts of Cornwall in
some plenty.


PLATE CXXXI. HELIX HORTENSIS. GARDEN SNAIL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Aperture of the mouth contracted and lunulated.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell imperforate, globose; spotted and
fasciated with brown: lip white.

HELIX HORTENSIS: testa imperforata globosa: labro albo. Mull. Zool. Dan. --
Gmel. Linn. Syst. Not. T. I. p. 6. p. 3649. sp. 109. Cochlea vulgaris fusca,
maculata and fasciata. VULGARIS. Da Costa, Brit. Conch. p. 72. sp. 39. Helix
Hortensis. Garden Snail. Penn. Brit. Zool. No. 129. tab. 84. fig. 129. HELIX
LUCORUM. Linn.
The Common Garden Snail is, we think, without doubt, the Helix lucorum of
Linnaeus, and most other writers. Gmelin calls it hortensis, and defines the
specific character of lucorum to be "testa imperforata subrotunda laevi
fasciata: apertura oblongo fusca." It more generally inhabits the southern
parts of Europe; is larger, and whiter than hortensis; and the lip is brown.

This is a most variable species in its colors and markings, and it may still
be doubted whether hortensis and lucorum be perfectly distinct. They have
certainly been confounded by almost every Conchologist.

On the manners of a creature which is so generally known, as the Common Garden
Snail, it is surely needless to enlarge: its mode of courtship is, however, so
curiously related, that it should not entirely escape remark; and were it not
attested by writers of the first authority, with the reader, we might be guilty
of no small degree of skepticism, as to believing it. Each of these animals, it
seems, are furnished, at a certain season, with a number of little pointed
darts, which are contained within a cavity on the right side of the neck. When
the Snails approach within two or three inches of each other, a scene of
hostility is observed to commence: each discharging at its antagonist these
darts, with considerable force, at the other; this battle continues till the
reservoir be exhausted of these offensive weapons, and then a perfect
reconciliation takes place between them. The eggs are about the size of peace,
and perfectly round.

Snails are used with success in some consumptive cases, and an excellent
cement, to fasten china, may be made of the saliva, or humors, mixed with
quick lime and white of eggs, according to Lister, etc. It feeds on all kinds
of vegetables and fruits, and is consequently very destructive in orchards and
gardens. Snails couple about May or June.


PLATE CXXXII. PHOLAS CANDIDA. WHITE PIDDOCK.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Ascidia. Shell bivalve, opening wide at each end,
with several lesser valves at the hinge. The hinges folded back and connected
by a cartilage.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER, AND SYNONYMS. Shell oblong, muricated with striae crossing
each other.

PHOLAS CANDIDA: testa oblonga undique striis decussatis muricata. Mus. Lud.
Ulr. 469. n. 7. -- Gmel. Linn. Syst. Not. T. 1. p. 6. p. 3215. sp. 4. Pholas
tenuis candidus ovatus decussatim striatus. Candidus. Da Costa. Brit. Conch. p.
246. sp. 66. Concha candida, dupliciter striata et veluti aculeata. List. H.
An. Angl. p. 193. tit. 39. tab. 5. fig. 39. -- Pholas alter. App. H. An. Angl.
in Goed. p. 37. tab. 2. fig. 4 and 6. -- Pholas parvus asper. H. Conch. tab.
435. fig. 278. Pholas latus; short Pierce-stone or Pholade. Petiv. Gaz. tab.
79. fig. 11. Pholas candidus. Penn. Brit. Zool. T. 4. No. 11. tab. 39. fig. 11.
The Pholas candida is rather a scarce species, and differs from P. Dactylus
(hians of Dr. Solander) in not being above one fourth of its size: of a more
oval shape, and having both ends equally rounded; in other respects it
resembles it. Da Costa seems to entertain some doubt whether it may not be
really a variety in growth, than a distinct species from Dactylus. It is found
on the same coasts as the latter.


PLATE CXXXIII. SABELLA TUBIFORMIS. STRAIGHT TUBE SABELLA, OR SAND SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal a Nereis, with a ringent mouth, and two thicker
tentacula behind the head. Shell tubular, and composed chiefly of sand,
agglutinated to a membranaceous tube.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell solitary, simple, tube-shaped,
straight; gradually tapering; and composed of brownish sand.

SABELLA TUBIFORMIS: testa solitaria simplici tubiformi recta sensim attenuata:
granis arenaceis fuscis. SABELLA GRANULATA. Linn. 1268? -- Martini, 4. t. 4.28?
SABELLA TUBIFORMIS. TUBE SABELLA. Penn. Brit. Zool. 4. sp. 163. STRAIGHT
SABELLA. Pult. Hist. Dorset.
The Sabella tubiformis of Pennant is believed by some conchologists to be the
same species as Linnaeus names granulata, but this must certainly admit of
doubt: the latter, from the description, apapears to be slightly incurvated,
whilst Pennant's shell is perfectly straight; a difference, perhaps, sufficient
to constitute two distinct species. Martini figures a kind of Sabella, which he
considers as the S. granulata of Linnaeus, and in that figure the curvature at
the narrowest end is very apparent: with Martini we consider that as the true
Sabella granulata of Linnaeus, and not having observed the same character in
any of those shells that have occurred to notice on our own coasts, have
thought it most advisable to retain the name Mr. Pennant had previously given
it.

Gmelin seems to be under some doubts respecting this shell, for he entirely
omits the Linnaean granulata among the species of this genus. -- Sabella
Belgica of Gmelin, which some have conjectured to be the S. tubiformis of
Pennant, is undoubtedly different, according to Klein and Martini.

Our shell is of an elegant form and remarkably delicate: it consists of two
coatings, the inner one of which is composed entirely of grains of sand, and
the outer one of sand intermixed with little fragments of shells. This kind is
local: it is supposed to inhabit deep waters only, and is sometimes found upon
the shore after a high sea.


PLATE CXXXIV. CHAMA COR. HEART-SHAPED CHAMA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal a Tethys. Shell bivalve, and rather coarse. Hinge
with a callous gibbosity, obliquely inserted into an oblique hollow: anterior
slope closed.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell subrotund, and smooth: beaks recurved:
anterior slope gaping.

CHAMA COR: testa subrotunda laevi: natibus recurvatis rima hiante. Mus. Lud.
Ulr. 516. n. 88. -- Gmel. Syst. Not. T. 1. p. 6. p. 3299. sp. 1.

As an inhabitant of the Mediterranean, the Adriatic, and Caspian tea, this
curious shell has been long since known; but as a British species has not been
before described. It was discovered several years ago in the seas about the
islands in the North of Scotland, by Mr. Agneu, Gardener to the late Duchess of
Portland; and since that time, a specimen of it was dredged up, by T. Swainson,
Esquire. of the Custom-house, London.

It is a delicate shell, and represented in the annexed plate of the natural
size. By some it is called the Bull's-heart Cockle, but very improperly,
because it cannot be considered in any manner of the Cardium genus.


PLATE CXXXV. ARCA LACTEA. MILKY-WHITE ARK.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Bivalve, valves equal. Teeth of the hinge numerous, and
inserted between each other.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell somewhat rhombic, with obsolete,
decussated striae, and diaphanous.

ARCA LACTEA: testa subrhomboidea obsolete decussatim striata diaphana. Gmel.
Linn. Syst. Not. T. 1. p. 6. p. 3309. sp. 15. ARCA LACTEA: testa subrhomboidea
obsolete decussatim striata diaphana, natibus recurvis, margin crenulato.
Linn. Syst. Not. p. 1141. No. 173. Pectunculus exiguus albus, admodum tenuiter
striatas. List. H. Conch. tab. 235. fig. 69. Mytulus Garnseiae albus, parvus
tenuiter cancellatus. Petiv. Gaz. tab. 73. fig. 1. Arca. Parva alba cancellata.
Lactea. Da Costa Brit. Conch. p. 171. sp. 14. ARCA CRINITA. Soland. Mus.
Portland. Puliney. Not. Hist. Dorsets.
There does certainly exist among conchologists a strange discordance of
opinion, respecting the species of Arca before us: some believing it to be the
very shell which Linnaeus described under the name of lactea, and others
maintaining the contrary. Dr. Solander, and Dr. Pultney, were persuaded that
Linnaeus intended a shell in some particulars not unlike this, but specifically
different: the same shell in fact which Lister figures No. 67, in his
Conchology. The opinions of two such respectable naturalists deserve every
consideration, but however we may be disposed to abide by their authority in
some instances, we cannot, for the following reasons, assent to it in the
present.

Dr. Pultney premises his description by naming this species Arca crinita, a
name which it appears Dr. Solander had previously given to it, in his catalogue
of the Portland Museum: he observes very justly, that it is the A. barbata of
Pennant, but not the barbata of Linnaeus: refers to Da Costa's figure, Plate
11, fig. 5; and calls it in English the HAIRY ARK-SHELL. His description is in
these words, "A small oblong subrhomboidal shell: in its recent state covered
with a brown epidermis. Undemeath the shell is minutely striated in the
longitudinal direction; commonly not much larger than a horse-bean. I found one
on the North shore at Poole, more than half an inch long, and seven-eights
wide. It is said to be more frequent on the shores of Guernsey island; but is
very rare on our coasts. This shell has commonly been described as the A.
lactea of Linnaeus; but that shell is much larger, and is strongly striated in
a reticulated manner."

In the first place, this does not so clearly agree with the Linnaean
description as might be expected. In the early editions of the Systema Naturae,
Linnaeus expressly describes his shell as being of a subrhombic form, with
obsolete decussating striae, diaphanous, with recurved beaks, and crenulated
margin; and the only alteration in the specific character to the last edition
of that work, by Gmelin, is, that the beaks and margins are not mentioned. It
hence is evident that Dr. Pultney is mistaken in the Linnaean lactea, when he
says it is strongly striated in a reticulated manner; for Linnaeus exactly
describes it as having the reticulating striae obsolete; and notwithstanding
that the longitudinal striae in the shell found on our coast are rather
prominent in some specimens, they far more frequently appear altogether
obsolete, and are decussated by fine transverse striae, precisely as Linnaeus
mentions. There is another circumstance equally remarkable, Linnaeus exactly
tells us his lactea is the size of a horse-bean, and Dr. Pultney, after
observing that his British shell crinita "are commonly not much larger than a
horse-bean," adds, that the lactea of Linnaeus is "much larger."

That there may have been some erroneous references among authors to the two
shells figured by Lister, No. 67 and 69, of which we are not aware, is not
impossible, but Gmelin refers to List. Conch. 69. A. T. Guernsey, for the
Linnaean lactea, and that shell clearly corresponds both with our specimen, and
the shell described by Linnaeus, pectunculus exiguus albus admodum tenuiter
striatis. List. -- Petiver is equally satisfactory, Mytilus Garnseiae albus,
parvus tenuiter cancellata. Da Costa is not so very clear, nor is his figure
expressive, because it represents the transverse ridges too prominent. Chemnitz
gives a larger specimen of it than any we have seen; and notwithstanding his
references to Da Costa and others, may not be of the same species. -- The shell
figured by Lister, No. 67, which seems to have occasioned the confusion before
alluded to, it should be observed, is described by Gmelin, in these words:
testa subrhomboidea decussatim striata alba: natibus approximatis, vulva
cordata, Arca reticulata.

Hence it is presumed the shell found on our coast ought still to be considered
as the Arca lactea of Linnaeus, and that the shell which is strongly striated
in a reticulated manner, and so much larger; and has been hitherto regarded by
some as that species, was never described, or even noticed by Linnaeus. Nothing
can be more evident than that this is the opinion of his editor Gmelin, both
from his references to the figures of lactea, and by his giving a new name and
character to that very shell in Lister which has been mistaken for it, and
which he conceived Linnaeus had omitted.

This kind is generally considered as an inhabitant of Dorsetshire, Devonshire,
and Cornwall.


PLATE CXXXVI. HELIX ARBUSTORUM. SINGLE-STREAK SNAIL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Aperture of the mouth contracted and lunulated.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell umbilicated, unequal, aperture somewhat orbicular,
lip reflected, with a single dark spiral band.

HELIX ARBUSTORUM: testa umbilicata convexa acuminata, apertura suborbiculari
bimarginata: antice elongata. Linn. Syst. Not. p. 1245. No. 680. Cochlea testa
utrinque convexa subcinerea: fascia solitaria grisea, labro reflexo. Linn. Fn.
Suec. 1. p. 370, No. 1295. II No. 2184. Cochlea maculata, unica fascia pulla,
angustioreque, per medium anfractus, insignita. List. H. An. Angl. p. 119. tit.
4. tab. 2. fig. 4. Cochlea subflava maculata atque unica fascia castanei
coloris per medium anfractus, insignita. Phil. Trans. No. 105. fig. 4. Cochlea
subumbilicata, maculata, unica fascia angusta, per medium anfractus insignita.
UNIFASCIATA, single streak, Da Costa. Brit. Conch. p. 75. sp. 40. Helis
arbustorum. Shrub. Penn. Brit. Zool. No. 130. tab. 85. fig. 130.
Like the two species of Helices, nemoralis and hortensis, this shell varies
exceedingly in its colors and markings in different shells; but the single
narrow spiral band very uniformly distinguishes it from any other. According to
Lister and Petiver, it is found in shady hedges, and is frequent in rushy,
moist, or marshy meadows. Da Costa says, it is also found in coppices and
shrubberies; but, from his own observations, it is not a common kind: we have
seen it in woods, though not often.

It may deserve remark, that this shell is generally found empty. Muller
accounts for this, by acquainting us, that the animal is the prey of young
Newts. Sometimes when the animal is living, the shell is of a light chestnut
color, finely marbled, mottled, or otherwise variegated, with a deep chocolate
colored brown.


PLATE CXXXVII. OSTREA JACOBAEA. PILGRIM OYSTER, OR SCALLOP.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal a Tethys. Shell bivalve, with the valves mostly
unequal and slightly eared. Hinge without teeth, but furnished with an ovate
hollow, and in general lateral transverse furrows.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shells with fourteen angular and
longitudinally striated rays.

OSTREA JACOBAEA: testae radiis quatuordecim angulatis longitudinaliter
striatis. Linn. -- Gmel. Syst. Not. p. 3316. sp. 2. Pecten magnus inaequivalvis
operculo subrufo, fornix vero albus costis angulatis et canaliculatis.
Jacobaeus. Da Costa Brit. Conch. p. 143. sp. 2. P. JACOBAEUS Lesser. Penn.
Brit. Zool. No. 62. tab. 60. fig. 62.
This large and handsome kind of Scallop is rare on the English coasts: in the
Mediterranean it is more frequent, and from that that circumstance, is supposed
to be the same species as was formerly worn by pilgrims, who visited the
holy land. Da Costa received it from Scarborough in Yorkshire, and also from
the coasts of Cornwall and Dorsetshire. Dr. Pultney remarks, that it is rare on
the Dorsetshire coast, but has been fished up at Weymouth and at Poole.

The upper valve is of a reddish brown, flat, and rather depressed at the beak:
the depression is generally white, and mottled, or otherwise marked with brown,
or dusky red; and often with prettily disposed marks, resembling the heads of
arrows. The under valve is usually white, or faintly tinged with brown, and has
the rays remarkably prominent and angular; a character by which it may be
easily distinguished from the Common Scallop, Ostrea maxima, which greatly
resembles it, but in which the rays are rounded.


PLATE CXXXVIII. VOLUTA TRIPLICATA. THREE PLAITED VOLUTE.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax. Shell spiral, narrow, without a beak:
columella or pillar, twisted or plaited.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell ovate, smooth and brown: spire rather pointed:
whorls six: pillar with three plaits.

VOLUTA TRIPLICATA: testa ovata laevi brunnea, spira acutiuscula: anfractibus
sex, columella triplicata. Turbo sex anfractibus apertura ovali bidentata.
Walker. Test. min. rar. fig. 50?
This curious little Volute has not we believe been either figured or described
by any Author. In its general appearance it approaches pretty nearly to the
shell figured by Walker, as above quoted; but if the same, that writer has
certainly described it with no very great degres of accuracy; for he speaks
only of two plaits, or teeth in the aperture, and calls it the double-toothed
Turbo; although from its plaited pillar, it is evidently a Volute: and the
third plait, which with the two others, characterize the species, is obviously
too large to have been overlooked. Da Costa, we are persuaded, though they were
both the same, for in a MS. note attached to this shell in his collection, he
says, "This shell is figured by Walker," and certainly no figure in the volume
of that Author corresponds with it, except that to which we refer above.

Walker speaks of his shell as being very common on the roots of rushes, in
marshes, near Faversham: The habitat of our shell we have not been able to
ascertain, having never found it in a living state.


PLATE CXXXIX. SABELLA ALVEOLATA. HONEYCOMB SABELLA, OR SAND SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal a Nereis, with a ringent mouth, and two thicket
tentaculae behind the head. Shell tubular, and composed chiefly of sand,
agglutinated to a membranaceous tube.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Composite, consisting of numerous parallel
tubes, with somewhat funnel-shaped aperture.

SABELLA ALVEOLATA: testa composita concamerationibus numerosis: aperturis
sub-infundibuliformibus. SABELLA ALVEOLATA: testa composita concamerationibus
numerosis poro communicantibus. Gmel. Linn. Syst. Not. T. 1. p. 6. p. 3749. Sp.
3. SABELLA ALVEOLATA, HONEYCOMB. Penn. Brit. Zool. Vol. 4. p. 147. sp. 162. --
Ellis Coral. p. 90. t. 36.
We have constantly observed this kind of Sabella to be an inhabitant only of
low rocky shores, that lie within reach of the tide at high water; and although
it is composed entirely of broken shells and sea sand; and those apparently
very slightly agglutinated by the animals that form and inhabit it, in its
native element it acquires a considerable comparative degree of tenacity from
the saline particles with which it is impregnated, and is capable of resisting
the reiterated dashing of the waves without material injury.

In the more sheltered crevices of the rocks, where the animal has ample scope
to expand its sandy dwelling secure from mutilation, the upper surface of a
mass of these shells has a very elegant appearance; the whole being beautifully
foliated with the single or bipartite funnnel. shaped lip, which each animal
forms at the opening of his cell. This appearance is represented in the plate
subjoined, and is a circumstance the more deserving attention, because it has
entirely escaped the notice of Mr. Pennant, and perhaps of every other
Naturalist, except Mr. Ellis; who in his History of Corals, figures it with a
foliated surface, under the title of Tubularia arenosa anglica, from a specimen
brought from Dieppe. The latter does not however agree precisely in figure with
any that have occurred to our notice. Mr. Pennant evidently represents a poor
mutilated fragment, in which the openings of the cells are shown like so many
rounded perforations, in a somewhat uneven surface, and is just as it appears
in masses on the sea-beach, that have been trodden under-foot; or pieces that
have been much worn, and thrown loose upon the shore.

These shells are three or four inches in length, and where they are found are
generally abundant, but they seem to be very local. Mr. Pennant says it is
found on the Western coasts of Anglesea, near Cricceth in Caernarvonshire, and
near Yarmouth. We have seen it on other parts of the sea coast of North Wales,
and in equal plenty on those of South Wales likewise. On the coast of
Dorsetshire, according to Dr. Pultney, fragments are found very frequently, but
none very perfect. In the History of that County the following account is given
of it. -- "GREGARIOUS SABELLA. This is composed of a mass of fine sand, and
particles of broken and finely comminuted shells, aggregated by vermiform
animals of the Nereis genus, each lodged in its separate tube close to, but not
interfering with each other. All the tubes end in orifices on the upper or the
same surface. I but once saw a mass of this kind, about the size of a large
apple, on the beach, a mile east of Weymouth; but I suspect it is not very
uncommon, as fragments are very frequent."


PLATE CXL. MACTRA HIANS. GAPING, OR OBLONG MACTRA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal a Tethys. Shell bivalve: valves equal; sides
unequal: middle tooth of the hinge complicated, with a small hollow: lateral
teeth remote and inserted into each other.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell oblong, rather arcuated, coarse, gaping anteriorly,
and the hinge placed very far back.

MACTRA HIANS: testa oblonga sub-arcuata rudi antice hiante, cardine
subterminali. MACTRA HIANS. Soland. Mus. Port.
Da Costa and some other Conchologists have very erroneously been led to
conclude, that this, and Mactra lutraria, are the same species, although they
differ in almost every particular. The present shell is much wider in
proportion to the length than M. lutraria; and of a more incurvated shape: it
is also a thicker and coarser shell, and has the hinge placed much further back
than in the other species. Dr. Solander, who described it in the catalogue of
the Portland Museum, gave in the specific name of hians, from its remarkable
gaping at the anterior end, and a name so applicable we thought it best to
retain.

The cicatrix of the animal, in this kind, is different from that of M.
lutraria, a circumstance that has not escaped the observation of Dr. Pultney.
This author tells us, the Mactra hians is thrown up in considerable quantities
on all the smooth beaches he has seen on the coast of Dorsetshire, particularly
on the North shore at Poole, opposite Branksea isle; and that he has also seen
it on the beaches at Studland, Swanage, and Weymouth. We have observed it, but
not in abundance, on other seacoasts.


PLATE CXLI. MYTILUS RUGOSUS. RUGGED MUSCLE.
GENERIC CHARACTER. The hinge toothless, and consists of a longitudinal furrow.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell rhombic oval, rugged, obtuse at the
ends and antiquated.

MYTILUS RUGOSUS: testa rhomboideo-ovali rugosa obtusa antiquata. Linn. Syst.
Not. p. 1156. No. 249. Pholas noster, sive concha intra lapidem quendam
cretaceum degens. List. II. An. Angl. p. 1722. tit. 21. tab. 4. fig. 21.
Mytilus parvus rhomboidea-ovalis, subalbescens, rugosus. Rugosus, Rugged, Da
Costa Brit. Conch. p. 223. sp. 52.
The Mytilus rugosus is rather a rare species on our coasts. Lister notes it
from Hartlepool in Durham, and Da Costa says on the coast of Yorkshire, about
Scarborough, Whitby, etc. It is found in incredible abundance, niched or
burrowed, in the rocks of limestone, etc.

In habit and manners of life this species greatly resembles the Pholades, each
forming for itself a separate apartment within the hard clay, or solid stone:
this it pierces when young, and afterward continues to enlarge the cell as it
increases in bulk, without widening the aperture; so that when full grown, the
shell cannot easily be taken whole out of the cell, without breaking the stone
in which it is contained.

This shell may perhaps be arranged with equal propriety with the Myae as the
Mytili, notwithstanding that it is admitted among the latter by most collectors.


PLATE CXLII. MYA GLYCYMERIS. LARGE MYA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Ascidia. Shell bivalve, gaping in general at one
extremity: hinge with a thick patulous tooth; seldom more than one, and that
not inserted into the opposite valve.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell gaping at both ends: very thick,
lamellous oblong-oval, with transverse rugose striae: first tooth of the hinge
very thick.

MYA GLYCYMERIS: testa utrinque hiante crassissima lamellata oblongo ovata
transverse striato rugosa, cardinis dente primario crassissimo. Gmel. Syst.
Not. p. 3222. sp. 17. MYA GLYCYMERIS: testa sub-ovata oblonga, ponderosa,
ventricosa, utrinque hians, antice et postice quasi oblique truncata, dente
cardinali crassissimo. Chemn. T. 6. p. 33. Telline beante, Favart D'Herbigny.
Dict. T. 3. p. 358. List. n. Conch. 6. t. 3. f. 25. Born. t. 1. f. 8.
A species of Mya admitted with some doubt as a British shell: it is a kind
acknowledged however as such, by collectors of English Natural History in
general; and is said to have been undoubtedly fished up in the deep waters
between the Dogger-Bank and the eastern coast of England.

The Mya Glycymeris is the largest of its genus, and is an inhabitant of most
parts of the European sea. In the Mediterranean, and on the northern coasts of
Spain, it is not uncommon: on the coast of France it is also found sometimes.


PLATE CXLIII. BULLA PATULA. PATULOUS BULLA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax. Shell rather convoluted at one end, suboval:
aperture oblong.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell ovate, smooth, and somewhat beaked at
both ends; that at the base produced and sub-umbilicated: lip entire.

BULLA PATULA: testa ovata laevi sub-birostri: basi productiori subumbilicata,
labro integro. BULLA PATULA. Open. B. with one one end much produced and
fuciform. The aperture very patulous. Penn. Brit. Zool. V. 4. p. 117. sp. 85.
Pennant seems to be the only author who has noticed this species. Da Costa
imagined, from the description given by that author, that it was of the same
kind as that which he inserted in his British Conchology, under the name of
Bulla, the Bubble (Aperta, Linn.) and refers to the figure in the work of
Pennant accordingly; but in this instance he was much mistaken, for the two
shells are perfectly distinct; and it appears certain, that the shell described
by Da Costa was as much unknown to Pennant, as that of Pennant was to Da Costa.
The shell of the latter is figured in Plate 120 of this work, and the true
Bulla patula of the other is figured in the Plate annexed.

This we apprehend to be one of the rarest of the British shells hitherto
discovered; Pennant notes it from Weymouth, and refers for his specimen to the
Portland Cabinet: our shell is from Weymouth likewise.


PLATE CXLIV. NERITA NITIDA. GLOSSY NERIT.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax. Shell univalve, spiral, gibbous, and rather
flat beneath: aperture semi-orbicular, or semi-lunar: pillar lip transverse
truncated and flattish.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell smooth, white, and glossy: spire rather pointed:
umbilicus half closed.

NERITA NITIDA testa laevi nivea nitida: spira sub-mucronata umbilico
semi-clauso.

Among the reserved shells intended by Da Costa for a second edition of his
Conchology, we find two specimens of this species of Nerita, with a MS.
memorandum, importing that he had received one of them from Mr. Church, and
that the other was in his possession before. On this vague authority, we did
not think it incumbent to insert the shell in the present Work, especially
since its habitat was not mentioned; but the same kind was discovered, in the
course of last summer, upon the coast of Scotland, near Caithness, by A.
Macleay, Esquire. and we can no longer hesitate to insert it as an undoubted
British species.

In the annexed plate it is represented of the natural size. It is a remarkable
little shell, and is not to the best of our knowledge, mentioned in the work of
any author.

INDEX VOL. IV.
LINNAEAN ARRANGEMENT.
*MULTIVALVIA:
PHOLAS dactylus, (Da Costa) Plate. 118 -- candida Plate. 132 -- striata Plate.
117
BIVALVIA. CONCHAE.
Mya ovata Plate. 122 -- glycymeris Plate. 142 Solen marginatus Plate. 110 --
antiquatus Plate. 114 Tellina inaequistriata Plate. 123 Cardium edule Plate.
124 Fig. 1 -- rusticum? Plate. 124 Fig. 2 Mactra glauca Plate. 125 -- hians
Plate. 140 -- subtruncata Plate. 126 Venus cancellata Plate. 115 -- undata
Plate. 121 -- borealis Plate. 130 Chama cor Plate. 134 Arca lactea Plate. 135
Ottrea Jacobaea Plate. 137 -- lineata Plate. 116 Mytilus edulis Plate. 128 Fig.
1 -- ungulatus Plate. 128 Fig. 2 -- anatinus Plate. 113 -- rugosus Plate. 141
UNIVALVIA.
Eulla aperta Plate. 120 Fig. 1 -- cylindrica Plate. 120 Fig. 2 -- patula
Plate. 143 Voluta triplicata Plate. 138 Murex carinatus Plate. 109 -- antiquus
Plate. 119 Trochus papillorus Plate. 127 -- terrestris Plate. 111 Turbo
duphestus Plate. 112 Helix hortensis (Aspersa G^^^^) Plate. 131 -- arbustorum
Plate. 136 Nerita nitida Plate. 144 Patella albida Plate. 129 Sabella alveolata
Plate. 139 -- tubiformis Plate. 133
INDEX TO VOL. IV. ACCORDING TO HISTORIA NATURALIS TESTACEORUM BRITANNIAE OF DA
COSTA.
PART I. UNIVALVA NON TURBINATA.
GENUS I. PATELLA. LIMPET, FLITHER, OR PAP SHELL.
PATELLA albida Plate. 129
PART II. UNIVALVIA INVOLUTA.
GENUS 5. BULLA. DIPPER.
Bulla aperta (Bulla Da Costa) Plate. 120 Fig. 1 -- cylindrica (Penn.) Plate.
120 Fig. 2 -- patula (Penn.) Plate. 143
PART III. UNIVALVIA TURBINATA.
GENUS 7. TROCHUS. THE TOP.
TERRESTRES. LAND. Trochus terrestris Plate. 111 * MARINAE. SEA. Trochus
papillosus Plate. 127
GENUS 10. COCHLEA SNAILS.
* TERRESTRES. LAND. Cochlea vulgaris Plate. 131 -- unfaciata Plate. 136

GENUS 12. STROMBIFORMIS. NEEDLE SNAIL.
* MARINAE. SEA. Strombiformis bicarinatus Plate. 112
ORDER 2. BIVALVES.
GENUS I. PECTEN ESCALLOP.
Pecten Jacobaeus Plate. 137 -- lineatus Plate. 116
GENUS 5. ARCA, ARKS, OR BOATS.
* MARINAE. SEA. Area lactea (Da Costa) Plate. 135
GENUS 6. CARDIUM. HEART COCKLE.
* MARINAE. SEA. Cardium vulgar Plate. 124 Fig. 1 -- rusticum? Plate. 124 Fig.
2

GENUS II. MYTILUS MUSCLE.
* FLUVIATILES. RIVER. Mytilus Anatinus Plate. 113 * MARINAE. SEA. Mytilus
vulgaris Plate. 128 Fig. 1 -- ungulatus Plate. 128 Fig. 2 -- rugosus Plate. 141

PART III.
GENUS 13. CHAMA GAPERS.
* MARINAE. SEA. Chama magna (hians. Solander) Plate. 140
GENUS 14. SOLEN. SHEATH OR RAZOR SHELL.
Solen marginatus Plate. 110 -- Chama-Solen Plate. 114
PART IV. MULTIVALVES.
GENUS 16. PHOLAS PIDDOCKS.
Pholas dactylus Plate. 118 -- candida Plate. 132 -- striata Plate. 117
ALPHABETICAL INDEX TO VOL. IV.
ALBIDA Patella Plate. 129 alveolata, Sabella Plate. 139 anatinus, Mytilus
Plate. 113 antiquatus, Solen Plate. 114 antiquus, Murex Plate. 119 aperta,
Bulla Plate. 120 Fig. 1 arbustorum, Helix Plate. 136 borealis, Venus Plate. 130
cancellata, Venus Plate. 115 candida, Pholas Plate. 132 carinatus, Murex Plate.
109 cor, Chama Plate. 134 cylindrica, Bulla Plate. 120 Fig. 2 dactylus, Pholas
Plate. 118 duplicatus, Turbo Plate. 112 edule, Cardium Plate. 124 Fig. 1
edulis, Mytilus Plate. 128 Fig. 1 glauca, Mactra Plate. 125 glycymeris, Mya
Plate. 142 hians, Mactra Plate. 140 hortensis, Helix Plate. 131 inaequistriata,
Tellina Plate. 123 Jacobaea, Ostrea Plate. 137 lactea, Arca Plate. 135 lineata,
Ostrea Plate. 116 marginatus, Solen Plate. 110 nitida, Nerita Plate. 144 ovata,
Mya Plate. 122 papillosus, Trochus Plate. 127 patula, Bulla Plate. 143 rugosus,
Mytilus Plate. 141 rusticum, Cardium Plate. 124 Fig. 2 striata, Pholas Plate.
117 subtruncata, Mactra Plate. 126 terrestris, Trochus Plate. 111 triplicata,
Voluta Plate. 138 tubiformis, Sabella Plate. 133 undata, Venus Plate. 121
ungulatus, Mytilus Plate. 123 Fig. 3
END OF VOL. IV.
Printed by Bye and Law, St. John's Square, Clerkenwell.


