THE PLATONIC LADY. A Comedy. As it is Acted at the QUEENS THEATER IN THE
HAY-MARKET.

By the Author of the Gamester, and Love's Contrivance.

LONDON, Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, and
Egbert Sanger, at the Post House at the Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet.
1707. Price 1 s. 6 d. Where may be had all Sorts of PLAYS.

To all the Generous Encouragers of Female Ingenuity, this Play is Humbly
Dedicated.
Gentlemen and Ladies;
MY Muse chose to make this Universal Address, hoping, among the numerous
Crowd, to find some Souls Great enough to protect her against the Carping
Malice of the Vulgar World; who think it a proof of their Sense, to dislike
every thing that is writ by Women. I was the more induced to this General
Application, from the Usage I have met on all sides.

A Play secretly introduced to the House, whilst the Author remains unknown, is
approved by every Body: The Actors cry it up, and are in expectation of a great
Run; the Bookseller of a Second Edition, and the Scribler of a Sixth Night: But
if by chance the Plot's discovered, and the Brat found Fatherless, immediately
it flags in the Opinion of those that extolled it before, and the Bookseller
falls in his Price, with this Reason only, It is a Woman's. Thus they alter
their Judgment, by the Esteem they have for the Author, though the Play is still
the same. They never reflect, that we have had some Male-Productions of this
kind, void of Plot and Wit, and full as insipid as ever a Woman's of us all.

I cannot forbear inserting a Story which my Bookseller, that printed my
Gamester, told me, of a Spark that had seen my Gamester three or four times,
and liked it extremely: Having bought one of the Books, asked who the Author
was; and being told, a Woman, threw down the Book, and put up his Money,
saying, he had spent too much after it already, and was sure if the Town had
known that, it would never have run ten days. No doubt this was a Wit in his
own Eyes. It is such as these that rob us of that which inspires the Poet,
Praise. And it is such as these made him that Printed my Comedy called, Love's
Contrivance; or, Medin cin Malgre lui, put two Letters of a wrong Name to it;
which though it was the height of Injustice to me, yet his imposing on the Town
turned to account with him; and thus passing for a Man's, it has been played at
least a hundred times.

And why this Wrath against the Women's Works? Perhaps you will answer, because
they meddle with things out of their Sphere: But I say, no; for since the Poet
is born, why not a Woman as well as a Man? Not that I would derogate from those
great Men who have a Genius, and Learning to improve that Genius: I only object
against those ill-natured Critics, who wanting both, think they have a
sufficient claim to Sense, by railing at what they don't understand. Some have
armed themselves with resolution not to like the Play they paid to see; and if
in spite of Spleen they have been pleased against their Will, have maliciously
reported it was none of mine, but given me by some Gentleman: Nay, even my own
Sex, which should assert our Prerogative against such Detractors, are often
backward to encourage a Female Pen.

Would these professed Enemies but consider what Examples we have had of Women
that excelled in all Arts; in Music, Painting, Poetry; also in War: Nay, to
our immortal Praise, what Empresses and Queens have filled the World? What
cannot England boast from Women? The mighty Romans felt the Power of Boadicea's
Arm; Eliza made Spain tremble; but ANN, the greatest of the Three, has shook
the Man that aimed at Universal Sway. After naming this Miracle, the Glory of
our Sex, sure none will spitefully cavil at the following Scenes, purely
because a Woman writ'em. This I dare venture to say in their behalf, there is a
Plot and Story in them, I hope will entertain the Reader; which is the utmost
Ambition of,

Gentlemen and Ladies, Your most obedient humble Servant,

PROLOGUE.
By Captain Farqubar.
Spoken by Mr. Betterton. REjoice, ye Fair, the British Warrior's come,
Victorious over, to your soft Wars at home.
Each Conqueror flies, with eager Longing's fraught,
To clasp the Darling Fair, for which he fought.
He lays his Trophies down before those Eyes,
By which Inspired, he won the Glorious Prize.
Prouder, when wellcom'd by his Generous Fair,
Of dying in her Arms, than Conquering there.
O! could our Bards of Britains Isle but write
With the same Fire with which our Hero's fight:
Or could our Stage but represent a Scene,
To Copy that on great Ramillis Plain;
Then we with Courage would assert our Plays,
And to your glorious Laurels join our Bays.
But our poor Pegasus, a Beast of ease,
Cares not for foraging beyond the Seas:
Content with London Provender, he flies,
To make each Coxcomb he can find, a Prize:
And after trudging long, perhaps he may
Pick up a Set of Fools, to furnish out a Play.
To make him Eat, and you to Entertain.
That for his safety fought beyond the Main.
Your Courage There, but Here your Mercy show;
The Brave scorn to insult a Prostrate Poe.
[Exit. EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. Wilks. TO you, the Tyrant Critics of the Age,
To you, who make such Havoc on the Stage;
Assault with Fury every coming Scene,
Like Hero's armed at Ramellis, or Turin.
Whilst vanquished Wit, shrunk from her Native-Glory,
Like the Cowed Gaul, too weakly stands before Ye.
Since then the Poets play this Loosing Game,
I, a poor Suppliant in the Muses Name,
Beg to avert our trembling Author's Fate;
And, like the sad Bavarian Advocate,
Resistance Vain, we to your Mercy fly.
And court you now to lay your Thunder by.
Of Slaughtered Wits, let the Effusion cease,
We, like the Humble Lewis, sue for Peace.
EPILOGUE.
Designed to be Spoken by Mrs. Bracegirdle, but came too late.
Wittten by the Author of Tunbridge-Walks.
WHat mighty pains our Scribbling Sot has shown,
To Ridicule our Sex, and Praise his own.
As if we Women mustered all our Charms,
To tempt an odious Fellow to our Arms.
One Lady proves so fond, or rather mad,
She Would fain confess a Child she never had.
Alas! how many Nymphs about this Town,
Have pretty Moppits, that they dare not own?
Then a West-country Dam'sel trots to Town,
And talks of Paint, False-hair, and Rumpt-up-Gown,
Things which to Men should never be revealed,
But equally with Cuckoldom concealed.
Yet, tell me, Sirs, don't you as nice appear,
With your false Calves, Bardash, and Favorites here?
[Pointing to her Forehead. Nay, in Side-Boxes too, I Have often known,
Amongst Flaxen-Wiggs, Complexions not their own;
Who hiss good Plays, and to Camilla fly,
Draw out their Pocket-glasses, Squint, and Cry,
[Sings.] These Eyes are made so killing, etc.
Young Templers too, with upstart forward Graces,
When Pummis-stone has traveled over their Faces,
March hither, where Mobb'd Hoods too often ply,
And want a Lodging, though Six-stories high;
Where the fond Youth the modest Dame implores,
And at Daybreak ejects her out of Doors.
Some Cheapside-Bobbs too trudge it to our Play,
Faith, Jack, this Hay-Market's a cursed way:
What signify the Quality or Wits,
The Money, Daniel, rises from us Cits.
Who, like Cock-Sparrows, hop about the Benches,
And court, with Six-pences, fat Orange-Wenches.
In short, you Men have more Fantastic ways,
More Follies, than can e're be stuffed in Plays:
But since all Satyr's for your Mirth designed,
Excuse the Errors, which to Night you find,
And to this Play be Generous, Just, and Kind.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Sir Tho. Beamont, Uncle to Beamont and Lucinda. Mr. Betterton. Sir Charles
Richley, Contracted to Isabella when young. Mr. Booth. Captain Beamont, Under
the Name of Belvil, in Love with Lucinda. Mr. Wilks. Sharper, A Man of the
Town. Mr. Cibber. Robin, Servant to Belvil. Mr. Pack. Equipage, Servant to
Sharper. Mr. Norris.
WOMEN.
Lucinda, Niece to Sir Tho. in Love with Beamont. Mrs. Bracegirdle. Isabella,
An Heiress, in Love with Beamont, but contracted by her Father to Sir Charles
in her Childhood. Mrs. Oldfield. Mrs. Dowdy, A Somersetshire Widow, come to
Town to learn breeding. Mrs. Willis. Toylet, Woman to Isabella. Mrs. Bignal.
Betty, Maid to Lucinda. Mrs. Mills. Peeper, Maid to Mrs. Dowdy. Mrs. Lee. Mrs.
Brazen Mr. Bullock. Manto-Women, Milliners, Match-makers, Tire-Women,
Singing-Masters, Dancing-Masters, Porters, etc.
SCENE LONDON. THE Platonic Lady.
ACT I.
Enter Mr. Sharper, and Equipage his Man. Equi. AS I was saying, Sir, I have
advanced the Expenses of our Summers Expedition from Epsom to Tunbridge, from
Tunbridge to the Bath, and from thence to London here; where instead of
Board-wages, I have lived upon Hopes that some of these Places would furnish
you with a Bubble, and me with my Money; but I see no appearance of it:
Therefore pray let you and I discount.


Sharp. Prithee, Equipage, have but Patience to see what this Winter produces.


Equi. No, Sir; the Affront you put upon me at Tunbridge I cannot forget, when
you had lost fifty Guineas to the Knight upon Honor, and pretended you had
sent me Post to London to your Scrutore for the Money, and that I had robbed
you and run away with your Keys; when you ordered me to keep out of the way
till he had left the Town.


Sharp. Thou know I had no other quibble to avoid paying the Debt, and
quitting the Place with Honor: Come, don't reflect upon my Misfortune; we have
seen better Summers.


Equi. In troth, Sir, I thought Bath promised well; I am sure 'twas very full
of Company; and if you had not fallen in Love, you might have paid me out of
the Subscription.


Sharp. How must I have lived like a Gentleman then, Sirrah? I shall break your
Head.


Equi. I have done upon that Subject, Sir; I only desire my Discharge and
Wages; that is all.


Sharp. Do you know what you ask, Equipage? A Gamester and a Soldier are both
Sons of Fortune; now to quit my Service, is directly to embroil your self with
Fortune.


Equi. I have been embroiled with her from the first Day I entered into your
Service: But I thank my Stars I am above Fortune, and design to forsake the
World.


Sharp. Ha, ha, forsake the World!


Equi. Yes, Sir, I have lately made some moral Reflections on the Uncertainty
of worldly Pleasures. I am weary of being well beaten, and ill fed; of passing
the Night at a Tavern Door, and the Day in carrying Messages from one Miss to
another. In short, Sir, I am weary of the subservient Title, without the
subservient Money, and resolve to marry; that is, when I can find a Woman that
deserves me.


Sharp. A difficult matter truly.


Equi. So it is, Sir; but this Digression makes you forget that there is a
small Rule in Arithmetic to be adjusted. I have served you these eight Years
at twenty-five Crowns a Year, which in plain English is forty-two Pounds
Sterling; of which I have received now and then a broken Pate: Nevertheless
there remains two and forty Pounds; which I desire you would give me immediately,
Sir.


Sharp. Two and Forty Pounds -- a great deal of Money -- eight Years Service;
Mercy upon me! How have I had Patience to endure this Dog so long?


Equi. How have I had Patience to stay thus long for my Wages?


Sharp. Are not you a Rogue, Sirrah?


Equi. Yes, Sir.


Sharp. And deserve to be hanged?


Equi. As Affairs stands now it seems. Whilst I was silent I was a very honest
Fellow; but now I ask for my Wages, I Am fit for the Gallows: Faith, Sir, you
might be a Duke by your Conscience.


Sharp. Well, Sirrah, you know I am good natured; hang me if I am not very
unwilling to part with thee: I will not turn thee away, go get my Cloak.


Equi. Turn me away! why, it is not you that turn me away; it is I that turn you
away, if you go to that.


Sharp. Well, well, we will not dispute about that; thou shall not leave me.


Equi. Be pleased to pay me then; for I design the Money for my Wife's
Jointure: Look ye, Sir, here is the Receipt ready.


Sharp. The Devil's in the Fellow, I think; thy Noddle runs of nothing but thy
own Business; prithee let us think a little of mine. Mrs. Brazen the
Match-maker, is to help me to a Somersetshire Widow worth fifty thousand Pound;
she is just come to Town.


Equi. But pray, Sir, consider my Business.


Sharp. I tell you, I am in haste to see her.


Equi. It Is done in one word, Sir; my Wages.


Sharp. Well, since you are so resolute, we will part, though it trouble me never
so much. Give me the Receipt: Let Us see how you have drawn it.


Equi. There, Sir. [Gives it him.


Sharp. Now begone; I discharge you.


Equi. But my Wages, Sir.


Sharp. Ah, Equipage, Equipage, the parting with thee softens me even into
Tears. If I stay I shall unman my self: Farewell.

[Exit.
Equi. The Devil! did not I know him well enough not to trust him with the
Receipt till I had the Money? But, egad, I Will be even with him one way, I Will
have his cowardly Bones well beaten, if my Project takes.

[Exit.
SCENE Changes to Isabella's Lodgings.
Enter Isabella and Toylet. Toy. I cannot imagine from whence proceeds this
change. You that used to love Parks, Plays, Balls, Drawing-Rooms, Picquet,
Baslett, and such nice Conversation: You Would not endure my Lady Lockup, because
she entertained you with nothing but railing at her Servants; of their Waste,
and her good House-wifery; nor Mr. Self-love, because he always got to the
Glass before you; my Lady Wrinkle laid on too much White, and my Lady Blouze
too much Red, and Mrs. Coquet engrossed the whole Company: My Lady Prattle
filled your Ears with the Beauty and Wit of her Children.


Isa. And is there any thing so disagreeable on Earth, as the Sayings of Miss
and Mass repeated: But what of all this?


Toy. Why then, I wrack my poor Brain in finding out why you spend so much time
with your Country Cousin, Mrs. Dowdy; who is the very reverse of every thing
you used to admire.


Isa. Charity, Toylet, perfect Charity. You know my awkward Cousin wants
Instructions: She Is left a rich Widow, and comes to London on purpose to Dress
and make a Figure.


Toy. Born and bred in Somersetshire; never five Miles from Home before, wore
the Cloth of her own Spinning, dain'd to make her own Butter, paid the
Laborers their Wages on Work-days, and took a Jigg with them on Holy Days. She
will make a Figure indeed, by that time the Fashion-mungers have done with her.
Pardon me, Madam, if I cannot help thinking you have some stronger Motive than
Charity.


Isa. What does your Wisdom guess?


Toy. Why truly, Madam, I should guess your Ladyship may have some small Pulse
for the handsome young Officer that Mrs. Dowdy is so much afraid you should
see, and thrust you into the Bedchamber, when he came into the Dining Room: I
remember with what Fury you caught up the red-hot Poker, and burnt a Hole
through the Door to look at him: Belvil, I think they call his Name.


Isa. Upon my Life thou have hit it, Girl; I Will not conceal my Plot, since I
design thee Chief Instrument. ^f you remember, I told you that five Years since
I was in France; and my Mother's Sister being of the Romish Persuasion, had
entered her self among the Augustines in Paris: She over-perswaded me to Board
there too, hoping (I suppose) from her endeavors to make me quit my Religion,
and profess my self a Nun: During my abode there, this very Gentleman used to
make me frequent Visits at the Grate; the first time I saw him he came a long
with another that paid a Compliment to a young Lady of the same Convent: Our
Acquaintance held near two Months. 'Twas then, Toylet, that I felt the force of
Love, but not without a thousand Protestations of the same from him. But my
Father hearing of my Aunts design, and apprehending my Youth, (for I was then
not full sixteen) might be prevailed upon to change my Faith, sent for me to
England in such haste, that I was not permitted to stay one Hour in the
Monastery after the Messenger arrived; so had no opportunity to inform Belvil
of my Departure.


Toy. I presume you have kept a Correspondence ever since.


Isa. No, I knew not how to direct to him; he told me he had been bred in the
Spanish-Netherlands, and came to France only for his Pleasure: His Parents (he
said) were English, and he spoke the Language very well.


Toy. Nor did not you inform him of your Family?


Isa. He often pressed it, and I promised to satisfy him; but my Father's
unexpected Commands broke all our Measures; and from that Day, till I saw him
here, I never heard of him.


Toy. And what is your Design now, Madam? I fear he is a Man of Gallantry;
besides you know he makes love to your Cousin; you cannot love him still sure?


Isa. Indeed I do; nay more, can love nothing else.


Toy. What will you do with Sir Charles Richley then? who your Father upon his
Deathbed enjoined you to marry, whom he contracted you to in your Childhood.


Isa. I cannot love him; it was in my Nonage, and the Barter's illegal; and
therefore I Will not Mind it; besides I Am informed he is in Love elsewhere, and
cares as little for me as I for him; and I would not be a Wife in the Mode.


Toy. In my Opinion, Sir Charles has all the Accomplishments of his Sex, and a
fair Estate.


Isa. I own it; but I have a whimsical Heart, not to be touched with Jointures
and Settlements.


Toy. And if I have any skill in Faces, Belvil is a general Lover.


Isa. No matter; my Conquest will be the greater to get him from them all;
besides, I will run any risk to break this unreasonable Contract.


Toy. What you please, Madam; I am ready to convey a Letter or a Message to him.


Isa. No, I have a Stratagem to try his Temper, and fathom his Inclinations, I
do not intend to discover my self to him, till I have him within my Power,
beyond a possibility of retreat. Come in with me, and I Will give thee a full
Relation, and prepare our selves for my design.

[Exit.
The SCENE Changes to Belvil's Lodgings, Belvil in a Nightgown playing on a
Flute; he lays it down and looks upon his Watch.
Bell. Ha! it is time to Dress. Robin.


Enter Robin. Robin. Sir.


Bell. My Things.


Robin. Here Is a Letter for you, Sir.


Bell. [Takes it and looks on it, then gives it him again.] Lay it by.


Robin. Will Not you read it, Sir.


Bell. No, I know the Hand. Egad, it is as hard to get rid of a Citizen's Wife,
when listed in her Service, as Subsistence out of the Hand of an Agent, who is
just setting up his Coach: She Is as troublesome as a Dun when our Stock's
exhausted.


Robin. Here Is another Letter, Sir; and the Footman stays for an Answer.


Bell. Lucinda's Character! Slave, how durst you defer my Joy so long?


Robin. Oh, Sir, ever whilst you live the sweetest Bit for the last.


Bell. Reads.] The Brightness of the Day tempts me to a Morning's Walk; if
you have an Inclination, you will find me in the Park at Twelve, Lucinda. An
Inclination! Yes, I have an Inclination; I wish you would gratify it. Bid the
Footman wait; I Will send an Answer.

[Exit.
Rob. Yes, Sir.


Enter Peeper. Robin. So, Mrs. Peeper; what News from Somersetshire?


Peep. Somersetshire, Manners; you should have said St. James's; for my Lady is
as great a Belle as the best of 'em, I assure you that.


Re-enter Belvil. Robin. A Belle! so is a Broom-stick.


Bell. Carry this Letter to the Footman. Well, Mrs. Peeper, what Affair brings
you?


Peep. I come from my Lady, Sir: She --


Bell. Dressing himself.] Robin, my Coat.


Peep. Is Impatient till she sees you: All the Trades in the Creation are
employed in her Dress; she spares no Art to charm you; there is Milleners,
Mantua-makers, Tirewomen, and so forth.


Bell. My Watch.


Peep. Amongst a Crowd of Compleaters, a Match, maker has shuffled in, and
proposes one Sir John Sharper to her; if you are cold you will lose her, upon my
Virginity, you will.


Bell. My Sword.


Peep. Ha! how careless you are; what, not a Word? In Truth, I don't know where
you will find such another Fool, as my Mistress, with Fifty Thousand Pound.


Bell. My Perriwigg.


Peep. Sure, if you don't value my Lady, you might answer me.


Bell. My Handkercher and Snuff Box. So am I well now, Mrs. Peeper? [Adjusting
himself.


Peep. Well: Ah! Nature has been but too kind to you. But, Sir, concerning my
Lady; you know I am entirely in your Interest.


Bell. Why then to be sincere with thee, I never did, nor never shall care
Threepence for her, without one thing.


Peep. But her Fortune, Sir.


Bell. Shall never tempt me to marry her at a venture.


Peep. No! why then to what purpose do you court her? It Is calling your
Gallanty in question to suspect an Intreague.


Bell. No faith, Peeper, my design is quite another thing; and if thou would
assist me --


Peep. In any thing, Sir, within my Power.


Bell. Say thou! there then [Gives her Money.] When we would have a Lawyer
plead heartily, we must not forget his Fee.


Peep. You are so generous, that to keep up the Simile, Lawer-like, I Will spare
no Breath to serve you.


Bob. But don't you carry the Simile too far, and take Bribes on both sides.


Peep. I scorn it. Instruct me, Sir.


Bell. Find some way to persuade her to let me see the Writings of her Estate;
tell her it is the only way to fix me; for what ever we say in Commendation of
your Sex, Beauty, Shape, Wit, and so forth, is but the Fable; the Moral is the
Money, Girl.


Peep. But you will not marry her you say, Sir?


Bell. Not till I am satisfied what she is worth, my Dear; but these Writings
must be seen: Upon Honor, it shall turn as much to your Account, whether I
marry her or not.


Peep. Nay then -- Well, Sir, it shall be done; when will you prove it?


Bell. Two Hours hence.


Peep. Your Servant.

[Exit.
Enter Sir Charles Richley. Sir Cha. What, just upon the Wing? I Am glad I Have
nick't the time, and find you without Company.


Bell. Why, have you Secrets to impart? Robin, leave us. [Exit Robin.] Come,
come, disclose some warm, wishing, kind, consenting Fair: Or is it a plump,
soft, wholesome Country Girl thou would consign over to thy Friend. 'm not
nice, nor care who plucks the Rose I smell to, provided it has not lost its
sweetness.


Sir Cha. Sure thou think the Business of the World is converted into
Wenching.


Bell. I Am sure there is no pleasure in that Business where a Woman is not
concerned.


Sir Cha. A Woman is the Subject. But such a Woman.


Bell. Bright as the Morn, when first the World began,
And I am doomed to be the happy Man.

Sir Cha. I fear so, Belvil.


Bell. Then she is in Love with me? where does she live? what is her Name? how
dignified or distinguished? by Mistress, Madam, or Right Honorable -- Maid,
Wife or Widow? Quick, quick disclose.


Sir Cha. It Is Lucinda.


Bell. The Devil! have you raised my expectation to this height, then pall me
with an Acquaintance? But what of her?


Sir Cha. You brought me into the Danger; I came wounded off, and have no hopes
of Cure, but from your roving Temper. You weigh the Sex alike, and without a
Pang may give me leave to try my Fortune with her.


Bell. This comes of carrying a Friend to see one's Mistress. Why, I thought you
had been engaged from your Childhood. Come will you be upon the square, bring
me to your Mistress; if I like her as well as I do Lucinda, perhaps we may
agree upon the change.


Sir Cha. I will: she cannot fail to charm thee; all Eyes, but mine, adore her:
And sure 'twas the Malice of our Stars caused our Fathers to conclude the
Match, where Interest only held the Scale, and gentle Love fled from either
side: But be serious. How far are you engaged with Lucinda?


Bell. Faith, it is a kind of intricate Story, but you must be satisfied. I have
been bred a Soldier of Fortune, and am to this Day ignorant who my Parents
were. The Man who took care of me, always told me England was my Native
Country, taught me the Language; and for ought I know, some traveling Prince
begot me: My Foster-Father was in Battle killed, and never gave me farther
Light: I had still an Inclination to see this Country.


Sir Cha. This Story seems Romantic --


Bell. You Will think it so before I have done: Being landed, and traveling with
my Servant toward London, I lost my way; Night came on; when, at a distance,
we discovered Lights and made up to 'em. It proved Lucinda's Country House: Her
Uncle, Sir Thomas Beamont, kindly received and entertained us.


Sir Cha. Lucky Chance!


Bell. So it proved to them; for that very Night her House was beset with
Thieves: Their number must have prevailed but for our unexpected Aid; we beat
them off, preserved their Wealth, and perhaps their Lives. The Lady expressed a
thousand Thanks. The old Man grew Inquisitive, who I was, and whence I came. I
frankly told him the Story of my Life: He stood amazed, and asked me fifty
Questions, and seemed surpised at every Answer.


Sir Cha. Well; and what ensued upon that?


Bell. Why, he has ever since been mighty fond of me, and forced Money upon me,
which I could scarcely make him take my Note for.


Sir Cha. You're established every way; his kindness promotes you Interest with
his Niece.


Bell. Quite contrary: His generous Carriage has obliged me to swear to him,
never to attempt to marry her, if she should consent without his leave, which
he seems still averse to. I confess I love her beyond the rest of her Sex,
except one I saw through a Grate in France, that I could never hear of since: yet
this restraint keeps me from pressing my Suit for Marriage, and I have too much
respect to attempt the other.


Sir Cha. Does she know the Injunction?


Bell. No; that he forbad me too -- Besides, she is devoted to Platonic Notions


Sir Cha. I never mind that in a handsome Woman: This generous Declaration
draws another Question, why do you address Mrs. Dowdy?


Bell. That Is another Injunction of the old Gentleman's, to procure the Writings
of an Estate out of her Hands, that her Husband cheated a Relation of his of.
You see, Sir Charles, I have a World of Business cut out, and have made you
entirely my Confident: No foul play; do ye hear?


Sir Cha. There can be none with a Prince that aims at universal Monarchy. But
setting Love apart, last Night after you left us, there came a Fellow into the
Chocolate-House, who pretended he had made a Campaign in the Nature of a
Voluntier; and amongst a number of palpable Lies, swore, at the Battle of
Blenheim, he pursued a French General over the Danube, and took him Prisoner on
the other side, then brought him over upon his Back; the Enemies Cannon playing
at him all the while: The Company laughed: I confess it raised my Spleen, and I
could not forbear saying, That Action was too Glorious in it self to want a
Romance to illustrate it.


Bell. So I suppose you brought a squabble upon your Hands.


Sir Cha. No; he swore, looked big, bluster'd, and walked off.


Enter Robin, and a Porter. Robin. Sir Charles, here is a Porter with a Letter.


Port. Sir, a Gentleman that saw you come in here, bid me give you this.


Sir Cha. [Peruses the Letter.] Very well, I Will come to him: Ha, ha, ha.

[Exit Porter.
Bell. Him! what, it is not a Challenge I hope? I must go with you.


Sir Cha. Suppose it true, it is not fair to carry a second when the Inviter
names none. But it is no such thing: Adieu.

[Exit Sir Charles.
Bell. If this should be a Duel now -- I could never forgive my self for letting
him go alone, especially if he comes to any harm.


Robin. Why; suppose he should be killed, Sir.


Bell. Rascal, I had rather suppose you hanged, Sir.


Robin. A sudden Death prevents a great deal of Vexation, Sir, sometimes


Bell. How do you make that out?


Robin. Why, when a Man takes his sick Bed, the sad Formalitics that attend it,
are more dreadful than Death it self: His Friends and Relations all weeping
round his Bed; a Lawyer, bribed by his Spouse to urge the Will: That made, the
Sorrow is finished; each then enquire after their Legacy: And the disconsolate
Wife having borrowed a Weed of her Neighbor, is consulting her Glass to see
how it becomes her. Her Thoughts are where to find another Husband; the
Servants Heads full of their Mourning: So that if the dying Man calls for a
Cordial; slap, they give him a Bolous -- He desires to be raised -- They pull
away the Pillow.


Bell. Ha, ha.


Robin. The Doctor, whose Prescription has poisoned him, orders a double Dose
of Opium, to smooth his Passage to the other World; takes his two Guineas Fee,
throws himself into his Chariot, and bids his Coachman drive on to the next
Patient. Now, Sir, a Builet, or an Oilet-hole in the Guts prevents all this.


Bell. You must preach this when we are raising Recruits, Sirrah; Ha, ha. But I
must to the Park to meet Lucinda.


Enter Isabella and Toylet, masked. Isa. Oh, Sir! if you are a Gentleman
protect me.


Bell. Ha! from what, Madam. Egad, I shall be famous for delivering distressed
Dam'sels.


Isa. Pursued by an old jealous Husband, whom I married by my Friends Command,
when I had given my Heart and Vows to another; he begged for one kind parting
Hour; which I, in pity, granted: But, Oh! the illfated Moment brought both my
Husband and my Father to be Spectators of our Meeting; they called for help to
seize him, but he leapt the Balcony; and in the Bustle I escaped with my Woman,
but know not whither.


Toy. Bless me! what a Story has she patched up.


Bell. Fear not, Madam, I Will defend you against all the Fathers and Husbands in
Christendom.


Rob. And I will take your Ladiship's Woman into my Protection.


Bell. If your Face answers your Shape and Mien, I cannot blame your Husband's
Fears: Convince me, Madam.


Isab. After what I have told you, if you are generous, you will not ask to see
my Face. Give me but Sanctuary here till Night, shall favor my escape to a
Friend's House.


Bell. Command it, Madam -- Robin, a Curse of Fortune, to send me a Collation
at home, when I Am engaged abroad: But I must not disappoint Lucinda. Madam,
Business of the last Consequence calls me out; but my return shall be sudden.
Can I serve you, by enquiring if the Storm be over?


Isab. By no means: enquiry would ruin me. At your return, perhaps I may inform
you more.


Bell. Humph! that was kindly insinuated -- Robin, give Orders that no Person be
admitted into my Lodgings in my absence. Madam, your most humble.

(Exit.
Toy. Well, Madam, what is your next Project? The Gentleman showed but little
Curiosity. It Is certainly an Assignation that hurried him hence -- Or he had
been more pressing to have seen your Face; and if he had, he would infallibly
have remembered you, and then your Plot would have been spoiled.


Isab. It Is impossible: For having had the Smallpox since, I am persuaded he
will not know me. He says he will return instantly; in the mean time I Will view
his Lodgings.


Toy, To what end will you stay? It Is ten to one if he comes back these six
Hours.


Isab. No matter; I resolve to finish what I once begin. I Will

Pursue his Steps, and trace 'em with such Art,
Discover all the Secrets of his Heart:
The Petty Tyrants by my Plots dethrone,
And there erect an Empire of my own.

The End of the First ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE the Park.
Enter Lucinda and Betty. Luc. WHAT should be the reason of Belvill's stay,
Betty? I wish I had not sent to him, I Am very uneasy: How calm my Hours were
before I knew this Man.


Betty. I thought Platonic Love never disturbed the Mind, Madam.


Luc. Yes, when the Friendship is nice and particular.


Betty. Nay, nay, I never knew Friendship in different Sexes but came to
particulars at last: See here he is.


Enter Belvill and Robin. Bell. So the bright Cyprian Goddess moves,
When loose, and in her Chariot drawn by Doves,
She rides to meet the Warlike God she loves.
[Embraces her.
Luc. Hey; what Lady have you lavished your Wit upon this Morning, that you are
forced to Trade upon other Men's Stocks?


Bell. Hang these Poetical Rogues, they publish every pretty Thought, that a
Gentleman's forced to borrow to express his own Notions.


Luc. Pray how do ye apply the last Line, Belvill?

-- To meet the warlike God she loves.

You may be vain enough to think your self a Mars --

But when did I betray the Weakness of a Venus?


Bell. S'life Madam! I ask your Pardon, this villainous Love is got into my
Heart, and dictates so fast to my Tongue, I had quite forgot your Platonicks.


Luc. And our Articles last Night too I suppose.


Bell. Ah! the Study's as crabbed as the Law -- And the Practice as unpleasant
as Penance. Imprimis, that I must take Pains to make the World understand our
Conversation is only Friendship, and though no Body will believe me -- Swear I
admire the Beauties of your Mind -- without regarding those of your Person --
Protest I have no desire to Kiss those rosy Lips -- press that soft white Hand
-- and Sigh my Soul, out in your Bosom --


[Lucinda aside,] The Devil! How the Fellow talks --

[To him,] All this you must positively observe -- But then consider the
freedoms I allow Balances the restraint. I promise you all public Marks of my
Favor; my Conduct is sincere and open, I hate a false Prude who will not know a
Gentleman in Company, though three Hours before she had held private Conference
with him in her Bedchamber; that solemnly declares she never writ or received
a Billet doux in her Life, and knows at the same time she keeps a Woman on
purpose for the Business.


Bell. Like your reforming Ladies, who all the while they are giving a young
Fellow advice against Wenching, their Looks slyly insinuate a liking to his
Person.


Luc. Or Mrs. Prim the Poetical She-Philosopher, whose Discourse and Writings
are filled with Honor and strict Rules of Virtue; that vows she could not
Sleep if she was guilty of one criminal Thought -- yet is terribly wronged if
she has not twice slipped aside for a natural Tympany.


Bell. Oh! How I hate the noise of Virtue in my Ears from a Woman -- whom I know
lives by Vice; and it is a Maxim with me -- That she who rails most, yields
soonest.


Luc. I have the same Opinion of those Men, who boast much of their Secrecy,
only for an opportunity to gain something to betray -- Well, I think our
Sentiments agree, therefore I hope you submit to the Conditions.


Bell. When one has given a Tyrant Power it is Prudence to obey.


Luc. Hold; One thing more; During this League you must Address no other Woman.


Bell. The Devil! You Will next prescribe my Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, Walking --
Nay, even Thinking! Madam, I suppose you have read of Aesop's Ox. God's Death!
Madam I am of Cowly's Mind, when I am all Soul, I shall keep your Rules.


Luc. Nay, don't believe I am jealous, but it would touch my Pride, to have it
said the Man that I esteemed worthy to be seen with -- was Mistress such a Ones
conquest --


Bell. So by what I can discover, you would have me have no other Affair upon my
Hands, but waiting upon you to no purpose.


Luc. To no purpose! Is not Friendship the noblest Aim of human Kind?


Bell. Had your Parents thought so, the World had never known your Charms, Ha,
ha, ha. Well, but when I have Sworn all this, what Tie have I upon you?


Luc. Oh you need not fear me -- I have an indifference to your whole Sex.


Bell. Heigh, ho! [Sighs.]


Luc. Why do you Sigh?


Bell. Only reflecting upon the desperate Case of a Friend of mine, who
confessed to me half an Hour ago he was dying for Love of you.


Luc. Dying for me! Who is it Belvill?


Bell. Ha, my Platonic Lady, hang me if I tell you --


Luc. Nay, let it alone -- I care not -- I think I am weary with walking; you
have often Importuned me to see the Collection of Pictures you brought over.
Come, my Maid's with me, I Will go now and Drink some Tea with you.


Bell. Oh the Devil! What a time she has chose now -- Robin, Zounds -- what
shall we do with the Woman that is at home? [aside to Robin.]


Rob. Ah pox of Ill-luck; Choke me If I know Sir?


Luc. What Is that Whisper? He shall not stir a step before me -- I Will have nothing
but Tea.


Bell. Dear Madam, let him go, he, he, he, he, sha, sha, shall only get a little
Jelly or Sweetmeats or so -- Robin, Sirrah, lock her into your Garret. [Aside
to Robin.]


Rob. It shall be done Sir.


Luc. I say it shall not be done Sir.


Rob. Then we are all undone Sir. [aside.]


Luc. I hate Sweetmeats in a Morning, 'twill spoil my Dinner -- There Is
something more; I read Confusion in his Face. [aside.]


Bell. But Mrs. Betty does I Am sure -- Pray let him go.


Luc. I tell you no Scout shall go before --


Rob. What shall I do -- Oh Sir, why you forget Sir Charles, whom you resolved
to prevent Fighting the Duel.


Luc. This is a newborn Lie -- I Will humor it, but resolve to find it out.
[Aside.]


Bell. True, but this Lady makes me forget all other Friends. --


Luc. To preserve Sir Charles is of greater consequence than my Visit, I Will
defer that till some other time; you will see me to my Coach.


Bell. The Rogue has brought me off -- Though I hope Sir Charles is in no Danger.
[aside.] I would not lose the pleasure of your kind Intention: Let it be to
Morrow Madam.


Luc. I Will think on it; Come --

[Exit.]
Rob. So here is a Guinea slap, for my Master always rewards my Politics.

[Exit.]
Enter Mr. Sharper. Sharp. The Devil! Never Man was so drawn in^^ a Kicking
certainly -- Ah hang Dog --

Enter Equipage. Are you there? You are always out of the way when you should
do a Body any Service.


Equi. Service, Sir!


Sharp. Ay Service Sir: I was appointed to meet a pretty Lady in Hide-Park, and
being there before her Hour, comes me up a blustering Fellow, who pretending I
had sent him a Challenge, drew upon me, so I was obliged to Fight him; and Egad
if I had not understood Fencing very well, I had been whipped through the Lungs,
for he had a cursed long Reach -- but I closed in with him, tripp'd up his
Heels, took away his Sword, and gave him his Life.


Equi. Oh the damned Lie -- This was a Plot of my contrivance, and I have seen
him fairly Kicked. [aside.]


Sharp. What Is that you mutter?


Equi. I was saying to my self, Sir, 'twas very unfortunate, for ten to one but
you would lost the Lady by it.


Sharp. Egad and so I did, for she shrieked out, and drove away like the Devil,
when she saw us engaged.


Equi. Where will his Lies end [aside] She was very hard Hearted Sir, not to
send her Coachman to part ye.


Sharp. And discover our Intreague.


Equi. True, I Would forgot that -- Well, Sir, you know I still follow in hopes of
my Wages.


Sharp. I owe you none, Sirrah; Have NOT I a Receipt to show -- however because
you are sometimes an useful -- Rascal you shall stay with me, and partake my
good Fortune; I expect an Emissary with News about the rich Widow I was telling
you of.


Equi. Shall I believe him or no -- if there were any hopes I Would stick close
[Aside] Nay, Sir, you know what an Affection I have for you --


Sharp. Yes, you Dog, I know it full well -- but convenience sometimes makes a
Man of Honor pocket Affronts.


Equi. What have I done Sir?


Sharp. Sirrah, you might have kept me out of the Chocolate-House when I was
Drunk last Night, and brought this Quarrel upon my Hands.


Equi. Oh Sir! But as long as you Conquered your Man --


Sharp. Peace, here comes Mrs. Brazen.


Equi. A fit Companion by my Troth.


Enter Mrs. Brazen. Mrs. Braz. Good Morrow noble Squire.


Sharp. My Genius, my better Angel! well how fares my buxsome Widow, ha?


Mrs. Braz. Fortune smiles upon my Lad of Iron. I have been with her all this
Morning, and I have praised thee from Head to Foot -- I have set her a Gog I Will
warrant thee Boy.


Sharp. Did you touch upon my Courage?


Equi. His Courage! Ah, in what Latitude does that lie? [Aside.]


Mrs. Braz. Thy Valor Boy! I said thou were a mere Hercules, Man both in Love
and War! I told her you had a large Estate, and you were of the ancient Family
of the O Sharpers in Ireland, dear Joy.


Sharp. Pox, why in Ireland?


Mrs. Braz. Oh! because the Irish-Men carry away all the Fortunes -- I said you
kept your own Coach too.


Sharp. I hope you said I had left it in my own Country then --


Mrs. Braz. No, no, here Man -- I can help thee to a Coach Boy from the Knights
to my Lord Dukes: Why, it is my Business I tell thee; if there were occasion I
can have half a dozen Footmen in Liveries too.


Equi. Hark ye Mistress -- observe my Stature -- Humph -- A'n't I a handsome
Fellow? [Setting himself out]

Help me to a Fortune now, and you shall go halves.


Mrs. Braz. Say you so? I Will put you down in my Book; you are not the first
Servant I have raised to a Lady's Bed -- as it is well known in this Town. [Puts
him down in her Book.]


Sharp. But when must I see her Mrs. Brazen? I am Impatient.


Mrs. Braz. See her -- but look ye Squire you know the Conditions, when shall
we Sign and Seal -- for you will grant I must live out of my honest Endeavors.
I Am sure I take a great deal of Pains for my Thousand Pounds -- up early and
down late -- then Mercy on me, how do I stretch my Conscience when I am setting
out one of you young Rogues!


Sharp. But are you sure she will have me?


Mrs. Braz. Sure? I can persuade them to any thing let me come at 'em. Hark ye
under the Rose, it is a Receipt of mine has prevailed with all the old Women to
marry of late --


Sharp. Away! Let Us to the Tavern, and over a Cup of mull'd Sack seal to thy
Demands.


Mrs. Braz. With all my Heart -- Come Sirrah, hold up your Head, you are in my
Book you Rogue, and that is the High Road to Preferment, Sirrah.


Equi. Along then. A hey for Little Equipage.

[Exeunt.]
SCENE changes to Belvill's Lodgings.
Enter Isabella and Toylet. Toy. What think you now Madam -- could any thing
but a Mistress make him guilty of such Ill-manners, to leave a Lady in distress
so long --


Isab. Most certain -- my Patience is quite worn out -- I must go.


Toy. Dear Madam, since we have efcap'd hitherto undiscovered, think of him no
more.


Isab. Don't you trouble your self about that, I shall not give him over thus --
but do you get me a Chair.


Toy. Yes, Madam.

[Exit.]
Isab. Let me examine my self a little. What have I undertaken here -- A duce
of too much Liberty -- If my old Dad had been alive, I durst not have gone a
Rover hunting thus. Do I value Reputation -- Yes, as much as any Body does --
that follows their Inclination -- Ay, but whether will that Inclination carry
me? Why, not beyond the Rules of Honor, and then -- a Fig for the Censure of
the World, I say -- Oh! Here he comes. [Claps on her Mask.]


Enter Belvill and Robin. Bell. Now Madam I am entirely yours, pray oblige me
with your Commands. I hope you have not been disturbed.


Isab. No way but by my Grief Sir --


Bell. I long to see her Face. [Aside.] Banish Grief, you are here secure, lay
by Constraint -- and venture to Unmask -- Sparkling Eyes -- Lovely Hair -- I
shall run Mad. [Aside.]


Isab. I thought I had had your Promise not to ask that.


Bell. Promise Madam -- God's Death, I, I, I, faith Madam; I will not tell your
Husband, if I happen to know him.


Isab. Indeed -- Indeed, I shall not put it in your Power.


Bell. Robin, run call out Fire -- Thieves, or the Devil -- That she may drop
her Mask in the Surprise.

[Aside to Rob.]
Rob. Yes Sir, yes Sir, Sir, [Goes and comes back.]

Here Is Sir Charles coming up.


Isab. Sir Charles! I am undone. [Aside.]

For Heaven's sake, Sir, give me leave to retire; if I am seen, I Am ruined.


Bell. In, in quickly. [Runs in.]

Enter Sir Charles. Oh! Sir Charles, I have been in some Apprehensions for you,
though you seemed to disguise the Matter; it was a Duel: Ha!


Sir Char. Something like it.


Bell. I see thy Sword has not failed thee.


Sir Char. No, nor my Shoes neither! I have used them pretty fairly since I
went out --


Bell. In Walking?


Sir Char. No in Kicking -- 'twas the very numerical Coward I told thee of --
at the Chocolate-House -- When I bid him draw, he swore he came to meet a Lady
and was not prepared for Fighting -- denied the Challenge, and provoked me to a
warm Breathing. And this was the end of my Adventure.


Bell. Ha, ha, ha, I Will be hanged if 'twas not Mr. Sharper.


Sir Char. The very same -- a Gentleman told me so as I came out of the Park.
But prithee Belvill let me go into thy Dressing Room, to put my self a little
in Order, after this Heat; Come Robin help me. [Going in.]


Bell. Hold, hold, hold! [Stops him.]


Sir Char. Why, what is the matter? You have not a Wench there have you?


Bell. No, then I would not stop you, but it is a Woman of Condition.


Sir Char. How my Blood chills -- it is Lucinda.


Bell. The same; She had a Mind to see my Pictures, I know not if she is willing
to be seen.


Sir. Char. You are a Happy Man -- Adieu.


Bell. Your Servant.


Luc. Sir Charles, I am glad to see you in Safety; Belvill left me abruptly --
to prevent a Duel he said you were engaged in -- I resolved to follow and
inquire after it. [Sir. Charles going off meets Lucinda and Betty, they both
start.]


Sir Char. I am happy if I created the least Concern in you, Madam. Hark ye
Belvill, doubtless you mistook the Lady's Name within [Aside to Belvill.]


Bell. Confusion! She here? Then I am caught.


Luc. Well, Sir Charles, all Danger over; now for the Pictures.


Bell. What the Devil shall I say. [Aside.]

Faith Madam you have surpised me a little, Batchellor's Lodgings are seldom
in Order -- please to take one turn in the Garden, and they shall be prepared
for you. Dear Charles bring me off this once, and I Will tell you all hereafter.
[Aside to Sir Charles.]


Sir Char. Come Madam, there is as many Curiosities in the Garden, as in the
Gallery; let him set his Things in Order, ha, ha. [Slyly.]


Luc. Make have then for my Uncle will stay Dinner. [Going.]


Enter Toylet Masked. Running to Lucinda. Toy. Madam there is a Chair -- I was
stopped --


Luc. Sweetheart I want no Chair, my Coach is here.


Toy. Oh wretched! What have I done now? [amaz'd.]


Bell. Ah! The Devil would not let me 'scape -- thus -- [Aside confounded.]


Luc. So, I apprehend the Disorder of your Rooms now Sir --


Sir Char. Ha, sure it is Toylet's Voice -- then she within should be Isabella
-- if I must Marry her my Honor is concerned, and I shall have occasion for my
Sword in earnest -- I Will to her House this Moment, e're I upbraid him.

[Exit.]
Luc. Perfidious Man -- to use such Artifice to me.


Bell. I confess it has a Face against me, but give me leave, and I will tell
you the whole Story --


Isab. Say you so, but I Will prevent that -- [ Isabella peeping.]


Enter Isabella. Luc. No Sir, you need not, her self will do it.


Bell. Gad, with all my Heart -- [Walking about in a Passion.]

Let her tell the plain Truth -- How came you here Madam?


Isab. How came I here, why was it not your own Appointment? Are you false? Did
you not come with Have and Rapture, and tell me what Excuses you had made -- to
get an Hour the Happiest of your Life?


Bell. God's Death and Hell! What Is the meaning of this? Did you not tell me Madam?
--


Luc. Go you are base, what Confusion you are in? Pray Madam what was your
Business here?


Isab. My Business Madam, the same with yours I suppose; if I had not loved
him, I had not come hither; and if you had not been Jealous you had not
followed us -- My Chair waits -- and so farewell, your Servant.

[Exit.]
Luc. Distraction! Affronted too -- very well, Sir. [Walking about.]


Bell. Upon my Faith Madam it is all a Trick -- they are two Devils; was ever Man
thus abused? Robin run, force them back -- I Will unmask them before your Face,
and make them confess their damned Design. [Passionately.]


Rob. Yes, yes, I Will bring them back with a Vengeance; put their Shams upon
Gentlemen.

[Exit Robin.]
Bell. Madam hear me but speak --


Luc. No! nor ever see thee more -- for now I am convinced there is not one of
all thy cursed flattering Race -- that is not Perjured in his turn.


Bell. By all the burning Passion in my Breast, which I feel your Anger blow yet
higher -- These Women came --


Luc. No matter why nor whence they came -- since I have seen them here -- Our
Conversation ends, approach me not, for by all the torturing Pangs of jealous
Love -- for I do find it Love, had I a Dagger I Would fix it in thy Heart or mine,
sooner than think of being reconciled

[Exit.]
Bell. It Is in vain to follow her. So, I thought by my self, what our Platonicks
would come to. But who can this Woman be? She is either set on, or else Egad
she is another Platonic, that has taken a liking to my Person too.

Enter Robin. Well Sirrah, where are they, what said they, what were they?


Rob. Devils, Sir, Devils! I believe they vanished -- for I could not find them
--


Bell. Sirrah you look as if you ly'd.


Rob. Faith and so I do; I got a Guinea to hold my Tongue. [Aside.]


Bell. Rascal! tell me who they are. [Takes him by the Shoulder.


Rob. Upon my Faith, Sir, I don't know; but to confess the Truth Sir, the Maid
pulled her Mask off, She was very pretty -- and said She was in Love with me;
and her Lady was a great Fortune, and desperately taken with you Sir: So I
thought 'twas pity to Hurt them, Sir, and let them go --


Bell. You did so Villain, have they stole nothing? Find them out again you Dog,
or I Will cut your Ears off -- I will be justified -- in Love with you, Vermin --
I shall have a Surgeon's Bill to pay I suppose before next Campaign, these are
common Jilts; call me a Chair, I Will to Lucinda's and use her Uncle's Interest
for my Peace -- To be thus plagued for nothing, 'twou'd vex a Stoic -- God's Death
had it been a real Intreague, there had been some Consolation in it, I find
Lucinda's Rage gives me real Pain.

Ask him who most affects the Rover's Part,
Caressing every Fair that will be kind,
If some one Woman reigns not in his Heart;
And is the Sovereign Mistress of his Mind.
[Exit.]
The End of the Second ACT.
ACT III.
Enter Mrs. Dowdy, Mrs. Brazon the Match-maker, Mrs. Wheedle the Milliner, Mrs.
Turnup the Manto-Maker, Mrs. Crispit the Tire-Woman, and Peeper her Maid --
They all seem Talking to her. Mrs. Dowdy, We Will, we will la you now, la you now
Shour and Shour you will Gally me.


Turnup, Here Is your Ladyships Manto and Petticoat.


Mrs. Dowdy, Ladyship, why what a main difference is here between this Town and
the Country -- I was never called above Forsooth in all my Life -- Mercy on me,
why you ha spoiled my Petticoat mun, zee Peeper, She has cut it in a Thousand
Bits.


Peep. Oh, that is the Fashion, these are Furbelows Madam -- it is the prettiest
made Coat --


Mrs. Dowdy. Furbelow's, a murrain take 'em, they spoil all the Zilk -- good
strange, shour London Women do nothing but study Vashions, they never mind
their Dairy I warant 'em.


Turn. Ladies have no other employment for their Brain -- and our Art lies in
hiding the defects of Nature -- Furbelows upwards, were devised for those that
have no Hips, and too large ones, brought up the full-bottom'd Furbelows.


Millin. And a long Neck and a hollow Breast, first made use of the Stinkirk --
and here is a delicate one for your Ladyship -- I have a Book in my Pocket just
come from France, Entitled, The Elements of the Toylet --


Mrs. Doud. Elements, mercy on me! what do they get up into the Sky now?


Peep. A Learned Author to be sure -- let me see that Mrs. Wheedle.


Millin. Here Mrs. Peeper, it is the Second Volume; the First only shows an
Alphabetical Index of the most notable Pieces which enter into the Composition
of a Comode.


Mrs. Dowd. Well, I shall never mind these hard Names; Oh Sirs, Peeper, what
swinging Cathedral Headgeer is this?


Peep. Oh, Modish French Night-Clothes; Madam, what is here -- all sorts of
Dresses painted to the Life -- Ha, ha, ha, Head-cloaths to shorten the Face --
Favorites to raise the Forehead -- to heighten flat Cheeks flying Cornets --
four Pinners to help narrow Foreheads and long Noses, and very forward, to make
the Eyes look Languishing


Mrs. Dowd. Ay, that Peeper, double it down, Oh, I love Languishing. [Puts on
an awkward Languish.]


Peep. Take it and read it at your leisure, Madam.


Mrs. Dowdy. I shall never ha done shour zeeing all my vine things. [Tumbling
her things over.]

Hy day, what is these two pieces of Band-Box for?


Tur. It Is Past board Madam, for your Ladyship's Rump.


Mrs. Dowdy. A Rump, ho, ho, ho, has Cousin Isbel a Rump, Peeper?


Peep. Certainly Madam.


Mrs. Dowdy. If Cousin has one, as I hope to be Kissed -- I Will have it Mrs.
Turnup.


Crispit. Will your Ladyship sit down and let me shape your Eyebrows? [She
nips her Eyebrows, she flies up and roars out.]


Mrs. Dowdy. Ods flesh, the Devil's in you, I think, what will you tear all the
Hair off? a murrain take ye, an this be your shaping.


Millin. Be pleased to put on the Addition Madam.


Mrs. Dowdy. What does she mean now? To pull my Skin off mehap next; ha Peper,
are these your London Vashions?


Peeper. No, no, Addition is only Paint, Madam.


Mrs. Dowdy. Paint Mistress, od I Have a good mind to hit you a dows of the Chops,
zo I have, what de ye take me for a Whore, because I Am come to London, ha?
Paint quoth a.


Peep. Fie, fie, Madam, Women of the first Rank think it no Crime to help Nature
in the Complexion.


Mrs. Dowdy. Zay you zo? Nay, my Skin was ever counted none of the best -- well
we'll zhut the Door then.


Millin. There you are in the wrong again, Madam; our Ladies make no scruple of
letting all the World see 'em lay it on --


Mrs. Dowdy. Well, in my Conscience and Zoul, they care not what they zhow here
--


Peep. Madam, your Dancing Master.


Mrs. Dowdy. O lack, get all you into the next Room, and stay for me there.


Mrs. Braz. Madam, you promised to hear a word from me about Sir John Sharper
--

[Exit Mrs. Brazen.
Mrs. Dowdy, Zo I will by and by.


Enter Caper the Dancing Master. Caper. Will your Ladyship please to take a
Dance?


Mrs. Dowdy. Pshaw, I hate your One, Two, Three, teach me a London Dance mun.


Caper, I Will lead you a Courant Madam.


Mrs. Dowdy. Ay, a Rant, with all my Heart, I dan't understand the Names, let
en be a Dance, and it is well enough. [He leads her about.]

Hy, hy, do you call this Dancing? ads heartlikins, in my thoughts it is plain
Walking; I Will show you one of our Country Dances; play me a Jig. [Dances an
awkward Jig.]


Caper. Oh dear, Madam you will quite spoil your Steps.


Mrs. Dowdy. Dan't tell me that -- I was counted one of the best Dancers in all
our Parish, zo I was


Peep. Ay, round a May Pole -- There are Fellows now in this Town so wretched,
that to purchase this Woman's Wealth, would to her Face swear she is an Angel.

[Exit.
Turnup. True; but if they had her once, would use her like the Devil -- [This
while the Dancing Master is setting her Arms and Breast.]


Enter Peeper. Peep. Madam, your Singing-Master.

[Exit Dancing-Mast.]
Mrs. Dowdy. O la, I cannot Dance no more now.


Enter Singing-Master, [Preparing his Papers.] Singing-Mast. Are you ready,
Madam?


Mrs. Dowdy. Ay, ay, Man.


Singing-Mast. Fa, la, mi, Sol.


Mrs. Dowdy. Louk you Friend, I cannot speak Outlandish, but I intend to learn;
I Am to have a Master come.


Singing-Mast. This is not Outlandish, Madam, it is only the Notes to try your
Voice.


Mrs. Dowdy. Nay, nay, and that be all, I Will zing you a Zong de ye see, and
show you my Voice shour

[Sings a Country Song.] SONG
AS I walked forth one May Morning,
I heard a pretty Maid sweetly Sing
As she sat under the Cow a Milking,
Sing I shall be Married a Tuesday;
I mun look Smug upon Tuesday.
I prithee Sweetheart what makes thee to Marry,
Is your Maidenhead grown a Burden to carry?
Or are you afraid that you shall Miscarry?
I prithe now tarry till Wednesday.
I pray good Sir, don't wish me such ill,
I have kept it these Seven Years against my own Will;
I have made a Vow, and I will it fulfill,
That I will be Married on Tuesday,
So I mun look Smug upon Tuesday.
A Tuesday Morn it will be all my care
To powder my Locks and to curl up my Hair,
And two pretty Maids for to wait on me there;
So I mun look Smug upon Tuesday;
So Fine and so Smug upon Tuesday.
Then two Young Men to the Church will me bring,
Where my Husband will give me a gay Gold Ring,
But at Night he will give me a far better thing;
So I mun look Smug upon Tuesday,
So Fine and so Smug upon Tuesday.

Peep. Madam, you will not be dressed in your New Clothes by that time Captain
Belvill comes.


Mrs. Dowdy. Ods Flesh well thought on, I can Learn no more this Morning, [Exit
Singing-Master.]

But Peeper, when did he zay he would come?


Peep. In two Hours, Madam.


Mrs. Dowdy. Well, I shall Charm him zure -- odso, but where is Cousin Bell to
day; you must vetch her mun to zee my vine Things, she will tell me an they be
vite or not --


Peeper. Bless me Madam, she is gone away to the Bath, in my Lady Flounce's
Coach this Morning.


Mrs. Dowdy. How! gone a hundred Mile and never bid one Good bye.


Peep. Oh dear, Madam, London Ladies never stand upon Ceremony -- why, Sir
Charles Richly that is to marry her, knew nothing of it -- he was here just now
to enquire for her, and was extremely Surpised.


Mrs. Dowdy. Ad she will make a rare Wife I Will war rant her -- and she has zuch
Frolicks -- well, but you zay the Captain will come; but an he don't come soon,
Mrs. Brazon will bring me a Squire, or a Knight, I tell you that.


Peep. Oh Madam, Belvill is the Sweetest, Noblest Gentleman; besides, we should
Encourage those that Defend us.


Mrs. Dowdy. Nay, for that matter I dan't mind, I like a Zouldier, but not for
that Reason, de ye zee, there is Convenience in it, for now I have learned to be
a Gentlewoman, I Will do as the Gentle Volk do, I Will not have another Husband
dangling at my Tail, like our Roger, that I could never spend a Shilling at a
Wake or a Gossipping, but I must be called to an Account for it; but methinks he
hangs off mainly.


Peeper. Shall I tell you, he is reckoned the Handsomest Man in Town, all the
Ladies are in Love with him; if you don't mind your Hits, you will lose him. The
only way for a Widow to secure a Young Gentleman, is to let him into her
Estate; now Madam, did he once see the Writings I have seen, I Would engage him
yours.


Mrs. Dowdy. But I dan't know if it be safe or no, for I remember Roger would
never let me zee 'em in all his Life, but now he is Dead -- why what care I who
zee'n; I Will carry him to my Trunk and show him all --


Peep. Oh Madam, do it decently, I Will fetch out your Trunk, and you shall
pretend to be looking over some Mortgage, and ask his Advice in it.


Mrs. Dowdy. Ay, ay, Wench, that will do, vetch 'em -- [Exit Peeper.]

Well, I long till I am Dizned zo I do -- come, come.

Re-enter Peeper with the Trunk. Zetten down, and let me put on my vine Rigging
Wench, Hark! zombody Knocks --


Peep. Odso Mr. Belvil's here -- he is come sooner than he promised, which shows
the greater Passion.


Mrs. Dowdy, A murrain take these People, they staid Chattering so long, or I
might have been Dressed now; hold away. [Runs to the Trunk and takes up the
Papers.]


Enter Belvill. Peeper. I have kept my Word, Sir, there are the Papers
displayed. [Aside to Belvil.]


Belv. Honest Peeper -- now to keep my Word with this Old Gentleman, who has
once more reconciled me to his Neice -- Ha! Widow, how do thou do Widow?


Mrs. Dowdy. Do you understand Law Captain?


Belv. No Faith, the Sword's my Profession, yet there are some Cases I
understand; pray what is yours, Widow?


Mrs. Dowdy. Louk ye, I cannot Read these Lawyers Crampt Hand de zee, and I Would
pray you look 'em over a little, they may be your own another day.


Belv. A long day first, if thou -- art an Incumbent upon it -- with all my
Heart; this Industrious Wench has wrought her to my purpose. [Aside.] Sits
down.]

Let me see. [Reads.] An Account of the Estate of um, um --


Mrs. Dowdy. Did not I do it right now?


Peep. Oh, Excellent, Madam.


Mrs. Dowdy. Ay, ay, let me alone for Trivance, and siche --


Belv. A Deed of Trust for James Beaumont Esquire. Ha, the very Writing Sir
Thomas mentioned -- this must along with me -- [Puts it up.] Why, you are a
Fortune for a Lord, Widow.


Mrs. Dowdy. Nay, nay, dan't Joak -- I have something to trust to you zee
Captain; you shall have warm Winter Quarters Captain; Ho, ho --


Belv. Well said, Widow, I Will Kiss thee for that In Faith.


Mrs. Dowdy. Pshaw, zee now how you all white a Body, but your Breath is zo
zweet --


Belv. I wish I could say the same by yours. [Aside.]


Mrs. Dowdy. Od in my mind a smells like a Nosegay -- pray Captain let me smell
it again.


Belv. Withal my Heart. [Kisses her again.]


Mrs. Dowdy. I like him mainly; would it was over once, that I might have'm all
to my self -- [Aside.]


Belv. Oh, the Monster grows so Loving, that if Robin comes not to my Rescue,
as I ordered him, I shall be Smothered.


Mrs. Dowdy. Zhour, and zhour, you have Bewitched me Captain; I Am all in a
trembling Fit, and my Flesh glows like an Oven zo it does.


Peep. Oh, her Condition is easily to be guessed; I have been in such a Twitter
my self before now.


Enter Robin hastily. Rob. Sir, Sir! The General stays in his Coach to speak
with you.


Bell. My dear Widow I must beg your Pardon at this time.


Mrs. Dowdy, But when will you come again Captain? they zay it is very unlucky
to be long a Wooing. [Aside.]


Bell. I Will speak to the Man in Black this Evening Widow, and then --


Mrs. Dowdy, Ay, Ay, I know what is to be done then as well as e're a Londoner
of 'em all. [Aside.]


Bell. to Peeper.] Hark ye I don't think her Rich enough, manage your Affairs
with Sir John Sharper, do you hear? But there is thy Fee --

[Exit.]
Mrs. Dowdy, Well I shall carry a handzomer Man into Zomerzetshire than the
High Sheriff of the County: Come Peeper, come in and let me Dress, for zhour if
I had had all this vine Gear on, a would ha Married me now. --

[Exit.]
Peeper, As much as ever --

[Exit.]
SCENE the outside of Lucinda's House.
Enter Isabella Dressed like a Country-Maid with Toylet. Toy. A tite Country
Lass, hang me Madam if I should know you.


Isab. I would not have you, I ought to be disguised for my purpose.


Toy. But Madam do you think Lucinda does not know her Tenant's Daughter that
is coming up to London, which you are to Personate?


Isab. No, no, She never saw her; her Tailor has informed me of every
Circumstance; him I have bribed to my Interest; here he comes, get you gone, you
have Belvill's Key, be ready for all my Orders; Act as I directed, and preserve
your Acquaintance with Robin.


Toy. Fear me not --

[Exit.]
Isab. Well Mr. Shread, do you think you can manage this Affair?


Shread, Manage it Madam! What is it I cannot do for this Purse? Why Madam I can
work Miracles! I can steal as much out of a Pair of Breeches as will make a
Coat; and for telling a Lie with an honest Face, let little Shread alone.


Isab. I have been so much with my Cousin Dowdy since She came to Town, I
warrant I hit the Country Dialect -- Come, Knock at the Door. [He knocks.]


Enter Footman. Shread, Sir pray let your Lady know here is a young
Country-Maid, Farmer Rent-Land's Daughter, come to wait on her.


Foot. Come in and I Will acquaint my Lady --

[Exeunt.]
Re-enter Isabella and Shread as into the House. Isab. She Is coming, and
Belvill's here, I see his Footman; now if I Am but received I shall be a Spy
upon their Actions, watch all their Turns, and break their Measures.


Enter Lucinda. Luc. How de do Mr. Shread -- is this the Daughter of Farmer
Rentland, that he writ to me about?


Isab. Yes and please you forsooth Madam, and I have another Letter from Vather
in my Pouch -- [Looking for a Letter.]


Shread, Madam the Girl is a little Clownish, her Father's my Cousin, he writ
to me to meet her at the Carriers and bring her to your Ladyship.


Luc. Very well, your Father's an honest Man, he desires me to let you be in my
House till he comes up to Town in order to put you to the Change -- you are
welcome -- She is very pretty. Sweetheart don't you wonder at this fine City?


Isab. I kno'nt how vine it is yet, for one can zee naught for Crowd, I suppose
it is Vair Time, there is zuch -- thrusting and squeezing.


Shread, She appears Rough to your Ladyship, but the Girl has good natural
Parts and apt to learn --


Luc. I like her Plainness, leave her with me, I Will take great Care of her.


Shread, Yes, Madam; good bye Cousin.


Isab. Good bye -- you will bring my Bundle and my Box -- besure you wait without
for my farther Orders.


Shread. I will -- your Servant Madam.

[Exit.]
Luc. What Is your Name fair Maid?


Isab. Dorothy and please you.


Luc. And do you think you shall be contented to stay with me till your Father
comes to Town Mrs. Dorothy?


Isab. Contented forsooth! od zhour, and zhour, I never saw naught zo Handsome
in all the Days of my Breath. Zhour I could look at you all Day.


Luc. Does the Country teach Flattery too?


Enter Belvill. Bell. Madam, where are you? we shall be too late for the Show.


Isab. Zhow! Oh dear forsooth take me with you to zee the Zhow -- How my Heart
beats. [Aside.]


Bell. What pretty Country Girl is this?


Luc. One of my Tenant's Daughters; we'll take her with us to your Lodging.


Isab. To his Lodgings, mum -- now a dispatch to Toylet. I Will fit you there.
[Aside.]


Bell. With all my Heart, there is Innocence and Beauty in her Face; if you
please to get ready, Madam, I have only two Words to dispatch with your Uncle
and I Will attend you.


Luc. Here he comes Sir -- we'll leave you; Come Mrs. Dorothy.


Isab. Yes forsooth --


Enter Sir. Thomas. Thus concealed, if none my Plot discover,
This Country Girl may Cheat you of your Lover.
[Exit.]
Bell. Ha, Sir Thomas, what would you Reward the Man with that should bring you
the Writings you desired? ha Friend?


Sir Tho. Say^^ thou my Boy! I would give him, let me see what would I give him
-- I would give him as much as I have given to the Lawyers to no purpose, which
is full Fifteen Hundred Pounds. But have thou got 'em my Hero?


Bell. Fifteen Hundred Pound, pish; will you give me your Niece?


Sir Tho. Fie, fie, fie, a Wife! Why the Devil should a young Fellow's Head run of
Marriage?


Bell. Because a young Fellow is very much in Love.


Sir. Tho. Why Love her Boy, I would have thee Love her, but prithee talk no
more of Marriage -- but let me see the Writings.


Bell. Love her! Why what does he mean -- he would not have me lie with her sure
-- See 'em, why here they are -- but I must know what right you have to these
Papers Sir. Thomas ever I part with them, for I would not be guilty of a base
Action; besides the Widow and the whole Estate is at my Service -- I can Marry
her.


Sir Tho. I had rather see thee Hanged -- I Will give you my Honor that nothing
shall redound to your Disgrace in this Affair. Surely you may take my Word
young Man.


Bell. It never shall be scrupled by me; there, take 'em.


Sir. Tho. Most Joyfully: Ay, these are they, let me Embrace thee my Boy for
this good Service -- But hark ye, don't you Marry that ill-manner'd Jug, the
Relict of a cheating old Rogue, that has not left a Foot of Estate but what he
deserved to be Hanged for.


Bell. In my Conscience this old Fellow would have me Marry no Body; what a
Devil does he pretend to? Egad I wish he does not lay claim to me for his Son
at last.

Enter Sir Charles. Ha! Sir Charles, what say thou, would not Matrimony
agree with thee, if thou liked the Woman?


Sir Cha. Or with any Man certainly.


Sir Tho. Why don't you Marry then Sir Charles?


Sir Char. Because I cannot have the Woman I like Sir Thomas, and she that I Am
destined for, neither likes me, nor I her, and to show the true Nature of a
Wife before she wears the Title, she is gone to the Bath this Morning without
taking Leave.


Sir Tho. Nay, if she has such an early Inclination to the Bath, thank thy
Stars thou art not Married Boy, for the Bath is a Pregnant Place; I know a
Virgin that went there to be cured of the Green Sickness, and came back with a
Timpany, ha, ha, ha.


Bell. Why hark ye, Sir Charles, how will you keep your Word then, no
Pretentions to Lucinda, since you cannot produce your Mistress.


Sir Tho. How Is that, how is that, have thou a Mind to my Neice, Knight, she is a
witty Baggage, I tell you that, and a weighty one too, twenty Thousand Pound
beside my Blessing, court her, win her, and wear her.


Bell. The Devil, what because he has a Title?


Sir Tho. And a good Estate Belvill, put in that.


Bell. Sink the Estate, the Brave despise it.


Sir Tho. Yet the Bold fight for it.


Bell. No, it is for Honor we hazard Life, and Ease, to preserve ungrateful Men
like you, in what does he merit Lucinda more than I -- nor shall he dare think
of her while I wear this. [Lays his Hand on his Sword.


Sir Cha. Hownot dare! such Language, Sir, I shall not take, though from a Friend.


Bell. Nor a Friend shall not take a Mistress from me, Sir.


Sir Tho. Mettled Lads in faith -- A Mistress Sir, pray what Hopes have you had
relating to that Affair?


Bell. Hopes Sir, did not you give me Leave to love her?


Sir Tho. But as I take it, that was not Leave to marry her.


Bell. Did you not take Pains to reconcile us to Day?


Sir Tho. True, because I thought her in the Wrong.


Bell. And have you not promised she shall come to my Lodgings to see the
Ambassador go by? Do you make any Scruple of letting her be seen in my Company.


Sir Tho. No, for I don't think thee Scandalous, and she shall come to thy
Lodgings, and I Will come with her; yet this is nothing to the Purpose -- Thou
art a pretty Fellow faith -- but a Little too impudent to expect Twenty
Thousand Pound, with nothing but a red Coat and a Commission.


Bell. Is this your Probity, I shall begin to suspect every Thing, I find why
you extorted the Promise from me, never to marry her without your Consent.


Sir Tho. You shall have no Cause to blame me, I am, and will be thy Friend --
Sir Charles you are out of Humor, never mind the young Warrior, by Mars the
God of War, thou have my Consent, address her Man.


Bell. So has all the Creation, I think -- What a Pox does this old Fellow aim
at! --


Sir Char. I am not to be detered by his Threats; but it is Lucinda must decide
this.


Bell. No, even if she consent, you shall dispute the Prize with me.


Sir Char. Let it come to that, ye Fates, and see how gladly I would meet thee.


Bell. If you are so hot, let us dispatch it now. [Lays his Hand to's Sword.


Sir Char. With all my Heart --


Sir Tho. Hold, hold, I Will have no Fighting this Day, to Morrow as you please.


Bell. Well then, to Day we have done.


Sir Char. I am always to be found; Farewell --

[Exit.
Sir Tho. Come put off your ill Humor, and let us go see the Show Boy --


Bell. Egad this is a strange unaccountable old Gentleman.


The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
Enter Mrs. Dowdy dressed extravagantly in French Night-Cloaths and Furbelows,
with Peeper. Mrs. Dow. LA ye now, la ye now, stand away from the Glass, will
you, look, look, I shall never adon staring at my zelf, I Am zhour I Am viner
than any of our Volk in Taunton; good Sirs, if old Roger Dowdy were alive, and
zeen me thisen, he would zwear I was going to fly away.


Peep. Ah Madam, he understood no better -- I think you look as well as any
Lady at Court.


Mrs. Dow. Nea, nea, I always thought I should look like other Volk an I was
but Clad as vinely, and zo I used to tell Roger, well, and do I zeem zo vitty
Peeper, don't thik Band-Box thrust out ones Tail rarely? Od one might carry a
Grist to Mill on it, as well as on a Packsadde, ho, ho, ho.


Peep. You are exact from Head to Foot.


Mrs. Dow. Ay, an't I mun, zee my Shoes; [pulls up her Coat a little.] but
these zilken Hose are woundy Cold; have NOT I got too many Beauty Spots on, in my
Mind now my Vace louks just like a Plumb-Cake var all the World -- Zhour I
shall never like thik Head-Gear, one must always louk vore-right, vor the Duce
a Bit one can zee of either Zide -- Faugh, I hate this red Stuff upon my Lips,
I cannot vorbear liking 'em, and it may be Poison for ought I know.


Enter Mrs. Brazen. Mrs. Braz. Good Morrow to your Ladyship, bless me, sure I Am
mistaken it is not the same!


Mrs. Dow. The very zame Mrs. Brazen, but am I zo changed indeed now?


Mrs. Braz. Changed, why you are a Cherubim.


Mrs. Dow. 'Parel Sheaps you know.


Mrs. Braz. Why you will kill Sir John, at first Sight, Madam.


Mrs. Dow. Oh dear, I hope not.


Mrs. Braz. He waits without poor Gentleman, but little knows the Danger he is
in -- Shall I admit him Madam?


Mrs. Dow. Why realy now Mrs. Brazen, I am zorry the Person of Quality should
lose his Labor, but I cannot help it -- He should ha com'd zooner, de ye zee
vor I Am engaged.


Mrs. Braz. How Madam, you have not served me so I hope? -- Make a Fool of a
Gentleman of his Fortune, that keeps his Coach, and four Footmen, besides a
Valet-de-Chambre, it is a Shame -- He could have made you a Lady Madam --


Mrs. Dow. His own Coach, and a Lady, zay ye; nay, nay, don't be in a Passion
-- Od I should like a Coach, and Ladyship hugely -- Shall I zee him Peeper?


Peep. By all means see him Madam.


Mrs. Dow. Ay but will not the Captain think me valse hearted then?


Peep. False hearted, Madam! Why Ladies here are distinguished by the Number of
their humble Servants --


Mrs. Braz. And scarce know two Hours before they Marry which to choose -- There
was my Lady Waver, had three Gentlemen fancied her Wedding Clothes, and then
threw Dies which of the three should have her --


Mr. Dow. Ha, ha, ha, by the Mass that is very pretty, why let him come in then
-- But do you realy think the Captain will not break his Heart?


Peep. Oh, no no, you need not fear that, perhaps He has two or three
Mistresses.


Mrs. Braz. My dear Lady I Will fetch him this Minute --

[Exit.
Mrs. Dow. Zay you zo, nay an it be the vashon, I Am resolved to have as many
Zweet hearts as I can get -- Here put up my Ban Box, zet my voretop, and brush
my Gown and make me vity --


Peep. So, so, you are exact now Madam.


Enter Mrs. Brazen, and Sharper. Mrs. Braz. There Is the Lady, Sir John.


Sharp. You need not tell me which is She, such Beauty is remarkable, her Eyes
cast a Luster, bright as the Meridian Sun, which dazles all beholders.


Mrs. Dow. Mercy on me, what high Speaking is this? -- Zo I suppose they talk
at Court -- Oh dear Sir, you Gentlemen are zo voll of your Jears, that we
Country Volk dan't know what to zay to you.


Sharp. What a Shape is there!


Mrs. Dow. That Is my Ban-Box -- [Aside.


Sharp. What a Complexion!


Mrs. Dow. That Is my Paint -- Vor they zay my Complexion was but, zo, zo, --
[Aside.


Sharp, What Ruby Lips!


Mrs. Dow. I Am glad to hear that -- I was afraid I had licked it all off.
[Aside.


Peep. I swear he is a well bread Gentleman.


Mrs. Braz. A Courtier every Inch of him.


Sharp. Oh Mrs. Brazen, if you have brought me to the Sight of all these
Charms, and she should prove inexorable.


Mrs. Braz. Goodness forbid.


Sharp. Oh I Am a dead Man Mrs. Brazen -- No Compassion Madam, for a poor dying
Lover --


Mrs. Braz. Speak Comfort to him Madam, he is just ready to Swoon.


Mrs. Dow. Why, what can I zay Mrs. Brazen -- Will the Gentleman drink a little
Cherry-Brandy --


Mrs. Braz. Brandy Madam, ads Heart, is that a Cordial for a dying Lover --


Mrs. Dow. Why it is my Cordial when I Am not well, Mrs. Brazen.


Mrs. Braz. A Word, a Look, a Smile revives him.


Mrs. Dow. Good Sirs, is it possible you can be zo zmitten Sir?


Sharp. It is the first Wound I ever received, though I have given Thousands, and
met my Enemies in Clouds of Smoke, and Sheets of Fire, and with this good Sword
have made my Way --


Mrs. Dow. Ah dan't draw it good Sir -- He is a brave Soldier I warrant him.


Peep. I protest Madam, I begin to pity him -- You can never let such a great
Man die.


Mrs. Dow. Ay but then the Captain will die, what shall I do?


Mrs. Braz. Do Madam, let us go into your Closet, and taste some of your
Cherry-Brandy; oh dear, oh dear -- I am very Faint, take her by the Hand, Sir
John.


Mrs. Dow. Indeed I cannot, for to tell you the Truth, I am promised --


Sharp. Promised -- I Will hunt the World but I will find my Rival out, rip up
his Breast, and upon my Sword's Point send you the Heart you dote on.


Mrs. Dow. Oh hold you, hold you, good Sir John -- What zhall I do to prevent
Murder?


Mrs. Braz. Give him your Hand, and take him into your Closet, I say, there
we'll appease him I warrant you.


Mrs. Dow. Well, well, come into the Closet then; mercy on me, I was never zo
loved before zhour.

[Exit.
Mrs. Braz. Now for my Thousand Pound --

[Exit.
Peep. Pretty well for the first Time; now to try how Generous he will be to me
-- If you don't disburse Sir John, for all your Go between, I Will sooner match
my Mistress to your Valet, I promise you that.

[Exit.
SCENE Belvill's Lodgings.
Enter Belvill, Sir Thomas, Lucinda, Isabella and Robin. Sir Tho. Well, and
what have thou got to treat us Boy? ha!


Bell. You shall have what you will Sir Thomas, this Lady shall name.


Luc. Uncle you retain the old Country Custom, all for Eating and Drinking; I
am for the Show.


Sir Tho. But what says my little Somersetsbire Lass, I warrant a Cheesecake
would go down with you now.


Isa. No I thank you Zir, my Belly's full evads, my thinks this is a huge vine
House.


Sir Tho. And in Troth thou art huge Pretty, are all the Farmers Daughters in
Somersetshire thus Handsome?


Isa. Yes indeed, and Handsomer too.


Sir Tho. Neice I Will gather your Rents next Year in that Country my self -- I
will.


Luc. So Mrs. Dorothy, I think you have made a Conquest here.


Isa. I don't know what you mean Madam.


Sir Tho. In Faith this is a pretey Rogue.


Luc. But this Room does not look upon the Pall Mall.


Bell. No Madam, but the next does; open the Door Robin.


Rob. [aside to him.] I never saw the Key since the strange Women were here.


Luc. What, Whispering again!


Bell. You careless Rascal, here take my Key.


Rob. The Devil, the Devil --

[ Robin goes to open the Door, flies back, and cries out.
Toy. Inhuman Monster, must I be exposed --


[Enter Toylet richly Dressed and Masked. Luc. Exposed, it is I am exposed;
Confusion, another Woman.


Sir Tho. How, how is this Belvill -- What, forgot to let your Mistress out this
Morning? ha!


Bell. My Mistress, 'sdeath, Hell and Furies --


Luc. Do not counterfeit Surprise, this is a palpable Abuse.


Sir Tho. Why truly Neice it does appear a Sort of an Abuse as a Man may say;
but let us hear what Defense he can make --


Bell. Defense -- I hope it needs none; what End could I have in this -- I Am
sure it looks more like a Trick upon me.


Luc. What mean you Sir, do you suspect I Would give my self the Trouble to put a
Trick upon you -- Oh Audacious!


Sir Tho. Hold, hold, no hard Words before we know for what.


Isa. [Going up to Toylet.] Get you off, get you off.


Rob. Nay, nay, egad I Will see whether you be Flesh and Blood, Spirit, or the
Devil. [Stops her.


Toy. Ah, if this Fool persists we are discovered -- I must show him my Face --
You know not what you do, it is I.


Rob. I, and how came I hither?


Toy. I longed to see you, and that I might charm you the more, I dressed my self
in my Mistresses Clothes, and came in hopes to meet you alone, being caught, I
was forced to say any thing, let me go, or we shall never meet again.


Rob. Get you gone, if my Master finds it out, my Bones will pay for it.

[Exit Toylet.
Luc. Absurdity! It has indeed a Face of Truth to have People haunt your
Lodgings that you know nothing of.


Isa. Nay, now I zee it is true what we Country Volk zay, that the London Men
are all as valse as the Devil.


Bell. What gone again -- Rascal, which Way went she? Why did not you stop the
Fiend, for 'twas a Fiend I am sure.


Rob. If you think so Sir, why should you be Angry? For who could stop the
Devil.


Bell. I Will make you fetch the Devil Sirrah if she be gone. [Looking about.


Rob. I Will try Sir. [Going.


Isa. Nay, nay, that is sending the Devil after his Dam, as we zay in
Zomersetshire, my poor Judgment tells me, he is no vit Person to zend after her
zhour.


Luc. Right, his Man doubtless is in the Secret -- Even this Innocent cau find
out your Deceit.


Bell. Deceit, stay here Dog.


Rob. With all my Heart.


Bell. Madam send who you please -- 'sdeath. [Stamps, and seems to persuade Luc.


Isa. Let me go forsooth, I Am zhour I know her Gown again -- I minded her when
she sliv'd off.


Sir Tho. Ay, ay, let little Rosy Cheek go -- Why what a Busle is here about a
Gypsy -- But thou wilt not find the Way back my Girl.


Isa. Oh never vear me, I Have an English Tongue in my Head -- I Have vound the Way
over Heaths, Copses, and Commons you would be mazed in.

[Exit.
Luc. Your Words are vain, back to the Nations you have been bred in, where
Women are so coming to your Wishes, there needs no Truth nor Constancy.


Bell. Truth -- I think Truth's my Foe, for I never made so much use of her to
so little Purpose in my Life, I believe you wished a Quarrel, and wanted only
Opportunity, else what I Have said would have convinced you.


Luc. Believe so still, and see my Face no more.

[Exit.
Sir Tho. Why Neice, Neice, will not you stay for little Somersetsbire -- She Is
gone -- Look ye now, did not I tell you Matrimony would not agree with you, yet
you would Marry I warrant -- Take my Word for it, you are not made for one
another.


Bell. I wish we had never seen one another. [Walking about disordered.


Enter Isabella. Isa. I ha vound her in faith.


Bell. Ha, and who is she?


Isa. A very vine Lady I asure you that, but where is Mistress? var I shall not
tell you what zhe zaid to me.


Sir Tho. Oh she is gone stark Mad Child -- Prithee tell as Reasonable Folks --


Bell. Said, why did thou speak to her?


Isa. Yes marry did I, and she got into a huge vine Coach, zo zhe did, and
called me into her, and pulled off her Vizard, and zhow'd me the vinest Vace
that ever I zaw, zhour, and zhour 'twas as bright as the Zun, she zaid she was
in Love with you to distraction mun, and vowed she would have you whatzomever
it cost her.


Rob. What a confounded Lie has this Country Toad told? And egad I dare not
contradict her. [Aside.


Sir Tho. Why hark ye Belvill, don't your Chops water at this Story, ha? My
Hero! adod thou were wrapped up in thy Mother's -- Faith thou were, thou were I
faith Boy --


Bell. Pishaw, she does not know a Woman of Condition from an Orange Wench --
Some tawdry Drab in a Hackney-Coach.


Rob. He makes very bold with my Mistress truly. [Aside.


Isab. Nay this was no Stage Coach I Am Zhour, it was as rich and as full of
Tossels, as Squire Pensilly's last Exeter Zize.


Sir Tho. What not warm yet? Why it may be a Duchess for ought you know --


Bell. The Devil -- Sir Thomas, either reconcile me once more to your Niece, or
by Jove I Will discover the Grand Secret, and set the Widow upon your Back.


Sir Tho. Here Is a Dog now, in my Conscience, I believe you would make a good
States Man -- Sirrah, what the Action you do in the Morning, will you be such a
Rogue to Peach in the Afternoon?


Isab. I Am out at all this -- Sure he was born without Curiosity -- Or is grown
Constant to torment me. [Aside.

But Sir, zhan't we go home to my Lady? Mahap Zhee may be Zick She Is vexed zo.


Bell. And pretty Creature will not you speak for me?


Isab. No by my Troth sha'n't I, I believe you are valse, zo I do.


Sir Tho. Come along Dolly. [Takes her by the Arm.] Ah such an Eye, an such a
-- Come along Dolly -- Let me see you in the Evening, de you hear Belvill, and
if the Lady comes again with Squire Pensilly's Coach, strike her Boy, strike
her.

[Exit.
Isab. Your Zervant, Sir.

[Exit.
Bell. What will be the Event of this? -- What Woman could this be?


Rob. Ha, ha, ha.


Bell. Why do you Snear Sirrah?


Rob. Ah Sir, I would tell you, if I durst --


Bell. What is it you would tell me? Out with it.


Rob. Ay, but will you forgive me, Sir?


Bell. If thou can explain this Riddle, I will.


Rob. Why then Sir, all that this Country Wench has told you, is a notorious
Lie.


Bell. How do you know that?


Rob. Because Sir, the Woman that was here is a Mistress of mine, who lodges at
the next Door.


Bell. A Mistress of yours Sirrah in that Garb -- What was her Business, and how
do you know it?


Rob. Sir, she showed me her Face, and told me she came to see me, the Clothes
she said were her Ladies, I suppose she had a Mind to captivate me, it is the
very Maid to that very Lady that you left in your Lodgings to Day Sir, and she
told me too by the by, Sir, that her Mistress is no more married than you are.


Bell. There must be something in this more than I can find out -- Egad I Will
endeavor to see her at least -- Hark ye Sirrah, fetch me this Woman instantly.


Rob. Od so, yonder she goes --

[Exit.
Bell. They may talk what they will of Spain, but for my part, I think the
English Women can manage an Intreague with the best of them.


Enter Robin and Toylet. Rob. Here she is Sir, trembling Ripe, answer for your
self now.


Bell. Pray tell me Mistress, why is my Lodgings your Randezvous, and what do
you design by those Appearances?


Toy. Dissembling Varlet, to betray me to thy Master -- Look ye Sir, since I Am
caught, the Truth shall out; for my Part I only obeyed the Commands of my Lady,
as we Servants must you know.


Bell. Very good, but prithee who is your Lady Child?


Rob. Ay there is the Query --


Toy. It Is my Lady Elizabeth Lovemore, a great Heiress, and very beautiful, but
I cannot help saying I think her a little Mad to run after you, when there is
fifty dying for her.


Bell. Humph! -- And is she so very Handsome do thou say?


Toy. A reigning Toast -- admired even by her own Sex, and then you must allow
she is Handsome indeed --


Rob. Now I question if it would not puzzle Patridge the Almanac Maker, to
find out whether this Wench Lies or not?


Bell. And where does this beautiful Lady of thine live, ha?


Toy. In Golden-Square the third House of the Right Hand.


Rob. There I have trapt you Gentlewoman, don't you Lodge at next Door.


Toy. Yes, what then? Cannot my Lady Lodge me at any Door that she pleases, when
it is A Propo.


Bell. This is a whimsical Tale, however I resolve to see the End of it, name
your Time when I may see this fair Incognita; I Am not obdurate faith, she
shall not die, assure her that.


Rob. If she does he must have changed his Nature with the Country.


Toy. A Messenger in the Evening shall bring you to the House.

[Exit.
Bell. I Will expect it, it is in vain for me to think of Constancy, the Devil is
sure to throw something in my Way, to hinder my pious Resolutions.


Rob. I Am of your Mind Sir, and for my Part I have not found this singular
Passion turn to any Account with me, since you begun, therefore Sir, if you would
take my Advice, even arm your self with a Bottle of Burgundy, that you may
attack your new Mistress with the better Courage.


Bell. But Pox I find Lucinda still sticks here -- [Pointing at his Heart.


Rob. Nothing like a Glass to wash her away Sir.


Bell. It shall be so --

I Will Sing, and Drink, and Drown her in Champaign,
Then warmed with Wine, I Will break the slavish Chain,
And she shall sue to Conquer me again --
Ex.
SCENE Changes to Lucinda's House.
Enter Lucinda and Betty. Luc. Good Heavens, who would wish to be a Woman?
Nature's unerring Laws are still the same as when she formed the Order of the
World -- But Custom has debauched her Rules, and given Tyrant Men pretense to
glory in their Falsehood -- What Libertine ever lost a Friend for being so? Nor
stands he less in Fame for perjured Vows, that has betrayed a Thousand trusting
Maids, whilst we for every trifling Fault condemned, become the Subject of
licentious Tongues, yet sure our Crimes are Registered alike in the great
Impartial Book above --


Enter Footman. Foot. Madam, Sir Charles Richley to wait on you.


Luc. Bring him up -- [Exit Foo.] though I Am in no Humor to Entertain --


[Enter Sir Charles. Sir Char. Do I not invade your Privacy Madam? There seems
a Melancholy settled on your Brow.


Luc. I confess Sir Charles I Am under some disorder. [sighing.


Sir Cha. Happy the Man for whom those Sighs are paid, as I am wretched in
Despair.


Luc. Ha!


Sir Cha. Oh Belvill, unworthy of such Love or Beauty.


Luc. Named you not Belvill, Sir? What of him.


Sir Cha. I did -- May not a Wretch that is Raving in a Fever express his eager
Wishes for the Bowl, which he sees his healthful Friend pass by untasted.


Luc. I understand you not.


Sir Cha. Why should I conceal the Burning Pain, when perhaps another
Opportunity may never offer -- I love you Madam, not with a loose ungarded
Flame, but all the Faculties of my Soul are centered in you.


Luc. How -- Would you supplant your Friend? Is this like a Man of Honor?


Sir Cha. Oh I had died in Silence, had not he, the happy he provoked me, he
threatened me like a Boy, he threatened me, if I presumed to own my Passion --


Luc. Then it is me he Loves above the rest, alas! how apt are we to flatter our
Disease. [Aside.] And could you hope, that I should listen to an ungrateful Man?


Sir Cha. Alas! too much you do -- and since when next Belvill and I meet --
Fate only knows the Consequence -- Let me beg this Favor, though I confess it is
boldness, to ask if you design Belvill for your Husband?


Luc. You take indeed a Liberty beyond what I expected from you, but I Will not
disguise the Truth, of all Men living, Belvill made the first Impression in my
Heart, and could he clear himself of this late Accident, I think I should
prefer him.


Sir. Cha. Now who is ungrateful, he or I? Had I such Hopes, what Crowns Should
Bribe me to forswear the Marriage? [Half aside.


Luc. How Is that? Take heed how you traduce him, am I so cheap, that he should
Swear he would not Wed me, Confusion! it is False, and were he here, you durst
not for your Soul affirm it.


Sir Cha. Yes, since you have heard me, if a thousand Points were levelled at
my Breast, I would maintain it, and in the Face of Death proclaim he said, he
had Sworn never to Marry you.


Luc. Sworn, oh Impudence! Oh weakness in my self to listen to an unknown
Villain, his Mercenary Soul never harbored generous Thoughts: He should have
been with Gold rewarded for the Business of his Sword, and the Defense he made
against Midnight Robbers paid with Money, not a Heart. What did his base
degenerate Soul hope I should yield to loose Desires? And durst he make his
Friend his Confidant? Destraction! The bare Idea warms me to Revenge, and turns
me all to Fury.


Sir Cha. What have I said? Oh let me Madam, though against my self attest that
in all our Conversation from our first Aquaintance, I never knew him swerve
from Honor, what ever his Reasons were to Swear it --


Luc. Revoke not what thou hastsaid, but, hence begone, and leave me to my
Self, for Tigers, Wolves and Serpents are less hurtful than thy barbarous Kind.


Sir Cha. Your Commands does like the Hand of Fate forbid my Stay -- But oh!
remember it is the faithfullest of your Slaves Obeys you.

[Exit.
Enter Isabella. Isab. So, Sir Charles is gone -- His Exit is my Cue, may his
Love succeed I say -- I Will help it as forward as I can -- What an Air she gives
her Self -- The very bare imagination of slighted Love is the Devil I find --
Oh vorsooth an't you well, will you pleasen that I shall get you zomewhat --


Luc. Alas poor Innocence it is not in thy Power, to assuage the Torment of my
Mind -- did thou ever meet with an ungrateful Swain?


Isab. No, no they are all true in our Country, I heard of but one valse, and
he had been at London -- But you don't ask me about the toping Lady, I vollow'd
from the Vine Gentleman's Lodgings.


Luc. I had forgot it, did thou see her --


Isab. Did I, yes I did zhour.


Luc. And what was the Creature?


Isab. Nay, he can tell you that vorsooth better than I, for they are mainly
well acquainted, I vound that --


Luc. Ha! how did thou find it? Did the ugly Thing tell thee?


Isab. Nay in troth, she is not ugly vorsooth -- though I hate her for your Sake
--


Luc. Faithful, kind, good natured Creature. -- [Hugs her.


Isab. She gin me this Silver Book, and writ down where she lives, and desires
you of all Love to let her Zee you this Evening, and she will tell you all, I did
not zay one Word to him on it. -- [Gives her the Book.


Luc. A plain Direction -- I thought never to have concerned my self with this
vile Man's Affairs, but I Will detect him thoroughly -- then throw him from my
Heart for ever --


Isab. I hope so ever I have done. [Aside.


Luc. How blessed, how happy is this Rural Maid?
All Cares are banished from thy peaceful Breast:
Thou never were to luckless Love betrayed,
Unknowing of the Racks that break my Rest.
Thou never the Flattering Wiles of Men believed,
Deceiving none, thou art by none deceived.
[Exit leaning upon her Arm.
SCENE Changes to Mrs. Dowdy's Lodgings.
Enter Mrs. Dowdy, Sharper, Mrs. Brazen, Peeper, and Equipage. Mrs. Dow. Well,
I protest you are a waggish Man, Lord how you have rouzl'd and touzl'd one? --
All my Rigging hangs as if 'twas zhaked on with a Zhed Vork, as the old Zaying
is --


Mrs. Braz. Ay there is a Man for you now Widow, ah would I were in your Place,
a brisk young Dog I Faith, I ask your Pardon, Sir, John, I Am a little Free --
But it is my Way and Madam's Cherry Brandy was so good --


Mrs. Dow. Will you have the other Cup, Mrs. Brazen? Ads lid my Hearts Open.


Sharp. Nay then take a Soldier in that will defend the Breach Widow.
[Embracing her.


Mrs. Dow. Zhaw you spoil all ones Rump, you zqueese one zo -- In troth I think
him main handsome -- [Aside.


Equi. Matters go rarely, if no Devil cross it, I shall come in for my Wages at
last. [Aside.


Enter Belvill Drunk, and Robin. Bell. Sings.] If a Nymph proves peevish and
Coy,
Turn off thy Glass, never mind her:
Take Bacchus in Room of the Boy,
Drink till the Goddess grow kinder.
How stands Taunton Dean now Widow? Ha! [Hickups.] what is here a Rival?


Sharp. Oh the Devil! this fighting Fellow here, we are all unravelled I doubt?
-- [Aside to Mrs. Brazen.


Mrs. Braz. I fear so too -- I hate this Spark, he has too much Sense for me to
get any Thing by him. [Aside.


Bell. Let me see who are you? [Hickups.] What do you pretend to, ha? Hold up
your Head, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Peep. Oh dear Sir, what do you do, you will spoil all, did not you say -- [To
Belvill.


Bell. Look ye [Hickups.] I don't care what I said, I Will take Care of the Widow.


Sharp. Ah dear Belvill don't prevent my Fortune.


Bell. Don't tell me of your Fortune, was not you kicked this Morning? [Hickups.]
Answer me that.


Equi. So, if my Contrivance ruins all now, I shall not come in for a Souce.
[Aside.


Peep. A duce take you for bringing your drunken Master here, when we were upon
the Point of Concluding. [to Rob.


Rob. What would you have me do with him?


Bell. Widow, why Widow I tell you [Hickups] this Scoundrel shall not have you
Widow.


Mrs. Dow. Stand away Mrs. Brazen, look ye Sir, Matters are gone varder than
you think vor, and don't zhow none of your drunken Frolicks here, de ye zee,
for I value them not a Rush -- What zhour I never broke Gold with ye --


Bell. No matter for that, I Will show you your Bargain Widow, and then I have
done -- He is --


Sharp. A Plague of ill Luck.


Bell. He is Widow -- [Hickups.


Mrs. Dow. What is he, uds lid dan't you affront any civil Gentleman in my
House, I dan't love ye well enough de ye zee to bear that; what is he now,
what is he, he is a Man I hope.


Sharp. Sweet Captain. [Softly.

'Sdeath Sir, what do ye mean? [To Bell. in a loud Voice.


Bell. Don't exalt your Voice Sirrah; [Hickups] don't I know you for a very
Poltron, noted for your Cowardice, and kicked out of all Conversation for your
Lying -- So Widow, I have warmed ye -- Now Robin I Will go Home and sleep till
the Hour of Assignation --

[Exit Singing, If a Nymph, etc.
Mrs. Braz. A Rival's Rage, stark Mad, he has lost you Madam.


Mrs. Dow. Come how de ye, Sir John, od my Heart goes apit apat, I was woundy
afraid ye would have fit.


Sharp. No, no, he knew your Presence hindered me from drawing, else I Would ha made
a Cartridge of his Skin, and pounded his Flesh into Gunpowder.


Mrs. Dow. A dod he has a World of Courage.


Mrs. Braz. Ah Madam, you would say so, if you had seen what I have seen.


Mrs. Dow. Od I am glad I'scap'd this drunken Rogue, but hold ye, hold ye, he
cannot ha no Claw upon my Estate, can ha, 'cause I ha kept him Company?


Mrs. Braz. He -- Marry Sir John, Madam, I Will engage ye secure.


Sharp. Come Madam, speak a kind Word, my Coach waits at the Door, let us go
take the Air.


Mr. Braz. And a Glass of good Canary.


Mrs. Dow. Of all Liquours indeed Zack Wine pleases me best. For the Air, de
ye Zee that is but little, it all zmells of Zea-Coal.


Equi. So, there is Hopes again.


Peep. Do, Madam go.


Mrs. Dow. I don't know how to deny them, they are such courteous Volk.


Peep. Mrs. Brazen, before the Marriage is over, you must secure me my Hundred
Pound.


Mrs. Braz. I will, I will.

Thus by our Art are Women bought and Sold,
They run the Hazard, but we share the Gold --

The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE Isabella's New House.
Enter Isabella in a rich Night-Dress, with Toylet. Toy. WELL, my Wit will let
me no farther into this Design, when you have brought 'em hither, do you
imagine it possible to deceive 'em any longer, Madam?


Isa. If I please it is -- But my Plot draws toward an End -- If when I
discover my self, he should still retain his Love for her -- I have reaped this
Advantage however by it, I shall get rid of that odious Contract, for I can
prove that Sir Charles made violent Love to Lucinda, and will force him to
release me, on that pretense I Will fix the Reason of my Frolic, if Belvill's
false, but never think of Love again.


Toy. I wish the Pains you have taken to get free from one, and try the
Constancy of the other, does not cast a Reproach upon your Fame.


Isa. That I weighed before, the Censure of the World is guided by Prejudice,
or Partiality, and not worth my Care, I depend on none, and can justify my
Conduct to my self --


Toy. I Am glad on it with all my Heart, I fancy you will have a Trial of Patience,
for I dare swear Belvill and Lucinda are reconciled again, they will find you
out Madam in your Roguery.


Isa. If they be, I fancy I shall break the Peace once more, and make the
Breach yet wider; is every Thing in order, have you told my Footmen what Name I
wear at present.


Toy. Yes Madam, and they have put on all their strange Liveries, and stare,
and ask a thousand Questions, but I sealed their Mouths with your Ladyship's
Gratuity.


Isa. Very well, be ready to admit her, for I know she will instantly be here, I
left her upon the Teaze.


Toy. Bless me Madam, she is coming.


Isa. Now for my Tragical Face. [Runs and sits down on the Couch.


Enter Lucinda and Betty. Luc. She appears indeed no common Beauty. [Aside.


Isa. I doubt not, Madam, your Surprise at my Desire to see you here, but when
you shall know the Ties I have to that false Man, ungrateful Belvill, I Am sure
you will forgive me.


Lu. Our Sex are too apt to credit the Appearances of Truth from the protesting
Tyrants -- I have Reasons to suspect Belvil base, and long to know your Story
-- Sure my Eyes deceive me, or she resembles much the Country Maid I have at
Home -- But it is impossible; Betty take the Coach, and fetch Dorothy hither.
[Aside to Betty.


Bet. Yes Madam.

[Exit.
Luc. I ask your Pardon -- Some Orders to my Maid, and now I Am all Attention.


Isa. Humph, I guess those Orders, but no matter. [Aside.] Madam I was born
many Leagues from hence in Flanders, my Name is Donna Clara; 'twas my hard Fate
to see this Captain Belvill, there he Conquered me, as few I think can make
Resistance to his Charms, I Married him, gave him my Heart and Fortune, the
last was I Am sure too great to be despised.


Luc. Married, oh the hardened Villain!


Isa. Nay, and what should have endeared him more to me, my Wedlock Joys were
blessed with a lovely Boy, his perfect Image, in his Parents Time become an
Orphan.


Luc. Oh the detested Monster! What a Precipice have I escaped -- Go on thou
injured Fair, and be assured I will assist thee.


Isa. He said his Business called him to this Country, and left me with the
firm Promise of his endless Faith -- I writ, and writ, but still no Answer
came; at length, directed by my Headstrong Love, I followed him, but oh how
Cold was my Reception! He forthwith charged me I should change my Name, and as
I prized my Life, not to declare my Marriage -- I obeyed in all, nay even
supplied him to my own undoing, but being inquisitive to find the fatal Cause
of this sad Alteration, I learnt 'twas you.


Luc. Oh how I hate my self for having been the Innocent Author of such Wrongs.


Isab. 'Twas I caused that disturbance in his Lodgings, nor durst I show my
Face, dreading his Rage, I have no Friend in England and am most Forlorn --
[Weeps.


Luc. Methinks there is Sympathy in Woes like these which melt me into Pity --
Which Way can I retrieve me in your lost Opinion, or how redress your anxious
Sorrows?


Isab. He sent Word he would instantly be here, tell him the Ills he has committed,
but reproach him gently.


Luc. Be sure I Will tell him.


Isab. And doubtless he will deny it with Imprecations, but I Will be near to
Second you.

The Devil's in him now if he don't long to see the Woman has made all these
Stories on him -- [Aside.


Enter Toylet. Toy. Madam, my Master --

[Exit.
Luc. The perfidious Traitor shocks me.


Isab. A Trembling seizes me all over permit me to retire till you have taxt
him.

[Exit.
Luc. Do, and compose your Self.


Enter a Footman showing Belvill in. Bell. Well, where is this Loving Lady of
yours?


Luc. Ay too loving for you base Man.


Bell. Ha Lucinda -- Trapt again -- now sparkling Champain assist me -- why this
is kindly done -- and yet faith it is not fair neither, why did not you send
your own Name, I did but Gallop now, I should have flown then.


Luc. Oh unparrallel'd Confidence, how came thou by that honest looking form,
have thou not a Cloven Foot?


Bell. Humph ha! egad I think not. [Looking on his Feet.


Luc. Stand off thou vile Contagion, bear to thy Injured Wife thy boasted
Passion.


Bell. Wife!


Luc. She well deserves what ever thou can pay.


Bell. The Devil she does.


Luc. Nor can thy Future Life atone the Wrongs thou have done her.


Bell. Done her, who a Pox is she -- Wife -- Death, what do you mean Madam?


Isab. Peeping.] Ay he may well ask that Question.


Luc. Oh Assurance! You don't know Donna Clara, whom you espoused in Flanders?


Bell. Donna Clara, Donna Fury, Madam, this is too much.


Luc. Too much indeed thou steeled Imposture, could thou abandon so much
Beauty in her blooming Pride, even when Nature to augment thy Joys had blessed
thee with a Son.


Bell. Death, Madam, you make me Mad, a Son! it may be so, though hang me if I
know any thing of the Matter.


Luc. Nor you don't know that you're in her House I suppose neither?


Bell. Not I faith -- I don't know whose House it is, nor do I care three
Farthings; go on with your Banter -- Donna Clara -- A Son, Wife, and the Devil.


Luc. Come forth Madam, and confront this Traitor. Now, Sir, do you start?


Enter Isabella. Bell. Ha! whose this -- What does she intend?


Isab. [Kneels.] Forgive me, Sir, that I have revealed the Secret, but my
impatient Love no longer could endure a Rival.


Bell. Secret, what does she mean? Egad she is very handsome, pray Madam, who are
you, Donna Clara, or the Lady Elizabeth Lovemore?


Isa. Oh wretched! am I then forgotten?


Bell. Sink me if I Remember you.


Luc. Oh that my Uncle now were here, that I at once might blast his Hopes, and
banish him our House for ever -- Rise Madam, he is not worth your tender Care
-- Does not thy Soul reflect upon thy Actions, and show thy Guilt as black as
Hell?


Bell. Damnation, Madam what design ye by these Pretenses? [Walks about in a
Passion.


Luc. What did you design base Man in your Address to me?


Isab. 'Twas your Beauty, Madam, made him False; Oh do not chide Him, cruel as
he is I love him still.


Bell. 'Gad I Will have some Revenge for her Plot. [Aside. Do thou so my dear
pretty Creature, well thy Virtue has overcome me, here where are my [Hugging
her.] Servants, let the Bed be made this Minute, I Am impatient till I have thee
in my Arms, Madam, you will fling the Stocking? I Will fancy it is again my Wedding
Night, and my beauteous Wife not yet enjoyed. [Kissing and embracing her all
the while.


Luc. Oh! you know her now, Sir.


Isab. Heavens! what shall I do now, what have I drawn upon my Self here?


Bell. And how does my Charming Boy, is he with you?


Isab. Sir, I, I, I.


Luc. Ha, she Stammers and blushes.


Bell. By all my Joys thou art more charming than when I first embraced thee,
thy Breath is Jessamine, thy Bosom sweeter than Beds of Roses. [Embracing her:


Isab. For Honor's sake stand off, hear me and I Will confess the Truth.


Luc. Ha!


Enter Betty. Bet. Oh Madam! Dorothy's gone, the Servants tell me she called
for a Coach in another Air, and away she flung like Lightning --


Luc. More Riddles.


Bet. But here is your Uncle and Sir Charles.


Enter Sir Thomas, and Sir Charles. Isa. Ha, Sir Charles, I shall be exposed --
but must resolve to bear it out. [Turns away.


Luc. Oh Uncle, I am glad you are come to prove the Baseness of your Favorite.


Sir Tho. How, how, my Boy base?


Luc. He Is Married, yet impudently denied it to her Face; she followed him from
Flanders, there she stands, and I believe you will think she meritted kinder
Usage.


Sir Cha. Then Madam he is not so culpable as you imagined, he had reason for
his Oath.


Sir Tho. And have thou shot the Gulf of Matrimony my Lad ha?


Bell. So it seems, Sir Thomas.


Sir Tho. Why let me see thy Wife then -- What de ye turn your Back? You need
not be ashamed of my Boy, my Hero Madam.


Sir Cha. How, Isabella! [Turns her about.


Isa. Yes Isabella, I hope you have no Pretentions to Isabella.


Bell. Pishaw, you mistake Man, this is Donna Clara.


Sir Tho. Who the Devil's Isabella?


Luc. I Am surprised; pray explain this to me, for only I am in the Dark.


Sir Tho. Why did notyou say 'twas his Wife?


Luc. I thought so --


Isa. He does not, or he will not know me -- [Aside] I own I have gone beyond
my Sex and Quality, but it was to purchase Liberty, and break a forced Contract
with that perfidious Man who paid his Vows to you.


Sir Cha. I should not have put you to this Trouble Madam, if you had let me
known your Mind sooner.


Luc. What, am I then a Property, am I a Person fit to be Abused?


Sir Tho. Why then thou art not Married, Man -- Have Patience Neice.


Luc. I can have none, and will renounce Mankind.


Sir Tho. Faith and Troth but thou shall not.


Bell. What Devil has possessed thee with such Indifference for a Woman so
charming, Sir Charles, had not Lucinda engrossed my Heart, I could adore this
Beauty, and make my only Request, to be what but now she called me, Husband.


Isa. Some kind Angel inform him who I am, and save my Blushes. [Aside.


Sir Cha. She never thought me worth her Conquest.


Isa. Nor ever will --


Sir Tho. Short and Pithy --


Bell. Now Madam, I hope my Innocence is cleared.


Luc. I am convinced -- I suppose Madam you were my Farmer's Daughter too --


Enter Toylet. Isa. I was indeed Madam, at your Service -- Toylet, and this was
the Lady in your Lodgings; when we were there, I keep my Word with you, Sir,
you see I confess all.


Bell. Now Madam, since your Uneasiness has discovered your Love, pray let the
Parson make an End of our Platonicks.


Isa. What do I hear? [Aside.


Luc. I see a real Passion cannot be disguised --


Sir Tho. Hold, hold, I forbid the Banes.


Isa. Blessed Sound. [Aside.


Bell. What! do you know of another Marriage Sir Thomas, ha?


Sir Tho. No, but I know that which you don't know, Boy -- Why I Will hold you
Fifty Pound you don't know your own Name --


Bell. No, that is very hard indeed.


Sir Tho. As hard as it is, it is true -- What Is your Name now?


Bell. James Belvill, I never had any other Name that I know of.


Sir Tho. Why look ye there now, did not I tell you, you did not know your
Name, then there is the Wrigtings again, you young Dog you, which intitles you
to Two Thousand a Year, and James Beamont Sirrah, ha, ha.


Luc. How Is this, my Name?


Sir Tho. As sure as he is thy own Brother Girl.


Luc. My Brother!


Bell. My Sister!


Luc. What is this he I have so often heard you lament? Why did you conceal it
from me thus long?


Isa. Her Brother, oh lucky Turn! [Aside.


Sir Tho. Because I was resolved he should get the Writings of his Estate
before he was known, that he might not be plagued with Law as I have been.


Sir Cha. Then Lucinda's free. Oh Transport -- Dear Sir Thomas unfold.


Sir Tho. Thus then, My Brother was a Merchant, a thriving Man, there were not
so many Privateers Abroad in his Time, nor the French so powerful.


Bell. Very well, go on Sir Thomas -- I shall have a Father at last --


Sir Tho. This Daughter, upon his Deathbed he bequeathed to me, you his Son he
did not think fit to trust in my Hands, being wheedled by that old Rogue Roger
Dowdy his Steward, who insinuated that I being next Heir, was not proper for
your Guardian, so prevailed with my Brother to let him have you, and with you
the Writings, Care and Management of the Estate --


Sir Cha. Happy Story.


Bell. Then you are my Uncle, Sir --


Sir Tho. Certainly Boy.


Luc. But how are you sure this is my Brother, Sir.


Sir Tho. If you will give me Leave, dear Madam, you shall hear. [Sliely.] Your
Father left Effects in Spain, whether Dowdy went to adjust 'em, and with him
took this proper Fellow, then an Infant; at his Return pretended he was Dead,
and produced a forged Will, wherein he was left my Brother's Heir, in case of
your Death; but I had private Intelligence from Spain, that he had Boarded you
there, and changed your Name to Belvill -- I have ever since been in Law with
him till he died: I got him into Chancery which we call the Court of Equity,
but it is the Court of the Devil, for the old Rascal bribed the Lawyers so high,
that I have hung there these Twenty Years.


Isa. Oh how my Heart leaps at this Relation. [Aside.


Sir Tho. I sent for you several Times, but the Distance of Place, and the Man
that had the Care of you being a Soldier, you was still removed, at last I lost
my Intelligence of you in the Spanish Netherlands, till that lucky Night that
brought you to our House, and being weary of Law, I put you upon that Stratagem
to get the Writings.


Bell. It agrees with every Circumstance of my Life; thus let me pay you a Son's
Duty for your Care; [Kneels] and now Sister let me Embrace you with a Brother's
Love.


Luc. And all my Passion shall be turned to a Sister's Fondness -- Whilst what
I as a Lover liked, I recommend to fair Isabella.


Bell. Isabella, oh that Name rouzes a Thought within my Breast, which I could
wish for ever lost, since the Cause is never to be found.


Isa. You do not wish to find it I presume, our Inclinations may possibly alter
with the Air, we do not breath the same in London which we did in Paris.


Bell. Ha!


Isa. You have learnt from the Beau-mond, that the Conversation of a
Drawing Room is beyond that of a Grate.


Bell. By Heaven it is she, my Isabella, [Runs and embraces her.] for whom I Have
searched, and sighed so long, now I am blessed indeed.


Sir Tho. What, another turn?


Luc. Pray unriddle this Brother.


Bell. You shall know it all at large within; let this suffice at present, this
Lady is my Wife by Promise, five Years ago in France we plighted Faiths, and
nothing now shall part us.


Isab. You must own I have deserved you.


Sir Cha. With this Embrace take my Consent, [Embrace. so thou wilt advance my
Interest here.


Bell. With all my Soul.


Sir Tho. And mine, with all my Spirit.


Enter Robin. Rob. Oh Sir, Mrs. Dowdy, and a whole Coach full of Folks, she has
been hunting you all the Town over she said, and seeing me at the Door knew you
were here, Sir.


Bell. Will you give me leave Madam, to bring 'em into your House? [To Isabella.


Isab. With all my Heart, my Time's short in this House, I only hired it for
this Purpose.


Toy. Oh Robin! your Master is found Heir to Two Thousand a Year.


Rob. Say thou so, then you and I must talk more of the Business, we shall
live rarely Girl, for he is generous as a Prince.


Bell. Go, bring 'em up.

[Exit Robin.
Reenters with Mrs. Dowdy, Sharper, Brazen, Equipage, and Peeper. Mrs. Dow. Oh
Captain! have I vound you? Z'dslid give me my Writings you stole from me, you
cheating Knave you, or I Will zet Sir John on your Back.


Isab. I am afraid my dear Country Cousin the Right owner has got 'em into his
Hands, and will not easily return 'em.


Bell. Sir John -- ha, ha, ha, how long has he been a Knight? Why this is
Sharper, a Fellow not worth Two Pence if thou art Married to him Widow, much
good may do thee --


S. Chapter The very honorable Gentleman I met this Morning.


Sharp. Pox on her for bringing me here, would I were well out again. [Aside.


Mrs. Dow. Well, well, an he be no Knight, I don't care de yezee, he is my
Husband, and for all you have chouc'd me out of Two Thousand Pound a Year, I
have enough to maintain him, and make him a Gentleman too, mun.


Sir Tho. Hark ye, hark ye, take me along with you -- Chouc'd you, did you say?
Have a Care, don't you remember a Child named James Beamont, your Husband
carried into Spain, ha?


Mrs. Dow. Od and it troubled his Conscience mainly zo it did -- But what of
him?


Bell. Nothing, only I am that Child it seems, and have made bold to secure my
Estate, and henceforth will manage it my Self.


Mrs. Dow. Zay you zo! nay then it is best to be quiet.


Luc. I find Mistress, your Husband was a great Knave --


Mrs. Dow. Zo may your Husband vor ought I know vorsooth -- I cannot zay much
for his Honesty truly, but I Am zhour I was a good Gentlewoman born, as Cozen
Isbell here can testify.


Isab. Don't call me for a Witness, for my part I was told I am related to you,
but our Acpuaintance began in London.


Sharp. How, Two Thousand pound a Year lopt off, would I were unmarried again.


Sir Cha. There Is too much for you Rascal yet --


Sir Tho. Come Jemmy, you shall go in and sign Releases this joyful Day, and
forgive her all that is past.


Bell. with all my Heart.


Mrs. Braz. But hark ye, hark ye, Sir, [To Sharper.] how must I have my
Thousand Pound?


Sharp. When you can secure the Estate you promised me, you unconscionable
Jade: Your Judgment, Gentlemen, does she deserve a Thousand Pound for making
the Match between us?


Sir Tho. I Am afraid she rather deserves to have her Bones broke.


Sir Cha. Not a Groat, when the Marriage is over your Business is done.


Mr. Dow. A Thousand Pound, oh you graceless Puss -- Ad's Life I gin her a
Hundred zo I did; let me come at her, I Will pull her Nose off --


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Luc. This is good Diversion.


Mrs. Braz. A Hundred Pound! I should have a rare Trade on it, if every old
Woman was as sneaking as you in the Matches I have made lately.


Equi. Don't let your Clack walk here Dol Domischief, out, out -- [Turns her
out.] I shall get my Wages. [Aside.


Peep. It Is best for me to hold my Tongue, lest I be served the same Sauce.
[Aside.


Mrs. Dow. Come Spouse, let us down into the Country, before George I ha paid
woundy Dear for learning London Vashons. [Noise of Fidles without


Sir Tho. Ha, the Fiddlers smell a Wedding, let us have a Country Dance.


A Dance. Bell. Thus for our Good, kind Providence provides,
Unseen by us through every Labyrinth guides:
'Twas that which kept me from a Sister's Arms,
And gave me back to Isabella's Charms.

FINIS.

