A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE NATURE and USE OF SPECTACLES.

In which is recommended, A Kind of Glass for SPECTACLES, preferable to any
hitherto made use of for that Purpose.

BY JAMES AYSCOUGH, OPTICIAN, At the Great Golden Spectacles in Ludgatestreet,
London.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCCL.

A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE Nature and Use of Spectacles.
MY Design in the following Tract is to explain the Structure of the Eye, and
the Nature of Vision, so far as is necessary to understand the Use and
Advantage of Spectacles. The Method of choosing the best Sort of Glasses, and
such as are suitable to the different Defects of the Eye in different Persons;
and to recommend a Kind of Glass, for this Purpose, much preferable to any that
has been hitherto made use of.

The Nature of Vision, and Use of Spectacles, will be best explained, by the
common Experiment of the dark Room, or as it is usually called the Camera
Obscura, which is this. In any Room that is pretty much darkened, let an Hole
be made in the Window-Shutter, in which Hole place a unequal Lens, or round
globular Glass; then holding a Sheet of white Paper within the Room, at a
proper Distance from the Hole, (which you will find by Trials) you will see on
the Paper the Pictures of all Objects before the Hole, both in their just
Proportions, and in their proper Colors, only they will be upside down. If the
Paper remain in the same Place, and in the Room of the aforesaid unequal Glass,
or Lens, one that is flatter be used, the Picture upon the white Paper will
then be confused; but by placing a unequal Spectacle-Glass before the Lens of a
due Convexity, the Image on the Paper will again be rendered distinct. If a
more unequal Lens than the first be used, the Image on the Paper will again be
confused, but may be rendered distinct, by placing in this case a concave
Spectacle-Glass before the Lens.

This Experiment exactly represents the Manner of Vision by the Eye; for the
Eye is of a globular or unequal Form, resembling the Lens placed in the Hole in
the Window-Shutter, the outside Coat of which is called the Cornea, and gives
the unequal Shape to the aqueous or watery Humor contained within it: On the
Bottom of the Eye is expanded a fine Membrane called the Retina, which
resembles the white Paper mentioned in the Experiment; on this Membrane the
Pictures of all external Objects are formed. When the Pictures are formed
distinct on the Retina, then the Object appears clear and distinct; if the
Pictures on the Retina are confused, then the Object appears hazy and confused.
This Account of the Eye, and the Cause of Vision, is farther confirmed by these
Arguments; that Anatomists, when they have taken off from the Bottom of the
Eye, that outward and thickest Coat called the Dura Matter, can then see the
Pictures of Objects lively painted on the Retina. And these Pictures propagated
by Motion along the Fibers of the optic Nerves into the Brain, are the Cause
of Vision. For, according as these Pictures are perfect or imperfect, the
Object is seen perfectly or imperfectly. If the Eye be tinged with any Color,
(as in the Disease of the Jaundice) so as to tinge the Pictures in the Bottom
of the Eye with that Color, then all Objects appear tinged with the same
Color.

From hence we shall easily see the Use of Spectacles; for the Humors of the
Eye decay by old Age, so as by shrinking to make the Cornea grow flatter than
before, in which Case the Light will not be refracted enough, and for want of a
sufficient Refraction will not converge to the Bottom of the Eye, but to some
Place beyond it; and by Consequence will paint in the Bottom of the Eye a
confused Picture, and according to the Indistinctness of this Picture the
Object will appear confused, just as the Image on the Paper became confused,
when a Lens flatter than just, was substituted in the Room of the right one.

This is the reason of the Decay of Sight in old Men, and shows why their Sight
is mended by Spectacles. For the unequal Glasses supply the Defect of Plumpness
in the Eye; and by increasing the Refractions make the Rays converge sooner, so
as to convene distinctly at the Bottom of the Eye, if the Glass has a due
Degree of Convexity, exactly in the same manner as the Defect of the too flat
Lens was corrected, and the Picture rendered distinct, by placing a
Spectacle-Glass of due Convexity before it.

And the contrary happens in short-sighted Men, whose Eyes are too plump; for
the Refractions being now too great, the Rays converge and convene in the Eyes
before they come at the Bottom; and therefore the Picture made in the Bottom,
and the Vision caused thereby, will not be distinct, unless the Plumpness of
the Eye be taken off, and the Refraction diminished by a concave Glass of a due
Concavity, just as the Confusion of the Image occasioned by the Use of too
unequal a Lens was remedied, by placing a Spectacle-Glass of a due Concavity
before it.

This in general is the Manner in which the Defects of the Eye are remedied by
the use of Glasses. But these Defects are neither the same in different Persons
of the same Age, nor in the same Persons at different Ages. The Defects of the
Eye are partly natural, and partly arise from Habits of looking either at very
remote, or very near Objects; in the former Case we flatten the Eye a little,
in the latter we draw it up into a more unequal Form to see distinctly; and by
Habit the Eye will acquire and retain that Form, and will have a fixed Shape,
either too flat, or too globular for Objects at a moderate Distance. We see
this confirmed by every Day's Experience, for Engravers, Watchmakers, Chasers,
etc. by frequently forcing their Eyes into too unequal a Form, to see minute
Objects very near; at last have their Eyes fixed in this Form, and become
short-sighted, especially if they are used to these Businesses very young,
while the Coats of the Eye are tender and pliable. On the contrary, Sailors and
Husbandmen, by looking out for distant Objects, are rarely or ever
short-sighted, and want the Assistance of unequal Glasses very soon, because the
Habit of flattening the Eye to see remote Objects, at last fixes it in this
Form.

From hence we may see that the Defects of all persons Eyes will likely alter,
according as they accustom themselves to such Habits as may either increase or
diminish these Defects. Besides this, Age itself alters the Form of the Eye,
making the Eyes of most Persons grow flatter, especially those who see well at
a moderate Distance, when young Persons, naturally short-sighted, seldom find
any considerable Alteration in the Eye; but when they do alter, I have observed
that they oftener grow more short-sighted than otherwise.

Since therefore the Defects of the Eye, and the Glasses proper to remedy these
Defects vary so much, both in different Persons and different Ages, I shall now
lay down some Rules, by which every one may choose not only good Glasses in
their Kind; but such too, as are best suited to the Form and Shape of their own
Eye. Every good Eye has one certain Distance (or nearly so) of seeing a common
Print to read with Ease: When the Eye begins to grow too flat, you will find
yourself obliged to hold your Book at a greater Distance; you may observe also,
that if you read, write, or work any long Time, a sort of Diziness like a
Cobweb will appear before your Eyes, or if you read by a Candle you find it
necessary to hold the Paper behind it.

These are Signs of the want of Spectacles, and whenever this appears to be the
Case, no Person should be without them; for your Endeavors to see what you
cannot without great Difficulty, strains and weakens the Eye, and by this you
receive more Injury in a Month or two, than perhaps you otherwise would do in
as many Years, with the Assistance of such Glasses, as would supply that
Defect, and render the Vision distinct and easy.

The next Thing then to be considered is, what Degree of Convexity is
sufficient to supply this Defect. In order to make a proper Choice, hold a
small Print at the Distance, at which you was used to read distinctly, when
your Eyes were good, which with most People is about nine or ten Inches, then
choose a Pair of Spectacles of such a Degree of Convexity as render the Letters
as plain as they used to appear before your Sight was defective; if you choose
them too young, i. e. not unequal enough, they will scarce remedy the Defect of
the Eye; and you will not see distinctly, unless the Print is so far off, that
the Letters will appear too small to be read. If you choose them too old, that
is too unequal, you will then be obliged to flatten the Eye to compensate the
over great Convexity, and thereby be in danger of increasing that Defect, which
Age naturally brings on.

But in many curious Pieces of Workmanship, there is an absolute Necessity of
viewing the Object under a larger Angle, that the most minute Parts may be
observed. In this case, Glasses of a larger Convexity may be used, and if the
Work be brought nearer to the Eye, its Form will not be much altered, but the
shorter time these Objects are viewed the better.

For short-sighted Persons, the best way is to look through a concave Lens at
some distant Object, and the least Concave of all the Glasses, through which
you can see it distinctly, is the best. I divide all my Glasses into 20
Degrees, marked 1, 2, 3, and so on. When a Person has fitted himself, I set
down his Name, with the Number of the Glass chosen, which prevents any more
Trouble of Trial, or even going for it; but such Person may be supplied by
sending a Servant or Letter, unless any material Alteration of the Eye should
happen.

A Person whose Residence is in the Country, and has no Opportunity of making
that Trial, may nearly as well be fitted by the following Method; viz. Let the
Person take a common Print, and move it to the Eye, till he sees distinctly,
then measure the exact Distance from the Eye to the Paper: By sending an
Account of that Distance to any Person in the Trade, they may be fitted to a
sufficient Degree of Exactness.

I come now to point out the Defects of the Glasses themselves, and the way of
discovering these Defects. Now these are either a false Figure, Veins in the
Glass, or the Color of it. And first for the Figure. Take any common Print,
lay it on a Table, then hold the Spectacles in your Hand at a good Distance
from the Eye, and looking through them, remove them gradually from the Paper,
till the Spectacles are at the focal Distance from it, which in a unequal Glass
is somewhat nearer to the Print, than the Point at which it begins to appear
consused. If the Spectacles are salse, the Object through the Middle of the
Glass will appear regular and distinct, but through the Edges distorted and
confused. Thus if you view any cross Lines, which form small Squares through a
false ground Glass, the Squares in the Middle will appear with strait Sides,
distinct, and all of a Size; but those near the Edges, with crooked Sides, of a
different Bigness, and confused; so that the whole Appearance will neither be
like the Original, nor all Parts of it distinct at the same Distance. If you
view it through a true Glass, it will be perfectly like the original Figure,
only bigger, and distinct in every Part. And as you gradually remove the Glass
beyond the Focus, all Parts of the Object will become indistinct together.

To discover the Veins in unequal Glasses, place a Candle from you about five or
six Yards, then looking through the Glass move it from your Eye, till you fill
it full of Light, and you will then discover every Vein and Speck in it. These
Veins always distort Objects, and in the Object Glasses of Telescopes and
Microscopes are especially mischievous, since all these Errors are much
magnified by the Eye-Glass. Specks differ from Veins; for Specks are only small
opake Spots, which do not distort the Object, but only intercept an
inconsiderable Part of the Light coming from it.

For the Color of Glass, the whitest has been generally made use of for
Spectacles, but I am inclined on many Accounts to prefer another Sort before
it, or any other Material that has been made use of for this Purpose: For the
common white Glass gives an offensive gla^ing Light, very painful and
prejudicial to the Eyes; insomuch, that some advise green or blue Glass, though
it tinge every Object with its own Color, rather than this white Sort. That
which I would recommend, is of a finer Composition than any commonly used; its
Color is the finest of any, and being a little tinged with Blue, it takes off
the glaring Light from the Paper, and renders every Object so easy and
pleasant, that the tenderest Eye, may through it view any thing intently, without
Pain. But, besides this, there are many other Reasons for rejecting the common
white Glass, for it is of a softer Body than any other, and will not receive so
true a Figure in the polishing, as a Glass of a harder Nature will, neither
will the Polish itself be so fine and beautiful, nor of so long Continuance;
for if it lies by any considerable Time, it will change to a reddish Color,
which is owing to the Nature of the Materials it is composed of; besides, this
Sort of Glass is generally found to be very full both of Specks and Veins;
insomuch, that one can hardly see any Spectacles made of this Sort of Glass
that are free from it. That which I would here recommend is of an harder
Nature, such as will receive a true Figure, and will take a very fine and high
Polish, is perfectly transparent, and the freest of any from Veins and Specks.
I have always found this much preferable to any other Sort, both in Telescopes
and Microscopes, where the least Faults are discernable, especially in the
Object-Glass, where every Error in the Image, they form, is greatly magnified
by the Eye-Glass.

Brazil Pebbles, and Rock Crystal Stones are much cried up by some for
Spectacles; they are indeed very hard, and therefore will take a true Figure
and a good Polish; but, besides a glaring Whiteness, all these Stones have a
Grain much like the Island Crystal See Sir Isaac Newton's Optics, Book 3. Quere
25.
; and not only a Grain, but like that too, a double Refraction, so that all
Objects appear double: Thus instead of one Letter there will appear two, one
over the other. What Confusion this must occasion in the Print of a Book may be
easily guessed at; and though this is sometimes not great, so that the Letters
are not much confused, yet it will occasion an Haziness and Indistinctness,
very like that of some Copper-Plate Prints, which have been moved a little on
the Plate while they were printing off. If any one has a Mind to be fully
satisfied of the Fitness of these Bodies for Spectacles, let him try to use
them for the Object-Glass of a Telescope. Every one conversant in Optics
knows, the greatest Exactness in Figure, the most perfect Freedom from Veins,
and the clearest Substances are always requisite to make a good Object-Glass in
a long Telescope. But, if these Substances are so far from being preferable,
that they are the worst of all others for that Purpose, so that it is scarce
possible to make any Telescope at all with them; they must, of Course, be the
worst of all others for Spectacles too, though their Faults are not so easily
discerned in so simple an Instrument.

FINIS.

