MAR-PLOT; Or The Second Part of The BUSIE-BODY. A COMEDY. As it is Acted at
the THEATER ROYAL in Drury Lane, BY Her MAJESTY's Servants.

Written by Mrs. SUSANNA CENTLIVRE.

LONDON: Printed for Jacob Tonson at Shakespeare's Head over against
Catherine-street in the Strand. 1711.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY BENTINCK, EARL of Portland, Viscount Woodstock,
Baron of Cirencester, Captain of Her Majesty's First Troop of Guards, etc.
My LORD,
WOmen, and Men like Women, naturally fly to the Brave for Protection. This
Pretense Mar-plot and I have for Addressing to your LORDSHIP. We know it is the
peculiar Distinction of Noble Minds, that they are ready to receive under their
Care the Distressed, though they have no other Merit, than that they beseech
their Patronage.

When I say this, my LORD, I would not be understood to conceal, that my Play
has been very kindly received; but we Women overlook all Praise, but from those
Persons whose Approbation we most esteem. We are apt to be carried away from
Admirers to those we Admire: And this Comedy prefers the Honor of being thrown
at Your Feet, to the Applause of an Audience. It is the Misfortune of our Sex,
that we are deterred from the Advantages of a Learned Education: But as our
Expressions are Artless, our Sentiments are less Disguised. Had I, my LORD, the
Skill of a Writer, I should here record your Noble Father's Zeal for his Royal
Master, and celebrate that Care and Fidelity which preserved the Life of Our
Deliverer: But, instead of mentioning this Obligation, which my late Lord
Portland laid on every Man in England, I confine my self to what we owe Him for
being your Father.

That Your LORDSHIP may long bless the World with the same Virtues which You
have shown in the Entrance You have made on the busy Stage of it, and long
enjoy the Advantages of an Affluent Fortune, Graceful Person, and Generous
Mind, is the ardent Prayer of,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Devoted, most Obedient, Humble Servant, SUSANNA
CENTLIVRE.

PROLOGUE.
THE Men of Wit do now their Brains fatigue
So much with Politics and State-Intrigue!
That there is not one Male-Poet of the Age
Will condescend to labor for the Stage.
Therefore our Author, though no Rules she knows,
What Nature prompts, with Artless Hand bestows:
You Will see the Subject for the Genius fit,
A Busie-Body, drawn by Female Wit,
Still on the Hunt to know of others Wooing,
Eternally employed, and nothing doing!
Into dear Secrets anxiously they press,
Destroying, even where they wish Success!
The scanty Age all better Fare denies,
And no new Characters the Town supplies.
Some Years ago Wit had a larger Field,
And every Room could fresh Stage-Coxcombs yield;
But long has been all Humorous Folly crossed,
All Fool in empty Politician's lost.
Scowrers, and Rakes, and Debauchees are over,
Beaux are extinct, and Bullies are no more.
Therefore in Scarcity of homebred Tools,
Your Treat to Night's composed of Foreign Fools;
And though our Mar-plot has been shown before,
The Fool may differ, on a different Shore --
For once, then, break old Custom; be not o'er-nice,
But let the self-same Woman please you Twice.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Don Lopez, a Noble Portuguese, Brother to Dona Perriera. Mr. Bowen. Don
Perriera, a rich Merchant. Mr. Dogget. Colonel Ravelin, An English Officer. Mr.
Wilks. Charles Gripe, Come to Lisbon about his Father-in-Law's Effects who is
dead, and left him Executor. Mr. Mills. Mar-plot, Went over with him to see the
Country. Mr. Pack. Lorenzo. Mr. Norris.
WOMEN.
Dona Perriera, Wife to Don Perriera, in love with Charles. Mrs. Santlow.
Isabinda, Wife to Charles, follows him in Boys Clothes. Mrs. Porter. Mademoisel
Joneton, an affected French Lady residing in Lisbon. Mrs. Bradshaw. Marton, Her
Sister, in Love with Colonel Ravelin. Mrs. Cox. Margaritta. Mrs. Willis.
Two Ladies, several Footmen, etc.
The SCENE the Terriera de Passa in Lisbon. MAR-PLOT.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
SCENE, The Terriera de Passa in Lisbon.
Enter Don Lopez, and Don Perriera. Don Per. WHY Brother, you are distracted;
how often have you filled my Brain with these Chymera's? Why should I murder my
Wife without a Cause?


D. Lop. A Cause! Does a Cuckold want a Cause?


D. Per. Look ye, Senior, keep that Word Cuckold between your Teeth, till you
can prove me such, or by St. Anthony you shall feel what Mettle my Spado is
made of. [Laying his Hand to his Sword.


D. Lop. Name your Spado again, and I Will shake thee into Dust, thou feeble
Dotard. Your Spado! employ it against the Man that robs you of your Honor, and
not against him that would preserve it. I say, My Sister, your Wife, is a
Strumpet, the Strumpet of a damned Heretic: I saw the Looks, nay the Signs,
she gave some of the English Officers, as she came from Church this Morning.


D. Per. English Officers!


D. Lop. English I Am sure they were, I cannot swear they were all Officers, nor
could I perceive which she signed to, or he should not live to meet her Wishes
-- Now if you don't like the Name of Cuckold, find another for the Husband of a
Whore, if you can -- For my part I know of none; but this I know, if you will not
punish her as a Wife, I will as a Sister; she shall not stain the Honor of my
House this way; she injured it too much in marrying you. I shall pursue my own
Method, and so Farewell. [Going.


D. Per. So, there is the Blessing of matching into an honorable Family: Now
must I bear all Affronts patiently, because I Am but a Merchant, forsooth -- Oh,
give me any Curse but this -- Pray, Senior, give me leave to speak one Word
with you: I am convinced of my too much Indulgence for this very Cockatrice,
and there remains nothing to quicken my Revenge, but certain Demonstration.


D. Lop. Certain Demonstration! Must you have Ocular Proof? Must your Coward
Heart be animated with the Sight? A Curse of your Equivocations --


D. Per. No, any other Sense will serve; let me hear 'em, feel 'em, nay, smell
'em; and sure Cuckoldom is so rank a Scent, that, though I lived in England,
where they scarce breathe any other Air, I could distinguish it.


D. Lop. Now you talk like a Portuguese; keep up this Passion, and secure the
Honor of your House and mine, and deserve the Alliance of my Blood, it shall
be my Care to fix them.

[Exit.
D. Per. And when they are so, mine to execute.

[Exit.
Enter Charles, meeting Colonel Ravelin. Cha. Colonel Ravelin!


Rav. Charles Gripe! honest Charles, how do thou do, Boy? Why, what brought
thee to Lisbon?


Cha. Part of the Cause that brought you, Colonel.


Rav. What? art thou in the Army?


Cha. No, Colonel, I leave Honor to you, Interest brought me.


Rav. They are Twin-Brothers, Charles; if Interest did not drive, Honor would
come slowly on: Art thou turned Merchant then?


Cha. No, faith, not I; but it pleased Heaven to take my Wife's Father out of
the way, who left me Executor, and his Concerns here obliged me to take this
Voyage.


Rav. So then, old Sir, jealous Traffic is dead at last. How long do you
intend to stay?


Cha. Longer than I expected when I embarked: I came away in such a Hurry, the
Ship sailing sooner than I thought she would, I forgot to put up some Papers,
without which I cannot adjust my Accounts with some Merchants here; I have writ
to my Wife to send them.


Rav. That was very unlucky; prithee, how do thou spend thy Time?


Cha. Why very insipidly: How do you pass yours? What Company have you here?


Rav. All sorts; the Women, I Will say that for 'em, are kind enough, and will not
put you to the Expense of Swearing and Lying to gain them; but a Man is as safe
in an Engagement, as in their Arms; Fortune is the kind Friend in both the
Onsets: But I have got acquainted in a French Family, which are not altogether
so dangerous one way, but much more so another.


Cha. Ay! how is that, Colonel?


Rav. Why, I Am fearful of dwindling into an honorable Amor there.


Cha. Exert your Gallantry, gain your Point once, and those Fears will vanish.
The French Ladies are easy of Access.


Rav. Right, the French Gayety resembles the English Complaisance, yet they
have always a Reserve to dash your Expectations, and when you think your self
in a manner Master of their Cover'd-way, they spring a Mine of Coquetry, and
blow you up at once.


Cha. Say you so, Colonel? Why then give me the Lisbon Dames, that surrender to
the Bold and Brave: He deserves not a Woman, that would not run some Hazard,
provided she be kind.


Rav. Some are of Opinion, that the jilting Fair gives the surest Blow, and
Sucklin says, It Is Expectation makes the Blessing dear. This French Woman has
found the way to unite my jarring Inclinations, and tune 'em to the pitch of
Constancy, and I am very apprehensive of becoming that tame Monster, called a
Husband. Ah! I find I am caught, for I can name that terrible Word without
starting.


Cha. Ha, ha, ha! I shall have you in my Class: Sure the Lady that can make
such an entire Conquest over your Heart must be a Person of extraordinary
Parts, Colonel.


Rav. Yes, faith, her Ladyship has very extraordinary Parts; she is airy to
Affectation, and changeable as the Wind: She has Tongue enough for a Lawyer,
but as hard to be understood as an Apothecary: She begins as many Stories as a
Romance, and ends them as intricately, or, to speak more properly, seldom ends
them at all: She Is as whimsical as a Projector, as obstinate as a Physician,
and as faithful as the Monarch of her Country.


Cha. Admirable Qualities for a Wife; and can you forsake the whole Sex for
this Woman?


Rav. Humph! that I will not swear; but I find I cannot forsake her for the whole
Sex: To be plain with you, I have tried the Strength of Variety, and at this
time am in prospect of the Favor from as fine a Woman as any in Lisbon; yet
this Medly of Womankind triumphs over all, and in the midst of my Raptures I
murmur Joneton.


Cha. But may I not see this wondrous Engineer, who can countermine her whole
Sex, and blow up the Magazine of your Affections, Colonel?


Rav. You shall, but you must give me your Honor not to rival me.


Cha. The Description you have given, Colonel, secures you from that Fear;
besides, you know I am married, neither am I destitute of a Mistress, though in a
strange Place. I this Morning was a assured, by a Sign from a Lady's
Hankerchief, that my Wants should be supplied upon Occasion. I did not rightly
understand her, till the good old Duena explained her Meaning; and this Night I
shall be happy in her Arms.


Rav. You are a Stranger to these Affairs Charles, take heed, proceed with
caution, for the Women here are as warm in their Revenge as in their
Inclinations, bare Suspicion justifies Murder; if you manage your Intreague so
closely to escape the Husband and Relations, it is odds but your Mistress finds
some pretense to employ her Bravoes, Fellows that will dispatch a dozen Men for
a Moydre.


Cha. I go well armed, understand the Language, and will not easily fall a
Victime, but resolve to see the event of this Intreague; the old Matron told me
that the Lady was young and beautiful, her Husband a Merchant, rich, covetous,
old, and ugly; that she hated him worse than Penance, and loved me better than
her Prayers; shall I be such a Poultroon to decline a Lady's Summons? No, for
the honor of Britain, it shall never be said an Englishman fled either from
the Wars of Mars, or Venus; let her bring me on, if I discharge not my self
with Honor, and make my Retreat secure, may I forfeit the Embraces of the Sex.


Rav. Well said Charles, in my Conscience you married Men encroach too much
upon our Prerogative methinks; you who purchase pleasure by way of Annuity,
should leave us Batchellours the liberty of the Freehold.


Cha. The Ground we course in, is never the worse for your Use.


Rav. No, it is sometimes the better; there is many a Wife lies Fallow, and many
a good Estate would want an Heir, if it were not for us young Fellows,
especially Soldiers.


Cha. I think you ought to make Provision for the Recruits you raise, as much
as for your Widows, they are far more Numerous.

[A noise of clashing of Swords, and Murder cried within.
Rav. Ha! What noise is that?


Cha. It Is Mar-plot's Voice, his damned Curiosity has brought him into some
Mischief, I Will lay my Life on it.

[Draws.
Rav. The Devil's in that Fellow; what made you bring him with you?

[Murder cried again within.
Mar. Murder, murder, [Mar. running pursued by two Bravoes. Ah Charles, help me
dear Charles, for Heavens sake.

[They beat off the Bravoes.
Cha. A Curse on your Paper Skull, what have you been doing now?


Mar. Nothing at all, as I hope to be saved; only I had a mind to see where
that Lady lived that shook her Handkerchief at you, and out of no other design
than to inform you, I protest, Charles, when immediately these two Scoundrels
came slap upon me, I know no more for what than the Child that is unborn; but
I Am sure I shall feel their blows this Month, pox take 'em.


Rav. For what? Why you took the only method in the World to have your Guts let
out: Ha, ha! watch a Woman in Lisbon! Hark you young Gentleman, suppress that
natural Curiosity of diving into other Peoples Affairs, or never hope to see
old England again.


Mar. I wish I were safe in it, Colonel Ravelin! The duce take me if I saw you
before, my Senses was all in such a hurry, with these unconscionable Villains,
that --


Cha. That you overlooked your Friends, I warrant.


Mar. You have said it Charles, but I hope the Colonel will forgive me.


Rav. To be plain with you, Mr. Mar-plot, I shall take these kind of
Over-sights for particular Favors, if you don't shake off that Temper of yours.


Mar. Pish, prithee Colonel don't put on those grave Airs, why what harm is
there in it?


Rav. There Is ill Manners in it, I Am sure, and have a care you have not your Bones
broke for it.


Cha. Look ye Mar-plot, you must either resolve to quit this inquisitive
Humor, or forfeit my Acquaintance,


Rav. A Man may be ruined by your foolish Quarrels.


Mar. Upon my Soul, Colonel, I never quarreled with any Man, out of design to
hurt him in my Life: Charles can witness for me, that I hate fighting.


Cha. So can every Body else that knows you; I wish you hated Impertinence as
much, for the good of Society.


Mar. Well, you of all Men living have the least reason to complain; I have run
the hazard of my Life many a time for you, and in my Conscience I believe I
shall fall your Martyr one time or another.


Cha. Your own you mean, you will certainly be Canonized by all the Busie-body's
about Town.


Mar. Is this all the thanks I get for my Friendship? Well Charles, well, you
shall see I can prefer Safety, and sacrifice my Curiosity too, as you call it.


Rav. That Is the way to oblige your Friends, Mr. Mar-plot, never desire to know
more than they are willing to tell you, readily comply with a reasonable
Demand, and never meddle with any body's Business but your own, this will
render you agreeable to all Companies.


Mar. Ay! But that will make all Companies very disagreeable to me. ( Aside.)
But Colonel, is there nothing due from one Friend to another? One ought to be
let into the bosom Secrets of a Friend.


Rav. Not always, for there are some Secrets of such a Nature that will not
admit of that Freedom; for Example, suppose your Friend had an Affair with
another Man's Wife, or Daughter, where is the advantage of your knowing it?


Mar. Why I would watch the Husband or Father in the mean time, prevent his
being surpised, and perhaps save his Life.


Cha. But how would you save his Honor? A Man of Honor must have no
Confidents in those Cases.


Mar. Then hang Honor, I say, it is good for nothing but to spoil Conversation.
Shall I beg a pinch of your Snuff, Colonel?


Enter Colonel Ravelin's Servant with a Letter. Rav. With all my Heart.

[Gives him his Box
Ser. The Messenger stays for your Answer, Sir.


Mar. A Letter! Would I were a Fly now, that I might swop down upon the Paper,
and read it before his Face: Lord, Lord, what would I give for an universal
Knowledge? [Aside.


Rav. Tell the Messenger I Will observe Orders to a second


Mar. Orders! Why, what have you Orders to march, Colonel?

[Ex. Servant.
Rav. From this place I have, Sir. Charles, I Would be glad to drink a Bottle with
you and Mr. Mar-plot in the Evening at my Lodgings: There Is the Directions.

[ Tears the Superscription of a Letter, and gives Charles.
Mar. I Will wait on you home Colonel, that I may know the House again exactly.


Rav. Excuse me Sir, I Am not going home perhaps. Charles, I Will expect you.

[Exit.
Cha. I Will do my self the honor to wait on you; adieu.

[Exit.
Mar. Perhaps! but perhaps I will not believe you: He has a world of Manners to a
Gentleman in a strange Place, I Will be sworn; ha! Charles's gone, nay, then I
have a rare opportunity, egad he has forgot his Snuff Box, an excellent Excuse
to follow him; the Devil take his Letter for me, it has given me the Cholick.

[Exit.
SCENE, A Chamber in Don Perriera's House.
Enter Dona Perriera, and Margaritta. Dona Per. Are you sure the Englishman
will come? What said he?


Marg. He ^^swer'd me in Transport, I warrant him a Man every inch of him Come,
Seniora? Yes, yes, he will come, though a thousand Dangers threatened him; these
Englishmen are brave Fellows, if they were not Heretics.


Dona Per. If he has but the Faith of a Lover, no matter for his Religion
Margaritta; but what came of the busy Fellow that watched us? Did you obey my
Orders?


Marg. Yes marry did I, and the Bravo's assured me they had taught him to look
another way for the future.


Dona Per. They dispatched him, I hope.


Marg. No, he was rescued, upon the Terriera de Passa.


Dona Per. Ill Fate; he did not see where I entered.


Marg. No, no, Madam, you are safe; hush, here is my Master Don Perriera.


Dona Per. Then there is my Jailer: This Englishman runs in my Head so much,
that methinks I hate the Sight of my Husband.


Enter Don Perriera. Don Per. So, you have been at Church to Day, my Dear, have
you not?


Dona Per. Yes, my Dear.


Don Per. And who did you see there, Wife?


Dona Per. Do you think I pass my Time in Observation at Church, my Dear? I
hope I have other Business to do there.


Don Per. And you are basely belied, if you have not other Business to do
elsewhere too, Wife.


Dona Per. What do you mean, my Dear?


Don Per. Nay, ask your Brother Don Lopez, who will have it that you send your
Eyes a m^rroding for English Forage; my Dear, have a care of an Ambuscade; for
the whole Artillery of his Senses are drawn down upon you, and Jealousy leads
the Force of his Invention; and though I love you, Wife, yet if his Spies bring
certain Intelligence of your holding Correspondence with those Heretic Dogs,
the English Officers, I shall infallibly treat you like a Traitress to your
Lord and Husband.


Dona Per. Ha! I fear I Am betrayed. [Aside.


Marg. My Lady a Traitress to her Lord and Husband! Don Lopez is a Traitor to
his own Flesh and Blood for saying so, by my Virginity --


Don Per. Away, away; that is so stale an Oath, 'twill not be credited.


Dona Per. The Accusation's false, I do not know one English Officer in Lisbon,
by this sacred Sign; [crosses her Thumb and Finger, and kisses it.] For my
Duena assures me my Lover is no Officer; so far I Am not forsworn. [Aside.] I
thought, my Dear had promised me never more to mind the Insinuations of that
cruel Brother; his Prejudice is founded on our Marriage, his proud imperious
Temper scorns your Alliance, and racks his Soul to find a Cause to ruin you:
And must it be by blasting of my Fame? Will not my Life suffice? And dares he
not employ his own Hand? But would he make you guilty of my Murder? oh
barbarous inhumane Thought!

[Weeps.
Marg. Cruel Don Lopez, now do I wish I may die a Maid; a terrible Wish, were I
not out of Danger of the Curse falling upon me; if I believe my Lady ever
thought of any Man but your self, Senior. Poor Creature, I Am sure her Heart is
full of Fears about you when you are absent.


Don Per. Ay, lest I should come back before she would have me.


Marg. He is the Devil of a Guesser. [Aside.


Dona Per. Unkindly urged, Deary; I Am sure, by my own Consent, I would never
have you --


Don Per. In your Sight.


Marg. The Man is certainly a Witch. [Aside.


Dona Per. Out of my sight, I meant, Deary.


Don Per. That would be as bad on the other side.


Dona Per. For my part, Deary, I Am never happier than when thou art in my Arms,
and could be content to have thee always there.


Don Per. Yes, I should have a fine Life truly, to be always in your Arms.


Marg. Look ye there now, the Dog in the Manger.


Dona Per. What would you have me say, my Dear, to convince you of my Love?


Don Per. Look ye, Wife, it is no matter what you say, do but take care what you
do: No regaling your Palate with Foreign Dishes, they are very dangerous. Take
my Word for it, you will live longer upon your own Food, and with less Danger of
your Health.


Marg. Nay, if Diseases are prevented by dry Meats, he is in the right on it.
[Aside.


Dona Per. I know not what you would have me say, my Dear; but if you think me
false, confine me to my Chamber, or send me to a Monastery. Grant, Heaven, he
does not take me at my Word. [Aside.


Marg. I would not give a Crusada for my Place, if he should; a cloistered
Mistress brings no Grise to the Servant's Mill. [Aside.


Don Per. Sure Don Lopez does belie her; I always found her thus pliable, kind,
and modest; however, I Will watch her narrowly. In the mean time, to take off her
Suspicion, I Will seem to believe her.


Marg. So, all is right once more, I see by that Ogle of his. [Aside.


Don Per. Come, my Love, dry thy Eyes; I am not jealous, nor shall thy Brother
make me so; I Will be an Englishman to thee. Come, buss thy own Husband then, do
Deary.


Marg. That Buss secures me a Moydre before I sleep, for the English are the
most generous Men living in their Love Affairs. [Aside.


Dona Per. And will not you be jealous of me no more indeed, and indeed, nor let
that naughty Brother vex you, till you fright me out of my Wits again? Will you
promise me that?


Don Per. Yes indeed, and indeed, I will, you little coaxing Thief you. By St.
Anthony, thou do look wondrous handsome methinks. Od! if I were not to meet
some Merchants about Business, thou should to Bed this Moment.


Dona Per. To Bed quotha? I had rather thou were in thy Grave. [Aside.] What?
then are you going to leave me, my Jewel?


Don Per. But for two or three Hours, my Dear; and then I will so buss it, and
love it, and hug it, and squeeze it.

[Kisses and embraces her.
Dona Per. Ah! the very Apprehension makes me sick. [Aside.


Don Per. What makes my Dear sick?


Dona Per. The Duce take his Ears -- The Apprehension of losing my dear,
little, old Man.


Marg. Well turned. [Aside.


Don Per. Thou shall quickly have me again, my Jewel.


Marg. Too soon, I dare swear. [Aside.


Don Per. By Deary, go make much of thy self till I come back. Here, Seniora
Margaritta, take care of your Lady.

[Ex.
Marg. Yes, Senior, a better Care than you think for. Come, Madam, now prepare
to receive the charming Englishman.


Dona Per. I think I had better let it alone; do you consider the Hazard which
I run?


Marg. Hazard! Are you born in Portugal, and talk of Hazard? Why, there is not
a Woman in Lisbon that would not run twice as much for such a Fellow -- Do you
consider the Difference between him and your old Husband?


Dona Per. Yes, and what I must suffer too, if I am caught.


Marg. Nay, nay, if Fear throws so many Bug-bears in your way, follow your own
Fancy: I Am like to make a fine Penny on it truly -- Pray send me of no more
Fool's Errands; I Will carry no more Challenges, if you do not mean to engage: I
trifle my Time away sweetly.


Dona Per. Nay, don't be angry, Marget; it is not but that I have as much
Inclination for that handsome Man as ever, were I sure not to be discovered, I
should not alter my Resolution.


Marg. That shall be my Care, I warrant you, Madam; he comes in by a
Rope-Ladder at your Closet-window, by which he may return with Secrecy and
Expedition upon the least Surprise.


Dona Per. My Closet-window looks upon the River, how can he come that way?


Marg. By a Boat, that shall wait to receive him again.


Dona Per. Let him come then.

When Inclination pleads, Fears quickly fly,
And powerful Love can Reason's Force defy.
[Exeunt.
SCENE changes to Colonel Ravelin's Lodgings.
The Colonel looking on his Watch. Rav. It Is within two Minutes of the Time; I
must be punctual; for Women here forgive not the least Omission. Let me see, is
my Trap-door unbolted? Not yet?

[Goes to the Chimney, and seems to pull at a Trap-door.
Enter Servant. Serve. Here Is a Gentleman to wait on you, Colonel.


Rav. I Will see no body: Did not I tell you so, Block-head?

[Gives him a Box on the Ear.
Enter Mar-plot. Mar. Nay, it is only I, Colonel; don't be angry, you forgot
your Snuff Box, and I thought you would want it, so I brought it you, that is
all, Sir.


Rav. Oh, Sir, you need not have given your self the Trouble.


Mar. I think it no Trouble, upon my Soul, Sir. Ad! you have very pretty
Lodgings here, Colonel: What a very fine Collection of Pictures you have got?
Pray who is this at length, Colonel?


Rav. I cannot tell indeed, Sir; they belong to the House. Pox take this
Coxcomb. [Aside.


Mar. Ho, do they so? Pray what do you give a Week for these Lodgings?


Rav. Prithee ask me no Questions; I don't know, I have forgot. Ha! the Door
unbolts, which way shall I get rid of this Puppy? [Aside.


Mar. Hey-day! forgot! that is impossible.


Rav. Look ye, Sir, I perceive it is impossible for me to answer all the
Questions you may possibly ask at this time; but in the Evening I promise to
solve all your Interrogatories.


Mar. Nay, nay, Colonel, if I am troublesome, I Will be gone -- This Uneasiness
has a Meaning. [Aside.


Rav. You Will oblige me in so doing, Mr. Mar-plot; for I have a Visit to make
this Moment.


Mar. Is it to Man or Woman, Colonel? Come hang it, you may tell me that.


Rav. Why then, it is to a Lady: Now I hope you will leave me.


Mar. Ay, ay, with all my Heart; but I may go with you to the Door, may I not?


Rav. Go to the Devil, Sir. Death, how shall I shift him off? [Aside.


Mar. How snappish he is -- how the duce shall I manage to find out this
Intrigue? [Aside.] Well, well, don't be angry Colonel: I Will leave you below
Stairs,


Rav. Confound his Impertinence. Death Sir, suppose I don't go down Stairs, how
then?


Mar. How then? Why how then do you intend to make your Visit, Colonel? You
don't go out at the Window, do you?


Rav No more of your Impertinence, Sir, but be gone, or I shall fling you out
at Window.


Mar. Nay, if you be so Choleric, your humble Servant Egad I Will secure the
Key, I will know the bottom of this, if I die for it.

[ Snatches the Key of the Door, and puts it in his Pocket, and Exits. The
Colonel slaps the Door after him, then runs to the Trap-door, pulls it up and
descends, and pulls it down after him.
Rav. This is the most intolerable Dog I ever saw: Pox take him, there is half a
minute claps'd.

[Mar-plot opens the Door softly and peeps.
Mar. Egad he is not come out yet, what is he a doing? Ha! I don't see him --
nor hear him neither -- od, I Will venture in -- upon my Soul here is no Body: Why
sure he deals with the Devil -- here is no Door but this that I can see -- Is
there any way out at Window? -- No, faith, that is impossible, they have all
Iron Bars. -- What can be become of him? Oh! I have it now, before George he is
gone up the Chimney, for there is no other Passage -- it must be so, [Peeps up
the Chimney] Egad the Chimney is large, and easy enough to mount, now have I a
strong inclination to follow him -- troth and I will too -- sure the greatest
pleasure in this World, l^s in discovering what other People take such pains to
conceal -- now they may call me impertinent Block head -- inquisitive Fool --
and ill-bred Puppy -- and what they please, but I Would not quit the pleasure of
knowing this Secret, for the finest breeding in France. -- I Am afraid I shall
spoil my Coat -- rot him, what a cursed, dirty Contrivance has he found out;
hold, well thought on -- I Will, I Will, turn the wrong side outward -- Ay, that
will do, [Turns his Coat] so now for the Art of Chimney Sweeping; egad Colonel,
in spite of all your caution, ten to one but I know your haunts; Lord how I
shall laugh at Night, when we meet, how I will Joak upon him. Ha, ha, ha.

[Goes into the Chimney, and the Scene shuts.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
SCENE, Dona Perriera 's Apartment.
Enter Margaritta and Charles. Marg. COme, Courage, Senior Englise, fear
nothing.


Cha. I hope you have a better Opinion of my Country, Seniora, than to think me
afraid; but where is the Lady? the beautiful young Lady, which you told me off,
my dear?


Mar. She Is forthcoming, Sir -- So, see what it is to be stricken in years
now, he looks over me, as if I were a thing of his own Species. Well Senior, I
assure you I have done you no small service with my Lady, poor young thing, she
had so many scruples, but I told her a thousand things in your Favor: Seniora
said I, the Cavalier is a fine Cavalier, he is --


Cha. Oh the Devil, if this old Woman's Clack sets a going, there will be no
end -- I understand you Senior, pray give me leave to thank you; and to engage
you more heartily in my Interest, be pleased to accept this Token of my Esteem.


Marg. Ah Seniora, you English have excellent faculties to please us Women;
I Will swear they have exceeding good natural Parts, and readily conceive our
Meaning, [Aside.] I Will acquaint my Lady that you are here, Senior.

[Exit.
Cha. Prithee do -- So, I am entered, but how I shall come off, I am not able
to determine: If instead of a Lady, there should come an old surly Dog, with
half a dozen Bravoes at his back, it would give a strange turn to my
Inclinations; how foolishly a Man must look upon such an Occasion; egad suppose
some Body should be doing me the same favor in England now with my Wife, could
I be angry? No faith; if a Man is born to be a Cuckold it is none of his Wife's
fault, and therefore Senior, Don, what de call 'em, by your leave, if your Wife
be handsome.

Enter Dona Perriera. Ha! here she comes; a thousand Darts issue from her Eyes
-- What a Forehead's there? Her Lips exceed the redness of the Coral -- it is
sure the Queen of Love -- Ay, it is she, those dimples in her Cheeks are Cupid's
bathing Tubs, and that snowy Bosom the Plain he keeps his Revels on -- Seniora
[Going toward her.] the duce take me if I can speak to her.


Dona Per. You seem surpised, Senior.


Cha. Who can look on such amazing Brighness without astonishment of Sense?
Semele, when Jove approached her in all his Glory, had not more cause to be
surpised.


Dona Per. You begin as if we had years to waste in Courtship, Senior, pray
descend from your high-flown Raptures, the Gods are no Example, let us talk
like Mortals.


Cha. But are you sure, Madam, that you are Mortal?


Dona Per. I Am afraid he will find me so, he is a charming handsome Fellow.
[Aside.] By your Distance one would imagine that you took me for a Shadow, but
you may venture to approach, I am Flesh and Blood, I shall not vanish. Ha, ha, ha.


Cha. Say you so Madam? Why then have at you, I was never afraid of Flesh and
Blood in my Life -- Ha! The Devil! a Dagger!

[Runs to catch her in his Arms, she holds up a Dagger, he starts back.
Dona Per. Ha, ha, ha; what, do you start at a Dagger, Senior?


Cha. Yes, in a Female Hand, those Limbs were made for softer Uses; and we
Britains are not wont to see our Ladies armed with Steel: Loves Combats are
fought with Kisses, in my Country, I know not what his Laws are here.


Dona Per. The Engagements are the same, only a little difference in the
Preparation; a Wound in the Reputation of an English Woman, they say, only lets
in Allimony, but with us it lets out Life: And therefore, though we proceed with
caution, a Lover ought to think us sincere, when we run such hazards to receive
him.


Cha. But to what end is the Dagger, Madam; is it to dispatch your Lover by way
of keeping the Secret -- faith he will have but small stomach to Eat, that knows
he must Die as soon as he has Dined.


Dona Per. No Senior, by this I would imprint in your Mind the danger which we
are both exposed to, if we are not both discreet; Favors in Portugal must not
be boasted off.


Cha. Nor any where else, Madam; a Man of Honor scorns so poor a piece of
Treachery; he that owns he ever had a Favor, proclaims himself both lewd and
foolish, but he that points the Woman out is a Villain, and ought to have that
Dagger in his Heart.


Dona Per. Nobly said. [Throws away the Dagger.] That Sentence has disarmed and
left me at your Mercy.


Cha. Then thus I seize, and thus I will revenge the Arts you took to fright
me. Ha! her Kisses would warm the Dead, I Am all Extacy. I fancy the next Room
is more private Madam, and I have a secret to impart of mighty Consequence,
therefore prithee let us withdraw.


Dona Per. Oh happy English Women, that have such Men as these plenty. Oh my
Heart, I find I have not power to deny him -- Open that Door, Margaritta.

[ Opens the Door, Marplot flops down the Chimney, the Women shriek, Charles
draws his Sword, Mar-plot roars out, the Women run off.
Marg. So, so, they understand one another,


Mar. Ah, Zounds I have broke my Leg.


Marg. Ah! Thieves, Thieves.

[Exit.
Mona Per. Ah! Murder, Murder.

[Exit.
Cha. Mar-plot! The Devil break your Neck, which way got you hither? I have a
good mind to stick you, you Rascal.


Mar. falls on his Knees.] Ah, dear Charles, is it you? Oh forgive me for
Heavens sake, this was pure Accident, as I hope to be saved, the Devil take me
if I dreamt of finding you.


Within.] Thieves! Murder! Murder!


Cha. Death, they will raise the House, and I shall be taken for a Thief, the
Women will swear they know nothing of me, I warrant 'em. Rogue, Dog, Poultroon.

[ Beats Mar-plot, and Exits into the Closet.
Mar. Nay, good Charles -- -- Oh, oh, oh, what shall I do? Oh Lord, oh Lord,
dear Charles take me out with you [ Exit after Charles, and returns.] Oh, woe's
me that ever I was born, he is leapt into the River; was there ever such an
unfortunate Dog as I am, to be in quest of one, and tumble upon the other? though
if I could but get safe out, and Charles escape with Life, the Accident would
not displease me neither, but if Charles be drowned, I shall hang my self,
that is certain.


Within.] Thieves, Thieves! Lorenzo, Pedro Sancho; where are you all?


Mar. Oh frightful! the whole House is up in Arms, which way shall I escape?
Ah! methinks I feel a Spado through my Guts already: Egad, there is no way but up
the Chimney again.

[Runs into the Chimney.
Enter Don Perriera and his Wife; Margaritta, and other Servants armed. Don
Per. Whre are these Rogues, my Dear? I Will swinge 'em. How many was there?


Marg. We saw ten at least.

[Exit into the Closet, and returns.
Dona Per. Yes indeed did we -- with Pistols and Spadoes, and Heaven knows
what. Is my Lover got off clear? [ Aside to Marg.


Marg. Without Dispute, for the Ladder is gone.


Dona Per. What could that Fellow be? I wish he was no Spy from my Brother Don
Lopez. [Aside.


Don Per. Why where are they all? And which way got they in?


Marg. They all came down the Chimney, Senior.


Don Per. Down the Chimney? here, Rascal, search the Chimney.


Marg. Take heed, Lorenza, and kill the first you light on -- The Dead can
discover nothing. [Aside.


Lor. Here Is one of 'em.

[ Pulls Mar-plot out.
Don Per. Take him alive, I charge you.


Dona Per. Ah! then all will out, and I Am ruined.


Don Per. How now, Sir? What are you?


Mar. I cannot tell what I am, Sir, not I.


Dona Per. It Is an Englishman, and cannot belong to Don Lopez. [Aside.


Don Per. Cannot you so, Sir? Death! how came you here?


Mar. Nay, I know as little of that too, for my part; what will become of me?
These Fellows have damned Murdering Faces. [Aside.


Don Per. Where are the rest of your Gang, Sirrah?


Mar. Nay, Heaven knows; would I were with them.


Don Per. Zounds, Sirrah, answer without these Equivocations, or, by St.
Anthony, I Will have you wracked to Death.


Mar. Ah! the Devil take your Popish Saints; for they are always bloody-minded:
I cannot think of any tolerable Lie to save my Life now. [Aside.


Don Per. Why don't you speak, I say? Where are the other Nine? Here was Ten of
you just now.


Mar. Ten! As I hope for Mercy from your Hands, Sir, I saw but one; and how he
came here, may I be castrated if I know. It Is true, he is a Friend of mine, but
I will not answer for his Virtue for all that, when there is a handsome Woman in
the case; for Beauty is a Temptation, you know, Sir.


Dona Per. Undone! this Fellow knew the other. [Aside.


Don Per. How Is this? a handsome Woman -- I wish my Wife has not a Hand in the
Plot. [Aside.


Marg. [ Aside to Mar-plot.] Recall what you have said; not one Word more of the
Man you saw here, as you hope to live two Hours.


Mar. Ah, wretched Mar-plot, what will become of thee? [Aside.


Don Per. Did you not tell me you saw ten armed Men come down the Chimney, Wife?


Dona Per. For my part I was so frighted, my Dear, that I durst have sworn I
saw twenty.


Marg. Ay, so did I too, Senior; for People in a Fright see double.


Don Per. Pray Heaven, some body had no Design to be double. [Aside.] Where is
this Friend of yours, Sir?


Mar. What Friend, Sir?


Don Per. Why him you said you saw here just now.


Mar. Ah! that was all a Mistake, Sir; I did not know what I said, Sir, nor, I
believe, did not know what I meant, and I Am sure I did not neither, except I
meant my self, Sir. Nay, now I think on it, I did mean my self, Sir -- Oh Lord,
oh Lord, which way shall I come off? [Aside.


Don Per. Don't stammer so, Rascal; I shall have no Mercy on you presently --
-- Did you not say you saw a Friend of yours here?


Mar. Why if I did, Sir, I meant my self; and there needs no Logic to prove a
Man's best Friend is himself, though I am sure I am my own worst Foe. Oh, I shall
swoond away with the Fright. [Aside.


Don Per. You said, you knew not how he came here neither.


Mar. My self again, Sir; for as I hope to get safe out, I had no more Design
to come into your House, than I had to eat it, Sir.


Don Per. And dare not you swear for your own Virtue neither (...)?


Mar. No really, Sir, no Man knows his own Strength; and I confess ingenuously,
Sir, that a pretty Woman has Power to dissolve my Resolutions of Virtue at any
time.


Don Per. Say you so, Sir? Why then there are things to be used to preserve
Virtue, which I Will take care to administer I Will engage you shall attempt no
Man's Wife for the future. Here, bind his Hands.


Marg. It Is a handsome Young Man, and no Fool. I wish I could tell how to save
him. [Aside.


Mar. Ah, dear Sir, what do you mean? I design upon a Man's Wife! Upon my Soul,
Sir, I never had any such damnable Design in my Days, Sir.


Don Per. Sirrah, Sirrah, you would not have come down my Chimney for nothing;
you are a Rogue, I see by your Disguise, Sirrah. Bind him, I say.


Dar. Disguise! hold, hold, if the Truth must out, it must; then to deal
ingenuously --


Dona Per. Ah! now it comes out, I Am ruined past Redemption. [Aside.


Mar. I am very subject to an itching in my Nature to know every body's
Concerns, and being thrust out of an Officer's Lodgings of my Acquaintance, for
my Impertinence (as he called it) I suspected he had some Intrigue on foot: So
I watched his coming out; but finding he shut himself up, I imagined he had got
his Mistress with him. So, Sir, I found means to get in again; but not meeting
with him, I fancied he had some private way up the Chimney. So, Sir, my
confounded Curiosity, with a Pox to it, must needs try to smell him out -- So,
Sir, I turned my Coat here to save it clean, and up I scrambl'd; but when I
came without-side, I saw no body there then: Sir, something whispered me in my
Ear, that he might be gone down the next Chimney: So, Sir, that devilish Desire
of mine brought me down hither, as you see, Sir; and this is the Truth, and
nothing but the Truth, as I hope for your Pardon, Sir -- Ah, poor Mar-plot, if
this brings thee not off, thou art undone for ever. [Aside.


Don Per. A well compact Lie. I Will Officer you, with the Devil to you. I
suppose your Countrymen think they have a License for Cuckoldom. Do you hear?
search the whole House; for this Rogue in Red may lurk in some Corner or other,
and watch his Opportunity to press my Wife to the Service, and think to raise
Recruits out of my Family: And for you, sweet Senior Sweep-Chimney, the
Corrigadore shall let you into the Secrets of our Laws in Portugal.


Mar. The Devil take all Secrets for me.


Don Per. Lorenzo, go let him know his Presence is required. Come, Sir, I shall
put you into a safer Place till he comes, where there is no Chimney to get out
at. Margaritta, take care of my Wife -- Hold, now I think on it, I Will ease you
of that Trouble, and do it my self. Go, get in there.


Dona Per. What Fault have I committed, my Dear, to be imur'd? If I had not
cried out, you had not taken this Villain.


Mar. I wish you had been dumb, with all my Blood.


Don Per. When he is gone, and the House found to be clear, you shall have your
Liberty again; therefore no Dispute, but in, I say.

[ Exit Dona Per. Now bring him along into the next Chamber.


Mar. O you malignant Stars -- Oh, take pity upon me, and let me go, or I shall
die with Vexation, and you will be accessory to my Murder, and that will trouble
your Conscience.


Don Per. Conscience! you Heretic Dog; do you talk of Conscience? Drag him
along.


Mar. Heretic Dog! a good Hint; ad, I Will pretend to turn Papist. Oh, hear me
one Moment, Sir; I do confess I am a Heretic, and my Conscience tells me very
unfit to die. Ah, dear Sir, be so charitable to afford me a little Instruction,
and recommend me to some Saint that may take care of me in the other World.


Don Per. Oh, Anthony! thou have touched his Heart, and put me upon a
meritorious Action -- I must have regard to his poor Soul -- Well, young Man,
since I find thou art become the Care of Heaven, I think thee worthy my Regard.
I Will send for a Priest that shall instruct thee in the Mysteries of our
Religion. Come, come along.

[Exit.
Mar. Ah, for some Instructions how to get out; here is a little time gained
however.

[Exit guarded.
Marg. Well, by St. Anthony, I am much concerned for him, methinks I feel a
more than ordinary motion about my Heart. Ha! My pulses beat quicker than they
used to do; oh dear, how my Breasts heave; I am much disordered, but I believe
my Distemper would not prove dangerous, were he my Physician; well, if I
thought he would be grateful I Would release him. I have a Key will open that Door;
besides, he knows my Lady's Gallant, and perhaps they may force him to discover
who he is, and where he lodges; and if he falls into Don Lopez's Hands, fare
him well, and farewell my Fees too; now if I convey him out, I may prevent
future Mischief, and may be get a Love of my own, at least I cannot fail of
Rewards from all sides, I Will do it I Am resolved.

[Exit. Enter again with Mar-plot. Well Senior Englise, what think you of
finding out secrets again?


Mar. For my part I shall hate every thing that is but spelled with any one
Letter that belongs to it: Have you no Bowels of Mercy for one neither? Ah,
Seniora, for honest Charles's sake let me go, you see I brought you off, then
prithee take some pity on me


Marg. Fie Senior, a Lady may compassionate your Person for your own sake, to
do you Justice, you are a clever young Man, and may make your Fortune.


Mar. I wish I could make my Escape,


Marg. Suppose a Lady should take a liking to you, could you be kind?


Mar. Kind? ods Heart, is it possible for a Man to think of kindness when the
Knife's at his Throat -- What the Devil does this old Hag mean?


Marg. But set the case a Woman should procure the liberty of your Person, what
Charms must she be Mistress off to captivate your Heart?


Mar. Charms! Egad if she had never a Nose, I should think my self bound in
Honor to be grateful.


Marg. Though she was not altogether so young.


Mar. Nay, though she were as old again as thou art, I would love her
monstrously. I fancy it is her self she means; egad I begin to conceive hopes of
Liberty. [Aside.


Marg. Indeed! And do you really think you could love me, Senior?


Mar. Do you really think you can let me out?


Marg. It lies in my Power.


Mar. Why then the other shall lie in my Will: And to prove my Love, there is Gold
for thee, old Girl.


Marg This is as it should be now, nothing like Earnest to bind ^ Bargain --
Well Senior, upon condition you will meet me whenever I shall give you Notice,
I Will take pity on you, and let you Escape.


Mar. My Angel, my Life, my Soul; od I Am wondrous full of Raptures of a sudden.


Marg. Hark, I hear some Body coming, follow me quickly.

[Ex.
Mar. With all my Spirit.

[Exit.
Enter Don Perriera, and Don Lopez. Don Lop. Stupidity! Give a Villain fair
play for his Life, that would rob you of your Honor! What business could this
Fellow have in your House? And by so Clandestine a way as the Chimney? Where is
he? give him to my Revenge.


Don Per. Nor for the World; you would not kill him now, when he is willing to
be Converted: Just when his Eyes are opening? That would be to destroy his Soul
with his Body.


Don Lop. His Soul? I Would rather give a hundred Moydres to have it prayed out of
Purgatory, then lose my Revenge. Open the Door I say, or I will force it open.


Don Per. I say you shall not see him till the Corrigadore comes, I Will deliver
him into the Hands of Justice; I will not have a Man murdered without a just
Cause; touch the Door if you dare, I Would have you to know I am Master of my own
Lodgings.


Don Lop. And I Would have you to know, Sir, that I Will batter your Lodgings about
your Ears, before I Will suffer in my Honor: Where is this salacious Woman, this
adulterous Sister, this Contaminated fair One, this Viper of our Family?


Don Per. Safe enough out of your reach I know she is innocent of this, and
therefore will preserve her. Pray mittigate your Passion, Senior, and you shall
have all the satisfaction in this matter you can desire from a Brother.


Don Lop. Brother! Dam the Alliance, I scorn the Title.


Don Per. Right, just as my Wife said -- he does hate me heartily -- [Enter
Servant.] How now, is the Corrigadore come?


Ser. Yes Sir, he is without.


Don Per. Bring him in.

Enter Corrigadore and Guards, I charge you, Senior Don Garcia Pedro
Compostello, to keep the Peace, and protect the Prisoner which I shall deliver
into your Hands from the fury of Senior Don Lopez, whose fiery Temper hurries
him on to execute, before he knows the Nature of the Offense.


Cor. Sure you mistake, Senior; Rashness has no Connection with true Courage;
and I look upon Don Lopez to be a Person of a singular good Conduct.


Don Lop. Rot your fawning Praise -- Do Justice, demand your Prisoner, let me
see the English Dog.


Cor. Nay Senior, if you are in earnest, I am obliged by my Offices to keep the
Peace; disarm him.


Don Lop. A Curse of your Authority.


Cor. Now Don Perriera, bring out the Offender.


Don Per. That I will. Here open that Door, and bring him hither.

[ Gives a Key to a Servant; who Exits, and returns.
Ser. Here is no Body within, Sir,


Don Per. How! no Body within? Ah, thou art a blind Booby.

[Goes in, and returns hastily, crossing himself. Mercy upon me! The Rogue was
in the right, there is no Body there, 'twas certainly the Devil, and he is gone
through the Keyhole; for no Humane Creature could get out; bless me, how I
tremble!


Don Lop. The Devil! I wish I had met with that Devil, I Would have tried to have
made him Mortal for the good of Mankind.


Cor. Pray let us see this Room from whence he escaped, perhaps he may be hid
somewhere.

[ Exe. Corrigadore and Don Lopez.
Don Per. Oh, it is to no purpose, there is nothing to be seen.

[Exit.
[The Scene draws, and discovers them searching about.
Don Lop. Hark ye Don Perriera, if your Wife be not vanished too, prithee ask
her what Species he was composed of, I warrant, she can tell you, he had no
sulphurous Scent about him.


Cor. It Is very odd; was the Door locked are you sure?


Ser. Yes Senior, I Am sure I unlocked it.


Don Per. I locked it my self, and have had the Key in my Pocket ever since.


Don Lop. But all your Locks are not secured, by carrying the Key about you. I
doubt Senior, I hope I may put on my Spado again.


Cor. Pray be certain of your Criminals, Senior, the next time you send for me.

[Exit
Don Per. God's Death! am I flouted -- I have lost all Patience, I Would give my whole
Estate to know which way this Dog escaped, if he were Flesh and Blood.


Don Lop. Ask your Wife that, -- Confusion.

[Walks about in a Passion.
Don Per. My Wife! If I should find my Wife guilty, I Would practice such unheard
of Cruelties on her, as should outdo our Inquisition.


Don Lop. Pshaw! All Talk, all Talk; you should have crushed when in your
Power, but then the Law must right you; you had a meritorious Work to do, there
was so much care taken on his Soul, that you left the Body unguarded, and it
has made bold to slip through your Fingers: Confound your Ignorance.


Don Per. Amen I say, with all my Heart, and send me more Sense -- I own my
good Nature has abused me, but here I throw it off; and now, Senior, I am apt
for any Impression, your Will shall be my Law; say what is to be done?


Don Lop. Why, if you will take my Advice, cause diligent search to be made
through all the Family, there is certainly a false Key to that Door, and those
you find it upon dispatch, but rack 'em first to bring the Secret out.


Don Per. It shall be done. What more?


Don Lop. If you find it not, put on the same Humor you used to wear, seem not
to suspect my Sister, but pretend some Business at St. Ubes for two or three
Days; take your leave, return privately, and conceal your self in some
convenient Place: I warrant you will make sufficient Discovery.


Don Per. All this I Will observe to a tittle, and if I do find her false, by St.
Anthony she dies.


Don Lop. In the mean time I Will not be Idle, my Revenge shall pursue these
English Dogs so close, that I Will find out this Villain, or write Villain on the
Heart of all his Countrymen.

[Exit.
Don Per. A Curse of the Cause that brought these Whore-masters to Portugal.
What a numerous Progeny will they leave behind them; the next Generation will
be all Mungrils -- But I Will endeavor to prevent the Increase in my Family.

Woman, thy Constancy I go to try:
Blessed if you are true -- but if you're false you die.

ACT III.
SCENE I.
SCENE the Terriera de Passa.
Enter Colonel Ravelin and Charles. Rav. HA, ha, ha; certainly this Fellow is
the most mischievous Rogue that ever lived; which way got he down the Chimney?


Cha. Nay that is past my finding out, as also what is become of him: I could
have cut his Throat with all my Soul just then, and yet I cannot help being
concerned for him now, I fear he is killed.


Rav. I should be sorry for that, though in my Conscience he deserves it, this
busy humor of his is as natural to him as his Food; he followed me home this
Morning, I was forced to use him very roughly to get rid of him, for you must
know, I have a trap Door in my Chimney, through which I descend into a back
Street, where I am conducted by an old Negro to an Angel of a Woman; I had her
Summons, and the hour of Assignation was come when he entered my Chamber.


Cha. A very unseasonable Visit, faith Colonel.


Rav. Ay, was it not? but I quickly dispatched him, though how he stumbl'd upon
you afterward, and in so odd a manner, is a miracle.


Cha. If he lives we shall know when next we meet; I never caught him in a
lie, which is the best Qualification he has: But Colonel, did not you promise
to introduce me to your French Mistress? What, this Lady incog. has not beat
her out by the by, has she Colonel?


Rav. No, no, she maintains her Ground too well, there is more danger of my
raising the Siege, than her beating the Chamade; she has so many retreats of
Pride, Vanity, and Affectation, that without some lucky Accident toss a Granade
into the Magazine of her Inclination, there'll be no hopes of the Town.


Cha. Storm then, Colonel, storm.


Rav. I rather choose to block her up and starve her out, suffer no Admirer to
enter; and if once a Woman of her temper want the Provision of Vanity, she
surrenders of course.


Cha. An admirable Stratagem, but prithee let me see her before you put it in
practice.


Rav. It shall be now, if you please, Charles.


Cha. With all my Heart: Is it far?


Rav. At that House, yonder.


Cha. Lead the way then.

[Exeunt.
Enter Mar-plot. Mar. Lead the way -- where the Devil are they going? now cannot
I help having a violent desire to follow them, though I escaped so narrowly in my
last Project: Yonder they go, ha! they are entered already, that is no public
House I Am sure: Egad, may be it is some private Bourdell, or what business can
both of 'em have at one House? Well, Charles, though you was so barbarous to
desert me in my Afflictions, I will not serve you so, I Will not stir from this
place 'till I see you safe out -- Od, upon second thoughts I Will knock at the
Door, and ask for him, perhaps three may be as welcome as two.

[ As he is going to knock, enter Isabinda in Boys Clothes.
Isab. Ha! Mar-plot here, this is lucky. [Aside.] Mr. Marplot, fortunately met.


Mar. That Is more than I can tell yet, for I don't know you, Sir.


Isab. Nor would I have you, [Aside.] But you know those that do; can you tell
me where Mr. Charles Gripe is to be found?


Mar. Ha! my Mind misgives me plaguily that this is an Envoy from the old Man's
Wife, pray Heaven he has never a Summons from my old Matron too; for though I
complied with all she asked to purchase my Liberty, I am sure I shall have no
Stomach to perform Articles. [Aside.


Isab. Don't you hear me, Sir?


Mar. Yes, yes, Sir, I hear you -- What the duce shall I say to him, he must
not know that Charles is gone into yon House; for Women here, they say, are
cursed Jealous, and that may be a means to have his Throat cut. [Aside.


Isab. Why don't you answer? where does he Lodge?


Mar. Where does he Lodge? -- this must be some new Intreague, for doubtless
the other knows his Lodgings: Look ye, Sir, one good turn deserves another; let
me know what business you have with him, and accordingly as I like it, your
Question shall be answered.


Isab. Mar-plot still, I find he is no changling. [Aside] Why then, Sir, if you
must know, I have a Letter for him from a Lady who is desperately in love with
him.


Mar. So, here is another Intreague popt into my Mouth. In Love with him?
prithee dear Youth who is she? where does she live? What Is her Name? Is she
Maid, Wife, or Widow? Young, or Old? Black, Brown, or Fair? Short, or Tall?
Fat, or Lean? this Country, or a Foreigner? quick, quick, quick my dear little
Rogue, let me into the secret, and I Will carry thee to his Lodgings immediately
-- Egad this Discovery will make my peace with Charles completely.


Isab. I can only answer him these questions, Sir, I am no Blab, you must
excuse me if I Am silent.


Mar. So must you me, Sir, I Am no Blab neither, Sir, if you go to that, I Would
have you to believe I can keep my Friend's secrets when entrusted; I don't know
his Lodgings, find them out as you can.


Isab. You are very short, Sir; I have nothing to say against your secrecy, but
it would be Impudence in me to run the hazard, besides forestalling your
Friend's Generosity, he ought to have the disposal of his own secrets.


Mar. Ay, if it comes into his Hands once 'twill cost me more pains to find
out? than it is worth.


Isab. Pains to find out? I hope you never endeavor to find out what other
People would conceal.


Mar. No? yes to choose; why the duce should any Man know more than my self? We
came into the World alike, and I can see no occasion for his superior knowledge.


Isab. I admire you are not for levelling Estates too; how can you bear any Man
to be richer than your self?


Mar. Oh with ease, my Wealth lies in my Mind, I had rather fathom the depth of
a Man's Thoughts, than his Pockets; yet to show you I can suppress my
Curiosity, let me read the Letter, and I Will excuse the rest.


Isab. It is as much as my Life's worth to open the Letter.


Mar. Pox take his Life -- tell me what is in it then, or may I be carbonaded if
you know his Lodgings. I Would give a Finger to have this Intreague rightly. [Aside.


Isab. I must not let this Fellow know me, if I intend to conceal my being in
Lisbon; I Will humor him a little, and try what discovery I can make. [Aside.]
Well, Sir, if you will promise to be secret, I Will let you into this Affair.


Mar. Secret as a Priest, Child -- Egad I shall have it, pray Heaven Charles
does not come out before he has done, if he should I should be undone. [Aside.


Isab. Why then the Lady I belong to, is a rich Merchant's Daughter, near the
Convent of Santo Vincente, her Name is Dona Cephisa, she saw your Friend at
Church, is extremely charmed with him, and resolves to marry him.


Mar. Marry him! ha, ha, ha, ha, poor Lady! why now to return secret for your
secret, he is Married already, but perhaps he may prick her down amongst the
rest of his Mistresses: You understand me?


Isab. Too well -- the rest of his Mistresses? has he such store then?


Mar. As many as he can well manage, I believe.


Isab. Oh my Heart, the danger of intreaguing in this place alarms my fears,
and shocks my very Soul.


Mar. What I have said makes you thoughtful, I perceive; will no Body do but
Charles? What think you of me?


Isab. Why really, Sir, were I a Woman, I should prefer you before him, but I
cannot answer for my Lady; if you please I Will mention you.


Mar. Your most humble Servant, Sir, -- Egad there may be new pleasure in
having an Intreague of ones own, for ought I know, for I never had one in my
Life. [Aside.


Isab. But, Sir, there is one Article in our Agreement which you have not
performed,


Mar. What Is that?


Isab. Where your Friend lodges?


Mar. Why he lodges at yon green Windows, where if you have any Service from
your Lady for your humble Servant, you will find me there also.


Isab. Sir I kiss your Hand, I Will do my best to serve you.

[Ex.
Mar. Sir, I kiss yours -- I Am glad he is gone before Charles came out; this is
a Nonsensical Secret, though methinks I had rather know what the Colonel and he
is doing in yon House -- Shall I knock at the Door or not? If I should, ten to
one but I do Mischief -- and shall be beaten again: To prevent which I Will wait
within sight for their coming out, so when they are passed by, I may with more
Security make my Enquiry.


SCENE Changes to Mademoisel Joneton 's Lodgings.
She dressed Fantastically modish, with her Sister Marton, and two other Ladies.
Mad. Susan, bring me the Glass.


Susan. Yes, Madam.

[Exit.
Mad. Don't I look wretchedly to Day, Sister?


Mart. Your looks are the same to Day they always are, I see no Difference.


Mad. How do you mean that, Sister? That I always look cursedly, or how?


Mart. She looks too well for my Ease, since she is beloved by Colonel Ravelin.
[Aside.] I Am sure your Vanity and Affectation does not put that Construction
upon my Words, Sister.


Mad. Affectation! Ladies, pray what am I affected in? Nay, take the Glass away
again.

[ Enter Susan with the Glass. My Sister Marton says, I Am affected, so I will
not look in it, to oblige her: Am I not very complisant, Ladies?


1. Lad. Mademoisel Joneton is always so, I think you have the most agreeable
manner of speaking --


Mart. Fie Madam, how can you do your Reason so much Violence, to commend the
most ridiculous Humor that ever Woman took up, it must needs be agreeable to
hear Words spun out to half an Hours length.


2. Lad. Well, I must own I like it in her extremely, I think there is a
particular Grace in it.


Mart. Yes, it is something particular truly, sometimes to talk as fast as
Schoolboys read, and other some so slow, that we forget the Sense of the
Argument before she has done speaking.


Mad. One would really think my Sister of Spanish Production, she is so formal
-- I see no reason why one may not alter and change the Form and Manner of
speaking, according to the Company one keeps, as well as the Mode and Fashion
of one Clothes -- Now when I converse with my own Sex, I love to indulge my
self, and let my Words fall from me with Indolence and Ease, because their
Conversation is insipid, and we only prattle away time.


Mart. Insipid! Ha, ha, ha, pray what relish have the Men's beyond ours?


Mad. Oh, that Question is Preposterous -- But you have no Taste Sister, you
detest Mankind.


Mart. Ay, but the Colonel has found the way to Convert that Notion. [Aside.] I
confess, Sister, I never could see any thing in those lordly Creatures of force
enough to make me submit blindly to their tyrannick Sway.


Mad. But there is a vast Pleasure in making them submit to ours, to make so
fine a Gentleman as Colonel Ravelin obey my Nod, sigh, weep and kneel at ones
Frown, then give him Raptures with a Smile. The Colonel! Oh! the most engaging
Man alive -- When he comes next you shall see him, Sister.


Mart. Not for the Spanish Mines -- I am too well acquainted with the Colonel,
which she must not know. [Aside.] Excuse me Sister, I should only spoil your
Conversation.


2. Lad. Does Madamoisel Marton hold her Resolution of a Monestery yet?


Mart. have not yet laid aside all Thoughts on it, Madam -- though it is in the
Colonel's Power to make me do it, I fear. [Aside.


Mad. Well, follow your own way, get up to a Six a Clock Mass, then stitch till
Dinner, tattle away your Hours with two or three silly Women, till Vespers;
then work again till Bedtime; and have no Pleasure beyond a Dream.


Mart. Oh would I could retrieve that tranquil State, she talks of what I was.
[Aside.] Every one to their Inclinations, Sister.


1. Lad. But pray inform me, Madamoisel Joneton, for I am very Ambitious of
coping you, where lies the Magic in Men to alter your manner of speaking?


Mad. Desire to please sets all the Senses in a Ferment, and Inclination
presses so hard upon the Faculty of Speech, that our Words hurry out with
Precipation, Vanity musters the Force of our Charms, and Pride leads us on the
attack of our Wishes, and a janty Variety of Airs complete the Conquest.


Enter Servant. Serve. Here Is Colonel Ravelin and another Gentleman to wait on
you, Madam.


Mad. Bring 'em up; une outer Galant.

[Rising in a hurry, and running to the Glass.
Mart. Ha! the Colonel, oh my Heart: I must be gone, I would not have him know
me for the World -- Well, Sister, I Will leave you to your desirable Company.

[Exit.
Mad. Adieu, ma Soer -- ah Maria Matter! how I look to day, je suis lead comme
le diable.


Lad. We'll wait on you another time, Mademoisel.


Mad. When you please, my dear Ladies.

[Ex. Ladies. Enter Colonel Ravlin, and Charles. Ah Monsieur le Colonel, je
suis ravi de vous voir.


Rav. Ah Madmoisel Joneton, je meur tout le moment que je ete absant de vous.


Mad. Ah Cela galant, ha, ha, ha, I have a most comical Story to tell you, ha,
ha, ha; such an Amor, ha, ha, such a Letter, ha, ha, such a Conquest; le
pleaser une Chatulez, ha, ha, ha.


Rav. Oh pleasant Ravishment, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Mad. What is it that is so Ravishing, Colonel, in your Opinion? [Very gravely.


Cha. Well Questioned.


Rav. Your Letter, Madam.


Mad. Then have you seen it, ma cheer Colonel?


Rav. Not I, Madam, I depend upon your superior Judgment for the Merit.


Mad. Most politely said: You are certainly the best bred Man in Europe,
Colonel.


Cha. I am sure this is the worst proof of his being so I ever knew him give.
[Aside.


Rav. You are certainly the most polite diverting charming Woman that ever told
a Story; but pray proceed, Madam; the Letter, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Mad. Oh ridiculous! a Letter from a High Dutch Servant; you shall hear it
Colonel.

[ Reads a Dutch Letter. Ha, ha, ha, methinks it has a rumbling sound.


Rav. He makes Love like a Cannon, ha, ha.


Mad. A mon Dieu! What makes me so merry? I am sure I have cause enough to the
contrary; my poor Paroquet is dead, Colonel.


Rav. Dead!


Mad. Dead, it died upon my Hand, it talked and buss'd me to the last moment;
oh my Heart is broke, oh, oh, oh, oh,

[Weeps.
Cha. So she is resolved to play over all her tricks I see. [Aside.


Mad. Oh I cannot contain my self when I think on it, oh, oh.


Rav. Oh unlucky Accident; give her Air.


Cha. In my Opinion she has already too much of that.


Rav. Mrs. Susan, loose her Lace; within there, bring some cold Water.

[Enter Servant with Water. She revives; for Heavens sake how do you do, Madam?
Come, I Will procure you another Paroquet.


Mad. Oh not so divertisant, it had a thousand pretty Actions; one day as
Monsieur le Markee de belle Jambe was entertaining me with a Recital of his
Amors -- ha, ha, ha, I have a pleasant Tale to tell you of him too, ha, ha,
ha, he is marriy'd, ha, ha, ha.


Cha. Upon the titter again, deliver me from such a medley I say. [Aside.


Mad. To a thirty thousand Pound Fortune, ha, ha, but the Estate lies in terra
incognita, I have recommended Imagination for his Steward, and Philosophy for
his Equipage, ha, ha, ha.


Rav. The Marquess let into the secret, ha, ha, pray who is the Lady that has
done him the favor?


Mad. Oh my Stars what ails me? ah Maria Matter, the Room goes round.


Rav. A Chair there, Mrs. Susan; repose your self a little, Madam, it is only
Vapors and will off again; these affectations in another I should hate, but
here I Am fated to the folly.


Cha. Most fantastical: the duce take me if I can bring my self to the
Complacence of asking her how she does. [Aside.


Rav. How do you, Madam?


Mad. Oh much better, Colonel, it is impossible any Malady can stay long in your
Company; I admire your Friend can be so melancholy with a Companion so
diverting.


Cha. I confess the Colonel is of a singular good humor, Madam, for an
Englishman; we, generally speaking, are dull heavy thinking Animals, not moved
by the losing of a Father.


Mad. Most unpolite, such a Lover as this would make me as splenetick as
fourscore.


Rav. Alas, Madam, he is married.


Mad. Married! nay then I forgive him; -- yet upon second thoughts, I will not
neither, for he ought to have left his dogged Humors at home, and not stamp
Wife in the Forehead of every Woman he meets.


Cha. He Is mad that would stamp any thing upon thee, I Am sure. [Aside.] Since I
offend you, Madam, I humbly take my leave. [Going.


Rav. I beg you would excuse the bluntness of my Friend, Madam, he is a very
honest Fellow. Oh that I could look upon her with his indifference. [Aside.


Mad. Oh fie Colonel, why that request? Your Friend is a fine Gentleman -- Mais
je ne scay pas en qui -- Nay, you shall not go, Monsieur; you being a married Man,
must understand every thing that belongs to our Sex.

[Runs and pulls him back by the Coat.
Cha. Heaven deliver me from the Study. [Aside.


Rav. Ha, ha, ha; poor Charles, how he frets. [Aside.


Mad. Here! give me your Opinion, how do you like these Clothes?


Cha. As I like every thing else that belongs to them, Madam.


Mad. A very odd Expression that -- but don't you think our Airs plus
Engageant, than the Ladies in England, Monsieur? How did your Lady dress, to
catch your Heart?


Cha. I never minded the Airs of her Person, Madam, she had other Charms for me.


Mad. This Fellow will give me the Hip confoundedly, if he goes on thus --
What! she sings; I fancy you love singing, Monsieur -- come I Will oblige you.

[Sings.
Rav. She resolves to teaze him. [Aside.


Mad. Well, Monsieur, Comment agrez vous cela?


Cha. The Words are very pretty, Madam.


Rav. And your manner of singing extremely engaging.


Mad. That Is not your Friend's Opinion, Colonel: He has certainly no Soul. If
all his Sex were such mortifying Animals, what a number of fasting Days should
we have in the Calendar; we should have no need of Indulgences, Pardons, and
Penance; we should live Saints, and dye without the fear of Purgatory. [Aside.


Cha. Colonel, you will excuse me if I leave you, for faith she has tired my
Patience. [ Aside to Rav.


Rav. No, prithee tarry a little longer.


Mad. What are you two whispering about? You shall not go 'till you have drank
some Tea; Susan, get Water for Tea, and set the Table ready.


Susan. It Is ready in the next Room, Madam.


Rav. My Friend is a lover of Tea, and was just enquiring of me where I thought
the best was to be got.


Cha. The Devil take his Excuse, now there is no getting off. [Aside.


Mad. That I am Mistress of any thing worth his Admiration, is no small
pleasure to me; I dare be vain to say, I can recommend him to the best in
Portugal. Along Messieurs. Fa, la, la, lera lal.

[Sings a Minuet, and Dances out.
SCENE the Terriera de Passa.
Enter Mar-plot, solus. Mar. They stay a cursed while, Egad I Will even ask for
Charles; the Story this young Fellow brought of a Letter will be a rare excuse.
[Going up to the Door.


Enter a Bravo with a Letter. Bravo. What Countryman are you, Sir?


Mar. Countryman, Sir? why I am an Englishman, Sir, I Am not ashamed of my
Country.


Bravo. I have a Letter for an Englishman, but those that sent it don't know
his Name.


Mar. From a Lady I warrant? Egad here is another Intreague of some Bodies pop'd
in my way now; I Have a good mind to own the Letter, open it and see what is in it;
but if it should come from the old Woman -- Pray, Sir, does it come from Youth
or Age?


Bravo. From Youth and Fire, I assure you.


Mar. Because I expect a Summons from a very beautiful young Lady my self.


Bravo. Your Description is just, Sir.


Mar. Say you so, Sir, why then I believe it is for your humble Servant, Sir.
Discoveries come thick to day.

[Aside. I am a lucky Dog, Faith.


Bravo. Not unlikely; there it is, Sir.

[Gives him the Letter.
Mar. Ah Colonel, ah Charles, what would you give to be in my place now? But
hang it, I Am good-natured, she shall fall to one of your shares, for I would
not give a Halfpenny for the finest Woman in Lisbon, for my own sake. [Opens
and reads.] What Is here? The Reader is a Villain, and deserves to have his
Throat cut. Surprising! upon my Soul, Sir, this Letter does not belong to me. I
am a lucky Dog now indeed.


Enter Don Lopez. Don Lop. Upon my Soul, Sir, you lie. Draw Sirrah, or I Will rip
your Guts up.

[Draws.
Mar. Draw, Sir? for what, Sir? Oh bloody-minded Wretch, what will come of me?
[Aside.


Don Lop. For opening the Letter, Villain.


Mar. Ah pox of my Curiosity -- The Devil take the Letter, 'twas none of my
seeking, the Fellow said it was for an Englishman, an, an, an I did not know
but it might have been for me as well as another; I ask your Pardon with all my
Heart.


Don Lop. Rot your Compliment; if it had come from my Sister it had been for
you, Sir; therefore Draw, or by St. Anthony --


Mar. Sister! as I hope to be saved, Sir, I know never a Man's Sister in the
Universe.


Don Lop. Cowardly Dog, [beats him.] dare to lie with a Man's Wife, and not
dare to fight for her?


Mar. Mercy upon me, I lie with a Man's Wife? oh, Sir, you are the most
mistaken in me that ever you was in your days, Sir; Upon my Faith, I never knew
what Woman was, nay, Sir, I never cared for a Woman, that is more -- But indeed
here is two or three Gentlemen of my Acquaintance very much given that way.


Don Lop. Is there so, Sir?


Mar. Oh exceedingly -- now I will not swear it is not one of them. I wish I were
fairly rid of him. [Aside.


Don Lop. Your Safety depends upon your Information, let me know where to find
them, and you shall live.


Enter Colonel Ravelin and Charles behind them. Mar. Thank you heartily, Sir,
-- What a cursed Premenary I have brought my self into now, for Egad I Will not
tell where Charles lives, if I dye for it -- I Will, I Will, I Will tell him a wrong
Place, I Am resolved.


Don Lop. Come, where do they lodge? What are you studying for, ha?

[Slaps him.
Mar. I, I, I, I, cannot think of the name of the Street for my Blood -- it is,
it is -- what de ye call the Street when you turn the Corner of your right
Hand, and then turn again of your left, and then again of the right, and so
back by the left, an, an, an, so, an, an a cross the what de call 'em, an, an.


Don Lop. No equivocating, Sirrah.

[Holds the Sword to his Breast.
Charles. I thought it was Mar-plot's Voice.

[Draws.
Rav. Since he lives, well preserve him.

[Draws.
Mar. Ah, good Sir, I, I, I, I, I, -- Ah Charles, dear Charles.


Rav. Guard your Life, Sir, or cease to insult this Gentleman.

[ They beat off Don Lopez and the Bravo.
Mar. Victoria! Victoria! Faith Gentlemen you came in the lucky Minute, or I
had been a dead Man.


Rav. Nay, in my Conscience I believe thou wilt never die in thy Bed. Which of
your inquisitive Actions brought this upon you?


Cha. Was this your Chimney Adventure, or another?


Mar. No, faith this was another, about a damned Letter, and Cuckolding some
Body, and debauching that Spaniard's Sister, and the Devil knows what; I wish
one of you two is not at the bottom of this.


Rav. Ha, ha! come Charles, we'll to your Lodgings, where he shall give us the
whole Relation of his Adventures.


Mar. With all Sincerity -- and I have something else to tell you, Charles;
there is a Lady in Love with you, and has sent you a Letter, but mum, you shall
promise to let me into the Secret, or you shall know no more on it.


Cha. How brisk the Rogue is again already? I thought you might have had enough
of Secrets.


Mar. Oh, the Mind you know is never satisfied.
Were all the Joys that Nature could bestow
Within my Power to taste, I Would rather know
What every Man endeavors still to hide;
And having that, would care for naught beside.
[Exeunt.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
SCENE, Charles 's Lodgings.
Enter Charles, Colonel Ravelin and Mar-plot. Rav. A Very pretty Account, ha,
ha, ha, what do you expect will be the end of your Curiosity, Mar-plot?


Mar. No good in this Country I fear, yet for my Blood I cannot help it.


Cha. What, cannot you help dogging People, and opening Letters of no Concern to
you?


Mar. OF my Soul, I have made Resolutions upon Resolutions to the contrary, but
to no purpose; there is a tickling desire runs through my Veins, which is always
craving as my Stomach -- and makes these Discoveries as necessary as my Food.
Though faith I never mean any harm -- Why this Letter now, who the Devil dreamed
of a consumed Challenge?


Rav. You should always dream of the worst, Sir.


Mar. That Is not my Maxim, Colonel; methinks ill luck comes fast enough. Look
ye Gentlemen, it is as much your fault as mine, if you would take me with you,
or tell me the bottom of things, I should trouble my Head no farther; but here
you leave me in the Dark, and nothing to do, but entertain my Fears, which are
strong for my Friends, and most of the Mischiefs I do, proceeds from my Concern
for their Safety; and here I get thump'd and beaten for my good Intentions, and
that is all, on every side.


Cha. And all you deserve; ha, ha, ha.


Enter Servant. Ser. There Is a Gentleman below inquires for you, Sir; he has
Business with you from England, he says, Sir.


Mar. From England! who the Devil can this be now? [Aside.


Cha. Bring him up.


Enter Isabinda. Isab. I have a Letter and Packet for Mr. Charles Gripe.


Cha. I am the Person, Sir. Robin, reach a Chair; pray be pleased to sit, Sir.

[Opens and Reads the Letter.
Mar. From England! Ha, ha, Sir, your humble Servant; why this is the very
Gentleman I told you of, Charles -- So, so, well, well, and how does Donna
Cephisa? What, she will have him then, and no Body else? ha? What does she say
to you, Charles? Ha? How does she write, Ha? Nay, egad you shall let me into
this Business, Mun -- for I have been chief Promoter of it I am sure, therefore
no shuffling, Charles --


Cha. No, no, I scorn it, Mar-plot; there read, read.

[Throws him the Letter.
Mar. Why that is civil now -- Let me see how these Spanish Dames express
themselves -- My dearest Life -- Humph -- As frank and fond, as if it came from
an Inhabitant of Covent Garden, egad -- I hope this will find you safely
arrived in Lisbon -- Ha, Lisbon -- Why what the Devil does she mean? Lets see
what is at bottom: From your ever loving Wife, Isabinda Gripe. A murrain Gripe
you -- Pish, Pox, I wondered you was so ready to show it me indeed.

[Throws it down.
Cha. Ha, ha, what does not the Secret please you?


Mar. Please a Fiddle-stick; why what did this young Dog mean? Egad I wish
Charles would beat him for the Disappointment. [Aside.


Cha. to Isab.] Pardon my Memory, Sir, I have seen your Face somewhere, but
cannot recollect where.


Isab. Heaven continue his Ignorance. [Aside.] Very likely, Sir, I have lived
most of my time in this Place.


Mar. Ay; why how in the Name of Wonder did he come by this Letter then? [Aside.


Isab. A Factor to my Uncle, Sir Francis Tradewell, from whom I received that
Packet, with Orders to deliver it to you.


Mar. Oh, so it came. [Aside.


Cha. I know Sir Francis very well, and for his sake, Sir, should be proud of
being better acquainted with you.


Isab. Sir, you Honor me --


Mar. Pies of his Acquaintance, I say. [Aside.


Rav. I hope your Lady's well, Charles.


Cha. At your Service, Colonel -- She has sent the Papers I told you I forgot;
now I shall dispatch my Business very quickly, she songs to see me, she says --
it is a Poor good-natured Tit, and I loved her heartily till I married her; but
whether her Overfondness, or the easy Access every Man has to his Wife, takes
off the edge of my Appetite, but methinks I see her not with half that desire I
used to do, when I scaled her Window for a Kiss, the Memory of it still is
Pleasant.


Mar. Ay! my Shoulders remember that time too.


Isab. Ungenerous Declaration, it is very unjust in my Opinion to slight the
thing that loves you, I Am sure it is what I could not do.


Mar. I fancy you never tried the Matrimonial strength of Inclination yet, Sir,
therefore can be no Judge: Nature abhors Constraint.


Rav. Ay ay, Inconstancy is a fault in Nature, and who can help it?


Cha. Right, Colonel! and when you marry Mademoisel Flutter yonder, you will have
a Proof of what I say.


Mar. Mademoisel Flutter, who is she? I never heard of her before. [Aside.


Rav. Let her look to that -- I thought Charles's Wife had been a Favorite of
yours, Mr. Mar-plot, but I don't hear you make the least Inquiry after her
Health.


Mar. Look ye, Colonel, I hate to be balked, for that puts every thing out of
ones Head -- Hark ye, what did you mean by telling me such a confounded Story
upon the Terriera de Pass, of a rich Merchant's Daughter Dona Cephisa, and I
cannot tell who? What, was it all but a sham then?


Isab. Why really, Sir, you was so inquisitive, that I had no other way to
dismiss you, and it is not my Custom to let one Man into the Affairs of another.


Rav. Poor Mar-plot, thou art balked every way; ha, ha.


Mar. Well, there was never good times since this shuffling and lying came in
Fashion.

[ A Letter tied to a Stone, is tossed in at the Window, Charles takes it up
and Reads to himself.
Mar. Ha day! Where the Devil came that from?

[Runs to the Window.
Isab. seeming to look out.] I fancy it came from that Fellow which looks up
yonder, there is no Body else near -- Ha, my Eyes deceive me, or he belongs to
some Body in the House where I lodge -- I Will home, and make the best
Observation I can in this matter. Ah, poor Charles, these Courses are more
dangerous than thou art aware of; I Will not discover my self yet, perhaps I may
satisfy my Curiosity better as I am. [Aside.


Rav. An Assignation, Charles; send thee better Fortune than last time.


Cha. It Is from the same Woman, Colonel -- No, no, it is only some roguish Boy,
tossing Stones about in Pieces of his Copy-Book.


Mar. Humph, but that sham will not take though. [Aside.


Isab. Oh well dissembel'd -- Sir, I Am your humble Servant.


Cha. Sir, I hope I shall have the Honor to see you here again.


Isab. Sir, the Honor will be mine.

[Exit.
Enter Ravelin 's Servant. Rav. The Trap-door is unbolted, Colonel. [Half aside.


Mar. What Is that of a Trap-door now? Ods heart here is two confounded
Intreagues on Foot, and I Am out at both, and they will be hanged before they will
let me into one of them. [Aside.


Rav. I Will be there immediately.

[Exit Servant.
Mar. Where, Colonel? I wish I could spilt my self in half now, that I might
follow them both.


Rav. Again at your Impertinence? Ha, ha.


Cha. He cannot help it for his Soul -- Though we take different Posts, Colonel, I
fancy it is one and the same Action, Prosperity to yours.


Rav. The same to thine. Mr. Mar-plot, Adieu.


Mar. What shall I do between both? Pox on it, it is very unlucky -- Then you
will not let me into the Secret, Colonel?


Rav. Positively no.

[Exit.
Mar. Nay, nay, nay, Charles, you will not both leave me, will you?

[ Catches hold of Charles.
Cha. Indeed, Mar-plot, I have extraordinary Business.


Mar. Do but tell me what it is, nay, tell me but something relating to it, and
I am satisfied.


Cha. Why then to be ingenious, the Letter which was tossed in is a Challenge,
and I am going to seek for a Second; now if you could Fight, you would save me the
Labor.


Mar. Ah, the Devil take it, that I never learned to Fence -- Why did you not
engage the Colonel?


Cha. Because I saw he had Affairs of his own to pursue.


Mar. What would I give for Courage now -- Pies on it, what is it that makes Men
so stout? Egad I Am ready to weep to think I cannot serve my Friend, I have the
Theory of fighting, methinks -- I only want the practick Part.


Cha. So, I have found the way to drop him at last -- Well, I hope you are
satisfied.


Mar. Satisfied? no faith, Charles, I am not satisfied; ods Life, I Will tell you
what I can do, I Will Charge my brace of Pocket Pistols, and shoot him -- if you
will.


Cha. Oh fie, there is a dishonorable Action indeed.


Mar. The Devil take Honor; when Life's concerned, what will a Man get by it?


Cha. I have not time at present to clear that Question, farewell.

[Exit.
Mar. Farewell! Egad 'twou'd be faring very ill though if he should be killed. I
wish I knew where to find Colonel Ravelin -- Oh Lord, oh Lord; I never thought
to ask Charles where this Duel was to be fought, and then whither could I send
him? Well thought on, yonder he goes, I Will follow till I fix him, and then I Will
soon call Company enough to part them -- Egad I love my Friend, as I love my
Life.

[Exit.
SCENE the Street.
Enter Charles with a Rope-ladder, Mar-plot at a distance. Cha. Let me see, she
has changed her Appartment, she has sent me Word -- Her Window now is over the
Door, this must be it.

[Throws up his Ladder, which falls down again.
Enter Margaritta. Mar. Humph, I see what kind of Challenge it is now; a Man
must have a rare fighting Stomach, that will scale the Window of his Antagonist.


Marg. Here, here, Senior, the Coast is clear, come in at the Door boldly, my
Lady is all Impatience to see you.


Cha. Mine is the greatest; in, in my Dear.

[Exit.
Mar. [Sings.] Ah, put her in mind how her time steals on -- Oh, Charles, the
Devil a Second did you want; that was only a sham to get rid of me. Ha, ha, ha,
how comically things jump in my way? I Will secure the Ladder though for him; this
is a great House, but whose it is, is the Query? If I thought I should not have
my Bones broke, I would make bold to Enquire -- Who

Enter behind him Don Perriera, and Don Lopez. have we here? They seem in deep
Consultation -- Oh bless me, one of them is the Bloody-minded Spaniard, egad it
is not safe to be seen.

[Exit between the Scenes.
Don Per. I have done all you ordered me to a tittle, and have taken leave of
my Wife for three Days, under pretense of Business at St. Ubes.


Don Lop. That Is well I cannot find who this Villain is, but I warrant we shall
have him fast enough. Now do you return, and cunningly convey your self into
the Antichamber-closet, there lie concealed, he will not be long absent, if he is
not there already; in the mean time I Will wait in the Street, with two or three
trusty Fellows, that shall dispatch him if he falls in our way.

[Exit.
Don Per. And if I find my self a Cuckold, fire, blood and brimstone, if I
catch 'em, I Will send them both to the Devil.

[Exit into the House.
Mar-plot comes forwards. Mar. Mercy upon me, what an Oath was that? Why
certainly, they think Murder a venial Sin here, and make no more of killing a
Man, then cracking a Nut. This is certainly Charles which they threaten, for
the old Cacademon is gone into that House; which way shall I give Charles
notice of his danger? I have a good mind to cry our Fire; ay, but when they
find there is no such thing, they may burn me perhaps -- Hark, I hear some Body
coming, 'gad I shall be beat again.

[Exit. Enter on the other side. My Fear hears double, I think, I can see no
Body -- Od I Will make use of this Ladder; he talked her Appartment was over the
Door, so that perhaps I may give him warning at the Window, and he may come
down the same way -- Oh lord, which is the House, now? Is it this, or this, I
wonder; choke me if I can tell what a blundering Sot was I not to take better
notice, this must be it certainly, [Seems to throw up the Ladder between the
Scenes, and Exit.] Heaven send me good luck, for I tremble horridly.

[Exit.
SCENE draws and discovers Marron 's Apartment.
She and Colonel Ravelin. Rav. Nay this is starving a Man in the sight of
Plenty; how many times have you put me off with Excuses and fair Promises*


Mart. And how often have you sworn Constancy, Colonel?


Rav. Why you will not give me leave to be constant, my Dear; let me once possess,
and then.


Mart. And then Mademoisel Joneton's Charms will be sufficient to excuse the
Perjury.


Rav. Ha! how does she know my Pretensions there? I fancy I shall have warmer
business by and by than I expected. [Aside.


Mar. Be not surpised at my knowledge of that Affair, nor apprehensive of the
least danger, though I know you love her, spite of all her Affectation, she is
the darling Mistress of your Soul, yet you are safe, I scorn those poor
Revenges which my Sex too often take; it is the Heart, not the Life, I Would make my
Prize.


Col. Generously said, -- But you are misinformed, Madam. I Will carry it off if
possible -- She Is handsome, and I don't find my Love to the other renders me
incapable of a Compliment to this. [Aside.


Mart. She has too much Vanity, Colonel, to keep your Passion a Secret, and it
is dishonorable in you to deny your Love.


Rav. Humph! Look you, Madam, I am a true Protestant, and have a mortal
Antipathy to Confession; I bear the Queen's Commission, and will entertain all
that will fairly list under me; then let me have no more of these little
Jealousies; I Will make as good Provision for thee as for any Lady in Portugal,
so prithee let us come to a right Understanding; if thou art plagued with an old
superannuated Husband, who wants a young Fellow to aid and assist him, here he
stands; if you are a Widow, and wants one to manage the Affairs of Love, I Will
give you my word you cannot have a better; I Am an Arithmetician, as well as a
Soldier, and can cast Account as fast as any Man: And if you are a Virgin, Egad
I Am as good an Engineer. [Embracing her.


Mart. You have mistaken your Plan, and may raise the Siege, Colonel, for
you will never carry the Town this way; I own I love you, and if I said with more
Sincerity than she, I fancy I should not injure her Passion; my Birth's as
noble, my Fortune not less; you give me some Proofs indeed, that my Person
falls short of her Charms to engage the Heart of Colonel Ravelin.


Rav. Thy Person? thy Person is a charming Person, and my Heart, and all the
rest of the Appurtenances, are at thy Service, my Dear; thy Birth and Fortune
are things indifferent, so no more to be said about them. [Hugging her.


Mart. Will you marry me then?


Rav. Ah! what a Turn's there? Who could have thought, after thy manner of
proceeding, thou would have asked such Security; why thou art an Usurer in
Love, but prithee use a Conscience; don't expect a Man to be a Slave all his
life. Marriage! why what confounded Extortion is that! ods heart thou art more
mercenary than an Agent; look ye, Madam, I Will give you Heart for Heart, and I
think that good lawful Interest, and thou shall have my Body for performance of
Articles.


Mart. Ah, Colonel, you will bring a Habeas Corpus, and remove it as soon as the
Campaign begins. I don't like these Prisoners at large.


Rav. And great Souls hate Restraint.


Mar-plot in the Balcony. Mar. I have him faith -- ah, how close they are,
Egad, it grieves me to part 'em -- but there is no help for it -- Fly, Charles,
fly, there is the Devil and all of Plots against you -- here, here, give me your
hand, come this way through the Window.


Mart. Oh! a Man at my Window! oh! my Reputation is undone for ever.

[Faints into a Chair.
Rav. How Is that? a Man?

[ Looks up and sees Mar-plot.
Mar. The Devil! the Colonel! -- Zounds, I am certainly bewitched -- I, I, I,
had as good fallen into the Hands of Turks and Tartars. O Lord, O Lord, my Ladder
is gone, what shall I do now?


Rav. Mar-plot. God's Death you Son of a Whore, I Will make an Example of you, to all
inquisitive Rascals in the Universe.

[Strikes at him with his Sword.
Mar. Ah, Colonel, for Heavens sake save my Life; upon my Soul you will make me
break my Neck, for I hang only by my Hands; may I be sliced into Collops, if I
knew any thing of your being here; certainly I am the most unfortunate Fellow
breathing.


Rav. Zounds come down Sirrah, and cease your bawling, or I Will shoot you through
the Head.

[Pulls out a Pocket Pistol.
Mar. Oh, oh, oh, I will, I will, I will, dear Colonel,

[Comes Down.
Rav. runs to Marton.] For Heaven sake, Madam, don't be frighted! it is an
honest foolish Fellow of my Acquaintance, there is no danger of your Reputation,
my Angel.


Enter Mademoiselle Joneton. Mad. What Noise was that? ha! what do I see? My
Sister and the Colonel? ah, ah!

[Faints.
Rav. Confusion! she here? I Am betrayed: What, ho, within there.


Mart. Ha! my Sister! nay then I Am completely wretched. [Aside.


Mar. Nay, now we shall be murdered -- Oh Lord, what do you mean by calling
out, Colonel?


Rav. God's Death, what did you mean, Rascal, by coming here? This Mischief is all
owing to you. I have a good mind to cut your Throat. [ Runs to Marton.] Madam,
Madam; ods heart was ever Man in this condition? What shall I do between 'em?
Run Sirrah, and call some Body.

[Kicks him.
Mar. Lord, Colonel, have a little Patience; see, see, she revives.


Mad. Is this your Reservedness, this your Modesty, this your hating Mankind,
Sister?


Rav. How Is that, her Sister? I have made a fine piece of work, Faith: Rascal,
I could find in my Heart to beat your Eyes out.

[Boxes him.
Mar. Look ye, Colonel, be merciful, and if I don't bring all this business off
clear, I Will forfeit my Neck, that is all.


Rav. Hang your Contrivance; nothing prospers you have a Hand in.


Mad. You have decent Inclinations for a Nun; you had a mind for a taste of the
World before you left it, Sister.


Mart. The World -- the World is surfeited with your Impertinence, and I would
avoid tasting what may breed a fever.


Mad. Why, what an Inundation of Mistresses has this Colonel? [Aside.


Mart. If he is so good a Physician, how comes yours to rage so high, Madam?
Methinks you are delirious --


Mad. It would not be amiss to confirm your Opinion --

[ Goes to strike her a Box on the Ear, but Col. Ravelin stops her Hand.
Rav. Hold, hold, hold, Madam; for Heavens sake, Ladies, let us have no
Petticoat War.


Mar. Ay! See what Example does, Colonel; Egad, Boxing's as catching as the
Smallpox -- Nay, pray Madam let it go round -- od if I were a Woman, I could
Box titely, but a pox on these Swords, they Spitchcock a Man in a Moment.


Mart. Did not your Temper carry a Punishment in its self, I should return the
Favor you designed me.


Mar. Should! And will not you Madam? Egad, I Would fain see them pull one another
Coifes.


Rav. Dog, mischievous Toad.

[Kicks him.
Mar. Oh your most humble Servant, Colonel -- I wish your Toes were not quite
so Complaisant. Their Intriegues tumble comically in my way -- But egad, I pay
a tragical price for my Knowledge.


Rav. Whatever Face this Accident may wear, Madam, give me leave to clear my
self -- upon Honor -- I have not --


Mad. Cease your odious Excuses, in vain you endeavor to be well with me --
and the civillest Action you can do, is to quit the Room --


Mar. That we shall immediately Madam; upon my Soul, it was no design of ours
to come into it, for to be plain with you Ladies, I am only in fault, and yet
not in fault neither, for you must know that I luckily, or unluckily, as it may
fall out --


Rav. What, in the name of Jupiter, is he a going to say?


Mar. Chanced to over-hear a Quarrel between a Friend of ours and a Portuguese;
the latter was foiled in the Duel, and fled into your Neighborhood here; but
our Friend being a mettl'd Fellow, pursued him into the very House. Seeing
that, Madam, away ran I, and called this Gentleman to his Assistance; but
finding every Door shut, and being very impatient to succor our Friend, as I
told you, Madam, we resolved to scale the Window; but for want of taking good
Notice, we mistook the House, it seems, and so happened in here. The Sight of
two Men at the Window surpised that Lady, and threw her into Fits --
Compassion for the Sex made the Colonel fall foul upon me -- And so this
created the Bustle, which brought you, Madam; an, an, an, so, so, so, an, an,
that is all, Madam -- Pray Heaven this brings us off. [Aside.


Mart. Excellent Fellow! [Aside.


Rav. The Dog deserves to be forgiven for this plausible Pretense; I Will strike
in with him -- This is matter of Fact, Ladies; yet sure there is a Fate in all
I do, which guides my Steps still toward something that relates to you.


Mad. Well there is a Beauty in that Expression, 'twas a surprising Accident,
-- Can you forgive my rash Suspicions, Sister?


Rav. And our unlucky Adventure -- What induces me to hope your Pardon, is your
being related to this Lady, whose good Humor cancels all Faults as soon as
acknowledged -- for her sake then. --


Mart. Ungrateful! For her sake! Methinks I hate him now, nay, hate my self for
indulging a foolish Passion, equally destructive to my Ease and Fame -- that
has reduced me to this low Contempt, but with this Breath I banish the soft
Passion from my Breast, and will this moment reassume my former Resolution.


Mad. You seem out of Humor, Sister.


Mart. Have I not Reason, but it is past; the Gentleman would be forgiven for
your sake, but I forgive him for my own, resolving to let nothing ruffle that
Calmness with which my Soul's possessed at present, for this Day shuts me from
the World and you for ever.


Mar. What does she mean by that now? But Colonel, Charles will be killed --


Rav. Hush, hush, enough, the Jest will grow stale. It Is pity so much Youth and
Beauty should be sacrificed to a Cloister, for if I apprehend you right, it is
that you mean, Madam.


Mar. I wish they were both there, so that Charles was but out of Danger.
[Aside.


Mart. It Is only there I can my Peace retrieve,
Where seeing nothing, nothing can deceive:
Shut from your sight, my Wishes I Will control,
Imure my Body, to preserve my Soul.
[Exit.
Mar. Turn Nun! Who would have thought it? So, there is an end of one Intreague.


Mad. Some forty years hence, perhaps, I may follow her Example --


Mar. Upon my Soul Colonel, Charles is in danger.


Rav. What do you mean? 'Sdeath I Will toss you out the same way you came in, you
long to spoil all again --


Mar. Spoil the Devil -- I tell you, he is in one of these Houses, I saw him go
in, and heard an old Cuckold swear what he would do if he caught him with his Wife;
and then egad went into that very House. My eagerness to give Charles notice of
the Danger, tumbled me a top of you, a pies on it; and though I have brought you
off, you are for tossing me out at Window. Egad I think no Man meets such
barbarous returns for his good Nature, as I do.


Rav. Nay, if Charles is really in Danger, I beg your Pardon with all my Heart,
Mr. Mar-plot.


Mad. What is this Consultation about? Et bein Monsieur, who are you thinking
of?


Rav. Of you, Madam: Inclination and Honor holds Dispute, Inclination chains
me to your Presence, but Honor calls me to the rescue of my Friend: And I hope
his Distress will excuse my abrupt Departure. Adieu, ma cheer ange.


Mad. And will you then precipitate your self into danger? This Gentleman will
go --


Mar. She Is very charitably inclined toward me, I thank her. [Aside.


Mad. Will Not you, Sir?


Mar. Why look ye Madam, I, I, I will go with all my Heart, but, but, but, but,


Rav. But a single Arm is weak Assistance, where the danger is so strong --
besides it would be a Reflection upon mine Honor -- You are my Guardian Angel,
if you smile I shall return in safety.

[Exit.
Mar. Faith is the main Point of Religion: Pray take me into your Protection
too, Madam.

[Exit.
Mad. So, he is gone then; now would not I give a Dish of Tea for a Lover that
I could not make sacrifice every thing to me. These Englishmen have too much
Sense to make Husbands on:

For only he should to our Sex be dear,
Who from a Look is capable of Fear.
The Man of Courage lords it every where.

SCENE, The Inside of Dona Perriera's House.
Dona Perriera and Charles at Supper, Margaritta waiting. Dona Per. I like the
Description you have given me of England extremely, and envy the pleasant Life
your Ladies live. Here Is a Health to their Husbands; I wish they could teach
ours their Complaisance.


Cha. We had rather teach their Wives, Madam, who have much more Docility: But
here is to their Conversion.


Dona Per. We! Why are you in the Number of married Men?


Cha. I have a Breviat to act as one, Madam, in the Absence of your Husband, if
it is not your Fault. Come, my Angel, we shall be interrupted again.


Dona Per. Why? you have no more Friends to come down the Chimney, have you?


Marg. If you have, I wash my Hands of him; no more Deliverance from me, I
assure him. I hate to have a Scheme balked that is so well laid.


Cha. No, no, Seniora Margaritta: What I apprehend is the Return of your Master.


Dona Per. He Is safe for three Days, which time I expect you pass with me. I
have several Doubts to be resolved, and as many Articles to make, ever I give
my self entirely to your Power.


Cha. What Agreements are we to make, I wonder? This Intrigue will end very
foolishly, I foresee that. [Aside.] All Secrets, I suppose. The next Room is
more private, I fancy; there I Will do my Endeavor to solve your Scruples.


Dona Per. Margaritta, bring in the Wine.


Cha. Well thought on.

The amorous Feast of Cupid soon would cloy,
If Bacchus did not join the fainting Boy.
[Exeunt.
Enter Don Perriera. Don Per. And is it then true at last? Am I a Cuckold? Oh
Vengeance! Vengeance! Oh Anthony, thou Guardian Saint of Lisbon, give me
Patience; let me have Christian Charity upon their Souls, for I shall have no
Mercy upon their Bodies. I have sent for two Priests to take their Confessions,
and then they die: Here I Will wait their Coming; should I enter, my Eyes would
let loose my Revenge too soon: It Is enough that I have them secure, and that my
Ears have heard a Man's Voice with this vile Adultress.

But since such Pleasure in his Arms she proves,
Death shall join her unto the thing she loves.
[Exit.
SCENE changes to the Terriera de Passa.
Enter Isabinda sola. Isab. As I suspected, he is here in this House; through the
Sovereign Power of Gold I have discovered all; but for my Ease, would I had
been ignorant still. Vice, thou ugliest Picture of the Soul, by what Power do
thou charm, and lull asleep the Dictates of a Conscience? And who can boast of
Honor, that starts not at the Breach of Vows? Who have we here?


Enter Lorenzo. Lor. Methinks I never went so heavily of an Errand in my Life:
I am sorry for this Englishman, and heartily sorry for my Mistress; for, to
give her her due, she is the best-natur'd Woman to her Servants living: And,
faith, I cannot blame her for loving this Gentleman better than that old gouty,
ptisicky, crook-back'd, covetous Hunks my Master.


Isah. Ha! this is the Servant which I bribed. Of what Errand is he sent?
[Aside.


Lor. What Saint shall I invoke, to save this wretched Pair? I know St. Anthony
is engaged on Don Perriera's Side -- Let me see, there is some She-Saint that
has been a Sinner this way her self; if I could think of her Name, she would be the
fittest Person to do their Business.


Isab. Their Business! Oh, my boading Heart foretells some Mischief. Lorenzo --


Lor. Ha! who is there?


Isab. It Is I, fear not: What is the Cause of your Complaint?


Lor. Oh! is it you, Senior? Oh, your Country-man's undone. My Master,
pretending to go to St. Ubes for three Days, concealed himself in the House
unknown to every body, and has discovered all. I Am sent this Moment for two
Monks from the Convent of Sante Vincente to confess the Criminals, and then you
know what follows.


Isab. Death! Oh Distraction! which, oh, which way, ye Powers, shall I save
this perjured Man?


Lor. Ay, dear Sir, think, if it be possible.


Isab. Oh Charles! little do thou think how dear thy unlawful Joys are
purchased; three Lives for a momentary Bliss: For, in spite of all the Cause
that thou have given me, you are still as dear as Virtue to my Soul, and Life
without thee is not to be born. Oh, hear me Heaven, that knows my chaste
Desires, and pity the Distress that tears my Breast; instruct me how to ward
this fatal Blow, and save a Man that may return to thee. Ha! methinks I feel
the inspiring Thought, and Hope begins to feed the Springs of Life -- Lorenzo,
first bring the Priests to me. If you perform this Business with Success and
Secrecy, I Will double twice this Sum.

[Gives him Money.
Lor. May I meet the Fate designed for them, if I Am not faithful to you.

[Exit.
Isab. If by this Plot I save this perjured Man,
I give the greatest Proof of Love that Mortal can.
[Exit.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Isabinda in a Ferriwig and Nightgown, and two Priests; a Sword lying
upon the Table. 1 Priest. PLead not for Adultery; would you have us draw a
Scandal on our Function?


2 Priest. All we can do is to set the Criminals right in their Journey to the
other World, Son.


Isab. Oh, it is a long Journey, Fathers; and who shall bring you word how they
arrive? Tell me, even you who purchase Heaven daily by your Prayer, to sell and
canton out as you think fit, how would you receive a Summons of this Nature?
Would sudden Death appear a welcome Guest?


1 Priest. The Innocent can never fear to die. Had he, for whom you plead,
lived free from Guilt, Death would appear no formidable Enemy.


2 Priest. Suffer us to discharge our Office, or we must leave you. [Going.


Isab. Oh, my tortured Soul! if they go, Charles is lost for ever. [Aside.] He
that treads this way treads upon his Death.

[Runs and catches up the Sword, draws, and gets between them and the Door.
1 Priest. Ha! St. Vincent defend us.


Isab. Not all the Saints your Calendar can boast shall save you, except you
save my Brother; your Innocence can never fear to die --

And though your Souls will know no Pity here, when I Have discharged 'em from
those heavy Carcasses, they may prove a Convoy to these Strangers. You who
daily trade with Heaven, must surely know the Road.


2 Priest Hold, hold -- if we thought this Matter could be done with Safety,
and that it was Charity to save them --


Isab. That it is Charity, let this demonstrate -- Here Is 200 Moydres to be
employed in charitable Uses.

[Gives him a Purse. Perhaps the Prayers of such whom you relieve
May pull a Blessing from offended Heaven,
And this poor guilty Pair may find Forgiveness.

1 Priest. This is a Youth of excellent Parts.


2 Priest. A Favorite of St. Vincent's, I warrant, he is so charitable. Well,
Son, seeing you so well inclined, we do consent, propose the way: Take care you
do not expose us --


Isab. I Will tell you my Design within, it is free from Hazard, or may the
Punishment designed for them be mine. I Will follow you, Fathers.

[Exeunt Priests. Over all Degrees of Men Gold bears a Sway,
Where all Entreaties fail, Gold finds the way;
Be thou propitious, Heaven, and bless the Scheme I lay.
[Exit.
SCENE, Don Perriera 's House.
Don Perriera solus. Don Per. What a cursed while this Rascal stays; if he
comes not instantly my Rage will get the better of my Reason, and I shall
dispatch the foul Adulterers without Confession.


Enter Lorenzo, and Isabinda in Priests Habit, and one of the Priests with her.
Lor. I have obeyed your Orders, Senior, here are the Priests.


Don Per. But very slowly, Hang-dog.

[Strikes him. Ex. Lor.
Priest. Peace be to you, Son.


Don Per. That Is not your Business, Father; try if you can administer Peace to
my salacious Wife and her young Amouretta within there; but do you hear,
Fathers? Dispatch the Business of their Souls as speedily as I will that of
their Bodies: But if Heaven has no more Mercy than I shall have, your Labors
might have been spared.


Priest. Speak not so irreligiously -- Which is the Room? Keep your distance.

[ Ex. Priest and Isabinda.
D. Per. Make haste then, or I shall take your Work out of your Hands. Now let
me consult my instruments of Death, for I Will have no bounds in my Revenge.
I Will, I Will, I Will, flea 'em alive.

[Exit.
Scene draws and discovers Dona Perriera and Charles.
Dona Per. Is it the unreasonableness of my Request, or the smallness of your
Respect, that causes this Hesitation, Senior? Sure if I give my self entirely
to your Arms, I may deserve to be freed from the Embraces of a Wretch I hate.
I Will not be chargeable to you in my Passage, I have Jewels of considerable
Value to defray that Expense; I insist upon a Promise, that you will convey me
to England, and then I am yours.


Cha. Why then to deal ingeniously, Madam, I am married in England, and shall not
well know how to bestow you there -- But whilst I am here, Child, I am thine --


Enter Isabinda and Priest. Dona Per. Ah! Maria matter, dic ora pro nobis,
[Crossing her self.] Oh, we are undone, this hour is our last.


Cha. Laying his Hand on his Sword.] Ha! What are you?


Priest. Our Habits show what we are, and your Guilt what you have need of.


Cha. Priests! Nay, then our condition is worse than I expected.

[Don Per. Runs and falls on her Knees.
Dona Per. Oh, confess me straight, my Soul is taking flight already; I see a
thousand dire revengeful Fiends hovering over me, and watching all to catch it
in the Air. Oh save it Father by your Holy Prayers, for in you only all my
Comforts center.


Isab. Come Son, consider the great Work you have to do, Death waits without,
therefore examine your self within.


Cha. The Work must be all my own, Father, I have no occasion for a
Journey-man, so you may spare your Pains.


Isab. How, a Heretic! alas poor Soul, how much it troubles me.


Cha. Pray good Father express your trouble some where else, I have no Faith in
your living Doctrine, and resolve to have nothing to do with you in Death,
therefore don't trouble me -- Is there no way to escape, and must I die
cowardly? No, that I will not, [Draws] the first that enters dies; I Will have
Company at least.


Isab. A weak Defense, alas, should I desert him -- Put up your Sword, in pity
to your Ignorance, and in hopes of Converting you to the true Faith, I Will
deliver you from this hazard.


Cha. But can you save her too?


Isab. How Son! Is this a time to dream of future Pleasures?


Cha. I Will give you mine Honor, Father, never to see her more; but as I am
Partner in the Guilt, I would not have the Punishment be only hers.


Isab. Well, I Will endeavor to preserve her too; observe my Orders well, turn
your Face, here put on this Garment, my Brother there will conduct you to a
place of safety, where I desire you will wait till I come; look not behind you,
nor speak as you pass the Husband of that Lady.


Cha. This Priest is an honest Fellow, [Puts on the Clothes.] nothing like the
Habit of Sanctity to cover close Designs, I shall observe your Directions most
religiously, Father.


Priest. Come Son, your Hand -- Madam, I leave you one to comfort your Distress.

[ Exeunt Priest and Charles.
[ Scene shuts, then draws and discovers Don Perreira Lissening.
Don Per. How still they are at Confession, I fancy the Penance I shall enjoin
them, will quicken their Voice. So,

Enter Priest and Charles. So your parts are done then, Fathers? Now for mine.


Priest. Done! I Am afraid Son, you are not right in your Senses, you have given
us the trouble of coming to confess two Adulterers, you said, but how you can
make two Women such; I leave to you, for there is no Male thing in the Room by
my Priesthood; take care you put no more Affronts upon our Cloth.

[Exit.
Don Per. Women! I Am amazed! Women! Egad I Am ravished, transported, nay,
translated methinks above the Stars; I Am, I Am, I Am, I Am, od I know not what I
am, I Am so glad to find my self no Cuckold -- Ah, but how shall I look my Wife
in the Face though, for having blamed her wrongfully? Ay, there is the Devil now
-- Pox take her Brother for instilling these Jealousies into my Head, I fear
she will never forgive me -- and indeed it is more than I deserve -- Oh, that
ever I should suspect her Virtue.

[Exit.
The Scene draws and discovers Dona Perriera on her Knees to Isabinda.
Dona. Oh Madam, you have set Vice and Virtue in their proper Light, from
whence I see the Deformity of one, and Beauty of the other; your generous
Forgiveness is all I want, to raise my Soul above a second fall. I have injured
you, but --


Isab. No more of that; the good Inclination which you show wipes out all
faults with me, and your Perseverance will give you as large a share in my
Breast, as if you never had offended. Rise Madam, I hear the Door unlock,
prepare your Husband according to my direction, and leave the rest to me.


Enter Don Perriera. Don Per. Ay, there they are -- both Woman by St. Anthony
-- that ever I should be such a Dunce to think my self a Cuckold -- Which way
shall I speak to her now? Oh, my poor dear innocent Lamb is all in Tears, nay
thou have cause to weep, that is the truth on it.


Dona Per. What have I done, my Dear, that you should expose me thus?


Don Per. That thou have done nothing at all to merit it, is my grief -- Nay do
not weep, thou will break my Heart, indeed thou will; I wish with all my Soul
thou had Cuckolded me; I think in my Conscience I could forgive thee now.


Dona Per. What Reparation can you ever make me, for the stain you have cast
upon my Fame, exposed me to the Priests, could you have found no other way?


Don Per. I was to blame indeed, Wife; oh forgive me, [falls on his Knees.] or
my Heart will burst: Oh, oh, oh, oh!


Isab. Nay, now, Madam, you must forgive him.


Don Per. Ay do, dear Madam, intercede for me; I Will never rise, except my dear
virtuous Spouse will say she pardon me.


Enter Don Lopez with his Sword drawn. Don Lop. What! Hangman like, are you
asking Pardon ever you dispatch her? I Will lend you a helping hand, since you
are not Master of your Resolution.

[Don Per. rises hastily, and catches down a Blunderbuss and cocks it at Don
Lopez.
Don Per. Zounds, put up your Sword, or by St. Anthony I Will shoot you through
the Head.


Dona Per. Do you start, Brother? Could you inflict that on me which your own
Courage starts at? Cruel Man.


Isab. A Brother should rather reconcile, than blow the Coals of strife; it is
barbarous in Strangers, but much more so in those allied to us by Blood:
Revenge, though just, excludes Religion, and he that pursues it poisons all his
Morals, and impudently affronts that Power which gave him Breath to threaten.


Don Lop. Hie day, what Philosopher have we here?


Don Per. Out of my Lodgings, I say, without one question more, and never set
foot into them again, as you hope to keep your Guts in* I Will be plagued with no
more of your Jealousies, I warrant you.


Don Lop. Fine! your Lodgings! -- but hear me, Don, dare not for your Soul, say
you matched into my Family, or you Mistress boast of any Blood of mine, as you
value those Eyes -- for from this day I hold you as a Bastard, and may
Perdition seize you both.

[Exit.
Don Per. Was ever Man so plagued? -- Come, dry thy Eyes, my Dear, and mind him
not, I Am glad I Am rid of him -- and if thou do but forgive me now, by this
I Will never offend again.

[Crosses his Thumb and Finger, and kisses it.
Dona Per. Then I am happy.


Don Per. Pray Wife, who is this Lady?


Dona Per. Heavens! what shall I say now? [Aside.


Isab. Hold, Madam, -- Let me entreat your Presence, with your Lady's, in my
Apartment, which is directly under this, and that you would suspend you
Curiosity 'till that time.


Dona Per. This is certainly an Angel in disguise.


Don Per. We'll wait on you.


Enter Servant. Serve. Here Is Mademoisel Joneton to wait on you.


Don Per. Bring her up.


Isab. I Will take my leave, and shall expect you with impatience.


Don Per. The desire of knowing how to treat you as I ought, Madam, will give
me Wings to follow you.

[ Exit Isab.
Enter Mademoisel Joneton. Mad. My Dear, I Am glad to see you -- Oh Senior, are
you there? Pray when do you intend to return to your House? Will it never be
finished? It is enough to Murder one to come up thus high -- Positively I Am as
much out of Breath as a Trumpeter. Ah pest, it has given me a Color like a
Cook-Maid.


Don Per. Thou art more impertinent than a Valet de Chamber. My House will be
finished next Week, Madam, and then it is to be hoped these Disorders which you
complain of will cease.


Mad. Very probable they may -- I am horridly chagreen'd to Day, my Dear, I
have made twenty Visits within this hour, and can meet with no Conversation to
my Gout; the Vanity of the Men gives me the Spleen, and the Insipidness of the
Women makes me sleepy -- I came just now from my Lady Betty Trifle's, where I
set the whole Room a yawning; ha, ha, ha.


Dona Per. Impertinence -- A Person of your polite Conversation, must not
expect to be diverted every where: How does your Sister, Madam?


Mad. Oh my Sister is this day dead, my Dear.


Don Per. How! Dead?


Dona Per. How! Dead?


Mad. Metaphorically speaking, she has enclosed herself, where she intends to
mortify with Hymns, and spiritual Songs, and has left me the whole World to
range in.


Don Per. And I warrant you think that but a Garden.


Mad. If the Sea could be drained, 'twou'd make a very pretty Park, Senior.


Don Per. Humph! This is a Woman of a copious Fancy -- Well my Dear, I Will go
before you.

[Exit.
Dona Per. Not for the World -- Madam, if you please, since you are upon the
visiting Pin, I Will introduce you to a new Acquaintance -- I Would rather take her
with me, than suffer him to go without me.


Mad. With all Satisfaction, I love new Acquaintance extremely, is it a Man?


Dona Per. No; a Lady.


Mad. What has she to recommend her? -- But, no matter, I Will wait on you. The
Devil take this Colonel, I cannot get him out of my Head, I am half afraid I
endure him more than I imagined. [Aside.


Dona Per. Madam, will you give me leave to wait on you down?

[Exeunt.
The SCENE draws and discovers Charles solus, in Isabinda 's Appartment looking
about him.
Cha. What will be the issue of this Affair, Heaven knows. To what end am I
ordered to stay here, under the same Roof? And why is this Priest so long a
coming? My Mind misgives me, it was no Priest -- But some Rival, jealous of her
Favors, found the way to surprise us, and contrary to the Custom of a
Portuguese, has Honor enough to dispute it with me fairly; faith I wish that
may be the worst on it.


Enter Colonel Ravelin and Mar-plot. Mar. Egad, here he is -- Charles, I Am glad
to find thee alive with all my Blood --


Cha. The Devil! Ha! Colonel Ravelin there too? You surprise me? How did you
find me?


Rav. By Mar-plot's Direction, you know he is a very good finder, he assured me
you wanted my Assistance --


Mar. Ah Charles, which got the better in the Duel, Ha? What Weapons did you
fight with?


Rav. I cannot tell what Engagement thou have been in, Charles, but by thy
Looks, I fancy it has not pleased thee.


Cha. I have run some hazard since I saw you, Colonel, but if I had caught you
dogging me, I Would a hamstring'd you, Rascal --


Mar. Very fine -- See what a Man gets for his good will now -- But if I had
not thought you in danger of Hamstringing, and Heartstringing too; the Devil a
step would I a fetched. I Am sure the old Cuckold frighted me out of my Wits
with his threats, and the Colonel here has almost broke my Bones, and all for
you -- And thus you reward me --


Cha. The old Cuckold! What do you mean?


Mar. Nay, let the Colonel tell you what I mean, for my part I Will have nothing
to do with you as long as I live again -- Bless me, what do I see? The very old
Dog that swore by Fire, Blood and Brimstone, he would send you to the Devil --
Oh Lord, oh Lord, draw Gentlemen, draw, put your self upon your Guard, Charles,
oh dear Colonel stand by him; ods life I tremble so, I cannot get my Sword out
for my Blood --


Enter Don Perriera. Cha. Ha! What are you, Sir?

[Draws.
Rav. Get you behind me, you timorous Puppy.

[Draws.
Don Per. What do you mean, Gentlemen, to murder me?


Cha. I mean that you shall not murder me, Sir.


Don Per. You, Sir? why I don't know you, Sir.


Mar. Not know him, Sir, what a confounded lying old Thief you are, I Will take
my Oath I heard you and that bloody-minded Spaniard, threaten what you would do to
this Gentleman, if you caught him in your House; egad Charles, knock him down.


Don Per. Oh Mr. Sweep-chimney, are you here? St. Anthony defend me, what
Ambuscade am I tumbled into? This was certainly my Wife's Gallant, and has
imposed upon the Priests, as well as me, in Petticoats, and now has trapan'd me
here to murder me -- Help, Murder, Treason, Murder, help --


Cha. Taking him by the Collar.] Cease your bawling, old Lucifer, or expect no
Mercy.

[Points his Sword to his Breast.
Rav. Confess your design, and produce your villainous Gang, and they shall
have Satisfaction, equal to their Merits.


Don Per. Gang? By St. Anthony, I have no Gang; I came hither to wait on the
Lady who belongs to this Appartment, but little thought of meeting with my
damnable virtuous Wife's Gallant. I suppose I am decoyed hither to have my
Throat cut, therefore come on both of you, old as I am, I yet can stand a Push.

[Draws.
Mar. Oh, oh, Murder, Murder, Murder.

[Runs off.
Don Per. I wish I had known you in Petticoats.


Cha. Ha, this must be Don Perriera; but what does he mean by Petticoats? Hold,
Sir -- What is the Lady's Name of this Appartment?


Don Per. I know not, it was to be informed of that I came, but I suppose you
are the Lady, Sir.


Rav. This shallow-brain'd Whelp has made a damned blunder here -- This is a
very odd Riddle, Sir, pray --


Enter Mar-plot running. Mar. Ah! a Ghost, a Ghost, a Ghost --


Don Per. St. Anthony defend me, a Ghost? where?

[Crosses himself. Enter Isabinda, Dona Perriera, Mademoisel and Margaritta.
Oh, Madam, is it you? This is the Lady I came to wait on, Gentlemen.


Cha. Ha! She here!

[Margaritta whispers Charles.
Marg. That Lady, in the Habit of a Priest, delivered you -- Do you know her?


Cha. Know her! Yes -- Delivered by my Wife --


Mad. The Colonel here too? I Am not displeased with this Visit. [Aside.


Rav. My Mistress -- a pretty kind of a Rencounter.

[Goes to her.
Cha. Oh let me fly into thy Arms, my Isabinda, my charming Love, thou hold
more Virtues in thy Breast, than thy whole (...) b^^st* Can thou forgive me,
Isabinda?


Isab. As freely as thou can ask it; but hush, we shall be observed; let not
the Company know this is our first meeting. I was loath to trust the Writings
with Strangers, so brought them my self.


Cha. Thou are all Goodness.


Isab. I thought I heard Murder cry out as I entered, Senior.


Don Per. Why truly, Madam, if you had not come as you did, I was in danger of
my Life here.


Cha. 'Twas only a Mistake, my Dear. I ask your Pardon, Sir.


Don Per. Pardon, Sir? This is a very odd mistake, Sir.


Mar. Egad, and so it is; a Pox of my Zeal --


Isab. I hope all Mistakes will be cleared, Sir, I know you loved my Father,
Sir, Jealous Traffic; and for his sake, I hope you will know my Husband.


Don Per. What, my old Friend? Yes faith will I, Sir, I am yours, but I must
kiss your Wife. My Dear, why did not you tell me who she was before?


Dona Per. A good Reason, because I did not know. [Aside.] You saw she forbad
me, my Dear.


Mar. Now you are all acquainted, I Will tell you how I came to mistake this
Matter: I did not know this was a House of Lodgings, nor that my Friend had
removed hither, till I found him out by Accident, upon my Honor, Senior --


Cha. The Rogue will stumble out an Excuse.


Don Per. Honor! Pray, Sir, upon your Honor tell me how you got out of my
Room?


Marg. For your Soul, no squeaking -- [ Aside to Mar-plot.


Mar. No, no; never fear me. Egad, what shall I say now? Why, Sir, you must
know I am a Chimist, and have found out a Secret that will open and shut all
Locks whatever; that helped me out, Sir.


Don Per. Say you so, Sir? Pray will you communicate.


Mar. Not for your whole Estate, Sir.


Don Per. I Will have this Fellow sent out of Town, for by the help of this
Secret he will Cuckold all the Men in Lisbon.


Cha. Ha, ha, ha, what a Lie has he lit of -- Colonel, will not the Lady
capitulate upon Honorable Terms?


Rav. She desires two days Consideration, a great while for a Man to fast, that
is almost starved already.


Mad. Well, Colonel, to show you I am good-natured, I Will put it to Arbitration.


Cha. Nay, then Madam, we shall all give it against you.


Don Per. What Is here, a Wedding on foot? Prithee let us have it just now, to
reconcile all Differences, and though I have not danced these forty Years, will
take a turn among you.


Mar. So! I Will be hanged if this is not Mademoisel Flutter now. Pox of these
Matrimonial Intreagues -- but Egad we will have Dancing -- I Am resolved.

[Exit.
Rav. Faith, Madam, the Cannon of Constancy is a heavy Carriage, and if I
should summon my Senses to a Council of War, and make Reason Judge-Advocate,
it is odds but I raise the Siege.


Mad. Well, Colonel, if I surrender Prisoner of War, remember I expect to be
generously used.


Rav. You shall have no cause to complain.


Om. We wish you Joy, Colonel.


Don Per. Now for a Dance.


Enter Mar-plot. Mar. And I have brought the Music.

A Dance.
Cha. Come, Colonel, Marriage is the only happy
State, when Virtue is the Guide.
Had but all Women Isabinda's Mind,
So Constant, Prudent, Virtuous, and so kind,
What Joys so great as Wedlock could we find?
No more should we unlawful Love pursue,
But think our Wives for ever young and new,
And learn from them the Art of being true.

Isab. In vain we strive by haughty ways to prove
Our chaste Affections, and our duteous Love.
To smooth the Husband's rugged Storms of Life,
Is the design and business of a Wife;
Still all his Faults with Patience to behold,
And not for every Trifle rant, and scold:
Men from Example, more than Precept, learn,
And modest Carriage still has power to Charm.
After my Method, would all Wives but move,
They Would soon regain, and keep their Husbands Love:
Our kind Indulgence would their Vice overcome,
And with our Meekness strike their Passions dumb.

EPILOGUE.
THE Play concluded, I Am at last set free,
Resume my self, and now am Cap-a-pee,
A freeborn Nymph of English Liberty.
I sweat to have been a Wife but three bare Hours;
What is it to be one then for Life, ye Powers,
Where Husbands too are ten times worse than ours?
The slightest Trip with them demands our Blood;
But venial Frailties here are better understood.
Your Don Cornuted is a Monster there,
But thank our Stars, the Fate's no Wonder here.
The Monster ceases, where the Case is common,
And watch your Eyes out, you must trust the Woman.
In vain her Person with Restraint you load,
When Spite of Walls her willing Mind's abroad.
A blessed Life indeed! where churlish Fear
Attends the Thing your Appetites could spare.
Is there on Earth, a Wretch, a greater Jest,
Than the pale Lover, starved for Beauty's Feast,
That begs, in pity of his famished Sense, a Taste?
Protest his Appetite shall last for Ages,
(...) ^gry Fit, to eat for Life engages.
(...) ^l'd, our Guest falls bravely to,
(...) ^m feeding grew:
(...) ^eeds,
(...) like Husband feeds.
(...) ^trimonial Mien,
(...) ^inly seen;
Incurable his Pain, and laughed at in Distress,
He snarling cries, Consume my Happiness.
Oh, tiresome Plenty! O intolerable Bliss!
Oh the lost Joys of freeborn Wretchedness!
Like Dog in Manger, thus he snarles and bites,
And curses what another's Taste delights.
While such Examples before my Eyes I see,
Guard me, ye Powers, from Loss of Liberty.
It Is strange, you Britains, whom no Force can humble,
Should court those Chains, at which you're sure to grumble:
But since, alas! it is fatal to the Age,
I Will even maintain my Post upon the Stage;
Which (for at once I Would all Men's Hope prevent)
I Will never leave, though tempted with a Settlement.
FINIS.

