AN APPENDIX To the Second Edition of Mr. Lofft's 'OBSERVATIONS On a late
Publication, entitled A Dialogue on the actual State of Parliaments; and on
some other Tracts equally inimical to the Constitution of 'Free Parliaments:'
BEING A FARTHER EXAMINATION Of the Argument, lately published by Mr. HATSELL,
(in his Precedents of Proceedings, etc.) against the ancient Law and
Constitution of this Kingdom, that the King ought to hold Parliaments elected
annually.

By GRANVILLE SHARP.

Great is the TRUTH, and stronger than all Things; -- it lives and conquereth
for evermore. APPENDIX.
THE supposed opinion of Mr. Hatsell, (in his Precedents of Proceedings in the
House of Commons, under the title of King calls the Parliament,) as
compendiously stated by my worthy and very learned friend, Mr. Lofft, in p. 5
of his Observations, is a much more favorable construction than Mr. Hatsell's
own words can really warrant; though all persons, who are acquainted with that
gentleman's very amiable character, (including the writer of this remark,) have
reason to wish, for his sake, that his opinion (whatever it may be) had been so
expressed as to be really limited by the moderate and very friendly
construction which Mr. Lofft has put upon it. Mr. Lofft supposes the opinion of
Mr. Hatsell to be, that the intent of the statutes of Edward, and the ancient
law and constitution of the kingdom, require parliaments to SIT once at least
in every year, but NOT that they should be ANNUALLY, OR OFTENER, ELECTED; but
Mr. Hatsell himself, if we may judge by his manner of writing, is far from
admitting that the constitution requires parliaments even to SIT once a year,
or that the king is obliged to call a parliament once at least in every year;
for this he has contemptuously treated merely as 'a notion' (that) has been
sometimes entertained; (p. 196, n.) and he, asserts, that those persons, who
maintain THIS DOCTRINE, (i. e. the doctrine last cited in his own words, as a
general doctrine, having two different acceptations, arising from the 4th and
36th Edward III.) 'do not mean' (says he) that, according to these statutes, A
SESSION of parliament shall be holden every year, but that A NEW ELECTION shall
be had, etc. -- In answer to which, it may be sufficient to oppose one eminent
example for all: viz. that the learned commentator, Judge Blackstone,
notoriously denied, as well as himself, that the latter doctrine 'ever was' the
meaning of those ancient statutes, though he actually was one of those persons
who maintained the former general construction of the said statutes (the only
operative construction they are now capable of bearing since the traverse of
the modern acts for triennial and septennial elections) as being still in force
to bind the king. See 1 Com. c. 2, p. 152 and 153: where the learned writer,
having mentioned that the king only can convoke a parliament, immediately adds,
and THIS, by the ancient statutes of the realm, HE IS BOUND TO DO EVERY YEAR,
or oftener if need be; for which, in a note, he expressly cites these statutes
of K. Ed. III. and immediately afterward he mentions the two different
acceptations of the said statutes. -- 'Not' (says he) 'that he' (i. e. the
king) is, or ^ver was, obliged by these statutes to call a NEW parliament every
year; but only to permit a parliament to SIT annually, etc. The words, -- 'to
permit,' -- being a verb in the infinitive mood, do manifestly require a
repetitio^ (to be understood) of the preceding verb, 'is obliged,' -- viz. is
oblige^ to permit; which confirms, by necessary grammatical construction, the
doctrine of the preceding sentence, that the king 'is bound' by the sai^
ancient statutes. This doctrine is strongly confirmed by the nationa^
declaration in the preamble to the statute of 16 Charles I. c. 1. that by the
laws and statutes of this realm, the parliament ought to be holden AT LEAST
ONCE EVERY YEAR for the redress of grievances, etc^ which (though the act is
repealed) is stated, as being still an existing principle of parliamentary
doctrine, by Judge Hales, in his Original Institution, Power, etc. of
Parliaments, p. 57. and which is still farther confirmed by the constant 'usage
and custom of parliament ever since the revolution, as well as by the obvious
reason and necessity of it; whereby the 'lex et consuetudo parliamenti' upon
this poin^ must surely be sufficiently clear not to be mistaken by persons o^
much less intelligence in those matters than the clerk of the house of commons!
Yet Mr. Hatsell does not admit even this general construction of the ancient
statutes; and, as a proof that he does not, I need only to observe, that,
though he is writing expressly concerning what he call^ the undoubted
prerogative of the crown to judge of the expediency of calling (...)
parliament, and to determine at what time the writs shall issue; yet this
prerogative (says he) is limited by two acts of parliament, the 16th Chapter II. c.
1, and the 6th of Wm and Mary, c. 2; both of which, etc. -- enact, that from
henceforth a parliament shall be holden once in three years at the least; so
that, in obedience TO THESE LAWS, (says he, without citing any other
limitation, either of statute or usage, but these two acts for triennial
parliaments,) the ministers of the crown (says he) are bound to take care, that
THE SITTING and holding of parliaments shall not be INTERMITTED or DISCONTINUED
above three years at the most. And it is their duty (says he) to give
directions for issuing the writs of summons ACCORDINGLY, -- i.e. according to
the two acts for triennia^ parliaments, or rather to a part of one of them,
viz. the part he has selected for the direction of 'the ministers of the crown'
to take care, that the SITTING, etc. shall not be INTERMITTED or DISCONTINUED
above three years at the most; whereby he leaves the ministers of the crown at
liberty to intermit and discontinue for three years even the SITTING of
parliament, for he has cited no other limitation of the prerogative on this
head: and, with respect to the two ancient statutes of K. Edward III. he did
not (it seems) think them worthy even to be named in his text, but only in a
note, (to show that he had not forgot them,) where he has treated even their
general construction merely as " a notion, etc." See p. 196-199.

But, though the original meaning and force of these ancient statutes are
materially affected and injured by the modern acts for triennial and septennial
parliaments, yet they are certainly still in force (as Judge Blackstone has
allowed) to oblige the king 'to permit a parliament to sit annually for the
redress of grievances and dispatch of business;' and this, without impediment
from the words 'if need be' in the 'loose and vague' manner that the Judge has
applied them, contrary to the necessary grammatical construction of the whole
sentence: (see 'Declaration of the 'People's Rights, p. 166 to 169, n.) -- For
our right to an annual session of parliament is founded on the ancient
constitution of the kingdom, -- on laws that are almost coeval with our
national existence in this island. See the 'usage perpetual' ordained by K.
Alfred, and cited by Lord Coke, 1 Inst. p. 110. viz. 'Le Roy Alfred' (fist)
assembler les Counties, etc. et ordeina, pur USAGE PERPETUEL, que deux foitz
par an, ou pluis sovent, pour mister (mestier) in temps de peace, se
assemblerent a Londres, a parliamenter sur le guidament del people de Dieu,
etc. -- The testimony of Knighton, ( one of our best historians, as Mr. Petyt
calls him in his preface to the Ancient Right of the Commons, p. 41.) that, by
an ancient STATUTE and CUSTOM, laudable and approved, which nobody could deny,
the king was ONCE IN A YEAR to convene his LORDS and COMMONS to his Court of
Parliament, etc. Mr. Nevill's testimony concerning an ancient statute of Edward
I. ordering that a parliament shall be held every year, and oftener if need be;
for which see his Plato Redivivus, p. 110-112. -- The same doctrine declared in
the very next reign, as proved by Mr. Petyt (p. 77) from Rot. Claus 10 Edw. II.
m. 28, intus; that "upon a petition to the king," (K. Edw. II.) ' he granted
that "SEMEL IN ANNO TENEATUR parliamentum," etc. whence it is evident, that the
act of 4 Edw. III. c. 14, was not a new law, but a declaration of the old
constitution, viz. That a parliament shall be holden every year once, and more
often if need be; which was again confirmed by statute in the 36 Ed. III. c.
10. And the USAGE of those times (proved by the writs issued for general
elections frequently MORE OFTEN than 'ONCE' in a year) excludes all
'doubtful'-ness from these ancient statutes; so that new parliaments must
necessarily have been understood, until (by the traverse of modern acts) they
became applicable only to the annual sitting of parliament.

The opposers of the original meaning (viz for annual elections, and more
often) have rendered that construction still more obvious by their own
miserable shifts to evade it! One says, -- the words are loose and vague,
though such a charge is applicable only to his own ungrammatical construction;
and another would render the acts doubtful, by boldly excluding the only just
criterion for clearing up doubts in such a case, viz. the USAGE of the times in
which the acts were made; and, instead of it, would have us refer ONLY to the
practice and to 'the opinion' of persons who lived from 200 to 400 years after
those times! But the proposer seems not to be aware, that this mode of
'explaining ancient statutes' is exactly similar to one of the most gross and
delusive practices of popery! The apostate church of Rome, for obvious reasons,
cannot submit the determination of what ought to be esteemed apostolic doctrine
to the evidence of apostolic times; and, of course, she is driven to this
wretched subterfuge of referring for evidence (in favor of her innovations and
unscriptural practices) to the traditions of more modern times, and to the
practices and opinions of persons who lived from 200 to 400 years afterward;
in order to invalidate all cotemporary evidence of facts and primitive usages.
-- And surely this dishonest and arbitrary mode of 'settling doubts' is equally
unjustifiable in legal and political, as in religious, questions. Yet Mr.
Hatsell boldly ventures to tell us that, where the expressions of acts of
parliament, (speaking of the acts of Edward,) passed above FOUR HUNDRED YEARS
AGO, are DOUBTFUL, (says he, though the contrary is evident,) nothing can clear
up and settle these DOUBTS but the OPINION of all the wisest and best-informed
persons, etc. from the beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth to the present
time. (P. 198, n.) Thus, even the commencement of the time, here proposed as
the best for affording information, is actually more than two hundred years
AFTER the times in which the acts were made; and he cuts off all cotemporary,
as well as intermediate, evidence, by a single bold assertion, that nothing can
clear up -- but, etc. taking care to secure to himself the ample space of
another two hundred years, (still more distant from the times in question,)
that he may range more securely in his search for precedents of innovations
both in practice and opinion. And indeed he has most industriously displayed
the practices of the Stuarts, reminding us, in the course of argument, even of
'intermissions of parliaments' for several years together: -- 'an intermission
of Parliament of six years,' by K. James I. -- 'an intermission of parliaments
for twelve years' together, by K. Charles I. These were surely most
unpropitious times for parliamentary knowledge; and Mr. Hatsell does not seem
to be aware, that the fear of similar intermissions was probably the principal
cause which withheld the patriots of those days from urging their
election-rights at a time when the sum total of all their rights was at stake,
even the right to have any parliament at all! so that their silence respecting
annua^ elections does not at all assist Mr. Hatsell's argument against them. --
The people of England, in those times, were rendered so deplorably abject, by
the unlimited, and therefore illegal, rule of Tudors and Stuarts that it was
considered as a crime, in the preceding reign of James I even to urge the
expediency of calling a parliament at all: -- I would fain know the man that
durst persuade the king unto it, -- says THE MINISTER OF STATE in Sir Walter
Rawleigh's Dialogue on the Prerogative of Parliaments, (p. 2.) so that this was
undoubtedly the language of those times to which Mr. Hatsell has referred us
for acts, opinions and speeches, whereby (with the addition of some still more
modern in formation) he thinks the true intent and meaning of the words used in
the statutes of Edward III, (though made almost 300 years before) might be best
explained: but, to look for explanatory 'opinions' and 'speeche^* in such
arbitrary times, when men dared not to speak their opinions upon the subject,
is too great an absurdity! so that Mr. Hatsell is peculiarl^ unfortunate in
fixing his era for parliamentary information. And ye^ if 'the wisest and
best-informed men' of those times had shown a little more regard to the
nation's rights than to the security of their own persons and property, (for
rich men are commonly the worst citizens, for various reasons,) and had
ventured, like honest men rather than like wise and prudent 'The prudent shall
keep silence in that time; for it is an evil time.' -- Amos v. 13.
men, to speak their opinions in favor of that SACRED TRUTH, our indispensible
right to the actual sitting of a new parliament 'every year once' at least,
'and more often if need be' -- (a truth never to be concealed, a claim never to
be relaxed!) -- they might probably, with God's blessing in the cause of truth
and right, have so checked the progress of unconstitutional doctrines, as to
deter their kings and statesmen from changing a limited monarchy to an absolute
tyranny; and might thereby have prevented the horrible effects of misrule which
speedily broke out and overwhelmed the state! and indeed the infringement of
our parliamentary rights was the true source of all the mischiefs that shortly
followed: for, when the able patriots (named by Mr. Hatsell) were struggling,
almost in despair, to retain the mere existence of a parliament, under K.
Charles I. they did not seem to apprehend that their full constitutional claim
to an annual election was a subject proper to be discussed at such a time; but
their only aim, when they met, ('after an intermission of parliaments for
twelve years,') seems to be how they might prolong their SITTING at any rate
for the redress of grievances; whereby it is manifest, that the obstinate
monarch's unwillingness to permit a parliament to SIT, together with the
previous criminal intermissions, (as one illegality is apt to beget another,)
became, eventually, the parents of a still greater evil -- a long parliament
without any election at all, which severely repaid the royal perfidy in kind,
by 'an (...) intermission,' in return, of regal government, -- an exclusion of
that per^ured monarch's family from the throne for exactly the same number of
years that he had presumed to intermit the sitting of parliaments, viz. -- for
'TWELVE YEARS at one time,' and even the SIX YEARS intermission, ^n his
father's reign, was severely repaid in a bloody SIX YEARS war, until the son's
imprisonment and death!

These are awful examples, worthy the serious attention of all parties; though
we are bound, at the same time, to discriminate between examples (or facts) and
precedents, that such baneful examples may not (by the critical observations of
ingenious men) be drawn into precedents for proceedings, but that the legal
acceptance of the word precedent may always ^e duly maintained.

Mr. Hatsell's argument, upon the whole, is certainly a very extraor^inary one:
not only because the arbitrary times, to which he has limited the commencement
of our parliamentary researches, seem to be utterly incapable of affording the
least information upon the particular point in question, and are also near
three hundred years AFTER the only proper time for ascertaining the usage of
the times when the statutes to be explained were made, -- but also because he
peremptorily excludes all other evidence whatever -- Nothing can clear up, etc.
but the opinion, etc. from the beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth! etc.

I am far more willing to attribute such an unaccountable argument to
inattention, and a superficial manner of writing, than to suspect any rea^
design of the ingenious author to promote a mode of explaining ancient statutes
so dangerously presumptuous and arbitrary! And, to justify the more moderate
conclusion of the two, he has luckily furnished me with an easy and obvious
proof of it in the very next chapter but one, to which he has given the running
title of -- King adjourns the Parliament, -- 'King adjourns the Parliament,' --
for several pages together, (i. e. from 204 to 211.) so that that one would
naturally suppose that he really meant what he had so often written: but, at
length, (though not till the very last page of that head,) he kindly guards us
against that baneful error by an explicit stating of what HE HIMSELF believes
to be the true parliamentary doctrine, viz. That the king has no authority to
adjourn the parliament; and, of course, his 'superficial manner' of expressing
himself (I mean on this particular head) must be corrected, in his next
edition, to 'the true parliamentary doctrine,' -- King does NOT adjourn the
Parliament: -- so that he must put a negative upon his present title throughout
all these pages!

But, to return to my subject, I trust that the necessity of at least ONE
SITTING of the parliament every year, and of our national right to such
SITTING, is so sufficiently understood and acknowledged, by the majority even
of all parties, that THE CONTRARY DOCTRINE, which arises too apparently from
Mr. Hatsell's manner of treating the king's prerogative on that subject, will
need no particular refutation: and yet so respectable is the authority of the
writer, (not only by his office of clerk of the house of commons, but also by
the personal esteem which is certainly due to him from a very numerous and
respectable body of friends and acquaintance,) that I thought myself obliged to
take some notice of his manner of treating the subject before us, in order to
warn the public against a possible construction of it which might hereafter (if
not seasonably censured) have dangerous consequences. At the same time I
sincerely profess, that my censure is aimed more at this gentleman's manner of
writing than his intention, and that I am much more willing to believe that the
opinion he intended to express was truly what Mr. Lofft has supposed; or that I
myself may perhaps be mistaken in conceiving that his words are liable to a
different construction; rather than to suspect that the worthy clerk of the
house of commons could really intend to favor a doctrine which is repugnant to
the established usage of parliament for near a century, and is equally inimical
to the just privileges of the Lords as to those of the Commons, and, of course,
to the welfare of the whole nation.

GRANVILLE SHARP.
Old Jewry, May 30, 1783.

