EVERY MAN HIS OWN PHYSICIAN.

BEING, A complete Collection of efficacious and APPROVED REMEDIES, For every
DISEASE incident to the HUMAN BODY.

WITH Plain Instructions for their common Use.

Necessary to be had in all families, particularly those residing in the
country.

By JOHN THEOBALD, M. D. Author of MEDULLA MEDICINAE.

Compiled at the command of his Royal Highness the Duke of CUMBERLAND.

Diseases are cured, not by eloquence, but by remedies, so that if a person
without any learning be well acquainted with those remedies that have been
discovered by practice, he will be a much greater physician than one who has
cultivated his talent in speaking without experience.

CELSUS. The FIFTH EDITION, IMPROVED.

LONDON: Printed and sold by W. GRIFFIN, in FETTER-LANE; R. WITHY, in CORNHILL;
and G. KEARSLY, in LUDGATE STREET.

MDCCLXIV.

[Price Eighteen-pence.]

PREFACE.
ALTHOUGH publishers of receipts have been always very numerous, yet it has so
happened, that the least able have hitherto undertaken this task, as the most
easy and likely to answer any mercenary views; which seems to have been the
reason, that more able persons have neglected it as an under part of their
profession. Nevertheless, I have persuaded myself, that I should perform a
work, neither entirely void, of use, nor foreign to the duties of my
profession, if I made the public partakers of the principal helps against most
diseases, which I had either learned by long experience, or selected from the
writings of the most eminent physicians. As these receipts are published
chiefly for the use of persons residing in the country, whose convenience or
abilities, will not allow of the attendance of a physician or apothecary, I
have studied plainness in my style, and in my directions, with regard to the
treatment of diseases, that I might render this treatise as useful as possible.

J. THEOBALD.

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.
THE favorable reception this work has met with, as is sufficiently shown by
the remarkable quick sale of the first large impression, has induced the editor
(to support the credit of what is really beneficial to the public, and add
weight to the receipts) to publish the authorities from whence those receipts
were taken; and to make it still more useful, has added the signs of diseases,
and some plain and concise directions for bleeding: he begs leave to remark,
that although Dr. Theobald has given no more than one receipt for the cure of
several disorders, yet he has been careful to select such, only, as upon a long
experience were found to be the best; and that although receipts are given for
diseases which are seldom cured, (as the apoplexy, consumption, etc.) yet if it
is in the power of medicine to remove any of these complaints, there is the
greatest reason to imagine, that the remedies directed in this pamphlet will
effect a cure.

THE EDITOR.

INDEX.
Of diseases, for which, remedies are proposed in this Treatise.
A
ACHES, from Colds Page 1 After-pains ibid Agues Page 2 Apoplexy Page 3
Appetite, want of Page 4 Astma ibid Saint Anthony's Fire Page 2
B
Baldness Page 5 Bleeding at the Nose ib. Blood, spitting of ibid Bloody Flux
Page 6 Boils ibid Bruises, External Page 7 -- Internal Page 6 Burns and Scalds
Page 7
C
Cancer Page 7 Cholick Page 8 Colds ibid Consumption Page 9 Convulsions ibid
Corns Page 10 Costiveness, to prevent ibid Cough ibid
D
Decays, see Consumption Page 11 Deafness ibid Delivery, to promote ibid
Diabetes, and pissing of Blood. ibid Dropsy Page 12 Dry Belly-Ach ibid
E
Ear-Ach Page 13 Excoriations ibid Eyes, disorders of ibid
F
Fainting Page 14 Falling Sickness ibid Fevers, Inflammatory Page 14 -- Nervous
Page 15 -- Spotted Page 16 Fits, see Histerics Fistula Page 17
G
Giddiness Page 17 Gout ibid Gravel Page 18 Green Sickness ibid Gripes Page 19
H
Headache Page 19 Heart-burn ibid Hoarseness ibid Histerics Page 20 Hard
Swellings ibid Hip-Gout ibid
I
Jaundice Page 21 Indigestion ibid Inflammations ibid Itch Page 22 Inflammation
of the Bowels ibid Intermitting Fever, see Ague
K
King's Evil Page 23
L
Leprosy Page 23 Lethargy Page 24 Looseness ibid
M
Madness Page 24 Measles Page 25 Menses, immoderate flow of ibid -- Suppression
of Page 26 Miscarriage ibid
N
Nervous Disorders Page 26 Noise in the ears ibid
O
Opiate Page 27 Obstructions ibid Old Ulcers ibid Ointment for the eyes Page 13
P
Pains in the Joints, See Hip-Gout Page 20 Pain in the Stomach Page 27 Palsy
Page 28 Piles ibid Pleurisy ibid
Q
Quinsey Page 29
R
Rheumatism Page 29 Retention of Urine Page 30 Rickets ibid Ruptures Page 31
S
Scald Head Page 31 Scurvy ibid Small Pox Page 32 Sprains Page 33 Sweating,
Excessive Page 34 Slow Fever, see Nervous Fever Stranguary Page 31 Stone, See
Gravel Stitch in the side Page 31 Shingles Page 33 Swelled Legs Page 34
T
Toothache Page 34 Tettars Page 35 Thirst, unquenchable Page 36 Thursh ibid
Throat, Sore, See Quinsey -- Putrid Page 35 Tympany Page 36
V
Violent pains after Delivery, See After-Pains Vomiting Page 37 Ulcers of the
Lungs ib. -- Kidneys ibid -- Bladder Page 38 -- Womb ibid
W
Warts Page 38 Whites Page 39 White Swellings ibid Wind ibid Watery Gripes ibid
Wasting away of children Page 40 Worms ibid Wounds, green ibid Directions
concerning Bleeding Page 41
Just Published. [Price 1 s. 6 d.]

Written by the AUTHOR of this Pamphlet; The Young WIFE's GUIDE.

CONTAINING Every thing necessary to be known relative to the magement of
Children, from the time of their Birth to the Age of Seven Years; with a plain
and full account of every Disorder to which Infants are subject, and a
collection of efficacious Remedies suited to every Disease.

LONDON: Printed and Sold by W. GRIFFIN, in Fetter-Lane; R. WITHY, in Cornhill;
and G. KEARSLY, in Ludgate Street.

Every Man his Own Physician.
ACHES AND PAINS.
RUB a little Opodeldoch upon the part affected, two or three times a day, and
wear a flannel upon it; if this does not give relief, take twenty drops of
volatile tincture of Guaicum, (prepared as directed in the Appendix,) every
night and morning, in a glass of spring water.

HEISTER.

AFTER-PAINS.
TAKE one scruple of Sperma Ceti, five grains of volatile salt of Hartshorn,
five drops of balsam of Peru, and half a dram of Venice treacle; mix them
into a bolus, with as much syrup of White Poppies as is sufficient to make a
bolus; to be repeated every six hours till the pains abate. Cover the woman up
warm, and let her drink plentifully of caudle.

HEISTER.

AGUE, or INTERMITTING FEVER, Signs of.
A violent headache, a weariness of the limbs, a pain in the loins, a coldness
of the external parts, a shivering and shaking, sometimes so much as to make
the very bed shake under them; a great thirst and burning heat, and frequent
inclination to vomit. Afterward the symptoms begin to abate, the skin becomes
moist, the urine is of a flame color, but without a sediment, and a sweat
breaking out terminates the fit.

METHOD OF CURE.
FIRST vomit the sick person, by giving half a dram of the powder of
Ipecacoanha, and work it off with Chamomile tea; then let the sick person take
the following powder:

Of the best Peruvian bark powdered, one ounce, of Virginia Snake root, and
salt of Wormwood, each one dram; mix these well together, and divide them
into eight doses, one paper to be taken every two hours in a glass of red wine
or any other liquid. This is a certain and infallible cure; but care must be
taken to administer it only in the intervals of the fits; but it must be
repeated for two or three days, about ten days after the first cure, or else
the disorder will frequently return. In obstinate cases, removing into a drier
air has been found of great service.

HUXHAM.

SAINT ATHONY's FIRE. Signs of.
This disease affects every part of the body, but most frequently the face, and
it happens at all times of the year. But whatever part is affected, a
chilliness and shivering generally attend the disorder, with great thirst,
restlessness, and other signs of a fever; the face swells of a sudden, with
great pain and redness, and abundance of small pimples appear, which often rise
up into small blisters, and spread over the forehead and head, the eyes being
quite closed by the largeness of the swelling. This, in the country, is usually
called a Blast.

METHOD OF CURE.
LET the sick, person loose eight or ten ounces of blood, and repeat the
bleeding more than once if the symptoms run high, and apply to the part a
pultice of white bread and milk, with a little Hogs Lard in it; let the pultice
be changed twice in a day, and every other morning take the following purge,
till the disorder is cured, viz.

Glauber's salt one ounce, Manna half an ounce, mix and dissolve it in warm
water for one dose.

The diet in this disease must be very low, chiefly Water Gruel, or at most
weak broth; all strong liquors must be avoided as poison.

SHARP.

APPOPLEXY. The immediate preceding Signs are,
Tremblings, staggering, a giddiness in the head, dimness of sight, sleepiness,
loss of memory, noise in the ears, and deep and laborious breathing. The
disease itself is a total deprivation of sense and motion, except that of
respiration, which is performed with difficulty, and snoring. It usually ends
in a paralytic disorder, and is seldom curable, but always leaves behind it a
great defect of memory, judgment and motion.

METHOD OF CURE.
CUPPING in the nape and sides of the neck is always useful, provided the
scarifications are deep enough to give a free passage to the blood; stimulating
clysters and warm purges are also of service, as is also the following
electuary: Take half an ounce of powdered Heath Valerian, and one ounce and an
half of conserve of Orange peel, and mix them together; the dose is the
quantity of a nutmeg every four hours, dissolved in a cupful of Rosemary tea.
Apply a strong blister to the back, the diet must be very sparing.

MEAD, SYDENHAM, and HEISTER.

APPETITE, want of
DRINK Chamomile tea every day an hour before dinner, or take ten drops of Acid
Elixir of Vitriol in a glass of water, about two hours before, and about two
hours after dinner, every day. A gentle Puke should precede the use of these
remedies, for which purpose nothing is preferable to the powder of Ipecacoanha,
a scruple of which is sufficient for a dose, and should be worked off with weak
Chamomile tea.

MEAD.

ASTHMA OR PHTHISICK. Signs of.
An obstructed and very laborious breathing, attended with unspeakable anxiety,
and a straitness about the breast.

METHOD OF CURE.
DISSOLVE two drachms of Gum Ammoniacum in half a pint of Pennvroyal water, and
add an ounce of Oxymel of Squills. Three large spoonfuls of this mixture may be
taken frequently; or from 20 to 30 drops or the Paregoric Elixir, may be taken
in Pennyroyal water, two or three times in a day. Bleeding is generally proper,
as is a large blister applied to the back, and gentle vomits; the diet should
be slender. Malt liquors must be avoided, being very pernicious.

MEAD.

BALDNESS.
RUB the part frequently with an onion till it looks red; the use of Bears
grease is also recommended as particularly serviceable in this case, being more
subtle and penetrating than any other animal fat hitherto known.

BLEEDING at the Nose.
APPLY to the back part and the sides of the neck, a linen cloth dipped in cold
water, in which salt Prunella has been dissolved. In very obstinate cases
bleeding in the foot is useful. Internally the quantity of a nutmeg, of the
following electuary may be taken or four three times in a day. Take the seeds
of White Henbane, and White Poppies, each half an ounce, Conserve of Roses
three ounces, and mix them into an electuary with syrup of Diacodion.

SYDENHAM, and BOIL.

Spitting of BLOOD.
TAKE Red rose leaves dried, half an ounce, twenty drops of oil of Vitriol, one
ounce and an half of refined Sugar, and pour two pints and an half of boiling
water on these ingredients in an earthen vessel; let it stand to be cold, and
take half a quarter of a pint frequently. In this disorder frequent bleeding in
small quantities is proper, not exceeding four, or at the most six ounces at
each time, according the strength of the sick person.

HOFFMAN, and MEAD.

BLOODY FLUX. Signs of.
Generally begins with coldness and shivering, succeeded by a quick pulse, and
intense thirst. The stools are greasy, and sometimes frothy mixed with blood,
with filaments intermixed, which have the appearance of melted suet, and are
attended with intolerable gripings, and a painful descent as it were of the
bowels.

METHOD OF CURE.
BLEED first, then give the following vomit; half a dram of powder of
Ipecacoanha, work it off with Chamomile tea, repeat this vomit every other day,
for three or four times. On the intermedite days between each vomit, let the
sick person take a large spoonful of the following mucilage, warm, every hour:
Dissolve half an ounce of Gum Arabic, and half an ounce of Gum Tragacanth, in a
pint of barley water, over a gentle fire. Clisters made of fat mutton broth are
of great service, the sick person must abstain, from malt and spirituous
liquors.

MEAD.

BOILS.
APPLY a plaster of Diachylon with the gums, once every day till they are
cured.

BRUISES, Internal.
TAKE a large spoonful of cold drawn Linseed oil, two or three times in a day.
The patient must also be blooded to the quantity of eight or ten ounces.

SYDENHAM.

BRUISES, External.
BATHE the part with a little spirits of wine and Camphire, which in slight
cases will effect a cure, but if that fails it will be necessary to apply a
pultice of stale beer grounds, and oatmeal, with a little Hog's lard, which
must be applied fresh every day till the bruise is entirely cured.

BURNS AND SCALDS.
TAKE May butter unsalted, and white wax, of each six ounces, oil of Olives
half a pint, Lapis Calaminaris one ounce and an half; melt the wax and butter
with the oil, and stir in the Lapis Calaminaris finely powdered, till it is too
hard to let it settle. This is an excellent ointment for the above purposes,
and is to be applied once a day spread on a fine linen rag.

TURNER.

CANCER. Signs of.
Begins at first with a small Tumor, about the size of a nut, which does not
change the color of the skin, and sometimes remains for several years without
increasing. But as soon as the virulent humor becomes more active, the small
hard swelling becomes all of a sudden a large, round, livid, unequal Tumor,
and is attended with an intense shooting pain, at length it breaks, and turns
into a sharp stinking sanies, which eating away the sound parts, the lips of
the wound become offensive to the sight, and the patient being worn out with
intolerable pain, at last ensues death. This disorder may infect any part of
the body, but most frequently the breasts, armpits, behind the ears, the lips,
nose, and private parts.

METHOD OF CURE.
BOIL a quarter of a pound of Guaicum shavings in six pints of water, till it
comes to four pints, drink a pint of this decoction twice a day, milk warm.
External applications most proper, are pultices of white bread and milk, and
fomentations of milk and water, and the cancer should be defended from the cold
air, by a piece of fine linen, on which a little of the Sperma Ceti ointment
(the composition of which you will see in the appendix) is spread, and should
be renewed two or three times in a day.

Dr. LOVE of Greenock.

CHOLICK.
TAKE two ounces of Daffy's Elixir, and repeat it as occasion may require, or
half a dram of power of Rhubarb toasted a little before the fire.

QUINCEY.

COLDS.
COLDS, may be cured by lying much in bed, by drinking plentifully of warm Sack
whey, with a few drops of spirits of Hartshorn in it, or any other warm small
liquor; living upon puddings, spoon meats, chickens, etc. and drinking every
thing warm. In short, it must at first be treated as a small fever, with gentle
Diaphoretics, such as half a dram of the compound powder of Contrayerva,
taken night and morning, or half an ounce of Mindererus's spirit, may be given
every night going to rest, drinking a plentiful draught of weak Sack Whey after
it. If any cough should remain, after using this method a few days, the
medicines directed under the article of Coughs, must be taken,

This is a much more easy, natural and certain method, than the common practice
by Balsamics, Linctuss's, and the like, which spoil the stomach, destroy the
appetite, and hurt the constitution.

Dr. CHEYNE.

CONSUMPTION. Signs of.
A dry cough, a disposition to vomit after eating, an uneasy straitness of the
breast, spitting of blood, a quickness of the pulse after meals, and flushing
of the cheeks; as the disease advances, the matter brought up by the cough, if
spit into the fire yields an offensive smell, if into a glass of water it sinks
to the bottom, profuse night sweats, looseness, and wasting away of the whole
body.

METHOD OF CURE.
A milk diet, riding on horseback, country air, and bleeding frequently in
small quantities, at each time taking away not more than six ounces of blood,
are the most efficacious remedies in this distemper; snails boiled in milk have
sometimes been of service, as is also the Peruvian bark, when it does not
occasion a purging.

SYDENHAM, BOERHAAVE, and PRINGLE.

CONVULSIONS in Children. Signs of.
The mouth is drawn awry, the eyes are distorted, and the face turns blackish,
the child's fist is clenched, and the globes of the eyes seem immovable; when
these symptoms give way, the child is sleepy till another fit comes on.

METHOD OF CURE.
GIVE three or four drops of the tincture of Wood soot in a tea-spoonful of
water frequently. A blister applied to the nape of the neck is also serviceable.

SYDENHAM.

CORNS.
After soaking them for a considerable time in warm water, pare away carefully
with a penknife the uppermost and hardest surface, then apply a plaster of
Green wax, or Diachylon with the Gums spread on thin Leather; repeat this
method (which is perfectly safe) a few times, and it will seldom fail to
extirpate them entirely.

HEISTER.

COSTIVENESS.
TAKE the size of a nutmeg of Lenitive Electuary every morning, or as often as
occasion requires.

SHAW.

COUGH.
TAKE oil of sweet Almonds and syrup of Balfam, of each two ounces, four ounces
of Barley water, and thirty drops of spirits of Sal Volatile; shake them well
together, and take two larger spoonfuls when the cough is troublesome: If this
medicine does not remove the cough in a few days, it will be absolutely
necessary to be blooded.

PRINGLE.

DECAYS, see CONSUMPTIONS.


DEAFNESS.
SYRINGE the ears well with some warm milk and oil, then take a quarter of an
ounce of liquid Opodeldoch, and as much oil of Almonds, mix them well, and drop
a few drops into each ear, stopping them with a little cotton or wool; repear
this every night going to rest.

FOTHERGILL.

DELIVERY, to promote.
DIVIDE one grain of purified Opium into two pills, to be taken one six hours
after the other.

MEAD.

DIABETES. Signs of.
Is an excessive discharge of urine, of the taste, smell, and color of honey,
attended with an intense thirst, and a wasting away of the whole body.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE of the shavings of Sassafras two ounces, Guaicum one ounce, Liquorice
root three ounces, Coriander seeds, bruised, six drachms; infuse them cold, in
one gallon of Limewater for two or three days, the Dose is half a pint three
or four times in a day. Or four ounces of Alum Whey, (which is prepared by
boiling four pints of milk over a slow fire, with three drachms of Alum, till
it is turned into Whey) may be taken three times in a day.

MEAD.

N.B. Lime water is made by pouring twelve points of boiling water on a pound
of unslacked lime; when it is cold it is fit for use.

DROPSY. Signs of.
Difficulty of breathing, making very small quantities of urine, costiveness,
great thirst, swelling of the feet and ancles, which when pressed with the
fingers will pit; swelling of the belly, and falling away of the other parts.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE powder of Jalap, cream of Tartar and Florentine Iris, of each a quarter
of an ounce, mix them: the dose is from thirty to forty grains every other day.
On the intermediate days take the quantity of a large nutmeg, every night and
morning, of the following electuary: Take two drachms of powdered Chamomile
flowers, as much Ginger, and half the quantity of prepared Steel, make it into
an electuary with two ounces of Conserve of Orange Peels. Diuretics should also
be made use of; the following is excellent: Take Broom ashes half a pound, and
steep them in a quart of Rhenish Wine cold, strain off the liquor, and take a
quarter of a pint, three times in a day.

Dr. DOVER.

Dry BELLY-ACH, or Nervous Cholic. Signs of.
Extreme costiveness, a most violent pain in the bowels, coldness of the hands
and feet, trembling, extreme anxiety, and a disposition to fainting, which is
frequently succeeded by the palsy.

METHOD OF CURE.
GIVE frequently the following clyster; take dried Mallow leaves an ounce,
Chamomile flowers, and sweet Fennel seeds, of each half an ounce; water a pint;
boil it for use. Take half a pint of this decoction and add two spoonfuls of
sweet oil, and half an ounce of Epsom salt, mix it for a clyster to be repeated
frequently. The warm bath is of the utmost service in this disorder, as is also
Balsam of Peru given inwardly from twenty to forty drops in a spoonful of
powdered loaf sugar, three or four times in a day.

RIVERIUS, and SYDENHAM.

EAR-ACH.
THE smoke of Tobacco blown into the ear is excellent.

HOFFMAN.

EXCORIATIONS in Children.
DISSOLVE a little white Vitriol in spring water, and dab the part with it,
which will heal presently.

HEISTER.

DISORDERS of the eyes.
AN excellent Eye-water. Take two grains of sugar of Lead, dissolve it in a
quarter of a pint of spring water.

An OINTMENT for the Eyes.
DIP a feather in a little ointment of Tutty, and gently rub it across the eyes
every night going to sleep.

TURNER.

FAINTING.
APPLY to the nostrils and temples some spirits of Sal Ammoniac, and give a few
drops in a wine glass of water inwardly.

HOFFMAH.

FALLING SICKNESS. Signs of.
A weariness of the whole body, an heavy pain of the head, unquiet sleep,
dimness of sight, a noise in the ears, a violent palpitation of the heart, a
coldness of the joints, and a sense as it were, of a cold air ascending from
the extreme parts to the heart and brain, then they fall suddenly on the
ground, the thumbs are shut up close in the palms of the hands, the eyes are
distorted and all sensation is lost, so that by no noise, nor even by pinching
the body, can they be brought to themselves: they also froth at the mouth.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE of Peruvian bark powdered one ounce, of wild Valerian root half an ounce,
of syrup of Orange-peel a sufficient quantity, make an electuary of this, and
let the patint take the quantity of a nutmeg, (after proper evacuations, such
as bleeding and purging) morning and evening, for three months together, and
then repeat it three for our days before the new and full moon.

MEAD.

FEVERS Inflammatory. Signs of.
The breath is very hot, and there is a dryness of the whole skin, and sense of
heat, the respiration is thick, difficult and quick, the tongue is dry, yellow,
parched and rough, the thirst is unquenchable, a vast anxiety, restlesness, and
weariness, frequent inclinations to vomit, and sometimes lightheadiness and
convulsions.

METHOD OF CURE.
BLEED to the amount of ten or twelve ounces, vomit with half a dram of
Ipecacoanha, work it off with Chamomile tea; if costive, inject as often as
occasion requires, the clyster directed under the article of the Dry-Belly-Ach,
and give inwardly the following mixture. Take of salt of Wormwood half a
dram, Lemon-juice three quarters of an ounce, salt of Prunella ten grains,
spring water one ounce; mix them together for one dose, and repeat it every six
hours.

HUXHAM.

NERVOUS FEVERS. Signs of.
Slight chillinesses often in a day, with uncertain flushes of heat, a vast
dejection and anxiety of the spirits, a giddiness and pain of the head, an
inclination to yawn and doze, a dryness of the lips and tongue without any
considerable thirst, the countenance heavy, pale and dejected, frequent sick
fits, the urine is pale and made often and suddenly, the pulse is low, quick
and unequal.

METHOD OF CURE.
A Vomit is necessary when the sickness and load of the stomach is urgent; if
the body is costive, clysters of milk, sugar and salt, may be injected every
second or third day. Blisters must be applied to the nape of the neck, head and
legs, the sick person must be kept quiet in body and mind, opiates are commonly
hurtful; a little wine may be allowed, and thin wine whey is proper for common
drink. Give the following draught every six hours: Take salt of hartshorn ten
grains, Lemon-juice half an ounce, simple Mint-water one ounce and an half,
compound spirits of Lavender and syrup of Saffron of each one dram and an
half, mix them together for one dose.

HUXHAM.

PUTRID OR SPOTTED FEVERS. Signs of.
The head aches and is hot, dull, and attended with a dejection of mind from
the very beginning, a constant watchfulness, the countenance is dejected, the
pulse is languid, small and low. A pain in the back and loins, a great load at
the pit of the stomach, a perpetual vomiting of black bile: the thirst is
commonly very great, and all drinks seem bitter and maukish: the tongue at the
beginning is white, but grows daily more dark and dry, with a kind of dark
bubble on the top, and livid or brown spots appear over the whole surface of
the skin.

METHOD OF CURE.
GENTLE Vomits are necessary in the beginning, and if the body is too costive,
a clyster of milk, sugar and salt, may be given as often as occasion requires;
wine diluted with water, and acidulated with the juice of Seville oranges, may
be used for common drink, and the following has been found of greater efficacy
in this disorder than any other medicine.

Boil three drachms of Peruvian bark in powder, and three drachms of Virginia
snake-root in powder, in a pint of water, till half a pint is boiled a way,
then add a quarter of a pint of good Red Port wine; the dole is a tea cup full
every three or four hours.

Dr. PRINGLE.

FISTULA.
TAKE a quarter of a pound of Elecampane root, three quarters of a pound of
Fennel seeds, and a quarter of a pound of Black Pepper, pound these separately
and sift them through a fine sieve; take half a pound of Honey, and half a
pound of powder Sugar, melt the honey and the sugar together over the fire,
scumming them continually till they become bright as amber, when they are cool
mix and knead them into your powder, in the form of a soft paste. The dose is
the size of a nutmeg, morning, noon, and night, drinking a glass of wine or
water after it.

This is Dr. WARD'S receipt for curing Fistula's.

GIDDINESS.
TAKE twenty drops of tincture of Castor in a glass of water two or three times
in a day; or from a scruple to a dram of powder of Valerian root, three or
four times in a day.

MEAD.

GOUT. Signs of.
A pain resembling that of a dislocated bone, succeeded by a chilness,
shivering and slight fever, usually seizes the great toe, heel, the calf of the
leg or ancle, which become so exquisitely painful as not to endure even the
weight of the bed clothes; the part looks red and is very much swelled; the
urine is high colored, and lets fall a kind of red gravelly sediment.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE a tea-spoonful of Volatile tincture of Guaiacum every night going to
rest, in a glass of water: be covered warm, and drink plentifully of weak sack
whey. In the Intervals of the fits, exercise, such as walking, and riding, is
absolutely necessary to prevent a return, and the duke of Portland's Gout
powder, the receipt of which we have given in our Appendix, should be taken
according to the directions annexed thereto.

Dr. CHEYNE.

GRAVEL AND STONE. Signs of.
A pain in the loins, bloody urine, a numbness of the thigh or leg on the side
affected, a sickness at the stomach, and frequent vomitings.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE one pound of calcined oyster shells, and pour thereon twelve pints of
boiling water, strain it when cold, and take half a pint mixed with a little
new milk three times in a day, gradually increasing the quantity, till it
amounts to four pints a day. If the Patient is costive, two ounces of Manna
dissolved in a quart of whey, should be taken for one dose, once or twice every
week.

Dr. WHYTT, and SYDENHAM.

GREEN SICKNESS. Signs of.
A pale complexion, swelling of the ancles, weariness of the whole body,
difficulty of breathing, a palpitation of the heart, drowsiness, a desire of
eating coals, chalk, etc. and a suppression of the monthly courses.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE thirty drops of the tincture of Black Hellebore, two or three times in a
day, in a glass of water or wine, using moderate exercise. Chalybeate Waters
are also of service, and bleeding in the foot about the time of menstruation.

MEAD.

GRIPES.
TAKE half a dram of powdered Rhubarb, and toast it a little before the fire,
then add a little powder of Ginger to it, and mix it for one dose, to be
repeated as occasion requires.

RADCLIFFE.

HEADACHE.
APPLY Leeches behind the ears, and take twenty drops of tincture of Castor in
a glass of water frequently.

HEART-BURN.
TAKE a little chalk scraped in a glass of water, or a tea-cup full of
Chamomile tea.

HOFFMAN.

HOARSENESS.
TAKE the medicines directed under the article of Coughs, or as much as will
lie on a shilling of the following powder, three or four times in a day: take
Sperma Ceti and Sugar Candy, of each equal parts, and make them into a fine
powder, or a tea-spoonful of Barbados Tar in a glass of old Rum, every night
going to rest. Three or four Wellfleet oysters swallowed early in the morning
fasting, afford surprising relief in this complaint.

SHAW.

HYSTERICS. Signs of.
An intercepted breathing, almost to suffocation, fainting, loss of speech,
great drowsiness, exceeding costiveness, and making large quantities of urine,
almost as clear as water.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE Simple Pepper Mint water, twelve ounces, one ounce of powdered Valerian,
and half an ounce of Lavender drops, mix them together, and take three large
spoonfuls two or three times in a day, and also apply to the navel a large
Galbanum plaster.

HOFFMAN, and MEAD.

Hard SWELLINGS.
APPLY a Plaster of Diachylon with the gums, spread thick on leather.

PAREY.

HIP-GOUT. Signs of.
A violent pain in the joint of the thigh, and lower part of the loins, which
sometimes reaches to the leg, and even the extremity of the foot, without any
swelling or change of color of the skin.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE a dram of aetherial oil of Turpentine, with three times as much honey
mixed with it, every morning, for six or seven days at farthest, drinking
plentifully of warm Sack whey after it.

CHEYNE.

JAUNDICE. Signs of.
A yellowishness of the whites of the eyes, and of the whole body, bitterness
of the tongue, heaviness, and lassitude, vomiting of gall, the stools almost
white, and the urine of a Saffron color, tinging linen dipped therein yellow.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE Venice soap half an ounce, oil of Anniseeds sixteen drops, mix them well
together, and make it into middle sized pills. The dose is three or four, two
or three times in a day; if costive, half a dram of Rhubarb must be taken in
the morning twice in a week.

HUXHAM.

INDIGESTION. Signs of.
Pain, and sense of weight in the stomach, attended with frequent belchings,
heartburn, etc.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE a large spoonful of tincture of Hiera Picra every day, an hour before
dinner; or from ten to twenty drops of Acid Elixir of Vitriol, in a glass of
water, two or three times in a day. Pyrmont, and Spaw waters are also very
efficacious in removing this complaint.

CHEYNE, and HEISTER.

INFLAMMATIONS.
TAKE away ten or twelve ounces of blood, and repeat it if necessary; give
cooling purges, and apply to the part a pultice of bread and milk, with some
ointment of Elder in it.

SHARP.

ITCH. Signs of.
Watery pimples, attended with intolerable itching, between the fingers, under
the hams, on the arms, and on the thighs.

METHOD OF CURE.
ANOINT the parts which break out every night with the following ointment: take
Hog's lard half a pound, flower of Brimstone and Sulphur Vivum, of each two
ounces, powdered cloves one ounce, mix them together: two or three weeks is as
little time as can be depended upon, and the same linen must be wore the whole
time. This is a never failing remedy.

INFLAMMATION of the BOWELS. Signs of.
A burning pain in the belly, attended with a fever, vomiting, and frequently
an obstinate costiveness.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE away ten ounces of blood, and repeat the bleeding according to the
urgency of the complaint, give the clyster directed in our Appendix, twice
every day, till the patient has had two or three stools, and to appease the
pain, and stop the excessive vomiting, give ten drops of liquid Laudanum, in a
little broth every six hours. The diet should consist entirely of weak broths.

Juice of Lemons taken inwardly in obstinate cases, has sometimes afforded
surprising relief.

ARBUTHNOT.

INTERMITTING FEVER, see AGUE.


KING's EVIL. Signs of.
Hard swellings in the neck, armpits, and groin, and Tumors on the joints and
fingers, attended with a swelling, and a rottenness of the bones, soreness of
the eye lids. In short there is no part of the human body which may not be
affected with tumors, abscesses, or ulcers, by this disease.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE a scruple of burnt Sponge, and four grains of Rhubarb, mix them together
for one dose, which is to be taken every night and morning, with a draught of
whey. Drinking sea water is very efficacious in curing this disease.

Sir EDWARD HULSE.

LEPROSY. Signs of.
Red pimples, or postules, commonly first break out in the elbows and knees,
which gradually increase in such a manner, that the whole body is covered with
a leprous scurf.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE sharp pointed Dock roots half a pound, Monks Rhubarb a quarter of a
pound, Stick Liquorice and Coriander seeds, of each half an ounce, boil them in
a gallon of spring water till it comes to three quarts, and to the strained
liquor add two ounces of Diaphoretic Antimony. The dose is a pint every morning
and evening.

BANYER.

LETHARGY, see APOPLEXY.


LOOSENESS.
TAKE half a dram of Ipecacoanha for a vomit; and work it off with Chamomile
tea. Abstain from malt liquors. If this does not entirely remove the looseness,
take half a dram of powder of Rhubarb, made into a bolus, with a little
Diascordium, and repeat it every day till the looseness is entirely stopped.

For common drink the sick person may take Hartshorn drink, or Rice boiled in
water with a little cinnamon.

TOWN.

MADNESS. Signs of.
A redness of the eyes, grinding of thee teeth, strange malice to particular
persons, want of sleep, singing in the ears, incredible strength, insensibility
of cold, and an exc^ssive rage when provoked to anger.

METHOD OF CURE.
BLEEDING is useful in this disorder, and take forty drops of tincture of black
Hellebore in a glass of water, two or three times in a day; or half a dram of
Camphor may be taken every right going to rest.

MEAD, and KINNEIR.

MEASLES. Signs of.
A chilness and shivering, which is succeeded by a fever, accompanied with
great sickness, thirst, a continual drowsiness, slight cough, and an effusion
of tears, which is the most certain sign of the Measles. About the 4th day
little red spots like flea bites appear over the whole body, which do not rise
above the surface of the skin.

METHOD OF CURE.
FIRST, bleed the sick person, then let him or her drink plentifully of the
following decoction: take Pearl Barley, Raisins and Figs, of each two ounces,
stick Liquorice bruised half an ounce, boil them in four quarts of water till
it comes to two quarts, strain it for use, and add a quarter of an ounce of
salt Prunella. You must purge often after this disorder, and the diet and
management must be the same as in the Smallpox.

SYDENHAM.

MENSTRUAL DISCHARGE, Excessive. Signs of.
Loss of strength and appetite, bad habit of body, sallow complexion, and
swelling of the feet.

METHOD OF CURE.
BLEED according to the strength of the patient, and give thirty grains of the
following powder in a glass of red Wine three times in a day: Take three
quarters of an ounce of Roch Alum, and a quarter of an ounce of Dragon's blood,
and mix them together.

MEAD.

MENSTRUAL DISCHARGE, Suppression of. Signs of.
A swelling of the belly, pain in the loins and groin, difficulty of breathing,
cold sweats, frequent faintings, and sometimes hysteric fits.

METHOD OF CURE.
USE exercise, and take the quantity of a nutmeg three times a day of this
electuary: Take conserve of dried Orange-peel, a quarter of a pound, candied
ginger half an ounce, powder of steel two ounces; mix them into the consistence
of an electuary with any syrup: or a tea spoonful of tincture of black
Hellebore may be taken in a glass of warm water twice in a day.

MEAD.

MISCARRIAGE.
TO prevent miscarriage. Bleeding is useful and necessary, about the third
month of pregnancy, more or less, according to the constitution of the woman
with child. The body should also be kept open with Manna or Rhubarb, in the
first months especially.

HAMILTON.

NERVOUS DISORDERS.
COUNTRY air, exercise, and the cold bath, with the mixture directed under the
article of Hysterics, will prove a certain cure for every species of these
disorders.

FULLER.

NOISE in the EARS.
MAY be cured by the vapor of a decoction of Rosemary flowers prepared with
wine, being conveyed to the ear by a funnel.

HEISTER.

A safe OPIATE for a grown Person.
TAKE twenty drops of liquid laudanum in a glass of wine and water going to
rest. The quantity must be proportionably lessened for children, according to
their different ages.

BOERHAAVE.

OBSTRUCTIONS.
TAKE species Hiera Picra half an ounce, salt of Steel one dram, make into
pills of a moderate size, with a little syrup of Saffron: the dose is five
pills twice a day.

SHAW.

OLD ULCERS.
TAKE a quarter of a pound of Basilicon, and an ounce and an half of oil of
Olives, and mix therewith half an ounce of Verdigrease; dress the sore with
this ointment, spread upon a little tow, after fomenting it well, with a
decoction made of Chamomile flowers and Mallow leaves; or the fomentation
directed in the Appendix. Take frequently a dose of cooling physic, and live
regularly.

SHARP.

PAIN in the STOMACH, see HEART-BURN.


PAINS in the JOINTS, see HIP-GOUT.


PILES. Signs of.
A violent pain at the time of going to stool, the excrements streakt with
blood, and small swellings like warts on the verge of the anus.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE of Lenitive Electuary one ounce and an half, flour of Brimstone half an
ounce, mix them together, the quantity of a nutmeg to be taken every night and
morning: apply outwardly a little of this ointment; Take two ounces of white
Diachylon, two ounces of sweet oil, and half an ounce of vinegar, mix them
together. Leeches applied as near the Piles as possible, or on the Pile itself,
afford surprising relief.

SYDENHAM.

PALSY.
BLISTERS are serviceable, and the following drops have frequently afforded
great benefit: Take Sal Volatile drops half an ounce, Lavender drops, and
tincture of Castor, a quarter of an ounce each, mix them together: the dose is
forty drops frequently in a glass of wine and water, or half a dram of wild
Valerian root in powder, may be taken three times in a day.

ALLEN.

The diet should be warm and attenuating.

PLEURISY. Signs of.
A violent pain in the side accompanied with heat, thirst, and the other usual
symptoms of a fever, and a troublesome cough; if the sick person is bled, the
blood, when cold, looks like melted tallow.

METHOD OF CURE.
BLEED frequently till the pain abates, apply a blister to the side, and take
half a pint of the following infusion twice a day: Take fresh horse-dung six
ounces, and pour on it a quart of boiling Pennyroyal water, strain it when
cold, and add a quarter of an ounce of Venice treacle, mix for use.

SYDENHAM and QUINCEY.

QUINSEY or SORE-THROAT. Signs of.
A swelling of the parts concerned in deglutition, accompanied with great pain,
inflammation and a fever, so as to hinder the swallowing any solid meats, and
almost stop breathing.

METHOD OF CURE.
BLEEDING is sometimes necessary, and cooling physic, but often jelly of black
Currants swallowed down leisurely in small quantities, effects a cure.

PHILOSOPHICAL TRANSACTIONS.

RHEUMATISM. Signs of.
It begins with chilness and shivering, heaviness of the joints, and coldness
of the extreme parts. The appetite is lost, the body is costive, and feverish,
and a racking pain is felt sometimes in one part, sometimes in another;
frequently shifting from place to place, and leaving a redness and swelling in
the part visited last.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE half a dram of powder of gum Guaicum in a draught of warm ale going to
rest, and be covered with a larger quantity of clothes than usual; persist in
this method a few days, and you will find relief. Bleeding is of service in
phlethoric constitutions.

PRINGLE.

RICKETS in CHILDREN. Signs of.
A swelling of the belly, constant desire of sitting still, the bones are
crooked, and the joints seem very large, as if knotted, the head is over large,
and the child's understanding exceeds its years.

METHOD OF CURE.
GIVE the child two grains of Ens Veneris, dissolved in a spoonful of wine and
water, every night; to this must be joined cold bathing, frictions of the back,
exercise, and a strengthening diet.

BOERHAAVE.

RETENTION of URINE.
TAKE a quarter of an ounce of Nitre, a dram of Volatile salt of Amber, a
quarter of an ounce of powder of egg-shells, and half an ounce of fine sugar,
mix them together: the dose is as much as will lie on a shilling, two or three
times a day, drinking a draught of Marshmallow tea after each dose.

TURNER.

RUPTURES.
ARE cured by applying a strengthning-plaister spread on leather, (the
composition of which is set down in our appendix,) and a truss, which may be
had of Mr. White, Truss-maker, in Fleet Street, London.

SCALD-HEAD.
FIRST shave, then cover the head with a Pitch plaster spread on leather, and
give inwardly one grain of Calomel, made into a pill, with a little conserve of
Roses, every night going to rest, and a a dose of cooling physic twice in a
week.

TURNER.

STRANGURY.
TAKE half a dram of Camphire, a scruple of powdered Gum Arabic, liquid
Laudanum five drops, with a sufficient quantity of Turpentine to make it into a
bolus, to be taken night and morning, drinking a draught of Marshmallow tea
after each dose.

TURNER.

STITCH in the SIDE, see PLEURISY.


SCURVY. Signs of.
A sallow complexion, difficulty of breathing after exercise, spongy gums
subject to bleed with the slightest touch, frequent bleeding at the nose, a
swelling of the legs, accompanied with livid spots, and unusual laziness, and
pains over the whole body, resembling the Rheumatism.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE one ounce of acid elixir of Vitriol, and one ounce of tincture of
Peruvian bark, mix them together; a tea-spoonful is to be taken twice in a day
in a glass of water. A decoction of the tops of the spruce fir may be taken,
the quantity of half a pint, twice in a day. Bathing in the Sea, and drinking
Sea water are of infinite service.

HEISTER, and RUSSEL.

SLOW FEVER, see NERVOUS FEVER,


SMALLPOX. Signs of.
A chilliness, shivering, and other usual symptoms of a fever, attended with a
violent pain in the head and back, and an inclination to vomit, and great
propensity to sweat. In children, a dullness, and drowsiness, and sometimes
epileptic fits: About the third or fourth day, red spots about the size of a
pin's head appear on the breast, face, and the whole body, which increase in
size every day, till they are of the size of a large pea, and are filled with
matter.

METHOD OF CURE.
THE sick person must be kept in bed, taking care to defend him or her from the
inclemency of the winter, by proper means, and to moderate the excessive heat
in summer by cool air, for the patient ought not to be stifled with heat and
clothes, nor should the eruption and perspiration be checked by cold. With
regard to diet it ought to be very slender, moistning and cooling, such as
watergruel, pipping-liquor and milk pottage; and in the beginning the best
regimen is that which keeps the body open, and promotes urine, as figs,
Damascene Prunes, and Tamarinds, and by giving subacid liquors for drink, as
Small Beer sharpened with Orange or Lemmon-juice; whey made with apples boiled
in milk, emultions made with barley water and almonds, or Rhenish wine,
plentifully lowered with water.

MEAD.

SHINGLES. Signs of.
An Eruption of watery Pustules, about the size of Millet feeds, which encircle
the body like a belt, of an hand's breadth, and occasion an intolerable itching
and soreness.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE two ounces of white Diachylon, two ounces of sweet Oil, and half an ounce
of Vinegar, mix together for a liniment, which spread on a piece of fine linen
and apply to the part affected, repeating it as occasion requires; this with
two or three doses of Glauber's salt, and a cooling and spare diet, will
entirely remove this complaint.

TURNER.

SPRAINS.
AFTER somenting with warm Vinegar, apply a pultice of stale beer grounds, and
oatmeal, with a little Hog's Lard, every day till the pain and swelling are
abated; then apply the strengthening plaster directed in our Appendix,
Observing the following rules, will much shorten the cure: Let the person stand
three or four minutes at a time on both his feet, and sometimes move the
strained foot, and when sitting with his foot on a low stool, let him move it
this way or that as he can bear it; let the strained part be gently rubbed with
a warm hand several times in a day, which will contribute very much to contract
the overstretched vessels, and recover a due circulation of their fluids
through them.

SHARP.

STONE, see GRAVEL.


SWEATING, Excessive.
TAKE twenty drops of acid elixir of Vitriol, in a glass of water, two or three
times a day.

SHAW.

Swelled LEGS.
TAKE the same medicines which are advised under the article of the Dropsy.

TOOTHACHE.
THE root of Yellow water Flower de Luce rubbed on the tooth which is painful,
or chewed in the mouth, in an instant, as if by a charm, drives away the pains
of the teeth, arising from what cause sover.

ALLEN.

THROAT SORE, see QUINSEY.


Putrid SORE THRAOT. Signs of.
A giddiness, chillness, and shivering, like that of an Ague fit, followed by
an intense heat, a violent headache, heat and soreness in the throat, stiffness
of the neck, great sickness, vomiting or purging, or both; the face looks red
and swelled, the eyes inflamed and watery, with restlessness, anxiety and
faintness; frequently a great number of small pimples appear on the neck,
breast, and hands, which are sensibly swelled, the inside of the mouth and
throat are swelled, and appear of a florid red color, sometimes of a pale
white, surrounded with red.

METHOD OF CURE.
ALL Evacuations which lessen the strength, particularly Bleeding and Purging,
and all cooling medicines, are highly prejudicial. The hot steam of a boiling
mixture of Vinegar, Myrrh and Honey, is to be received into the throat, through
an inverted funnel; this cannot be used too frequently. The decoction of the
Peruvian bark made by boiling an ounce of bark in a pint and a half of water,
till it comes to half a pint, and adding a dram of acid elixir of Vitriol, is
the best medicine in this disorder, if given, a tea cup full, every four hours.

HUXHAM and FOTHERGILL.

TETTARS.
TAKE four ounces of sweet Oil, one ounce of white Wax, one ounce of Sperma
Ceti, and twenty-five grains of Camphor, mix them together for a liniment, with
which gently touch the tettars three or four times in a day.

THIRST, unquenchable.
A quart of water mixed with an ounce or two of White wine Vinegar will make an
agreeable drink.

THRUSH. Signs of.
Little white ulcers affect the lips, gums, cheeks, tongue, palate, and the
whole inside of the mouth.

METHOD OF CURE.
RUB the child's mouth with a linen rag dipped in the following mixture; Take
honey of roses an ounce, oil of Vitriol six drops, mix them together; or the
child's mouth may be frequently washed with a docoction of Elm Bark.

SHAW. and ALLEN.

TYMPANY. Signs of.
A great swelling of the belly, which being occasioned by air pent up in the
cavity of the belly, gives an hollow sound when struck by the hand.

METHOD OF CURE.
THE same medicines which are directed for the Dropsy are also of service in
this disorder.

VIOLENT PAINS after DELIVERY, see AFTER-PAINS.


VOMITING.
TAKE Mint water one ounce, Lemon-juice half an ounce, a scruple of salt of
Wormwood, mix them for one dose, to be repeated as occasion may require.

MEAD.

ULCER of the LUNGS.
REQUIRES the same treatment as is directed under the article of Consumptions.

ULCER of the KIDNEYS: Signs of.
Fleshy excrescences are voided by urine: The h^at and pain in making water
comes by intervals, the matter that comes from the kidneys is more plentiful,
white and thin, than in an ulcer of the bladder, and is not foetid; the urine
looks like milk when first made, but after standing some hours, the matter
separates from it, and falls to the bottom.

METHOD OF CURE.
BUTTER-Milk not very sour, is extremely beneficial, as is also an emulsion
made of Barleywater and sweet Almonds. Chalybeate waters have been sometimes of
service.

ARBUTHNOT.

ULCER of the BLADDER. Signs of.
A voiding of stinking matter or blood, and sometimes scales, or a membranous
skin along with the urine, and a continual heat and pains in the urinary
passages.

METHOD OF CURE.
THE Seller's mineral water mixed with milk are excellent, as is also the
constant use of Spawwater.

HOFFMAN.

ULCER of the WOMB. Signs of.
A flux of purulent matter, or matter mixed with blood, which is more viscid and
foetid, than the Whites, and attended with a fixed pain.

METHOD OF CURE.
AN injection, composed of Barley-water, a pint, and honey of Roses two ounces,
must be used to the part affected by the help of a syringe, several times in a
day. You may add a small quantity of tincture of Myrrh.

ASTRUC

WARTS.
MAY be removed by rubbing them with the juice of Celandine, or milk of Spurge,
but when they are situated about the Eyelids, to prevent hurting the eyes, it
is proper to surround the wart with a ring of Wax, or a piece of Plaster with
a hole in the middle, so that the wart may come through, by which means the
warts will be destroyed, without hurting any other part.

HEISTER.

WATERY GRIPES in Children.
TAKE half a dram of Magnesia alba, and half a dram of Rhubarb, mix them
together, and give the child three or four grains in its pap every morning and
evening.

CADOGAN.

WHITES. Signs of.
A flux of matter from the womb, attended with a pain and weight in the loins,
loss of appetite, pale complexion, difficulty of breathing, a liableness to
miscarriage, and a swelling of the eyes and feet.

METHOD OF CURE.
APPLY a large strengthening plaster to the small of the back, and take a
quarter of a pint of this decoction, every night and morning: Take cow's milk
half a pint, and boil in it one handful of Archangel flowers, and a bit of
Cinnamon, strain it for use; in obstinate cases, Bathing in the sea, and
drinking sea water, is far preferable to any thing else.

RUSSEL.

WIND.
TAKE of the powder of Angelica seeds, Carraway seeds, and Parsley seeds, of
each a quarter of an ounce, make them into an electuary with the syrup of Clove
Gilliflowers: the dose is the quantity of a nutmeg at discretion.

HOFFMAN.

WHITE SWELLINGS of the Joints.
ANOINT the part with Barbados tar, before a good fire, two or three times in a
day, covering it with a bladder, and drink half a pint of seawater every
morning fasting.

GUY'S HOSPITAL.

WASTING AWAY of Children.
TAKE salt of Tartar, Nitre and Arcanum Duplicatum, of each a quarter of an
ounce, Sal Ammoniac three drachms, mix them together; a very little of this
must be put into the child's drink, according to its age.

HEISTER.

WORMS. Signs of.
Paleness of the countenance, itching of the nose, voraciousness, startings,
and grinding the teeth in sleep, loosenesses, stinking breath, hard swelled
belly; and sometimes epileptic fits.

METHOD OF CURE.
TAKE burnt Hartshorn, and the best Scammony in powder, of each a quarter of an
ounce, Calomel one dram, powder of Tin a quarter of an ounce, mix them
together, and let the child take eight or ten grains according to its age,
every other morning, in a tea-spoonful of roasted apple.

ALSTON.

GREEN WOUNDS.
DRESS them every day, with yellow Basilicon spread on fine lint, after
fomenting them well with the Fomentation, the receipt for making which is
inserted in the Appendix.

TURNER.

DIRECTIONS concerning BLEEDING.
THOUGH Bleeding has been directed in many disorders in the course of this
work; yet as the improper use of it is attended frequently with the most fatal
consequences, it has been judged necessary to bring into one point of view all
those cases in which bleeding may be administered with advantage, as well as
those in which it is highly prejudical. In all inflammatory diseases, it should
by no means be omitted, as in the Pleurisy, and Peripneumony, during the first
days; but so soon as the symptoms of suppuration appear expectorating medicines
are the most proper means from which to expect relief, and the use of the
lancet must be totally forbid. In the Apoplexy, Epilepsy, Bloody Flux and
Inflammation of the bowels, bleeding must be repeated according to the exigence
of the symptoms: it is also useful, sometimes to promote suppuration in large
abscesses, where nature is too much oppressed by the violence of the
inflammation. In Inflammations of the Eyes, Bladder, or Womb, Ischiatic pains,
Rheumatisms, Coughs, Head-achs, Quinseys, Asthmas, Hemorrhages, and Nephritic
complaints, Bleeding is of the utmost service: but in every disorder proceeding
from a relaxed state of the vessels, and impoverished state of the Blood,
attended with a cachectic habit of body, such as Dropsies, Jaundice, Gout, etc.
bleeding must be abstained from with the utmost caution, as it will, instead of
relieving, greatly aggravate those distempers.

APPENDIX.
A choice receipt to make OPODELDOCH.
TAKE of Hungary water a pint, Castile soap sliced three ounces, Camphor an
ounce, let them stand together in a glass closely stopped, till the Soap and
Camphor are entirely dissolved in the Hungary water.

The CLYSTER Decoction.
TAKE of dried Mallow leaves an ounce, Chamomile flowers, and Fennel seeds, of
each half an ounce, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water to strain off
about half a point, then add two ounces of sweet Oil and it is fit for use.

HARTSHORN-DRINK.
TAKE burnt Hartshorn two ounces, Gum Arabic two drachms, boil them in three
pints of water till one pint is wasted away, then strain it and it is fit for
use.

BARLEY-WATER.
TAKE two ounces of Pearl barley, and wash it well in cold water, then boil it
in half a pint of water for a very little while; this water will look reddish,
and is to be thrown away, then add four pints of water and boil it away to one
half, the remainder is fit for use.

An Excellent FOMENTATION.
TAKE Southernwood and wormwood dried, and Chamomile flowers, of each an ounce,
Bay leaves dried half an ounce, boil them gently in six pints of water and
strain it of for use. All green wounds, and old sores, should be fomented with
this every day, before they are dressed.

The Infusion of SENNA.
TAKE three quarters of an ounce of Senna, Cream of Tartar three drachms,
Carraway seeds bruised two drachms; boil the cream of Tartar in half a pint of
water till it is dssolved, then pour the boiling water upon the rest of the
ingredients, and let it stand until it is cold, then strain it off, and it is
fit for use.

A PURGING DRAUGHT.
TAKE of the infusion of Senna as above directed, two ounces, syrup of
Buckthorn one ounce, mix them together for one dose, which may be taken in the
morning fasting, three times in a week, and as it is a safe and sure purge, it
may be taken in all cases where purging is proper.

A dose of Cooling Physic.
TAKE Glauber's salts an ounce, Manna half an ounce, dissolve them in a little
boiling water for one dose, to be taken as often as occasion requires.

HIERA PICRA.
TAKE of Sucotrine aloes finely powdered, a quarter of a pound, Winter's bark
finely powdered, three quarters of an ounce, mix them together.

Tincture of HIERA PICRA.
STEEP an ounce of Hiera Picra, made as above directed, in a pint of Mountain
wine, for a week or ten days, by which time it will be fit for use.

MINDERERUS's SPIRIT.
TAKE a quarter of an ounce of Volatile Salt Ammoniac, and add to it by degrees
distilled Vinegar, till the effervescence entirely ceases.

An Excellent Bitter Tincture.
TAKE Gentian root, and Orange Peel dried, each two ounces, Cochineal bruised,
half a dram, infuse them in a quart of French Brandy for three or four days,
then strain off the liquor for use. This is a very pleasant and wholesome
Bitter, and may be used occasionally to provoke an appetite and assist
digestion.

Duke of PORTLAND's GOUT POWDER.
TAKE of Round Birthwort root and Gentian root, of the tops and leaves of
Germander, Ground Pine, and Centaury: Take of all these well dried, powdered,
and sifted as fine as possible, an equal quantity; mix them well together, and
take one dram of this mixed powder every morning fasting, in a cup of wine
and water, broth, tea, or any other vehicle you like best; keep fasting an hour
and an half after it, continue this for three months without interruption, then
diminish the dose to three quarters of a dram for three months longer, then
to half a dram for six months more, taking it regularly every morning if
possible. After the first year, it will be sufficient to take half a dram
every other day.

As this Medicine operates insensibly, it will take perhaps two years before
you receive any great benefit; so you must not be discouraged though you do not
perceive at first any great amendment, it works slow but sure: it does not
confine the patient to any particular diet, so one lives soberly, and abstains
from those meats and liquors that have always been accounted pernicious in the
Gout, as Champaign, Drams, high sauces, etc.

N. B. In the Rheumatism, that is only accidental and not habitual, a few of
the dram doses may do; but if habitual, or that has been of long duration,
then you may take it as for the Gout: The remedy requires patience, as it
operates but slow in both distempers.

Sir HANS SLOANE's Ointment for SORE EYES.
TAKE prepared Tutty one ounce, Boodstone finely prepared, two scruples,
Sucotrine Aloes in fine powder, twelve grains, prepared Pearl four grains, mix
them together in a marble mortar, with as much Vipers fat, as is sufficient to
give it the consistence of an ointment.

This ointment is to be applied with a hair pencil, the eyes winking or a
little opened.

It must be observed, that purging medicines are hurtful to the diseases of the
eyes, which are cured by this medicine.

Dr. MEAD's Remedy for the Bite of a MAD DOG.
TAKE Ash colored Ground Liverwort four drachms, Black Pepper two drachms, mix
them together into a fine powder:

This is to be divided into four doses, whereof one is to be taken in warm milk
in a morning fasting, for four mornings successively; after this the person
must be put into a cold bath, pond, or river, for thirty days together, early
in the morning, and before breakfast: he is to remain in it with his head above
water, not longer than half a minute. The wound should be continually fomented,
with a pickle made with Vinegar and Salt, as warm as it can be borne.

Mrs. Stephens's famous cure for the STONE and GRAVEL, as amended by Dr.
Hartley.
TAKE two scruples of calcined Egg-shells, three times in a day, in a glass of
any convenient liquor, drinking after each dose, a third part of the following
decoction: Take two ounces of Castile soap, dissolve it in a quart of soft
water, and sweeten it according to your taste, with Honey or Loaf sugar. If
this decoction is made in a copper vessel, care must be taken that it is well
tinned. The taking of these medicines must be continued for some time after the
complaint ceases, lest any part of the Stone should remain, which being rough
and unequal might occasion exquisite pain. It is common after a few days use of
these medicines, to have an increase of pain in making water, at which time, a
soft diet, emollient drinks, and rest, are proper. For common drink, milk and
water, or a decoction of Marshmallow roots, Parsley and Liquorice may be used;
but if the person has been used to strong liquors, small punch made without
acid may be drank sparingly. Artichoaks, asparagus, spinnage, lettuces,
succory, parsley, turnips, carrots, potatoes, radishes, peace, etc. may be
safely used, but onions, leeks and cellery, are to be preferred to all other
vegetables.

The patient ought to drink no more of any liquor than is sufficient to quench
his thirst, and he should hold his water, as long as he can without great
uneasiness, that it may have the longer time to act on the stone. If these
medicines occasion costiveness, it will be necessary now and then, at
discretion, to take a dose of Glauber's salt and Manna.

A Warm Purge, proper to be given in the PALSY and APOPLEXY.
TAKE tincture of Hiera Picra two ounces, syrup of Buckthorn three quarters of
an ounce, Lavender drops a quarter of an ounce; mix them together for one dose,
which may be given in the morning fasting, twice a week, or as often as
occasion may require.

DAFFY's ELIXIR.
TAKE Raisins stoned four ounces, Senna three ounces, Carraway-seeds bruised
one ounce, steep these ingredients in a quart of Brandy, for three weeks or a
month, then strain it off for use, and keep it in a bottle close stopped.

VOLATILE TINCTURE of Guaicum.
TAKE an ounce of Gum Guaicum in gross powder, and steep it for a week or ten
days in six ounces of Sal Volatile drops, in a Bottle closely stopped.

FRYER's BALSAM.
TAKE of Gum Benjamin, one ounce and an half, of strained Storax one ounce, of
Balsam of Tolu half an ounce, of Sucotrine Aloes a quarter of an ounce,
rectified Spirit of Wine, a pint. Digest them together till the Gums are
dissolved as much as possible, then strain off the Tincture for use.

DIACHYLON with the Gums.
TAKE three quarters of a pound of white Diachylon, two ounces of strained
Galbanum, Turpentine and Frankincense, of each three quarters of an ounce; melt
them together over a slow fire.

WHITE DIACYLON Plaster.
TAKE Litharge finely powdered a pound and a quarter, Sweet-oil a quart, boil
them together with a quart of water, till they are thoroughly mixed, and are of
a proper consistence for a plaster, and look quite white; if the water should
be entirely wasted away, you must add some more to prevent its turning black.

An excellent STENGTHNING Plaster, see page 31 and 33.
TAKE white Diachylon half a pound, Frankincense two ounces, and Dragon's Blood
three quarters of an ounce; melt the Diachylon over a slow fire, and then add
the other ingredients finely powdered, and mix them well together, by stirring
them continually till the plaster is quite cold.

Ointment of ELDER.
IS made, by boiling the young leaves of Elder in Mutton-suet, till they are
quite crisp, and the suet is of a deep green color.

SPERMA CETI Ointment.
TAKE a quarter of a pint of the best Sallad-oil, a quarter of a pound of white
Wax, and half an ounce of Sperma Ceti; melt these ingredients together, over a
gentle fire, and keep them continually stirring until the ointment is quite
cold.

Ointment of MARSHMALLOWS.
TAKE half a pound of Marshmallow-roots, of Linseeds and Faenugreek-seeds, each
three ounces, bruise them, and boil them half an hour gently, in a quart of
water, then add two quarts of sweet oil, and boil them together, till the water
is quite wasted away, then strain off the oil, and add to the oil a pound of
Beeswax, half a pound of yellow Rozin, and two ounces of common Turpentine;
melt them together over a slow fire, and keep them continually stirring, till
the ointment is cold.

TURNER's CERATE, see the article of BURNS and SCALDS.


Yellow BASILICON.
TAKE sweet Oil a quarter of a pint, Beeswax, yellow Rozin, and Burgundy pitch,
of each a quarter of a pound, Venice Turpentine three quarters of an ounce; mix
them together over a slow fire.

FINIS.

