THE NATURAL HISTORY OF BRITISH SHELLS, INCLUDING FIGURES AND DESCRIPTIONS OF
ALL THE SPECIES HITHERTO DISCOVERED IN GREAT BRITAIN, SYSTEMATICALLY ARRANGED
IN THE LINNEAN MANNER, WITH SCIENTIFIC AND GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON EACH.

VOL. V.

BY E. DONOVAN, F.L.S. AUTHOR OF THE NATURAL HISTORIES OF BRITISH BIRDS,
INSECTS, etc. etc.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, AND FOR F. AND C. RIVINGTON, NO 62, ST. PAUL'S
CHURCHYARD; BY BYE AND LAW, ST. JOHN'S SQUARE, CLERKENWELL.

1803.


THE NATURAL HISTORY OF BRITISH SHELLS.
PLATE CXLV. TEREDO NAVALIS. SHIP WORM.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Terebella, with two calcareous hemisphaerical valves
cut off before, and two lanceolate ones. Shell roundish, flexuous, and capable
of penetrating into wood.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell very thin, cylindrical and smooth.

TEREDO NAVALIS: testa tenuissima cylindrica laevi. Gmel. p. 3747. 334. sp. 1.
TEREDO, Linn. Syst. Not. 12. 2. p. 1267. n. 1. Dentalium testa membranacea
cylindracea, ligno inserta. Linn. Fn. Suec. 1. p. 380. No. 1329. Serpula testa
cylindracea flexuosa, lignum perforans. Teredo. Da Costa. Brit. Conch. p. 21.
sp. 11. Sellius Hist. Not. Tered. Baster, Phil. trans. 61. TEREDO NAVALIS.
SHIP-WORM. Penn. Brit. Zool. 4. No. 160.
This destructive creature is supposed to have been originally a native of the
East Indies, and from thence introduced into the European seas: at present it
may be considered with propriety as a naturalized British species; and it is a
fortunate circumstance that it does not thrive so well with us as in warmer
climates.

The animal, a soft and almost shapeless gelatinous body, is furnished with a
calcareous process, or augur, at the head, with which it bores with the utmost
facility into the stoutest oaken plank, as it lies in the water; and where a
number of them attack the same piece of wood, will in a few days entirely
destroy it: hence the ravages of these animals in the bottoms of ships are
fraught with the greatest danger; and notwithstanding all the precaution of
sheathing the bottoms of ships with copper, they insinuate themselves through
the smallest cavities, and lodge themselves securely in the timbers. Where the
work of the animal first commences, the shell is obtusely rounded and closed,
and as it proceeds it continues to lengthen its shell till, as Gmelin says, it
becomes from four to six inches in length; -- we have seen one of them whose
progress through the solid plank had not been interrupted, that had grown
nearly to the length of eighteen inches. It is said that sheets of paper dipped
in tar, and applied to the ship's bottom, will prove a more effectual
preservative of the timber than the usual sheathing of copper, and an extensive
manufactory has been of late established for the preparation of this article:
how far it may prove ultimately successful we cannot presume to imagine, but
perhaps both the paper and the copper might be employed together with greater
advantage than either of those articles separately.

For a more complete history of the Teredo than we might have otherwise
possessed, we are indebted to a remarkable circumstance that occurred about
sixty years since: the piles on the coast of Holland were found to be injured
to a very alarming degree, by the ravages of this creature; and beside several
other ingenious tracts upon their history and the calamity they had occasioned,
Sellius published an account of it, under the title of Historia Naturalis
Teredines, seu, Xylophagi Marini, in 1733; in this book the anatomy of the
animal is illustrated with Plates, and upon the whole his observations deserve
the attention of the curious reader. Another account was also written by
Baster, and published in the Transactions of the Royal Society of London, in
vol. 61, as quoted above.

In our specimens, the apertures, or mouths of the shells, are very perfect,
and exhibit the same appearance as Kaemmer and Gmelin seem to think peculiar to
the species Utriculus; namely, an oval aperture divided by a partition in the
middle. The shell is extremely delicate, or thin, and very brittle.


PLATE CXLVI. PATELLA INTORTA. INCLINING PATELLA, OR LIMPET.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax. Shell univalve subconic and without spire.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell entire, ovate, furrowed: ribs slightly
imbricated, vertex somewhat reflexed and obtuse.

PATELLA INTORTA: testa integris ovata, sulcata; costis sub-imbricatis, vertice
sub-reflexo obtuso. PATELLA INTORTA, inclining: with an elevated shell,
slightly striated; the vertex bending, but not hooked. Penn. Brit. Zool.
This shell is described by Pennant, who acquaints us it "inhabits Anglesea,
found on the shores." It is a very rare shell, but has been taken also on the
western coast, and communicated by J. Laskey, Esquire. of Crediton, Devonshire.

The figure of Patella intorta, in the British Zoology, is certainly very
indifferent: but having examined the shell Mr. Pennant describes, we have no
hesitation in saying that it is not the Patella mammillaris of Gmelin, as some
conchologists imagine. Specimens of the latter we are likewise in possession
of, but they are not certainly known to be natives of this country. -- In
Lister Conch, t. 537. fig. 17; and in Martini. Conch. 1. t. 7. f. 58, 59. P.
mammillaris is very accurately figured; and a slight comparison of either of
them, with the shell figured in the annexed plate, will prove very clearly that
they cannot be of the same species.


PLATE CXLVII. PATELLA LACUSTRIS. LAKE LIMPET.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax. Shell univalve, subconic, without spire.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell very entire, oval, membranaceous: crown
pointed and reflected.

PATELLA LACUSTRIS: testa integerrima ovali membranacea: vertice mucronato
reflexo. Fn. suec. 2200. -- Gmel. Syst. Not. T. 1. p. 6. Patella fluviatilis,
fusca, vertice mucronato, incurvo, inflexoque. Gualt. Ind. Conch. tab. 4. fig.
B. Patella fluviatilis, exigua, subflava, vertice mucronato, inflexoque. List.
Hist. Conch. tab. 141. fig. 39. Morton Northamp. p. 417. PATELLA LACUSTRIS,
Penn. Brit. Zool. 4. No. 149. PATELLA integra, exigua, fusca, fragilis, vertice
inflexo. Da Costa. Brit. Conch. 1. tab. 2. fig. 8. 8.
This is a thin and brittle shell, of a pale brown, or whitish color, that is
found on aquatic plants, in most ponds and rivers in Europe: in England it is
very common in some places. The animal, as Gmelin describes it, has two
truncated and concealed tentacula, each of which is furnished with an eye at
the inner angle.

Dr. Lister informs us, that they couple in September, and fix their spawn
plentifully on stones and other bodies in the water: this spawn consists of
little gelatinous globules, in each of which it is said many small shells may
be distinguished. -- The shell is shown of the natural size in the annexed
plate.


PLATE CXLVIII. LEPAS TINTINNABULUM. BELL ACORN SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Triton. Shell of many valves, affixed by a stem or
broad base.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell conic, obtuse, rugged and fixed.

LEPAS TINTINNABULUDM: testa, conica, obtusa, rugosa fixa. Mus. Lud. Ulr. 466.
n. 3. Balanus major angustus purpurascens, capitis apertura valde patente.
List. H. Conch. tab. 433. fig. 285. Balanus major. The conic center shell.
Grew. Mus. p. 148. Balanus maximus ore patulo. Mus. Petiv. p. 82. No. 803. B.
tintinnabuliformis et B. calyciformis orientalis. Phil. Trans. 1758. p. 11.
tab. 34. fig. 8, 9. B. ore hiante magnus. Borlase. Corn. p. 27. Gland de Mer
clochette, D'Avila Cab. p. 404. No. 922. BALANUS TINTINNABULUM BELL. B. major
purpurascens, conicus, angustus tintinnabuliformis, apertura valde patente. Da
Costa Brit. Conch. p. 250. sp. 70. BALANUS TINTINNABULUM BELL. Penn. Brit.
Zool. T. 4. No. 8.
This kind of Balanus is found affixed in large clusters to the bottoms of
ships in our seas, but the general opinion is that it originates in warmer
climates, and should not be considered an indigenous British species. A
supposed variety of it of a dirty whitish color, is said to be found in the
North seas, by Chemnitz.

Balanus Tintinnabulum is admitted among the testaceous productions of our seas
by Borlase, Pennant and Da Costa, and this we must confess is the best apology
we have to offer for inserting it in the present Work.


PLATE CXLIX. VENUS LACTEA. MILKY VENUS SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Bivalve. Hinge furnished with three teeth; two near each
other, the third divergent from the beaks.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell lentiform, somewhat compressed, with thick,
elevated, obtuse concentric striae, and slightly truncated anteriorly.

VENUS LACTEA: testa lentiformi sub-compressa: striis concentricis crassis
elevatis obtusis, antrorsum subtruncata.
This appears to be a new and undescribed British species of Venus,
approaching, in some particulars, to others of the same genus found on our
coast, although differing in having the concentric striae: or ridges large,
elevated, and obtusely rounded. The striae, for example, in V. borealis, and V.
cancellata rise in a thin membranaceous ridge to an acute edge; and the former
of these seems at first sight to bear a strong analogy to our shell: Venus
lactea is also a much thicker and heavier shell than any other resembling it,
with which we are acquainted. V. Exoleta has thick, but minute striae.

Our present species, we are informed, is found on the western coast.


PLATE CL. PATELLA OBLONGA. OBLONG FRESH WATER PATELLA, OR LIMPET.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax. Shell univalve, sub-conic, and without spire.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell very entire, oblong, compressed,
membranaceous: vertex pointed and reflected obliquely, or to one side.

PATELLA OBLONGA: testa ingerrima oblonga compressa membranacea, vertice
mucronato reflexo oblique. Lightfoot. Phil. Trans. V. 76. p. 167.
This species was first described in the transactions of the Royal Society of
London, by the Rev. Mr. Lightfoot, chaplain to the late Duchess of Portland. He
says it was found adhering to the leaves of the Iris Pseudacorus, in waters
near Beaconsfield in Buckinghamshire, by Mr. Agneu, the Duchess of Portland's
Gardener. It has been since found on plants in the river Stour, by the Rev.
Thomas Rackett.

It is evidently distinct from the Patella lacustris of Linnaeus, in being of
an oblong instead of ovate form; and in having the pointed vertex bending
obliquely or to one side, instead of being centrical and reflected back. The
color is variable, in some it is greenish, and in others of a pale brown. It
is represented on our plate both of the natural size and magnified.


PLATE CLI.
FIG. I. HELIX HISPIDA. BRISTLY SNAIL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax. Shell univalve, spiral, diaphanous, fragile.
Aperture contracted semilunar, or roundish.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell umbilicated, unequal, hairy, diaphanous;
whorls five: aperture roundish-lunated.

HELIX HISPIDA: testa umbilicata convexa hispida diaphana: anfractibus quinis,
apertura subrotundo-lunata. Linn. Fn. Suec. 2182. -- Gmel. Syst. Not. 3625.
Helix sub-globosa umbilicata, cornea, diaphana, hispida. Hispida, Helix. Da
Costa. Brit. Conch. p. 58.
This shell is not unfrequently found at the bottoms of trees among the moss,
in woods and wet shady places. It is glossy, very thin, brittle, and of a brown
horny color. When the animal is alive in the shell it is of a dark red color
approaching to black, and is very elegantly set all over with minute, short,
white bristles, or hairs, which easily rub or fall off when the animal dies.

In the plate the upper and underside are represented, together with a
magnified figure, which is distinguished by a star, and is intended to show the
hispid appearance of the shell while the animal is alive.

FIG. II. HELIX ERICETORUM. HEATH SNAIL.
SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell umbilicated, depressed and yellowish,
with one or more fuscous bands.

HELIX ERICETORUM: testa umbilicata depressa lutescente: fascia una vel
pluribus fuscis. Mull. Hist. Verm. 2. p. 33. n. 236. -- Gmel. Linn. Syst. Not.
p. 3632. Cochlea cinerea albidave, faciata, ericetorum. List. H. An. Angl. p.
126. tit. 13. tab. 2. f. 13. -- Cochlea compressa, umbilicata fasciata
campestris. List. H. Conch. tab. 78. fig. 78. HELIX ALBELLA, Penn. Brit. Zool.
Vol. 4. tab. 85. fig. 122, HELIX cinerea albidave, fasciata, ericetorum Erica.
Da Costa. Brit. Conch. p. 53. Sp. 30.
This species of Helix, as its name implies, is found on heaths and sandy
soils, and is very common both in this country and other parts of Europe. When
full grown, this shell is three quarters of an inch in breadth, and one-third
of its breadth in height: the spires flat: the outermost wreath very unequal
beneath, with a large and deep central umbilicus; and circular mouth or
aperture.

The young shells are quite plain, and of a horny color, or whitish and
semitransparent. When full grown they are opake, dull, white or yellowish, and
usually fasciated with one or more brown circular bands, according to the
involutions of the wreaths. The order, size, and number of these brown bands,
as Da Costa says, vary extremely, though commonly there is one band in the
middle or near the bottom of each wreath, and often other fainter and narrower
bands accompany it. Gmelin speaks of five distinct varieties, which differ in
size, in color, and number of the bands. Sometimes they are quite white, or
marked with a single spiral band; and sometimes these bands amount to eight or
nine on each shell.

Dead shells of this kind are found in vast numbers intermixed with the sand on
heaths, and are always observed in great plenty with the others.


PLATE CLII. PINNA LAEVIS. SMOOTH PINNA, OR HAM SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax. Shell sub-bivalve, fragile, erect, gaping at
one end, and furnished with a byssus or beard: hinge toothless, and uniting the
valves into one.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell nearly triangular, horn-colour, smooth: valves
rugose on the posterior part.

PINNA LAEVIS: testa sub-triangulari cornea laevi: valvis posterius rugosis.
This species of Pinna which differs from any that has been before described as
a British shell; and if we are not mistaken, from either of the Linnaean or
Gmelinian species of the genus also; was received by A. M'Leay, Esquire. among
other curious shells that were dredged up on the coast of Shetland.

The difference between this and the other analogous kinds, seems to consist in
its being of a more triangular form, and in not having the least trace of
spines or murication: from the beak descend some very obsolete longitudinal
striae, but the surface is in general perfectly smooth and glossy,
notwithstanding the specimen before us has at first sight a rugged aspect; the
shell having been greatly bruised or mutilated in its growth, and afterward
uncouthly repaired by the animal inhabitant.


PLATE CLIII. SOLEN PELLUCIDUS. PELLUCID RAZOR SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Bivalve, with equal valves, oblong, open at both ends; at
the hinge a subulated tooth turned back, often double; not inserted in the
opposite shell. Animal an ascidia.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell suboval, somewhat arcuated, fragile,
pellucid: hinge with an acute bidentated tooth on one side.

SOLEN PELLUCIDUS: testa subovali subarcuata fragile pellucida cardine altero
acute bidentato. SOLEN PELLUCIDUS, Penn. Brit. Zool. T. 4. p. 1. p. 84. sp. 23.
A very rare species, and described only by Mr. Pennant, who says it inhabits
Red Wharf, Anglesea.


PLATE CLIV. BUCCINUM GLACIALE. NORTHERN WHELK.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax. Shell univalve, spiral, gibbous. Aperture
ovate, ending in a short canal or gutter, inclining to the right: tail or beak
retuse: inner lip expanded.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell smooth, somewhat striated,
ovate-oblong; lower whorl slightly carinated.

BUCCINUM GLACIALE: testa laevi substriata ovato-oblonga: anfractu infimo
subcarinato. Linn. Faun. Suec. 2162. -- Gmel. Syst. Not. 4.3491. sp. 92. Chemn.
Conch. 10 t. 152.1446, 1447. TRITONIUM GLACIALE, O. Fabr. Faun. Groenl. No.
397.
As a native of the North Seas, this shell was well known to Linnaeus, by whom
it was most accurately and minutely described in his Fauna Suecica Buccinum
glaciale; testa cra^^a magnitudine extimi articuli pollices, pallida, secundum
anfractus obsolete striata, acuminata superne conica. Anfractus infimus sen
maximus subcarinatus est, sed haec carina in reliquis superioribus anfractibus
evanescit, cum sutura anfractuum cradat, quae attenuata. Basis gibba
emarginafa. Apertura ovata. Labium exterius crassum patulum, striis
incumbentibus. Linn. Fn. Suec.
but we have no other authority for believing it to be an inhabitant of our own
seas, than that of Mr. Agneu, gardener to the late duchess of Portland, by
whom it was discovered among the Orkney Islands, and, in consequence, admitted
into the collection of British shells in the Portland Museum.

One of the most striking characters of this shell, is a single carinated ridge
that surrounds the first or largest wreath of the shell, and does not
afterward appear on either of the rest. This it may be proper to notice, since
the circumstance has been strictly mentioned both by Linnaeus, Fabricius, (
Faun. Groen.) and Chemitz, but it is not certainly a constant criterion of the
species: there was a variety of this kind in the collection of the late Dr.
Fordyce, at present in that of the Earl of Tankerville, in which the carinated
ridge distinctly traverses the whole shell in a spiral course, from the first
wreath nearly to the apex. -- The latter was from Newfoundland.


PLATE CLV.
FIG. I. I. TROCHUS CONICUS. CONIC TROCHUS, OR TOP SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal a Slug. Shell conic: aperture nearly triangular.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell conic, smooth, whitish, obliquely
lineated with brown; whorls flattish, and finely striated.

TROCHUS CONICUS: testa conica laevi, albida oblique fusco lineata: anfractibus
planiusculis subtiliter striatis.
A small shell bearing some affinity with Trochus Conulus, from which it is
notwithstanding perfectly distinct; as a British shell we believe it is
altogether new; nor does it seem to be described by any foreign author. Four of
these shells were picked up on the sea coast of Devonshire by J. Laskey, Esquire.
from whom we received the specimens represented in our Plate. It has been since
communicated also from the Mediterranean sea.

FIG. II. II TROCHUS CINEREUS. ASHEN TOP SHELL.
SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell pyramidal, umbilical, cinereous; marked with narrow
blackish lines.

TROCHUS CINEREUS: pyramidalis umbilicatus, cinereus, lineis angustis
nigrescentibus notatus. Da Costa. Brit. Conch. p. 42. sp. 23. tab. 3. fig. 9.
10. Trechus pyram, pravus, ex viridi sive subcaeruleo variegatus, insigniter
umbilicatus. List. H. Conch. tab. 623. fig. 21.
This shell is described and figured by Da Costa from the specimen at present
in our possession; the only inducement we have for inserting it, for though
this writer observes that it is a common shell on several of our coasts, we
must acknowledge it has never occurred to us as a British shell. Exotic
specimens we have, but these are said to have been brought from the South Seas.
Da Costa, we have a strong suspicion was mistaken concerning this shell; his
reference to Lister is correct; the rest of his synonyms, namely, those of
Dale, Wallis, etc. are erroneous, since those writers meant a very different
shell. The following is the minute description Da Costa gives of this kind:

"The shell is thick and strong, of the size of a cherry; shape obtusely
pyramidal, or not quite tapering to a point.

"The base is very concave, with some circular furrows; the mouth roundish and
capacious, within fine mother-of-pearl; the outer lip smooth and even; the
inner of pillar lip has two jags or slight teeth, and two furrows crossing it
transversely; from hence it widens, runs oblique, and forms a spacious cavity,
at the bottom of which lies the umbilicus, deep, cylindric, and so hollow as to
admit the head of a large pin. All this part is of a dark ash, greatly
variegated with blackish lines, or streaks, which run lengthways and across;
but the beginning of the umbilicus is generally pearly, and of a fine light
greenish color.

"The body and turban have five bellied, or swelled wreaths, or whorls,
separated by a very depressed line; they are circularly striated, but faintly,
and the colors are exactly the same as at the base."


PLATE CLVI. MUREX ANGULATUS. ANGULATED MUREX.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax. Shell spiral, rough: aperture ending in a
straight, and somewhat produced gutter or canaliculation.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell oblong, whorls depressed, angulated, transversely
striated, sulcated longitudinally; aperture toothless.

MUREX ANGULATUS: testa oblonga: anfractibus depressis angulatis transversim
striatis longitudinaliter sulcatis, apertura edentula.
A near shell of interesting figure, that has been found, though rarely, on the
English coasts. The specimens figured in our Plate were discovered on the sands
at Brighton by Mr. Munn, who kindly communicated them to us. We have received
it since from the coast of Weymouth.

This is doubtless an undescribed species.


PLATE CLVII.
FIG. I. I. HELIX RUFESCENS. REDDISH SNAIL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax. Shell univalve, spiral, diaphanous, fragile.
Aperture semilunar, or roundish.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell umbilicated, and streaked with pale
reddish.

HELIX RUFESCENS: testa umbilicata, et striata dilute rufescens. Cochlea
umbilicata, et striata dilute rufescens. RUFESCENS Da Costa. Brit. conch. p.
80. sp. 43. Cochlea dilute rufescens, aut subalbida, sinu ad umbilicum exiguo,
circinata. List. H. An. Angl. p. 125. tit. 12. tab. 2. fig. 12. Cochlea
terrestris depressa and umbilicata mellei coloris, labio candido repando, sinu
ad umbilicum exiguo circinato. Gualt. 1. Conch. tab. 3. fig. N
This kind may be readily distinguished by a slight carene, or ridge that
surrounds the first or largest wreath of the shell. The color, as the name
implies, is reddish when the animal is alive; when dead, whitish and
discolored: the carene is usually of a lighter color than the rest of the
shell.

Da Costa speaks of it as being not very common; observing at the same time
that he had received it from Cornwall and Hampshire. It is pretty frequent, he
adds, about Leeswood in Flintshire, between the bark and wood of trees thrown
down, and decayed, especially alders. Dr. Lister found it in plenty about
Tadcaster, in the woods and hedges of marshy and shady meadows, and in like
places throughout Craven, in Yorkshire: he observes there is a variety, (if not
a different species,) in Kent, somewhat larger, lighter colored, and with a
smaller umbilicus. Mr. Morton found it at Morsley, and the other,
Northamptonshire woods. To this we should add, that from our own observation,
the species appears to be more frequent in many parts of the country than our
author imagined. It delights chiefly in marshy places. Occasionally we have
found it on aquatic plants in Battersea meadows.

FIG. II. HELIX PALLIDA. PALE SNAIL.
SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell inflated, slightly umbilicated, fragile, pale:
whorls six, unequal; aperture semilunar.

HELIX PALLIDA: testa inflata subumbilicata fragili pallida: anfractibus sex
convexis, apertura semilunari.
Rather a local species, found in some parts of Kent: we have also seen it on
the great roman wall of Cacrwent, Monmouthshire.


PLATE CLVIII. FIG. I. II. ARCA NOAE. NOAH'S ARK SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Shell bivalve, valves equal: teeth at the hinge numerous,
acute, and inserted between each other.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell oblong, striated, at the apex emarginated: beaks
very remote: margin gaping.

ARCA NOAE: testa oblonga striata apice emarginata, natibus remotissimis,
margin hiante. Linn. Gmel. Syst. Not. T. 1. p. 6. p. 3306. sp. 2. Musculus
Matthioli. List. t. 368. Concha rhomboides, Rondel. 99.2. p. 27. Bonanu. recr.
2. f. 32.
Miss Pocock, whose liberal communication of British shells collected by
herself, we have had such frequent occasion to mention in the progress of this
publication, has obliged us with a small specimen of the Arca Noae found on the
shores of Cornwall; the smallest shell figured in the upper part of our Plate.

It has been presumed before that this shell was a native of our coasts: that
Borlase had met with it; and that the Arca tortuosa No. 57, Penn. Brit. Zool.
of Pennant, (which he says inhabits Cornwall, and has been found near
Weymouth,) was no other than the Arca Noae of Linnaeus. But this still remained
a matter of much uncertainty among Conchologists, and with ourselves, till we
received the specimen from the lady abovementioned, which proves beyond dispute
that it is a British shell, and perfectly similar to those of the same species
found in the Mediterranean sea. This being a young shell, is not of course
covered with the rude brown epidermis, as in the old or full grown
Mediterranean shell, figured with it, in order to elucidate the species with
more precision. Since the publication of the Plate we have also had the
satisfaction of receiving another specimen of the shell nearly thrice the size
of the small one figured, in a parcel of shells collected on Slapton sands,
Devonshire, last summer.

At the same time that Miss Pocock discovered this small specimen of Arca Noae,
several worn valves of an Arca, confessedly of a different kind, occurred
likewise. Both the internal and external view of these are represented in the
lower part of the plate, fig. 3, together with that of the perfect specimen of
a foreign shell, fig. 4, which may prove hereafter to be of the same species.
The mutilated valves we have little hesitation in believing it to be precisely
those of the shell figured by Lister, t. 367. n. 207. Balanus Bellonij tenuiter
striata; though from their imperfect condition it might be improper to offer
any positive opinion concerning them. At a future period we may be enabled, by
receiving better specimens, to ascertain this point, and as it may then appear,
our conjectures were not unfounded. We should further add, that this species,
though observed by Lister, has been overlooked by Linnaeus; and that from a MS.
note in one of the copies of Lister's work, in the library of Sir Joseph Banks,
we find the late Dr. Solander intended to have named it specifically fusca, had
he lived to publish his new arrangement of Conchology.


PLATE CLIX. TURBO RETICULATUS. RETICULATED TURBO.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax. Univalve, spiral, or of a taper form.
Aperture somewhat compressed, orbicular, entire.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell tapering, reticulated with granules, testaceous,
whorl reversed; aperture straitened.

TURBO RETICULATES; testa turrita reticulata granulata testacea, anfractibus
coarctata.
This is a remarkably neat, or rather elegant shell, and equally distinguished
for its rarity. It was found in the sands on the coast of Cornwall, by Miss
Pocock, to whose polite attention we are exclusively indebted for the specimen
now figured.

That this small species of Turbo is undescribed either as a British or a
foreign shell, we have little reason to dispute, unless the following,
described by Mr. Walker, should prove to be the same: "Turbo, Turritus
perversus novem anfractibus punctatis apertura coarctata; the reversed taper
Turbo of nine dotted whorls and straitened aperture. A shell found at
Sandwich." -- The description does not strictly correspond with our shell, the
figure is yet more remote. Some degree of ambiguity arises from this particular
circumstance; in our shell the wreaths are uniformly lineated spirally, with
three prominent rows of tubercles, or more correctly speaking, granulations,
except on the first wreath, where they are more numerous, and the intermediate
series on every wreath, consists of smaller granulations than those on either
side of it. The term punctatis, on the contrary, which Mr. Walker has adopted,
must rather imply a dot depressed: in the engraving also, by which his
description is elucidated, the dots appear to be disposed in three distinct
series upon each wreath, as the granulations are in the shell before us, but
each dot is apparently depressed, and situated in the center of a quadrangular
compartment: at the same time also it must be remarked, that the intermediate
series of these dots on every wreath, are of an equal magnitude with the
others. The aperture, whatever might be the shell designed, is miserably
expressed, as are indeed the figures both of the natural size, and magnified.
We suspect upon the whole, they are intended for our shell, and were it not for
the objections stated, should insert a reference to his figure, plate 3. No.
48. as a synonym.


PLATE CLX. LEPAS BOREALIS. NORTHERN ACORN SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Triton. Shell affixed at the base; multivalve; the
valves unequal.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell erect, subconic, aperture quadrangular, operculum or
lid acute, and striated transversely.

LEPAS BOREALIS; testa erecta subconica, apertura quadrangulari operculis
acutis transversim striatis.
A few small clusters, with some single specimens of this curious species of
Lepas, were discovered about three years since, attached to the bottom of the
Warspight ship of war, when taken into dock to be repaired, after lying in the
harbor of Portsmouth for a great length of time. Mr. James Hay, of Portsmouth,
has since found two or three shells of the same kind, by dredging in Portsmouth
harbor; so that though probably not indigenous, it has now become a
naturalised species.

This was first communicated by J. Laskey, Esquire. We have since received it from
Newfoundland, affixed to the valve of a northern ostrea; and learning that it
is undoubtedly a native of the north seas, we venture to assign it the specific
name of borealis, -- The clusters of these shells, when pressed together,
(which rarely happens) take an elongated form, as is expressed in the upper
figure. -- We are certainly to consider this as a rare species.


PLATE CLXI. MACTRA RADIATA. RADIATED MACTRA.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal a Tethys. Shell bivalve, sides unequal. Middle tooth
complicated, with a little groove on each side; lateral tooth remote.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell thin, fragile, somewhat triangular,
compressed, whitish, and finely striated with testaceous rays.

MACTRA RADIATA: testa tenui fragili subtriangulari compressa albida
subtilissime striata testaceo radiata.
Several valves of this shell were found upon Langston beach, near Portsmouth,
after a severe storm that happened in the year 1800, by J. Laskey, Esquire. of
Crediton; from whom we received the specimens figured in the annexed plate.

This is a thin, brittle shell, of a large size; color sordid white, tinged
with reddish, and faintly marked with rays of a testaceous color, beneath a
brown filmy epidermis.


PLATE CLXII. DENTALIUM OCTANGULATUM. EIGHT-RIDGED TOOTH-SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal a Terebella. Shell univalve, tubular, straight or
slightly curved, with an undivided cavity open at both ends.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell white, somewhat curved, with eight ribs
or angles, and three intermediate striae.

DENTALIUM OCTANGULATUM: testa alba subarcuata octangulata: interstitius
tri-striatis. DENTALIUM STRIATULUM: Gmel. Syst. Not. 3738. sp. 13?
For the discovery of this elegantly striated tooth-shell, as a native of the
British coasts, we have once again to acknowledge our obligation to a lady,
mentioned on other similar occasions in the progress of this work, Miss Pocock;
several shells of this kind were found by her on the sandy coasts of Cornwall,
near Lelant, in the year 1802.

It remains to express some little doubt, whether every circumstance will allow
us to consider this as an hitherto undescribed species; as a British shell we
can have no hesitation in saying it has not been mentioned by any author. We
were rather inclined at first to think our shell could be no other than a
variety of the Dentalium striatulum of Gmelin, which is described as a native
of the Mediterranean and Sicilian seas. The synonyms given by Gmelin to that
species, we found however to be less expressive of our shell than his
description; Lister's shell, to which he refers, t. 547. f. 1. b. is much
larger than our shell, as is likewise that of Martini, quoted with it; both are
described to be of a fine green color, with the tip only white, but it has
uniformly eight distinct ribs or angles, as in our shell, which is a much more
important characteristic of a species, than the mere difference of color. --
There is another shell, figured by Martini, pl. 1. f. 4. B. that seems to
approach much nearer to our shell, and the color is white, but as in D.
elephantium, this has ten ribs instead of eight; it is the Dentalium aprinum of
Gmelin, -- As our shell, upon the whole, does not strictly accord with those
species noticed, nor any others which we are acquainted with, a new name and
character will tend at least to obviate confusion. Of Dentalium striatulum it
may prove to be a variety, but that is doubtful; and there is scarcely any
reason to dispute its being undescribed, unless it be of that species.


PATE CLXIII. TELLINA DEPRESSA. DEPRESSED TELLEN.
GENERIC CHARACTER. The hinge usually furnished with three teeth. Shell
generally sloping on one side.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell inaequilateral, depressed, and very
minutely striated.

TELLINA DEPRESSA: testa inaequilatera depressa minutissime striata. Gmel.
Linn. Syst. p. 3238. sp. 55. Gualt. test. t. 88. f. L. Tellina Squalida. Soland
Mus. Port. -- Pult. Cat. Dors. p. 29.
In the summer of the year 1800, we first discovered this shell, laying in
plenty upon the sands on the south east side of Tenby, Pembrokeshire; where
they had been apparently thrown up by a violent sea that had raged with
considerable fury two or three hours before. This shell we conceived to be an
undescribed British shell, but have since found that it had been observed on
the north shore of Poole, at Weymouth, sparingly, by Dr. Pultney, and described
by him in Hutchin's History of Dorsetshire, under the specific name of
Squalida. This conchologist admit it to be Tellina squalida of Solander, Mus.
Port. and Tellina depressa of Gmelin.

The only synonym given by Gmelin for his T. depressa, (whose habitat he is
even unacquainted with,) is a reference to Gualtieri, f. H. I. L. The two first
are small, and perhaps not of the same species, those represented at letter L
and M, we believe to be the true shell of which we offer a figure as the
Tellina depressa of Gmelin; Gualtieri thus describes his shell: "Tellina
inaequilatera satis depressa, minutissime striata, vel candida, vel
purpurascens, vel subrosea."

The figures in the annexed plate represent the natural size of our largest
specimens: the colors are variable, more or less, of a fine pale orange,
yellow, and tinged with rosy. It is certainly rare.


PLATE CLXIV. LEPAS DILATA. DILATED LEPAS.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Triton. Shell affixed at the base: multivalve; the
valves unequal.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell compressed, five valved, thin, dorsal
valve dilated at the base with an acute angle; and seated on a peduncle.

LEPAS DILATA: testa compressa quinquevalvi tenui, valvula dorsali basi dilata
angulo acuto, pedunculo insidente. LEPAS FASCICULARIS: testa quinquevalvi laevi
corpus tegente, valvula dorsali basi dilata angulo acuto prominente, stipite
nudo. Ellis. Zooph. pl. 15. f. 6. p. 167. LEPAS SIGILLATUM, Mus. Portl?
The first, and only account we have of this kind of Lepas, is that given by
the late Mr. Ellis in his Natural History of Zoophytes. In addition to the
character he assigns to this shell, quoted as a synonym, this writer acquaints
us only that it is "from St. George's Channel." We have never met with it
either on the coast of that channel, or any other, nor have we received it from
any of our friends, at the same time that we have no reason to distrust the
information of that author, and only infer from the attention we have by chance
bestowed particularly to the marine productions of that sea, that it must be
rare.

A specimen of this shell, one which we are inclined to think, on pretty good
authority, to be the same, or one of them at least, that was sent by the late
Mr. Ellis to the Duchess of Portland, is at this time in our Cabinet; the late
Dr. Fordyce became first possessed of this specimen, and at his death we
obtained it, under the title of Lepas sigillatum of Solander. Unlike Lepas
anatifera, or anserifera, the valves of this shell are uncommonly thin,
brittle, in a certain degree corneous, with the largest lateral valves rather
crumpled in the usual course of the striae, and marked transversely with
obsolete rays: the shell is likewise covered with a fine pale brown skin, or
epidermis: is larger than anatifera, and has a singular acute prominent
dilation at the base of the back valve.


PLATE CLXV. VOLUTA LAEVIS. SMOOTH VOLUTE.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal a Limax. Shell with one cell, spiral; aperture
without a tail or beak, and somewhat effuse. Columella plaited; generally
without lips or umbilicus.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell rather ovate, very smooth; spire obtuse; two plaits
on the pillar lip; lip gibbous, and slightly denticulated.

VOLUTA LAEVIS: testa obovata laevissima, spira obtusa, columella biplicata,
labro gibbo subdenticulato. VOLUTA EDENTULA. Mus. Portl.
As a British species, this extremely rare little shell was first noticed on
the coast of Weymouth, being dredged up in deep water by some fishermen, and
consigned to the cabinet of the late Duchess of Portland. The specimens we
have figured, are two of those originally in the possession of her Grace.

Dr. Solander, who, it is well known to the scientific conchologist, intended
to have published a catalogue of that Museum, it appears, on a reference to his
posthumous papers, called this species edentula; a name which, without
detracting from the merit of that able naturalist, it must be allowed is by no
means applicable. So far from its being destitute of teeth, the series of
denticulations are sufficiently visible on the columella; those on the lip are
yet more prominent, and can by no means justify the appellation of edentula.

Voluta Laevis, for such we have presumed to name this shell, is remarkably
glossy, free in a perfect degree from any kind of striae, whitish, and most
delicately tinged with pale blushes of red, and yellowish or straw color. --
It has much the habit of a cypraea, and might without any impropriety be
arranged under that genus.


PLATE CLXVI.
FIG. I. LEPAS SCALPELLUM.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Triton. Shell affixed at the base, multivalve; the
valves unequal.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell compressed. Valves thirteen, smooth,
and seated on a scaly peduncle.

LEPAS SCALPELLUM: testa compressa tredecim valvi laeviuscula pedunculo
squamosa insidente. Linn. Fn. Suec. 2121. -- Gmel. Syst. Not. 3210. Sp. 11.
Ellis Phil. Trans. 1758. t. 34. f. 4. page 849.
Lepas Scalpellum, a very rare and curious species, has been found attached to
some sea weeds, dredged up on the coast of Weymouth; a specimen of it affixed
to the branches of a coralline that was discovered here, after passing through
the collections of the late Duchess of Portland, and Dr. Fordyce, is at
present in our possession.

There are several interesting remarks upon this singular genus in a paper
written by the late Mr. John Ellis; which is inserted in the transactions of
the Royal Society, for the year 1758: the letter is addressed to Mr. Isaac
Romilly, a member of the society, and contains in particular, the following
observation upon Lepas Scalpellum. "Fig. 2," he says, referring to his
illustrative plate, "is the next animal of this class: this is not yet
described. I found several of them sticking to the warted Norway Sea Fan, which
Dr. Pantoppidan, the Bishop of North Bergen, sent you: from its appearance, I
have called it the Norway Sea Fan Penknife. The stem of this is covered with
little testaceous scales. The upper part of the animal is enclosed in thirteen
distinct shells, six on each side, besides the hinge-shell, which is common to
both sides: these are connected together by a membrane that lines the whole
inside.

Gmelin speaks of it as a native of the Norway seas.

FIG. II. LEPAS ANSERIFERA.
SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell compressed, quinquevalve, striated, and
seated on a peduncle.

LEPAS ANSERIFERA: testa compressa quinquevalvi, striata, pedunculo insidente.
Gmel. Linn. Syst. p. 3210. Sp. 12.
Chiefly distinguished from Lepas Anatifera, described at the commencement of
this work, by having the valves striated with elevated lines; the valves in the
former being perfectly smooth. Lepas anatifera has been heretofore considered
as a native of the American and Atlantic seas; but that it has been likewise
found upon the English coast, there is no reason to dispute, the shell with the
living animal has been dredged up at Weymouth; as well as the preceding
species. We have the valves of this shell likewise in the collection of Da
Costa, as an English species.


PLATE CLXVII. NERITA INTRICATA. INTRICATE-LINED NERIT.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax. Shell univalve, spiral, gibbous, flattish
beneath: aperture semiorbicular, or semilunar; pillar lip, transversely
truncated, and flattish.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell smooth: spire somewhat pointed: umbilicus large,
nearly heart shaped, with a small carinated lobe.

NERITA INTRICATA: testa laevi: spira submucronata, umbilico magno subcordato;
lobo parvo carinato. NERITA CANRENA var?
That this shell is not the young of Nerita Glaucina, as some have suspected,
is evident from the depth and structure of the umbilicus, which in the former
is almost completely closed by the pillar lip. It is rather allied to Nerita
Canrena, which has a gibbous bifid umbilicus; and may possibly indeed prove to
be nothing more than a variety of that shell. The varieties of N. Canrena,
enumerated by Gmelin, amount to twenty-five, neither of which accords exactly
with our shell, and that writer describes them only as natives of India,
Africa, and America, but it is not unlikely it may be also an European shell.

Our specimens are from Weymouth.


PLATE CLXVIII.
FIG. I. HELIX PUTRIS. MUD SNAIL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Aperture of the mouth contracted and lunulated.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell imperforate, obtuse, ovate, yellow:
aperture ovate.

HELIX PUTRIS: testa imperforata, ovata obtusa flava: apertura, ovata. Linn.
Fn. Suec. 2189. Gualt. t. 5. f. H. Chem. Conch. 9. t. 135. f. 1248. List.
Conch. t. 123. f. 23? Helix (succinea) testa oblonga fulva diaphana,
anfractibus tribus, apertura ovata. Mull. Zool. dan. prodr. 2912. Turbo
subflavus pellucidus imperforata, testa praetenui fragili, trium spirarum.
TRIANFRACTUS, THREE SPIRED. Da Costa, p. 92. sp. 51. Pl. 5. fig. 13.
The two Linnean species of fresh water helices, putris, and limosa are so
closely allied, that authors have, not unfrequently, confounded one with the
other. Dr. Pultney considers our shell with some doubt, as the Helix limosa of
Linnaeus, in which particular we think, he must be mistaken. The figure given
by Gualtieri is the only one referred to by Linnaeus, in the Systema Naturae,
for Putris, and that is most exactly the same as our shell, although the design
is taken from a minute specimen. Pennant's Helix Putris, t. 86. f. 137. is
apparently the H. limosa. Both the species in question are well figured by
Chemnitz, on the same plate.

This shell is very common in ditches, ponds, and other watery places, and
especially in those overgrown with weeds.

FIG. II. HELIX BULLAOIDES.
SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell ovate, smooth, glossy, horny, brittle, whorls
reversed, spire short.

HELIX BULLAOIDES: testa ovata laevi nitida cornea fragili, anfractibus
contrariis, spira brevi.
Received from Lincolnshire by the late Duchess of Portland, from whose
collection the specimen at this time in our possession was obtained.


PLATE CLXIX.
FIG. I. MUREX BAMFFIUS. BAMFF WHITE MUREX.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Spiral, rough. The aperture ending in a strait, and
somewhat produced gutter, or canaliculation.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell ventricose, white, ribbed longitudinally, with acute
plaits.

MUREX BAMFFIUS: testa ventricosa alba costis longitudinalibus acutis plicatis.
A nondescript species, discovered by Mr. Cordiner, on the coast of Bamffshire,
Scotland; and communicated by him to the late Duchess of Portland. The smallest
figure is only of the young shell, we have it of the exact size of the largest
figure, numbered 1, in the annexed plate. Uncommonly rare.

FIG. II. MUREX EMARGINATUS. NOTCHED-LIP PALE MUREX.
SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell somewhat elongated, pale, with a white band: wreaths
striated, with longitudinal undulations: on the posterior part of the lip a
single notch.

MUREX EMARGINATUS: testa sub-elongata pallida fusca alba: anfractibus striatis
longitudinaliter undulatis labio postice emarginato.
The notch in the posterior part of the lip of this shell is singular. By this
mark the species may be immediately distinguished in a collection of British
Shells, being perhaps the only one of the kind found on our coast. This notch,
it should however be added, is to be considered rather as the distinctive
feature of a natural family of shells, than as the character of the individual
species now before us, the very same appearance being observable on several of
the extra-european shells of the Murex Genus.

Our specimens of this scarce, and, as we believe, undescribed species, were
found on the western coast.


PLATE CLXX. VENUS FASCIATA. FASCIATED VENUS SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER.
Hinge furnished, with three teeth, two near each other the third divergent
from the beaks.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell somewhat heart-shaped, white, fasciated
with brown: ridges large, broad, depressed, of regular thickness at both
extremities.

VENUS FASCIATA: testa subcordata alba fusco-fasciata sulcis crassis latis
depressis regularibus continuis. Pectunculus parvus, planior, crassus dense
fasciatus. Fasciated: Da Costa, p. 188. sp. 25. Tab. 13. fig. 3.
This elegant shell occurs very rarely on the coasts of this country; we have
observed it sparingly distributed on the sands near Tenby, in Pembrokeshire. Da
Costa says, he was informed that it is found near Bangor, among the rocks from
Bangor Ferry to Anglesea, in Wales, by which he could only mean that the
species is an inhabitant of the Menai, the arm of Beaumaris bay, communicating
with the St. George's channel which divides Caernarvonshire from the island of
Anglesea. The same writer notes it likewise from Cornwall. Dr. Pultney
describes it as a scarce shell, which he had found at Weymouth.

Having Da Costa's specimens of this shell, and also that of his Pectunculus
Vetula before us, we should not refrain from observing, that the opinion of Dr.
Pultney respecting these shells is incorrect; they are not merely transitions
in growth, or varieties of the same kind, the difference between the two is
obvious, and fully authorize us to consider them as distinct species. It should
be understood in advancing this remark, that the shell which Da Costa figures
and describes, for Pectunculus Vetula is clearly the Linnaean Venus Paphia, a
shell well known as a native of the West Indies, and never found to our
knowledge in any of the European seas. Da Costa was aware, after his work had
been published, that he had erroneously confounded the variety of Fasciatus,
Fig. 1, 1, in our Plate, with the West Indian shell; he had conceived the
latter to be the same shell in a more perfect condition, and caused it to be
engraved accordingly.

Dr. Pultney, in the passage wherein these shells of Da Costa are noticed (in
his catalogue of the shells found on the coast of Dorsetshire,) describes the
Pectunculus Fasciatus as nothing more than a variety of Venus Paphia ( Linn.)
in which respect he is assuredly mistaken. One of the most striking characters,
by means of which the two species are to be discriminated, in our opinion, may
be observed in the structure of the concentric ridges on the outside of the
shell: these in the true Linnaean Paphia are remarkably thick, and prominent in
the middle, but in approaching each extremity become suddenly obtuse, and are
then continued in an attenuated ridge, particularly as they extend toward the
front of the shell, and thus exactly corresponding with the definition of
Linnaeus, "rugis incrassatis, pube rugis attenuatis." On the contrary, in our
shell the ridges are nearly of an uniform thickness throughout, sloping
gradually with the depression of the shell behind, and only terminating
abruptly at the edge of the front, or fore part of the shell where the valves
appear obtuse: the outline of the shell is also very different from Venus
Paphia, the latter being more produced on each side than our Venus Fasciata.


PLATE CLXXI. PATELLA MILITARIS. HOOKED LIMPET.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal a Limax: shell univalve, sub-conic without spire.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell entire, conic, pointed, striated, with the tip
hooked, or recurved on one side.

PATELLA MILITARIS: testa integra conica acuminata striata, vertice hamoso
lateraliter recurvo. Linn. Mant. 552. List. Conch. 544. Pult. Cat. p. 51.
When Linnaeus described this shell in the Appendix to his Mantissa Plantarum,
its native country was unknown to him. It is a Mediterranean species, and is
sometimes, though rarely, met with on the British coast. We have it from
Cornwall through the favor of Miss Pocock, and lately from Devonshire. Dr.
Pultney acquaints us, that Mr. Bryer found this species on the sands near
Weymouth Castle, Dorsetshire.

Gmelin, in his edition of the Systema Naturae, neglects to insert this
species, for what reason we are at a loss to conceive. The specimens we possess
of this rare shell, from the warmer parts of Europe, are larger than those
found on our coast. In different specimens we observe that the striae are
liable to vary both in form and number, some shells appearing much more
strongly reticulated than others.


PLATE CLXXII. TURBO SUBULATUS. SUBULATE WREATH SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax. Shell univalve, spiral, or of a taper form.
Aperture somewhat compressed, orbicular, entire.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell subulate, tapering, pale flesh-colors,
glossy, fasciated with testaceous-brown. Aperture oval.

TURBO SUBULATUS: testa subulato-turrita pallide-carnea nitida testaceo
fasciata, apertura ovali. STROMBIFORMIS parvus corneus glaber. Smooth. Da
Costa, Brit. conch. p. 117. sp. 69. Turbo laevis. Smooth. Penn. Brit. Zool. No.
115. tab. 79. upper figure?
Our best specimens of this rare shell were dredged up on the coast of
Weymouth. Da Costa received it from Exmouth, in Devonshire; he also adds, that
three were found in the stomach of a Five Finger, or common Stella Marina. The
Turbo laevis of Pennant is from the coast of Anglesea, but it is altogether
uncertain whether he means this species or not. -- It is an elegant shell, of a
taper form, thin, and semitransparent; when very perfect, of a pale
flesh-colors, spirally wreathed with whitish lines, and others of an ochreous
or brownish hue; the stripes are not uniformly disposed alike in all specimens.
Da Costa thinks the species may be well distinguished by the spiral white lines.

The smallest figures in the plate denote the natural size of this shell.


PLATE CLXXIII. TURBO MAMMILLATUS. MAMMILLATED TURBO.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax: shell univalve, spiral, or of a taper form.
Aperture somewhat compressed, orbicular, entire.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell imperforate, subovate, whorls striated with raised
dots, and slightly angulated by a few of the striae, the dots of which are
larger.

TURBO MAMMILLATUS: testa imperforata subovata anfractibus, striatis punctis
eminentibus striis aliquot majoribus subangulatus.
This remarkable shell is introduced among the British species of the Turbo
genus, only on the authority of a posthumous memorandum in the hand writing of
Da Costa, which we find in the collection of that Conchologist affixed to one
of the specimens figured in the annexed Plate. From this it appears the shell
had teen picked up by Mr. Platt on the Scilly rocks, at the western extremity
of Cornwall, and communicated by him to Da Costa.


PLATE CLXXIV. MYA PICTORUM. PAINTER'S MUSCLE.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Ascidia. Shell bivalve, gaping at one end. The hinge
for the most part furnished with a thick, strong, broad tooth, not inserted
into the opposite valve.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell oblong, rounded at both ends; a single
crenulated tooth in one valve, and two in the other.

MYA PICTORUM: testa oblonga antice posticeque rotundata, cardinis dente
primario crenulato, alterius duplicato. MYA PICTORUM. Linn. Fn. Suec. 2129. Mya
pictorum, Moule des Peintres. Chemn. Conch. 6. t. 1. f. 6. Belg. verf houder.
-- Dan. Maler miegen, -- Maler Skiael, ibid.
Two, or perhaps no less than three different kinds of the fresh water Myae
have been confounded with the M. pictorum of Linnaeus, as it has been already
intimated in the description of the Mya Ovalis, Plate 89, of this work, a shell
considered by Da Costa as the true M. pictorum. The present species, which we
have little hesitation in believing to be the shell Linnaeus means, is more of
an oblong form than M. ovalis, rounded at both extremities, thin,
semitransparent, and of a pale color, beneath the epidermis, which is of a
faint green, or brownish hue; within the shell is pearly.

The only synonyms we can venture to adopt with certainty, are those above
quoted. There can be no doubt that the figure given by Chemnitz for the M.
pictorum of the continental writers, is the same as that now before us, but the
extensive list of references to other works, added by that writer, we are
induced to reject as being at least in many respects ambiguous. Our specimens
of this shell were obtained from Mr. George Humphrey, who assures us, that
although he never had met with it himself alive in this country, he was told
some years ago by the late -- Seymour, Esquire. that this very species had been
fished up in the river Stour.


PLATE CLXXV.
FIG. I. HELIX FRAGILIS. BRITTLE RIVER SNAIL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Aperture of the mouth contracted, and lunulated.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell imperforate, ovate, tapering, round,
pellucid: aperture oblong-ovate.

HELIX FRAGILIS: testa imperforata ovato-subulata tereti pellucida: apertura
ovata-oblonga. Linn. Faun. Suec. 2187. -- Gmel. Linn. Syst. Not. 3658. Sp. 129.
Penn. Pl. 86. Brown River Snail. Pult. Cat. p. 48.
Helix fragilis is distinguished from Helix stagnalis, and one or two other
very analogous species of river snail by a number of slight ridges which
spirally traverse the whole shell, and are in particular obvious on the first
wreath. The shell is likewise more uniformly elongated than H. stagnalis, the
first wreath being less swollen, or ventricose, and the remainder more so, than
in that shell. -- Helix fragilis we have found on plants growing in rivulets
about Greenwich. Dr. Pultney says, it is common on plants in the river Stour.

FIG. II. HELIX FONTINALIS. SMOOTH FRESH WATER SNAIL.
SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell imperforate, ovate, and pointed, glabrous, horny;
volutions five, the first and second ventricose.

HELIX FONTINALIS: testa imperforata ovato-acuminata glabra cornea anfractibus
quinque, primo secundoque ventricosis.
Common in some of the rivulets in Devonshire. Communicated by J. Laskey, Esquire.

Fig. 2, are those of the common sort; a reversed variety of the same species
is distinguished by a star.


PLATE CLXXVI. MYA PRAETENUIS. THIN WHITE SPOONHINGE GAPER.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Ascidia. Shell bivalve, gaping at one end. The hinge
for the most part furnished with a thick, strong, and broad tooth, not inserted
into the opposite valve.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell ovate, subpellucid, fragile, white;
tooth in both valves at the hinge oval, and patulous. MYA PRAETENUIS: testa
ovata subpellucida fragili alba, cardinis dente ovali patulo. MYA PRAETENUIS:
testa ovata subpellucida fragili alba subumbonali pubescente, cardinis dente
ovali patulo. Pult. Cat. p. 28. CHAMA praetenuis cardine cochleato porrectiore.
Petiv. Gaz. t. 94.4.


This delicate shell was first observed by us on the sandy coast of
Caermarthenshire. We have since received the same kind from the shores of
Cornwall, where it was found by Miss Pocock. Petiver describes his shell as
being found at Poole, in Dorsetshire: where Dr. Pultney also met with it on the
sands in the harbor; likewise on the north shore near Brownsea Isle, and once
with a few valves on the shore between Weymouth and Portland.

Mya praetenuis, as the specific name implies, is a remarkably thin shell, very
brittle, of a whitish color, and distinguished by having an oval process or
tooth resembling the bowl of a spoon in each valve at the hinge.


PLATE CLXXVII. TURBO ALBUS. WHITE WREATH SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax. Shell univalve, spiral, or of a taper form.
Aperture somewhat compressed, orbicular, entire.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell tapering, glossy, and white.

TURBO ALBUS: testa turrita nitida alba. Strombiformis parvus albissimus
laevis, white. Da Costa Brit. Conch. p. 116. Sp. 68. Turbo minimus laevis
albus. Milk white smooth whelke. Borlase Cornw. p. 277. Turbo albus. Penn.
Brit. Zool. No 114, tab. 79?
We have never met with this shell on any of the British sea coasts, although
we are told it is found not very unfrequently on several of those to which our
researches have been directed. Da Costa says, the species is found on the
shores of Cornwall, about Fowey, Whitsand Bay, the Land's End, etc. and also in
Devonshire. Pennant's Turbo Albus is from Anglesea.


PLATE CLXXVIII.
FIG. I. TURBO VITTATUS. RIBBON-WREATH SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax. Shell univalve, spiral, or of a taper form.
Aperture somewhat compressed, orbicular, entire.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell smooth, taper, whitish, whorls
subobsolete; on the first, three chestnut bands, one on the rest

TURBO VITTATUS: testa turrita albida anfractibus subobsoletis, primo faciis
tribus castaneis reliquis unica.
This, and the following species of Turbo, we discovered in the Menai, between
Caernarvonshire and the island of Anglesea. Turbo Vittatus, we have likewise
been favored with from Cornwall, by Miss Pocock, and from Devonshire, by J.
Laskey, Esquire. There is some reason for believing this to be the Turbo
Trifasciatus of Adams's description of minute British Shells, discovered on the
coast of Tenby, South Wales, which is inserted in the fifth volume of the
Transactions of the Linnaean Society. The account he gives does not exactly
agree with our Shell; he speaks of only two red bands on the first spire,
instead of three; and the single spiral line arising from the posterior band,
terminates in his Shell after encircling the second volution, whereas, in all
our specimens this line is continued on every wreath to the apex. Should his T.
trifasciatus be intended for our Shell, the outline also is very badly
expressed. -- The smallest figure in the annexed plate shows the natural size
of this shell.

FIG. II. TURBO INTERRUPTUS. INTERRUPTED-STRIPE WREATH SHELL.
SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Shell smooth, taper, whitish, fasciated, with
an interrupted ochreous band.

TURBO INTERRUPTUS: testa laevi turrita albida fascia interrupta ochrea. TURBO
INTERRUPTUS: testa quinque anfractibus subobtusis, apertura subrotunda. Adams.
Linn. Trans. V. 5. sp. 3?
We feel a much slighter degree of hesitation in admitting this to be the Shell
meant by Mr. Adams, in the paper above quoted, than the preceding species;
notwithstanding that our Shell has a greater number of whorls; the outline of
his figure is rude, and far from characteristic of the shell. -- Our specimens
are from Anglesea, as before mentioned. It is represented both of the natural
size and magnified, in the plate.

FIG. III. TURBO COSTATUS. RIBBED WREATH SHELL.
SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell taper, snowy white, with numerous obtuse
longitudinal ribs.

TURBO COSTATUS: testa turrita nivea costis longitudinalibus numerosis obtusis.
Specimens of this elegant shell were found at Margate. The smallest figure
denotes the natural size.

FIG. IV. TURBO PALLIDUS. PALE WREATH SHELL.
SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell somewhat taper, pale; whorls very slightly
bicarinated.

TURBO PALLIDUS: testa subturrita pallida anfractibus obsoletissime
bicarinatus.
Found on the western coast: a Shell of very plain appearance, brownish color,
and rather flattened on the wreath, so as to form two slight spiral ridges or
obtuse angles, especially on the first or largest volution.


PLATE CLXXIX.
FIG. I. TURBO ACUTUS. ACUTE WREATH SHELL.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Animal Limax. Shell univalve, spiral, or of a taper form.
Aperture somewhat compressed, orbicular, entire.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell taper, acute, snowy white, whorls about twelve with
numerous oblique obtuse ribs.

TURBO ACUTUS: testa turrita acuta nivea, anfractibus subduodecim costis
confertis obliquis obtusis.
A mutilated specimen of this curious Shell has been sent to us from the coast
of Cornwall: we believe it has been also found at Weymouth; but our perfect
shell of this species is from Guernsey. -- The smallest figure is of the
natural size.

FIG. II. BUCCINUM BRUNNEUM. LITTLE BROWN WHELK.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Aperture oval, ending in a short canal.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell taper, brown, whorls transversely striated, and
longitudinally undulated. Aperture toothless.

BUCCINUM BRUNNEUM: testa turrita brunnea anfractibus transversim striatis
longitudinaliter undulatis apertura edentula.
Found on the coast of Cornwall: -- A rare, and, as it is presumed, an
undescribed species.

FIG. III. MUREX ELEGANS. ELEGANT MUREX.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Spiral, rough, aperture ending in a strait, and somewhat
produced gutter or canaliculation.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell yellowish, banded with ochreous, tip violet: whorls
longitudinally ribbed, and finely striated transversely.

MUREX ELEGANS: testa ovata flavescente ochreo-fasciata apice violacea
anfractibus longitudinaliter costatis transversim minutissime striatis.
A very beautiful little shell, discovered by Miss Pocock on the coast of
Cornwall.

FIG. IV. MUREX SEPTEM-ANGULATUS. SEVEN-ANGLED.
SPECIFIC CHARACTER. Shell oblong, acute, pale, with seven longitudinal angles.

MUREX SEPTEM-ANGULATUS: testa oblonga acuta pallida longitudinaliter
septem-angulata.
This kind rarely occurs on our coasts. The specimens in our possession are
from Weymouth. It bears a strong affinity to Murex costatus, plate XCIV. of
this work, although it is certainly distinct. Murex costatus is much more
linear in the outline, and has the ribs less prominent and acute than our Murex
septem-angulatus.


PLATE CLXXX. MUREX DESPECTUS. DESPISED MUREX.
GENERIC CHARACTER. Spiral, rough. The aperture ending in a strait, and
somewhat produced gutter, or canaliculation.

SPECIFIC CHARACTER AND SYNONYMS. Tail patulous: shell oblong; whorls eight,
with two elevated lines.

MUREX DESPECTUS: testa patulo-subcaudata oblonga: anfractibus octo lineis
duabus elevatis. Linn. It. Wgoth. 200. tab. 5. f. 8.
The present shell, it must be tacitly acknowledged, is inserted among the
rarer shells of this country on very slight authority; namely, that of a
friend, who believes he once saw a few specimens of this Murex that were fished
up in the sea at a short distance to the north of the Orknies. -- On this
suspicion only we could not have presumed to insert the species in this work,
were it not to avail ourselves of the opportunity afforded by that means to
correct an error very generally admitted concerning the true Murex despectus of
Linnaeus, the shell at this time under consideration.

To the English conchologist it need be scarcely said, that another shell,
somewhat similar to the present, although specifically different, has been
hitherto received as the Murex despectus of Linnaeus by every writer in this
country who has had occasion to speak of that shell. The origin of this
mistake, it will be perceived from the following particulars, rests in a great
measure, if not entirely, with Linnaeus himself. The Murex despectus of this
writer is noticed, for the first time, in the account of his Travels through
part of Sweden: a small octavo volume written in the Swedish language, with
notes, relative to Natural History in Latin. At page 200, he describes this
shell in these words, "cochlea spiris octo oblonga utrinque producta lineis
duabus elevatis," referring to plate 8. fig. 5. of the same work for a
delineation of the shell; the figure quoted in every respect agrees with our
specimen, not only in the general outline, but most exactly in having the
slight carinated ridges that pass spirally round the whorls, a character not
observable on the Murex despectus of English authors. So far therefore we are
convinced that the present shell is the Murex despectus of the Linnaean Iter
Westrogothicum.

The work above mentioned appeared in 1746, the year in which Linnaeus likewise
published the first edition of his Fauna Suecica. In the latter, Murex
despectus is again described with a reference to his Iter W. goth. and in
addition to that synonym, a shell figured by Lister is also quoted for the same
species. This is the source of that very confusion which has since arisen
concerning the Linnaean Despectus, and should be fully stated. -- Lister's
Angl. t. 3. f. 1. is the reference given by Linnaeus Adverting to this we find
the following definition of the shell given by Lister, "Buccinum album laeve
maximum septem spirarum." -- He further adds, in the general description,
"Testae pars exterior ex tota laevis est, i. e. sine striis quamvis saepius vel
rugis quibusdam vel aliis rebus extrinsecus adnatis exasperetur." From this
account, and from the figure he has given of the shell, there is not the
smallest reason to dispute that Lister means the shell which English writers
have heretofore considered as the Murex Despectus In Lister's Plate the shell
is reversed by mistake, most likely, of the engraver.
; but it is not less certain that Linnaeus was wrong in quoting Lister's figure
for his Swedish shell, since they are not the same. However, on the authority
of this reference to Lister, which afterward appeared in the Systema Naturae,
this shell has continnued to be considered as the species meant by Linnaeus.

Nor was this the only oversight which appears to have been committed by that
eminent Naturalist; by continuing to refer, in the Systema Naturae, to Lister's
figure for his species Despectus, no one scarcely could imagine that Lister's
shell should be the M. Antiquus of Linnaeus, instead of his Despectus, and yet
we are persuaded, after attentively comparing his description of the shells
with his synonyms, that such is the fact: the description agrees with it, and
the figure given by Gualteri is surely of the same kind as that which Lister
speaks of.

The Linnaean shell, M. Despectus, is well described, and the figure in his
Iter. W. Goth. is expressive: the two elevated spiral lines, together with the
rotundity of the wreaths, are strikingly characteristic of this species. At the
first glance this shell appears to be an intermediate kind between Lister's
shell and the Murex Carinatus of Pennant, and ourselves: indeed the principal
difference we perceive between the true M. Despectus and Lister's shell is,
that the former has the whorls of the spire rather more ventricose, and
distinctly marked with two slightly elevated spiral lines; from Murex Carinatus
it differs principally in the very prominent angulations of the anfractibus,
where the ridges appear, and more particularly in the strong depression between
the upper ridge, and the suture of the whorls.

The Murex despectus, at pesent under consideration, is certainly very rare,
except in the North of Europe, where we are led to suppose, from what Linnaeus
says, it is not uncommon.

The only specimens we have ever seen of this kind are from Greenland.

HAVING thus ascertained, as we may reasonably believe, the true Linnaean Murex
Despectus, it remains in this place to propose the following emendations and
additions to the description of two Shells figured in the course of this work,
namely, Murex Despectus, Plate XXXI. and Antiquus, Plate CXIX. which, in common
with other testaceological writers, we had misconceived.

INDEX VOL. V. LINNAEAN ARRANGEMENT.
MULTIVALVIA.
LEPAS Tintinnabulum Plate. 148 -- borealis Plate. 160 -- Scalpellum Plate. 166
Fig. 1 -- anserifera Plate. 166 Fig. 2 -- dilata Plate. 164
BIVALVIA. CONCHAE.
Mya pictorum Plate. 174 -- praetenuis Plate. 176 Solen pellucidus Plate. 153
Tellina depressa Plate. 163 Mactra radiata Plate. 161 Venus fasciatus Plate.
170 Fig. 1,2 -- lactea Plate. 149 Area Noae Plate. 158 Pinna laevis Plate. 152
Voluta laevis Plate. 165 Buccinum Glaciale Plate. 154 -- brunneum Plate. 179
Fig. 2 Murex despectus Plate. 180 -- Bamffius Plate. 169 Fig. 1 -- emarginatus
Plate. 169 Fig. 2 Murex septem-angulatus Plate. 179 Fig. 4 -- elegans Plate.
179 Fig. 3 -- angulatus Plate. 156 Trochus conicus Plate. 155 Fig. 1 --
cinereus Plate. 155 Fig. 2 Turbo pallidus Plate. 178 Fig. 4 -- subulatus Plate.
172 -- acutus Plate. 179 Fig. 1 -- vittatus Plate. 178 Fig. 1 -- interruptus
Plate. 178 Fig. 2 -- costatus Plate. 178 Fig. 3 -- pallidus Plate. 178 Fig. 4
-- reticulatus Plate. 159 -- albus Plate. 177 Helix rufescens Plate. 157 Fig. 1
-- pallida Plate. 157 Fig. 2 -- hispida Plate. 151 Fig. 1 -- cricetorum Plate.
151 Fig. 2 -- fragilis Plate. 175 Fig. 1 -- fontinalis Plate. 175 Fig. 2 --
putris Plate. 168 Fig. 1 -- Bullaeoides Plate. 168 Fig. 2 Nerita intricata
Plate. 167 Patella militaris Plate. 171 -- oblonga Plate. 150 -- intorta Plate.
146 Dentalium octangulatum Plate. 162 Teredo navalis Plate. 145
INDEX TO VOL. V. ACCORDING TO THE HISTORIA NATURALIS TESTACEORUM BRITANNIAE OF
DA COSTA.
PART I. UNIVALVA NON TURBINATA.
GENUS I. PATELLA. LIMPET, FLITHER, OR PAP SHELL.
PATELLA fluviatilis Plate. 147
GENUS 3. SERPULA. THE WORM SHELL.
Serpula Teredo Plate. 145
PART III. UNIVALVIA TURBINATA.
GENUS 7. TROCHUS. THE TOP.
MARINAE. SEA. Trochus cinereus Plate. 155 Fig. 2
GENUS 9. HELIX.
* TERRESTRES. LAND. Helix Erica Plate. 151 Fig. 2 -- hispida Plate. 151 Fig. 1
-- rufescens Plate. 157 Fig. 1
** FLUVIATILES. RIVER. Turbo trianfractus Plate. 168 Fig. 2
GENUS 12. STROMBIFORMIS. NEEDLE SNAIL.
Strombiformis albus Plate. 177
ORDER 2.
BIVALVES. GENUS 7. PECTUNCULUS. COCKLE.
Pactunclus fasciatus Plate. 170
MULTIVALVES. GENUS 17. BALANUS. ACORN.
Balanus Tintinnabulum Plate. 148
ALPHABETICAL INDEX TO VOL. V.
ACUTA, Turbo Plate. 179 Fig. 1 albus, Turbo Plate. 177 angulatus, Murex Plate.
156 anserisera, Lepas Plate. 166 Fig. 2 Bamffius, Murex Plate. 169 Fig. 1
borealis, Lepas Plate. 160 brunneum, Buccinum Plate. 179 Fig. 2 Bullaeoides,
Helix Plate. 168 Fig. 2 cinereus, Trochus Plate. 155 Fig. 2 costatus, Turbo
Plate. 178 Fig. 3 conicus, Trochus Plate. 155 Fig. 1, 1 depressa, Tellina
(Squalida) Plate. 163 conicus, Trochus Plate. 155 Fig. 1, 1 depressa, Tellina
(Squalida) Plate. 163 despectus, Murex Plate. 180 dilata, Lepas Plate. 164
elegans, Murex Plate. 179 Fig. 3 emarginatus, Murex Plate. 169 Fig. 2
Ericetorum, Helix Plate. 151 Fig. 2 fasciatus, Venus Plate. 170 Fig. 1, 2
fontinalis, Helix Plate. 175 Fig. 2 fragilis, Helix Plate. 175 Fig. 1 glaciale,
Buccinum Plate. 154 hispida, Helix Plate. 151 Fig. 1 interruptus, Turbo Plate.
178 Fig. 2. intorta, Patella Plate. 146 intricata, Nerita (Canrena var?) Plate.
167 lactea, Venus Plate. 149 lacustris, Patella Plate. 147 laevis, Pinna.
(Ingens Penn?) Plate. 152 laevis, Voluta Plate. 165 mammillatus, Turbo Plate.
173 militaris, Patella Plate. 171 ravalis, Teredo Plate. 145 Noae, Area Plate.
158 Fig. 1, 2 oblonga, Patella Plate. 150 octangulatum, Dentalium Plate. 162
pallida, Helix Plate. 157 Fig. 2 pallida, Turbo Plate. 178 Fig. 4 pellucidus,
Solen Plate. 153 Pictorum, Mya Plate. 174 praetenuis, Mya Plate. 176 putris,
Helix Plate. 168 Fig. 1 radiata, Mactra Plate. 161 reticulatus, Turbo Plate.
159 rufescens, Helix Plate. 157 Fig. 1, 1 scalpellum, Lepas Plate. 166 Fig. 1
septem-angulatus, Murex Plate. 179 Fig. 4 subulatus, Turbo Plate. 172
Tintinnabulum, Lepas Plate. 148 vittatiss, Turbo Plate. 178
FINIS.
Printed by Bye and Law, 'St. John's Square, Clerkenwell.

Lately Published, BY THE SAME AUTHOR:
I. THE NATURAL HISTORY of BRITISH INSECTS; explaining them in their several
States, with the Periods of their Transform their Food, Economy, etc. The
whole illustrated with colored Figures, designed and executed from living
Specimens. In Ten Volumes, Royal Octavo, containing Three Hundred and Sixty
Plates. -- Price in Boards, 15 l. 10 s. 2. THE NATURAL HISTORY of BRITISH
BIRDS; Or, a SELECTION of the MOST RARE, BEAUTIFUL, AND INTERESTING BIRDS which
inhabit this Country. Embellished with One Hundred and Twenty-four Figures,
drawn, engraved, and colored from the original Specimens. In Five Volumes,
Royal Octavo. -- Price in boards, 9 l. 3. THE NATURAL HISTORY of BRITISH
FISHES, including scientific and general Descriptions of the most interesting
Species, and an extensive Selection of accurately Finished Colored Plates. --
Taken entirely from Original Drawings, purposely made from the Specimens in a
recent State, and for the most part whilst living.
N. B. This Work is now in a Course of Publication, in Numbers, monthly, at 3
s. 6 d. each; and in Volumes, annually, at 2 l. 2sl. each in Boards. It is
intended to be comprised in Five Volumes, Royal Octavo. Two of these are
completed, and may be had in boards, Price 4 l. 4 s.


