ADVICE TO THOSE WHO ARE AFFLICTED WITH THE VENEREAL DISEASE. CONTAINING THE
SYMPTOMS AT LARGE, WITH PRACTICAL NOTES, AND ADVICE TO THEM WHILE UNDER CURE.
ALSO, Methods of preventing any future INFECTION, in either Sex.

By F. B. SPILSBURY, Man-Midwife, WARDOUR STREET, SOHO.

LONDON: Printed for the AUTHOR, and sold by W. NICOLL, in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and all the Booksellers in Town and Country.

MDCCLXXXIX, PRICE ONE SHILLING.

[ Entered at Stationers'-Hall.]

PREFACE.
AS this is wrote for the benefit of persons afflicted with the Venereal
Disease, in its various stages; for the regulation of their diet and conduct on
any emergency that may happen, when it is not in their power to apply
immediately to their Surgeon; and also proper instructions for conducting
themselves while under cure; I have therefore not given any anatomy of the
parts, nor entered into the minutiae of the disease, more than is necessary for
restoring the constitution, and given means for future prevention. Such a small
work as this will appear peculiarly necessary to every one. In the first place,
from the symptoms of the disease, prudent persons will be on their guard, and
libertines have a method to prevent any future injury; by which means posterity
will be benefited, and unhappy sufferers will here have full directions; which
will not only be acceptable to them, but to all persons of either sex.

ADVICE, etc.
THE Venereal Disease In ancient records, 1376 and 1398 public stews and
brothels were tolerated under certain regulations; and those girls that had the
Burning, as it was called, were separated from the rest, and forbid to lie with
man while she had it. Falstaff hints at the disease in the Second Part of Henry
IV. Act II. Scene IV. -- " Fall. If the cook help to make the gluttons, you help
to make diseases, Doll; we catch of you, Doll; we catch of you; grant that my
poor virtue -- grant that --." Also see Leviticus, chap. 13, 15, and 20.
may be obtained three ways, viz. First, By impure connection. Secondly, By
contact of parts Midwives ought to be excessive careful to have no cuts or
sores on their fingers, as numbers of cases have occurred, where they have
obtained a confirmed lues by the contact of parts.
. And lastly, Hereditary. Be it obtained which way it will, we ascribe it to
the French (i. e. the French Pox), they call it the Neapolitan; the Neapolitan,
the Spanish; and the Spanish, the Indian. In its first stage it is called the
Gonorrhoea, or Clap What is commonly called the Dry Clap, is when there is no
discharge, with difficulty of making water; from the increase of the swelling
and inflammation an ischury, or total suppression of urine, is the consequence.
; in the second, the Confirmed Pox, or Lues Venerea; and that every one may
know when they have obtained this horrid disease, and to what stage they have
advanced, I shall lay down every symptom as they occur.

GONORRHOEA, I believe the gonorrhoea to be merely a local complaint; the lues
venerea, constitutional. This is proved in the hospitals every day; for if a
patient should go through a ptylysmis, or spitting, and contract a gonorrhoea,
during the cure, the constitutional disease would be removed, but the local
continue.
ITS SIGNS.
THE first symptoms are an agreeable sensation in the genital parts in general,
and the testicles have a creeping worm-like motion, which stimulates to venery;
next a gradual discharge comes on; first, a limpid thin humor, which increases
until it comes a sharp, stinking, purulent matter; the parts inflame, and now
great pain is felt in passing the urine, like so many needles; this increases
to such a height, that the patient dreads to make water; and from the pain and
fear he does not let it flow, but passes it in jerks: his physiognomy at this
period is very unfavourable This is called a dysuria, an inflammable symptom:
young people, at the first time, have it worse than others.
. The misery is now increased by a chordee So called from its similarity to a
chorde binding down the penis.
, i. e. the penis becomes frequently erect in a disagreeable manner, curved
downwards with exquisite pain. In those that have long foreskins, it inflames,
cannot be drawn back, and is called phymosis There is sometimes vesicles, or
bladders, filled with water on the surface.
; in those that are short, it contracts, and swells up behind the nut sometimes
to such a degree as to endanger the patient's life, and is named a paraphimosis
I have known it to swell, and contract, till the inflammation increased so as
to stop the circulation in the nut, which by this means mortification came on,
and they have lost this part.
. From the inflammation, deep corroding ulcers Venereal ulcers are always known
by their being jagg'd at the edges, and running in different ways, with a
slough-like appearance.
now appear, called chancres The first appearance of a chancre is not unlike
the thrush in the mouths of children. Parents cannot be too careful who suckle
their children, as they may obtain this disease from a small chancre on the
nipple, or on the breast of the nurse; nor can youth be too careful who they
salute, as prostitutes frequently have small ulcers on their lips, tongue, etc.
Whenever these appear, even in the slightest manner, we should consider it as
the confirmed pox, and treat it under that head.
.

IN WOMEN.
IT makes its appearance in about three or four days; the patient feels a
pleasing irritation, which soon degenerates into pain; a prickling shooting
sensation within the parts, which inflame and swell, is sore and painful; the
urine is hot and scalding to such a degree, that the patient dreads to make
water; she feels a contractive From the inflammable attack of the virus in
women, there is a peculiar constriction toward one side or the other in the
vagina, which answers to the chordee in men.
and painful sensation in the lower part of her body, with a creeping motion
within the sides about the hips, dull pains across the back. The discharge is
at first slime; then thin, watery, sharp, foetid, bloody; and, at length,
becomes a deep green.

BUBOES AND SWELLED TESTICLES.
IN this stage, will sometimes arise, either from sudden colds, or the virus
being repelled by improper treatment.

In the first, the notice of the patient is attracted by a pain in the groin,
and upon examination he finds a small lump, the size of a pea; there is no
inflammation externally, but, after handling, the part becomes more painful,
and increases to the size of a nut; the part is more sensible, it throbs, the
body is inflamed, a slight fever comes on, universal lassitude, pains in the
limbs, headache, thirst, etc. Still increasing to the size of a pigeon's egg,
becomes inflamed, matter forms, and it is now at its maturity. The second makes
its approach with a painful worm-like motion in one or both testicles; the
running abates, and frequently stops; they swell and inflame; dull, heavy,
burdensome pains come on, with sudden twinges and stitches extending into the
loins; they now become a painful load; a fever succeeds, and the crisis is at
hand, by either suppuration, gangrene, or cancer When the pain and inflammation
in the testicle abate, the running returns; if the inflammation runs high, it
is then that bleeding plentifully is of service; also purging, fomentations,
etc. which must be left to the surgeon's care.
.

THE CONFIRMED POX, OR SECOND STAGE, Women may have the dry or latent pox for a
length of time in their habit, as long as their menstrual discharges continue;
but the moment these cease, the whole frame falls into confusion.

Is now ushered in by venereal excrescences, or warts, which make their
appearances about the private parts; they are neither hard nor soft, open,
moist, or dry; they put on forms like pinheads, or ragged at bottom; some is
pendent, others like a cock's comb, or mulberries. The first symptoms the
patient feels, is an irregular intermittent fever, pain in the head, arms,
legs, knees, great lassitude and dejection of spirits; the pain increases,
especially at night; and when warm in bed, it is past bearing, nor can they get
any sleep till toward the morning I have observed in the hospitals patients
laboring under nocturnal pains from a venereal cause, that when they have had
no rest for a month, etc. before they come into the venereal ward, they have
not been in the ward above two days, before they have generally good nights,
owing to the minute particles of mercury floating in the atmosphere they
breathe.
; the head grows heavy, sometimes with a dull pain sixed in one spot, like a
nail drove in by degrees; small lumps arise on the scull, arms, legs, and
thighs, (nodes) which become painful, and torment the patient alternately;
scurfy places appear in different parts of the body, face, eyebrows, and
forehead; gradually increasing till it invades the hair, which it incircles,
(the crown of Venus); the ears are corroded and filled up with scabby stinking
matter, the eruptions increase, the lips become sore, and crack; the mouth and
nostrils are now infected, and run a thick ischor; the skin becomes rough, and
covered with branny scales; the eyes are dull, heavy, red, and staring; the
face becomes blotted, the neck stiff, the mouth sore, the cheeks firey, the
nose swells, is distorted, and stuffed with scabs, the tongue enlarges, the
throat is sore, the hairy scalp is now covered with a crust, and loses its
natural color, the hands swell, the nails grow thick and drop off, the voice
changes, and the language is unintelligible, the lungs depressed, the mouth
stiff and open, the breath loathsome and foetid, and the mind filled with
wretchedness and despair. To close this horrid scene, the burning pains
increase, a heavy pulse, universal weakness, dimness of sight, hiccup,
stranguary, difficulty of speech and respiration, the nodes break open, the
scaly scalp cracks, the nose and throat is corroded, the teeth drop out, the
breath is insupportable, and the whole fabric is now a mass of stinking
carrion; if the malady continues, till limb from limb drops off, the vitals are
attacked, and the unhappy sufferer expires, the putrid carcass is hurried to
the grave, offensive to all.

Having thus far given the history of the disease, from the beginning to the
end, that every one may know how to avoid those who are unfortunate enough to
have any of the above appearances, I shall now proceed to give advice to those
who labor under its baneful influence.

On the first appearance of the disease, let me injoin you to temperance,
soberness, and chastity; three moral virtues here indispensably necessary. Your
diet Neither purging nor a low diet are necessary in the cure of the
gonorrhoea; drastic purging will increase the inflammation.
must be moderate, and roast meat is preferable to boiled; beef and mutton, to
veal or lamb; the former is the more easy of digestion; but mutton is the
easiest of all. Avoid spices, or high sauces; for, as it is in its first stage
a topical inflammation, every thing which increases the circulation of the
blood will promote the disease; consequently all excessive exercises must be
avoided, such as riding on horseback, leaping, jumping, etc. You may drink
wine; but beware of intoxication, or you will suffer the next day severely.
Though at this time Venus attracts your thoughts, yet pay no homage at her
shrine. In short, eat when you are hungry, but small quantities at a time; let
your drink be moderate, and be satisfied when your thirst is quenched. The
passions of the mind have here great influence; avoid them; they irritate the
disease; and when indulged to excess, they have been known to bring on alarming
symptoms. I must lay particular stress on cleanliness A species of lues venerea
prevails in the west of Scotland, which the natives call Sibbins, or Sivvins,
owing to uncleanliness.
, especially in the fair sex; for without this the disease rapidly increases,
from the corroding virus lying on the parts, or hid in the folds, by which
means the irritation is increased, and consequently the inflammation will
extend, bringing on chancres, buboes, etc. which in many instances, by timely
care, might have been avoided: and to this end always wash the parts with a
little milk and water two or three times a day; or, what is better, a scruple
of calomel in two or three ounces of rose water; and between the folds put a
little lint, which change every time. To those who in the first stage use
injections, retain them in the parts as long as possible; to let it come away
immediately is of very little service. By the improper use of astringent
injections Astringent injections are such as the vitriol, alum, and the
preparations of lead. About 10 or 15 drops of the extract of lead, in four
ounces of soft water, are sometimes necessary to wash the parts when a
pariphimosis takes place; it acts as a seditive, and will abate the
inflammation; but ought to be sparingly used.
the running at first is frequently stopped, and the unhappy sufferer thinks he
is cured, till, alas! appearances too soon inform him of his fatal mistake. On
the contrary, injections that are serviceable at first increase the discharge;
your body should be kept moderate, neither bound nor loose. If you find a
painful sensation in your groin, or testicle, and at this time it is not
convenient to apply for advice, suspend the testicle in a bag, and rub it with
a little mercurial ointment mixed with camphor; the same by the buboe; but
remember, in the latter, rub rather below the part, that the lymphatis may
carry it through the glands; but if they still increase, apply a poultice of
bread and milk, mixed with the blue mercurial ointment, which, in general, will
carry them off There certainly is no occasion to bring the buboe to
suppuration, giving the patient unnecessary pain and trouble; I do, and always
think it advisable to suppress them, especially at the beginning, as they
frequently arise from irritation, which causes inflammation in the glands, and
hence obstructions. I must here ask the gentlemen of the faculty, if abating
the inflammation, lessening the irritation, and by any means removing the
obstructions, can pox the patient? On the contrary, I think letting it proceed
to suppuration, and exposing a surface to the air, is the most likely means in
the world. [I knew a worthy practitioner in the country so bigoted to the idea
of a suppurated buboe curing the diseafe, that after he has applied his
caustic, he seldom took any further notice of it.] But if the patient applies
too late, and suppuration is at its height, I seldom open them in men -- in
women, never. If an opening is required, I guage the lancet between my finger
and thumb, and by drawing the same across the buboe, from left to right (and
vice versa, as occasion may require) open it with ease and safety; by this
means the patient is not frightened with the knife, nor tortured with the
caustic. The dressing cannot be too slight; and for the first day or two apply
a poultice of white bread and milk mixed, with a little mercurial ointment over
all; this takes off the callous edges, so much complained of when the knife is
used.
, or relieve till you can get assistance Buboes sometimes, by ill treatment, or
a bad habit of body, become phagedenic, i. e. when the lips of the wound are
hard, loose, and for the space of an inch does not adhere to the surface of the
ulcer; underneath this a probe may be passed; all round there is a livid
appearance, discharges a thin fluid very different from the true pus. Some
practitioners have been induced to give mercury at this time, while suppuration
is going on, and likewise after matter has been evacuated, which will irritate,
inflame, and produce a truly phagedenic sore; when this is the case, I would
recommend the bark and sarsaparilla; the patient at the same time should have a
milk and vegetable diet, with country air. There is no medicine that so
speedily removes the effects of mercury, as sarsaparilla given in powder or
decoction, and bark will strengthen the system. After this treatment has been
used for some time, and the sore brought into a good state, it will be apt to
spread, and break out again, from being affected by the venereal matter
returning, when mercury must be had recourse to, but with a great deal of
caution. If the sore should again have phagedenic appearances, mercury must be
desisted from, and the bark and sarsaparilla as before; and when at a
favorable state, the mercury again continued. These kind of ulcers are the
most difficult to cure in all surgery; outward applications should be mild; the
best is a white bread poultice.
. If a phimosis comes on, soak the part in milk and water, syringe the glands
with the calomel injection frequently, after which put up a little lint round
the nut with a probe, or skewer. The pariphimosis treat the same; but always
have your surgeon's advice, especially in the latter, as delays here would be
injurious. I would always advise, as long as any scalding continues, to drink
plentifully of linseed tea, or to eat gum arabic; these mucilaginous substances
will abate the acrimony of the urine. If any hard knot should arise, rub them
with the ointment beforementioned. Another symptom attending this stage, is a
chordee; no pleasant companion; but it is soon removed, by rubbing the part
with a little ointment, and applying a plaster of the same upon it.

Having thus far given you cautions, I will now proceed to a more pleasant
subject, namely, symptoms of an approaching cure; which is, when the scalding
abates, the discharge thickens, the green appearance gradually vanishes, yellow
succeeds, till at last it is white, and does not stain the linen, and may now
be called a common gleet, which is removed by balsamic medicines, fresh air,
and moderate exercise; to which I will add, frequent topical cold bathing The
parts are always, after a gonorrhoea, relaxed, or lame; and nothing is more
conducive to restore the tone of the fibers than topical cold bathing: what I
mean by this is, to pour a bottle of cold water on the parts as soon as you
rise in the morning; this some call cabbaging.
If from ill treatment, or neglect, the urethra is filled with carnosities, or
callofities, so as to obstruct the passage of urine Where there are strictures
in the urethra, the urine is always divided into two streams; and there is
always matter on the bougie where the stricture or ulcer is. A bougie will
sometimes cause a chordee in an healthy person; but, as above, it is the most
painful at the part affected.
, then bougies become absolutely necessary; but always be careful to tie a
piece of thread round the top, bind and fasten it gently around the nut.

Though thus far I have treated it as a simple inflammation, and supposed it to
be cured on that principle; yet always take some alterative medicine
Mercurials, in small doses, are the best alterative medicines; and during their
course I always give the following diet drink -- Take of sassafras chips 4 oz.
sarsaparilla 2 oz. guaiacum shavings 3 oz. mezerian root 2 drams; pour on this
three quarts of boiling water, and when cold, it is fit for use; a gill four or
five times a day.
, to guard against any lurking mischief; for I am certain too great security
here, or relying on the words of boasting pretenders It is become the fashion,
in modern quackery, to advertise to cure without taking a single grain of
mercury. True; so I am satisfied it is frequently done; but if there be one out
of five that have any virus left in the constitution, it ought to induce all to
take a few small doses. I am certain it is from this our hospitals are so
crowded -- from this lurking mischief breaking at a distant period in various
forms, well deserving the name of Hydra.
, has, in the end, been the ruin of many; for the disease lying dormant for a
number of years, has afterward broke out in the various forms
above-men-mentioned, which, had they taken some alterative medicines, would
never have happened. Where this is the case, alterative medicines are the
speediest and safest cure; they act without injuring the system, and, joined
with cleanliness, never fail in the most confirmed pox. The first thing to be
thought of is frequently cleaning the teeth, and gargling the throat, change of
linen, frequently washing the body, and beware of catching cold. If any scaley
eruptions appear, wash them with bran and water; or warts, clip them off with a
pair of scissars, and apply the ointment over them. If your throat, or nostrils
are affected, use the fumes of mercury The best method of applying mercury in
fumes, is to put ten or fifteen grains of cinnabar on a hot iron, drawing the
smoke into the throat, or up the nose, twice a day, through a funnel.
, or apply immediately to your surgeon. If nodes arise, rub them every night
with the ointment; keep the body temperate; and, in some cases, it is advisable
to wear a flannel jerkin and drawers next the skin. When you find all the
symptoms abate and vanish, leave not off your medicines too suddenly. After
which I would advise a course of bark, exercise, change of air, and cold
bathing, to take off the irritability the disease has caused in the system.

Before this advice is closed, I shall give a few hints on the use of mercury.

In the first place, I do not agree with salvation, even in the worst of cases.
It is from this imprudence that this sacred medicine has been thrown aside; a
medicine which, when administered with caution, is not injurious to the human
frame; on the contrary, expel it from the Materia Medica, how many millions
would suffer from the scurvy, gout, rheumatism, yaws, bilious complaints, etc.?
It should be given in small doses, without any perceptible action. In this
manner, what are its effects? it increases the action of the lymphatic system;
the consequence is, the glands, before obstructed, have now a free circulation,
the offending virus is absorbed, and thrown off by the pores of the skin,
urine, stool, etc. the blood is purified, and the body now restored to health.
On the contrary, if too large a quantity is taken, a foul breath, rotten gums,
carious teeth, etc. ensues; the glands are irritated to secretions beyond their
power, the appetite is lost, the intestinal canal affected, the head swells,
the tongue hangs out of the mouth, and saliva is continually running from it;
copious sweats, and universal debility follow; at this period few come near
him, from the offensive smell. Suppose he stops here, and the disease is cured,
how dearly is it paid for, when so safe a remedy is at hand? He lingers out the
rest of his life with a debilitated, irritable constitution. -- How many by
this are brought to an early grave! From this cause salivation is now justly
exploded.

To sum up the whole, I would advise, that in the first stage of a gonorrhoea,
or clap, the method of cure shall be to lessen the inflammation and
irritability of the system, to promote gentle perspiration, to correct the
acrimony of the fluids, and to protect the body from infection. Injections that
will abate the inflammation, that are void of astringency, are preferable; they
are applied to the part diseased, and certainly will cure more speedily than
medicines taken by the mouth. With proper injections, where they have applied
as soon as they have discovered the injury, I have completely cured, in a few
days, the most virulent gonorrhoea. What medicines are taken internally should
be anti-inflammatory. After this, when the scalding is abated, the color gone,
a simple gleet only remaining, balsamics are the most proper; but, after all,
it is prudent to guard the constitution by a few alterative medicines. In the
lues venerea alteratives are what we must depend on; but when joined to
balsamics, and others that will promote a gentle perspiration, they are sure of
success. By these principles I have always succeeded in the worst of cases; and
weak debilitated habits, arising from excesses of any kind whatsoever, by
cordial tonic medicines, cold bathing, change of air, and exercise, are sure to
meet with relief.

I must here guard youth from that diabolical practice of machinery; so far is
it from being a preservative, that numbers have been poxed from too great a
security. There is now another fashionable vice, no less injurious in
debilitating the system, by forcing nature further than her strength will bear,
and bringing on a train of nervous complaints; I mean, whipping. I cannot help
wishing, with Dr. Faulk, that fools who lasciviously use this exercise to stir
up their lust, might be switched after emission, as they endured it before;
which would soon cure them of this diabolical practice.

To conclude; I shall now lay down the most safe means of preventing this
loathsome disease. After intercourse with a suspected person, always wash the
parts with a little warm water, or soap; or if not at hand, your own urine. Be
careful to wash between the folds, or round the glands; and when you get home,
use the following -- calomel 1 scruple, rose water 2 ounces I cannot speak too
highly of this preparation; it is the most safe and efficacious application to
old ulcers and cancers of every kind, it producing good matter in a few
dressings; and when the ears are affected, and discharge a foetid matter, they
should be syringed with it three or four times a day.
, and leave some of it on. Some throw it up the parts with a syringe, and they
are sure of success; even if a slight gonorrhoea has taken place, it will cure
without any further application. In women it is the best, easiest, and safest
remedy; not only here, but also in the flower albus; it being thrown up the
vagina 3 times a day, and the patient taking a little bark to strengthen and
brace the system, nothing else is further required. By having this by them,
they may at all times keep free from the disease. Some choose to rub a small
quantity of blue mercurial ointment on the groin and parts; this too, like the
other, is certainly destroying the infection in the bud, and advisable when the
other cannot be procured; but there is one caution, always to have the calomel
pure and mild: what I prepare for the purpose, and for private practice,
undergoes a number of washings in lime water, etc. to take off every minute
particle of acid.

THE END.
POSTSCRIPT.
No. 120, WARDOUR STREET, SOHO.
The AUTHOR still continues to cure the VENEREAL DISEASE, in all its different
Stages, from the SIMPLE GONORRHOEA to the CONFIRMED LUES, taking the utmost
Care of the Constitution. -- Weak, relaxed, and debilitated Habits, proceeding
from Irregularities, injudicious Treatment, or any other Cause, are speedily
restored to Health and Strength.

Advice to poor Persons gratis.

* All Letters, Post-paid, will be duly answered; or, Attendance of required.


