Britannia and Batavia: A MASQUE.

[Price Sixpence.]

Britannia and Batavia: A MASQUE. Written on the MARRIAGE of the PRINCESS ROYAL
With his HIGHNESS the PRINCE of ORANGE. By the late Mr. LILLO.

LONDON: Printed for JOHN GRAY, at the Cross-Keys in the Poultry near
Cheapside. MDCCXL.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Ithuriel. Eliphas. Britannia. Batavia. Liberto. Tyranny. Superstition. Chorus
of Country Lads and Lasses. Chorus of Sailors and their Lasses. Landlady.
Chorus of Spectators. The Procession. Mutes Slavery and Poverty, Attendants on
Tyranny. Mutes Pride and Cruelty, Attendants on Superstition. Mutes


Britannia and Batavia: A MASQUE.
SCENE the FIRST. A Pleasant Country. Britannia asleep under a small, but rich
Pavilion. Her Sword and Shield lying by her. Ithuriel her Guardian Angel with a
drawn Sword, leaning on a Cloud, and suspended in the Air near her. Ith. SLEEP,
fair Britannia, sleep secure;
Thy own Ithuriel, happy in his Charge,
Thy Guardian Angel wakes.
AIR I.
Rest is the Recompense of Toil,
The noblest Fruit of Conquest, Peace;
Learn but Content, high-favour'd Isle,
And nothing can your Bliss increase.
What Splendour rises in the East,
Now when the Sun has measured half the Day?
Some alien Spirit sure --


Descends, and stands before Britannia in a Posture of Defense. Eliphas, the
Guardian Angel of Batavia, descends with an Olive Branch in his Hand. Eliphas,
as I think,
The vigilant Protector of Batavia.

El. Exalted Seraph, powerful and benign,
Thou judge right, I am indeed Eliphas.

Ith. Distinguished as thou art,
Prudent, and brave, and of approved Integrity,
Thou can not doubt thy Welcome:
Yet let me wonder, high and friendly Guest,
Why thou have left thy Charge.

El. Not so, bright Chief;
Unable to defend her
From proud Hispania's fierce and cruel Power,
I Have brought her here,
To seek Protection from Britannia's Arms.

Ith. For others Dangers
I may not interrupt her calm Repose;
Her Peace and Safety are my Care,
Her Virtue is her own.

AIR II.
El. It Is great to succor the distressed!

Ith. Britannia's Bounty stands confessed,
Unequaled and alone.

El. Can lost Batavia sue in vain?

Ith. Must Britain endless Wars maintain
For Causes not her own.

El. Behold the mourning Fair.


Enter Batavia in Mourning, supported; her Hair disheveled, and her Coronet
falling. Bat. Ah! me, ah! wretched, wretched lost Batavia.
Britannia wakes.
Brit. Whoever thou art, thy Groans have waked Britannia.

Bat. Kneeling. Thou great and just Defender of the oppressed,
See at your Feet poor and distressed Batavia:
Her Cities rased, her sacred Rights destroyed,
Her Nobles slaughtered, and her Sons enslaved.
AIR III.
O whither shall I turn me, whither fly,
If you refuse your Aid?
By Friends forsaken,
By my Foes betrayed,
There Is not on Earth so lost a Wretch as I.
O! whither, etc.


Brit. Arise, afflicted Fair, my Sister, rise;
Believe, I feel and will redress thy Wrongs;
Deceitful bloody Rome, and haughty Spain,
Shall be compelled to render back their Prey.

AIR IV.
Brit. Let Tyranny devour,
And build in Blood her Throne;
Britannia holds her Power
For righteous Ends alone.

Bat. While Heaven refers to you the Fate
Of Europe; while you hold the Scale,
And may dispense the casting Weight,
Justice and Virtue must prevail.
Both repeat the first Stanza.

End of the first serious Interlude.
Enter a Chorus of Country Lads and Lasses. AIR V. Under the Greeenwood Tree.
1st Lad. Let envious Faction call me Slave,
I know and feel I Am free.

1st Lass. It Is well, brisk Sir, that you're so brave;
I thought you bound to me.

1st Lad. Such lovely Eyes,

1st Lass. Must tyrannize,
And you their Captive be.

1st Lad. Love's Chains alone,
True Britons own,
Nor would from them be free.

Chorus. Love's Chains alone, etc.


Dancing suitable to the Occasion. Exeunt. SCENE A Palace. Britannia on a Couch
in a Posture expressive of Distress. On her Right Hand, Tyranny attended with
Slavery and Want; on her Left, Superstition attended with Cruelty and Pride.
Ithuriel at a Distance weeping. Brit. Surpised! betrayed! no Help, no Succor
near!
O most undone! O ruined, lost Britannia!

Tyr. Stubborn, ungrateful Fair,
Blinded by Error will you ever scorn
The friendly Hand that offers at your Cure?
Behold thy Soul's Physician.

Sup. Taste of this Cup, and be enlightened:
Thou have lost no Freedom,
Except the fatal Liberty to err;
And Riches are but Snares;
Those we'll remove:
But in return the Church
Shall pour forth all her Benedictions on thee:
Thou shall abound in Grace.

Brit. Detested Superstition! Bloated Monster! --
Drunk with the Blood of Nations, -- from my Sight.
I Will have no more to do with thy Enchantments,
Hence, Sorcerer, hence, and let me die in Peace.

Sup. Consult not Reason, close the Eye of Sense;
So shall you judge aright, and see the better.
We are your Friends.

Brit. I know and I abhor you.

Sup. Poor wandering Soul!
She must be driven back into the Fold:
Wholesome Severities may set her right,
And save her from Destruction.

Tyr. I trust your pious Skill.


Sup. Whips, Chains and Racks,

Those gentler Methods,
May first be tried;
If these should seem too mild,
You must impute it to our tender Mercy.

Ith. Now, Batavia, if thou have Gratitude,

Assert it now, and save distressed Britannia.
Aside and Exit.
Sup. Heresy is indeed a rank Disease,

But then the Fire's a never failing Cure.

Tyr. Take your own Way.


Sup. Nay, nay, I but advise;

The Church expects that you should do her Justice:
She but condemns -- She never deals in Blood --
She damns, it is true, the Wretch who spares her Foes;
But begs, by me, your Mercy
For this poor Heretic relapsed.
Touch not her Life, singe not a single Hair,
Nor shed one Drop of Blood.

Tyr. I understand the Church, and know my Duty.

To his Attendants. Seize her, and bind her strait.

AIR VI.
Brit. Kneeling. Just Heaven! if ever
The Wretched's Prayer
I heard, and eased his Pain;
Now in return,
Let me not mourn,
Nor ask Relief in vain.


Loud Shouts without, mixed with martial Music, Cries of Liberty, etc. Scene
changes to the Prospect of a calm Sea with a Fleet of Ships at Anchor. Enter
Ithuriel, Eliphas, and Batavia, ushering in Liberto, richly habited and
attended. At whose Appearance, Tyranny, Superstition, and their Followers run
off in Confusion. Liberto unbinds Britannia. Brit. Grateful Batavia! generous
Liberto!
Bounteous Heaven! O how shall I express
My Wonder, or my Thanks?

Lib. Fair Queen of Isles,

Guardian of Liberty and sacred Truth,
In saving you we have preserved ourselves;
Our Interest is the same.

Brit. Most Godlike Prince! O how shall Lreward thee!


Lib. To serve Britannia is its own Reward.


Brit. -- It shall be so --

Prudence and Gratitude demand it of me --
He best can guard the Freedom he restored,
And well deserves to wear the Crown he saved.
Aside. What think thou of me Prince?

Lib. All must confess your Charms:

Fair and majestic, happy in your Offspring.
Europe sees few so great, and none so blessed:
Freedom, and Wealth and Power are in your Hand.

Brit. Then here I place them all.
Giving her Hand.
Lib. And I with Joy accept 'em.
Kissing it. 'Twere Folly to refuse so great a Blessing.
Whether Ambition, or the Love of Virtue,
Sway most with me, my Actions must declare.

Brit. By me you are not doubted, brave Liberto:
And let inveterate Malice do her worst,
Grateful Posterity shall clear your Fame.

Bat. O happy Change! O glorious Revolution!

AIR VII.
Lib. To conquer without Blood;

Brit. To reign for others Good;

Bat. Lost Freedom to restore;

Brit. This is the Hero's Praise:

Bat. For this we Temples raise,

Lib. And justly Heaven adore.

All three. To conquer, etc.


End of the second serious Interlude.
A Chorus of Sailors. AIR VIII. When the Stormy, etc.
1st Sail. You Terror of Britannia's Foes,
Whose Valor does maintain
Her Power, wherever the Ocean flows,
Or stormy Tempests reign;
For Liberty restored,
Now let your Joys overflow:
As on the Shore
The Billows roar,
When the stormy Winds do blow.


Enter Landlady, followed by a Train of young Women. AIR IX.
Land. Well fare your Hearts, my jovial Boys,
You ranting, roaring Sons of Noise,
See who are come to aid your Joys,
And hail you safe to Shore:
See here the Treasure of our Isle,
Here reap the Fruits of all your Toil,
And all your future Cares beguile,
With fall, lal, etc.

Chorus See here, etc.


Dancing. Scene a magnificent Monument in the Front of the Stage. At the Foot
of which Batavia is discovered, leaning on an Urn. AIR X.
Bat. Though hopeless, I must ever languish:
Nor Time, nor Fate, can ease my Anguish,
Still adoring,
Still deploring
Lost Liberto: endless Grief!
Will the cruel Grave return him,
Can I ever cease to mourn him?
Will my Sorrows bring Relief?


Enter Eliphas. El. Arise, Batavia, and with Wonder hear
How generous Britannia has devised
To pay her Tribute to Liberto's Fame,
And make her Gratitude, like that, immortal.
She on the Princely Youth,
In whom Liberto's Name
Must live or be extinguished,
Does Wisdom, Beauty, Majesty bestow,
Domestic Happiness, Wealth, Fame, and Power;
To sum up all that may be said or thought
She gives, --
The Firstborn Princess of her Royal House,
Replete with every Virtue, for his Bride.
Her joyful Sons
With Acclamations rend the Skies;
Assist, Batavia, and increase their Joys:
Now prove how you regard your Princely Char^^*
And what you owe Liberto,
Pay to his dear Remains.
AIR XI.
Hark, from Britannia's Shore
The Cannons loudly roar;
The Horizon how bright?
Ten thousand Piles of Fire,
Waving to Heaven aspire,
And turn to Day the Night.


Chorus of Spectators. Scene the Procession of the Marriage of the Princess
Royal with his Highness the Prince of Orange in the same Order, and as near as
possible with the same Magnificence, as it was really performed. AIR XII.
Spec. Ten thousand Joys
Attend the Princely Pair,
Whilst every grateful Briton
Applauds his Sovereign's Care;
Who on Nassau bestows,
(A Name to Britons dear,
Whence every Blessing flows,
And we with Transport hear)
Anna, that Royal Dame,
Our Blessings to insure;
That Freedom like his Fame,
May evermore endure.

Chorus. Ten thousand, etc.


THE END.

