BRAGANZA.

A TRAGEDY.

PERFORMED AT THE THEATER ROYAL IN DRURY LANE.

WRITTEN BY ROBERT JEPHSON, ESQUIRE.

LONDON: Printed for T. EVANS, near York-Buildings in the Strand; AND T.
DAVIES, in Russel Street, Covent Garden. M DCC LXXV.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

TO LADY VISCOUNTESS NUNEHAM.
MADAM,
I HAVE many reasons to be flattered with the public reception of this Tragedy,
yet I confess my solicitude for its reputation extends further.

Your Ladyship's having permitted me the honor of inscribing it to you, will
in some measure gratify my ambition by recommending it to the reader, whose
judgment is not influenced by the adventitious assistance of theatrical
decorations and the graces of action.

Where your Ladyship's name appears as a patroness, merit will be expected; and
where there is a wish to find any, probably none will pass unnoticed.

Whatever motive may be assigned for this Address, my principal purpose will be
fully answered if your Ladyship accepts it, as a testimony of my gratitude for
the favors I have received from the Noble Family to which you are so happily
united, and of the perfect esteem and respect of

MADAM, Your Ladyship's Much obliged and Most obedient Humble Servant, ROBERT
JEPHSON.
Dublin Castle, Febr. 1775.
PROLOGUE.
Written by ARTHUR MURPHY, Esquire.
SPOKEN BY MR. PALMER.
WHILE in these days of sentiment and grace
Poor comedy in tears resigns her place,
And smit with novels, full of maxims crude,
She, that was frolic once, now turns a prude;
To her great end the tragic muse aspires,
At Athens born, and faithful to her sires.
The comic sister in hysteric fit,
You Would swear, has lost all memory of wit.
Folly, for her, may now exult on high;
Feathered by ridicule no arrows fly;
But if you are distressed, she is sure to cry.
She that could jig, and nickname all heaven's creatures,
With sorrows not her own deforms her features;
With stale reflections keeps a constant pother;
Greece gave her one face, and she makes another;
So very pious, and so full of woe,
You well may bid her "To a nunnery go."
Not so Melpomene; to nature true
She holds her own great principle in view.
She, from the first, when men her power confessed,
When grief and terror seized the tortured breast,
She made, to strike her moral to the mind,
The stage the great tribunal of mankind.
Hither the worthies of each clime she draws,
Who founded states, or rescued dying laws;
Who, in base times, a life of glory led,
And for their country who have toiled or bled;
Hither they come, again they breathe, they live,
And virtue's meed through every age receive.
Hither the murderer comes, with ghastly mien!
And the fiend conscience hunts him over the scene.
None are exempted; all must re-appear,
And even kings attend for judgment here;
Here find the day, when they their power abuse,
Is a scene furnished to the tragic muse.
Such is her art, weakened perhaps at length,
And, while she aims at beauty, losing strength.
Oh! when resuming all her native rage,
Shall her true energy alarm the stage?
This night a bard -- (our hopes may rise too high,
It Is yours to judge; -- it is yours the cause to try)
This night a bard, as yet unknown to fame,
Once more, we hope, will rouse the genuine flame.
His; no French play; -- tame, polished, dull by rule!
Vigorous he comes, and warm from Shakespeare's school.
Inspired by him, he shows, in glaring light,
A nation struggling with tyrannic might;
Oppression rushing on with giant strides;
A deep conspiracy, which virtue guides;
Heroes, for freedom who dare strike the blow,
A tablature of honor, guilt and woe.
If on his canvass nature's colors shine,
You Will praise the hand that traced the just design.

EPILOGUE.
By a FRIEND.
SPOKEN BY MRS. YATES.
IS it permitted in this age severe,
For female softness to demand a tear?
Is it allowed in such censorious days,
For female virtue to solicit praise?
Dares manly sense, beneath a tender form,
Presume to dictate, and aspire to warm?
May so unnatural a being venture
As a true heroine on the stage to enter?
No, says a wit, made up of French grimaces,
Yet self-ordain'd the high priest of the graces.
Women are play-things for our idle hours,
Their souls unfinished, and confined their powers;
Loquacious, vain, by slight attentions won,
By flattery gained, and by untruths undone.
Or should some grave great plan engage their minds,
The first caprice can give it to the winds;
And the chief stateswoman of all the sex
Grows nervous, if a fop or pimple vex.
Injurious slanders! -- in Louisa's air
Behold the exemplar of a perfect fair;
Just, though aspiring; merciful, though brave;
Sincere, though politic; and though fond, no slave;
In danger calm, and smiling in success,
But as securing ampler means to bless.
Nor think, as Zeuxis, for a faultless piece,
Culled various charms from various nymphs of Greece,
Our bard has centered in one beauteous whole,
The rays that gleam through many a separate soul.
On Britain's and Ierne's shores he saw
The models of the fair he dared to draw;
True virtue in these isles has fixed her throne,
And many a bright Louisa is our own.

PERSONS.
Don Juan, Duke of Braganza Mr. Reddish. Almada Mr. Aickin. Ribiro Mr. Palmer.
Mendoza Mr. Brereton. Antonio Mr. Wrighten. Mello Mr. Wheeler. Roderic Mr.
Wright. Ferdinand Mr. Norris. Lemos Mr. Usher. Corea Mr. Hurst. Velasquez,
Minister of Spain Mr. Smith. Pizarro Mr. Davies. Ramirez Mr. Packer. Officer
Mr. Keen. First Citizen Mr. Wright. Second Citizen Mr. Griffiths.
Ines Mrs. Johnston. Louisa, Duchess of Braganza Mrs. Yates.
Gentlemen, Attendants, Soldiers, etc.

SCENE, LISBON.

BRAGANZA; A TRAGEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A Piazza.
RIBIRO meeting a Spanish Officer conducting two Citizens bound. LEMOS and
COREA following RIBIRO at a little Distance. RIBIRO. HOLD, officer -- What
means this spectacle?
Why lead you thus in fetters through the streets
These aged citizens?

OFFICER. Behold this order. shows a paper.

RIBIRO. I know the character. It Is signed Velasquez.

1st CITIZEN. We have not mines of unexhausted gold
To feed rapacious Spain and stern Velasquez;
And wrung by hard exactions for the state --

OFFICER. No more -- I must not suffer it --

RIBIRO. (pointing to the prisoners.) Pray, Sir --
See these white hairs, these shackles -- Misery
May sure complain -- You are a soldier, Sir,
Your mien bespeaks a brave one --

OFFICER. I will walk by.
Detain them not too long -- It Is a harsh sentence.

Officer withdraws a little. 2d CITIZEN. O good Ribiro, what have we deserved,
That these rude chains should gall us?

RIBIRO. What deserved!

1st CITIZEN. The little all our industry had earned,
To smooth the bed of sickness, nurse old age,
And give a decent grave to our cold ashes,
Spain's hungry minions have already seized. --

RIBIRO. I know the rest -- Dry up these scalding tears --
The hour of your deliverance is at hand:
-- An arm more strong than shuts your prison doors,
Shall burst them soon, and give you ample vengeance.

CITIZENS. May we indeed expect --

RIBIRO. -- Most sure -- But hush --
Resume the semblance of this transient shame,
And hide your hope in sadness -- Brave Castilian,
Thanks for this courtesy. To the Officer, who returns.

CITIZENS. Lead on -- Farewell.

Exeunt Guard and Citizens. LEMOS and COREA come forward to RIBIRO. RIBIRO. Was
that a fight for Lisbon?

LEMOS. O shame! shame!
What crime could they commit? -- Old, helpless, plundered --

RIBIRO. -- Even thoughts are crimes in this distempered state.
They once had wealth as you have -- Spain thought meet
To seize it -- They (rash men) have dared to murmur.
Velasquez here -- our scourge -- King Philip's idol,
Whom Portugal must bow to -- mildly dooms them,
But to perpetual bondage for this treason.

LEMOS. We must be patient -- It Is a cureless evil.

RIBIRO. Is patience then the only virtue left us?
Come, come, there is a remedy more manly.

COREA. Would it were in our reach!

RIBIRO. Look here, I grasp it.
Laying his hand on his sword. What turned to statues! -- Hence enfranchisement
If the quick fire that lately warmed your breasts,
Already wastes to embers. -- Am I rash?
We touched this theme before -- You felt it then.
Would I could put a tongue in every ingot,
That now lies pil'd within your massy stores --
Your gold perhaps might move you -- Spain will seize it,
Then bid you mourn the loss in the next dungeon,
Or dig her mines for more -- Is It not enough? --
Instruct me, Lemos, you, good Corea, teach me
This meekness so convenient to our foes,
Or pierce this swelling bosom.

LEMOS. Who can teach it?
It Is not in art Ribiro -- Know us better.
The canker discontent consumes within,
And mocks our smooth exterior.

COREA. Hear me for both:
For all the indignant hearts in Portugal --
If curses sped like plagues and pestilence,
Thus would I strike them at the towers of Spain.
May her swollen pride burst like an empty bubble?
Distraction rend her councils, route and shame
Pursue her flying squadrons -- Tempests scatter
And whirlpools swallow up her full manned navies!
Bold insurrection spread through all her states,
Shaking like pent-up winds their loose allegiance!
All Europe arm, and every frowning king,
Point at one foe, and let that foe be Spain!

RIBIRO. O be that curse prophetic! -- Here it is dangerous,
Nor will the time allow to tell you all.
But thus far rest assured; -- I speak not rashly --
A project is on foot, and now just ripening,
Will give our indignation nobler scope,
Than tears or curses (priests and women's weapons.)
All that secures the event of great designs,
Sage heads, firm hearts, and executing arms,
In formidable union league with us,
And chain capricious fortune to our standard.

LEMOS. Say, can our aid promote this glorious cause?

RIBIRO. All private virtue is the public fund:
As that abounds, the state decays, or thrives;
Each should contribute to the general stock,
And who lends most, is most his country's friend.

LEMOS. O would Braganza meet the people's wish!

RIBIRO. He is not yet resolved, -- but may be won --
Could I assure him men like you but wished it,
(For well he knows and loves you) -- Trust me, Lemos!
It would do more to knit him to this cause,
Than legions of our hot nobility.

COREA. We love his virtue -- will support his rights --

RIBIRO. Then show it by your deeds. -- Your artizans
Are prompt, bold, hardy, fond of violence.
Alarm their slumbering courage, rouse their rage,
Wake their dulled senses to the shame and scorn
That hisses in the ears of willing bondmen;
If they will hazard one bold stroke for freedom,
A leader shall be found, a brave -- a just one.
Anon expect me where the ivied arch
Rears the bold image of our late Braganza.
In sullen discontent he seems to frown
As if still hostile to the foes of Lisbon.
There we'll discourse at large -- Almada comes --

LEMOS. Is he a friend?

RIBIRO. A firm one -- No dishonor
Ever bowed that reverend head -- That mighty spirit
When first the oppressor, like a flood, overwhelmed us,
Reared high his country's standard and defied him.
-- He comes to seek me -- Lose no time -- Remember.

Exeunt Lemos and Corea. RIBIRO alone. I should detest my zeal, could it be
stirred
Against the wholesome rigor of restraint
Licentiousness made needful -- But good Heaven!
Foul murders unprovoked, delib'rate cruelty --
-- The God within us must rise up against it.

Enter ALMADA. ALMADA. Well met Ribiro -- What new proselytes?
Thy ardor every hour, or finds, or makes them.

RIBIRO. No -- thank the Spaniards for our proselytes --
Scarce half an hour ago, two citizens
(My blood still boils) by fell Velasquez order
Were dragged to prison --

ALMADA. Spare my soul, Ribiro,
Superfluous detestation of that villain.

RIBIRO. Knowing this way they were to pass, I brought
Lemos and Corea (whom last night I founded)
That their own eyes might see the outrages,
Men of their order must expect to meet
From power that knows no bounds, and owns no law.

ALMADA. 'Twas wisely done; for minds of coarse alloy
But bluntly feel the touch of others wrongs,
Though deep they take the impression of their own.

RIBIRO. By heaven their fury bore a nobler stamp;
Their honest rage glowed on their kindling cheeks,
Broke through the cold restraints of coward caution,
And swelled even to an eloquence of anger.

ALMADA. It Is well -- But are they yet informed how near
The approaching hour, decisive of our fate,
That gives us death or freedom -- that the dawn --

RIBIRO. Not yet -- They still believe the Duke at noon
But visits Lisbon to command the march
Of our new levies, to the Spanish bounds;
Himself to follow straight -- Ere then I mean
Again to see them, and still more to whet
The keeness of their hate against our tyrants.
-- At least a thousand follow where they lead --

ALMADA. Their boldness well directed may do much.

RIBIRO. That care be mine -- I Have studied -- and I know them;
Inconstant, sanguine, easily inflamed,
But like the nitrous powder uncompress'd,
Consuming by the blaze naught but itself.
It Is ours to charge the mine with deadly skill,
And bury usurpation in the ruin.

ALMADA. I think we cannot fail -- Our friends are firm.
Honor will bind the noble -- Hope the weak,
And common interest all -- The insulting Spaniard
Broods over embryo mischiefs, nor suspects
The wretched worm conceals a mortal sting
To pierce the haughty heel that tramples him.

RIBIRO. How great will be our triumph, Spain's disgrace,
When every mischief that perfidious court
Has framed against Braganza's precious life,
Recoils on the contriver!

ALMADA. Urge that home;
Urge how the Duke's affection to his country,
His right unquestionable to her crown,
First marked him for the victim of false Spain;
That his commission as high admiral,
His general's staff, and all the lofty pomp
Of his high sounding titles, were but meant
As gilded snares to invite him to his death.

RIBIRO. These truths, shameful to Philip, must be told;
They will endear Don Juan to the people,
Will keep them waking, restless, and disposed
To aid the glorious tumult of tomorrow.

ALMADA. My heart expands, and with a prophet's fire
Seizes the bright reversion of our hopes.
I see the genius of our realm restored,
And smiling lead him to his rightful throne.
No wild ambition, like a pampered steed,
O'erleaps the boundaries of law and reason,
And tramples every seed of social virtue:
But over the temperate current of his blood
The gentlest passions brush their breezy wings,
To animate, but not disturb the stream.
Such is his temper -- The approaching hour
Demands perhaps a sterner.

RIBIRO. Heaven still kind,
Has in his confort's breast struck deep the root
Of each aspiring virtue. -- Bright Louisa,
To all the softness of her tender sex,
Unites the noblest qualities of man;
A genius to embrace the amplest scheme
That ever swelled the laboring statesman's breast;
Judgment most sound, persuasive eloquence
To charm the froward and convince the wise;
Pure piety without religion's dross,
And fortitude that shrinks at no disaster.

ALMADA. She is indeed a wonder. -- O Ribiro,
That woman was the spring that moved us all.
She canvass'd all our strength, urged all our wrongs,
Combined our force, and methodized our vengeance.
Taught us that ends which seem impossible
Are lost, or compassed only by the means;
That fortune is a false divinity,
But folly worships what the wise man makes.
She turned our cold dejection to device,
And roused despondency to active valor.
My age delights to dwell on her perfections --

RIBIRO. And I could ever hear them -- Virtue's praise
To honest ears is music. -- But no more --
A noise comes this way, and that hurrying throng
Proclaims the upstart Minister's approach.
This is the hour with fancy pageantry
Through our thin'd streets he takes his wonted round;
Like the dire clapping of the harpy's wing,
To choke the frugal meal with bitter tears,
And scare content from every humble board.
I will avoid him. But I go, proud man,
When next we meet to make my presence dreadful.

Exit Ribiro. ALMADA alone. Honest Ribiro! -- To this hour my soul
Has kept her purpose; my firm foot has never
Swerved from its path in Lisbon, nor shall now
Give way to insolence. -- Your country's dregs!
Looking toward the train of Velasquez. Ye supple sycophants! Ay, cringe and
beg
That he will tread upon your prostrate necks,
Or ride you like his mules. -- Authority!
Thy worshipped symbols round a villain's trunk
Provoke men's mockery, not their reverence.

OFFICER entering. Make way there -- room, room for the Minister.
Know you the lord Velasquez comes this way? (To Almada.)
Pray, Sir, give place.

ALMADA. Officious varlet, off!
Let not thy servile touch pollute my robe.
Can hirelings frown? --

Enter VELASQUEZ and PIZARRO. -- The Magistrates of Lisbon with their Insignia,
Guards and Attendants preceding. VELASQUEZ. (looking sternly at Almada.) How!
Am I then despised --
A tumult in my presence: -- Good, my lord,
It better would become your gravity,
To set the fair example of obedience
To trust and office, than instruct the rabble
In what they are the most prone to, feuds and faction.

ALMADA. Most reverend admonition! Hold my spleen!
Ye golden coronets and ermin'd robes,
Bend from your stools, behold this wondrous man,
This Lusitanian censor, this sage Cato,
This consul, with his lictors, rods and axes,
Reprove the boy, Almada, for his lightness!

PIZARRO. Regard not his wild words, he is old and choleric.

VELASQUEZ. ( To his train.) Attend me at the citadel -- Move on. Exeunt
attendants.
I know not whether to accuse my fortune,
Or blame my own demerits; brave Almada,
That ever when we meet, thy angry brow
Rebukes me with its frown, or keen reproach
Darts from thy tongue, and checks the forward wish
That fain would court thy friendship and esteem.

ALMADA. Friendship with thee! -- Is it so slight a boon?
If such deserve the name, go seek for friends
Amidst the desperate crew whose only bond
Is the black conscience of confederate crimes;
Nor in prepost'rous union think to join
Integrity with guilt, and shame with honor.
Know me for what I am -- thy foe professed.
Fall on thy knee -- solicit Heaven for mercy,
And tell that seat of pride, thy obdurate he art,
Its last, its only virtue is -- remorse. --

Exit Almada. Manent VELASQUEZ and PIZARRO. VELASQUEZ. Go, hoary fool! preach
to the whistling winds,
I scorn thy council, and defy thy hate.
It Is time enough for lagging penitence,
When age, like thine, has quenched ambition's flame.
Now nobler thoughts possess my active soul.
This haughty province first shall feel my weight,
And since it scorns my love, through fear obey me.

PIZARRO. Already all the power of Spain is thine,
The Vice Queen, Marg'ret, though of Austrian blood,
Discreet, firm, virtuous, complains in vain;
You leave her but a regent's empty title,
While power is only yours: -- And happier still,
Braganza summoned to attend the King,
Will soon cut off his country's only hope,
And leave no rival to obscure thy luster.
'Bate but the show and name of royalty,
Thou art already King.

VELASQUEZ. The show, the name,
All that gives grace and awe to majesty
Shall soon be mine, Pizarro -- Olivarez,
Whose counsels rule the Escurial, to my hand
Has long resigned the reins of Portugal,
And dreams not (unsuspicious of my faith)
The Delegate, the creature of his breath,
Anon will bid defiance to his power,
And rank himself with monarchs.

PIZARRO. O take heed,
Consider, Sir, that power still awes the world --

VELASQUEZ. My towering fortune rises on a rock,
And firm as Atlas will defy the storm.
The purple cement of a Prince's blood
Shall strengthen its foundation.

PIZARRO. Ha!

VELASQUEZ. Braganza's.
-- The precious mischief swells my exulting breast,
And soon shall burst its prison.

PIZARRO. Can it be?
I know thy dauntless temper mocks at fear,
And prudence guides thy daring. -- But a Prince
Followed by faithful guards -- encompassed round
With troops of gallant friends -- the people's idol --

VELASQUEZ. Is mortal, like the meanest of his train,
And dies before tomorrow. -- Cease to wonder --
But when this mighty ruin shakes the realm,
Prepare like me, with well-dissembled grief,
To hide our real joy, and blind suspicion.
Flourish of trumpets. These trumpets speak his entrance; never more
Such sprightly notes, nor shout of joyful friends,
Paean or choral song shall usher him;
But sad solemnity of funeral pomp,
Mute sorrow, mournful dirges, ghastly rites,
Marshaled by death, in comfortless array,
Wait his cold relics to their sepulcher.

End of the First ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
An Antichamber in the Duke of BRAGANZA 's Palace. RIBIRO, MENDOZA. RIBIRO. A
Moment's pause, Mendoza! here appointed
By promise to the Duke at noon to wait him,
I could not mingle with his followers,
So saw it but in part --

MENDOZA. The air still rings
With loudest acclamations.

RIBIRO. Yes, Mendoza;
With joy I heard them -- heard the vaulted sky
Echo Braganza. -- 'Twas no hireling noise,
No faction's roar of mercenary joy,
Sound without transport -- but the heartfelt cry
Of a whole nation's welcome. Hear it Spain!
Proud usurpation hear it!

MENDOZA. The whole way
Was covered thick with panting multitudes,
That scarce left passage for their chariot wheels;
The trees were bent with people; every roof,
Dome, temple, portico, so closely filled,
The gazers made the wonder. Here and there
A discontented Spaniard stalked along
Should'ring the crowd; and with indignant scorn
Turned up his sallow cheek in mockery.

RIBIRO. We shall retort their scorn -- Marked you the Duke?
His mind is ever lettered in his face.

MENDOZA. Pleasure was mingled with anxiety,
Both visible at once. But, O what words
Can paint the angel form that graced his side,
His bright Louisa! like the Olympian Queen,
When over her fragrant bosom Venus bound
The enchanting Cestus -- from her lucid eyes
Streamed the pure beams of soft benevolence,
And glories more than mortal shone around her.
Harmonious sounds of dulcet instruments
Swelled by the breath, or swept from tuneful wire,
Floated in air -- while yellow Tagus burned
With prows of flaming gold; their painted flags
In gandy frolic fluttering to the breeze.
On to their palace thus the triumph came:
Alighted at the gate, the princely pair
Expressed their thanks in silent dignity
Of gesture, far more eloquent than words;
Then turned them from the throng --

RIBIRO. Why this looks well.
The Duke will sure be roused to resolution
By this bright presage of his coming glory.

MENDOZA. With grief I learn he still is undetermined.
His fears prevail against the public wish;
And thus the ill-pois'd scale of our fair hopes,
Mounts light and unsubstantial.

RIBIRO. O you wrong him.
I know his noble nature -- Juan's heart
Pants not with selfish fear -- His wife, his friends,
An infant family, a kingdom's fate,
More than his own, besiege his struggling soul;
He must be more than man, who will not hear
Such powerful calls, and less, who can despise them.

MENDOZA. Indeed I cannot wonder he is disturbed,
But doubts are treason in a cause like this.

RIBIRO. Dismiss these fears -- Louisa's gentle sway
Will fix him to our purpose. Night's chaste orb
Rules not the heavings of the restless tide,
More sure than she with mild ascendancy
Can govern all his ebbs and flows of passion.
But come, by this time the fond multitude
Have gazed away their longing, and retire.
Our greeting will be seasonable now. Exeunt.

SCENE II.
A magnificent Chamber in the Duke of BRAGANZA' s Palace. -- The Duke speaking
to LEMOS and COREA -- Other Citizens at a little Distance. DUKE. No more kind
countrymen -- This goodness melts me.
What can I render back for all these honors?
This wondrous prodigality of praise?
What but my life, whenever your welfare asks it.

LEMOS. Heaven guard that precious life for Portugal!
To you, as to a tutelary God,
This sinking country lifts her suppliant hands,
And certain of your strength, implores your arm
To raise her prostrate genius from the dust.

DUKE. A private man, a subject like yourselves,
Bankrupt of power, though rich in gratitude --
The sense of what you suffer wrings my soul,
Nor makes your sorrows less.

DUCHESS. Much injured men
Whom love not fear should govern -- from this hour
Know we espouse your cause -- We have not hearts
Of aliens, to behold with passing glance
And cold indifference, the ruthless spoiler
Smile over the ravage of your fertile plains.
We feel the fetters that disgrace your limbs;
We mourn the vigor of your minds depressed:
With horror we behold your generous blood,
Drained by the infatiate thirst of ravening wolves.
If we have nature, we must feel your wrongs,
If we have power, redress them --

COREA. Matchless lady!
There spoke our rightful Queen, our better angel!
In us behold your servants, subjects, soldiers;
Though yet unpracticed in the trade of war,
Our swords will find an edge at your command.

DUKE. We neither doubt your courage nor your love,
And both perhaps ere long may meet the trial --
I would detain you -- but our conference,
Might now be dangerous -- Rank me with your friends,
And know I have a heart for Portugal.

Exeunt Lemos, Corea, etc. Manent DUKE and DUCHESS. DUCHESS. Why wears my
Juan's brow that thoughtful cloud
Why thus with downcast look and folded arms?
When every other bosom swells with hope,
When expectation, like a fiery steed,
Anticipates the course, and pants to hear
The sprightly signal start him for the goal.
Think that the people from their leader's eye
Catch the sure omens of their future fate;
With his their courage falls, their spirits rise;
For confidence is conquest's harbinger.

DUKE. Light of thy Juan's life! My soul's best joy?
Swifter than meteors glide, or wings of wind,
My nimble thoughts shoot through their whirling round:
A thousand cares distract this anxious breast.
To recompense the dark uncertainty
Of this dread interval, 'twixt now and morn,
Would ask whole years of happiness to come.
Now thou art mine, these faithful arms enfold thee;
But oh! tomorrow may behold thee torn
By barbarous ruffians from their fond embrace,
The flowing honors of that beauteous head,
May sweep a scaffold's dust, and iron death
Close in eternal sleep those radiant eyes
That beam with love and joy unutterable.

DUCHESS. O make me not your curse, as sure I must be,
The stain, the blot of your immortal fame,
If one soft passion like a languid spell,
Dissolve thy manly fortitude of soul,
And melt the prince and patriot in the husband.

DUKE. That tender union is the healing balm,
The cordial of my soul -- our destinies
Are twined together -- Were my single life
The only forfeit of this perilous chance,
I Would throw it, like a heedless prodigal,
And wanton with my fortune -- But alas!
More than the wealth of worlds is now at stake.
And can I hazard this dear precious pledge,
Venture my all of bliss on one bold cast,
Nor feel the conflict that now rends my heart?

DUCHESS. Why do you tremble? -- These cold struggling drops --

DUKE. -- They fall for thee Louisa -- my quelled spirit
Avows its weakness there --

DUCHESS. It Is cruel fondness,
It wounds me deeply Juan.

DUKE. Witness honor!
Thy martial call never found Braganza's ear
Cold, till this bitter moment. -- I have met,
Nay courted death, in the steeled files of war,
When squadrons withered as the giant trod;
Nor shrunk even when the hardiest in the field
Have paused upon the danger -- Here, I own,
My agonizing nerves degrade the soldier,
Even to a coward's frailty -- Should the sword
Which black destruction soon may wave over all,
(Avert it Heaven!) strike at thy precious life,
Should but one drop, forced by rude violence,
Stain that dear bosom, I were so accursed,
The outstretch'd arm of mercy could not save me.

DUCHESS. I have a woman's form, a woman's fears,
I shrink from pain and start at dissolution.
To shun them is great Nature's prime command;
Yet summoned as we are, your honor pledged,
Your own just rights engaged, your country's fate,
Let threatening death assume his direst form,
Let dangers multiply, still would I on,
Still urge, exhort, confirm thy constancy,
And though we perished in the bold attempt,
With my last breath I Would bless the glorious cause,
And think it happiness to die so nobly.

DUKE. O thou have roused me -- From this hour I banish
Each fond solicitude that hovered round thee:
Thy voice, -- thy looks -- thy soul are heaven's own fire.
'Twere impious but to doubt that power ordained thee
To guide me to this glorious enterprise:

DUCHESS. Thou shall be chronicl'd to latest time,
Heaven's chosen instrument to punish tyrants.
The great restorer of a nation's freedom!
Thou shall complete what Brutus but attempted.
Nor withering age, nor cold oblivion's shade,
Nor envy's cank'rous tooth shall blast thy wreaths:
But every friend to virtue shall inscribe
To Juan's name eternal monuments.
But see our friends approach -- awhile I leave thee --
Remember still -- thou must be king or nothing.

Exit Duchess. DUKE alone. I will suppress the emotions of my heart.
Quite to subdue them is impossible.
Enter RIBIRO and MENDOZA. Welcome ye wakeful guardians of your country!
Had we in all the people's mighty mass
But twenty spirits matched with you in virtue,
How might we bid defiance to proud Spain;
How scorn the close disguise of secret councils,
And challenge their full force in open combat!

RIBIRO. Led by Don Juan, can we doubt the event?
All things conspire -- Antipathy to Spain
Is here hereditary -- It Is nature's instinct,
It Is principle, religion, vital heat.
Old men to listening sons with their last breath
Bequeath it as a dying legacy.
Infants imbibe it at the mother's breast.
It circles with their blood, spreads with their frame,
Its fountain is the heart, and till that fails
The stream it fed can never cease to flow.

MENDOZA. That furious impulse gives the spleen of fiends
To softest tempers, the unpracticed arm
Sinews with lion's strength, and drives us on
Resistless as the sweeping whirlwind's force.

DUKE. All is propitious! Every post is filled
With officers devoted to our service:
Already in their hearts they own my title,
And wait but for our orders to proclaim it.

Enter ALMADA. DUKE. Come to my breast, my sage admonisher!
The tutor and example of my arms!
The proud Iberian soon shall feel their force;
And learn from Juan's sword to venerate
The fame of brave Almada.

ALMADA. Thus my prince,
Thus did I hope to find thee. Hence no more
Shall hard exactions grind the prostrate people;
Our gentry to their provinces confined
Languish no more in shameful circumscription;
No more our ancient noblemen be stripped
Of all but empty titles, tinsel names
Like tarnish'd gold on rags to mock the wearer!
Our posts of eminence no more be filled
With upstart strangers, or the sordid lees
Of base plebian natives --

DUKE. My impatient breast,
Full of the expected joy, like a young bridegroom,
Upbraids the lazy hours that lag between
My wishes and enjoyment -- The onset is --

ALMADA. When St. Lazar beats five, about that hour
We'll welcome the sun's rising with an offering
More glorious than the Persians Hecatomb.

RIBIRO. At night your friends assemble with Almada
In dreadful secrecy -- Then with raised arm
We rush to cancel our long debt to vengeance,
And glut our thirsty blades with Spanish gore.

ALMADA. If we suspend the blow beyond tomorrow
All may be lost -- Three thousand veterans
Lie cantoned on the river's southern side;
Should our design be known, they will be called
To reinforce the posts, and guard the city.
Adieu then to our dream of liberty!
We rivet closer chains on Portugal,
And drag the doom of traitors on ourselves.

Enter DUCHESS. DUCHESS. Suspend your consultations for a moment,
Within the minister of Spain attends;
Forgive the officious love of your Louisa:
No stranger to his arts, she warns her Juan --

DUKE. I know he comes in solemn mockery
To make a hollow tender of his service
With most obsequious falsehood.

DUCHESS. My best Lord,
Hold strictest watch on all your words and motions;
Guard every look, with that discerning villain;
Subtle, infiduous, false, and plausible;
He can with ease assume all outward forms,
Seem the most honest, plain, sincere good man,
And keep his own designs locked close within,
While with the lynx's beam he penetrates
The deep reserve of every other breast.

DUKE. I too will wear my vizor in the scene,
And play the dupe I am not. -- Friends, farewell!
Perhaps ere morning we may meet again --
The hour is fixed, Louisa; -- all prepared --

DUCHESS. Then this is our last night of slavery --
A brighter era rises with the dawn. Exit Duke.
If we may dare without impiety
To challenge heavenly aid, and swell the breast
With confidence of more than mortal vigor,
Can Heaven stand neuter in a cause like this?
Or favor fraud, oppression, cruelty?
-- Now gentle friends I am a suitress to you.

ALMADA. You are our sovereign, madam -- it is your right,
Not to solicit but command our duty.

DUCHESS. Think me not light, capricious, variable,
If I who urged ye to this bold attempt,
And ever when your anger seemed to cool
Poured oil to wake the flame and feed its blaze,
Now supplicate with milder earnestness
And strive to allay its fury.

ALMADA. Speak your pleasure!
The obedience of our hearts will follow it!

DUCHESS. I know the measure of your wrongs would license,
Nay justify the wild excess of vengeance;
Yet in the headlong rage of execution,
Think rather what your mercy may permit
Than what their crimes deserve who feel your justice.
O! follow not the example we abhor,
Nor let those weapons justice consecrates
Be died with drops drawn from the bleeding breast
Of reverend age, or helpless innocence.
Will thou take heed Almada?

ALMADA. Fear not, madam,
All mercy not injurious to our cause,
Even Spaniards, as they are men, from men may challenge.
For Indus' wealth I would not stain this sword,
Sacred to honor, in the guiltless blood
Of unoffending wretches -- rest secure,
A prostrate and defenseless enemy,
Has stronger guards against a brave man's wrath,
Than tenfold brass, or shields of adamant.

DUCHESS. Generous Almada! well do thou instruct --
Soft pity is not more akin to love
Than to true fortitude. -- Thy soft youth, Mendoza,
Need not be tutored to humanity.

MENDOZA. Heaven and my conscious soul bear witness for me,
That not to satiate any private malice,
But for the general good, I stand engaged
In this great compact. -- 'Twere a coward's vengeance
To turn a sacrifice to massacre.
And practice while I punish cruelty.

RIBIRO. Till fortune give one victim to my rage,
Compassion and this bosom must be strangers,
No sanctuary, nor interceding prayers,
Nor wings of angels stretched to cover him,
Shall save that monster from the doom he merits.

DUCHESS. You mean the minister of Spain, Velasquez.

RIBIRO. I mean the minister of hell, Velasquez,
That cool deliberate executioner;
If he escape, may this good arm rot off,
All worthy thoughts forsake, and scorn pursue me:
Write boaster on my forehead -- let my name
Blister the tongue that speaks it. -- Infamy
Be here my portion, endless pains hereafter.

DUCHESS. O would that sacrifice might expiate! --

RIBIRO. Pardon the rash effusion of my zeal;
It deals too much in words.

DUCHESS. Not so, Ribiro,
Thy anger has a license; -- and thy zeal
We know is generous, not sanguinary.

ALMADA. Madam, we take our leave -- good angels guard you!
We go to prove our duty in your service.
The homage of our hearts has long been yours,
And soon you shall receive it from our knees.

DUCHESS. Believe me, friends, your loves are written here,
In characters no time can ever efface.

Exeunt Almada, Ribiro and Mendoza. DUCHESS alone. And may the mighty spirits
of past times
Raised by desert to bright immortal thrones,
Suspend awhile their task of heavenly praise
In ministry unseen to hover round them!
Protect aspiring virtue like their own,
And in their bosoms breathe resistless ardour! Exit.

End of the Second ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
The Apartments of VELASQUEZ, in the Palace of the Vice-Queen. VELASQUEZ,
PIZARRO. PIZARRO. YOU seem disturbed --

VELASQUEZ. With reason -- dull Braganza
Must have been tutored -- At our interview
I practiced every supple artifice
That glides into man's bosom -- The return
Was blank reserve, ambiguous compliment,
And hatred thinly veiled by ceremony.

PIZARRO. Might I presume --

VELASQUEZ. Pizarro, I am stung --
His father Theodosius, that proud Prince,
Who durst avow his enmity to Philip,
And menaced thunders at my destined head,
With all his empty turbulence of rage
Could never move me like the calm disdain
Of this cold blooded Juan.

PIZARRO. Then, my Lord,
Your purpose holds.

VELASQUEZ. It does -- I will dispatch
This towering Duke, who keeps the cheek of Spain
Pale with perpetual danger.

PIZARRO. For what end?
Unconscious of his fate, he blindly speeds
To find a grave in Spain -- Why then resolve
To spill that blood, which elsewhere will be shed
Without your crime or peril?

VELASQUEZ. That Is the question.
Were I assured they meant his death, 'twere needless:
But when they draw him once from Portugal,
Where only he is dangerous, then perhaps
Their fears, or lenity may let him live;
And while he lives, my fiery course is checked,
My sun climbs slowly, never can ascend
To its meridian brightness.

PIZARRO, Still, my Lord,
My short lined wisdom cannot sound your depth.

VELASQUEZ. I mean to tell thee all, for thou may aid me,
And thy tried faith deserves my confidence.

PIZARRO. I am your own for ever -- Your kind hand,
Bounteous beyond my merit, planted here
Favors innumerable. --

VELASQUEZ. -- Think them little --
An earnest, not the acquittal of my love.
The enormous wealth of Juan's royal house,
His large domains, extended influence,
His numerous vassals so have swelled his state,
That were his means but pushed to one great end;
How easy might he wrest this realm from Spain,
And brave King Philip's rage?

PIZARRO. Good careless prince!
Mild and uxorious! No ambitious dream
Disturbs his tranquil slumber --

VELASQUEZ. Just his nature!
On household wing he flutters round the roof,
That with the princely eagle might have soared
And met the dazzling sun. Now by his death
(My engine cannot fail, this night he meets it)
His wealth, his mightiness, his followers
Become Louisa's dower -- What think thou now?
Could I but win her to accept my hand,
(And much my art will move, and more my power)
Might not our union, like the impetuous course
Of blending torrents, break all feeble mounds
Spain could oppose to bar me from the crown?
That once obtained, let Olivarez rail,
Let his inglorious master call me traitor,
I Will scorn their idle fury.

PIZARRO. Still I fear
Louisa's heart, cold and impenetrable,
To all but Juan's love, will own no second,
Though big ambition swells her female breast
Beyond the sex's softness.

VELASQUEZ. My hope rests
Even on that favorite passion -- Grief at first
Will drive her far from love -- A second flame
Perhaps may never rekindle in her heart;
Yet, give her momentary frenzy scope,
It wastes itself; ambition then regains
Its wonted force and winds her to my lure --
But come -- I must not lose these precious moments,
The Fates are busy now -- What Is yet untold,
There place thyself and learn -- Take heed you move not.
Pizarro retires. Without there! Ho!

Enter an OFFICER. OFFICER. What is your lordship's pleasure?

VELASQUEZ. Attends the monk, Ramirez?

OFFICER. He does, my lord.

VELASQUEZ. Conduct him in and leave us.
Enter RAMIREZ. You are welcome,
Most welcome, reverend father -- Pray draw near --
We have a business for your privacy,
Of an especial nature -- The circling air
Should not partake it, nor the babbling winds,
Lest their invisible wings disperse one breath
Of that main secret, which thy faithful bosom
Is only fit to treasure.

RAMIREZ. Good my lord,
I am no common talker.

VELASQUEZ. Well I know it,
And therefore chose thee from the brotherhood,
Not one of whom but would lay by all thoughts
Of earth and Heaven, and fly to execute
What I, the voice of Spain, commissioned him.

RAMIREZ. Vouchsafe directly to unfold your will,
My deeds, and not my words, must prove my duty.

VALESQUEZ. Nay, trust me, could they but divine my purpose,
The holiest he, that wastes the midnight lamp
In prayers and penance, would prevent my tongue
And hear me thank the deed, but not persuade it.
Therefore, good friend, it is not necessity,
That sometimes forces any present means,
And chequers chance with wisdom, but free will,
The election of my judgment and my love,
That gives thy aptness this pre-eminence.

RAMIREZ. The state, I know, has store of instruments,
Like well-rang'd arms in ready order placed,
Each for its several use.

VELASQUEZ. Observe me well;
Think not I mean to snatch a thankless office;
Who serves the state, while I direct her helm,
Commands my friendship, and his own reward.
Say, can you be content in these poor weeds
To know no earthly hopes beyond a cloister?
But stretched on musty matts in noisome caves,
To rouse at midnight bells, and mutter prayers
For souls beyond their reach, to senseless saints?
To wage perpetual war with nature's bounty?
To blacken sick men's chambers, and be numbered
With the loathed leavings of mortality,
The watch-light, hourglass, and the nauseous phial?
Are these the ends of life? Was this fine frame,
Nerves exquisitely textur'd, soft desires,
Aspiring thoughts, this comprehensive soul,
With all her train of god-like faculties
Given to be sunk in this vile drudgery?

RAMIREZ. These are the hard conditions of our state.
We sow our humble seeds with toil on earth,
To reap the harvest of our hopes in Heaven.

VALESQUEZ. Yet wiser they who trust no future chance,
But make this earth a Heaven. Raise thy eyes
Up to the temporal splendors of our church;
Behold our priors, prelates, cardinals;
Survey their large revenues, princely state,
Their palaces of marble, beds of down,
Their statues, pictures, baths, luxurious tables,
That shame the fabled banquets of the gods.
See how they weary art, and ransack nature
To leave no taste, no wish ungratified.
Now -- if thy spirit shrink not -- I can raise thee
To all this pomp and greatness. -- Pledge thy faith,
Swear thou will it do this thing -- whatever I urge,
-- And Lisbon's envied crozier shall be thine,

RAMIREZ. This goodness, so transcending all my hopes,
Confounds my astonished sense. -- Whatever it be
Within the compass of man's power to act,
I here devote me to the execution.

VELASQUEZ. I must not hear of conscience and nice scruples,
Tares that abound in none but meagre soils,
To choke the aspiring seeds of manly daring:
Those puny instincts, which in feeble minds,
Unfit for great exploits, are miscalled virtue --

RAMIREZ. Still am I lost in dark uncertainty;
And must for ever wander, till thy breath
Deign to dispel the impenetrable mist,
Fooling my sight that strives in vain to pierce it.

VELASQUEZ. You are the Duke of Braganza's confessor,
And fame reports him an exact observer
Of all our churches' holy ceremonies.
He still is will not whenever he visits Lisbon,
Ere grateful slumber seal his pious lids,
With all due reverence, from some priestly hand
To take the mystic symbol of our faith.

RAMIREZ. It ever was his custom, and this night
I am commanded to attend his leisure
With preparation for the solemn act.

VELASQUEZ. I know it -- Take (gives him a box) thou this -- It holds a wafer
Of sovereign virtue to enfranchise souls,
Too righteous for this world, from mortal cares.
A monk of Milan mixed the deadly drug,
Drawn from the quintessence of noxious plants,
Minerals and poisonous creatures, whose dull bane
Arrests the nimble current of life's tide,
And kills without a pang.

RAMIREZ. I knew him well,
The Carmelite Castruccio, was it not?

VELASQUEZ. The same, he first approved it on a wretch
Condemned for murder to the lingering wheel.
This night commit it to Braganza's lips.
Had he a heart of iron, giant strength,
The antidotes of Pontus -- All were vain,
To struggle with the venom's potency.

RAMIREZ. This night, my lord?

VELASQUEZ. This very night, nay, shrink not,
Unless thou mean to take the lead in death,
And pull thy own destruction on thy head.

RAMIREZ. Give me a moment's pause -- A deed like this --

VELASQUEZ. Should be at once resolved and executed.
Think thou I am a raw unpracticed novice,
To make thy breast a partner to the trust,
And not thy hand accomplice of the crime?
Why it is the bond for my security:
Look not amazed, but mark me heedfully.
Thou have thy choice -- dispatch mine enemy.
The means are in thy hand -- be safe and great,
Or instantly prepare thee for a death
Which nothing but compliance can avert.

RAMIREZ. Numbers I know even thus have tasted death,
But sure imagination scarce can form
A way so horrid, impious!

VELASQUEZ. How Is this, How Is this!
Hear me, pale miscreant, my rage once roused,
That hell thou dread'st this moment shall receive thee.
Look here and tremble -- Draws a dagger and seizes him.

RAMIREZ. My lord be not so rash,
Your fury's deaf -- Will you not hear me speak?
By every hope that cheers, all vows that bind,
Whatever horror waits upon the act,
Your will shall make it justice -- I Am resolved.

VALASQUEZ. No trifling, Monk -- take heed, for should thou fail --

RAMIREZ. Then be my life the forfeit -- My obedience
Not only follows from your high command,
But that my bosom swells against this Duke
With the full sense of my own injuries. --

VELASQUEZ. Enough -- I thank thee -- Let me know betimes
How we have prosper'd. Hence, retire with caution,
Deserve my favor, and then meet me boldly. Exit Ramirez.
It Is done -- His doom is sealed -- Come forth Pizarro.
Pizarro comes forward. Is It not a subtle mischief?

PIZARRO. Past all praise,
The holy tool had qualms.

VELASQUEZ. (Pointing to his dagger.) But this dispelled them,
And fortified the coward by his fears.
His work performed, I mean to end him too. --
Say, is my barge prepared as I commanded?

PIZARRO. All is prepared, my Lord.

VELASQUEZ. The friends of Juan,
(I Will tell thee as we pass) they shall not long
Survive to lift their crests so high in Lisbon. Exeunt.

SCENE changes to the Castle of ALMADA. Enter ALMADA and an Attendant. ALMADA.
Good Perez, see that none to night have entrance
But such whose names are written in that roll,
And bid your fellows from the northern tower,
Choose each a faulchion, and prepare to follow
Where I at dawn will lead.

ATTENDANT. I will, my Lord.

ALMADA. Wait near the gate thyself, nor stir from thence
Without my summons.

ATTENDANT. Trust my vigilance. Exit Attendant.

ALMADA alone. Now rayless midnight flings her sable pall
Athwart the horizon, and with ponderous mace
In dead repose weighs down o'er-labour'd nature,
While we, the busy instruments of fate,
Unmindful of her season, wake like ghosts,
To add new horrors to the shadowy scene.

To him enter several of the Duke of BRAGANZA'S Friends. ANTONIO. Health to
Almada.

ALMADA. Thus to meet, Antonio!
Is the best health, the soundness of the mind.
Better at this dark hour to embrace in arms
Thus girt for manly execution, friend!
Than in the mazes of the wanton dance,
Or revelling over bowls in frantic mirth,
To keep inglorious vigils.

ANTONIO. True, my Lord.

Enter RIBIRO with LEMOS and COREA. ALMADA. (to Ribiro.) O soul of honor,
ever, ever constant.
These are the worthy citizens, our friends --

RIBIRO. (Presenting Lemos and Corea.) And such as laurell'd Rome might well
have owned
Worthy to fill her magisterial chairs,
When reverence bowed to virtue though untitled.

ALMADA. As such I take their hands, nay more as such,
Their grateful country will rejoice to own them.
Are we all met?

ANTONIO. Mendoza is not here,
Nor Roderic, and Mello too is absent.

ALMADA. They were not wont to be thus waited for.

RIBIRO. Anon they will be here, -- mean time proceed,
They know their place already --

ALMADA. Why we meet,
Is not to canvass our opprobrious wrongs,
But to redress them. -- Yet as trumpets sound,
To rouse the soldier's ardor, -- so the breath
Of our calamities will wake our fires,
And fan them to spread wide the flame of vengeance.
It Is not my gift to play the orator,
But in plain words to lay our state before you.
-- Our tyrant's grandsire, whose ambition claimed,
And first usurped Braganza's royal rights,
My blood established his detested sway.
Old Tagus blushed with many a crimson tide,
Sluic'd from the noblest veins of Portugal.
The exterminating sword knew no distinction.
Princes, and prelates, venerable age,
Matrons, and helpless virgins fell together,
'Till cloyed and sick of slaughter, the tired soldier
With grim content flung down his reeking steel,
And glutted rage gave truce to massacre.

RIBIRO. Nor passed the iron rod to milder hands
Through two succeeding reigns -- With cruel zeal
The barbarous offspring emulate their sire,
And track his bloody footsteps in our ruin.

ALMADA. Now mark how happily the time conspires,
To give our great achievement permanence;
-- Spain is not what she was, when Europe bowed
To the fifth Charles, and his degenerate son.
When, like a torrent swelled by mountain floods,
She swept the neighboring nations with her arms,
And threatened those remote, -- contracted now
Within an humble bed, the thrifty urn,
Of her exhausted greatness, scarce can pour
A lazy tide through her own mouldering states.

RIBIRO. Yes the Colossus totters, every blast
Shakes the stupendous mass and threats its downfall.

Enter MENDOZA. MENDOZA. Break off -- break off -- the fatal snare is spread,
And death's pale hand assists to close the toil.

ALMADA. Whence this dread greeting? -- Ha -- thy altered cheek
Wears not the ensign of this glowing hour.

MENDOZA. The scream of night owls, or the ravens croak
Would better suit the baleful news I bring,
Than the known accents of a friendly voice.
-- We are undone -- betrayed --

ALMADA. Say thou -- betrayed?

MENDOZA. Our tower is sap'd -- the high raised fabric falls
To crush us with the ruin. -- What avails
The full maturity of all our hopes?
This glorious league -- the justice of our cause? --
-- High Heaven might idly thunder on our side,
If traitors to ourselves. --

ALMADA. Ourselves -- Oh shame!
I Will not believe it -- What perfidious slaves --

MENDOZA. Two whom we thought the sinews of our strength,
Don Roderic and Mello. --

RIBIRO. Lightnings blast them!
May infamy record their dastard names,
And vulgar villains shun their fellowship --
These hot, loud brawlers --

MENDOZA. Are the slaves of Spain,
And bargain for the price of perfidy. --
On to the wharf with quick impatient step,
I saw Velasquez press, and in his train
These lurking traitors. -- Now, even now, they cross
The ebbing Tagus in the tyrant's barge,
And hasten to the sort. -- The troops of Spain,
Even while we speak, are summoned to the charge,
And mark us for their prey.

ALMADA. Nay then, it is past.
Malignant fortune, when the cup was raised
Close to our lips, has dashed it to the ground.

RIBIRO. This unexpected bolt strikes flat our hopes,
And leaves one dreary desolation round us.
I see their hangmen muster -- wolf-ey'd cruelty,
Grimly sedate, glares over her iron hoard
Of racks, wheels, engines, feels her axe's edge
Licks her fell jaws, and with a monster's thirst,
Already drinks our blood.

MENDOZA. There Is not a pang
That rends the fibers of man's feeling frame,
No vile disgrace, that even in thought o'er-spreads
The cheek with burning crimson, but her hate
Ingenious to devise, and sure to inflict
In keenest agony will make us suffer.

ALMADA. Would that were all -- Our dismal scene must close;
Nature over power'd at length will leave her load,
And baffie persecution. -- But O, Portugal!
Alas unhappy country! Where Is the bourn
Can mark the extent of thy calamities.
Like winter's icy hand our luckless end
Will freeze the source of future enterprise:
Oppression then over the devoted realm
Erect and bold will stalk with tenfold ravage.
There, there alone, this breast is vulnerable;
These are the wheels that wrench, the racks that tear me.

ANTONIO. But are there left no means to elude the danger?
Why do we linger here? -- Why not resolve
To save ourselves by flight?

MENDOZA. Impossible!
The guards no doubt are set -- the port is barred.

ALMADA. Fly Lemos to the people, and restrain
Their generous ardor. -- It would now break forth
Useless to us, and fatal to themselves. Exit Lemor.
You to the Duke, Ribiro! -- In our names,
(Perhaps our last request) by our lost fortunes,
By all our former friendship, O conjure him
To save our richest treasure from the wreck,
Nor hazard in a desperate enterprise
His country's last best hope, his valued life.

RIBIRO. Support him Heaven, and arm his piety
To bear this sad vicissitude with patience. Exit Ribiro.

ALMADA. And yet we will not meet in vain, brave friends;
We came with better hopes, resolved like men
To struggle for our freedom. -- What remains?
A greater power than mortals can arraign,
Has otherwise decreed it. -- Speak, my brothers,
Now doubly dear in stern adversity;
Say, shall we glut the spoiler with our blood,
Submit to the vile insults of their law,
To have our honest dust by the ruffian hands
Given to the winds -- Is this the doom that waits us?

MENDOZA. Alas what better doom? To ask for mercy
Were ignominious, to expect it bootless.

ALMADA. To ask for mercy -- could Spain stretch my life
To years beyond the telling, for one tear,
One word, in sign of sorrow, I Would disdain it.
Death still is in our power -- and we'll die nobly,
As soldiers should do, red with well earned wounds,
And stretched on heaps of slaughtered enemies.

Exeunt severally. End of the Third ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
A Chamber in the Duke of BRAGANZA' s Palace. DUCHESS alone. O Thou supreme
disposer of the world!
If from my childhood to this awful now,
I Have bent with meek submission to thy will,
Send to this feeble bosom one blessed beam
Of that bright emanation, which inspires
True confidence in thee, to calm the throbs
That heave this bosom for my husband's safety,
And with immortal spirit to exalt
Above all partial ties our countries love.

To her enter RIBIRO hastily. RIBIRO. Where is the Duke? O pardon, gracious
madam.

DUCHESS. What means this haste and these distracted looks?

RIBIRO. Detain me not -- but lead me to my Lord. --
His life, perhaps -- nay, your --

DUCHESS. His life -- O heavens!
Tell me, Ribiro -- speak --

RIBIRO. Too soon, alas
You Will hear it -- Ask not now dear lady
What I Have scarce breath to utter -- Where Is the Duke?

DUCHESS. This moment with his confessor retired
I left him in his closet.

RIBIRO. -- It Is no time --
All must give place to this dire urgency.
Even while we speak -- A moment's precious now. --
He must be interrupted -- Guide me to him.

DUCHESS. Suspense is lingering death. -- Come on, I Will lead you.

Exeunt. Enter RAMIREZ. RAMIREZ. O welcome interruption -- Pitying Heaven
A while at least arrests the murderous deed,
And gives a moment's respite from damnation.
-- Is there a hell beyond this war of conscience?
My blood runs backward, and my tottering knees
Refuse to bear their sacrilegious load.
Methought the statues of his ancestors,
As I passed by them, shook their marble heads;
His father's picture seemed to frown in wrath,
And its eye pierce me, while I trembling stood
Assassin like before it -- Hush -- I Am summoned.

Re-enter DUCHESS. DUCHESS. Get you to rest good father -- Fare you well.
Some unexpected business of the state
Demands my Lord's attention -- For this night
Your holy function must be unperform'd
Till more convenient season.

RAMIREZ. Holy function! aside.
I humbly take my leave, and will not fail
To recommend you in my prayers to Heaven.

Exit Ramirez DUCHESS. The Heavens I fear are shut and will not hear them.
-- Now gush my tears -- now break at once my heart!
While in my Juan's presence, I suppressed
The bursting grief -- But here give nature way!
Is there a hope -- Oh no -- All horrible --
My children too -- Their little lives -- My husband --
I conquered his reluctance -- I persuaded
By every power his boundless passion gave me --
I thought it virtue too -- Mysterious Heaven? --
Then I, and only I, have worked his ruin.

Enter DUKE. DUKE. Alas my love, why must thy Juan seek thee?
Why do thou shun me at this aweful moment?
The few sad hours our destiny permits,
Should sure be spent together.

DUCHESS. Must we part then?

DUKE. I fear we must for ever in this world,
Till that great power who fashioned us in life,
Unites us once again no more to fever;
In those blessed regions of eternal peace,
Where sorrow never enters, where thy truth,
Thy unexampl'd fortitude and sweetness,
Will meet their full reward.

DUCHESS. Where is the friend
Who rung our dismal knell?

DUKE. Good, generous man!
Assured of death, yet careless of his life,
And anxious but for us, he is returned,
To know what our brave leaders will determine --
Yet what can they determine but to die?
Our numbers poorly armed, undisciplined,
May fight and fall with desperate obstinacy,
For valor can no more -- But, oh Louisa!
Friends, country, life itself, all lost seem little;
One sharp devouring grief consumes the rest,
And makes thee all its object.

DUCHESS. My dear husband!
These soft endearments, this excess of fondness,
Strike deeper to my soul, than all the pangs
The subtlest vengeance could contrive to wound me.
Oh fly me, hate me, call me murderess;
It Is I have driven thee to this precipice,
I urge the ruffian hand of law to seize thee,
I drag thee to the block, -- I lift the axe,
(Oh agony) Louisa dooms thee dead!

DUKE. -- It Is anguish insupportable to hear thee
Add self-upbraidings to our misery.
Thou my destroyer! No my best Louisa,
Thou art my guardian angel. -- At this hour,
This dreadful hour, it is safety to be near thee.
Those dastards who betrayed our brave design,
That baseness which no caution could prevent,
Nor wisdom could foresee, 'twas that undid us.
I will not curse them -- Yet I swear by honor,
Thus hunted to the utmost verge of fate,
Without one ray of hope to cheer the danger,
I would not barter this dire certainty,
For that ignoble life those bad men purchase
By perfidy and vileness --

DUCHESS. Oh two such --
But indignation wants a tongue to name them.
How was their fury thundered on our side!
Their youthful veins full of Patrician blood
Insulted by Velasquez -- stripped by Spain
Of all the ancient honors of their house;
Sworn at the altar to assert this cause
By holiest adjurations: -- Yet these two
To turn apostates -- Can this fleeting breath,
This transitory, frail, uncertain being,
Be worth so vast a ransom?

DUKE. Yes, to cowards,
Such ever be the proselytes of Spain, --
Leave them to scorn. -- Fain would I turn my thoughts
From this bad world -- shake off the clogs of earth,
And for that great tribunal, arm my soul,
Where Heaven, not Spain, must judge me -- but in vain;
My softened mind still hangs on those blessed days,
Those years of sweet tranquillity and peace,
When smiling morn but waked us to new joys,
And love at night shed blessings on our pillow.

DUCHESS. These hours are fled, and never can return.
It Is Heaven's high will, and be that will obeyed.
The retrospect of past felicity
Plucks not the barbed arrow from the wound,
But makes it rankle deeper. -- Come my Juan,
Here bid adieu to this infectious grief,
Let Us knit our constancy to meet the trial;
Shall we be bold in words, mere moral talkers?
Declaim with pedant tongue in virtue's praise,
Yet find no comfort, no support within
From her bright energy? -- It comes -- it comes,
I feel my breast dilate -- The phantom, death,
Shrinks at the radiant vision -- bright eyed hope
Bids us aspire, and points the shining throne. --
-- Spain, I defy thee!

DUKE. O would she hew the elm,
And spare the tender vine -- This stubborn trunk
Should brave her fury. Here is royal blood,
And blood long thirsted for. -- They cannot dare,
Insatiate as they are, remorseless, savage,
With sacrilegious hands to violate
This beauteous sanctuary. -- Let me not think.
Distraction -- horror -- Oh it splits my brain,
Rends every vital string, and tears my heart.
Mercy can grant no more -- nor I petition,
Than to fall dead this instant and forget it.
I look toward Heaven in vain. -- Gape wide, O earth,
And bury, bury deep this load of anguish.

DUCHESS. Be not so lost. -- Hear, Oh hear me Juan,
My lord, my life, my love. -- Will thou not speak?
He heeds me not. -- What shall I say to move him?
For pity's sake look up. -- Oh think Braganza,
Could Spain behold thee thus --

DUKE. Oh no, Louisa,
No eye shall see me melt. -- I will be calm,
Still, silent, motionless. -- Oh tough, tough heart,
Would I could weep to ease thee --

DUCHESS. Here, weep here,
Pour the warm stream into this faithful breast,
Thy sorrows here shall find a kindred source,
Which flows for every tear with drops of blood.
Now summon all thy soul. -- Behold, he comes
To thunder our irrevocable doom.

Enter RIBIRO. RIBIRO. O for an angel's organ to proclaim
Such gratulations as no tongue can speak,
Nor mortal breast conceive -- joy, boundless joy.

DUKE. Am I awake? -- Thou can not mean to mock me.

RIBIRO. I shall go wild with transport. -- On my knee
I beg you to forgive the cruel shock
This tongue (Heaven knows with what severe reluctance)
So lately gave to all your dearest hopes.

DUKE. No, let me take that posture: for I swear,
Though yet I know not why, my lightened heart
Beats freer, and seems eased of half its burden.
-- Forgive my strong impatience -- quickly tell me.

RIBIRO. Still ignorant of our intended vengeance,
Velasquez is returned. -- Our gallant friends
Were wronged by rash suspicion. --

DUKE. Heard I right?
Or is it illusion all? (embracing him) Thus let me thank thee.
Louisa then is safe -- Fountain of mercy!
These late despairing arms again enfold her,
My Queen, my love, my wife! --

DUCHESS. Flow, flow my tears;
Take, bounteous lord of all, this melting tribute,
My heart can give no more for all thy goodness.

DUKE. And now disclose this wonder.

RIBIRO. Thus, my lord,
When at the appointed time, our two brave friends
Were hastening to Almada, near the square,
Velasquez and his followers crossed their steps,
Their course seemed toward the river; -- struck with fear,
And ignorant what cause at that late hour
Could draw him from the palace; straight they changed
Their first intent of joining our assembly,
And unobserved pursued the attending train.
Think what these brave men suffered when they saw
The tyrant climb his barge, and push from shore.
Their swords were half unsheathed, both half resolved
To rush at once, and pierce him to the heart.
-- But prudence, or our fortune checked their hands.

DUKE. It had been certain ruin -- but go on --

RIBIRO. An instant passed in thought, they seized a boat,
And following, anxious hung on all his motions:
Mendoza saw them thus -- then hurrying back,
Filled us with consternation at the tidings.

DUCHESS. Nor was it strange -- it wore a dreadful aspect;
But fear interprets all things to its danger.

RIBIRO. He crossed the river where Jago's fort
Commands the narrowing stream. The governor
Attended at the gate, a while there passed
In short but earnest converse, they took leave,
With hasty strides Velasquez reimbark'd;
The vessel, to the shore she left, returned,
And her proud master sought again the palace.

DUCHESS. Could not our valiant friends discover ought
That might reveal his purpose?

RIBIRO. Madam -- No.
To have inquired too near were dangerous
Besides, their haste to reassure our hopes
Pressed their return -- But thus we may resolve:
He apprehends some danger imminent.
He sees above his head the gathering cloud,
But knows not when 'twill burst in thunder on him.

DUKE. Thanks, gentle friend -- Alas, I tremble still;
As just escaped from shipwreck, I look round,
And though I tread on earth, -- firm, solid earth
See with broad eye the threatening surge far off,
Scarce can I credit my conflicting sense
Or trust our preservation --

DUCHESS. Thy glad tale
Has raised me from the gulf of black despair,
Even to the topmost pinnacle of joy.
Yes, we shall conquer -- All these dangers past
Will serve but to enrich the future story.
Our children's children shall recount each fear,
And from the mingled texture of our lives,
Learn to revere that sacred Providence
That guides the strife of virtue.

DUKE. O Louisa!
I thought I knew the extent of all my fondness,
That long acquaintance with thy wondrous virtue
Had given thee such dominion over my soul,
Time could not add to my trascendent passion.
But when the danger came, it waked new fires,
Presented thee in softer loveliness,
And twined thee closer here.

RIBIRO. My Lord, ere this
Our friends expect me. --

DUKE. Let us fly to meet them.
I long to pour into their generous breasts
My cordial greeting.

DUCHESS. Go my dearest Juan,
To them and all commend me; such rare zeal
Merits more recompense than our poor thanks
Can at the best requite. For souls like theirs
Ill brook the indignity of soul surmise;
And virtue wronged demands a double homage.

Exit Duchess. DUKE. If the good augury of my breast deceive not,
No more such terrors will appal our souls,
But guilt alone shall tremble -- Come, Ribiro. Exeunt.

SCENE changes to the Castle of ALMADA. ALMADA and several conspirators as
before, with MELLO and RODERIC. ALMADA. Again our hopes revive -- The unloaded
stem
Shakes the wet tempest from its vigorous head,
And rears the swelling harvest to our sight.

MENDOZA. After the chillings of this aguish fear,
Methinks I breathe more free -- the vital stream
In sprightlier tides flows through its wonted course,
Warms my whole frame and doubly man's my heart.

ALMADA. And may the generous ardor spread to all --
Observe me friends, -- our numbers must divide
Into four equal bands, all to attack
At the bell's signal the four palace gates.
So every passage barred, the foe in vain
May strive to unite and overwhelm our force.
Myself with the brave few, who have sworn to follow,
Will rush impetuous on the German guard,
Who at the northern entrance hold their station.
-- The fort be Roderic and Mello's care,
With Ferdinand, Henriquez, and Antonio.
-- Mendoza, Carlos, and their gallant troop
Must seize the regent Margaret, and secure
The counselors of Spain as hostages
For the surrender of the citadel.

MENDOZA. Letters to every province are dispersed
Importing this great change, and all are ready
To shake to earth the intolerable yoke.
Nay distant India, in her sultry mines
Shall hear the cheerful sound of liberty;
Again fair commerce welcomed to our shore,
Shall loose her swelling canvas to the winds,
And golden Tagus heave once more to meet her.
But see the Duke. --

Enter DUKE. ALMADA. Your unexpected presence,
Like a propitious omen cheers the night,
And gives a royal sanction to this meeting.

DUKE. My wish surpassed my speed -- A call like this
Might imp the tardiness of feeble age.
The general perseverance in our cause
Transcends all gratitude -- but these wronged virtues --

To Mello and Roderic. MELLO. Pray forbear;
The painful error brought its punishment.
Ribiro bore our duties to your grace.

DUKE. He did, and soon will join us -- On our way
He left me with design once more to view
The posture of the guards, -- for still we fear
Some dark impending mischief from Velasquez.

ALMADA. Whatever fortune waits upon our swords,
Your highness must not share the common hazard;
Lest in the tumult some inglorious chance
Deprive your country of its last best bulwark.

DUKE. And should I merit to be called her bulwark,
Or rank with men like you. -- could I submit
To hear, and not partake the glorious danger?

ALMADA. Pray be advised -- in this I must command.

DUKE. Then be it so -- but yet should ought betide
To claim the interest of thy prince's arm,
I cannot wrong our friendship to suspect
You will forbear my summons to the field.

ALMADA. Trust your Almada -- Lo! the night wears fast;
Nor are our scattered numbers yet returned.

DUKE. Welcome Ribiro! What intelligence?

Enter RIBIRO. RIBIRO. The worst if we delay -- Oh had your eyes
Beheld the sight that blasted mine.

DUKE. What fight?

RIBIRO. Lemos is seized this moment -- and Pizarro,
The ready tool of fell Velasquez' crimes,
Leads him to prison.

DUKE. Soon we'll wrench the gates,
And from their gloomy caverns draw to light
All that remains of those unhappy men,
Whom unarraign'd unheard the tyrants nod
Consigned to horrors nature shakes to think of.

ALMADA. His triumph will be short -- The subtle fiend
May league with hell to thwart us -- but in vain;
His fate or ours must quickly be decided.

RIBIRO. Even now it seems his demon whispers him
His audit is at hand and scares his soul.
Anxious at this late hour, he walks his chamber,
Nor seeks the season's rest -- and still more strange
The palace guards stretched by their glimmering fires,
Their arms cast by, lie wrapped in thoughtless sleep,

DUKE. Anon we'll rouse them with so loud a peal,
That death's dull ear shall hear it.

ALMADA. Corea!
Soon as our work begins, your hardy tribes
Must through the streets proclaim Don Juan King.
Press toward the palace; should our friends give ground,
Sustain their fainting strength.

COREA. We will not fail.

ALMADA. The general suffrage to thy sword, Ribiro,
Commits our master work; a deed so envied
That every trenchant steel of Portugal
(Did not thy gallant zeal demand it first)
Would strike to share the glory.

RIBIRO. (Pointing to his sword.) This shall thank you,
And if it reek not with his hated blood
Exchange it for a distaff.

ALMADA. Friends, I mean not
By gloomy presage to allay your ardor.
We must not look to fortune in this cause:
But on ourselves rely for sure success.
The least disorder in our bold approach,
The least repulse may drive our engine back.
One brave man's rashness, or one coward's fear,
Turns all our fairest hopes to shame and ruin.

DUKE. Now to our stations -- Yet ere we depart
This honest pledge, the soldier's short embrace.
The sweet remembrance, if we fall for freedom,
Will more than soften half the pains of dying;
But if we meet, in stronger clasps renewed,
Will double all the joys of victory.

End of the Fourth ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
The Apartments of VELASQUEZ in the royal Palace. VELASQUEZ alone. WHY am I
haunted by these phantom fears?
It cannot be my fate. It Is nature's weakness:
The spirits raised too high, like billows puffed
By sudden storms, lift up our little bark,
Then slipping from their burden, sink as fast,
And leave it wrecked and found'ring.

Enter PIZARRO. VELASQUEZ. Have you, as I commanded, questioned Lemos?

PIZARRO. Just now I left him.

VELASQUEZ. Has the slave confessed?

PIZARRO. With sullen calmness he defies your power,
Or answers but with scorn.

VELASQUEZ. We'll find the means
To make him speak more plainly, to bring down
This daring spirit -- He is dangerous;
And under the fair mask of public virtue,
Combines with proud Almada and the rest
In dark confed'racy against my state.

PIZARRO. He is, my Lord, the master-spring that moves
The factious populace.

VELASQUEZ. I know it well,
But I have taken such care as shall unhinge
Their ill-contriv'd designs. Ere noon tomorrow,
Don Garcia, with the Spanish veterans
From Saint Jago's fortress, shall pour in
And bend these stubborn necks to due obedience.
How will their disappointed fury rave
To find their royal demagogue, Braganza,
The idol their vain worship raised so high,
Low levelled with the earth. -- I wonder much
Ramirez not returns -- Night's latest watch
Will soon be told.

PIZARRO. Perhaps he but delays
(For better welcome) to behold the effect
Of the dire venom, and to glad your ears
By telling how your enemy expired.

VELASQUEZ. It may be so, I cannot doubt the effect;
Poison administered will do its work,
And this most speedily; it is swift perdition.
Yet, though this hour cuts off my greatest foe,
If my firm soul were capable of fear,
I might distrust the promise of my fortunes.

PIZARRO. Wherefore, my Lord?

VELASQUEZ. I almost blush to tell it,
Tired with the travail of this anxious night,
I threw me on my couch, and tried to rest;
I tried in vain -- my vexed lids scarce closed;
Or when a momentary slumber sealed them,
Strange visions swam before their twilight sense:
-- But why retrace the hideous phantasy?
Yet still it hovers round me, still remains
A fearful reverence of the past illusion.

PIZARRO. Such reverence but degrades a noble mind,
And sinks its vigor to an infant's weakness.
Beldams and priests infuse these idle fears,
And turn the milk of nature to its bane. Noise at a distance.

VELASQUEZ. Heard you that noise? Did thou not mark, Pizarro?
The monk has kept his word -- It Is Juan's knell:
His followers who shouted him at noon,
Now wail his death. -- My genius now has room;
Their sorrows are my triumph, and proclaim
Assured success to my aspiring soul.

PIZARRO. Sure it is the din of clashing arms -- again --
It comes this way --

Enter OFFICER with his sword drawn. VELASQUEZ. Ha! bleeding -- speak
Know you the cause? -- Speak, instant, speak --

OFFICER. Too well!
The raging multitude have forced their way;
Their cry is, Where Is the tyrant? -- Where Is Velasquez?
Don Juan's at their head, and guides the storm.

VELASQUEZ. Juan alive! eternal silence seize thee!
Impossible!

OFFICER. These eyes, my Lord, beheld him --
Saw his raised arm --

VELASQUEZ. Ha! am I then betrayed!
Perdition catch Ramirez -- You, Pizarro,
Collect my scattered train -- I Will forth, and meet
The rebel's sword.

PIZARRO. Be not so rash,
Nor venture singly -- Exit VELASQUEZ.

OFFICER. He rushes on his death.
Two of my soldiers are already slain,
Striving to bar the outward palace gates;
Where like a tide the frantic people press,
Bearing down all before them.

PIZARRO. Hence, begone;
The uproar's louder -- Wake the sleeping grooms --
Bid them bring arms -- Alarm the magistrates --
Send to the guard and draw them to the square.

Exit OFFICER. Re-enter VELASQUEZ. VELASQUEZ. Ruined! undone! all is lost -- the
streets are thronged
With raging citizens -- A furious band
Of armed Portugueze just now are mounting,
Fate's bloody book is opened; and I read
My dreadful doom: yet I Will not tamely yield,
But grapple to the last with destiny.

PIZARRO. All is not lost -- perhaps some means are left.

VELASQUEZ. Just at the gate I met the dastard monk
Struggling for entrance -- scarce his breath sufficed
To tell me that our purpose had miscarried,
And Juan lives -- I stabbed him to the heart,
The best reward for unperforming fear.

PIZARRO. Think not of him -- but save yourself by flight.

VELASQUEZ. Where can I fly? -- I am beset, devoted --
Our foes like famished bloodhounds are abroad,
And have us in the wind.

PIZARRO. Resolve at once. --
The postern's yet unforced, that way escape,
Disguise yourself, and fly to Juan's palace.
It Is but the terrace length -- Implore his mercy;
It is the foolish weakness of his nature
To spare where he may punish.

VELASQUEZ. Ask my life!
No, rather let me perish -- Hold -- his wife --
Perhaps alone, unguarded -- If I fall,
I Will leave a scorpion in the traitor's breast,
Shall make him curse the hour he roused my fury. Exit

PIZARRO alone. Now let the tempest rise -- Oh, fickle fortune!
This moment mounted to thy giddy top,
Now whirled to earth and grovelling -- Hark -- they come.

RIBIRO (entering with others.) Search all the chambers -- If the villain 'scape
Our work's but half accomplished --

PIZARRO. Pass no farther.

RIBIRO. This is the tyrant's bosom counselor.
Where is thy master, Spaniard?

PIZARRO. Safe, I hope,
From lawless rage like thine, and still will live
To punish this outrageous violence.

RIBIRO. Insolent slave -- And yet I like thy courage.
It Is vain to strive, deliver up thy sword.
I will not force thee to betray thy master,
Perfidious as he is -- Even in a foe
I can discern a virtue, and esteem it.
Gonsalez, guard him safe -- the rest disperse,
And leave no place unsearch'd -- He must be found:
But by your loves I charge you kill him not.
Rob not my sword, but leave that stroke for me.

Exeunt severally. SCENE changes to the Duke of BRAGANZA'S Palace. Enter
DUCHESS, an Attendant following. DUCHESS. No, Ines, no, I love my husband
much,
But more his honor. Could I press his stay
In tame inaction here to wait the event,
While almost in his sight, his crown and glory
Hung on the doubtful fate of others swords?
Would he have heard me? No, I knew him better.
Soon as Almada's danger reached his ear,
Who twice repulsed could scarce renew the charge,
(Swift as a javelin cuts the whistling air)
He snatched his sword, and breaking from my arms,
Rushed to the fight, and joined the warring throng.

INES. That favoring power which has so often preserved,
Will not forsake him now.

DUCHESS. O grant it Heaven!
Go, Ines, to the terrace, and observe
If any friend (for sure I may expect it)
Bring tidings from my husband. Exit Ines.
Would this arm,
This feeble arm had strength to second him!
The conflict here is worse. -- My restless heart,
Swelled with eventful expectation, throbs
And feels its bounds too narrow. -- Fear on fear,
Like light reflected from the dancing wave,
Visits all places, but can rest in none.
The distant shouts, that break the morning sky,
Lift up a while my mounting thoughts to Heaven,
Then sinking, leave them to fall down as low,
In boding apprehension. -- Welcome, welcome?
Enter MENDOZA. What of my lord?

MENDOZA. He bad me fly to greet you;
Himself a while detained to stop the rage
Of cruelty and carnage.

DUCHESS. He returns
Unhurt, victorious to these happy arms?

MENDOZA. All, all your fondest wish could form he brings,
Crown, conquest, all. -- Oppression is no more,
Pierced by a thousand wounds the giant dies,
While freeborn men with fearless gaze walk round,
And view the monster's bulk.

DUCHESS. I would know more. --
Was it a dear bought triumph? Must we mourn
The fall of many friends?

MENDOZA. Scarce one of note
But lives to share our joy. -- The regent seized,
Gave orders for the citadel's surrender,
To save the threatened lives of the whole council,
Whom sleeping we secured. -- Poorly content
To obey her mandate, though he knew it forced,
The dastard governor resigned his charge,
And struck the Austrian banner. -- Such the power
Of Juan's royal name, and conquering arm.
The rest himself will tell. -- I must return. --
Abroad the wild commotion rages still;
The King may want my service -- Angels guard you.

Exit Mendoza. DUCHESS. O fly, begone, lose not a thought on me.
Now to thy rest, my soul, thy prayers are heard.
From this white hour the bright revolving sun
With kinder beams shall view this smiling land;
A grateful people, by my Juan's arm,
Rescued from shameful bonds, shall bless his name,
And own him their preserver. (Enter Ines.) From my lord?

INES. Madam, not yet -- A stranger at the gate,
Disguised, and almost breathless with his fears,
With earnest importunity entreats
He may have leave to cast him at your feet.
His accents moved me much; he seems afflicted.

DUCHESS. Some wretch escaped from the pursuer's rage,
And flies for shelter here. -- Yes, let him come. Exit Ines.

DUCHESS alone. Would I could save them all -- my woman's soul,
Forced from her place in this tumultuous scene.
But ill supports the assumed severity,
And finds her native seat in soft compassion.
Enter VELASQUEZ, disguised. Whoever thou art, be safe. -- The greedy sword
Will have enough of death, and well may spare
One fugitive, who shuns its cruel edge
To wait the stroke of nature. -- Trust thy safety. --
Why do thy doubtful eyes so often look round?
Here are no enemies. -- My word is passed
Inviolable as recorded oaths. --
-- Methinks I have seen that face. -- Say, art thou not --

VELASQUEZ. The man you most should fear, most hate.

DUCHESS. Velasquez!

VELASQUEZ. Yes, that devoted wretch, the lost Velasquez;
From the high top of proud prosperity,
Sunk to this ignominy.

DUCHESS. Presumptuous man!
If mercy could know bounds, thy monstrous crimes
Almost exceed them. -- Speak then, what could urge thee
To seek the shelter of this hostile roof,
And trust a virtue to thy soul a stranger?

VELASQUEZ. Fate left no second choice. -- Close at my heels
Revenge and death insatiably pursued;
Fear lent me speed, and this way winged my flight.
Why flash those eyes with anger? -- Royal lady!
Fortune has stripped me of the power to injure;
A stingless serpent, a poor fang-drawn lion,
Fitter for scorn than terror. --

DUCHESS. Thou art fallen!
Yet let me not insult thy altered state,
By pity or upbraiding. -- If thy life
Be worth the acceptance -- take it -- and hereafter
Wash out the foulness of thy former deeds
By penitence and better purposes. [shouts without.]
These joyful sounds proclaim my Juan near
(To Valesquez) -- Retire a while till I prepare my lord
To shield thee from the angry nobles rage.
All were combined to take thy forfeit life. --

DUKE without. Throw wide the palace gates -- Let all have entrance.

DUCHESS. His well-known voice -- It Is he, it is he himself!

DUKE without. Where is my Queen?

DUCHESS. Quick let me fly to meet him,
Fly to my hero's breast. --

Velasquez seizes her and draws a dagger. VELASQUEZ. Hold, madam, hold,
Thus I arrest your transports.

DUCHESS. Barbarian! monster!

DUKE entering. What sounds are these? Horror! Inhuman slave?
Turn thy fell pogniard here

VELASQUEZ. Approach not, stir not.
Or by the blackest furies hell ere loosed,
This dagger drinks her blood.

DUKE. See, I obey,
I breathe not, stir not, I am rooted here.
Here will I grow for ages.

DUCHESS. Oh my Juan!

DUKE. O horrible! Does Juan live for this?
Cursed be the fatal fire that led my steps
To follow false ambition, while I left
To lurking robbers an unguarded prize;
This gem more worth than crowns or worlds can ransom

VELASQUEZ. Take back a name more foul, thou dark usurper
Was it for this, thy unsuspecting prince
With lavish bounty, to thy faithless hand
Trusted his royal functions? Thus to arm
Against his own breast, thy black ingratitude.

DUKE. Must I endure it?

DUCHESS. Out! false hypocrite!
Thy tyrants snares were found, his flimsy nets
To catch that precious life long since unravel'd,
Thy conscious cheek avows it.

VELASQUEZ. Be it so. --

DUCHESS. Coward! Perfidious coward! Is it thus,
Thus you requite --

VELASQUEZ. Thy foolish pity -- thus --
Hear me thou rebel -- Is this woman dear?

DUKE. O heavens!

VELASQUEZ. Thy straining eyes, thy agonizing heart,
Thy life's inglorious dotage all proclaim it.

DUCHESS. Peace, devil, peace, nor wound his generous soul
By taunts that fiends might blush at.

DUKE. Speak thy purpose.

VELASQUEZ. Then briefly thus -- call off thy traitorous guards,
-- The fruits of thy foul treason, every post,
Seized by the midnight plots, thy rebel arms
Restore again to Spain -- Back to the palace
Give me save conduct -- To thy oaths I trust not;
It must be done this instant -- leave my power
To intercede with Spain for thy full pardon,
And grace to all, whom thy ill-starr'd ambition
Led to this base revolt -- Else, by my rage!
The boiling rage that works my soul to frenzy,
Thou shall behold this beauteous bosom gored,
All over gash'd and mangled

DUCHESS. Strike this instant!

DUKE. Hold, ruffian, hold!

DUCHESS. Give me a thousand deaths;
Here let me fall a glorious sacrifice,
Rather than buy my life by such dishonor.
(To the Duke) If thy fond love accept these shameful terms,
That moment is my last -- these hands shall end me.
(To Velasquez) Blood thirsty tiger, glut thy fury here.

VELASQUEZ. Her courage blasts my purpose (aside) do thou brave me

DUCHESS. Defy thee -- yes -- feel, do I shrink or tremble?
Serene undaunted will I meet the blow;
But every drop that stains thy reeking hands,
In thy last pangs shall cry for vengeance on thee.
Furies shall seize thee, shake their scorpion whips,
And in thy deafen'd ears still hollow, murder.

VELASQUEZ. No more -- Resolve -- (To the Duke.) -- Not Heaven itself can save
her.
Ha! darkness cover me! he still alive!
Fate thou have caught me -- Every hope is lost.

(Enter Ramirez wounded, Almada, Ribiro, Mendoza and others following -- The
Duke and Duchess run to each others arms -- Velasquez is seized.) DUKE. I have
thee once again, my heart's best treasure,
Saved from the vulture's talons -- O dire fiend!

VELASQUEZ. Unhand me -- No -- though earth and hell conspire.

DUCHESS. Blasphemer, down! and own a power above thee!

RIBIRO. Secure this monster -- Read this paper, madam.
Returning from the charge we found that wretch
Stretched in our way and welt'ring in his blood;
Earnest he begged we should commit to note
These few short words, and bear them to the Duke.
That done, he dragged his bleeding body on,
And came to die before him.

DUKE. Oh, Ramirez!
Even in this day of joy my heart runs over
With sorrow for thy fate -- What cruel hand?

RAMIREZ. -- A villain's hand, yet Heaven directed it.
I have not strength to publish all my shame,
That roll contains it -- This wide gaping wound,
My deep remorse, may expiate my crime;
But, Oh! that tempter --

DUKE. Ha! he faints, support him.
Thy crime, what crime?

RAMIREZ. Thy happier star prevailed,
Else, had thou died even by the pious act
That seals our peace above.

DUKE. Merciful powers!

RAMIREZ. Yet ere I sink, speak comfort to my soul,
And bless me with forgiveness.

DUKE. Take it freely.

RAMIREZ. Enough, I die contented. He is led off

DUCHESS. O my Juan,
Peruse that tale and wonder -- Impious wretch,
Well might my heart stand still -- my blood run cold,
And struggling nature murmur strong reluctance
Against my foolish pity -- While I meant
To step between thee and the brandished bolt,
To rescue from the stroke of righteous justice
The foul suborner of my husband's murder.

VELASQUEZ. Curse on the coward's fears prevented it!
Wither these sinews that relaxed their hold,
And left thy feeble wing to soar above me,

DUKE. Hence with that villain -- Drag him from my sight. --
Till aweful justice doom his forfeit life,
Let heaviest chains secure him -- Hence, begone.

VELASQUEZ. Yes, in your gloomiest dungeons plunge me down.
Welcome congenial darkness -- Horrors hail!
No more these loathing eyes shall view that sun,
Whose irksome beams light up thy pageant triumph.

He is led off by Ribiro and others. DUKE. Thou ever present, all protecting
power!
Through what dark clouds of thick involving danger
Thy watchful providence has led my steps?
The imagined woes that sunk me in despair,
Thou made the wondrous instruments to save me.

DUCHESS. I feel, I own the high supremacy --
Yet have I much to ask -- Thy victory --

DUKE. For that our thanks to this brave man are due.
He chose the post of danger, and exposed
His dauntless breast against the stubborn force
Of steady northern courage.

ALMADA. Twice was I down,
And twice my prince's valor rescued me.

DUKE. For ever hallowed be the well poised blade
That saved that reverend head.

DUCHESS. Fortune was kind, Almada, to commit
Your safety to the arm you taught to conquer.

ALMADA. Henceforth I more shall prize that trifle life,
Since now I owe it to my sovereign's valor.

Enter RIBIRO. RIBIRO. Vengeance thy debt is paid -- The tyrant's dead.

DUKE. Say thou? Velasquez!

RIBIRO. Aye, what was Velasquez
Dispersed and mangled by the people's rage,
In bloody fragments stains a thousand hands;
Like ravenous wolves by eager famine pinched,
With worrying fangs they dragged him from my grasp,
And in my fight tore out his reeking entrails.

DUKE. His blood be on his head, and may his end,
Provoked by crimes beyond the reach of pardon,
Strike terror to the souls of impious men,
Who own no God, but from his power to punish.

THE END.

