THE JOURNEY. A FRAGMENT. PRICE ONE SHILLING.

THE JOURNEY. A FRAGMENT. BY C. CHURCHILL.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR JOHN CHURCHILL. (Executor to the late C. CHURCHILL,) and
Sold by W. FLEXNEY, near Gray's-Inn-Gate, Holborn. MDCCLXV.

THE JOURNEY.
SOME of my Friends (for Friends I must suppose
All, who, not daring to appear my foes,
Feign great good will, and, not more full of spite
Than full of craft, under false colors fight)
Some of my Friends (so lavishly I print)
As more in sorrow than in anger, hint
(Though that indeed will scarce admit a doubt)
That I shall run my stock of Genius out,
My no great stock, and, publishing so fast,
Must needs become a Bankrupt at the last.
"The Husbandman, to spare a thankful soil,
"Which, rich in disposition, pays his toil
"More than a hundred fold, which swells his store
"Even to his wish, and makes his barns run over,
"By long Experience taught, who teaches best,
"Foregoes his hopes awhile, and gives it rest.
"The Land, allowed its losses to repair,
"Refreshed, and full in strength, delights to wear
"A second Youth, and to the Farmer's eyes
"Bids richer crops, and double harvests rise.
"Nor think this practice to the earth confined,
"It reaches to the culture of the Mind.
"The Mind of Man craves rest, and cannot bear,
"Though next in power to Gods, continual care.
"Genius himself (nor here let Genius frown)
"Must, to ensure his vigor, be laid down,
"And fallow'd well; had CHURCHILL known but this,
"Which the most slight observer scarce could miss,
"He might have flourished twenty years, or more,
"Though now alas! poor Man! worn out in four.
Recovered from the vanity of youth,
I feel, alas! this melancholy truth,
Thanks to each cordial, each advising Friend,
And am, if not too late, resolved to mend,
Resolved to give some respite to my pen,
Apply myself once more to Books, and Men,
View what is present, what is past review,
And my old stock exhausted lay in new.
For twice six moons (let winds, turned Porters, bear
This oath to Heaven) for twice six moons I swear,
No Muse shall tempt me with her Siren lay,
Nor draw me from improvement's thorny way.
Verse I abjure, nor will forgive that Friend,
Who in my hearing shall a Rhyme commend.
It cannot be -- Whether I will, or no,
Such as they are, my thoughts in measure flow.
Convinced, determined, I in prose begin,
But e're I write one sentence, Verse creeps in,
And taints me through and through; by this good light
In Verse I talk by day, I dream by night;
If now and then I curse, my curses chime,
Nor can I pray, unless I pray in rhyme.
Even now I err, in spite of Common Sense,
And my Confession doubles my offense.
Rest then my Friends -- spare, spare your precious breath,
And be your slumbers not less sound than death;
Perturbed Spirits rest, nor thus appear
To waste your counsels in a spendthrift's ear,
On your grave lessons I cannot subsist,
Nor even in verse become Oeconomist;
Rest then my Friends, nor, hateful to my eyes,
Let Envy, in the shape of Pity, rise
To blast me ever my time; with patience wait,
('It Is no long interval) propitious Fate
Shall glut your pride, and every Son of phlegm
Find ample room to censure and condemn.
Read some three hundred lines, (no easy task;
But probably the last that I shall ask)
And give me up for ever; wait one hour,
Nay not so much, Revenge is in your power,
And Ye may cry, ever Time has turned his glass,
Lo! what We prophesied is come to pass.
Let Those, who Poetry in Poems claim,
Or not read this, or only read to blame;
Let Those, who are by fiction's charms enslaved,
Return me thanks for half a crown well-sav'd;
Let Those, who love a little gall in rhyme,
Postpone their purchase now, and call next time;
Let Those, who, void of Nature, look for art,
Take up their money, and in peace depart;
Let Those, who energy of diction prize,
For BILLINGSGATE quit FLEXNEY, and be wise;
Here is no lie, no gall, no art, no force,
Mean are the words, and such as come of course,
The Subject not less simple than the lay;
A plain, unlabored journey of a Day.
Far from Me now be every tuneful Maid,
I neither ask, nor can receive their aid.
Pegasus turned into a common hack,
Alone I jog, and keep the beaten track,
Nor would I have the Sisters of the hill
Behold their Bard in such a Dishabille.
Absent, but only absent for a time,
Let Them caress some dearer son of Rhyme,
Let Them, as far as Decency permits,
Without suspicion, play the fool with Wits,
Against Fools be guarded; it is a certain rule,
Wits are safe things, there is danger in a Fool.
Let Them, though modest, GRAY more modest woo;
Let Them with MASON bleat, and bray, and cooe;
Let Them with FRANKLIN, proud of some small Greek,
Make Sophocles, disguised, in English speak;
Let Them with GLOVER over Medea doze;
Let Them with DODSLEY wail Cleone's woes,
Whilst He, fine feeling creature, all in tears,
Melts as they melt, and weeps with weeping Peers;
Let Them with simple WHITEHEAD, taught to creep
Silent and soft, lay FONTENELLE asleep;
Let Them with BROWN contrive, no vulgar trick,
To cure the dead, and make the living sick;
Let Them in Charity to MURPHY give
Some old French piece, that he may steal and live;
Let Them with antic FOOT subscriptions get,
And advertise a Summer House of Wit.
Thus, or in any better way They please,
With these great Men, or with great Men like these,
Let Them their appetite for laughter feed;
I on my Journey all Alone proceed.
If fashionable grown, and fond of power
With hum'rous SCOTS let Them disport their hour;
Let Them dance, fairy like, round OSSIAN's tomb;
Let Them forge lies, and histories for HUME;
Let Them with HOME, the very Prince of verse,
Make something like a Tragedy in Erse;
Under dark Allegory's flimsy veil
Let Them with OGILVIE spin out a tale
Of rueful length; Let Them plain things obscure,
Debase what is truly rich, and what is poor
Make poorer still by jargon most uncouth;
With every pert, prim Prettiness of Youth
Born of false Taste, with Fancy (like a Child
Not knowing what It cries for) running wild,
With bloated Style, by Affectation taught,
With much false Coloring, and little Thought,
With Phrases strange, and Dialect decreed
By Reason never to have passed the Tweed,
With Words, which Nature meant each other's foe,
Forced to compound whether they will or no,
With such materials, Let Them, if They will,
To prove at once their pleasantry and skill,
Build up a Bard to war against Common Sense,
By way of Compliment to Providence;
Let Them with ARMSTRONG, taking leave of Sense,
Read musty lectures on Benevolence,
Or conn the pages of his gaping Day,
Where all his former Fame was thrown away,
Where all, but barren labor, was forgot,
And the vain stiffness of a Lettered SCOT;
Let Them with ARMSTRONG pass the term of light,
But not one hour of darkness; when the Night
Suspends this mortal coil, when Memory wakes,
When for our past misdoings Conscience takes
A deep revenge, when, by Reflection led,
She draws his curtains, and looks comfort dead,
Let every Muse be gone; in vain He turns
And tries to pray for sleep; an Aetna burns,
A more than Aetna in his coward breast;
And Guilt, with vengeance armed, forbids him rest.
Though soft as Plumage from young Zephyr's wing,
His couch seems hard, and no relief can bring.
INGRATITUDE has planted daggers there,
No Good Man can deserve, no brave Man bear.
Thus, or in any better way They please,
With these great Men, or with great Men like these,
Let Them their appetite for laughter feed;
I on my Journey all Alone proceed.

