A CHARGE TO THE POETS. By WILLIAM WHITEHEAD, Esquire POET LAUREAT.

Quasi ex Cathedra loquitur. --

LONDON: Printed for R. and J. DODSLEY, at Tully's-Head, Pallmall. And Sold by
J. HINXMAN, at the Globe in Pater Noster Row. MDCCLXII.

A CHARGE TO THE POETS.
FULL twenty years have rolled, ye rhiming band,
Since first I dipped in ink my trembling hand,
For much it trembled, though th'obliging few,
Who judge with candor, praised the "The danger of writing Verse." First
printed in the year 1741. to which this Poem may be considered as a sequel.
sketch I drew;
And Echo, answering from the public voice,
Indulged as genius, what I feared was choice.
At length, arrived at those maturer years
So rarely raised by hope, or sunk by fears,
I rest in peace; or scribble if I please:
In point of wealth not affluent, but at ease;
In point of what the world and you call fame,
(I judge but by conjecture) much the same.
But whether right or wrong I judge, to you
It matters not: the following fact is true.
From nobler names, and great in each degree,
The pension'd Laurel has devolved to me.
To me, ye Bards; and, what you will scarce conceive,
Or, at the best, unwillingly believe,
However unworthily I wear the crown,
Unasked it came, and from a hand unknown.
Then, since my King, and Patron have thought fit
To place me on the throne of modern wit,
My grave advice, my brethren, hear at large;
As Bishops to their Clergy give their charge,
Though many a Priest, who listens, might afford
Perhaps more solid counsel to my Lord.
TO YOU, ye guardians of the sacred fount,
Deans and Archdeacons of the double mount,
That through our realms intestine broils may cease,
My first, and last advice is, "Keep the peace!"
What is it to you, that half the town admire
False sense, false strength, false softness, or false fire?
Through heaven's void concave let the meteors blaze,
He hurts his own, who wounds another's bays.
What is it to you that numbers place your name
First, fifth, or twentieth, in the lists of fame?
Old Time will settle all your claims at once,
Record the Genius, and forget the Dunce.
It boots us much to know, observers say,
Of what materials Nature formed our clay;
From what strange beast Prometheus' plastic art
Purloin'd the particle which rules the heart.
If milky softness, gliding through the veins,
Incline the Muse to panegyric strains,
Insipid lays our kindest friends may lull,
Be very moral, yet be very dull.
If bile prevails, and temper dictates satire,
Our wit is spleen, our virtue is ill nature;
With it is own malice armed we combat evil,
As zeal for God's sake sometimes plays the devil.
O mark it well! does Pride affect to reign
The solitary tyrant of the brain?
Or Vanity exert her quickening flame,
Stuck round with ears that listen after fame?
O to these points let strict regard be given,
Nor E coelo descendit, (...). Juv.
"KNOW THYSELF" in vain descend from Heaven.
Do Critics teize you? -- with a smile I speak,
Nor would suppose my brethren were so weak.
It Is on ourselves and not our foes, or friends,
Our future fame, or infamy depends.
Let envy point, or malice wing the darts,
They only wound us in our mortal parts.
Besides, it is much too late to go to school,
Grown men will judge by Nature's noblest rule,
Admire true beauties, and slight faults excuse,
Not learn to dance from This is not intended as a reflection on either the
Journals or the Reviews. They are not the Masters but the Scholars, the Grown
Gentlemen, at whom the Author smiles; and who, he thinks, had much better not
pretend to judge at all, than borrow opinions which never sit easy upon them.
Journals and Reviews.
If fools traduce you, and your works decry,
As many fools will rate your worth too high;
Then balance the account, and fairly take
The cool report which men of judgment make.
In writing, as in life, he foils the foe,
Who, conscious of his strength, forgives the blow.
They court the insult who but seem afraid:
And then, by answering, you promote the trade,
And give them, what their own weak claims deny,
A chance for future laughter, or a sigh.
YOU, who as yet, unsullied by the Press,
Hang over your labors in their virgin dress;
And YOU, who late the public taste have hit,
And still enjoy the honey-moon of wit,
Attentive hear me: grace may still abound,
Whoever preaches, if the doctrine's sound.
If Nature prompts you, or if friends persuade,
Why write; but never pursue it as a trade.
And soldom publish: manuscripts disarm
The censor's frown, and boast an added charm,
Enhance their worth by ^^^ming to retire,
For what but few can prate of, all admire.
Who trade in verse, alas, as rarely find,
The public grateful, as the Muses kind.
From constant feasts like fated guests we steal,
And tired of tickling lose all power to feel.
It Is novelty we want; with that in view
We praise stale matter, so the Bard be new;
Or from known Bards with exstucy receive
Each part new whim they almost blush to give.
A life of writing, unless wondrous short,
No wit can brave, no genius can support.
Some soberer province for your business choose,
Be that your helmet, and your plume the Muse.
Through Fame's long rubric, down from Chaucer's time,
Few fortunes have been raised by lofty rhyme.
And, when our toils success no longer crowns,
What shelter find we from a world in frowns?
Over each distress, which vice or folly brings,
Though Charity extend her healing wings,
No Maudlin Hospitals are yet assigned
For slip-shod Muses of the vagrant kind;
Where anthems might succeed to satires keen,
And hymns of penitence to songs obscene.
What refuge then remains? -- with gracious grin
Some practiced Bookseller invites you in.
Where luckless Bards, condemned to court the town,
(Not for their parents' vices, but their own!)
Write gay conundrums with an aching head,
Or carn by defamation daily bread,
Or friendless, shirtless, pennyless complain,
Not of the world's, but "Caelia's cold disdain."
Lords of their workhouse see the tyrants sit
Brokers in books, and scock-jobbers in wit,
Beneath whose lash, obliged to write or fast,
Our confessors and martyrs breathe their last!
And can ye bear such insolence? -- away,
For shame; plough, dig, turn pedlars, drive the dray;
With minds indignant each employment suits,
Our fleets want sailors, and our troops recruits;
And many a dirty street, on Thames's side,
Is yet by stool and brush unoccupied.
Time was when Poets played the thorough game,
Swore, drank, and bluster'd, and blasphemed for fame.
The first in brothels with their punk and Muse;
Your toast, ye Bards? "Pamassus and the stews!"
Thank Heaven the times are changed; no Poet now
Need roar for Bacchus, or to Venus bow.
It Is our own fault if Fielding's lash we feel,
Or, like French wits, begin with the Bastile.
Even in those days some few escaped their fate,
By better judgment, or a longer date,
And rode, like buoys, triumphant over the tide.
Poor Otway in an alehouse dos'd, and died!
While happier Southern, though with spots of yore,
Like Plato's hovering spirits, crusted over,
Lived every mortal vapor to remove,
And to our admiration joined our love.
Light lie his funeral turf! -- for you, who join
His decent manners to his art divine,
Would ye (whilst, round you, toss the proud and vain
Convulsed with feeling, or with giving pain)
Indulge the Muse in innocence and ease,
And tread the flowery path of life in peace?
Avoid all authors. -- What! the illus^^ious few,
Who shunning Fame have taught her to pursue
Fair Virtue's heralds? -- yes, I say again,
Avoid all authors, 'till you have read the men.
Full many a peevish, envious, slandering elf,
Is, in his works, Benevolence itself.
For all mankind unknown, his bosom heaves,
He only injures those with whom he lives.
Read then the Man: Does truth his actions guide,
Exempt from petulance, exempt from pride?
To social duties does his heart attend,
As Son, as Father, Husband, Brother, Friend?
Do those who know him love him? if they do,
You Have my permission, you may love him too.
But chief avoid the boisterous roaring sparks,
The sons of fire! -- you will know them by their marks.
Fond to be heard they always court a crowd,
And, though it is borrowed nonsense, talk it loud.
One epithet supplies their constant chime,
Damned bad, damned good, damned low, and damned sublime!
But most in quick short repartee they shine
Of local humor; or from plays purloin
Each quaint stale scrap which every subject hits,
'Till fools almost imagine, they are wits.
Hear them on Shakespeare! there they foam, they rage!
Yet taste not half the beauties of HIS page,
Nor see that Art, as well as Nature, strove
To place HIM foremost in the Aonian grove.
For there, there only, where the sisters meet,
HIS Genius triumphs, and the work's complete.
Or would ye sift more near these sons of fire,
It Is Garrick, and not Shakespeare they admire.
Without his breath, inspiring every thought,
They never perhaps had known what Shakespeare wrote;
Without his eager, his becoming zeal,
To teach them, though they scarce know why, to feel,
A crude unmeaning mass had Johnson been,
And a dead letter Shakespeare's noblest seen.
O come the time, when diffidence again
Shall bind our youth in Nature's modest chain!
Born in a happier age, and happier clime,
Old Sophocles had merit, in his time;
And so, no doubt, however we flout his plays,
Had poor Euripides, in former days.
Not like the moderns we confess; but yet
Some seeming faults we surely might forget,
Because 'twould puzzle even the wise to show
Whether those faults were real faults, or no.
To all true merit give it is just applause,
The worst have beauties, and the best have flaws.
Greek, French, Italian, English, great or small,
I own my frailty, I admire them all.
There are, mistaking prejudice for taste,
Who on one species all their rapture waste.
Though, various as the flowers which paint the year,
In rainbow charms the changeful Nine appear,
The different beauties coyly they admit,
And to one standard would confine our wit.
Some MANNER'D VERSE delights; while some can raise
To fairy FICTION their exstatic gaze,
Admire PURE POETRY, and revel there
On sightless forms, and pictures of the air!
Some hate all RHYME; some seriously deplore
That Milton wants that one enchantment more.
Tired with the ambiguous tale, or antique phrase,
Over Spenser's happiest paintings, loveliest lays,
Some heedless pass: while some with transport view
Each quaint old word, which scarce Eliza knew;
And, eager as the fancied knights, prepare
The lance, and combat in ideal war
Dragons of lust, and giants of despair.
Why be it so; and what each thinks the test
Let each enjoy: but not condemn the rest.
Readers there are of every class prepared,
Each village teems, each hamlet has its Bard
Who gives the tone, and all the inferior fry,
Like the great vulgar here, will join the cry.
But be it mine with every Bard to glow,
And taste his raptures genuine as they flow,
Through all the Muse's wilds to rove along
From plaintive Elegy to Epic song;
And, if the sense be just, the numbers clear,
And the true coloring of the work be there,
Again, subdued by Truth's ingenuous call,
I own my frailty, I admire them all.
Nor think I, with the mob, that Nature now
No longer warms the soil where laurels grow.
It Is true Our Poets in repose delight,
And, wiser than their fathers, seldom write.
Yet I, but I forbear for prudent ends,
Could name a list, and half of them my friends,
For whom posterity it is wreaths shall twine,
And it is own Bards neglect, to honor mine.
Their Poets in their turn will grieve, and swear,
Perhaps with truth, no Patron lends an ear.
Complaints of times when merit wants reward
Descend like similies from Bard to Bard;
We copy our distress from Greece and Rome;
As in our Northern lays their flowrets bloom.
We feel their breezes, with their heats we burn,
And plead prescription to rejoice or mourn.
All present times are bad: then cast your eyes
Where fairy scenes of bliss in prospect rise.
As fond enthusiasts over the western main
With eager ken, prophetical in vain,
See the mixed multitudes from every land
Grow pure by blending, virtuous by command;
'Till, phoenix-like, a new bright world of gold
Springs from the dregs and refuse of the old.
I Am no enthusiast, yet with joy can trace
Some gleams of sunshine for the tuneful race.
If Monarchs listen when the Muses woo,
Attention wakes, and nations listen too.
The Bard grows rapturous, who was dumb before,
And every fresh-plum'd eagle learns to soar!
Friend of the siner arts, when Egypt saw
Her second Ptolemy give Science law,
Each Genius wakened from his dead repose,
The column swelled, the pile majestic rose,
Exact proportion borrowed strength from ease,
And use was taught by elegance to please.
Along the breathing walls, as fancy flowed,
The sculpture softened, and the picture glowed,
Heroes revived in animated stone,
The groves grew vocal, and the The Seven Poets patronised by Ptolemy
Philadelphus are usually called by the name of that constellation.
Pleiads shone!
Old Nilus raised his head, and wondering cried,
Long live the King! my Patron, and my Pride!
Secure of endless praise, behold, I bear
My grateful suffrage to my Sovereign's ear.
Though war shall rage, though Time shall level all,
Yon colors sicken, and yon columns fall,
Though art's dear treasures feed the wasting flame,
And the proud volume sinks, an empty name,
Though Plenty may desert this copious vale,
My streams be scattered, or my fountain fail,
Yet Ptolemy has lived: the world has known
A King of arts, a Patron on a throne.
Even utmost Britain shall his name adore,
"And Boyn be sung, when it has ceased to flow." Addison.
"And Nile be sung, when Nile shall flow no more."
One rule remains. Nor shun nor court the great,
Your truest center is that middle state
From whence with case the observing eye may go
To all which soars above, or sinks below.
It Is yours all manners to have tried, or known,
TO adopt all virtues, yet retain your own:
To stem the tide, where thoughtless crowds are hurled,
The firm spectators of a bustling world!
Thus armed, proceed: the breezes court your wing.
Go range all Helicon, taste every spring;
From varying nature cull th'innoxious spoil,
And, whilst amusement sooths the generous toil,
Let puzzled Critics with judicious spite
Descant on what you can, or can not write.
True to yourselves, not anxious for renown,
Nor court the world's applause, nor dread it is frown.
Guard your own breasts, and be the bulwark there
To know no envy, and no malice fear.
At least you will find, thus Stoic-like prepared,
That Verse and Virtue are their own reward.
THE END.

