A PLAN for a TOWN and TOWNSHIP, to be laid out within the Compass of ONE
SQUARE MILE, or 640 Acres.
Containing 40 Town Lots, for Planters or Farmers, having large Out Lots beyond
the Township^ also Town Lots for 4 Public Officers, and for 132 Troulesmen,
Clerks, Artificers, Fishermen, Seamen or Laborers, in all 176 Town Lots, with
small Outlots, of a Quarter of a Square Furlong, or 2 Acres each, for the said*
Officers, Laborers and within 1/4 of a Mile from each side of the Town.



A GENERAL PLAN FOR LAYING OUT TOWNS AND TOWNSHIPS, ON THE NEW-ACQUIRED LANDS
IN THE EAST INDIES, AMERICA, OR ELSEWHERE;
In order to promote Cultivation, and raise the Value of all the adjoining
Land, at the Price of giving gratis the Town-Lots, and, in some Cases (as in
new Colonies), also the small Out-Lots, to the first Settlers and their Heirs,
so long as they possess no other Land; and on other equitable Conditions.

1794.

EXPLANATION OF THE ANNEXED PLAN.
THE town (distinguished by being colored red) is contained in a square, each
side of which is 4 furlongs, or half a mile; having a square furlong, or 10
acres, in the center, appropriated to public offices ( viz. a church,
town hall, guard-house, separate penitentiary lots (or prisons) for males and
females; also schools for each sex, and a public caravansera for strangers and
travelers, under the control of the constable on guard by rotation). The
Breadth of the streets and highways is proposed to be the 8th part of a
furlong, or 82 feet 6 inches; which will allow room for aquaducts wherever
streams of water can be introduced from superior levels, and also room for
planting ranges of spreading trees to shelter the footpaths. And as the bounds
of each square furlong meet in the center of the streets, measured from the 4
external edges or sides of the town (colored red), which are distant, each
from its opposite side, 4 complete furlongs, or half a mile (4 inches by the
scale), these external edges or lines of the town and the streets must be first
laid out, that the remaining space, in each square furlong of the town, may be
divided into town-lots in equal proportions, viz. 2 opposite sides of the town
are appropriated to large town-lots of nearly one acre each for PLANTERS or
FARMERS; and as these large town-lots commence from the external edge of the
town (and not from the center of the streets, like the small town-lots), their
length will be a complete half furlong, or 330 feet: In their breadth there
will be some variation: The uppermost and undermost divisions of square
furlongs, being measured from the external edges, or red lines, at the top and
bottom of the town (as represented in this Plan), have a deduction of 41 feet 3
inches for half the width of the street on one side only; which, subtracted
from 660 feet, the breadth of the furlong, leaves a space of 618 feet 9 inches
for the breadth of 5 lots: Which space divided by 5 allows the breadth of each
PLANTER'S TOWN-LOT, in the uppermost and lowermost divisions to be 123 feet 9
inches including the fences; and the PLANTERS town-lots, in the 4 central
divisions (as the central divisions have a street on 2 sides), must lose 82
feet 6 inches from the width of each furlong, which being first deducted from
the 660 feet leave a breadth of only 577 feet 6 inches to be divided into 5
equal parts, whereby the width of the PLANTERS lots in the 4 central divisions,
is reduced to 115 feet 6 inches each, including the fences.

The size of the small town-lots will also unavoidably vary, and be of two
different dimensions as to their breadth, though all are of equal length: For
as they are measured from the center of each square furlong to the center of
the streets, a deduction of 41 feet 3 inches (half the width of the streets)
must be made from the length of half a furlong, or 330 feet, which reduces the
length of each lot to 288 feet 9 inches. And 41 feet 3 inches being also
deducted from the breadth of the uppermost and lowest ranges of square
furlongs, for half the width of the street, on one side of each furlong, the
space for the width of 6 lots is thereby reduced to 618 feet 9 inches, which
divided by 6 gives 103 feet 1 inch and half, for the width of each lot,
including the fences: And 82 feet 6 inches being deducted from the central
divisions, for half the width of the streets on 2 sides of each division, or
square furlong, reduce the space for 6 lots to 577 feet 6 inches, which divided
by 6 gives only 96 feet 3 inches for the width of the small townlots in the
central divisions, including their respective fences.

N. B. In old settled countries, where land is already of considerable value,
it is not to be supposed that the proprietors of land can be induced to give
gratis more than the small town-lots of half an acre and a few poles each,
which with the roads and streets will amount to about 120 acres to be given
gratis out of 2560 acres, or less than 4 per cent.; and the improved value of
the remaining estate, most certainly, will amply repay the donation; as the
value of land is generally doubled by the proximity of a town.

And as even this last proposed donation of 120 acres will be much too large a
venture for landholders in general to risque in such an experiment; it is
necessary to remark, that they may proceed on the half of this plan, quite as
effectually, by dividing the town and township in the center, whereby the land
to be given gratis, or granted in freehold to the settlers, will not exceed 60
acres: And even with this large reduction of the plan, space will be reserved
for the families of 20 farmers or planters and of 68 artificers or laborers;
and as the line of division in this latter mode will pass through the center
square of the present plan, 6 additional small town-lots may be formed in the
space of half the square, and half of the public lots around it, which will
enable the town, upon the whole, to contain 94 households. And if 6 cottages
for laborers be added at the outer gates or avenues of the estate, the
community will form a complete hundred of householders, which is a very
respectable body of people for maintaining peace and good order according to
the common law of England.

Whenever only one half of the plan is adopted, the side where the central line
of division is made must be placed next to the water (whether the sea or river,
creek or canal), and care must be taken that a sufficient strand, or space of
common land, be reserved between the town and the water, that all the
inhabitants may have equal access to the waterside.

PROOF OF THE MEASUREMENTS.
In one Quarter of the Town. 5 Large town-lots (marked A. B. C. D. and E.) of
330 Feet - Inches by 115 Feet 6 Inches or = 0 Acs. 3 Rds. 20 Pis. each =
Amounting together to 4 Acres 1 Roods 20 Poles 5 Do. do. (marked F. G. H. I.
and K.) of 330 Feet - Inches by 123 Feet 9 Inches or = 0 Acs. 3 Rds. 30 Pis.
each = Amounting together to 4 Acres 1 Roods 30 Poles 15 Small town-lots
(numbered 1 to 3 of 288 Feet 9 Inches by 96 Feet 3 Inches or = 0 Acs. 2 Rds. 22
Pis. 907/10890 1-half = Amounting together to 9 Acres 2 Roods 11 Poles
2722/10890 1-half 15 Small town-lots (numbered 10 to 15 and of 288 Feet 9
Inches by 96 Feet 3 Inches or = 0 Acs. 2 Rds. 22 Pis. 907/10890 1-half =
Amounting together to 9 Acres 2 Roods 11 Poles 2722/10890 1-half 15 Small
town-lots (numbered 22 to 27 of 288 Feet 9 Inches by 96 Feet 3 Inches or = 0
Acs. 2 Rds. 22 Pis. 907/10890 1-half = Amounting together to 9 Acres 2 Roods 11
Poles 2722/10890 1-half 18 Do. do. (numbered 4 to 9 of 288 Feet 9 Inches by 103
Feet 1 Inches or = 0 Acs. 2 Rds. 29 Pis. 4083/10890 3-4ths. = Amounting
together to 12 Acres 1 Roods 8 Poles 8167/10890 1-half 18 Do. do. (numbered 16
to 21 and of 288 Feet 9 Inches by 103 Feet 1 Inches or = 0 Acs. 2 Rds. 29 Pis.
4083/10890 3-4ths. = Amounting together to 12 Acres 1 Roods 8 Poles 8167/10890
1-half 18 Do. do. (numbered 28 to 33 of 288 feet 9 Inches by 103 Feet 1 Inches
or = 0 Acs. 2 Rds. 29 Pis. 4083/10890 3-4ths. = Amounting together to 12 Acres
1 Roods 8 Poles 8167/10890 1-half 1 Public lot in one quarter of the central
square is 3 Acres 2 Roods 0 Poles 44 Town lots in one quarter of the town 33
Acres 1 Rood 30 Poles
Measurement of the Streets in one Quarter of the Town.
Half the width of the center street (horizontal on the Plan) from the middle
gate (on the East, or right hand) to the public ground in the central furlong
990 Feet 0 Inches by 41 Feet 3 Inches = 0 Acs. 3 Rds. 30 Pis. The whole of the
next parallel street below, from the side of the town to the center of the
middle cross-street 1320 Feet 0 Inches by 82 Feet 6 Inches = 2 Acs. 2 Rds. 0
Pis. The upper part of the crossing-street in the center of the quarter,
measured from the corners of the lots at each end 577 Feet 6 Inches by 82 Feet
6 Inches = 1 Acs. 0 Rds. 15 Pis. The lower part of do. do. do. 618 Feet 9
Inches by 82 Feet 6 Inches = 1 Acs. 0 Rds. 27 Pis. 5445/10890 or Half the width
of the upper part of the cross-street in the center of the town, measured from
the corners of the lots 288 Feet 9 Inches by 41 Feet 3 Inches = 0 Acs. 1 Rds. 3
Pis. 8167/10890 1-hf. or Half the width of the lower part of do. do. 618 Feet 9
Inches by 41 Feet 3 Inches = 0 Acs. 2 Rds. 13 Pis. 8167/10890 or 6 Acres 2 Rood
10 Poles
In 4 quarters of the same, as above, containing 176 lots, viz. for 4 public
officers 40 planters or farmers 132 laborers, tradesmen, etc.
multiply by 4 176 Total of acres in the whole town of half a mile square 160
Acres 0 Rood 0 Poles
Number of acres in the whole town (colored red) being half a mile square 160
Acres The lesser TOWNSHIP of small Out-Lots, extending 2 Furlongs from each
Side of the Town. In one Quarter of the lesser Township. 34 Out-lots of 2 acres
each, measured to the center of the adjoining roads 85 Acres 1 Square furlong
of common land intersected by the diagonal road 10 Acres 1 Quarter of a square
furlong of do. do. do. 2 Acres 1 Quarter of the common land adjoining the sides
of the town 22 Acres Total of the common land in one quarter 35 Acres Total of
all the land in one quarter of the lesser township 120 Acres multiply by 4 In
four such quarters of the lesser township, extending two furlongs from the
sides of the town 480 Acres The whole town and lesser township in one square
mile contain acres 640 Acres A farther extension from the lesser township of a
mile, for 10 large out-lots of 40 acres each, to be added on the outside of one
quarter, with 70 acres of reserved land and a common of 10 acres 480 acres.
multiply by 4 And if a like extension be made on the outside of all the 4
quarters of the township, it will include 192 square furlongs of 10 acres each,
which will allow room for 40 farms of 40 acres each, with a proportionable
quantity of common and reserved lands, that may be afterward wanted for other
purposes 1920 acres. Add the contents of the central town, and its lesser
township of small out-lots in one square mile 640 Total: In a square district
of 2 miles, containing town township farms
2560 acres.
Conditions on which the Grants of Land should be made, for the peaceable
Regulation of the several Towns or Communities.

THE Proprietors of the land should give, gratis, to each male settler, of good
moral character, and of ability to labor, one small town-lot; and, in new
settlements where few laborers can be procured, also one of the small out-lots
of 2 acres, gratis, so long as they possess no other land, but no longer; for
strict provision should be made in the grants, that no man shall hold 2 lots in
the same town, even if an additional lot should fall to him by inheritance, or
be acquired in any other way (for that would destroy the safety of the town, by
decreasing the number of inhabitants); and that no lot which had once been
given gratis should, ever afterward, be either sold, or let at rent, to any
under-tenant, or be added to any other lot, on the penalty of forfeiture to the
first granter or granters, or to their heirs or successors, to be by them once
more bestowed for the same benevolent purpose, on some other industrious
tradesman, or labourer, who has no other land already in possession, that the
number and strength of the little community may be maintained: And if the first
granter, etc. should neglect such disposal of any forfeited or vacant lot, more
than 12 months, the right of disposal, as above, should lapse, and be vested in
the householders of the town where the forfeiture is incurred, according to the
election of the majority of them in common council assembled.

But though the settlers may not sell, let, or enlarge their lots, when they
acquire other lands either by inheritance or otherwise, yet they may,
nevertheless, be allowed to present in free gift, the possession of their lots
(when so vacated by additional landed property elsewhere), on the same limited
terms, to any person whom they shall think proper to elect, provided such
person has not already any other land in possession.

But with respect to the larger town-lots for planters or farmers, marked A, B,
C, D, etc. they may be as appendages, or homesteds, to the farms, or large
out-lots, extending beyond the lesser township, and of course they may be let,
or sold, with those farms, as the proprietors or granters of the land may think
best for their own advantage. And so likewise with respect to the small
out-lots in the lesser township, whenever the proprietors of the land shall
have reserved to themselves that power in their original grants.

And for the safety and happiness of each community, the land should be granted
on the farther especial condition, that the settlers shall promise to keep
watch and ward by rotation of militia service, under their own elected chiefs,
that they may duly maintain PEACE, JUSTICE, and COMMON RIGHT, in their
respective communities and folkmotes, according to the common law of England in
FRANKPLEDGE, which is the only effectual mode of obtaining law, peace, and good
government, without expense.

A DESCRIPTION OF FRANKPLEDGE.
FRANKPLEDGE is an ancient patriarchal mode of arranging the families, or
rather households, of a nation, in numerical divisions of TENS (or tythings),
FIFTIES, HUNDREDS (or wappentacs), and THOUSANDS See Deuteronomy. i. 13-15. "Take ye"
(or rather, according to the Hebrew, "CHOOSE YE to YOURSELVES") wise men and
understanding, and known among your tribes (which necessarily implies that the
tribes were to nominate), "and I" (said Moses) "will make them rulers over you"
(i. e. the returns of the elections were to be made to Moses, and he was to
invest the elected with public authority); "and ye" (said Moses) answered me
and said, The thing which thou have spoken (is) good (for us) to do. (Thus
Moses, like a good politician, and faithful public minister under God, declared
the free assent of the people, whereby the important measure he himself had
proposed of establishing Frankpledge by the advice of Jethro, was enacted, and
became a public law, or statute, of that nation (Israel), as much as it has
been enacted to Englishmen by MAGNA CHARTA). "So I took" (said Moses) "the
chief of your tribes, wise men and known" (that is, "known among the tribes,"
as expressed in the 13th verse) which necessary qualification could not fairly
be ascertained, unless the known men were really returned, or named, to Moses,
as such, by the tribes themselves), "and made them heads over you, captains"
(or heads) "over THOUSANDS, and captains over HUNDREDS" (what we call
hundreders, or high constables), and captains over FIFTIES, and captains over
TENS (or tythingmen), and officers among your tribes.

Thus it appears that the officers in general, from the colonel or captain of a
thousand (whether of individuals or families), down to the sergeant, constable,
or tythingman, were recommended, or rather nominated by the people, before they
were invested with authority by Moses.

"And I (said Moses) charged your JUDGES at that time" (whereby it must of
course be understood that the JUDGES also had been previously nominated by the
people, as wise men and understanding, and known among the tribes, agreeable to
the preceding enacted proposal); saying, hear (the causes) between your
brethren, and judge righteously between (every) man and his brother, and the
stranger (that is) with him. YE SHALL NOT RESPECT PERSONS IN JUDGMENT. (Deuteronomy.
i. 9 -- 17.) Compare this with Deuteronomy. xvi. 18. Judges and officers shall thou
GIVE TO THYSELF in all thy gates throughout thy tribes, and they shall judge
the people with JUST JUDGMENT, etc. and the rule for JUST JUDGMENT is NOT TO
RESPECT PERSONS IN JUDGMENT. But the colonial legislators, in all the European
settlements of America and the West Indies, in order to favor and tolerate
slavery, have suppressed this indispensable rule for "JUST JUDGMENT," for
otherwise that abominable pagan oppression, slavery (which had been gradually
abolished through the happy influence of Christianity), could not have been
renewed under governments which still call themselves christian! But this
hateful mark of reprobacy and delinquency of the nations, or rather "of the
fullness of the Gentiles," I mean the baneful renewal of pagan slavery, will
surely draw down upon the guilty nations a severe retribution from that Supreme
Judge, who I^ NO RESPECTER OF PERSONS IN JUDGMENT, if they cannot find leisure
from their bloody wars and destructive oppressions, for repentance! For the
Divine retribution is clearly revealed in the Scriptures, that it will be
"measure for measure;" that (...) that leads into captivity shall be led into
captivity: He that kills with the sword must be killed with the sword: For
the ALMIGHTY has promised to "DESTROY them who DESTHOY the "earth!"


of householders, or masters of families, including all that either rent a
house by the year (on which the right of burgage tenure in England is founded),
or live in their own houses, and pay their due proportion of public expenses.

All such, by this most ancient and salutary system, were required to pledge
each other; and to pledge, (or be responsible) for every other individual,
living under their respective roofs; whereby all persons were rendered most
completely, and readily, amenable to JUST LAWS (an indispensable condition of
LIBERTY; because, neither LIBERTY, nor JUSTICE, can walk upright and secure,
unless they go hand in hand) for every breach of the public peace, or for any
breach even of common morality, or decency, that could be deemed hurtful or
inconvenient to others in the judgment of an impartial jury of neighbors,
subject to the previous challenge of the persons accused (or indicted), in so
full and effectual a manner, as to exclude all suspicion of partiality; and
this under MAGISTRATES and PUBLIC OFFICERS freely elected by the HOUSEHOLDERS
of every district, for short probationary terms of power, never exceeding 12
months, without re-election by a majority of the HOUSEHOLDERS over whom,
respectively, their delegated power extended.

It was a just and wise principle of the ancient constitution of England, to
vest ALL ELECTION-RIGHTS in the HOUSEHOLDERS, paying scot and lot (or the
ordinary public rates); but a farther extension of the franchise to every
individual of the community (which some well-meaning friends to reformation
have proposed) would be a vain innovation, that might perhaps prove as
dangerous as it is, certainly, inexpedient and needless; because the ancient
constitution of FRANKPLEDGE (which vested the right of election in the
householders alone) is distinguished in the law books See Lambard's
Archionomia, inter Leges Edwardi Regis, ^.20. de ^^ibergis, where FRANKPLEDGE
is more particularly ex^^^^ed.
^y the peculiar style of SUMMA ET MAXIMA SECU^ITAS ( the chief and greatest
security), a title justly ^^unded on the practical experience of ages. And
^^erefore, though the first plants to be cultivated in (...) colonies and
communities are, most certainly, the sacred plants of RIGHTEOUSNESS, PEACE, and
LIBERTY, yet even these indispensable plants cannot so effectually take root
and flourish, as when the happy soil of their cultivation is previously fenced
by the establishment of FRANKPLEDGE with a due practical knowledge of NATURAL
AND REVEALED RELIGION (the two first foundations of English law), contrary to
which no custom, maxim, or even statute can be legal, according to the common
law of England; which is only common sense, improved by the written revelation
of GOD'S LAWS in the Holy Scriptures.

So indispensable to the constitution of England was FRANKPLEDGE deemed by our
ancestors, that they justly required "THE VIEW OF FRANKPLEDGE," by an express
article of their great charter (chap. 35.) to be at the feast of St. Michael
without occasion, i. e. without waiting for any other circumstance to authorize
the view, than the mere annual return of Michaelmas, the usual season of
holding it: And "THE TRYTHING" (by the same high authority) is required to "be
wholly kept" (or maintained entire) as it used to be ( trithing a teneatur^
integra sicut esse consuevit); because the efficacy of FRANKPLEDGE, in the
ready administration o^ justice without expense, depends chiefly on holding
"THE TRYTHING," which is the monthly COUR^ LEET of "three or more hundreds"
joined together or, more generally, THE COURT LEET of a third pa^^ of a shire,
or RIDING; derived from TRYTHING See Camden's Britannia, Bishop Gibson's
edition, p. 8^ As the word riding is allowed to be derived from trything, i^
very probable that ruding has also the same etymology. See also "Leges Edwardi
Regis," cap. 34. de TRITHINGIS and LEDIS.
and as both FRANKPLEDGE and the TRYTHING are thus, expressly, required by MAGNA
CHARTA, they may lawfully be established wherever a legal English government is
maintained; without any farther authority than the vote or agreement of a
majority of the householders in each district.

GRANVILLE SHARP.

EXTRACT OF A LETTER FROM THE AUTHOR, TO A GENTLEMAN IN THE EAST INDIES.
FROM some late determinations in the courts of Bengal against Slave Dealers,
and oppressors of the poor laboring natives (accounts of which have been
published in our English newspapers), the Public here, in general, are well
satisfied that the poor natives in India are free, and receive wages for their
labor: And, consequently, all the most steady friends to the measure of
abolishing the Slave Trade are solicitous to promote the use and sale of East
India Sugar, in preference to that which is cultivated by Slaves elsewhere: So
that you may be assured that the Sugar Trade from India may be immensely
increased, and the value of the new-acquired lands in India may be amply
advanced for the benefit of the Hon. East India Company (or of the proprietors
of East Indian lands in general), if due care be taken by the Company's agents
and servants to satisfy Europeans that the East India Sugar continues to be
really the produce of free labor: And care must also be taken to prevent West
Indian adventurers, or others, from forming plantations in any of the
new-acquired Indian lands (now become British territory) on any other plan,
than that of free labor; that the baneful and iniquitous practice of exacting
labor without wages may be effectually prevented, and be duly deemed as
detestable among men, as it is, certainly, abominable in the sight of God! All
imposing contracts for labor should also be vigilantly guarded against by the
administrators of government in the several Indian departments; for, next after
the abolition of the Slave Trade and Slavery, the most important consideration
certainly is, how to place the poor laboring natives of India in such a happy
state of permanent establishment, as may insure to them a general subsistence
independent of the caprice and injustice of monopolizers, and the grasping
speculations of mercenary adventures; and yet, with such moderation in this
little elevation of their condition, that they may still feel sufficient
inducement to prompt their industry for the public good. To this point I have
lately turned my thoughts, and have reason to think, that it may easily be
effected, not only to the advantage and security of the industrious poor, and
to the general promotion of trade in the numerous articles which the laborers,
by (...) little elevation of their condition, will be enabled to purchase; but
also, at the same time, to the very great advantage and profit of the rich. I
mean those that have much landed property, and have thereby the power of
carrying such a plan into execution. For by granting a very small proportion of
their lands to industrious laborers, upon the conditions I have proposed in
the enclosed paper, they will be enabled to raise the value of all the rest of
their lands: For by this means they will never be at a loss, either for free
laborers to cultivate whatever parts of their estates they shall choose to
continue in their own hands, or for a sufficient number of well-known people
among them, of approved industry, that may be trusted to contract, as renters,
for the cultivation of the remainder of their estates in small portions, or
farms, suited to their respective abilities, and at their own risque. And, by
the same means (I am persuaded), the value of the new-acquired lands in India
may be exceedingly enhanced, as well for the advantage of the natives as for
the Hon. East India Company, and of all their agents and servants, in case the
latter should be permitted to realize their fortunes (acquired in India) by
investments of landed property, purchased either of the Company, or of the
native proprietors; especially as the increasing demand for East Indian Sugar
affords great encouragement for cultivating lands in India; and there are many
other branches of husbandry, hitherto neglected in India, as the planting of
sago trees, and a variety of other valuable productive vegetables, which would
enrich the occupiers of land; and amply assord a due compence to the
industrious laborers.

I am aware, however, that my proposal, in the ^nclosed paper, of establishing
Frankpledge among the Indian nations, will be charged with objections too
commonly deemed insuperable by Europeans that have dwelt among them, and who,
therefore, ought to be best acquainted with their dispositions. The inveterate
prejudices of the Gentoos, concerning the (imaginary) inscrutable antiquity of
the Braminical traditions, and their (supposed) unalienable attachment to their
religion, will be alleged. But how shall we venture to rely on the experience
and consequent opinions of most of the Europeans that have lived among them, in
a point, which they are so far from having attempted to investigate with
candor, that many of them, through a lamentable neglect or ignorance of
christianity and ancient history, have rather been inclined blindly to adopt,
than to confute, the absurdities of Gentooism?

One English gentleman, though he is neither deficient in understanding nor in
experience and knowledge of the manners and dispositions of the Gentoos, has
very gravely informed us of a great similarity between the Mosaical Laws and
those of the Gentoos. But this gentleman (whose benevolent intentions I do not
at all question, or even suspect) has not been sufficiently aware o^ "the
mystery of iniquity, and the working of Satan," the great "deceiver of the
nations!" For all tru^ religion is uniform in righteousness and in justice*
Whereas the code of laws, which he has commended, abounds with injustice,
falsehood, and cruel oppr^ssion of the poor, though some faint traces of
justice an^ morality may seem to be dispersed among these laws for the more
easy seduction of indiscriminate people, as Satan will always endeavor to
appear as an Angel of Light, and all his votaries wear a mask of very opposite
features from those that are hid by it! But some even of the very laws which
are included in this gentleman's publication, and which are, thereby, exposed
to the light of truth and common sense, afford ample confutation of his own
remark; for by these it appears, that the Gentoo laws proceed by a sevenfold
proportion of IN-EQUITY (i. e. a numerical perfection of IN-IQUITY), extorting
from the poor Sooders fines of seven times the value that are required of the
Bramins for the very same offenses; though the Laws of God, declared by Moses
(to which they have been very injudiciously compared), absolutely prohibit any
respect of persons in judgment. And notwithstanding the pretended mildness of
these laws, yet the cloven foot is apparent; for the Sooder is doomed to be
burned alive for fornication with a Bramin woman, even though she should have
been proved the first seducer; whereas the Bramin, for the abominable and
irreparable injury to a female Sooder, even of a violent rape, is let off for a
small fine! And this detestable and enormous iniquity is even established by an
acknowledged law! Nay there is an express law to insure to the Bramins the
gross privilege (which they claim for the indulgence of their lust) that it is
lawful for a Bramin to tell a lie to deceive a woman. And yet with all these
abominable privileges, bad as they are, their iniquity is still aggravated by
the blasphemous falsehood, that their deceitful cast proceeded from the mouth
of the Creator, other casts from inferior parts of his body, and the Sooders
from the soles of his fect. Satan could not suggest a more malicious calumny
against, the divine justice! It is so evident a token of "the mystery of
iniquity and "working of Satan," that we need not search farther in the Gentoo
Laws for the declared "Doctrines of Demons," the two revealed marks of "the
mystery of iniquity" by which Christians are warned to know "the man of sin,"
or (...), the lawless one, that was to prevail in the Roman Empire in the
latter times, viz. "forbidding to marry," and commanding to abstain from meats,
etc. -- though the poor Gentoos are also grievously injured and deluded by the
last of these marks. For as the interposition of "deluding spirits" is
manifested, in the apostate church of the Roman Empire, by the open assumption
of a pagan title of priesthood, PONTIFEX, and, still more especially, by that
most presumptuous title of pretended infallibility, and universal dominion,
PONTIFEX MAXIMUS, through which this dangerous usurper of unlimited power
(under the masque of religion) became the true "image of the beast," the former
IMPERIAL PONTIFICES, or Heathen Emperors, who did not more haughtily suppress
the natural rights of mankind than did their successors the PAPAL PONTIFICES,
in proclaiming Crusades, and in exciting lawless Princes to wage bloody and
destructive wars against all persons that opposed their image worship, and
other antichristian corruptions; and in establishing bloody inquisitions to
maintain this horrible tyranny! So the same unnatural interposition may as
evidently be traced to its spiritual source by the baneful fruits and bloody
track of inquisitorial cruelty and tyranny manifested in the Laws of the
Bramins lately published; as the cutting off the buttock of a Sooder, for
sitting on the carpet of a Bramin! the cramming a red-hot iron into their
mouths for repeating any words of the Beads or Shaster! and the pouring hot wax
into their ears for sitting to hear them read! If the Beads contained any good,
it would be consummate Popery, thus to prohibit the communication of what is
good from the vulgar, like the universal prohibition of the Scriptures in the
vernacular tongues wherever the beast prevails! But there can be no doubt, if
the Sooders were duly protected by government from the fear of such frightful
penalties, that they would not be backward to acknowledge their just and equal
claims to all the rights of mankind. And I need only mention these severe laws
as ample and sufficient proofs to confute the prejudices of gentlemen
infallibly experienced (as they suppose) by their residence in India,
respecting the imaginary unalienable attachment of the Hindoos to their false
religion; for unless the Bramins themselves had known that the other Hindoos
were much inclined to think themselves equally men with the Bramins, and to be,
thereby, entitled to all equal rights and natural justice, they would not have
disgraced their code of laws with such enormities! Frankpledge is the only safe
mode of restoring these poor people to their just rights, and it was necessary
for me, thus far, to guard against the obvious objections that would be made by
many gentlemen who presume much on their own experimental knowledge of the
Gentoos.

I remain, with sincere esteem, DEAR SIR, Your affectionate friend, And obliged
humble servant, G. S.


