A Short Account OF THE ITCH, OR A Compendious Treatise of the Diseases of the
SKIN, from the slightest Itching Humor in particular Parts only, to the most
inveterate Itch, stubborn Scabbiness, and confirmed Leprosy.

Plainly describing Their Symptoms, Nature, Dependence on each other, original
Cause, and dismal Consequence to the Patients and their Posterity, if neglected
or mismanaged.

ALSO The dangerous Effects of Quicksilver Girdles, Ointments, Washes, and
other pernicious Mercurial-Medicines.

DISCOVERING The True and only certain Method of Curing those Distempers with
Safety, Ea^e and Expedition, and without the Use of daubing Ointments
^^imstone, or other nauseous and ill-smelling Remedies, Confinement of the
Patient, Disorder of the Body, or Knowledge of the nearest Friend.

THE WHOLE Illustrated with several extraordinary Cases, and very remarkable
Cures performed by the Author, Necessary to be read by all Persons, but more
especially those who are unhappily troubled with the ITCH, or any other
Cutaneous Distemper.

By T. S.

The Sixth Edition, Corrected.

LONDON: Printed, And Sold by J. Roberts near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane,
and A. Dodd at the Peacock without Temple Bar. 1728.

Price Sti^^'d 1 s.

THE PREFACE.
THE fifth Edition of this little Book being sold off, and the Bookseller
calling on me to reprint it, I quickly determined to look it over carefully for
that End; and what did not a little conduce to my publishing it again so
readily, was, the favorable Reception the former Editions met with from the
Public, who were so indulgent as to esteem it a plain honest Account of the
Distempers it treats of, and (what I my self have not Vanity enough to think)
more to the purpose than any thing wrote before.

THE great Experience also I have had (since I first published this little
Book) of the Method I recommended in it as most rational for the Cure of the
Itch, inveterate Itching Humors, Scabbiness and Leprosy, was anothor Motive of
my venturing it again into the World; for I can truly say my Success in Curing
Cutaneous Diseases (having been exceedingly great, greater perhaps than many
can easily believe) is a thorough Confirmation of the Efficacy of the Method I
have mentioned to use, and by which I have restored abundance of People to
perfect Health, who from the inveteracy of the Disease, length of Time they had
been afflicted, and from their having often tried other Means in vain, almost
despaired of ever being Cured; of which I could give many Instances of Men of
Worth and Probity, were it proper.

I have added at the latter End, an Index to the whole, that those who have not
Leisure or Inclination to begin and read the Book quite through (which yet is
much the best way) may however, by looking over That, know what it contains,
and turn to the Page they think most likely to inform them, of what they want
chiefly to be acquainted with.

THE Index, considering the smallness of the Book it self, may be thought
strange by some, it being as large as what is commonly found to a Book of six
times the Bulk of this; but their wonder will cease, when the consider that
this Short Account, under some Authors Pens, would have swelled perhaps to more
than six times its bigness, without containing more in Fact, than it does now.
For my part, I think the fewer Words a Man expresses his Thoughts in, the
better, provided he can be clearly understood; for to use more, or be prolix in
Writing, serves only, in my Opinion, to puzzle the Cause, or amuse the Reader.

BUT whosoever Writes and Publishes his Thoughts upon any Subject to the World,
would be vain in the last degree, should he expect every one would approve of
them; the most Correct Books in all Arts and Sciences, have ever met with
ill-natured and unjust Censure from some, which indeed is no wonder, since Holy
Writ it self has not escaped the Ridicule of Profligate Wretches; it is truly
said, unhappy is that Person of whom every one speaks well, alluding that there
never was or can be such a one, and in that Sense we may say, Vile and
Contemptible is the Book, which every body likes: The Man therefore who sets
Pen to Paper, in order to communicate any thing to the Public, ought first to
resolve to bear unmoved, all the Calumny and invidious Reflections that Malice
can invent.

THIS I fully determined when I began the following Treatise, and shall be
altogether unconcerned for the Success it meets with amongst the cavilling part
of Mankind.

I have given my Thoughts freely on the Itch, inveterate Itching Humors,
Scabbiness and Leprosy, under one or other of which, almost all Cuticular
Eruptions, that are not the immediate Effects of acute Diseases, may be
comprised; I thought it needless in this Short Account to treat particularly of
Tetters, Ringworms, etc. more especially since the Medicines that will Cure the
Itch, etc. will likewise Cure them, and most, if not all, other Defilements of
the Skin that take their Rise from Chronick Distempers.

I am not so opinionated of my own Performances, as to imagine that what I have
written is without fault; yet I hope the Candid and Benevolent Reader will take
what I have done in good Part.

HE that writes his Sentiments of any Distemper, or concerning any Matter or
Thing, with unfeigned Sincerity, is, in my Opinion, excusable, though he may not
be wholly free from Error, and though a great Motive of it may be Self-Interest
viz. gaining Honors, or increasing his Substance; but those are truly
blamable, who to obtain either of these, publish to the World as solemn Truths,
their own sprightly Inventions, which have no real Foundation, and which in
Fact, they do not believe themselves.

AND that such groundless Hypotheses are to be found among Physical Authors,
and that plain dealing is a Virtue not always to be met with, may be gathered
from the Works of Dr. Sydenham, the most worth and sincere Physician Europe
ever bred, who being importuned to write an History of Chronick Distempers,
complained of the difficulty of such a Task, in the following Words.

'FOR among Physical Writers, if you except Hippocrates, and some very few
others, scarce any Footsteps can be found whereby I might trace through these
impassable Ways, obstructed with so many Difficulties; for the Lights and Helps
which Authors promise, are rather Ignes fatui, than true Lights; which rather
misguide to Rocks and Precipices, than direct for the finding the Genuine
Method of Nature; for most of their Writings are built upon Hypotheses
proceeding from their own Fancies; and the very Phoenomena of Diseases, of
which the History of them consists, as they are described by these, are
modelled in the same Shop of Suppositions, and the very Practice wherewith they
undertake Diseases, (which is the certain Plague and Destruction of Mankind) is
suited to this kind of Postulata, and not according to the Truth of the Thing,
so reigning are these Men's Whimsies almost in every Page; and in the mean while
the Directions of Nature are slighted.'

WHAT this most Excellent Physician says is very much to be lamented; for to be
swayed by an embraced Hypothesis, and to be insincere in what relates so
eminently to Life, and Health the greatest Blessing of it, must surely be
highly Criminal, and in the last degree Barbarous.

IF I know my own Heart, I have wrote the following Pages with that Integrity
that becomes an honest Man, and have given as plain and natural an Account of
the Illnesses I have treated about, as I possibly could; for the rest I do not
trouble my self, I pretend not to Correctness of Style; all the use I know of
Words, is to convey one Man's sense of Things to another, if therefore I can be
understood, it is sufficient: This I am satisfied of, from very great
Experience, that the Method I have described for the Cure of the Diseases the
Title mentions, will, if they are curable, by Blessing of God, take Effect; and
not only in them, but in the King's Evil, and all Scrophulous, Cases also, in a
very short Time, in proportion to the inveteracy of them, provided the Patients
will follow Directions; and such of them who think fit to apply to me, may
depend upon faithful and civil Treatment, as I am sure all who have been under
my Care hitherto, will acknowledge they have found, from

T. SPOONER.
From my House, next the Black-Horse Inn, in Leman-Street, in Goodman's-Fields,
April 15, 1728.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE Description, Symptoms, Nature, and dangerous Consequence of the
Itch, particular Itching Humors, Scabbiness and Leprosy. Page 1. CHAP. II. Of
the Original Cause of the Itch, Inveterate Itching Humors, Scabbiness and
Leprosy. p. 16. CHAP. III. Of several Methods of curing the Itch, particular
Itching Humors, Scabbiness and Leprosy; the Reason why so many miss of being
Cured; the Danger of falling into grievous and incurable Distempers by ill
Methods and pernicious Mercurial Applications; and of the safe, easy and
effectual Method of Cure advanced by the Author. p. 24.
A Short Account OF THE ITCH, etc.
CHAP. I. The Description, Symptoms, Nature and dangerous Consequences of the
Itch, particular Itching Humors, Scabbiness and Leprosy.
THE Itch is a filthy Distemper, infesting the External Parts of the Body
universally, but more particularly the Joints, and between the Fingers,
commonly with Pustulous Eruptions raised upon the Scarf-Skin, by almost
unavoidable scratching, occasioned through violent itching of the Parts; from
these Pustulous Eruptions or little Bladders, when broke, there issues a thin
Crystalline Humor, which touching any other Part not yet infected, soon causes
incessant itching, and upon scratching, more Bladders to arise.

AND by this means the Itch, in whatever Part it begins first, is soon spread
over the whole Body, and very remarkably fixes upon the Wrists, Hams, and
especially between the Fingers, which peculiarly distinguishes a real Itch from
that slight itching of the Body, many People are troubled with for a short
time, commonly about the beginning of Winter, and in the Spring, occasioned
only by Straitness, or Constipation, of the Pores of the Skin, through change or
coldness of the Season, and which mostly goes away, upon enlarging or opening
the Pores again, either by proper Exercise, or the help of the Bagnio, without
further Trouble, or Medicines; yet if it continues, it may lay the Foundation
of a true Itch soon after to follow, as will be shown hereafter.

WHEN the Itch has continued long, and is become confirmed, the little
Ulcerations increase, and the clear Humor, contained in the little Bladders,
degenerates to a porulent Matter, which still makes the Disease more Nauseous
and Infectious.

SOMETIMES the Itch appears in a dry form, without those Pustules before
mentioned, and then the Scarf-Skin looks red, rugged or uneven, and when by
long continuance it is grown inveterate, the Parts affected are covered over
with a dry kind of thin Scab, and this is the worst and most stubborn sort of
Itch, which, as well as the moist kind before spoken of, if neglected, in
length of Time, turns to a foul Scabies or Scabbiness of the whole Body,
quickly to be described.

THE moist Itch, though not so stubborn o^ virulent as the dry kind, yet, by
means of its moisture, sooner and more easily communicates its Infection to
Sound Bodies.

AND so Contagious is the Itch of either sort, that lying in Bed with a Person
troubled with it, or in the Sheets an itchy Person has lain in, or to wipe
one's Hands with the same Cloth, or draw on a Glove such a Person has worn, or
even to have Linen washed with the Linen of one afflicted with the Itch, is
sufficient to catch the Distemper and as the Famous and Ingenious Dr. Willi.
says, 'Certainly the Infection of no one Disease is more easily and certainly
propagated (the Plague only excepted) than this of the Itch.'

YET some Persons are much more subject to be infected with it than others; for
i^ many there is a certain aptness to receiv^ Diseases of this kind, and such
Persons catc^ it sooner than others, as Experience demonstrates; which
difference it is likely may happen through the Natural Structure of the External
Pores of the Body, or their being larger in one Person than in another, so a to
imbibe or receive the infecting Humou^ sooner and more surely.

BUT when One Person in a Family o^ House is infected with the Itch, it
commonl^ runs through the whole, and especially seizes (...) those who Eat, Drink
and Lie, or are very conversant with the Person who has so accidentally caught
it; and thus the Itch is communicated from one Person, and one Family to
another, by means of lying in strange Beds, by Children of different Families
playing together, or by Servant Maids or Nurses, etc. that have had this
loathsome Disease, and come into Families before they are perfectly cured of it.

WHEN the Itch is caught by Infection, the Scarf or outward Skin only, for some
time, is infected, and the Blood not at all tainted with it, and then it may
easily and quickly be cured by proper Medicines regularly administered.

BUT when it has been neglected long, and the little Ulcers have crept deeper,
and touched the Cutis or real Skin, so that the infecting Humor penetrates the
small Veins, and is circled about with the Blood, it soon contaminates its
whole Mass, and all the other Juices of the Body, and then becomes confirmed,
is more dangerous, and much more difficult to Cure.

SO also where it happens to aged People, and likewise if it is complicated
with other Distempers, in which last Case it must be treated with the utmost
Skill, for then the Circumstances of the Patient will not often admit of its
being cured after the nearest manner, but require it to be managed with great
Care and Caution, and with a particular regard to the other Illnesses that
afflict the Patient; who otherwise may be killed instead of being cured, as in
another Case happened to a certain Person laboring under a Consumption of the
Lungs and the Venereal Disease together, the Person he applied to for Cure
imprudently put him into a Salivation for the latter, without minding the
former, and so destroyed him; for which he was deservedly Prosecuted in a Court
of Justice.

SOME Authors, Ancient and Modern, are of the Opinion, that when the Itch has
continued many Months together, and got into the whole Habit of the Body, it
cannot be cured; but with Submission, I must dissent from them, being satisfied
from my own Experience, that the most inveterate Itch may be perfectly and
safely cured, by the Rational Method recommended in the latter Part of this
Book, of which I also flatter my self my Readers will be convinced.

YET that an inveterate Itch is much more difficult to Cure than a slight one,
is most certain, and Dr. Willis beforementioned, speaking of some of his
Patients that were afflicted with the Itch, which proved so stubborn, that with
the most powerful Remedies, and even repeated Salivations, he could no^ Cure,
tells us, that 'The Veneral Disease though it be extremely Malignant, and cause^
most foul Ca^oethick Ulcers that Eat the Flesh and Bones, may more easily and
certainly be cured than the Itch.'

ANOTHER Author, writing upon this Distemper, has the following Words, 'I knew
three Brothers, all young Men, die purely of the Itch, which by length of Time
becoming habitual, at last corrupted the whole Body, which with putrid and
eating Ulcers destroyed them.'

AND thus we find Authors believe this Disease when grown inveterate, by being
neglected too long, to be not only Incurable, but Mortal; but with them I
cannot agree, for in my Opinion, the Disease that killed the Three Brothers the
last quoted Author mentions (judging by the latter part of his own Words) was
rather a confirmed and universal Scabbiness properly the Itch it self, which I
believe never proves Mortal till it turns to a loathsome Scabbiness, which
indeed many times brings on Death.

HOWEVER certain it is, that there is a vast Difference in this Distemper, it
being much harder to Cure in some Persons than in others; the Reason of which
seems very plain, and my Experience every Day confirms it more and more, to be
generally speaking thus, That those in whom it proves stubborn, are themselves
the occasion of it; for when they first find they have caught the Itch, instead
of applying instantly to an ingenious Physician for a regular Cure, as they
ought to do, they tamper with it themselves, and neither take and use trifling
Remedies, so as to let the Disease gain ground of it self, or else more
mischievous ones, so as hastily to fix it in the Blood and Juices, by which, of
course, it becomes very stubborn and inveterate.

AN Example of which I very lately met with in a Tradesman, who having caught
the Itch, followed the Advice of a Woman and other unskilful Persons, and also
by using several Pretended Infallible Remedies, on his own Head, had so engaged
the Disease, fixed it in all his Fluids, and rendered it so very stubborn and
inveterate, that it was with much difficulty I overcame it, and perfectly Cured
him.

ONE would admire that People should be thus infatuated to their own Detriment,
and, as sometimes it proves, to their own Destruction; but so it is, and that
not only now and then, but very frequently; and what one would still more
wonder at, I have almost daily Accounts from Persons of the best Sense and
Worth, who apply to me for Cure in those stubborn Cases, of their having
injured themselves in this Manner, which I think, can proceed from nothing
else, than that either they are ashamed to acquaint a Physician that they are
troubled with such a Distemper, which is an Error, or else they imagine the
Itch to be a Disease of little or no Consequence and with Danger, which is a
very great and sometimes fatal Mistake, as in the Course of these Papers, will
be made apper.

BUT besides the Distemper commonly called the Itch, there are particular and
inveterate Itching Humors of various Kinds or Appearances, that do not affect
the Body universally as That does, but fix upon particular Parts only, as in
some Persons upon the back of one or both of the Hands, in others upon the
Shoulders or Arms, and in others upon one or both of the Thighs, or some other
particular Parts, either of the Head, Face, Body or Limbs, many times about as
broad as a Man's Hand; but some Persons have them much broader, and others much
narrower; and in whatever Parts they first appear, they mostly continue,
sometimes diminishing and sometimes increasing, in respect both to largeness in
inveteracy, for many Months and oftentimes Years together, unless prudently
managed and perfectly Cured, by Internal as well as External Remedies.

NOW and then the inveterate Itching Humors of this kind in some Patients
change their Station, and disappearing in the Parts they first affected, soon
after arise in others; but this they seldom do, unless the Persons troubled
with them, tamper with outward Applications, which, alone, are dangerous, as
will be made appear in the following Sheets.

THESE particular Itching Humors, in whatever Parts they show themselves, make
the Scarf-Skin look Red, Angry and Unequal, and besides the violent Itching
that mostly attends them, little Pimples, upon scratching, commonly arise, that
are very fore for a short time, and often send forth a thin Humor, that may be
seen standing upon the Parts affected, almost like Dew, and when the Soreness
abates, the Pimples diminish, and the Itching increases, and then little dry
Scurf falls off, and fresh Pimples soon arise, so that there is unsufferable
itching, and sever^ soreness, almost at the same time, which proves exceeding
troublesome to those unhappily fatigued therewith.

THESE inveterate Itching Humors differ not much from the Disease, called
Scabies or Scabbiness, excepting only that they confine themselves to
particular Parts, as before shown, and That mostly affects the Body universally

SCABIES or Scabbiness, is a Disease most commonly succeeding an inveterate
Itch either moist or dry, for when either kin^ has continued long, or been ill
Cured, s^ that the very Fountains of the Blood and Juices are corrupted, an
inveterate and filthy Scabbiness, quickly follows, which not only affects the
Cuticula or Scarf-Skin, as tha^ does, but penetrates deeper, and fixes upon the
Cutis or real Skin, which it gnaws and ulcerates, and causes nastly Scabs to
cover the Parts.

IF it follows the moist Itch, foul Ichorous Matter issues from them, which is
very contagious, and infects and found Part it touches; but if it succeeds the
dry Itch, there is seldom any Pus issues from the Scabs, which then appear very
crusty, dry and nauseous to the sight.

SOMETIMES a Scabbiness happens when the Itch has not gone before it, but this
is not near so frequent as the Scabbiness following the Itch, which as before
said, is generally a Preludium to this hateful Distemper.

A Scabbiness is also accompanied with itching as well as soreness, especially
about the Edges of the small Ulcers that void a foul corrupted Pus in the moist
kind, and about the crusty Scabs in the dry sort.

AN universal Scabbiness, as it is much worse than the Itch for Filthiness and
Putrefaction, so it is much more dangerous and difficult to Cure.

IF it continues long without being Cured, the Ulcerations increase in number
as well as largeness, and the discharge of Matter from them is so great, the
Humors continually flowing that way, that the Body being robbed or drained of
its moisture, falls of course into a Consumption, which, together with the
fatigue the Patient undergoes in the Day time, and want of Rest and Sleep at
Night, occasioned by continual alternate itching and smarting, quickly finishes
the fatal Catastrophe, and the unhappy Patient is obliged to submit to a
miserable Death.

BUT this must be understood only of the moist Scabbiness, for the dry one,
though very Inveterate and Malign, yet seldom or never is attended with Death,
but first ushers in a poisonous Leprosy, that, if not timely Cured, soon puts a
Period to the Patient's Life.

THE Leprosy is the most Malignant Distemper that affects the External Parts of
the Body, the Blood and Juices being contaminated with its fatal Poison, whence
proceeds the great Difficulty of curing it.

THE Leprosy is sometimes the Hereditary Disease of the Family, but is much
more commonly contracted by Infection.

AND it may indeed be termed, as in the Learned Dr. Blancard's Physical
Dictionary, a Disease, by which, 'The Temperature, Form, and Figure, and at
last the very Continuity of the Body is corrupted; and as he again says, 'Is a
Canker commonly to the whole Body.'

THE Itch and Scabies are usually the Forerunners of it, for the Itch, being
neglected, turns to an universal Scabies, and That to the Leprosy as before
shown, which is the worst of Cutaneous Diseases, and accompanied with the
highest degree of Corruption and Putrefaction.

THE Symptoms accompanying this direful Disease, are both Internal and External
concisely summed up as follow:

'THE Internal are Acid or Musty Belchings, Costiveness, Thirst, a stinking
Sweat, thick Urine, insomuch, that the Powder of Lead will swim upon it; an
extreme propensity to Venery; thickness, viscosity, and unctuosity of the Blood
when drawn forth, and little Clots of Sand sticking to the Cloth through which it
is strained; stinking Breath, a weariness of the Limbs, Chilness, Stupidity,
and a hoarse Voice, as if it came through the Nose.'

'THE External Symptoms are these, the Skin appears livid, black or yellow; it
wrinkles when exposed to the Cold; it is notably rough and oily, insomuch, that
Water will not stick to it; it is covered over with a Purple or white Dandriff;
little moveable painless Knots and Swellings beset the Forehead, Chin and
Joints; a dry Ringworm and Pushes cover the whole Body, and affect not only the
Skin but the Muscles; an eternal Itch like the gnawing of Worms, or pricking
with Needles molests 'em; when they scratch any Part, it turns dry and scaly,
but voids no Matter; the Hair of their Head and Eyebrows falls of; their
Forehead is furrowed with wrinkles; their Ears stretched and swelled; the
Eyebrows callous and raised; their Eyes round red and sparkling, infested with
little hard swellings in the corners, and apt to water; the upper Part of their
Nose contracted, while the inferior is enlarged, troubled with frequent
sneezing, and infested with a Polypus and Cancrous corrosive Ulcers; the Face
and Lips are pale, hard, livid, and chopped; their Tongue and Mouth liable to
hard Swellings, Chops and Corrosion; the Gums rough and swol'n; the Spittle
Viscous; their Breasts hard, and their Veins swol'n; the Joints withered, and
beset with callous indolent Ulcers, that are apt to bleed upon the slightest
touch; the Muscles of their Hands, especially those of the Thumb, and first
Finger, are much consumed; the Fingers and Toes benumbed; the Joints distorted
and knotty, and the Nails black, bowed and chopped.'

THE Reader, I presume will readily allow, that Persons laboring under all
these Symptoms, can have but small, if any hopes of Life, and indeed here are
so many dreadful ones enumerated, that the very Thoughts of them, one would
think, are sufficient not only to sink a Person Afflicted with them to the
Grave, but also to make him desire a speedy Death, as a kind Relief to the
grievous Misery he must necessarily endure.

BUT it must not be imagined, that every one affected with the Leprosy, is
afflicted with all these Symptoms; some Persons are not troubled with one half
of them, and yet are as surely Leprous as those laboring under the greatest
part, or all, that have been summed up.

THE most distinguishing Sign of the Leprosy, is the Fish like Scales, of a
Branny Color, that fall from the External Parts of the diseased Person; and
whether that is attended with many more of the beforementioned Symptoms, as it
mostly is, or not, it bespeaks the Leprosy.

THE sooner the Cure of this Distemper is undertaken, and the fewer the
Symptoms are, the better it will be overcome, and the sooner and more certainly
will the Patient be restored to Health; but if it be neglected for a
considerable time, till the Symptoms are multipied, the Strength of the Patient
much impaired, and the Disease arrived to the highest degree, it may then be
said to be incurable, and the suffering Wretch has nothing more to do, than to
settle his Worldly Affairs, commit his Soul to God who gave it, and patiently
expect his Dissolution to put a final End to his intolerable Torment.

BY the Account and Description of the Symptoms, Nature and Danger of the
External Diseases here given, I think it plainly appears how inexcusably
remiss, and in the last degree negligent of themselves those Persons are, who
being afflicted in the slightest manner with Cutaneous Distempers, or such as
affect the External Parts universally, omit to seek for a regular Cure in time,
since it has been sufficiently proved, that the most trifling Itch, if
neglected, becomes more and more inveterate, and advances step by step, from
one degree to another, till from the Itch it turns to an universal and nauseous
Scabies, which many times kills the Patients unfortunnately troubled with it,
and if it does not, turns to a loathsome Leprosy, that very often proves
incurable, and fails not to render the unhappy Sufferers, and oftentimes their
Posterity after them, miserable Spectacles to others, as well as lamentable
Torments to themselves, and at last accomplishes their Destruction, by the
unavoidable Death it certainly brings on.

AND no less imprudent are they, who being troubled with Tetters, Ringworms,
and other breakings out, in particular Parts, neglect to get Cured; for they
are for the most part Species of one or other of the Diseases I have described,
and are of very ill Consequence, if not quickly remedied.

I have not enlarged on those several breakings out, by their particular Names,
as found in Authors, because, as they may be comprehended under the Itch,
inveterate Itching Humors, Scabies, or Leprosy, which I have discoursed on I
would neither tire the Reader's Patience, or swell these Papers beyond my first
Intention.

CHAP. II. Of the Original Cause of the Itch, inveterate Itching Humors,
Scabbiness and Leprosy.
THAT the External Diseases I treat of, are for the most part occasioned by
Infection, is very certain, there being, I believe, scarcely One Person in
Fifty troubled with them, but what were infected by others in the manner I have
shown in the foreging Chapter; yet as the communicating of them from one Person
to another, cannot properly be called the Cause, but rather the spreading of
Diseases before caused, I design here, passing over that, as sufficiently
proved and already known, to proceed to an enquiry after the Original Cause of
those Cutaneous Distempers, when they arise and happen to Persons who have not
been infected by, or received them from others, and that from the Opinions of
some of the Ancient as well as Modern Physicians, many of whom assign the Itch,
Scabies, Leprosy, etc. to one and the same Cause, and are of Opinion that those
Diseases differ from one another only in degree. Nevertheless it must be
allowed, that inveterate Itching Humors in particular Parts, are sometimes of
a Scrophulous Nature, and proceed from the King's Evil.

GALEN lays the fault of Diseases of the Skin on melancholy or adust Matter.

AVICEN is of Opinion that, 'Blood with which Choler is mixed, and that with
Salt Phlegm converted into Melancholy, is the cause of Scabbiness.'

LANGIUS accuses, 'Impure Choleric Blood, or adust and Faeculent, mixed with
Liquor of Salt Phlegm (produced by discracy of the Liver, and oftentimes
obstruction of the Spleen) as the cause of the Itch.'

THE Learned Dr. Blancard, in his Physical Dictionary, says, the Leprosy is
caused by 'Black Bile diffused through the whole Body.'

OTHERS are also of the Opinion, that the Itch proceeds from 'Choler,
subtilized and sent into the Habit of the Body, which being mixed with thin Salt
Phlegm, and spreading into the Superficies of the Body, breaks out in the
Cuticula with small watery Pustules causing great Itching.'

'THAT a Scabbiness proceeds from Blood and Lympha defiled with Excrementitious
Humors, not sufficiently separated and expelled by Urine, Stool, Sweat, etc.
So that the Sanguineous and Lymphatick Juices must of necessity be corrupted
with sharp and biting Humors, mixed with Salt Phlegm and adust Choler.'

THAT the Leprosy is caused by 'Salt Phlegm possibly putrified with a mixture of
oily Humors, as a depraved Lympha and adust Choler.'

AND that the remote Causes of this Depravation of the Choler and Lympha, are
'Feeding upon Salt, Acrid and Hot Meats; also want of Cleanliness, or keeping
the Body sweet and clean.'



Dr. Willis believes the Cause of the Itch, etc. to be the Depravation of the
Humor of the Cutaneous Glands:

'THE Glandulous Humor, says he, depraved either by the Blood being very
impure, and also dissolved, leaving its Corruption and Recrements plentifully
in the Cutaneous Glands, which there assuming the Nature of a more Corrosive
Ferment, does ferment and variously Coagulate with other Juices that come
thither or pass that way, and so produces the Itch, etc. or the Humor gathered
in the Cutaneous Glands, sometimes by mere Stagnation, becomes not only Itchy
but Corruptive. Therefore those kept long in Prison, or that lead a Sedentary
Life, and are used to filth and stink, are Obnoxious to these Diseases.'

AGAIN, the same Author tells us, That in a Scabbiness and Leprosy, '
Acido-Saline Concretions (like Tartar in Wine) do happen in the Mass of Blood,
which when they cannot be conquered or dissolved, are driven to the Skin, as in
the other Case, (viz. Wine) to the sides of the Cask.'



THE Excellent Etmuller assigns the Cause of the Itch, to 'Sharp Particles of
the Serum, repairing to the Surface in small Quantities.'

OF a Scabbiness, to the 'Depravation of the Nutritive Serum, or Juice of the
Parts under the Skin, occasioned by a Preternatural Acid, that takes its Rise
from sudden Cold, succeeding Heat, and shutting up the Steams of the Body
within the straightened Pores; and which by continuance may at last infect the
Blood.'

HE also says, that 'A Scabbiness proceeds sometimes, but very rarely, from
Internal Causes, as Scurvy, French Pox, etc.'

AND treating of the Leprosy, he gives his Opinion that it is caused by 'A
Saline Corrosive Acid reigning in the Serum.'

HE likewise ingeniously gives the Reason why Cutaneous Diseases are sometimes
moist and sometimes dry, as follows:

'IF the Nutritive Juice be very serous and apt to corrupt, the Breakings out
run much; if balmy and impregnated with a Volatile Oily Salt, they are crusty
and dry.'



BY what has been said, it appears how much Physicians differ from one another,
concerning the Cause of those Cutaneous Distempers, but in my Judgment the two
last quoted Authors have hit the Mark much nearer than others, and their
Opinions, which amount almost to one and the same thing, will appear more
Rational, if what the accurate and learned Physician Dr. J. Keill says
concerning the Scarf-Skin, in his Anatomy of the Human Body abridg'd, be
considered; his Words follow: 'THIS (i. e. the Scarf-Skin) is that soft Skin
which rises in a Blister upon any burning, or the application of a Blistering
Plaster. It sticks close to the Surface of the true Skin, to which it is also
tied by the Vessels which nourish it, though they are so small as not to be seen;
when we examine the Scarf-Skin with a Microscope, it appears to be made up of
several Lays of exceeding small Scales, which cover one another more or less,
according to the different thickness of the Scarf-Skin in the several Parts of
the Body. In the Lips where the Scales appear plainest, because the Skin is
thinest, they only in a manner touch one another. Now these Scales are either
the excretory Ducts of the Glands of the true Skin, as I think is apparent in
Fishes, or else these Glands have their Pipes opening between the Scales.'

'THESE Scales are often glewed one to another by the grosser parts of our
insensible Transpiration, hardening upon them by the Heat of our Body, which
carries off the more Volatile Particles. The Humor which is afterward
separated by the Glands of the Skin, being pent in between the Scales, causes
frequent Itchings, and where the Matter has been longer pent up, small Pimples.'

Thus far the Ingenious Dr. Keill.

NOW if the Humor designed by Nature to be excreted, by being pent in, through
Cold or any other Accident, causes frequent Itchings, and by a longer
continuance, small Pimples, as certainly it does, why may it not be supposed,
according to Willis and Etmuller, that, by a yet longer Confinement or
Stagnation, it will be depraved, become corruptive, and at last infectious,
especially if the remote Causes, such as leading a Sedentary Life, eating Salt
Meats, the Relics of other Distempers, or living in Nastiness or Filth, have
obstructed or impaired the Glandules of the Body, or any way injured their
Structure, and also caused irregular Cohaesions of Particles in the Blood and
Juices, so as to make them apt upon the least Stagnation to Corrupt and Putrify?

MUCH might be said to strengthen and defend this Opinion; yet after all the
fine Speculations and Notions Men have, and propagate concerning the Original
Cause of these and many other Diseases, it must be acknowledged that it is
doubtful, whether we can more than guess at the real Essence of them; and the
most faithful Physician that ever wrote, the Immortal Sydenham, our Countryman,
appears to have had the same Sentiments, when treating of another Distemper he
tells us:

'AS to the intrinsic Nature and Essence of this Disease, as they say, I count
I am to seek for it no further than as it appears by the Symptoms we have
described, no more than I am obliged to search into the Essence of any Plant or
Animal.'

THIS admirable Man being sensible, no doubt, of the insufficiency of Human
Reason to penetrate into the Abstruse Principles or first moving Causes of
Diseases, seems to have applied himself wholly to the Observation of
Distempers, their several Symptoms, Stages and Terminations, together with the
most Natural and Effectual Method of curing them, as his admirable Works, so
justly valued all over Europe, show.

AND it would be well if all Persons who Practice Physic, and who have the
good of Mankind most at Heart, would Copy after the Learned and Incomparable
Sydenham, whose Works will never Die, and whose Example all ought to follow,
and not be forward to broach New Notions, and strain every thing to support an
embraced Hypothesis, or to assert this or that to be the Original Cause of any
Distemper, unless it could be made appear by undeniable Demonstration; but
rather apply themselves diligently to the Observation of Diseases, through their
Beginning, State and Declination, and be thereby perfectly acquainted with all
their Symptoms, Variations, and Consequences, so as to be able safely and
quickly to Cure them, which I am sure all unprejudiced Persons will agree,
would be much better for the unhappy Patients afflicted with Distempers, than
for their Physicians to be taken up with airy Speculations concerning them, and
at the same time perhaps, be at a Loss how to effect their Cure

AND, indeed, the many Mistakes there are made, and Errors committed in the
Cure of Cutaneous Diseases, even by those from whom one would be far from
expecting Mismanagement, are very surprising, and what I could not believe, if
almost daily Experience did not convince me of it, of which I could give very
many Examples, but that I think it much better rather to draw a Veil over the
Miscarriages of others, than expose them to Public View.

CHAP. III. Of several Methods of curing the Itch, particular Itching Humors,
Scabbiness and Leprosy; the Reasons why so many miss of being Cured; the Danger
of falling into grievous and incurable Distempers by ill Methods, and
pernicious Mercurial Applications; and of the safe, easy, and effectual Method
of Cure advanced by the Author.
MOST Authors agree, that the same Method and Medicines that will Cure an
inveterate Itch, will likewise take Place in a Scabbiness, Leprosy, and most
other Defilements of the Skin, if curable; and indeed Experience answers for
the Truth of it, only with this difference, that the Method must be closely
followed for a longer Time, and the Medicines be made stronger for a Scabbiness
and Leprosy, than it is requisite they should be for the first mentioned
Infection.

BUT what that Method and those Medicines are, that with the greatest
Certainty, least Trouble, and without Danger, will accomplish the Cure of
Cutaneous Diseases, is what Physicians differ very much about.

SOME recommend Bleeding and Purging as absolutely necessary; the first to
cause Revulsion, temperate the Blood, and allay its too great Ebullition, the
last to cleanse the Stomach, Bowels, and all the Juices, from Impurities, and
both of them to diminish the Humors of the Body in general, without all which,
they are of Opinion the Itch and other Defaedations cannot safely or easily, if
at all, be cured.

OTHERS advise to Sudorificks, or Sweating Medicines; and others to Diuretics,
or such as work by Urine; some neglecting all evacuating Medicines, prescribe
sweetners of the Blood, and cooling Alteratives, which they believe will Cure
by subduing the Choleric Disposition and Acrid Quality of the Juices.

OTHERS, laying aside all Internal Remedies, rely wholly upon External
Applications for the Cure of Cuticular Maladies, such as Ointments, Baths and
Washes, made of Tobacco, Brimstone, Elecampane, Sharp pointed Dock, etc. and
others chiefly insist on Mercury or Quicksilver, outwardly applied, either by a
Girdle, or mixed with Unguents, etc. which they say will effectually kill the
Itch, and other Diseases of the Skin.

THUS Physical Authors vary exceedingly in their Opinions one from another, and
each brings several Reasons and Arguments to sup port the Opinion he is of, or
has advanced Those who plead most for External Applications, have but an
indifferent Opinion o^ Purging, and inveigh mightily against Bleeding, which
they say draws the foul Humor, that either never reached deeper than the Skin,
or else that Nature had kindly expelled to the outer Parts, into the Blood and
Juices, so as certainly to corrupt them, and fix the Distemper upon the whole
Habit of the Body, and thereby render it incurable.

MARTIANUS gives an Account of a certain Person, 'Who laboring under the Itch,
would have Four Pound of Blood taken from him by opening a Vein, upon which,
that very Day, revulsion of the Putrid Humor being made from the Skin to the
greater Veins by Venae-Section, he was taken with a Malignant Fever, which
killed him the Fifth Day.'

'LETTING Blood (says another Author) must absolutely be avoided in this Cure,
for thereby the Impurity is drawn into the Blood, and that defiled which before
was pure.'



THE famous Helmont mentions purging Medicines in this Distemper, as well as in
other Cases, with Derision.

BUT Willis, amongst many others, is of Opinion, that both Bleeding and Purging
in Cutaneous Diseases are necessary.

SPEAKING of Bleeding he says, 'The Effect is not taken away till first the
Cause be removed, which may this way properly be done. Yea for an universal
Disease, such as the Itch is, an universal Remedy, such as letting Blood is,
seems convenient.'

HE likewise mightily recommends Purging in the following Words; 'Therefore
Purges ought both to begin and make an end of this Method of Cure; for though
Helmont treats a Cathartick Medicine with high Disdain, and, as it were, leads
it in Triumph, because of it self it does not Cure the Itch; yet we may affirm,
that this Disease is scarce ever easily, but never safely cured, without this
sort of Physic.'

'HE that would Cure the Itch, (says Hartmanus) must first of all Cleanse the
Blood, for it lodges in the Saline, Vitriolick, and Aluminous Impurities
thereof.'



ETMULLER also advises to Purging; and Sydenham, directing to sweating
Medicines, and outward Applications for an Inveterate Itch, says, 'But these
Things ought not to be applied till the Patient's Body has been first duly
prepared by Bleeding and Purging.'

BESIDES the Authorities of these Great and Learned Men for Bleeding and
Purging in the Itch, etc. there are many Examples given by Authors, of the
unhappy Consequences o^ attempting the Cure of External Diseases by outward
Applications only.

BORELLUS informs us of a Man, who being troubled with an exceeding Itching,
an^ endeavoring to Cure himself with a Wash in a few Hours after using it,
'There were Blisters raised all over his Body, and in (...) little while after,
he was so troubled wit^ Faintings and Swoonings, that he was ver^ nigh Death.'

'A lusty Matron (says Hildanus) about Forty Years Old, fat and of a moist
Constitution of Body, when in the Month of February, she had put on a
Quicksilver Girdle for a small Itch, and had worn it for three Weeks Night and
Day, she indeed was rid of her Itch, but there followed a Salivation,
exulceration of the Gums, and heaviness in the Head, which was followed by a
Catarrh on the Left Side, and weakness of the same.'



VELSCHIUS gives an Account of a Person afflicted with this Disease, 'Who
neglecting Universals, killed the Itch with Ointments; presently upon which,
Defluxions of Salt Humors supervening, and falling upon his Lungs, he spit
Blood at times, and at length, an Hectic coming upon him, he died: When he was
dead, his Lungs were found altogether corrupted, and most part of 'em hardened
into a Scirrhus.'

BY these Accounts, amongst many others, that are left upon Record, to warn us
against the like irrepairable Mischiefs, the Readers may judge what Care there
ought to be taken, and what Skill there is required in curing Chronick Diseases
of the Skin; and I believe it will be easily allowed, that it is not only
requisite to Cure them surely, but safely too; for to omit Internal Remedies,
and strike in those Distempers by external and repelling Applications, though
ever so seemingly innocent in themselves, may be attended with very bad
Accidents, such as violent Fevers, Asthmas, Consumptions of the Lungs,
Convulsions, Falling Sickness, Palsies, Apoplexies, Madness, internal Ulcers,
Scirrhous Tumors, and other dangerous, and oftentimes incurable Maladies,
under which, if the Patients escape with Life, they may remain miserable all
their Days.

FOR when the malignant Humor is thus forced to retire from the external Parts
of the Body, it is then circled about with the Blood, till it is deposited and
fixed upon such of the Noble internal Parts, as happen to be most weak, or apt
to receive it. Thus if it falls on the Brain and Nerves, it produces the
Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, Palsy, Convulsions, or Madness, etc. If it happens
to fix on the Breast, it causes a violent Cough, dreadful Asthma, or Ulceration
of the Lungs and incurable Consumption; if upon the Urinary Parts, it occasions
the Diseases common to them, such as racking Pains, Dysury, Strangury,
incurable Ulceration of the Kidneys, or Bladder, etc. If upon the Liver and
Spleen, Obstructions and Scirrhous Tumors of those Parts are produced; if it
fixes on the Bowels, it causes a severe Cholick, Diarrhaea, Dysentery,
Inflammation of the Gutts, or Illiack Passion, etc. And if it does not happen
to lodge on any of those particular Parts, it then commonly inflames the whole
Mass of Blood universally, and so produces violent Fevers, continual or
intermitting, threatening speedy Death.

AND the Illnesses that happen by such imprudent Management, sometimes do not
appear till some Months after such outward Applications have been forborne.

WHAT a risque therefore do those run, who, being unhappily troubled with the
Itch, or any other Cutaneous Distemper, endeavor to Cure themselves with
Ointments, Washes, Quicksilver Girdles, etc. which if they do not take effect,
as very often happens, are then a very great Fatigue to them to no purpose, and
if they do Cure, then expose them to the Danger of worse Diseases, and even
Loss of Life.

THE Ingenious Dr. Fuller, in the Appendix to his Book, entitled, Medicina
Gymnastica, informs us, that he split upon this Rock, and endured the most
violent Illness imaginable for many Years together, by means of curing himself,
with a Quicksilver Girdle, of an Itch that he had accidentally caught; an
Abstract of which take as follows:

'I wore it (says he, meaning a Mercurial Girdle) for several Months by times,
and then laid it quite aside; but the Mischief was begun, though I was not aware
of it; for about a Month after, I awaked one Morning with an unusual Giddiness,
and in a little time after, I found several Convulsions begin to come upon me,
in the Capillary Arteries of my Eyes, etc. Sometimes I should have my Hands
drawn in, and my Fingers brought to the Palm of my Hand involuntarily. I was
not a little terrified, as any may imagine; but by proper means the severity of
the Symptoms went off, and I remained only with a Giddiness, which was very
troublesome. Once upon drinking the Bath Waters too long, that Vertiginous
Rotation was so increased, that I was laid up for a Month with it, being scarce
able to go about without staggering like a drunken Man; but this extremity
abated, and I remained healthy under that Giddiness for several Years, till
happening once to be more indisposed than usually, upon taking a Chalybeate,
the Humor struck deeper into the Nerves of the Pectoral Muscles; so that I
found my Shoulders begin to be contracted involuntarily, and upon walking, a
shortness of Breath, which I could discern, was caused by the preternatural
pressure of those Muscles upon my Breast, which I have sometimes resisted so
far, when it has happened to come upon me in the Streets, before I could get to
a House I knew, that it has made my Eyes Flash, and brought other Epileptick
Symptoms upon me, that I have been forced to take into a Shop, and desire leave
to rest me for a time. These Things continued on me for a Year or more, and
declining under these Spasms of my Breast, I was at length quite confined to my
Home for near three Months, all the while growing worse and worse, in spite of
the Power of any Medicines I took, when it happend that I was casually directed
to the use of Riding, in order to which I removed to Hampstead, where I rode at
least twice a Day, for the space of Seven Weeks. After I had by these means
recovered a good Measure of Health, I enjoyed it about a Year and half, by the
help of Riding at due Intervals; but thinking my self stronger than I really
was, and Riding long Journies, I was took of a sudden with the strangest sort
of Deliquium (or Fainting) that perhaps ever was heard of; to these sort of
Fits was added a Diarrhaea (or Looseness) which was attended with a Nauseousness
and Inclination to Vomit; and what is Remarkable, those Nights after my
Vomiting, I should Sweat to that degree, as to make my Shirt and Sheets as wet
as if they had been dipped in Water, upon which I was refreshed and freed from
the greater severity of those Symptoms, which plainly shows how pernicious that
Psoradick (or Itchy) Salt was, which the Mercurial Particles had repelled and
intimately mixed in my Blood.'

'THUS I had three Calamities upon me at once, a Flux, a Vomiting, and the
Deliquiums (or Faintings) I spoke of before, the last of which had something so
incredible to 'em, that I shall forbear to relate it; I do not speak in heat,
but seriously and calmly, that the Vomiting, though very frequent and severe, was
desirable, if compared with these most strange Faintings, which were so
tormenting and insupportable, that if I had been Stabbed or had had my Flesh cut
with Knives, I am certain I could much easier have born it; I betook my self to
moderate Riding again, and held out even under such pressing Severities, as I
have related, no less a time than a Year and Nine Months, when at length these
Evils gained upon me, and my Vomitings were so frequent and incredibly violent,
that they took away the use of my Limbs, so that I was forced to be lifted
every time upon my Horse, that I might continue my Riding, though it were but to
gain a little periodical Ease, till that seizure on my Limbs increasing, I was
confined to my Chamber, my Legs and Thighs swelled, and I was very near the End
of this tedious Journey of Life.'

THE Account this Learned and Ingenious Physician gives of his own dreadful
Illness, occasioned by his wearing a Quicksilver Girdle, together with the
Instances before given, of the Mischiefs that have been done by that Method, as
also by Washes and Ointments, are sufficient, one would think, to deter all
Persons from tampering with outward Medicines, for the Cure of Cutaneous
Diseases, without taking proper Internal Remedies also, by the Direction of a
Skilful Physician.

AND here it will not be amiss to exemplify the great danger of Quicksilver
Girdles, by another Case that lately happened.

ON the 24th of May, an Ingenious Woman of very good Repute, in the utmost
Fright and Consternation (for which, indeed, she had a great deal of Reason)
desired my Assistance; She gave me to understand, that she had for some time
before been troubled with the Itch, and for the Cure of it, had put on a
Quicksilver Girdle, which, in a short time, raised such a violent Salivation,
as I scarcely ever saw before; for besides the ordinary Symptoms of soreness of
the Mouth, exulceration of the Gums, stinking Breath, looseness of the Teeth,
etc. it was attended with others very severe and dangerous; particularly such a
prodigious Inflammation and swelling of the Glandules about her Throat, that at
first, I questioned very much whether I should be able to save her Life; and I
really believe if she had not applied for Relief at the Instant she did, she
would in a little time have been suffocated or choked, and so have perished by
the effect of that pernicious Girdle.

I immediately endeavored to check the Salivation, and remove the Symptoms by
Catharticks, Specific Absorbents, Cardiacks, Gargarisms, and other proper
Remedies, which, by God's Blessing, had all the wished for Success, saved her
from the Grave, and restored her to perfect Health.

THE narrow escape this Woman had, and what has been said before on this Head,
will, I hope, prevent all Persons who happen to read these Papers, from making
use of Mercurial or Quicksilver Girdles, on any account whatever.

NEITHER is frequent Bleeding, or in a large quantity at a time, to be
attempted without Danger; for it is certain, that irregular Bleeding many times
draws the pernicious Humor of the Itch, etc. from the Scarf-Skin, which alone
was infected, into the Mass of Blood, and to the Internal and more Noble Parts,
that before were not in the least tainted with it.

SO likewise Purging imprudently with strong Medicines, will have the same
effect, and not often clear the External Parts of their troublesome defilement
neither; many times it happens that Patients may Purge themselves into the
Grave, with the common violent Catharticks, before their Skin will be freed
from the Itch, etc. and this Helmont well knew, and made a handle of it to
despise Purging, in the manner before mentioned.

IF therefore Learned Physicians themselves, who make the Body of Man, and all
the Defects and Distempers it is liable to, their continual Study; and who are
well acquainted with the Virtue, Nature and Use of Medicines, which are keen
Instruments in their Hands and which, when well applied, restore the Diseased
Body to pristine Health, but when improperly prescribed, quite the contrary; if
I say, such Eminent Men make false steps, as in the Instances just now given,
and diffe^ from one another about the most effectual Method of curing the Itch,
etc. as already shown How should the Afflicted Patients, who mus^ be supposed
to be wholly Ignorant of the Nature, Cause, etc. of the Distemper, and who know
not the Virt^^ of Medicines, or at least, when, and when not, there is a proper
Indication for their Use, be able to form a right Judgment, or take and use the
most seemingly innocent Remedies, without extreme Danger?

HAVING thus given the Opinion of Physicians, concerning Bleeding, Purging, and
External Applications in the Cure of the Itch, etc. and apprised the Reader of
the Danger that attends the unskilful use of them, it may not be amiss to offer
my own Opinion concerning their true Use, and then describe the Method that to
me appears most Rational for the Cure of Cutaneous Distempers, and which
Experience has confirmed to be the Safest, Surest, and most Expeditious to
eradicate the Itch, Inveterate Itching Humors, Scabbiness and Leprosy when
Curable.

FIRST then, as to Bleeding, it ought not promiscuously to be advised to all
Persons, neither is it absolutely to be forborne; large or frequent Bleeding
weakens the Patient, and, as already said, draws the Infection inwards, and
often fixes it upon the habit of the Body, so as to render it very difficult to
Cure; but to omit Bleeding entirely, where a Patient is Young, and of a
Plethorick Constitution, and whose Juices are apt to be much disturbed, and
whole Body disordered upon administering Remedies, is certainly very erroneous;
and that omission may be attended with an acute Fever, or other Accidents,
end^^^ering Life.

EXTREMES the^^fore must be avoided, and if a Fever is to be feared, Bleeding
in a small quantity, may without Danger of attracting the foul Humor inwards,
be premised, in order to prevent all Accidents, but in my Opinion, for no other
reason.

GENTLE Purging is always requisite for all Persons, whose Circumstances of
Body will admit of it, some very few excepted; but the strong common Purges
must be avoided, not only as too fatiguing to the Patient, but pernicious also;
for all Catharticks made use of in these Cases, ought to be very gentle, that
so Nature may not be oppressed, but on the contrary assisted, and the offending
Matter be carried off by a constant and easy Evacuation, by which the Patient
will escape the Danger of drawing the Diseasy Humor to the Internal Parts, and
of fixing it in the Blood and Juices, which violent Purges would expose him to.

PROPER External Applications are also exceeding necessary to expedite the
Cure, and to eradicate more certainly the foul Infection, and are very safe to
be used, when gentle Catharticks (with which Specificks must ever bemixed) are
also inwardly given; but are very dangerous when used unskilfully, alone, or
without the necessary Precautions.

IN the choice of External Applications (...) there is much Judgment required;
for such a^ are proper for one Person troubled with the Itch, etc. may not be
so for another; yet in general they ought to be of a very subtle and
penetrating Nature, that they may easily enter the External Pores of the Skin,
and be also endued with a Specific Quality, to mortify or kill the pernicious
sharp Humor lodged therein, and likewise be adapted to enlarge the excretory
Ducts, that there may be free perspiration for the future, and that the
excrementitious Salts combined with Sulphur, may no more be pent in, and by
Stagnation acquire Acrimony, and so cause Itching, etc.

SPECIFIC Alteratives, Diuretics and Sudorificks, are also often very useful
to mend the Crasis of the Blood, depurate the Juices, rectify the Glands, open
the External Pores, and restore their Tone, and must be prescribed as the Case
may require.

I might here give various Prescriptions, of Remedies of every kind I have
mentioned, from the Works of Learned and Eminent Physicians, for the Cure of
the Itch, inveterate Itching Humors, Scabbiness and Leprosy; but considering
that the Judgment of a Skilful Man is always requisite for their right
Application, even in the most trifling Itch, and that though those Prescriptions
might be excellent in their kind, and should fully answer the Character Authors
have given of them; yet if Patients should proceed on their own Heads, and
unskilfully take or use them, they might prove very prejudicial, and instead of
Curing their Diseases, injure their Bodies, and perhaps endanger their Lives, I
thought it best to omit them.

BUT the Method that I think most proper to Cure the Itch, and other Chronick
Diseases of the Skin, is this, viz. In the first place, if the Patient is
Young, of a Sanguine Complexion, Plethorick, or inclined to a Fever, the Day
before I order any Medicines, I direct to Bleeding in a small quantity, in
order to prevent a Fever, or other acute Illness, and for no other end; but if
no such Accident is to be feared, I omit Bleeding, and immediately advise to
both Internal and External Remedies, to be taken and used together.

THE External Medicines I direct to, certainly clear the Skin from all manner
of foulness, rendering it in a short time smooth, fair, and entirely free from
Itching, and from all Pimples, Scurf, Scabs, and other Defilements; whilst the
Internal ones, which are gently Purging, Diuretic, and Alterative, cleanse the
Blood and Juices from Impurities, destroy and carry off sharp Humors, and
Acrid Particles, that may have intimately mixed with the Blood, and infected
its whole Mass; break the Combinations of Saline and Sulphurous Corpuscles,
rectify the Glandules, free the Pores from obstructing Viscosities, and
effectually clear the whole Habit from all Filth and Putrefaction whatsoever;
and yet are so homogeneous to Nature, as not to cause any Sickness at Stomach,
disorder of Body, or require Confinement, more than barely to guard against Wet
Weather, or more than ordinary Cold.

NEITHER are the External Remedies I advise to, compounded with Brimstone, or
accompanied with any nauseous Smell, but may be used by the most delicate
Person, without Offense, and yet are more effectual for the Intention than
those with which Brimstone is mixed: Now by this Method, and the Medicines I
Order (which I always prepare my selt, and which both External and Internal are
different from the common Remedies) the Diseasy Matter, in whatsoever Corner it
lurks, will be ferreted out and entirely destroyed, with safety to the
Patients, who will thereby be happily restored to their Pristine Health.

IT may here be enquired of me, why, since the External Medicines I speak of,
will effectually clear the Skin from all Defilements, I do not rely on them for
the Cure of a recent Itch, that has only infected the Scarf-Skin and not
penetrated deeper, without advising to Internal Remedies? To which I answer,
That no Man can be assured, that some of the subtle Itchy Particles have not
penetrated the small Blood Vessels, and if it should happen that they have,
though the Itch, to all appearance might be cured, yet those small Particles,
that by getting into the Blood have escaped being destroyed by the outward
Remedies, will, by circulating about with it, soon infect all the Fluids, and
so the Itch will break out again in a few Months after, and prove worse and
more stubborn than before, as Persons without Number who have endeavored to be
cured that way, have experienced to their Cost, and which, by taking proper
Internals at the same time, might have been effectually prevented; besides, by
administering peculiar. Purging and Alterative Medicines, all Accidents and
Distempers, that the using of even the Safest outward Applications make the
Patients liable to, as before shown, are absolutely guarded against.

IT may likewise be asked, why, If the Internal Remedies I direct to, are of
such Efficacy as I mention, I do not wholly depend upon them for the Cure of
Diseases of the Skin, without advising to External Applications? To which it
may be answered, That we ought to attack such stubborn Distempers with all our
force, and by all likely ways of succeeding; besides which, we cannot
reasonably suppose it possible for a Patient to be cured near so soon by
Internal Medicines alone, as by them and External Applications together; the
whole Mass of Blood and Juices will take up a considerable time to be perfectly
altered and purified, and much longer will it be, before the Diseasy Particles
lodged in the External Pores of the Skin, can by Internals alone, be absolutely
overcome and destroyed; but when with them we join proper outward Remedies,
which are always safe whilst gentle Catharticks, etc. are given inwardly, we
then answer all the Intentions of Cure, and strike home to the Morbifick
Matter, so as to destroy it Root an^ Branch, and from thence may reasonably
promise our selves happy Success in a very short time.

FROM what has been said, may be gathered the Reasons why so many Persons miss
of being perfectly cured of the Itch, etc. for many Months, and oftentimes
Years; for by using outward Applications alone, though proper ones, the Cure even
of a new caught Itch, is not often perfectly accomplished, and when it is, not
without Danger; neither can Persons handsomely, I Am sure not expeditiously, be
Cured by taking Internal Medicines, though exceeding good, unless assisted with
proper Externals at the same time; and to take and use Internal and External
Remedies together, that are not very Efficacious (a misfortune often happening
to Persons who follow the Vulgar Methods) is only trifling with the Distemper
and prolonging their Affliction; for if they happen to be better, and seem
quite Cured, it is generally but for a short time, and the Disease soon after
breaks out again, with greater force than before.

MANY Persons have been thus fatigued with a simple Itch, sometimes for Years
together, and at last ended their Days, by means of a severe Scabbiness or
Leprosy, when if at first they had been treated in a regular Me^hod, with the
most effectual Medicines, they ^ight have been completely Cured, perhaps ^n a
few Days.

TO these Reasons, why Persons miss of being entirely cured, we may add, that
those afflicted with the Itch, etc. are for the most part ashamed to own it,
and also imagining, being otherwise well in Health, that the Disease is but of
slight Consequence, and not at all Dangerous, they neglect to apply to a
Skilful Physician for their Cure, but follow the Advice of some good Woman or
other, few of whom are without a Receipt of some Ointment, or other Medicine,
which they really think will certainly Cure the Itch, etc. or else they take or
use Brimstone, the vulgar Remedy, which, besides its Nauseousness, often proves
of dangerous Consequence, especially to those Hectically inclined; and so the
Patients are very much fatigued, and many times ruined instead of being Cured.

NAY, that they are sometimes killed outright, by following the Advice of
Women, and other unskilful Persons, is demonstrated by a deplorable Accident
that happened but a few Years ago; for on the 15th of December, 1717. four
young Men, Apprentices to Mr. Sluice, a Weaver in Old George-street
Spittle-Fields, being pestered with the Itch, took each of them a Dose of some
pernicious Drug, that a Woman (Sister to one of the young Men) gave them, with
an Assurance that it would certainly Cure the Itch; and which it too surely and
unhappily did, by depriving every one of them of Life that very Day, to the
great surprise and Sorrow of their Friends, and unspeakable Grief and
distracting Terror of Mind of the unfortunate Woman who gave it them, and who,
it seems, was very far from designing 'em any Injury.

SOME People I have met with, who think to lightly of the Itch as to judge it a
thing of nothing, a slight matter, scarcely worth minding, and are so very weak
as to expect to be cured of it for a Trifle, and seem frightened when they are
told of being put into a regular Method of Cure, that will come to more than
Ten or Twenty Shillings Expense.

TO hear such Persons talk would almost provoke one to Laughter, were it not
for the dismal Effects that usually attend their Ignorance; for I have
observed, that for the most part it is this Class of People who are seldom
cured of the Itch, but suffer it in length of Time, to terminate in a foul
Scabbiness or loathsome Leprosy; or if they are cured of the Itch by Brimstone,
Quicksilver-Girdles, Ointments, etc. to one or other of which they commonly
have Recourse, they are often precipitated into other dreadful Diseases; in
either of which Cases, they would then give above half they are worth in the
World, to be restored to Health.

IT would be well therefore, if those troubled with the Itch, etc. would
seriously reflect upon the dangerous Consequences I have mentioned, and
consider, That it is not This or That Medicine (though ever so good) that ought
to be relied on; but that it is requisite to know when, and when not, it is
proper. That the Habit of the Body, State of the Disease, and other
Circumstances of the Patient, should be carefully considered: That the best
Medicines often prove hurtful, when prescribed unskilfully, or at Random; and
that therefore for Patients to proceed on their own Heads, or to follow the
Advice of Women, or other unskilful Persons, is exceeding dangerous, may be
attended with Dismal Consequences, and perhaps cost them their Lives, as the
Examples before given, fully prove.

AMONG the many Instances I could give of the taking and using Brimstone
ineffectually, I shall only trouble my Readers with the following, which are
very remarkable.

A Country Gentleman happening in a Family who were all troubled with the Itch,
was quickly infected with that Distemper, which, as soon as he precieved, he
endeavored to Cure by taking Brimstone and Milk inwardly, and using Brimstone
in an Ointment outwardly, in a very plentiful Manner, according to the vulgar
Method, and for a longer Time than is customary, but to no purpose; for he
declared to me, that his Itch continued upon him as vexatious and bad as ever.

HE then had the Opinion of several Physicians, one after another, and by their
Advice took and used abundance of Medicines, which, together with their Fees,
cost him a large Sum of Money; at last the Distemper seemed to be conquered,
and he thought himself perfectly cured, and in a short space of Time married;
soon after which, the Itch broke out again upon him to as great a degree as
ever; neither did the New married Lady escape, but was as much pestered with
that Distemper as himself.

AT that time he happened to meet with the first Edition of this little Book,
and after reading it, thought proper to put himself and Spouse under my Care
for Cure; and in a short time, by punctually following my Directions, they were
both entirely freed from that tormenting Disease, for which the Gentleman (who
could neither be cured by Brimstone, nor any of the Medicines he had before
taken and used) with abundance of Thanks, not only paid me to my Content, but
also made me a handsome Present, expressing at the same time the greatest Joy
and Satisfaction, for having been so fortunate as to meet with my little
Treatise, which he said he would not but have seen for ever so much, the
reading of it having caused him to apply to me, and be (as he was pleased to
say himself) so safely and easily Cured; for he assured me that what he had
taken and used before, by his Physician's Prescriptions, (as well as the
Brimstone) was not only ineffectual, but very nauseous, and withal exceeding
costly.

ANOTHER Gentleman who lived not far from Epsom, applied to me very lately for
the Cure of the Itch, with which not only himself but his Son was very much
afflicted; his Son, as the Gentleman informed me, had in vain gone through a
very long and nauseous Brimstone Course, had taken Epsom Waters, used a Liquor
which is publicly sold, and which the Author pretends will Cure the Itch
without any other help, and had taken and used many other things, but all to no
purpose; for which reason the Gentleman, finding the ill Success his Son had,
would try none of them himself, but came to me for Advice and Medicines, and as
soon as he was cured, sent his Son to me also, whom I put into a regular
Course, and quickly discharged perfectly well, to the entire Satisfaction of
them both.

BRIMSTONE also, in the Cure of the Itch, etc. is attended with this further
Inconvenience, that it obliges those who take and use it, either to confine
themselves during the whole Course, or else to let every one they come near,
know they are troubled with the Itch; for the smell of it is so very strong, as
not to be overcome, or be concealed, from even those who only just pass by the
Persons who use it, much less from them they converse with, to whom it smells
much more plain, strong and filthy than to themselves: And it is as natural for
People to believe that those who use Brimstone, use it for the Itch, as it is
for them to believe, that those that smell of it, use it.

AS to such as are ashamed to own they are troubled with the Itch, etc. and for
that Reason neglect to apply to a Physician, or a Skilful Person, for Cure,
they are certainly much in the wrong; for they may be assured, that it is the
Principle, as well as Interest of all Physicians or Persons practicing Physic,
to keep private any Illness their Patients are desirous to conceal, and to
direct to such Remedies as may be taken and used privately, without the
knowledge of any other Person, and without Confinement; as the Medicines I
advise to in such Cases most certainly may, and so as not to be discovered,
even by the nearest Friend, though lying in the same Bed.

I must not omit another Reason, why Persons are often pestered with the Itch,
every Three or Four Months, Spring and Fall, etc. viz. That when by a proper
Method they find themselves tolerably well, and free from Itching, etc. they
grow weary of the trouble of taking and using Medicines, and leave them off
before the Diseasy Particles are wholly Eradicated, and thereby deceive
themselves; for if the least part of the Itchy Infection happens to remain in
their Clothes, Gloves, etc. as sometimes may happen even after Washing, they
then catch the Distemper afresh, which would be prevented by continuing the use
of Remedies according to the Direction of a Skilful Man, for a reasonable Time,
that so all the very Seeds of the Disease, either in their Bodies or Clothes,
may be utterly destroyed.

AND for the better preventing all Danger of this kind, it is necessary for the
Patients, as soon as the Itching and appearance of the Distemper are taken off,
to change their Clothes, Sheets, etc. immediately, and be very careful not to
wear them again, till they are sure, by often boiling, washing, and cleansing,
all the Itchy Particles that lodged in them, are entirely mortified and
expunged.

FOR want of due Care in this particular only, abundance of Persons have been
exceedingly fatigued with this hateful Disease, on and off, for many Months,
and sometimes Years together; of which I could give several Examples that have
happened within my own Knowledge, but shall mention but one.

A Gentleman of Consideration came to me sometime since, troubled with a severe
and universal Itch; upon enquiring how he had received the Infection, etc. He
told me he had been troubled with that Distemper some Months before, but had
been perfectly cured of it, and assured me that he caught it again to that
degree I saw, only by his Servant giving him, by Mistake, a pair of Gloves to
wear, that he remembered afterward to have worn, but once or twice at the
most, during the time he was pestered with the Itch. He added, that he kept
them on his Hands scarcely an Hour, before he perceived the Mistake, threw them
away, and presently washed and scoured his Hands two or three times, but all to
no purpose; for the Itch soon discovered it self between his Fingers, etc. and
from thence spread all over his Body.

BY this Relation all Persons may perceive how very subtle, penetrating, and
infecting the Itchy Particles are, that could lie so long in a pair of Gloves,
and afterward so soon and so far insinuate themselves into the Skin, as not to
be washed or scoured off, but to cause a very severe, universal and stubborn
Itch.

THIS Gentleman I put into a regular Method of Cure, which soon had the desired
Effect, for which he handsomely gratified me, and is at this Time perfectly
well.

NOW by the Method I have advanced, the Directions I give, and the Medicines I
have mentioned to use, (which, as before said, I always prepare my self, and
which are not difficult to take, or to be applied, or in the least fatiguing to
the Patients) those miserably afflicted with the Itch, inveterate Itching
Humors, Scabbiness or Leprosy that are Curable, and even many that have been
pronounced incurable, may be certainly restored to Health in a reasonable time,
proportionably to the Stubborness and Inveteracy of those Diseases.

SO also Persons troubled with the King's Evil, stubborn Scrophulous Breakings
out, Tumors, Running Ulcers, etc. may, by the Method I have proposed, be more
assuredly and sooner Cured, with the Blessing of God, than by any other
whatever.

A few Remedies well adapted and rightly administered, for a reasonable time in
all those Cases, will generally take effect, without fatiguing the Patients
with a vast number of Medicines to nauseate their Stomachs, and tire their
Patience.

BUT what hinders many People afflicted with the King's Evil and Leprosy from
being Cured, is their want of sufficient Resolution to go through a regular
Course; for though they are put into one that is neither nauseous troublesome,
nor requiring Confinement; and though they seem at first resolved to go through it
and are convinced, that unless they do continue it for a reasonable time, they
cannot be Cured; yet, which is strange, they often stagger in their Resolution,
grow weary they know not why, and many times leave off before they themselves
can so much as expect Relief* whereas if they would have steadfastly adhered to
the Resolution they first took, they might in all human Probability, have been
certainly Cured of their Distemper, and been restored to perfect Health.

THERE are also many Persons, laboring under the last mentioned stubborn
Chronick Diseases, who, dreading the uncertain Expense of a regular Course of
Medicines, are desirous to enter into a Contract, to be Cured for a certain Sum
of Money. These sort of People, in my Opinion, are the fittest in the World to
fall into the Hands of some of our bold, daring Practitioners, who venture at
all, and never fail to promise Wonders; for Patients of this kind, are apt to
be pleased and taken with the positive Assurances these Men give them, o^
perfectly and infallibly Curing them, etc. whereas a modest, faithful Physician
neither will, nor ought to undertake Patients in that manner, but only desire a
reasonable Price for his Medicines, and suitable Fees in Consideration of his
Trouble, Advice, or Attendance; neither will he give his Patients such positive
Assurances of an infallible Cure, but be cautious in what he says, and only
promise in these and all other difficult Cases, to endeavor to the utmost of
his Power to Cure them; and for that End, put them into such a rational Course
of Medicine, as he really believes, and has found, to be most effectual for
such stubborn Maladies, and from which Course they, as well as he, may
reasonably, and in all likelihood, expect the desired Success.

THIS is the only Method I take; and the Success God has been pleased to bless
me with, in the Cure of the Itch, inveterate Itching Humors, Scabbiness and
Leprosy, etc. is very remarkable, and I believe can hardly be paralleled;
having, since I first published this little Treatise, discharged from under my
Care great Numbers of Persons, who applied to me for Cure of inveterate
Diseases of the Skin, perfectly well, and who are, many of them, Men of the
first Rank, and of Eminent Learning and Parts, and had gone through many
Courses of Physic to no purpose, before they came to me; particularly one
Gentleman, a Divine of the Church of England, that had been unfortunately
afflicted with a very foul Scabbiness for some Years, and had ineffectually
tried almost all Methods, whom I perfectly Cured in a very short time,
(considering the inveteracy of the Disease) to his entire Satisfaction.

ANOTHER Person, who had been afflicted with a Leprous Humor about his Thighs
and Privy Parts for many Years together, and had gone through several Courses
of Physic in vain, and afterward tried abundance of particular Remedies to no
Purpose, applied himself to me, though at the same time seemed to despair of
being ever perfectly Cured, but hoped only to be relieved in some Measure, his
Leprous Humor having grown, for some time before, more than ordinarily
troublesome to him, and when he came to me, was so very Vexatious as to hinder
Sleep at Night; this Man I put into the Method of Cure I thought most proper,
which had such Success, that in a reasonable Time, contrary to his own
Expectation, he was not only made perfectly easy, but was also completely
Cured, at which he mightily rejoiced; about four Months after I had been paid
for his Cure, and had dismissed him, he came voluntarily and acknowledged the
Service I had done him, in a very handsome manner.

A little while ago a young Man about Seventeen Years of Age, who was in a very
bad Condition indeed, put himself under my Care for Cure; when he came to me,
he was all over from Head to Foot so full of red, angry, sore Pimples, (which
by turns also itched intolerably) that one could scarcely stick a Pin between
them; and his Arms and Legs were so sore and stiff with them, that he had much
ado to walk from the Royal Exchange, to my House; he told me his Mother had
been so before him, and supposed he had it from her Hereditarily; the
Apothecary, who is made use of by the Family he lives with, had done all he
could for him, without his receiving the least Benefit; this young Man I put
into a regular easy Course, which, through God's Mercy, had the desired Effect,
and he was perfectly Cured in such a short time, that himself and Friends
admired at it; some time after he had paid me, and I had discharged him, he
came unexpectedly and full of Joy, to return me Thanks for my Care of him, and
at the same time showed his Gratitude, by making me a small Present.

I could give many more Examples of extraordinary Cases that I have met with,
and have had Success in, but think those I have already given, sufficient.

I cannot here conclude, without taking Notice, of the Absurdity of some
Practitioners, who confine themseves to one Set of Medicines, which they give
to all Persons troubled with the Distempers I have treated about, and which
they think will answer the End, in People of all Habits, Ages and
Constitutions; which undoubtedly is altogether against Reason, and needs no
further Confutation.

I find my self often obliged to vary my Medicines, according to the State of
the Disease, Habit of the Body, and other Circumstances of the Patient, though
generally speaking, the Method I take (except in some extraordinary Cases, in
which a Cardiack and Sudorifick Course, etc. may be required, and where
Diseases of the Skin are complicated with other Illnesses) is one and the same,
though the Medicines may be different.

AND even for a Consideration of less moment than that of Health, viz. for
convenience of the Patient, it is sometimes necessary to change the External
Remedies; as for Example, Instead of ordering Ointments outwardly, I have been
obliged for the sake of nice Persons, who were utterly against using any thing
daubing, or that would appear upon their Linen, to prepare a Liquor as clear
as fair Water, and of a pleasant Scent, to be used externally for the same
purpose, and which will certainly have the same good Effect; it being a
delicate Medicine, very Efficacious, and not to be seen after using, either
upon the Skin, or Linen, only being a difficult Preparation, is somewhat more
expensive to the Patient than many other Applications.

FROM this short Account of Cutaneous Diseases, I hope my Readers, at least the
unprejudiced part of them, will be convinced, that the Itch, etc. may be easily
and safely Cured, without the use of Brimstone, Confinement of the Patient, or
knowledge of other Persons; for that there are other Remedies much pleasanter,
and more effectual than Brimstone (which besides its nauseousness, oftentimes
will not Cure; but on the contrary, when taken and used by Hectical Persons,
proves very injurious) is most certain, since Experience vouches for it; and
that Patients may be Cured of the Itch, etc. without more than ordinary
Confinement, is as true, since the Evacuating Remedies I have found necessary,
and make use of, are so very gentle, that those who take them may go Abroad
about their Business, without any Disorder, or further Observation, than only
not to expose themselves to wet Weather, or to extraordinary Cold; and also
that Patients may be Cured without the knowledge of other Persons, is very
plain, because the External Medicines I advise to, may be used privately, and
as they have not any ill Scent, they can by no means be discovered.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
OF the Itch, Page 1. Its Description, ibid. Its manner of spreading from one
part to another, p. 2. How to distinguish a real Itch, from a slight Itching of
the Body, some are troubled with, Spring and Fall, ibid. That there are two
sorts of Itch, one moist, the other dry, ibid. That both kinds turn to a soul
Scabbiness, if neglected, ibid. The moist Itch not so stubborn as the dry kind,
yet sooner communicates its Infection to sound Bodies, p. 3. That the Itch is
exceeding Contagious, ibid. The Famous Willis's Opinion that no one Disease
(except the Plague) is more easily propagated than the Itch, ibid. Some Persons
more subject to be infected with the Itch than others, and the reason of it,
ibid. How the Itch is communicated from one Person and on^ Family to another,
ibid. That when the Itch is first caught, the Scarf-Skin only is infected, and
the Blood not tainted with it, p. 4. A confirmed Itch much more dangerous than
a slight one, ibid. That where the Itch happens to aged Persons, or to those
afflicted with other Diseases, it must be treated with the utmost Care and
Skill, otherwise the Patients may be Killed instead of being Cured, as happened
to a certain Person in another Case, ibid. That Case related, p. 5. The Opinion
of some Ancient and Modern Writers, tha^ the Itch, when it has continued many
Months, cannot be Cured, ibid. That Opinion refuted by the Author's own
Experience of the contrary, ibid. Dr. Willis's Opinion that the Venereal
Disease may more easily be Cured than an inveterate Itch, ibid. Another
Writer's Account of three Brothers whom he knew to die purely of the Itch, p.
6. The Author's Opinion that the Itch, how inveterate soever, is neither
incurable nor mortal, ibid. That the Itch is much more stubborn in some Persons
than in others, and the reason of it, ibid. Illustrated by an Example, p. 7.
That abundance of People troubled with the Itch are infatuated to their own
Detriment, etc. and whence it proceeds, ibid. Of inveterate Itching Humors of
various kinds, that six on particular Parts only, p. 8. That they sometimes
change their Station, ibid. Their Description and Nature, p. 9. That they
differ not much from the Disease called Scabies or Scabbiness, ibid. Of Scabies
or Scabbiness, ibid. That it commonly succeeds an inveterate Itch, either moist
or dry, and is also of two kinds, ibid. The Nature of a Scabbiness, when it
follows the moist Itch, p. 10. How it appears when it succeeds the dry Itch,
ibid. That a Scabbiness sometimes happens when the Itch has not gone before it,
ibid. That it is accompanied with Itching as well as soreness, and is much more
filthy and dangerous than the Itch, ibid. That the moist Scabbiness, if not
timely cured, certainly brings on Death, ibid. That the dry sort first ushers
in a poisonous Leprosy, p. 11. Of the Leprosy, ibid. That it is the most
malignant Distemper that affects the External Parts of the Body, ibid. That it
is sometimes the Hereditary Disease of a Family, but much oftener contracted by
Infection, ibid. Dr. Blancard's Definition of the Leprosy, ibid. That the Itch
and Scabies are commonly the forerunners of it, ibid. The Symptoms of the
Leprosy Internal and External summed up, p. 12. That those afflicted with all
of them, desire a speedy Death to be relieved from the grievous misery they
endure, p. 13. That every one troubled with the Leprosy, is not afflicted with
all the enumerated Symptoms, ibid. What the most distinguishing Sign of the
Leprosy is p. 14. That the sooner the Cure is undertaken, and the fewe^ the
Symptoms are, the better will the Leprosy be overcome, and the Patient more
certainly be restorea to Health, ibid. That those are inexcusably wanting to
themselves, wh^ being afflicted in the slightest manner with the Itch,
Scabbiness, etc. omit to seek for a regular Cure in time. ibid. That those who
neglect to get cured of Tetters, Ringworms, etc. are no less imprudent, p. 15
That not one in fifty who are troubled with the Itch, inveterate Itching
Humors, Scabbiness or Leprosy, but what received them from others by
Insection, p. 16 An Inquiry after the Original Cause of Cutaneous Distempers,
when they happen to Persons who have no^ been infected by, or received them
from others, ibid. The Opinion of many Ancient and Modern Physicians, that
those Diseases proceed from one and the same Cause, and differ only from one
another in degree ibid. Galen's Opinion of the Cause of those Diseases, p. 17
The Opinion of Avicen. ibid Langius's Opinion, ibid The Learned Blancard's
Opinion, ibid The Opinion of other Writers of the Cause of the Itch etc. ibid.
Dr. Willis's Opinion, p. 18. The excellent Etmuller's Opinion, p. 19. His
reason why Cutaneous Distempers are sometimes moist and sometimes dry, ibid.
The Author's Judgment of those Opinions, ibid. Illustrated by the consideration
of the Structure of the Scarf-Skin, as described by the accurate and learned
Dr. J. Keill, p. 20. That leading a Sedentary Life, eating Salt Meats, the
Rel^^ks of other Distempers, or living in Nastiness and Filth, are the remote
Causes of these Diseases, p. 21. That after all the fine Speculations and
Notions Men have concerning the Original Cause of these and many other
Diseases, it is doubtful whether we can more then guess at the real Essence of
them, ibid. That the most faithful Dr. Sydenham had the same Sentiments, ibid.
That he ind^fatigably applied himself to the Observation of Diseases, and to
find out the most effectual Method of curing them, p. 22. That it would be well
if all who practice Physic would da the same, and not be too Much taken up
with airy Speculations, or be forward in broaching new Notions, ibid. The many
Mistakes and Errors committed in the Cure of Cat^neous Diseases taken notice
of, p. 23. The Opinion of Authors, that the same Method and Medicines that will
Cure an inveterate Itch, will likewise Cure a Scabbiness, and Leprosy, p. 24.
How far Experience answers for the Truth of it, ibid. That Physicians differ
very much about the most effectual Method and Medicines for the Cure of those
Distempers, ibid. Some recommend Bleeding and Purging as absolutely necessary,
p. 25. Others advise to sweating Medicines, ibid. Others to such as work by
Urine, ibid. Some prescribe sweetners of the Blood and cooling Alteratives,
ibid. Others rely wholly upon outward Applications, as Ointments, Baths,
Washes, Quicksilver Girdles, etc. ibid. That those who plead most for External
Applications, inveigh mightily against Bleeding and Purging, ibid. Martianus's
Account of a Man, who by Bleeding for the Itch, drew the putrid Humor inwards,
which caused a malignant Fever, and killed him, p. 26. Another Author's
Opinion, that letting Blood must absolutely be avoided in the Itch, ibid. The
famous Helmont against Purging in the Itch, ibid. Willis's Opinion that both
Bleeding and Purging are necessary, ibid. He affirms the Itch is never safely
Cured without Purging, ibid. Hartmanus's Opinion, that to Cure the Itch, the
Blood must be cleansed, p. 27. Etmuller advises to Purging, ibid. Sydenham
approves of Bleeding and Purging, ibid. That there are many Examples of the
unhappy Consequences of attempting the Cure of Diseases of the Skin by outward
Applications only, ibid. Borelius acquaints us with the dreadful Effects of a
Wash made use of by a Man for the Itch, ibid. Hildanus's Account of the dismal
Consequences that attended a Woman's wearing a Quicksilver Girdle, p. 28.
Velschius's Account of the fatal Effects of Ointments in the Itch, ibid. That
great Skill and Care are required to Cure Diseases of the Skin, ibid. That to
omit inward Remedies, and strike in those Distempers by outward Applications,
though seemingly innocent, may be attended with violent Fevers, Asthmas,
Consumptions of the Lungs, Convulsions, Falling Sickness, Palsies, Apoplexies,
and other dangerous Maladies, p. 29. That the unhappy Efects of such imprudent
Management, sometimes do not appear till some Months after, p. 30. The great
Risque those run, who venture to use Medicines on their own Heads, ibid. The
Ingenious Dr. Fuller's Account of the most violent Illness imaginable, that he
endured for many Years together, by means of curing himself of the Itch with a
Quicksilver Girdle, ibid. The aanger of Quicksilver Girdles further exemplified
by a Disaster that lately happened to a Woman by that means, whose Life the
Author saved, p. 33. The Author's Opinion, that large or frequent Bleeding is
dangerous, and for what Reason, p. 35. That imprudent Purging with the common
strong Medicines is as bad, ibid. How far Bleeding is proper, p. 36. What sort
of Purging is requisite, p. 37. In what respect outward Applications are
allowable, ibid. Of what Nature External Medicines ought to be, ibid. That
specific Alteratives, Diuretics and Sudorificks, are often very useful, p.
38. The Author's Method of curing Diseases of the Skin, particularly described,
p. 39. The effect of the Medicines the Author makes use of both External and
Internal, ibid. That the outward Remedies the Author advises to, are not
compounded with Brimstone, or accompanied with any nauseous Smell, p. 40.
Reasons why Internal and External Medicines ought to be taken and used
together, ibid. How it happens that many Persons miss of being Cured of the
Itch, for many Months, and sometimes Years, p. 42. That Brimstone taken and
used, often proves of dangerous Consequence, p. 43. That Persons are sometimes
killed by following the Advice of Women, and other unskilful Persons, ibid.
Demonstrated by the Death of four young Men who lived in Spittle-Fields, ibid.
The weakness of those who expect to be Cured in a regular manner for a Trifle,
censured, p. 44. That they are their own Enemies, and commonly suffer in a
dreadful manner, ibid. What those troubled with the Itch ought seriously to
consider, ibid. An eminent Instance of the ineffectual use of Brimstone in the
Itch, p. 45. Another Instance of the insignificancy of Brimstone, though in a
large quantity and for a long time taken and used, p. 46. The further
Inconvenience of Brimstone, p. 47. That those who neglect to apply for a
regular Cure because they are ashamed to own they are troubled with the Itch,
etc. are very much in the wrong, and why, ibid. Another reason of Persons being
pestered with the Itch off and on for a long time, p. 48. When Patients
afflicted with the Itch ought to change their Clothes, ibid. The Case of a
Gentleman of Consideration relating to that particular. p. 49. The subtiltyt
penetrating and infecting Quality of the Itchy Particles taken Notice of, ibid.
That by the Author's Method, Medicines and Directions, those afflicted with the
Itch, inveterate Itching Humors, Scabbiness and Leprosy, may be certainly
Cured, p. 50. That those troubled with the King's Evil, stubborn Scrophulous
Tumors, Breakings out, running Ulcers, etc. may also be more assuredly Cured
by the Author's Method than by any other, ibid. That a few Remedies well
adapted, are generally sufficient in those Cases, ibid. What it is that hinders
many Persons afflicted with the King's Evil and Leprosy from being Cured, p.
51. The Humor of those who are desirous of making a Contract to be Cured for a
certain Sum of Money, cosider'd ibid. The Author's Success in the Cure of
Diseases of the Skin, p. 52 The Case of a Divine of the Church of England, whom
the Author Cured of a foul and inveterate Scabbiness, ibid. The Case one
efflicted with an old six'd Leprous Humor, whom the Author Cured, p. 53. The
Case of a Young Man in a very bad Condition, who was Cured by the Author, ibid.
The absurdity of some Practitioners, who confine themselves to one Set of
Medicines in these Diseases, p. 54. That the Author varies his Remedies
according to the State of the Disease, Habit of the Body, and other
Circumstances of the Patient, ibid. The Conclusion, p. 55.

