THE Clandestine Marriage, A COMEDY.

(Price One Shilling and Sixpence.)

THE Clandestine Marriage, A COMEDY.

As it is ACTED at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane.

BY GEORGE COLMAN AND DAVID GARRICK.

Huc adhibe vultus, et in una parce duobus:
Vivat, et ejusdem simus uterque parens!
OVID. LONDON: Printed for T. BECKET and P. A. DE HONDT, in the Strand; R.
BALDWIN, in Paternoster Row; R. DAVIS, in Piccadilly; and T. DAVIES, in
Russel Street, Covent Garden. M.DCC.LXVI.

Advertisement.
HOGARTH's MARRIAGE-A-LA-MODE has before furnished Materials to the Author of a
Novel, published some Years ago, under the Title of The Marriage-Act: But as
that Writer persued a very different Story, and as his Work was chiefly
designed for a Political Satire, very little Use could be made of it for the
Service of this Comedy.

In Justice to the Person, who has been considered as the sole Author, the
Party, who has hitherto lain concealed, thinks it incumbent on him to declare,
that the Disclosure of his Name was, by his own Desire, reserved till the
Publication of the Piece.

Both the Authors, however, who have before been separately honored with the
indulgence of the Public, now beg Leave to make their joint Acknowledgements
for the very favorable Reception of the CLANDESTINE MARRIAGE.

PROLOGUE.
Written by Mr. GARRICK.
Spoken by Mr. HOLLAND. POETS and Painters, who from Nature draw
Their best and richest Stores, have made this Law:
That each should neighbourly assist his Brother,
And steal with Decency from one another.
Tonight, your matchless Hogarth gives the Thought,
Which from his Canvas to the Stage is brought.
And who so fit to warm the Poet's Mind,
As he who pictured Morals and Mankind?
But not the same their Characters and Scenes;
Both labor for one End, by different Means:
Each, as it suits him, takes a separate Road,
Their one great Object, MARRIAGE-A-LA-MODE!
Where Titles deign with Cits to have and hold,
And change rich Blood for more substantial Gold!
And honored Trade from Interest turns aside,
To hazard Happiness for titled Pride.
The Painter dead, yet still he charms the Eye;
While England lives, his Fame can never die:
But he, who struts his Hour upon the Stage,
Can scarce extend his Fame for Half an Age;
Nor Pen nor Pencil can the Actor save,
The Art, and Artist, share one common Grave.
O let me drop one tributary Tear,
On poor Jack Falstaff's Grave, and Juliet's Bier!
You to their Worth must Testimony give;
It Is in your Hearts alone their Fame can live.
Still as the Scenes of Life will shift away,
The strong Impressions of their Art decay.
Your Children cannot feel what you have known;
They Will boast of QUINS and CIBBERS of their own:
The greatest Glory of our happy few,
Is to be felt, and be approved by YOU.
Dramatis Personae.
Lord Ogleby, Mr. KING. Sir John Melvil, Mr. HOLLAND. Sterling, Mr. YATES.
Lovewell, Mr. POWELL. Canton, Mr. BADDELEY. Brush, Mr. PALMER. Sergeant Flower,
Mr. LOVE. Traverse, Mr. LEE. Trueman, Mr. AICKIN.
Mrs. Heidelberg, Mrs. CLIVE. Miss Sterling, Miss POPE. Fanny, Mrs. PALMER.
Betty, Mrs. -- Chambermaid, Miss PLYM. Trusty, Miss MILLS.
THE Clandestine Marriage, A COMEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE A room in Sterling's house.
Miss Fanny and Betty meeting. Betty running in. MA'am! Miss Fanny! Ma'am!


Fanny. What Is the matter! Betty!


Betty. Oh la! Ma'am! as sure as I Am alive, here is your husband --


Fanny. Hush! my dear Betty! if any body in the house should hear you, I am
ruined.


Betty. Mercy on me! it has frighted me to such a degree, that my heart is come
up to my mouth. -- But as I was a saying, Ma'am, here is that dear, sweet --


Fanny. Have a care! Betty.


Betty. Lord! I Am bewitched, I think. -- But as I was a saying, Ma'am, here is
Mr. Lovewell just come from London.


Fanny. Indeed!


Betty. Yes, indeed, and indeed, Ma'am, he is. I saw him crossing the
courtyard in his boots.


Fanny. I am glad to hear it. -- But pray now, my dear Betty, be cautious.
Don't mention that word again, on any account. You know, we have agreed never
to drop any expressions of that sort for fear of an accident.


Betty. Dear Ma'am, you may depend upon me. There is not a more trustier
creature on the face of the earth, than I am. Though I say it, I am as secret
as the grave -- and if it is never told, till I tell it, it may remain untold
till doom's-day for Betty.


Fanny. I know you are faithful -- but in our circumstances we cannot be too
careful.


Betty. Very true, Ma'am! -- and yet I vow and protest, there is more plague
than pleasure with a secret; especially if a body may not mention it to four or
five of one's particular acquaintance.


Fanny. Do but keep this secret a little while longer, and then, I hope you may
mention it to any body. -- Mr. Lovewell will acquaint the family with the
nature of our situation as soon as possible.


Betty. The sooner, the better, I believe: for if he does not tell it, there is
a little tell-tale, I know of, will come and tell it for him.


Fanny. Fie, Betty! [blushing.


Betty. Ah! you may well blush. -- But you're not so sick, and so pale, and so
wan, and so many qualms --


Fanny. Have done! I shall be quite angry with you.


Betty. Angry! -- Bless the dear puppet! I am sure I shall love it, as much as
if it was my own. -- I meant no harm, heaven knows.


Fanny. Well -- say no more of this -- It makes me uneasy -- All I have to ask
of you, is to be faithful and secret, and not to reveal this matter, till we
disclose it to the family ourselves.


Betty. Me reveal it! -- if I say a word, I wish I may be burned. I would not
do you any harm for the world -- And as for Mr. Lovewell, I am sure I have
loved the dear gentleman ever since he got a tidewaiter's place for my brother
-- But let me tell you both, you must leave off your soft looks to each other,
and your whispers, and your glances, and your always sitting next to one
another at dinner, and your long walks together in the evening -- For my part,
if I had not been in the secret, I should have known you were a pair of loviers
at least, if not man and wife, as --


Fanny. See there now! again. Pray be careful.


Betty. Well -- well -- nobody hears me. -- Man and wife -- I Will say so no more
-- what I tell you is very true for all that --


Lovewell. [calling within.] William!


Betty. Hark! I hear your husband --


Fanny. What!


Betty. I say, here comes Mr. Lovewell -- Mind the caution I give you -- I Will
be whipped now, if you are not the first person he sees or speaks to in the
family -- However, if you choose it, it is nothing at all to me -- as you sow,
you must reap -- as you brew, so you must bake. -- I Will even slip down the
back-stairs, and leave you together. [Exit.


Fanny alone. I see, I see I shall never have a moment's ease till our marriage
is made public. New distresses crowd in upon me every day. The solicitude of
my mind sinks my spirits, preys upon my health, and destroys every comfort of
my life. It shall be revealed, let what will be the consequence.


Enter Lovewell. Lovew. My love! -- How Is this? -- In tears? -- Indeed this is
too much. You promised me to support your spirits, and to wait the
determination of our fortune with patience. -- For my sake, for your own, be
comforted! Why will you study to add to our uneasiness and perplexity?


Fanny. Oh, Mr. Lovewell! the indelicacy of a secret marriage grows every day
more and more shocking to me. I walk about the house like a guilty wretch: I
imagine myself the object of the suspicion of the whole family; and am under
the perpetual terrors of a shameful detection.


Lovew. Indeed, indeed, you are to blame. The amiable delicacy of your temper,
and your quick sensibility, only serve to make you unhappy. -- To clear up this
affair properly to Mr. Sterling, is the continual employment of my thoughts.
Every thing now is in a fair train. It begins to grow ripe for a discovery; and
I have no doubt of its concluding to the satisfaction of ourselves, of your
father, and the whole family.


Fanny. End how it will, I am resolved it shall end soon -- very soon. -- I
would not live another week in this agony of mind to be mistress of the
universe.


Lovew. Do not be too violent neither. Do not let us disturb the joy of your
sister's marriage with the tumult this matter may occasion! -- I have brought
letters from Lord Ogleby and Sir John Melvil to Mr. Sterling. -- They will be
here this evening -- and, I dare say, within this hour.


Fanny. I am sorry for it.


Lovew. Why so?


Fanny. No matter -- Only let us disclose our marriage immediately!


Lovew. As soon as possible.


Fanny. But directly.


Lovew. In a few days, you may depend on it.


Fanny. Tonight -- or tomorrow morning.


Lovew. That, I fear, will be impracticable.


Fanny. Nay, but you must.


Lovew. Must! why?


Fanny. Indeed, you must. -- I have the most alarming reasons for it.


Lovew. Alarming indeed! for they alarm me, even before I am acquainted with
them -- What are they?


Fanny. I cannot tell you.


Lovew. Not tell me?


Fanny. Not at present. When all is settled, you shall be acquainted with every
thing.


Lovew. Sorry they are coming! -- Must be discovered! -- What can this mean! --
Is it possible you can have any reasons that need be concealed from me?


Fanny. Do not disturb yourself with conjectures -- but rest assured, that
though you are unable to divine the cause, the consequence of a discovery, be
it what it will, cannot be attended with half the miseries of the present
interval.


Lovew. You put me upon the rack. -- I would do any thing to make you easy. --
But you know your father's temper. -- Money (you will excuse my frankness) is
the spring of all his actions, which nothing but the idea of acquiring nobility
or magnificence can ever make him forego -- and these he thinks his money will
purchase. -- You know too your aunt's, Mrs. Heidelberg's, notions of the
splendour of high life, her contempt for every thing that does not relish of
what she calls Quality, and that from the vast fortune in her hands, by her
late husband, she absolutely governs Mr. Sterling and the whole family: now, if
they should come to the knowledge of this affair too abruptly, they might,
perhaps, be incensed beyond all hopes of reconciliation.


Fanny. But if they are made acquainted with it otherwise than by ourselves, it
will be ten times worse: and a discovery grows every day more probable. The
whole family have long suspected our affection. We are also in the power of a
foolish maidservant; and if we may even depend on her fidelity, we cannot
answer for her discretion. -- Discover it therefore immediately, lest some
accident should bring it to light, and involve us in additional disgrace.


Lovew. Well -- well -- I meant to discover it soon, but would not do it too
precipitately. -- I have more than once sounded Mr. Sterling about it, and will
attempt him more seriously the next opportunity. But my principal hopes are
these. -- My relationship to Lord Ogleby, and his having placed me with your
father, have been, you know, the first links in the chain of this connection
between the two families; in consequence of which, I am at present in high
favor with all parties: while they all remain thus well-affected to me, I
propose to lay our case before the old Lord; and if I can prevail on him to
mediate in this affair, I make no doubt but he will be able to appease your
father; and, being a lord and a man of quality, I am sure he may bring Mrs.
Heidelberg into good humor at any time. -- Let me beg you, therefore, to have
but a little patience, as, you see, we are upon the very eve of a discovery,
that must probably be to our advantage.


Fanny. Manage it your own way. I am persuaded.


Lovew. But in the mean time make yourself easy.


Fanny. As easy as I can, I will. -- We had better not remain together any
longer at present. -- Think of this business, and let me know how you proceed.


Lovew. Depend on my care! But, pray, be cheerful.


Fanny. I will.


As she is going out, Enter Sterling. Sterling. Hey-day! who have we got here?


Fanny. [confused.] Mr. Lovewell, Sir!


Sterling. And where are you going, hussy!


Fanny. To my sister's chamber, Sir! [Exit.


Sterling. Ah, Lovewell! What! always getting my foolish girl yonder into a
corner! -- Well -- well -- let us but once see her elder sister fast-married to
Sir John Melvil, we'll soon provide a good husband for Fanny, I warrant you.


Lovew. Would to heaven, Sir, you would provide her one of my recommendation!


Sterling. Yourself? eh, Lovewell!


Lovew. With your pleasure, Sir!


Sterling. Mighty well!


Lovew. And I flatter myself, that such a proposal would not be very
disagreeable to Miss Fanny.


Sterling. Better and better!


Lovew. And if I could but obtain your consent, Sir --


Sterling. What! you marry Fanny! -- no -- no -- that will never do, Lovewell! --
You're a good boy, to be sure -- I have a great value for you -- but cannot
think of you for a son-in-law. -- There Is no Stuff in the case, no money,
Lovewell!


Lovew. My pretensions to fortune, indeed, are but moderate: but though not
equal to splendour, sufficient to keep us above distress. -- Add to which, that
I hope by diligence to increase it -- and have love, honor --


Sterling. But not the Stuff, Lovewell! -- Add one little round o to the sum total
of your fortune, and that will be the finest thing you can say to me. -- You
know I Have a regard for you -- would do any thing to serve you -- any thing on
the footing of friendship -- but --


Lovew. If you think me worthy of your friendship, Sir, be assured, that there
is no instance in which I should rate your friendship so highly.


Sterling. Psha! psha! that is another thing, you know. -- Where money or interest
is concerned, friendship is quite out of the question.


Lovew. But where the happiness of a daughter is at stake, you would not
scruple, sure, to sacrifice a little to her inclinations.


Sterling. Inclinations! why, you would not persuade me that the girl is in love
with you -- eh, Lovewell!


Lovew. I cannot absolutely answer for Miss Fanny, Sir; but am sure that the
chief happiness or misery of my life depends entirely upon her.


Sterling. Why, indeed now if your kinsman, Lord Ogleby, would come down
handsomely for you -- but that is impossible -- No, no -- 'twill never do -- I
must hear no more of this -- Come, Lovewell, promise me that I shall hear no
more of this.


Lovew. [hesitating.] I am afraid, Sir, I should not be able to keep my word
with you, if I did promise you.


Sterling. Why you would not offer to marry her without my consent? would you,
Lovewell!


Lovew. Marry her, Sir! [confused.


Sterling. Ay, marry her, Sir! -- I know very well that a warm speech or two from
such a dangerous young spark, as you are, will go much farther toward
persuading a silly girl to do what she has more than a month's mind to do, than
twenty grave lectures from fathers or mothers, or uncles or aunts, to prevent
her. -- But you would not, sure, be such a base fellow, such a treacherous
young rogue, as to seduce my daughter's affections, and destroy the peace of my
family in that manner. -- I must insist on it, that you give me your word not
to marry her without my consent.


Lovew. Sir -- I -- I -- as to that -- I -- I -- I beg, Sir -- Pray, Sir,
excuse me on this subject at present.


Sterling. Promise then, that you will carry this matter no further without my
approbation.


Lovew. You may depend on it, Sir, that it shall go no further.


Sterling. Well -- well -- that is enough -- I Will take care of the rest, I warrant
you. -- Come, come, let us have done with this nonsense! -- What Is doing in
town? -- Any news upon 'Change?


Lovew. Nothing material.


Sterling. Have you seen the currants, the soap, and Madeira, safe in the
warehouses? Have you compared the goods with the invoice and bills of lading,
and are they all right?


Lovew. They are, Sir!


Sterling. And how are stocks?


Lovew. Fell one and an half this morning.


Sterling. Well -- well -- some good news from America, and they will be up again.
-- But how are Lord Ogleby and Sir John Melvil? When are we to expect them?


Lovew. Very soon, Sir! I came on purpose to bring you their commands. Here are
letters from both of them.


Sterling. Let me see -- let me see -- 'Slife, how his Lordship's letter is
perfumed! -- It takes my breath away. -- [opening it.] And French paper too!
with a fine border of flowers and flourishes -- and a slippery gloss on it that
dazzles one's eyes. -- My dear Mr. Sterling. -- [reading.] -- Mercy on me! His
Lorship writes a worse hand than a boy at his exercise -- But how is this? --
Eh! -- with you tonight -- [reading.] -- Lawyers tomorrow morning --
Tonight! -- that is sudden indeed. -- Where Is my sister Heidelberg? she should
know of this immediately. -- Here John! Harry! Thomas! [calling the servants.]
Hark ye, Lovewell!


Lovew. Sir!


Sterling. Mind now, how I Will entertain his Lordship and Sir John -- We'll show
your fellows at the other end of the town how we live in the city -- They shall
eat gold -- and drink gold -- and lie in gold -- Here cook! butler! [calling.]
What signifies your birth and education, and titles? Money, money, that is the
stuff that makes the great man in this country.


Lovew. Very true, Sir!


Sterling. True, Sir? -- Why then have done with your nonsense of love and
matrimony. You're not rich enough to think of a wife yet. A man of business
should mind nothing but his business. -- Where are these fellows? John! Thomas!
[calling.] -- Get an estate, and a wife will follow of course. -- Ah! Lovewell!
an English merchant is the most respectable character in the universe. 'Slife,
man, a rich English merchant may make himself a match for the daughter of a
Nabob. -- Where are all my rascals? Here, William! [Exit calling.


Lovewell alone. So! -- As I suspected. -- Quite averse to the match, and
likely to receive the news of it with great displeasure. -- What Is best to be
done? -- Let me see! -- Suppose I get Sir John Melvil to interest himself in
this affair. He may mention it to Lord Ogleby with a better grace than I can,
and more probably prevail on him to interfere in it. I can open my mind also
more freely to Sir John. He told me, when I left him in town, that he had
something of consequence to communicate, and that I could be of use to him. I
am glad of it: for the confidence he reposes in me, and the service I may do
him, will ensure me his good offices. -- Poor Fanny! It hurts me to see her so
uneasy, and her making a mystery of the cause adds to my anxiety. -- Something
must be done upon her account; for at all events, her solicitude shall be
removed. [Exit.


Scene changes to another chamber.
Enter Miss Sterling, and Miss Fanny. Miss Sterling. Oh, my dear sister, say no
more! This is downright hypocrisy. -- You shall never convince me that you
don't envy me beyond measure. -- Well, after all it is extremely natural -- It
is impossible to be angry with you.


Fanny. Indeed, sister, you have no cause.


Miss Sterling. And you really pretend not to envy me?


Fanny. Not in the least.


Miss Sterling. And you don't in the least wish that you was just in my situation?


Fanny. No, indeed, I don't. Why should I?


Miss Sterling. Why should you? -- What! on the brink of marriage, fortune, title
-- But I had forgot -- There Is that dear sweet creature Mr. Lovewell in the
case. -- You would not break your faith with your true love now for the world,
I warrant you.


Fanny. Mr. Lovewell! -- always Mr. Lovewell! -- Lord, what signifies Mr.
Lovewell, Sister?


Miss Sterling. Pretty peevish soul! -- Oh, my dear, grave, romantic sister! -- a
perfect philosopher in petticoats! -- Love and a cottage! -- Eh, Fanny! -- Ah,
give me indifference and a coach and six!


Fanny. And why not the coach and six without the indifference? -- But, pray,
when is this happy marriage of yours to be celebrated? -- I long to give you
joy.


Miss Sterling. In a day or two -- I cannot tell exactly. -- Oh, my dear sister! --
I must mortify her a little. [aside.] -- I know you have a pretty taste. Pray,
give me your opinion of my jewels. -- How do you like the style of this
esclavage? [Shewing jewels.


Fanny. Extremely handsome indeed, and well fancied.


Miss Sterling. What do you think of these bracelets? I shall have a miniature of my
father, set round with diamonds, to one, and Sir John's to the other. -- And
this pair of earrings! set transparent! -- here, the tops, you see, will take
off to wear in a morning, or in an undress -- how do you like them? [Shews jewels.


Fanny. Very much, I assure you -- Bless me; sister, you have a prodigious
quantity of jewels -- you will be the very Queen of Diamonds.


Miss Sterling. Ha! ha! ha! very well, my dear! -- I shall be as fine as a little
queen indeed. -- I have a bouquet to come home tomorrow -- made up of
diamonds, and rubies, and emeralds, and topazes, and amethysts -- jewels of all
colors, green, red, blue, yellow, intermixed -- the prettiest thing you ever
saw in your life! -- The jeweller says I shall set out with as many diamonds as
any body in town, except Lady Brilliant, and Polly What d'ye-call-it, Lord
Squander's kept mistress.


Fanny. But what are your wedding-cloaths, sister?


Miss Sterling. Oh, white and silver to be sure, you know. -- I bought them at Sir
Joseph Lutestring's, and sat above an hour in the parlour behind the shop,
consulting Lady Lutestring about gold and silver stuffs, on purpose to mortify
her.


Fanny. Fie, sister! how could you be so abominably provoking?


Miss Sterling. Oh, I have no patience with the pride of your city-knights'
ladies. -- Did you never observe the airs of Lady Lutestring dressed in the
richest brocade out of her husband's shop, playing crownwhist at
Haberdasher's-Hall? -- While the civil smirking Sir Joseph, with a smug wig
trimmed round his broad face as close as a new-cut yew-hedge, and his shoes so
black that they shine again, stands all day in his shop, fastened to his
counter like a bad shilling?


Fanny. Indeed, indeed, sister, this is too much -- If you talk at this rate,
you will be absolutely a bye-word in the city -- You must never venture on the
inside of Temple Bar again.


Miss Sterling. Never do I desire it -- never, my dear Fanny, I promise you. --
Oh, how I long to be transported to the dear regions of Grosvenor-Square -- far
-- far from the dull districts of Aldersgate, Cheap, Candlewick, and Farringdon
Without and Within! -- My heart goes pit-a-pat at the very idea of being
introduced at court! -- gilt chariot! -- pyeballed horses! -- laced liveries!
-- and then the whispers buzzing round the circle -- "Who is that young Lady!
Who is she?" -- "Lady Melvil, Ma'am!" -- Lady Melvil! my ears tingle at the
sound. -- And then at dinner, instead of my farther perpetually asking -- "Any
news upon 'Change?" -- to cry -- well, Sir John! any thing new from Arthur's?
-- or -- to say to some other woman of quality, was your Ladyship at the
Duchess of Rubber's last night? -- Did you call in at Lady Thunder's? In the
immensity of crowd I swear I did not see you -- scarce a soul at the opera last
Saturday -- shall I see you at Carlisle-House next Thursday? -- Oh, the dear
Beau-Monde! I was born to move in the sphere of the great world.


Fanny. And so, in the midst of all this happiness, you have no compassion for
me -- no pity for us poor mortals in common life.


Miss Sterling. [affectedly.] You? -- You're above pity. -- You would not change
conditions with me -- you're over head and ears in love, you know. -- Nay, for
that matter, if Mr. Lovewell and you come together, as I doubt not you will,
you will live very comfortably, I dare say. -- He will mind his business --
you will employ yourself in the delightful care of your family -- and once in a
season perhaps you will sit together in a front-box at a benefit play, as we used
to do at our dancing-master's, you know -- and perhaps I may meet you in the
summer with some other citizens at Tunbridge. -- For my part, I shall always
entertain a proper regard for my relations. -- You sha'n't want my countenance,
I assure you.


Fanny. Oh, you're too kind, sister!


Enter Mrs. Heidelberg. Mrs. Heidel. [at entering.] Here this evening! -- I vow
and pertest we shall scarce have time to provide for them -- Oh, my dear! [to
Miss Sterling.] I am glad to see you're not quite in dish-abille. Lord Ogleby and
Sir John Melvil will be here tonight.


Miss Sterling. Tonight, Ma'am?


Mrs. Heidel. Yes, my dear, tonight. -- Do, put on a smarter cap, and change
those ordinary ruffles! -- Lord, I have such a deal to do, I shall scarce have
time to slip on my Italian lutestring. -- Where is this dawdle of a
housekeeper? -- [Enter Mrs. Trusty.] Oh, here, Trusty! do you know that people
of qualaty are expected here this evening?


Trusty. Yes, Ma'am.


Mrs. Heidel. Well -- Do you be sure now that every thing is done in the most
genteelest manner -- and to the honor of the fammaly.


Trusty. Yes, Ma'am.


Mrs. Heidel. Well -- but mind what I say to you.


Trusty. Yes, Ma'am.


Mrs. Heidel. His Lordship is to lie in the chintz bedchamber -- do you hear? --
And Sir John in the blue damask room -- His Lordship's valet-de-shamb in the
opposite --


Trusty. But Mr. Lovewell is come down -- and you know that is his room, Ma'am.


Mrs. Heidel. Well -- well -- Mr. Lovewell may make shift -- or get a bed at
the George -- But hark ye, Trusty!


Trusty. Ma'am!


Mrs. Heidel. Get the great dining room in order as soon as possible. Unpaper
the curtains, take the civers off the couch and the chairs, and put the china
figures on the mantle-piece immediately.


Trusty. Yes, Ma'am.


Mrs. Heidel. Be gone then! fly, this instant! -- Where Is my brother Sterling
--


Trusty. Talking to the butler, Ma'am.


Mrs. Heidel. Very well. [Exit Trusty.] Miss Fanny! -- I pertest I did not see
you before -- Lord, child, what is the matter with you?


Fanny. With me? Nothing, Ma'am.


Mrs. Heidel. Bless me! Why your face is as pale, and black, and yellow -- of
fifty colors, I pertest. -- And then you have dressed yourself as loose and as
big -- I declare there is not such a thing to be seen now, as a young woman
with a fine waist -- You all make yourselves as round as Mrs. Deputy Barter.
Go, child! -- You know the qualaty will be here by and by -- Go, and make
yourself a little more fit to be seen. [Exit Fanny.] She is gone away in tears
-- absolutely crying, I vow and pertest. -- This ridicalous Love! we must put a
stop to it. It makes a perfect nataral of the girl.


Miss Sterling. Poor soul! she cannot help it. [affectedly.


Mrs. Heidel. Well, my dear! Now I shall have an opportunity of convincing you
of the absurdity of what you was telling me concerning Sir John Melvil's
behavior to you.


Miss Sterling. Oh, it gives me no manner of uneasiness. But, indeed, Ma'am, I
cannot be persuaded but that Sir John is an extremely cold lover. Such distant
civility, grave looks, and lukewarm professions of esteem for me and the whole
family! I have heard of flames and darts, but Sir John's is a passion of mere
ice and snow.


Mrs. Heidel. Oh, fie, my dear! I am perfectly ashamed of you. That Is so like
the notions of your poor sister! What you complain of as coldness and
indiffarence, is nothing but the extreme gentilaty of his address, an exact
pictur of the manners of qualaty.


Miss Sterling. Oh, he is the very mirror of complaisance! full of formal bows and
set speeches! -- I declare, if there was any violent passion on my side, I
should be quite jealous of him.


Mrs. Heidel. I say jealus indeed -- Jealus of who, pray?


Miss Sterling. My sister Fanny. She seems a much greater favorite than I am, and
he pays her infinitely more attention, I assure you.


Mrs. Heidel. Lord! do you think a man of fashion, as he is, cannot distinguish
between the genteel and the wulgar part of the famaly? -- Between you and your
sister, for instance -- or me and my brother? -- Be advised by me, child! It is
all politeness and good-breeding. -- Nobody knows the qualaty better than I do.


Miss Sterling. In my mind the old lord, his uncle, has ten times more gallantry
about him than Sir John. He is full of attentions to the ladies, and smiles,
and grins, and leers, and ogles, and fills every wrinkle in his old wizen face
with comical expressions of tenderness. I think he would make an admirable
sweetheart.


Enter Sterling. Sterling. [at entering.] No fish? -- Why the pond was dragged but
yesterday morning -- There Is carp and tench in the boat. -- Pox on it, if that
dog Lovewell had any thought, he would have brought down a turbot, or some of
the land-carriage mackarel.


Mrs. Heidel. Lord, brother, I am afraid his lordship and Sir John will not
arrive while it is light.


Sterling. I warrant you. -- But, pray, sister Heidelberg, let the turtle be dressed
tomorrow, and some venison -- and let the gardener cut some pine-apples -- and
get out some ice. -- I Will answer for wine, I warrant you -- I Will give them such
a glass of Champagne as they never drank in their lives -- no, not at a Duke's
table.


Mrs. Heidel. Pray now, brother, mind how you behave. I am always in a fright
about you with people of qualaty. Take care that you don't fall asleep directly
after supper, as you commonly do. Take a good deal of snuff; and that will keep
you awake. -- And don't burst out with your horrible loud horse-laughs. It is
monstrous wulgar.


Sterling. Never fear, sister! -- Who have we here?


Mrs. Heidel. It is Mons. Cantoon, the Swish gentleman, that lives with his
Lordship, I vow and pertest.


Enter Canton. Sterling. Ah, Mounseer! your servant. -- I am very glad to see you,
Mounseer.


Canton. Mosh oblige to Mons. Sterling. -- Ma'am, I am yours -- Matemoiselle, I
am yours. [Bowing round.


Mrs. Heidel. Your humble servant, Mr. Cantoon!


Canton. I kiss your hands, Matam!


Sterling. Well, Mounseer! -- and what news of your good family! -- when are we to
see his Lordship and Sir John?


Canton. Mons. Sterling! Milor Ogelby and Sir Jean Melvile will be here in one
quarter-hour.


Sterling. I am glad to hear it.


Mrs. Heidel. O, I am perdigious glad to hear it. Being so late I was afeard of
some accident. -- Will you please to have any thing, Mr. Cantoon, after your
journey?


Canton. No, I tank you, Ma'am.


Mrs. Heidel. Shall I go and show you the apartments, Sir?


Canton. You do me great honeur, Ma'am.


Mrs. Heidel. Come then! -- come, my dear! [to Miss Sterling.]

[Exeunt.
Manet Sterling. Sterling. Pox on it, it is almost dark -- It will be too late to go
round the garden this evening. -- However, I will carry them to take a peep at
my fine canal at least, I am determined. [Exit.


ACT II.
SCENE an antichamber to Lord Ogleby's bedchamber -- Table with chocolate,
and small case for medicines.
Enter Brush, my Lord's valet-de-chambre, and Sterling's chambermaid. Brush.
YOU shall stay, my dear, I insist upon it.


Chapter Maid. Nay, pray, Sir, don't be so positive; I cannot stay indeed.


Brush. You shall take one cup to our better acquaintance.


Chapter Maid. I seldom drinks chocolate; and if I did, one has no satisfaction,
with such apprehensions about one -- if my Lord should wake, or the Swish
gentleman should see one, or Madam Heidelberg should know of it, I should be
frighted to death -- besides I have had my tea already this morning -- I Am sure
I hear my Lord. [in a fright.


Brush. No, no, Madam, don't flutter yourself -- the moment my Lord wakes, he
rings his bell, which I answer sooner or later, as it suits my convenience.


Chapter Maid. But should he come upon us without ringing --


Brush. I Will forgive him if he does -- This key [takes a phial out of the case]
locks him up till I please to let him out.


Chapter Maid. Law, Sir! that is potecary's-stuff.


Brush. It is so -- but without this he can no more get out of bed -- than he
can read without spectacles -- [sips.] What with qualms, age, rheumatism, and a
few surfeits in his youth, he must have a great deal of brushing, oyling,
screwing, and winding up to set him a going for the day.


Chapter Maid. [sips.] That Is prodigious indeed -- [sips.] My Lord seems quite in a
decay.


Brush. Yes, he is quite a spectacle, [sips.] a mere corpse, till he is revived
and refesh'd from our little magazine here -- When the restorative pills, and
cordial waters warm his stomach, and get into his head, vanity frisks in his
heart, and then he sets up for the lover, the rake, and the fine gentleman.


Chapter Maid. [sips.] Poor gentleman! -- but should the Swish gentleman come upon
us. [frighten'd.


Brush. Why then the English gentleman would be very angry -- No foreigner must
break in upon my privacy. [sips.] But I can assure you Monsieur Canton is
otherwise employed -- He is obliged to skim the cream of half a score
newspapers for my Lord's breakfast -- ha, ha, ha. Pray, Madam, drink your cup
peaceably -- My Lord's chocolate is remarkably good, he will not touch a drop but
what comes from Italy.


Chapter Maid. [sipping.]'It Is very fine indeed! -- [sips.] and charmingly perfumed
-- it smells for all the world like our young ladies dressing-boxes.


Brush. You have an excellent taste, Madam, and I must beg of you to accept of
a few cakes for your own drinking, [takes 'em out of a drawer in the table.]
and in return, I desire nothing but to taste the perfume of your lips --
[kisses her.] -- A small return of favors, Madam, will make, I hope, this
country and retirement agreeable to both. [he bows, she curtsies.] Your young
ladies are fine girls, faith: [sips.] though upon my soul, I am quite of my old
lord's mind about them; and were I inclined to matrimony, I should take the
youngest. [sips.


Chapter Maid. Miss Fanny's the most affablest and the most best nater'd creter!


Brush. And the eldest a little haughty or so --


Chapter Maid. More haughtier and prouder than Saturn himself -- but this I say
quite confidential to you, for one would not hurt a young lady's marriage, you
know. [sips.


Brush. By no means, but you cannot hurt it with us -- we don't consider tempers
-- we want money, Mrs. Nancy -- give us enough of that, we'll abate you a great
deal in other particulars -- ha, ha, ha.


Chapter Maid. Bless me, here is somebody -- [bell rings.] -- O! it is my Lord --
Well, your servant, Mr. Brush -- I Will clean the cups in the next room.


Brush. Do so -- but never mind the bell -- I shall not go this half hour. Will
you drink tea with me in the afternoon?


Chapter Maid. Not for the world, Mr. Brush -- I Will be here to set all things to
rights -- but I must not drink tea indeed -- and so your servant. [Exit Maid
with teaboard.

[Bell rings again.]
Brush. It is impossible to stupify one's self in the country for a week
without some little flirting with the Abigails: this is much the handsomest
wench in the house, except the old citizen's youngest daughter, and I have not
time enough to lay a plan for Her -- [bell rings.] And now I Will go to my Lord,
for I have nothing else to do. [going.


Enter Canton with newspapers in his hand. Cant. Monsieur Brush -- Maistre
Brush -- My Lor stirra yet?


Brush. He has just rung his bell -- I am going to him.


Cant. Depechez vous donc. [Exit Brush. [puts on spectacles.] I wish de Deviel
had all dese papiers -- I forget, as fast as I read -- De Advertise put out of
my head de Gazette, de Gazette de Chronique, and so dey all go l'un apres
l'autre -- I must get some nouvelle for my Lor, or he will be enrag^e contre moi
-- Voyons! -- [reads in the papers.] Here is noting but Anti-Sejanus and
advertise --


Enter Maid with chocolate things. Vat you vant, child? --

Chapter Maid. Only the chocolate things, Sir.


Cant. O ver well -- dat is good girl -- and ver prit too! [Exit Maid.


Lord Ogleby within. Lord Ogle. Canton, he, he -- [coughs.] -- Canton!


Cant. I come, my Lor -- vat shall I do? -- I have no news -- He vil make great
tintamarre! --


Lord Ogle. [within.] Canton, I say, Canton! Where are you? --


Enter Lord Ogleby leaning on Brush. Cant. Here, my Lor; I ask pardon, my Lor,
I have not finish de papiers --


Lord Ogle. Them your pardon, and your papers -- I want you here, Canton.


Cant. Den I run, dat is all -- [shuffles along -- Lord Ogleby leans upon
Canton too, and comes forward.


Lord Ogle. You Swiss are the most unaccountable mixture -- you have the
language and the impertinence of the French, with the laziness of Dutchmen.


Cant. It Is very true, my Lor -- I cannot help --


Lord Ogle. [cries out.] O Diavolo!


Cant. You are not in pain, I hope, my Lor.


Lord Ogle. Indeed but I am, my Lor -- That vulgar fellow Sterling, with his
city politeness, would force me down his slope last night to see a
clay-colour'd ditch, which he calls a canal; and what with the dew, and the
east wind, my hips and shoulders are absolutely screwed to my body.


Cant. A littel veritable eau d'arquibusade vil set all to right again -- [my
Lord sits down, Brush gives chocolate.


Lord Ogle. Where are the palsy-drops, Brush?


Brush. Here, my Lord! [pouring out.


Lord Ogle. Quelle nouvelle avez vous, Canton?


Cant. A great deal of papier, but no news at all.


Lord Ogle. What! nothing at all, you stupid fellow?


Cant. Yes, my Lor, I have littel advertise here vil give you more plaisir den
all de lies about noting at all. La voila! [puts on his spectacles.


Lord Ogle. Come read it, Canton, with good emphasis, and good discretion.


Cant. I will, my Lor -- [ Cant. reads.] Dear is no question, but dat de
Cosmetique Royale vil utterlie take away all heats, pimps, frecks and oder
eruptions of de skin, and likewise de wrinque of old age, etc. etc. -- A great
deal more, my Lor -- be sure to ask for de Cosmetique Royale, signed by de
Docteur own hand -- Dear is more raison for dis caution dan good men vil tink
-- Eh bien, my Lor!


Lord Ogle. Eh bien, Canton! -- Will you purchase any?


Cant. For you, my Lor?


Lord Ogle. For me, you old puppy! for what?


Cant. My Lor?


Lord Ogle. Do I want cosmeticks?


Cant. My Lor!


Lord Ogle. Look in my face -- come, be sincere -- Does it want the assistance
of art?


Cant. [with his spectacles.] En verite, non. -- It Is very smoose and brillian
-- but I tote dat you might take a little by way of prevention.


Lord Ogle. You thought like an old fool, Monsieur, as you generally do -- The
surfeit-water, Brush! [ Brush pours out.] What do you think, Brush, of this
family, we are going to be connected with? -- Eh!


Brush. Very well to marry in, my Lord; but it would not do to live with.


Lord Ogle. You are right, Brush -- There is no washing the Blackamoor white --
Mr. Sterling will never get rid of Black-Fryars, always taste of the Borachio
-- and the poor woman his sister is so busy and so notable, to make one
welcome, that I have not yet got over her first reception; it almost amounted
to suffocation! I think the daughters are tolerable -- Where Is my cephalic
snuff? [ Brush gives him a box.


Cant. Dey tink so of you, my Lor, for dey look at noting else, ma foi.


Lord Ogle. Did they? -- Why, I think they did a little -- Where Is my glass? [
Brush puts one on the table.] The youngest is delectable. [takes snuff.


Cant. O, ouy, my Lor -- very delect, inteed; she made doux yeux at you, my Lor.


Lord Ogle. She was particular -- the eldest, my nephew's lady, will be a most
valuable wife; she has all the vulgar spirits of her father, and aunt, happily
blended with the termagant qualities of her deceased mother. -- Some
pepper-mint water, Brush! -- How happy is it, Cant, for young ladies in
general, that people of quality overlook every thing in a marriage contract but
their fortune.


Cant. C'est bien heureux, et commode aussi.


Lord Ogle. Brush, give me that pamphlet by my bedside -- [ Brush goes for
it.] Canton, do you wait in the antichamber, and let nobody interrupt me till
I eall you.


Cant. Mush goot may do your Lordship!


Lord Ogle. [to Brush, who brings the pamphlet.] And now, Brush, leave me a
little to my studies. [Exit Brush.


Lord Ogleby alone. What can I possibly do among these women here, with this
confounded rheumatism? It is a most grievous enemy to gallantry and address --
[gets off his chair.] -- He! -- Courage, my Lor! by heavens, I Am another
creature -- [hums and dances a little.] It will do, faith -- Bravo, my Lor!
these girls have absolutely inspired me -- If they are for a game of romps --
Me voila pret! [sings and dances.] O -- that is an ugly twinge -- but it is gone
-- I have rather too much of the lily this morning in my complexion; a faint
tincture of the rose will give a delicate spirit to my eyes for the day.
[unlocks a drawer at the bottom of the glass, and takes out rouge; while he is
painting himself, a knocking at the door.] Who Is there! I will not be disturbed.


Canton. [without.] My Lor, my Lor, here is Monsieur Sterling to pay his devoir
to you this morn in your chamber.


Lord Ogle. [softly.] What a fellow! -- [aloud.] I am extremely honored by Mr.
Sterling -- Why don't you see him in, Monsieur? -- I wish he was at the bottom
of his stinking canal -- [door opens.] Oh, my dear Mr. Sterling, you do me a
great deal of honor.


Enter Sterling and Lovewell. Sterling. I hope, my Lord, that your Lordship slept
well in the night -- I believe there are no better beds in Europe than I have
-- I spare no pains to get 'em, nor money to buy 'em -- His Majesty, God bless
him, don't sleep upon a better out of his palace; and if I had said in too, I
hope no treason, my Lord.


Lord Ogle. Your beds are like every thing else about you, incomparable! --
They not only make one rest well, but give one spirits, Mr. Sterling.


Sterling. What say you then, my Lord, to another walk in the garden? You must see
my water by daylight, and my walks, and my slopes, and my clumps, and my
bridge, and my flow'ring trees, and my bed of Dutch tulips -- Matters looked
but dim last night, my Lord; I feel the dew in my great toe -- but I would put
on a cut shoe that I might be able to walk you about -- I may be laid up
tomorrow.


Lord Ogle. I pray heaven you may! [aside.


Sterling. What say you, my Lord!


Lord Ogle. I was saying, Sir, that I was in hopes of seeing the young ladies
at breakfast: Mr. Sterling, they are, in my mind, the finest tulips in this
part of the world -- he, he.


Cant. Bravissimo, my Lor! -- ha, ha, he.


Sterling. They shall meet your Lordship in the garden -- we will not lose our walk
for them; I Will take you a little round before breakfast, and a larger before
dinner, and in the evening you shall go to the Grand Tower, as I call it, ha,
ha, ha.


Lord Ogle. Not a foot, I hope, Mr. Sterling -- consider your gout, my good
friend -- You Will certainly be laid by the heels for your politeness -- he, he,
he.


Cant. Ha, ha, ha -- it is admirable! en verite! -- [laughing very heartily.


Sterling. If my young man [to Lovewell] here, would but laugh at my jokes, which
he ought to do, as Mounseer does at yours, my Lord, we should be all life and
mirth.


Lord Ogle. What say you, Cant, will you take my kinsman under your tuition?
you have certainly the most companionable laugh I ever met with, and never out
of tune.


Cant. But when your Lorship is out of spirits.


Lord Ogle. Well said, Cant! -- but here comes my nephew, to play his part.


Enter Sir John Melvil. Well, Sir John, what news from the island of Love? have
you been sighing and serenading this morning?

Sir John. I am glad to see your Lordship in such spirits this morning.


Lord Ogle. I Am sorry to see you so dull, Sir -- What poor things, Mr.
Sterling, these very young fellows are! they make love with faces, as if they
were burying the dead -- though, indeed, a marriage sometimes may be properly
called a burying of the living -- eh, Mr. Sterling? --


Sterling. Not if they have enough to live upon, my Lord -- Ha, ha, ha.


Cant. Dat is all Monsieur Sterling tink of.


Sir John. apart. Prithee, Lovewell, come with me into the garden; I have
something of consequence for you, and I must communicate it directly.


Lovew. apart. We'll go together --

If your Lordship and Mr. Sterling please, we'll prepare the ladies to attend
you in the garden.

[Exeunt Sir John, and Lovewell.
Sterling. My girls are always ready, I make 'em rise soon, and to-bed early;
their husbands shall have 'em with good constitutions, and good fortunes, if
they have nothing else, my Lord.


Lord Ogle. Fine things, Mr. Sterling!


Sterling. Fine things, indeed, my Lord! -- Ah, my Lord, had not you run off your
speed in your youth, you had not been so crippled in your age, my Lord.


Lord Ogle. Very pleasant, I protest -- He, he, he. -- [half-laughing


Sterling. Here Is Mounseer now, I suppose, is pretty near your Lordship's
standing; but having little to eat, and little to spend, in his own country,
he will wear three of your Lordship out -- eating and drinking kills us all.


Lord Ogle. Very pleasant, I protest -- What a vulgar dog! [aside.


Cant. My Lor so old as me! -- He is shicken to me -- and look like a boy to
pauvre me.


Sterling. Ha, ha, ha. Well said, Mounseer -- keep to that, and you will live in any
country of the world -- Ha, ha, ha. -- But, my Lord, I will wait upon you into
the garden: we have but a little time to breakfast -- I Will go for my hat and
cane, fetch a little walk with you, my Lord, and then for the hot rolls and
butter! [Exit Sterling.


Lord Ogle. I shall attend you with pleasure -- Hot rolls and butter, in July!
-- I sweat with the thoughts of it -- What a strange beast it is!


Cant. C'est un barbare.


Lord Ogle. He is a vulgar dog, and if there was not so much money in the
family, which I cannot do without, I would leave him and his hot rolls and
butter directly -- Come along, Monsieur!

[Exeunt Lord Ogleby and Canton.
Scene changes to the Garden.
Enter Sir John Melvil, and Lovewell. Lovew. In my room this morning?
Impossible.


Sir John. Before five this morning, I promise you.


Lovew. On what occasion?


Sir John. I was so anxious to disclose my mind to you, that I could not sleep
in my bed -- But I found that you could not sleep neither -- The bird was
flown, and the nest long since cold. -- Where was you, Lovewell?


Lovew. Pooh! prithee! ridiculous!


Sir John. Come now! which was it? Miss Sterling's maid? a pretty little rogue!
-- or Miss Fanny's Abigail? a sweet soul too! -- or --


Lovew. Nay, nay, leave trifling, and tell me your business.


Sir John. Well, but where was you, Lovewell?


Lovew. Walking -- writing -- what signifies where I was?


Sir John. Walking! yes, I dare say. It rained as hard as it could pour. Sweet
refreshing showers to walk in! No, no, Lovewell. -- Now would I give twenty
pounds to know which of the maids --


Lovew. But your business! your business, Sir John!


Sir John. Let me a little into the secrets of the family.


Lovew. Psha!


Sir John. Poor Lovewell! he cannot bear it, I see. She charged you not to kiss
and tell. -- Eh, Lovewell! However, though you will not honor me with your
confidence, I Will venture to trust you with mine. -- What do you think of Miss
Sterling?


Lovew. What do I think of Miss Sterling?


Sir John. Ay; what do you think of her?


Lovew. An odd question! -- but I think her a smart, lively girl, full of mirth
and sprightliness.


Sir John. All mischief and malice, I doubt.


Lovew. How?


Sir John. But her person -- what do you think of that?


Lovew. Pretty and agreeable.


Sir John. A little grisette thing.


Lovew. What is the meaning of all this?


Sir John. I Will tell you. You must know, Lovewell, that notwithstanding all
appearances -- [seeing Lord Ogleby, etc.] We are interrupted -- When they are
gone, I Will explain.


Enter Lord Ogleby, Sterling, Mrs. Heidelberg, Miss Sterling, and Fanny. Lord
Ogle. Great improvements indeed, Mr. Sterling! wonderful improvements! The four
seasons in lead, the flying Mercury, and the basin with Neptune in the middle,
are all in the very extreme of fine taste. You have as many rich figures as the
man at Hyde-Park Corner.


Sterling. The chief pleasure of a country house is to make improvements, you
know, my Lord. I spare no expense, not I. -- This is quite another-guess sort
of a place than it was when I first took it, my Lord. We were surrounded with
trees. I cut down above fifty to make the lawn before the house, and let in the
wind and the sun -- smack-smooth -- as you see. -- Then I made a green-house
out of the old laundry, and turned the brew house into a pinery. -- The high
octagon summer house, you see yonder, is raised on the mast of a ship, given me
by an East India captain, who has turned many a thousand of my money. It
commands the whole road. All the coaches and chariots, and chaises, pass and
repass under your eye. I Will mount you up there in the afternoon, my Lord. It Is
the pleasantest place in the world to take a pipe and a bottle, -- and so you
shall say, my Lord.


Lord Ogle. Ay -- or a bowl of punch, or a can of flip, Mr. Sterling! for it
looks like a cabin in the air. -- If flying chairs were in use, the captain
might make a voyage to the Indies in it still, if he had but a fair wind.


Canton. Ha! ha! ha! ha!


Mrs. Heidel. My brother's a little comacal in his ideas, my Lord! -- But
you will excuse him. -- I have a little gothic dairy, fitted up entirely in my
own taste. -- In the evening I shall hope for the honor of your Lordship's
company to take a dish of tea there, or a sullabub warm from the cow.


Lord Ogle. I have every moment a fresh opportunity of admiring the elegance of
Mrs. Heidelberg -- the very flower of delicacy, and cream of politeness.


Mrs. Heidel. O my Lord!


leering at each other. Lord Ogle. O Madam!


Sterling. How do you like these close walks, my Lord?


Lord Ogle. A most excellent serpentine! It forms a perfect maze, and winds
like a true-lover's knot.


Sterling. Ay -- here is none of your strait lines here -- but all taste -- zig-zag
-- crinkum-crankum -- in and out -- right and left -- to and again -- twisting
and turning like a worm, my Lord!


Lord Ogle. Admirably laid out indeed, Mr. Stering! one can hardly see an inch
beyond one's nose any where in these walks. -- You are a most excellent
oeconomist of your land, and make a little go a great way. -- It lies together
in as small parcels as if it was placed in pots out at your window in
Gracechurch-Street.


Canton. Ha! ha! ha! ha!


Lord Ogle. What do you laugh at, Canton?


Canton. Ah! que cette similitude est drole! So clever what you say, mi Lor.


Lord Ogle. [to Fanny.] You seem mightily engaged, Madam. What are those pretty
hands so busily employed about?


Fanny. Only making up a nosegay, my Lord! -- Will your Lordship do me the
honor of accepting it? [presenting it.


Lord Ogle. I Will wear it next my heart, Madam! -- I see the young creature
doats on me. [apart.


Miss Sterling. Lord, sister! you have loaded his Lordship with a bunch of flowers
as big as the cook or the nurse carry to town on Monday morning for a beaupot.
-- Will your Lordship give me leave to present you with this rose and a sprig
of sweet-briar?


Lord Ogle. The truest emblems of yourself, Madam! all sweetness and poignancy.
-- A little jealous, poor soul! [apart.


Sterling. Now, my Lord, if you please, I Will carry you to see my Ruins.


Mrs. Heidel. You Will absolutely fatigue his Lordship with overwalking, brother!


Lord Ogle. Not at all, Madam! We Are in the garden of Eden, you know; in the
region of perpetual spring, youth, and beauty. [leering at the women.


Mrs. Heidel. Quite the man of qualaty, I pertest. [apart.


Canton. Take a my arm, mi Lor! [Lord Ogleby leans on him.


Sterling. I Will only show his Lordship my ruins, and the cascade, and the Chinese
bridge, and then we'll go in to breakfast.


Lord Ogle. Ruins, did you say, Mr. Sterling?


Sterling. Ay, ruins, my Lord! and they are reckoned very fine ones too. You would
think them ready to tumble on your head. It has just cost me a hundred and
fifty pounds to put my ruins in thorough repair. -- This way, if your Lordship
pleases.


Lord Ogle. [going, stops.] What steeple's that we see yonder? the
parish church, I suppose.


Sterling. Ha! ha! ha! that is admirable. It is no church at all, my Lord! it is a
spire that I have built against a tree, a field or two off, to terminate the
prospect. One must always have a church, or an obelisk, or a something, to
terminate the prospect, you know. That Is a rule in taste, my Lord!


Lord Ogle. Very ingenious, indeed! For my part, I desire no finer prospect,
than this I see before me. [leering at the women.] -- Simple, yet varied;
bounded, yet extensive. -- Get away, Canton! [pushing away Canton.] I want no
assistance. -- I Will walk with the ladies.


Sterling. This way, my Lord!


Lord Ogle. Lead on, Sir! -- We young folks here will follow you. -- Madam! --
Miss Sterling! -- Miss Fanny! I attend you. [Exit, after Sterling, gallanting
the ladies.


Canton. [following.] He is cock o'de game, ma foy! [Exit.


Manet Sir John Melvil, and Lovewell. Sir John. At length, thank heaven, I have
an opportunity to unbosom. -- I know you are faithful, Lovewell, and flatter
myself you would rejoice to serve me.


Lovew. Be assured, you may depend on me.


Sir John. You must know then, notwithstanding all appearances, that this
treaty of marriage between Miss Sterling and me will come to nothing.


Lovew. How!


Sir John. It will be no match, Lovewell.


Lovew. No match?


Sir John. No.


Lovew. You amaze me. What should prevent it?


Sir John. I.


Lovew. You! wherefore?


Sir John. I don't like her.


Lovew. Very plain indeed! I never supposed that you was extremely devoted to
her from inclination, but thought you always considered it as a matter of
convenience, rather than affection.


Sir John. Very true. I came into the family without any impressions on my mind
-- with an unimpassioned indifference ready to receive one woman as soon as
another. I looked upon love, serious, sober love, as a chimaera, and marriage
as a thing of course, as you know most people do. But I, who was lately so
great an infidel in love, am now one of its sincerest votaries. -- In short, my
defection from Miss Sterling proceeds from the violence of my attachment to
another.


Lovew. Another! So! so! here will be fine work. And pray who is she?


Sir John. Who is she! who can she be? but Fanny, the tender, amiable, engaging
Fanny.


Lovew. Fanny! What Fanny?


Sir John. Fanny Sterling. Her sister -- Is not she an angel, Lovewell?


Lovew. Her sister? Confusion! -- You must not think of it, Sir John.


Sir John. Not think of it? I can think of nothing else. Nay, tell me,
Lovewell! was it possible for me to be indulged in a perpetual intercourse with
two such objects as Fanny and her sister, and not find my heart led by
insensible attraction toward Her? -- You seem confounded -- Why don't you
answer me?


Lovew. Indeed, Sir John, this event gives me infinite concern.


Sir John. Why so? -- Is not she an angel, Lovewell?


Lovew. I foresee that it must produce the worst consequences. Consider the
confusion it must unavoidably create. Let me persuade you to drop these
thoughts in time.


Sir John. Never -- never, Lovewell!


Lovew. You have gone too far to recede. A negotiation, so nearly concluded,
cannot be broken off with any grace. The lawyers, you know, are hourly
expected; the preliminaries almost finally settled between Lord Ogleby and Mr.
Sterling; and Miss Sterling herself ready to receive you as a husband.


Sir John. Why the banns have been published, and nobody has forbidden them,
it is true. But you know either of the parties may change their minds even after
they enter the church.


Lovew. You think too lightly of this matter. To carry your addresses so far --
and then to desert her -- and for her sister too! -- It will be such an affront
to the family, that they can never put up with it.


Sir John. I don't think so: for as to my transferring my passion from her to
her sister, so much the better* -- for then, you know, I don't carry my
affections out of the family.


Lovew. Nay, but prithee be serious, and think better of it.


Sir John. I have thought better of it already, you see. Tell me honestly,
Lovewell! Can you blame me? Is there any comparison between them?


Lovew. As to that now -- why that -- that is just -- just as it may strike
different people. There are many admirers of Miss Sterling's vivacity.


Sir John. Vivacity! a medley of Cheapside pertness, and Whitechapel pride. --
No -- no -- if I do go so far into the city for a wedding-dinner, it shall be
upon turtle at least.


Lovew. But I see no probability of success; for granting that Mr. Sterling
would have consented to it at first, he cannot listen to it now. Why did not
you break this affair to the family before?


Sir John. Under such embarrassed circumstances as I have been, can you wonder
at my irresolution or perplexity? Nothing but despair, the fear of losing my
dear Fanny, could bring me to a declaration even now: and yet, I think I know
Mr. Sterling so well, that, strange as my proposal may appear, if I can make it
advantageous to him as a money-transaction, as I am sure I can, he will
certainly come into it.


Lovew. But even suppose he should, which I very much doubt, I don't think
Fanny herself would listen to your addresses.


Sir John. You are deceived a little in that particular.


Lovew. You Will find I am in the right.


Sir John. I have some little reason to think otherwise.


Lovew. You have not declared your passion to her already?


Sir John. Yes, I have.


Lovew. Indeed! -- And -- and -- and how did she receive it?


Sir John. I think it is not very easy for me to make my addresses to any
woman, without receiving some little encouragement.


Lovew. Encouragement! did she give you any encouragement?


Sir John. I don't know what you call encouragement -- but she blushed -- and
cried -- and desired me not to think of it any more: -- upon which I pressed her
hand -- kissed it -- swore she was an angel -- and I could see it tickled her
to the soul.


Lovew. And did she express no surprise at your declaration?


Sir John. Why, faith, to say the truth, she was a little surprised -- and she
got away from me too, before I could thoroughly explain myself. If I should not
meet with an opportunity of speaking to her, I must get you to deliver a letter
from me.


Lovew. I! -- a letter! -- I had rather have nothing --


Sir John. Nay, you promised me your assistance -- and I am sure you cannot
scruple to make yourself useful on such an occasion. -- You may, without
suspicion, acquaint her verbally of my determined affection for her, and that I
am resolved to ask her father's consent.


Lovew. As to that, I -- your commands, you know -- that is, if she -- Indeed,
Sir John, I think you are in the wrong.


Sir John. Well -- well -- that is my concern -- Ha! there she goes, by heaven!
along that walk yonder, do you see? I Will go to her immediately.


Lovew. You are too precipitate. Consider what you are doing.


Sir John. I would not lose this opportunity for the universe.


Lovew. Nay, pray don't go! Your violence and eagerness may overcome her
spirits. -- The shock will be too much for her. [detaining him.


Sir John. Nothing shall prevent me. -- Ha! now she turns into another walk. --
Let me go! [breaks from him.] I shall lose her. -- [going, turns back.] Be sure
now to keep out of the way! If you interrupt us, I shall never forgive you.
[Exit hastily.


Lovewell alone. 'Sdeath! I cannot bear this. In love with my wife! acquaint me
with his passion for her! make his addresses before my face! -- I shall break
out before my time. -- This was the meaning of Fanny's uneasiness. She could
not encourage him -- I am sure she could not. -- Ha! they are turning into the
walk, and coming this way. Shall I leave the place? -- Leave him to solicit my
wife! I cannot submit to it. -- They come nearer and nearer -- If I stay it will
look suspicious -- It may betray us, and incense him -- They are here -- I must
go -- I am the most unfortunate fellow in the world. [Exit.


Enter Fanny, and Sir John. Fanny. Leave me, Sir John, I beseech you leave me!
-- nay, why will you persist to follow me with idle solicitations, which are
an affront to my character, and an injury to your own honor?


Sir John. I know your delicacy, and tremble to offend it: but let the urgency
of the occasion be my excuse! Consider, Madam, that the future happiness of my
life depends on my present application to you! consider that this day must
determine my fate; and these are perhaps the only moments left me to incline
you to warrant my passion, and to entreat you not to oppose the proposals I
mean to open to your father.


Fanny. For shame, for shame, Sir John! Think of your previous engagements!
Think of your own situation, and think of mine! -- What have you discovered in
my conduct that might encourage you to so bold a declaration? I am shocked that
you should venture to say so much, and blush that I should even dare to give it
a hearing. -- Let me be gone!


Sir John. Nay, stay, Madam! but one moment! -- Your sensibility is too great.
-- Engagements! what engagements have even been pretended on either side than
those of family-convenience? I went on in the trammels of matrimonial
negotiation with a blind submission to your father and Lord Ogleby; but my
heart soon claimed a right to be consulted. It has devoted itself to you, and
obliges me to plead earnestly for the same tender interest in yours.


Fanny. Have a care, Sir John! do not mistake a depraved will for a virtuous
inclination. By these common pretenses of the heart, half of our sex are made
fools, and a greater part of yours despise them for it.


Sir John. Affection, you will allow, is involuntary. We cannot always direct
it to the object on which it should fix -- But when it is once inviolably
attached, inviolably as mine is to you, it often creates reciprocal affection.
-- When I last urged you on this subject, you heard me with more temper, and I
hoped with some compassion.


Fanny. You deceived yourself. If I forbore to exert a proper spirit, nay if I
did not even express the quickest resentment of your behavior, it was only in
consideration of that respect I wish to pay you, in honor to my sister: and be
assured, Sir, woman as I am, that my vanity could reap no pleasure from a
triumph, that must result from the blackest treachery to her. [going.


Sir John. One word, and I have done. [stopping her.] -- Your impatience and
anxiety, and the urgency of the occasion, oblige me to be brief and explicit
with you. -- I appeal therefore from your delicacy to your justice. -- Your
sister, I verily believe, neither entertains any real affection for me, or
tenderness for you. -- Your father, I am inclined to think, is not much
concerned by means of which of his daughters the families are united. -- Now as
they cannot, shall not be connected, otherwise than by my union with you, why
will you, from a false delicacy, oppose a measure so conducive to my happiness,
and, I hope, your own? -- I love you, most passionately and sincerely love you
-- and hope to propose terms agreeable to Mr. Sterling. -- If then you don't
absolutely loath, abhor, and scorn me -- if there is no other happier man --


Fanny. Hear me, Sir! hear my final determination. -- Were my father and sister
as insensible as you are pleased to represent them; -- were my heart for ever
to remain disengaged to any other -- I could not listen to your proposals. --
What! You on the very eve of a marriage with my sister; I living under the same
roof with her, bound not only by the laws of friendship and hospitality, but
even the ties of blood, to contribute to her happiness, -- and not to conspire
against her peace -- the peace of a whole family -- and that my own too! --
Away! away, Sir John! -- At such a time, and in such circumstances, your
addresses only inspire me with horror. -- Nay, you must detain me no longer. --
I will go.


Sir John. Do not leave me in absolute despair! -- Give me a glimpse of hope!
[falling on his knees.


Fanny. I cannot. Pray, Sir John! [struggling to go.


Sir John. Shall this hand be given to another? [kissing her hand.] No -- I
cannot endure it. -- My whole soul is yours, and the whole happiness of my life
is in your power.


Enter Miss Sterling. Fanny. Ha! my sister is here. Rise for shame, Sir John!


Sir John. Miss Sterling! [rising.


Miss Sterling. I beg pardon, Sir! -- You Will excuse me, Madam! -- I have broke in
upon you a little unopportunely, I believe -- But I did not mean to interrupt
you -- I only came, Sir, to let you know that breakfast waits, if you have
finished your morning's devotions.


Sir John. I am very sensible, Miss Sterling, that this may appear particular,
but --


Miss Sterling. Oh dear, Sir John, don't put yourself to the trouble of an
apology. The thing explains itself.


Sir John. It will soon, Madam! -- In the mean time I can only assure you of my
profound respect and esteem for you, and make no doubt of convincing Mr.
Sterling of the honor and integrity of my intentions. And -- and -- your
humble servant, Madam! [Exit in confusion.


Manent Fanny, and Miss Sterling. Miss Sterling. Respect? -- Insolence! -- Esteem?
-- Very fine truly! -- And you, Madam! my sweet, delicate, innocent,
sentimental sister! will you convince my papa too of the integrity of your
intentions?


Fanny. Do not upbraid me, my dear sister! Indeed, I don't deserve it. Believe
me, you cannot be more offended at his behavior than I am, and I am sure it
cannot make you half so miserable.


Miss Sterling. Make me miserable! You are mightily deceived, Madam! It gives me
no sort of uneasiness, I assure you. -- A base fellow! -- As for you, Miss! the
pretended softness of your disposition, your artful goodnature, never imposed
upon me. I always knew you to be fly, and envious, and deceitful.


Fanny. Indeed you wrong me.


Miss Sterling. Oh, you are all goodness, to be sure! -- Did not I find him on his
knees before you? Did not I see him kiss your sweet hand? Did not I hear his
protestations? Was not I witness of your dissembled modesty? -- No -- no, my
dear! don't imagine that you can make a fool of your elder sister so easily.


Fanny. Sir John, I own, is to blame; but I am above the thoughts of doing you
the least injury.


Miss Sterling. We shall try that, Madam! -- I hope, Miss, you will be able to give
a better account to my papa and my aunt -- for they shall both know of this
matter, I promise you. [Exit.


Fanny alone. How unhappy I am! my distresses multiply upon me. -- Mr. Lovewell
must now become acquainted with Sir John's behavior to me -- and in a manner
that may add to his uneasiness. -- My father, instead of being disposed by
fortunate circumstances to forgive any transgression, will be previously
incensed against me. -- My sister and my aunt will become irreconcilably my
enemies, and rejoice in my disgrace. -- Yet, at all events, I am determined on
a discovery. I dread it, and am resolved to hasten it. It is surrounded with
more horrors every instant, as it appears every instant more necessary. [Exit.


ACT III.
SCENE I. A hall.
Enter a servant leading in Sergeant Flower, and Counselors Traverse and
Trueman -- all booted. Servant. THIS way, if you please, gentlemen! my master
is at breakfast with the family at present -- but I Will let him know, and he
will wait on you immediately.


Flower. Mighty well, young man, mighty well.


Servant. Please to favor me with your names, gentlemen.


Flower. Let Mr. Sterling know, that Mr. Sergeant Flower, and two other
gentlemen of the bar, are come to wait on him according to his appointment.


Servant. I will, Sir. [going.


Flower. And harkee, young man! [servant returns.] Desire my servant -- Mr.
Sergeant Flower's servant -- to bring in my green and gold saddle-cloth and
pistols, and lay them down here in the hall with my portmanteau.


Servant. I will, Sir. [Exit.


Manet Lawyers. Flower. Well, gentlemen! the setting these marriage articles
falls conveniently enough, almost just on the eve of the circuits. -- Let me
see -- the Home, the Midland, and Western, -- ay, we can all cross the country
well enough to our several destinations. -- Traverse, when do you begin at
Hertford?


Traverse. The day after tomorrow.


Flower. That is commission-day with us at Warwick too. -- But my clerk has
retainers for every cause in the paper, so it will be time enough if I am there
the next morning. -- Besides, I have about half a dozen cases that have lain by
me ever since the spring assizes, and I must tack opinions to them before I see
my country-clients again -- so I will take the evening before me -- and then
currente calamo, as I say -- eh, Traverse!


Traverse. True, Mr. Sergeant -- and the easiest thing in the world too -- for
those country attorneys are such ignorant dogs, that in case of the devise of
an estate to A. and his heirs for ever, they will make a query, whether he takes
in fee or in tail.


Flower. Do you expect to have much to do on the Home circuit these assizes?


Traverse. Not much nisi prius business, but a good deal on the crown side, I
believe. -- The goals are brimfull -- and some of the felons in good
circumstances, and likely to be tolerable clients. -- Let me see! I am engaged
for three highway robberies, two murders, one forgery, and half a dozen
larcenies, at Kingston.


Flower. A pretty decent jail-delivery! -- Do you expect to bring off Darkin,
for the robbery on Putney-Common? Can you make out your alibi?


Traverse. Oh, no! the crown witnesses are sure to prove our identity. We shall
certainly be hanged: but that don't signify. -- But, Mr. Sergeant, have you
much to do? -- any remarkable cause on the Midland this circuit?


Flower. Nothing very remarkable, -- except two rapes, and Rider and Western at
Nottingham, for crim. con. -- but, on the whole, I believe a good deal of
business. -- Our associate tells me, there are above thirty venires for Warwick.


Traverse. Pray, Mr. Sergeant, are you concerned in Jones and Thomas at Lincoln?


Flower. I am -- for the plaintiff.


Traverse. And what do you think on it?


Flower. A nonsuit.


Traverse. I thought so.


Flower. Oh, no manner of doubt on it -- luce clarius -- we have no right in us
-- we have but one chance.


Traverse. What Is that?


Flower. Why, my Lord Chief does not go the circuit this time, and my brother
Puzzle being in the commission, the cause will come on before him.


Trueman. Ay, that may do, indeed, if you can but throw dust in the eyes of the
defendant's council.


Flower. True. -- Mr. Trueman, I think you are concerned for Lord Ogleby in
this affair? [to Trueman.


Trueman. I am, Sir -- I have the honor to be related to his Lordship, and
hold some courts for him in Somersetshire, -- go the Western circuit -- and
attend the sessions at Exeter, merely because his Lordship's interest and
property lie in that part of the kingdom.


Flower. Ha! -- and pray, Mr. Trueman, how long have you been called to the bar?


Trueman. About nine years and three quarters.


Flower. Ha! -- I don't know that I ever had the pleasure of seeing you before.
-- I wish you success, young gentleman!


Enter Sterling. Sterling. Oh, Mr. Sergeant Flower, I am glad to see you -- Your
servant, Mr. Sergeant! gentlemen, your servant! -- Well, are all matters
concluded? Has that snail-paced conveyancer, old Ferret of Gray's Inn, settled
the articles at last? Do you approve of what he has done? Will his tackle hold?
tight and strong? -- Eh, master Sergeant?


Flower. My friend Ferret's slow and sure, Sir -- But then, serius aut citius,
as we say, -- sooner or later, Mr. Sterling, he is sure to put his business out
of hand as he should do. -- My clerk has brought the writings, and all other
instruments along with him, and the settlement is, I believe, as good a
settlement as any settlement on the face of the earth!


Sterling. But that damned mortgage of 60,000l. -- There don't appear to be any
other encumbrances, I hope?


Traverse. I can answer for that, Sir -- and that will be cleared off
immediately on the payment of the first part of Miss Sterling's portion -- You
agree, on your part, to come down with 80,000l. --


Sterling. Down on the nail. -- Ay, ay, my money is ready tomorrow if he pleases
-- he shall have it in India-bonds, or notes, or how he chooses. -- Your lords,
and your dukes, and your people at the court-end of the town stick at payments
sometimes -- debts unpaid, no credit lost with them -- but no fear of us
substantial fellows -- eh, Mr. Sergeant! --


Flower. Sir John having last term, according to agreement, levied a fine, and
suffered a recovery, has thereby cut off the entail of the Ogleby estate for
the better effecting the purposes of the present intended marriage; on which
abovementioned Ogleby estate, a jointure of 2000l. per ann. is secured to your
eldest daughter, now Elizabeth Sterling, spinster, and the whole estate, after
the death of the aforesaid Earl, descends to the heirs male of Sir John Melvil
on the body of the aforesaid Elizabeth Sterling lawfully to be begotten.


Traverse. Very true -- and Sir John is to be put in immediate possession of as
much of his Lordship's Somersetshire estate, as lies in the manors of Hogmore
and Cranford, amounting to between two and three thousands per ann. and at the
death of Mr. Sterling, a further sum of seventy thousand --


Enter Sir John Melvil. Sterling. Ah, Sir John! Here we are -- hard at it --
paving the road to matrimony -- First the lawyers, then comes the doctor -- Let
us but dispatch the long-robe, we shall soon set Pudding-sleeves to work, I
warrant you.


Sir John. I am sorry to interrupt you, Sir -- but I hope that both you and
these gentlemen will excuse me -- having something very particular for your
private ear, I took the liberty of following you, and beg you will oblige me
with an audience immediately.


Sterling. Ay, with all my heart -- Gentlemen, Mr. Sergeant, you will excuse it --
Business must be done, you know. -- The writings will keep cold till tomorrow
morning.


Flower. I must be at Warwick, Mr. Sterling, the day after.


Sterling. Nay, nay, I shall not part with you tonight, gentlemen, I promise you --
My house is very full, but I have beds for you all, beds for your servants, and
stabling for all your horses. -- Will you take a turn in the garden, and view
some of my improvements before dinner? Or will you amuse yourselves on the
green, with a game of bowls and a cool tankard? -- My servants shall attend you
-- Do you choose any other refreshment? -- Call for what you please; -- do as
you please; -- make yourselves quite at home, I beg of you. -- Here, -- Thomas,
Harry, William, wait on these Gentlemen! -- [follows the lawyers out, bawling
and talking, and then returns to Sir John.] And now, Sir, I am entirely at your
service. -- What are your commands with me, Sir John?


Sir John. After having carried the negotiation between our families to so
great a length, after having assented so readily to all your proposals, as well
as received so many instances of your cheerful compliance with the demands made
on our part, I am extremely concerned, Mr. Sterling, to be the involuntary
cause of any uneasiness.


Sterling. Uneasiness! what uneasiness? -- Where business is transacted as it
ought to be, and the parties understand one another, there can be no
uneasiness. You agree, on such and such conditions to receive my daughter for a
wife; on the same conditions I agree to receive you as a son-in-law; and as to
all the rest, it follows of course, you know, as regularly as the payment of a
bill after acceptance.


Sir John. Pardon me, Sir; more uneasiness has arisen than you are aware of. I
am myself, at this instant, in a state of inexpressible embarrassment; Miss
Sterling, I know, is extremely disconcerted too; and unless you will oblige me
with the assistance of your friendship, I foresee the speedy progress of
discontent and animosity through the whole family.


Sterling. What the deuce is all this? I don't understand a single syllable.


Sir John. In one word then -- it will be absolutely impossible for me to
fulfill my engagements in regard to Miss Sterling.


Sterling. How, Sir John? Do you mean to put an affront upon my family? What!
refuse to --


Sir John. Be assured, Sir, that I neither mean to affront, nor forsake your
family. -- My only fear is, that you should desert me; for the whole happiness
of my life depends on my being connected with your family by the nearest and
tenderest ties in the world.


Sterling. Why, did not you tell me, but a moment ago, that it was absolutely
impossible for you to marry my daughter?


Sir John. True. -- But you have another daughter, Sir --


Sterling. Well?


Sir John. Who has obtained the most absolute dominion over my heart. I have
already declared my passion to her; nay, Miss Sterling herself is also apprized
of it, and if you will but give a sanction to my present addresses, the
uncommon merit of Miss Sterling will no doubt recommend her to a person of
equal, if not superior rank to myself, and our families may still be allied by
my union with Miss Fanny.


Sterling. Mighty fine, truly! Why, what the plague do you make of us, Sir John?
Do you come to market for my daughters, like servants at a statute-fair? Do you
think that I will suffer you, or any man in the world, to come into my house,
like the Grand Signior, and throw the handkerchief first to one, and then to
the other, just as he pleases? Do you think I drive a kind of African slave trade
with them? and --


Sir John. A moment's patience, Sir! Nothing but the excess of my passion for
Miss Fanny should have induced me to take any step that had the least
appearance of disrespect to any part of your family; and even now I am desirous
to atone for my transgression, by making the most adequate compensation that
lies in my power.


Sterling. Compensation! what compensation can you possibly make in such a case as
this, Sir John?


Sir John. Come, come, Mr. Sterling; I know you to be a man of sense, a man of
business, a man of the world. I Will deal frankly with you; and you shall see
that I do not desire a change of measures for my own gratification, without
endeavoring to make it advantageous to you.


Sterling. What advantage can your inconstancy be to me, Sir John?


Sir John. I Will tell you, Sir. -- You know that by the articles at present
subsisting between us, on the day of my marriage with Miss Sterling, you agree
to pay down the gross sum of eighty thousand pounds.


Sterling. Well!


Sir John. Now if you will but consent to my waving that marriage --


Sterling. I agree to your waving that marriage? Impossible, Sir John!


Sir John. I hope not, Sir; as on my part, I will agree to wave my right to
thirty thousand pounds of the fortune I was to receive with her.


Sterling. Thirty thousand, do you say?


Sir John. Yes, Sir; and accept of Miss Fanny with fifty thousand, instead of
fourscore.


Sterling. Fifty thousand -- [pausing.


Sir John. Instead of fourscore.


Sterling. Why, -- why, -- there may be something in that. -- Let me see; Fanny
with fifty thousand instead of Betsey with fourscore -- But how can this be,
Sir John? -- For you know I am to pay this money into the hands of my Lord
Ogleby; who, I believe -- between you and me, Sir John, -- is not overstocked
with ready money at present; and threescore thousand of it, you know, is to go
to pay off the present encumbrances on the estate, Sir John.


Sir John. That objection is easily obviated. -- Ten of the twenty thousand,
which would remain as a surplus of the fourscore, after paying off the
mortgage, was intended by his Lordship for my use, that we might set off with
some little eclat on our marriage; and the other ten for his own. -- Ten
thousand pounds therefore I shall be able to pay you immediately; and for the
remaining twenty thousand you shall have a mortgage on that part of the estate
which is to be made over to me, with whatever security you shall require for
the regular payment of the interest, 'till the principal is duly discharged.


Sterling. Why -- to do you justice, Sir John, there is something fair and open in
your proposal; and since I find you do not mean to put an affront upon the
family --


Sir John. Nothing was ever farther from my thoughts, Mr. Sterling. -- And
after all, the whole affair is nothing extraordinary -- such things happen
every day -- and as the world has only heard generally of a treaty between the
families, when this marriage takes place, nobody will be the wiser, if we have
but discretion enough to keep our own counsel.


Sterling. True, true; and since you only transfer from one girl to the other, it
is no more than transferring so much stock, you know.


Sir John. The very thing.


Sterling. Odso! I had quite forgot. We are reckoning without our host here. There
is another difficulty --


Sir John. You alarm me. What can that be?


Sterling. I cannot stir a step in this business without consulting my sister
Heidelberg. -- The family has very great expectations from her, and we must not
give her any offense.


Sir John. But if you come into this measure, surely she will be so kind as to
consent --


Sterling. I don't know that -- Betsey is her darling, and I cannot tell how far
she may resent any slight that seems to be offered to her favorite niece. --
However, I Will do the best I can for you. -- You shall go and break the matter
to her first, and by that time that I may suppose that your rhetoric has
prevailed on her to listen to reason, I will step in to reinforce your
arguments.


Sir John. I Will fly to her immediately: you promise me your assistance?


Sterling. I do.


Sir John. Ten thousand thanks for it! and now success attend me! [going.


Sterling. Harkee, Sir John!


Sir John returns. Sterling. Not a word of the thirty thousand to my sister, Sir
John.


Sir John. Oh, I am dumb, I am dumb, Sir. [going.


Sterling. You remember it is thirty thousand.


Sir John. To be sure I do.


Sterling. But Sir John! -- one thing more. [Sir John returns.] My Lord must know
nothing of this stroke of friendship between us.


Sir John. Not for the world. -- Let me alone! let me alone! [offering to go.


Sterling. [holding him.] -- And when every thing is agreed, we must give each
other a bond to be held fast to the bargain.


Sir John. To be sure. A bond by all means! a bond, or whatever you please.
[Exit hastily.


Sterling alone. I should have thought of more conditions -- he is in a humor
to give me every thing -- Why, what mere children are your fellows of quality;
that cry for a plaything one minute, and throw it by the next! as changeable as
the weather, and as uncertain as the stocks. -- Special fellows to drive a
bargain! and yet they are to take care of the interest of the nation truly! --
Here does this whirligig man of fashion offer to give up thirty thousand pounds
in hard money, with as much indifference as if it was a china orange. -- By
this mortgage, I shall have a hold on his Terrafirma, and if he wants more
money, as he certainly will, -- let him have children by my daughter or no, I
shall have his whole estate in a net for the benefit of my family. -- Well;
thus it is, that the children of citizens, who have acquired fortunes, prove
persons of fashion; and thus it is, that persons of fashion, who have ruined
their fortunes, reduce the next generation to cits. [Exit.


SCENE changes to another apartment.
Enter Mrs. Heidelberg, and Miss Sterling. Miss Sterling. This is your
gentle-looking, soft-speaking, sweet-smiling, affable Miss Fanny for you!


Mrs. Heidel. My Miss Fanny! I disclaim her. With all her arts she never could
insinuat herself into my good graces -- and yet she has a way with her, that
deceives man, woman, and child, except you and me, niece.


Miss Sterling. O ay; she wants nothing but a crook in her hand, and a lamb under
her arm, to be a perfect picture of innocence and simplicity.


Mrs. Heidel. Just as I was drawn at Amsterdam, when I went over to visit my
husband's relations.


Miss Sterling. And then she is so mighty good to servants -- pray, John, do this
-- pray, Tom, do that -- thank you, Jenny -- and then so humble to her
relations -- to be sure, Papa! -- as my Aunt pleases -- my Sister knows best --
But with all her demureness and humility she has no objection to be Lady
Melvil, it seems, nor to any wickedness that can make her so.


Mrs. Heidel. She Lady Melville? Compose yourself, Niece! I Will ladyship her
indeed: -- a little creepin, cantin -- She shall not be the better for a farden of
my money. But tell me, child, how does this intriguing with Sir John correspond
with her partiality to Lovewell? I don't see a concatunation here.


Miss Sterling. There I was deceived, Madam. I took all their whisperings and
stealing into corners to be the mere attraction of vulgar minds; but, behold!
their private meetings were not to contrive their own insipid happiness, but to
conspire against mine. -- But I know whence proceeds Mr. Lovewell's resentment
to me. I could not stoop to be familiar with my father's clerk, and so I have
lost his interest.


Mrs. Heidel. My spurrit to a T. -- My dear child! [kissing her.] -- Mr.
Heidelberg lost his election for member of parliament, because I would not
demean myself to be slobbered about by drunken shoemakers, beastly
cheesemongers, and greasy butchers and tallow-chandlers. However, Niece, I
cannot help diffuring a little in opinion from you in this matter. My experunce
and sagucity makes me still suspect, that there is something more between her
and that Lovewell, notwithstanding this affair of Sir John -- I had my eye upon
them the whole time of breakfast. -- Sir John, I observed, looked a little
confounded, indeed, though I knew nothing of what had passed in the garden. You
seemed to sit upon thorns too: but Fanny and Mr. Lovewell made quite
another-guess sort of a figur; and were as perfet a pictur of two distressed
lovers, as if it had been drawn by Raphael Angelo. -- As to Sir John and Fanny,
I want a matter of fact.


Miss Sterling. Matter of fact, Madam! Did not I come unexpectedly upon them? Was
not Sir John kneeling at her feet, and kissing her hand? Did not he look all
love, and she all confusion? Is not that matter of fact? And did not Sir John,
the moment that Papa was called out of the room to the lawyermen, get up from
breakfast, and follow him immediately? And I warrant you that by this time he
has made proposals to him to marry my sister -- Oh, that some other person, an
earl, or a duke, would make his addresses to me, that I might be revenged on
this monster!


Mrs. Heidel. Be cool, child! you shall be Lady Melvil, in spite of all their
caballins, if it costs me ten thousand pounds to turn the scale. Sir John may
apply to my brother, indeed; but I Will make them all know who governs in this
fammaly.


Miss Sterling. As I live, Madam, yonder comes Sir John. A base man! I cannot
endure the sight of him. I Will leave the room this instant. [disordered.


Mrs. Heidel. Poor thing! Well, retire to your own chamber, child; I Will give it
him, I warrant you; and by and by I Will come, and let you know all that has past
between us.


Miss Sterling. Pray do, Madam! -- [looking back.] -- A vile wretch! [Exit in a
rage.


Enter Sir John Melvil. Sir John. Your most obedient humble servant, Madam!
[bowing very respectfully.


Mrs. Heidel. Your servant, Sir John! [dropping a half-curtsy, and pouting.


Sir John. Miss Sterling's manner of quitting the room on my approach, and the
visible coolness of your behavior to me, Madam, convince me that she has
acquainted you with what past this morning.


Mrs. Heidel. I am very sorry, Sir John, to be made acquainted with any thing
that should induce me to change the opinon, which I could always wish to
entertain of a person of quallaty. [pouting.


Sir John. It has always been my ambition to merit the best opinion from Mrs.
Heidelberg; and when she comes to weigh all circumstances, I flatter myself --


Mrs. Heidel. You do flatter yourself, if you imagine that I can approve of
your behavior to my niece, Sir John. -- And give me leave to tell you, Sir
John, that you have been drawn into an action much beneath you, Sir John; and
that I look upon every injury offered to Miss Betty Sterling, as an affront to
myself, Sir John. [warmly.


Sir John. I would not offend you for the world, Madam! but when I am
influenced by a partiality for another, however ill-founded, I hope your
discernment and good sense will think it rather a point of honor to renounce
engagements, which I could not fulfill so strictly as I ought; and that you will
excuse the change in my inclinations, since the new object, as well as the
first, has the honor of being your niece, Madam.


Mrs. Heidel. I disclaim her as a niece, Sir John; Miss Sterling disclaims her
as a sister, and the whole fammaly must disclaim her, for her monstrus baseness
and treachery.


Sir John. Indeed she has been guilty of none, Madam. Her hand and heart are, I
am sure, entirely at the disposal of yourself, and Mr. Sterling.

Enter Sterling behind. And if you should not oppose my inclinations, I am sure
of Mr. Sterling's consent, Madam.


Mrs. Heidel. Indeed!


Sir John. Quite certain, Madam.


Sterling. [behind.] So! they seem to be coming to terms already. I may venture to
make my appearance.


Mrs. Heidel. To marry Fanny? [ Sterling advances by degrees.


Sir John. Yes, Madam.


Mrs. Heidel. My brother has given his consent, you say?


Sir John. In the most ample manner, with no other restriction than the failure
of your concurrence, Madam. -- [sees Sterling.] -- Oh, here is Mr. Sterling, who
will confirm what I have told you.


Mrs. Heidel. What! have you consented to give up your own daughter in this
manner, brother?


Sterling. Give her up! no, not give her up, sister; only in case that you --
Zounds, I am afraid you have said too much, Sir John. [apart to Sir John.


Mrs. Heidel. Yes, yes. I see now that it is true enough what my niece told me.
You are all plottin and caballin against her. -- Pray, does Lord Ogleby know of
this affair?


Sir John. I have not yet made him acquainted with it, Madam.


Mrs. Heidel. No, I warrant you. I thought so. -- And so his Lordship and
myself truly, are not to be consulted 'till the last.


Sterling. What! did not you consult my Lord? Oh, fie for shame, Sir John!


Sir John. Nay, but Mr. Sterling --


Mrs. Heidel. We, who are the persons of most consequence and experunce in the
two fammalies, are to know nothing of the matter, 'till the whole is as good as
concluded upon. But his Lordship, I am sure, will have more generosaty than to
countenance such a perceeding -- And I could not have expected such behavour
from a person of your quallaty, Sir John. -- And as for you, brother --


Sterling. Nay, nay, but hear me, sister!


Mrs. Heidel. I am perfetly ashamed of you -- Have you no spurrit? no more
concern for the honor of our fammaly than to consent --


Sterling. Consent? -- I consent! -- As I hope for mercy, I never gave my consent.
Did I consent, Sir John?


Sir John. Not absolutely, without Mrs. Heidelberg's concurrence. But in case
of her approbation --


Sterling. Ay, I grant you, if my sister approved. -- But that is quite another
thing, you know. -- [to Mrs. Heidelberg.


Mrs. Heidel. Your sister approve, indeed! -- I thought you know her better,
brother Sterling! -- What! approve of having your eldest daughter returned upon
your hands, and exchanged for the younger? -- I am surprised how you could
listen to such a scandalus proposal.


Sterling. I tell you, I never did listen to it. -- Did not I say that I would be
governed entirely by my sister, Sir John? -- And unless she agreed to your
marrying Fanny --


Mrs. Heidel. I agree to his marrying Fanny? abominable! The man is absolutely
out of his senses. -- Cannot that wise head of yours foresee the consequence of
all this, brother Sterling? Will Sir John take Fanny without a fortune? No. --
After you have settled the largest part of your property on your youngest
daughter, can there be an equal portion left for the eldest? No. -- Does not
this overturn the whole systum of the fammaly? Yes, yes, yes. You know I was
always for my niece Betsey's marrying a person of the very first quallaty. That
was my maxum. And, therefore, much the largest settlement was of course to be
made upon her. -- As for Fanny, if she could, with a fortune of twenty or
thirty thousand pounds, get a knight, or a member of parliament, or a rich
common-council-man for a husband, I thought it might do very well.


Sir John. But if a better match should offer itself, why should not it be
accepted, Madam?


Mrs. Heidel. What! at the expense of her elder sister! Oh fie, Sir John! --
How could you bear to hear of such an indignaty, brother Sterling?


Sterling. I! nay, I shall not hear of it, I promise you. -- I cannot hear of it
indeed, Sir John.


Mrs. Heidel. But you have heard of it, brother Sterling. You know you have;
and sent Sir John to propose it to me. But if you can give up your daughter, I
shall not forsake my niece, I assure you. Ah! if my poor dear Mr. Heidelberg, and
our sweet babes had been alive, he would not have behaved so.


Sterling. Did I, Sir John? nay speak! -- Bring me off, or we are ruined. [apart
to Sir John.


Sir John. Why, to be sure, to speak the truth --


Mrs. Heidel. To speak the truth, I Am ashamed of you both. But have a care what
you are about, brother! have a care, I say. The lawyers are in the house, I
hear; and if every thing is not settled to my liking, I Will have nothing more to
say to you, if I live these hundred years. -- I Will go over to Holland, and
settle with Mr. Vanderspracken, my poor husband's first cousin; and my own
fammaly shall never be the better for a farden of my money, I promise you.
[Exit.


Manent Sir John, and Sterling. Sterling. I thought so. I knew she never would
agree to it.


Sir John. 'Sdeath, how unfortunate! What can we do, Mr. Sterling?


Sterling. Nothing.


Sir John. What! must our agreement break off, the moment it is made then?


Sterling. It cannot be helped, Sir John. The family, as I told you before, have
great expectations from my sister; and if this matter proceeds, you hear
yourself that she threatens to leave us. -- My brother Heidelberg was a warm
man; a very warm man; and died worth a Plumb at least; a Plumb! ay, I warrant
you, he died worth a Plumb and a half.


Sir John. Well; but if I --


Sterling. And then, my sister has three or four very good mortgages, a deal of
money in the three percents. and old South Sea annuities, besides large
concerns in the Dutch and French funds. -- The greatest part of all this she
means to leave to our family.


Sir John. I can only say, Sir --


Sterling. Why, your offer of the difference of thirty thousand, was very fair and
handsome to be sure, Sir John.


Sir John. Nay, but I am even willing to --


Sterling. Ay, but if I was to accept it against her will, I might lose above a
hundred thousand; so, you see, the balance is against you, Sir John.


Sir John. But is there no way, do you think, of prevailing on Mrs. Heidelberg
to grant her consent?


Sterling. I am afraid not. -- However, when her passion is a little abated -- for
she is very passionate -- you may try what can be done: but you must not use my
name any more, Sir John.


Sir John. Suppose I was to prevail on Lord Ogleby to apply to her, do you
think that would have any influence over her?


Sterling. I think he would be more likely to persuade her to it, than any other
person in the family. She has a great respect for Lord Ogleby. She loves a lord.


Sir John. I Will apply to him this very day. -- And if he should prevail on Mrs.
Heidelberg, I may depend on your friendship, Mr. Sterling?


Sterling. Ay, ay, I shall be glad to oblige you, when it is in my power; but as
the account stands now, you see it is not upon the figures. And so your
servant, Sir John. [Exit.


Sir John Melvil alone. What a situation am I in! -- Breaking off with her whom
I was bound by treaty to marry; rejected by the object of my affections; and
embroiled with this turbulent woman, who governs the whole family. -- And yet
opposition, instead of smothering, increases my inclination. I must have her.
I Will apply immediately to Lord Ogleby; and if he can but bring over the aunt to
our party, her influence will overcome the scruples and delicacy of my dear
Fanny, and I shall be the happiest of mankind. [Exit.


ACT IV.
SCENE I. A room.
Enter Sterling, Mrs. Heidelberg, and Miss Sterling. Sterling. WHAT! will you send
Fanny to town, sister?


Mrs. Heidel. Tomorrow morning. I Have given orders about it already.


Sterling. Indeed?


Mrs. Heidel. Positively.


Sterling. But consider, sister, at such a time as this, what an odd appearance it
will have.


Mrs. Heidel. Not half so odd, as her behavior, brother. -- This time was
intended for happiness, and I Will keep no incendaries here to destroy it. I
insist on her going off tomorrow morning.


Sterling. I Am afraid this is all your doing, Betsey.


Miss Sterling. No indeed, Papa. My aunt knows that it is not. -- For all Fanny's
baseness to me, I am sure I would not do, or say any thing to hurt her with you
or my aunt for the world.


Mrs. Heidel. Hold your tongue, Betsey! -- I will have my way. -- When she is
packed off, every thing will go on as it should do. -- Since they are at their
intrigues, I Will let them see that we can act with vigur on our part; and the
sending her out of the way shall be the purlimunary step to all the rest of my
perceedings.


Sterling. Well, but sister --


Mrs. Heidel. It does not signify talking, brother Sterling, for I Am resolved
to be rid of her, and I will. -- Come along, child! [to Miss Sterling] -- The
postshay shall be at the door by six o'clock in the morning; and if Miss Fanny
does not get into it, why I will, and so there is an end of the matter. [bounces
out with Miss Sterling.


Mrs. Heidelberg returns. Mrs. Heidel. One word more, brother Sterling! -- I
expect that you will take your eldest daughter in your hand, and make a formal
complaint to Lord Ogleby of Sir John Melvil's behavior. -- Do this, brother;
show a proper regard for the honor of your fammaly yourself, and I shall throw
in my mite to the raising of it. If not -- but now you know my mind. So act as
you please, and take the consequences. [Exit.


Sterling alone. The devil's in the woman for tyranny -- mothers, wives,
mistresses, or sisters, they always will govern us. -- As to my sister
Heidelberg, she knows the strength of her purse, and domineers upon the credit
of it. -- "I will do this" -- and "you shall do that" -- and "you must do
the other, or else the fammaly shall not have a farden of" -- [mimicking.] -- So
absolute with her money! -- but to say the truth, nothing but money can make us
absolute, and so we must even make the best of her.


SCENE changes to the garden.
Enter Lord Ogleby and Canton. Lord Ogle. What! Mademoiselle Fanny to be sent
away! -- Why? -- Wherefore? -- What Is the meaning of all this?


Cant. Je ne scais pas. -- I know noting of it.


Lord Ogle. It cannot be; it shall not be. I protest against the measure. She Is a
fine girl, and I had much rather that the rest of the family were annihilated
than that she should leave us. -- Her vulgar father, that is the very abstract
of 'Change-Alley -- the aunt, that is always endeavoring to be a fine lady --
and the pert sister, for ever showing that she is one, are horrid company
indeed, and without her would be intolerable. Ah, la petite Fanchon! she is the
thing. Is n't she, Cant?


Cant. Dear is very good sympatie enter vous, and dat young lady, mi Lor.


Lord Ogle. I Will not be left among these Goths and Vandals, your Sterlings,
your Heidelbergs, and Devilbergs -- If the goes, I Will positively go too.


Cant. In de same post-chay, mi Lor? You have no object to dat I believe, nor
Mademoiselle neider too -- ha, ha, ha.


Lord Ogle. Prithee hold thy foolish tongue, Cant. Does thy Swiss stupidity
imagine that I can see and talk with a fine girl without desires? -- My eyes
are involuntarily attracted by beautiful objects -- I fly as naturally to a
fine girl --


Cant. As de fine girl to you, my Lor, ha, ha, ha; you fly togedre like un pair
de pigeons. --


Lord Ogle. Like un pair de pigeons -- [mocks him.] -- Vousetes un sot, Mons.
Canton -- Thou art always dreaming of my intrigues, and never see me badiner,
but you suspect mischief, you old fool, you.


Cant. I am fool, I confess, but not always fool in dat, my Lor, he, he, he.


Lord Ogle. He, he, he. -- Thou art incorrigible, but thy absurdities amuse one
-- Thou art like my rappee here, [takes out his box.] a most ridiculous
superfluity, but a pinch of thee now and then is a most delicious treat.


Cant. You do me great honeur, my Lor.


Lord Ogle. It Is fact, upon my Thou art properly my cephalic snuff, and art no
bad medicine against megrims, vertigoes, and profound thinking -- ha, ha, ha.


Cant. Your flattery, my Lor, vil make me too prode.


Lord Ogle. The girl has some little partiality for me, to be sure: but
prithee, Cant, is not that Miss Fanny yonder?


Cant. [looking with a glass.] En verite, it is she, my Lor -- it is one of de
pigeons, -- de pigeons d'amour.


Lord Ogle. Don't be ridiculous, you old monkey. [smiling.


Cant. I am monkee, I am ole, but I have eye, I have ear, and a little
understand, now and den. --


Lord Ogle. Taisez vous beat!


Cant. Elle vous attend, my Lor. -- She vil make a love to you.


Lord Ogle. Will she? Have at her then! A fine girl cannot oblige me more. --
Egad, I find myself a little enjouee -- come along, Cant! she is but in the
next walk -- but there is such a deal of this damned crinkum-crankum, as
Sterling calls it, that one sees people for half an hour before one can get to
them -- Allons, Mons. Canton, allons donc!

[Exeunt singing in French.
Another part of the garden. Lovewell, and Fanny. Lovew. My dear Fanny, I
cannot bear your distress; it overcomes all my resolutions, and I am prepared
for the discovery.


Fanny. But how can it be effected before my departure?


Lovew. I Will tell you. -- Lord Ogleby seems to entertain a visible partiality
for you; and notwithstanding the peculiarities of his behavior, I am sure that
he is humane at the bottom. He is vain to an excess; but withal extremely
good-natured, and would do any thing to recommend himself to a lady. -- Do you
open the whole affair of our marriage to him immediately. It will come with
more irresistible persuasion from you than from myself; and I doubt not but
you will gain his friendship and protection at once. -- His influence and
authority will put an end to Sir John's solicitations, remove your aunt's and
sister's unkindness and suspicions, and, I hope, reconcile your father and the
whole family to our marriage.


Fanny. Heaven grant it! Where is my Lord?


Lovew. I have heard him and Canton since dinner singing French songs under the
great walnut-tree by the parlour door. If you meet with him in the garden, you
may disclose the whole immediately.


Fanny. Dreadful as the task is, I Will do it. -- Any thing is better than this
continual anxiety.


Lovew. By that time the discovery is made, I will appear to second you. -- Ha!
here comes my Lord. -- Now, my dear Fanny, summon up all your spirits, plead
our cause powerfully, and be sure of success. -- [going.


Fanny. Ah, don't leave me!


Lovew. Nay, you must let me.


Fanny. Well; since it must be so, I Will obey you, if I have the power. Oh
Lovewell!


Lovew. Consider, our situation is very critical. Tomorrow morning is fixed for
your departure, and if we lose this opportunity, we may wish in vain for
another. -- He approaches -- I must retire. -- Speak, my dear Fanny, speak, and
make us happy! [Exit.


Fanny alone. Good heaven, what a situation am I in! what shall I do? what
shall I say to him? I am all confusion.


Enter Lord Ogleby, and Canton. Lord Ogle. To see so much beauty so solitary,
Madam, is a satire upon mankind, and it is fortunate that one man has broke in
upon your reverie for the credit of our sex. -- I say one, Madam, for poor
Canton here, from age and infirmities, stands for nothing.


Cant. Noting at all, inteed.


Fanny. Your Lordship does me great honor. -- I had a favor to request, my
Lord!


Lord Ogle. A favor, Madam! -- To be honored with your commands, is an
inexpressible favor done to me, Madam.


Fanny. If your Lordship could indulge me with the honor of a moment's -- What
is the matter with me? [aside.


Lord Ogle. The girl's confused -- he! -- here is something in the wind faith --
I Will have a tete-a-tete with her -- allez vous en! [to Canton.


Cant. I go -- ah, pauvre Mademoiselle! my Lor, have pity upon de poor pigeone!


Lord Ogle. I Will knock you down Cant, if you're impertinent. [smiling.


Cant. Den I mus avay -- [shuffles along.] -- You are mosh please, for all dat.
[Aside, and exit.


Fanny. I shall sink with apprehension. [aside.


Lord Ogle. What a sweet girl! -- she is a civilized being, and atones for the
barbarism of the rest of the family.


Fanny. My Lord! I -- [She curtseys, and blushes.


Lord Ogle. [addressing her.] I look upon it, Madam, to be one of the luckiest
circumstances of my life, that I have this moment the honor of receiving your
commands, and the satisfaction of confirming with my tongue, what my eyes
perhaps have but too weakly expressed -- that I am literally -- the humblest of
your servants.


Fanny. I think myself greatly honored, by your Lordship's partiality to me;
but it distresses me, that I am obliged in my present situation to apply to it
for protection.


Lord Ogle. I am happy in your distress, Madam, because it gives me an
opportunity to show my (...). Beauty to me, is a religion, in which I was born
and bred a bigot, and would die a martyr. -- I Am in tolerable spirits, faith!
[aside.


Fanny. There is not perhaps at this moment a more distressed creature than
myself. Affection, duty, hope, despair, and a thousand different sentiments,
are struggling in my bosom; and even the presence of your Lordship, to whom I
have flown for protection, adds to my preplexity.


L. Ogle. Does it, Madam? -- Venus forbid! -- My old fault; the devil's in me,
I think, for perplexing young women. [aside and smiling.] Take courage, Madam!
dear Miss Fanny, explain. -- You have a powerful advocate in my breast, I
assure you -- my heart, Madam -- I am attached to you by all the laws of
sympathy, and delicacy. -- By my honor, I am.


Fanny. Then I will venture to unburthen my mind. -- Sir John Melvil, my Lord,
by the most misplaced, and mistimed declaration of affection for me, has made
me the unhappiest of women.


L. Ogle. How, Madam! Has Sir John made his addresses to you?


Fanny. He has, my Lord, in the strongest terms. But I hope it is needless to
say, that my duty to my father, love to my sister, and regard to the whole
family, as well as the great respect I entertain for your Lordship,
[curtseying] made me shudder at his addresses.


L. Ogle. Charming girl! -- Proceed, my dear Miss Fanny, proceed!


Fanny. In a moment -- give me leave, my Lord! -- But if what I have to
disclose should be received with anger or displeasure --


L. Ogle. Impossible, by all the tender powers! -- Speak, I beseech you, or I
shall divine the cause before you utter it.


Fanny. Then, my Lord, Sir John's addresses are not only shocking to me in
themselves, but are more particularly disagreeable to me at this time, as -- as
-- [hesitating.


L. Ogle. As what, Madam?


Fanny. As -- pardon my confusion -- I am entirely devoted to another.


L. Ogle. If this is not plain, the devil's in it -- [aside.] But tell me, my
dear Miss Fanny, for I must know; tell me the how, the when, and the where --
Tell me --


Enter Canton hastily. Cant. My Lor, my Lor, my Lor! --


L. Ogle. Damn your Swiss impertinence! how durst you interrupt me in the most
critical melting moment that ever love and beauty honored me with?


Cant. I demand pardonne, my Lor! Sir John Melvil, my Lor, sent me to beg you
to do him the honor to speak a little to your Lorship.


L. Ogle. I Am not at leisure -- I Am busy -- Get away, you stupid old dog, you
Swiss rascal, or I Will --


Cant. Fort bien, my Lor. -- [ Cant. goes out tipto^.


L. Ogle. By the laws of gallantry, Madam, this interruption should be death;
but as no punishment ought to disturb the triumph of the softer passions, the
criminal is pardoned and dismissed -- Let us return, Madam, to the highest
luxury of exalted minds -- a declaration of love from the lips of beauty.


Fanny. The entrance of a third person has a little relieved me, but I cannot
go through with it -- and yet I must open my heart with a discovery, or it will
break with its burden.


L. Ogle. What passion in her eyes! I am alarmed to agitation. [aside.] -- I
presume, Madam, (and as you have flattered me, by making me a party concerned,
I hope you will excuse the presumption) that --


Fanny. Do you excuse my making you a party concerned, my Lord, and let me
interest your heart in my behalf, as my future happiness or misery in a great
measure depend --


L. Ogle. Upon me, Madam?


Fanny. Upon you, my Lord. [sighs.


L. Ogle. There Is no standing this: I have caught the infection -- her
tenderness dissolves me. [sighs.


Fanny. And should you too severely judge of a rash action which passion
prompted, and modesty has long concealed --


L. Ogle. [taking her hand.] Thou amiable creature -- command my heart, for it
is vanquished -- Speak but thy virtuous wishes, and enjoy them.


Fanny. I cannot, my Lord -- indeed, I cannot -- Mr. Lovewell must tell you my
distresses -- and when you know them -- pity and protect me! -- [Exit, in tears.


Lord Ogleby alone. How the devil could I bring her to this? It is too much --
too much -- I cannot bear it -- I must give way to this amiable weakness --
[wipes his eyes.] My heart overflows with sympathy, and I feel every tenderness
I have inspired -- [stifles the tear.] How blind have I been to the desolation
I have made! -- How could I possibly imagine that a little partial attention
and tender civilities to this young creature should have gathered to this burst
of passion! Can I be a man and withstand it? No -- I Will sacrifice the whole sex
to her. -- But here comes the father, quite apropos. I Will open the matter
immediately, settle the business with him, and take the sweet girl down to
Ogleby-house tomorrow morning -- But what the devil! Miss Sterling too! What
mischief's in the wind now?


Enter Sterling and Miss Sterling. Sterling. My Lord, your servant! I am attending
my daughter here upon rather a disagreeable affair. Speak to his Lordship,
Betsey!


Lord Ogle. Your eyes, Miss Sterling -- for I always read the eyes of a young
lady -- betray some little emotion -- What are your commands, Madam?


Miss Sterling. I have but too much cause for my emotion, my Lord!


Lord Ogle. I cannot commend my kinsman's behavior, Madam. He has behaved like
a false knight, I must confess. I have heard of his apostasy. Miss Fanny has
informed me of it.


Miss Sterling. Miss Fanny's baseness has been the cause of Sir John's inconstancy.


Lord Ogle. Nay, now, my dear Miss Sterling, your passion transports you too
far. Sir John may have entertained a passion for Miss Fanny, but believe me, my
dear Miss Sterling, believe me, Miss Fanny has no passion for Sir John. She has
a passion, indeed, a most tender passion. She has opened her whole soul to me,
and I know where her affections are placed. [conceitedly.


Miss Sterling. Not upon Mr. Lovewell, my Lord; for I have great reason to think
that her seeming attachment to him, is, by his consent, made use of as a blind
to cover her designs upon Sir John.


Lord Ogle. Lovewell! No, poor lad! She does not. think of him. [smiling.


Miss Sterling. Have a care, my Lord, that both the families are not made the
dupes of Sir John's artifice and my sister's dissimulation! You don't know her
-- indeed, my Lord, you don't know her -- a base, insinuating, persidious! --
It is too much -- She has been beforehand with me, I perceive. Such unnatural
behavior to me! -- But since I see I can have no redress, I am resolved that
some way or other I will have revenge. [Exit.


Sterling. This is foolish work, my Lord*


Lord Ogle. I have too much sensibility to bear the tears of beauty.


Sterling. It is touching indeed, my Lord -- and very moving for a father.


Lord Ogle. To be sure, Sir! -- You must be distressed beyond measure! --
Wherefore, to divert your too exquisite feelings, suppose we change the
subject, and proceed to business.


Sterling. With all my heart, my Lord!


Lord Ogle. You see, Mr. Sterling, we can make no union in our families by the
proposed marriage.


Sterling. And very sorry I am to see it, my Lord.


Lord Ogle. Have you set your heart upon being allied to our house, Mr.
Sterling?


Sterling. It Is my only wish, at present, my omnium, as I may call it.


Lord Ogle. Your wishes shall be fulfilled.


Sterling. Shall they, my Lord! -- but how -- how?


Lord Ogle. I Will marry in your family.


Sterling. What! my sister Heidelberg?


Lord Ogle. You throw me into a cold sweat, Mr. Sterling. No, not your sister
-- but your daughter.


Sterling. My daughter!


Lord Ogle. Fanny! -- now the murder's out!


Sterling. What you, my Lord? --


Lord Ogle. Yes -- I, I, Mr. Sterling!


Sterling. No, no, my Lord -- that is too much. [smiling.


Lord Ogle. Too much? -- I don't comprehend you.


Sterling. What, you, my Lord, marry my Fanny! -- Bless me, what will the folks
say?


Lord Ogle. Why, what will they say?


Sterling. That you're a bold man, my Lord -- that is all.


Lord Ogle. Mr. Sterling, this may be city wit for ought I know -- Do you court
my alliance?


Sterling. To be sure, my Lord.


Lord Ogle. Then I Will explain. -- My nephew will not marry your eldest daughter --
nor I neither -- Your youngest daughter will not marry him -- I will marry your
youngest daughter --


Sterling. What! with a younger daughter's fortune, my Lord?


Lord Ogle. With any fortune, or no fortune at all, Sir. Love is the idol of my
heart, and the demon interest sinks before him. So, Sir, as I said before, I
will marry your youngest daughter; your youngest daughter will marry me. --


Sterling. Who told you so, my Lord?


Lord Ogle. Her own sweet self, Sir.


Sterling. Indeed?


Lord Ogle. Yes, Sir: our affection is mutual; your advantage double and treble
-- your daughter will be a Countess directly -- I shall be the happiest of
beings -- and you will be father to an Earl instead of a Baronet.


Sterling. But what will my sister say? -- and my daughter?


Lord Ogle. I Will manage that matter -- nay, if they will not consent, I Will run
away with your daughter in spite of you.


Sterling. Well said, my Lord! -- your spirit's good -- I wish you had my
constitution! -- but if you will venture, I have no objection, if my sister has
none.


Lord Ogle. I Will answer for your sister, Sir. Apropos! the lawyers are in the
house -- I Will have articles drawn, and the whole affair concluded tomorrow
morning.


Sterling. Very well: and I Will dispatch Lovewell to London immediately for some
fresh papers I shall want, and I shall leave you to manage matters with my
sister. You must excuse me, my Lord, but I cannot help laughing at the match --
He! he! he! what will the folks say? [Exit.


Lord Ogle. What a fellow am I going to make a father of? -- He has no more
feeling than the post in his warehouse -- But Fanny's virtues tune me to
rapture again, and I will not think of the rest of the family.


Enter Lovewell hastily. Lovew. I beg your Lordship's pardon, my Lord; are you
alone, my Lord?


Lord Ogle. No, my Lord, I am not alone! I am in company, the best company.


Lovew. My Lord!


Lord Ogle. I never was in such exquisite enchanting company since my heart
first conceived, or my senses tasted pleasure.


Lovew. Where are they, my Lord? [looking about.


Lord Ogle. In my mind, Sir.


Lovew. What company have you there, my Lord? [smiling.


Lord Ogle. My own ideas, Sir, which so crowd upon my imagination, and kindle
it to such a delirium of ecstasy, that wit, wine, music, poetry, all combined,
and each perfection, are but mere mortal shadows of my felicity.


Lovew. I see that your Lordship is happy, and I rejoice at it.


Lord Ogle. You shall rejoice at it, Sir; my felicity shall not selfishly be
confined, but shall spread its influence to the whole circle of my friends. I
need not say, Lovewell, that you shall have your share of it.


Lovew. Shall I, my Lord? -- then I understand you -- you have heard -- Miss
Fanny has informed you --


Lord Ogle. She has -- I have heard, and she shall be happy -- it is determined.


Lovew. Then I have reached the summit of my wishes -- And will your Lordship
pardon the folly?


Lord Ogle. O yes, poor creature, how could she help it? -- 'Twas unavoidable
-- Fate and necessity.


Lovew. It was indeed, my Lord -- Your kindness distracts me.


Lord Ogle. And so it did the poor girl, faith.


Lovew. She trembled to disclose the secret, and declare her affections?


Lord Ogle. The world, I believe, will not think her affections ill placed.


Lovew. -- [bowing.] -- You are too good, my Lord. -- And do you really excuse
the rashness of the action?


Lord Ogle. From my very soul, Lovewell.


Lovew. Your generosity overpowers me. -- [bowing.] -- I was afraid of her
meeting with a cold reception.


Lord Ogle. More fool you then.
Who pleads her cause with never-failing beauty,
Here finds a full redress. [strikes his breast.
She Is a fine girl, Lovewell.


Lovew. Her beauty, my Lord, is her least merit. She has an understanding --


Lord Ogle. Her choice convinces me of that.


Lovew. -- [bowing.] -- That Is your Lordship's goodness. Her choice was a
disinterested one.


Lord Ogle. No -- no -- not altogether -- it began with interest, and ended in
passion.


Lovew. Indeed, my Lord, if you were acquainted with her goodness of heart, and
generosity of mind, as well as you are with the inferior beauties of her face
and person --


Lord Ogle. I am so perfectly convinced of their existence, and so totally of
your mind touching every amiable particular of that sweet girl, that were it
not for the cold unfeeling impediments of the law, I would marry her tomorrow
morning.


Lovew. My Lord!


Lord Ogle. I would, by all that is honorable in man, and amiable in woman.


Lovew. Marry her! -- Who do you mean, my Lord?


Lord Ogle. Miss Fanny Sterling, that is -- the Countess of Ogleby that shall
be.


Lovew. I am astonished.


Lord Ogle. Why, could you expect less from me?


Lovew. I did not expect this, my Lord.


Lord Ogle. Trade and accounts have destroyed your feeling.


Lovew. No, indeed, my Lord. [sighs.


Lord Ogle. The moment that love and pity entered my breast, I was resolved to
plunge into matrimony, and shorten the girl's tortures -- I never do any thing
by halves; do I, Lovewell?


Lovew. No, indeed, my Lord -- [sighs.] -- What an accident!


Lord Ogle. What Is the matter, Lovewell? thou seem to have lost thy
faculties. Why don't you wish me joy, man?


Lovew. O, I do, my Lord. [sighs.


Lord Ogle. She said, that you would explain what she had not power to utter --
but I wanted no interpreter for the language of love.


Lovew. But has your Lordship considered the consequences of your resolution?


Lord Ogle. No, Sir; I am above consideration, when my desires are kindled.


Lovew. But consider the consequences, my Lord, to your nephew, Sir John.


Lord Ogle. Sir John has considered no consequences himself, Mr. Lovewell.


Lovew. Mr. Sterling, my Lord, will certainly refuse his daughter to Sir John.


Lord Ogle. Sir John has already refused Mr. Sterling's daughter.


Lovew. But what will become of Miss Sterling, my Lord?


Lord Ogle. What Is that to you? -- You may have her, if you will. -- I depend
upon Mr. Sterling's cityphilosophy, to be reconciled to Lord Ogleby's being his
son-in-law, instead of Sir John Melvil, Baronet. Don't you think that your
master may be brought to that, without having recourse to his calculations? Eh,
Lovewell!


Lovew. But, my Lord, that is not the question.


Lord Ogle. Whatever is the question, I Will tell you my answer. -- I am in love
with a fine girl, whom I resolve to marry.

Enter Sir John Melvil. What news with you, Sir John? -- You look all hurry and
impatience -- like a messenger after a battle.


Sir John. After a battle, indeed, my Lord. -- I have this day had a severe
engagement, and wanting your Lordship as an auxiliary, I have at last mustered
up resolution to declare, what my duty to you and to myself have demanded from
me some time.


Lord Ogle. To the business then, and be as concise as possible; for I am upon
the wing -- eh, Lovewell? [he smiles, and Lovewell bows.


Sir John. I find it is in vain, my Lord, to struggle against the force of
inclination.


Lord Ogle. Very true, Nephew -- I am your witness, and will second the motion
-- shall not I, Lovewell? [smiles, and Lovewell bows.


Sir John. Your Lordship's generosity encourages me to tell you -- that I
cannot marry Miss Sterling.


Lord Ogle. I am not at all surpised at it -- she is a bitter potion, that is
the truth of it; but as you were to swallow it, and not I, it was your
business, and not mine -- any thing more?


Sir John. But this, my Lord -- that I may be permitted to make my addresses to
the other sister.


Lord Ogle. O yes -- by all means -- have you any hopes there, Nephew? -- Do
you think he will succeed, Lovewell? [smiles, and winks at Lovewell.


Lovew. I think not, my Lord. [gravely.


Lord Ogle. I think so too, but let the fool try.


Sir John. Will your Lordship favor me with your good offices to remove the
chief obstacle to the match, the repugnance of Mrs Heidelberg?


Lord Ogle. Mrs. Heidelberg* -- Had not you better begin with the young lady
first? it will save you a great deal of trouble; will not it, Lovewell? --
[smiles.] -- but do what you please, it will be the same thing to me -- will not
it, Lovewell? -- [conceitedly.] -- Why don't you laugh at him?


Lovew. I do, my Lord. [forces a smile.


Sir John. And you Lordship will endeavor to prevail on Mrs. Heidelberg to
consent to my marriage with Miss Fanny?


Lord Ogle. I Will go and speak to Mrs. Heidelberg, about the adorable Fanny, as
soon as possible.


Sir John. Your generosity transports me.


Lord Ogle. Poor fellow, what a dupe! he little thinks who is in possession of
the town. [aside.


Sir John. And your Lordship is not offended at this seeming inconstancy.


Lord Ogle. Not in the least. Miss Fanny's charms will even excuse infidelity
-- I look upon women as the ferae naturae, -- lawful game -- and every man who
is qualified, has a natural right to pursue them; Lovewell as well as you, and
I as well as either of you. -- Every man shall do his best, without offense to
any -- what say you, kinsmen?


Sir John. You have made me happy, my Lord.


Lovew. And me, I assure you, my Lord.


Lord Ogle. And I am superlatively so -- allons donc -- to horse and away,
boys! -- you to your affairs, and I to mine -- suivons l'amour! [sings.

[Exeunt severally.
ACT V.
SCENE I. Fanny's apartment.
Enter Lovewell and Fanny -- followed by Betty. Fanny. WHY did you come so
soon, Mr. Lovewell? the family is not yet in bed, and Betty certainly heard
somebody listening near the chamber door.


Betty. My mistress is right, Sir! evil spirits are abroad; and I am sure you
are both too good, not to expect mischief from them.


Lovew. But who can be so curious, or so wicked?


Betty. I think we have wickedness, and curiosity enough in this family, Sir,
to expect the worst.


Fanny. I do expect the worst. -- Prithee, Betty, return to the outward door,
and listen if you hear any body in the gallery; and let us know directly.


Betty. I warrant you, Madam -- the Lord bless you both! [Exit.


Fanny. What did my father want with you this evening?


Lovew. He gave me the key of his closet, with orders to bring from London some
papers relating to Lord Ogleby.


Fanny. And why did not you obey him?


Lovew. Because I am certain that his Lordship has opened his heart to him
about you, and those papers are wanted merely on that account -- but as we
shall discover all tomorrow, there will be no occasion for them, and it would
be idle in me to go.


Fanny. Hark! -- hark! bless me, how I tremble! -- I feel the terrors of guilt
-- indeed, Mr. Lovewell, this is too much for me.


Lovew. And for me too, my sweet Fanny. Your apprehensions make a coward of me.
-- But what can alarm you? your aunt and sister are in their chambers, and you
have nothing to fear from the rest of the family.


Fanny. I fear every body, and every thing, and every moment -- My mind is in
continual agitation and dread; -- indeed, Mr. Lovewell, this situation may have
very unhappy consequences. [weeps.


Lovew. But it shall not -- I would rather tell our story this moment to all the
house, and run the risque of maintaining you by the hardest labor, than suffer
you to remain in this dangerous perplexity. -- What! shall I sacrifice all my
best hopes and affections, in your dear health and safety, for the mean, and in
such a case, the meanest consideration -- of our fortune! Were we to be
abandoned by all our relations, we have that in our hearts and minds, will
weigh against the most affluent circumstances. -- I should not have proposed
the secrecy of our marriage, but for your sake; and with hopes that the most
generous sacrifice you have made to love and me, might be less injurious to
you, by waiting a lucky moment of reconciliation.


Fanny. Hush! hush! for heaven sake, my dear Lovewell, don't be so warm! --
your generosity gets the better of your prudence; you will be heard, and we
shall be discovered. -- I am satisfied, indeed I am. -- Excuse this weakness,
this delicacy -- this what you will. -- My mind's at peace -- indeed it is --
think no more of it, if you love me!


Lovew. That one word has charmed me, as it always does, to the most implicit
obedience; it would be the worst of ingratitude in me to distress you a moment.
[kisses her.


Re-enter Betty. Betty. [in a low voice.] I Am sorry to disturb you.


Fanny. Ha! what is the matter?


Lovew. Have you heard any body?


Betty. Yes, yes, I have, and they have heard you too, or I am mistaken -- if
they had seen you too, we should have been in a fine quandary.


Fanny. Prithee don't prate now, Betty!


Lovew. What did you hear?


Betty. I was preparing myself, as usual, to take me a little nap.


Lovew. A nap!


Betty. Yes, Sir, a nap; for I watch much better so than wide awake; and when I
had wrapped this handkerchief round my head, for fear of the earach, from the
keyhole I thought I heard a kind of a sort of a buzzing, which I first took
for a gnat, and shook my head two or three times, and went so with my hand --


Fanny. Well -- well -- and so --


Betty. And so, Madam, when I heard Mr. Lovewell a little loud, I heard the
buzzing louder too -- and pulling off my handkerchief softly -- I could hear
this sort of noise -- [makes an indistinct noise like speaking.


Fanny. Well, and what did they say?


Betty. Oh! I could not understand a word of what was said.


Lovew. The outward door is locked?


Betty. Yes; and I bolted it too, for fear of the worst.


Fanny. Why did you? they must have heard you, if they were near.


Betty. And I did it on purpose, Madam, and cough'd a little too, that they
might not hear Mr. Lovewell's voice -- when I was silent, they were silent, and
so I came to tell you.


Fanny. What shall we do?


Lovew. Fear nothing; we know the worst* it will only bring on our catastrophe
a little too soon -- but Betty might fancy this noise -- she is in the
conspiracy, and can make a man of a mouse at any time.


Betty. I can distinguish a man from a mouse, as well as my betters -- I am
sorry you think so ill of me, Sir.


Fanny. He compliments you, don't be a fool! -- Now you have set her tongue a
running, she will mutter for an hour. [to Lovewell.] I Will go and hearken myself.
[Exit.


Betty. I Will turn my back upon no girl, for sincerity and service. [half aside,
and muttering.


Lovew. Thou art the first in the world for both; and I will reward you soon,
Betty, for one and the other.


Betty. I Am not marcenary neither -- I can live on a little, with a good
carreter.


Re-enter Fanny. Fanny. All seems quiet -- suppose, my dear, you go to your own
room -- I shall be much easier then -- and tomorrow we will be prepared for
the discovery.


Betty. You may discover, if you please; but, for my part, I shall still be
secret. [half aside, and muttering.


Lovew. Should I leave you now, -- if they still are upon the watch, we shall
lose the advantage of our delay. -- Besides, we should consult upon tomorrow's
business, -- Let Betty go to her own room, and lock the outward door after her;
we can fasten this; and when she thinks all safe, she may return and let me out
as usual.


Betty. Shall I, Madam?


Fanny. Do! let me have my way tonight, and you shall command me ever after.
-- I would not have you surprised here for the world. -- Pray leave me! I shall
be quite myself again, if you will oblige me.


Lovew. I live only to oblige you, my sweet Fanny! I Will be gone this moment.
[going.


Fanny. Let us listen first at the door, that you may not be intercepted. --
Betty shall go first, and if they lay hold of her --


Betty. They Will have the wrong sow by the ear, I can tell them that. [going
hastily.


Fanny. Softly -- softly -- Betty! don't venture out, if you hear a noise. --
Softly, I beg of you! -- See, Mr. Lovewell, the effects of indiscretion!


Lovew. But love, Fanny, makes amends for all.

[Exeunt all softly.
SCENE changes to a gallery, which leads to several bed-chambers.
Enter Miss Sterling, leading Mrs. Heidelberg in a nightcap. Miss Sterling. This
way, dear Madam, and then I Will tell you all.


Mrs. Heidel. Nay, but Niece -- consider a little -- don't drag me out in this
figur -- let me put on my fly-cap! -- if any of my Lord's fammaly, or the
counselors at law, should be stirring, I should be perdigus disconcarted.


Miss Sterling. But, my dear Madam, a moment is an age, in my situation. I am sure
my sister has been plotting my disgrace and ruin in that chamber -- O she is all
craft and wickedness!


Mrs. Heidel. Well, but softly, Betsey! -- you are all in emotion -- your mind
is too much flustrated -- you can neither eat nor drink, nor take your natural
rest -- compose yourself, child; for if we are not as warysome as they are
wicked, we shall disgrace ourselves and the whole fammaly.


Miss Sterling. We are disgraced already, Madam -- Sir John Melvil has forsaken
me; my Lord cares for nobody but himself; or, if for any body, it is my sister;
my father, for the sake of a better bargain, would marry me to a
'Change-broker; so that if you, Madam, don't continue my friend -- if your
forsake me -- if I am to lose my best hopes and consolation -- in your
tenderness -- and affect -- ions -- I had better -- at once -- give up the
matter -- and let my sister enjoy -- the fruits of her treachery -- trample
with scorn upon the rights of her elder sister, the will of the best of aunts,
and the weakness of a too interested father. [she pretends to be bursting into
tears all this speech.


Mrs. Heidel. Don't Betsey -- keep up your spurrit -- I hate whimpering -- I am
your friend -- depend upon me in every partickler -- but be composed, and tell
me what new mischief you have discovered.


Miss Sterling. I had no desire to sleep, and would not undress myself, knowing
that my Machiavel sister would not rest till she had broke my heart: -- I was
so uneasy that I could not stay in my room, but when I thought that all the
house was quiet, I sent my maid to discover what was going forward; she
immediately came back and told me that they were in high consultation; that she
had heard only, for it was in the dark, my sister's maid conduct Sir John
Melvil to her mistress, and then lock the door.


Mrs. Heidel. And how did you conduct yourself in this dalimma?


Miss Sterling. I returned with her, and could hear a man's voice, though nothing
that they said distinctly; and you may depend upon it, that Sir John is now in
that room, that they have settled the matter, and will run away together before
morning, if we don't prevent them.


Mrs. Heidel. Why the brazen slut! has she got her sister's husband (that is to
be) locked up in her chamber! at night too? -- I tremble at the thoughts*


Miss Sterling. Hush, Madam! I hear something.


Mrs. Heidel. You frighten me -- let me put on my fly cap -- I would not be
seen in this figur for the world.


Miss Sterling. It Is dark, Madam; you cannot be seen.


Mrs. Heidel. I protest there is a candle coming, and a man too.


Miss Sterling. Nothing but servants; let us retire a moment! [they retire.


Enter Brush half drunk, laying hold of the Chambermaid, who has a candle in
her hand. Chapter Maid. Be quiet Mr. Brush; I shall drop down with terror!


Brush. But my sweet, and most amiable chambermaid, if you have no love, you
may hearken to a little reason; that cannot possibly do your virtue any harm.


Chapter Maid. But you will do me harm, Mr. Brush, and a great deal of harm too --
pray let me go -- I am ruined if they hear you -- I tremble like an asp.


Brush. But they shall not hear us -- and if you have a mind to be ruined, it
shall be the making of your fortune, you little slut, you! -- therefore I say
it again, if you have no love -- hear a little reason!


Chapter Maid. I wonder at your impurence, Mr. Brush, to use me in this manner;
this is not the way to keep me company, I assure you. -- You are a town rake I
see, and now you are a little in liquor, you fear nothing.


Brush. Nothing, by heavens, but your frowns, most amiable chambermaid; I am a
little electrified, that is the truth on it; I am not used to drink Port, and
your master's is so heady, that a pint of it oversets a claret-drinker.


Chapter Maid. Don't be rude! bless me! -- I shall be ruined -- what will become of
me?


Brush. I Will take care of you, by all that is honorable.


Chapter Maid. You are a base man to use me so -- I Will cry out, if you don't let me
go -- that is Miss Sterling's chamber, that Miss Fanny's, and that Madam
Heidelberg's. [pointing.


Brush. And that my Lord Ogleby's, and that my Lady what do you call'em: I don't
mind such folks when I Am sober, much less when I am whimsical -- rather above
that too.


Chapter Maid. More shame for you, Mr. Brush! -- you terrify me -- you have no
modesty.


Brush. O but I have, my sweet spider-brusher! -- for instance, I reverence
Miss Fanny -- she is a most delicious morsel and fit for a prince -- with all my
horrors of matrimony, I could marry her myse;f -- but for her sister --


Miss Sterling. There, there, Madam, all in a story!


Chapter Maid. Bless me, Mr. Brush! -- I heard something!


Brush. Rats, I suppose, that are gnawing the old timbers of this execrable old
dungeon -- If it was mine, I would pull it down, and fill your fine canal up
with the rubbish; and then I should get rid of two damned things at once.


Chapter Maid. Law! law! how you blaspheme! -- we shall have the house upon our
heads for it.


Brush. No, no, it will last our time -- but as I was faying, the eldest sister
-- Miss Jezabel --


Chapter Maid. Is a fine young lady for all your evil tongue.


Brush. No -- we have smoked her already; and unless she marries our old
Swiss, she can have none of us -- no, no, she wont do -- we are a little too
nice.


Chapter Maid. You're a monstrous rake, Mr. Brush, and don't care what you say.


Brush. Why, for that matter, my dear, I am a little inclined to mischief; and
if you will not have pity upon me, I will break open that door and ravish Mrs.
Heidelberg.


Mrs. Heidel. [coming forward.] There Is no bearing this -- you profligate
monster!


Chapter Maid. Ha! I am undone!


Brush. Zounds! here she is, by all that is monstrous. [runs off.


Miss Sterling. A fine discourse you have had with that fellow!


Mrs. Heidel. And a fine time of night it is to be here with that drunken
monster.


Miss Sterling. What have you, to say for yourself?


Chapter Maid. I can say nothing. -- I am so frightened, and so ashamed -- but
indeed I am vartuous -- I am vartuous indeed.


Mrs. Heidel. Well, well -- don't tremble so; but tell us what you know of this
horrable plot here.


Miss Sterling. We'll forgive you, if you will discover all.


Chapter Maid. Why, Madam -- don't let me betray my fellow servants -- I shall not
sleep in my bed, if I do.


Mrs. Heidel. Then you shall sleep somewhere else tomorrow night.


Chapter Maid. O dear! -- what shall I do?


Mrs. Heidel. Tell us this moment, -- or I Will turn you out of doors directly.


Chapter Maid. Why our butler has been treating us below in his pantry -- Mr. Brush
forced us to make a kind of a holiday night of it.


Miss Sterling. Holiday! for what?


Chapter Maid. Nay I only made one.


Miss Sterling. Well, well; but upon what account?


Chapter Maid. Because, as how, Madam, there was a change in the family they said,
-- that his honor, Sir John -- was to marry Miss Fanny instead of your
Ladyship.


Miss Sterling. And so you made a holiday for that. -- Very fine!


Chapter Maid. I did not make it, Ma'am.


Mrs. Heidel. But do you know nothing of Sir John's being to run away with Miss
Fanny tonight?


Chapter Maid. No, indeed, Ma'am!


Miss Sterling. Nor of his being now locked up in my sister's chamber?


Chapter Maid. No, as I hope for marcy, Ma'am.


Mrs. Heidel. Well, I Will put an end to all this directly -- do you run to my
brother Sterling --


Chapter Maid. Now, Ma'am! -- It Is so very late, Ma'am --


Mrs. Heidel. I don't care how late it is. Tell him there are thieves in the
house -- that the house is o'fire -- tell him to come here immediately -- go, I
say!


Chapter Maid. I will, I will, though I Am frightened out of my wits. [Exit.


Mrs. Heidel. Do you watch here, my dear; and I Will put myself in order, to face
them. We'll plot 'em, and counter-plot 'em too. [Exit into her chamber.


Miss Sterling. I have as much pleasure in this revenge, as in being made a
countess! -- Ha! they are unlocking the door. -- Now for it! [retires.


Fanny's door is unlocked -- and Betty comes out with a candle. Miss Sterling
approaches her. Betty. [calling within.] Sir, Sir! -- now is your time -- all is
clear. [seeing Miss Sterling.] Stay, stay -- not yet -- we are watched.


Miss Sterling. And so you are, Madam Betty! [Miss Sterling lays hold of her,
while Betty locks the door, and puts the key in her pocket.


Betty. [turning round.] What Is the matter, Madam?


Miss Sterling. Nay, that you shall tell my father and aunt, Madam.


Betty. I am no tell-tale, Madam, and no thief they will get nothing from me.


Miss Sterling. You have a great deal of courage, Betty; and considering the
secrets you have to keep, you have occasion for it.


Betty. My mistress shall never repent her good opinion of me, Ma'am.


Enter Sterling. Sterling. What is all this? what is the matter? why am I disturbed
in this manner?


Miss Sterling. This creature, and my distresses, Sir, will explain the matter.


Re-enter Mrs. Heidelberg, with another head-dress. Mrs. Heidel. Now I Am
prepared for the rancounter -- well, brother, have you heard of this scene of
wickedness?


Sterling. Not I -- but what is it? Speak! -- I was got into my little closet --
all the lawyers were in bed, and I had almost lost my senses in the confusion
of Lord Ogleby's mortgages, when I was alarmed with a foolish girl, who could
hardly speak; and whether it is fire, or thieves, or murder, or a rape, I am
quite in the dark.


Mrs. Heidel. No, no, there is no rape, brother! -- all parties are willing, I
believe.


Miss Sterling. Who Is in that chamber? [detaining Betty, who seemed to be stealing
away.


Betty. My mistress.


Miss Sterling. And who is with your mistress?


Betty. Why, who should there be?


Miss Sterling. Open the door then, and let us see!


Betty. The door is open, Madam. [Miss Sterling goes to the door.] I Will sooner
die than peach! [Exit hastily.


Miss Sterling. The door's locked; and she has got the key in her pocket.


Mrs. Heidel. There Is impudence, brother! piping hot from your daughter Fanny's
school!


Sterling. But, zounds! what is all this about? You tell me of a sum total, and
you don't produce the particulars.


Mrs. Heidel. Sir John Melvil is locked up in your daughter's bedchamber. --
There is the particular!


Sterling. The devil he is? -- That Is bad!


Miss Sterling. And he has been there some time too.


Sterling. Ditto!


Mrs. Heidel. Ditto! worse and worse, I say. I Will raise the house, and expose
him to my Lord, and the whole family.


Sterling. By no means! we shall expose ourselves, sister! -- the best way is to
insure privately -- let me alone! -- I Will make him marry her tomorrow morning.


Miss Sterling. Make him marry her! this is beyond all patience! -- You have
thrown away all your affection; and I shall do as much by my obedience:
unnatural fathers, make unnatural children. -- My revenge is in my own power,
and I Will indulge it. -- Had they made their escape, I should have been exposed
to the derision of the world: -- but the deriders shall be derided; and so --
help! help, there! thieves! thieves!


Mrs. Heidel. Tit-for-tat, Betsey! -- you are right, my girl.


Sterling. Zounds! you will spoil all -- you will raise the whole family, -- the
devil's in the girl.


Mrs. Heidel. No, no; the devil's in you, brother. I am ashamed of your
principles. -- What! would you connive at your daughter's being locked up with
her sister's husband? Help! thieves! thieves! I say. [cries out.


Sterling. Sister, I beg you! -- daughter, I command you. -- If you have no regard
for me, consider yourselves! -- we shall lose this opportunity of ennobling our
blood, and getting above twenty per cent. for our money.


Miss Sterling. What, by my disgrace and my sister's triumph! I have a spirit
above such mean considerations; and to show you that it is not a low-bred,
vulgar 'Change-Alley spirit -- help! help! thieves! thieves! thieves! I say.


Sterling. Ay, ay, you may save your lungs -- the house is in an uproar; -- women
at best have no discretion; but in a passion they will fire a house, or burn
themselves in it, rather than not be revenged.


Enter Canton, in a nightgown and slippers. Cant. Eh, diable! vat is de raison
of dis great noise, this tintamarre?


Sterling. Ask those ladies, Sir; it is of their making.


Lord Ogleby [calls within.] Brush! Brush! -- Canton! where are you? -- What Is
the matter? [rings a bell.] Where are you?


Sterling. It Is my Lord calls, Mr. Canton.


Cant. I com, mi Lor! -- [Exit Canton.] -- [Lord Ogleby still rings.


Sergeant Flower [calls within.] A light! a light here! -- where are the
servants? Bring a light for me, and my brothers.


Sterling. Lights here! lights for the gentlemen! [Exit Sterling.


Mrs. Heidel. My brother feels, I see -- your sister's turn will come next.


Miss Sterling. Ay, ay, let it go round, Madam! it is the only comfort I have left.


Re-enter Sterling, with lights, before Sergeant Flower (with one boot and a
slipper) and Traverse. Sterling. This way, Sir! this way, gentlemen!


Sergeant Flower. Well, but, Mr. Sterling, no danger I hope. -- Have they made
a burglarious entry? -- Are you prepared to repulse them? -- I am very much
alarmed about thieves at circuit-time. -- They would be particularly severe
with us gentlemen of the bar.


Traverse. No danger, Mr. Sterling? -- No trespass, I hope?


Sterling. None, gentlemen, but of those ladies making.


Mrs. Heidel. You Will be ashamed to know, gentlemen, that all your labors and
studies about this young lady are thrown away -- Sir John Melvil is at this
moment locked up with this lady's younger sister.


Sergeant Flower. The thing is a little extraordinary, to be sure -- but, why
were we to be frightened out of our beds for this? Could not we have tried this
cause tomorrow morning?


Miss Sterling. But, Sir, by tomorrow morning, perhaps, even your assistance
would not have been of any service -- the birds now in that cage would have
flown away.


Enter Lord Ogleby [in his robe de chamber, night cap etc. -- leaning on
Canton.] Lord Ogle. I had rather lose a limb than my night's rest -- what is the
matter with you all?


Sterling. Ay, ay, it is all over! -- Here Is my Lord too.


Lord Ogle. What is all this shrieking and screaming? -- Where Is my angelick
Fanny. She Is safe, I hope!


Mrs. Heidel. Your angelick Fanny, my Lord, is locked up with your angelick
nephew in that chamber.


Lord Ogle. My nephew! then will I be excommunicated.


Mrs. Heidel. Your nephew, my Lord, has been plotting to run away with the
younger sister; and the younger sister has been plotting to run away with your
nephew: and if we had not watched them and called up the fammaly, they had been
upon the scamper to Scotland by this time.


Lord Ogle. Look'ee, ladies! -- I know that Sir John has conceived a violent
passion for Miss Fanny; and I know too that Miss Fanny has conceived a violent
passion for another person; and I am so well convinced of the rectitude of her
affections, that I will support them with my fortune, my honor, and my life.
-- Eh, shant I, Mr. Sterling? [smiling] what say you? --


Sterling. [sulkily.] To be sure, my Lord. -- These bawling women have been the
ruin of every thing. [aside.


Lord Ogle. But come, I Will end this business in a trice -- if you, ladies, will
compose yourselves, and Mr. Sterling will insure Miss Fanny from violence, I
will engage to draw her from her pillow with a whisper through the keyhole.


Mrs. Heidel. The horrid creatures! -- I say, my Lord, break the door open.


Lord Ogle. Let me beg of your delicacy not to be too precipitate! -- Now to
our experiment! [advancing toward the door.


Miss Sterling. Now, what will they do? -- my heart will beat through my bosom.


Enter Betty, with the key. Betty. There Is no occasion for breaking open doors,
my Lord; we have done nothing that we ought to be ashamed of, and my mistress
shall face her enemies. -- [going to unlock the door.


Mrs. Heidel. There Is impudence.


Lord Ogle. The mystery thickens. Lady of the bedchamber! [to Betty] open the
door, and entreat Sir John Melvil (for these ladies will have it that he is
there,) to appear and answer to high crimes and misdemeanors. -- Call Sir John
Melvil into the court!


Enter Sir John Melvil, on the other side. Sir John. I am here, my Lord.


Mrs. Heidel. Heyday!


Miss Sterling. Astonishment!


Sir John. What is all this alarm and confusion? there is nothing but hurry in
the house; what is the reason of it?


Lord Ogle. Because you have been in that chamber; have been! nay you are there
at this moment, as these ladies have protested, so don't deny it --


Traverse. This is the clearest Alibi I ever knew, Mr. Sergeant.


Flower. Luce clarius.


Lord Ogle. Upon my word, ladies, if you have often these frolicks, it would be
really entertaining to pass a whole summer with you. But come, [to Betty] open
the door, and entreat your amiable mistress to come forth, and dispel all our
doubts with her smiles.


Betty. [opening the door.] Madam, you are wanted in this room. [pertly.


Enter Fanny, in great confusion. Miss Sterling. You see she is ready dressed --
and what confusion she is in!


Mrs. Heidel. Ready to pack off, bag and baggage! -- her guilt confounds her!
--


Flowers. Silence in the court, ladies!


Fanny. I am confounded, indeed, Madam!


Lord Ogle. Don't droop, my beauteous lilly! but with your own peculiar modesty
declare your state of mind. -- Pour conviction into their ears, and raptures
into mine. [smiling.


Fanny. I am at this moment the most unhappy -- most distressed -- the tumult is
too much for my heart -- and I want the power to reveal a secret, which to
conceal has been the misfortune and misery of my -- my -- [faints away.


speaking all at once. Lord Ogle. She faints; help, help! for the fairest, and
best of women!


Betty. [running to her.] O my dear mistress! -- help, help, there! --


Sir John. Ha! let me fly to her assistance.


Lovewell rushes out from the chamber. Lovew. My Fanny in danger! I can contain
no longer. -- Prudence were now a crime; all other cares are lost in this! --
speak, speak, to me, my dearest Fanny! -- let me but hear thy voice, open your
eyes, and bless me with the smallest sign of life! [during this speech they are
all in amazement.


Miss Sterling. Lovewell! -- I am easy. --


Mrs. Heidel. I am thunderstuck!


Lord Ogle. I am petrified!


Sir John. And I undone!


Fanny. [recovering.] O Lovewell! -- even supported by thee, I dare not look my
father nor his Lordship in the face.


Sterling. What now! did not I send you to London, Sir?


Lord Ogle. Eh! -- What! -- How Is this? -- by what right and title have you
been half the night in that lady's bedchamber?


Lovew. By that right that makes me the happiest of men; and by a title which I
would not forego, for any the best of kings could give me.


Betty. I could cry my eyes out to hear his magnimity.


Lord Ogle. I am annihilated!


Sterling. I have been choked with rage and wonder; but now I can speak. --
Zounds, what have you to say to me? -- Lovewell, you are a villain. -- You have
broke your word with me.


Fanny. Indeed, Sir, he has not -- You forbad him to think of me, when it was
out of his power to obey you; we have been married these four months.


Sterling. And he shall not stay in my house four hours. What baseness and treachery!
As for you, you shall repent this step as long as you live, Madam.


Fanny. Indeed, Sir, it is impossible to conceive the tortures I have already
endured in consequence of my disobedience. My heart has continually upbraided
me for it; and though I was too weak to struggle with affection, I feel that I
must be miserable for ever without your forgiveness.


Sterling. Lovewell, you shall leave my house directly; -- and you shall follow
him, Madam. [to Fanny.


Lord Ogle. And if they do, I will receive them into mine. Look ye, Mr.
Sterling, there have been some mistakes, which we had all better forget for our
own sakes; and the best way to forget them is to forgive the cause of them;
which I do from my soul. -- Poor girl! I swore to support her affection with my
life and fortune; -- it is a debt of honor, and must be paid -- you swore as
much too, Mr. Sterling; but your laws in the city will excuse you, I suppose;
for you never strike a balance without errors excepted.


Sterling. I am a father, my Lord; but for the sake of all other fathers, I think
I ought not to forgive her, for fear of encouraging other silly girls like
herself to throw themselves away without the consent of their parents.


Lovew. I hope there will be no danger of that, Sir. Young ladies with minds,
like my Fanny's, would startle at the very shadow of vice; and when they know
to what uneasiness only an indiscretion has exposed her, her example, instead,
of encouraging, will rather serve to deter them.


Mrs. Heidel. Indiscretion, quoth a! a mighty pretty delicat word to express
disobedience!


Lord Ogle. For my part, I indulge my own passions too much to tyrannize over
those of other people. Poor souls, I pity them. And you must forgive them too.
Come, come, melt a little of your flint, Mr. Sterling!


Sterling. Why, why -- as to that, my Lord -- to be sure he is a relation of yours
my Lord -- what say you, sister Heidelberg?


Mrs. Heidel. The girl's ruined, and I forgive her.


Sterling. Well -- so do I then. -- Nay, no thanks -- [to Lovewell and Fanny, who
seem preparing to speak] there is an end of the matter.


Lord Ogle. But, Lovewell, what makes you dumb all this while?


Lovew. Your kindness, my Lord -- I can scarce believe my own senses -- they
are all in a tumult of fear, joy, love, expectation, and gratitude; I ever was,
and am now more bound in duty to your Lordship; for you, Mr. Sterling, if every
moment of my life, spent gratefully in your service, will in some measure
compensate the want of fortune, you perhaps will not repent your goodness to
me. And you, ladies, I flatter myself, will not for the future suspect me of
artifice and intrigue -- I shall be happy to oblige, and serve you. -- As for
you, Sir John --


Sir John. No apologies to me, Lovewell, I do not deserve any. All I have to
offer in excuse for what has happened, is my total ignorance of your situation.
Had you dealt a little more openly with me, you would have saved me, and
yourself, and that lady, (who I hope will pardon my behavior) a great deal of
uneasiness. Give me leave, however, to assure you, that light and capricious as
I may have appeared, now my infatuation is over, I have sensibility enough to
be ashamed of the part I have acted, and honor enough to rejoice at your
happiness.


Lovew. And now, my dearest Fanny, though we are seemingly the happiest of
beings, yet all our joys will be dampt, if his Lordship's generosity and Mr.
Sterling's forgiveness should not be succeeded by the indulgence, approbation,
and consent of these our best benefactors. [To the audience.


FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
Written by Mr. GARRICK.
CHARACTERS of the EPILOGUE.
Lord Minum Mr. DODD. Colonel Trill Mr. VERNON. Sir Patrick Mahony Mr. MOODY.
Miss Crotchet Mrs. -- Mrs. Quaver Mrs. LEE. First Lady Mrs. BRADSHAW. Second
Lady Miss MILLS. Third Lady Mrs. DORMAN.
SCENE an Assembly.
Several Persons at Cards, at different Tables; among the rest Col. Trill, Lord
Minum, Mrs. Quaver, Sir Patrick Mahony. At the Quadrille Table. Col. T. LADIES,
with Leave --

2d Lady. Pass!

3d Lady. Pass!

Mrs. Qu. You must do more.

Col. T. Indeed I cannot.

Mrs. Qu. I play in Hearts.

Col. T. Encore*

2d Lady. What Luck!

Col. T. Tonight at Drury Lane is played
A Comedy, and toute nouvelle -- a Spade!
Is not Miss Crotchet at the Play?

Mrs. Qu. My Niece
Has made a Party, Sir, to damn the Piece.

At the Whist Table. Ld. Min. I hate a Playhouse -- Trump! -- It makes me sick.

1st Lady. We Are two by Honors, Ma'am.

Ld. Min. And we the odd Trick.
Pray do you know the Author, Colonel Trill?

Col. T. I know no Poets, Heaven be praised -- Spadille!

1st Lady. I Will tell you who, my Lord! (whispers my Lord.)

Ld. Min. What, he again?
" And dwell such daring Souls in little Men?"
Be whose it will, they down our Throats will cram it!

Col. T. O, no. -- I have a Club -- the best. -- We'll damn it.

Mrs. Qu. O Bravo, Colonel! Music is my Flame.

Ld. Min. And mine, by Jupiter! -- We Have won the Game.

Col. T. What, do you love all Music?

Mrs. Qu. No, not Handel's.
And nasty Plays --

Ld. Min. Are fit for Goths and Vandals.
(Rise from the Table and pay.)
From the Piquette Table. Sir Pat. Well, faith and troth! that Shakespeare was
no Fool!

Col. T. I Am glad you like him, Sir! -- So ends the Pool!
(Pay and rise from Table.)
SONG by the Colonel.
I hate all their Nonsense,
Their Shakespears and Johnsons,
Their Plays, and their Playhouse, and Bards:
It Is singing, not saying;
A Fig for all playing,
But playing, as we do, at Cards!
I love to see Jonas,
Am pleased too with Comus;
Each well the Spectator rewards.
So clever, so neat in
Their Tricks, and their Cheating!
Like them we would fain deal our Cards.
Sir Pat. King Lare is touching! -- And how fine to see
Old Hamlet's Ghost! -- "To be, or not to be." --
What are your Op'ras to Othello's roar?
Oh, he is an Angel of a Blackamoor!

Ld. Min. What, when he choaks his Wife? --

Col. T. And calls her Whore?

Sir Pat. King Richard calls his Horse -- and then Macbeth,
When ever he murders -- takes away the Breath.
My Blood runs cold at every Syllable,
To see the Dagger -- that is invisible. (All laugh.)

Sir Pat. Laugh if you please, a pretty Play --

Ld. Min. Is pretty.

Sir Pat. And when there is Wit in it --

Col. T. To be sure it is witty.

Sir Pat. I love the Playhouse now -- so light and gay,
With all those Candles, they have taken away! (All laugh.)
For all your Game, what makes it so much brighter?

Col. T. Put out the Light, and then --

Ld. Min. It Is so much lighter.

Sir Pat. Pray do you mane, Sirs, more than you express?

Col. T. Just as it happens --

Ld. Min. Either more, or less.

Mrs. Qu. An't you ashamed, Sir? [to Sir Pat.]

Sir Pat. Me! -- I seldom blush. --
For little Shakespeare, faith! I Would take a Push!

Ld. Min. News, News! -- here comes Miss Crotchet from the Play.

Enter Miss Crotchet. Mrs. Qu. Well, Crotchet, what is the News?

Miss Cro. We Have lost the Day.

Col. T. Tell us, dear Miss, all you have heard and seen.

Miss Cro. I Am tired -- a Chair -- here, take my Capuchin!

Ld. Min. And is not it damned, Miss?

Miss Cro. No, my Lord, not quite:
But we shall damn it.

Col. T. When?

Miss Cro. Tomorrow Night.
There is a Party of us, all of Fashion,
Resolved to exterminate this vulgar Passion:
A Playhouse, what a Place! -- I must forswear it.
A little Mischief only makes one bear it.
Such Crowds of City Folks! -- so rude and pressing!
And their Horse-Laughs, so hideously distressing!
When ever we hissed, they frowned and fell a swearing,
Like their own Guildhall Giants -- fierce and staring!

Col. T. What said the Folks of Fashion? were they cross?

Ld. Min. The rest have no more Judgment than my Horse.

Miss Cro. Lord Grimly swore 'twas execrable Stuff.
Says one, Why so, my Lord? -- My Lord took Snuff.
In the first Act Lord George began to doze.
And criticis'd the Author -- through his Nose;
So loud indeed, that as his Lordship snor'd,
The Pit turned round, and all the Brutes encor'd.
Some Lords, indeed, approved the Author's Jokes.

Ld. Min. We have among us, Miss, some foolish Folks.

Miss Cro. Says poor Lord Simper -- Well, now to my Mind
The Piece is good; -- but he is both deaf and blind.

Sir Pat. Upon my Soul a very pretty Story!
And Quality appears in all its Glory! --
There was some Merit in the Piece, no Doubt;

Miss Cro. O, to be sure! -- if one could find it out.

Col. T. But tell us, Miss, the Subject of the Play.

Miss Cro. Why, 'twas a Marriage -- yes, a Marriage -- Stay!
A Lord, an Aunt, two Sisters, and a Merchant --
A Baronet -- ten Lawyers -- a fat Sergeant --
Are all produced -- to talk with one another;
And about something make a mighty Pother;
They all go in, and out; and to, and fro;
And talk, and quarrel -- as they come and go --
Then go to Bed, and then get up -- and then --
Scream, faint, scold, kiss, -- and go to Bed again. [all laugh.
Such is the Play -- Your Judgment! never sham it.

Col. T. Oh damn it!

Mrs. Qu. Damn it!

1st Lady. Damn it!

Miss Cro. Damn it!

Ld. Min. Damn it!

Sir Pat. Well, faith, you speak your Minds, and I Will be free --
Good Night! this Company's too good for me. [going.]

Col. T. Your Judgment, dear Sir Patrick, makes us proud. [all laugh.]

Sir Pat. Laugh if you please, but pray don't laugh too loud. [Exit.]

RECITATIVE. Col. T. Now the Barbarian's gone, Miss, tune your Tongue,
And let us raise our Spirits high with Song!

RECITATIVE. Miss Cro. Colonel, de tout mon Coeur -- I Have one in petto,
Which you shall join, and make it a Duetto.

RECITATIVE. Ld. Min. Bella Signora, et Amico mio!
I too will join, and then we'll make a Trio. --

Col. T. Come all and join the full-mouthed Chorus,
And drive all Tragedy and Comedy before us!

All the Company rise, and advance to the Front of the Stage. AIR. Col. T.
Would you ever go to see a Tragedy?

Miss Cro. Never, never.

Col. T. A Comedy?

Ld. M. Never, never,
Live for ever!
Tweedle-dum and Tweedle-dee!

Col. T. Ld. M. and Miss Cro. Live for ever!
Tweedle-dum and Tweedle-dee!

CHORUS. Would you ever go to see, and c.

Books printed for T. Becket and P. A. De Hondt, in the Strand; and R. Baldwin,
in Paternoster Row.
1. THE COMEDIES of TERENCE, translated into Familiar Blank Verse. With NOTES,
and the LIFE of TERENCE. By GEORGE COLMAN. In One Volume in Quarto, elegantly
printed, and illustrated with Eight Copper Plates. [Price One Guinea in
Boards.] 2. The CONNOISSEUR. 4 Vols. Price 12s. bound. 3. The JEALOUS WIFE, a
Comedy. Price 1s. 6d. 4. POLLY HONEYCOMB, a Farce. Price 1s. 5. The MUSICAL
LADY, a Farce. Price 1s. 6. The DEUCE IS IN HIM, a Farce. Price 1s.

