THE CITIZEN.

A FARCE.

As it is performed at the THEATER ROYAL in Covent Garden.

By ARTHUR MURPHY, Esquire

Aeque neglectum pueris senibusque nocebit. HOR. LONDON: Printed for G.
KEARSLY, in Ludgate Street.

MDCCLXIII.

[Price ONE SHILLING.]

Lincoln's End, 25th Jan. 1763.
THE Author's compliments to Miss ELLIOT, and he desires to inscribe to her the
following scenes. She need not be alarmed at a dedication, the propriety of
which will strike every reader, who remembers that Miss ELLIOT and the CITIZEN
made their first appearance on the stage together, and that her uncommon
talents gave the piece the best and most effectual protection. Elegance of
figure, a voice of pleasing variety, a strong expression of humor, not
impaired, but rendered exquisite, by delicacy; these were circumstances that
secured the farce at first, and have since brought it into favor. No author
ever met with a better patronage; and though the CITIZEN, like other things of
this kind, has many faults, yet it has this peculiar merit, that it produced,
in the character of MARIA, a genuine comic genius. The CITIZEN claims another
praise. When all the little arts of theatrical malice were conspiring against
her, it recommended Miss ELLIOT to the notice of Mr. BEARD, and obtained for
her that generous treatment, which that manager seems determined to extend to
real merit. The Author therefore desires Miss ELLIOT'S acceptance of this
farce, for the defects of which he makes no apology, because, should the most
severe judge in this kind resolve to arm himself with criticisms, let him but
look at the acting of MARIA, and he will forget them all.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
OLD PHILPOT, Mr. SHUTER. YOUNG PHILPOT, Mr. WOODWARD. SIR JASPER WILDING, Mr.
DUNSTALL. YOUNG WILDING, Mr. DYER. BEAUFORT, Mr. YOUNG. DAPPER, Mr. COSTOLLO.
QUILLDRIVE, Mr. PERRY.
WOMEN.
MARIA, Miss ELLIOT, CORINNA, Miss DAVIES.
SERVANTS, etc.

THE CITIZEN.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
YOUNG WILDING, BEAUFORT, and WILL following. Wilding. HA, ha, my dear
Beaufort! A fiery young fellow like you, melted down into a sighing lovesick
dangler after a high heel, a well-turn'd ankle, and a short petticoat!


Beau. Prithee, Wilding, don't laugh at me -- Maria's charms --


Wild. Maria's charms! And so now you would fain grow wanton in her praise, and
have me listen to your raptures about my own sister! ha, ha, poor Beaufort! --
Is my sister at home, Will?


Will. She is, Sir.


Wild. How long has my father been gone out?


Will. This hour, Sir.


Wild. Very well. Pray give Mr. Beaufort's compliments to my sister, and he is
come to wait upon her -- ( Exit Will.) You will be glad to see her I suppose,
Charles.


Beau. I live but in her presence.


Wild. Live but in her presence! How the devil could the young baggage raise
this riot in your heart? It Is more than her brother could ever do with any of
her sex.


Beau. Nay, you have no reason to complain; you are come up to town,
post-haste, to marry a wealthy citizen's daughter, who only saw you last season
at Tunbridge, and has been languishing for you ever since.


Wild. That Is more than I do for her; and to tell you the truth, more than I
believe she does for me. -- This is a match of prudence, man! bargain and sale!
-- My reverend dad and the old put of a citizen finished the business at
Lloyd's Coffee-house by inch of candle -- a mere transferring of property! --
Give your son to my daughter, and I will give my daughter to your son. That Is
the whole affair, and so I am just arrived to consummate the nuptials.


Beau. Thou art the happiest fellow --


Wild. Happy! so I am -- what should I be otherwise for? If Miss Sally -- upon
my soul I forget her name --


Beau. Well! that is so like you -- Miss Sally Philpot --


Wild. Ay! very true -- Miss Sally Philpot -- she will bring fortune sufficient
to pay off an old encumbrance upon the family-estate, and my father is to
settle handsomely upon me -- and so I have reason to be contented, have not I?


Beau. And you are willing to marry her, without having one spark of love for
her?


Wild. Love! -- why I make myself ridiculous enough by marrying, don't I?
without being in love into the bargain! What! am I to pine for a girl that is
willing to go to bed to me? Love of all things! -- My dear Beaufort, one sees
so many people breathing raptures about each other before marriage, and dinning
their insipidity into the ears of all their acquaintance; My dear ma'am, don't
you think him a sweet man? charminger creature never was. Then he, on his side
-- My life, my angel, oh! she is a paradise of ever blooming sweets. And then in
a month's time, He Is a perfidious wretch! I wish I had never seen his face --
the devil was in me when I had any thing to say to him." -- "Oh! damn her for
an inanimated piece -- I wish she would poison herself with all my heart. That is
ever the way; and so you see, love is all nonsense; well enough to furnish
romances for boys and girls at circulating libraries; that is all, take my word
for it.


Beau. Pho! this is all idle talk; and in the mean time, I am ruined --


Wild. How so?


Beau. Why, you know the old couple have bargained your sister away.


Wild. Bargained her away! and will you pretend you are in love? -- Can you
look tamely on, and see her bartered away at Garraway's like logwood,
cochineal, or indigo? Marry her privately, man, and keep it a secret till my
affair is over.


Beau. My dear Wilding, will you propose it to her


Wild. With all my heart -- She is very long a coming -- I Will tell you what, if
she has a fancy for you, carry her off at once -- But perhaps she has a mind to
this cub of a citizen, Miss Sally's brother --


Beau. Oh no! he is her aversion --


Wild. I have never seen any of the family, but my wife that is to be; my
father-in-law and my brother-in-law, I know nothing of them. What sort of a
fellow is the son?


Beau. Oh! a diamond of the first water! a buck, Sir, a blood! every night at
this end of the town; at twelve next day he sneaks about the Change, in a
little bit of a frock and a bob-wig, and looks like a sedate book-keeper in the
eyes of all who behold him.


Wild. Upon my word, a gentleman of spirit.


Beau. Spirit! -- he drives a phaeton two story high, keeps his girl at this
end of the town, and is the gay George Philpot all round Covent Garden.


Wild. Oh brave! -- and the father --


Beau. The father, Sir -- But here comes Maria; take his picture from her --

[She sings within.]
Wild. Hey! she is musical this morning; she holds her usual spirits, I find.


Beau. Yes, yes, the spirit of eighteen, with the idea of a lover in her head
--


Wild. Ay! and such a lover as you too! though still in her teens, she can play
upon all your foibles, and treat you as she does her monkey, tickle you,
torment you, enrage you, sooth you, exalt you, depress you, pity you, laugh at
you -- Ecce signum!


Enter MARIA, singing. Wild. The same giddy girl! -- Sister; come my dear --


Maria. Have done, brother; let me have my own way -- I will go through my song.


Wild. I have not seen you this age; ask me how I do? --


Maria. I will not ask you how you do -- I will not take any notice of you, I don't
know you --


Wild. Do you know this gentleman then? Will you speak to him?


Maria. No, I will not speak to him; I Will sing to him; it is my humor to sing.

[Sings.]
Beau. Be serious but for a moment, Maria; my all depends upon it --


Maria. Oh! sweet Sir, you are dying, are you? then positively I will sing the
song; for it is a description of yourself -- mind it, Mr. Beaufort -- mind it
-- Brother, how do you do? [kisses him.] Say nothing, don't interrupt me --

[Sings.]
Wild. Have you seen your city lover yet?


Maria. No; but I long to see him; I fancy he is a curiosity.


Beau. Long to see him, Maria!


Maria. Yes, long to see him -- [Beaufort fiddles with his lip, and looks
thoughtful.] Brother, brother! [ goes to him softly, beckons him to look at
Beaufort] do you see that? [mimicks him] mind him; ha, ha!


Beau. Make me ridiculous if you will, Maria; so you don't make me unhappy, by
marrying this citizen --


Maria. And would not you have me marry, Sir? What, I must lead a single life
to please you, must I? upon my word you are a pretty gentleman to make laws for
me.

[Sings.] Can it be or by law, or by equity said.
That a comely young girl ought to die an old maid?

Wild. Come, come, Miss Pert, compose yourself a little -- this will never do
--


Maria. My cross, ill-natured brother! but it will do -- Lord! what do you both
call me hither to plague me? I will not stay among ye -- a l'honneur, a l'honneur
-- [running away.] a I'honneur --


Wild. Hey, hey, Miss Notable! come back, pray madam, come back -- [Forces her
back.]


Maria. Lord of heaven! what do you want!


Wild. Come, come, truce with your frolicks, Miss Hoyden, and behave like a
sensible girl; we have serious business with you.


Maria. Have you? Well, come, I will be sensible -- there, I blow all my folly
away -- It Is gone, it is gone, and now I Will talk sense; come -- Is that a
sensible face?


Wild. Po, po, be quiet, and hear what we have to say to you.


Maria. I will, I am quiet. It is charming weather; it will be good for the
country, this will.


Wild. Po, ridiculous! how can you be so silly?


Maria. Bless me! I never saw any thing like you -- there is no such thing as
satisfying you -- I am sure it was very good sense what I said -- Papa talks in
that manner -- Well, well! I Will be silent then -- I will not speak at all; will
that satisfy you?

[Looks sullen.]
Wild. Come, come, no more of this folly, but mind what is said to you -- You
have not seen your city lover, you say?

[Maria shrugs her shoulders, and shakes her head.]
Wild. Why don't you answer?


Beau. My dear Maria, put me out of pain --

[Maria shrugs her shoulders again.]
Wild. Po! don't be so childish, but give a rational answer --


Maria. Why, no, then; no -- no, no, no, no, no, -- I tell you no, no, no --


Wild. Come, come, my little giddy sister, you must not be so flighty; behave
sedately, and don't be a girl always


Maria. Why don't I tell you I have not seen him -- but I am to see him this
very day.


Beau. To see him this day, Maria?


Maria. Ha, ha! -- look there, brother; he is beginning again -- But don't
fright yourself, and I Will tell you all about it -- My papa comes to me this
morning -- by the by, he makes a fright of himself with his strange dress --
Why does not he dress as other gentlemen do, brother!


Wild. He dresses like his brother fox-hunters in Wiltshire --


Maria. But when he comes to town, I wish he would do as other gentlemen do
here -- I am almost ashamed of him -- But he comes to me this morning -- Hoic!
hoic! our Moll -- Where is the sly puss -- Tally ho! -- Did you want me, papa?
-- Come hither, Moll, I Will gee you a husband, my girl; one that has mettle enough
-- he will take cover, I warrant un -- Blood to the bone.


Beau. There now, Wilding, did not I tell you this?


Wild. Where are you to see the young citizen?


Maria Why, papa will be at home in an hour, and then he intends to drag me
into the city with him, and there the sweet creature is to be introduced to me
-- The old gentleman, his father, is delighted with me, but I hate him, an old
ugly thing --


Wild. Give us a description of him; I want to know him --


Maria. Why he looks like the picture of Avarice, sitting with pleasure upon a
bag of money, and trembling for fear any body should come and take it away --
He has got square-toed shoes, and little tiny buckles, a brown coat, with small
round brass buttons, that looks as if it was new in my great-grandmother's
time, and his face all shrivelled and pinched with care, and he shakes his head
like a mandarine upon a chimney-piece -- Ay, ay, Sir Jasper, you are right, and
then he grins at me; I profess she is a very pretty bale of goods. Ay, ay, and
my son Bob is a very sensible lad -- ay, ay! and I will underwrite their
happiness for one and a half per cent.


Wild. Thank you, my dear girl; thank you for this account of my relations.


Beau. Destruction to my hopes! Surely my dear little angel if you have any
regard for me --


Maria. There, there, there he is frightened again --

[ Sings, Dearest creature, etc.]
Wild. Pshaw! give over these airs -- listen to me, and I Will instruct you how
to manage them all --


Maria. Oh! my dear brother, you are very good -- but don't mistake yourself;
though just come from a boarding-school, give me leave to manage for myself --
There is in this case a man I like, and a man I don't like -- It is not you I
like [ to Beaufort] -- no -- no -- I hate you -- But let this little head
alone; I know what to do -- I shall know how to prefer one, and get rid of the
other.


Beau. What will you do, Maria?


Maria. Ha, ha, I cannot help laughing at you.

Sings. Do not grieve me,
Oh! relieve me, etc.

Wild. Come, come, be serious, Miss Pert, and I Will instruct you what to do --
The old cit, you say, admires you for your understanding, and his son would not
marry you unless he found you a girl of sense and spirit?


Maria. Even so -- this is the character of your giddy sister --


Wild. Why then, I Will tell you -- You shall make him hate you for a fool, and
so let the refusal come from himself --


Maria. But how -- how my dear brother? Tell me how?


Wild. Why you have seen a play with me, where a man pretends to be a downright
country oaf, in order to rule a wife and have a wife.


Maria. Very well -- what then? what then? -- Oh -- I have it -- I understend
you -- say no more -- it is charming; I like it of all things; I Will do it, I
will; and I will so plague him, that he shall not know what to make of me -- He
shall be a very toad-eater to me; the sour, the sweet, the bitter, he shall
swallow all, and all shall work upon him alike for my diversion. Say nothing of
it -- it is all among ourselves; but I will not be cruel. I hate ill nature, and
then who knows but I may like him?


Beau. My dear Maria, don't talk of liking him --


Maria. Oh! now you are beginning again --

[ Sings, Voi Amanti, etc. and exit.]
Beau. 'Sdeath, Wilding, I shall never be your brother-in law at this rate.


Wild. Pshaw, folllow me; don't be apprehensive -- I Will give her farther
instructions, and she will execute them I warrant you; the old fellow's
daughter shall be mine, and the son may go shift for himself elsewhere.


SCENE II. Old Philpot 's House.
Enter OLD PHILPOT, DAPPER, and QUILLDRIVE. Old Phil. Quilldrive, have those
dollars been sent to the Bank, as I ordered?


Quill. They have, Sir.


Old Phil. Very well! -- Mr. Dapper I am not fond of writing any thing of late;
but at your request --


Dap. You know I would not offer you a bad policy.


Old Phil. I believe it -- Well, step with me to my closet, and I will look at
your policy -- How much do you want upon it?


Dap. Three thousand; you had better take the whole: there are very good names
upon it --


Old Phil. Well, well, step with me, and I Will talk to you -- Quilldrive step
with those bills for acceptance -- This way, Mr. Dapper, this way.

[Exeunt.]
QUILLDRIVE solus. Quill. A miserly old rascal! digging, digging money out of
the very hearts of mankind; constantly, constantly scraping together, and yet
trembling with anxiety for fear of coming to want. A canting old hypocrite! and
yet under his veil of sanctity, he has a liquorish tooth left -- running to the
other end of the town slily every evening, and there he has his solitary
pleasures in holes and corners --


GEORGE PHILPOT, peeping in. G. Phil. Hist, hist! -- Quilldrive!


Quill. Ha, Master George! --


G. Phil. Is Square-toes at home?


Quil. He is --


G. Phil. Has he asked for me?


Quil. He has.


G. Phil. [Walks in an tip-toe] Does he know I did not lay at home?


Quil. No; I sunk that upon him.


G. Phil. Well done; I Will give you a choice gelding to carry you to Dulwich of
a Sunday -- Damnation! -- up all night -- stripped of nine hundred pounds --
pretty well for one night! -- Picqued, repicqued, slammn'd, and capotted every
deal! -- Old Dry-beard shall pay all -- is forty-seven good? no -- fifty good?
no! -- no, no, no -- to the end of the chapter -- Cruel luck! -- Damn me, it is
life though -- this is life -- 'sdeath! I hear him coming [runs off and peeps] --
no, all is safe -- I must not be caught in these clothes, Quilldrive --


Quil. How come you did not leave them at Madam Corinna's, as you generally do?


G. Phil. I was afraid of being too late for old Square-toes, and so I whipped
into a hackney-coach, and drove with the windows up, as if I was afraid of a
bumbailey. -- Pretty clothes, an't they?


Quill. Ah! Sir --


G. Phil. Reach me one of my mechanic city frocks -- no -- stay -- it is in the
next room, an't it?


Quill. Yes, Sir


G. Phil. I Will run and slip it on in a twinkle.

Exit. QUILLDRIVE solus.
Quill. Mercy on us! what a life does he lead? Old Cojer within here will
scrape together for him, and the moment young Master comes to possession, "I Will
got, ill gone", I warrant me; a hard card I have to play between 'em both --
drudging for the old man, and pimping for the young one -- The father is a
reservoir of riches, and the son is a fountain to play it all away in vanity
and folly!


Re-enter GEORGE PHILPOT. G. Phil. Now I Am equipped for the city -- Damn the
city! -- I wish the Papishes would set fire to it again -- I hate to be beating
the hoof here among them -- Here comes father -- no; -- it is Dapper --
Quilldrive, I Will give you the gelding --


Quill. Thank you, Sir.

Exit.
Enter DAPPER. Dap. Why you look like a devil, George.


G. Phil. Yes, I have been up all night; lost all my money, and I am afraid I
must smash for it --


Dap. Smash for it -- what have I let you into the secret for? Have not I
advised you to trade upon your own account -- and you feel the sweets of it --
how much do you owe in the city?


G. Phil. At least twenty thousand --


Dap. Poh, that is nothing! Bring it up to fifty or sixty thousand, and then
give 'em a good crash at once -- I have ensur'd the ship for you.


G. Phil. Have you --


Dap. The policy's full; I have just touched your father for the last three
thousand.


G. Phil. Excellent! are the goods re-landed?


Dap. Every bale -- I have had them up to town, and sold them all to a packer
for you --


G. Phil. Bravo --! and the ship is loaded with rubbish, I suppose?


Dap. Yes; and is now proceeding the voyage.


G. Phil. Very well -- and tomorrow, or next day we shall hear of her being
lost upon the Goodwin, or sunk between the Needles.


Dap. Certainly.


G. Phil. Admirable! And then we shall come upon the underwiters.


Dap. Directly.


G. Phil. My dear Dapper!

Embraces him.
Dap. Yes; I do a dozen every year. How do you think I can live as I do,
otherwise?


G. Phil. Very true; shall you be at the club after Change?


Dap. Without fail --


G. Phil. That Is right; it will be a full meeting: we shall have Not Pigtail,
the dry-salter, there, and Bob Reptile, the Change-broker, and Sobersides, the
banker -- we shall all be there. We shall have deep doings --


Dap. Yes, yes; well, a good morning; I must go now and fill up a policy for a
ship that has been lost these three days --


G. Phil. My dear Dapper, thou art the best of friends.


Dap. Ay, I Will stand by you -- It will be time enough for you to break, when
you see your father near his end; then give 'em a smash; put yourself at the
head of his fortune, and begin the world again -- Good morning.

[Exit.] G. PHILPOT, solus.
G. Phil. Dapper, adieu -- Who now in my situation would envy any of your great
folks at the court-end! A Lord has nothing to depend upon but his estate -- He
cannot spend you a hundred thousand pounds of other people's money -- no -- no
-- I had rather be a little bob-wig citizen, in good credit, than a
commissioner of the customs -- Commissioner! -- The King has not so good a
thing in his gift, as a commission of bankruptcy -- Don't we see them all with
their country seats at Hogsdon, and at Kentish-town, and at Newington-butts,
and at Islington; with their little flying Mercurys tipped upon the top of the
house, their Apollos, their Venus's, and their leaden Hercules's in the garden;
and themselves sitting before the door, with pipes in their mouths, waiting for
a good digestion -- Zoons! here comes old Dad; now for a few dry maxims of
left handed wisdom, to prove myself a scoundrel in sentiment, and pass in his
eyes for a hopeful young man likely to do well in the world.

Enter OLD PHILPOT.
Old Phil. Twelve times twelve is 144.


G. Phil. I Will attack him in his own way -- Commission at two and a half per
cent.


Old Phil. There he is, intent upon business! What, plodding, George?


G. Phil. Thinking a little of the main chance, Sir.


Old Phil. That Is right, it is a wide world, George.


G. Phil. Yes, Sir, but you instructed me early in the rudiments of trade.


Old Phil. Ay, ay! I instilled good principles into thee.


G. Phil. So you did, Sir -- Principal and interest is all I ever heard from
him. [Aside] I shall never forget the story you recommended to my earliest
notice, Sir.


Old Phil. What was that, George? It is quite out of my head --


G. Phil. It intimated, Sir, how Mr. Thomas Inkle, of London, merchant, was
cast away, and was afterward protected by a young lady, who grew in love with
him; and how he afterward bargained with a planter to sell her for a slave.


Old Phil. Ay, ay, [laughs] I recollect it now.


G. Phil. And when she pleaded being with child by him, he was no otherwise
moved than to raise his price, and make her turn better to account.


Old Phil. [Bursts into a laugh.] I remember it -- ha, -- ha* there was the
very spirit of trade! ay -- ay -- ha, ha!


G. Phil. That was calculation for you --


(...) Ay, ay.


G. (...) (...) Rule of Three -- If one gives me so much; what will two give me?


Old Phil. Ay, ay, [Laughs.]


G. Phil. That was a hit, Sir.


Old Phil. Ay, ay.


G. Phil. That was having his wits about him.


Old Phil. Ay, ay! It is a lesson for all young men. It was a hit indeed, ha,
ha! [Both laugh.]


G. Phil. What an old negro it is.

[Aside].
Old Phil. Thou art a son after my own heart, George.


G. Phil. Trade must be minded -- A penny saved, is a penny got --


Old Phil. Ay, ay! [Shakes his head, and looks cunning.]


G. Phil. He that has money in his purse, will not want a head on his shoulders.


Old Phil. Ay, ay.


G. Phil. Rome was not built in a day -- Fortunes are made by degrees -- Pains
to get, care to keep, and fear to lose --


Old Phil. Ay, ay.


G. Phil. He that lies in bed, his estate feels it.


Old Phil. Ay, ay, the good boy --


G. Phil. The old Curmudgeon [aside] think nothing mean that brings in an
honest penny --


Old Phil. The good boy! George, I have great hopes of thee.


G. Phil. Thanks to your example; you have taught me to be cautious in this
wide world -- Love your neighbor, but don't pull down your hedge.


Old Phil. I profess it is a wise saying -- I never heard it before; it is a
wise saying; and shows how cautious we should be of too much confidence in
friendship.


G. Phil. Very true --


Old Phil. Friendship has nothing to do with trade.


G. Phil. It only draws a man in to lend money.


Old Phil. Ay, ay --


G. Phil. There was your neighbor's son, Dick Worthy, who was always cramming
his head with Greek and Latin at school; he wanted to borrow of me the other
day, but I was too cunning.


Old Phil. Ay, ay -- Let him draw bills of exchange in Greek and Latin, and see
where he will get a pound sterling for them.


G. Phil. So I told him -- I went to him to his garret, in the Minories; and
there I found him in all his misery; and a fine scene it was -- There was his
wife in a corner of the room, at a washing-tub, up to the elbows in suds; a
solitary pork-stake was dangling by a bit of pack-thread, before a melancholy
fire; himself seated at a three-legg'd table, writing a pamphlet against the
German war; a child upon his left knee, his right-leg employed in rocking a
cradle with a bratling in it -- And so there was business enough for them all
-- His wife rubbing away [mimicks a washer-woman] and he writing on, The King
of Prussia shall have no more subsidies; Saxony shall be indemnify'd -- He
shall not have a foot in Silesia. There is a sweet little baby! [to the child on
his knee] then he rocked the cradle, hush ho! hush ho! -- then twisted the
griskin, [snaps his fingers] hush ho! "The Russians shall have Prussia,"
[writes] The wife [washes and sings] he -- "There Is a dear." Round goes the
griskin again, [snaps his fingers] "and Canada must be restored," [writes] --
and so you have a picture of the whole family --


Old Phil. Ha, ha! What becomes of his Greek and Latin now? Fine words butter
no parsnips -- He had no money from you, I suppose, George?


G. Phil. Oh! no; charity begins at home, says I.


Old Phil. And it was wisely said -- I have an excellent saying when any man
wants to borrow of me -- I am ready with my joke -- "A fool and his money are
soon parted" -- ha, ha, ha!


G. Phil. Ha, ha -- An old skin flint.

[Aside.]
Old Phil. Ay, ay -- A fool and his money are soon parted -- ha, ha, ha!


G. Phil. Now if I can wring a handsome sum out him, it will prove the truth of
what he says. [Aside.] And yet trade has its inconveniences -- Great houses
stopping payment! --


Old Phil. Hey -- what! you look chagrin'd! -- Nothing of that sort has
happened to thee, I hope? --


G. Phil. A great house at Cadiz -- Don John de Alvarada -- The Spanish
Galleons not making quick returns -- and so my bills are come back --


Old Phil. Ay! -- [Shakes his head.]


G. Phil. I have indeed a remittance from Messina. That voyage yields me thirty
per cent. profit -- But this blow coming upon me --


Old Phil. Why this is unlucky -- how much money?


G. Phil. Three and twenty hundred --


Old Phil. George, too many eggs in one basket; I Will tell thee George, I expect
Sir Jasper Wilding here presently to conclude the treaty of marriage I have on
foot for thee: then hush this up* say nothing of it, and in a day or two you
pay these bills with his daughter's portion.


G. Phil. The old rogue, (aside) that will never do, I shall be blown upon
Change. -- Alvarada will pay in time -- He has opened his affairs -- He appears
a good man.


Old Phil Does he?


G. Phil. A great fortune left; will pay in time, but I must crack before that
--


Old Phil. It is unlucky! a good man you say he is --


G. Phil. No body better --


Old Phil. Let me see -- Suppose I lend this money --


G. Phil. Ah, Sir.


Old Phil. How much is your remittance from Messina?


G. Phil. Seven hundred and fifty.


Old Phil. Then you want fifteen hundred and fifty.


G. Phil. Exactly.


Old Phil. Don Alvarada is a good man you say.


G. Phil. Yes, Sir.


Old Phil. I will venture to lend the money -- You must allow me commission
upon those bills for taking them up for honor of the drawer --


G. Phil. Agreed.


Old Phil. Lawful interest, while I am out of my money --


G. Phil. I subscribe.


Old Phil. A power of attorney to receive the moneys from Alvarada, when he
makes a payment.


G. Phil. You shall have it.


Old Phil. Your own bond.


G. Phil. To be sure.


Old Phil. Go and get me a check -- You shall have a draught on the bank --


G. Phil. Yes, Sir, (going.)


Old Phil. But stay -- I had forgot -- I must sell out for this -- Stocks are
under par -- You must pay the difference --


G. Phil. Was ever such a leech, (aside) By all means, Sir.


Old Phil. Step and get me a check.


G. Phil. A fool and his money are soon parted.

aside, Exit G. Philpot.
OLD PHILPOT, Solus. What with commission, lawful interest, and his paying the
difference of the stocks, which are higher now than when I bought in, this will
be no bad morning's work, and then in the evening, I shall be in the rarest
spirits for this new adventure I am recommended to -- Let me see what is the
lady's name. [Takes a letter out.] Corinna! ay, ay, by the description she is a
bale of goods -- I shall be in rare spirits -- Ay, this is the way, to indulge
one's passions and yet conceal them, and to mind one's business in the city
here, as if one had no passion at all -- I long for the evening methinks --
Body of me -- I am a young man still.

Enter QUILLDRIVE.
Quill. Sir Jasper Wilding, Sir, and his daughter. --


Old Phil. (...) at home. --


Enter Sir JASPER and MARIA. [Sir Jasper dressed as a Fox-hunter, and singing.]
Old Phil. Sir Jasper, your very humble servant.


Sir Jasp. Master Philpot, I be glad to zee ye, I am indeed --


Old Phil. The like compliment to you, Sir Jasper, -- Miss Maria, I kiss your
fair hand --


Maria. Sir, your most obedient --


Sir Jasp. Ay, ay, I ha brought up to zee you -- There Is my girl -- I ben't
ashamed of my girl --


Maria. That Is more than I can say of my father -- luckily these people are as
much strangers to decorum as my old gentleman, otherwise this visit from a lady
to meet her lover would have an odd appearance -- Though but late a
boarding-school girl, I know enough of the world for that -- [Aside.]


Old Phil. Truly she is a blooming young lady, Sir Jasper, and I verily shall
like to take an interest in her.


Sir Jasp. I ha brought her to zee ye, and so your zon may have her as soon as
he will.


Old Phil. Why she looks three and a half par cent. better than when I saw her
last.


Maria. Then there is hopes that in a little time, I shall be above par -- he
rates me like a lottery ticket.

[Aside.]
Old Phil. Ay, ay, I doubt not, Sir Jasper. Miss has the appearance of a very
sensible, discreet young lady; and, to deal freely, without that she would not
do for my son -- George is a shrewd lad, and I have often heard him declare, no
consideration should ever prevail on him to marry a fool.


Maria. Ay, you have told me so before, old gentleman, and I have my cue from
my brother; and if I don't soon give master George a surfeit of me, why then I
am not a notable girl.

[Aside.] Enter GEORGE PHILPOT.
G. Phil. A good clever old cuff this -- after my own heart -- I think I Will
have his daughter, if it is only for the pleasure of hunting with him --


Sir Jasp. Zon-in-law, gee us your hand -- What zay you? Are you ready for my
girl?


G. Phil. Say grace as soon as you will, Sir, I Will fall too --


Sir Jasp. Well zaid -- I like you -- I like un master Philpot -- I like un --
I Will tell you what, let un talk to her now.


Old Phil. And so he shall -- George, she is a bale of goods; speak her fair
now, and then you will be in cash --


G. Phil. I think I had rather not speak to her now -- I hate speaking to those
modest women -- Sir; -- Sir -- a word in your ear; had not I better break my
mind, by advertising for her in a news-paper?


Old Phil. Talk sense to her, George; she is a notable girl -- and I Will give
the draft upon the bank presently --


Sir Jasp. Come along, master Philpot -- come along; I ben't afraid of my girl
-- come along --

[ Exeunt Sir Jasp. and Old Phil.]
Maria. A pretty sort of a lover they have found for me.

[Aside.]
G. Phil. How should I speak my mind to her? She is almost a stranger to me.

[Aside.]
Maria. Now I Will make the hideous thing hate me if I can.

[Aside.]
G. Phil. Ay, she is as sharp as a needle, I warrant her.

[Aside.]
Maria. When will he begin? -- Ah, you fright! You rival Mr. Beaufort! I Will
give him an aversion to me, that is what I will; and so let him have the trouble
of breaking off the match: not a word yet -- he is in a fine confusion [Looks
foolish] I think I may as well sit down, Sir --


G. Phil. Ma'am -- I -- I -- I -- [frighted] -- I Will hand you a chair, Ma'am --
there Ma'am.

Bows awkwardly.
Maria. Sir, I thank you --


G. Phil. I Will sit down too.

[In confusion.]
Maria. Heigho!


G. Phil. Ma'am!


Maria. Sir!


G. Phil. I thought -- I -- I -- did not you say something, Ma'am?


Maria. No, Sir; nothing.


G. Phil. I beg your pardon, Ma'am.


Maria. Oh! you are a sweet creature.

Aside.
G. Phil. The ice is broke now; I have begun, and so I Will go on. Sits silent,
looks foolish, and steals a look at her.


Maria. An agreeable interview this!


G. Phil. Pray, Ma'am, do you ever go to concerts?


Maria. Concerts! what is that, Sir!


G. Phil. A music meeting --


Maria. I have been at a Quaker's meeting; but never at a music meeting. --


G. Phil. Lord, Ma'am, all the gay world goes to concerts -- She notable! I Will
take courage, she is nobody -- Will you give me leave to present you a ticket
for the Crown and Anchor, Ma'am?


Maria. [Looking simple and awkward.] -- A ticket -- what is a ticket?


G. Phil. There, Ma'am -- at your service --


Maria. [Curtsys awkwardly] I long to see what a ticket is?


G. Phil. What a curtsy there is for the St. James's end of the town! I hate
her; she seems to be an idiot.

[Aside.]
Maria. Here Is a charming ticket he has given me, [Aside.] And is this a
ticket, Sir?


G. Phil. Yes, Ma'am -- And is this a ticket.

[Mimicks her aside.]
Maria. [Reads.] For sale by the candle, the following goods -- thirty chests
straw hats -- fifty tubs chip hats -- pepper, sago, borax -- ha -- ha! Such a
ticket!


G. Phil. I -- I -- I have made a mistake, Ma'am -- here, here is the right one
--


Maria. You need not mind it, Sir -- I never go to such places --


G. Phil. No, Ma'am -- I don't know what to make of her -- Was you ever at the
White-Conduit-house?


Maria. There Is a question. [Aside.] Is that a nobleman's seat?


G. Phil. [Laughs.] Simpleton! -- No Miss -- it is not a nobleman's seat --
Lord! it is at Islington --


Maria. Lord Islington! -- I don't know my Lord Islington --


G. Phil. The town of Islington --


Maria. I have not the honor of knowing his Lordship --


G. Phil. Islington is a town, Ma'am --


Maria. Oh! it is a town --


G. Phil. Yes, Ma'am.


Maria. I am glad of it.


G. Phil. What is she glad of? --


Maria. A pretty husband my papa has chose for me.

Aside.
G. Phil. What shall I say to her next? Have you been at the burletta, Ma'am?


Maria. Where?


G. Phil. The burletta.


Maria. Sir, I would have you to know that I am no such person -- I go to
burlettas! I am not what you take me for, Sir --


G. Phil. Ma'am! --


Maria. I Am come of good people, Sir; and have been properly educated as a
young girl ought to be --


G. Phil. What a damned fool she is. [Aside.] -- The burletta is an opera,
Ma'am --


Maria. Opera, Sir! I don't know what you mean by this usage -- to affront me
in this manner?


G. Phil. Affront! I meant quite the reverse, Ma'am; I took you for a
connoisseur.


Maria. Who me a connoisseur, Sir! I desire you will not call me such names; I am
sure I never so much as thought of such a thing. Sir, I will not be called a
connoisseur -- I wont -- I will not -- I will not.

Bursts out a crying.
G. Phil. Ma'am, I meant no offense -- A connoisseur is a virtuoso --


Maria. Don't virtuoso me! I am no virtuoso, Sir, I would have you to know it
-- I am as virtuous a girl as any in England, and I will never be a virtuoso.

[Cries bitterly.]
G. Phil. But, Ma'am, you mistake me quite.


Maria. [In a passion, choking her Tears and sobbing.] Sir, I am come of as
virtuous people as any in England -- My family was always remarkable for virtue
-- My mamma [bursts out] was as good a woman as ever was born, and my aunt
Bridget [sobbing] was a virtuous woman too -- And there is my sister Sophy makes
as good and as virtuous a wife as any at all -- And so, Sir, don't call me a
virtuoso -- I will not be brought here to be treated in this manner, I will not -- I
will not -- I will not.

Cries bitterly.
G. Phil. The girl's a natural -- So much the better. I Will marry her, and lock
her up -- Ma'am, upon my word you misunderstand me --


Maria. Sir [drying her tears] I will not be called connoisseur by you nor any
body -- And I am no virtuoso -- I Would have you to know that --


G. Phil. Ma'am, connoisseur and virtuoso are words for a person of taste --


Maria. Taste!

[Sobbing]
G. Phil. Yes, Ma'am --


Maria. And did you mean to say as how I am a person of taste?


G. Phil. Undoubtedly.


Maria. Sir, your most obedient humble servant; Oh! that is another thing -- I
have a taste to be sure --


G. Phil. I know you have ma'am -- Oh you're a cursed ninny.

Aside.
Maria. Yes, I know I have -- I can read tolerably; and I begin to write a
little --


G. Phil. Upon my word, you have made a great progress! -- What could old
Square-Toes mean by passing her upon me for a sensible girl? And what a fool I
was to be afraid to speak to her -- I Will talk to her openly at once. -- Come
sit down, Miss -- Pray ma'am, are you inclined to matrimony?


Maria. Yes, Sir.


G. Phil. Are you in love?


Maria. Yes, Sir.


G. Phil. Those naturals are always amorous. [aside] How should you like me?


Maria. Of all things --


G. Phil. A girl without ceremony, [aside.] Do you love me?


Maria. Yes, Sir.


G. Phil. But you don't love any body else?


Maria. Yes, Sir.


G. Phil. Frank and free, [aside.] But not so well as me?


Maria. Yes, Sir.


G. Phil. Better may be?


Maria. Yes, Sir.


G. Phil. The devil you do, [aside.] And pehaps, if I should marry you, I
should have a chance to be made a --


Maria. Yes, Sir.


G. Phil. The case is clear; Miss Maria, your very humble servant; you are not
for my money, I promise you.


Maria. Sir.


G. Phil. I have done, Ma'am, that is all, and I take my leave.


Maria. But you will marry me?


G. Phil. No, Ma'am, no; -- -- No such thing -- You may provide yourself a
husband elsewhere, I am your humble servant.


Maria. Not marry me, Mr. Philpot -- But you must -- My papa said you must --
And I will have you --


G. Phil. There Is another proof of her nonsense, [aside.] Make yourself easy,
for I shall have nothing to do with you.


Maria. Not marry me Mr. Philpot, (bursts out in tears) but I say you shall,
and I will have a husband, or I Will know the reason why -- You shall -- You
shall --


G. Phil. A pretty sort of a wife they intend for me here --


Maria. I wonder you an't ashamed of yourself to affront a young girl in this
manner. I Will go, and tell my papa -- I will -- I will -- I will.

crying bitterly.
G. Phil. And so you may -- I have no more to say to you -- and so your
servant, Miss -- your servant --


Maria. Ay! and by goles! my brother Bob shall fight you.


G. Phil. What care I for your brother Bob?

Going.
Maria. How can you be so cruel, Mr. Philpot? how can you -- oh -- cries, and
struggles with him. Exit G. Phil. ha! ha! I have carried my brother's scheme
into execution charmingly; ha! ha! He will break off the match now of his own
accord -- Ha! ha! This is charming; this is fine; this is like a girl of spirit.


End of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter CORINNA, TOM following her. Cor. AN elderly gentleman did you say?


Tom. Yes; that says he has got a letter for you, ma'am.


Cor. Desire the gentleman to walk up Stairs. [ Exit Tom.] These old fellows
will be coming after a body -- But they pay well and so -- Servant, Sir --


Enter OLD PHILPOT. Old Phil. Fair Lady, your very humble servant -- Truly a
blooming young girl! Madam, I have a letter here for you from Bob Poacher, whom
I presume you know --


Cor. Yes, Sir, I know Bob Poacher -- He is a very good friend of mine; (Reads
to herself.) he speaks so handsomely of you, Sir, and says you are so much of
the gentleman that to be sure, Sir, I shall endeavor to be agreeable, Sir --


Old Phil. Really you are very agreeable -- You see I am punctual to my hour.

Looks at his watch.
Cor. That is a mighty pretty watch, Sir.


Old Phil. Yes, Madam, it is a repeator; it has been in our family for a long
time -- This is a mighty pretty lodging -- I have twenty guineas here in a
purse, here they are; (turns them out on the table) as pretty golden rogues as
ever your fair fingers played with --


Cor. I am always agreeable to any thing from a gentleman.


Old Phil. There are [aside] some light guineas among them -- I always put off
my light guineas in this way -- You are exceedingly welcome, madam. Your fair
hand looks so tempting; I must kiss it -- Oh! I could eat it up -- Fair lady,
your lips look so cherry -- They actually invite the touch; (Kisses) really it
makes the difference of cent. per cent. in one's constitution -- You have
really a mighty pretty foot -- Oh, you little rogue -- I could smother you with
kisses -- Oh you little delicate, charming --

Kisses her.
GEORGE PHILPOT, within. G. Phil. Gee-houp! -- Awhi! -- Awhi! Gallows! Awhi!


Old Phil. Hey -- What is all that? -- Somebody coming!


Cor. Some young rake I fancy, coming in whether my servants will or no --


Old Phil. What shall I do? -- I would not be seen for the world -- Cannot you
hide me in that room?


Cor. Dear heart! No, Sir -- These wild young fellows take such liberties -- He
may take it into his head to go in there, and then you will be detected -- Get
under the table -- He shall not remain long whoever he is -- Here -- Here, Sir,
get under here --


Old Phil. Ay; ay; that will do -- Don't let him stay long -- Give me another
buss -- Wounds! I could --


Cor. Hush! -- Make haste --


Old Phil. Ay; ay; I will fair lady -- [Creeps under the table, and peeps out]
Don't let him stay long --


Cor. Hush! Silence! you will ruin all else.


Enter G. PHILPOT, dres'd out. G. Phil. Sharper do your work -- Awhi! Awhi! So
my girl -- How do do?


Cor. Very well, thank you -- I did not expect to see you so soon -- I thought
you was to be at the club -- The servants told me you came back from the city
at two o'clock to dress, and so I concluded you would have staid all night as
usual.


G. Phil. No; the run was against me again, and I did not care to pursue
ill-fortune. But I am strong in cash, my girl --


Cor. Are you?


G. Phil. Yes, yes -- Suskins in plenty.


Old Phil. [peeping.] Ah the ungracious! These are your haunts, are they?


G. Phil. Yes, yes; I am strong in cash -- I have taken in old curmudgeon since
I faw you --


Cor. As how, pray?


Old Phil. [peeping out] Ay, as how; let us hear pray.


G. Phil. Why, I Will tell you --


Old Phil. [peeping] Ay! let us hear.


G. Phil. I talked a world of wisdom to him --


Old Phil. Ay!


G. Phil. Tipped him a few rascally sentiments of a scoundrelly kind of prudence
--


Old Phil. Ay!


G. Phil. The old curmudgeon chuckled at it --


Old Phil. Ay, ay; the old curmudgeon! ay, ay.


G. Phil. He is a sad old fellow!


Old Phil. Ay! go on --


G. Phil. And so I appeared to him as deserving of the gallows as he is himself
--


Old Phil. Well said, boy, well said -- Go on --


G. Phil. And then he took a liking to me -- Ay, ay, says he, ay, friendship
has nothing to do with trade -- George, thou art a son after my own heart; and
then as I dealt out little maxims of penury, he grinn'd like a Jew broker, when
he has cheated his principal of an eighth per cent. -- And cried, ay, ay, that
is the very spirit of trade -- A fool and his money are soon parted --
(mimicking him) and so, on he went, like Harlequin in a French comedy, tickling
himself into a good humor, till at last I tickled him out of fifteen hundred
and odd pounds --


Old Phil. I have a mind to rise and break his bones -- But then I discover
myself -- Lie still, Isaac, lie still --


G. Phil. Oh! I understand trap -- I talked of a great house stopping payment
-- The thing was true enough, but I had no dealing with them --


Old Phil. Ay, ay, --


G. Phil. And so, for fear of breaking off a match with an idiot he wants me to
marry, he lent me the money, and cheated me though --


Old Phil. Ay, you have found it out -- Have ye?


G. Phil. No old usurer in England, grown hardhearted in his trade, could have
dealt worse with me -- I must have commission upon those bills for taking them
up for honor of the drawer -- Your bond -- Lawful interest, while I am out of
my money; and the difference for selling out of the stocks -- an old miserly
good for nothing skin-flint --


Old Phil. My blood boils to be at him -- Go on, can you tell us a little more?


G. Phil. Po! he is an old curmudgeon -- And so I will talk no more about him
-- Come give me a kiss.

They Kiss.
Old Phil. The young dog, how he fastens his lips to her!


G. Phil. You shall go with me to Epsom next Sunday.


Cor. Shall I? That Is charming.


G. Phil. You shall, in my chariot -- I drive --


Cor. But I don't like to see you drive --


G. Phil. But I like it, I am as good a coachman as any in England -- There was
my lord -- What do you call him -- He kept a stage coach for his own driving,
but, Lord! he was nothing to me --


Cor. No!


G. Phil. Oh! no -- I know my road work my girl -- When I have my coachman's
hat on -- Is my hat come home?


Cor. It hangs up yonder! but I don't like it --


G. Phil. Let me see it -- Ay! the very thing -- Mind me when I go to work --
Throw my eyes about a few -- Handle the braces -- Take the off leader by the
jaw -- Here you -- how have you curbed this horse up? -- Let him out a link, do
you blood of a -- Whoo Eh! -- Jewel! -- Button! -- Whoo Eh! Come here, you Sir,
how have you coupled Gallows? you know he will take the bar of Sharper -- Take
him in two holes, do, -- There Is four pretty little knots as any in England --
Whoo Eh!


Cor. But cannot you let your coachman drive? --


G. Phil. No, no -- See me mount the box, handle the reins, my wrist turned
down, square my elbows, stamp with my foot -- Gee up! -- Off we go -- Button,
do you want to have us over? -- Do your work, do -- Awhi! awhi! -- There we
bowl away; see how sharp they are -- Gallows! -- Softly, up hill [whistles.]
there is a public house -- Give 'em a mouthful of water, do -- And fetch me a
dram -- Drink it off -- Gee up! Awhi! Awhi! -- There we go scrambling
altogether -- Reach Epsom in an hour, and forty-three minutes, all Lombard
street to an egg-shell, we do -- There Is your work my girl! -- Eh! damn me --


Old Phil. Mercy on me! What a profligate debauched young dog it is --


Enter YOUNG WILDING. Wild. Ha! my little Corinna -- Sir, your servant --


G. Phil. Your servant, Sir --


Wild. Sir, your servant --


G. Phil. Any commands for me, Sir?


Wild. For you, Sir?


G. Phil. Yes, for me, Sir?


Wild. No Sir, I have no commands for you.


G. Phil. What Is your business?


Wild. Business!


G. Phil. Ay, Business.


Wild. Why, very good business I think -- My little Corinna -- My life -- My
little --


G. Phil. Is that your business? -- Pray, Sir, -- Not so free, Sir --


Wild. Not so free!


G. Phil. No Sir! that lady belongs to me --


Wild. To you, Sir!


G. Phil. Yes, to me --


Wild. To you! Who are you?


G. Phil. As good a man as you --


Wild. Upon my word! -- Who is this fellow, Corinna? Some journeyman tailor, I
suppose, who chooses to try on the gentleman's clothes before he carries them
home --


G. Phil. Tailor! -- What do you mean by that? You lie? I am no tailor --


Wild. You shall give me satisfaction for that!


G. Phil. For what?


Wild. For giving me the lie.


G. Phil. I did not.


Wild. You did, Sir.


G. Phil. You lie; I Will bet you five pounds I did not -- But if you have a mind
for a frolic -- Let me put by my sword -- Now, Sir, come on -- In a boxing
attitude.


Wild. Why, you scoundrel, do you think I want to box? Draw, Sir, this moment.


G. Phil. Not I -- come on --


Wild. Draw, or I Will cut you to pieces --


G. Phil. I Will give you satisfaction this way --


Wild. And I Will give you satisfaction this way [pushes at him.] Draw, Sir --
Draw; You will not draw! -- There, take that, Sirrah -- and that -- and that, you
scoundrel --


Old Phil. Ay, ay; well done; lay it on --

peeps out.
Wild. And there, you rascal, and there --


Old Phil. Thank you; thank you -- Could not you find in your heart to lay him
on another for me?


Cor. Pray, don't be in such a passion, Sir.


Wild. My dear Corinna, don't be frightened; I shall not murder him --


Old Phil. I am safe here -- lie still Isaac, lie still -- I am safe --


Wild. The fellow has put me out of breath. [Sits down.] [ Old Philpot 's watch
strikes ten under the table] Whose watch is that? [stares round] Hey! what is
all this? [looks under the table] Your humble servant, Sir! Turn out pray, turn
out -- You will not -- Then I Will unshell you. [Takes away the table.] Your very
humble servant, Sir --


G. Phil. Zounds! my father there all this time!

[Aside.]
Wild. I suppose you will give me the lie too?


Old Phil. [Still on the ground.] No, Sir; not I truly. But the gentleman there
may divert himself again if he has a mind.


Wild. No, Sir, not I; I pass --


Old Phil. George, you are there I see --


G. Phil. Yes, Sir; and you are there I see --


Wild. Come rise -- Who is this old fellow?


Cor. Upon my word I don't know -- As I live and breath I don't -- he came
after my maid, I suppose; I Will go and ask her -- let me run out of the way, and
hide myself from this scene of confusion --

Exit Corinna.
G. Phil. What an imp of hell she is.

Aside.
Wild. Come, get up, Sir; you are too old to be beat.


Old Phil. [Rising.] In troth, so I am -- But there you may exercise yourself
again if you please --


G. Phil. No, no more for me, Sir -- I thank you.


Old Phil. I have made but a bad voyage of it -- The ship is sunk, and stock
and black lost. Aside.


Wild. Ha, ha! upon my soul, I cannot help laughing at this old Square-toes --
As for you, Sir, you have had what you deserved -- Ha, ha! you are a kind cull,
I suppose -- ha, ha! And you, reverend dad, you must come here tottering after
a punk, ha, ha!


Old Phil. Oh! George! George!


G. Phil. Oh! father! father!


Wild. Ha, ha! what father and son! And so you have found one another out, ha,
ha! -- Well, you may have business, and so, gentlemen, I Will leave you to
yourselves.

Exit.
G. Phil. This is too much to bear -- What an infamous jade she is! All her
contrivance! -- don't be angry with me, Sir, -- I Will go my ways this moment,
tie myself up in the matrimonial noose -- and never have any thing to do with
these courses again.

Going.
Old Phil. And hark you, George; tie me up in a real noose, and turn me off as
soon as you will.

Exeunt.
Enter BEAUFORT, dressed as a lawyer, and Sir JASPER WILDING, with a bottle and
glass in his hand. Beau. No more, Sir Jasper, I cannot drink any more.


Sir Jasp. Why you be but a weezen faced drinker, master Quagmire -- come, man,
finish this bottle --


Beau. I beg to be excused -- you had better let me read over the deeds to you
--


Sir Jasp. Zounds! it is all about outhouses, and messuages, and barns, and
stables, and orchards, and meadows, and lands and tenements, and woods and
underwoods, and commons and backsides. I am of the commission for Wilts, and I
know the ley, and so truce with your jargon, master Quagmire.


Beau. But, Sir, you don't consider, marriage is an, affair of importance -- it
is contracted between persons, first consenting; secondly, free from canonical
impediments; thirdly, free from civil impediments, and can only be dissolved
for canonical causes or levitical causes -- See Leviticus xviii. and xxviii.
Harry VIII. chapter vii --


Sir Jasp. You shall drink the other bumper, an you talk of ley --


Enter a Servant. Ser. Old Mr. Philpot, Sir, and his son --


Sir Jasp. Wounds! that is right, they will take me out of the hand of this lawyer
here -- Exit.


BEAUFORT, solus. Beau. Well done, Beaufort! thus far you have played your
part, as if you had been of the pumple nose family of Furnival's inn.


Sir Jasp. Master Philpot, I be glad you are come; this man here has so plagued
me with his ley, but now we'll have no more about it, but sign the papers at
once.


Old Phil. Sir Jasper, twenty thousand pounds you know is a great deal of money
-- I should not give you so much, if it was not for the sake of your daughter's
marrying my son; so that if you will allow me discount for prompt payment, I
will pay the money down.


G. Phil. Sir, I must beg to see the young lady once more, before I embark; for
to be plain, Sir, she appears to me a mere natural --


Sir Jasp. I Will tell you what, youngster, I find my girl a notable wench -- and
here, here is zon Bob --


Enter YOUNG WILDING. Sir Jasp. Bob, gee us your hand -- I have finished the
business -- and zo now -- here, here, here is your vather-in-law.


Old Phil. Of all the birds in the air, is that he!

Aside.
G. Phil. He has behaved like a relation to me already.

Aside.
Sir Jasp. Go to un man -- that is your vather --


Wild. This is the strangest accident -- Sir, -- Sir -- [stifling a laugh] I --
I -- Sir -- upon my soul, I cannot stand this.

[Bursts out a laughing.]
Old Phil. I deserve it; I deserve to be laughed at.

Aside.
G. Phil. He has shown his regard to his sister's family already.

[Aside.]
Sir Jasp. What Is the matter, Bob? I tell you this is your vather-in-law -- [
Pulls old Philpot to him.] Master Philpot, that is Bob -- Speak to un Bob --
speak to un --


Wild. Sir -- I -- I am [stifles a laugh] I say, Sir -- I am, Sir -- extremely
proud -- of -- of --


G. Phil. Of having beat me, I suppose.

Aside.
Wild. Of the honor, Sir -- of -- of --

Laughs.
G. Phil. Ay! that is what he means.

Aside.
Wild. And, Sir -- I -- I -- this opportunity -- I cannot look him in the face
-- [bursts into a laugh] ha, ha! I cannot stay in the room --

Going.
Sir Jasp. Why the volks are all mad, I believe! you shall stay, Bob; you shall
stay.

Holds him.
Wild. Sir, I -- I cannot possibly --

Whispers his father.
Old Phil. George, George! what a woeful figure do we make!


G. Phil. Bad enough of all conscience, Sir.


Sir Jasp. An odd adventure, Bob.

Laughs heartily.
Old Phil. Ay! there now he is hearing the whole affair, and is laughing at me
--


Sir Jasp. Ha, ha! Po never mind it -- a did not hurt un --


Old Phil. It Is all discovered --


Sir Jasp. Ha, ha! -- I told ye, zon Bob could find a hare squat upon her form
with any he in Christendom -- ha, ha! never mind it man, Bob meant no harm --
here, here, Bob, -- here is your vather, and there is your brother -- I should
like to have zeen un under the table --


Wild. Gentlemen, your most obedient.

Stifling a laugh.
Old Phil. Sir, your servant -- He has licked George well -- and I forgive him
--


Sir Jasp. Well, young gentleman, which way is your mind now.


G. Phil. Why, Sir, to be plain, I find your daughter an idiot.


Sir Jasp. Zee her again then -- zee her again -- here you, sirrah, send our
Moll hither --


Serve. Yes, Sir.


Sir Jasp. Very well then, we'll go into the other room, crack a bottle, and
settle matters there; and leave un together -- Hoic! hoic -- Our Moll -- Tally
over --

Enter MARIA.
Maria. Did you call me, papa?


Sir Jasp. I did, my girl -- There, the gentleman wants to speak with you --
Behave like a clever wench as you are -- Come along, my boys -- Master
Quagmire, come and finish the business.


[ Exit singing, with old Philpot and Beaufort, man^nt George and Maria.] G.
Phil. I know she is a fool, and so I will speak to her without ceremony --
Well, Miss, you told me you could read and write?


Maria. Read, Sir! -- Heavens! [Looking at him.] ha, ha, ha!


G. Phil. What does she laugh at!


Maria. Ha, ha, ha, ha!


G. Phil. What diverts you so, pray?


Maria. Ha, ha, ha! What a fine tawdry figure you have made of yourself? ha,
ha, ha! --


G. Phil. Figure, Madam!


Maria. I shall die -- I shall die! -- ha, ha, ha!


G. Phil. Do you make a laughing stock of me?


Maria. No, Sir, by no means -- ha, ha, ha!


G. Phil. Let me tell you, Miss, I don't understand being treated thus --


Maria. Sir, I cannot possibly help it -- I -- I -- ha, ha, ha!


G. Phil. I shall quit the room, and tell your papa if you go on thus --


Maria. Sir, I beg your pardon a thousand time -- I am but a giddy girl -- I
cannot help it -- ha, ha, ha!


G. Phil. Ma'am, this is a downright insult.


Maria. Sir, you look somehow or other -- I don't know how so comically -- ha,
ha, ha!


G. Phil. Did you never see a gentleman dressed before?


Maria. Never like you -- I beg your pardon, Sir -- ha, ha, ha!


G. Phil. Now here is an idiot in spirits -- I tell you this is your ignorance
-- I am dressed in high taste --


Maria. Yes, so you are -- ha, ha, ha!


G. Phil. Will you have done laughing?


Maria. Yes, Sir, I will -- I will -- there -- there -- there -- I have done --


G. Phil. Do so then, and behave yourself a little sedate --


Maria. I will, Sir; -- I will not look at him, and then I shall not laugh --


G. Phil. Let me tell you, Miss, that nobody understands dress better than I do
--


Maria. Ha, ha, ha!


G. Phil. She Is mad sure --


Maria. No, Sir, I am not mad -- I have done, Sir -- I have done -- I assure
you, Sir, that nobody is more averse from ill manners, and would take greater
pains not to affront a gentleman -- ha, ha, ha!


G. Phil. Again! Zounds! What do you mean! you will put me in a passion, I can
tell you, presently --


Maria. I cannot help it -- Indeed I cannot -- Beat me if you will, but let me
laugh -- I cannot help it -- ha, ha, ha!


G. Phil. I never met with such usage in my life --


Maria. I shall die -- Do, Sir, let me laugh -- It will do me good -- ha, ha,
ha!

[Falls down in a fit of laughing.]
G. Phil. If this is your way, I will not stay a moment longer in the room -- I Will
go this moment and tell your father.


Maria. Sir, Sir, Mr. Philpot, don't be so hasty, Sir -- I have done, Sir, it is
over now -- I have had my laugh out -- I am a giddy girl -- but I Will be grave
-- I Will compose myself and act a different scene with him from what I did in
the morning. I have all the materials of an impertinent wit, and I will now
twirl him about the room, like a boy setting up his top with his finger and
thumb.

Aside.
G. Phil. Miss, I think you told me you can read and write --


Maria. Read, Sir! Reading is the delight of my life -- Do you love reading,
Sir?


G. Phil. Prodigiously -- How pert she is grown -- I have read very little, and
I Am resolved for the future to read less. [Aside] What have you read, Miss?


Maria. Everything --


G. Phil. You have --


Maria. Yes, Sir, I have --


G. Phil. Oh! brave -- and do you remember what you read, Miss?


Maria. Not so well as I could wish -- Wits have short memories.


G. Phil. Oh! you are a wit too?


Maria. I am -- and do you know that I feel myself provoked to a simile now.


G. Phil. Provoked to a simile! -- Let us hear it?


Maria. What do you think we are both like?


G. Phil. Well --


Maria. Like Cymon and Iphigenia in Dryden's fable --


G. Phil. Jenny in Dryden's fable!


Maria. The fanning breeze upon her bosom blows,
To meet the fanning breeze her bosom rose.
That Is me -- now you --

He trudged along, unknowing what he sought,
And whistled as he went [mimicks] for of want of thought.

G. Phil. This is not the same girl --

Disconcerted.
Maria. Mark again, mark again:

The fool of nature stood with stupid eyes,
And gaping mouth that testified surprise.
He looks foolish, she laughs at him.
G. Phil. I must take care how I speak to her; she is not the fool I took her
for --


Maria. You seem surpised, Sir -- but this is my way -- I read, Sir, and then
I apply -- I have read every thing; Suckling, Waller, Milton, Dryden,
Landsdown, Gay, Prior, Swift, Addison, Pope, Young, Thompson --


G. Phil. Hey! the devil -- what a clack is here!

He walks across the stage.
Maria. [Following him eagerly.] Shakespeare, Fletcher, Otway, Southern, Row,
Congreve, Wicherly, Farquhar, Cibber, Vanbrugh, Steel, in short every body; and
I find them all wit, fire, vivacity, spirit, genius, taste, imagination,
raillery, humor, character, and sentiment -- Well done, Miss Notable! you have
played your part like a young actress in high favor with the town.

Aside.
G. Phil. Her tongue goes like a water mill --


Maria. What do you say to me now, Sir?


G. Phil. Say! -- I don't know what the devil to say.

Aside.
Maria. What Is the matter, Sir? Why you look as if the stocks were fallen -- or
like London Bridge at low water -- or like a waterman when the Thames is frozen
-- or like a politician without news -- or like a prude without scandal -- or
like a great lawyer without a brief -- or like some lawyers with one -- or --


G. Phil. Or like a poor devil* of a husband henpeck'd by a wit, and so say no
more of that -- What a capricious piece here is!

Aside.
Maria. Oh, fie! you have spoiled all -- I had not half done --


G. Phil. There is enough of all conscience -- You may content yourself.


Maria. But I cannot be so easily contented -- I like a simile half a mile long
--


G. Phil. I see you do.


Maria. Oh! and I make verses too -- verses like an angel -- off hand --
extempore -- Can you give me an extempore?


G. Phil. What does she mean! -- no, Miss -- I have never a one about me.


Maria. You cannot give me an extempore -- Oh! for shame, Mr. Philpot -- I love
an extempore of all things; and I love the poets dearly, their sense so fine,
their invention rich as Pastolus.


G. Phil. A poet rich as Pactolus! I have heard of Pactolus in the city.


Maria. Very like --


G. Phil. But you never heard of a poet as rich as he --


Maria. As who?


G. Phil. Pactolus -- He was a great Jew merchant -- lived in the ward of
Farringdon without.


Maria. Pactolus, a Jew merchant! Pactolus is a river --


G. Phil. A river!


Maria. Yes -- don't you understand geography!


G. Phil. The girl's crazy --


Maria. Oh! Sir -- if you don't understand geography, you are nobody -- I
understand geography, and I understand orthography; you know I told you I can
write -- and I can dance too -- will you dance a minuet?

[Sings and dances]
G. Phil. You shall not lead me a dance, I promise you.


Maria. Oh! very well, Sir -- you refuse me -- remember you will hear immediately
of my being married to another, and then you will be ready to hang yourself


G. Phil. Not I, I promise you --


Maria. Oh! very well -- very well -- remember -- mark my words -- I Will do it
-- you shall see -- ha, ha!

[Runs off in a fit of laughing.]
GEORGE solus. G. Phil. Marry you! I would as soon carry my wife to live in
Bow-street, and write over the door Philpot's punch-house --


Enter Old PHILPOT and Sir JASPER. Sir Jasp. [Singing] So rarely so bravely
we'll hunt him over the downs, and we'll hoop and we'll hollow. Gee us your
hand, young gentleman; well -- what zay ye to un now? -- Ben't she a clever
girl?


G. Phil. A very extraordinary girl indeed --


Sir Jasp. Did not I tell un zo -- then you have nothing to do but to
consummate as soon as you will.


G. Phil. No, you may keep her, Sir -- I thank you -- I Will have nothing to do
with her --


Old Phil. What Is the matter now, George?


G. Phil. Po! she is a wit.


Sir Jasp. Ay! I told un zo --


G. Phil. And that is worse than the other -- I am off, Sir --


Sir Jasp. Odds heart! I am afraid you are no great wit.


Enter MARIA. Maria. Well, papa, the gentleman will not have me --


Old Phil. The numskull will not do as his father bids him; and so, Sir Jasper,
with your consent I Will make a proposal to the young lady myself.


Maria. How! what does he say?


Old Phil. I am in the prime of my days, and I can to a brisk lover still --
Fair lady, a glance of your eye is like the returning sun in the spring -- It
melts away the frost of age, and gives a new warmth and vigor to all nature.

Falls a coughing.
Maria. Dear heart! I should like to have a scene with him --


Sir Jasp. Hey! What Is in the wind now! -- This will not take -- My girl shall
have fair play -- No old fellow shall totter to her bed -- What say you, my
girl, will you rock his cradle? --


Maria. Sir, I have one small doubt -- Pray can I have two husbands at a time?


G. Phil. There Is a question now! She is grown foolish again --


Old Phil. Fair lady, the law of the land --


Sir. Jasp. Hold ye, hold ye; let me talk of law; I know the law better nor any
on ye -- Two husbands at once -- No; no -- Men are scarce, and that is downright
poaching --


Maria. I am sorry for it, Sir -- For then I cannot marry him, I see --


Sir Jasp. Why not?


Maria. I am contracted to another.


Sir Jasp. Contracted! To whom --


Maria. To Mr. Beaufort -- That gentleman, Sir --


Old Phil. That gentleman!


Beau. Yes, Sir, (Throws open his gown.) My name is Beaufort -- And I hope, Sir
Jasper, when you consider my fortune, and my real affection for your daughter,
you will generously forgive the stratagem I have made use of.


Sir Jasp. Master Quagmire! What are you young Beaufort all this time?


Old Phil. That will not take, Sir -- That will not take --


Beau. But it must take, Sir -- You have signed the deeds for your daughter's
marriage; and Sir Jasper, by this instrument has made me his son-in-law.


Old Phil. How is this? How is this? Then Sir Jasper, you will agree to cancel
the deeds, I suppose, for you know --


Sir Jasp. Catch me at that, an ye can! I fulfilled my promise, and your son
refused, and so the wench has looked out slily for herself elsewhere. Did I not
tell you she was a clever girl? I ben't ashamed of my girl -- Our Moll, you have
done no harm, and Mr. Beaufort is welcome to you with all my heart. I Will stand
to what I have signed, though you have taken me by surprise.


Wild. Bravo! my scheme has succeeded rarely --


Old Phil. And so here I am bubbled and choused out of my money -- George!
George! what a day's work have we made of it! -- Well, if it must be so, be it
so -- I desire, young gentleman, you will come and take my daughter away
tomorrow morning -- And, I Will tell you what, here, here -- Take my family
watch into the bargain, and I wish it may play you just such another trick, as
it has me, that is all -- I Will never go intriguing with a family watch again --


Mar. Well, Sir. ( To G. Phil.) What do you think of me now? An't I a
connoisseur, Sir, and a virtuoso, ha! ha!


G. Phil. Yes, and much good may do your husband, I have been connoisseur'd
among ye to some purpose -- Bubbled at play -- dup'd by my wench -- cudgel'd by
a rake -- laughed at by a girl -- detected by my father, and there is the sum
total of all I have got at this end of the town --


Old Phil. This end of the town! I desire never to see it again while I live --
I Will pop into a hackney-coach this moment, drive to Mincing-lane, and never
venture back to this side of Temple Bar.

[Going.]
G. Phil. And, Sir, Sir! -- shall I drive your?


Old Phil. Ay, you or any body.

[Exit.]
G. Phil. I Will overturn the old hocus at the first corner.

[Following him.]
Sir Jasp. They shall not go zo neither -- they shall stay and crack a bottle.

[Exit after them.]
Maria. Well, brother, how have I played my part?


Wild. Beau. To a miracle.


Maria. Have I? -- I don't know how that is --

Love urged me on to try all wily arts
To win your -- [To Beaufort.] no! not yours -- to win your hearts.
[To the Audience.] Your hearts to win is now my aim alone;
"There if I grow, the harvest is your own."

EPILOGUE,
By Old PHILPOT and GEORGE PHILPOT. Fath. OH! George, George, George! it is such
young rakes as you,
That brings vile jokes, and foul dishonor too
Upon our city youth,

Geo. -- It Is very true.

Fath. St. James's end of the town

Geo. -- No place for me,

Fath. No truly -- no -- their manners disagree
With ours entirely -- yet you there must run,
To ape their follies --

Geo. -- And so am undone --

Fath. There you all learn a vanity in vice,
You turn mere fops -- you game

Geo. -- Oh! damn the dice.

Fath. Bubbled at play --

Geo. -- Yes, Sir --

Fath. -- By every common cheat,

Geo. Ay! here is two witnesses -- [Pulls out his pockets.]

Fath. -- You get well beat.

Geo. A witness too of that, [shews his head] and there is another.
[ To young Wilding.]
Fath. You dare to give affronts --

Geo. -- Zounds such a pother! --

Fath. Affronts to gentlemen! --

Geo. -- 'Twas a rash action --

Fath. Damn me, you lie! I Will give you satisfaction --
[Mimicking.] Drawn in by strumpets -- and detected too! --

Geo. That Is a sad thing, Sir! I Will be judged by you --

Fath. The dog he has me there --

Geo. -- Think you it right;
Under a table --

Fath. -- Miserable plight!

Geo. For grave threescore to sculk with trembling knees,
And envy each young lover that he sees!
Think you it fitting thus abroad to roam?

Fath. Would I had staid to cast accounts at home.

Geo. Ay! there is another vice --

Fath. -- Sirrah give over.

Geo. You brood for ever over your much loved store,
And scraping cent per cent still pine for more.
At Jonathan's, where millions are undone,
Now cheat a nation, and now cheat your son.

Fath. Rascal, enough!

Geo. -- I could add, but am loath --

Fath. Enough! -- this jury [to the audience] will convict us both.

Geo. Then to the court we'd better make submission,
Ladies and gentlemen, with true contrition,
I here repent my faults -- ye courtly train,
Farewell! -- farewell, ye giddy and ye vain!
I now take up -- Forsake the gay and witty,
To live henceforth a credit to the city --

Fath. You see me here quite covered over with shame,
I hate long speeches -- But I Will do the same;
Come, George -- To mend is all the best can boast,

Geo. Then let us in --

Fath. -- And this shall be our toast,
May Britain's thunder on her foes be hurled,

Geo. And London prove the market of the World!

FINIS.

