EDGAR and EMMELINE: A FAIRY TALE.

[Price One Shilling.]

EDGAR and EMMELINE; A FAIRY TALE: IN A DRAMATIC ENTERTAINMENT Of TWO ACTS; As
it is performed at The THEATER ROYAL in DRURY LANE.

LONDON, Printed for H. PAIN and W. CROPLEY, at Dryden's Head, in Paternoster
Row. 1761.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
EDGAR, son to the Earl of KENT, disguised as a Woman, under the name of
ELFRIDA, Mr. OBRILN. FLORIMOND, a Courtier, Mr. KING.
WOMEN.
EMMELINE, daughter to the Earl of NORTHUMBERLAND, disguised as a Man, under
the Name of GONDIBERT, Mrs. YATES. ELFINA, a Fairy, Master KENNEDY. GROTILLA, a
Fairy, Miss ROGERS. An attendant Fairy, Miss WRIGHT.
Other Fairies, Servant, etc.

SCENE, Windsor-Castle, and the Parts adjacent. The Music composed by Mr. ARNE,
jun.

EDGAR and EMMELINE. A FAIRY TALE.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A dark part of Windsor Forest; the castle in prospect: one side of
the horizon tinged with the rays of the setting sun; the moon rising on the
other. Light music. Several fairies enter in grotesque characters, moving to
the music, and at length forming a ring and dancing. Enter another FAIRY.
RECITATIVE.
NOW no more in dells we sleep;
Here our revels now we keep,
By the moon, our silver sun --
See, our sports are now begun!
AIR.
Welcome with thy lambent light,
Welcome, lovely queen of night!
To thy gentle reign belong,
Love, and mirth, and dance, and song.
War, and strife, and toil, and care,
Now their works of woe forbear:
Night shall now for day atone;
Give the night to joy alone!
The fairy mixes with those that dance. Enter ELFINA, an old fairy. Elf. Hist
-- break off! -- My charge receive;
Then renew the sports ye leave.
They leave off dancing; the music ceases; and Elfina beckons first one, then
another, speaking to them separately. When the midnight hour is nigh,
Duteous to your tasks apply.
You, the miser's haunt be near;
Break his rest with causeless ear,
Creak his doors, his windows shake,
'Till his iron heart shall quake.
You, as gouty humors flow,
Pinch the glutton by the toe.
You, with boding dreams molest
Proud ambition's anxious breast.
You, with fancied ghosts affright
Atheists in their own despite:
Bold by day, the blustering spark
Turns believer in the dark.
Hence -- of vice to work the woe,
And the weal of virtue, go! --

The fairies go out at one door; and as Elfina is going out at the other, Enter
GROTILLA, another old fairy. Grot. Sister! sister!


Elf. Whence come thou?


Grot. I come far.


Elf. What to do? Tell me --


Grot. To confer with you.


Elf. Yonder, -- pointing to the castle


Grot. What?


Elf. The castle there --


Grot. Well --


Elf. Contains my present care.


Grot. Briefly then thy care unfold.


Elf. Mark! it shall be briefly told.
Edgar, Emmeline, you knew --

Grot. Youthful both, and fair and true.


Elf. Thus their destiny was read,
While the sisters spun their thread:
This youth a maid, this maid a youth must find,
The best, the fairest, both in form and mind:
Each, as a friend, must each esteem, admire;
Yet catch no spark of amorous desire!
Till this be done, no chance shall bliss bestow;
When this is done, no chance shall work them woe!

Grot. This was published at their birth.


Elf. Right; and well it is known on earth.


Grot. Blessed I wish them --


Elf. So do I.


Grot. Can you help them --


Elf. Certainly.


Grot. Search the island round and round,
None like either can be found.

Elf. Each by each must then be seen;
But not loved --

Grot. Hard task, I ween!


Elf. Hard the task, I know it well.


Grot. How perform it? --


Elf. I can tell.
Here the king pursues the chase;
All his nobles crowd the place:
Emm'line here a youth appears,
Gondibert the name she bears;
Edgar is a maid in dress,
Called Elfrida --

Grot. Now I guess.


Elf. To the youth, the virgin seems,
Like himself, a youth; and dreams,
Like herself, the youth a maid;
Neither thus to love betrayed.

Grot. You contrived --


Elf. I did --


Grot. But --


Elf. Stay!
Mortal footsteps mark the way.
Vanish -- quick! and leave me here:
If conjured, I must appear.

Exit Grotilla; Elfina retires. Enter EMMELINNE, disguised in a man's habit, as
GONDIBERT. Emm. What a situation am I in! -- Is this figure really and truly
Emmeline -- the beloved and only daughter of great Northumberland? Every thing
about me is so like a dream, that I am frighted to think I am awake. -- O how
weary I am of this dress! If I had known half that I should have suffered in
it, all the fairies in the world should not have persuaded me to put it on. --
If I resided here in this disguise the month of the king's hunting, I was to
break the spell I was born under, and my life was to be happy -- so the fairy
told me! -- Yet the time expires tomorrow, and nothing has happened to me but
vexation and disappointment. I must once more see this powerful yet decrepit
being, who, though invisible, is always within my call -- This ring, which she
gave me, convenes her: if I take it off and touch it thrice, she appears --
Once -- twice -- thrice!


Elfina comes forward, and touches her. Emm. O fairy! my situation is such as I
can bear no longer.


Elf. Patience; for it ends tomorrow.


Emm. Tomorrow! -- tomorrow is a thousand years -- When the horse has all he
can bear, a feather will break his back.


Elf. What Is the matter?


Emm. Matter! why, in the first place, I have lived almost a month in a court
--


Elf. That your sorrow?


Emm. That my sorrow! yes -- I that have always lived in my father's
principality, fair Northumberland, where a noble simplicity of manners showed
the heart to be open and undersigning; have, by your persuasion and assistance,
left it for a place, where hypocrisy is avowed by the name of good breeding;
where the most shameful licentiousness is justified as gallantry; dissimulation
and perfidy, as address and good management; where self-interest is professed
as the first principle of wisdom, and virtue and public spirit derided as
extravagance and superstition.


Elf. But your dress was your defense.


Emm. O! it is my dress that exposes me to more than half that I suffer. When
one of my own sex is in company, I am comparatively happy; but how unfit for a
woman's ear is the conversation of men, when it is not restrained by knowing
that a woman is present! I begin to fear that I should hot have thought so well
even of those men I have been used to converse with, if they had appeared to me
as they appear to each other. -- The friendship and confidence of these lords
of the creation, have almost robbed me, a weak woman, of my allegiance: -- I am
frighted at the thought of living among them.


Elf. Fear not vices you detest.


Emm. Fear not! but what must I hope? O fairy! if I have implicitly followed
your instructions, if I have hidden them in my breast from every friend, and
even from good Northumberland my father, let me no longer suffer the anguish of
suspense.


Elf. Persevere; believe; confide.


Emm. But I have yet found no object worthy of my love.


Elf. You must find, and know it not.
Such the Fates ordained thy lot!

Emm. I know the mystery of my fate -- that the happiness of my life depends
upon my seeing and making a friend of the most beautiful and accomplished of
men, without one thought of love -- Alas! -- forgive my doubts, my fears --
should you -- --


Elf. Hold! of foul mistrust beware -- -- To^morrow! --


Emm. Well then, till to morrow --


Elf. Soft -- unhallowed feet are nigh! -- Florimond --


Emm. O! that wretch haunts me like my shadow. To rally me for what he calls my
virtue, seems to be his supreme delight; he is proud of his own insensibility
to what gives me pain: the confusion he throws me into, he considers as a test
of his own abilities and accomplishments; and as vanity is his predominant
passion, he is so assiduous to secure the enjoyment of his superiority, that I
can scarce escape him one hour in a day.


Elf. He shall work thee woe and weal,
As tomorrow shall reveal.

Emm. But how? where? -- dear, dear fairy! --


Elf. Ha, ha, ha! How and where must still perplex ye;
And, in kindness, I must vex ye -- Ha, ha, ha!

Elfina disappears. Emm. Gone! -- Mystery! perplexity, and distress! She sports
too with my anxiety! I almost wish I had not trusted her: but it is too late --
Here comes Florimond, and my torment begins.


Enter FLORIMOND, singing. Flor. Ha! my little Gondibertus! have I found you?
-- What all alone peeping about? Egad I was in hopes there had been a wench in
the case, and that I might have given thee joy of thy reformation.


Emm. Sir, I chose to be alone. Solitude is sometimes not only useful, but
pleasant.


Flor. Why it is a fine moonlight evening indeed --
But what the devil --

Emm. I have sufficient subject for meditation, Sir; and I hoped that, as there
is a ball at the castle tonight, you would have been better engaged than to
watch my privacy.


Flor. What! better engaged than to raise such a recruit for the beau monde, as
thou art? -- Come, come, thou shall not thus steal away from good company to
thyself.


Emm. Sir, upon my word, I Am fit company for none but myself at present.


Flor. Pshaw! -- what always muzzy, with a dismal countenance as long as a
taylor's bill! Come, cheer up, boy, I Have news for thee.


Emm. For me, Sir! alarmed


Flor. Aye, to divert thee I mean; that is all.


Emm. What, is it any thing uncommon then?


Flor. No faith, not very uncommon neither; though perhaps thou may make a
wonder of it. -- It Is only an heiress that is just run away with a young fellow.


Emm. That, indeed, is not so uncommon as might be wished. But who is she? is
she of any fashion?


Flor. Yes faith, she is of some fashion; Northumberland's fair daughter
Emmeline, that is all --


Emm. Oh! --


Flor. What, thy virtue is shocked at the licent ousness of the age? Ha, ha,
ha! -- Or art thou a lover of the fair Emmeline's? hey!


Emm. aside. What shall I say? my confusion will certainly betray me -- 'Twas
only a sudden pain shot cross my bread -- But what particulars do you hear?


Flor. Why it seems she got leave of her father to follow him hither; and it is
just accidentally discovered, that she left his castle the next day, though she
has not been here yet.


Emm. Well; but why do you therefore conclude, that she is gone off with a man?


Flor. Why only because the duke of Kent's son, Edgar, disappeared upon the
same pretense, just at the same time; and both have been missing ever since.


Emm. And is this sufficient to authorize a positive assertion to the prejudice
of a reputation, which hitherto not slander itself has presumed to stain?


Flor. Ha! ha! ha! Not slander itself has presumed to stain! Ha, ha, ha.
Mimicking her.


Emm. aside. O my heart! what new insult am I doomed to suffer? -- You Will
excuse me, Sir, if, upon this occasion, I take the liberty to tell you, that
your mirth is rather ill-timed; and --


Flor. Sir -- do you know this fair lady, that you are so much disposed to
become her knight errant?


Emm. aside. I must be cautious, or my zeal may discover me. Sir, though I
should not know her, it is my point of honor, never to suffer the reputation
of the absent to be wantonly sported away, upon mere circumstances and surmise.


Flor. Your point of honor! -- why to be sure all this is very fine. But I Will
tell you a secret, my dear -- As unstained as you may think the fair Emmeline's
reputation, there is a certain humble servant of yours, that shall be nameless,
who has some small reason to think, that a certain piece of brittle ware, which
she had the keeping of, may be a little cracked -- or so.


Emm. asideA wretch! who never saw me but in this disguise -- You are well
acquainted with her then?


Flor. Why -- I am --


Emm. And pray, what kind of woman is she?


Flor. Why, she is a pretty -- upon my word, a very pretty wench.


Emm. But is she tall, or short, or brown, or fair?


Flor. You have never seen her, you say?


Emm. No more than I do this moment.


Flor. Aside. Then I may venture -- Why she is fair, tall, and slender; has a
fine neck, a very fine neck! her limbs remarkably well turned, her leg and
ancle the finest I ever saw --


Emm. distressed and confounded. Oh!


Flor. Aye -- I thought I should set you a longing: but come, she is not to be
had at present it seems; so no more of her.


Emm. I cannot so easily dismiss her as you may imagine; and yet, perhaps, you
may mistake the reason.


Flor. Very likely, faith; but what is it?


Emm. Why I am astonished, that you make so light of what has happened to her;
whether you consider it as the loss of a mistress, or whether as a misfortune
to a woman you must be supposed to have loved, and to whom you must have had
obligations of the strongest and most tender kind: one of these lights you must
see it in.


Flor. Why, my dear, as to that, I am extremely easy about losing her; for
between you and I -- I could spare her. I must, indeed, confess, that I was
very fond of her once; but 'faith, the obligations were all on her side -- It Is
among ourselves.


Emm. aside O, my heart! what a monstrous compound of vanity and lies is this!
-- How so, pray sir?


Flor. Why, I used to meet her in her father's park night after night, at the
risk of my life; and egad, what with the danger, and what with the fatigue, I
grew tired of her; and, to tell you the truth, provided her another lover, to
make good my retreat. It Is among ourselves.


Emm. Well said -- and who was that, sir?


Flor. The very same Edgar that she is now run away with. I thought it would be
a pretty thing for him; for he is one of your fighting fellows, that is never
so happy as when he is in danger -- but I Am sorry he has been so indiscreet.


Emm. Pray, Sir -- excuse me -- I don't pretend to question the truth of what
you say; but there are some difficulties in the story, that I should be glad to
have cleared up -- If you was so much in the lady Emmeline's good graces, and
had, as you say, no dislike to her person, how came you not to think of
marrying her? Such an alliance, I presume, would not have dishonored you. -- I
shall confound him now. Aside.


Flor. Marrying her! Egad, she knew a trick worth two o'that. I would have
married her; and I told her so: "My dear Florimond," says she, -- her arm was
then lying negligently cross my shoulder, thus, -- and she looked archly at me,
thus, -- My dear Florimond, says she, why should you and I, that have now only
the power of making each other happy, suffer a doting old priest to give us
the power of making each other miserable? If you were to be my husband, you
might cease to be my lover; and then, says she, with a most roguish leer,
perhaps I might be tempted to take another: you would tyrannize, I should
rebel; you would enjoy nothing but the hope of breaking my heart, and I should
enjoy nothing but the hope of breaking yours.


Emm. aside. Still, still, I draw upon myself more confusion. -- But why then
did she run away with Edgar? That must ruin her schemes, both of interest and
pleasure.


Flor. Nay, how the devil can I tell that?


Emmeline walks apart, confused and embarrass'd Flor. What, in your reveries!
-- Thou art now musing on some vartuous love, like an ever faithful lovyer tell
death, -- ha, ha, ha! -- Come, come, pshaw, don't be a fool; some kind wench
now would cure you -- Egad, what think you of Elfrida? -- Come along, we'll
call at her apartment: perhaps she is dressing, and we shall be admitted to her
toilet. Upon my soul, a fine figure of a woman! a little masculine, that is all;
but take my word for it, a delicious morsel for all that! -- Hark ye --, if you
are not sheepish, she will not be coy: it is among ourselves -- I tell you, as a
friend; 'faith I don't love to monopolize -- I Will just tickle up her fancy a
little, and leave you together. Come --


Emm. Pray, sir --


Flor. I will, 'faith.


Emm. I must insist --


Flor. Nay, nay, come along, come along.


Lays hold of her. Emm. Sir, I must absolutely be excused at present.


Flor. Why, what a plague is it now that thou have taken into thy head?


Emm. Sir, I have an affair that at present requires me to be alone; which I
cannot farther explain, than --


Flor. Say no more, say no more, aside. Egad, I have guessed it now -- A
challenge! -- why, there is light enough for two people to cut one another's
throats by, to be sure -- I Will away -- Well, my dear, if I must leave you to
the dew and the moonshine, I must; but do you hear -- 'faith I Will to Elfrida --
will you follow me? If you don't stay too long, you will find an attendrissement,
that you may be obliged to your humble servant for; that is all -- it is among
ourselves. -- Adieu. Exit.


Emm. Why, fare thee well, thou -- wretch, without a name -- What will, what
can become of me? What is it that prompts this fool, whom as I never knew, I
never could provoke, to wrong me thus? is it a sacrifice to his vanity? or is
it mere wantonness and sport? -- Pray heaven this fairy don't deceive me! --
What shall I do? -- I must see her, and take her counsel in this new distress.

She takes off her ring, and touches it thrice; but the fairy does not appear.
Ha! -- sure I dream! -- Forlorn, deserted! -- this perfidious goblin! -- Again
I touch it; once -- and twice -- and thrice -- and yet she is not here! -- O I
could -- But though I see her not, she may be near me, to hear and punish the
complaints which her unkindness forces from me -- To whom can I now ease my
heart! -- O! sacred friendship! -- but here I have no friend. Elfrida -- yes,
she indeed, as if by some secret sympathy, claims my confidence; and my heart
tells me, she deserves it -- Yes, I will trust her with my secret: she will be
a witness for me against this slander, and assist me with her advice. Exit.


The scene changes to Edgar 's apartment, and discovers him at a toilet,
dressing in the character of Elfrida; a woman attending. Edgar. Here, give me
the ribbons -- Get you gone -- I Will, call you, when I want you.


Woman. aside This lady has the strangest humors!


Exit. Edgar. Was ever man in such ridiculous distress! I Am sure I never knew
any thing like it, since I was Edgar the son of Kent. Here have I had a young
tempting girl fiddle-faddling about me these two hours to dress me, forsooth --
with an officious handiness so provoking, that no virtue under that of a
stockfish could endure it patiently. Yet an old woman upon these occasions I
cannot bear: and, in short, I can no longer bear a young one -- It is my fate,
they say, to be miserable, if I don't get acquainted with the finest girl in
England, without wishing for her; and I was told by a little goblin that
started up before me, after it had led me, under the appearance of a Jack of
Lantern, into a wood, That if I could spend the king's hunting month here in
this disguise, all would be right: but how my being in petticoats should make
me less likely to love a fine girl, I cannot conceive! A fine girl, indeed, may
be less likely to love me; but as to myself, it is high time for me to get into
breeches, that I may get out of temptation. Here they flock about me -- one
sits down just before me, and, without any ceremony, ties her garter -- another
gets me to adjust her tucker. -- I Am the witness of so many pranks, and the
confidant of so many secrets! Then I have my hours of mortification too: I am
tormented by a swarm of profligate fops, who try to debauch every woman they
see, with as little concern as they take snuff: wretches, who are as destitute
of love, as they are of virtue; and have as little enjoyment, as they have
understanding! And here I Am obliged to mince, and pish, and fie, -- and affect
to blush, -- 'sdeath, when I Am bursting with indignation, and long to knock 'em
down -- I Will bear it no longer.


ELFINA suddenly appears from under the toilet, and places herself before him.
Edgar. Ha! What again?


Elf. Again.


Edgar. Art thou my good or evil genius? Tell me.


Elf. As you think me, you shall find me.


Edgar. I will think thee then my good genius, for I would fain find thee so.


Elf. You must trust me too, or else --


Edgar. Trust you! -- Look at the figure I make here, and then judge if I have
not trusted you.


Elf. But your virtue must be tried.


Edgar. Tried! -- By what new torments would you try it? Have I not suffered
the two worst things in nature, temptation and suspense? Have not I --


Elf. No -- you have not persevered: all is lost, if you give out.


Edgar. Resolve my doubts then; torment me no longer with suspense: let me be
certain of the event, and I will be an anchorite, in spite of this habit and
all its works, a month longer.


Elf. Well -- Observe me then, and learn.


Edgar. eagerly What shall I learn?


Elf. Patience, Edgar! -- Fare thee well. Ha, ha, ha! A machine rises under
her, and carries her away.


Edgar. Derided, and forsaken! -- I doubt this is one of the wanton and
mischievous elves, that tantalize poor mortals for their own diversion:
however, as I have played in the farce so long, I Will not stop in the last
scene. --


Enter Woman. Woman. Ma'am, here is my lord Trifle has sent his compliments to
your la'aship; and begs to know, whether he shall have the honor of waiting
upon your la'aship to the ball.


Edgar. recovering his female attitude and accent My compliments, am much
obliged to his lordship, but am engaged.


Woman. Yes, ma'am.


Edgar. Harkye --


Woman. Ma'am.


Edgar. Has Gondibert called here this evening?


Woman. No, ma'am.


Edgar. Nor sent?


Woman. No, ma'am. Exit.


Edgar. There Is a man, now, who might atone for the vices of the whole sex! I
am so anxious to recommend myself to him, even in this disguise; and feel such
a reluctance to do any thing that may disgust him, even while he thinks me a
woman; that when he is present, I labor to make my manner suit with my
appearance, I know not how, by a kind of involuntary effort. How strange is the
rapidity with which some minds unite!


Enter Woman. Woman. Ma'am, there is count Florimond.


Edgar. Did not I tell you --


Woman. Yes, ma'am; and I told him, -- but he said he knew your la'aship was at
home, and that he must see you.


Edgar. Must see me!


Woman. Yes, ma'am; and though I told him your la'aship was a-dressing, yet he
would follow me. -- O Lord, he is the strangest man! -- He Is here, an please
your la'aship. --


Enter FLORIMOND. Edgar. aside What a farce must I now act! Pray heaven it has
not a tragical catastrophe!


Flor. My dear goddess!


Edgar. Lard, how can you be so monstrous rude! -- bursting into one's
dressing room -- and putting one into such flurries --


He fumbles at pinning on a breast-knot. Flor. That your heart beats in concert
with mine. -- The dear toilet is not more the altar of beauty, than of love. --
Permit me the honor, ma'am, of assisting to place that envied ornament on your
bosom.


Edgar. Lard, Sir! -- I beg -- not for the world -- you quite confound me --


Flor. pressing My life! My angel! --


Catches him hastily round the waist, and endeavors to kiss him; upon which
Edgar gives him a smart blow on the ear. Edgar. Nay then there is no expedient
--


Flor. retreating backward Ma'am! --


Edgar stamps, and Florimond starts and retreats farther back; at the same time
EMMELINE, as GONDIBERT, appears at the door. Flor. I protest, ma'am, -- frighted


Edgar. sternly And I protest, Sir, --


Flor. Ma'am, I beg --


Edgar. And I beg, Sir, --


Flor. turning and seeing Gondibert O -- Ma'am, your most humble servant. going.


Emm. aside to Flor. Sir -- I am under very great obligations to you -- but I
would not have you tickle up her fancy any more, upon my account --


Flor. Duce take you! -- I wish you had been as near her as I was.


Is going, but again stops and adjusts his wig by a pocket mirror. Edgar to
Emmeline, recovering himself, and adjusting his dress Lord, Sir -- I Am in such
a flurry -- I, I, I, I Am very sorry I should have been provoked to any thing so
unbecoming the delicacy of my sex.


Flor. Upon my soul, so am I too -- Sir, your humble servant. Exit.


Emm. You have no reason to apologize for your indignation, madam; though your
blow was something spirited, I must confess.


Edg. I Am in such confusion, sir -- and he has made me such a figure! -- to
treat me with indecent familiarities!


Emm. Dear madam, compose yourself, and think no more of him. He has not been
much better company to me, than he has to you, I Will assure you.


Edgar. Lord, sir, you surprise me! -- Pray, what impertinence has he been
guilty of to you?


Emm. He has been filling my ears with scandal, madam; a subject which seems to
be equally suitable both to his abilities and disposition! He has been telling
me, that Edgar --


Edgar. Who, sir? hastily.


Emm. Edgar, madam, the son of the earl of Kent --


Edgar. What of him, sir? -- what scandal has he spread of Edgar? --


Emm. aside. Ha! so interested! -- She loves him, sure.


Edgar. Let me conjure you, sir, if this wretch has said any thing to dishonor
Edgar, you would tell it to me.


Emm. aside. It must be so -- Your very earnestness forbids me, madam.


Edgar. I know I Am moved, and you must think it strange.


Emm. surprised at the masculine tone and manner into which his earnestness
involuntarily betrays him Strange, indeed! --


Edgar. Perhaps, it is stranger still than you can think.


Emm. Your manner, madam --


Edgar. No matter -- Forms and modes become trifles too small for notice, when
they stand in competition with a friend's good name.


Emm. aside. Her love is to distraction -- She frights me, and is not to be
trusted --


Edgar. Let me conjure you -- tell me --


Emm. I cannot tell you, madam.


Edgar. Cannot!


Emm. I ought not -- Trust me there are reasons -- Let it suffice that in the
story I have heard, a lady's honor is as much concerned as Edgar's; that the
slander cannot interest you, more than me; that I will do my utmost to make
it is falsehood so notorious, that it cannot be believed; and I entreat that, as
you tender your peace, you would as yet enquire no farther -- I know myself not
proof against your importunity; and therefore you will excuse me, if, having no
other way, I save myself by flight. Exit.


Edgar runs out after her, but returns. Edgar. Curse on this cumbersome habit!
I cannot overtake him. Was ever any thing so vexatious! I have been defamed by
some scandalous falsehood, and I must do my honor justice -- I can, at a small
expense of dissimulation, get that wretch, Florimond, to repeat to me all that
he has told to Gondibert: I will do it -- and I will as yet lie in ambush under
this disguise, to make sure of my blow.


Exit. EMMELINE, as GONDIBERT, reenters. Emm. She Is gone! -- What can I, or
what ought I to do? If I had told her the story, I must have discovered myself
to convince her it could not be true: but who knows what a jealous woman might
have thought upon finding the very person, who is said to have gone off with
her lover, in so strange a disguise! -- Yet she will certainly contrive to hear
it from Florimond; and then, good heaven! what will she suffer, if I do not
convince her that it is false! -- I must, I will trust her -- I have no other
chance to save her, but by making a discovery, which, if I had really gone off
with Edgar, it is certain I should not have made, especially to her. But I must
not intrude upon her now: I will plant myself where I may intercept her before
she can see Florimond, and trust to generous friendship for the event. Exit.


END of the FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. The Terrace at Windsor Castle. Enter FLORIMOND, with a Letter. Flor.
AYE -- she was obliged to be angry, because that fool Gondibert appeared just
in the critical minute at the door -- pox take him! -- I might have known it
was not natural, by her overdoing it -- it was, indeed, overdone with a
vengeance! But now she is in the pannicks, lest I should resent it. Now she has
something to say -- and -- if I am disengaged, -- she will be glad to meet me
upon the terrace. If I should humble her now, and not meet her -- but that
would be cruel. I will, however, take some state upon me -- I will look a
little formal; it may save me some trouble in my future advances. -- Here she
comes.


Enter EDGAR, still disguised as ELFRIDA. Florimond receives him with an air of
negligent haughtiness, and makes a formal bow. Edgar. Sir, I hope you will not
take any advantage of my weakness --


Flor. turning from her. Weakness! pox on you -- Your weakness don't lie in
your arm, I Am sure o'that.


Edgar. following. Or suppose, sir, that whatever reason I may have for
desiring this meeting -- What airs the wretch gives himself! aside -- I say,
sir, that you would not suppose -- I cannot contain myself! --


Aside. Flor. Poor soul! what confusion! I will relax a little of my severity.
Aside. Madam, I will suppose nothing, but that you have given me another
opportunity of hearing your commands.


Edgar. I think, sir, you was telling Gondibert a certain affair between you,
and Edgar, and a lady; and something that, by his manner of telling it, I could
not very well understand.


Flor. aside. Aye -- a very good introduction -- a love-story is a most
excellent prelude to a love-scene -- I perceive we are to adjourn -- Why,
madam, a certain fair lady, called Emmeline, has thought fit to make Edgar as
happy, as any man can be made, except him, madam, whom you shall please to
honor with the same favor -- Upon my soul, she is a fine creature!


Edgar. Sir, your compliments really put me so out of countenance -- that I
shall blush to death --


Flor. Your blushes are so becoming, madam, that --


Edgar. Give me leave, sir, to entreat, that you would at present spare my
confusion, and tell me all the particulars of that affair which have come to
your knowledge.


Flor. Aye -- she wants a luscious description now. aside. Why, madam, I
presume that Edgar, being fired with the charms of Emmeline, first gazed
languishingly upon her; caught her eyes the first time they were casually
turned upon him; when, in a soft confusion, she hastily turned her look
downward and blushed; he took her hand, first pressing it gently in his own,
then raising it to his lips; then, madam, I presume he might proceed to --


Edgar. Sir! -- I shall certainly be out of patience, and knock him down aside.
-- Sir, if you have any desire to oblige me -- or have any expectations, sir,
of favors -- Not, sir, that I --


Flor. My dear angel, keep me no longer in suspense; let me know your commands,
that I may fulfill the condition of -- Pressing.


Edgar. drawing back Hold, Sir -- You must then, without farther delay or
interruption, give me a direct answer to a few short questions.


Flor. Why, madam, it shall then be in your own way.


Edgar. First then, Sir, are you acquainted with Edgar, the young heir of Kent?


Flor. Why, madam, to proceed implicitly as you direct, I believe there are few
persons who know more of that gentleman, than your humble servant.


Edgar. aside Matchless impudence! -- And pray, Sir, what kind of a youth is he?


Flor. aside I see by her curiosity she don't know him -- Why, madam, the youth
is a, a, a, rather soft -- a green youth, madam, as we say --


Edgar. Sir, these are terms that I do not perfectly comprehend: and,
therefore, I beg you would be more explicit.


Flor. Why then, explicitly, madam, he is, upon my soul, a shallow fellow -- a
very shallow fellow, faith -- It Is among ourselves.


Edgar. He is.


Flor. He is indeed, madam. -- The poor devil has some awkward good nature, and
I have a kindness for him; but, between you and I, he will never be so much a man
of honor as I could wish him --


Edgar. forgetting his feminine character, and running up to him How, villain!
--


Flor. frighted and drawing back Ma'am --!


Edgar. aside What have I done! he draws himself again into form To think of
villainy in people that, by their rank, are set up as examples to others, quite
transports me out of myself. -- Heigh ho! -- It has quite overcome me.


Affects to be faint, and takes out a smelling bottle. Flor. aside What a
terrible virago it is! -- May I presume, madam, to lend you my hand.


approaching cautiously. Edgar. It is over, Sir -- -- I Am so subject to
flurries -- and my poor nerves are so shattered. -- I Am extremely obliged to
you for this character of Edgar -- To have been guilty of any thing base! --


Flor. Very base, I assure you, madam.


Edgar. Sir. -- assuming a fierce masculine air, but instantly correcting
himself


Flor. Ma'am -- starting back Fore Gad, she is mad! -- and upon my soul in my
opinion damnably mischievous. aside --


Edgar. Give me leave, sir -- as well as I am able -- to ask you what in
particular has -- but I see company coming -- If we walk this way, we shall
avoid them.


Flor. aside Avoid them! -- Heaven forbid! -- Perhaps, madam, another time --


Edgar. Sir, I shall die, if my curiosity is not gratified.


Flor. Madam -- at present I am --


Edgar. Sir, I beg -- for my reputation, that we may not be surpised together,
while I am in this disorder.


Flor. By no means, madam -- let us part this moment -- If you will go off one
way, I Will go the other.


Edgar. O not for the world! -- To be seen to part hastily, upon being observed
together, would be the subject of eternal scandal. -- Let me beg the favor of
your arm -- lays hold of his arm


Flor. crying out Lard Gad, madam! --


Edgar. Sir? --


Flor. You Will pinch it through --


Edgar. Lord, Sir, it is my fright -- One naturally clasps any thing hard in a
fright.


Flor. Madam, you do me honor --
Edgar holds his arm; he keeps as far off as he can, and fixes his eyes upon
him; as they go out. By the heavens! she has the gripe of a bum-bailiff.

aside. Exeunt. SCENE, the dark Grove. Enter ELFINA. Elf. Sister! sister!
Grotilla suddenly appears


Grot. -- -- Here am I.


Elf. Now the fated hour is nigh
Keep the lovers in your eye.
Each to each shall soon be known;
Each for each was born alone.

Grot. Florimond, the caitiff vile --


Elf. They shall prosper by his guile:
(Evil we for good permit)
This their friendship's knot shall knit.
But the fated hour is nigh --
Come, ye elves, whose minds perceive,
By secret impulse, what I will;
Come, your sports this moment leave,
And what I ordain fulfill.
Many fairies suddenly appear. Now the fated hour is nigh,
To rites that charm from ill apply.
Form the circle on the dew, they form a ring.
Round, and round, the track renew; --
they dance. Mark it thrice, and thrice again --
Join with me the magic strain.

SONG.
By the bat's nocturnal flight
Over the sleeping plants and flowers;
By the moon's inconstant light,
Potent spell of midnight hours --
By the ring of various dies,
Circling often the silver ball;
By the genial mists that rise,
By the virgin dews that fall. --
By the meteor's gleamy spark,
Wandering over the reedy lake;
Stars that shoot athwart the dark,
Lights from polar skies that break. --
By Night, and all things that to Night pertain --
Ye rival powers, from adverse arts abstain!
Intrude not now my purpose to contest;
But let the pair that I would bless, be blessed.
Elf. Cease, the fated hour is nigh! --
Cease, and to the castle fly!
Careful watch the great event,
Finished ere the day be spent.

Fairies and the scene disappear together. Enter EMMELINE, still disguised as
GONDIBERT. Emm. She Is gone out, and I have unfortunately missed her -- She is
certainly got to Florimond -- Ha! yonder they are -- Yes, it is certainly so --
What violent emotion! -- Now they move hastily forward -- Now she stops short
-- her gestures are scarce feminine -- Now she recovers herself -- Florimond
too seems to be frighted out of his gallantry, and extremely willing to put an
end to the conversation -- It Is over! he leaves her, and she comes this way. --
Yes, I will open my whole heart to her; not for my sake now, but her own.
Whatever are the first fallies of her surprise and passion, she must at length
feel and return my friendship. -- Here she comes: I must not accost her too
abruptly. Retires to a little distance.


Enter EDGAR still as ELFRIDA. Seeing EMMELINE, he stops short. Edgar. Ha!
Gondibert -- I know the generous reason, now, of his reserve. In this disguise,
what could my interest in Edgar appear to him, but love! -- and if it had been
so, how must I have been hurt by what he had to tell me! -- But he is not less
interested in the lady -- so he said -- Sure then he is to Emmeline, what he
thought Edgar was to me! -- Let me then repay his generous kindness; let me
discover, not only what, but who I am, to convince him that the tale is false,
which, if true, must destroy his peace. Going up to Emmeline -- You need not
shun me, sir; I have now nothing to ask, that you would wish to conceal: I have
only to request, that you would forgive me for having violated your injunction,
not to satisfy the curiosity you had raised. I am apprized of your kind, your
generous motive; and it has inspired my breast with all that it is possible I
should feel for you, a grateful and ardent friendship.


Emm. Your love, madam, I make no doubt, is fixed on a much nobler and more
deserving object. -- Edgar, I presume --


Edgar. My connection with Edgar, sir, is indeed, in some sense, the reason why
your merit cannot make an impression, which I am not ashamed to say it might
otherwise have done: and yet, sir, let me confess that I am not affected by the
story of his disappearing with Emmeline, as you might reasonably imagine,
because I know for certain that it cannot be true.


Emm. hastily Ha! that it cannot be true --


Edgar. I now owe your friendship a discovery, if indeed it is a discovery,
which I was prompted by mere regard to myself to have made before: I think
there is a connection between you and Emmeline, that --


Emm. There is, indeed, a connection, madam -- a secret, which you convince me
it is now in vain to affect to hide --


Edgar. Let me then claim it -- But let me first, as a pledge of that
friendship which I hope shall end but with our lives, give, for your secret,
mine. --


Emm. Do then, nor keep me longer in suspense; for still, the more we talk, the
more I am perplexed. aside What can her secret be!


Edgar. Why then, in the first place, sir, -- I am -- a man --


Emm. aside, with great emotion, which she labors to conceal A man! -- Good
Heaven! what will become of me!


Edgar. And now, let me at once embrace you as a friend: punctilios and forms
no longer part us --


As Edgar advances eagerly to Emmeline, she hides her face, and appears in
great confusion. Edgar. hastily What ails my friend?


Emm. O! you have ruined all my pleasing project -- prevented -- but no matter
--


Edgar. This is amazing! For heaven's sake, what do you mean? -- You was not sure
enamoured of my person --


Emm. O! no -- You still mistake --


Edgar. Then tell me my mistake; for we may now converse on even terms: our
hearts may now be opened to each other, without the forms and the reserve
prescribed in friendships with the softer sex.


Emm. O! still you wander, wide and wider still -- I cannot speak --


Edgar. You must -- There is a secret, which, but now, your heart was ready to
reveal --


Emm. And then I thought it known -- but now --


Edgar. Now my warm heart has claimed you for my friend --


Emm. And now to tell it is impossible -- I cannot tell it -- and if I could,
you would not find the friendship that you hope --

Edgar looks earnestly at her, wondering and embarrass'd. aside I sicken at his
sight -- Oh my heart!


Edgar. I Am all perplexity and wonder! -- Your color comes and goes, like a
sick girl's -- She becomes more confused, as he marks her confusion -- You
tremble! -- Heavens! he faints! -- he catches her in his arms, and discovers
her breast By all my wonder and my joy, a woman! -- How lovely her confusion!
-- O let my bosom warm thee back to life! Look up, and trust the honor of my
love: you shall not whisper what you would conceal; nor will I seem to know it.


She recovers. Emm. O! let me hide me from myself -- my sex thus known -- in
this disguise! Where shall my conscious blushes find a veil! -- Who are you?
Tell me, that I may hide me from your sight for ever.


Edgar. O! no -- On that condition, let me never be known.


Emm. Yet tell me -- trust me --


Edgar. Trust thee! Yes, with my life I Would trust thee. Thy friend -- O! know me
by a softer name -- is Kent's young heir; that Edgar you have heard so falsely
and so wantonly traduced.


Emm. Still wonders crowd on wonders!


Edgar. I dream myself, or this is all enchantment.


Emm. So might you think, indeed, if more you knew me.


Edgar. Let me then know thee more, whom now I know as the most fair and gentle
of thy sex; whom yet I saw and loved without desire -- my pledge of happiness!
-- May I be thine! -- but yet I rave -- thy fate was not like Edgar's --


Emm. Spare me -- thy words have power, which yet thou know not.


Edgar. O! take me from the rack! My thoughts grow wild! -- There is, indeed, a
maid, whose fate I Have heard was such as mine -- that Emmeline -- O! heaven,
that Emmeline, in whom I thought thy interest, love! -- O! yes, it must, it
shall -- thou, thou art she!


Emm. Leave me, or I shall die with my confusion --


Edgar. Let me support thee, hide thee in my breast, where thou shall breathe
thy answer in a sigh. -- Art thou not Emmeline, my fated love?


Emm. If Emmeline be thy fated love -- I am --


Edgar. Still let me clasp thee close, and closer still; calm all the tumults
of thy feeling mind, and sooth thee into confidence by love.


Emm. No, let me now retire: for, in this dress, I cannot bear to see myself,
or you.


Edgar. Yet stay -- forgive the violence I do you -- My fame and yours are
wantonly traduced; it is fit that we do justice to them both, and punish the
traducer.


Emm. He is not worth resentment.


Edgar. He is for others sakes, though not his own. -- I have a thought, would
Emmeline but join --


Emm. Tell me then quickly.


Edgar. Send him a challenge in behalf of Emmeline, as Gondibert; and meet him,
not as Gondibert, but Emmeline: I will take care to be present, not as Elfrida
but Edgar: he will then be self-convicted as a liar, by knowing neither of the
persons he has defamed; and we may farther punish him as we please.


Emm. Well, I will try at this: but now dismiss me. She breaks from his hand,
and runs off.


Edgar. Farewell, my love! -- How has the hand of heaven vouchsafed to guide me
through all the mazes of my fate, to bliss! Even my revenge, my justice rather,
upon that wretch, whose very folly is envenomed, shall be complete -- But a
mind so base can never be brave -- Suppose he should not come -- He Is here.


Enter FLORIMOND. Seeing EDGAR, he stops short. Flor. Gad take me -- this
damned madwoman is certainly fated to be my death.


Edgar advances toward him; he draws back, and looks frighted. Edgar. Sir, I
am so shocked when I reflect upon the indecorums that my passions have made me
guilty of to you, and my poor spirits are so flurried, that I really am not
able to make my 'pology.


Flor. Ma'am, I Am extremely sorry -- and ma'am -- I must absolutely fly from
your ladyship's apology. --


Going. Edgar. Sir, I must beg the favor of your ear for a few minutes -- I
hope, sir, you will pardon my confusion -- I have something to say to you, sir,
that -- Let me beg, sir, that you would come a little nearer --


Flor. aside. Pox on her -- she wants to fasten her damned claws upon me again
-- To her Your commands, madam, always do me honor -- And upon my soul always
leave me black and blue. Aside.


Edgar. I have just heard, sir, something that has flustered me to such a
degree --


Flor. aside. Aye -- another fright! she will certainly lay hold of me --
retiring Ma'am -- a, a, a, I hope there is no danger threatens your ladyship. --


Edgar. Not directly me, sir; nor indeed much danger to you: but I was willing
you should be prepared --


Flor. Danger -- prepared -- for heaven's sake, madam, what d' ye mean?


Edgar. Why Gondibert, sir -- you will excuse my freedom -- Lard, that I should
be so indiscreet -- I Am sensible, that the interest I take in the affair, may
be liable to constructions of such a nature -- that --


Flor. Lord, ma'am, if there is any villainous design against me, I beseech you
to let me know it -- looking about. Perhaps we had better change our ground;
some villain may be taking aim at me as I stand.


Edgar. You need not be under such apprehensions, sir; it is a matter of no
consequence -- It is only, that Gondibert is to send you a challenge, for the
liberty you have taken with lady Emmeline; that is all --


Flor. Oh, if it is only an intention of Gondibert to cut my throat, to be sure
that is a matter of no consequence -- A bloody-minded ruffian* Aside.


Edgar. Why, sir, to my certain knowledge, Gondibert knows no more of a sword,
than a girl of eighteen; and has not a grain more courage.


Flor. taking courage Why, as to that, madam --


Edgar. As to that, sir, I am confident it would make no difference to you; but
as I know he will not fight, and only presumes upon an insolent opinion, that
count Florimond's courage is as questionable as his own --


Flor. blustering. How, madam!


Edgar. Lard, sir, if you are so violent, I shall certainly fall into my
tremors -- I shall certainly want the support of your arm.


Flor. Aside. Mercy upon me! and I shall want but very little killing
afterward, if you do.


Edgar. I say, sir, I think he should be properly exposed; and I hope you will
act accordingly.


Flor. Madam -- excuse me -- a coward is my aversion; and you may depend upon
his being chastised with most exemplary severity -- but I should be sorry to
mistake his character aside -- You know he will not fight? --


Edgar. a little hastily Sir, if you suspect my veracity --


Flor. O! Lord, madam -- no, not in the least.


Edgar. You Will excuse me, sir: I am really ashamed -- of the liberty I have
taken -- Sir, your humble servant. Exit.


Flor. Madam, your most obedient -- Thank heaven, she is gone -- It was a lucid
interval; but it would not have been of much longer continuance. I Am obliged to
her though, for her information -- indeed am I -- Egad, I Will make a figure in
this business -- But if the challenge is coming, I must be at home to receive
it. Exit.


SCENE, the dark Grove. Enter several Fairies. 1 st Fairy. Come away, come away!
We have jubilee today.

2 d Fairy. Wherefore, wherefore?


3 d Fairy. Tell me.


4 th Fairy. Tell me.


1 st Fairy. Ever the evening sheds the dew,
You shall know, and you, and you.

2 d Fairy. What is finished?


3 d Fairy. What is planned?


1 st Fairy. Peace -- the sisters are at hand.


Enter ELFINA and GROTILLA, with many Fairies in grotesque Characters. Elf. Now
we triumph! -- now it is past!
Spells are broken, joy shall last!
Let the voice of music rise;
Music, grateful to the skies.

AIR, with Chorus.
We triumph, we triumph, with victory blessed;
And beauty and truth are of pleasure possessed.
Let mortals be told, and rejoice in the sound,
"No lovers henceforward by fate shall be bound:"
There Is now no conditions of pleasure but two,
Which they all may fulfill -- to be tender and true.
Da Capo. Elf. Now let every elf and fay
Dance the laughing hours away:
Ler your nimble feet rebound,
Lightly from the daified ground;
Trip it round, and round, and round.

A dance. Elf. stopping suddenly. Hist -- a mortal foot is nigh --
None must here remain but I.

Exeunt all but Elfina, who retires to the back of the stage. Enter FLORIMOND.
Flor. This is the place, and this is the time -- but I see no signs of my
little Gondibertus -- Ha! here comes a bona roba, whom I have not the honor to
know -- Egad this affair will turn out with an eclat -- very much to my honor
-- I Will make the most of it: I Will let her into my business here, without
seeming to see her.

Emmeline enters in her own habit, and observes him; he affects not to see her;
but walks hastily to and again, often looking on his watch, affecting great
impatience, and speaking as to himself. A poltron! not to meet me upon his own
challenge -- I Will make him know what it is to insult a man of honor -- If the
wretch had met me, I would have given him his life; but now to spare him -- a
scandal to mankind! Ha! affects to be surprised at seeing Emmeline. 'Death,
interrupted and discovered! -- half aside Madam -- I protest -- I am confounded
-- I am afraid that my natural impetuosity has a, a, a --


Emm. Sir, I am very sorry that I should have intruded upon your privacy; but,
perhaps, I have prevented something that would have had worse consequences.


Flor. Madam, I am not at liberty --


Emm. By the few words, sir, which just now involuntarily escaped you, I know
that you are waiting here upon an affair of honor -- but I entreat --


Flor. Madam, it is impossible -- nothing but his life can atone for the insult.


Emm. You will excuse a woman, though a stranger, sir, upon such an occasion:
may I entreat to know, sir, who has had the misfortune to incur the resentment
of a gentleman, who seems so little to deserve ill treatment, and so able to
punish it?


Flor. Madam, you do me honor -- She is making advances already aside. -- Why,
madam, as the treatment I have received makes it an act of justice to tell,
what I should otherwise rather die than discover, I will comply with your
request -- Hem! A little dirty dependant upon the court here, madam, one
Gondibert, thought fit to send me a challenge, upon account of something I
happened to say concerning a lady, in whole good graces I happened to be, and
whom a foolish young fellow that I was a friend to has thought fit to run away
with; and, madam, though I have so far treated him like a gentleman, as to
accept his challenge, he has not come to the place appointed, and it is now
half an hour past the time.


Emm. looking out Methinks I see somebody at a distance, coming this way;
perhaps that may be the gentleman --


Flor. starting and looking out as afraid Ah! egad that is certainly he --
aside. Now if he should not be a coward at last -- Madam a, a, a, for God's
sake retire -- for -- a, a, a.


Emm. Sir, I believe it will not be necessary; for I Am pretty sure now, that
the gentleman is a friend of mine --


Flor. A friend of yours, madam! pray who is he?


Emm. A gentleman, sir, who, I am sure, will be extremely glad to be better
known to you.


Enter EDGAR in his proper dress. Emm. aside. Yes, it is he, it is Edgar! With
what elegance and dignity he looks the man!


Edgar. aside. How soft, how lovely in her female dress!


Emm. to Florimond. Sir, as we are now no longer alone, I may confess, that I
am not altogether a stranger to your person or your merit. To Edgar. Sir, this
is Florimond, a gentleman to whom both you and I have some obligations, which I
believe he is not at present aware of.


Flor. Upon my word, madam, you absolutely confound me -- this excessive honor
-- is it possible that I should have been so happy, as to confer obligations --
pray, madam, may I crave the honor of your name?


Edgar. Do you not at all recollect that lady, sir?


Flor. Upon my soul, sir, I cannot say that I do.


Edgar. Who, now, do you think it can possibly be, of all that your polite
generosity has obliged?


Flor. Let me perish, sir, if I can tell.


Edgar. Why, sir, that lady is one Emmeline; with whom, as she tells me, you
was formerly most intimately acquainted; and whom you lately conversed with,
sir, in disguise, by the name on Gondibert: it is among ourselves. -- What!
quite confounded, sir!


Flor. recovering himself Ha! ha! ha! confounded! Ha! ha! ha! No, no, sir: you
have had your jest, and I have had mine. I knew well enough who I was talking
to, when I played upon the little Gondibertus -- Ah! I thought I should make
you smart for your frolic -- I told Elfrida my whole scheme --


Edgar. You told Elfrida your whole scheme --


Emm. But pray, sir, as you did not know my person in my own dress, how came
you to know me in disguise?


Flor. Why, madam, to confess the truth, I was let into the secret by a friend.
aside Egad, this goes swimmingly. --


Edgar. Well, sir; but pray give me leave to bring you acquainted with a
person, who, I Am sure, you are at present totally a stranger to -- Pray, who do
you think I am?


Flor. aside Heaven knows! but I wish I was fairly out of your clutches -- Upon
my soul, sir, I have not the honor to know you, any otherwise than as a
gentleman, whom I should be extremely proud to consider as my friend.


Edgar. Why, sir, I have the honor to be one Edgar; a very shallow fellow,
sir, that you had some kindness for, because he was aukwardly good-natured: I
have also had the honor to receive several of your civilities, under the name
of Elfrida -- It Is among ourselves.


Flor. Sir, your most humble servant -- I have at this time some urgent
business --


Edgar. So have I, sir; and therefore you must not leave me yet -- You may
remember, sir, that you told me your whole scheme to punish Emmeline for her
frolic, and to mortify her with stories of herself by way of joke.


Flor. Sir, I beseech you --


Edgar. Sir, I am extremely sorry for the occasion; but as this lady has not
got her fighting clothes on, you must excuse me if I take her challenge upon
myself; and so sir -- draws -- it is among ourselves.


Emm. What has my thoughtless indiscretion done!


Flor. Ah, dear sir, now you are too serious --


Emm. This must not be -- For heavens sake, Edgar, hear me!


Edgar. Fear not, my love -- Sir, whatever you may think, this is but sport to
what is to follow -- and so, sir, without more words --


Flor. O Lord, sir! -- I beseech you, madam --


Emm. For my sake, Edgar --


Edgar. Trust me -- Draw, sir, or --


Flor. Sir, I don't desire to do you any harm; I don't, upon my soul, sir.


Edgar. Scoundrel, coward, draw!


Emm. Consider, Edgar --


Flor. Ay, do, dear sir, consider --


Edgar. Consider what?


Flor. That I am but a poor, miserable, lying coxcomb, sir -- Indeed, sir, I am
--


Emm. It is better to dismiss him, Edgar, as beneath your resentment.


Flor. So it is, indeed, sir -- a great deal better.


Emm. He is worthy only of contempt.


Flor. It is very true indeed, sir,


Edgar. Art thou not a wretch, without the least principle of truth or honor?


Flor. Yes, sir.


Edgar. Art thou not infamous, as a slanderer and a coward?


Flor. Yes, sir.


Edgar. Have not thy very follies the malignity of vices; and is it not a
disgrace to nature, to consider thee as a man?


Flor. Any thing, dear sir, if you will but spare my life. -- If you choose any
other satisfaction, sir; if you would be content to kick me into some dark
corner, and leave me, I should think myself under infinite obligations to you.


Edgar. Hence then -- and be thyself thy punishment!

Florimond runs off. As FLORIMOND runs off, ELFINA comes forward. Ha! -- Fear
not, my Emmeline! It is a friendly power, familiar to my sight.


Emm. What! is she known to you? -- My friend! my guide!


Edgar. And mine! -- both run and kneel to her.


Elf. Rise both, both blessed! -- --


Emm. Forgive my diffidence -- When my heart accused you, I was overwhelmed
with distress! -- Your promise to come at my call, was not fulfilled.


Elf. I came not, that I might send you hither: pointing to Edgar Your
friendship was the parent of your love.


Edgar. I too have need of your forgiveness! pardon my distrust.


Elf. Say no more, -- your fathers now
Ought to hear your mutual vow;
Both the royal presence grace,
Heroes both of British race!
Go, your duties there present;
I will answer for the event.
Long may virtue guard your breast!
Joy shall then be long your guest.

The fairy disappears. Edgar. She Is gone! the kind propitious spright, that has
led us, hoodwinked, to the happiness, which, seeing, we had missed.


Emm. Let us then haste to follow her last advice; for I can trust her now.

A FAIRY behind the scenes. Edgar, Edgar, Edgar!


Emm. Hark! What voice?


Edgar. Perhaps some other kind and invisible being -- There Is music too -- An
overture to a song.


Emm. It comes, another tiny spright -- It cannot mean us ill -- It beckons you
--


RECITATIVE. Fairy. Hear me, Edgar; hear, and trust!
Still be kind, and still be just:
Truth and fondness that endure,
Love from jealousy secure.

AIR.
Take and keep the fated fair,
Born to give supreme delight;
Make her ever all thy care,
And secure thy envied right.
Clasp her to thy beating breast,
Round her lock thy faithful arms;
These will guard her virtue best,
These will best secure her charms.
The fairy disappears. Edg. They need not such a guard, but yet shall have it.
Come then, my fair, whom Fate my love ordains,
By whom kind Heaven o'erpays my fears and pains!
Chos'n as thou art for graces of the mind,
Ere gold could influence, or desire could blind;
Whose charms, unsought, unknown, are friendship's dower;
Whose love on reason founds its lasting power.
O! might each pair thus work what Fate intends,
And none be lovers but who first were friends!

EPILOGUE. Written by Mr. GARRICK. Spoken by Mrs. YATES.
OLD times, old fashions, and the Fairies gone;
Let us return, good folks, to sixty-one --
To this blessed time, ye Fair, of female glory,
When pleasures unforbidden lie before ye!
No Sprites to fright you now, no guardian Elves;
Your wise directors are -- your own dear selves --
And every Fair One feels, from old to young,
While these your guides -- you never can do wrong.
Weak were the sex of yore -- their pleasures few --
How much more wife, more spirited are You?
Would any Lady Jane, or Lady Mary,
Ere they did this or that, consult a Fairy?
Would they permit this saucy pigmy crew,
For each small slip, to pinch 'em black and blue?
Well may you shudder -- for, with all your charms,
Were this the case -- good heaven, what necks and arms!
Thus did they serve our grandames heretofore --
The very thought must make us moderns sore!
Did their pour hearts for cards or dancing beat,
These Elves raised blisters on their hands and feet:
Though Loo the game, and fiddles played most sweetly --
They could not squeeze dear Pam, nor foot Moll Peatly.
Were wives with husbands but a little wilful,
Were they at that same Loo a little skilful;
Did they with pretty fellows laugh or sport --
Wear ruffs too small, or petticoats too short:
Did they, no matter how, disturb their clothes;
Or, ever-lilied, add a little rose! --
These spiteful Fairies rattled round their beds,
And put strange frightful nonsense in their heads!
Nay, while the husband snor'd and prudish aunt,
Had the fond wife but met the dear gallant --
Though locked the door, and all as still as night --
Pop through the keyhole whips the Fairy Sprite,
Trips round the room -- "My husband!" madam cries --
"The devil! where!" the frighted beau replies --
Jumps through the window -- she calls out in vain --
He, cured of love -- and cooled with drenching rain,
Swears -- "Them him if he will ever intrigue again!"
These were their tricks of old -- But all allow,
No childish fears disturb our Fair Ones now. --
Ladies, for all this trifling, 'twould be best
To keep a little Fairy in your breast:
Not one that should with moderate passions war;
But just to tweak you -- when you go too far.

