ALONZO.

A TRAGEDY. IN FIVE ACTS. As it is performed at the THEATER ROYAL, DRURY LANE.

Et mentem strinxit patriae pietatis imago. VIRGIL. LONDON: Printed for T.
BECKET, in the Strand. MDCCLXXIII.

(Prince One Shilling and Sixpence.)

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE author of the following Tragedy, has, in his former attempts of the same
kind, avoided to trouble the reader with either dedication or preface. His
chief reason for declining this common mode of appearing before the public, was
the necessity, which it would lay him under, of speaking concerning himself and
his works. The success of Alonzo calls upon him to depart from his former plan;
and to break that silence, which might now be reckoned arrogant, and even
ungrateful, to those, from whom he in a great measure derives his success.

He embraces with pleasure, this occasion, to acknowledge his obligations to
THE MANAGERS of the theater, whose friendly, anxious, and active zeal he has
so often experienced: TO THE PERFORMERS, who have so strenuously contended with
each other, in their very generous endeavors to embellish the representation
of the piece: To MRS. BARRY -- but the public voice has exalted HER above his
praise: Yet he claims the merit of having, before others, observed her now
allowed and unrivalled excellency. From the color of the dawn, he foretold the
brightness of the day.

For MRS. BARRY he wrote the part of Ormisinda, and the most flattering
circumstance to him, in the success of his play, is the universal opinion,
(vouched, not only by the loudest applause that ever shook the stage, but by
the greatest effusion of tears) that the ACTRESS so much exalted THE CHARACTER,
that she exceeded all imagination, and reached the summit of perfection.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. PALMER.
WHILST ardent Zeal for India's Reformation,
Has fired the Spirit of a generous Nation;
Whilst Patriots of presented Lacks complain,
And Courtiers Bribery to Excess arraign;
The Maxims of Bengal still rule the Stage,
The Poets are your Slaves from Age to Age.
Like Eastern Princes in this House you sit,
The Soubahs, and Nabobs of suppliant Wit;
Each Bard his Present brings, when he draws near,
With Prologue first, he sooths your gracious Ear;
We hope your Clemency will shine to Day,
For though despotic, gentle in your Sway.
These conscious Walls if they could speak would tell,
How seldom by your Doom, a Poet fell:
Your Mercy often suspends the Critics Laws,
Your Hearts are partial, to an Author's Cause.
Pleased with such Lords, content with our Condition,
Against your Charter we will never petition.
If certain Folks, should send us a Committee,
(Like that which lately visited the City)
Who without special Leave of our Directors,
At the Stage Door should enter as Inspectors;
Although their Hearts were armed with triple Brass,
Through our resisting Scenes, they could not pass.
Lions and Dragons too keep watch and ward,
Witches and Ghosts the awful entrance guard;
Heroes who mock the pointed Sword are here,
And desperate Heroines who know no Fear;
If as Rinaldo stout each Man should prove,
To brave the Terrors of the enchanted Grove,
Here on this Spot, the Center of our State,
Here on this very Spot they would meet their Fate.
The Prompter gives the Sign, and down they go;
Alive descending to the Shades below.
To you whose Empire still may Heaven maintain,
Who here by ancient Right and Custom reign,
Our Lions couch, our Dragons prostrate fall,
Witches and Ghosts obey your potent Call.
Our Heroines smile on you with all their Might,
Our boldest Heroes tremble in your Sight,
Even now with anxious Hearts they watch your Eyes,
Should you but srown, even brave ALONZO flies.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
KING, Mr. AICKIN. ALONZO, Mr. REDDISH. ALBERTO (his Son) Mr. CLINCH. COSTOLLO,
Mr. J. AICKIN. SEBASTIAN, Mr. PALMER. HAMET, Mr. WRIGHT. VELASCO, Mr.
JEFFERSON. MESSENGER, Mr. J. BANNISTER.
WOMEN.
ORMISINDA, Mrs. BARRY. TERESA, Miss MANSELL.
Officers and Attendants, etc.

ALONZO. A TRAGEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A hall in the palace of the kings of Spain. ORMISINDA. TERESA.
ORMISINDA. THIS roll contains the secret of my life,
And of the state: My marriage with Alonzo,
The story of my son, my injured child,
Bred in a desert, though the heir of Spain.
To thee, my faithful friend, my loved Teresa!
This precious record I commit. Oh! keep it
From sight of human eye, till better times:
For still I hope that better times may come,
Though not to me, to this afflicted land.
My hand has signed it, and my act to day
Shall give it faith and credence with mankind.
This will explain the mystery of my fate,
And tell the world why Ormisinda died.

[Gives the writing.] TERESA. Do not too soon despair.


ORMISINDA. I wait the last
Decisive moment. But to guard my soul
Against the sallies of a rash despair,
Against the weakness which attends surprise,
I have forecast whatever may befall,
And framed to the event my firm resolve.
This is the day appointed for the combat,
Between a Moorish and a Christian knight,
To end the wars of Spain, and fix the fate
Of the contending nations.

TERESA. Ancient times,
If tales of ancient times may be believed,
Have known such combats. In her infant state,
Against her rival Alba, Rome was pledged
As now Asturia is: But later times
Afford no parallel.

ORMISINDA. There never was,
Nor will there ever, while the world endures,
Be found a parallel to my distress --
I am the victor's prize -- whoever prevails
He gains the princess, and the crown of Spain.
Such is the solemn treaty, sworn, confirmed,
By every rite, which either nation owns.
Mean while I am Alonzo's wedded wife --
I am a mother -- by the false Alonzo,
Who from his hate to me abandons Spain,
Which he alone can save. No other arm
Can match Mirmallon's force. Proud of his strength
Already in the lists the Moor exults,
Secure of victory. The setting sun
Concludes the dreadful period of suspense,
And death alone from infamy can save me.

TERESA. He yet may come. Far in the Nubian wilds,
That guard the secret sources of the Nile,
Velasco found the chief. The wind of spring,
The constant East, this year forgot its season,
And only since this moon her light renewed,
Began to blow upon the western shore.
On that I build a hope.

ORMISINDA. I have no hope!
Review the story of my life, Teresa,
And by the past conjecture of the future.
First my lamented brother, blindly led
By proud Ramirez, quarreled with Alonzo,
Then by Alonzo's sword Ramirez fell.
For that offense to banishment condemned,
Alonzo won me to accept his hand
Before he left this kingdom. Since that time,
What I have suffered, Heaven, and you can tell.
It was the fifth, a memorable day,
After our marriage, when he failed to come,
At the appointed place to meet his bride.
Then' midst my fear, anxiety, and sorrow,
For only death I thought, or dangerous harm,
Could keep him from my arms, amazed I heard
That he was gone for Asia. To this hour,
Even to this present hour, no cause assigned
But these distracted lines long after sent:
"Thou never shall behold Alonzo more;
"The foul, foul cause thy guilty conscience knows."
My conscience knows no cause, so help me Heaven!
Now, in my utmost need, this dreadful day,
When I must struggle with despair and Death,
To keep myself a chaste, a blameless wife,
And to my silent grave the secret bear,
That my dear son and his may live to wield
The scepter of his fathers!

TERESA. To this hour,
Thy husband knows not that he is a father.

ORMISINDA. His ears, his eyes are shut. Often have I sent
Letters, that would have piere'd an heart of stone;
Pleading for pity, begging but to know,
Wherein I had unwittingly offended;
But every letter, with unbroken seal,
To me returned. He will not read one word
From my detested hand.

TERESA. It Is very strange,
And much unlike the way of other men.
For though they are inconstant in their love,
There is a course and process in the change.
Ardent at first, their ardor lasts not long.
With easy, full, secure possession cloyed,
Their passion palls, and cold indifference comes,
As chilly autumn steals on summer's prime,
Making the green leaf yellow. Then it is
That some new beauty takes their roving eyes,
And fires their fancy with untasted charms.
But in a moment, from excess of love,
To the extreme of hate Alonzo passed
Without a cause. Nor did another come
Between thee and the current of his love.
It Is moon-struck madness, or the dire effect
Of incantation, charm, compulsive spell,
By magie fastened on his wretched soul.
It can be nothing else.

ORMISINDA. Whatever it is,
He shuns all womankind. His life is spent
In war and in devotion. When the field
Is won, the warrior lays aside his spear,
Takes up the pilgrim's staff, and all alone,
Obscured in homely weeds, he bends his course
To some remote, religious, holy place,
Where he exceeds the strictest penitent,
In penances severe and sad austerity.
Sometimes in deeper melancholy wrapped
He loathes the sight of man, and to the cliffs
Of hoary Caucasus or Atlas flies,
Where all the dreary winterhe remains,
And, desolate, delights in desolation.
My faithful fervant Juan saw him once
Upon the ledge of Atlas; on a rock
Beside the empty channel of a brook,
He stood and gazed intent a cataract
Which, as it tumbled from a cliff, the blast
Had caught midway, and froze before it fell.
Juan drew near and called. He turned about,
Looked at him for a space, then waved him back,
And mounting swiftly sunk behind the hill.
Wan was his face, and like a statue pale!
His eye was wild and haggard! Oh! Teresa,
Amidst my woes, my miseries, my wrongs!
My bosom bleeds for him!

TERESA. Something there is
Mysterious and unfathomable here,
Which passes human wisdom to divine.
The hand of fate is on the curtain now.
Within my breast a firm persuasion dwells,
That in the lists Alonzo will appear.
Behold in haste the king your father comes,
And seems the messenger of welcome tidings.

Enter the KING. KING. I come in this alarming hour, my child,
To pour a ray of comfort on thy heart.
A valiant Moor, once captive of my sword,
And ever since, my firm but secret friend,
Acquaints me that a champion is at hand,
Shunning those honors which the Moors would pay:
Dark and reserved he travels through their towns
Without a name. I judge it is Alonzo,
For the description best accords with him.
Scorning his foes, offended with his friends,
Shrouded in anger and in deep disdain,
Like some prime planet in eclipse he moves,
Gazed at and feared.

ORMISINDA. It is! It is Alonzo!
Welcome, most welcome, in whatever shape.
The hero comes to save his native land,
To save the honor of the Christian name,
And over the fading crescent of the Moor
Exalt the holy cross.

KING. And, even as thine
Is the consenting voice of all the land.
The hope of Spain on brave Alonzo rests.
In this I see the ruling hand of heaven,
Which to its own eternal purpose leads,
By winding paths, the steps of erring man!
Painful it were to speak of those events
Sad and disastrous which have laid us low.
Unjustly was Alonzo banished hence,
And happily the hero now returns.
For since my son, your valiant brother, fell,
With an impartial mind I have inquired
And traced the story of Alonzo's birth.
He is the offspring of our ancient kings,
The rightful heir of Riccaredo's line,
Called the Catholic, who reigned in Spain
Before the first invasion of the Moors.
Lost in the general wreck, buried and hid
Beneath the ruins of a fallen state,
Obscure, unknown, the royal infant lay,
When I, indignant of a foreign yoke,
In wild Asturia rose against the Moors.
The righteous cause prevailed; the baffled foe
Retired, and left us and our mountains free.
The grateful people chose their leader king.
I knew not then, nor did my people know,
Ought of Alonzo.

ORMISINDA. I have heard him own
The justice of thy title to command
And rule the state thy valor had restored.
Enough, he said, remained for him to conquer?
The fertile provinces of ample Spain,
Which still the Moor usurps.

KING. Of all mankind,
He is the champion whom my soul desires
This day to fight for Spain and for my aughter;
Not only for his great renown in arms,
But for his birth, his lineage, and his blood.
If his unconquered arm in fight prevails,
The ancient monarchy shall rise again,
In all its splendour and extent of empire.
The streams of royal blood divided now,
Shall roll a tide united through the land.

ORMISINDA. Thy heart dilates with pleasing hopes, my father!
And fond anticipates its own desire.
But who can tell the purpose of Alonzo?
His strange approach no friendly aspect bears:
He comes the foe determined of the Moors,
But not to us a friend.

KING. Of that no fear.
I know him proud, impetuous, and fierce,
Haughty of heart, and high of hand: Too prompt
On all occasions to appeal to arms.
But he was ever gentle to my daughter:
The proud Alonzo bowed the knee to thee.
At his departure I observed thy grief,
And in my mind --

(A trumpet sounds.) ORMISINDA. What means that shout of war?


KING. The trumpet sounds to arms.


(Enter a messenger.) MESSENGER. Thy presence, Sir,
Is at the camp required. Both nations arm,
And rush to battle: Loud the Moors complain
Of violated faith. A Spanish knight
They say has broke the treaty, and attacked
Their bands, of peace secure.

KING. It Is basely done!
Command my guards to meet me at the gate.
Farewell.

[Exit the King. TERESA. Who can this headlong warrior be?
Too well Alonzo knows the laws of war,
Too much reveres the treaty feal'd and sworn,
To make a rash attempt upon the Moors.

ORMISINDA. If it is he, it is no deliberate act,
No treacherous intention to assail
The Moors unguarded. Yet it may be he:
My mind misgives me that it is Alonzo.
Ill would his swelling spirit brook the sight
Of Moorish tents and arms on yonder plain.
If as he passed, one slighting word was dropped,
With tenfold scorn to that he would reply,
Nor hesitate alone to draw his sword
Amidst an host of Moors.

TERESA. The clamor sinks.
Whatever it was, the tumult is appeased.
And now what does my Ormisinda think
Of my predictions?

ORMISINDA. Oh! my dear Teresa!
Thy fond desire to cheer my hopeless heart
Makes thee forever to my mind present
The fairest side of things.

TERESA. Ha! do thou doubt
Still of his coming?

ORMISINDA. No, I think it is he;
But hope and fear alternate sway my mind:
Like light and shade upon a waving field
Coursing each other, when the flying clouds
Now hide and now reveal the sun of heaven.
I tremble for the issue of the combat;
And if my Lord should, as I hope, prevail,
I tremble for myself: Afraid to see,
Though sick with strong impatience to behold him,
And learn why he forsook his Ormisinda.
He says I know the cause. Oh! most unjust!
Was it because I loved him to excess,
Although his title shook my father's throne?
Was it because I joined my fate to his,
And fondly chose to wed a banished man?
For such are my demerits.

TERESA. It Is but vain
Thus to torment thyself, and rack thy mind
With sad conjectures, at a time like this,
When the reality will soon be known.

ORMISINDA. I know one thing that is real, it is a fault,
An imperfection which I cannot cure;
Sixteen long years are past since I beheld him,
And grief and care, those tenants that deface
The sad and weary mansion they inhabit,
Have dwelt with me. Am I not altered much?
The ghost and shadow of what once I was?

TERESA. No, Ormisinda, I perceive no change,
That in the least impairs thy lovely form.
The beam that gilds the early morn of youth
Yields to the splendour of a riper hour:
The rose that was so fair in bud, is blown;
And grief and care, though they have dwelt with thee,
Have left no traces of their visitation,
But an impression sweet of melancholy
Which captivates the soul. Unskilful they
Who dress the queen of love in wanton smiles:
Brightest she shines amidst a shower of tears;
The graces that adorn her beauty most,
Are sostness, sensibility, and pity.

ORMISINDA. Oh! how ingenious thou art, Teresa,
How subtle to elude my simple fears!
Still they advance and gather round my heart.
If nothing can recall Alonzo's love,
Let him but own his son, and I Will renounce
The title of his wife, and of a queen;
Then in a convent hide me and my sorrows.
The saddest sister of the holy train,
Whose watchful zeal prevents the midnight bell,
Shall find me kneeling on the marble floor,
Oh! it will be the luxury of grief,
To weep incessant in the vaulted cell,
To lift my hands, and send my vows to heaven,
Invoking every power that dwells above,
To guard and bless my husband and my son!
Perhaps some friend, most likely my Teresa,
When I am quite forsaken and forgot
By all the world, will still remember me;
Will come and tell me of Alonzo's wars;
Tell how my boy in his first battle fought,
At once the rival of his father's fame.

END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE I. Enter the KING and a Moorish officer, with Moors and Spaniards. KING.
HAMET, impartial justice shall be done,
And thou I know as justly wilt report it:
Thou art the friend of peace.

HAMET. Therefore I sought
This office; for in yonder camp, O! King,
Some counselors there are who urged the Caliph
To take advantage of this fair occasion
And hold the treaty void.

KING. That I believe,
But with your aid I hope to disappoint them;
My guards are gone to bring the offender hither.

HAMET. Yonder they come, and through their files I see
A prisoner.

[Enter guards with a young man armed.] KING. Ha! by Heaven, he is but a youth,
A beardless boy, and like a woman fair.
He moves my pity much. Unhappy youth!
[To the prisoner.] Art thou the chief of that unruly band,
Who broke the treaty and assailed the Moors?

YOUTH. No chief, no leader of a band am I.
The leader of a band insulted me,
And those he led basely assailed my life
With bad success indeed. If self-defence
Be criminal, O King! I have offended.

KING. [ To Hamet.] With what a noble confidence he speaks!
See what a spirit through his blushes breaks!
Observe him, Hamet.

HAMET. I am fixed upon him.


KING. Did thou alone engage a band of Moors
And make such havoc? Sure it cannot be.
Recall thy-scattered thoughts. Nothing advance
Which proof may overthrow.

YOUTH. What I have said
No proof can overthrow. Where is the man,
Who speaking from himself, not from reports
And rumors idle, will stand forth and say
I was not single when the Moors attacked me?

HAMET. I will not be that man, though I confess,
That I came hither to accuse thee, Youth!
And to demand thy punishment. -- I brought
The tale our soldiers told.

YOUTH. The tale was false.


HAMET. I thought it true; but thou have shook my faith.
The seal of truth is on thy gallant form,
For none but cowards lie.

KING. Thy story tell,
With every circumstance which may explain
The seeming wonder; how a single man
In such a strife could stand?

YOUTH. 'Twill cease to be
A wonder, when thou hear'st the story told.
This morning on my road to Oviedo
A while I halted near a Moorish post.
Of the commander I inquired my way,
And told my purpose, that I came to see
The famous combat. With a scornful smile,
With taunting words and gestures he replied,
Mocking my youth. Advised me to return
Back to my father's house, and in the ring
To dance with boys and girls. He added too
That I should see no combat. That no knight
Of Spain durst meet the champion of the Moors.
Incensed I did indeed retort his scorn.
The quarrel grew apace, and I defied him,
To a green hill, which rose amidst the plain,
An arrow's flight or farther from his post.
Alone we sped: at once we drew, we fought.
The Moorish captain fell. Enraged his men
Flew to revenge his death. Secure they came
Each with his utmost speed. Those who came first
Single I met and slew. More wary grown
The rest together joined, and all at once
Assailed me. Then I had no hopes of life.
But suddenly a troop of Spaniards came
And charged my foes, who did not long sustain
The shock, but fled, and carried to their camp
That false report which thou, O King! have heard.

KING. Now by my scepter, and my sword, I swear,
Thou art a noble youth. An angel's voice
Could not command a more implicit faith
Than thou from me have gained. What think thou, Hamet?
Is he not greatly wronged?

HAMET. By Allah! yes.
The voice of truth and innocence is bold,
And never yet could guilt that tone assume.
I take my leave impatient to return,
And satisfy my friends that this brave youth
Was not the aggressor.

KING. I expect no less
From generous Hamet.

[ Exit Hamet and Moors.] KING. Tell me, wondrous Youth!
For much I long to know; what is thy name?
Who are thy parents? Since the Moor prevailed.
Thecottage and the cave have often concealed
From hostile hate the noblest blood of Spain:
Thy spirit speaks for thee. Thou art a shoot
Of some illustrious stock, some noble house
Whose fortunes with their falling country fell.

YOUTH. Alberto is my name. I draw my birth
From Catalonia; in the mountains there
My father dwells, and for his own domains
Pays tribute to the Moor. He was a soldier:
Often I have heard him of your battles speak,
Of Cavadonga's and Olalles' field.
But ever since I can remember ought,
His chief employment and delight have been
To train me to the use and love of arms;
In martial exercise we past the day;
Morning and evening, still the theme was war.
He bred me to endure the summer's heat,
And brave the winter's cold: To swim across
The headlong torrent, when the shoals of ice
Drove down the stream. To rule the fiercest steed
That on our mountains run. No savage beast
The forest yields that I have not encountered.
Meanwhile my bosom beat for nobler game;
I longed in arms to meet the foes of Spain,
Often I implored my father to permit me,
Before the truce was made, to join the host.
He said it must not be, I was too young
For the rude fervice of these trying times.

KING. Did he permit you now?


ALBERTO. A strange adventure
Forced me from home. Not many days ago,
When hunting in the woods, I heard a voice,
A woman's voice, calling aloud for help.
I rushed into the thicket; there I saw
A moorish Lord, for brutal license famed,
Who shamefully abused a rural maid
Of Spanish race. I freed her from his arms.
The moor spoke not a word, but mad with rage
Snatched up his lance, which stood against a tree,
And at me flew. I turned his point aside,
And with a slender javelin pierced his heart.
I hastened home, but did not find my father;
Nor was it sase to wait for his return.
I took the fairest armor in the hall,
And hither bent my course. The rest thou know.

KING. Thou art a prodigy, and fill'ft my mind
With thoughts profound and expectation high.
When in a nation, humbled by the will
Of Providence, beneath an haughty foe,
A person rises up, by nature reared,
Sublime, above the level of mankind;
Like that bright bow, the hand of the most High
Bends in the watery cloud: He is the sign
Of prosperous change and interposing Heaven:
And thou, if right I read --

(Enter Messenger.) MESSENGER. The champion, Sir,
Who comes to fight for Spain, is near at hand:
One of our scouts has seen him and his trian,
But brings a strange report, which damps the heart
Of every Spaniard. It is not Alonzo.

KING. What say thou? God of heaven! Not Alonzo!
Who is he then?

MESSENGER. That is not fully known.
Clad in the flowing vesture of the east,
A Persian turban on his head he wears,
Yet he is a christian knight. To mark his falth,
Holy, and adverse to Mohammed's law,
Before his steps a silken banner borne
Streams in the wind, and shows a golden cross,

KING. Send out another scout.


MESSENGER. There is not time
To go and to return.

KING. Begone, begone,
And let me be obeyed. Alas! my hopes
Are vanished like a dream.

ALBERTO. I grieve to see
The king afflicted.

KING. Ah! Thou do not know
How deep these tidings strike.

ALBERTO. Is not the king
Free to accept or to refuse the aid
This stranger offers?

KING. If I am, what then?


ALBERTO. Be not offended, Sir, at my presumption,
For from my heart I speak, a loyal heart,
True to my sovereign and my native land.
If this is not Alonzo, why should he,
Or any stranger fight the cause of Spain?
Are there not warriors born of Spanish race,
Who court the combat?

KING. To my words attend.
The Moorish champion is of great renown;
In stature like the giant race of old,
Like Anak's true, or Titan's fabled sons.
Against the foe nor sword nor spear he lifts,
But in his might secure, a mace he wields,
Whose sway resistless breaks both shield and arm,
And crushes head and helmet. Thus he fights
Whose fatal prowess turned the doubtful scale
Of three successive battles. He is deemed
Invincible but by Alonzo's arm:
Therefore our warriors, though they know no fear,
No fear of ought that can themselves befall,
Anxious for Spain, to great Alonzo yield,
And on his valor rest.

ALBERTO. Often have I heard
My father speak of brave Alonzo's deeds;
What can withold him when his country calls?
Perhaps the last of combats he has fought,
And in the silent tomb the hero rests.
But, since he is absent, from whatever cause,
O! let no stranger knight his place assume,
To bring dishonor on the Spanish name.
If this gigantic champion of the Moors,
Clad in the glory of his battles won,
Dazzles the warriors, and confounds their valor,
Let me, though young in arms, the combat claim,
On me his fame has no impression made.
I Will meet the giant with a fearless heart.
It beats for battle now. Often have I killed
The wolf, the boar, and the wild mountain bull,
For sport and pastime. Shall this Moorish dog
Resist me fighting in my country's cause?

KING. By heaven and earth, thou mov'st me much! thy words
Have stirred the embers of my youthful fire.
Thou make me wish I could recall those days,
When of an age like thine, and not unlike
To thee in face and form, I raised the spear
Against the Moor, in Cava's bloody field.
Then by my hand the great Alchammon fell,
The strength and pillar of the Caliph's host.
Then I was sit to meet Mirmallon's arm.
But now, my hairs are gray, my steps are slow,
My sword descending breaks the shield no more:
Our foes have known it long.

ALBERTO. O! King, thou art
Thy country's great deliv'rer, and the sole
Restorer of the state. Pelagio's fame
Shall never die: But let thy counsel now
(As often thy valor) save this land from shame.
Let not a foreign warrior take the field,
And snatch the glory from the lance of Spain.

KING. My voice alone cannot determine that.
The council sit assembled near the lists,
To them I will present thee. If this knight
Unknown, who from that distant egion comes,
Where the bright sun lights up his golden lamp,
Bears not some high pre-eminence about him,
Which marks him out our surest safest choice,
My voice is for a Spaniard, and for thee!

ALBERTO. Upon my knees, that never were bowed before
To mortal man, I thank thee!

KING. Rise, Alberto!
To me no thanks are due. A greater King,
The King of Kings, I deem has chosen thee
To be the champion of his law divine
Against the Insidel. -- If not for this,
For some great purpose sure thou art ordained.
Bred in the desert, and by heaven endued
With force and valor marvellously great,
Conducted by a hand unseen, thyself
Not knowing whither, and this day produced
Before the nations.

ALBERTO. Ah! my soul's on fire!
Should such a glorious destiny be mine!
May I entreat to go without delay?
I fear some gallant warrior may step forth
And claim the fight before me.

KING. Stay, Sebastian,
And to my daughter tell what has befallen.
[ Exeunt King and Alberto. (Manet SEBASTIAN.) How many changes mark this awful
day!
What must the Princess suffer! Well I know
That she above all others wished Alonzo.

Enter ORMISINDA and TERESA. TERESA. It is a false report. In times like these
The minds of men are credulous and weak:
To rumor's shifting blast they bow and bend,
Like corn of slender reed to every wind:
Thou know that from the East Alonzo comes.
Might not the hasty messenger mistake
For him some turban'd warrior of his train?

ORMISINDA. O! good Sebastian, can thou tell me ought?
Is it Alonzo?

SEBASTIAN. If report speaks truth,
And so the King believes, it is not Alonzo.

ORMISINDA. Then I am lost, Teresa.


TERESA. Have thou heard,
If not Alonzo, who this stranger is?

SEBASTIAN. His garb bespeaks him native of the East.
But from whatever clime the warrior comes,
I hope, my Princess! that he comes in vain.
Another warrior, and of Spanish race,
Now claims the combat for his native land.

ORMISINDA. Of Spanish race! Who is this Knight of Spain?


SEBASTIAN. A wonder! never was his equal seen,
For daring valor and address in arms.
He has not yet attained the prime of youth,
His look partakes more of the boy than man,
But he has vanquished men. This day the Moors
Have felt his hand.

ORMISINDA. Ha! Is it he, Sebastian,
Who was the author of the late alarm?

SEBASTIAN. The same.


ORMISINDA. And whence does this young hero come?


SEBASTIAN. From Catalonia. In the deserts there
His sire, obscure, though once a warrior, dwells.

ORMISINDA. From Catalonia! In the desert bred!
Teresa! All that is possible I fear:
What if this youth --

TERESA. [ To Ormisinda.] O! think how many youths
Of Spanish race in Catalonia dwell.
Be recollected whilst I ask Sebastian
A question that at once all doubt resolves.
[To Sebastian.] Has this youth no name? Have thou not heard
How he is called?

SEBASTIAN. He calls himself Alberto.


ORMISINDA. Mother of God!


TERESA. [ To Her.] Beware! -- The Princess grieves,
[To Sebastian.] That Spain deprived of great Alonzo's aid,
Should rest her safety on a stripling's arm.

ORMISINDA. No judge of warriors or of combats I;
But sure this youth, though never so brave and bold,
Of tender years, who has not reached his prime,
Is most unfit to cope with strong Mirmallon.

SEBASTIAN. Heroes must not be judged by common rules.
Irregular like comets in their course,
Who can compute the period when they shine?
Lady! If thou had seen this gallant youth,
If thou had heard him, when obliged to speak,
In self-defence, he told his wondrous deed,
As if he though them nothing: Thy faint heart
Would from his fire have caught the flame of hope,
Thou would'^t, even as thy royal father did,
Believe he was created and ordained,
By Heaven supreme, the champion of his country.

TERESA. Sebastian, go, and find this gallant youth.
Tell him, the Princess, partial to the brave,
Desires his presence.

SEBASTIAN. Gladly I obey.


[ Exit SEBASTIAN.] ORMISINDA. He Is gone. Now I may speak. My son! my son!
My hope, my comfort, in despair and death!
The only star in my dark sky that shone!
Must thy unhappy mother live to see
Thy light extinguished? I will not permit
This most unequal combat. I Will proclaim
My fatal story, and declare his birth.

TERESA. Think what must follow. Absolute perdition!


ORMISINDA. Is not his death perdition? Can be meet
The Moor and live? How should his tender youth
Resist the giant, who has overthrown
Squadrons entire, and trampled on the necks
Of firmest warriors?

TERESA. It Is not yet decreed
That he shall fight the Moor. The stranger knight,
Who was at first mistaken for Alonzo,
Comes not so far, without a name in arms,
To gain the suffrage of the Peers of Spain,
When once that name is known.

ORMISINDA. Teresa, no.
My fate has still one even tenor held,
From bad to worse. When I had framed my mind
To one disaster, then a greater came.
I had made death familiar to my thoughts;
I could embrace the spectre like a friend:
But still I kept a corner of my heart
Safe and untouched. My dearest child was there:
Amidst the ruins of the wife and queen,
The mother stood secure. O thou Alonzo!
If yet thine eyes behold the light of day,
What sorrow and remorse must be thy portion,
When thou shall hear -- Now promise me, Teresa,
That when my son and I are laid in dust,
(For each event accelerates our doom)
Thou will seek out and find this cruel man.
Tell him how Spain, the kingdom of his fathers,
By him deserted, was for ever lost:
How his forsaken wife in honor died --
But that is not much -- for me he will not mourn.
Then tell him of is son, to wring his heart!
Truly describe the boy! how brave he was!
How beautiful! how from the cloud obscure
In which his careful mother had involved him,
He burst the champion of his native land:
Then tell him how the springing hero fell
(...) a stronger arm, fighting for Spain,
And for his mother; fighting with the foe
His father should have fought, and could have vanquished!

TERESA. Sebastian comes.


Enter SEBASTIAN. SEBASTIAN. All is reversed again:
The stranger knight is for Abdallah know,
The Persian prince, Alonzo's chosen friend,
His only equal in the strife of arms.
To him the combat is decided.

ORMISINDA. I know
His story well; he is the Sophy's son,
The eldest born and Persia's rightful heir;
But by his mother's zeal a Christian bred:
True to his faith, he lost his father's throne,
What says he of Alonzo?

SEBASTIAN. Sent by him,
The brave Abdallah comes to fight for Spain.
They marched together, from the falls of Nile
To Damietta. There a wound received
In Asia's wars broke out, and forced Alonzo,
Full of regret, in Egypt to remain.
His friend for him appears. The king, they father,
With all his peers, in honor of the prince,
Go forth to meet him.

ORMISINDA. Have thou seen Alberto?


SEBASTIAN. I have, and told him what I had in charge;
Then hastened hither to report these tidings,
At which Alberto droops.

TERESA. Return, I pray,
To my apartment guide the young Alberto.
The princess will be there.
[ Exit Sebastian.] Did not I say,
Alonzo never would abandon Spain?
Abdallah comes to conquer in his name.
Now I can read the characters of fate,
And spell the will of Heaven. This boy of yours
Will win your husband back. When he beholds
The image of his valor so express,
His heart will melt. The husband and the father
Will rush upon him with a flood of joy.

ORMISINDA. Is he not like him? Mark his coming forth!
Behold Alonzo in his daring son!
Full of the spirit of his warlike sire,
His birth unknown, he felt his princely mind,
Advanced undaunted on the edge of war,
And claimed the post of danger for his own.

TERESA. A mother's tongue cannot exceed the truth
In praising him. There never was a prince,
Since old Iberia first excelled in arms,
Broke out with so much luster on mankind.
But in this interview, with prudence check
The transport of affection from thy son.
Cautions conceal the secret of his birth.
Safest he is, while to himself unknown.

ORMISINDA. How could his faithful guardian let him go?
Perhaps that faithful guardian lives no more.

TERESA. Alberto will inform thee.


ORMISINDA. Not Alberto;
Alonzo is his name. I go to meet him.

[Exeunt.] END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I. A view of the country near the city. Enter ABDALLAH. O! CITY! once
the seat of all I loved!
O! hills and dales! haunts ofmy youthful days!
O! scenes well known! unaltered you remain.
But I approach you with an altered mind,
Hate what I loved, and loath what I desired,
Intolerable state! My soul is void!
A chaos without form. Why, nature, why!
Art thou so watchful over the brutal tribes,
And yet so careless of the human race.
By certain instinct beasts and birds discern
Their proper food: For them the fairest fruit
Untouched, if poisonous, withers on the bough:
But man, by a fair outside, still deceived,
And by his boasted reason more betrayed,
Gives the affection of his soul to beauty,
Devours the deadly bane.
Enter VELASCO. My Lord! Thy people,
Where thou commanded'st, halt, and wait thy coming.

ABDALLAH. It Is well! I wished to speak with thee alone.
Velasco! though to thee but little known,
I did in part reveal my secret soul,
Told thee the feigned Abdallah was Alonzo
Further than that, thou have not sought to know,
Though many a lonely hour we two have worn
On sea and shore, that some men would have thought
Most opportune,

VELASCO. My Lord! There are some men
Who having once been trusted with a little,
Avail themselves of that, some more to learn,
And penetrate the bosom of a friend,
Even with the wedge his uneasiness had furnished --
Such men should not be trusted.

ABDALLAH. True, Velasco!
But thou art not like them: I have observed thee,
Warm in affection, but in temper cool:
A steady judgment guides thee through the world.
Thy generous mind pursues the path of honor,
Unbiased and unmoved.

VELASCO. From early youth,
The chosen consident of my companions,
I never yet from persidy betrayed,
From babbling vanity, divulged a secret,

ABDALLAH. I have a tale to tell, that will amaze,
Confound, and strike thee dumb. The deserts vast,
Of Asia and of Africa have heard it.
The rocky cliffs of Caucasus and Atlas
Have echoed my complaints: But never yet
The human ear received them. Thou have heard
Already more than ever mortal did.
Thou know the princess?

VELASCO. Ormisinda!


ABDALLAH. Her.


VELASCO. Not many of the court have been more honored
With opportunities to know her worth;
And there is none who more her worth reveres.

ABDALLAH. Her worth! Thou may as well revere a fiend,
The blackest fiend, that dwells in burning hell,
Is not more opposite to all that is good
Than Ormisinda.

VELASCO. What a strain is this?


ABDALLAH. It Is true, by every high and holy name,
That binds a soldier's and a prince's vow:
I swear, Velasco, she is the vilest woman
That ever disgraced her sex. The most abandoned,
The hardiest, most determined in her vice,
That ever wronged a fond believing heart.

VELASCO. Great God!


ABDALLAH. You start and shudder like a man
Struck with a heavy blow.

VELASCO. And so I am.


ABDALLAH. And now you lift your eyelids up and stare
With looks full of conjcture and suspicion,
As if you doubted of my sober mind.
I am not mad, Velasco, though sometimes
I have been near, yes, very near to madness;
By that bad woman crazed.

VELASCO. O! Would to heaven!
That this afflicting moment of my life
Were a delirious dream! Unreal all
That Is heard and spoken now! But how, my Lord,
Art thou so much affected by her crimes?

ABDALLAH. I am her husband.


VELASCO. Heaven for that be praised!


ABDALLAH. How dare thou thus profane the name of heaven,
And mock my misery? Thou art mad, I think;
The frenzy which thou wished'st has come upon thee
Beware, for if this ecstasy endures,
My sword secures thy silence.

VELASCO. O! forgive me,
Noble Alonzo, royal, I should say,
Doubly my master now. There Is not a man,
Whose veins contain one drop of Spanish blood,
Who does not wish thee wedded to the princess.
And for her virtue! Thou have long been absent,
Reserved, retired, and sad. I Will stake my soul,
Some villain has belied thy faithful wife,
And snared thy easy faith.

ABDALLAH. Take heed, take heed!
I am the villain who accuse the princess,
And thou shall be her judge.

VELASCO. Eternal power!
What should I think of this?

ABDALLAH. Listen to me.
I have perplexed thee, and have marred the story
By my abruptness. It Is a serious story,
Not to be told in parcels and by starts,
As I from impotence of mind began,
But I will bear my swelling passion down,
And utter all my shame. Thou do remember
How I was banished from my native land?

VELASCO. For killing young Ramirez.


ABDALLAH. At that time
I doated on the princess. She conjured me
With earnest prayers, with deluges of tears,
Not to resist her father, nor advance
My better title to the crown of Spain,
As I had once resolved. My rage she soothed,
Pride, anger, interest, yielded all to love.
With her I made a merit of obedience,
And pleaded so effectually my cause,
That she consented to a private marriage,
Before I left the kingdon. We were married,
And met together, four successive nights,
In the sequestered cottage of the wood,
Behind the palace garden. O! I thought
Myself the happiest and the most beloved
Of all mankind. She mocked me all the while;
Meant me the cover of her loose amors.
A cloak to hide her shame. O God! O God!
Did I deserve no better?

VELASCO. Good my Lord!
What circumstance to warrant such conclusion?
What evidence?

ABDALLAH. The evidence of sight --
Mine eyes beheld: I saw myself dishonored.

VELASCO. Your eyes beheld!


ABDALLAH. By Heaven and Hell -- they did.
The night preceding the appointed day
Of my departure, from the realm of Spain,
I slew impatient to the place of meeting,
Before the hour was come: To wear away
The tedious time, for every minute seemed
An age to me, I struck into the wood
And wandered there, still steering to the gate
By which she was to enter. Though the trees
The moon full orb'd in all her glory shone.
My amorous mind a sportful purpose formed,
Unseen to watch the coming of my bride,
And wantonly surprise her. Near the gate
There stood an aged tree. It was a beech,
Which far and wide stretched forth its level arms
Low, near the ground, and formed a gloomy shade.
Behind its trunk I took my secret stand;
The gate was full in view, and the green path
On which it opened. There I stood awhile,
And soon I heard the turning of the key.
My heart beat thick with joy -- and forth she came: --
Not as I wished: She had a minion with her;
A handsome youth was tripping by her side,
Girt with a sword, and dressed in gay attire.
He seemed to court her, as they passed along,
Coy, but not angry, for I heard her laugh.
She flung away. He followed, soon o'erttok her,
Embraced her --

VELASCO. Ah! The Princess Ormisinda!


ABDALLAH. I drew my sword, that I remember well,
And then an interval like death ensued.
When consciousness returned, I found myself
Stretched at my length upon the naked ground
Under the tree: My sword lay by my side.
The sudden shock, the transport of my rage,
And grief, had stopped the current of my blood,
And made a pause of life.

VELASCO. Alas! my Lord!
'Twas piteous indeed. What did thou do,
When life and sense returned?

ABDALLAH. With life and sense,
My rage returned. Stumbling with haste, I ran
To sacrifice them to my just revenge.
But whether they had heard my heavy fall,
Or that my death-like swoon had lasted long,
I know not, but I never saw them more.
I searched till morning; then away I went,
Resolved to scorn the strumpet, and forget her.
But I have not been able to forget
Nor to despise her; though I hate her more
Than ever I loved her, still her image haunts me
Wherever I go. I think of nothing else
When I Am awake, and never shut my eyes
But she is the certain vision of my dream.
Sometimes, in all her loveliness she comes
Without her crimes: In ecstasy I wake,
And wish the vision had endured for ever.
For these deceitful moments, O! my friend!
Are the sole pleasant moments which Alonzo
For eighteen years has known.

VELASCO. Within that time,
What regions barbarous have thou explored,
What strange vicissitudes of life endured
In action and repose.

ABDALLAH. Extremes of both
I courted to relieve my tortured mind:
But the tormenter still my steps attends;
Behind me mounts, when through the ranks of war
I drive my fiery steed; and when I seek
The hermit's cell, the fiend pursues me there.
Time, which they say the wounds of passion cures
In other hearts, inflames and festers mine.
There Is but one remedy.

VELASCO. Would I could name one!


ABDALLAH. Her life. The unction for the serpent's bite
Is the fell serpent's blood. I Will have her life.
The adulteress with infamy shall die,
By public justice doomed. With this intent
Disguised I come. If in my proper shape
I had appeared, alarmed she would have sled,
And bafiled my revenge.

VELASCO. My Lord, pemit me
One thing to mention, which these eyes beheld,
Although it squares not just with thy opinion.

ABDALLAH. Opinion!


VELASCO. Good my Lord! with patience hear.
When first I was to this employment named,
Which since I have so happily discharged,
The Princess sent and called me to her presence.
The treaty with the Moor engrossed her thoughts.
That sad and pensive air she always wears
Was settled to a thicker gloom of grief.
Her voice was low and languid. Few her words,
And the short periods ended with a sigh.
But when I gave her hopes of thy return,
A sudden gleam of joy spread over her face,
Like morning breaking in a cloudy sky.
With earnest voice, still rising as she spoke,
She urged dispatch, exhorted me to zeal
And perseverance, Never to desist
Till I had found thee: For her fate, she said,
The fate of Spain, depended on Alonzo.
Her passion then burst in a flood of tears
That choked her utterance.

ABDALLAH. And thou did believe
That every word she spoke was most sincere.
How to interpret her let me instruct thee.
Whatever she utters with unusual warmth,
As the effusion genuine of her heart,
Receive and construe in another sense
Reverse and opposite; for that is the truth.
The words she spoke, her sights, the tears she shed,
Were all from apprehension of my coming,
Not as they seemed, for fear I should not come.

VELASCO. It Is dreadful that.


ABDALLAH. It Is horrible, it is monstrous!
When I for her had way'd my right to reign,
The right undoubted of the Gothic line,
And stooped, enamored, to that base decree
From Spain, which banished the true heir of Spain,
That she should pitch on me to be her fool,
And pour such infinite contempt upon me.
But four days married! Fond, to madness fond!
And on the very eve of my departure!
She would not for a single day refrain,
But ruth'd to prostitution!

VELASCO. I have heard
Stories and tales enough of female falsehood,
Some that were true, and others that were feigned,
By spiteful wits maliciously devised.
But this surpasses all.

ABDALLAH. All wicked women
Compared with her are saints. She is a foil
To set them off, and make their foulness fair.
In her incontinence she stands unrivaled,
Burning in fires peculiar to herself,
Phoenix in lewdness.

VELASCO. May I ask my Lord
How he intends? -- But see, the King draws near.

ABDALLAH. He Is much impaired.


VELASCO. When fore affliction comes
In the decline of life! it is like a storm
Which in the rear of autumn shakes the tree
That frost had touched before; and strips it bare
Of all its leaves.

(Enter the KING with attendants.) (As he advances, speaks to VELASCO.) KING.
We thank thy care, Velasco!


To ABDALLAH. Illustrious Prince! whom love of glory brings
From regions so remote, to fight for Spain,
Accept the thanks a grateful nation pays
To her defender.

ABDALLAH. Monarchof Asturia!
The nations of the East have heard thy praise.
Had not the hand of Time unstrung thine arm,
Spain never would have sought for foreign aid
To quell her foes.

KING. It Is better far for Spain
That I am old: For in my warlike days,
When in the prime of flow'ring youth I fought,
I equaled not thy friend. Above his own,
Above the strength of every mortal arm!
Alonzo thine exalts.

ABDALLAH. Three times we fought
With equal fortune on the Wolga's banks;
He for the Monguls, I against them stood.
But at our last encounter, on my helm
His faithless blade broke short, and in his hand
The useless hilt remained. My sword I dropped,
And in my arms the valiant chief embraced.
Our friendship thus commene'd, and since that time
We have been brothers sworn, and leagued in arms.
Alonzo, fighting in my cause, received
That wound which now detains him from the field.
Urged by affection, and by honor bound,
For him I come against the soes of Spain.
But of myself more than enough is said;
It Is time to act. The Moorish knight, I hear,
Is in the lists already.

KING. Prince of Persia!
The terms to thee are known.

ABDALLAH. The first of men
With pride such honors might from Spain receive;
But never can these honors grace Abdallah.
Long since my heart and hand were given away;
And though the custom of the East permits
Unnumber'd consorts, me my faith restrains.
But if victorious in the strife of death,
I have an earnest and a just request
To thee, O King! which, at a proper time,
I shall be bold to make.

KING. Whatever it is,
I pledge my honor and my faith, to grant it.

Enter SEBASTIAN and ALBERTO. (ALBERTO goes on to the KING.) KING. Advance,
Alberto! to the Prince himself,
Deliver thou thy message and the present.

ALBERTO. Great Sir! the Princess Ormisinda greets
The generous champion of her country's cause,
Wishes that victory may sit to day,
And every day of battle, on his sword.
This costly bracelet from her arm she sends
To prince Abdallah, to Alonzo's friend.

ABDALLAH. (Looking steadfastly on ALBERTO) The Princess is most bountiful, as
thou,
Who have the honor to attend her, know.
Her gracious present humbly I accept,
And thank her for her goodness to Alonzo,
Who will be proud to be by her remembered.
The combat ended, I propose to pay
My homage to her beauty. At this time
My mind is in the lists. -- The Moorish knight.
Will think me tardy.
( To the KING.)
KING. Let our trumpets sound
A sprightly charge. The warrior's heart beats time
To that brave music. Onward from this place
A path direct to thy pavilion leads.

(The KING turns and gives orders). ABDALLAH (to VELASCO.) Another minion! View
him well, Velasco.
How insolent! See what a crest he rears,
Elated with her favor. O! vile woman!
Insatiate and inconstant.

VELASCO. Ah! my Lord!
Truce with such thoughts! Sure this is not a time!
The combat claims a cool and present mind.

ABDALLAH. Fear not the combat.


VELASCO. Thou art waited for;
The King himself intends with thee to walk.

[ Exeunt: Abdallah looking back at Alberto.] (Manent ALBERTO, SEBASTIAN.)
ALBERTO. That Prince of Persia is composed of pride;
He did not deign to look upon the present,
But stretched his sunburned hand straight out before him,
Like a blind man, and would have stood so still,
Had I not made his fingers feel the pearls.
And all the while he star'd me in the face,
As if he meant t'oppress me with his eye,
And fright me with his fierce and uncouth looks.
I blushed at first, but anger came at last,
And bore me up.

SEBASTIAN. Those princes of the East,
Used to the servile manners of their country,
Where every prostrate slave adores his lord,
Without intention shock the sons of Europe.

ALBERTO. O! how unlike to him the King of Spain,
And that most gentle Princess, Ormisinda!
Her look, her voice, benign and mild, dispel
The awe her rank inspires, and reassure
The modest mind. Would thou believe, Sebastian,
She talked to me, I cannot tell how long,
Before thou came, and questioned me minutely
How I had lived, how past my youthful days?
I fear I was too copious in my answers.
What signifies my rural life to her?
And yet she seemed to listen with delight,
As if she had an interest in my fate;
And once or twice when I of danger spoke,
From which I hardly had escaped with life,
Methought I saw her tremble. Much she blamed
My rashness; yet she praised my courage too.
With all her tenderness of heart, I see
That she admires true valor.

SEBASTIAN. So she does.
The bravest knight that ever was clad in steel,
Alonzo, was the lover of her youth:
And since he left this land she never rejoiced,
But of these matters I will tell thee more
At a convenient season. Let us follow,
And join the train before they reach the lists.

ALBERTO. I would not lose one moment of this sight
For half the lands of Spain. Though I abhor
The Persian, yet I pray devoutly for him.

[Exeunt.] END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. The City. Enter ORMISINDA and TERESA. ORMISINDA. THIS city looks as
if a pestilence
Had swept the whole inhabitants away.
The solitary streets, the empty squares,
Appall me more than the deserted palace.
Let us go back again.

TERESA. It Is time we should.
You trembled at the howling of a dog,
That broke the silence and increased the horror.
If we stay here we shall be fancy-struck,
Mistake some statue for a pale-faced ghost,
And think it beckons with its marble arm.

ORMISINDA. Why should this desolation frighten me?
Why should I fear to see a grave-clad ghost,
Who may so soon be numbered with the dead,
And be myself a ghost? What noise is that?
Did thou not hear, Teresa?

TERESA. Yes, I did.
I heard an uncouth sound.

ORMISINDA. Uncouth indeed!
An universal groan! Hark! there again.

TERESA. It Is not the same. This has another tone,
A shout of triumph, and a burst of joy.

ORMISINDA. The combat's over, and my fate's determined.
Now death or life!

[The trumpets sound.] TERESA. Long may the Princess live!
And every hour be fortunate as this!
The Spanish trumpets sound, the sign I know.
Thy champion has prevailed.

ORMISINDA. O gracious Heaven!
The lists are near, and we shall quickly learn.

TERESA. Look yonder, flying swifter than the wind,
A horseman comes; now at the gate he lights,
And hastes across the square. It is Sebastian.
His look, his gesture, speak his tidings good.

[ Enter SEBASTIAN.] SEBASTIAN. Joy to the Princess! Victory and peace!
The Moor is slain by brave Abdallah's hand.

ORMISINDA. Blessed be thy tongue, Sebastian! Thou shall find
Some better recompense than barren thanks
For these glad tidings. But the generous Prince
Who fought for Spain --

SEBASTIAN. Safe and without a wound,
Fresh for another foe, Abdallah stands.
Short was the combat: Soon the boaster fell,
Who durst defy the Christian world to arms.

ORMISINDA. The God of battles, whom Abdallah serves,
Has overthrown the infidel, whose trust
Was in his own right arm.

SEBASTIAN. If I should live
Ten thousand years, I never could forget
The solemn prelude and the fierce encounter.
Thou know the place appointed for the combat,
An amphitheatre by nature formed.

ORMISINDA. I know it well.


SEBASTIAN. The hills, of various slope
And shape, which circle round the spacious plain,
Were covered with a multitude immense
Of either sex, of every age and rank,
Christian and Moor; whose faces and attire
Strangely diversified the living scene.
Within the lists a gallery was raised
In which thy father and the Moorish prince
Sat with their peers, the judges of the field.
To them the knights with slow and stately pace
Approached; and bound by sacred oaths declared
That they no charm nor incantation used,
But trusted in their valor and their arms.
With low obeisance then they both fell back;
And first the Moor (for he the challenge gave)
Marched to the middle of the listed field;
There seized his ponderous mace, beneath whose weight,
The brawny bearer bowed; and round his head,
Like a light foil, he flourished it in air.
On him with different thoughts the nations gazed.
But suddenly a flash of light and flame
Struck every eye from brave Abdallah's shield,
Covered till then. 'Twas made of polished steel,
Which shone like adamant; and to a point
Rose in the center, stanting on each side.
This shield the Persian Prince advancing bore
On his left arm outstretch'd, and in his right,
Thrown back a little, gleam'd a pointed sword.
Erect and high the bold Mirmallon stood,
And sternly eyed his near-approaching oe.
Then forward sprung, and on the flaming shield
Discharged a mighty blow, enough to crush
A wall, or split a rock. The Spaniards gave
A general groan.

ORMISINDA. That was the dreadful sound
We heard, Teresa.

SEBASTIAN. Glancing from the shield,
Aside the mace descended. Then enraged,
Once more the Moor his thundering weapon reared.
In stepped the Prince, and raising high his shield,
Midway he met the blow; and with the strength
And vigor of his arm, obliquely down
The ponderous mace he drove. Then quick as thought,
His better hand and foot at once advancing,
Plunged in Mirmallon's throat his thirsty blade.
The giant staggered for a little space;
Then falling, shook the earth. The Christians raised
A shout that rent the air. Away I came,
Happy to be the bearer of such tidings.

[Trumpet. ORMISINDA. Behold, they come in triumph from the field.
O! glorious man! And yet forgive me, Heaven,
I grudge the conquest to Alonzo's friend,
And wish Alonzo in Abdallah's place.

Enter the KING, ABDALLAH, VELASCO, ALBERTO, etc. ABDALLAH. [ To Velasco.] See
where she stands. O Heavens!


VELASCO. My Lord Alonzo,
Compose thy thoughts.

ABDALLAH. Behold her how she looks,
As if she knew no ill. That hardened heart
Against remorse and fear and shame is armed;
But I shall wring it now.

KING. Daughter, draw near!
This godlike Prince all recompense disclaims,
Save thanks from Spain. The pleasing task be thine
To greet the savior of thy native land,
And speak our gratitude.

ORMISINDA. No words can speak
The gratitude I feel. Believe it great
As my deliverance, vast as my distress!
Like sad Andromeda, chained to the rock
I stood a living prey, when this brave Prince,
Came like another Perseus from the sky,
And saved me from destruction. I forget,
Wrapped in myself, the charge my father gave
To thank the savior of my native land;
Another voice shall give thee thanks for Spain,
Alonzo's voice shall thank thee for his country,
His friends, his people -- saved.

ABDALLAH. Ah! If I hear
(Aside.) This siren longer, she will charm my rage;
But I remember where I heard her last.
Princess of Spain! I merit not thy praise.
Sent by Alonzo to this land I came:
What has been done, for Him I have performed.
Now of his promise I remind the King
To grant me one request.

KING. Speak! It is granted.


ORMISINDA. If I conjecture right, even that request
Will prove one favor more on Spain conferred.

ABDALLAH. Perhaps it may


KING. Proceed, illustrious Prince!
And make me happy to fulfill thy wish.

ABDALLAH. Not for myself I speak, but for my friend;
And in his name, whose person I sustain,
I ask for justice on a great offender.

KING. Thou shall have ample and immediate justice.
Nor favor nor affinity shall skreen
The guilty person. Prince, why ar thou troubled?
Thou shank'st from head to foot. Thy quivering lip
Is pale with passion. On thy forehead stand
Big drops. Almighty God! What dreadsul birth
Do these strong pangs portend?

ABDALLAH. The guilty person,
Whom with a capital offense I charge,
Stands by thy side.

KING. My daughter!


ABDALLAH. Yes! thy daughter!
It Is her I mean, the Princess Ormisinda.
Here in the presence of the Peers of Spain,
I charge her with a crime, whose doom the laws
Of Spain have wrote in blood: Adultery.
I read astonishment in every face!
Who would suspect that one so highly born,
With every outward mark of virtue graced,
Had given her honor to a worthless wretch,
And driven a noble husband to despair!

KING. Am I awake! Is this the light of day?
Art thou, O! Prince, with sudden frenzy seized?
Or is the madness mine? Renowned Abdallah!
What answer can be made to such a charge?
This strange demand of justice on my daughter,
For an offense that she could not commit?
My daughter never was married.

ABDALLAH. Ask her that?
Hear if she will deny she has a husband?

KING. My child, thou art amazed!


ORMISINDA. No, not so much
As thou will be, my father, when thou hear'st
Thy daughter's tongue confess she has a husband.

KING. Have thou a husband! God of heaven and earth!
Since thou have thus dissembled with thy father,
Perhaps thou have deceived thy husband too.
Who is thy husband? Speak!

ORMISINDA. The Prince Alonzo.


KING. And have thou been so long in secret wedded?
It Is eighteen years since he departed hence.

ORMISINDA. O! I have reason to remember that.
There is no calendar so just and true
As the sad memory of a wife forsaken.
The years, the months, the weeks, the very days,
Are reckoned, registered, recorded there!
And of that period I could cite such times,
So dolorous, distressful, melancholy,
That the bare mention of them would excite
Amazement how I live to tell the tale.
But I forget the present in the past.
No wonder, for this moment is the first
That opes the sluices of a heart o'ercharg'd,
And bursting with a flood of grief concealed.
But I must turn me to another theme.
The earnest eyes of all are bent on me,
Watching my looks, and prying to discern
Symptoms of innocence or signs of guilt.
Hear then the frank confession of my soul:
I have transgressed.

KING. Stain of a noble race!
Do thou avow thy crime?

ORMISINDA. Mistake me not,
I have transgressed my duty to my father:
Without his knowledge, and against his will,
Moved by a tender lover's parting tears,
I joined myself in wedlock to Alonzo.
My King, my father, pardon the offense,
Which against thee I own I have committed:
But may I never of God or man be pardoned,
Nor friend nor father ever pity me,
If I have swerved one step from virtue's path,
Or broke the smallest parcel of that vow
Which binds a faithful wife! O! Prince of Persia!
Thou art the est of friends and benefactors;
Thou come to end my most distracting woes,
And to dispel the impenetrable cloud
That darkened all my days. Now I shall know
Why I have been abandoned and forsaken,
Why I have been detested and despised,
As never woman was. Proceed, my Lord.
And whilst thou keenly do assail my life,
And, dearer far, my honor and my fame,
Secure in innocence, I Will calmly hear.
From thee, I hope, the end of all my cares.

ABDALLAH. Even thus Alonzo told me she would speak,
And thus proclaim her innocence.

ORMISINDA. Did He?
O! would to Heaven Alonzo heard me now,
Fearless defend his honor and my own!
My voice, which once was music to his ear,
Like David's harp which soothed the gloomy king,
Would charm his malady, would drive away
The evil spirit, and call back again
The better genius of his early days.
O! thou that were so good, so great! admired
Of all mankind! my loved, my lost Alonzo!
For thee, in this humiliating hour,
More than myself I mourn.

ABDALLAH. (Half aside.) Eternal Power!
To whom the secrets of all hearts are known!
Hear, hear this woman, and between us judge!
It Is not my business to contend with words,
These are the conquering arms of womankind.
A nobler course of trial lies before me:
In a wronged husband's name I charge this lady
With infidelity; and crave the doom
Of law upon her head. If any knight,
Spaniard or stranger, dares assert her cause,
Let him stand forth, and take my gauntlet up;
Which on the ground I throw, my gage to prove
That she is false to honor and Alnzo.

ORMISINDA. Before the gage of death is lifted up,
Hear me one moment. By Alonzo sent,
Thou come instructed in Alonzo's wrongs.
Let me conjure thee then, by all that is dear,
By all that is sacred to the great and brave,
Thy mother's memory, thy consort's fame,
Not on a general charge, obscure and vague,
To which there is no answer but denial,
To found the claim of combat: Single out
What circumstance thou will of special note,
Of such a kind as may be tried and known
For true or false. Tell us at least his name
With whom Alonzo's wife her honor stained,
And let us be confronted.

[ Young ALBERTO steps forth. ALBERTO. Heaven forbid
That thou should be consronted with a villain.
Princess of Spain! Be sure some wretch there is,
Some renegado, false to God and man,
Suborned, and ready with a lying tongue,
To second this brave Prince who wrongs thy fame,
And wounds thy modest ear. Too much by far
Already thou have heard. Pretended Prince!
For there is nothing royal in thy soul!
Thou base defamer of a lady's name!
I take thy gauntlet up, and hold it high
In scorn, and fierce desiance, to thy face,
My gage to prove thy accusation false,
And thee, the author of a tale invented
To rob a noble lady of her fame.

ORMISINDA. Where am I now? What shall I do, Teresa?


[Aside. TERESA. The God of Heaven direct thee!


ABDALLAH. Boy! To thee
I answer nothing. I suspect the cause
Of thy presumption, and could wish that Spain
Had gi'n a worthier victim to my sword.

[Walks aside. ORMISINDA. O! valiant youth! much am I bound to thee:
But I have reasons that import the state,
Which shall, whatever is my fate, be known,
And owned hereafter to be great and weighty,
Why I decline the assistance of thy sword.
If this appeal to combat is the law,
And I can find no champion but Alberto,
Without the chance of combat let me fall,
For I will not accept --

ALBERTO. Recall these words,
Too generous Princess! I can read thy thoughts:
Thou think my youth unequal to the foe;
Thou fear the weakness of Alberto's arm.
My strength exceeds the promise of my years.
Often have I bent the bow, and drawn the sword,
Nor fly my shafts, nor falls my sword in vain.
This day against a troop alone I fought;
But never did I fight in such a cause,
Nor was I ever so certain to prevail.
A fire divine invades my zealous breast:
I feel the force of legions in mine arm.
Thy innocence has made thy champion strong!
The God of battles is our righteous judge;
And let the cause be tried.

(A warrior armed, with his helmet on, steps forth.) WARRIOR. But not by thee!
Thy father's voice forbids, too daring youth!
Stand back, and let thy master in the art
Of war, now claim the combat for his own.
My liege!

KING. That voice I know: Thy figure too
Resembles much a chief, lamented long
As slain in battle.

WARRIOR. I am he, Costollo.
It Is true, O! king! that on the field I fell,
Fighting for Spain. How I was saved from death,
And where, for many years I have remained,
This is no time to tell. This hour demands
A soldier's speech, brief prologue to his deeds.
On me, proud Persion! turn thy gloomy eyes,
Hear me, and let thy ready sword reply.
With hell-born malice, levelled at her life,
Thou have defamed a Princess, honored, loved,
By all, who virtue or fair honor love.
The fell Hyaena, native of thy land,
Has not a voice or heart more false than thine,
Thou counterfeit of truth! whom I defy
To mortal combat, and the proof of arms.
Thy full-blown fame, thy unexhausted strength,
Deceitful confidence, I laugh to scorn;
The conquering cause is mine.

ALBERTO. My lord, the King!
And ye his counselors for wisdom famed!
You will not sure permit this good old man,
By fond affection for his son impelled,
To meet so stern a foe. His hoary head,
His withered veins, are symptoms of decay,
Lean not upon a reed which time has bruised,
Nor trust the life and honor of the Princess
To the weak arm of age.

ABDALLAH. I Will fight you both,
Father and son at once. Together come,
Tongue-valiant men! and try Abdallah's arm.
I Will have it so; for both of you have dared,
Ignoble as you are, to match yourselves
Against a Prince who moves not in your sphere,
And utter words for which such blood as yours
Is poor atonement.

COSTOLLO. Every word thou speak,
Is insolent and false. Son of a slave!
For eastern monarchs buy with gold their brides,
The blood by thee despised, flows from a sourc
Purer than thine and nobler.

ALBETO. Nay, my father!
That Is said too far. Fierce and disdainful Prince,
Vain is the offer which thy passion makes.
Perhaps the conqueror of the Moor may find
One Spaniard is enough.

COSTOLLO. A father's right
Unmoved I claim, and with determined voice
Forbid the combat.

KING. Hence let us retire
To the pavilion. There our peers shall judge
Of your pretensions.

[Exeunt King and Spaniards. ABDALLAH. Come with me Velasco.


[ Exeunt Abdallah and Velasco. ( Manent ORMISINDA and TERESA.) ORMISINDA. My
thoughts are of my son. Mine own estate
Is desperate. The husband whom I loved,
On whom I doated, and from whom I suffered,
What never woman with such patience bore,
Conspires against my honor and my life,
Long cherished hope, farewell!

TERESA. To guard thy son
Defend thyself; and, to prevent the combat,
In thy demand persist. Call the accuser
To circumstance of proof. That is the thread
To lead us through this labyrinth perplexed.
Nor has the Persian thy demand refused,

ORMISINDA. He had not time to speak. Alberto's voice
Broke in like thunder in his mother's cause.
Amidst the anguish of my tortured heart,
My soul exults, Teresa! in my son!
When in the pride of valor forth he came,
And for my sake defied the bold Abdallah,
His look (he seemed a cherub in my eyes!)
His voice (at every word my bosom yearn'd!).
Transported me so much, that I forgot
His state and mine, and had well nigh sprung forth
To clasp my blooming hero in my arms.

TERESA. No wonder that his mother's soul was moved:
His brave demeanor the spectators charmed.
Valor, which sheds a glory round the head
Of age and ruggedness; how bright its beams
When in the lovely front of youth they shine!

ORMISINDA. I Have heard of strange and perilous essays
To try the pureness of suspected virtue.
I Will undergo whatever can be devised.
By ordeal trial let my faith be proved.
Blindfold, barefooted, on the smoking soil,
With red hot plough-shares spread, I Will walk my way,
Plunge in the boiling oil my naked arm,
But will not risk my young Alonzo's life.
The Moorish host hangs over our heads no more.
The heir of Spain shall for himself be known,
Alonzo's son.

TERESA. He will not be allowed
Alonzo's son, nor yet the heir of Spain,
Whilst slander's breath sullies his mother's fame.

ORMISINDA. Now thou have touched a string, to whose deep sound
A mother's heart replies. My son! my son!
I weigh thy virtues down, hang on thy life,
Attaint thy blood, thy birth, thy right to reign!
The birds of prey that dwell among the rocks,
The savage beasts that through the deserts roam,
The monsters of the deep, their offspring love,
And to preserve their lives devote their own.
Athwart the gloom, I see a flash of light,
That opens the horizon. I descry
A hand that points a high and lofty path
Which I will boldly tread. Now to my father.
Upon my knees his aid I Will first implore.

[Exeunt. END F THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE I. ABDALLAH and VELASCO. VELASCO. BEFORE this day she never beheld the
boy.
Far from this place in Catalonia bred.
He came to see the famous combat fought.
'Twas he, my Lord, who slew the Moorish chief,
And in his own defense such wonders wrought.
That action to the Princess made him known,
The rest in honor of his valor followed.

ABDALLAH. How do thou know?


VELASCO. With admiration struck,
When he stood forth and braved a foe, like thee,
Of diverse persons curious I inquired,
Who, and from whence he was.

ABDALLAH. Pity it were
To hurt the stripling. It Is a noble boy.
I love the outbreak of his Spanish fire
Against the Moors.

VELASCO. Ay, and against Abdallah,
Whom ancient fame and recent glory raised,
Above all mortal men. Spare this young plant,
Who makes so fair a shoot.

ABDALLAH. How can I spare him?
Should their election send him to my sword,
How, good Velasco?

VELASCO. When the peers return,
The King, the Princess, with their champion chosen;
Then to the wondering audience, in the face
Of her that is guilty, let my Lord relate
The truth-mark'd story he to me has told.
Detected thus, confounded and surprised,
Pierced with a thousand eyes, that gaze upon her,
And dart conviction; can she still deny,
And by denial, make her guilt ambiguous?
But if her sex's genius is so strong
That she the port of innocence maintains,
And, from the fullness and excess of vice,
Derives a boldness, that may look like virtue,
Then let the sword decide.

ABDALLAH. What you propose
Is worth the trial. I am loath to spill
The young Alberto's or Costollo's blood:
For they deserve no harm. Even you, my friend.
Before my hand unclasp'd the book of shame,
Her champion would have been.

VELASCO. Against the world.


ABDALLAH. I will adopt the counsel of Velasco,
And probe more deeply still her fester'd mind.
I see it is better that she should confess
Her guilt, than with her vanquished champion fall,
By doom of law, protesting to the last
Her innocence.

VELASCO. Better a thousand times.
Her dying voice would shake the hearts of men,
And echo through the world.

ABDALLAH. Behold the King,
And young Alberto marching by his side
As if he trod on air.

VELASCO. See, Ormisinda
With folded hands implores her listening sire.

Enter the King, Ormisinda, Teresa, Alberto, Costollo, etc. KING. The peers of
Spain have judged. Stand forth, Alberto!
Behold the champion of my daughter's fame.

ALBERTO. Before the trumpet's voice unsheaths the sword
Which one of us shall never sheath again,
Permit me, Prince of Persia, to entreat
A moment's audience. Not from fear I speak.
The cause I fight for, and the mind I bear,
Exalt me far above the thoughts of dnger;
But from a conscious sense of what is due
To thee, renowned Abdallah. In the heat
Of our contention, if my tongue has uttered
One word offensive to thy noble ear,
Which might have been omitted, and the tone
Of firm defiance equally preserved;
For that I ask forgiveness.

ABDALLAH. Less I marked
The manner than the matter of thy speeck:
If thou do need forgiveness, freely take it,

KING. 'Twas generously asked, and nobly granted;
Such courtesy with valor ever dwells.
Let me too crave for a few words thine ear.
Throughout the trying business of this day,
Thou art my witness, that my mind upright
Has never been by powerful nature bent,
Nor swayed to favor and opinion formed,
By long habitual and accustomed love:
But I with equal hand the balance held
Between thee and my child.

ABDALLAH. Thou have indeed.
It is but justice that I should declare it.

KING. Then to thy candor let me now appeal,
And beg of thee to grant me one request,
Which I do not, but might perhaps, command.

ABDALLAH. What is it?


KING. I have searched my hapless child,
Even to the pith and marrow of her soul,
Have touched her to the quick. She never shrinks
Nor wavers in the least. Perhaps, my Lord!
Some fool officious, or some wretch that is worse,
(If there is ought comes between man and wife
That Is more pernicious than a meddling fool)
Some false designing friend has wronged her fame,
And poured his poison in Alonzo's ear.
If thou will give some scope to her defense,
And bring the charge from darkness into light,
Then she shall forthwith answer on the spot
Where now she stands before us.

ORMISINDA. If I fail
To clear my fame even in Abdallah's sight;
If but one dark suspicious speck remains
To make mine honor dim, let me be held
Guilty of all. Beforehand I renounce
The right of combat, and submit to die.

ABDALLAH. Thy wish is fatal, but if shall be granted,
This instant too.

ORMISINDA. Blessings upon thy head!
Ten thousand blessings! O! thou do not know
How happy thou have made me. On my breast
A mountain lay: Thy hand has heaved it off,
And now I breathe again.

ABDALLAH. O woman! woman!
A little way from hence my people wait;
With them remains a necessary witness.
Thither I go, and quickly will return
To ring thy knell.
[ Exit Abdallah.]
ORMISINDA. The knell of all my woes!
My heart knocks at my side, as if 'twould burst
Itself a passage outward. Yet a while;
Poor suss'ring heart, and thou shall beat no more.
Shortly for what I am I shall be known,
Then let my doom be squared to my desert
Without indulgence.

KING. I can trust thee, now:
Thine eye secure beams innocence and honor.
Thou art my daughter still.

ALBERTO. I fear, O King!
Some practice vile, some infamous imposture,
Supported by false witness. Still I wish
The fair decision of the honest sword.

Enter ABDALLAH in a Spanish Drss as ALONZO. KING. God of my soul! What mockery
is this?
Unless my eyes deceive me, it is Alonzo.

ORMISINDA. My husband! Ah!

[Runs to embrace him, he repulses her.]
ALONZO. Away, thy husband's shame,
Shame to thy sex, reproach of womankind!

ORMISINDA. O! shield me, Heaven! Abdallah was Alonzo.


ALONZO. To Heaven appeal not.


ORMISINDA. I appeal to Heaven,
Justice on earth will come too late for me.

KING. [ To Alonzo.] Have thou no other witness than thyself?


ALONZO. I have no other, and none else require.


KING. Unfeeling man, to trifle with our sorrows,
And like a pageant play a mimic scene.
This is thy hatred of Pelagio's house,
Thy passion to confound a rival race.
Would I were young again!

ALBERTO. [ To Alonzo.] Defend thyself.
I can no longer hold me from thy breast.

PELAGIO. Sound, trumpet, sound! and Heaven defend the right!


ALONZO. [ Drawing his Swords.] His blood be on your heads.


[Ormisinda throws herself between their Swords.] ORMISINDA. Hold! Strike through
me!
You know not what you do, unhappy both!
This combat must not, nor it shall not be.
The Sun in Heav'n-would backward turn his course,
And shrink from such a spectacle as this,
More horrid than the banquet of Thyestes.
You have no quarrel. I Will remove the cause.
A Roman matron, to redeem her fame.
Before her husband's and her father's eyes
Plunged in her breast the steel.

[Stabs herself, and falls.] KING. O! Desperate deed!
What fury urged thy hand?

ORMISINDA. Condemn me not.
There was no other way to save -- but that
Must not as yet be told. My husband! hear
My dying voice! my latest words believe,
Whose truth my blood has sealed. I Am innocent.
As I for mercy hope at that tribunal
Where I shall soon appear, I never wronged thee.
When that is manifest, remember me
As love like mine deserved, and to this youth,
Who is --

ALONZO. Who is this youth! All-seeing God!
A secret horror comes upon my soul.
Who is this youth!

ORMISINDA. He is thy son.


ALONZO. My son!


ORMISINDA. Whom thy forsaken wife in sorrow bore,
And gave in secret to Costollo's care.

ALBERTO. Art thou my mother! Do thou die for me?


ORMISINDA. I die with pleasure to be just to thee.
O! if that Power which did inspire my soul,
To rush between your swords, would let me live,
To prove my innocence. Alonzo speak!
Whilst I have breath to answer.

ALONZO. Though disarmed
And softened, even if guilty to forgive thee,
Thy solemn call I instantly obey.
That night appointed for our last farewell,
That fatal night for ever cursed -- thou know
What happened then.

ORMISINDA. I know thou did not come,
Forlorn thou lefted'st me.

ALONZO. Thou wast not forlorn,
In the dark wood with thee there was a youth.

ORMISINDA, (After a pause.) O heaven and earth, a youth! It was Teresa.


ALONZO. Teresa!


TERESA. Yes, that memorable night,
My brother's sword and helmet plumed I wore.

ALONZO. Great God! the snares of hell have caught my soul.


TERESA. The night before, the Princess, as she went,
Was fright'ned in the wood, and I assumed
That warlike form, to seem --

ALONZO. No matter why?
I saw thee then, and thought thee what thou seem'dst.

KING. She Is innocent; like gold tried in the fire,
Her honor shines: Would I had died for thee!

[ To ORMISINDA. ORMISINDA. Why did thou never till this moment speak?


[ To ALONZO. ALONZO. Because I Am born and destined to perdition.
Had I a voice like AEtna when it roars;
For in my breast is pent as hot a fire:
I Would speak in flames.

ORMISINDA. My Lord!


ALONZO. Do not forgive me.
Do not oppress me with such tender looks:
I will not be forgiven.

[ORMISINDA raising herself and stretching out her arms. ORMISINDA. Come to my
arms
And let me sooth thine anguish. Had I been
What I to thee appeared, thy rage was just,
A Spaniard's temper, and a Prince's pride,
A Lover's passion, and a Husband's honor,
Prompted no less.

ALONZO. Hear, men and angels hear.
Let me fall down and worship.
[Throws himself into her arms. Oh I loved thee!
I loved thee all the while, to madness loved.

ORMISINDA. My husband! dear as ever to my heart!
In my last moments dear!

ALONZO. My heart is torn.
My head, my brain! How blessed I might have been!
With such a wife, with such a son!

ORMISINDA. To him
Pay all the debt of love thou ow'st to me:
Embrace thy son before mine eyes are closed:
Let me behold him in his father's arms.

ALONZO. Thou brave defender of thy mother's fame!


ORMISINDA. He Is gentle too; his soul dissolves in grief.


ALONZO. My falt'ring tongue dares scarcely call thee son.
Can thou endure the touch of such a father?

ALBERTO. My bursting heart, amidst its grief is proud
Of such a father. Let me clasp thy knees,
And help to reconcile thee to thyself.

[They embrace. ORMISINDA. This pleasing sight subdues the pains of death,
My son!

ALBERTO. My mother, Oh!


ORMISINDA. My dearest husband --


ALONZO. What would thou say. Alas! thine eye grows dim;
Thy voice begins to fail.

ORMISINDA. Remember me
When I am dead; remember how I loved you.
And thou, Alnzo, live to guard thy son,
To fix the Spanish scepter in --

[ Dies looking at her son. Alonzo remains silent, with his eyes fixed upon
Ormisinda. ALBERTO. My father!
Under thy gathered brows I see despair:
Have pity on thy son, who lived so long
In total ignorance of what he was:
Who has already seen one parent die,
And for the sad survivor trembles now.
My mother's last request!

ALONZO. I Am mindful of it,
And to her sacred memory will be just.
Hang not on me, my son! go to the King
And pay thy duty there.

[ The King embraces Alberto. KING. My child, my all!
I loved thee at first sight.

ALONZO. It Is well; it is well.
The good old King has still some comfort left.
Now is my time.
[Draws his sword. Often have I struck with thee,
But never struck a foe with better will
Than now myself.
[Stabs himself and falls.
VELASCO, COSTOLLO. Alas!


(ALBERTO turning.) ALBERTO. 'Twas this I feared.


ALONZO. There was good cause to fear. I would have lived
For thee, if I with honor could have lived.
My son! thy fathers were renowned in arms:
The valor of our warlike race is thine:
But guard against the impulse of their blood.
Take warning by my fate.

PELAGIO. Thou might have lived,
Renowned Alonzo; even I forgave
And pitied thee.

ALONZO. I am more just than thou --
For I did not forgive, nor would I live,
Upon the alms of other men; their pity --
Farewell, my son! O! Ormisinda, stay
'Till I overtake thee.
[Dies.
( The King to ALBERTO.) PELAGIO. Dwell not on this sight,
Prince of Asturia! leave the scene of sorrow.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. BARRY.
THOUGH lately dead, a Princess, and of Spain,
I am no Ghost, but Flesh and Blood again!
No time to change this Dress, it is expedient,
I pass for British, and your most obedient.
How happy, Ladies, for us all -- That we,
Born in this Isle, by Magna Charta free,
Are not like Spanish Wives, kept under Lock and Key.
The Spaniard now, is not like him of Yore,
Who in his whisker'd face, his Titles bore!
Nor Joy, nor Vengeance made him smile or grin,
Fixed were his features, though the Devil within!
He, when once jealous, to wash out the Stain,
Stalked home, stabbed Madam, and stalked out again.
Thanks to the times, this Dagger-drawing passion,
Through polished Europe, is quite out of Fashion.
Signor The Italian, quick of sight and hearing,
Once ever lisf'ning, and for ever leering,
To Cara Sposa, now politely kind,
He, best of Husbands, is both deaf and blind.
Mynheer the Dutchman, with his sober pace,
Whenever be finds his Rib has wanted Grace,
He feels no Branches sprouting from his Brain,
But Calculation makes of Loss and Gain,
And when to part with her, occasion's ripe,
Mynheer turns out mine Frow, an smokes his pipe.
When a brisk Frenchman's Wife is given to prancing,
It never spoils his Singing or his Dancing:
Madams, you false -- de tout mon Coeur -- Adieu;
Begar you Cocu me, I Cocu you. --
He, torjours gai, dispels each jealous Vapor,
Takes Snusf, sings Vive l'amour, and cuts a Caper.
As for John Bull -- not he in upper Life,
But the plain Englishman, who loves his Wife;
When honest John, I say, has got his doubts,
He sullen grows, scratches his head, and pouts.
What is the Matter with you, Love? Cries She;
Are you not well, my Dearest? Humph! Cries He:
You're such a Brute! -- But, Mr. Bull, I Have done:
And if I am a Brute -- Who made me one?
You know my tenderness -- My heart's too full,
And so's my head -- I thank you Mrs. Bull.
O you base Man! -- Zounds, Madam, there is no bearing,
She falls a weeping, and he falls a swearing:
With Tears and Oaths, the Storm domestic ends.
The Thunder dies away, the rain descends,
She sabs, he melts, and then they kiss and Friends.
Whatever case these modern Modes may bring,
A little Jealousy is no bad thing:
To me, who speak from Nature unrefin'd,
Jealousy is the Bellows of the Mind.
Touch it but gently, and it warms desire,
If handled roughly, you are all on Fire!
If it stands still, Affection must expire!
This Truth, no true Philosopher can doubt.
Whatever you do -- let not the Flame go out.


