AN EPISTLE TO DR. SHEBBEARE: TO WHICH IS ADDED AN ODE TO SIR FLETCHER NORTON,
IN IMITATION OF HORACE, ODE VIII. BOOK IV.

By MALCOLM MACGREGGOR, of Knightsbridge, Esquire. Author of the Heroic Epistle to
Sir Wm. Chambers, etc.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR J. ALMON, OPPOSITE BURLINGTON-HOUSE, PICCADILLY.

MDCCLXXVII.

[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]

ADVERTISEMENT.
THOUGH I look upon this Poem, in point of elevation of diction and sublimity
of sentiment, to be as highly heroical, as my Epistle to Sir William Chambers,
yet I have not thought proper to add that epithet to it on the title page. I am
willing to wish that first production of my muse may preserve the distinction
which it now possesses, of being called The Heroic Epistle, par excellence.
Besides this consideration, the different ranks of the two persons, to whom
these two works are addressed, require a difference to be made in this matter;
and it would be unpardonable in me not to discriminate between a Comptroller of
his Majesty's Works, and the Hackney Scribbler of a Newspaper; between a
Placeman and a Pensioner, a Knight of the Polar Star, and a broken Apothecary.

AN EPISTLE TO DR. SHEBBEARE.
O For a thousand tongues! and every tongue
Like Johnson's, armed with words of six feet long,
In multitudinous vociferation
To panegyricize this glorious nation,
Whose liberty results from her taxation. Ver. 2. Words of six feet long.]
Sesquipedalia verba. HOR.



O, for that passive, pensionary spirit,
That by its prostitution proves its merit!
That rests on RIGHT DIVINE, all regal claims,
And gives to George, what^'er it gave to James:
Then should my Tory numbers, old Shebbeare,
Tickle the tattered fragment of thy ear!
Then all that once was virtuous, wise, or brave,
That quelled a tyrant, that abhorred a slave,
Then Sydney's, Russel's patriot fame should fall,
Besmeared with mire, like black Dalrymple's gall,
Then, like thy prose, should my felonious verse
Tear each immortal plume from Nassau's hearse,
That modern monarchs, in that plumage gay,
Might stare and strut, the peacocks of a day.
But I, like Ansty, feel myself unfit
To run, with hollow speed, two heats of wit. Ver. 11. Tickle the tattered
fragment.] Churchill, in alluding to this capital anecdote in our Doctor's
life, says, in his poem called The Author,

The whole intent

Of that parade, was fame, not punishment.

Intimating that his ears received no detriment in the pillory. My line
intimates, that they did. However, if my intimation be false, it is easily
refuted: the Doctor has only to expose his ears again to the public, and the
real fact will be flagrant.



He, at first starting, won both fame and money,
The betts ran high on Bladud's Cicerone;
Since distanc'd quite, like a galled jade he winces,
And lashes unknown priests, and praises well-known princes.
So I, when first I tuned the heroic lay,
Gained Pownall's praise, as well as Almon's pay.
In me the nation placed its tuneful hope,
Its second Churchill, or at least its Pope:
Proudly I pricked along, Sir William's squire,
Bade kings recite my strains and queens admire;
Chaste maids of honor praised my stout endeavor,
Sir Thomas swore "The fellow was damned clever." Ver. 23. Bladud's Cicerone.]
Anglice, Bath Guide.

Ver. 25. Lashes unknown priests.] Without a note posterity will never
understand this line. Two or three years ago this gentleman found himself
libelled in a newspaper; and on suspecting a certain clergyman to be the
author, he wrote a first canto of a poem, called The Priest Dissected, in which
he prepared all chirurgical matters previous to the operation. In the mean time
the parson proved an alibi, and saved his bacon. To this first and unique canto
the author prefixed a something in which he exculpated himself from being the
author of the Heroic Epistle, which it seems had been laid to his charge during
the time the clan of Macgreggors continued without a name, and which, as the
world well knows, was the only reason which prevented me from claiming the
merit of that production. It is to this something, that the latter part of the
line alludes. For in it he had told the public, that his Majesty had ten
children, which it knew very well before. Hence the epithet well-known.

Ver. 33. Sir Thomas.] The Petronius of the present age needs not the addition
of a surname to make the world certain who is meant by this appellative.



But popularity, alas! has wings,
And flits as soon from poets as from kings.
My pompous Posiscript found itself disdained
As much as Milton's Paradise regained --
And when I dared the Patent Snuffers handle,
To trim, with Pinchy's aid, Old England's candle,
The lyric muse, so lame was her condition,
Could hardly hop beyond a third edition.
Yes, it is a general truth, and strange as true,
(Kenrick shall prove it in his next Review)
That no one bard, in these degenerate days,
Can write two works deserving equal praise.
Whether the matter of which minds are made
Be grown of late mephitic and decayed,
Or wants phlogiston, I forbear to say,
The problem's more in Doctor Priestley's way.
He knows of spirit the material whole,
For Priestley has the cure of Sh-lb -- e's soul. Ver. 51. The cure of Sh-lb --
e's soul.] It is not here insinuated, that the soul in question wants curing.
The word cure is here put for care, in the sense in which ecclesiastical
lawyers use cura animarum.



Enough of souls, unless we waste a line,
Shebbeare! to pay a compliment to thine:
Which forged, of old, of strong Hibernian brass,
Shines through the Paris plaster of thy face,
And bronzes it, secure from shame, or sense,
To the flat glare of finished impudence.
Wretch! that from Slander's filth art ever gleaning,
Spite without spirit, malice without meaning:
The same abusive, base, abandoned thing,
When pilloried, or pension'd by a King.
Old as thou art, methinks, 'twere sage advice,
That N -- th should call thee off from hunting Price.
Some younger blood-hound of his bawling pack
Might sorer gall his presbyterian back.
Thy toothless jaws should free thee from the fight;
Thou can but mumble, when thou mean to bite.
Say, then, to give a requiem to thy toils,
What if my muse arrayed her in thy spoils?
And took the field for thee, through pure goodnature;
Courts praised by thee, are cursed beyond her satire. Ver. 63. From hunting
Price.] See a series of wretched letters, written by Shebbeare, in the Public
Advertiser, and other papers.



Yet, when she pleases, she can deal in praise:
Exempli gratia, hear her fluent lays
Extol the present, the propitious hour,
When Europe, trembling at Britannia's power,
Bids all her princes, with pacific care,
Keep neutral distance, while she wings the war
Cross the Atlantic vast; in dread array,
Herself to vanquish in America.
Where soon, we trust, the brother chiefs shall see
The Congress pledge them in a cup of tea,
Toast peace and plenty to their mother nation,
Give three huzzas to George and to taxation,
And beg, to make their loyal hearts the lighter,
He Would send them over Dean T -- k-r, with a mitre.
In Fancy's eye, I ken them from afar
Circled with feather wreaths, unstained by tar:
In place of laurels, these shall bind their brow,
Fame, honor, virtue, all are feathers now.
Even beauty's self, unfeather'd, if we spy,
Is hideous to our Macaroni eye.
Foolish the bard, who, in such flimsy times,
Would load with satire or with sense his rhymes:
No, let my numbers flutter light in air,
As careless as the silken Goffimer.
Or should I, playful, lift the muse's scourge,
Thy cocks should lend their tails, my Cocking G --,
To make the rod. So fear not thou the song;
To whip a post, I never will waste a thong.
Were I inclined to punish courtly tools,
I Would lash the knaves before I slapt the fools*
Gigantic vice should on my ordeal burn,
Long ere it came to thy poor pigmy turn.
But sure it is best, whatever rash Whigs may say,
To sleep within a whole skin, while one may;
For Whigs are mighty prone to run stark mad,
If credence in A -- hb -- ps may be had.
Therefore I Will keep within discretion's rule,
And turn true Tory of the M -- d school.
So shall I 'scape that creature's tiger paw,
Which some call Liberty, and some call Law: Ver. 97. My cocking G --.] A great
cock-fighter, and little senator, who, in the last Parliament, called the
Heroic Postscript a libel.

Ver. 111. Which some call Liberty.] With courtiers and churchmen the terms are
synonimous. See a late Sermon.



Whose whale-like mouth is of that savage shape,
Whenever his long-rob'd shewman bids him gape,
With tusks so strong, with grinders so tremendous,
And such a length of gullet, Heaven defend us!
That should you peep into the red-raw track,
'Twould make your cold flesh creep upon you back.
A maw like that, what mortal may withstand?
'Twould swallow all the poets in the land.
Come, then, Shebbeare! and hear thy bard deliver
Unpaid-for praises to thy pension-giver.
Hear me, like T -- k-r, swear, "so help me, muse!"
I write not for preferment's golden views.
But hold -- it is on thy province to intrude:
I would be loyal, but would not be rude.
To thee, my veteran, I his fame consign;
Take thou St. James's, be St. Stephen's mine.
Hail, genial hotbed! whose prolific soil
So well repays all North's perennial toil, Ver. 122. Like T -- k-r swear.] The
reverend Dean took a solemn oath in one of his late pamphlets, that he would
not be a bishop.



Whence he can raise, if want or whim inclines,
A crop of votes, as plentiful as pines.
Wet-nurse of tavern-waiters and Nabobs,
That empties first, and after fills their fobs:
(As Pringle, to procure a sane secretion,
Purges the primae viae of repletion.)
What scale of metaphor shall Fancy raise,
To climb the heights of thy stupendous praise?
Thrice has the sun commenced his annual ride,
Since full of years and praise, thy mother died.
'Twas then I saw thee, with exulting eyes,
A second phoenix, from her ashes rise;
Marked all the graces of thy loyal crest,
Sweet with the perfume of its parent nest.
Rare chick! How worthy of all court caresses,
How soft, how echo-like, it chirp'd addresses.
Proceed, I cried, thy full-fledg'd plumes unfold,
Each true-blue feather shall be tipped with gold;
Ordained thy race of future fame to run,
To do, whatever thy mother left undone.
In all her smooth, obsequious paths proceed,
For, know, poor Opposition wants a head.
With horn and hound her truant schoolboys roam,
And for a fox-chace quit St. Stephen's dome,
Forgetful of their grandfire Nimrod's plan,
"A mighty hunter, but his prey was man."
The rest, at crowded Almacks, nightly bett,
To stretch their own beyond the nation's debt.
Vote then secure; the needful millions raise,
That fill the privy-purse with means and ways.
And do it quickly too, to show your breeding,
The weazel Scots are hungry, and want feeding.
Nor need ye wait for that more plenteous season,
When mad America is brought to reason.
Obsequious Ireland, at her sister's claim,
(Sister or step-dame, call her either name)
Shall pour profusely her Pactolian tide,
Nor leave her native patriots unsupply'd. Ver. 155. A mighty hunter.] A line
of Mr. Pope's. If our younger senators would take the hint, and now and then
hunt a minister instead of a fox, they might perhaps find some fun in it.

Ver. 161. The weasel Scots.] It is not I, but Shakespeare, that gives my
countrymen this epithet. See Hen. V. act 1. scene 2.

For once the eagle England being in prey,
To her unguarded nest the weazel Scot
Comes sneaking, and so sucks her princely eggs, etc.


Earl N -- t sung, while yet but simple Clare,
That wretched Ireland had no gold to spare.
How could thou, simple Clare! that isle abuse,
Which prompts and pays thy linsey-woolsey muse?
Mistaken peer! Her treasures near can cease,
Did she not long pay Viry for our peace?
Say, did she not, till rang the royal knell,
Irradiate vestal Majesty at Zell? Ver. 168. Earl N -- t sung.] The intellect
not only of posterity, but of the present reader, must here again be
enlightened by a note: for this song was sung above two years ago, and is
consequently forgotten. Yet if the reader will please to recollect how easily I
brought to life Sir William Chambers's prose dissertation which had been dead
half that time, he will, I hope, give me credit for being able to recover this
dead poem from oblivion also. It was sent to her Majesty on her birthday, with
a present of Irish grogram; and the newspaper of the day said (but I know not
how truly) that the Queen was graciously pleased to thank the noble author for
both his pieces of stuff: The poet's exordium seemed to have been taken from
that very Ode in Horace which I have also attempted to imitate in this
pamphlet. It began by assuring her Majesty, that Ireland was too poor to
present her with a piece of gold plate.

Could poor Ierne gifts afford,
Worthy the consort of her lord,
Of purest gold a sculpter'd frame
Just emblem of her zeal should flame.
This supposed poverty of his native country struck me at the time as a mere
gratis-dictum. I have therefore, from verse 180 to verse 186 of this epistle,
endeavored to refute it, for the honor of Ireland.



Sure then she might afford, to my poor thinking,
One golden tumbler, for Queen Charlotte's drinking.
I care not, if her hinds on fens and rocks,
Never roast one shoulder of their fatted flocks,
Shall Irish binds to mutton make pretensions?
Be theirs potatoes, and be ours their pensions.
If they refuse, great North, by me advised,
Enact, that each potatoe be excis'd.
Ah! had thou, North, adopted this sage plan,
And scorned to tax each British serving-man,
Thy friend Macgreggor, when he came to town,
(As poets should do) in his chaise and one,
Had seen his footboy Sawney, once his pride,
On stunt Scotch poney trotting by his side,
With frock of fustian, and with cape of red,
Nor grudged the guinea taxed upon his head.
But tush, I heed not -- for my country's good
I Will pay it -- it will purchase Yankee blood -- Ver. 178.] I care not, etc.]
Alluding to these lines in the same poem: Where starving hinds from fens and
rocks,
View pastures rich with herds and flocks.
And only view -- forbid to taste, etc.
And in a note on the passage, he tells us that these hinds never eat animal
food; but says not one word about potatoes, that most nutritious of all
aliments, which is surely very disingenuous.



And well I ween, for this heroic lay,
Almon will give me wherewithal to pay.
Tax then, ye greedy ministers, your fill:
No matter, if with ignorance or skill.
Be ours to pay, and that is an easy task,
In these blessed times to have is but to ask.
Ye know, whatever is from the public pressed,
Will sevenfold sink into your private chest.
For he, the nursing father, that receives,
Full freely though he takes, as freely gives.
So when great Cox, at his mechanic call,
Bids orient pearls from golden dragons fall,
Each little dragonet, with brazen grin,
Gapes for the precious prize, and gulps it in.
Yet when we peep behind the magic scene,
One master-wheel directs the whole machine:
The self-same pearls, in nice gradation, all
Around one common center, rise and fall. Ver. 211. Around one common center.]
I was let into this secret by my late patron, Sir William Chambers; who, as Mr.
Cox's automata were very much in the Chinese taste, was very curious to
discover their mechanism. I must do the Knight the justice to own that some of
my best things are borrowed from him.



Thus may our state-museum long surprise;
And what is sunk by votes in bribes arise;
Till mocked and jaded with the puppet-play,
Old England's genius turns with scorn away,
Ascends his sacred bark, the sails unfurled,
And steers his state to the wide western world:
High on the helm majestic Freedom stands,
In act of cold contempt she waves her hands.
Take, slaves, she cries, the realms that I disown,
Renounce your birthright, and destroy my throne.
FINIS.
ODE TO SIR FLETCHER NORTON, IN IMITATION OF HORACE, ODE VIII. BOOK IV.

Q. HORATII FLACCI, CARMEN VIII. LIB. IV.
DONAREM pateras, a grataque commodus,
Censorine, meis era sodalibus:
Donarem tripodas, praemia fortium
Graiorum: neque tu pessima munerum,
Ferres, divite me scilicet artium,
Q^as aut b Parrhasius protulit, aut Scopas;
Hic saxo, liquidis ille coloribus
Solers c nunc hominem ponere, nunc deum.
Sed d non haec mihi vis; nec e tibi talium
Res est aut animus deliciarum egens.
Gaudes carminibus: f carmina possumus
Donare, g and pretium dicere muneri.
Non h incisa notis marmora publicis,
Per i quae spiritus and vita redit bonis
Post mortem ducibus: k non celeres fugae,
Rejectaeque retrorsum Annibalis minae,
Non incendia Carthaginis impiae,
Ejus, qui domita nomen ab Africa
Lucratus rediit, clarius indicant Ver. 11. Guades carminibus.] The imitator
found himself obliged to deviate in this place a little further from his
original, than perhaps the strict critic will tolerate. But as he was not quite
so certain of Sir Fletcher's fondness for poetry, as Horace seems to have been
about the taste of Cenformus, he thought it best to express himself with a
modest diffidence on that subject.



Lauds, quam Calabrae l Pierides: neque
Si chartae sileant quod been feceris
Mercedem tuleris.
Quid foret Iliae
Mavortisque m puer, si taciturnitas
Obstaret meritis invida Romuli?
Ereptum o flygius fluctibus Aeacum
Virtus, and favor, and n lingua potentium
Vatum divitibus consecrat insulis.
Dignum laud virum Musa p vetat mori,
Caelo q Musa beat. Sic r Jovis interest
Optatis epulis impiger Hercules:
Clarum s Tyndaridae sidus ab infimis
Quassas t eripiunt aequoribus rates:
Ornatus viridi tempora pampino
Liber u vota bonos ducit ad exitus.
FINIS.
HORACE, ODE VIII. BOOK IV. IMITATED.
MUSE! were we rich in land, or stocks,
We'd send Sir Fletcher a a gold box;
Who lately, to the world's surprise,
Advised his Sovereign to be wise.
The zeal of cits should never surpass us,
We'd make him speaker of Parnassus.
Or could I boast the mimic eye
Of b Townshend, or of Bunbury,
Whose art can catch, in comic guise,
"The manners living as they rise,"
And find it the same easy thing
To c hit a Jollux or a king;
I Would hangings weave, in fancy's loom,
For Lady Norton's dressing room. Line 12. A Jollux.] A phrase used by the bon
ton for a fat parson. See a set of excellent Caricatures published by
Bretherton, in New Bond-Street.



But d arts like these I don't pursue,
Nor e does Sir Fletcher heed virtu.
Enough for me in these hard times,
When every thing is taxed but rhymes,
To f tag a few of these together:
Though I am quite uncertain, whether
My verse will much rejoice the knight,
As g great a store as I set by it.
For verse, (I Would have Sir Fletcher know it)
When written by a genuine poet,
Has more of meaning and intent,
Than h modern acts of Parliament.
It Is i fit and right, when heroes die,
The nation should a tomb supply;
Yet, not the votes of both the houses,
Without the assistance of the muses,
Can give that permanence of fame
That heroes from their country claim.
And tell me pray, to our good King,
What fame our present broils can bring,
Even k should the Howes (which some folks doubt)
Put Washington to total rout,
Unless his treasurer in an ode,
Exalt the victor to a god.
A man, I know, may get a pension
Without the muse's intervention?
Yet what are pensions to the praise
Wrapped up in l Caledonian lays?
Say, Johnson! where had been m Fingal,
But for Macpherson's great assistance?
The chieftain had been naught at all,
A non-existing nonexistence.
Mac, like a n poet stout and good,
First o plunged, then plucked him from oblivion's flood,
And bad him bluster at his ease,
Among the fruitful Hebrides.
A p common poet can revive
The man who once had been alive:
But Mac revives, by magic power,
The man who never lived before. Ver. 37. Unless his treasurer.] The late
promotion of a poet to the treasurership of the household, must necessarily give
to all true votaries of the muses (as it does to me) great delectation. It Is
whispered, by some people in the secret, that the very pacific cast of the
Laureat's birthday ode, occasioned the noble bard's exaltation; as it was
thought expedient to have another poetical placeman in readiness to celebrate
the final overthrow of the American rebels. Nay, it is assured, that a
reversionary grant of the office of laureat has in this instance been
superadded to the treasurership, yet with the defalcation of the annual butt of
sack, which the Lord Steward calculates will be a considerable saving to the
nation.



Such hocus-pocus tricks, I own,
Belong to Gallic bards alone.
My q muse would think her power enough,
Could she make some folks fever-proof;
Dub them immortal from their birth,
And give them all their heaven on earth,
Then r Doctor K --, that broad divine,
With lords and dukes should ever dine;
Post, prate, and preach, for years on years,
And puff himself in Gazetteers.
Sandwich for aye, should shine the star,
Propitious to our naval war;
Caulk all our vessels' t leaky sides,
And in the docks work double ties.
While Stormont, u graced with ribband green,
Keeps France from mixing in the riot,
Till w Britain's lion vents his spleen,
And tears his rebel whelps in quiet.
THE END.
Just Published,
AN Heroic Epistle to Sir William Chambers, Knt. comptroller general of his
Majesty's works, and author of a late Dissertation on Oriental Gardening;
enriched with explanatory notes, chiefly extracted from that performance. 13th
edit. Price 1s. An Heroic Postscript to the Public, occasioned by their
favorable reception of the Heroic Epistle to Sir William Chambers. 8th edit.
Price 1s. Ode to Mr. Pinchbeck, upon his newly invented Patent Candle-snuffers.
5th edit. Price 6d.
* The above three by the same author. Printed for J. AL^OX, opposite
Burlington-house, Piccadilly. Of whom may be had,

The new Paradise of dainty Devices; consisting of original poems. 2s. 6d. A
familiar Epistle from C. Anstey, Esquire. to C* W. Bampfylde, Esquire Translated, and
addressed to the ladies. 2d Edit. Price 1s. Genius of Britain. An ode. 1s.
America. An ode. 6d. Lord Ch -- m's Prophecy. An ode. Addressed to General
Gage. 1s. Kien Long. A Chinese Eclogue. 1s. The Advertiser. A Poem. 1s. The
Optimist. 1s. Macarony Fables. 3d Edit. 2s. 6d. Lyric Consultations. By the
fame. 3s. Ode on Sir W. Brown's Legacy. 6d. La Fete Champetre. 1s. Verses to
--, with a new Year's Gift. 1s.
* All the above printed in Quarto.

Sappho. A poetic Rhapsody. Inscribed to the (...) Ba^roness of Bath-Easton
(Printed in the same size as the Bath-Easton poems.) Price 1s. The new
Foundling Hospital for Wit. Being a collection of Fugitive Pieces, in verse and
prose, many of which were not before printed. In six volumes, (each volume
ornamented with a curious frontispiece) price 18s. bound, and 15s. sewed.
Several were written by Sir C. Hanbury Williams, The Duke of Wharton, Earl of
Chesterfield, -- Delawar, -- Bath, -- Hardwicke, -- Carliste, -- Chatham, Lord
Viscount Clare, Lord Lyttelton, -- Harvey, -- Capel, Lady M. W. Montague, Lady
Irwin, Miss Carter, Hon. C. York, -- H. Walpole, Right hon. C. Townshend, Sir
J. Mawbey, T. Potter, Soame Jenyns, Dr. King, Dr. Armstrong, Dr. Akenside, C.
Anstey, T. Edwards, C. Churchill, W. Shenstone, Mr. Gray, J. Thompson, J. S.
Hall, J. Wilkes, D. Garrick, S. Johnson. B. Thornton, G. Colman, R. Lloyd, R.
Bentley, C. Morris, Esqrs. And other eminent persons; with some pieces of
Milton, Waller, Pope, Congreve, etc. not in their works.

The following are printed in the same size and manner as the New Foundling for
Wit, and being collections of Fugitive Pieces upon the same plan, may be had
bound uniform with that work, price 1l. 10s. or separate, at the prices
undermentioned.

The Fugitive Miscellany; being a collection of such Fugitive Pieces, in prose
and verse, as are not in any other collection; with many pieces never before
published. By several Noblemen and Gentlemen. In two volumes, price 5s. sewed,
or 6s. bound. A Companion for a leisure Hour; being also a collection of
Fugitive Pieces, in no other collection; chiefly (...) in prose and verse. One
volume, 2s. 6d. sewed, or 3s. bound. An Asylum for Fugitives. Volume the First.
3s. sewed, and 3s. 6d. bound. Published in numbers every three months. The
first number of the second volume of the Asylum was published on the first of
June, 1777, price 1s. and the second number is preparing for the press. * The
New Foundling Hospital for Wit, etc. being completed, it has been desired to
continue the plan of collecting such fugitive pieces of merit, as are either
circulated in MS. or occasionally printed in the temporary publications of the
day, under the title of The Asylum. Though this work may be called a
continuation of the former, being printed in the same size and manner; yet the
publication being more frequent, affords a greater variety, and therefore it is
hoped, will prove as agreeable to the public. Those gentlemen who wish to see
any of their pieces preserved it this collection, may be assuted, that their
favors will, at all times, be most gratefully received.

