A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A DISSENTER AND THE OBSERVATOR, CONCERNING The Shortest Way
with the DISSENTERS.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCCIII.

A DIALOGUE, etc
Dissen. PRAY Sir, are you the Author of the Observator?


Obser. Suppose it Sir, what then?


Dis. Nay don't be angry, are you the reputed Author? A. Come off you Taught me
in one of your Papers about Mr. F.


Obs. And what then?


Dis. Why I wanted a little Civil Discourse with you.


Obs. If it be Civil, as you say, you are Welcome, but you begin but odly.


Dis. My Questions may be blunt, but you are not bound to Answer them, but let
that be as you like 'em.

First, Pray who do you reckon is the Author of this Devilish Book, called, The
Shortest Way?


Obs. I shall Answer most of your Questions with a Question, I believe, and
begin with you here.

Do you think my Name is Mr. Bellamy, that you take me for an Informer? read
the Gazett, there you have the Man with the Sharp Chin, and a Dutch Nose.


Dis. Ay, but Sir, we begin to doubt that is not the true Author, that he has
been only made the Tool of some other party, who now they find the World
Exasperated at it, have slipped out of the Noose, and left him in it; we begin to
be afraid the thing is a Reality, and there is such a design on foot.


Obs. Your Answer, like Parson Jacobs Text, ought to be taken a pieces and
Explained.

1. If you are not sure he is the Author, you Dissenters have done him a great
deal of wrong, for you have railed at him more than all the rest of the World,
and charged him with more Crimes than it is well possible for one Man to be
Guilty of.

2. And yet by supposing him not to be the Author, you suppose him to be very
Honest to his friends, that he bears all this without discovering them.

3 As for your fears of a real design, to put the Shortest way in practice upon
you, no Question there are abundance of People in the World, who would be glad
there was not one of you left; I believe no body doubts it.


Dis. Pray who do you think they are?


Obs. Sir your Humble Servant; no Bellamy, I tell you not I Sir; If I were in a
Plot with the Devil, I Will never turn Evidence, besides Sir, I have no mind to
have my Nose and Chin described, but if you please I Will Answer you Negatively,
who I believe are not concerned in it.


Dis. That may be some satisfaction, Sir.


Obs. Not the Queen, Sir, not the Parliament, not the Council, not the Army,
not the Ministers of State, not the Government.


Dis. Thou art a safe Man, thou wilt never go to Newgate for Negatives.


Obs. No Sir, nor for Positives neither, if I can help it; but you have had
your will at Catechizing, and I ought to have my turn, let me ask you a few
Questions too.


Dis. You are welcome.


Obs. Pray why are you Dissenters Angry at the Book called The Shortest Way,
It Is a little Mysterious, Sir, that the Church Men are Affronted because it was
Writ against them, and the Dissenters are Affronted because it is Wrote against
them too, I don't well understand it, 'ne sort must be Fools, that is certain.


Dis. I don't care whether I understand it or no, he is a Rogue, a Villain, and
I wish the Government had him, if I knew where he was, I Would deliver him up and
abate them the 50 l.


Obs. Spoken like a Dissenter truly, so that I find you are Angry at him
because you don't understand him, and the Government because they do.


Dis. You are so sharp upon me, I do understand a a little too, I understand he
meddl'd with that he had nothing to do with, and he is the Man they say who has
been the occasion of all this Persecution which is coming upon us, by railing
at Occasional Conformity.


Obs. If he exposed you for Occasional Conformity, it is what you ought to have
rectified your selves, that you need not have been exposed for it; and in that
he was your Friend; for had you took the hint and exploded the Practice, there
had been no need of an Act of Parliament to force you to it.


Dis. But what had he to do with that?


Obs. Nay, What had Mr. How to do to meddle with it afterward, I Will assure you
his Name is down in my Pocket Book, and when any Man in England defends a cause
worse, I Will put his Name out, and put to others Name in: But pray Sir, why do
you call this bringilng Persecution upon you; do you suppose the Occasional
Bill will be a Persecution?


Dis Without doubt it will.


Obs. What sort of Persecution can you call it? it cannot be a Persecution for
Conscience sake.


Dis. Why so Sir?


Obs. Why, pray Sir, suppose one of your Brethren Dissenters, who can go to the
Meeting to Day, and to the Church to Morrow; take the Sacrament to Day,
sitting, and to Morrow to get a good place, go to Church, and take it kneeling,
wipe his Mouth and go home to Dinner, and so to the Meeting again; suppose this
Genleman should be put up for Sherriff, or Lord Mayor, can this Man pretend
Conscience not to Conform? I tell you Sir, Mr. How must make a better Answer to
the matter before I can be convinced, you may call it Persecution but it can
never be for Conscience sake.


Dis. Persecution is Persecution, let it be for what sake it will, every man
ought to be at liberty.


Obs. Ay that is true, ^ am for Liberty for every man to serve God as is most
agreeable to his Conscience: But this is not serving God at all: besides Sir, I
could easily make it appear, this Act is for your advantage, if ye were a sort
of People were to be convinced.


Dis. Pray, how Sir?


Obs. Why Sir, it will purge you of all your half in half Professors. That Is
one thing; then it will put all those Gentlemen into a capacity of being in
places and Parliaments, who though by this Act they are separated from you, and
rejoined to the Church because they can conform, will still be friends to your
Interest in all Public Concerns; and therefore had I been to word the Bill so
as to have done most harm, it should have excluded all that ever were
Dissenters, and have forced you to continue so, and not have accepted your
return to the Church without a public Repentance.


Dis. Well, well, you may persuade us it is for our advantage, but we don't like
it, and therefore we hate him for meddling with it; for what had he to do with
it?


Obs About as much as you and I have to do with him, if a man meddles with what
does not concern him, that is his Fault, and if we who really have nothing to do
with him, meddle with him, that is our Fault, let the Government alone with
him, have you nothing else to talk on?


Dis. Why all the Town has talked of him as wellas we.


Obs. Yes, and reckoned up all his Faults, all the sins that ever he committed
in his Life, and abundance more; be the man who he will, and what he will, I
don't see but the best of us would be loath all the Faults we have should be
reckoned up and writ in our Foreheads, as his are.


Dis. Oh, he has been a most wicked Wretch.


Obs. You force a man to be an Advocate for One he has no kindness for; a
wicked wretch you say; why what has he been a Thief, a Murderer?


Dis. No no, I don't mean that way.


Obs. What has he been a Clipper or Coyner?


Dis. No no, nor that neither.


Obs. Has he been a Whoremaster or a Drunkard, or a Swearer?


Dis. No, I cannot say so neither, but he broke and cannot pay his Debts.


Obs. If you had said he had broke and will not pay his Debts, you had said more
to the purpose.

But I must do one piece of Justice to the man, though I love him no better
than you do, that is this: That meeting a Gentleman in a Coffee-House, where I
and every body else was railing at him, the Gentlemen took us up with this
short Speech.

Gentlemen, said he, I know this D Foe as well as any of you, and I was one of
his Creditors, and I compounded with him, and discharged him fully; and several
years afterward he sent for me, and though he was clearly discharged, he paid me
all the Remainder of his Debt voluntarily, and of his own accord: and he told
me, that as fast as God should enable him he Intended to do so with every body;
when he had done, he desired me to set my hand to a Paper to acknowledge it,
which I readily did, and found a great many Names to the Paper, before me, and
I think my self bound to own it, though I am no Friend to the Book he has wrote,
no more than you. What do you think of this story?


Dis. Think of it, I do'nt believe it!


Obs. I cannot help that, nor I care not whether you do or no, but I assure you
after I heard it, I never railed at him any more.


Dis. Ay, but I Will rail at him for all that.


Obs. You Dissenters are in something like Case with the Pharisees; when the
Question was put to them by our Savior about John's Baptism; whether it was
from Heaven or of Men. If a man should ask you of the Shortest way, was it
wrote for you or against you? If you should say for us, you would be asked why
then are you so mad with the Author? And if you should say against you, the
People would laugh at you; for all men but you see into it, and that a
Dissenter wrote it; you must say therefore, we cannot tell, and consequently,
that you rail at the Author for you cannot tell what.


Dis. But we don't count him a Dissenter.


Obs. He has all the marks of a Dissenter upon him, but mant of Brains.


Dis. Why are we so empty of Brains pray?


Obs. There Is reason for it, God has given you Equivalents.


Dis. I don't understand you.


Obs. That Is a further Testimony of your being a Dissenter; why if you will
have it, take it, I say, God Almighty would have seemed unkind to you, if he
had not given you a great deal of Grace? For he has given you but little Wit.


Dis. Well, I hope they will take him still, I should be glad to see him hanged
for it, I am sure he deserves it; I heard one met him a little while ago, would
I had been there.


Obs. Alone, do you mean Sir, or to have helped the other?


Diss. Any how, so I could but have taken him.


Obs. 'Twas in Hackney Fields, was it not?


Dis. Yes, I think so.


Obs. Ay, and they say 'twas one of your own Party too, and one that would fain
have got the 50 l. but that he drew upon him frighted him out of his Wits, and
made him down of his Knees and swear that if ever he met him again, he should
shut his eyes till he was half a mile off him.


Diss. I don't think he is such a fighting Fellow.


Obs. Do you know him?


Diss. No not I.


Obs. So I thought by your Charity and good Nature; I know him not neither, but
the man has the Government upon his Back already, and if they take him they will
avenge your Quarrel for you. Let him alone, it is Ingenerous, as I said before
in print, to triumph over a man in his Affliction: 'twas but a little while ago
he wrote a Book that pleased you, and then you cried him up as much as now you
cry him down.


Dis. What Book pray?


Obs. Why the New Test of Church of England Loyalty.


Diss. Did he write that Book?


Obs. I told you I was no Informer, go ask Mr. Bellamy;


Dis. why truly that was a good thing, I liked it fully. 'Twas well done, but
this cursed Shortest-way is the Devil, he must be turned Rogue now, what ever
he was then.


Obs. Why, this it is to oblige a Dissenter, if you serve them a hundred times
it is well, but once get your Head in the Pillory for them, and they will be the
first to palt you with rotten Eggs; what cannot you set down one good thing and
one bad, and balance with him: You understand Accounts well enough; but you
Dissenters, are like a Shop keeper I knew, who having traded 20 Year with a
Gentleman, and served all his Family and gotten a great deal of money by him,
at last the poor Gentleman fell to decay, and owing him 40 s. the Shopkeeper
abused him, and called him all the Knaves and Rogues for cheating of him of 40
s.


Dis. No, no, this has spoylt all.


Obs. Well, but we will go back further with you, There Is the Reformation of
Manners, and the True born-English-man; there he pleased you for certain, for
he is for reforming your Magistrates.


Dis. I don't understand them, I am for Reformation as much as any Body.


Obs. But what say you to the Legion Paper?


Dis. Ay that was a good thing indeed.


Obs. Well, but if he had been taken in doing that, would you not have called
him as many Rogues then as you do now?


Dis. No indeed, should I not?


Obs. But I don't find you call him one Rogue the less for it now, and that is
hard.


Diss. Well, But you see he denies it, and challenges you to prove it.


Obs. Ay, deny it, I told you he was no Fool, indeed I am not glad I printed
it, for though it is charged upon him by common Fame, I am not for hanging men
upon suppositions as you do.


Diss. Well, you do well, and I think it is a little hard, the man is gone, and
though he has done ill, he might mean no harm, and so let him alone, I reckon you
will not be long before you follow him.


Obs. And when I am gone, you will call me as many Rogues as you do him, will not you?


Dis. No, it may be I shall not, but I can tell you of some that do already.


Obs. It Is all one to me, common Fame like a common Strumpet, jilts every Body,
but methinks Slander and Reproach, out of the mouth of a Dissenter comes with
some more than common ill favor.


Diss. They think they have good reason for it upon you.


Obs. And I think not, pray what are their good reasons?


Diss. For abusing your Friends?


Obs. My Friends, prithee who are they? I know but very few I have, and I am
very sure I never abused them


Dis. They all agree you would not be permitted to write so long, but the party
would have ruffled you before now, only you court them and please them by a
Side-Wind, with your railing at King William's Friends sometimes.


Obs. King William's Enemies you mean; look, Sir, I have as much veneration for
the Memory of King William as any of you, and do but once prove them to be King
William's Friends, and I Will own all you say, and recant all I have wrote.


Dis. It Is easy to prove they were his Friends.


Obs. Pray Sir, don't you tax me with abusing King William, and abuse him your
self, I have proved sufficiently they were the Nations Enemies: Now if you can
prove the Nations Enemies were King VVilliam's Friends, you will make a fine spot
of work on it indeed.


Diss. The Nations Enemies! That is, because being in great places, they got as
much money as they could, and so would you do, and so have all the Favorites
that ever were or will be.


Obs. When ever Favorites did, do or shall get money by rapine or injustice,
and oppression of the subject, they were and will be the Nations Enemies and
their Sovereigns too.


Diss. But what have you to do with it? it is none of your business.


Obs. It Is every Man's business to discover mischief, fraud and ill design, as
much as every Man who first spies Fire, has a duty upon him to raise the
Neighbors: I am a Subject, and am Cheated among the rest.


Dis. You Cheated, why what have you to lose?


Obs. Why, my Liberty, which you said but now, every Man had a Right to, and my
Money when I have it; what is that to you, how little, or much I have, and how
do you know how much I may have hereafter.


Dis. Nay, they say you get Money by Railing, and so you may soon be Rich.


Obs. Then I Rail for something, and you get none, and yet you Rail; pray who
has the best Excuse for it?


Dis. He that has the best Reason for it, not he that gets the most Money by it.


Obs. I believe if you could get Money by Railing, you would count it the best
Reason in the World.


Dis. Why so?


Obs. Because you are so willing to Rail at any body, when you know not for
what, nor why, and charge People with Crimes they never Committed; of all your
Christian Duties, you make the least use of your Charity.


Dis. Why, since you put so hard, I can tell the time when you abused King
William himself, as openly as you durst speak it, or any body dare Print,
particularly in a Poem of yours, called the Foreigners.


Obs. How do you prove 'twas mine?


Dis. Nay, they say 'twas yours, you were the Reputed Author, as you said in
another case.


Obs. I tell you, there is no People in the World so forward to Condemn a Man
upon hear say, as the Dissenters, when they have a Mind to slander a man, they
take every thing upon trust, it is their Shortest way.


Dis. These Scribbling People are always meddling with things they have nothing
to do with; what have you to do with Kings and Favorites, or that the other
Fellow with the Shortest Way: you Pamphleteers are always Quacking with the
State.


Obs. Come let us turn the Tables, now it is my Play, what have you to do with
Acts of Parliamenrs; you Dissenters are always thrusting in your Oar too; what
have you to do to talk of Persecution and Acts against Occasional Conformity,
you are Mountebanking with the State too in every Coffee-House, pray meddle
with your own business.


Dis. We shall have to do with it, when we feel it.


Obs I am persuaded if you were put to it severely, few of you would stay to
feel it, at least few of your Wealthy Members, few of Mr. Hows mind, few of
such Dissenters as go from Meetting to Church, and can back-stroke and
fore-stroke, Communicate on both sides.


Dis. I wish they may not, but we are afraid 'twill not only be a Persecution,
but a very long one.


Obs. Why then you are beholding to the Author we talked of, for you see he is
for putting you out of your Pain, but I am of a different Opinion from you in
several of your darkest thoughts about Persecution.


Dis. Pray what is your Opinion?


Obs. 1. I am of Opinion that if your Enemies were true Masters of Politics,
they would not Persecute you at all, I take you to be a declining Party,
Toleration will be your Ruin; and if God in Mercy to you don't send a
Persecution among you, you are lost, you will all dwindle back into the Church
again; your old stock of Ministers dye off, your Owens, Mantons, Charnocks,
Clarksons, Baxters, and Bates's are gone, and pray what can you name out of the
new Generation of your Leyden Doctors fit to succeed them.

2. The Occasional Bill at once carries off your Wealthy Members, who are the
support of your Clergy, and as Mr. William's very well observed at
Salters-Hall, If the Rich ones forsake you, the party will be weakened so as to
make you fear the Dissolution of the whole. Indeed the Gentleman was in the
right, if the Wealthy Members quit the Congregations, 'twill make poor work for
the Ministers, and they like other People Generally do their work best where
they have best Wages.


Dis. I thought you had Loved the Dissenters better, than to abuse them at this
rate.


Obs. I don't abuse them, I wish them clear of all their Hypocrites, and that
there were none among them but what were Dissenters for mere Conscience: if
that were so, 'twould make their Enemies at Peace with them, they would never be
Persecuted; the Government would Cherish them, and be as tender of them as they
would desire. But to be plain with you, it is your own Pride and Pushing at
great things has made you Obnoxious, and withal your discovering by an
Alternate double-fac'd Conscience, that while you pretend to Dissent, and to
have tender Consciences, you can nevertheless Conform, if you plaese; this
makes your Enemies suspect your Honesty, and apprehend more trick and design in
you, than I hope they need. Nay this gives your Enemies such advantage against
you, as you can never Answer.


Dis. I do not think any Man ought to be confined by Laws and Acts of
Parliaments about his Religion.


Obs. It may be I think so too; but Men ought to be Honest to their own
Principles, whether there were Laws or no; and if I see a Man pretend he cannot
Conform, and upon occasion I find he can, it makes me suspect his Honesty, and
if I once think a Man a Knave, I am not to blame to fence my self against him
by Laws: I tell you an Act of Parliament to keep you Honest, can never be
called Persecution.


Dis. Ay, if there was no more in it.


Obs. If there be any more in it, I wish there was not, I Am sure I know not
what is in it, and I believe you don't neither; pray have you seen the Bill?


Dis. No not I, but I hear it is a very Terrible Bill.


Obs. True to the old way still, always to judge before you hear, Indeed I
forgot to ask you, but on my Conscience I don't believe you ever read the Book
of the Shortest way; Come, be honest.


Diss. Read it, why the very Outside of that is enough for any man to read; I
thank God I spend my time better.


Obs. I think you ought to spend your time better too, than to give your
Verdict upon any thing before you read it.


Diss. You are a strange man, why every body says it is a horrible Book, and not
fit to be read, but what is that to this Act of Parliament?


Obs. Why thus much it is, that you cry out Persecution from this Act of
Parliament, and there is not a word of Persecution in it.


Diss. I think it is Persecution, if I must not be at liberty to worship God as
I think fit.


Obs. Still you are without Book, why you may be a Dissenter all the days of
your life, and go to Meetings as long as you live, and never be troubled by
this Act.


Diss. I cannot imagine what you mean, why I must pay, God knows what, if I am
seen at a Meeting.


Obs. Ay, Sir, that is after you have strained your Conscience from the Meeting
to the Church; after you have bob'd your Religion to be Sheriff of London, or
the like; and then want to go back again; but if you, to keep your Conscience,
can be content to be without these gay things called Places, you may be a
Dissenter to the end of the Chapter: So that this will only be a Persecution
for Honor sake, not for Conscience sake, and never fall upon you neither, till
you bring it upon your self.


Diss. Well, I hope it will not pass for all that.


Obs. I hope so too, but if it don't, it must be the Lords doing, and it will
be mavelous in our eyes.


Diss. The House of Lords you mean, I suppose.


Obs. I must mean as you will have me, let it be how it will, but if I hope it
will not pass, it is from different reasons with you.


Diss. Pray, your reasons?


Obs. Because I am against (and ever shall be) Imposing any religious Ordinance
or part of Worship as a Qualification for any temporal Employment. Let the
Princes be at full liberty to employ who, or what sort of their Subjects they
see Cause. 2. Such Impositions are a Bait to People to banter their
Consciences, and to comply with that for a Preferment, which otherwise they
would not, and so seem to lead them into Temptation: But I don't know the
Contents of the Bill, therefore I Will say no more.


Diss. And I would not have it pass, because I take it to be a Foundation of
Persecution; it is but pulling down the Toleration next, and then we are all
undone.


Obs. You Faithless and perverse Generation! Has not the QUEEN promised to
maintain your Toleration? Besides, what is that to the Bill?


Diss. Why should not we be afraid of it, as well as some of the Church-party
have the confidence to hope it? Nay, to condemn the Toleration as
Antichristian, and threaten us with the having it overthrown.


Obs. Why these are for the Shortest way; you ought to rail at them as much as
you do at the man with the book Nose, and sharp Chin, and more too; and no
doubt if you would but turn Informer, you might hook their Noses into the
Gazett too, to be sure the Government would not allow of it; they would never
suffer the QUEEN to be so affronted.


Diss. I don't know how it is, such things are suffered daily. I heard our
Parson the other day say at a Public Dinner 'twou'd never be well with England
till some Course was taken to reconcile all Dissenters to the Church, Longest
way or Shortest, 'twas all one to him; he said he hoped to see the Church
flourish without them; and a great deal more, and worse than this.


Obs. That was a topping high-flying Gentleman indeed, and why did you not
acquaint the Government with it?


Diss. What do you think I am an Informer? My Name is not Bellamy any more than
yours, but pray why do you make so strange of it? Don't we hear daily People
expressing their high-flying hopes that a Parliament in Scotland will restore
Episcopacy there, and yet has not the QUEEN given her word, and published it in
our Gazett, that she will maintain the Presbyterian Government there.


Obs. Has she so? Then though they have the impudence to hope, you ought not to
have the ignorance to fear it. The QUEEN gave her word to maintain it! be not
slow of Heart to believe. She has taken up the famous Motto of Q. Flizabeth,
Semper eadem, and can you so much as doubt she will deface it, for a few Scotch
Bishops.


Diss. I am sorry for my Fears, I beg her Majesty's pardon, there are so many
Turns and Windings in Law and State matters, that we know not what to say to
things.


Obs. Say! Why a promise is a promise, and you may depend upon it, she has
never broke her word with us yet.


Diss. Ay, but what if the Parliament should do it?


Obs. Nay, If the Parliament does it, we do it our selves.


Diss. Very good, so that we may be undone, and the Toleration Bill taken away;
and yet the QUEEN be as good as her word still.


Obs. Yes Sir, so you may, whenever an Act of Parliament becomes so without the
Royal assent, and when do you think that can be?


Diss Why then these high-flying Churchmen are very impudent Fellows, to
suggest such things of the QUEEN, and to bully us with overturning the
Toleration, and put us in such fears of what they will do to us, when it can
never be done without the QUEEN's acting so directly against her Royal Promise.


Obs. Well, and what then.


Dis. Why I think they ought to be used as they used the Author of the Shortest
Way, Gazetted and a Reward for the Discoverer.


Obs. Or as you have used him rather, viz. Rail at them, for being of your own
side: you Dissenters are rare Fellows for Punishments, if God should have no
more Mercy on you, than you show to all Men that offend you, we should have
Plagues, Pestilence and Famine every Year upon us; so now you are come about
again, these high Flying Church Men have bully'd you with the fears of losing
your Toleration, come confess.


Dis. Yes.


Obs. And made you distrust the QUEEN's Veracity.


Dis. Yeas, GOD and the QUEEN forgive us.


Obs. And have Terrified you with what things they will do when they have pulled
down your Antichristian Toleration, have they not?


Dis. Ay, Ay.


Obs. And so you thought the Shortest Way was Wrote to make a beginning with
you, and to set the Dragoons of the Church upon your Backs; did you not?


Dis. It Is very true.


Obs. And continued of the same mind like an Ignoramus, though you heard 'twas
Wrote by one of your own Party.


Dis. Indeed I did.


Obs. Now pray, after so much patience as I have had with you, have a little
with me; and if I can, I Will set you right in your Thoughts of these things.

There are a sort of People among the Dissenters who can either Dissent or
Conform, as they find their Inclinations or Interest rather directs them, these
by their Wealth and Interest have always put themselves into good places, and
qualified themselves for that purpose, by taking the Sacrament: of these
People, even the most moderate Church Men have an ill Opinion, and truly so
have Two Thirds of your own Friends, for it looks as if they were Men of no
Principles at all.

Against these Men the Act against Occasional Conformity is principally
designed, and if there was nothing else in the Bill, I believe no good Man
would be against it.

Concerning these things, Two sorts of People have been very grossly mistaken,
and upon their Mistakes have proceeded to Act very Foolishly.

First, The high Flying Church Party begun to think, all was a going their own
way, and that the Government would fall in with them, and do your business for
you, and away they run with the Notion, and Preach you down, and Print you
down, and Talk you down like Mad Men; there is Sermon upon Sermon, Pamphlet
upon Pamphlet: One says you are all Rogues and Hypocrites, another says you are
Enemies to the Government, one Flies at the Toleration, and tells the World
it is Destructive to the Nations Happiness, and the Politicians must pull it
down; another says it is Antichristian, and we cannot be true Sons of the Church
of England, if we don't pull it down; others like hare-brain'd Huntsmen that
overrun the Hounds, roar you down with full Cry, till they run themselves out
of Breath; others are for having you deprived of Voices in Elections of
Parliament, in hopes of Arriving to that Blessed Day, when they shall have a
Parliament of their own Mind; and thus they Run before they are Sent, and
without Reflecting upon their ill grounded Zeal, without examining any
Authorities, other than their Passions, without regard to good manners, taking
no Notice of the Preamble of the Act of Parliament, which Declares against
Persecution, or the Honor and Sacred Promise of Her MAJESTY, given to make Her
Subjects easy, they blow up the Fire of Persecution and Destruction, whether
the Government will or no.

You are the next sort of People, who are mistaken, for being Naturally a
little Hypish, as the Beaus call it, troubled with the Spleen, and
Hypocondriack Vapors, this Cloud of Raillery so darkened your Understanding,
that you presently take these People and the QUEEN, these People and the
Government, these People and the Parliament, to be all of a mind; and the QUEEN
having displac't all your Friends, as it is but just, That all Princes should
employ who they please: And the Parliament falling on your Occasional
Conformers, and this Book of the Shortest way coming out, altogether the high
Church Party Thundered at you from the Press and the Pulpit: Away you run with
the Notion that you are all to be blown up, that all these Things aimed at your
Destruction, and that Fire and Faggot was at the door.

But the Government is steady, and the QUEEN still has maintained her Motto,
the Parliament steers in the middle way, going about to restrain, but not to
destroy you; and taking no notice either of the heat of one party, or Folly of
the other, they hold the Balance of your Liberty between your own exorbitant
License, and the other party's unchristian Fury; and in my opinion, thus far
are you safe.


Diss. But then why has not the Government thought fit to disown the Zeal of
these High-flyers, by punishment, and make Examples of some of them?


Obs. I told you, the Dissenters were all for Punishments and Examples, for the
same reason that they have not punished you for suspecting the QUEEN's Honesty
to her word, charging the Parliament with going about to persecute you, and the
like; for this reason, because they are more merciful than both parties deserve.


Dis. 'Twould have convinced us very plainly of two very significant Things.
First, That there is such a Design, and then that the Authors of it received no
Countenance from Court.


Obs. Good Manners and Common Justice ought to have convinced you of the last,
and your Author of the Shortest way, to his Cost, opened your Eyes in the
first, if you had not wilfully shut them against the Light.

1. Good Manners would inform you, not to doubt the Word of your Prince, 'till
you had some reason from her MAJESTY her self.

2. Common Justice commands us to suppose every Person just and honest, till
something appears to the contrary; and it is a very unchristian, uncharitable
way of treating the QUEEN, That because some of the high Churchmen have had
the Indiscretion, without her Authority, to swagger you out of your Senses;
therefore you must suppose her Promise broken, and her Word of no value.

The Author of the Shortest way comes with a Lanthorn for you, and he sums up
all the black Things this high Party had published, into one General, and if
you had any Eyes, you might learn two Things from him, where he is like topay
dear enough for teaching you.

First, From the general abhorrence Mankind showed of the Book, you might learn
that the destruction of your Party is a Cruelty not to be found in the English
Nature.

Secondly, from the Outcry made against it by that Party in particular, you
might learn who they were that were touched in the Book, and where the design
against them lay.

As to the Quarrel you Dissenters have at the Book that is a mystery no man can
unriddle but your selves. It Is like Mr. Mead's Wheel within a Wheel, and a
further Testimony to the World that you are a most unaccountable People whose
ways are past finding out.


Diss. So that you would go about to persuade me the Book was writ of our side.


Obs. First, Sir, it is hard to know what side you are off, and

Secondly, Sir I know you too well to go about to persuade you to any thing,
whose peculiar Talent is to be unperswadeable; but if you will please to answer
me a few Questions you may perhaps persuade your self of something or other.


Diss. What Questions?


Obs. Why are the high Churchmen angry with him, while at the same time they
openly declare it is the only way to deal with you, and what they would feign be
at?


Dis. Truly you puzzle me a little there.


Obs. They are angry, because they take the Book as the Author meant it, and
you, because you take it as he wrote it, they as he meant, viz. to expose them,
and though they are heartily willing to do you a Kindness that way, and have
shown their good will by their words, yet knowing they wanted power to execute
it, and being conscious to themselves that the Government was not of their
Opinion; they are enraged to have all their designs, laid open in Minature, and
an Abridgment communicated to the World in true Billinsgate.


Dis. There may be some truth in this, but pray why then is the Government so
angry with him? I believe I have puzzled you now.


Obs. No, no, the Government may have Reasons to be angry that you nor I know
not off, nor have nothing to do with: But what if I should suppose

That the Government not thinking any person could be so Barbarous as to
harbor such a villainous Design as the Book suggests; are displeased at it as
an affront done to the Church of England to Father Principles of Cruelty and
Destruction upon her Members, which they are not guilty off.

I say, if I suppose this to be a Reason, I believe you cannot suppose a better.


Dis. I confess, I begin to have better Thoughts of the Government than I had.


Obs. I Am glad of that.


Dis. I begin to hope they will not persecute us now, and as for Occasional
Conformity what care I? I shall never be Lord Mayor or Common Council man; If I
am called to it, it is time enough to come off then.


Obs. God Almighty is wonderfully beholden to you, when he calls you from a
middle State to a good place, you will take it for granted He calls you from the
Meeting to the Church, and you will be sure to come. But I tell you, you ought to
be so far from the fear of a Persecution, that if you have any respect to your
Party, you ought to pray for a Persecution upon them or ye are all undone.


Dis. Why thou art mad, thou art for the Shortest way.


Obs. No, no, I an't for such Persecution neither, but I told you my mind
before, I am sure you have received more damage in your Interest as Disse
nters, and more weakened your Reputation as well as your Number, Since the late
Tolleration, than ever your Enemies did for you by all the penal Laws,
Informers, Fines, and Prisons of the last Persecution.


Dis. Well, but here is another danger upon us that we have not talked of yet, and
fear it will come upon us too.


Obs. Pray what is that?


Dis. We are afraid that this restless Party will overthrow our Settlement,
for they do not stick to talk that way.


Obs. We afraid, who do you mean by we? Are not the Church of England as much
concerned in the Settlement as you and more too, as they are the major part of
the Nation? and We (if you will give me leave to talk your way) We Protestants
fear nothing for our Settlement, and for this, I Will give you a Quotation from
the man with the hook Nose and sharp Chin, it may be you will not like it because
of the Author, but his words are these. "The Settlement of the Crown (says he)
is the Basis of our Religion, Laws and Liberties. This is the solid Bottom on
which we all stand, and of which, with respect to civil Right, may be said
Other Foundation can no man lay than that which is Laid. It Is the Rock on which
we are all built, and that stone of which, according to the Scripture, it may
without profaneness be said, Whosoever it falls upon, he will be broken to
pieces, but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to Powder. "'It Is the
last thing the People of England will part with after all their Estates, Wives
and Children, Churches and Houses are destroyed.

"'It Is the Pledge of the Divine Goodness to the Nation, which they purchased at
the expense of 50 millions of Money, and the Blood of above 100000 English men
in Eleven years War.

"'It Was one of the great Things King WILLIAM did for us, and the Treasure GOD
and his MAJESTY left in our Hands in trust for our Posterity; which if we part
with, our Children will curse our Memory and digg us out of our Graves.

"'It Is a Thing so sacred the dissolving of it cannot be mentioned without a
Crime, nor so much as intended without being guilty of Treason in the most
intense Degree.

"'It Is the solid Prop upon which stands her present MAJESTY'S Throne, and the
right and just Title she has to govern us.

"'It Is like the two Pillars in the House of Dagon whoever pulls them down will,
like Sampson be buried in the Ruins, and pull the whole Nation upon their
Heads.

" I Fear nothing for this Settlement; the Parliament of England are the
Trustees for the seeing it forth coming to the People of England, and a
Parliament of England will never betray their trust.

"The Parliament will not, and all the rest of Humane Power dare not attempt to
dissolve it, no Weapon formed against it can prosper.




Dis. Is this done by our Shortest way Man?


Obs. The very same.


Dis. Well, I shall love him the better for it: But there is one thing more
still, what say you to the Prince of Wales? If ever he comes again you will be
hanged, that is for certain.


Obs. And if ever we let him come we ought all to be hanged, I can do no better
than refer you to the same Author.

"The Act of Settlement (says he) and the Prince of Wales are the two Bucketts,
keep one but up and the other must be down, and put the one down and the other
comes up of Course: There can be no pretense made to alter or dispose the
Settlement, but the Bringing in the Prince of Wales; therefore whoever they are
that mention it, we ought to suppose they would be so understood.


Dis. So that you are of Opinion we are in no danger of our Settlement.


Obs. Indeed I am of the Opinion your Fears both of the Prince of Wales, and of
altering the Settlement, and of Persecution, are all groundless and equally so.
I would only advise the Dissenters to be honest to their own Principles; if
they can conform they ought to do it, if they cannot, no body forces them; let
them dissent, and not for the desire of preferment bring such a Scandal upon
their Integrity, as if they were Men of no Principles. It Is scandalous to the
very Name of a Dissenter and injurious to all the rest of that Body who are
honest and conscientious.


and so I bid you Farewell.

